25 

ian 

C ee T h 

Te * 7 = ` — * r 8 5 3 4 Z * ir m 

Bs 5 7 < 883 VA 2 Į% p 4 
r$, g N À D uag male i r nl PeU 

s n k Intro 


9 


* 


ete 


1 * 
. 
4 

FS 


2 


A A 
Lo — 


n 
Ae 


=f 


=A Ne 
1 Pa pty, = > 
al A ipi 4 


S We 
5 


Spee Ay a ees y y Neer AQE. a d 
n Sen + 2 Dy 1 * 
— a. N $ EW - it. p 4 AVE. = 
as 2 N . PIAA NA, 


1 — SAY 


8 
wong PR 


Encyclopedia Magica“ 


Accessory 


Credits 
Design: It is impossible to list all of the creators of the items cataloged in these volumes, but 
credit goes to everyone who has created a magic item in a module, boxed set, accessory, 
hardbound, or magazine article published in the last 20 years. 
Compilation and Development: slade 
Development and Editing: Doug Stewart 
Project Coordination: Steve Winter 
interior Black and White Art: Arnie Swekel 
Interior Color Art: Gerald Brom, Clyde Culdwell, Jeff Easley, Tim Hildebrandt, 
Roger Loveless, and Keith Parkinson 
Art Coordination: Peggy Cooper 
Graphic Design: Dee Barnett 
Graphic Coordination: Sarah Feggestad 
Typesetting: Nancy J. Kerkstra 
Production: Paul Hanchette 
Acknowledgments; L. Richard Baker III. Anne Brown, Bruce Heard, Colin McComb, Ed Greenwood, 
Roger E, Moore, slade, Steven E. Schend, Doug Stewart, Georgia S. Stewart, and Skip Williams 
who supplied new and unique magical items. And, of course, James M. Ward, for laughing 
when he heard stade had this project. 


Volume Three 


Pick of Earth Parting to Thesis on Conditional Ruptures (Spellbook) 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 
Rei ͤ —ͤ;U—T—— — ũFm;Mm̃̃ , K ↄ . ˙— . 7“. Tr ese 
„ U —⏑ ÜN Dee eee eee 
RF r ll aie S e eee ee 931 
BY E tule EO OOA A O EE SA Ridge eae T. eee e ee ee e . 1049 


TSR, inc TSR Lid 
PO Rox 756 IXI Chach End 
Lake Geneva Cherry lige 
WI. 53147-0756 Cambridge, CBE NLA 

Unitet Kingin 


USA 
2157XXX1301 


AD&D, ADVANCED DUNGEONS & DRAGONS, AL-QANIM, RATTLESYSTEM, ALACKMOOR, CARDMASTER, D&D, DARK SUN, DRAGON, 
DRAGON'S CROWN, DRAGONLANCE, DRAGON MOUNTAIN, DRAGON QUEST. DUNGEON, DUNGEONS & DRAGONS, DUNGEON MASTER, 
FIEND FOLIO, FORGOTTEN REALMS, GAMMA WORLD, GREYHAWK, HOLLOW WORLD, MONSTROUS CUMPENIIUM, MYSTARA, POLYIE- 
DRON RAVENLOPT, RPGA, the RPGA Logo, SPELLIAMMER, and WORLD OF GREYHAWK are registered trademarks owned by TSR, Inc 


ALWAYS AN ADVENTURE! CREATURE CRUCIBLE, DENIES & DLMIGODS, ENCYCLOPEDIA MAGICA, MONSTROUS MANDAL 
PLANESCAPE RAVENS ULUFF ROLE PLAYING GAME ASSOC LATION, WILDSPACE. and the TSR Lage ate cue owned by TSR. Inc 


LANKIIMAR is a trademark owned by end wed ander license fem Friz Leiher 


ASR character, character names, spell names. magical itema names. unaque place cal, and tlre distant likenesses thereof are trademarks owned by TSM, Ine 
Random Hoave amd its alfthate companies have worldwide distribution tix ditt an thie book trade for English language products of TSR, Ine Distrthuted in the wry 
and bobby (rade by regronal disterbuturs, Dustributed lo the book and bobby trade in the United Kingdom by TSR Lul This work is pwosected uniler the copyright 
laws of the United States of Amonca, Any reprodection of unauthorized use of the material or eet work presented herein i prohibited hy law withowt the espress 
written permission of TSR, lnc 


C194 TSR, Inc All Raghts Reserved 
Fina Printing, May 1995 


STH 


CUT bey 
eh 


Pick 
The pick is a tool that looks like a simple 
cross between an axe and a hammer. It is usually 
used during mining operations as a digging tool. 


of Earth Parting 
XP Value: 5,000 GP Value: 25,000 
Tome of Magic 

This enchanted pick allows its wielder to cut 
through elemental earth quickly. The wielder of 
the pick must have strength of 17 or better. By 
repeatedly swinging the pick at elemental earth, 
the wielder can carve out a 10- by 10- by 60- 
foot tunnel per round, The pick’s magical prop- 
erties create a smooth, clean surface regardless 
of the mining skill of the user. All rubble from 
the excavation magically disappears, leaving a 
clear passage. 


Cursed Pick of Earth Parting 

XP Value: — GP Value: 5,000 
1992 Fantasy Collector Card 635 
This item functions almost exactly like the 
uncursed item of the same name, it allows the 
wielder to cut through elemental earth at a rate of 
10 fect by 10 feet by 60 feet per round. The wall 
surfaces are clean and excavated rubble magi- 
cally disappears. Unfortunately the user discov- 
ers, after six rounds that he or she has consistently 
varied the digging direction by 1° per foot, result- 
ing in a 360° turn and a circular tunnel. Further- 
more, any dwarf who uses the pick finds that all 
dwarven mining abilities are lost until a remove 
curse spell is cast. 


Pick of Propitiousness 
See Stringed Instruments 


Pick of Strumming 
Sec Stringed Instruments 


Pie 


of Four-and-Twenty Blackbirds 
XP Value: 250 GP Value: 800 
POLYHEDRON" Newszine 23 
This magical pie looks and smells delicious, and 
causes no ill effect if eaten. If the proper com- 
mand is spoken while holding the pie, it opens 
and releases 24 black pterodactyls who can 
understand and will obey the holder of the pie. 


835 


Pic, Rhubarb 


They will fight or carry if so instructed, 
but are too dim-witted to report observa- 
tions or carry messages. They disappear 
when slain, and cannot be replaced. This item 
functions once. 


of Raspberries 
GP Value: 700 
Polyhedron Newszine 23 
This pie is identical to the pie of four-and-twenty 
blackbirds, but, when commanded to release, it 
instead emits a long, loud burbling sound, audible 
to all within 120 feet regardless of walls or doors. 


XP Value: 


y hs 
L Gs ` g 
‘ fs 


8 . 5 WS 
K* 


Mes 
MOMEN 


Rhubarb 
XP Value: 700 GP Value: 2,100 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 23 
This pie is also identical to a pie of four-and- 
twenty blackbirds, but when commanded to 
release its residents, it produces a cloud of red- 
dish smoke in an area 60 feet across and 20 feet 
high. All within the cloud start to argue about 
meaningless things for three rounds; After that, 
each victim may make a saving throw vs. spell 
to negate the effect. Those who fail continue to 
argue even if attacked; those who make a suc- 
cessful saving throw may act normally. The 


smoke does not itself cause an NPC or monster 
3652 


~ Pigment, Belly Palette of Identity 


to attack, though a PC may respond violently if 
desired and if appropriate to the alignment of 
the character. 


Pigment 
Pigments are powders that have been mixed with 
water, oil, or other liquid to produce a colored 
paste or paint. Most pigments are made from a 
single substance, but some are blends to produce 
a particular hue, 


Bell's Palette of Identity 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
Tome of Magic 
This device offers protection against polymorph 
spells and other magical effects that change a per- 
son's physical appearance, 

The item is an artist’s palette covered with 
bright, mystical paints. To use the item, a person 
must paint a self-portrait. The painting does not 
need to be created with any expertise, but the 
painter must believe that the portrait is accurate. 
Any time a character carries this self-portrait on 
his or her person, the portrait suffers the effects 
of unsuccessful saving throws when massmorph, 
polymorph ather, polymarph any object, or seem- 
ing spells are cast on the owner, The portrait also 
suffers the effects if a character steps in front of a 
mirror of simple order. 

The character k saving throw is made normally. 
If successful, the spell simply fails, If the saving 
throw is unsuccessful, the portrait is altered, 
reflecting the effect of the spell, but the character 
remains unharmed. Once the portrait suffers 
these effects, it no longer can offer protection for 
the person it represents. 

A person on the Plane of the Gray Waste, car- 
rying u picture made from Bell y palette of iden- 
lity is protected from the effects of fading on this 
plane, It is the picture that slowly fades to gray 
while the person retains all of his or her color. 
After two weeks in that planc, the character 
makes a saving throw against being trapped in the 
Gray Waste. If the saving throw is unsuccessful, 
the portrait becomes uscless to the person who 
painted it. 

There is always a risk that some denizen of the 
Gray Waste will discover a baneful use for a dis- 
carded painting. Travelers are wise not to leave 
such personal effects behind on this plane, A sin- 
gle Belly palette of identity can be used to paint 
Ida portraits. 


of Blackmoor 
XP Value: 300 GP Value: 2,500 
GREYHAWK* Adventures 

This set of multicolor paints was enchanted when 

the city of Blackmoor was in full power. After the 

city and castle fell into ruin, the wizard used the 
paints to insure his own survival in the hostile 
land. 

Each set has five applications of cach color. 
Each color comes in a tiny jar held in a box of 
holding (as the smallest bag of holding). The 
paint is applied all over the body of the user 
and lasts for 24 hours. During this time its 
effects can only be taken away by a remove 
curse. 

* Red transforms the user into a 7th-level fighter 
with an AC of 2, a two-handed sword +1, and 
70 hit points, 

Blue transforms the user into a 7th-level pries 
with an AC of 3, a footman'’s mace +2, and 60 
hit points, Spells should be selected immedi- 
ately—three Ist, three 2nd, two 3rd, and one 
4th-level spell. 

+ Green transforms the user into a 7th-level 
ranger with an AC of 4, a long bow +3, and 
56 hp. 

Black transforms the user into a 7th-level thief 
with an AC of 6, a dagger +2, and 32 hp. 

White transforms the user into a 7th-level 
paladin with an AC of 1, a long sword +3, and 
67 hp. 

* Brown Transforms the user into a 7th-level 
druid with an AC of 6, a quarter staff +2, and 
44 hp. 

Using the paints twice in a 24-hour period 
results in the instant death of the user. Upon 
return to normal, the user regains 1d10 lost hit 
points, For purposes of operating in the 
assumed class, all ability scores are treated as 
at least the minimum starting scores required 
for the class for the duration of the effect. A 
transformed character has all the memories of 
the original character but all the powers of the 
new class. Failure to adhere strictly to the lim- 
its of the assumed class breaks the magic and 
restores the original form, A transformed char- 
acter is proficient in the new weapon magically 
acquired (that vanishes with the effect) and in 
any weapons known and used before the trans- 
formation, 


3654 


ERN . ee re 


836 


of Longevity 

XP Value: 5,000 GP Value: 25,000 
DUNGEON* Magazine 10 
The pigments necessary to paint a portrait of 
longevity ure created from the blood of the sub- 
ject to be painted, many hard-to-acquire materi- 
als, and a wish spell, which gathers the necessary 
life force from the surrounding land (often caus- 
ing plagues and other natural disasters). The pig- 
ments may be altered to paint other subjects by 
use of limited wish and alter reality spells, 
applied together with the blood and sweat of the 
new subject. 


Nolzur’s Marvelous Pigments 

XP Value: 500 GP Value: 3,000 
Dunceon Masten" Guide 
These magical emulsions enable their possessor 
to create actual objects simply by depicting their 
form in two dimensions. The pigments are applied 
by a stick tipped with bristles, hair, or fur. The 
emulsion flows from the application to form the 
desired object as the wiclder concentrates on the 
desired image. One pot of Nolzur $ marvelous 
pigments is sufficient to create an object of 1,000 
cubic feet by depicting it in two dimensions over 
a surface 100 feet square. Thus, a 10- by 10-foot 
rendition of a pit would result in an actual 10- by 
10- by 10-foot pit; a 10- by 10-foot depiction of a 
room would result in a 10- by 10- by 10-foot 
room; and so on. 

Only normal, inanimate things can be cre- 
ated—doors, pits, flowers, trees, cells, but mon- 
stets, people, golems, and the like can’t be 
created, The pigments must be applied to a sur- 
face (a Moor, wall, ceiling, or door), 

From 1d4 containers of pigments are usually 
found, normally with a single instrument about 
1-foot long with which to apply them. It takes 
one turn to depict an object with pigments, 
Objects of value depicted by pigments, precious 
metals, gems, jewelry, ivory, appear to be valu- 
able but are actually made of tin, lead, paste 
gems, brass, bone, and similarly worthless 
materials. Normal armor or weapons can, of 
course, be created. 

In a DRAGONLANCE” Campaign: Nolzur’s 
marvelous pigments are called Branchala $ paints 
on Ansalon. 


837 


Pill of Plentiful Water 


Yellow Kohl 
XP Value: 5,000 GP Value: 25,000 
The Emirates of Ylaruam 

Kohl is a greasy, pigmented cye makeup. An evil 
alchemist has discovered a formula that turns 
1d10 pounds of metal into gold, He concealed it 
by fashioning it and its container to resemble a 
woman's makeup case. The stratagem backfired; 
an apprentice in his shop mistook the substance 
for real kohl, and sold it to a woman. 


Pill 
Pills are small water-soluble tablets that serve a 
number of purposes. First, pills can be swallowed 
to relieve the symptoms of a number of ailments, 
Second, they can be dissolved in fluids to pro- 
duce a desired effect. 


Desalination Tablet 

XP Value: 10 GP Value: 100 
Port of Raven's Buure™ 
These orange pills are about the size of a marble. 
Each pill transforms one gallon of seawater into 
fresh, drinkable water, Incidently, each pill also 
causes Ida points of damage to water weirds and 
water elementals 


Hangover Relief 

GP Value: 200 
: Dracon” Magazine 73 
This small pouch contains 2d6 pills, cach shaped 
like a huge teardrop. Ifa pill is dissolved in water, 
and the Water is immediately consumed, all 
effects of alcoholic hangovers disappear. 


XP Value: 40 


of Plentiful Water 
XP Value: 100 GP Value: 500 
DRAGON Magazine 73 

These blue pills are about the size of aspirin 
tablets, usually found in a group of 2410. When 
covered with spittle, a pill expands and changes 
within 10 seconds, becoming one gallon of 
water. Customarily, one would dab the pill in 
one's mouth and then quickly pop it into a 
waterskin or bucket to expand. If the pill is loft 
in the mouth, the water may (5% chance) drown 
the victim as it expands and is forced into the 
lungs. (The chance rises to 50% if no one is 
present to help the victim. Back-slapping or 
some similar action helps the victim to expel 
most or all of the water.) If the pill is swal- 
lowed, the victim's stomach may burst (10% 

o 


Pillow of Regencration 


chance), resulting in death, but in any case it 
causes incapacitating discomfort. 


Pillow of Regeneration 

XP Value: 800 GP Value: 4,000 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 43 

Usually found mixed with bedclothes or on furni- 
ture, this magical cushion doubles the rate at 
which hit points are regained and cuts by half the 
time needed in rest to regain spells. Time must be 
spent actually reclining against the cushion. 


Pipe of Heated Wind 
XP Value: GP Value: 
DraGoN Magazine 73 

This pipe looks like a curved metal pipe that is 
closed at one end. When the command word 
inscribed on the side is spoken, hot air streams 
from the open end. It is ordinarily used to dry 
things, especially hair. 


Pitcher 
A pitcher is a container used to hold fluids. Pitch- 
ers normally have elaborate handles sturdy 
enough to hold the weight of the pitcher as well 
as any fluid poured into it, 


of Blending 

GP Value: 1,500 
DraGoN Magazine 73 
This is a black, covered pitcher or cylinder with 
one button on it. Objects are placed in the 
pitcher, the button is pushed one or more times, 
and the lid is closed; the item then blends, 
smashes, and breaks up whatever is inside. 
However, if anything harder than food or simi- 
larly soft material is blended, the item probably 
ceases to function permanently. Chunks of ice 
are the hardest usable material, and only if they 
are in a supporting liquid. The number of times 
the button is pushed determines how long the 
smashing gocs on. 


XP Value: 300 


Continuous Water 
XP Value: 600 GP Value: | 800 
DRAGON Magazine 73 
This is a half-gallon open glass pitcher. Each day 
up to five gallons of water can be poured from 
the pitcher, provided it has not been tightly cov- 
ered at any time in the preceding 24 hours, 


838 


* NTA ; 
wi N. 4 70 5 a Ae 
SDE 


0 x 
S `~ ii 


"Plank 
XP Value: 700 GP Value: 3,500 
War Cuptum Companion 

This magical item is popular among the piratical 
and privateering humans throughout the Grey- 
space crystal sphere. When extended, the plank 
magically stretches far beyond the gravity plane 
and atmosphere envelope of the ship. Prisoners 
destined to “walk the plank” are sent out on it to 
be sent adrift in wildspace and suffocate 

On the plank, a step taken is actually the equiv- 
alent of four steps, meaning a character taking 
yard-long strides actually moves 4 yards with 
every step. This allows the blindfolded plank 
walker to be set adrift much faster than normal. It 
also helps alleviate the irritating tendency of pris- 
oners to stand at the brink of disaster overlong. 
The plank can be extended once an hour. 


Plate 

The term “plate” describes two kinds of objects 
One type of plate is a shallow, circular dish made 
of carthenware, wood, or metal. These are used to 
hold food, Another kind of plate is a flat, polished 
picce of metal that is engraved and etched with 
symbols, drawings, and writing, This type of 
plate is used during the minting process. 


Plurmastone 


— aai, 


Book 
XP Value: 750 GP Value: 3,750 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

This item may be found in one of two forms— 
cither as a round paper seal affixed to the inside 
front cover of a book (magical or otherwise), or 
as a fine pewter dinner plate, 1-foot in diameter. 
If found as a paper scal in a book, a command 
word causes the entire book to turn into a pewter 
plate, returnable by use of another command 
word. If found in pewter form, the command 
turns it into a normal, but blank spell book (with 
affixed book plate seal), usable by any wizard. 
The book thus created can hold up to 20 spells, 
and no more. 


of Counterfeiting 
XP Value: 1,200 GP Value: 6,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

This fine, pewter dinner plate, on command, 
causes one gold piece to appear upon it. The gold 
may bear a perfect replica of a seal of any local or 
royal mint, or plain and featureless, as com- 
manded by the user. A coin thus created is not 
magical, but it cannot be differentiated from nor- 
mally minted coins. However, there is a 1% 
chance per use that the reigning mintsmith secs a 
vision of user and plate producing counterfeit 
coins. The plate functions once per day. 


Dinner 

XP Value: 600 GP Value: 3,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

This fine pewter dinner plate, a foot in diameter, 
produces food if it is warmed slightly over a 
cooking fire. It produces three such meals per 
day, cach containing enough food for one human- 
sized being. The food is tasty and nutritious, 
regardless of who is cating it. 


Leomund's 
XP Value: 700 GP Value: 3,500 
DRAGON Magazine 28 
These devices appear in many forms, sometimes 
as platters, sometimes plates, mugs or goblets, 
but in all cases they are made of engraved silver, 
gold, or platinum. The value of the metal and 
engraving is not visible until the plate is com- 
manded to function. When told to fill itself, it 
produces an excellent meal of epicurean quality 
(enough for 4 people in the case of a platter). The 
plate or platter functions three times a day. The 


839 


item must be cleaned with sweet water or holy 
water at least once a week or it will never func» 
tion again. Cleaning is not necessary if the item 
has not been used during any given week. 


Platter of Purity 

XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
Needle 
This golden serving platter is I- foot wide and 2 
feet long, with golden handles on each end, Any 
consumables placed on its surface become puri- 
fied in three rounds, poisons are negated and 
potions are turned to pure water. No living 
thing can be affected, nor any nonconsumable 
items. 


Platter of Purity II 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 5,000 
pot vu h²U Magazine 26 
The platter of purity is a golden serving platter l- 
foot wide and 2 feet long, with golden handles on 
each end. Any consumables placed on its surface 
are purified in three rounds. Poisons are negated, 
but, unfortunately, potions are turned into pure 
water. No living thing can be affected, nor can 
any nonconsumable items, 


Plumalitter 

GP Value: 5,000 
Maztica Campaign Sct 
The plumalitter is a work of featherweaving that 
is the only Maztican equivalent of a wagon. It is a 
rectangle of thick, fluffy plumage some 6 feet 
wide, 10 feet long, and | foot thick. It can carry 
up to 750 pounds. It requires a command word, 
but not an elevate spell, to activate. It will follow 
the one who commands it, matching his speed at 
a movement rate up to 18. It can rise or lower at a 
rate of 30 feet per round. 


XP Value: 800 


Plumastone 
XP Value: 1,600 GP Value: 8,000 
Muzticu Campaign Set 
The artisan who creates this talisman must be a 
weaponmaker as well as a master of pluma. An 
item of plumastone is an enchanted weapon with 
an obsidian tip or edge. It can be a maca, a knife, 
a bundle of three spears, or a quiver of 10 arrows. 
The objects are not subject to the normal 
breakage rules of obsidian-tipped weapons. In 
addition, each reccives a +2 benefit to attack, and 
a +3 to damage. 


wn 


+ 


Poker, Draw 


Poker 
A poker is a metal tool used to tend fires. It is 
simply a rod with a prong near the end, designed 
to move burning logs. Most pokers are 2 to 4 feet 
long and made of wrought iron, 


Draw 
XP Value: 600 GP Value: 3,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

This item appears to be and functions as a poker 
of fire control in all respects, but it has a 25% 
chance per use of malfunctioning, If so, the user 
is drawn into the fire being controlled (no saving 
throw), All control of the fire is immediately lost, 
and all of the victim’s fire resistances are tem- 
porarily negated. The victim then takes fire dam- 
age based on the size of the fire—1d6 points per 
round from campfires, up to 3d6 points per round 
from large blazes. The fire magically continues to 
burn, regardless of any magical or ordinary 
attempts to douse it, and the victim cannot be 
removed until a remove curse spell is applied, 


of Fire Control 
XP Value: 5,000 GP Value; 25,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

This poker may be placed into flames and a com- 
mand word spoken. After that, by concentrating 
for one round, the user may reduce the fire to 
mere embers or increase it to a great bonfire. The 
poker affects only normal fires and has no effect 
on magical flames. It functions three times a day 
for up to one hour per use; if the user's concentra- 
tion is broken or the fuel is consumed by the 
great bonfire (burning at 10 times the normal 
rate), the effect ends. 


of Searing 
XP Value: 700 GP Value: 3,500 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
When commanded, this poker heats itself to red- 
hot temperature. The poker may, after that, be 
used as a spear, inflicting 1d6 points of fire dam- 
age in addition, No saving throw applics, but any 
magical or innate fire resistance negates the heat 
damage, The poker cools in one turn but may be 
heated three times per day, Any additional heat- 
ing does not gain the heat damage bonus and 
there is a 10% chance that it may crack and 


destroy the poker. 


j 


of Summoning 
XP Value: 600 GP Value: 3,000 


The Book of Marvelous Magic 
This poker appears to be, and functions as, a 
poker of fire control in all respects. On command, 
it summons a 12-HD fire elemental (AC 0; Dmg 
2d8) that obeys the summoner as long as the 
poker is held with both hands, The summoner 
must concentrate to control the elemental and is 
subject to the usual rules for summoning and 


controlling elementals. 


Polearm 
Polearms are melee weapons that have blades or 
heads mounted on wooden shafts that are 4 to 6 
feet long. Because of their length, all polearms 
are two-handed weapons. Depending on the type 
of head, a polearm can thrust, chop, stab, or hook 


Roll Polearm Type 
01-02 Attached Gaff-Hook 
03-04 Aw! Pike 

05-07 = Bardiche 

08-09 Bece de Corbin 
10-11  Bill-Guisarme 
12-13 Bill Hook 

14-16 Dragon's Paw 
17-18 Fang 

19-20 Fauchard 

21-22 Fauchard- Fork 
23-24 Footman Pike 
25-27 Fuxina Trident 
28-29 Gaff-Hook 
30-31 Glaive 

32-33 lawe-(iuisarme 
34-36 Goblin Stick 
37-38  Guisarme 

39-40 Guisarme-Voulge 
41-42 Gythka 

43-44 Harberd 

45-47 Hook-Falchard 
48-49 Horseman's Pike 
50-51 Impaler 

52-53 Lajatang 

54-66 Lotulis 

57-58 Lucern Hammer 
59-60 Luqu Trident 
61-62 Main-Gauche 
63-64 Mancatcher 
65-67 Military Fork 
68-69 Nagimaki 


OE ˙*wmwMAMA·ĩ 


Polearm, Fork of Travel 


— — ͤ— 


70-71 Naęinata 

72-73 One-Handed Trident 

74-76 Partisan 

77-78 Pincher Staff 

79-80 Pitchfork 

81-82  Polcaxe 

83-84 Ranscur 

85-86 Sode Gurami 

87-88 Spetum 

89-90 Tetsubo 

91-92 Trident 

93-94 Trikal 

95-96 Two-Handed Trident 

97-98 Voulge 

99-00 Weighted Pike 
Baphomet’s Bardiche 

XP Value: 11,200 GP Value: 80,000 
The Lost Caverns of Tsojcanth 


Baphomet bardiche, is a long poleaxe that 
inflicts 3d4+8 points of damage and causes 
armor, shiclds, and weapons struck by it to save 
vs. crushing blow or be destroyed. 


Belial’s Military Fork 
XP Value: 11,000 GP Value: 75,000 
Monster Manual I! 
Belial uses a huge military fork +4 in combat. 
This weapon causes the creature struck to save 
vs. spell or be affected as if smitten by a symbol 
of pain. 


Blessed Trident 
XP Value: 2,400 GP Value: 16,000 
Otherlands 

Land-based paladins seck out Aoly avenger 
swords, rare swords that give many abilities to 
the paladins who wield them. Holy avengers arc 
even more scarce under the seas. The paladins 
in the Order of the Dolphin use special tridents 
created by the Dargonesti wizards and priests. 
To a nonpaladin, the trident acts as a +1 weapon 
with no other abilities. In the hands of a pal- 
adin, it becomes a +4 weapon, that does +8 
points of damage against lawful or chaotic evil 
opponents, 

In addition, the trident bestows 25% magic 
resistance to the wielder. The trident also can 
cure serious wounds and know alignment, cach 
three times a day. The trident also enables the pal- 
adin to communicate with any sca creature 
encountered. 


Trident of Commanding 
Water Creatures 
XP Value: 1,200 GP Value: 6,000 
GREYHAWK 

This device functions in the same manner as a 
staff of commanding, but it functions only with 
regard to water-dwellers within a 60-foot radius 
of its user It functions for 12 turns each time it is 
used, and it has 24 charges, It may not be 
recharged, 


Fisher's Trident of 
Fish Command 
XP Value: S00 GP Value: 4,000 
1992 Fantasy Collector Card 24 

The Fisher's chaotic good trident is the archetypi- 
cal version of its kind. It uses no charges in its 
function. The trident magically causes all fish to 
stay 10 feet or more away. It also forces all fish 
within 10 feet to roll a successful saving throw 
vs. spell or they are forced to obey any simple 
commands of the user (such as “attack that crea- 
ture” or “swarm around that group of creatures”), 
The trident is also a +3 magical weapon in its 
own right (5 Ego points). 


Fork of Jabbing 
XP Value: — GP Value: 1,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

This copper-colored fork is identical to a fork of 
travel but when commanded to function, it 
attacks the user, It hits every round, inflicting | 
point of damage cach time, regardless of Armor 
Class, immunities, or other defenses. It can only 
be stopped by a remove curse spell, but is treated 
as AC 0 for the attempt at touching it. This rem- 
edy causes the fork to disappear. 


Fork of Travel 

XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 10,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
This copper fork may be placed at any intersec- 
tion, and it will point (on command) toward 
either the most dangerous, safest, shortest, or 
longest route, as desired by the user, It may be 
used three times per day. For answers about dis- 
tance, the destination must be known and 
named 


= oS a U = ĩ ĩ 


84 


Polearm, Lacedonbane 


Lacedonbane 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 10,000 
Drrcon Magazine 48 
This +//+3 vs. lacedons weapon is frequently 
found in the possession of a triton or in a triton 
lair. All tridents of this sort have a neutral good 
alignment and are most effective when used 
against the marine variety of the ghoul. 


Mephistopheles’s Fork 

XP Value: 3,200 GP Value: 16,000 
Monster Manuul I! 
This great, three-tined fork +3 can, on command, 
deliver 3d4 points of cold, electrical, or fire dam- 
age, saving throw vs. spell applicable Each func- 
tion is usable three times per day. These damage 
points are in addition to all other damage caused 
by the weapon. 


Niord’s Great Trident 
XP Value: 4,200 GP Value: 21,000 
Dragon Magazine 110 
Niord uses a great trident +4, that combines the 
powers of fish command and submission, striking 


Spetrum 


Awi Pike 


——ů—— 


* 


pardiché 


peret 


: 

È 

* 
1 


D = 
eee 


for 3410 points of damage with a +4 bonus. 
(Strength bonuses are added after that as well.) 
Those not of lawful good alignment are unable to 
grasp this trident 


O-Wata-Tsu-Mi’s Jade Trident 
XP Value: 2,100 GP Value: 10,500 
Legends & Lore 
When struck by the avatar x jade trident, victims 
must save vs. petrification or be stuck on its 
prongs. In such cases, the avatar may elect to turn 
the shaft of the trident, rotating the razor sharp 
prongs and doing 2d10 points of automatic dam- 


age cach round. This weapon is also called Shio- 
Zuchi x Trident. 


Persana’s Trident 
XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 15,000 
Monster Mythology 
The avatar’s trident +3 paralyzes opponents by 
touch for 3d4 turns unless a successful saving 
throw is made vs. paralyzation at —2. 


Pitchfork of Penetration 

XP Value: 700 GP Value: 3,500 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
This three-pronged item has a 3-foot-long handle 
but otherwise appears to be identical to a normal 
farmer's tool. It can be used on the Prime Mater- 
ial Plane to attack a creature on the Ethereal 
Plane, requiring only a normal attack roll. The 
user must be able to see ethereal things to use the 
fork (by a detect invisible spell or other means). 
The pitchfork inflicts 1d6 points of damage plus 
Strength bonus per hit. In addition, if an attack is 
successful, the user may pull the victim from the 
ether into the Prime Material Plane. The victim 
may make a saving throw vs. spell to avoid being 
drawn across, 


Poseidon’s Trident 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 10,000 


Legends & Lore 
Any being hit by Poseidon’s avatars trident must 
save vs. paralyzation or be stuck on its prongs. 
They will remain there until removed by another 
character (inflicting 1410 additional points of 
damage) or released by the avatar himself, 


Polearm, Rutterkin 


Reptilebane 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 10,000 
Dragon Magazine 48 
This weapon is especially effective (+3 on attack 
and damage rolls) against dragon turtles, lizard- 
men, dinosaurs, crocodiles, and other typcs of 


aquatic and nonaquatic reptiles 

Rutterkin 
XP Value GP Value 
+1: 1,000 6,000 
+2: 2,000 12,000 
+3: 3,000 18,000 


Outer Planes MC Appendix 
The least tanar ti. rutterkins, use a polearm with a 
double crescent head. The weapon weighs eight 
pounds, is Size L, has a Speed Factor of 8, and 
causes 1d10/1d8 points damage. 


Roll Attack hamage Modifier 


01-05 +1 
06-08 12 
09-00 +3 


Polearm, Saw-Toothed Glaive 


— --—-—— 


Saw-Toothed Glaive 


XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 15,000 

Monster Manual L 
These appalling weapons are used by various 
types of lower planar beings in the pursuit of evil 
The saw-toothed glaive is a +3 weapon equipped 
with a treblehook at the base of the blade. The 
treblehook curves backward and is used to entan- 
gle or snag opponents closing or fleeing, causing 
an additional 143 points of damage above and 
beyond the glaive’s normal damage. The victim ts 
held fast unless a successful open doors roll is 
made 


Trident of Elemental Death 
XP Value: 800 GP Value: 10,000 
DRAGON Magazine 91 
Another item manufactured by the most powerful 
sahuagin priests, this weapon gives its wielder a 
+2 combat bonus against creatures like tritons, 
water weirds, and water clementals; +1 against all 
others, As with the dagger dolphins’ bane, this 
weapon has a lawful evil alignment and function 
as a l weapon in the hands of anyone of another 


alignment, Only the most powerful sahuagin war- 
riors carry them 


Trident of Fish Command 

XP Value: 500 GP Value: 4,000 
DUNGEON Master Guide 
This three-tined fork atop a stout rod 6 feet long 
appears to be a barbed military fork of some sort. 
However, its magical properties enable its wielder 
to cause all fish within a 60-foot radius to roll 
saving throws vs. spell. This uses one charge of 
the trident. Fish failing the throw are completely 
under empathic command and will not attack the 
possessor of the trident nor any creature within 
10 feet of him. The wiclder of the device can 
cause fish to move in whatever direction is 
desired and can convey messages of emotion 
(fear, hunger, anger, indifference, repletion). Fish 
who make the saving throw are free of empathic 
control, but they cannot approach closer than 10 
feet of the trident. In addition to ofdinary fish the 
trident affects sharks and cels. It doesn’t affect 
mollusks, crustaceans, amphibians, reptiles, 
mammals, and similar sorts of nonpiscine manne 
creatures. A school of fish should be checked as a 
single entity, A trident of this type contains 
1d4+16 charges 


Trident of Fish Control 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 4,000 
BLACKMOOR" 
On a successful strike or touch, this trident will 
allow the wieldet to control any nonairbreathing, 
swimming creature (save vs. spell applicable). 


Trident/Military Fork 

XP Value: 750 GP Value: 6,000 
DU Mastik Guide, Ist Edition 
This weapon is about 6 feet long. Upon com- 
mand, the middle tine of the trident retracts into 
the pole while the shaft of the weapon lengthens 
to 9 feet, creating a military fork with a short cen- 
ter spike. The changing of the form of the weapon 
from trident to fork or vice versa requires one 
round, 


Trident of the Oljatt Sea 
XP Value: 1,500 GP Value: 12,000 
GKEYHAWK Adventures 
Rumored to be a weapon of sahuagin fighters, 
this weapon gives a bonus of +2 to attack and 
damage. Once per turn, it can fire a jet of steam 
in an area 60 feet long, 20 feet high, and 20 feet 
wide. The steam inflicts 6d6 points of damage, 
half if a successful saving throw vs. spell is made. 


pes cc a | 


Polearm, Trident of the Phiogiston 


pp ne 2 


When fired underwater, the steam travels only 
half the distance, and causes half damage (a sav- 
ing throw for 1 damage is applicable). 


Trident of the Phiogiston 

XP Value: 1,800 GP Value: 18,000 
War Captain's Companion 
This special weapon was designed by an unknown 
power, and is extremely old, The blades show 
centuries of nicking armor. Thousands of polish- 
ings, rust removals, and sharpenings are evident, 
The leather-bound hilt looks worn, tattered, and 
partially rotted, The trident appears on the verge 
of uselessness. It is actually a trident +4, which 
causes 1d6+5 points of damage to small and 
human-sized opponents, and 3d4+4 points of 
damage to larger opponents (this damage includes 
the +4 bonus). 

When wielded on a world, it acts as a trident 
+4, and nothing more. When wielded in wild- 
space or in hostile, other planar environments, it 
can purify cnough air for one person to use in a 
single day. 

When wielded in the phlogiston, it has the 
powers stated above, as well as its greatest power. 
When the weapon strikes an opponent of opposite 
alignment to the wielder (as given on the table 
below), the weapon creates a concentrated bead 
of fire when the opponent is struck. This deto- 
nates on the target only—the wielder is protected 
by the length of the shaft. The 2-foot fireball 
inflicts 1d3 points of fire damage plus the level of 
the trident’s wiclder upon the opponent (a 6th- 
level wieldet would inflict 7-9 points of fire 
damage in addition to the trident damage). The 


alignment oppositions are: 
LG—CE NG—NE 
CG—LE LN—CN 


It takes a week for the weapon to adopt the align- 
ment of a new owner, after that time it will regis- 
ter as the owner's alignment if tested, 


Trident of Submission 
XP Value: 1,250 GP Value: 12,500 
Duncnon MAsTER Guide 
A weapon of thix nature appears unremarkable, 
exactly like any normal trident. The wielder of a 
trident of submission causes any opponent struck 
to save vs, spell. If the opponent fails to save, it 
must check morale the next round instead of 


„„ ae a a ea i 


attacking; if morale is good, the opponent may act 
normally next round, but if it is poor, the opponent 
ceases to fight and surrenders, overcome with a 
feeling of hopelessness. The duration of the hope- 
lessness is 2d4 rounds. After that the creature is 
normal again. The trident has 1d4+16 charges 


Trident of Warning 
XP Value: 750 GP Value: 7,500 
DUNGON MASTER Guide 

A weapon of this type enables its wielder to deter- 
mine the location, depth, species, and number of 
hostile or hungry marine predators within 240 fect. 
A trident of warning must be grasped and pointed 
in order for the person using it to gain such infor- 
mation, and it requires one round to scan a hemi- 
sphere with a radius of 240 feet. There are 1d6+18 
charges in a trident of this type, each charge suffi- 
cient to last for two rounds of scanning. 


Trident of Yearning 
XP Value: — GP Value: 1,000 
DuNoron Master Guide 

A trident of yearning looks exactly like any nor- 
mal trident, and its aura is indistinguishable from 
that of other enchanted weapons of this sort. Any 
character grasping this type of trident immedi- 
ately feels an overwhelming desire to be 
immersed in as great a depth of water as possible, 
This unquenchable longing causes the affected 
character to proceed immediately toward the 
largest and deepest body of water available—in 
any event, one that is sufficient to completely 
cover his or her person. Once there, the character 
immerses permanently. 

The character cannot loose his or her grip on 
the trident, and only a water breathing spell (after 
submersion) or a wish can enable the character to 
do so, The trident is otherwise a —2 cursed magi- 
cal weapon. Note that this item does not confer 
the ability to breathe underwater. 


Uluth’gak’s Gythka 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 7,500 
1992 Fantasy Collector Card 136 

This magical weapon consists of a thick shaft 
with a set of metal blades mounted at both ends. 
Uluth’ ak is very proud of this particular weapon, 
for it was given to her by her clutch-leader when 
she came of age. Its superior attention to detail 
and magical enchantments (+2 enhancement) 
have helped Uluth’ gak to become a keen warrior 

3703 


~ Pool, Mallenea’s Pool Portal _ 


Water Elemental Slayer 

XP Value: 800 GP Value: 10,000 
Deacon Magazine 48 

Creatures most severely affected by this trident 
include all those known or thought to be native to 
the Elemental Plane of Water, such as tritons, 
water weirds and water elementals—the attacker 
gains an additional +2 on the attack. Another of 
the items crafted by sahuagin priests, this trident 
is normally only found in the possession of the 
most powerful members of that society. 


Wave 
XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 20,000 
White Plume Mountain 
Wave, a neutral trident +3, does 1d10 points of 
damage per strike. It has a 14 Intelligence and an 
Ego of 20. Its special purpose is death or disfig- 
urement to all who won't convert to the worship 
of Poseidon (or any similar sea-god). 

It functions as a trident of fish commanding and 
as a trident of warning. It also finds water, confers 
water breathing and underwater action upon the 
bearer, and confers a cube of force ability. It pos- 
sesses speech and telepathy (in the common tongue 
as well as the languages of all sea creatures), 

On a natural roll of 20, in addition to its nor- 
mal damage, wave dehydrates its opponent, 
draining one-half of his or her remaining hit 
points (compute normal damage first). 


Zezen Washio's Trident 

XP Value: 2,200 GP Value: 11,000 
Ochimo: The Spirit Warrior 
Zezen Washio, a 6th-level Samurai, owns a fri- 
dent +3 with an Intelligence of 15. It has the 
power to detect magic in a 10-foot radius, detect 
large traps within 10 feet, and detect precious 
metals in a 20-foot radius. It is semi-empathic 
with an Ego of 6, 


Pool 
A pool can be anything from a simple, backwater 
pond to a small lagoon. 


Dimensional 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 10,000 
Escape from Thunder Raft 
A dimensional pool can appear as a small pond, 
an ornate reflecting pool, or anything in between. 
The pool's form is decided by the wizard who 
creates it. These pools can be used to travel from 


one dimension to another. The pool reflects some 
far-off scene in a shimmering image on its sur- 
face, and any creature submerging itself in the 
pool finds itself transported to that scene (immer- 
sion must be complete for the magic to work). 

To control the destination of the pool requires a 
magical talisman that the wizard enchants at the 
sume time that the pool is created. The poo! talis- 
man is made of nixie, merman, and nuckalavee 
hairs magically encased in a large diamond, The 
process ruins the diamond's value as a precious 
stone but creates a powerful tool for traveling the 
dimensions. 

To change the pool's destination, the bearer of 
the pool talisman simply stares at the water and 
concentrates, and the pool's image shifts to the 
place or dimension the user has in mind. The pool 
remains fixed on that location, and may transport 
anyone submerged in its waters, until the poo! 
talisman holder changes the destination again. 

Unless an individual holds the talisman, how- 
ever, the journcy is one-way; the talisman-bearer 
may return to the pool (with up to six comrades) 
by simply concentrating upon it while immersed 


in a normal body of water, 
Golden 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,00 
The Hidden Shrine of Tamoachan 


The fluid in this basin is magical as long as it 
remains in the basin. If it is removed, it is just col- 
ored water. Anything stuck into the liquid reacts 
with the fluid so that the second time that the 
item or an item of the same material is stuck into 
the pool, it will turn to gold. The item remains 
gold for only two turns. 


Mellenea’s Pool Portal 
XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 20,000 
Rogue's Gallery 

The magical pool portal is the favored mode of 
planar travel for psionicist Mellenca, but hers is 
not the only one known to exist, Rumors persist 
of one somewhere in a Sla-mori beneath Quali- 
nost, Ansalon, and on other worlds as well. Meth- 
ods of activating the portal vary from merely 
touching the magical liquid to placing astrally- 
linked material in it and performing an incanta- 
tion, but the result is the same as invoking the 
Psychoportive Discipline, Probability Travel— 
sending the traveler, including his or her physical 
body, into the Astral Plane. 

708 


r 


847 


Vol of Tears — 


of Tears 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 10,000 
The water fulls down a surface of rocks and 
undergoes a brief magical change. At its begin- 
ning it is merely water, and when it falls into the 
pool, it becomes normal once more, If taken dur- 
ing the course of its fall, however, the liquid is 
magical. A draft of one pint volume has some 
effect, similar to a potion, To determine the 
results, use the table below. Note that the Potion 
Miscibility Table must be used if more than one 
such drink is taken. Storage of the liquid in any 
sort of container causes it to lose all of its magi- 
cal properties instantly. 
Ten feet from its edge, the water is 10 feet 
deep. It is 30 feet deep in the center, Visibility is 3 
feet clearly, 6 feet dimly. 


Roll Magical Effects 
1 Baldness: Hair regrows naturally in 


time. 
2 Color Change: Any bright color covers 


skin for 1d6+6 turns. 

3 Diminution: As the potion of the same 
name, 

4 Divisibility: Can become two exact 
duplicates for 1d6+6 rounds, 


5 Dragonfly Control: Ability to control 
normal insccts of this sort for 1d6+6 
turns. 

6 Gaseous Form: As the potion of the 
same name. 

7 Gascousness: Belching for 1d6+6 
hours. 

8 Giant Feet: Feet grow one foot or more 
in length for 1d6+6 rounds, 

9 Growth: As the potion of the same 
name. 

10 Hairiness: All hair grows longer, 
thicker, and quite bristly, remaining 
until trimmed or shaved. 

11 Human Controlled: The speech of any 
human will act as suggestion spell for 
2d6+6 turns. 

12 Invisibility to Self; Unable to see any 
part of self or possessions for 1d6+6 
rounds, j 

13 Levity: Overcome by urge to be witty, 
tell jokes and puns, and laugh at others 
for 1d6+6 rounds. 

14 Philter of Loaf: Sit with fect up or lic 


around 1d6+6 turns. 

15 Plumpness: Immediate weight gain of 
1d10+20% for 1d6+6 turns. 

16 Spud: Tuberous growth pops out of ear 
every round for 1d6+6 rounds. 

17 Super Hedonism: Relax, smell flow- 
ers, enjoy scene, and seek pleasure for 
1d6+6 turns 

18 Sweat Water: Perspire very freely for 
1d6+6 rounds, and must drink 1d4 


quarts of liquid after that. 

19 Water Breathe: Must inhale water for 
1d6+6 rounds. 

20 Yodeling: Overcome with desire to 
climb atop anything and yodel as loudly 


as possible for 1d6+6 turns. 


Porpherio’s Garden 
XP Value: 6,000 GP Value: 45,000 
Beyond the Crystal Cave 

The garden stands atop a small hill. It is in the 
shape of an ellipse about 2,600 feet long and 1,900 
feet wide at its widest place. It is entirely sur- 
rounded by an impenetrable force wall created by 
Porpherio, The wall is a complete ellipsoid (a solid 
oval-shaped body)—thus tunneling or flying gain 
invaders nothing if they attempt to enter the gar- 
den. In addition to being impenetrable, the wall 
has strange properties. When viewed from a dis- 
tance, it is transparent—the garden is visible from 
afar, from inside the garden there is an excellent 
view of the surrounding countryside, When 
approached, the wall gradually becomes opaque. It 
begins to mist over when the viewer is 30 feet away 
and, as someone begins to approach, the opacity 
increases until about 10 feet away, when vision 
through the walls becomes impossible. 

Just prior to his death, Porpherio laid five great 
enchantments on the entire garden area that are 
still in effect. 

* The flow of time in the garden has been slowed 
in relation to the outside world so that all that 
dwell inside age very slowly. This may pose a 
problem for the adventurers since, when they 
return to the outside world, they may have been 
absent some time. They will not, however, suf- 
fer any ill effects on their return (like unnatural 
aging), apart from a partial loss of memory, 
This enchantment also means that from the 
inside of the garden the passing of time (the 
passage of the sun and other time effects) on the 


outside appears to be going at the expecied rate, 
3i 


| | 


Porpherio’s Garden 


— — 


Thus, characters are not aware of the slowing of 
time within the garden, 

No fire, natural or magical, can be made to 
burn in the garden. 

Magical or psionic flying, and levitation can- 
not be performed in the garden. 

No matter what the season outside the garden, 
inside it is always summer. During the garden's 
nights, a little light rain (from small, magically 
produced clouds) provides whatever moisture 
the plants need. 

Because of Porpherio’s first enchantment, time 


plant, conjure fire elemental, control weather, 
control winds, creeping doom, delayed blast 
fireball, earthquake, entangle, explosive runes, 
find familiar, fire charm, fire seeds, fire shield, 
fire storm, fire trap, fireball, flame arrow, flame 
strike, fly, hallucinatory forest, hallucinatory 
terrain, hypnatism, incendiary cloud, insect 
plague, jump, levitate, mass charm, produce fire, 
produce flame, pyrotechnics, reverse gravity, 
summon insects, wall of fire, and weather sum- 
moning. 

Spells that do not have their usual effects: A 


within the garden moves about 700% slower than 

that on the outside. For each day spent in the gar- 

den, two years pass in the outside world; for each 
hour spent in the garden, one month passes. The 

DM must therefore take care recording time. 

It is possible that characters will try to destroy 
the force field. Physical assault cannot harm it, 
though a magical assault may cause a temporary 
weakening of the field. For this to occur, a spell 
cast by a wizard of 20th level or above is required. 
Any weakening of the field, however, causes a 
temporal wind to sweep the caster into a time vor- 
tex. The DM may choose to have the caster arrive 
in a random dimension, at a random time. 

As a consequence of the enchantments Porphe- 
rio cast, the entire garden and all its contents and 
inhabitants show a strong dweomer if detect 
magic is cast, Further, such detection indicates all 
possible forms of magic—conjuration, alteration, 
abjuration, and others are present, thus making 
the use of detect magic spells and even artifacts 
useless. Because the garden has a highly magical 
nature, there are other interesting side effects. 

First, druids operate within the confines of the 
garden at one level higher than normal. This 
affects their spell abilities, hit points and saving 
throws. Druids gradually become aware of their 
new powers during the first six turns spent in the 
garden, The advancement is temporary, lost when 
the druid returns to the outside world. As the 
advancement of druids represents their greater 
oneness with the garden, the loss of the benefits 
should not cause the druids injury. Thus, the loss 
of the hit points never reduces a druid to 0 or less. 

Then too, many spells do not operate or have 
different effects: 

Spells that do not operate: animal summoning 
J, animal summoning Il. animal summoning III, 
burning hands, call lightning, charm monster, 
charm person, charm person or mammal, charm 


chariot of Sustarre cannot operate through the 
time barrier. Command operates, but creatures 
do not obey (this may confuse the caster as he or 
she will be of the opinion that command oper- 
ates normally). Conjure elemental does not con- 
jure a fire elemental, though other elementals 
may be conjured as normal, Dimension door 
takes the traveler through the time barrier, but 
only to the Astral Plane. Dispel magic only 
works on a single, specific item; it cannot be 
used on areas of the garden. Drawmij 5 instant 
summons works, but articles called from outside 
the barrier are lost in time. A glyph of warding 
will not produce a fire glyph. Predict weather 
works, but the forecast is always “fine.” Snake 
charm would work, but there are no snakes in 
the garden, Snare operates, but not against the 
interests of the garden. Suggestion and mass 
suggestion have the same limitation as snare. 

Trip is also subject to the snare limitation. 

The only entrance to the garden (apart from pla- 
nar travel) is through a cave complex under the 
southwestern side of the hill on which the garden 
stands. These caves were formed by the river that 
once flowed freely from the garden but which now, 
due to the time change, no longer reaches the cave 
opening. Over the cons, the original river bed in 
the surrounding countryside was refilled and cov- 
ered without trace. If the area is searched, the 
entrance to the cave complex may easily be found. 

The garden grounds, portions of which can be 
seen through the barrier, are extremely well 
maintained and beautifully ordered, as if by a 
team of expert gardeners. The grounds fall into 
two distinct categories: woodland and lawn. 

The woodlands are pleasant, sunny, open 
places with the trees well spaced and a rich 
greensward studded with a multitude of flowers. 
Unless otherwise indicated, there is a generous 


collection of tree species and other plants includ- 
Ii 


"a ae re 


849 


a... nS 


Portable Bridge 


EEE 


ing tropical, subtropical and temperate. Tree 
species present include almond, ash, beech, birch, 
box, cedar, chestnut, cypress, elm, holly, 
mahogany, maple, olive, poplar, redwood, rowan, 
willow, and yew—oak is present but not com- 
mon. Pundits among the players may complain 
about the mixture of species (for example, shrub- 
bery and grass growing beneath a beech tree), the 
DM should remind the players that the area is 
magical and almost anything can happen, 

The woodlands are threaded with pathways, 
they are obvious when trod upon or crossed, 
slight depressions in the turf that bear no flowers. 
But, once abandoned, a path may only be found 
by crossing it. When not on a path, a party cannot 
follow a planned route, as the woods are confus- 
ing. On each turn roll 1d6: 


Roll Direction 

1-2 The party wanders at 45° to the left of 
their chosen route. 

3-4 They go where they intend. 

5-6 They wander at 45° to the right of their 


chosen route. 


The lawns are not difficult to cross; characters 
may go anywhere on them without difficulty and 
without becoming lost. As in the woodland, the 
paths cannot be seen unless followed or crossed. 
Despite their neat appearance, the lawns are 
never cut, but, like all else here, grow under the 
direction of the songs of the Green Man per- 
suaded by to become the keeper of the garden. 

The garden inhabitants, including a pair of 
rarely seen lovers, are potentially hostile to any 
intruders. If the party does no harm, they mect 
nothing worse than extreme indifference— 
though some inhabitants attack on sight or under 
certain circumstances (left to the DM's imagina- 
tion). Any form of aggression (physical or verbal) 
or any hint that the party has come to take away 
the two lovers results in an assault by the inhabi- 
tants. Under no circumstances can the garden’s 
inhabitants (including those charmed by the 
fountain All Heal) be persuaded, charmed, hyp- 
notized, or controlled into betraying the two 
lovers they believe to be Caerwyn and Porpherio 
reborn. During conversation with some of the 
more garrulous creatures (for example the lep- 
rechauns), hints may be dropped that somewhere 
there is a palace. The Palace of Spires once stood 
as the residence of Cacrwyn and Porpherio in the 


8 


5 


0 


— 


ae onthe 


2 
Re, 


2 ll 2 40 Sad 
TE 


A 


A 
44 t 


S Wr i bi iA. ner 7 ý 


7 U 


f 


garden, but now exists as their tomb in a parallel 
dimension. It may only be reached via the tele- 
port mechanism in the garden maze. 

Not all the garden denizens were present in Por- 
pherio’s time. A treant has made a home here 
{although how it managed to gain access to the gar- 
den is a mystery to the other inhabitants) and the 
Green Man now tends the plants and animals at Por- 
pherio s behest. Two human adventurers, Hamish 
and Argus, managed to enter the garden, drank from 
the fountain A/ Heal and so resolved to remain. 

Should the party indulge in combat in the gar- 
den, there is a chance that the Green Man will 
appear. If the party kills anything, the odds of his 
appearance are one in six. 

Generally, the garden inhabitants will not 
attack druids or nonevil elves unless attacked by 
them, Though the various creatures refrain from 
attacking, certain other classes are less restrained. 


Portable Bridge 
XP Value: 10,000 GP Value: 50,000 
The Complete Wizard's Handbook 

This is a bridge that can be folded up and carried 
in a pocket. When unfolded, the bridge can span a 
river or chasm without the use of pillars or other 
supports. The portable bridge is as strong as a 
bridge made of stone. 

3712 


e 


Pot of Plam Protection — 


f 
; 


KL Ek 


— VA 


Portable Hole 
XP Value: 5,000 GP Value: 50,000 

DUNGEON Master Guide 
A portable hole is a circle of magical cloth 
spun from the webs of a phase spider and inter- 
woven with strands of ether and beams of 
Astral Plane luminaries. When opened fully, a 
portable hole is 6 feet in diameter, but it can be 
folded as small as a pocket handkerchief, When 
spread upon any surface, it causes an extradi- 
mensional hole 10 feet deep to come into 
being. This hole can be “picked up” from 
inside or out simply by taking hold of the edges 
of the magical cloth and folding it up. Either 
way, the entrance disappears, but anything 
inside the hole remains. 

The only oxygen in the hole is that allowed 
by creation of the space, so creatures requiring 
the gas cannot remain inside for more than a 
turn or so Without opening the space again by 
means of the magical cloth. The cloth does not 
accumulate weight even if its hole is filled 
(with gold, for example). Each portable hole 
opens on its own particular nondimensional 
space. Ifa bag of holding is placed within a 
portable hole, a rift to the Astral Plane is torn in 
the space, and the bag and the cloth are sucked 


851 


into the void and forever lost. If a portable hole 
is placed within a bag of holding, it opens a 
gate to another plane, and the hole, bag, and 
any creatures within a 10-foot radius are drawn 
to the plane, the portable hole and bag of hold- 
ing are destroyed in the process. 


Portable Shadow 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 7,000 

The Complete Ranger's Handbook 
Similar in appearance to a portable hole, a 
portable shadow resembles a gauzy black circle 
about 10 feet in diameter that can be folded up 
into a packet about 6 inches square, When 
unfolded and laid on any horizontal surface, the 
portable shadow looks like any normal area of 
shade, as dark as a shadow cast by a tree or 
another solid object under a midday sun. This 
magical item is useful for concealment and 
makes as good a hiding place as any naturally 
shaded area; rangers, thieves, and others have 
their normal chance of hiding in shadows when 
standing in a portable shadow. The shadow can 
be picked up by lifting the edge and folding it like 
a tablecloth. 

Dungeon Masters should use common sense 
adjudicating the use of a portable shadow. If a 
character attempts to use it to hide in shadow 
while crossing a featureless plain, the presence of 
a “black hole” attached to nothing is more likely 
to attract attention than to divert it. However, it 
can provide a shady place to cool off, away from 
the desert sun. 


Portable Spring 
XP Value: 2,500 GP Value: 12,500 
Secrets of the Lamp 

This blue piece of cloth becomes a bubbling 
spring, pouring forth 100 gallons of water a day 
whenever it is placed on the ground. Like a 
portable hole, the spring can be picked up and 
moved as a piece of cloth, allowing the spring to 
travel with the owner 


Postern-! 
See Diving Bell 


Pot of Plant Protection 
XP Value: 200 GP Value: 1,000 
DRAGON Magazine 73 
This is a simple clay plant pot (size varies). Any 
insect entering the pot, or alighting on a plant 
3716 


growing in the pot, dies if it is of a species harm- 
ful to that plant Pots of plant protection are usu- 
ally found in groups of Ida. never singly. 


Potion 
Potions are typically found in ceramic, crystal, 
glass, or metal flasks or vials (though you can 
change this, if you want). Flasks and other con- 
taincrs generally contain enough fluid to provide 
one person with one complete dose to achieve the 
cffects described for cach potion below. 

Opening and drinking a potion has an initia- 
tive modifier of 1, but the potion doesn't take 
effect until an additional initiative modifier 
delay of 1d4+1 has passed. Only then do the full 
magical properties of the potion become evi- 
dent. Magical oils are poured over the body and 
smeared appropriately; this imposes a speed fac- 
tor delay of Ida. Potions can be compounded 
by wizards at relatively low cost However, they 
must have a sample of the desired potion to 
obtain the right formula. Furthermore, ingredi- 
ents tend to be rare or hard to come by. This 
aspect of potions, as well as the formulation of 
new ones by players, is detailed in the Spell 


Research rules in the DMG. 
Roll Potion Type 
Ol-10 Brew 

11-20 Concoction 
21-30 Cordial 
31-40 Elixir 
41-50 Extract 
51-60 Koumiss 
6170 Mixture 
7180 Philter 
81-90 Potion 
91-00 Tonic 


Identifying Potions: Generally, potion con- 
tainers should bear no identifying marks, so the 
PCs must sample each container to find the 
nature of the liquid inside. However, even a small 
taste should suffice to identify a potion in some 
way. Introduce different sorts of potions, both 
helpful and harmful, to cause difficulties in iden- 
tification. In addition, the same type of potion, 
when created in different labs, might smell, taste, 
and look differently. 

Combining Potions: The magical mixtures 
and compounds that make up potions are not 
always compatible. The compatibility of potions 


is tested whenever two potions are actually inter- 
mingled, or a potion is consumed by a creature 
while another such liquid, already consumed, is in 
effect. 

Permanent potions have an effective duration 
of one turn for mixing purposes. If you drink 
another potion within one turn of drinking one 
with Permanent duration, check on the Potion 
Compatibility Table. The exact effects of combin- 
ing potions can’t be calculated, because of differ- 
ences in formulae, fabrication methods, and 
component quality employed by various wizards. 
Therefore, it is suggested that the following table 
be used, with the following exceptions: 

* Delusion potions mix with anything. 
* Treasure finding potions always yield a lethal 


poison. 

Secretly roll 14100 for potion compatibility 
giving no clucs until necessary. The effects of 
combining specific potions can be preset as a plot 
device at your option. 


Roll Result 

01 Explosion. If two or more potions are 
swallowed together, internal damage is 
6410 points Anyone within a 8“ radins 
takes 1d10 points of damage. If the 
potions are mixed externally (in a 
beaker, say), all within 10“ radius suffer 
4d6 points of damage, no saving throw. 
Lethal poison results. Imbiber is dead. 
If externally mixed, a poison gas cloud 
of 10° diameter results. All within the 
cloud must roll successful saving 
throws vs. poison or die. (A treasure 
Sinding potion always creates a lethal 
poison when combined with another 
potion.) 

Mild poison causes nausea and the loss 
of | point cach of Strength and Dexter- 
ity, no saving throw, One potion is can- 
celed and the other is at half strength 
and duration, (Randomly decide which 
is canceled.) 

Potions can't be mixed. Both potions 
are totally destroyed - one cancels the 
other 


02-03 


09-15 


16-25 Potions can't be mixed. One potion is 
canceled, but the other remains normal 
(random selection). 

Potions can’t be mixed. Both potions 


function at half normal efficacy. 
mé 


Potion of 


a — — 4 


Potions can be mixed and work nor- 
mally, unless their effects are contradic- 
tory (diminution and growth, for 
example, simply cancel each other). (A 
delusion potion can be mixed with all 
other potions.) 

Compatible result, One potion (ran- 
domly selected) has 150% its normal 
efficacy. The DM can rule that only the 
duration of the augmented potion is 
extended. 

Discovery. The mixing of the potions 
creates a special effect—only one of 
the potions functions, but its effects 
upon the imbiber are permanent. 
(Note that some harmful side effects 
could well result from this, at the 
DM's discretion.) 


91-99 


Potion Duration: Unless otherwise stated, the 
effects of a potion last for four complete turns 
plus Ida additional turns (1d4+4). 

In Kara-Tur: Potions in the Land of Fate are 
usually found in small crystal bottles, slightly 
pyramid-shaped in that the base is wider than 
the mouth. The mouth is steppered with crystal, 
and sealed with wax. The bottles are heavy and 
quite resilient, and gain a +2 on saving throws 
against crushing blows. In addition, these bot- 
tles are often labeled to indicate their contents. 
As an option, the DM may on the following 
table to determine if the bottle is labeled and 


labeled correctly: 


Roll Label 
1-2 Bottle is labeled correctly. 
3-5 Bottle is unlabeled. 

6 Boule is labeled incorrectly. 


For incorrectly-labeled bottles, the DM may 
roll again on the chart to determine the incor- 
rect label, and note it accordingly in his or her 
own notes. An Intelligence check may indicate 
to a player character that a bottle may be mis- 
labeled, but only if the character has encoun- 
tered that form of potion before (“It looks 
cloudier than any extra-healing potion you've 
ever cen). 

In a Dark Sun” Campaign: Potions come in 
the form of magical fruits or berries. The juices 
of the fruit hold the magical properties of the 
potion and the fruit must be eaten to release the 


853 


magical effect. On Athas, potions are never found 
as fluids in flasks or vials. 

Any juicy berry or fruit may be enchanted 
with a potion. Since the juice itself holds the 
potion, drier fruits such as dates cannot be so 
enchanted. The type of fruit chosen to house the 
potion has no effect; any fruit can contain any 
potion, 

Any potion, elixir, philter, or oil can be 
enchanted into a fruit, On Athas, these may be 
referred to as potions or fruits, interchangeably (a 
potion of giant strength is the same as a fruit of 
giant strength). 

Once the skin of the fruit is broken, it must be 
eaten within one turn or the potions magic is lost. 
Whereas normal fruits may only remain ripe for a 
few days or weeks before they begin to rot, potion 
fruits have their period of ripeness greatly 
extended. Once enchanted with a potion, a fruit 
remains ripe for 99 years. After that time, the 
enchantment fades and the fruit rots normally. 
The entire fruit must be eaten to gain the effect of 
the potion. This takes an entire round. 

Fruits that are enchanted with oil or salve 
magie must be crushed and the juice allowed to 
run over the user, which takes two rounds. 

Potion fruits cannot be identified by taste, A 
detect magic spell can identify a fruit or tree as 
magical, but only identify or similar magic pro- 
vides a positive identification. 

Potion fruits can be combined. Different potion 
fruits caten concurrently all have their effects on 
the consumer. Potion fruit duration is 4+1d4 turns 
unless otherwise stated in the description. 


of Absorption 

XP Value: 700 GP Value: 1,200 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 65 
This powerful concoction protects the drinker 
from one specific kind of energy or attack form 
for six rounds per draft, The drinker swallows the 
potion and concentrates on a particular type of 
attack, such as fire, and the potion's effects 
allows the character to ignore 20 points of fire 
damage per round for six rounds. These potions 
are usually found in flasks that contain four 
doses, The type of attack named must be specific. 
For example “melee attack” is too general, but 
“blunt attack,” or “slicing attack” are specific 
enough to work. 


nu 


Potion of Advanced Meditation 


— .. — — 


of Advanced Meditation 
XP Value GP Value 
Normal: 300 700 
Special: 400 850 


Pouynmnaon Newszine 65 

A psionic character imbibing this potion gains a 
+2 on all Power Scores in the primary discipline 
and a +1 to all Power Scores in other disciplines 
for 1d&+4 rounds, A rare 5% of these potions also 
negate the ill effects of rolling a natural 20 on a 
power check. These potions are useless to nonp- 
sionic characters, 


of Agility 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 900 
Dunctons & Dracons* Rules Cyclopedia 
The user's Dexterity score becomes IS. and all 
applicable bonuses are immediately gained. The 
effect lasts for one turn 


of Aging 
XP Value: — GP Value: 500 
Potynepron Newszine 65 
Drinking this potion increases the imbiber’s age 
by 1d20 years, changing ability scores as detailed 
in the PHB. 


of Alternate Profession 
XP Value: 250 GP Value: 700 
POLYHLORON Newszine 65 
This potion allows the drinker to temporarily gain 
the Ist level abilities of any class of the charac- 
ter’s choosing, This includes abilities such as a 
priest's to turn undead or a ranger’ tracking abil- 
ity. The duration of the potion is 2d4 turns. 


of Ambrosia 
XP Value: 200 GP Value: 300 
Dine, & Deacons Master Set 
This is a potion of immortality, but with a short 
duration, Repeated quuſſs are needed to maintain 
Immortal status, While under the influence of this 
potion, (lasting 1d4 years), the user does not age 
and is immune to all ageing attacks. 


Amalgamous 
XP Value GP Value 
Type J. 1,200 9,350 
Type II: 550 900 
Type II: 700 1,450 
The Secret of Bone Hill 


A unique feature of this module was that potions 

crossed with other potions were featured as the 

PC rewards. The three resulting potions are listed 

below. 

* Type I: Potion of polymorph self crossed with 
a potion of vampire control: This one is a real 
discovery, but when tested it gives no indica- 
tion of its nature other than a “good feeling,” a 
“warm tingling,” or “an unexplained desire.” 
After quaffing this potion, the subject becomes 
nervous and excitable. He or she wants to do 
“something” but does not know what, and cau- 
tion is not exercised by this character. The very 
next living thing the character mentions, how- 
ever, is what he or she becomes! (Character 
classes are not considered “living things” for 
this purpose. If the next living thing is an elf 
wizard, the drinker of the potion becomes an 
eli but not a wizard.) The effect lasts for 246 
days. Objects worn are allowed a save of 12 or 
better or they become part of the polymorph, 
unless the altered form is one that wears simi- 

3723 


ccc 


8 


54 


lar gear under normal circumstances. The 
polymorphed form still has the same mind, but 
the abilities could be radically changed. If no 
form is seen within 24 hours of game time no 
transformation occurs. 

Type II: Potion of gaseous form crossed with a 
potion of invisibility: Testing this liquid pro- 
duces translucence in the entire figure. If the 
entire potion is consumed, the figure becomes 
gaseous and then vanishes. His or her items 
will become gaseous as well. Obviously, he or 
she cannot communicate at all in this state. 
Vision is likewise slightly obscured, Hearing is 
quite impossible. Only taste and smell are fully 
activated, A vague sense of touch, especially 
temperature sensitivity, does exist. The charac- 
ter has a MV rate of 9, slightly slower if pene- 
trating a small hole, cracks under a door, or 
other small spaces. After 20 rounds the invisi- 
bility wears off and the cloud is visible. The 
cloud remains gascous for a further eight 
turns. The cloud can be damaged by lightning 
and magical fire, and a whirlwind does double 
damage. 

Type III: Potion of longevity crossed with a 
potion of speed: A test sample produces a craving 
for the rest unless a save vs. poison is made. If 
the save is successful, the character talks rapidly 
for a few minutes but feels terribly robust and 
hardy. The full potion causes the character to 
become five years younger while being able to 
move at a 50% bonus for 30 rounds. The charac- 
ter must also, however, suffer two system shock 
rolls. If cither check fails the character takes 
2d10 points of immediate damage, 


of Animal Control 
XP Value: 250 GP Value: 400 
DUNGEON MasteR Guide 
This potion enables the imbiber to empathize with 
and control the emotions of animals of one type 
cats, dogs, horses, etc. The number of animals con- 
trolled depends upon size: 5d4 animals the size of 
giant rats; 3d4 animals of about human size; or 1d4 
animals weighing about ton or more. The type of 
animal that can be controlled depends upon the 
potion, as indicated by a 1d20 die roll. 


Roll Animal Type 
01-04 Mammal 
05-08 Avian 
09-12 Reptile/Amphibian 


Eo 
x Potion, Anti-Sleep 


13-15 Fish 
16-17 Mammal/Avian 
18-19 Reptile/Amphibian/Fish 


20 All of the above 


Animals with Intelligence of 5 (low Intelli- 
gence) or better are entitled to a saving throw vs. 
spell. Control is limited to emotions or drives 
unless some form of communication ts possible. 
Note that many monsters can’t be controlled by 
the use of this potion, nor can humans, demihu- 
mans, or humanoids. 


Antidote 
XP Value: 200 GP Value: 400 
DUNGEONS & DRAGONS Rules Cyclopedia 

The user becomes completely immune to certain 
poisons and gains a +2 bonus to all saving throws 
vs. poison. The weakest type of antidote protects 
against the poisons of all creatures with 3 Hit 
Dice or less; stronger antidotes counteract the 
poisons of larger creatures. Poisons avoided for 
the duration of the potion (by successful saving 
throws) have no effect after the duration ends. 

Roll 1d10 to determine what types of poisons 
the antidote protects against. 


Roll Effected Poisons 

1-4 Poisons from 3-HD (or lesser) creatures 
5-7 Poisons from 7-HD (or lesser) creatures 
8-9 Poisons from 15-HD (or lesser) creatures 


0 All poisons 
"A potion of poison is normally treated as poison 
from a 7-HD monster. The DM can adjust this 
option as necessary. 


of Anti-Magic 
XP Value: 800 GP Value: 2,400 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 65 
When this potion is ingested, it dispels magic on 
the imbiber, negating any spell or magical effect 
the character may be under. For example, it 
hegates charms, geas, and curses. 


Anti-Sleep 
XP Value: 350 GP Value: 500 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 67 

Imbibing this mystical draft makes a creature 
immune to all magical sleep effects for eight 
hours, The need for normal rest is not negated, 
however, so a very tired drinker still could fall 
asleep. 

3727 


855 : 


i WS Se 


Potion of Arcane Comprehension 


of Arcane Comprehension 

XP Value: 400 GP Value: 1,200 
Dunoron Magazine 35 
The formula for this magical draft was devel- 
oped by the alchemist-wizard Jocasta to facili- 
tate the organization of her spell library. It 
grants the imbiber the ability to read magic for 
as long as the potion lasts, but, more impor- 
tantly, it enhances a spellcaster’s comprehen- 
sion of all written spells. This allows the user 
to cast spells from scrolls (or books) or scribe 
them into a personal spell book without fear of 
failure due to the level of the spell. This does 
not, however, allow the user to cast spells inap- 
propriate to class. A typical, single-draft vial of 
4 potion of arcane comprehension lasts for 
3410 hours, 


of Archmagedom 
XP Value: 450 GP Value: 1,200 


NA Newszine 6$ 
Similar to a potion of wizardry, this grants a wiz- 
ard a temporary increase of 5 levels for 1d4+2 
turns. It improves the effected character's Hit 
Dice, attack rolls, and saving throws, In addition, 
it allows the character to cast spelle 4 levels 
higher, The drinker does not gain any additional 


spells 


of Black Sight 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 900 
Vale of the Mage 
This potion enables the imbiber to see as well in 
darkness as in daylight. This does not work in 
magical darkness. The potion’s effects last for 
10d8 minutes. 


of Blending 
XP Value: 300 GP Value: 500 
Dunonons & Deacons Rules Cyclopedia 

The user may change at will to any color, pat- 
tern, or combination of colors. Only colors can 
be altered, but all items carried are affected. 
The user, hidden by this chamelconesque cam- 
ouflage, can rarcly be detected (10% chance) 
unless the observer can defect invisible things 
or possesses (ruesight (as the priest spell) or a 
similar ability, 


856 


of Blindness 
XP Value: — GP Value: 250 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 65 
When a character quaffs this potion, he or she is 
blinded, per the 2nd-level wizard spell of the 
same name, Its effects last for 2d4 turns. 


LANN 


of Bouncing 
XP Value: 250 GP Value: 400 
PotynenaoN Newszine 65 
The drinker of this potion begins to bounce 
1d6+4 feet above the ground with each step 
taken. The effects of the potion last 1d10+10 
turns. 


of Bubbles 

XP Value: 50 GP Value: 250 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 65 
Upon consuming this potion, the imbiber begins 
to spew forth a mass of bubbles. If the imbiber 
closes his or her mouth, the bubbles spew forth 
from the ears and nose. The duration of the 
potion is one week, and during that the time the 
affected character makes all attacks and saving 
throws at —2, 


Nn 


— — — 


Potion of Climbing 


of Chameleon Power 
XP Value: 350 GP Value: 700 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 65 

This small potion appears to contain a swirling 
mass of colors. When quaffed, it causes the 
drinker to blend into the background for 1d4 
turns, If the character remains immobile, there is 
only a 10% chance of being seen. However, if the 
character moves, that chance increases to 30%, A 
detect invisibility spell cannot reveal someone 
using a chameleon power potion. 


of Childishness 

XP Value: GP Value: 400 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 65 
A character drinking this cursed potion regresses 
physically into the body of a child, age five. The 
character remains unchanged intellectually, and 
all equipment and clothing are left at adult size. 
The potion’s effects on the character are perma- 
nent unless a restoration spell is cast within three 
weeks, otherwise only a wish can restore the 
character. 


of Clairaudience 
XP Value: 250 GP Value: 400 
DUNGEON Master Guide 
This potion empowers the creature drinking it to 
hear as the 3rd-level wizard spell of the same 
name. However, the potion can be used to hear 
even in unknown areas within 30 yards. Its effects 
last for two turns. 


of Clairvoyance 

XP Value: 300 GP Value: 500 
DUNGEON Master Guide 
This potion empowers the individual to see as the 
3rd-level wizard spell, clairvoyance. It differs 
from the spell in that unknown areas up to 30 
yards distant can be seen. Its effects last for one 
turn, 


of Clarity 
XP Value: 550 GP Value: 1,100 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 65 
This potion works on the character drinking it as 
the 6th-level wizard spell true seeing, granting 
that ability for 1d6 turns. The potion also negates 
the effects of a feeblemind spell. 


857 


Clay 
XP Value: 900 GP Value: 2,700 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 65 
The imbiber of this potion, along with all cloth- 
ing and all items worn, turns into soft sculpting 
clay for two turns. During this time, the clay can 
be sculpted by anyone, thereby changing the 
imbiber’s appearance. When the potion’s duration 
expires, the drinker turns back to flesh and any 
changes made to the clay now a permanently 
fixed—-whether the changes were to body or 
clothing. Only a wish can restore the character's 


original appearance. 


Clean And Dry 
XP Value: 100 GP Value: 250 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 65 
When this potion is quaffed, the imbiber’s body, 
clothing, and equipment become instantly clean 
and dry—as if after a bath and a thorough steam- 
cleaning of possessions. 


Clearwater 
XP Value: 200 GP Value: 300 
BLACKMOOR 
Removes all salt from water in a 10-foot globe 
around the point of release. 


of Climbing 
XP Value: 300 GP Value: 500 
DUNGEON Master Guide 

Imbibing this potion enables the individual to 
climb as a thief, up or down vertical surfaces. A 
climbing potion is effective for one turn plus Sda 
rounds. The base chance of slipping and falling is 
1%. Make a percentile check at the halfway point 
of the climb—01 means the character falls. For 
every 100 pounds carried by the character, add 
1% to the chance of slipping. If the climber wears 
armor, add the following to the falling chance: 


Chance 
Armor to Fall 
Studded leather 1% 
Ringmail 2% 
Scale mail 4% 
Chain mail 1% 
Banded or splinted armor 8% 
Plate mail 10% 
Field plate 10% 
Full plate 12% 
Magical armor, any type 1% 


Potion of Controlling Damage 


of Controlling Damage 

XP Value: 400 GP Value: 2,000 
Mordenkainen Fantastic Adventure 
This potion is usable by all classes, When 
imbibed, the effects are realized immediately 
Damage to the user is lessened by 2 points per Hit 
Die of any damage dealt after drinking the potion, 
including damage from spells, weapons, falling, 
etc. When damage caused by combat is given in 
“points,” the potion negates one-third of the total. 
The duration is 348 rounds. 


of Cold Resistance 
XP Value: 250 GP Value: 500 

POLYHEDRON Newszine 65 
Drinking this potion gives an individual magi- 
cal invulnerability to all forms of normal cold, 
such as snow, ice, and arctic winds, In addition, 
it gives resistance to the cold generated by 
spells such as ice storm, wall of ice, and cone of 
cold, and it offers resistance from icy dragon 
breath—all damage from such attacks are ~2 
per cach die of damage (minimum | point of 
damage per die). The potion’s duration is 1d4+4 
turns. 


of Confusion 
GP Value: 250 
PoLyiiEpRON Newszine 68 
The imbiber of this potion instantly becomes con- 
fused for 1d4+4 rounds and docs one of the fol- 
lowing (roll 144): 


XP Value: 


Roll = Effect 
1 Stand still and do nothing. 
2 Attack the nearest creature, 
3 Give away weapon or favorite magical 
item, 
4 Wander off in a daze, 
of Contact Disruption 
XP Value: 400 GP Value: 800 


POLYHEDRON Newszine 65 

When consumed, this potion removes one tangent 
gained by a psionicist who is attempting to estab- 
lish contact with the imbiber. For example, if the 
imbiber is under a two-finger contact, it is 
reduced to a one-finger contact. The potion lasts 
da rounds, and it climinates one tangent each 
round, 


858 


of the Corrosive Touch 


XP Value: 700 GP Value: 1,200 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 65 

This mixture gives the drinker the ability to dis- 
solve material with a touch of the hands. Once 
activated, the corrosive touch remains for 2d12 
rounds whether the affected character wants it 
to or not. The character can dissolve I cubic 
foot of nonliving material such as soft stone or 
wood per round if actively trying to touch as 
much material as possible. This ability can be 
used to cut holes in walls, sculpt statucs, create 
handholds in sheer cliffs, and so forth, Tougher 
materials, such as gemstones, hard rock, or 
metal, dissolve at half the rate, and acid-resis- 
tant matcrials, such as ceramics or crystal dis- 
solve at one quarter the rate. Involuntary 
corrosive touches dissolve | to 4 cubic inches 
of material depending on its strength 
Enchanted items gain a saving throw vs. acid. 
Corrosive hands are deadly in combat, inflict- 
ing 1d8 points of damage per hit. 


n 


of Craftsmanship 
XP Value: 400 GP Value: 800 

POLYHEDRON Newszine 65 
These potions, created by the gnomish wizard 
Fip Cranktip, improve a character's nonweapon 
proficiencies, The imbiber quaffs the potion 
while thinking about a particular skill, and the 
potion grants a 20 in the ability score in that 
skill for 24 hours. Multiple craftsmanship 
potions can be consumed without fear. How- 
ever, cach potion imbibed produces a side 
effect, which also lasts 24 hours. Roll on the 
table below to figure out the side effect for the 
character: 


Roll Effect 

01-16 Grows chicken feathers. 

17-24 Gains X-ray vision. 

25-31 Facial hair turns green. 

32-37 Goblinoids of the opposite sex are 
attracted to the user. 

38-45 Glows in the dark. 

46-55 Shrinks to 50% of normal height. 

56-60 Transported to the Ethereal Plane 

61-67 Continuously bloated with and 
releasing air. 

68-78 Turns into a 4-foot-long, yellow butter- 
fly with human hands, 

79-94 Gains 20 pounds. 

95-00 Roll twice more, ignoring this result 
after that. 

of Creation 
XP Value: 250 GP Value: 400 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 65 


This potion docs nothing if ingested. However, if 
it is poured on the ground, it creates a permanent 
object. The object is most often the one pictured 
on the potion’s container. The majority of these 
potions create furniture, shields, ladders, and 
other nonmagical items. 
Cure Disease 
XP Value: 400 GP Value: 750 


DraGoN Magazine 2 
This potion acts as the priest spell cure disease. 


859 


Potion of Deafness 
of Curing Lycanthropy 
XP Value: 250 GP Value: 2,000 


POLYHEDRON Newszine 82 
Drinking this rare potion cures the imbiber of any 
form of lycanthropy. If the imbiber does not suf- 
fer from lycanthropy, a saving throw vs. poison 
must be made or the character falls unconscious 
for 1d4 turns due to the potent ingredients in the 
liquid. 


of Danger Detection 
XP Value: 250 GP Value: 600 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 6$ 

This powerful elixir is effective for 1d4+4 turns, It 
enables the character drinking it to detect anything 
representing immediate or potential danger within 
100 feet indoors and 100 yards outdoors, It defects 
traps, vipers, or any objects or creatures threaten- 
ing the user. The imbiber can detect dangers that 
are invisible, ethereal, astral, out of phase, hidden, 
or disguised. The user fecls a tingling at the back 
of the neck when faced with a danger. However, 
the exact nature of the danger is not revealed. For 
example, while the user can detect a dangcrous 
trap, the type of trap cannot be discerned, 


Dark Draft of the Voodoo Masters 
XP Value: 600 GP Value: 2,400 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 65 
This four-dose potion was created by savage wiz- 
ards practicing voodoo. Unlike other elixirs, a 
dark draft is meant to be mixed with other 
potions. The user must mix \ of this potion with 
any other magical potion. Also, a fingernail, lock 
of hair, or other bit of organic matter from the 
intended target must be added to the concoction. 
When consumed, the drinker thinks of an 
intended target, and if that target is within 50 
miles, the potion takes effect on that person. The 
victim is not allowed a saving throw. For exam- 
ple, a character who mixed a dark draft potion 
with an elixir of madness can inflict madness 
upon the target. A dark draft does not work with 

poisons or nonmagical oils. 


of Deafness 
XP Value: — GP Value: 800 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 65 
This potion affects the character drinking it as the 
2nd-level wizard spell of the same name. How- 
ever, the saving throw allowed is ys. poison 


instead of spell. Its effects last for 1d4 turns. 
3788 


Potion of Defense 


zac 


of Defense 
XP Value GP Value 
+1; 200 1,000 
+2: 400 2,000 
+3: 600 3,000 
+4; 800 4,000 
+5; 1,00 5,000 


DUNGEONS & Dragons Rules Cyclopedia 
The user gains a bonus to Armor Class, which 
lasts for one turn only. Roll 1d10 to find the 
power of the potion. 


Roll Defense Value 

1-3 +I 
4-5 +2 
6-7 +3 
8-9 +4 

10 +5 

of Deftness 

XP Value GP Value 
Dex 17; 500 800 
Dex 18. 700 1,000 
Dex 19; 900 1,200 
Dex 20: 1,000 1,300 
Dex 21: 1,200 1.500 


POLYHEDRON Newszine 65 
This family of five potions is sought after by 
those who need extra quickness, The potions 
increase Dexterity to various levels. Consult the 
table below. 


Dexterity Duration 
Dex 17 1 day 
Dex 18 12 hours 
Dex 19 9 hours 
Dex 20 6 hours 
Dex 21 2 hours 
of Delusion 
XP Value: — GP Value: 150 


DUNGEON Master Guide 

This potion affects the mind of the character so 
that he or she believes the liquid is some other 
potion (healing, for example, is a good choice 
damage is “restored” by drinking it, and only 
death or rest after an adventure reveals that the 
potion only caused the imbiber to believe it was 
bencfictal). If several individuals taste this 
potion, it is 90% probable that they all agree it is 
the same potion (or whatever type the DM 
selects). 


of Digestion 
XP Value: 200 GP Value: 500 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 65 
The character consuming this potion immediately 
finds all organic substances appetizing. Further- 
more, the user can digest any organic substance 
with no ill effects. This concerns only digestion, 
so while a plank of wood can provide nourish- 
ment, the character must break it into pieces 
before he can swallow it. The duration is 1d4 


days. 


of Digging 
XP Value: 400 GP Value: 1,200 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 65 

This potion enables the drinker to dig through 
dirt, rock, or stone with bare hands. In this man- 
ner, the individual can travel through the 
ground—at normal movement rates—by creating 
a tunnel roughly his or her own size. However, 
any tunnel the digger creates has an 80% chance 
of collapsing behind the user. While this could be 
useful in undermining castle walls, it means that 
other characters are taking a risk if they choose to 
follow the digger. As long as the digger keeps 
moving, it is assumed there is an air pocket sur- 
rounding the character, However, if he or she 
pauses for more than three rounds or encounters a 
mishap, such as running into an underground 
lake, the character's air supply rapidly disappears. 
A single potion lasts for 1d4+4 turns. 


of Diminution 
XP Value: 300 GP Value: 500 
DUNGEON Master Guide 

After drinking this potion, the individual (and 
everything carried or worn) diminishes in size— 
to as small as 5% of normal. The percentage of 
the potion consumed determines the amount a 
character shrinks. For example, if 40% of the 
contents are swallowed, the person shrinks to 
60% of normal size. The effects of this potion last 
for six turns plus 1d4+1 turns. 


of Direction 
XP Value: 350 GP Value: 800 
Dragon Magazine 91 

The effects of this drink last much longer than 
most potions, continuing for 12d4 hours. Con- 
sumption of this potion enables a character to 
retrace a path over any solid terrain, in effect pre- 
venting the character from getting lost. If a maze 

3762 


„ r r 


860 


— eee 


Potion of the Dracolich 


j ae 


spell is cast at a person under the influence of this 
potion, the user re-emerges from the maze after 
only one round, If the reversed form of find the 
path is cast at such a character, the spell and 
potion cancel cach other out; the potion is neu- 
tralized, and the spell does not take effect. 

This potion does not have the same effect as 
find the path, in that it does not provide clues to 
the shortest path to a desired location. Note that 
the user is only able to retrace a path traveled 
from the moment the drink is consumed to the 
moment the drink wears off. Any distance cov- 
ered before or after that is not automatically 
recalled. Once the potion wears off, the enhanced 
memory of the terrain is forgotten; one must then 
rely on a map of the area to successfully retrace 
the path 


of the Dracolich 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 2,500 
Foxoorren Reatms* MC Appendix 
The creation of a dracolich is a complex process 
involving the transformation of an evil dragon by 
arcane, magical force. The most notorious practi- 
tioners of these magical arts are the members of 
the Cult of the Dragon. The process is usually a 
cooperative effort between the evil dragon and 
the wizards, but especially powerful wizards have 


861 


been known to coerce an evil dragon to undergo 
the transformation against its will 

Any evil dragon is a possible candidate for 
transformation, although old dragons or older 
with spell-casting abilities are preferred. Once a 
candidate is secured, the wizards first prepare the 
dragon x host, an inanimate object that is to hold 
the dragon life force. The host must be a solid 
item of not less than 2,000 gp value, and resistant 
to decay (wood, for instance, is unsuitable), A 
gemstone is commonly used for a host, particu- 
larly ruby, pearl, carbuncle, and jet, and is often 
set in the hilt of a sword or other weapon. The 
host is prepared by casting enchant an item upon 
it and speaking the name of the evil dragon; the 
item may resist the spell by successfully saving 
vs. spell as an I Ith-level wizard. If the spell is 
resisted, another item must be used for the host. If 
the spell is not resisted, the item can then function 
as a host. If desired, glassteel can be cast upon 
the host to protect it 

Next, a special potion ts prepared for the evil 
dragon to consume, The exact composition of the 
potion varies according to the age and type of the 
dragon, but it must contain precisely seven ingre- 
dients, among them a potion of evil dragon con- 
trol, a potion of invulnerability, and the blood of a 
vampire, When the evil dragon consumes the 
potion, the results are determined as follows (roll 
percentile dice) 


Roll Result 

01-10 No effect 

11-40 Potion docs not work. The dragon suf- 
fers 2d12 points of damage and is help- 
less with convulsions for 1d2 rounds. 

41-50 Potion does not work. The dragon dics. 
A full wish or similar spell is needed to 
restore the dragon to life; a wish to 
transform the dragon into a dracolich 
results in another roll on this table, 

51-00 Potion works 


If the potion works, the dragon's spirit transfers 
to the host, regardless of the distance between 
the dragon's body and the host. A dim light 
within the host indicates the presence of the 
spirit. While contained in the host, the spirit 
cunnot take any actions; it can neither be con- 
tacted nor attacked by magic. The spirit can 
remain in the host indefinitely. 


Once the spirit is contained in the host, the host 
TAI 


Potion of Dragon Breath 


— — 


must be brought within 90 feet of a reptilian 
corpse; under no circumstances can the spirit 
possess a living body The spirit’s original body is 
ideal, but the corpse of any reptilian creature that 
died or was killed within the previous 30 days is 
suitable. 

The wizard who originally prepared the host 
must touch the host, cast a magic jar spell while 
speaking the name of the dragon, then touch the 
corpse, The corpse must fail a saving throw vs. 
spell for the spirit to successfully possess it; if it 
saves, it never accepts the spirit, The following 
modifiers apply to the roll: 


10 Ifthe corpse is the spirits own former 
body (which can be dead for any length 
of time). 

lf the corpse is of the same alignment as 
the dragon. 

lf the corpse is that of a true dragon (any 
type). 

3 lf the corpse is that of a firedrake, ice 

lizard, wyvern, or fire lizard. 

1 If the corpse is that of u dracolisk, drag- 
onne, dinosaur, snake, or other reptile. 


If the corpse accepts the spirit, it becomes ani- 
mated by the spirit. If the animated corpse is the 
pirit x former body, it immediately becomes a 
dracolich; however, it does not regain the use of 
its voice and breath weapon for another seven 
days (note that it is not able to cast spells with 
verbal components during this time), At the end 
of seven days, the dracolich regains the use of its 
voice and breath weapon 

If the animated corpse is not the spirit’s former 
body, it immediately becomes a protodracolich. A 
protodracolich has the mind and memories of its 
original form, but has the hit points and immuni- 
ties to spells and priestly turning of a dracolich. A 
protodracolich can neither speak nor cast spells 
further, it cannot cause chilling damage, use a 
breath weapon, or cause fear as a dracolich. Its 
Strength, movement, and Armor Class are those 
of the possessed body. 

To become a full dracolich, a protodracolich 
must devour at least 10% of its original body. 
Unless the body has been dispatched to another 
plane of existence, a protodracolich can always 
sense the presence of its original body, regard- 
less of the distance, A protodracolich tirelessly 
seeks out its original body to the exclusion of all 


other activities. If its original body has been 
burned, dismembered, or otherwise destroyed, 
the protodracolich need only devour the ashes or 
pieces equal to or exceeding 10% of its original 
body mass (total destruction of the original 
body is possible only through use of a disinte- 
grate or similar spell; the body could be recon- 
structed with a wish or similar spell, so long as 
the spell is cast in the same plane as the disinte- 
gration), If a protodracolich is unable to devour 
its original body, it is trapped in its current form 
until slain. 

A protodracolich transforms into a full dracol- 
ich within seven days after it devours its original 
body. When the transformation is complete, the 
dracolich resembles its original body; it can now 
speak, cast spells, and employ the breath weapon 
of its original body, in addition to having all of 
the abilities of a dracolich. 

The procedure for possessing a new corpse is 
the same as explained above, except that the 
assistance of a wizard is no longer necessary 
(casting magic jar is required only for the first 
possessions). If the spirit successfully repos- 
sesses its original body, it again becomes a full 
dracolich. If the spirit possesses a different body, 
it becomes a protodracolich and must devour its 
former body to become a full dracolich. 

A symbiotic relationship exists between a dra- 
colich and the wizards who create it. The wizards 
honor and aid their dracolich, as well as provid- 
ing it with regular offerings of treasure items. In 
return, the dracolich defends its wizards against 
enemies and other threats, as well as assisting 
them in their various schemes. Like dragons, dra- 
coliches are loners, but they take comfort in the 
knowledge that they have allies. 


of Dragon Breath 

XP Value: 500 GP Value: 1,400 
Draconomicon 
There is a formulation of this potion corre- 
sponding to each of the major races of drag- 
onkind. Thus, there are 23 types of potions of 
dragon breath, including amethyst, black, blue, 
brass, bronze, brown, cloud, copper, crystal, 
deep. emerald, gold, green, mercury, mist, red. 
sapphire, shadow, silver, steel, topaz, white, and 
yellow. 

Ifa dragon drinks a full draft of one of these 
powerful potions, it can immediately use the 
breath weapon attack of the corresponding type 

3764 


F -w-w-w̃ ĩuðn i eee. 


Potion of Dragon Control 


„—..— <: 


of dragon. The damage inflicted is that of a 
dragon one age category lower than the drinker. 
(For example, an adult green drinks a potion of 
red dragon breath. It is able to breathe flame 
inflicting the same damage as a young adult 
red—10d10+5 points of damage.) This newly 
guined breath weapon is in addition to the 
dragon's own breath weapon. 

The formulations of these potions are very 
tricky, and it very easy to make a mistake. To 
reflect this, there’s a 20% chance that any given 
potion is defective. A defective potion can be: 


Roll Effect 

01-50 Totally Ineffective. 

51-75 Poisonous. Roll a successful saving 
throw vs. poison or suffer 3d20 points 
of damage. 

76-00 Catastrophic Failure. This horrible con- 


sequence means that the first time the 
dragon trics to use its newly gained 
breath weapon, the attack form is trig- 
gered internally, inflicting the full dam- 
age on the breathing dragon (no saving 
throw allowed). 


The effects of a potion of dragon breath lust 
da hours, or until the drinker has exhausted the 
newly gained breath weapon. These potions are 
highly toxic to nondragons (roll a successful sav- 
ing throw vs. poison with a -A penalty, or die hor- 
ribly in Ida rounds). 


of Dragon Control 
XP Value: 700 GP Value: 7,000 
DUNGEON Master Guide 
This potion enables the individual drinking it to 
cast what is, in effect, a charm monster spell 
upon a particular dragon within 60 yards, The 
dragon is entitled to a saving throw vs. spell, 
but with a 2 penalty. Control lasts for 5d4 
rounds. 
There are various sorts of dragon potions, as 
shown below: 


Roll Dragon Type 


01-02 White Dragon Control 
03-04 Black Dragon Control 
05-07 Green Dragon Control 
08-09 Blue Dragon Control 
10 Red Dragon Control 
11-12 Brass Dragon Control 


Copper Dragon Control 
15 Bronze Dragon Control 
16 Silver Dragon Control 
17 Gold Dragon Control 
Evil Dragon Control 
20 Good Dragon Control? 
' Black, Blue, Green, Red, and White. 


Brass, Bronze, Copper, Gold, and Silver. 


In a DRAGONLANCE Campaign: Potions of 
dragon control do not exist on Ansalon. 


of Dragon Control II 
XP Value: 700 GP Value: 7,000 
Onentul Adventures 
While potions of dragon control do exist in the 
lands of Kara-Tur, they do not affect the same 
types of dragons as those listed in potion of 
dragon control 1. Instead, use the table below to 


determine the dragon affected: 
Roll Potion 
01-02 Chiang Lung Control 
03-04 Pan Lung Control 
05-07 Yu Lung Control 
08-09 Shen Lung Control 

10 Li Lung Control 
11-12 Mist Dragon Control 
13-14 Cloud Dragon Control 

15 Lung Wang Control 
16-17 Tien Gold Dragon Control 
18-19 Evil Dragon Control 

20 Good Dragon Control 

of Dragon Control III 

XP Value: 700 GP Value: 7,000 


DUNGEONS & DRAGOONS Rules Cyclopedia 

There are several different types of this potion, 
one corresponding to cach dragon type. The user 
may control up to three small dragons at once, 
but the dragons do get saving throws. Large and 
huge dragons are not affected by these potions. 
The controlled dragons do whatever is com- 
manded of them except cast spells. They are hos- 
tile when the control ends. Roll 1420 to find the 
type of dragons affected. 


Roll Dragon Controlled 
01-05 White (or Crystal) 
06-10 Black (or Onyx) 
11-14 Green (or Jade) 


3767 


x Potion of Elasticity se 


Roll Dragon Controlled 
15-17 Blue (or Sapphire) 
18-19 Red (or Ruby) 

20 Gold (or Amber) 


The DM can roll 1d100, and on 01-30 the 
potion actually affects the gemstone dragon 
equivalent (crystal instead of white, onyx instead 
of black, etc.). 


of Dragon Sight 
XP Value: 200 GP Value: 1,000 
Dragon Down 
This potion bestows excellent vision on the 
imbiber. Under its influence, a character can see 
for three times the normal range of vision, and 
can see as well as a dragon at night (treat as 
infravision with twice normal range). While 
affected by this potion, a character suffers no 
range penalties for long distance attacks with 


missile weapons. 


Dragon’s Blood 
XP Value: 400 GP Value: 700 
DraGoN QursT* Game 
This magical potion is thick and sour tasting. 
Whether or not it actually has any dragon's blood 
in it is unknown, When a hero takes a drink of 
dragon x blood, his or her Strength score increases 
to 18 for one full battle. Dragon $ blood comes in 
a bone flask that holds enough liquid for three 
drinks before it is empty. Any type of hero may 
use this potion. 


of Dreaming 
XP Value: 300 GP Value: 500 
Land of Fate 
This potion grants the imbiber a vision of that 
which he or she most desires. The imbiber drinks 
the potion before retiring, and names the person, 
object, or setting sought. That evening, a dream 
reveals something about the desired—a location, 
a magical guardian, other individuals nearby, 
potential dangers, some clue. Only one thing is 
revealed about a person, object, or setting per 
dream. Upon awakening, the dream remains in 
the imbiber’s mind so that he or she may use the 
clues provided there as a guide. A dreamer seck- 
ing water may have a marid appear, pointing to 
the east, where water is in the “waking” world 
within easy walking distance. A dreamer seeking 
a lost gem may see a deep cavern, where a great 


ghul hunkers over the gem, indicating the crea- 
ture guarding the gem. 

The DM determines the nature of the clue: a 
direction, a location, or an individual involved in 
the search in the dream. If no clues are available 
(DM's decision) or the item searched for is magi- 
cally protected or not in existence, the individual 
has instead a vivid nightmare. The DM may feel 
free to pepper the dream with horrific images, 
foreboding of doom, and dangers to the dreamer 
and the dreamer’s party. 


of Dreamspeech 

XP Value: 800 GP Value: 1,200 
Dungeons & Dragons Rules Cyclopedia 
If the user speaks to one sleeping or paralyzed 
creature within 30 feet, the creature hears and 
silently answers as if awake. The user hears the 
responses by ESP and is able to understand the 
language used. The creature is not compelled to 
be truthful. Dead and undead creatures cannot be 
affected, but cursed sleeping victims are within 
the power of the potion. The effect lasts for 1 turn 
only, and it applies to only one sleeping or para- 
lyzed creature. 


of Drunkenness 

GP Value: 250 
DRAGON Magazine 179 
Upon imbibing this potion, the individual imme- 
diately becomes horribly, totally inebriated. Role- 
playing aspects of this situation are left to the 
player and the DM, but in game terms the indi- 
vidual is A for all attack rolls as well as all profi- 
ciency checks. An Intelligence check is required 
each time an affected spellcaster attempts to cast 
a spell to see if it is cast correctly (failure means 
merely that the spell is lost), and all spells cast 
have a +2 bonus on saves. The effects last six 
hours, followed by three hours of splitting 
headaches (no spellcasting allowed, Ion attack 
rolls), 


XP Value: — 


of Elasticity 
XP Value: 300 GP Value: 800 
Duxcrons & Daacons Rules Cyclopedia 
The user may stretch his or her body, plus all 
equipment carried, to nearly any form—flat, long, 
anything—to a maximum of 30 feet in length or a 
minimum of 10 inches thick. Items carried cannot 
be used or dropped unless they are first returned to 


normal form. While in “stretched” form, the user 
vm 


F 865 


Potion of Elasticsty I 


» . ——— 


cannot attack or cast spells, but takes half damage 
from blunt weapons (mace, hammer, giant-thrown 
boulder, others). The effect lasts for one turn only. 


of Elasticity 

XP Value: 300 GP Value: 800 
The Complete Wizard’ Handbook 
A character consuming one dose of this potion 
is able to stretch his or her legs, arms, neck, or 
any other appendages up to a distance in feet 
equal to twice the character’s Constitution 
score; for instance, a character with a Constitu- 
tion of 15 can stretch up to 30 feet A character 
can stretch only onc appendage at a time; for 
instance, one arm, one finger, or just the neck. 
Whenever any appendage is stretched, a Consti- 
tution Check must be made; if it fails, the stress 
of the stretch causes 1d6 points of damage. The 
potion lasts for Ida turns; during this time, the 
character can make as many stretches as desired, 
as long as a check for damage is made for cach 
stretch. 


of Elemental Control 
XP Value: 600 GP Value: 1,800 
Tome of Magic 
When this potion is consumed, the imbiber can 
influence one or two elementals in a manner 


similar to a charm monster spell. The elemen- 
tals must be within 60 feet of the imbiber and 
are allowed a saving throw vs. petrification to 
avoid the effect. If only one clemental is influ- 
enced, it is subject to a 4 penalty on its save. If 
two are influenced, their saving throws gain a 
+2 bonus because the effect of the potion is 
weakened, 

If cither clemental is controlled by another 
wizard, it gains a +2 bonus to its saving throw. 
Note that if the elemental was summoned by the 
Sth-level conjure elemental spell, the summoner 
has a 50% chance of dispelling the creature. Con- 
trol lasts for 5d6 rounds, 

The type of elemental subject to a particular 


potion is randomly determined. 
Roll Elemental Type 
1 Earth 
2 Air 
3 Fire 
4 Water 
of Elemental Form 
XP Value: 400 GP Value: 700 


Duncroxs & Daacows Rules Cyclopedia 
There are four types of this potion: Earth, Air, 
Fire, and Water (equal chances for each). The 
user may change into the form of an elemental (of 
the appropriate type) and back to normal form as 
often as desired while the potion lasts. Each 
change of form takes | round. While in elemental 
form, no special immunities are gained, but the 
special attacks of each elemental are usable, Note 
that a protection from evil effect does not block a 
character using this potion. The user's Armor 
Class and hit points do not change. The duration 
is one turn only. 


of Enlightenment 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 900 
Wonders of LANKHMAR™ 
This potion was first created by two poorly- 
schooled alchemists. These potions are actually 
failed potions of flying, clairvayance, and clairau- 
dience. These alchemists kept notes on these fail- 
ures as they made them, and thus are able to 
reproduce them as often as they like. The potions’ 
only effects are to make the imbibers believe they 
are flying or clairvoyant, In truth, they might be 
standing in the street drawing stares. They mix 


into these potions the juice squeezed from the 
yn 


PDD 


x Potion of Explosions ay» 


taro root, This extract causes the potion to become 
unbearably addictive. (Imbibers must make a sav- 
ing throw vs. spell at a cumulative —4 per draft.) 
Once the person becomes addicted, there is a 
cumulative 1% chance per potion of feeling no 
effects from the potion. Then people begin to 
consume multiple potions. 

If the character should take more than one of 
these potions in a day, which after a while is 
assured, he must roll Id io and consult the table 


Roll Effect 
01 Explosion. Damage is 6d10 points. 

02-03 Lethal Poison. Imbiber is Dead. 

04-08 Mild Poison. Causes nausea and loss of 
point cach from Strength and Dexter- 
ity for 1d8 days. 

09-10 No special effect. 


The only way to end the addiction of the potion 
is to cast a cure disease on the character, other- 
wise, the addiction continues. Once the addiction 
has taken hold, the character cannot choose to 
stop. A cure must be obtained. 


of ESP 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 850 
DUNGEON Master Guide 
The ESP potion bestows an ability that is the 
same as the 2nd-level wizard spell of the same 
name, except that its effects last for $d8 
rounds, 


of Ethereality 
XP Value: 300 GP Value: 500 
Dunctons & Dracons Rules Cyclopedia 
The user can become ethereal once, at any time 
during the potion’s duration, and may thereafter 
remain ethereal for up to 24 hours, returning to 
the Prime Material Plane at will. Once returned to 
the Prime Material Plane, the potion docs not 
enable the user to become ethereal again. 


of Explosions 
XP Value . GP Value 
Bottle: 450 900 
Vial: 75 150 
DRAGON Magazine 91 


Though this potion appears to be like any other 
drinkable fluid, it is not meant to be consumed. 
The liquid is a powerful, magical explosive that 


only requires contact with the open air and a 
physical disturbance of some sort (being 
dropped or thrown, struck with an object, or 
shaken vigorously) to set it off. Potions of 
explosions are found in tightly sealed bottles, 
similar to most potion containers. The container 
is generally fragile, of a ceramic or glass mater- 
ial that would probably break (save vs. crushing 
blow) if thrown against a hard surface. Most of 
these containers, of course, are wrapped in 
cloth or stored where they aren’t likely to be 
broken or jostled. 

If the entire bottle of liquid is thrown and 
breaks, this will generate a blast of 30 feet in 
radius, doing 6d6 damage to all within this area 
(save vs. breath weapon for half damage) 
Sometimes a “dose” of this liquid comes pack- 
aged in six small glass or ceramic vials that can 
be thrown separately. Each exploding vial docs 
de damage to any character or creature within 
a 5-foot-radius. The small size and light weight 
of these vials makes them difficult to throw 
accurately; attacks intended to hit a creature 
directly are made at —2 to attack rolls. The vials 
are especially fragile, taking a -? penalty on any 
saving throw to determine breakage, The victim 
of a direct hit from a vial or an entire bottle of 
this liquid takes half damage if a save vs. breath 
weapon succeeds, but must make the saving 
throw at a —6 penalty. 

If an intended target is missed, the projectile 
continues until it strikes the ground or some other 
solid object—possibly causing damage to some- 
one else in the vicinity of the impact point. If the 
container hits its target but does not break, the 
liquid inside is not set off, and the container can 
be picked up and rethrown. The container must 
make a saving throw vs. normal blow if it is 
dropped from a height of 5 feet or less. In addi- 
tion, there is a 50% chance that the liquid will 
explode if the container is shaken or jostled vig- 
orously for longer than one segment. The same 
50% chance applies on cach consecutive seg- 
ment; for example, if a character with a potion of 
explosions in a backpack moves at faster than 
walking speed for three consecutive rounds, three 
separate rolls are made to see if the liquid 
explodes. 

If someone tries to identify this potion by tak- 
ing a small taste, several things can happen. 
Opening the bottle and exposing the contents to 


the air activates the explosive fluid, and there is 
1 


0 aaa 


867 


Potion of of Extra-Healing 


— .. — — 


a 5% chance that the character doing so inadver- 
tently jars the bottle enough while opening it to 
sct off the explosive. No saving throw would be 
given to the opener against the explosion in this 
case. If a tiny bit is swallowed to sample the 
potion, the drinker feels his heart accelerate and 
feels as if he or she has just sampled a potion of 
speed, This effect is felt only for one round, and 
does not actually give the drinker any of the 
benefits of such a potion. If the entire contents 
of a bottle or vial are drunk, the character must 
make a system shock roll. If the roll fails, the 
liquid explodes inside the drinker, doing 646 (or 
1d6) damage and requiring another system 
shock roll to avoid immediate death. If the first 
system shock roll succeeds, the drinker becomes 
extremely ill and is incapacitated for 3-6 
hours—unable to walk without assistance, 
attack, or defend. Potions of explosions are 
extremely rare, Few alchemists will agree to 
manufacture this liquid because of the great 
danger involved, and even fewer treasure hoards 
contain it. 


of Extra-Healing 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 1,000 
DuNnanon Master Guide 
This potion restores 3d8+3 points of damage 
when wholly consumed, or 1d8 points of damage 
for each one-third that is drunk. 


of Fire Breath 
XP Value: 400 GP Value: 1,000 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 

This potion allows the imbiber to spew a tongue 
of flame any time within one hour of quaffing the 
liquid. Each potion contains enough liquid for 
four small drafts. One draft allows the imbiber to 
breathe a cone of fire 10 feet wide and up to 20 
feet long that inflicts 141042 points of damage. A 
double draft doubles the range and damage. A 
triple draft trebles the range and damage. If the 
entire potion is taken at once, the cone is 20 feet 
wide, up to 80 fect long, and inflicts $d10 points 
of damage. Saving throws vs. breath weapon for 
half damage apply in all cases. If the flame is not 
expelled before the hour expires, the potion fails, 
with a 10% chance that the flames erupt in the 
imbiber’s system, inflicting double damage with 
no saving throw allowed. 


of Fire Resistance 
XP Value: 250 GP Value: 400 

DUNGEON Masten Guide 
This potion bestows upon the person drinking it 
magical invulnerability to all forms of normal 
fire (such as bonfires, burning oil, or even huge 
pyres of flaming wood). It also gives resistance 
to fires generated by molten lava, a wall of fire, 
a fireball, fiery dragon breath, and similar 
intense flames and heat. All damage from such 
fires is reduced by 2 from each die of damage, 
and if a saving throw is applicable, it is rolled 
with a +4 bonus, If one-half of the potion is con- 
sumed, it confers invulnerability to normal fires 
and half the benefits noted above (-I. +2). The 
potion lasts one turn, or five rounds for half 
doses. 


of Fire Vulnerability 
XP Value: — GP Value: 250 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 65 

This potion, frequently identified as a potion of 
fire resistance, causes the imbiber to become 
very sensitive to heat, thus suffering twice the 
amount of damage caused by normal! fire. In 
addition, the imbiber also suffers +2 to each die 
of damage sustained from molten lava, magical 
fire, and fiery dragon breath, If a saving throw is 
applicable, the imbiber suffers a A penalty. The 
effects of this potion last for 1d4+4 turns. 


of Fluidness 
XP Value: 750 GP Value: 1,500 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 65 
The imbibed of this potion—and all items worn 
ot carried—turns into a one gallon puddle of liq- 
uid, The effects of this potion last for 1d8 hours, 
and during that time the character can flow 
through cracks and grates, under doors, hide in 
ponds, pools of rain, and other bodies of liquid. 
Attacks against a character in this form are at ~2, 
and the user suffers only half damage. However, 
ice-based attacks cause an extra +1 per dic of 


damage. 


of Flying 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 750 
Dungeon Masten Guide 
A flying potion enables the individual drinking it 
to fly in the same manner as the 3rd-level wizard 
spell, fly. 


xs 


868 


~ Potion of Frost Resistance r 


of Forewarning 
XP Value: 600 GP Value: 1,200 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 65 
Many rulers have become dependent on this mag- 
ical draft, It is a potent brew which allows the 
imbiber to enter a trance for one turn and “see” 
the future. This vision is a possible future, and the 
imbiber learns an important piece of information 
regarding a future event. 


of Forgetfulness 
XP Value: 400 GP Value: 800 

DRAGON Magazine 28 
Upon imbibing this potion a character completely 
forgets everything that occurred in the last 24 
hours, including spells memorized and even 
experience points gained during that period. This 
potion has only a temporary effect if less than the 
full volume is consumed. Adding % of the potion 
to a nonalcoholic beverage produces a memory 
lapse of mundane knowledge only full memory 
returns 50% of the time in 1d4 hours. Adding it to 
an alcoholic beverage gives the beverage a ter- 
nible taste and produces rage in the drinker 90% 
of the time. 


of Forgetfulness II 
XP Value: — GP Value: 250 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 65 
Imbibing this honey-flavored potion causes 
amnesia for 2d10 days. The drinker does not 
remember his or her name, friends, faces, or other 
things of importance. 


of Fortitude 
XP Value: 900 GP Value: 1,500 
DUNGEONS & DRAGONS Rules Cyclopedia 

The user's Constitution score becomes 18, and 
the imbiber immediately gains the corresponding 
hit points (if any). Points of damage to the user 
are taken from the magically gained hit points 
first. Damage applied to the user's original hit 
points remains after the duration ends until cured 
by the usual means. 


Foul Water 
XP Value: — GP Value: 200 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 65 
If this liquid is consumed, the imbiber must save 
vs. poison or become ill for three days. The liquid 
is intended to be added to other liquids to change 
them into stale, undrinkable water, Further, foul 


water doubles the potency of poisons and ruins 
magical potions. The contents of a single con- 
tainer can change up to 1,000 cubic fect (7,500 
gallons) of pure, fresh water into polluted, salty 
water. It turns up to 100 cubic feet of wine or oil 
(750 gallons) into mild acid. The effects of the 
potion are permanent, although the liquid may be 
purified magically after an initial period of 5d8 
rounds. 


of Freedom 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 900 
DUNGEONS & Dracons Rules Cyclopedia 
The user cannot be affected by paralysis of any 
sort nor by Hold person or hold monster spells, 


of Fresh Air 

XP Value: 350 GP Value: 700 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 65 
When this potion vial is opened, up to 125,000 
cubic feet of air is cleansed, making it safe to 
breathe. It neutralizes any gas, mist, or vapor. 
This fluid is handy for those long spelljamming 
adventures when the adventurers really have no 
idea where they're going or how long it will take 
to get there 


of Fright 
XP Value: 100 GP Value: 250 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 65 
This liquid temporarily causes the imbiber to 
decrease three levels in hit points, combat ability, 
and saving throws for 4d4 rounds. If the character 
is slain while at reduced hit points, he or she is 
dead, but can be resurrected normally. 


of Frost Resistance 
XP Value: 250 GP Value: 400 
Dracon Magazine 91 
This potion grants immunity to the ill effects of 
all forms of normal cold down to —100° F. Partial 
resistance to magical cold is also granted; saving 
throws vs. cold spells are made at +4 on the die, 
and damage from cold attacks is reduced by 2 
points per die of damage, down to a minimum of 
one point per die. If only half a dose is consumed, 
the potion’s benefit against magical cold is 
halved (2 on saves, I on each damage die), but 
the protection from normal cold is unchanged. A 
full dose lasts one turn (10 rounds); a half dose 
lasts five rounds. Note that the icy breath weap- 


ons of creatures such as white dragons, winter 
3 


~ Potion of Pur Growth * 


wolves, and hour foxes are included in the cate- 
gory of magical cold. 


of Fur Growth 

XP Value: 125 GP Value: 250 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 65 
This thick liquid is either brown or black and 
tastes like roasted game. When imbibed, the 
drinker immediately sprouts a shaggy coat of 
fur, 6-inches thick. The fur lasts 1d4+7 hours, 
after which time it falls off harmlessly. It pro- 
tects the character from temperatures to -30° F, 
but tends to make wearing armor impossible. 
The potion is prized by adventurers planning 
arctic forays. 


of Gaseous Form 

XP Value: 300 GP Value: 400 
Dunoon Master Guide 
By imbibing this magical liquid, the individual 
causes his or her body, as well as anything car- 
ried or worn, to become gaseous. The gaseous 
form is able to flow at a base speed of 3 per 
round, (A gust of wind spell, or even normal 
strong air currents, will blow the gaseous form 
at air speed.) The gaseous form is transparent 
and unsubstantial, It wavers and shifts, and can't 
be harmed except by magical fire or lightning, 
which do normal damage. A whirlwind inflicts 
double damage upon a creature in gaseous form, 
When in such condition the individual is able to 
enter any space that is not airtight—even a small 
crack or hole that allows air to penctrate also 
allows entry by a creature in gaseous form. The 
entire potion must be consumed to achieve this 
result, and the effects last the entire duration 
(dada turns), 


of Genius 
XP Value: 300 GP Value: 800 
p NH Newszine 65 
The character who quaffs this potion gains +4 to 
Intelligence for 2d4+4 rounds. 


of Ghostliness 
XP Value: 600 GP Value: 1,800 
PoLynepKon Newszine 65 
This potion gives the drinker, and any nonliv- 
ing items carried or worn, the ability to pass 
through all other objects for 2d4+4 turns, as if 
the PC were a ghost. Further, the effected char- 
acter is immune to normal weapons while in 


this state, and magical weapons inflict only 
half damage. While in this condition, the ghost 
character cannot pick up objects, cast spells 
that require material components. or physically 
enter melee, 


of Giant Control 
XP Value: 600 GP Value: 1,000 
DUNGEON Master Guide 
A full potion of this draft must be consumed for 
its effects to be felt. It will influence one or two 
giants like a charm monster spell. Control lasts 
for 5d6 rounds. If only one giant is influenced, it 
is entitled to a saving throw vs. spell with a 4 
penalty; if two are influenced, the die rolls gain a 
+2 bonus—ceffectively weakening the effect of 
the potion. The type of giant subject to a particu- 
lar potion is randomly determined. 


Roll Giant Type 


01-05 Hill Giant 
06-09 Stone Giant 
10-13 Frost Giant 
14-17 Fire Giant 
18-19 Cloud Giant 


20 Storm Giant 


In Kara-Tur: The only type of giant control 
potion commonly found in Kara-Tur is the potion 
of hill giant control. 


of Giant Control H 
XP Value: 600 GP Value: 1,000 
Land of Fate 
In Zakhara, this potion affects the following 
types: 


Roll Giant Type 


1-8 Hill Giant 
9-11 Desert Giant 
12-13 Reef Giant 
14-15 Jungle Giant 
16-17 Stone Giant 


18 Fire Giant 
19 Cloud Giant 
20 Storm Giant 


870 7 


oe 


Dr 


+ Potion of Growth — 


Giant Strength 
XP Value GP Value 
Cloud: 700 1,300 
Fire: 650 1,200 
Frost: 600 1,100 
Hill: $00 900 
Stone: 550 1,000 
Storm: 750 1,400 
Dunoon Master Guide 


This potion can be used only by warriors. When a 
giant strength potion is consumed, the individual 
gains great Strength and attack roll bonus when 
scoring a hit with any handheld or thrown 
weapon, It is also possible for the person to hurl 
rocks as shown on the table below, Note that the 
type of giant strength gained by drinking the 
potion is randomly determined on the same table. 


Roch 
1 Sr u Dmg Hurling Bend Barv 
Roll Equiv Allow Phs Rng Dmg Lif Gates 
O06 Hill 485 +7 Wyd idé s0% 
0-10 Sione 535 +8 160% ldd: 60% 
Il-14 Fot 63S 49 100yd 1d 70% 
15-17 Fme 785 +10 120d 148 80% 
1819 Cloud 935 +1 140yd 1410 00% 
W Som 1235 +2 160yd 1di2 95% 
Glitz & Klax’s Potion* 
XP value: GP Value: 


Inside Raven’s Buurt”, The Living City 

Glitz and Klax specialize in minor potions, magi- 
cal mixtures that have about % the power of full- 
strength potions. For example, a minor potion of 
growth causes the imbiber to grow about 7 inches; 
a potion of treasure finding can lead the imbiber 
to dropped coins, Duration of minor potions is 
half of the full-strength varieties. 

A minor potion affects only the imbiber, so cir- 
cus goers ure not able to obtain anything like a 
potion of human control or a philter of love. 

Cost for the potions and philters range from 10 sp 
to one gold piece. G Ned Klax is not the Realms 
most organized person, so there is a 5% chance that 
any potion purchased is actually full-strength. 


of Gluttony 
XP Value: — GP Value: 100 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 65 
This potion causes the imbiber to become insa- 
tiably hungry, consuming everything edible in 
sight for Id la rounds 


of Golden Silence 
XP Value: 250 GP Value: 400 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 65 
This renders the vocal chords of the imbiber use- 
less. No spells requiring a vocal incantation can 
be cast until after the effects of the potion wear 
off in 1d4+4 turns, This potion is usually found in 
a flask containing three doses, 


of Good Humor 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 1,100 
Pouvimnnon Newszine 65 

This potion, if imbibed, grants the drinker uplifted 
feelings and a cheery disposition. However, the 
potion is more useful iſ u stick is inserted into the 
vial. When this occurs, the potion freezes and can 
be pulled from the vial by the stick. When the 
frosty version of the potion is caten, the character 
gains the cheery disposition mentioned above, 
needs no further nourishment for the day, and 
operates as if under a bless spell. The duration of 
the potion in either form is 2d12 hours. 


Gray Slumber 

XP Value: 250 GP Value: 600 
Nn Newszine 65 
The imbiber of this potion falls into a deep sleep 
for 1d6+4 turns, The character cannot be awak- 
ened unless dispel magic is cast. Further, the 
character appears to be dead, the skin takes on a 
gray pallor. This potion is often used to feign 
death. 


of Greensprouting 
XP Value GP Value 
Normal: 300 600 
Rooting: 250 600 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 65 


This potion allows the drinker to polymorph at 
will into a green, leafy bush with thick bark. The 
bush takes one-half damage from bludgeoning 
weapons and is AC $. The potion’s duration is 
2410 days; 10% of the potions cause the bush to 
become rooted to the spot, not allowing the 
character to change back to proper form until it 
wears off, 


of Growth 


XP Value: 250 GP Value: 300 


Dunoron Master Guide 
This potion causes the height and weight of the 


person consuming it to increase. Garments and 
un 


r TT 


871 


Potion of Healing 


, ͤ— K—. ²⁵wnànà1᷑ĩ¾uß.n T— —— 


other worn and carried gear also grow in size. 
Each one-fourth of the liquid consumed causes a 
6-foot growth in height—in other words, a full 
potion increases height by 24 feet! Weight 
increases should be proportional to the change in 
height. Strength is increased sufficiently to allow 
bearing armor and weapons commensurate with 
the increased size, but does not provide combat 
bonuses. Movement increases to that of a giant of 
approximately equal size. 


of Healing 
XP Value: 200 GP Value: 400 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 
An entire potion must be consumed in a single 
round, If this is done, the potion restores 2d4+2 
points of damage (see extra-healing). 


of Heroism 
XP Value: 300 GP Value: 500 
DUNGEON Master Guide 
This gives the imbiber a temporary increase in 
levels (hit points, combat ability, and saves) if the 
character has fewer than 10 levels of experience. 


Number of Additional 
Level of Levels Temporary 
Imbiber Bestowed Hit Points 
0 4 4d10 
Ist-3rd 3 3d10+1 
4th-6th 2 2d10+2 
Tth-9th l 1d10+3 


When the potion is quaffed, the individual 
fights as if he or she were at the experience level 
bestowed by the magic of the elixir. Damage sus- 
tained is taken first from magically gained hit and 
bonus points. This potion can only be used by 
warriors. 


Horn of Plenty 
XP Value: 250 GP Value: 500 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 65 

This magical elixir allows the imbiber to create 
food and wine, One cubic foot of food and one 
gallon of wine can be created per round for 
1d8+4 rounds. All of the food is fresh, roasted or 
chilled as desired by the imbiber, and the wine is 
of good quality. 


of Housecat Control 
XP Value: 250 GP Value: 550 
DRAGON Magazine 30 

The presence of Fran’s familiar (a large white cat) 
caused the creation of the potion of housecat con- 
trol. It allows the user to control one housecat for 
a number of rounds equal to his or her Wisdom. It 
does not work, however, on familiars—this was 
said to have been one reason for suspecting less 
than dire causes for Orlow’s disappearance. 


of Human Control 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 900 
DUNGEON Master Guide 
A potion of human control allows the imbiber to 
control up to 32 levels or Hit Dice of humans, 
humanoids, and demihumans as if a charm per- 
son spell had been cast. All creatures are entitled 
to saving throws vs. spell. Any pluses to Hit Dice 
are rounded down to the lowest whole die (1+2 
HD = 1 HD, 2+6 HD = 2 HD). This potion lasts 
for 5d6 rounds. The types of humanoids that can 
be controlled are randomly determined. 


Roll Human/Humanoid Controlled 


01-02 Dwarves. 

03-04 ~— Elves/Half-Elves 

05-06 Gnomes 

07-08  Halflings 

09-10 Half-Orcs 

11-16 Humans 

17-19 Gnolls, Ores, and Goblins 


20 Elves, Half-Elves, and Humans 
In Kara-Tur: when finding the type of crea- 
ture that can be controlled, use the following 
table: 


Roll Potion Controls 


01-02 Korobokuru 
03-05 Hengeyokai 
06 Spirit Folk 
07-15 Human 
16 Tengu 
17-19 Kororbokuru, Hengeyokai, and Humans 


20 Gajin 


x Potion of invulnerability 


Hummingbird Nectar 

XP Value: 200 GP Value: 450 
DRAGON Quest Game 
This unusual drink tastes very much like honey, 
but it is no thicker than water. Anyone who 
drinks this amber liquid is able to move twice as 
fast as usual for one encounter. In other words, 
the hero may take two actions cach turn while 
everyone else only gets onc. Hummingbird nec- 
tar is found in crystal globes. Each globe holds 
one dose of the liquid. The globes are always 
found in groups of three. Any type of hero may 
use this potion. If a hero already has had a haste 
spell cast on him or her, the Aummingbird nectar 
won't work, 


of Immunity 

XP Value 
To ageing: 600 
To disease: 200 
To death magic: 200 
To normal weapons: 200 
To poison: 200 
Poison: 

POLYHEDRON Newszine 6$ 
This very rare, very potent clixir confers upon the 
imbiber a permanent immunity, Approximately 
one in 10 is cursed. Consult the table below: 


Roll Benefit 
01 Immunity to normal weapons. 
02-04 Immunity to death magic. 
05-07 Poison. Instant death, no saving throw, 
08-10 Immunity to poison. 
11-14 Immunity to magical ageing. 
15-20 Immunity to discase. 
Immunization From Lycanthropes 
XP Value: 300 GP Value: 500 
DRAGON Magazine 2 


Protects user from contracting lycanthropy for 
one month. There is a 1% chance of contracting 
the disease from the serum, however. 


of Infravision 
XP Value: 200 GP Value: 500 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 65 
This potion bestows upon humans a 60-foot 
infravision for \d8 turns. Characters possessing 
infravision have their ranges increased by 60 feet. 


of Inner Strength 
XP Value: 250 GP Value: 700 
POLYHIDRON Newazine 65 
Psionic characters imbibing this potion have their 
current Psionie Strength Points increased by 
35%, allowing the PSPs to be increased above 
their normal maximum. The additional PSPs 
remain until the points are used. This potion 
affects only psionicists. 


of Insulation 
XP Value: 250 GP Value: 600 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 65 
This potion gives the drinker + 4 on all saves vs. 
electrical attacks, including blue dragon breath, 
and reduces damage suffered by 2 points per die, 


of Intensity 
GP Value: 750 

Vale of the Mage 
Quaffing this potion causes all spells cast by the 
imbiber within the next three rounds to have the 
maximum effect. For cxample, a pricst drinking 
this potion can cure the maximum amount of hit 
points possible with healing spells during the 
next three rounds, or a wizard can cause the max- 
imum amount of damage with a fireball or any 
other spell during the potion’s duration, 

However, there is a drawback to the potion. It 
so drains the imbiber of energy following its 
three-round duration that the imbiber cannot cast 
spells during the three rounds following the 
potion’s expiration. 


of Invisibility 

XP Value: 250 GP Value: 800 
Duncion MasteR Guide 
This potion confers invisibility similar to the 2nd- 
level wizard spell of the same name. Actions 
involving combat cause termination of the im- 
ible state. The individual possessing this potion 
can quaff a single gulp—equal to X of the con- 
tents of the container—to bestow invisibility for 
1d4+2 turns. 


XP Value: 400 


of Invulnerability 
XP Value: 350 GP Value: 500 
Dunavon Master Guide 
This potion confers immunity to nonmagical 
weapons. It also protects against attacks from 
creatures (not characters) with no magical prop- 
erties or fewer than 4 Hit Dice, Thus, an 8th-level 
m 


7 873 > 


Potion of tron Handedness 


P Tee nS K . ̃.̃——ĩ—̃ĩ̃̃̃̃ 


character without a magical weapon could not 
harm the imbiber of an invulnerability potion. 
The potion also improves Armor Class rating by 
2 classes and gives a bonus of +2 to saving 
throws ys, all forms of attack, Its effects are real- 
ized only when the entire potion is consumed, and 
they last for 5d4 rounds. Only warriors can use 
this potion, 


of Iron Handedness 

XP Value: 300 GP Value: 600 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 65 
Drinking this potion turns a characters hands into 
iron-hard weapons, enabling him or her to deflect 
weapons barehanded. The hardened hands are 
able to chop through wood or can be used as 
melee weapons, inflicting 1d12 points of damage 
per successful hit. The effects of the potion last 
do rounds. 


Istar’s Truth 

XP Value: 750 GP Value: 1,400 
DRAGONLANCE" Adventures 
This is a potion used in the courts of Istar to 
ascertain the truth in matters brought before the 
kingpriest or his appointed ministers. The potion 
forces its recipient to truthfully answer a number 
of questions. The person who administers the 
potion can ask the victim 2d4 questions requiring 
yes or no answers and 1d4 questions requiring 
longer responses. (An example of a question 
requiring a longer response: “What happened to 
you three days ago?”) The victim is allowed a 
saving throw with a 5 penalty to the die roll. If 
the save is successful, then the potion simply 
makes the victim sleepy but does not cause a loss 
of control of the will, The victim can then give 
false answers. 

The length of the answer to a question is up to 
the victim so long as it is absolutely truthful and 
answers all the stated parts of the question. The 
DM can use this opportunity to impart important 
information to the PCs. The formula is known to 
any good priest in Istar of at least Sth level, 

In a DRAGONLANCE Campaign: This formula 
was lost in post-Cataclysm Ansalon. 


Kanzaz 
XP Value: 400 GP Value: 900 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 65 
When this potion is consumed, the imbiber is 
instantly transported to his or her place of birth. 


Kur’s Drink 

XP Value: 400 GP Value: 800 
DraGoN Quist Game 
This mysterious potion was created by a strange 
order of holy men who live their lives locked 
away in a forgotten monastery. The potion comes 
in a silver flask that holds enough liquid for three 
drinks. Each drink restores 2d4 hit points to a 
wounded hero. Any type of hero may use Kur & 
drink. 


of Language Learning 
XP Value: 600 GP Value: 1,300 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 65 
When consumed, this potion allows the imbiber 
to master an unknown language by concentrating 
on a race of people or a type of creature. Each 
flask typically contains four doses of the potion, 
each dose enabling a new language to be learned. 
The languages learned are permanent. 


of Lethargy 
XP Value: GP Value: 250 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 65 
This potion acts as the 3rd-level wizard spell slow 
on the person drinking it. Its effects last for 
Id4+4 turns. 


of Levitation 

XP Value: 250 GP Value: 400 
DUNGEON Master Guide 
A levitation potion enables the consumer to levi- 
tate in much the same manner as the 2nd-level 
wizard spell of the same name. The potion allows 
levitation of the individual, to a maximum weight 
of 600 pounds. The consumer can carry another 
person, as long as the total weight is within this 
limit. 


of Lichdom 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 2,500 
Lords of Darkness 
To become a lich, a wizard or wizard/pricst must 
attain at least the 18th-level of experience as a 
wizard. The candidate for lichdom must have 
access to the spells magic jar, enchant an item, 
and trap the soul. Nulathoe 5 ninemen, a Sth-level 
wizard spell that serves to preserve corpses 
against decay, keeping them strong and supple as 
in life, is also required. 
The procedure of attaining lichdom is ruined if 


the candidate dies at any point during the process. 
3830 


a ~ 


874 


SS ccc 


See 


Potion of Lichdom - 


Even if successful resurrection follows, the oper- 
ation must be started anew. The process involves 
the preparation of a magical phylactery and a 
potion. Most candidates prepare the potion first 
and arrange for an apprentice or ally to raise them 
if ingestion of the potion proves fatal. Preparation 
of the phylactery is so expensive that most candi- 
dates do not wish to waste all the effort of its 
preparation by dying after it is completed but 
before they are prepared for lichdom. 

The nine ingredients of the potion are as fol- 
lows: 

* Arsenic (2 drops of the purest distillate). 

* Belladonna (1 drop of the purest distillate). 

* Blood (1 quart of blood from a dead unicorn 
yearling killed by wyvern venom). 

* Blood (1 quart from a dead demihuman slain 
by a phase spider). 

* Blood (1 quart from a vampire or a being 
infected with vampirism). 

* Heart (the intact heart of a humanoid killed by 
poisoning, a mixture of arsenic and bel- 
ladonna must be used). 

* Reproductive glands (from seven giant moths 
dead for less than 10 days, ground together). 

Venom ( pint or more, drawn from a phase 
spider less than 30 days previous) 

* Venom (1 pint or more, drawn from a wyvern 
less than 60 days previous) 

The ingredients are mixed in the order given by 
the light of a full moon, and must be drunk within 
seven days after they combine into a glowing 
bluish, sparkling black liquid. All of the potion 
must be drunk by the candidate, and within six 
rounds will produce an effect as follows (roll per- 
centile dice): 


Roll 
01-10 


Effect 

All body hair falls out, but potion is 
ineffective (the candidate knows this). 
Another potion must be prepared if 
lichdom is desired. 

Candidate falls into a coma for 1d6+1 
days, is physically helpless and immo- 
bile, mentally unreachable. Potion 
works; the candidate is aware of this 
Potion works, but candidate is feeble- 
minded. Any failed attempt to cure the 
candidate's condition is 20% likely to 
slay the candidate. 

Potion works, but candidate is para- 
lyzed for 2d6+2 days (no saving throw, 


11-40 


41-70 


875 


curative magic notwithstanding). There 
is a 30% chance for permanent loss of 
1d6 Dexterity points 


91-96 Potion works, but candidate is perma- 
nently: 

01-33 Deaf 

34-66 Dumb 

67-00 Blind 


The lost sense can only be regained by a wish 
or limited wish, 
97-00 


Death. Potion does not work. 


The successfully prepared candidate for lich- 
dom can exist for an indefinite number of years 
before becoming a lich. He or she does not 
achieve lichdom upon death unless preparation of 
his or her phylactery is complete. A successfully 
prepared candidate may appear somewhat paler 
of skin than before imbibing the potion, but can- 
not mentally or magically be detected by others 
as ready for lichdom. The candidate, however, is 
always aware of readiness for lichdom, even if 
charmed or insanity or memory loss occurs. (A 
charmed candidate can never be made to reveal 
where his or her phylactery is—although the can- 
didate could be compelled to identify what the 
phylactery is, if shown it.) 


The phylactery may take any ſorm it may be 
J530 


Potion of Life Stealing 


) — <; 


a pendant, gauntlet, scepter, helm, crown, ring, or 
even a lump of stone It must be of inorganic 
material, solid, and of high-quality workmanship 
if of human manufacture. The phylactery cannot 
be an item having other spells or magical proper- 
ties on or in it. It may be decorated or carved in 
any fashion. 

Enchant an item is cast upon the phylactery 
(this is one of the rare cases in which this spell 
can be cust on unworked material), a process 
requiring continual handling of the phylactery for 
a long time, The phylactery must successfully 
make its saving throw as noted in the spell 
description. It must be completely enchanted 
within nine days (not the 24 hours normally 
allowed by the spell). Note that the “additional 
spell” times given in the enchant an item spell 
description are required. 

When the phylactery is made ready for 
enchantment, the candidate must cast trap the 
soul on it, Percentile dice are rolled; the spell has 
a 50% chance or working, plus 6% per level of 
the candidate (or caster, if it is another being) 
over | 1th level. The phylactery glows with a 
flickering bluc-green, /verie firelike radiance for 
one round if it is successfully receptive for the 
candidate's essence. 

The candidate then must cast Nulathoe & nine- 
men on the phylactery, and within one turn of 
doing so, cast magic jar and enter it with his or 
her life force. No victim is required for this use of 
magic jar. 

Upon entering the phylactery, the candidate 
instantly loses one experience level along with its 
commensurate spells and hit points. The essence 
and lost hit points remain in the phylactery, which 
becomes AC 0 and has those hit points from now 
on. The candidate is now a lichnee, and must 
return to its own body to rest for Id days. The 
ordeal of becoming a lichnee is so traumatic that 
the candidate forgets any memorized spells of the 
top three levels available, and cannot regain any 
spells of those levels until the rest period is com- 
plete. (Candidates usually then resume a life of 
adventuring to regain the lost level.) 

The next time the lichnee candidate dies, 
regardless of the manner or planar location of 
death, or barriers of any sort between corpse and 
phylactery, the candidate's life-force goes into 
the phylactery, For it to emerge again, there must 
be a recently dead (less than 30 days) corpse 
within 90 feet of the phylactery. The corpse may 


be that of any creature, and must fail a saving 
throw vs. spell to be possessed. If it makes its 
saving throw, it never receives the lich. If the 
creature had 3 Hit Dice or fewer in life, it saves 
as a O- level fighter. If it had 3+1 HD or greater in 
life, it saves as if it were alive, with the following 
alignment modifiers: 


LG, CG, NG: 0 
LN. CN. N -3 
LE: 4 
NE: -Š 
CE: -6 


The candidate's own corpse, if within range, is 
at —10, and may have been dead for any length of 
time. The lichnee may attempt to enter its own 
corpse once per week until it succeeds. (A phy- 
lactery too well hidden might never offer the lich- 
nec a corpse to enter. Many lichnee commit 
suicide to save themselves such trouble.) When 
the lichnee enters its own corpse, it rises in 1d4 
turns as a full lich, with all memorized spells and 
all undead abilities described in the MONSTROUS 


MANUAL™ accessory. 


of Life Stealing 
XP Value: 800 GP Value: 1,800 
Pouynnpron Newszine 65 
This potion gives the drinker the ability to drain 
levels like a vampire. The duration of the potion 
is 1d4+4 rounds, and during that time the user 
can drain two life levels each time someone is 
successfully touched. The victim is allowed a sav- 
ing throw vs. spell to avoid the level drain. 


of Life Suspension 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 1,200 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 65 
The imbiber of this potion falls into a coma for 
30 days. During this time, healing takes place as 
if the character were resting. This potion is often 
used by adventurers on characters who have been 
poisoned or cursed; buying time to find cures. 
The duration of the coma only can be interrupted 
by a haste spell. 


of Lightning Form 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 1,500 


POLYHEDRON Newszine 65 
Drinking this magical liquid causes the user and 
anything worn or carried, to assume a vaguely 
* 


e / a ia 


876 


D 


Potion of Mame Enhancement pi 


humanoid, electrical form. This form, which lasts 
da rounds, is able to fly at a speed of 96, MC D. 
Each round the form can attack all creatures 
within a 10-foot-radius by arcing from target to 
target, striking as if each victim were AC 10, and 
causing 1d6+2 points of damage per successful 
attack. Because of the speed of the character, 
there is a 25% chance of striking any friendly tar- 
gets within range. 


of Longevity 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 900 
Dunoron Master Guide 

The longevity potion reduces the character's age 
by 1d12 years, restoring youth and vigor The 
entire potion must be consumed to achieve the 
desired result. It is also useful as a counter to 
magical or monster-based aging attacks, Each 
time one drinks a /ongevity potion, there is a 1% 
cumulative chance the effect is the reverse of 
what the consumer wants—all age removed by 
previous drinks are restored. 


Love 
XP Value: 200 GP Value; 300 
DRAGON Magazine 43 

The potion has the effect of charming an individ- 
ual who drinks it and does not save successfully 
vs. spell, Each potion has a maximum duration of 
one week, with a 15% chance cach day (cumula- 
tive) that the potion wears off at the end of the 
first through sixth days. Victims who make a suc- 
cessful save vs. spell are not affected. 


of Luck 
XP Value: 600 GP Value: 1,500 
Duncnons & Dracons Rules Cyclopedia 

This potion makes the user lucky. The player of 
the character using this potion may choose the 
result of any one roll, rather than rolling a ran- 
dom result (attack or damage roll, saving throw, 
or any other). Other players’ rolls cannot be 
affected, nor are the Dungeon Masters rolls 
affected. The effect lasts for I hour or until the 
luck is used 


of Lycanthropy 
XP Value GP Value 
Werewolf: 50 500 
Wereboar: 50 500 
Werebear: 50 500 
Wererat: 50 500 
Werewolf: 50 500 
Werefox: 50 500 
Weretiget: 50 500 
Werebadger: 50 $00 


POLYHEDRON Newszine 65 
This foul, enchanted mixture contains the blood 
of a lycanthrope. The character who quaffs the 
potion notices no ill effects until the first full 
moon. At that time, he or she turns into a lycan- 
thrope, the same as contracting the disease by 
fighting one, Use the following table to deter- 


mine the type of lycanthropy. 
Rall Effect 

1 Werewolf 

2 Wereboar 

3 Werebear 

Wererat 

5 Werewolf 

6 Were ſox 

7 Wereliger 

8 Werebadger 

Mage Wine 

XP Value: 400 GP Value: 900 


POLYHEDRON Newszine 65 
This potion is only usable by mages and bards. 
When imbibed, the drinker can immediately 
recall a spell cast carlier in the day. The recalled 
spell must be cast within the next 24 hours. 


of Magic Blocking 
XP Value: 400 GP Value: 900 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 68 
The imbiber of this potion is immune to all magi- 
cal weapons for 1d4+1 turns. 


of Magic Enhancement 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 1,200 


Potyiinnnon Newszine 65 
When this potion is swallowed by a spellcaster, the 
next Id4 spells have maximum duration, range, 
effect, and damage. Any nonspellcasters imbibing 
this potion suffer 1d12 points of damage. 


Potion, Magic Peas 


—— — . . — 


Magie Peas 
XP Value: GP Value: 250 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 65 
This unique potion confuses even the worst glut- 
ton. When poured on any surface, the potion cre- 
ates a plateful of delicious smelling, sweet peas. 
However, once someone tries to cat the peas, the 
peas magically roll away, making them impossi- 
ble to cat. The effect lasts for 1d6 turns. However, 
if the potion is imbibed, the drinker becomes ill 
for Ida hours, as the peas churn about in his or 
her stomach. A character can neither attack nor 
defend while effected in this way. 


of Magic Resistance 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 900 
Rook of Lairs 
This potion causes the drinker to always make 
successful saving throws vs. all forms of magic 
for da rounds 


of Magic Resistance II 

XP Value: 900 GP Value: 2,000 

Poynton Newszine 65 
Five doses are found in 95% of the vials found, 
the other 8% contain seven doses, Each dose lasts 
4d4 rounds and confers a 10% magic resistance 
to the drinker—or adds 10% if he or she already 
has a magic resistance, If more than one potion is 
imbibed, the results are not cumulative; the effect 
only lasts an additional four rounds. 


of Magic Shielding 
XP Value: 450 GP Value: 900 
Pouwyneprox Newszine 65 
When a character drinks this potion, a minor 
globe of invulnerability springs up to envelope 
the user, The duration is 1d8+3 rounds. 


of Magnetism 
XP Value: 250 GP Value: 800 
POLYIEEDRON Newszine 65 

When this potion is quaffed, the drinker gener- 
ates a 20-foot field of magnetism. All iron 
objects of 50 pounds or less are attracted to his 
or her body. Sharp and pointed objects have a 
50% chance of piercing the imbiber. The dura- 
tion is Sda rounds 


878 


of Magnification 
XP Value: 250 GP Value: 700 
POLYNEDRON Newsxzine 65 
This potion y properties are not revealed until it 
is mixed with a second potion. The imbiber of 
the combined potions receives the maximum 
effectiveness and duration of the second potion 
For example, mixing a potion of magnification 
with a potion of magnetism gives the latter 
potion a duration of 20 rounds, or mixed with a 
potion of extra healing would heal 27 points of 
damage 


of Master Thievery 


XP Value: 500 GP Value: 1,200 
The Complete Thief ' Handbook 

This potion gives the thief a temporary increase 

in levels if he or she has fewer than 13 levels of 

experience. The number of levels gained depend 

on the thief level, as shown below. 


o oh 


Potion of Mirrored Eyes 


—e— 2 


Increase 
Level of Levels Added in each 
Imbiber Bestowed Hit Points Skill 
Ist—3rd 5 5d6 +20% 
4th-6th 4 4d6+1 +16% 
7th-9th 3 3d6+2 +12% 
10th-1 2th 2 2d6+3 +8% 


The thief acts as if at the experience level 
bestowed by the magic of the potion, Damage 
sustained is taken first from magically gained 
temporary extra hit points, So far as thieving 
skills are concerned, the potion affects these all 
equally by the increase shown. The effects of this 
potion last for Sd rounds. 


of Merging 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 900 
Dunotons & Dragons Rules Cyclopedia 

The effect of this potion is quite unusual. The 
user can permit others to actually merge their 
forms with the user's, including all equipment, as 
if all were gascous, A maximum of seven other 
creatures can merge with the user of the potion. 
The merging cannot be forced; the user can, at 
will, prevent anyone from merging. A creature 
merged with the user can leave the merger by 
merely stepping out. No creature merged with 
another (including the user) can attack or cast a 
spell, but may speak. Damage to the user of the 
potion does not affect those merged. 


of Metal Immunity 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 2,500 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 65 
This thin liquid has a metallic hue and tastes 
chalky. It grants the character quaffing it immu- 
nity to metal. Metal weapons pass harmlessly 
through the body, metal armor falls through the 
body, and the user can pass through metal doors. 
The effects of the potion lust Ida turns. 


of the Midas Touch 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 1,500 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 65 
Metal turns to gold when touched by a person 
who consumes this potion, However, touching 
gold turns it to lead, and magical metals and met- 
als weighing more than 10 pounds cannot be 
altered. The potion’s duration is Ida turns. Trans- 
formed metals revert to their original form after 
one hour. 


Mind Dampening 

XP Value: 400 GP Value: 900 
Dracon Magazine 2 
This potion renders the user immune to psionic 
location or attack (including crystal ball and 
ESP) for one weck. The user may not employ 
psionic powers during this period. It renders 
psionic devices inoperative for that period also 
(ESP medallion, amulet of inescapable 
location), 


of Mind Focusing 
XP Value: 800 GP Value: 1,700 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 65 
When this potion is ingested, the drinker’s Intelli- 
gence and Dexterity are increased by one, to a 
maximum score of 18, for Ida hours 


of Mind Restoration 
XP Value: 650 GP Value: 1,300 
Deacon Magazine 91 

When consumed, this magical liquid cures any 
form of normal or magical insanity, and restores 
feebleminded characters to health. If a psionic 
character who was attacked while defenseless 
later drinks this potion, it cures any psychic dam- 
age suffered except for death, idiocy, the perma- 
nent loss of an attack or defense mode, ora 
robotic state. This potion also enables a psionic 
character to recover Psionic Strength Points at 
twice the normal rate for two hours after the 
potion is consumed. 


XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 2.500 

Pouvnepron Newszine 65 
When poured on the ground, this potion creates a 
mini-environment, about 100 yards in diameter. 
The environment is essentially a tropical paradise 
with temperatures ranging from 75° to 80° and a 
small waterfall cascading into a pool, The par- 
adise lasts for 1d4+4 hours. Adventurers and 
explorers seek these potions, as they provide 
oases in the desert and warm retreats in arctic 
climes. 


. of Mirrored Eyes 
XP Value: 600 GP Value: | 400 


Pouyummaon Newszine 65 
This thick liquid has a silvery hue and is almost 
always odorless. When consumed, the eyes of the 
imbiber change to silver orbs with no pupils. The 
3843 


a ES i ES 


879 


Potion of Missile Protection 


drinker can see perfectly well, but light is 
reflected off his or her eyes, granting protection 
from petrification and all other gaze attacks. This 
potion is prized by adventurers, and has made the 
reputation of the Basilisk Exterminating Com- 
pany. The potion & duration is 1d4+4 turns. 


of Missile Protection 

XP Value: 400 GP Value: 800 
Daacon Magazine 91 
The effects of this magical potion last for 346 
rounds. When consumed, the potion gives partial 
protection from all magic missile attacks. The 
drinker gains a saving throw vs. spell each time 
he or she is hit by a single magic missile; if the 
throw is successful, no damage is taken from the 
missile, If the throw fails, only 1 point of damage 
is taken from the missile. Separate throws are 
required for cach magic missile, so a target struck 
by five of them from an 1 Ith-level wizard must 
save five times. 


of Monster Creation 

XP Value: 200 GP Value: 400 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 65 

When this rainbow colored liquid is poured on 
the ground, four hobgoblins spring to life and 
begin battling the character holding the empty 
vial. The hobgoblins fight until destroyed or the 
character is killed. This potion was created for 
fighters wishing to practice without leaving the 
comfort of their homes, If the potion is con- 
sumed, the imbiber suffers 112 points of dam- 
age and is incapacitated for Id hours. 


Hobgoblins (4): Int Average; AL LE; AC 5 (10), 
MV 9; HD 1+1; hp 9 each; THACO 19; #AT 1; 
Dmg 1d8; SZ M; ML 12; XP 35. 


of Neutralization 
XP Value: 200 GP Value: 600 
Deacon Magazine 189 
This potion is valuable in emergency situations 
If a character who has been poisoned by any 
means drinks this potion before death occurs, the 
potion neutralizes the toxin instantly. 


of Noxious Resistance 
XP Value: 400 GP Value: 900 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 65 
This elixir protects the imbiber from all forms of 
noxious and poisonous odors and gasses. Further, 


it negates the effects of gas-based attacks, such as 
green dragon breath, cloudkill, or poison gas 


traps. The duration is 1d4+4 turns. 


of Nutrition 
XP Value: 150 GP Value; 500 
Dragon Magazine 91 

The imbiber of this potion can go one week with- 
out food or water, and suffers no ill effects as a 
result. Protection is also granted against chimes 
of hunger; the user of a potion of nutrition 
receives an initial saving throw vs. spell to negate 
the effect of the chime upon him or herself. Even 
if the throw fails, the drinker receives two (not 
one) saving throws vs. spell on each succeeding 
round to end the hunger, 


Odrovir 
XP Value: 600 GP Value: 1,800 
DUNGEONS & DRAGONS Master Set 

In Norse legend, a great war took place between 
the Aesir (the 24 deities of Asgard) and the 
Vanir (the nature gods of Noatun). At its peace- 
ful conclusion, both sides spat into a jar, pro- 
viding their mixed essences hostage to peace. 
Kvasir, the wisest of all men, was made of the 
spittle. His blood, mixed with honcy, was called 
Odrovir (or Odhrevir), and all who partook of it 
became poets. 

In game terms, those who partake of this fluid 
can choose two bardic artistic proficiencies. 


of Open Mind 

GP Value: 250 
Pouviepaon Newszine 65 
When this potion is quaffed, the surface 
thoughts of the imbiber are known to all crea- 
tures within 50 yards, This mental broadcast is 
stopped by 2 or more feet of rock, 2 or more 
inches of any metal, or a thin sheet of lead foil. 
This potion can reveal that the imbiber is behind 
a door, around the next corner, or what he or 
she thinks of fellow party members, or the bar- 
maid across the room. The effects of this pogon 
last 5d6 rounds. 


XP Value: 


of Opposite Alignment 
XP Value: — GP Value: 600 
POLYHEDRON Newsvine 65 
The imbiber of this potion immediately assumes 
the opposite alignment for 1d8+8 turns, The 


potion does not affect true neutral characters. 
356) 


a aa, 


D 


Potion, Phase 


— — aan 4 


of Pain Suppression 

XP Value: 50 GP Value: 100 
Dracon Magazine 99 
This concoction is presumably a barbarian cre- 
ation, but, the secrets of its manufacture are 
closely guarded. The potion deadens pain for 1d4 
hours and tends to deplete the user’s energy 
reserves, 

Against magical powers that directly cause 
pain, such as a symbol of pain or venom from an 
erinyes’ daggers, the potion gives a +5 on all 
applicable saving throws and reduces all effects 
of such pain by half in all respects except dura- 
tion. Furthermore, the potion restores 2d8 hit 
points to the drinker (not exceeding the drinker's 
original hit point total) and allows the character 
to act as if his or her Strength class was one class 
higher. (A Strength class is considered to be each 
individual line given in the Strength Table of the 
Players’ Handbook. A fighter with a Strength of 
12 would be able to employ a Strength of 14 (the 
lowest value of a range is considered to be the 
Strength achieved), When the potion’s effect 
ends, the user suffers the loss of Strength and hit 
points bestowed, and loses an additional 1d4 hit 
points as well from exhaustion. 

Because the potion draws on the user's 
reserves, taking more than one dose at a time can 
be risky. If two doses are taken together, they last 
a total of 2d4 hours, and the user loses 2d4 hit 
points when the double dose wears off. However, 
the Strength-class increase is the same as for a 
normal-sized dose, and bonuses against magical 
pain attacks are as described above. If three or 
more doses are taken at once, the user must make 
a system shock roll, with a -5% per dose penalty, 
to avoid retchhing and ruining the effect. If the 
roll is successful, the duration of the potion is 344 
hours, and 3d4 additional hit points are lost at the 
end. In no case is Strength raised by more than 
one class, bonuses against magic raised, or more 
than 2d4 temporary hit points bestowed. 


of Perception 
XP Value: 300 GP Value: 750 
The Complete Thief Hundbook 
This enhances the senses of the imbiber to a great 
degree, with many effects: 
A thief gains a 10% bonus to both open locks 
and remove traps skills. 
A thicf gains a 20% bonus to find traps and 
hear noise skills. 


A character's chance for being surprised is 
halved (usually this means a +! or +2 on the 
dic). 

A character's chance for detecting secret or 
concealed doors is doubled. This may also be 
applied to detecting hidden or concealed 
objects. If the DM wishes to use an Intelli- 
gence check for this; a bonus of +4 applies to 
such an ability check, A corresponding bonus 
of -A applies to any observation proficiency 
check. 

A character has a 25% chance to automati- 
cally detect invisible or detect illusions (from 
spells or magical effects below Sth level). 
However, this enhancement also makes the 
imbiber vulnerable to gaze attacks and weap- 
ons and also sound-based attacks (such as a 
shout spell or the roaring of an androsphinx) 
and all saving throws made against such 
attacks are at 2. The effects of the potion last 
for 1d4+4 turns. 


of Pestilence 
XP Value: — GP Value: 600 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 65 
Often misidentified as a potion of healing, this 
vile mixture was believed to be brewed by priests 
of the god of disease. While it heals 4 points of 
damage to the imbiber, it also causes the user to 
become a “carrier” of a debilitating disease. This 
is similar to the priest spell cause disease. The 
effected character infects anyone touched during 
the next 1d4+1 days, but the character is immune 
to the disease. A cure disease spell cast upon the 
potion or drinker negates the effects of the 


One sip of this potion causes a character to 

become petrified, like a statue. Only a stone to 

flesh or similar magic can restore the imbiber. 

Phase 
XP Value: 800 GP Value: 2,000 
Dungeon Magazine 20 

The phase potion, which is related to oil of ethere- 

alness, is more useful for general combat. When 

taken, this potion allows the user to shift in and out 

of phase with the Prime Material Plane at will, 

much like a phase spider. When out of phase, the 
3568 


881 a 


~ Potion of Plant Control r 


user is impervious to all forms of attack except 
those that reach into the Ethereal Plane. A phase 
door spell forces the user to remain in phase for 
seven rounds, Even when in phase, the user is sur- 
rounded by a fiery nimbus of white fire—the trace 
of the portal to the Ethereal Plane. 

In addition to being able to shift into the Ethe- 
real Plane, the user may take up to 60 pounds of 
material along. Inert gear can be taken automati- 
cally simply by touching it and willing it to come 
along, but a living creature is entitled to a save vs. 
spell at -2 if it does not wish to go with the 
potion user. These effects last for 5d8 rounds. 

Phase potions are brewed from phase spider 
ichor or from the concentrated juices of rare 
underground fungi. 


of Plant Control 
XP Value: 250 GP Value: 300 

DUNGEON Master Guide 
A plant control potion enables the individual who 
consumes it to influence the behavior of vegetable 
life forms. This includes normal plants and fungi, 
even molds and shambling mounds—within the 
parameters of their normal abilities. The imbiber 
can cause the vegetable forms to remain still or 
silent, move, or entwine, according to their limits. 

Vegetable monsters with Intelligence of 5 or 

higher are entitled to a saving throw vs. spell. 
Plants within a 20- by 20-foot square can be con- 
trolled, subject to the limitations set forth above, 
for 5d4 rounds. Self-destructive control is not 
directly possible if the plants are intelligent (see 
charm plants spell). Control range is 90 yards 


of Plant Growth 

XP Value: 200 GP Value: 250 
Adventure Pack I 
This potion has the same effects as a plant growth 
spell. It causes plants to grow into a dense barrier 
of thorns and briars. To use it, the potion must be 
poured onto the ground; it affects a 100- by 10- 
foot area. 


of Poison 
XP Value: — GP Value: 100 
DUNGEON Master Guide 
A poison potion is simply a highly toxic liquid in 
a potion flask. Typically, poison potions are odor- 
less and can be of any color. Ingestion, introduc- 
tion of the poison through a break in the skin, or, 
in some cases, just skin contact, can cause death. 


Poison can be weak (+4 to +1 bonus to the saving 
throw), average, or deadly (I to 4 penalty or 
greater on saving throws), Some poison can be so 
toxic that a neutralize poison spell simply lowers 
the toxicity level by 40%—say, from a A penalty 
to a +4 bonus to the saving throw vs. poison, The 
DM selects the strength of poison desired, 
although most are strength “J” (see Table 51 in 
the DMG). The DM may want to allow characters 
to hurl poison flasks, 


of Poison Negation 
XP Value: 250 GP Value: 400 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 82 
Imbibing this potion makes the drinker immune 
to all ingested or injected poisons for the next 18 
hours. This does not include poison gas or poi- 
sons that were ingested prior to drinking the 


potion of poison negation, 
of Polymorph Self 
XP Value: 200 GP Value: 350 


DUNGEON Master Guide 
This potion duplicates the effects of the 4th-level 
wizard spell of the same name. 


of Power 
XP Value GP Value 
Wizard: 500 1,300 
Priest: 500 1,300 
Rogue: 500 1,300 
Warrior: 500 1,300 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 65 


There are four different varieties of this potion, 
one each for warriors, wizards, priests, and 
rogues. Each type of potion lasts 1d4+4 turns. 
Characters receive no bonuses if they drink a 
potion meant for another class. 

Wizards: cast spells as if they were two levels 
above their present level. 

Priests: gain a +1 to attack rolls, +3 damage, and 
cast spells as if they were one level higher. 
Rogues: gain a +1 to attack rolls, +2 to damage, 
and gain 20 percentage points in any one ability. 
Warriors: gain +3 to attack rolls, +5 damage, 
and 20 additional temporary hit points. 


Pox 
XP Value: 50 GP Value: 450 
Deacon Maguzine 194 
Although this potion is often the result of a failed 


attempt at creating some beneficial potion, it is 
3874 


V 


882 


Bee. | 


x Potion, Psionics Boosting ye 


sometimes intentionally manufactured or substi- 
tuted for some other potion (for reasons ranging 
from con games to assassination attempts), When 
first swallowed, the potion has no apparent effects. 
After about an hour, boils, rashes, warts, and sores 
appear on the user's body. These grow in number 
and size until they cover the victim completely, but 
while they resemble the symptoms of many conta- 
gious diseases, the effects of a pox potion are not 
catching. For every hour after the elixir x ill effects 
first manifest themselves (up to a maximum of 
seven hours) the pox increases in stages, with the 
victim's Strength, Dexterity, and Charisma drop- 
ping by | point and hit points by 2 points cach hour 
(a maximum loss of 7 and 14 points, respectively). 

The only known cures for this poison are a full 
doses of sweet water, a dispel magic spell (the 
poison resists as if created by a 12th-level wiz- 
ard), or a cure disease spell cast by a priest of at 
least the 12th level. There is rarely more than one 
dose found in a single place. 


of Protection from Immiscibility 

XP Value: 500 GP Value: 900 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 68 

When thie potion is quaffed, it grants the imbiber 
the ability to drink two additional potions without 
fear of incompatibility. The two potions must be 
consumed within eight rounds of drinking the 
potion of protection from immiscibility. If a charac- 
ter drinks two potions after that time has elapsed, 
he or she faces the possibility of immiscibility. 


of the Pseudo Treant 
XP Value: 300 GP Value: 800 
PotynEpron Newszine 65 
Upon drinking this liquid, the imbiber’s body 
starts to stretch and change. Within six rounds the 
user takes on the appearance of a tree (AC 0; MV 
12; HD 7; hp 42; THACO 13; #AT 2; Dmg 
1d8/1d8). The potion’s duration is 10d4 turns. 


of Psionic Ability ; 
XP Value: 900 GP Value: 2,000 
PowyvEpRon Newszine 65 
This rure and valuable potion has great potential 
for nonpsionic characters, allowing them to gain 
a randomly determined wild talent. While the 
duration of the potion is Id months, the imbiber 
is free to consume other potions after two days. 
This potion has no effect on psionic characters, 


Psionics Boosting 
XP Value GP Value 
Gray: 200 350 
Green: 300 600 
Red; 350 650 
Silver: 300 650 
Violet: 300 650 
White: 200 300 
Yellow: 300 600 
DraGoN Magazine 9! 


A few potions are known to psionic wizards and 
alchemists that are capable of increasing a psionic 
character q attack and defense strengths for a lim- 
ited time after being consumed. A potion of this 
type takes effect one round after imbibing it, and 
the cffects last 2420 turns, 

Below are descriptions of these potions, giving 
their effects and brief words on the materials 
required to manufacture them. Specific details of 
potion-making are left up to the DM. Experience 
points for these potions can only be gained by 
psionic characters who consume and use them or 
by the alchemist who designs the potion (depend- 
ing upon the rules used); the drinker must 
at least one of the psionic modes affected by the 
potion before the duration of that duse expires. 

The potions described here are most probably 
the only ones of their kind, The major ingredient of 
euch is taken from a nonhumanoid creature native 
to the Prime Material Plane that has psionic attack 
or defense ability, and the effects of each potion 
are closely tied to the abilities of the source crea- 
ture. These major ingredients must be taken from 
creatures slain without the use of magic or psion- 
ics; failure to follow this rule spoils the ingredient 
and make the resulting potion useless—perhaps 
(10% chance) even poisonous. A character who 
drinks a psionics boosting potion receives extra 
strength points when employing one of the attack 
or defense modes that the potion affects. The boost 
enables the drinker to attack or defend as if current 
psionic strength was increased by the amount of 
the bonus. However, the user cannot receive these 
bonus points unless he or she has enough Psionic 
Strength Points remaining to use the attack or 
defense mode normally. For example, someone 
who drinks the violet potion does not receive 


bonus points for using a Psionic Blast unless that 


character has at least 20 strength points remaining 
(so that attack mode could be used even if the 
potion had not been consumed) and actually 
employs a Psionic Blast attack. 


~ Potion of the Peychotic Killer = 


Gray: Adds 50 attack points to all Psychic 
Crush attacks, but makes no defensive alterations 
in the imbiber. Parts from a psionic gray ooze are 
required to manufacture such a potion. 

Green: This potion adds 50 points to all 
Psionic Blast attacks made by the drinker, and 
100 points onto all defense modes used as well. A 
specimen of tissue from an algoid is required to 
make this potion, 

Red: This potion adds 25 points to any Psionic 
Blast, Psychic Crush, or Mind Thrust attacks 
made by the drinker, as well us 100 points to any 
psionic defense mounted, The brain of a su-mon- 
ster is required to make this brew. 

Silver: This drink adds 50 strength points to 
any Ego Whip or Id Insinuation attacks made by 
the drinker, and 50 points to any psionic defenses 
used. An intellect devourer’s body is required to 
make this potion 

Violet: This potion adds 100 points to all 
Psionic Blast attacks made by the drinker, and 50 
points to any defense modes used while the 
potion is in effect. The brain of a mind flayer is 
required to make this potion. 

White: Adds 50 attack points to all Mind 
Thrust attacks made by the drinker but no defen- 
sive alterations. This potion requires one brain 
mole to create. 

Yellow: This potion adds 50 points to all Id 
Insinuation attacks made by the drinker, and also 
makes the drinker immune to psionic attack for 
the duration of the potion's effects. One-half 
cubic foot of material from a living colony of 
psionic yellow mold, collected in an appropriate 
container, is needed to make this potion. 


of the Psychotic Killer 
XP Value: — GP Value: 600 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 65 


A fling thi d liquid immediate! . NO 
nyone quaffing this curved liquid immediately 5 yD 


starts attacking everyone within sight for 1d&8+4 
rounds. 


of Pursuit 
XP Value: 800 GP Value: 4,000 
New Item 
This purplish potion increases a character's 
movement rate by | more than that of any crea- 
ture being pursued, for one round only. Found in 
tiny, clear glass bottles, there is never more than 
one dose of the potion of pursuit in them. 


Potion, Quirks of P 


Quirks of Magical Potions* 
XP Value: GP Value: 
Drapo Magazine 163 
The AD&D" game has one of the largest compi- 
lations of magical items in the fantasy gaming 
industry 

The following tables have been created to add 
some spice and variety to existing magical items 
in the AD&D game worlds. A table of nonstan- 
dard magical item abilities is offered for cach 
major type of magical item in the AD&D game. 
The rationale for such quirks is simple. 

Most items are created normally, and function 
exactly as a standard item of the same type in the 
DMG. However, sometimes there is a slight 
mishap in the creation of the device: the steps are 
not followed in the proper order, the astrological 
signs do not bode well, the item's creator is dis- 
turbed to begin with, the instructions are incom- 
plete, or something just plain goes wrong. Any of 
these results may cause a magical item to behave 
differently from others just like it. 

Not all quirks are bad, however. Some are 
detrimental to the item or its user, some are neu- 
tral, and some are even beneficial, The possibility 
of quirks existing (and the actual number of 
quirks) is determined by using the table below to 
find the exact quirks that a magical potion pos- 
SCSSES, 


Roll Quirks Present 


01-86 No quirks 
87-94 One quirk 
95-98 Two quirks 
99-00 Three quirks 


Quirks of Magical Potions 
Roll Result 
Drinker glows (as per a light spell) a 
random color for as long as the potion 
is in effect, 
Drinker skin turns a random color for 
1d10 turns, 
Drinker is unable to speak or cast spells 
with verbal components for Ida hours 
after drinking the clixir. 
Imbiber gets extremely hungry imme- 
diately after the potion is consumed (as 
per a chime of hunger). 
Drinket's senses sharpen while the 
potion ts in effect, or for a maximum of 
three turns (whichever is longer). The 


31-34 


35-40 


414 


45-50 


A 
1A 
w 


individual affected gains a +2 bonus 
against being surprised (unless he or 
she possesses the alertness nonweapon 
proficiency or is a ranger, in which case 
add a +3 bonus) 

Drinker cannot hear anything duc to 
ringing or buzzing in ears for as long as 
the potion is in effect, or for three turns 
if no duration is given 

Potion is diluted and works 50% as well 
as a normal potion of the same type. 
Both duration and effects are dimin- 
ished in power 

Potion becomes inert and useless if left 
unstopped for longer than five rounds 
Potion’s duration doubles if it is mixed 
with wine prior to consumption. 
Drinker becomes highly intoxicated for 
di hours after the potion is con- 
sumed. Only dispel magic can prema- 
turely remove the effects of the 
drunkenness (effects determined by the 
DM). 

Drinker gains 60° infravision for as 
long as the potion is in effect, or for 
three turns if no duration is given. If the 
drinker normally has infravision, it is 


lost for the same amount of time 
tke 


885 


a ee E E 


Potion of Rage 


(i A——————— ⁵˙A' 


54-57 
58-62 


63-66 


67-71 


72-76 


77-78 


79-83 


92-95 


96-97 


98-99 


i 886 * 


Potion has no effect upon demihumans. 
Drinker experiences slight disorienta- 
tion for 1d6 rounds after drinking the 
potion (—2 penalty on any attack roll 
and +2 penalty on Armor Class during 
this time). 

Drinker becomes drowsy; a Constitution 
check on 1d20 must be made every 
round for four rounds after the potion is 
consumed. If the roll on any check is 
higher than the drinker’s constitution, he 
or she falls asleep for 3d6 minutes. The 
sleeping individual can be awakened 
only by taking at least 1 of pointdamage 
from a physical or magical attack. 
Potion is phosphorescent and glows 
(equal to faerie fire spell) in the dark. 
Potion is found in powdered form; 
water has to be added to the powder for 
the potion to be effective. 

Potion is stronger than normal; its dura- 
tion is 150% of a normal potion of the 
same type. 

Potion is nauseating to drink; a Constitu- 
tion check on 1d20 must be made in order 
to gulp the contents of the potion. Ifa sav- 
ing throw vs. poison at +2 is not made 
after that, the drinker feels nauseated for 
2d10 tums ( to hit during that time). 
Drinker loses | point of Dexterity for 
2d10 turns, 

Potion evaporates (50%) or coagulates 
(50%) and becomes useless if left open 
to air for longer than five rounds, 
Potion is unpredictable—it works nor- 
mally 50% of the time, does nothing 
30% of the time, and sickens the drinker 
for Ida days without any beneficial 
effect 20% of the time. A cure disease 
removes this illness. 

Potion is unstable; if severely jostled or 
shaken, it bursts its container (75% 
chance) and becomes useless. 

Drinker suddenly becomes extremely 
verbose and talks incessantly for the 
duration of the potion, or one turn if no 
duration is given. During this time, the 
drinker and his associates cannot gain 
surprise on any encountered monsters. 
If the potion is mixed with anything 
else, it forms a lethal compound (if 
swallowed, save vs. poison at -A on the 


roll, or die in Ida rounds). 

00 Potion is addictive; a draft of it must be 
taken at least once a week after such an 
addictive liquid is imbibed. If the addict 
does not drink the potion every week, 
he or she suffers a —2 penalty on all 
ability scores until the potion is taken 
or the affliction is removed. Only alter 
reality, limited wish, wish, or going 
“cold turkey” without the potion for 
1d3 months eures the addiction. 


of Rage 
XP Value: — GP Value: 400 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 65 

This unusual elixir is identified as a potion of heal- 
ing 80% of the time. It has two effects: the imbiber 
is instantly healed of 4 points of damage. The sec- 
ond effect, though, remains hidden until the char- 
acter is threatened, attacked, or angered. When this 
condition is met, the potion causes the character to 
become enraged, dropping everything in hand in 
favor of the most damaging weapon within reach. 
The character attacks the person or creature that 
angered him or her, at +2 to attack and damage 
rolls. The rage continues for 1d10 rounds. 


of Rainbow Hues 
XP Value: 200 GP Value: 800 
Duncron Master Guide 
This rather syrupy potion must be stored in a 
metallic container. The imbiber can become any 
hue or combination of hues desired at will. Any 
color or combination of colors is possible if the 
user simply holds the thought in his or her mind 
long enough for the hue to be affected. If the 
potion is quaffed sparingly, a flask yields up to 
seven drafts of one hour duration each. 


of Recall 
XP Value: 600 GP Value: 1,300 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 65 
After drinking this potion, anything the imbibing 
character reads, hears, or sees during Idi turns, 
can be remembered at any time. This potion is 
especially sought after by spies and map makers. 


of Reflection 
XP Value: 300 GP Value: 700 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 65 
This very rare potion causes the drinker to 


develop mirror-like skin, clothing, and armor for 
3884 


Potion of Safe Consumption 


— a 


1d6+3 turns. The individual reflects the images of 
creatures and scenery on all sides. Attacks against 
such a character are made at -A due to the dis- 
torted image. 


of Regeneration 

XP Value: 500 GP Value: 4,000 
DRAGON Magazine 2 
Acts as a ring of regeneration with a duration of 
one day and revitalization ability if the body is 
fresh (up to three days, with a Constitution check 
needed after the first). If applied over an extended 
period (at least two weeks) to an inactive charac- 
ter, it can be used to regenerate a lost member of 
the body. 


of Regeneration II 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 4,000 
Dragon Magazine 132 
A sip of this fluid gives the taster a tingling feel- 
ing. Imbibing the whole dose causes the drinker 
to enter regenerative sleep immediately, for eight 
hours. 


of Rejuvenation 
XP Value: 250 GP Value: 500 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 65 
This potion allows a character with psionic abili- 
ties to regain PSPs at twice the normal rate per 
hour for Ida hours. 


of Rest 
XP Value: 250 GP Value: 500 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 65 
After drinking this potion, a character is suddenly 
relieved of all fatigue, receiving the benefits of 
eight hours of sleep. 


of Restoration 
GP Value: 2,000 
DUNGEON Magazine 4 
This magical fluid was first created by Kenither 
the Gaunt. Each dose negates the effects of the 
following spells and powers, restoring the 
affected creature to its normal state: charm mon- 
ster, charm person, feign death, forget, friends, 
haste, hold person, polymorph other, polymorph 
self, ray of enfeeblement, sepia snake sigil, sleep, 
slow, stoneskin, strength, and Tasha 3 uncontrol- 
lable hideous laughter. 
A polymorphed creature restored by this potion 
need not make a system shock roll. The liquid 


XP Value: 300 


also cures blindness and deafness, and restores a 
crystallized creature and those turned to stone by 
gaze attacks. The potion can be administered by 
pouring a dose on the subject or by the creature 
ingesting it. In either case, it can negate more 
than one spell. For example, if applied to a crea- 
ture affected by both Tasha q uncontrollable 
hideous laughter and haste, both spells would be 
negated. 


of Resuscitation 
XP Value: 300 GP Value: 600 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 65 

When the cap of this exotic liquid is removed, a 
highly magical gas is released. If opened under 
the nose of an unconscious creature or character 
who has 0 hit points or more, the gas revives 
them. Characters or creatures with 0 hit points 
receive | point of healing. The gas does not work 
on those with a negative score of hit points. The 
potion also can be used to revive characters who 
are the victims of sleep spells. 


of Reverse Ventriloquism 
XP Value: — GP Value: 500 
Peu v,] Newszine 64 

A randomly selected person or creature within 50 
feet of someone drinking this potion can make 
his or her voice sound as if it were issuing from 
the imbiber. The selected speaker is instantly 
aware of this ability and can talk in any known 
language, through the imbiber, for one turn, To 
detect the ruse, listeners must roll a successful 
saving throw vs. spell with a penalty of I. 


of Rogue Wisdom 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 900 
CARDMASTER* Adventure Design Deck 
Drinking this potion increases the rogue’s level by 
two for five turns. 


of Safe Consumption 

XP Value: 300 GP Value: 500 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 65 
When this sweet liquid is consumed, the drinker 
is rendered immune to the harmful effects of any 
nonmagical food and drink for the next 24 hours, 
Thus, the character is unaffected by ingested poi- 
sons and can safely eat rotted food, tainted water, 
or lousy cooking. 


389% 


3 8 * 


8 


7 


Potion of Scent Neutralization 


fg, ee A. - 


of Scent Neutralization 


XP Value GP Value 
Controllable: 400 900 
Normal: 300 500 


POLYHEDRON Newszine 65 

This odorless liquid has the consistency of rub- 
bing alcohol and appears in a variety of pastel 
colors. It tends to taste like wild game and ren- 
ders the imbiber odorless for the duration of its 
effect—-1d4+4 turns. One in 20 of these potions 
also allows the character drinking it to control his 
or her aroma in order to smell like anything he or 
she desires. This latter version is prized by noble 
women who use it to create individual perfumes. 


of Scrying 
XP Value: 700 GP Value: 1,000 
PoLyHEDRON Newszine 65 

When this potion is poured into calm, clear water, 
it forms a silvery reflecting pool. The pool acts as 
a crystal ball for 1d6 turns, and may be used only 
by wizards. Many wizards favor these potions as 
portable crystal balls. 


of Seeing 
XP Value: 300 GP Value: 500 
DRAGON Magazine 189 
This potion instantly cures blindness in the 
imbiber, whether it was the result of natural or 
magical causes, 


of Sensory Enhancement 

XP Value: 250 GP Value: 500 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 65 
While drinking this potion, a character must con- 
centrate on one of the five senses—the one 
selected becomes enhanced. For 1d12 hours, the 
potion's effects imitate the animal that best fits 
the chosen sense. For example, a character may 
acquire the eyes of an eagle or the nose of a 
bloodhound, 


of Shadow 
XP Value: 400 GP Value: 1,000 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 65 
When swallowed, this ink-black substance 
causes the imbiber’s body and possessions to 
become shadow. The character remains on the 
ground or against a wall, like a normal shadow, 
until a person or creature walks across his or her 
path. In this instance, the character becomes the 
shadow of that person or creature. The shadow 


888 


merely moves with the person or creature and 
cannot attack or take physical actions during the 
potion’s duration—2d12 turns. When the potion 
wears off, the character appears next to the per- 
son or creature to which he or she was 
“attached.” This potion is often sought after by 
assassins and spies. 


of Sharp Eyes 

XP Value: 300 GP Value: 500 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 65 
The character drinking this potion is able to see in 
darkness as easily as in daylight. This does not 
include magical darkness. Under normal lighting 
conditions, the drinker gains +2 to all chances of 
spotting secret doors and automatically spots any 
creatures hiding in shadows. The duration is 
1d4+4 turns. 


of Sight 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 900 
Dungeons & Dragons Rules Cyclopedia 
The user can detect invisible things (as the magic- 
user spell) for one turn. This negates blindness 
for that time. 


Singing 
XP Value: 200 GP Value: 500 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 65 

When swallowed, this odorless, colorless draft 
produces a warm, tingly sensation that allows the 
imbiber to sing in a melodious, resonant voice for 
da hours. The character gains a singing profi- 
ciency with an ability score of 18. If the character 
already possesses the proficiency, the score 
increases to 20. 


Skeletal 
XP Value: 200 GP Value: 650 
DRAGON Magazine 198 

The first of the “false undead” is not a creature, 
but rather a potion that allows its imbiber to 
appear to be an animated skeleton. The potion 
was first created by Phomboulicos the Mender as 
an aid for proper bone-setting. Once swallowed, 
the potion causes all parts of the drinker’s body to 
become invisible, with the exception of the skele- 
ton. This allows any broken bone to be clearly 
seen, and it aids the bonesetter tremendously—to 
be able to see when the bones are in place so that 
they heal properly. 


Of course, another possible use for the potion— 
3902 


Potion of Sobricty 


ee a i 


one which was unforeseen by naive Phombouli- 
cos—is that it allows the imbiber to impersonate 
an undead skeleton. Unlike various types of magi- 
cal invisibility, such as those bestowed by spells 
and rings, the skeletal potion’s effects are not 
negated by attacks made by the imbiber. Once the 
potion is consumed, its effects persist until the 
potion wears off in 1d4+4 turns. Clothing and 
armor worn are not affected by the potion and 
remain visible, as do any items carried. 

Several points are worth mentioning. One, the 
potion drinker, unlike a true (undead) skeleton, is 
fully able to talk while under the effects of the 
potion. Two, the imbiber’s invisible skin, fat, and 
muscle prevent the skeleton from actually con- 
tacting the things it touches. A careful observer 
may note that the skeleton’s feet hover slightly off 
the ground, the pelvis never touches a cushion on 
which the skeleton sits, and objects seem to float 
slightly over a skeletal hand holding them. 
Finally, dust, paint, and other particulate or liquid 
materials also reveal the presence of the invisible 
flesh. Those wishing to pass themselves off as 
undead would do well to remember that udead are 
not fooled by invisibility. 


of Sleep Bestowing 
XP Value: 200 GP Value: 500 

POLYHEDRON Newszine 65 
These drafts are usually brown in color and come 
in black flasks. Once a character imbibes the 
elixir, for 1d8+1 rounds, he or she can make any 
intelligent creature fall asleep as a sleep spell for 
2-3 hours just by speaking. The listeners grow so 
bored, they fall asleep. The drinker cannot control 
who falls asleep. This elixir was first created to 
be placed into a kings cup—the court wizard 
wanted the king to bore his subjects to sleep. 
However, the king never tried the potion, since 
his wine-taster put everyone in the royal cham- 
bers into a deep slumber. 


of Sleep Breathing 
XP Value: 250 GP Value: 550 
The Complete Thief Handbook 
This potion allows the imbiber to breathe a col- 
orless, odorless cloud of sleep-inducing gas up 
to three times within an hour after drinking it. 
This cloud is effectively a 20- by 20- by 20-foot 
cube. Within the cloud, creatures are affected as 
if struck by a sleep spell, the effects of which are 
exactly duplicated by the cloud. If the thief does 


not breathe out a cloud in this way within an 
hour after drinking the potion, he or she must 
save vs. spell or fall into a deep, comatose sleep 
for 1d4+4 turns. This potion is obviously of 
great value for a thief when dealing with num- 
bers of low-level and peripheral guards while 
working. 


Sleeping 

XP Value: 300 

Assassin Mountain 
This tart liquid lets the imbiber sink into restful 
sleep for 2d6 turns, during which time the sleeper 
feels a sense of well-being and peace. The potion 
mimics the effects of normal sleep, so hit points 
are regained as for a full night of rest, and spell- 
casters can drink this potion instead of resting 
before memorizing spells. Upon waking, the user 
can memorize spells as if he had slept a full night. 
Unwilling victims are not entitled to a saving 
throw. The recipient of this magical slumber 
always wakes up instantly if attacked. This awak- 
ening nullifies any benefit of the potion. 


GP Value: 500 


of Sleepy Breath 

XP Value: 250 GP Value: 500 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 65 

The breath of the person imbibing this potion can 
put any air breathing creature of up to 6 Hit Dice 
to sleep (save vs. spell to negate). The imbiber’s 
breath is a cone, 4 inches wide at the mouth, 12 
fect long, and 6 feet wide at the base. The dura- 
tion of the potion is a single breath. 


of Snake Crawling 
XP Value: 250 GP Value: 600 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 65 
This potion turns a character, and everything 
worn or carried, into a writhing humanoid with 
diminutive arms and legs. The imbiber is able to 
crawl at a movement rate of 12. The duration of 
the potion is 1d4 hours. 


of Sobriety 
XP Value: 200 GP Value: 400 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 65 
The consumer of this potion becomes instantly 
sober, no matter how intoxicated at the time. 


3908 


pa a Ls SF 


111111111; eee 


Potion of Soul-Chitling 


ja Ell 


a ‘i 15 
MI 


1. 


of Soul-Chilling 

XP Value: 300 GP Value: 500 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 65 
This foul fluid is an invention of a kobold 
shaman. It always appears as a cobalt blue liquid 
in a thimble-sized vial. Each vial can affect 100 
gallons. The potion is normally used by pouring 
it into a barrel of water or ale. Those who drink 
the mixture witness their skin turn a pale blue 
and ice form on their bodies. Further, they are 
subject to requests as if a suggestion spell had 
been cast on them. The effects of this potion last 
1d6 turns. 


of Speech 
XP Value: 200 GP Value: 400 
DUNGEONS & DraGcons Rules Cyclopedia 
The user can understand any and all languages 
heard within 60 feet and can respond in the same 
tongues. A language must be heard to be used 
unless already known, 


of Speed 
XP Value: 200 a GP Value: 450 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 

A potion of speed increases the movement and 
combat capabilities of the imbiber by 100%. 
Thus, a movement rate of 9 becomes 18, and a 
character normally able to attack once per round 
attacks twice. This does not reduce spellcasting 
time, however. Use of a speed potion ages the 
individual by one year. The aging is permanent, 
but the other effects last for da rounds 


of Spelljamming 
XP Value: 600 GP Value: 1,300 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 65 
This rare and valuable potion allows any warrior 
or rogue to operate a helm as a spelljammer of 
equivalent level. In addition, any wizard or priest 
who imbibes this potion doubles his or her ability 
at spelljamming. The duration is Ida days. 


of Spirit Binding 

XP Value: 250 GP Value: 800 
Night of the Seven Swords 
This potion, when splashed on a noncorporeal 
spirit, solidifies it, reducing its AC by 5 (if no AC 
is given, the potion gives it an AC of 5). If the 
spirit has assumed a physical shape, the potion 
locks it in that shape for ada turns. If poured on a 
character taken over by a spirit, the physical body 
is paralyzed for 2d4 turns and the spirit is impris- 
oned for that time. 


of Spirit Flight 

XP Value: 300 GP Value: 500 
Van Richten’s Guide to the Lich 
This potion causes the imbiber’s spirit to depart 
its body. The physical body instantly dies and can 
only be resuscitated by a resurrection spell, Psy- 
chically, the effects are similar to the spell astral 
travel in that the drinker is now a disembodied, 
spirit creature floating about the Prime Material 
Plane, invisible to normal sight and unable to 
communicate. 

While in this form, the drinker is effectively 
removed from reality, unable to affect the physi- 
cal world, and unable to be affected by it. The 
spirit is invulnerable to all forms of attack and is 
invisible to all forms of detection except through 
spells or devices designed to detect the presence 
of the alignment of the drinker. 


As stated, the spirit of the imbiber is unable to 
3914 


s 890 z 


~ Potion of Superior Healing 


return to its body unless a resurrection spell is 
cast upon him or her. While in this state, the user 
is only able to observe the physical world and 
travel to the astral plane at will. If the astral 
plane is entered, the user is vulnerable to any haz- 
ards endemic to that environment. Otherwise, the 
spirit will continue to exist for as long as its body 
is intact. 

There is one circumstance in which the disem- 
bodied spirit is able to affect the physical world— 
the spirit is able to appear as a ghostly, visible 
form within mirrors. The spirit may not appear in 
any magically enchanted mirror, however. While 
visible, the spirit is able to move and make any 
gestures it desires within the confines of the mir- 
ror. Likewise, the spirit may appear at any size or 
scale within the mirror desired. The ghostly 
image can be maintained for 1d20 seconds each 
hour, after which the spirit must rest from the 
exertion of crossing planar boundaries, if only 
superficially, 

Verbal communication is impossible, and the 
spirit and people in the physical world are unable 
to hear cach other, Not even a speak with dead 
spell can aid in this endeavor, 

In Ravenloft; This potion is largely ineffective 
in the Demiplane of Ravenloft, nor is astral travel 
possible in the demiplane. 


of Stone Form 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 1,100 
Pouynennon Newszine 65 

A character drinking this magical mixture turns 
into a living, stone statue. This grants the charac- 
ter an AC of 0, a saving throw bonus of +3, and a 
Dexterity loss of 3 for the potion duration 
Ida rounds. A character's THACO and damage 
rolls are not changed, 


of Strength 
XP Value; 400 GP Value: 800 
Dunotons & Dracons Rules Cyclopedia 
The user's Strength score becomes 18, and all 
applicable bonuses are gained immediately. 


of Superhealing 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 900 


Death's Ride 
This potion is exactly like a potion of healing, 
except that it cures 3d6+3 points of damage. The 
entire potion must be drunk at one time. 


of Superheroism 
XP Value: 450 GP Value: 750 
GREYHAWK 
A potion which resembles heroism except that it 
increases fighter levels as follows: 


Fighter Level 
Ist-3rd level 
4th-7th level 
Sth-1 lth level 
12th-15th level 


Increase 
Four levels 
Three levels 
Two levels 
One level 


of Superheroism II 
XP Value: 450 GP Value: 750 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 
This potion gives the individual a temporary 
increase in levels (see heroism potion) if the user 
has fewer than 13 levels of experience. It is simi- 
lar to the heroism potion, but more powerful, and 
its effects last just Sd6 rounds 


Number Additional 


Level of ol levels Temporary 
Imbiber Bestowed hit points 
0 6 5d10 
Ist-3rd 5 4d10+1 
4th- 6th 4 3d10+2 
7th-9th 3 2d10+3 
10th—12th 2 1d10+4 
of Superior Animal Control 
XP Value: 300 GP Value: 600 
POLYNEDRON Introductory Issue 


This magical potion works just like a normal 
potion of animal control, except that control is 
not limited to only onc type of animal and the 
duration is 4 hours. 


of Superior Healing 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 1,000 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 65 
This prized healing potion cures 6d8+2 points of 
damage. If the potion is consumed in thirds, each 
third cures 2d8 hit points. If more than one of 
these potions is consumed in a 24 hour period, the 
imbiber suffers a loss of 6d8+2 points for every 


~ Potion of Sustenance r 


of Sustenance 

XP Value: 250 GP Value: 350 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 65 
This thick liquid always has an appealing color, 
ruby red or emerald green. It smells like fresh 
baked bread or broiling steak. If the potion is 
consumed, the imbiber recalls the taste of his or 
her favorite food, and has no need for food for the 
next seven days. The potion does not negate the 
need for water. 


Sweet Water 
XP Value: 200 GP Value: 250 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 

This liquid is not actually a potion to be drunk 
(though it tastes good), Sweer water is added to 
other liquids in order to change them to pure, 
drinkable water. It neutralizes poison and ruins 
magical potions (no saving throw). The contents 
of a single container changes up to 100,000 cubic 
feet of polluted, salt, or alkaline water into fresh 
water. It turns up to 1,000 cubic fect of acid into 
pure water. The effects of the potion are perma- 
nent, but the liquid may be contaminated after an 
initial period of Sd4 rounds. 


of Swimming 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 900 
Quagmire! 
The user may swim in any liquid at the rate of 18, 
even if encumbered. The user does not sink (even 
if pushed below the surface) unless carrying 
more than 300 pounds. The potion doesn't allow 
the user to breathe water. The effects of this 
potion last for eight hours. 


Teleportation 

XP Value: 500 GP Value: 1,900 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 65 

This potion typically comes sealed in a metal 
flask, It takes two turns to consume the entire 
contents, after which the imbiber is teleported to 
the first place visualized—provided it is within 
100 miles of the current location. 


of Thievery 
XP Value: 350 GP Value: 950 
The Complete Thief 's Handbook 
Similar to, but weaker than, the potion of master 
thievery, this potion also grants the thief drinking 
it temporary increases in levels, hit points, and 


892 


skills, if he or she is of 9th or lower level prior to 


drinking it, as shown below: 

Increase 
Levelof Levels Added in each 
Imbiber Bestowed Hit Points Skill 
Ist—3rd 5 Sd +20% 
4th-6th 4 4d6+1 +16% 
7th-9th 3 3d6+2 +12% 
10th-12th 2 2d6+3 +8% 


As with the potion of master thievery, the indi- 
vidual acts in all respects as a thief of the higher 
level gained after drinking the potion, with the 
increase in thieving skills being equally spread 
across all categories by the bonus shown. Dam- 
age sustained is taken from additional temporary 
hit points gained first. The effects of the potion 
last for Ida turns. 


of Thinness 

XP Value: 250 GP Value: 600 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 65 
Most potions of thinness are found in four-dose 
flasks. When consumed, the drinker's trunk size 
is reduced from normal proportions ta paper- 
thinness. This permits the character to pass 
through cracks or flatten against a wall to hide. 
The potion also reduces the character s weight to 
that of parchment—a hazard if the potion is con- 
sumed in strong winds. The effects of the potion 
last 1d4 turns. 


Toad Skin 

XP Value: 500 GP Value: 1,000 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 65 
A character drinking this potion immediately 
gains hundreds of wart-like nodules that cover 
the entire body. The warts, which last for 1d6+6 
rounds, exude a caustic fluid which does not 
harm the imbiber, but burns other characters 
and creatures. When a toad skin character suc- 
cessfully makes a bare-handed attack against 
another character, the victim suffers 1d4 points 
of damage and begins gagging and writhing 
from the burning sensation for the next four 
rounds. Undead are immune to toad skin 
attacks. 


3928 


of Tongues 
XP Value GP Value 
Speak with animals: 200 $00 
Speak with dead: 250 600 
Speak with monsters; 250 600 
Speak with plants: 200 500 
Tongues: 250 600 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 65 


There are five varicties of this potion, each may 
be used by any character class. Every tongues 
potion provides magical linguistic abilities to the 
character who swallowed it for 1d4+4 turns 


Roll Potion 

01-30 -Tongues 

31-60 Speak with animals 

61-80 Speak with dead 

81-90 Speak with monsters 

91-00 Speak with plants 
of Toughening 

XP Value: 300 GP Value: 600 
Dracos Magazine 91 


Quaffing this potion immediately adds Idi -d 
hit points to the user's current total, even if the 
final total exceeds the maximum number of hit 
points possible for the character. However, these 
new hit points are held in reserve. Any damage 
taken by the character is first deducted from the 
character's own hit points; only after all of these 
hit points are gone are hit points subtracted from 
those bestowed by the potion. 

The duration of the potion (and the hit points it 
grants) is only 1d6+6 turns. Thus, if someone has 
received extra hit points from this potion and has 
lost all normal hit points, there is a limited 
amount time to find a way to heal all or at least 
some of the damage taken before the potion 
wears off and the bonus hit points disappear. If 
this happens, the character collapses unconscious 
with 0 hit points and continues to lose one hit 
point per round after that. Unless the stricken 
character receives aid, death occurs at 10 hit 
points. Any normal or magical methods of heal- 
ing injuries work. 

If the drinker loses all normal hit points and all 
the hit points bestowed by the potion, he or she 
immediately falls unconscious or dies; and then is 
considered to have a negative total of hit points 
equal to the number of points that were granted by 
the potion. If this number is between —2 and -. 
the character has a chance of recovering if aid is 


Potion of Truth 


received before sinking to 10. If this number is 
=10 or lower, the character dies instantly. Potions 
of toughening should only be taken singly; if a sec- 
ond dose is consumed before the first one has 
worn off, the second dose has no effect, and the 
drinker must make a system shock roll or die. 


of Tragic Heroism 
XP Value: 250 GP Value: 400 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 65 
This elixir works as a potion of superheroism, with 
the following additional cffect—all monsters 
within 20 feet of the character quaffing the potion 
stop whatever they are doing and attack the charac- 
ter. The monsters fight until they are slain or the 
character dies. To paladins and other heroic fig- 
ures, this potion has considerable appeal. 


of Treasure Finding 
XP Value: 600 GP Value: 2,000 
DUNGEON Master Guide 
A potion of treaxure finding empowers the drinker 
with a location sense, so that he or she can point 
to the direction of the nearest mass of treasure. 
The treasure must be within 240 yards, and its 
mass must equal metal of at least 10,000 copper 
pieces or 100 gems or any combination. 

Note that only valuable metals (copper, silver, 
electrum, gold, platinum) and gems and jewelry, 
are located. The potion won't locate worthless 
metals or magical items that don’t contain pre- 
cious metals or gems. The imbiber of the potion 
can “feel” the direction in which the treasure lies, 
but not its distance. Intervening substances other 
than special magical wards or lead-lined walls 
cannot withstand the powers that the liquor 
bestows upon the individual. The effects of the 
potion last for 5d4 rounds. (Clever players will 


attempt triangulation.) 


of Truth 
XP Value: 400 GP Value: 900 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 65 

Developed by a wizard interested in investigating 
criminal activities, this potion is intended to be 
consumed by someone who is to be questioned. 
One round after being swallowed, the potion puts 
the character into a trance for 1d4 turns. The 
character freely and literally answers any ques- 
tions asked during the trance, provided the ques- 
tions are posed in a language the character can 
understand. 


3) 


„7 ˙ V TT 


893 


N Potion of Vampirism 


Truth Drug 
XP Value: 200 GP Value: 500 
Dracon Magazine 43 
A victim who ingests a dose of the drug falls into 
a stupor and is forced to answer Ida questions 
truthfully. 


of Ugliness 
GP Value: 250 


POLYHEDRON Newszine 65 
Drinking this elixir causes the loss of all but Ida 
points of Charisma for 3412 hours. The character 
polymorphs into a creature resembling a large, 
slimy humanoid toad. The humanoid, complete 
with warts and a repulsive odor, is capable of nor- 


XP Value: — 


of the Undead 
XP Value: 700 GP Value: 1,200 
Peu V h Newszine 65 

Drinking this potion polymorphs a character into 
the appearance (and odor) of a zombie for 1d4+1 
hours. The character cannot be turned and retains 
all original statistics and Armor Class. There is an 
80% chance that other undead believe the charac- 
ter is a true zombie, 


of Undead Control 
XP Value: 700 GP Value: 2,500 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 
This potion in effect gives the imbiber the abil- 
ity to charm certain ghasts, ghosts, ghouls, 
shadows, skeletons, spectres, wights, wraiths, 
vampires, and zombies. The charm ability is 
similar to the Ist-level wizard spell, charm per- 
son. It affects a maximum of 16 Hit Dice of 
undead, rounding down any hit point additions 
to the lowest die (4+1 equals 4 Hit Dice). The 
undead are entitled to saving throws vs. spell 
only if they have intelligence. Saving throws are 
rolled with 2 penalties due to the power of the 
potion; the effects wear off in 5d4 rounds. To 
determine the type of undead affected by a par- 
ticular potion, roll 1410 and consult the follow- 
ing table: 


Roll Undead Type 


1 Ghasts 

2 Ghosts 

3 Ghouls 

< Shadows 
5 Skeletons 


6 Spectres 
7 Wights 

8 Wraiths 
9 Vampires 
10 Zombies 


In Kara-Tur: This potion is not normally 
available in Oriental lands. The result should be 
rerolled. 


of Underground Awareness 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 1,100 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 65 
The imbiber of this potion gains abilities to aid in 
underground travels. These potions vary widely 
in the abilities conferred. A typical potion, which 
grants 144 abilities, lasts for 1d4+4 hours. 


Roll = Skill conferred 


01-04 Detect new tunnels passages 
06-08 Detect grade or slope. 
09-11 Determine direction of travel 
12-14 Determine depth underground. 
15-16 Detect shifting walls rooms. 
17-18 Detect unsafe constructions. 
19 20 — Deteet stonework trups/pits. 
of Useful Appendages 
XP Value: 250 GP Value: 800 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 65 


When this potion is quaffed, the character forms 
one or more appendages; the formation takes two 
rounds. The appendages vanish after 1d4+4 turns 
or after suffering five points of damage each. 
Consult the following table to determine the 


appendages grown. 


Roll Appendage Damage 

1 Tail 1-8 

2 Two arms 1-2 cach 

3 Two crab claws 1-4 cach; 

crush for 1-10 
4 Four tentacles 1-6 each 
of Vampirism 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 1,600 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 65 


An odd, necromantic brew, this potion causes 
any character taking it to undergo a frightening 
metamorphosis. The change takes one round to 
complete and is very painful. At the end of the 
transformation, the character gains the appear- 

3940 


895 5 


ance and many of the abilities of a vampire. The 
charucter oan spider climb and turn to gareoux 
form at will, regenerate three points of damage 
per round, The character is not restricted to 
darkness, does not gain any attack bonuses, 
charm ability or other benefits, nor can he or 
she drain levels, The duration of the potion is 
1d10+10 turns 


of Venom 

XP Value: 450 GP Value: 990 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 65 
When a character imbibes this potion, sharp 
fangs dripping venom grow from the mouth, 
Anyone bitten by this character takes 1d4 points 
of damage and must save vs. poison or die in 
ld rounds. The imbiber is immune to the 
venom. The effects of the potion last for $d4 
rounds, 


of Ventriloquism 
XP Value: 200 GP Value: 800 
Dungeon Master Guide 
This allows the user to make his or her voice 
sound as if it (or someone's voice or a similar 
sound) were issuing from someplace other than 
where it is from another creature, a statue, from 
behind a door, down a passage, or across the 


alley. The user can speak in any language he or 
she knows, or make any normally made sound. To 
detect the ruse, listeners must roll a successful 
saving throw vs. spell with a penalty of —2. If cast 
in conjunction with other illusions, the DM may 
rule greater penalties or disallow an independent 
saving throw against this effect—the combined 
illusion may be perfect! The imbiber can use the 
ventriloquist ability up to six times within the 
duration of the potion 


of Visions 

XP Value: 50 GP Value: 250 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 65 
This is a cursed version of the potion of fore- 
warning, and 90% of the time it is identified as 
that beneficial potion. For one turn, the imbiber 
enters a trance and “sees” the future. Only in this 
case, the imbiber is deceived; the visions are not 
true and always depict the imbiber suffering mis- 
fortune. 


of Vitality 

XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 2,500 
DUNGEON Master Guide 
This potion restores the user to full vitality 
despite exertion, lack of sleep, and going without 
food and drink for up to seven days. It nullifies 
up to seven days of deprivation, and continues in 
effect for the remainder of its seven-day duration. 
The potion also makes the user proof against poi- 
son and disease while it is in effect, and the user 
recovers lost hit points at the rate of one every 
four hours, 


Wallac’s Potion of Speedcasting 

XP Value: 400 GP Value: 900 
1992 Fantasy Collector Card 272 
Wallac has been producing potions for years. 
He has also tried to create many new potions— 
usually with either explosive or no effects. The 
potion of speedcasting is one of his few suc- 
cesses. When any spellcaster takes a dose of 
this potion, casting time is halved. Thus, a spell 
with a initiative modifier of 6 can be cast with a 
modifier of 3 under the influence of a potion of 
speedcasting, Spells with an initiative modifier 
of 1 are instantaneous, always going off at the 
beginning of the round, before any other action 
takes place. The effects of the potion last for 
Ida rounds. 


yeas 


= 896 


~ Potion of Worm Calling 


of Water Adventuring 
XP Value: 800 GP Value: 1,800 
1992 Fantasy Collector Card 271 
When a dose of this potion is consumed, two 
effects are conveyed upon the imbibers: they are 
able to breathe underwater and they are affected 
as if a spell of free action had been cast upon 
them. The effects last for one hour plus an addi- 
tional ld rounds. There is a 75% chance that 
the potion contains two doses and a 25% chance 
that four doses are found. 


of Water Breathing 
XP Value: 400 GP Value: 900 
The War Rafts of Kron 
The effects are the same as the 3rd-level wizard 
spell and last for one hour per dose. 


of Water Breathing II 
XP Value: 400 GP Value: 900 
Port of Raven's Buurt 
This potion works the same as the spell cast at the 
12th level, but only works 50% of the time. 


of Water Breathing III 

XP Value: 400 GP Value: 900 
Dunonon Master Guide 
It is 75% likely that a water breathing potion 
contains two doses and, 25% probable that there 
are four in the container. The potion allows the 
character drinking it to breathe normally in lig- 
uids that contain suspended oxygen. This abil- 
ity lasts for one full hour per dose of potion 
quaffed, with an additional 1410 rounds (min- 
utes) variable. Thus, a character who has con- 
sumed a water breathing potion III could enter 
the depths of a river, lake, or even the ocean and 
not drown while the magical effects of the 
potion persisted. 


of Water Movement 
XP Value: 350 GP Value: 650 
The Minrothad Guilds 

A ground pearl fragment is the primary ingredi- 
ent in the water elf potion of water movement. 
This potion allows the imbiber to move underwa- 
ter or on the Elemental Plane of Water as easily as 
if he or she were surrounded by air. The effect 
lasts for one day. It does not, however, enable the 
user to breathe under water; some other method is 
required to gain that ability 


of Wizardry 


XP Value: 350 GP Value: 900 


POLYHEDRON Newszine 65 
This potion, which has a duration of 1d4+4 turns, 
only benefits wizards, giving them a temporary 
increase of 3 levels of experience. This improves 
their attack rolls and saving throws. In addition, it 
allows them to cast spells as if they were 3 levels 
higher. It does not grant additional spells. 


of Worm Calling 

GP Value: 250 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 65 
This potion causes the drinker to become irre- 
sistible to all crawling insects, animals, and mon- 
sters, such as snakes, worms, carrion crawlers, 
and caterpillars. The location of the character 
determines the type of creature attracted, Each 
potion lasts 1d12 turns, and 15 creatures are 
attracted to the drinker per turn 


XP Value: 


3952 


897 


~ Potion, Zak's Potion of Invulnerability r 


Zak’s Potion of Invulnerability 

XP Value: 650 GP Value: 1,600 
1992 Fantasy Collector Card 275 
Zak’s potion of invulnerability is basically a liq- 
uid minor globe of invulnerability, and may be 
used by all classes, Upon ingestion of this potion, 
the imbiber is immune to all Ist, 2nd, and 3rd 
level spell effects for 5d4 rounds. The globe is not 
stationary as that of the spell, but moves with the 
imbiber, allowing him or her to engage in combat 
and spellcasting from multiple locations. A suc- 
cessful dispel magic spell negates the effects of 
the potion. 


Zombie Blood 
XP Value: 700 GP Value: 1,200 
Forbidden Lore 
This horrid potion can turn a normal person into 
a zombie for 1d4+1 days. It is colorless, odorless, 
and tasteless, making it easy to slip into food or 
drink. The potion can be attuned to a single 
master if that person stirs the potion with a finger 
prior to giving it to the victim. Once consumed, 
the person becomes mentally like a zombic. The 
body is still alive, but he or she does nothing 
without explicit orders. If the potion was stirred, 
then the zombie obeys only that person, other- 
wise the new zombie obeys any order. The victim 
does not even eat or sleep unless commanded. He 
or she cannot feel pain and is immune to sleep 
and charm spells, just like a zombie. 

In combat, hit points and saving throw values 
are retained, but THACO and damage are the 
same as a normal zombie. The character is still 
affected by physical damage and even poison. 
The person can be turned just like a zombie, but 
cannot be destroyed. If the turning attempt would 
destroy a normal zombie, the effects of the potion 
are negated immediately, 

In Ravenloft: Knowingly using this potion is 
cause for a Ravenloft powers check. 


Zombie Broth 

GP Value: 1,200 
The Mileman Empire 
This is a foul-smelling magical potion. 
Zargosians typically brew it in large iron caul- 
drons, adding unspeakable ingredients. They use 
this concoction as the first step in the process of 
turning people into zombies. Any human, demi- 
human, or humanoid who drinks zombie broth 
must immediately attempt a saving throw vs. poi- 


XP Value: 700 


son. If successful, there is no effect. 

If the saving throw is missed, the character's 
Intelligence drops to 3, and he or she loses all 
self-motivation and will-power. Movement rate 
drops to 6. The character is effectively a slug- 
gish, mindless automaton. A victim of zombie 
broth must obey the commands of anyone with- 
out hesitation, even self-injury if told to do so. 
He or she can perform only very simple tasks, 
such as talking, walking, opening a door, pick- 
ing up or dropping objects, or rowing a boat. 
The character automatically misses in combat— 
too “out of it” to fight. Spell casting is out of the 
question. The potion also acts like a truth serum; 
the character answers all questions to the best of 
his or her ability. 

The effects of drinking zombie broth last for 
one full day. During this time, the character can 
neither hold down nor has a hunger for normal 
food and drink—the hapless victim craves only 
more zombie broth. If the character should die 
of lack of food and water while under the influ- 
ence of the broth, he or she becomes an undead 
zombie. 


Powders 

Magical powders are usually stored in small 
paper packets, cloth pouches, or hollow blow 
tubes made of glass, wood, metal, or bone. A 
packet or pouch can be shaken to cover the arca 
around the user to a radius of 5 feet. This action 
lasts an entire round and powders used in this 
manner can affect the user. 

Alternatively, powder in a tube can be blown 
outward in a 10-foot long cone shape that is | 
foot wide at the apex and 5 feet wide at the end. 
Used in this manner, the powder has no chance of 
affecting the user (unless it rebounds due to wind 
or similar circumstances), Powders may also be 
blown from the user's hand, but can only affect a 
single individual within 5 feet of the user. 


Roll Powder Type 


01-13 Bran 
14-25 Cosmetic 
26-38 Dust 
39-50 Farina 
51-63 Grain 
64-75 Pounce 
76-88 Powder 
89-00 Talc 


o . m / w Ü— 99 


~ Powder, Black Arts y- 


Absinthe 
XP Value; 100 GP Value: 500 
DRAGON Magazine 33 
When applied to another person, that person 
takes twice the damage given to others for 24 
hours or until dispelled, 


African Ju Ju 
XP Value: 100 GP Value: 500 
DRAGON Magazine 33 
This powder increases the wearer's Charisma by 
2. It also grants a +2 bonus to all saving throws 
for 24 hours. 


Allspice 
XP Value: 150 GP Value: 750 
DRAGON Magazine 33 
This powder adds 1 point to Strength for 24 hours 
when rubbed into the skin of the arms and legs. 


Allspice II 
GP Value: 1,000 
DRAGON Magazine 33 
Adds a +4 bonus to all saving throws vs. spell for 
24 hours. 


XP Value: 250 


Anger 
XP value: 300 GP Value: 1,500 
DraGoN Magazine 33 
When used before combat, any warrior or 
werecreature can be calmed to the point where 
they enter neither berserker rage nor wereform. 
One application of powder of anger can even 
keep a werecreature from suffering the alterations 
of his or her lycanthropic disease during times of 
full moons or other environmental triggers. The 
effects of this powder last for 24 hours. 


Anise 
XP Value: 100 GP Value: 500 
Dragon Magazine 33 
This powder, also called Aries powder, doubles 
range and effect (enabling the user to see infrared 
and ultraviolet) of clairvoyance spells for 24 
hours. 


Aphrodisia 
XP Value: 200 GP Value: 400 
DRaGoN Magazine 33 
This powder raises the user's Charisma by 3 
points (to a minimum of 18) for 24 hours. The 
powder causes all members of the opposite sex to 


make a saving throw vs. spell or fall under the 
effects of a charm spell for the duration of the 
powder. 


Arabian Nights 
XP Value: 300 GP Value: 550 
DRAGON Magazine 33 
This powder raises the user's Charisma by 2 
points for 24 hours. 


Attraction 
XP Value: 200 GP Value: 400 
DRAGON Magazine 33 
This powder raises the user’s Charisma by 3 
points for 24 hours. 


Bats’ Blood 
XP Value: 250 GP Value: 750 
Dragon Magazine 33 
This toxic powder causes 2d4 points of damage 
when sprinkled on characters of good alignment. 
This cursed powder often is misread as a random 
beneficial powder. 


Bendover’s 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 3,000 
Dragon Magazine 33 
This powder grants a bonus of +5 to saving throw 
vs. death magic for 24 hours, 


Bergamot’s 
E Value: 1,800 
DraGoN Magazine 33 
Bergamot 8 powder grants a +3 to saving throws 
vs. spell for 24 hours. 


XP Value: 600 


Black Arts 

GP Value: 2,100 
DRAGON Magazine 33 
When applied to the forehead and sprinkled in an 
“X” over where a victim will step, the victim 
must make a saving throw vs, death magic or 
instantaneous death results, Only characters of 
evil alignment can use this powder, The powder's 
effect lasts for 24 hours or until one victim passes 
over the “X.” Whether the victim dies or not, the 
powder loses its potency after one use. 


XP Value: 700 


3969 


„ . ans 


899 


Powder of the Black Veil 


jp, a :it 


of the Black Veil 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
Tome of Magic 

This sooty, black powder causes temporary magi- 
cal blindness to all those in the arca of effect, Ifa 
creature's saving throw is successful, he or she 
suffers no effects. If the saving roll fails, the crea- 
ture is blinded and suffers a A penalty to attack 
rolls, a A penalty to Armor Class, and a +2 
penalty to initiative rolls. Blindness persists cach 
round until the victim succeeds at a saving throw 
vs. spell, at which time the effect is instantly 
negated, An entire packet or blow tube must be 
used for cach application. 


Bottom #20 
XP Value: 100 GP Value: 300 
DRAGON Magazine 33 
When applied to the doorknob of the victim's 
house, the victim must make a saving throw vs. 
spell at - or receive 3d6 points of damage when 
he or she tries to leave home. The powder main- 
tains its potency for 24 hours. 


Bruno’s Curse 
XP Value: 200 GP Value: 400 
Dracon Magazine 33 
This powder grants protection from evil as the 
spell. The effect lasts for 24 hours 


Buddha 
XP Value GP Value 
Type 1: 300 900 
Type Il; 600 1,800 
Type III, 900 2,700 
DRAGON Magazine 33 


This powder increases a priest's likelihood of 
gaining requested spells. There are three different 
potencies of the powder that currently exist. The 
powder functions for 24 hours. Usually, priests 
and clerics anoint themselves with this powder 
when they return to the temple to request more 


spells. 


Type Increased Chances 
Type | +5% 

Type II +10% 

Type III +15% 


Bull's 
XP Value: 100 GP Value: 300 
DRAGON Magazine 33 
This powder increases Strength to 18 for one 
turn, then subtracts 2 points from the user's origi- 
nal Strength for six turns, 


Carnation 
XP Value: 150 GP Value: 450 
Dracon Magazine 33 
This powerful powder cures all nonmagical dis- 
eases the user may suffer from. For the 24-hour 
duration of the powder, the user is immune to all 
nonmagical and magical diseases, including 


lycanthropy, 


Chocolate 
XP Value: 100 GP Value: 250 
DRAGON Magazine 33 
Makes all wandering monsters friendly for one 
day if saving throw vs. spell fails. If the monsters 
make their saving throws, they will go into 


frenzy. 


Citronella 
XP Value: 125 GP Value: 650 
DRAGON Magazine 33 
This powder adds +3 to Charisma for 24 hours. 


Civet 
XP Value: 100 GP Value: 300 
DRAGON Magazine 33 
This powder grants protection from good 
(reversed priest spell prorection from evil) for 24 
hours. 


Cleo May 
XP Value: 100 GP Value: 300 
Duanan Magazine 33 

Also known as Cleopatra powder and come to 
me powder, this powder raises the user's Cha- 
risma by 4 points for 24 hours. If the users Cha- 
risma increases past 18, the powder causes all 
members of the opposite sex to make a saving 
throw vs. spell or fall under the effects of a charm 
spell for the duration of the powder. 


of Coagulation 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 2,500 
Tome of Magic 
When placed on an open wound, a pinch of this 


yellow powder stops all bleeding and heals 1d6 
yw 


8 900 7 


Powder, 


ee acne 


points of damage. Each pouch or packet contains 
Ada pinches, A blow tube contains one use, but 
stops bleeding and heals 1d4 hit points for all 
creatures in the area of effect. 


of Comeliness 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 900 
Prince of LANKHMAR 
The powder of comeliness is very popular among 
upper-class women, The price, however, makes it 
unavailable to all except the wealthy. It currently 
comes in a small crystal canister with a silver lid. 
The lid is designed with intricate flowers and 
leaves from the rose bush. The Order of Apothe- 
caries’ members are the exclusive manufacturers 
of this product, but the Sorcerers’ Guild created 
the original Charisma-altering spell. 

The powder is magically enchanted to give the 
wearer a 1d2 bonus to her Charisma score. The 
powder also enhances femininity, which prevents 
male characters from using it, If a man were to 
usc this powder, his Charisma would be lowered 
by Ida points for the duration of the effects 

The powder is good for a total of 24 hours, at 
which point it disappears, The powder can also be 
removed by water within the first five minutes 
after application. Once the initial five minutes are 
over, the powder of comeliness cannot be removed 
for 24 hours. 

The powder is a very costly item, since its 
effects are so very popular. It costs 100 gp for a 
sample, which is enough for about two weeks. 
The user merely uses the cotton ball that is sup- 
plied, the cotton swab is daintily patted into the 
powder, and the powder then dabbed onto the 
face. 

The effects of the improved comeliness are 
instantancously seen. Once the powder has been 
placed on the face, putting on more does not 
improve the Charisma of the character, it only 
lengthens the effects, 

If a double dose is placed on the face, the 
effects of higher Charisma last for a total of 48 
hours. As many doses of this powder can be 
placed on the face as desired, but the length of the 
effect is the only thing that is improved. 


Commanding 
XP Value: 300 GP Value: 900 
DRAGON Magazine 33 
This powder acts as a command spell when 
touched to another for 24 hours. 


Concentration 

GP Value: 1,200 
Dracon Magazine 33 
This powder causes silence in a 30-foot radius for 
24 hours. The powder can be rubbed on un indi- 
vidual or onto an object. 


XP Value: 400 


Confusion 
GP Value; 2,700 
DRAGON Magazine 33 
This powder causes confusion, as the spell, when 
thrown or applied to another for 24 hours, Saving 
throw vs. spell is applicable. 


Conquering Glory 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 1,500 
Dracon Magazine 33 
The powder of conquering glory adds +1 to the 
user's THACO when applied to a weapon (magi- 
cal or otherwise) for one turn. 


Controlling 

GP Value: 1,800 
DraGON Magazine 33 
This powder charms its victim, as a charm person 
spell, when applied to another or town in com- 
bat It can also charm monster, adding a +1 bonus 
to the monster x saving throw for each Hit Die 
above | for 24 hours, 


Crab Apple 
XP Value: 100 GP Value: 300 
Deacon Magazine 33 

When applied to another, the powder causes the 
individual to be well disposed toward the user (in 
the way of giving information, buying drinks, and 
the like) for 24 hours, The powder can be applied, 
thrown onto the victim, or mixed into food or 
drink. The victim is granted a saving throw vs. 
spell to counter the effects, 


XP Value: 900 


XP Value: 600 


Crossing 
XP Value: 600 GP Value: 1,800 
Dracon Magazine 33 
When sprinkled in the victim's path, this pow- 
der causes the victim to sustain 3d6 points of 
damage. The victim's Strength and Constitu- 
tion are lowered by 3 points for the day if a sav- 
ing throw vs. spell fails. Only evilly aligned 
characters can use this powder without align- 
ment difficulties. 


Powder, Cumin Seed 


—-—᷑— ae 


Cumin Seed 
XP Value: 100 GP Value: 300 
Deacon Magazine 33 
When sprinkled in the doorway of one’s 
dwelling, this building will be protected from 
evil as the spell protection from evil 10' radius 
for 24 hours. 


Cypress Seed 
XP Value: 100 GP Value: 300 
DraGoN Magazine 33 

Cypress seed powder increases the probability of 
a friendly reaction (granting a +5 Reaction 
Adjustment bonus) from devotees of chaotic gods 
for 24 hours unless a saving throw vs, spell is 
successful. If successful, the followers are more 
apt to be unfriendly toward the user (suffering a 
reaction adjustment penalty). 


Damnation 
XP Value: 300 GP Value: 900 
DRAGON Magazine 33 

When sprinkled on another, the victim must make 
a saving throw vs. poison or die. If the victim 
dics, a Wisdom check must be rolled. If the check 
fails, the victim is trapped on the Prime Material 
Plane as a ghost or poltergeist (50% chance for 
either), The apparition appears 1d4 weeks after 
death from this powder. 


Desiré Eme’s 

GP Value: 1,500 
DRAGON Magazine 33 
When applied, it makes the next being (regardless 
of the species) of the opposite sex fall madly in 
love with the user for 24 hours. No saving throw 
is allowed unless the being has an Intelligence of 
S or greater. 


XP Value: 500 


Doas Isay’s Powder 
XP Value: 300 GP Value: 900 
Dragon Magazine 33 
This powder gives the user the power to detect 
illusion and detect charm for 24 hours. 


Double Cross 
GP Value: 1,800 
DRAGON Magazine 33 
When sprinkled on an enemy, it confuses the vic- 
tim as the spell of the same name. Also, when 
applied to oneself, it causes anyone with an Intel- 
ligence of 10 or less to believe whatever the 


XP Value: 600 


wearer says (no saving throw). The powder lasts 
for one turn. 


Dragon’s Blood 

GP Value: 1,500 
DRAGON Magazine 33 
This potent powder will remove curse, cure dis- 
ease, dispel charm, and cure 3d6 points of dam- 
age. For the next 24 hours, the user is immune to 
all curses and charms. 


XP Value: 500 


Dream 
XP Value: 600 GP Value: 1,800 
DRAGON Magazine 33 
This powder causes s/eep when sprinkled on a 
victim, The effect lasts for 24 hours and cannot 
be removed unless a dispel magic, wish or similar 
spell is used. 


Dypshez’s Powder of the Black Veil 
XP Value: 1,500 GP Value: 4,500 
1992 Fantasy Collector Card 507 
This sooty, black powder causes temporary blind- 
ness to all who fail a saving throw vs. spell. 
While affected, a character suffers a -A penalty to 
attack rolls and AC, and suffers a 2 penalty to 
initiative rolls. Saving throws are made every 
round until all affected characters succeed. At 
that point, due to the illusionist Dypshez’s magi- 
cal enhancements, affected characters are only 
able to see nonliving objects for two further 
rounds, as if everyone in the area had been ren- 

dered magically invisible. 


Elixir 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 900 
DUNGEONS & DRAGONS Master Set 
In Arabic legend, this powder was sprinkled on 
battle-wounds, curing them. Treat as a potion of 
extra-healing, but it is applied topically, instead 
of being consumed. 


Enchantment 
GP Value: 2,700 
Dragon Magazine 33 
This powder adds a bonus of +2 to the user's Cha- 
risma for 24 hours. 


XP Value: 900 


31999 


902 


= Powder of the Heros Heart r 


Eucalyptus 
XP Value: 200 GP Value: 600 
DRAGON Magazine 33 
When rubbed into wounds, this powder cures 2d6 
points of damage. 


Eve 
XP Value: 300 GP Value: 900 
Dracon Magazine 33 
When used by a female, it has the ability to 
charm men for 24 hours. 


Evil Eye 
XP Value: 200 GP Value: 600 
Dragon Magazine 33 
This powder grants the user prorection from evil 
for 24 hours. 


Excisement 
XP Value: 300 GP Value: 750 
DRAGON Magazine 33 
This powder acts as a remove curse spell. 


Exodus 
XP Value: 200 GP Value: 600 
Dracon Magazine 33 
When thrown on another, the victim flees from the 
thrower for one full turn (save vs. spell to negate). 


Five Finger Grass 
XP Value: 250 GP Value: 750 
Dracon Magazine 33 
This powder grants the user protection from good 
and increases Dexterity by 2 points (maximum of 
18) for 24 hours. 


Frangi Pani 
XP Value: 200 GP Value: 600 
Draoon Magazine 33 
When applied, all those around the user will trust 
him or her and tell secrets, indiscretions, ete. for 
one turn, A saving throw vs. spell at a -3 penalty 
is applicable, 


Galangale’s 


XP Value: 100 GP Value: 400 


Dracon Magazine 33 
When Galangale'’s powder is applied before 
going to court or before the constabulary, the 
judge or constables always find in favor of the 
user (unless a saving throw vs. spell is made). 
This powder lasts for one turn. 


Gardenia 
XP Value: 200 GP Value: 600 
Draco Magazine 33 
When sprinkled on an opponent, the victim suf- 
fers the effects of a hold person spell for one turn 
unless a saving throw vs. spell is successful. 


Getaway’s 
XP Value: 300 GP Value: 900 
Dagon Magazine 33 
This powder will protect a dwelling from evil (as 
the spell) for 24 hours, 


of Good Taste 
XP Value: 100 GP Value: 200 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 79 

A single pinch of this soft, white powder will turn 
one pound of food into a repast to tempt any taste 
buds. The effected food can start out as a horrid- 
tasting meal, a burned-to-a-crisp dinner, or an 
average dish—no matter the condition, the pow- 
der causes it to taste delicious. However, the pow- 
der docs not affect the appearance of the meal. 
Powder of good taste is usually found in packets 
containing 2d12 uses. 


Grape 
XP Value: 100 GP Value: 500 
Dragon Magazine 33 
When this powder is poured onto the ground, 
100 gold pieces will appear. If poured onto any 
other surface, there is no gold, and the magic is 
wasted. 


of the Hero’s Heart 
XP Value: 750 GP Value: 1,800 
Tome of Magic 

When used, this dull red powder instills bravery 
in all creatures within the area of effect (both 
friends and enemies), It grants such creatures a 
morale bonus of +2 and negates the effects of 
magical fear. The effect lasts for 5d4 rounds. An 
entire packet, pouch, or blow tube must be used 
for each application, 

In Ravenloft; This powder affects fear checks 
in Ravenloft, The +2 bonus that is applied to 
morale checks is also granted for fear checks. 
Horror checks are unaffected by the powder. 


Powder, High Conquering 


p aaaea ee 


High Conquering 
XP Value: 600 GP Value: 1,800 
DraGoN Magazine 33 
This powder adds a +2 bonus to the user's THACO 
for 24 hours when applied to a weapon. 


High John the Conqueror 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 2,500 
DRAGON Magazine 33 
This powder gives its user a +3 THACO bonus 
when rubbed onto a weapon. The effect lasts for 
24 hours. 


Hindu Grass 
XP Value: 250 GP Value: 750 
DRAGON Maguzine 33 
This powder adds a +3 to the user's Wisdom for 
24 hours. 


Honeysuckle 
XP Value: 100 GP Value: 300 
DRAGON Magazine 33 
When this powder is rubbed in the eyes, the user x 
range of sight is doubled and infravision is 
obtained for 24 hours. 


Hypnotic 
XP Value: 300 GP Value: 900 
DRAGON Magazine 33 
This powder has a relaxing effect on user that 
lasts 24 hours. While under the effect, the user is 
immune to all charm, hold, and fear spells 


Hysspo 
XP Value: 200 GP Value: 600 
DRAGON Magazine 33 
This powder, when sprinkled on an opponent, 
placed in food or drink, or placed in the clothing 
or bedding of an opponent, causes 1d6 points of 
damage if the opponent is of evil alignment. 
Once placed in food or on an item, the powder 
lasts 24 hours before it loses potency. 


of Images 
XP Value: 400 GP Value: 900 
DRAGON Magazine 189 
This strange substance, which looks like multi- 
colored sand, is useful in discovering the causes 
of illness, accidents, and evil occurrences. When 
a pinch is thrown into a fire built for this purpose, 
the resulting cloud of smoke forms an image. If 
there is no evil cause (just plain bad luck), the 


image is of the savage wizard. If the evil events 
have been caused by a monster or NPC, an image 
of the monster or NPC appears. The image is 
clear, although in the case of monsters that all 
appear to look alike, the PCs will have to work 
out for themselves which individual cast the 
spell. If the evil event was caused by a deed of 
one of the villagers, the scene is depicted in the 
smoke. Evil brought about by a device or artifact 
without an evil character controlling it produces 
an image of the device alone. 

If three pinches of powder are cast into the 
fire, a trail of smoke wends its way from the 
flames toward the cause of the evil. The smoke 
will stretch 100 feet in its search. For every addi- 
tional pinch, another 100 feet is added. Once the 
source has been reached, the smoke curls around 
the person or object, The smoke cannot be dis- 
pelled, blown away, or affected by any means. It 
has no other effect. 

The powder can be used to track down the 
cause of an individual's problems, but due to the 
rarity of the substance this ts done for nobles 
alone. In this case, the fire must be built in an 
enclosed space, such as a hut, and need not be 
large. Otherwise, the fire must be built in the cen- 
ter of the village and must be a large bonfire. This 


powder is found in small, beaded bags made from 
4019 


the tanned skins of monsters. Usually a single 


pouch will contain Id e pinches. 


Jamaica 
XP Value: 200 GP Value: 600 
Dracon Magazine 33 
When rubbed onto wounds, this powder heals 
2d4 points of damage. 


Jezebel 
XP Value: 300 GP Value: 900 
DRAGON Magazme 33 
When used by a female, it has the ability to 
charm men for 24 hours. 


Jinx Removing 

GP Value: 1,900 
Dracon Magazine 33 
After three days of continued usage of this pow- 
der, it removes any curse or geas placed on a 
character, 


XP Value: 900 


Kludde 
XP Value: 300 GP Value: 900 
DRAGON Magazine 33 
This powder allows its user to speak with ani- 
mals, as the priest spell, for 24 hours. 


Lavender 
XP Value: 100 GP Value: 300 
Dracon Magazine 33 
Powder of lavender increases both Wisdom and 
Dexterity by 2 (Maximum of 18) for 24 hours. 


Life 
XP Value; 300 GP Value: 900 
DRAGON Magazine 33 
When this powder is liberally applied to the skin, 
the user gains the benefit of a cure disease spell, 
This powder even has a 25% chance to cure 


lycanthropy. 


Lily of the Valley 
XP Value: 200 GP Value: 600 
DRAGON Magazine 33 
This powder must be kept absolutely pure, which 
means that it can only be contained in gold con- 
tainers or containers that are gold-lined, When 
splashed on any creature not of good alignment, 
it causes 2d6 points of damage. 


of Magic Detection 

XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 2,500 
Tome of Magic 
Under close inspection, this ordinary-looking 
powder can be seen for what it truly is—an 
extremely fine powder of minute, crystalline 
granules. When this powder contacts a magical 
object, the crystals spark and flash with a rain- 
bow of colors. The effect does not reveal the 
nature or intensity of the enchantment—only 
that the item is magical. A small pinch of pow- 
der is needed for cach use, no matter how large 
or small the object, Each packet contains 
1d10+10 pinches, Powder that is placed on a 
nonmagical item has no effect and cannot be 
reused, 


Magnolia 
XP Value: 150 GP Value: 450 
DraGoN Magazine 33 
This rare powder doubles a character's existing 
PSPs for three turns. If rubbed into the hair of a 
nonpsionic character, the magic in the powder is 
ineffectual; it does not have the power to instill 
psionic ability. 
Manpower 

GP Value: 1,200 
Deacon Magazine 33 
This powder increases the user's Strength by 2 (to 
a maximum of 18) for 24 hours. If a fighter 
already has 18 Strength, add 20% to his or her 
exceptional Strength score. 


XP Value: 400 


Mercury 
XP Value: 100 GP Value: 300 
Draoon Magazine 33 

When users anoint themselves with this powder, 
they are able to contact a vassal of a deity and ask 
a question that is truthfully answered with a short 
phrase or word. If this powder is used more than 
once in a year’s time, the deity’s vassal will 
demand payment of onc sort or another. The table 
below can be used by the DM as a guide. 


z 905 


x Powder, Mojo r 


Alignment 

of Contact Payment 

Good Geas. The quest forced upon the 
character cannot be removed short 
of the use of two wishes, The quest 
will be sacred in nature and impor- 
tant to the deity questioned. 

Neutral Loss. The user loses either a point 


from a prime requisite statistic or 
two levels (DM choice.) 

Evil Death (save vs. death magic 
applicable at a —6 penalty), forc- 
ing the user to serve the deity as a 
vassal for 1,000 years. 


Mojo 
XP Value: 100 GP Value: 500 
DRAGON Magazine 33 
This powder has the power to grant one wish. 


Moon 
XP Value: 200 GP Value: 600 
DRAGON Magazine 33 
With the use of this powder, the user can teleport 
without error as the spell (only once). 


Musk 
XP Value: 100 GP Value: 400 
DRAGON Magazine 33 
This powder adds | point to Strength for 24 
hours. 


Narcissus 
XP Value: 200 GP Value: 600 
DRAGON Magazine 33 
This powder causes sleep when thrown on 
another. The effect lasts for 24 hours. 


New life 
XP Value: 200 GP Value: 600 
DraGoN Magazine 33 
When splashed on an opponent, a saving throw 
vs. spell is required. If the save fails, the victim 
suffers the effects of a forget spell that lasts for 24 
hours, 


Nine Mystery 
XP Value: 300 GP Value: 900 
DRAGON Magazine 33 
This handy powder, when massaged into the face 
and neck, acts as a /ocate object spell. The effect 
lasts 24 hours. 


Obeah 
XP Value; 400 GP Value: 1,200 
Dracon Magazine 33 
This powder acts as a rernave curse spell, It can- 
not cure lycanthropy or magical diseases or 
afflictions. It does, however, make the user com- 
pletely immune to the effects of curses for 24 
hours. 


Oak-in-Acorn 

XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 4,000 

Nightwail 
Rare to the point of legend in modem times, this 
potent powder (also known as Shrinking powder) 
once achieved popularity among Chaotic wiz- 
ards. The silvery powder, made from essence of 
homunculus and other esoteric components, 
shrinks a specified target to a hundredth (or less) 
of its original size for an indefinite time. The user 
can recall the target to normal size with a word. 
Shrunken, living creatures fall into stasis, neither 
aging nor deteriorating until recalled to normal 
size. Objects of any size can be shrunk, but larger 
objects require more powder. 

The shrinking powder, oak-in-acorn, is found 
in a sealed, | ounce copper vial in sufficient 
quantity to shrink a large human to the size of a 
beetle. Trying to prepare an ounce of powder 
requires alchemical skills, takes two weeks, and 
costs 4,000 gp. The user must spend a full round 
sprinkling the powder in a complete circle around 
the target while doing nothing else, Unwilling 
targets receive a saving throw vs, spell to resist 
being shrunken, The effect can be countered by a 
dispel magic spell. 


of Obsession 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 1,500 
Old Empires 

This pink powder is used as a defense by the 
priestesses of Isis, though only on rare occasions. 
The magical powder is cast into a sphere with a 
10-foot radius, at a range of 30 feet. When cast, 
all who are caught in its area of effect must roll a 
successful saving throw vs. spell or continue their 
actions mindlessly. If they fail the saving throw 
and are in combat, they do not care whom they 
attack, even their comrades. They continue to 
attack the nearest target for 3d4+4 rounds. If the 
target is eating or drinking, the activity continues 
for the duration of the powder's influence, even if 
attacked. 

4039 


7 906 = 


iim @ 


Olibanum 
XP Value: 200 GP Value: 600 
DraGoN Magazine 33 
For the 24-hour duration of this powder, the dam- 
age inflicted upon the user is halved for 24 hours. 


Power 
XP Value: 750 GP Value: 2,250 
Dragon Magazine 33 
This powder removes charm spells from any 
creature. It also grants full immunity to all charm 


spells and magical abilities for 24 hours. 


Primrose 
XP Value: 200 GP Value: 600 
DRAGON Maguzine 33 

When added to food or drink, this powder 
draws truth from liars (no saving throw 
allowed). The victim loses all inhibitions, say- 
ing whatever comes to mind, telling the whole 
truth and yielding a lot more information that 
may or may not pertain to the question. The 
effects last for one turn. 


Purification 
XP Value: 300 GP Value: 900 
Dracon Magazine 2 
This powder, when sprinkled on bad food or 
water, makes them fit to consume. It docs not 


neutralize poison or drugs. 


Puchezma’s Powder 
of Edible Objects 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 2,500 
Tome of Magic 

An inveterate traveler who was notoriously 
cheap, Puchezma could never bring himself to 
spend money on decent provisions or hire a qual- 
ity chef for his long wilderness excursions. In his 
efforts to create a scasoning that would make the 
bland dishes of his second-rate cooks more palat- 
able, Puchezma stumbled on a formula for the 
powder of edible objects. 

This powder, which resembles normal salt, 
causes any normally indigestible material to 
become edible, nutritious food. The material must 
be nonliving and nonmagical, and must be in a 
form the consumer can swallow; for instance, dirt 
and cotton cloth are acceptable (the diner could 
chew up and swallow these materials), but large 
stones and planks of hard wood are not (these 
objects would have to be broken up into small 


— —_ —_ 


907 


Powder, Quirks of 


pieces before they could be swallowed). All poi- 
sonous and otherwise harmful properties (such as 
sharp edges) are negated by the powder. One 
pinch of powder of edible objects is sufficient to 
treat | cubic foot of material, The powder is nor- 
mally found in small bags containing 10d10 
pinches. 


Purwuvok's Powder of the 

Hero's Heart 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 2,500 
1992 Fantasy Collector Card 506 
This dull red powder instills bravery in those 
within its area of effect—affected creatures 
gain a morale bonus of +2 and become immune 
to magical fear for 5d4 rounds, Purwuyok also 
has learned to tune the powder to an alignment 
of the user choosing so that an enemy cannot 
enjoy its benefits should the powder be used in 
battle. 


Quirks of Magical Powders* 
XP Value: GP Value: — 
Dragon Magazine 163 
The AD&D game has one of the largest compila- 
tions of magical items in the fantasy gaming 
industry. 

The following tables have been created to add 
some spice and variety to existing magical items 
in the AD&D game world. A table of nonstandard 
magical item abilities is offered for each major 
type of magical item in the AD&D game. The 
rationale for such quirks is simple. 

Most items are created normally, and func- 
tion exactly as a standard item of the same type 
in the DMG. However, sometimes there is a 
slight mishap in the creation of the device: the 
steps are not followed in the proper order, the 
astrological signs do not bode well, the item’s 
creator is disturbed to begin with, the instruc- 
tions are incomplete, or something just plain 
goes wrong. Any of these results may cause a 
magical item to behave differently from others 
just like it. 

Not all quirks are bad, however. Some are 
detrimental to the item or its user, some are 
ncutral, and some are even beneficial. The pos- 
sibility of quirks existing (and the actual num- 
ber of quirks) is learned by using the table 
below to find the exact quirks that a magical 
powder possesses, 


40 


16-21 


22-25 


36-30 


41-44 


45-50 


5183 


Quirks of Magical Powders 
Result 
User glows (as per a light spell) a 
random color for as long as the pow- 
der is in effect. 
User's skin turns a random color for 
1d 10 turns, 
User is unable to speak or cast spells 
with verbal components for 1d4 
hours after consuming the powder. 
Imbiber gets extremely hungry 
immediately after the powder is con- 
sumed (as per a chime of hunger). 
User's senses sharpen while the 
powder is in effect, or for a maxi- 
mum of three turns (whichever is 
longer). The individual affected 
gains a +2 bonus against being sur- 
prised (unless he or she possesses 
the alertness nonweapon profi- 
ciency or is a ranger, in which case 
add a +3 bonus). 
User cannot hear anything due to 
ringing or buzzing in ears for as long 
as the powder is in effect, or for three 
turns if no duration is given. 
Powder is diluted and works 50% as 
well as a normal powder of the same 
type. Both duration and effects are 
diminished in power. 
Powder becomes inert and useless if 
left unstopped for longer than five 
rounds. 
Powder duration doubles if it is mixed 
with wine prior to consumption. 
User becomes highly intoxicated for 
dio hours after the powder is con- 
sumed, Only dispel magic can pre- 
maturely remove the effects of the 
drunkenness (effects decided by the 
DM). 
User gains 60° infravision for as long 
as the powder is in effect, or for three 
turns if no duration is given. If the 
user normally has infravision, it is 
lost for the same amount of time. 


67-71 
72-76 


77-78 


79-83 


84-87 


90-91 


92-95 


96-97 


Powder has no effect upon demihu- 
mans 

User experiences slight disorienta- 
tion for Ido rounds after consuming 
the powder (—2 penalty on any attack 
roll and +2 penalty on Armor Class 
during this time). 

User becomes drowsy; a Constitution 
check on 1420 must be made every 
round for four rounds after the pow- 
der is consumed. If the roll on any 
cheek is higher than the user's consti- 
tution, he or she falls asleep for 346 
minutes, The sleeping individual can 
be awakened only by taking at least 1 
point of damage from a physical or 
magical attack. 

Powder is phosphorescent and glows 
(equal to faerie fire spell) in the dark. 
Water must be added to the powder 
for it to be effective. 

Powder is stronger than normal; its 
duration is 150% of a normal powder 
of the sume type. 

Powder is nauseating to consume; a 
Constitution check on 1d20 must be 
made in order to force down the pow- 
der, If a saving throw vs. poison at +2 
is not made after that, the user feels 
nauseated for 2d10 turns (= on 
attack rolls during that time). 

User loses 1 point of Dexterity for 
2d10 turns. 

Powder is blown by the wind (50%) 
or turns lumpy duc to moisture (50%) 
and becomes useless if left open to 
air for longer than five rounds. 
Powder is unpredictable—it works 
normally 50% of the time, does noth- 
ing 30% of the time, and sickens the 
user for Ida days without any ben- 
cficial effect 20% of the time. A cure 
disease removes this illness. 

Powder is unstable; if severely jostled 
or shaken, it bursts its container 
(75% chance) and becomes useless. 
User suddenly becomes extremely 
verbose and talks incessantly for the 
duration of the powder, or one turn if 
no duration is given. During this 
time, the user and his or her associ- 


ates cannot gain surprise on any 
04) 


Wc 


908 


encountered monsters 


98-99 If the powder is mixed with anything 
else, it forms a lethal compound (if 
swallowed, save vs. poison at A on 
the roll, or die in Ida rounds) 

00 Powder is addictive; it must be taken 


at least once a week after such an 
addictive substance is imbibed. If the 
addict does not consume the powder 
every week, he or she suffers a —2 
penalty on all ability scores until the 
powder is taken or the affliction is 
removed, Only alter reality, limited 
wish, wish, or going “cold turkey” 
without the powder for 1d3 months 
cures the addiction, 


Reversibility 

GP Value: 1,500 
DRAGON Magazine 33 
This powder reverses any spell put on the user or 
object, In many cases, this property acts as a lim- 
ited effect dispel magic, rendering the object or 
person immune to all spells and magical abilities 
for 24 hours. 


XP Value: 500 


Rosemary 
XP Value: 200 GP Value: 600 
DRAGON Magazine 33 
When worn on the temples, wrists, and ankles, 
this powder has the following attributes. It cures 
2d4 points of damage, protects the wearer like a 
protection from evil spell, and grants a +3 bonus 
to all saving throws vs. offensive magic 


Rue 
XP Value: 100 GP Value: 300 
DRAGON Magazine 33 
This powder instantly cures insanity if used for 
three consecutive days. 


Sandalwood 

XP Value; 300 GP Value: 900 
DRAGON Magazine 33 
Powder of sandalwood cures ds points of 
damage sustained from blunt weapons. If the 
character suffers from slashing or puncture 
wounds, though, the powder cannot aid the 
victim at all 


Smoke 
XP Value: GP Value; 750 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 
This magical substance is similar, though not 
identical, to gunpowder, It is extremely scarce 
and, duc to its volatile nature, dangerous to 
fabricate. Smoke powder will be available in a 
campaign only if the DM allows it. If the DM 
doesn't want it in the campaign, it simply 
docan't exist 

Smoke powder is commonly found divided 
into two separate componcnis—onc, a stecly- 
blue granular substance, the other, a fine white 
powder. Alone, cach component is inert and 
harmless. However, when equal portions of the 
two are mixed, the smoke powder is complete 
and dangerous. 

When touched by a flame, the mixed powder 
explodes with great force, noise, and smoke. The 
size and force of the explosion vary according to 
the amount of smoke powder used. A small, mea- 
sured amount (a spoonful of each componcnt) 
causes Ida points of damage. Such an amount is 
sufficient for a large firecracker or a single 
charge of an arquebus (if these optional weapons 
exist in the campaign), Increasing the amount 
increases the damage „proportionally doubling 


causes 2d2 points of damage, tripling causes 3d2, 
4047 


„ = / / . 


909 


Powder, Snake 


p — ͤ(—— — ̃———ę— 


and so on. 

An explosion capable of causing 30 points of 
damage (15 charges) has a 5-foot radius. Blasts 
capable of causing 50 or more points of damage 
(25 or more charges) have a radius of 15 feet, and 
affect items and fortifications as would a giant's 
blow. 

When discovered, a pouch of smoke powder 
contains 3d6 charges. Charges from several 
pouches of smoke powder can be combined to 
create bigger, more damaging explosions. 


Snake 
XP Value: 250 GP Value: 750 
DRAGON Magazine 33 
When a green candle is anointed with this powder 
and burned, it will cure disease as the spell. Up to 
four individuals can be aided with one use. This 
powder cannot cure magical afflictions, 


Solomon’s 
XP Value: 300 GP Value: 900 
DRAGON Magazine 33 
This powder increases the user’s Wisdom by 3 for 
24 hours. 


Spikenard 
XP Value: 300 GP Value: 900 
DRAGON Magazine 33 
This powder cures Id points of damage when 
used on characters of good alignment, but 
causes 1d8 points of damage to characters of 
evil alignment. 


Spirit 
XP Value: 300 GP Value: 900 
DRAGON Magazine 33 
This powder allows the user to speak with dead, 
as the spell for two turns. 
Time 
XP Value: 600 GP Value: 1,800 
DraGoN Magazine 33 
When this powder is thrown into the air, an effect 


identical to a time stop spell occurs for one round. 


Trinity 
XP Value: 900 GP Value: 2,700 
Deacon Magazine 33 

This powder raises three statistics of a player 
character by | point each (no maximum) for 24 
hours, depending upon the character class. The 
table below depicts the chances of any particular 


statistics being temporarily increased, using a 
1d10 die roll. Anything marked with an X is auto- 
matically increased. To use this chart, find the 
character class (not the kit), and roll the dice. The 
statistic rolled and all those marked with an X are 
raised by 1 point for 24 hours. 


Class Str Dex Con Int Wis Cha 
Fighter X X 11 — + — 
paladin 15 — 60 — X X 
Ranger 5 X 60 — X — 
Wizard — I X X 48 9-0 
Specialist Wizard 
Abjurer — l4 58 X X 9-0 
Conjurer 6 — X X 7 — 
Diviner — — la X X 3 
Enchanter — — WHN X SO Xx 
Illusionist — X 12 X 34 70 
Invoker 1 25 X X 60 — 
Necromancer 1-4 — 50 X X — 
Transmuter 1-2 X 3-7 X 80 - 
Priest — — — 14 X 50 
Druid — 14 5 60 X X 
Thief — xX — 12 36 710 
Bard — X — xX = X 
Verbena 
XP Value: 400 GP Value: 1,200 
Dragon Magazine 33 
This powder completely protects the user against 
curse and gea spells for 24 hours. 
Vibration 
XP Value: 300 GP Value: 900 
DRAGON Magazine 33 


When this powder is applied to the user and one 
victim, the victim is under the user's charm for 
24 hours. The user must be the first to apply the 
powder, otherwise, the “victim” becomes the 
charmer. 


Virgin Olive 
XP Value: 100 GP Value: 300 
Dragon Magazine 33 
When applied to a priest's holy symbol, it adds +4 
to a priest's roll to turn undead. It also causes 2d8 
points of damage on the undead if a saving throw 
vs. spell fails. The effect lasts 24 hours. 


4056 


D ⅛ eUwͤ˙—— 


910 


Powder, Zula Zula 


ASLAN 


Vision 


XP Value: 900 GP Value: 1,800 
DraGoN Magazine 33 
This powder, rubbed onto the face, gives the power 


to see invisible and see ultraviolet for six turns. 


Voodoo 
XP Value: 200 GP Value: 600 
Dragon Magazine 33 
When thrown, this powder reduces the victim“ 
Strength to 3 if a saving throw vs. spell fails. 


Will Power 

GP Value: 1,500 
DRAGON Magazine 33 
When applied, this powder raises the user's 
Strength by 3 (to a maximum of 18), In addition, 
for the next 24 hours, the user gains a +3 to all 
petrification, polymorph, paralyzation, and poi- 
son saving throws. 


XP Value: 500 


Wintergreen 
XP Value: 100 GP Value: 300 
DraGoN Magazine 33 
This powder cures 1d6 points of damage and 
adds a bonus of +5 to all saving throws vs. dis- 
ease and disease effects (excluding lycanthropy) 
for 24 hours. 


911 


Wishing 
GP Value: 2,700 
DRAGON Magazine 33 
When this powder is placed on a candle and 
burned, it causes a wish, written on parchment to 
come true. 


XP Value: 900 


Witch’s 

GP Value: 1,800 
DraGoN Magazine 33 
Eight days after a piece of an opponent's or 
enemy's hair is soaked in this powder, the victim 
must make a saving throw vs. poison or die. Only 
evil characters can use this powder without an 
alignment penalty. 


XP Value: 600 


Xyz 
XP Value: 300 GP Value: 900 
DRAGON Magazine 33 

This powder makes the user 10 years younger. 
Unfortunately, a System Shock roll is required. If 
the roll fails, the user dies. If resurrected after 
death, the user is 10 years younger than before 
death, 


Ylang Ylang 
XP Value: 300 GP Value: 900 
DRAGON Magazine 33 
This powder increases the user’s Charisma by 2 
points for 24 hours. 


Zodiac 
XP Value: 100 GP Value: 300 
DRAGON Magazine 33 
This powder usually brings a favorable reaction 
(add +2 to all reaction rolls) when speaking with 
followers of lawful deities. 


Zula Zula 
XP Value: 250 GP Value: 750 
DRAGON Magazine 33 
When sprinkled on an enemy, this powder will 
kill (if a saving throw vs. death magic fails) or 
cause 3d6 points of damage (if the saving throw 
succeeds). 


Prism 
A prism is a triangular piece of pure glass or 
crystal that refracts light into a prismatic rainbow 
of color, Most magical and alchemical laborato- 
ries and sage workshops are equipped with one or 


more prisms. 
4066 


rr ̃ ˖;Oẽi— 2 te ‚ Tr.! ee ee 


Prism of Distraction 


of Distraction 
XP Value: 800 GP Value: 4,000 
PotuyHEDRON Newszine 43 

When held in front of a nonmagical light source 
(torch, bright sunlight, candle, anything) this 
prism has a 60% chance to cause opponents to 
stop in their tracks and stare with fascination at 
the multicolor lights given off by it. When com- 
bined with a magical light source (continual 
light, magic lantern, and so on) the probability 
rises to 90%. It may be used once a day. If the 
light source is extinguished, the spell is broken. A 
saving throw vs. spell applies. 


of Greyhawk 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 4,500 
Greyuawn Adventures 

This crystal sorcerer’s tool was enchanted to 
enhance the prisms ability to create dazzling col- 
ors, The prism can cast two spells, cach once per 
day; color spray (as a 6th-level spellcaster) and 
hypnotic pattern. Note that the prism must be 
used in the presence of direct sunlight. It cannot 
be used under moonlight, normal torchlight, or 
daylight on an overcast day. 


of Kushk 
XP Value: 12,000 GP Value: 60,000 
Storm Riders 

The prism of Kushk is also known as the dia- 
mond. When a beam of light is shining through 
the bottom of the diamond, it acts like a prism. 
a different color of the rainbow: red, orange, yel- 
low, green, blue, and purple. These colored 
beams shoot out from the tip of the diamond, 
writhing and squirming like tendrils. 

If the prism of Kushk happens to be pointed at 
a living being, the tendrils lash and try to grasp 
the target The tendrils do a certain amount of 
damage and stand a chance of grappling the vic- 
tim, depending upon the power level of the light 
source. 
The power level depends upon the nature of the 
light. All nonmagical light sources are considered 
0 power-level sources. Light caused by Ist-level 
spells, +1 glowing weapons, and similar magic is 
considered a level 1 source. Light caused by 2nd- 
level spells or +2 glowing weapons are consid- 
ered from a level-2 source, light caused by 
3rd-level spells or +3 glowing weapons are con- 
sidered a level 3 source, and so on. For example, 


light caused by the Sth-level priests’ spell moon- 
beam would be considered a Sth-level power 
source. Lightning bolt, pyrotechnics, wall of fire, 
and other spells producing light as a side-effect 
may be used as a light source, but only for one 
round, Color spray, rainbow pattern, and similar 
spells producing a prism-like effect may not be 
used as light sources. 

For every power level of the light source, the 
tendrils do 1d10 damage (save vs. petrification for 
half damage) and have a 10% chance of grasping 
the victim's spirit. Once the tendrils grasp a spirit, 
they drag it back into the diamond. For example, 
light caused by the 7th-level priests’ spell sunray 
causes 7410 points of damage (save vs. petrifica- 
tion for half) and stands a 70% chance of dragging 
the victim's spirit into the prism of Kushk. 

To intentionally hit a target, the person wield- 
ing the diamond must be able to see the target, 
simply point the diamond at it, and speak the tar- 
gets name No attack roll is required. The victim 
suffers the appropriate damage and the attacker 
makes the appropriate percentile roll to see if the 
victim's spirit is dragged into the prism (no sav- 
ing throw, but magic resistance applies). The bod- 
ics of victims are dragged into the prism along 
with their spirits, 

There are only two ways to release a captured 
spirit, The first is to capture another victim, The 
first victim is released when the second spirit 
enters the prism, for it can hold only one prisoner 
at a time. The other way to release the spirit is to 
cast a spell creating darkness upon the Prism of 
Kushk. This spell must be of a power level equiv- 
alent to or greater than the power level of the light 
source that trapped the victim in the first place, 
The prism of Kushk cannot be shattered, cracked, 
or opened by any other means. The powers of the 


prism of Kushk are summarized below: 
Power Damage Capture 
Level Chance 
0 0 0% 
l 1d10 10% 
2 2d10 20% 
3 3d10 30% 
4 4d10 40% 
5 5d 10 50% 
6 6d10 60% 
7 7d10 70% 
8 8d10 80% 
9 9d10 90% 


912 


of Light Splitting 
XP Value: 1,500 GP Value: 7,500 
Tome of Magic 

This useful device refracts light into the three 
primary colors of red, blue, and green. The user 
can choose the color of light that is emitted by 
the prism. When creating a magical fluid or 
powder, the wizard casts an enchant an item 
spell. Following this, the wizard may use the 
prism of light splitting to shine a blue, red, or 
green beam of light on the mixture. The light 
must shine on the substance for one full day. At 
the end of this time, the material gains an addi- 
tional magical property, depending upon the 
color of the beam employed. 


Color Magical Properties 

Red The potion, powder, or aromatic oil is 
stronger than normal; targets of its 
effects suffer a 2 saving throw 


Blue The duration of the magical potion, 
powder, or fragrance's effect is doubled. 
The amount of liquid or powder is 
doubled; the wizard now has enough 
for two potions, powders, or aromatic 
oils, 


Sim’s Prism of Light Splitting 
XP Value: 3,500 GP Value: 17,500 


1992 Fantasy Collector Card 386 
Improving upon the original prism of light split- 
ting, Sim z prism uses all seven major colors in 
the visible spectrum. In addition to the three pri- 
mary colors and their established effects, Sim 3 
ps can perform the following magic 
* Orange; A second, randomly rolled property 
is infused into the potion, dust, or aromatic 
oil. 
* Yellow: The potion, dust, or oil becomes mix- 
able with any other. 
* Indigo; The potion, oil, or dust, and the con- 
tainer it is in, becomes invisible. 
* Violet: A potion becomes a dust, a dust 
becomes an aromatic oil, or an aromatic oil 
becomes a potion, 


Prismal’s Useful 
Enchanted Gear 


While most of the magical creations of Prismal 
are to be found under standard categories, these 


items are unusual enough to be placed in an entry 


Prismal’s Fish Hooks 


under Prismal’s name. These are items he created, 
usually at the request of friends or acquaintances, 
to make life a little easier, labor less demanding, 
and adventuring more fun. 


Block and Tackle 
XP Value: 900 GP Value: 9,000 
New Item 

Prismals block and tackle is a tackle block (with 
a dual pulley system) that can be easily threaded 
with a rope. The block magically decreases the 
weight of the object being hoisted by a factor of 
1,000, For example, if a 5-ton (10,000 pounds) 
piece of cargo is hoisted from a cargo ship, a 
deck hand using Prismal x block and tackle feels 
as though he or she is lifting only 10 pounds. The 
rope on the cargo-side of the block, however, as 
well as the crane holding the magical block must 
be able to sustain the real weight of the cargo. 
This side effect makes it useless as a tool for 
adventurers who wish to carry 1,000 times their 
normal weight allowance, 

Prismal created this item as a wedding gift 
for a friend who worked at the local ship yards. 
For years, the man complained of muscle 
cramps and nightly fatigue from his overtly 
strenuous job. Prismal wanted to make sure his 
friend kept his blushing bride happy in their 
new life together. 


Fish Hooks 
XP Value GP Value 
Minute: 50 250 
Tiny: 100 500 
Small: 150 750 
Medium: 200 1,000 
Lurge: 250 1,250 
Huge: 300 1,500 
New hem 


These fish hooks come in six different sizes, 
each designed to capture the attention of a par- 
ticular size of fish. Prismal’s fish hooks, when 
immersed in water, send out a magical fish 
attraction signal that lures fish of appropriate 
size to bite and swallow the hook. Anything 
larger than the specified size (see the table 
below), automatically saves against the effect. 
Fish smaller than the size specified are repelled 
(by fear) from the fish hook. 

Just because Prismal sy fish hooks attract 
fish, does not necessarily mean that the hooks 


owner is able to automatically reel the fish tn. 
m 


~ Prismal’s Flint r 


The line connecting the fish hook to the pole 
must be sturdy enough to sustain the pull of the 
fish as it struggles to escape, Many an adven- 
turer has suffered the loss of these hooks, try- 
ing to pull in 6-foot fish with the equivalent of 
a thread for line, 


Size Fish Size 
Minute 4" — 6" long 
Tiny 6" 8“ long 
Small 8" 12“ long 
Medium 152“ long 
Large 24“ long 
Huge 4’ ~8' long 
Flint 


XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
New Item 

This magical device causes any small, flammable 
materials to ignite, regardless of relative dryness. 
By striking the flint with a piece of steel, a very 
hot spark flies from the flint, igniting whatever it 
touches, as long as the item is small and flamma- 
ble (like parchment, leaves, pine needles, oil, fur, 
hair, straw, or clothing, for example). Against live 
flesh, the spark causes Ida points of damage. The 
flint is unable to burn down a large establishment. 
Instead, an arsonist must first start a fire using 
small kindling. In real-world terms, anything that 
can be ignited using a butane lighter can be 
ignited using Prismal & flint. 

At the request of an accomplished explorer 
named Orion the Outrider, (and the promise to 
name a peak after him), Prismal created this item 
in order to make the man and his companions 
more comfortable when climbing higher and 
more dangerous mountains. Upon returning from 
Prismal Peak, Orion reported that the flint saved 
their lives on more than one occasion. Being 25 
days travel from his humble domicile, Prismal 
has yet to visit “his” summit. 


Grappling Hook 

XP Value: 2,500 GP Value: 17,500 

New Item 
Jett, Prismal’s acquaintance of dark and question- 
able ethos, once asked the wizard for a magical 
device so he could get into his house after he had 
accidentally locked himself out, Since Prismal 
generally asks few questions, as long as gold 
pieces are laid in front of him, he designed a 
device perfect for Jett's need. 


Prismal’s grappling hook is a magical hook 
that wedges itself into any solid object (animate 
objects excluded). The only limitation on the 
device is the length of the accompanying rope 
and the Strength (and accuracy) of the user. Once 
the grappling hook reaches the apex of the user's 
throw and touches a solid object, it silently lodges 
itself into the target. 

No amount of pulling or prying will remove 
the device. If the material around the grappling 
hook is chipped away from the hook, it will fall, 
with part of the structure still attached. The 
only other way to remove the device is to say its 
command word. Recently, there has been a rash 
of unexplained thefts around the city and in 
nearby boroughs. Prismal, of course, knows 
nothing. 


Musical Minstrel 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 7,500 
New Item 

Prismal’s musical minstrel is able to learn and 
retain any musical numbers to which it is exposed, 
If taken to carnival or a pub where music is played, 
the musical minstrel memorizes the song for later 
use. If the owner has ever heard a song that he or 
she particularly enjoys, the musical minstrel will 
extract the memory for its use. Up to 1,000 musi- 
cal pieces can be retained by the musical minstrel. 
If it is exposed to more than that number, it erases 
the oldest tune in favor of the new one. If exposed 
to a duplicate melody, the musical minstrel auto- 
matically retains the best composition, erasing the 
least favorable version. 

The owner is able to request a musical piece 
from the magical minstrel at any time he or she 
chooses. The minstrel allows its owner to tele- 
pathically browse through the euphony catalog in 
order to find the desired piece. 

Prismal created this item for an acquaintance 
of his who journeyed with a merchant caravan. 
This woman wanted to be able to fall asleep to 
music and refused to pay a meistersinger. 


Pitons 
XP Value: 120 GP Value: 600 
New Item 
After having a peak named after him (sce Pris- 
mal x Flint), Prismal came up with another handy 
device for his explorer friend, Orion the Out- 
rider—mazgical pitons. To use Prismal 5 pitons, 


simply push them into a solid, nonliving object, 
4077 


/ / / 


914 


N Prison, Castellan's Magical y- 


No hammering is needed, and there is no need to 
look for tight cracks, either. Once in place, the 
pitons never detach until the command word is 
spoken while touching the piton. 

Orion was thrilled when Prismal handed him 
almost 100 of these devices on his way to Mount 
Divinia. Prismal showed him how they worked 
and instructed him that the command word was 
“come out.” After four months, Orion came back 
to Prismal and thanked him for the devices. 
Unfortunately. Orion lost one of the members of 
his team when he asked, “Are you sure these 
pitons won't come out. 


Weaponblack 

XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
New Item 
At the request of many warriors who were look- 
ing for ways to hide military gear from city offi- 
cials who frowned upon civilians carrying arms, 
Prismal devised a simple recipe to render weap- 
ons invisible. By mixing dust of disappearance 
with a small enchantment (generally believed to 
be an improved invisibility spell), Prismal created 
a weapon polish that must be vigorously rubbed 
into the pores of the weapon’s blade (and hilt, for 
the overly apprehensive), When this 10 minute 
process is done, the warrior finds that the weapon 
simply vanished from sight (but not touch), along 
with portions of the polishing rag and fingers and 
palms. 

The polish washes off rags and skin with a 
little soap and elbow grease. Prismal's weapon- 
black continues to function as long as the weapon 
is not used in combat or subjected to the dissolv- 
ing properties of water (such as rain, jaunts 
across streams, the dunking effects of a capsized 
boat, or a friendly nudge into a fountain). Each 
dose of Prismal’s weaponblack is enough to coat 
two daggers or one sword. 


Whetstone 
XP Value: 1,200 GP Value: 6,000 
New Item 
As most warriors know (or soon discover), the 
condition of one’s weapons is an important con- 
sideration for a fighter. The more pristine, rust- 
frec, and sharp the weapon, the better the 
chances are for survival in combat. One way to 
remove the rust and dullness from the blade is 
an occasional use of Prismal x whetstone. This 
small magical stone is approximately 2 inches 


long, 1 inch wide, and % inch thick. By simply 
caressing the weapon's edge with this stone, the 
weapon magically regains its sharpness, and the 
rust of months of neglect vanishes. Since even 
magical weapons can show the signs of age, the 
whetstone 1s helpful in restoring these wondrous 
weapons. The whetstone can be used 100 times 
before it loses its enchantment. Once the 
enchantment is gone, the whetstone can be used 
as a normal sharpener. 

When used on any nonmagical weapon, Pris- 
mul y whetstone temporarily enchants the item 
with a +1 bonus to attack and damage rolls. This 
bonus lasts for 2d8 successful strikes against 
opponents. Once the randomly determined strikes 
are used, the enchantment wears off and the 
weapon returns to its nonmagical form, If used on 
a magical weapon, the whetstone grants an addi- 
tional +1 bonus for 1d4 successful strikes. 


Prison 

Prisons are used to hold creatures against their 
wills. Magical prisons are compact, ingenious 
devices, so unassisted escape from them is dif- 
ficult, if not impossible. Some enchanted pris- 
ons also make rescues difficult by interfering 
with serying, tracking, and some forms of 
communication, 


Castellan’s Magical 
XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 20,000 
The Gauntlet 

This prison of Castellan Keep does not consist 
of a physical place but employs a variant of the 
imprisonment spell. When the keep was first 
built, four magical cells were established and the 
jailers were provided with a number of magical 
gems with which to operate the system, Black 
gems allow the user to imprison creatures ina 
specified cell, while white gems were used to 
release them. 

An instruction book and a supply of black and 
white gems were given to Castellan, but a number 
of white gems were mislaid. Since the gems 
could each be used only once, the time came 
when only two black gems remained. This made 
the system useless and left some prisoners 
trapped in the cells. The book is on the desk in 
Castellan’s room. 


The last Guardian hid an emergency supply of 
four white gems in a Leomund $ secret chest, the 
replica of which is hidden in a compartment in the 

4080 


ꝶ6öꝛöFͤzʒzß ee eee ee 


91S 


Prison. Casiellan'’s Magical 


painted room in the undetetroſt. The instruction 
book includes a reference to these gems but the 
secret door leading to the undercroft had been 
forgotten, and so the gems have never been found. 

The instruction book and the two black gems 
were found by an ogrillon when the keep was 
taken. When the giantess was brought to the keep, 
the ogrillon imprisoned her with one of the 
remaining black gems, heedless of the problem of 
her release. 

The imprisoning process can take place any- 
where in the Keep. All that is necessary is that the 
victim is touched with a black gem and the words 
“Go hence unto . are uttered, followed by the 
number of the captive’s cell. The creature fades 
and vanishes as it is sent to the cell and the black 
gem breaks into fragments. The creature will not 
be imprisoned (and the gem will remain whole) if 
an occupied cell is specified. 

Releasing creatures can only take place in the 
release chamber. To release a prisoner, a white 
gem is placed on the spiral pattern in the center of 
the floor and the command “Come forth from 
followed by the cell number, is spoken. A few 
moments later the gem shatters and the prisoner 
appears in the center of the room, If an empty cell 
is specified or if the procedure is curried out other 
than in the release chamber, nothing happens and 


916 


the gem remains whole. 

In either case, there is no saving throw for the 
captive, and while imprisoned, creatures are 
affected by the equivalent of a temporal stasis spell, 

The Instruction Book: This book may be 
found on Castellan’s desk. It has a rich, tooled 
leather binding with the words The Prison in gold 
leaf on the spine. The front cover is nearly an inch 
thick and has 36 padded compartments (cach 
about half an inch wide and deep) hollowed out 
on the inside. These compartments are used to 
hold the black and white gems used to operate the 
prison. All are now empty 

The first five pages of the book explain how 
the imprisonment system is operated. When the 
adventurers read the book, the DM should give 
the players a summary of the procedures detailed 
above, 

The sixth page contains a reference to a 
cache of white gems for use in an emergency. 
Their location is given as the secret compart- 
ment at the top of one of the columns in the ™. . 
painted room with pillars beneath the keep.” 
The text docs not describe how to get to the 
room but, once there, the adventurers automati- 
cally find the compartment, following the 
directions given. 

The book contains no reference to the Leo- 
munds secret chest since the last Guardian only 
decided to leave this at the kecp in a last-minute, 
emergency measure 

The next three pages contain records of prison- 
ers kept in the cells. All but the last two entries 
(shown below) have been carefully crossed out: 


* (Neatly written) “Cell Four, Lorganarch.” The 
date given for its imprisonment is about 50 
years ago. There is no release date given. 

* (Scrawled) “Bloodfire’s daughter—Number 
Three.” 


Although the reference to the imprisonment of 
the fire giantess in cell three is correct, the deten 
tion of a volt in cell two was never recorded. Also, 
as a result of the exchange it has performed the 
Gauntlet is now in cell four with a giant two- 
headed troll. 

There follow seven blank pages. Written on the 
inside of the back cover are the words “Fram 
eweartern theostre, cume.” These are the com- 
mand words for the return of the Leomund 's 
secret chest. 


x Prison of Zagig y 


Genie 
XP Value GP Value 
Dao Decanter: 2,000 10,000 
Dao Geode: 2,000 10,000 
Djinn Bottle: 2,000 10,000 
Efreet Bottle: 2,000 10,000 
Marid Ewer: 2,000 10,000 
Noble Genie: 6,000 30,000 
Noble Dao: 6,000 30,000 
DRAGON Magazine 179 


These magical devices come in a variety of 
forms in the Land of Fate: bottles for djinn and 
efrect, stoppered ewers for marids, and geodes 
or crystal decanters for dao, They are used by 
sha ir to capture und discipline genies. Some 
captured genies deserve their fate for being mis- 
chievous, dangerous, or hateful. Some are inno- 
cent of any crimes, bul were imprisoned by evil 
or misguided sha’ir, All clairn innocence in such 
matters. The following types of genics may be 
found within any bottle; 


Roll Genie type 

01-24 Djinni 

25-48 Dao 

49-73 Efreeti 

1-96 Marid 
97 Noble Djinni 
98 Noble Dao 
99 Noble Efrecti 
00 Noble Marid 


An imprisoned genie may be charged, upon 
release, to perform certain actions. The DM may 
choose or roll randomly from the following table: 


Roll Task 

01-20 The genie must perform three tasks for 
the opener of the bottle. If the genie has 
wish granting powers, the creature may 
use those to perform the task. 

The genic must serve the opener of the 
bottle for 1,001 days. 

The genic must attack the opener of the 
bottle. Good-aligned genies leave their 
opponents unconscious but alive; other- 
wise, they fight to the death. 

The genie must bring the opener of the 
bottle to a particular location, which 
may be a treasure vault, wizard tower, 
or city bazaar, DM's choice. 

The genie must locate a particular item 


21-70 


71-80 


81-86 


and may not leave the opener of the bot- 
tle until that item is found. The genic is 
under no obligation to serve the opener 
of the bottle. 

The genic has gone insane and will 
attack all within reach upon release. 
Any item or spell that cures insanity 
will bring the genic back to his senses. 
The genie will then perform three tasks 
for the individual. 


91-00 


of Zagig 
XP Value: 2,750 GP Value: 25,000 
The Lost Caverns of Tsojcanth 

Only five of these brass devices are believed to 
exist. Each is nearly identical, appearing to be 
nothing more than a small, well-made bird cage. 
Normal handling or examination does not reveal 
them to be magical. If a detect magic spell is cast 
on the prison of Zagig, there is a 50% chance that 
magic of an uncertain nature will be detected 
either no particular type of dweomer, or a false 
type of magic. 

Each prison-cage has permanent antimagic and 
antidetection spells that protect the exterior and 
interior of the cage. 

The prison of Zagig is usable only by a wizard, 
and attunes itself to the possessor when he or she 
learns the spell word that activates the prison. 
Activation has two effects, The first is that the 
door of the cage is sealed by a wizard lock as if 
the possessor had cast it, The second effect is that 
the possessor is able to imprison a creature in the 
cage by speaking a trigger word and uttering a 
special command spell with a casting time of one 
round. 

The command must contain the personal name 
of the creature to be imprisoned. If the creature 
does not have a personal name, its history must 
be recited in great detail, 

The creature being commanded into imprison- 
ment receives a saving throw vs. spell. If success- 
ful, the creature is unaffected. If it fails, the 
creature is reduced to a 3-inch height and ix 
instantly teleported into the cage. Since magic 
does not function within the cage, imprisoned 
creatures cannot free themselves with spells or 
magical items. An imprisoned creature does not 
need food or water while imprisoned, and is 
instantly restored to its former size and abilities 
once freed, 

A prison of Zagig cannot by damaged by force 

40K. 


— °° °° °° °° *& so- ji 


917 


~ Prison of Zagyg Z 


or magic. An imprisoned creature can be freed by 

the owner of the prison or by a wizard able to 

break the wizard lock without using spells (a wiz- 

ard 4 or more levels above the owner of the prison 

of Zagig), A wish or an alter reality spell can also 

be used to open the cage. A creature inside a 

prison of Zagig cannot be located by spells or 

magical items, only by normal sight and hearing, 
Words necessary to operate a prison of Zagig 

are: 

* Activation Word. 

* Trigger Word (used to begin the imprisonment 
of a subject). 

* Command Spell (naming or describing the his- 
tory of the subject). 

* Freedom Word. 


of Zagyg 
XP Value: 2,750 GP Value: 25,000 
Unearthed Arcana 
Only five of these brass devices are thought to 
exist. Each is nearly identical, appearing to be noth- 
ing more than a small, well-made birdcage. No 
amount of normal handling or examination will 
reveal it to be magical, but if a detect magic spell is 
cast upon one, it is 50% likely to show a vague 
dweomer of uncertain nature—cither no class of 
magic or an erroncous one will be detected, Each 
prison-cage has a permanent antimagic and nonde- 
tection spell in and upon it. Each such item attunes 
itself to the wizard possessing it when he or she 
learns the wording which activates that particular 
prison of Zagyg. Speaking the activation word has 
two effects: First, the door to the cage is immedi- 
ately held fast by a wizard lock spell as if the pos- 
sessor had cast it, and that portal can be opened 
only from the outside by a character of the wizard 
profession who can normally overcome such a wiz- 
ard lock without resorting to additional magic. Sec- 
ond, the cage is attuned to a single trigger word 
which will enable its possessor to imprison a crea- 
ture within the cage by invoking an enchantment of 
one round casting time. This command spell must 
name the true name of the creature to be impris- 
oned, or else its history (in great detail) in the case 
of creatures without a name. If the creature being 
commanded into imprisonment fails to make its 
saving throw vs. spell, it shrinks to about /4-foot in 
height and is instantancously transported into the 
cage. Since magie does not function within the 
cage, the imprisoned creature cannot itself escape. 
It can be freed by a wizard able to open the door of 


the device or by any other being who can do so by 
use of a wish or an alter reality spell. A Prison of 
Zagyg cannot be harmed or affected by the use of 
force or magic. Any creature inside cannot be 
located by any means except actual sight or hearing 
due to normal proximity, Naturally, the possessor 
can free a prisoner by use of a single freedom word. 
Once freed, the former captive is restored to its for- 
mer size and abilities. Imprisoned creatures need 
neither food nor drink when in the cage, for its 
magic negates the need for either 


Prosthesis 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 


DraGoN Magazine 73 
These prostheses (artificial arm or leg) magically 
enable a “wearer” to hide the fact that he or she has 
lost a limb or an eye. It won't necessarily allow full 
use of the body part as though it were “real,” but 
the enchantment will prevent any observer from 
noticing the wearer's inability to use it fully. 


Psychometron of Nerad 
XP Value: — GP Value: 
Book of Artifacts 
The Psychometron is a small, clear gem about | 
inch in diameter. It is mounted in a headband of 


gold and carru leather. The gem is perfectly round 
4085 


< 918 7 


TT — — —— —jꝙ——j— 


and sparkles even in complete darkness. It would 
appear to be worth a king’s ransom simply as a 
piece of jewelry. This item originated on Athas. 

Six Kings’ Ages ago, a powerful psionicist and 
preserver, Nerad the Wise, arose in the waste- 
lands along the shores of the Sea of Silt. After 
wandering the wilderness and aiding people of 
good heart, Nerad was perhaps the first to attempt 
the transformation from preserver to avangion. 

Nerad ultimately came to a spectacular end, as 
the dragon hunted down and challenged him. The 
preserver was trapped and could not avoid the 
fight. Anticipating his defeat, he gave his most 
valued possession—the marvelous Psychome- 
tron—to one of his retainers and told her to flee 
with it. The woman subsequently took the gem to 
a Villichi community in the Tablelands. Since that 
time, the Psychometron has been used by the Vil- 
lichi on occasions when they needed its power to 
defend their community. 

The Psychometron is a psionic artifact, useful 
only in campaigns where psionics are employed. 
An Athasian character looking to follow in 
Nerad's or Korgunard s footsteps could be aided 
significantly by the Psychometron, Furthermore, 
the gem provides heroes with powerful defenses 
that could enable a group to challenge a sorcerer- 
king or one of the great monsters of the wastes. 
However, the Villichi believe the gem belongs to 
them and will eventually ask for its return. 

Constant Powers: The Psychometron radiates 
a 10-foot circle of +2 protection to the wielder’s 
saving throws and power scores in the felepathic 
ot metapsionic disciplines. It also functions as a 
receptacle containing 150 PSPs, which can power 
the owner's psionics (PSPs regenerate at the rate 
of 25 per hour). The psychometron radiates non- 
detection and obscures any attempt to sery the 
wielder, either psionically or magically, 

Invoked Powers: When the Psychometron is 
within the radius of a defiling spell, the gem pro- 
tects the earth from defilement, sacrificing | PSP 
for cach radial yard that would be destroyed. 

The Psychometron is an empowered item with 
the following disciplines installed: Aura Sight, 
Aversion, Awe, Complete Healing, Contact, Dis- 
placement, Energy Containment, Mind Bar, 
Mindlink, Radial Navigation, and Teleport, 

Curse: The Psychometron is imbued with the 
powerful personality of the avangion Nerad, so its 
owner is subject to artifact possession. The 
device seeks an end to slavery and oppression, 


demanding that the owner attempt to bring down 
the sorcerer-kings and the dragon. 
Suggested Means of Destruction: 
* Cause an earth drake to devour it. 
Let no light touch it for 99 years. 


Puppy Putty 
250 GP Value: 400 
Pouynenaon Newszine 82 
This material is found in small, scaled jars. Puppy 
putty is a black clay, somewhat cold and wet, but 
pleasing to the touch. To use puppy putty, a charac- 
ter must mold it into a round ball and press it firmly 
on the end of his nose. The putty will remain on the 
wearer for 1d4+1 hours, unless it is removed carlicr. 
One round after it has been applied to a nose, the 
character's sense of smell becomes remarkably acute 
and he or she is compelled to travel on hands and 
knees. The character gains the tracking proficiency 
while the putty is in place. Characters who already 
possess the proficiency temporarily gain a +3 bonus 
to the proficiency score. The wearer gains a +2 
bonus to surprise rolls. Further, a character wearing 
puppy putty gets +2 on saving throws vs. poison gas, 
due to the character's increased chance of noticing 
the gas and reacting before complete exposure, A jar 

of puppy putty usually contains four uses. 


XP Value: 


Pyramid Energy 
XP Value: GP Value: 
Kingdom of Nithia 

Throughout Nithia there are pyramids dotting 
the desert and badlands. Some are well known, 
such as those in the necropolis of Tarthis, 
located some two miles south of the city, Others 
have been hidden in the deep desert and bad- 
lands for ages, Pyramids are grand structures 
that seem to radiate great power. Foreigners are 
generally struck dumb with awe for the enig- 
matic Nithian pyramids. 

Almost all Nithians believe that one day, the 
dead will arise to walk the world again. This tale 
has been passed down throughout the ages since 
before the Nithians arrived in the Hollow World. 
For an equal time, great pyramids have been built 
to serve as burial tombs capable of spanning the 
ages until the time of rebirth at last arrives, It is 
believed that when that day comes, only those 
properly entombed will rise to take back their 
possessions, lands, and power, living an everlast- 
ing life. Some even claim that all will then be 
equals with the Immortals and live among them. 

+a 


* 919 a 


„Pyramid Energy r 


This belief is so strong that almost every Nithian 
would gladly dic to share a sarcophagus in the 
Pharaoh x tomb, even if his life were cut short to do 
it. The prime motivators for this are not so much 
love and respect for the Pharaohs as they are hope 
and greed—hope that onc may be selected by a 
dying Pharaoh to accompany him or her, and greed 
for the powers that may result from this ritual burial. 

As soon as a Pharaoh comes to power, one of 
the first acts he or she performs is the authoriza- 
tion for initial construction of a personal pyra- 
mid. This is a lengthy process, occasionally the 
Pharaoh dies before the tomb is complete. 

Pharaohs are not the only people who make 
pyramids, but they are the only ones who may 
authorize their construction. Few have the wealth 
and power to bring such a project to completion 
without the Pharaoh's aid. 

All this simply supports the fact that the Nithi- 
ans, though proud, are essentially a simplistic, 
superstitious people who are blind to the light of 
reason. They are obsessed with death. Only a 
backward, barbaric culture would promulgate the 
belief that flinging oneself into an open grave 
would impart ‘mystical powers’. 

Pyramid energy can be used to perform many 
acts, Other applications (and misuses) are outlined 
below. Of course, a pyramid energy collector is nec- 
essary to perform any task involving pyramid 
energy. If something is desired that is not on this list, 
the DM should determine if it is possible at all, and 
how much it costs, To do this, the DM may use the 
following examples as a base. Pyramid power can be 
used to perform almost anything associated with 
mysticism and magic, The primary uses of pyramid 
power involve household magic, and powering the 
engines of hover-chariots and the mighty hover- 
barges. Other more expensive uses of pyramid 
energy are listed below, along with their point costs. 


Use Cost 

Healing 2 points per round 
Control Statue 5 points per round 
Research 10 points per hour 
Create Undead Warrior“ 1000 points 
Activate Undead Warrior? 100 points 


* Used only by followers of Thanatos or Ranivorus. 


Healing: This use of pyramid energy allows 
the user to heal | point of damage for every 
2points of pyramid energy used. For most people, 
this means a swift drain on the days pyramid 


energy charge. However, when there is no other 
way to help the severely injured, many people use 
this power without hesitation. It is especially use- 
ful when used in conjunction with the five-point 
houschold spell, set bones. 

Control Statue: This application allows the 
user to “remote control” a statue into which a pyra- 
mid energy collector has been built. Using contro! 
statue, à statue can be made to walk around and 
perform simple tasks, like bashing one’s oppo- 
nents, Statues cannot speak, and have no intelli- 
gence, No statue smaller than man-sized can be 
controlled with this ability. Furthermore. the point 
cost given above for control statue is a median, 
based on a man-sized statuc. Individual strength, 
Hit Dice, damage, and pyramid point cost to run 
is adjusted based on their size as follows: 


Hit Points/ 
Size Str Dice Dmg Round 
3-6" 18 4-4 1-39 5 
711“ 18/50 6+ 4-6* 10 
12-24’ 20 10 9-11* 20 
25-50 23 20 2d8+11* 30 
51-100" 25 30 3410 -¹¹ 4 50 


* Or by weapon type. Strength bonuses apply 
when weapons are used, 


Human-sized statues usually have an AC of 6 
(due to being stone). The statue’s Armor Class 
may be adjusted by size and type of stone from 
which it is made. 

Research: This application allows a wizard or 
priest to access a “spirit library,” consulting with 
wise folk in the afterlife to gain insight into new 
magical spells. To use this skill, one must first 
invest 10 points of pyramid energy per hour of 
“consultation” then roll on the following table, or 


pick a result as you see fit: 
Roll Result 
1 Spirits cannot be bothered. No assistance 
available. 
2 Receive a small hint. Reduce research time 
by one day. 
3 A capricious wizard (or priest) lied. Dou- 
ble the research time. 
4 Contacted the wrong spirit. The spell is 
successful, but add X to research time 


5 Contacted an eccentric individual. The 
spell yields results are different from what 
was intended (DM adjudication). 


4087 
= 920 X 


6 The spell is very important in the scheme 
of things. Halve research time. 

7 Cosmic censors pull a fast one. Quarter the 
research time, and reduce spell effects by 
half. 

Cosmic censors really dislike the spell. 
Everything works (special effects, light, 
and sound), but the spell is a dud. 

9 Hard work pays off. Research time reduced 
to 4 of original amount. 

10 Immortal sees the spell research and says, 
Neat!“ Research time cut to overnight. 


Create Undead Warrior: This magic is used 
by followers of the Immortals of Entropy to cre- 
ate guardians for crypts, strongholds, and other 
places of power. For detailed information on the 
processes by which a body is mummified, consult 
your local library's Egyptology section. However, 
in game terms the process involves special 
enchanted lacquers, and a complex curing 
process. During this time, the mummy is bathed 
in pyramid energy (100 points per week) for nine 
weeks. At the end of this time, the final 100 
points are shunted into an amulet, placing the 
warrior under the creator's control, 

Undead warriors fight and cast spells at the 
same levels of ability as when they were alive. 
Movement rates are also the same. They react to 
priestly “turning undead” as a vampire. They are 
also immune to spells such as charm. Due to the 
enchanted lacquers and special drying processes 
used in their creation, all undead warriors have a 
base Armor Class of 2. They can wear armor and 
use the same weapons they used in life. 

In combat, an undead warrior is a tireless fight- 
ing machine. It does not check morale, nor does it 
give quarter. If the party chooses to retreat or run 
away, it pursues, not stopping until it either destroys 
the party to the last character or is itself destroyed. 

Destroying an undead warrior can be a difficult 
proposition, Simply beating on the construct may 
damage it, but the pieces remain animate, imbued 
with a sense of deadly purpose. Burning the thing 
is an option, since the lacquers used in the undead 
warrior's construction are quite flammable. The 
final option is to destroy the thing's control amulet, 
which causes the warrior to crumble into dust. 

Control Undead Warrior: This magic is the 
“spark” needed to set undead warrior into 
deadly action. As shown by the point cost, this is 
an investment of power. Such a thing is not 


without drawbacks there is a 25% chance that 
the warrior is "flawed" and attacks its owner 
upon activation, 

The pyramids often have certain magical 
effects on those who venture within them. A 
sample list of these effects follows: 


Turning undead always fails. 

Mummy y Curse (see below). 

Anyone who takes treasure loses 1 XP 
for every 10 gp taken. 

4 No Ist- level spells will function. 

5 All spells have a 25 % chance of func- 
tioning at twice the normal power or 
duration, 

6 All spells have a 25% chance of failing. 


Roll Effect 
l 
2 
3 


At the DM's option, a mummy 3 curse causes 
would-be tomb robbers to make a saving throw vs. 
death magic, or fall ill and slowly die over the 
course of the next 30 days. Another curse effect may 
cause the victims to go insane and wander aimlessly 
through the tomb, to be picked off one by one by the 
tomb defenses. Returning the treasure and apolo- 
gizing sincerely to the person entombed negates all 
negative effects. Feel free to invent other fiendish 
manifestations of the dreaded mummy & curse. 


Queen Ehlissa’s 


Marvelous Nightingale 
XP Value: 22,500 GP Value: 112,500 
Eldritch Wizardry 
This bejewelled songbird seems to actually spring 
to life when its mechunism is activated, The crea- 
ture is held within a fine mesh of golden wires, 
much like the cage of a real bird, and when set in 
motion the nightingale opens its glittering wings, 
hops to the highest perch in the cage and per- 
forms, It is rumored that the eyes of this artifact 
shoot forth scintillating rays of brilliant color, 
each color having a different effect; its songs 
likewise are able to work magical wonders; and if 
the rays and songs are directed in combination 

powerful spells are supposedly woven. 

It is known that the device throws forth a pro- 
tective sphere, preventing detection or magical 
(or psionic) intrusion in a 30-foot radius. Those 
within this sphere are reported to neither hunger 
nor thirst as long as they remain within. Queen 
Ehlissa bent all to her will with the enchantments 
of the device, and throughout her reign of several 
centuries the nightingale never escaped its con- 
finement. The nightingale has the following abili- 
ties and penalties: 

Detect evil (or good if evil, or both if neutral). 
* Speak with animals. 

* Generate a double effect s/ow spell twice a day. 
* There is an increasing chance that the power 
confined in the object will break free, take 
over the wiclder of the item by destroying the 
individual's soul, and then (masquerading as 
the person) kill all of the hirelings and associ- 
ates of the person. The chance should range 
from 1% to 4%, cumulative, per use of the 
nem 

User may restore | lost level (as in restoration 
spell) once per week (perhaps one drained 
from a nearby friendly player character). 


Queen Ehlissa's 
Marvelous Nightingale I 
XP Value: — GP Value: 
Rook of Artifacts 


With crystal cyes, tiny golden feathers delicately 
layered over its body, and a small windup key on 
its underside, Queen Ehlissa & marvelous nightin- 
gale is a beautiful golden songbird mounted in a 
golden cage. 


Queen Ehlissa’s Marvelous Nightingale II 


STAs 


Last in a line of benevolent rulers, Queen 
Ehlissa treated everyone in her domain fairly, and 
no one lived in poverty or want. Having no fam- 
ily, Queen Ehlissa raised song birds, her favorite 
being a nightingale that she loved dearly. Each 


night she would sit and listen for hours as her 


beloved bird would sing the most beautiful songs. 
Sadly, the nightingale died, on her birthday no 
less. Devastated, Queen Ehlissa went into mourn- 
ing. Her subjects, fearing for their beloved qucen, 
sent for their greatest artisans, bards, wizards, 
and craftsmen, For one year they labored, and on 
Ehlissa’s next birthday, they gave her the mechan- 
ical nightingale, The music that came forth was 
so pure and lovely that it soothed the queen and 
her sorrow melted away. 

The nightingale can be used by anyone and 
provides excellent role-playing opportunities 
Perhaps Queen Ehlissa’s land is overrun by a bar- 
barian horde, which makes off with the beloved 
nightingale. She hires a group of would-be heroes 
to retrieve her stolen songbird. 

Invoked Powers: A narrow groove with five 
notched slots is embedded in the bottom of the 

4089 


7 923 z 


~ Quill Pen of Copying r 


cage. By moving a small lever into different 
notches, the nightingale plays five different songs 
each associated with a power. Indoors, the area of 
effect is the entire room; otherwise it is as if cast 
by a 20th-level character. 


Slot Power 

1 Bless (day). 

2 Music of the spheres (5/day). 

3 Unceasing vigilance of the holy sentinel 
(1/week). 

4 Zone of truth (A/week, no saving throw). 

5 Emotion (Uday), If the emotion is not 
chosen, one is selected randomly and 
lasts 2d4 rounds. Selected emotions last 
as long as concentration is maintained. 


Curse: Anyone possessing the nightingale 
becomes increasingly childlike. Monsters cause 
the PC to flee in panic for 2d4 rounds, Each 
night there is a 50% chance that the owner is 
too frightened to sleep, preventing healing and 
the memorization of spells. Should sleep be lost 
for 3 consecutive nights the owner is incoherent 
and sluggish, with attributes dropping by 1 
point. The owner must always speak the com- 
plete truth. For cach month that the nightingale 
is possessed, one experience level is lost, Once 
the nightingale is given up, these negative 
effects are gradually reversed over the same 
amount of time, 


Suggested Means of Destruction: 

It must be given to the king of songbirds, 

lt must be smashed by a tinker gnome with the 
strength of a titan. 

lt must be exposed to the most wretched cord 
playable on Heward $ mystical organ. 


Quill Pen 
A quill is a large feather that can be dipped in ink 
and used as a writing tool. Quills are most often 
found in the possession of sages, scholars, spell 
casters, bookkeepers, and where research or writ- 
ing materials are common, (See also Pen.) 


of Copying 
XP Value: 5,000 GP Value: 25,000 
Dungeons & Dracons Rules Cyclopedia 
A quill is a large feather that can be dipped in ink 
and used as a writing use. Usable only by spell- 
casters, this quill can be commanded to copy any 


spell on a scroll. It copies only one spell per week 
at most. The original scroll must be burned, and 
the ashes mixed with rare ink (of 1,000 gp cost), 
The quill is then placed on a blank scroll along 
with an inkwell containing the prepared ink. 
Upon command, the quill starts to write, creating 
two identical spells on the scroll instead of the 
single original. If the scroll burnt contains two or 
more spells, only one spell is copied—either the 
lowest level spell or (if more than one is the same, 
low level) a randomly selected spell, The quill 
cannot copy protection scrolls or any other writ- 
ing except spell scrolls. 

Unfortunately, there is a 25% chance per use 
that the quill suddenly drains its ink, spoiling the 
entire scroll upon which it is writing. The blot 
thus created cannot be removed from the parch- 
ment by any means but a wish, 


of Erasing 
XP Value: — GP Value: 1,500 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

This quill looks like any other quill. However, 
when moved, it causes one scroll carried or 
owned by the victim moving it (regardless of 
range) to be erased, destroying all the magic 
inside it. If no scrolls are carried or owned, the 
quill destroys one spell in a spell book carried or 
owned; failing that, it erases a magical book car- 
ried or owned. If it can find nothing of the vic- 
tim’s to erase, it turns on the creature closcst to 
the victim and in the same order continues 
searching until it can crase something. The quill 
functions each time it is touched and continues to 
destroy written magical materials for as long as it 
is held, until three scrolls or writings are 
destroyed. After crasing three times, the quill 
crases itself and disintegrates. 


of Forgery 
XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 20,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

This quill may be commanded to imitate any 
writing with perfect accuracy, A written sample 
containing at least 10 words in the style to be 
copied must be burned and the ashes mixed with 
the ink to be used. The quill can perfectly forge a 
written text of 100 words or less per use. It may 
be used only once per week. 


4092 


£ 924 z 


Quill Pen, Kuroth’s tl 


Kuroth’s 


XP Value: 5,500 GP Value: 27,500 
DUNGEON Master Guide 

There can be little dispute that the master thief 
Kuroth was the most successful of his profession, 
and several sages attribute his performance to the 
acquisition of a writing instrument of unknown 
antiquity that now bears Kuroth’s name. This 
Quill reportedly draws and writes infallibly upon 
command, depicting whatever its possessor sces 
or speaks accordingly. It also is supposed to be 
able to find treasure (as a potion of treasure find- 
ing) one time per month. 


Kuroth’s II 
XP Value: — GP Value: 
Book of Artifacts 
Kuroth & quill is made from a white feather taken 
from the wing of a full-grown male griffon—its 
writing nib is made of gold. 

During the Age of Veth, beyond the Wasted 
Lands, an apprentice wizard named Baalice, 
possessing great potential and little discipline, 
was determined to prove his abilities to his 
master. On a day when the apprentices were 
alone, Baalice snuck into the master’s study and 
used his spell book. He tried what appeared to 
be a simple summoning, but the spell went awry, 


and two dretches arrived from the Abyss. Baal- 
ice managed to send them back, but his right 
arm was mangled and his best friend, Julian, 
was killed. Although his arm was healed, Baal- 
ice believed it to be permanently crippled. The 
torment of his failure and his friend's death 
became overwhelming. Baalice came to believe 
that the only way to find peace was to ultimately 
right the wrongs he had inflicted, so he dedi- 
cated himself to amassing arcane knowledge. 
The drive to correct the situation became an 
obsession, though, until he was convinced that 
the only way to succeed was to achieve immor- 
tality. Baalice decided to become a lich. 

Once transformed, Baalice took up residence 
in a lonely stone tower by the sea. He strove to fix 
the damage he had done, but nothing ever set 
things completely right. Over the years the lich’s 
obsession grew, until a possible solution formed 
in his mind. For three decades Baalice spent all 
his energies researching and creating a writing 
instrument capable of altering events. When he 
finished, he believed he could finally set the 
events right again. All too soon, though, he dis- 
covered that each change he made became twisted 
in some way and often led to greater problems 
even for someone of his powers, In sorrow and 
rage, Baalice planned to destroy the quill. 

One afternoon, Kuroth, an able thief, wandered 
into an inn near Baalice’s tower. He happened to 
overhear a table of local folk discussing strange 
happenings at the tower. Upon inquiry, Kuroth 
learned that during the previous two months the 
stone tower had transformed into a mighty 
fortress, smoldering ruins, and then back again 
into its original form. Seeking the source of these 
great curiosities, the thief slipped into the stone 
tower and stole four rubies, one sapphire, and an 
engraved ebony box containing the quill and 
some fine parchment paper. While recording the 
items stolen, Kuroth accidentally wrote four sap- 
phires and four rubies, To his amazement, there 
were now four of each gem on the table before 
him, Kuroth was quick to realize that the pen was 
the source of the tower's mysteries. Not wishing 
to attract undue attention, Kuroth immediately 
wrote, “The previous owner of this pen believes 
that the quill pen, four rubies, and one sapphire 
were lost.” Not certain that this would be clear 
enough he wrote, “This quill pen is the rightful 
property of Kuroth, and shall from now on be 


known as Kuroth $ quill.” 
40 


9 


2 


5 


~ Quill Pen of Law 


Soon Kuroth sat at the head of the local thieves’ 
guild and had many interests extending through- 
out the region. After his death, many of Kuroth’s 
closest associates shook their heads as they told 
of the guild masters’ insistence upon keeping the 
guild’s books and ledgers himself. 

Over the years, the quill pen passed from hand- 
to-hand and ended with a caravan driver. He sold 
it to Sharmana the merchant, mumbling some- 
thing about how his best team had died of what 
he wrote down. Not believing the superstitious 
man, Sharmana promptly shelved it and forgot 
about it. Six months later, his beloved daughter 
accidentally drowned in the lake. Months later, 
still bereaved, Sharmana wrote in his journal, “I 
wish my daughter back at my side.” The popular 
folk tale tells of the decayed remains of Shar- 
mana’s daughter leaving the graveyard. 

Kuroth & quill has the power to alter the course 
of a campaign—it is the equivalent of giving a 
character an unlimited number of twisted wishes. 
For this reason, the PCs should have limited or no 
contact with the quill, and should strive to pre- 
vent anyone else from using it as well. 

To avoid all possible confusion, the DM 
should have any players actually write down 
what their characters wish to write with the 
quill. If a character does not command the pen 
to write infallibly, any and all errors written are 
subject to interpretation and substitution by the 
DM (see examples under Curse). It is important 
to remember that no wish is innocent; all have 
consequences. 

A possible adventure might have the party 
returning to a small fishing village after van- 
quishing a horde of monsters, only to find that it 
is now a massive fortress bustling with activity. 
As they unravel this mystery, more events are 
rewritten, and the one of the PCs might even sud- 
denly change or shift—perhaps becoming a 
member of the king’s staff or maybe a lowly 
stable servant, This PC will not know the rest of 
the characters, believing in this new life com- 
pletely. The rest of the group will have to find a 
way to rectify this, while the DM plays that char- 
acter as an NPC for a while, Of course, anyone 
with an inkling of the pen’s powers will want to 
possess it for themselves, so preventing unscrupu- 
lous individuals from acquiring it is an adventure 
in itself. 

Constant Powers: The user gains the benefits 
of a comprehend languages spell as long as the 


926 


pen is in hand. Any illiterate gains the nonweapon 
read/write proficiency for Ida hours (1/day). 

Invoked Powers: The user of the quill is able 
to alter reality by writing it down on a piece of 
parchment, similar to the 9th-level wizard spell 
wish. The quill cannot be used more frequently 
than every 12 hours (6/week). The pen also writes 
or sketches an infallible description of what the 
writer sees or speaks upon command. The quill 
functions as a potion of treasure finding while 
held (1/month). 

Curse: While the quill grants wishes and alters 
reality, there is always a price to be paid; for 
every boon there is a bane. Illegible or smudged 
words are omitted from the request entirely, Mis- 
spelled words are substituted to the best of the 
quill’s ability. For example, if a character writes, 
“I wish to have a roster for all of the taxpayers in 
this county,” and accidentally misspells “roster” 
as “rooster,” the PC is going to be overwhelmed 
with crowing roosters from all the surrounding 
farms. 

Even correctly written requests have a “mon- 
key’s paw” effect. The pen does not create 
things; rather, it draws upon existing material to 
grant the wish. Ifa party requests a vast fortune, 
they could find themselves teleported inside the 
King's treasury. A wizard might write for desired 
magical spells, awakening in a heap of ancient 
tomes, At the same time, a nearby kingdom suf- 
fers the wrath of an archmage whose library has 
disappeared. 


Suggested Means of Destruction: 

* The words “Kuroth & quill was never made” 
must be written 100,000 times. 

The lich Baalice must be located, his memory 
of the pen restored, and it must be returned to 
him. 

The quill must be taken back in time and given 
to the apprentice Julian at the moment of his 
death, 


of Law 
XP Value: 7,000 GP Value: 35,000 
Tome of Magic 
This magical pen is used by despots and good 
rulers alike to ensure that their laws and procla- 
mations are obeyed, Anyone reading a posted 
proclamation or law that was written with one of 
these pens must obey the law, regardless of 
whether it is a good law. 
4098 


; Quill Fen of Scroll Creation y> 


This effect applies only to persons who actu- 
ally see the written message. If a person knows 
about the law but has not read a notice written 
with the quill, he or she still has the option to 
obcy or break the 
law. Once read, however, it must be obeyed. 

The magical effect is limited in that only the 
three most recent laws written with the quill 
maintain this power. Laws written prior to the 
most recent three can still be law, but citizens are 
not compelled to obey them. 

Creatures with 15 or greater Intelligence and 
12 or more Hit Dice or levels are entitled to a sav- 
ing throw vs. spell when viewing the proclama- 
tion, If the saving throw is successful, the effect is 
negated and the person is leſi to his or her own 
moral decisions. 


of Longwriting 
XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 20,000 


DRAGON Magazine 30 

The quill of longwriting is a writing instrument 
that Orlow developed to eliminate the bother and 
mess of inkwells. It has no limit to the number of 
pages or words it can write, 


of Necromancy 
XP Value: 6,000 GP Value: 30,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

This quill can write the words of the dead. It must 
be filled with special ink containing powdered 
bone (100 gp cost per use) and then placed along 
with a parchment on the grave or body of any dead 
creature, When preparations are complete, the 
command word is spoken; the quill then creates a 
speak with dead spell effect as if a priest of 21st 
level. The user may ask three questions and the 
answers from the dead creature are written on the 
parchment by the quill, Other normal restrictions 
as described in the spell, particularly to matters of 
alignment, apply. The quill may be used once per 
day as long as the proper ink is available. 


Porcupine 
XP Value: — GP Value: 500 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
This quill is identical to a quill of forgery. How- 
ever, when used, it changes into a giant, magical 
porcupine (AC 4; HD 3; MV 9; #AT 1; Dmg Ida 
(bite) + quills; ML 12; AL N; if bite hits, 1d6 
quills attack, each inflicting Ida additional points 
of damage). The porcupine attacks the quill user 


immediately. Attack rolls are made normally, but 
this magical creature inflicts maximum damage 
(four points per bite and quill) per hit; it is also 
immune to all charm and hold spells. 


of Pyrophilius 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 6,000 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 82 
More than two dozen quills arè known to have 
been enchanted by a mighty magician living on 
Abcir-Toril. Each quill is made from a Ki-Rin 
feather, and the spint of a sprite has been forcibly 
trapped within them. The sprite listens to any 
intelligible conversation within normal hearing 
distance and writes it down on the nearest piece 
of paper, or any other suitable substance. The 
quill never runs out of ink, and cannot move, 
other than to write. Any language that is heard by 
the quill can be transcribed, being written in the 
language being spoken. If more than one person 
is speaking at a time, the quill transcribes the 
loudest voice. The quill is activated by a specific 
command word, and can be deactivated by restat- 
ing the command word, or physically destroying 


of Scribbling 

XP Value: — GP Value: 1,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
This item appears to be a quill of copying but 
writes unintelligible gibberish. This does not 
become apparent until after the original scroll is 
burnt and mixed with ink. The original scroll can- 
not be regained from the parchment by any means 
but a wish. 


of Scroll Creation 
XP Value GP Value 
Type I (with ink): 500 1,000 
Type | (without ink): 250 600 
Type Il: 100/charge 200/charge 
DraGoN Magazine 99 


This enchanted writing tool is of great use to a 
mage or specialist wizard attempting to inscribe 
a magical spell scroll. It gives its user a 10% 
bonus to the chance of successfully writing a 
spell onto a scroll. The quill is only good for six 
uses (six spells), and loses its magical property 
when the sixth spell is finished. Each usage 
counts against the quill's capacity, whether or 
not the spell in question was successfully trans- 


ferred to the scroll. 
410) 


O A ae. 


927 


a ĩ •—ß?[i a 


~ Quill Pen of Swift Writing A 


If the quill is used along with a special ink that 
is attuned to the item, the chance of success in the 
preparation of a scroll spell is increased by an 
additional 10%, The manufacture of the ink is a 
costly and time-consuming process, taking at 
least a week and requiring ingredients of at least 
1,000 gp in value to make enough ink to last for 
six usages. This special ink must be mixed with 
the ink that a particular scroll normally requires. 
A bottle of this ink may be discovered along with 
the quill, but the ink is never found by itself. 

A second type of quill of scroll creation does 
not require ink. The quill magically creates the 
ink it requires to write the magical spells on 
scrolls. This type of quill can write 1d100 spell 
levels of spells before its magic is spent, Each 
spell level is considered a “charge” in the case of 
figuring Experience Points and relative gold 
piece value, 


of Swift Writing 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
Dragon Magazine 73 
Using this quill pen, anyone can write twice as 
fast as normal, with no loss of legibility. These 
pens are usually found in lots of 2d6, since the 
quills do wear out. The pens are appropriate for 
normal writing tasks, but not for the magical 
scribing of (for instance) scrolls or spell books. 


of Transcription 
XP Value: 4,000 GP Walue: 20,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

This quill may be commanded to write down all 
words spoken within 30 feet of it. The words tran- 
scribed by the quill appear in the language spo- 
ken and may require translation. It transcribes all 
normal words, but if any magical words are spo- 
ken, only the name of the spell or effect is tran- 
scribed, not the spell itself. It tramseribes until 
commanded to stop and otherwise functions 
indefinitely, stopping only when it runs out of ink 
or parchment, When multiple voices are tran- 
scribed, the quill identifies each only by race and 
sex, numbering them in the order heard (human 
male #1, gargoyle #4, and so on); it writes all 
such nontranscribed remarks in Common The 
quill’s detection abilities cannot be blocked by 
any means; it hears and transcribes even if 
encased. It may be used most effectively with an 
everfull ink well and a parchment of looping. 


of Truth 
XP Value: 1,500 GP Value: 6,500 
DraGoN Magazine 73 

This is a metal pen, made of a near golden material, 
and having a replaceable, quill tip. Only statements 
believed to be true can be written with this pen. 
Windscribe 

GP Value: 10,000 
Black Opal Eye 
This magical quill is an intelligent item. If asked 
a direct yes or no question, it will answer accu- 
rately, Five questions may be asked altogether 
(treat as a legend lore spell). 


XP Value: 2,000 


Wondrous Writing Set 
XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 15,000 
Oriental Adventures 

This magical writing set comes in a lacquered 
box and contains a brush, inking stone, and 
inkwell with ink. When used for writing, the set 
improves the character's calligraphy proficiency 
by +2. Furthermore, if the character has a sample 
of another person's handwriting, he or she can 
create a perfect forgery of that persons handwrit- 
ing, provided a successful calligraphy profi- 
ciency roll is made. The inkwell contains enough 
ink to write 1d4+1 pages, 


Zellot’s Quill of Law 
XP Value: 8,000 GP Value: 40,000 
1992 Fantasy Collector Card 385 

Zellot’s quill works pretty much the same as any 
quill of law: those who read edicts written with it 
are compelled to obey unless they possess cither 
15 or greater Intelligence or 12 or more levels or 
Hit Dice. Also, only the last three laws written 
have the compelling power. When it became 
obvious that people were deliberately avoiding 
Zellot’s posts, however, he had to take additional 
steps to enforce his laws, Now thanks to a high- 
level alchemist Zellot's quill writes in a Aypnotic 
pattern—anyone who so much as sees the parch- 
ment on the wall must successfully save vs. spell 
or be irresistibly drawn to read it. 


Quiver 

Quivers are containers used to hold arrows, quar- 
rels, javelins, bolts, and similar missile weapons. 
Quivers usually have a strap that allows them to 
be slung over the back or attached to a belt. A 
plain quiver is usually included in the basic price 
of a load of missiles. 

4107 


5 928 


‘ Quiver of Wrong Returmng 


of Arrow Storing 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 4,000 
Deacon Magazine 133 
This quiver appears to be a normal quiver, 
although it has magical properties much like a 
bag of holding. Up to 200 arrows can be held in 
the quiver without adding any further encum- 
brance to the bowman (the quiver itself weighs as 
much as a normal, empty quiver). The arrows in 
the quiver are easily accessible and may be of any 
sort—though finding the exact, magical arrow 
desired may prove difficult, 


Black 
XP Value: 1,000 
Black Courser 
This quiver contains one black arrow +3, which 
is replaced whenever it is used. After a hit is 
made, roll 1d4 to find the arrows effect: 


GP Value: 5,000 


Roll Effect 
l Death (save vs. death magic for 3d10 
damage). 


2 Magic drain (vietims' magic armor 
becomes normal armor, ability to cast 
spells is lost for 24 hours). 

3 Victim paralyzed for 1d10 turns 

Victim explodes (save vs. death magic 
for 5d10 fire damage), 


Unfortunately, every time one of these arrows is 
fired, the urcher's hand blackens and withers slightly, 
reducing his Dexterity by | point permanently, 


of Ehlonna 
XP Value: | 500 GP Value: 10,000 
Dunaton Master Guide 

This appears to be a typical arrow container capa- 
die of holding about 20 arrows. It has an aura of 
alteration if defect magie is cast, and examination 
shows that it has three distinct portions. The first 
and smallest one can contain up to 60 objects of the 
same general size and shape as long bow arrows. 

The second, slightly longer, compartment 
holds up to 18 objects of the same general size 
and shape as a javelin. The third and longest por- 
tion of the case contains as many as six objects of 
the same gencral size and shape as a bow—spears 
or staves, for example. Such a quiver is always 
found empty, but once the owner has filled it, it 
can be commanded to produce any stored items 
each round, 


In a DRAGONLANCE Campaign: The quiver of 
Ehlonna does not exist on Ansalon. 


Frief’s Magical 

XP Value: 1,100 GP Value: 4,500 
Du ac Magazine Issue 133 

Frief $ magical quiver looks like a normal quiver, 
but radiates magic. If found on a captured or slain 
opponent, it contains 3d4 normal (70%) or magi- 
cal arrows +7 (30%), If found in a treasure hoard, 
it contains only 3d4 normal arrows, as the magi- 
cally created ones lose their powers if they 
haven't been used for four weeks. 

Frieſù magical quiver functions as a normal 
quiver until it contains only one magical arrow of 
any sort. When only one magic arrow is lef, that 
arrow disappears and is replaced by 12 arrows with 
a magical bonus one less than that of the original 
arrow—an arrow +2 is replaced by 12 arrows +]; 
an arrow +/ is replaced by 12 magical arrows with 
no attack bonus (but useful against monsters like 
lycanthropes or gargoyles); a magical arrow with 
no bonus is replaced by 12 normal arrows, and so 
on. This continues until only normal arrows are left, 
but only one replacement occurs per day. The 
quiver does have one drawback; if an arrow of slay- 
ing is the arrow that would be replaced, 12 cursed 
arrows =| appear, Also, under no conditions can the 
PC get experience points for the created arrows. 


Never Empty Quiver 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 10,000 
Kare-Tur 
The Glass Warrior, detailed under the Crystal 
Warriors entry, carnes this magical quiver, allow- 
ing it to have unlimited missile weapons at its dis- 
posal. The quiver magically creates whatever type 
of arrow or crosshow bolt is required by the user. 


of Returning 
XP Value: 1,500 GP Value: 10,000 
New Item 
A missile fired from this quiver always returns to 
it, ready for a second shot. 


of Wrong Returning 
XP Value: — GP Value: 500 


New ltem 
Missiles taken from this quiver and fired return to 
it—but they're always the wrong ones. If a cross- 
bow bolt is fired, an arrow returns; an arrow 
returns a javelin, which, at least, is useful. 


Rabbit's Foot 
XP Value; 100 GP Value: 500 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
If worn visibly on outer clothing or armor, this 
item gives the user a bonus of +1 to all saving 
throws, However, any herbivores secing the item 
take an instant dislike to the wearer, having a -2 
penalty to reactions 


Rag of Drying 
XP Value: 250 GP Value: 1,250 
DRAGON Magazine 30 
The rag of drying absorbs and teleports into the 
ocean, one gallon of any noncaustic, biodegrad- 
able liquid per day. 


Rainbow Scarf of Sinbad 
XP Value: GP Value: — 
DUNGEONS & Deacons Master Set 
The success of the famous adventurer Sinbad the 
Sailor (whose whereabouts and cven existence is 
now dubious) is said to have been caused by this 
simple item of apparel. Especially made to aid 
the Epic Hero on the way to Immortality, this 
device must be worn at all times. It may bring 
luck and intelligence, but it will bring hazardous 
adventure as well if even a tenth of the legends 

are truc. 

This is a silk scarf, 2 feet square, decorated in 
swirls of rainbow colors. 

The artifact is not active when found. If it is 
worn while the user travels by sea, the powers of 
the scarf may be read in passing sca mists, by 
using both read magic and detect invisible spells, 
at the maximum rate of one power per hour. 

Any power revealed can be produced by 
thought alone, without uttering any command 
words. However, the Intelligence 18 power is pro- 
duced automatically whenever open locks is 
called forth, unless the user specifies otherwise. 
Suggested Powers: 

Cause Fear 

Bless 

Container (1,000 pounds; Duration six hours.) 
Open Locks (75% success.) 

Saving throw bonus (+2 bonus.) 

Intelligence bonus (Increase to 18) 


Suggested Handicap: When the scarf is first 
worn, the user's Wisdom drops by 4 points 


Suggested Penalty: Ida hostile monsters of 
some kind magically appear within 30 feet of the 
user. Select or randomly decide any monster from 
I to 12 Hit Dice. 


Rakasta Tea 
XP Value: 100 GP Value: 500 
Rage of the Rakasta 

Although strict carnivores and fierce warriors, 
the rakasta are also a highly civilized people, The 
rituals that they have created around tea cere- 
montes are complex and, in some cases, magical, 
Whenever a DM is rolling to generate treasure for 
a monster that is killed and the results call for that 
enemy to have a magical potion, a packet of mag- 
ical tea leaves has been found instead. Although 
the effects of the tea are the same as the potion, 
the characters must spend a 1d4+! rounds heat- 
ing water and steeping the tea leaves before they 
can use it and gain the benefits, 


4118 


WWA 


931 


Rake of Climbing 


—̃ AR R 


Rake 
A rake is a common farming tool, often made of 
wood, but sometimes having metal prongs. The 
handle is 3 to 5 feet long, and the 2d10 prongs 
may be stiff or flexible. Magical rakes have stiff 
metal prongs, sct in a row. 


of Climbing 

XP Value: 500 GP Value: 2,500 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
This rake will, on command, lengthen as much as 
30 feet. If the prongs can be used to catch some 
outcropping or ledge, the user may hold onto the 
rake and command it to shorten, providing easy 
passage up most sheer surfaces, It may be used to 
descend by hanging from it and commanding it to 
lengthen. 


Rake of Iron 

XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 12,000 
Gods, Demigods, & Heroes 
This item appears 3 feet in length but because of 
its magical origin and purpose it can elongate to 
as far as the user wishes. This rake was used by 
Lemmikainen’s mother in recovering his body 
from deep under water. There is a 10% chance 
per turn of “raking” out the desired item (if it is 
there). 


of Retrieval 
XP Value: 200 GP Value: 1,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

This rake lengthens on command in a manner 
similar to a rake of climbing. However, if it is 
touched to open water (pool, lake, ocean, etc.) 
while lengthened, it can be further commanded. 
If the user describes an item known or hoped to 
be in the water and within 360 yards, the rake 
lengthens further, searching for the lost item for 
one hour, and then shortens to normal size. If 
the lost item was within range, it is dragged out 
by the rake. Though the rake cannot retrieve a 
creature, it can be commanded to get an item 
securely fastened to a lost creature (such as a 
lost character's armor) by dragging the creature 
out with it. The rake may be used once per day. 
If used in any large body of salt water, there is a 
10% chance per use that it will attract a large 
monster, such as a sca serpent, sca dragon, or 
other denizen of the sca. 


Ship 
XP Value: — GP Value: 1,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

A ship rake looks like and functions as a rake of 
retrieval in all respects, However, if taken aboard 
a ship or boat of any kind, disaster occurs, When 
it next approaches land, the ship's hull crumbles 
in spite of other protections and takes double its 
number of hull points in damage. A remove curse 
spell cast upon the rake (not the ship) destroys the 
rake and removes the curse from the vessel; only 
a wish can cancel the effect while leaving the rake 
intact. Thus, the destruction or loss of the rake 
virtually dooms the vessel. 


of Smoothing 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 2,500 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

This rake can be used to remove all traces of the 
user s footsteps, whether indoors or outdoors, no 
matter how clean and uncluttered the area. It 
affects only traces on the ground or floor. If the 
user is the last of a group, the traces of the entire 
group may be removed. 


of Tracking 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

This rake appears to be a rake of smoothing, but 
the user's (or groups’) traces reappear in Ida 
hours and may be easily seen or smelled by any 
animal or intelligent creature, even if the original 
traces were few. 


Razor 
A razor is a small straight blade used to shave the 
hair off the face or legs. As a weapon, it is gener- 
ally useless since it requires such close quarters 
to properly function. As a throwing weapon, how- 
ever, it is totally useless. 


Baltron’s 
GP Value: 2,000 
Baltron’s Beacon 
The razor is magically sharp (as a sword of 
sharpness), but cannot cut living flesh. It is use- 
less as a weapon but excellent for shaving. 


XP Value: 500 


ans 


s 3 


9 


2 


Regalia of Might 


O es 


of Close Shaving 
XP Value: 100 GP Value: 10,000 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 82 
Prized by the nobility, these straight-edged razors 
are made of platinum and encrusted with dia- 
monds. This is a blade +/, allowing the user to 
shave with little chance marring his or her fuce 
ifa perverse dwarf female uses it. Characters 
shaved with the razor gain a +1 Charisma bonus 
for that day. The razor is also useful in combat, 


functioning as a small knife. 
of Truth 

XP Value: 800 GP Value: 4,000 
Land of Fate 


This blade appears as a barber's razor, and has 
no benefit in combat. However, if used in the 
traditional fashion, it can be used as a tool of 
interrogation. When used to shave, the razor 
nicks the subject every time a lie is spoken (the 
nick is small and causes no loss of blood). In 
this fashion, a barber may gain information 
from the customer and judge its truthfulness, 
After the third cut, the razor cannot function for 
two days. 


Regalia of Might 
XP Value GP Value 
Crown of LG: 10,000 50,000 
Crown of LN: 10,000 50,000 
Crown of LE: 10,000 50,000 
Crown of NG: 10,000 50,000 
Crown of N: 10,000 50,000 
Crown of NE: 10,000 50.000 
Crown of CG: 10,000 50.000 
Crown of CN: 10,000 50.000 
Crown of CE: 10,000 50.000 
Orb of LG: 20,000 100,000 
Orb of LN: 20,000 100,000 
Orb of LE: 20,000 100,000 
Orb of NG: 20,000 100,000 
Orb of N; 20,00 100,000 
Orb of NE: 20,000 100,000 
Orb of CG: 20,000 100,000 
Orb of CN: 20,000 100,000 
Orb of CE: 20,000 100,000 
Scepter of LG: 30,000 150,000 
Scepter of LN: 30,000 150,000 
Scepter of LE: 30,000 150,000 
Scepter of NG: 30,000 150,000 
Scepter of N: 30,000 150,000 
Scepter of NE: 30,000 150,000 


Scepter of CG: 30,000 150,000 
Scepter of CN: 30,000 150,000 
Scepter of CE; 30,000 150,000 


Eldritch Wizardry 

There are several sets of the crown, orb and 
scepter, one for cach alignment. They are scat- 
tered across the world and well hidden. Each item 
is only useful to one who is of the same align- 
ment as the item, others take 2d12 points of dam- 
age when touching it. The crowns of the various 
alignments look very similar, as do the orbs and 
scepters. Obviously a detect evil (or good) spell 
has no effect on them, They have the following 
abilities and penalties: 


Orb of Lawful Good: 

Levitation, 

ESP 

Crown of Lawful Good: 

Charm monster with -3 on saving throws 
twice a day, 

Speak with dead. 

User immune to disease. 

Sleep (also affects up to one creature of any 
level), 3 times a day. 

Scepter of Lawful Good: 

User has no need to eat or drink. 

Detect magic. 

Stone flesh twice a day. 

Two Lawful Good items: 

All powers of the two owned items. 

As long as user has artifact on his or her per- 
son, he or she acts as a magic drainer. Any 
magic directed at the owner has no effect, the 
user cannot employ magic, and any magical 
item that touches any part of his or her body 
permanently loses its magical ability. 

Time stop once per day. 

Three Lawful Good Items: 

All powers of the three owned items. 

All the powers granted from owning two items. 
This artifact compels the user to go on a holy 
quest, As soon as the user fulfills the quest, he 
or she is immediately sent on yet another 
quest. 

Artifact gives legend lore and commune upon 
command by the user. 


Orb of Lawful Neutral: 

Light. 

Read magic. 

Generate a 20-HD fireball once per day. 


BIEL 


me PO ee 


933 


Regalia of Might 


Crown of Lawful Neutral: 
Invisibility. 

Detect invisible objects. 
Generate a double effect slow spell twice a day. 
Scepter of Lawful Neutral: 

Fly. 

Detect evil (or good if evil, or both if neutral). 
Polymorph any object with 2 on saving 
throws, 

Two Lawful Neutral items: 

All powers of the two owned items. 

User becomes fantastically strong but clumsy, 
Treat as a 18/00 strength, except that instead of 
receiving a +4 hit he or she receives —5 on 
attack rolls and ts equally clumsy in casting 
spells, prone to drop items, and damage break- 
able oncs with his or her incredible strength. 
User granted onc wish per week. 

Three Lawful Neutral items: 

All powers of the three owned items. 

All the powers granted from owning two items. 
User goes insane for 1d3 days (roll for random 
actions). 

User may restore I lost level (as a restoration 
spell) once per week (drained from a PC?). 


Orb of Lawful Evil: 

Clairaudience. 

Move at double speed. 

Fear with -2 on saving throws twice per day. 
Crown of Lawful Evil: 

Clairvoyance. 

Move at double speed. 

Cause serious wound of double effect, twice a 
day. 

Scepter of Lawful Evil: 

Water breathing 

User protected against attacks as if wearing +! 
armor 

Shape change once per day. 

‘Two Lawful Evil items: 

All powers of the two owned items. 

User has a poison touch. Anyone he or she 
touches must make a saving throw against poi- 
son. 

User may summon a fiend once per day. The 
fiend will serve the user for 2d12 turns. 


Three Lawful Evil items: 

All powers of the three owned items. 

All the powers granted from owning two items. 
Each time the artifact is used. user loses I hit 


41% 


x Regalia of Might 


2 935 s 


point permanently. 

All of user's abilities are raised to scores of 18 
(18/00 for Strength), as long as user owns the 
relic, 


Orb of Neutral Good: 

Telekinesis. 

Wizard eye. 

Cold ray of 10 HD effect three times a day. 
Crown of Neutral Good: 

Detect traps and secret doors. 

Cure light wounds once per day. 

Finger of death with -A on saving throws once 


per day. 

Scepter of Neutral Good: 

Fire resistance. 

Speak with animals. 

Regenerate up to one half of all points lost in 
combat. 

Two Neutral Good items: 

All powers of the two owned items. 

User cannot touch or be touched by any type of 
metal, it simply passes through with no effect. 
User has limited omniscience. He or she may 
ask the DM any question once a day, and if the 
judge actually knows the answer, all or part of 
the question may be answered at the DM dis- 
cretion, 

Three Neutral Good items: 

All powers of the three owned items, 

All the powers granted from owning two items. 
User sustains double damage when attacked 
while using artifact. 

User granted one wish per week. 


Orb of Neutral: 

Speak with plants. 

Adds 143 points to one ability while using the 
artifact. 

Paralyzation with -3 on saving throw three 
times a day. 

Crown of Neutral: 

Speak with dead. 

Levitation. 

Dispel magic four times per day. 

Scepter of Neutral: 

Read magic. 

User has no need to eat or drink. 

Generate a 20 HD lightning bolt once per day. 
Two Neutral items: 

All powers of the two owned items. 

This artifact (which appears as some type of 


weapon) has no power whatever until it is used 
to kill a certain, predetermined type of monster 
(example: a vampire), Once this type is killed 
with the relic, the relic immediately regains all 
of its powers. However, whenever another cer- 
tain, predetermined type of monster is sighted 
(example: a troll), the artifact compels the user 
to attack and slay the monster, and when this is 
completed, the artifact loses all of its powers 
until another monster of the same type as first 
mentioned (a vampire, again) is killed. 

Power word kill once a day. 

Three Neutral items; 

All powers of the three owned items. 

All the powers granted from owning two items. 
User has limited omniscience, and may ask the 
DM any question once a day—if the judge 
actually knows the answer, he or she may 
answer all or part of the question at the DM's 
discretion. 

Each time the artifact is used, the user loses | 
point on one of his or her abilities perma- 
nently, and the abilities may never be 
increased, 


Orb of Neutral Evil: 

Detect evil (or good if evil, or both if neutral), 
Detect invisible objects. 

Teleport twice per day. 

Crown of Neutral Evil: 

Infravision. 

Clairvoyance. 

Conjure one elemental, djinn, efreet. or invis- 
ible stalker once per day, 

Scepter of Neutral Evil: 

Wizard eve. 

User protected against attacks as if wearing 
armor +1, 

Stone flesh twice per day, 

Two Neutral Evil items: 

All powers of the two owned items. 

Use of this artifact causes the user to eventu- 
ally become ethereal every time he or she is 
under stress. Each time it is used, the user has a 
2% chance (cumulative) of going ethereal 
while under stress—after 10 uses the owner 
has a 20% chance of becoming ethereal when 
under stress, Being under stress is defined as 
any situation where the user faces any monster, 
trap, place or person that the user is uncertain 
that can be conquered or solved. After 50 uses, 


the user becomes ethereal every time that he or 
ans 


— a SS 


= Regalia of Might 


she isunder stress. The cthereal state lasts until 
the stress is removed. 

User becomes super charismatic. Any creature 
of same alignment who can communicate with 
the user willingly serves the user (without 
compensation) for 1d6 turns. After that lime 
the enchantment wears off and they are no 
longer able to serve im any case and may 
become hostile, 

Three Neutral Evil items: 

All powers of the three owned items. 

All the powers granted from owning two items. 
User loses one level of experience with each 
use. 

Power word kill once a day. 


Orb of Chaotic Good: 

Speak with animals. 

Cure light wounds once per day. 

Monster summoning once per day. 

Crown of Chaotic Good: 

Detect traps and secret doors. 

Adds 143 points to | ability while using arti- 
fact. 

User may become ethereal twice per day. 
Scepter of Chaotic Good: 

Speak with plants. 

Fire resistance. 

X-ray vision. 

Two Chaotic Good items: 

All powers of the two owned items. 

Each day that the owner of this relic wishes to 
make use of its powers, a human sacrifice must 
be made to the relic (possibly one of the player 
characters). The relic then functions normally 
for 24 hours. After that another sacrifice must 
be made or the relic ceases to function. 

User may raise dead fully once a day. 

Three Chaotic Good items: 

All powers of the three owned items. 

All the powers granted from owning two items. 
User becomes 2 inches shorter each time arti- 
fact is used. 

User of this artifact always receives a premoni- 
tion of danger, just before the event occurs. It 
does not tell the character what to expect, just 
that there is danger near 


Crown of Chaotic Neutral: 

Light. 

User immune to disease. 

Death spell twice a day. 

Scepter of Chaotic Neutral: 

Water breathing. 

Detect magic. 

Power Word Stun once a day. 

Two Chaotic Neutral items: 

All powers of the two owned items. 

The item destroys from 50% to 100% of the 
treasure of its owner by consuming it in order 
to sustain its own power, 

Finger of death with no saving throw twice per 


day. 

Three Chaotic Neutral items: 

All powers of the three owned items. 

All the powers granted from owning two items. 
The item causes greed and desire in any person 
viewing it, There is a 10% cumulative chance 
that each time any person sees the item he or 
she attacks the owner, slay the owner, and 
takes it. 

User may restore one lost level (as a restora- 
tion spell) once per week (perhaps one drained 
from a nearby, friendly PC). 


Orb of Chaotic Evil: 
Telekinesis. 
Move at double speed. 
Touch turns opponent's bones to jelly, usable 
once per day. 
Crown of Chaotic Evil: 
ESP 
Invisibility. 
Locates treasure as follows (select one): 
1. Silver, gold, etc. within 90 feet 
2. Gems within 60 feet 
3. Magic within 10 feet 
Scepter of Chaotic Evil: 
Detect invisible objects. 
Detect traps and secret doors, 
Has the power of a gem of seeing when held by 
the owner, 
Two Chaotic Evil items: 
All powers of the two owned items. 
The item is itself a live, sentient being, com- 
manded by magic to serve. However, there is a 
2% possibility per use that the being revolts 
and does one of the following: 


. Kill the individual and go back into the item. 
Carry the individual off on some mission of 


ass 


Regalia of Might I 


— — —— . a 


the item's choosing 
3. Dominate the individual and make him or her 

a servant of the item for one month. 
* Disintegrate three times per day. 

Three Chaotic Evil items: 
These are the power and penaltics available when 
ajo items are owned: 

All powers of the three owned items. 
All the powers granted from owning two items. 
* There is an increasing chance that the power 
confined in the object breaks free, takes over 
the wielder of the item by destroying the indi- 
vidual’s soul, and then (masquerading as the 
person) kills all of the hirelings and associates 
of the person, The chance should range from 
1% to 4%, cumulative, per use of the item. 
Artifact gives legend lore and commune upon 
command of the user. 


Regalia of Might II 
XP Value: — GP Value: — 
Book of Artifacts 

There are three different sets of the regalia of 
might, one for cach ethos—Good, Neutral, and 
Evil. Each set consists of three pieces—a crown, 
an orb, and a scepter. All three sets are cloaked by 
a powerful illusion that makes them all look iden- 
tical, In this form, the crowns are gold and red 
velvet, and studded with stones of great wealth. 
The orbs, about the size of melons, are enameled 
blue and red and set with a ring of pearls, and the 
scepters (no matter what their truc size) are iron- 
shod rods with carved knobs at the top. The work 
on every picce is clearly of the best quality. 

In the hands of a like-aligned creature, the 
pieces are perceived as unique in appearance and 
there is no confusing the different regalia. 

The descriptions below are of each item in 
“true” form, normally recognized only when the 
regalia of might is carried by a creature of con- 
cordant alignment and of sufficient power to 
wield the devices as explained, 

The Regalia of Good. The crown of good is a 
thin coronet of twisted silver, decorated with 
incredibly detailed, golden laurel leaves, so that 
the whole thing looks like a victor’s wreath. 
When worn by a good-aligned creature, the 
crown radiates a brilliant light that obscures the 
wearer's face. The orb of good is a sphere of 
purest crystal, encased in a filigree cage of 
golden laurel leaves, As large as a cannonball, it 
is nonetheless quite light and easy to carry. The 


scepter of good is a slender rod of polished crys- 
tal, entwined with verdant vines of silver and 
gold and topped with a gem that blazes with bril- 
liant white light. 

The Regalia of Neutrality. This set of regalia 
is the least ostentatious of the three, as befits the 
somewhat passive role of most neutral powers. 
The crown of neutrality is carved from a single 
piece of smoky quartz, polished to a dazzling 
smoothness; when worn, the creature's face is 
concealed behind a shimmering, smoky veil that 
radiates from the crown. The orb of neutrality is 
crystalline, as is the orb of goad, but it is of 
smoky quartz, caged in green jade, carved like 
smoke, The scepter of neutrality is a rod almost 
as long as a staff. It is made from smoky quartz 
and sparkles with flashes of light—some brilliant 
white, others blood red. When gripped, a thin 
wisp of smoke trails from the tip. 

The Regalia of Evil. This set, when used by a 
creature of evil alignment, is casy to distinguish 
from the others. The crown of evil is a single 
piece of black iron, cast into the form of a flam- 
ing headpiece. The craftsmanship is harsh and the 
iron is filled with impurities that leave the surface 
coarse, When worn by an evil creature, the iron 
flames blaze into reddish light and magical 
flames (that cause no harm) lap and flicker over 
the head, concealing the wearer's face. The orb of 
evil is an iron sphere, pitted and scarred, of appar- 
ently crude workmanship. The sphere is bound in 
chains of iron, equally harsh and crude. Red 
sparks fly from the orb at the slightest touch. The 
rod of evil is a staff of iron, draped with chains 
that clank and rattle. A flame of red fire (that 
radiates no heat) springs from the top. 

The regalia of might is reputed to be perhaps 
the greatest of all artifacts, though this is only 
speculation, for no one can honestly claim to 
have used all of them. They are certainly the most 
ancient, having existed since before the time of 
men, It is believed the regalia was fashioned by 
the gods, to spare the multiverse from ultimate 
destruction of those powers as they made war, 

For an eternity before recorded time began, the 
many powers struggled for ascendancy in the 
Outer Planes. But such is the way of the gods that 
seldom did the powers directly attack each other, 
fighting their battles in the mortal worlds instead, 
and manipulating their creations like pawns on a 
gameboard. As the battle raged on distant planes, 
the waste and destruction were horrendous. 

4155 


= 938 3 


PP ²˙ ˙äꝛ— ⁵ ' *— ůw»w' m 


Finally, the wisest deities agreed that this could 
no longer continue. They decreed that each cthos. 
Good, Neutral, and Evil, should outfit a cham- 
pion who would stand for that faction in future 
contests. Three items, objects of celestial might, 
were given to cach champion: the crowns, orbs, 
and sceptets. 

Just how the deities struck this agreement, and 
how they enforced their will upon the dissenting 
powers is unknown. Nor is it even certain just 
who among the gods proposed the idea (several 
deities lay claim to this achievement). Suffice it 
lo say that great and mysterious are the workings 
of such powers, for the feat was accomplished 
The terms set, each group set to the task of fash- 
ioning their regalia according to its nature. Speed 
was essential, for all had agreed to finish their 
work in a single millennium 

The gods of good, it is said, met ina great 
council, and they chose from among their num- 
bers the three greatest craftsmen and set them to 
the task. These three worked together to create 
their three pieces of regalia, each sharing his 
knowledge and experience with the others 

The gods of neutrality did not accept this 
approach, but met in council and choose the pat 
tern desired for their version. The neutral crafts- 
men-gods were summoned and a competition was 
proposed. Each craftsman-god was to design a 
single piece of the regalia, be it crown, orb, or 
Scepter, und the finest would be used by ncutral- 
itys champion 

The gods of evil proposed a competition, too. 
Whoever among them, whether craftsman or not. 
could produce a crown, orb, and scepter could 
claim the right to outfit the champion of evil. The 
evil deities threw themselves to their work with a 
frenzy. Not content to merely build, they schemed, 
spied, robbed, and betrayed each other in their 
struggles to win this contest. 

Finally, the deadline was reached and the gods 
reconvened to approve the results. So long ago 
did all this transpire that men and perhaps even 
the deities themselves have forgotten the names 
of those who labored for each group. But first 
came the three craftsmen of good, who had 
labored in harmony to prepare their items. Next 
came the three victors of neutrality, each bearing 
his contribution to the regalia. Lastly came a 
trickster god, evil’s victor, who had cunningly 
stolen his prizes from the workshops of others. 
When they beheld the regalia, the wise gods were 


PN 


> Regalia of Might Il 


Wie y 


Regalia of Might I 


content and proclaimed the great wars ended, 
From now on, all disagreements were to be 
settled by champions chosen to wear the regalia. 

Since that time, each group has watched over 
its regalia in its own way. By agreement, the 
deities of good hold theirs as a group. The regalia 
of might is available to any power who should 
need them. The powers of neutrality could not be 
so amicable in their approach, however. Rather, 
they agreed that each deity should hold the items 
for a period of time and then pass them to another. 
The owner had absolute control over the regalia 
and could use them or give them away as he 
pleased. The powers of evil took their usual, 
direct approach to the question—possession of 
their regalia went to whomever was strong 
enough, devious enough, and savage enough to 
take and hold them. If a deity needed the regalia 
of evil, he had to take them from their current 
owner, The evil regalia became much contested, 
used as much by fiends in the Blood War as by 
evil's champions against those of good and neu- 
trality. Over the years, the three evil pieces have 
been separated and sometimes even lost. This 
may even be the case today. 

All three sets of regalia, no matter of what 
ethos, are powerful artifacts and should not be 
used in a campaign without an expressed and a 
carefully thought-out purpose. Fortunately, sev- 
cral conditions on these items make it difficult, if 
not impossible, for PCs to gain full benefit, or in 
some cases any benefit, from the artifacts. Still, 
the DM should do everything possible to limit 
character use of such items. 

Introducing the regalia into a game varies, 
depending on which set the DM intends to use. 
The DM should remember that the regalia was 
created for a specific use, so if one set appears, it 
is quite likely to be followed by one or both of the 
others. It is assumed that the sets are to be used 
by a pair of champions who must fight to settle 
some celestial dispute. 

The regalia of good is never found purely by 
accident; good gods don’t misplace their items 
(although evil deities might steal them). They are 
either safely stored on their own plane or loaned 
out for some purpose. Thus, the regalia of good 
only appears when there is a need for their use. 
The PCs might think they have accidentally found 
a great treasure, but this discovery should always 
be part of a greater plan. The regalia of good nor- 
mally enters an adventure when one of the player 


characters is called upon by his or her deity and is 
saddled with the awesome responsibility to act as 
a champion of cause. 

Likewise, the regalia of neutrality is not hap- 
hazardly left about, although the powers of Evil 
might plot to whisk them away. Their appearance 
should herald some purpose, but this may be sim- 
ply to prevent conflict between the champions of 
Good and Evil. 

The regalia of evil is another matter. With the 
constant squabbling of the evil lords, their regalia 
has been known to slip from their grasp from 
time to time, and it is possible that one of the 
pieces could find its way to the Prime Material 
Plane. Once there, it could be discovered by the 
PCs or by an NPC. 

Of course, just stumbling across the regalia 
does an injustice to a good potential storyline. If 
the items are something the player characters 
could potentially use (most likely one or more of 
the good or neutral pieces), one of the characters 
may be thrust into the role of champion of the 
ethos—at least temporarily. For whatever obvious 
or inexplicable reasons, the gods have chosen the 
PC to face another champion (outfitted with 
appropriate pieces of regalia), Thereby settling 
some celestial dispute. The contest need not be 
over some world-shattering conflict; deities 
squabble over all sorts of petty details—they 
could even be vying for the favors of a mortal. In 
any case, the champion should be the equal of the 
PC unless it is evil, in which case the evil forces 
cheat and make their man a little tougher. The 
character may never know of the divine roles, or 
have to figure it out and the find the enemy. 

When all is said and done, whether the charac- 
ter wins or loses, the piece or pieces of the regalia 
magically disappear—the powers never leave 
such items behind. Any reward the PC receives 
depends upon the task performed and the nature 
of the deity involved. Characters should not 
expect much reward from evil gods! 

Of course, the PCs could just accidentally find 
a piece of the regalia—particularly if it was 
stolen from or by an evil deity. Legends and tales 
of the regalia exist in most faiths, and high priests 
can recognize the items for what they are. 
Unhappy indeed are the servants who refuse to 
yield these treasures back to their divine masters. 
The gods may even take note and spend special 
messengers to claim what is rightfully theirs. Ser- 


vants of good deities first try honest and gentle 
4155 


„ SS . le a. eo 


940 


EF aaa aS... 


persuasion, but evil deities almost certainly pun- 
ish anyone who possesses their regalia, on the 
simple assumption that the current owner 
deserves his fate. In this case, even giving up the 
regalia is likely to do the PCs little good. But they 
must find some way to do so, through clever 
oaths or the protection of others, to save their 
skins. 

In all cases, the regalia should not remain in a 
campaign for very long. These are not items to be 
held by kings, great wizards, or even the highest 
of high priests. Once any part of the regalia has 
been used for its purpose, it should vanish, 
preferably with enough drama or terror to remind 
the player characters of just who and what they 
have been dealing with. If a piece is accidentally 
found, the PCs will be faced by an ever-escalating 
series of messengers until such time as the item is 
recovered, 

Each of the nine pieces of regalia has a differ- 
ent collection of powers, although different 
crowns, orbs, and scepters may have some powers 
in common. Each, too, has its own perils that can 
affect the foolish and unworthy. The sets also 
have ever-increasing resonating powers, so that 
the might of the regalia grows with cach item 
acquired. 

The powers and curse for each piece of regalia 
is described separately, After the powers for all 
three pieces of a set are given, the resonating 
powers for various combinations of that set are 
described, along with any additional curse effects 
that may occur, Following the powers and curses 
is a section listing suggested means of destroying 
the entire set of regalia. 


The Crown of Good 

Constant Powers: The crown confers upon the 
wearer Wisdom and Charisma of 21, including all 
benefits for bonus spells, magical defense, spell 
immunities, and reaction adjustments. 

Invoked Powers: The crown can create a 
minor globe of invulnerability around the wearer 
once per day. 

Random Powers: The crown possesses two 
abilities from Artifact Table 1-05; Detection. 

Curse: First and foremost, the crown, like all 
the pieces of regalia, is attuned only to its align- 
ment ethos. Neutral characters who touch the 
crown suffer 5d6 points of damage (no saving 
throw, excepting neutral good characters, who are 
allowed a saving throw vs. spell to halve this 


— 


941 


` Regalin of Might I — 


effect). Evil characters who touch the crown must 
save vs. death magic, and those who succeed still 
suffer 5d6 points of damage. Among good char- 
acters, only those with lawful heart can use all the 
item’s powers. For others, only the invoked power 
functions. 

Although not a curse, the crown does have a 
drawback in it, which its owner (whether the 
crown is worn or not) is no longer capable of 
telling a falsehood or performing acts that would 
normally be considered evil. Note that this pre- 
vents the character from bluffing or making 
threats he or she does not intend to carry out, 
Even haggling in the marketplace can become 
difficult, should the character manage to dicker 
the price down to a “steal.” 


The Scepter of Good 

Constant Powers: While the scepter is 
gripped, the owner is immune to all wizard spells 
of the enchantment/charm school, and to all 
priest spells of the charm sphere. 

Invoked Powers: At the wielder’s mental com- 
mand, anyone touched by the scepter must save 
vs. paralyzation or be held motionless for 3d6 
rounds. The scepter also functions as a rod of 
rulership with endless charges. 

Curse: The scepter is sensitive to alignment. 
Neutral characters who touch the scepter suffer 
5d6 points of damage (no saving throw). Evil 
characters who touch it must save vs. death 
magic, and those who succeed still suffer 5d6 
points of damage. Even good characters must be 
lawful in order to benefit from the constant pow- 
ers of this artifact, 

Not viewed as a curse by the powers of good, 
the owner of the scepter must live up to noble 
ideals. Specifically, the owner of the scepter must 
always come to the aid of those in need, whether 
they are accused innocents in the marketplace or 
the oppressed masses of distant lands. This call 
cannot be refused or resisted unless the character 
is already involved in another quest or actively 
battling the champion of the other powers, The 
master of the scepter becomes a true knight- 
errant, forever galloping off to right every wrong. 


The Orb of Good 
Invoked Powers: All of the orb powers must 
be activated with a command word (DM's 
choice). First, it functions as a gem of brightness 


with unlimited charges. Second, the orb can heal 
4158 


b 


N Pesala of Might 1 r 


(1/day) any creature that touches it. 

Random Powers: The orb possesses one abil- 
ity from Artifact Table 1-06: Divination. 

Curse: Like the crown and scepter, the orb is 
selective about who handles it. Neutral characters 
who touch the orb suffer 5d6 points of damage 
(no saving throw). Evil characters who touch it 
must save vs. death magic, and those who suc- 
ceed still suffer 5d6 points of damage. Good 
characters of less than lawful purity can only use 
its healing ability. 

Another consideration for the owner of the orb 
is that all worldly possessions must be sacrificed 
(given to charity) and all titles and claims must be 
forever renounced; knights forswear their fealty 
oaths, priests leave their temples, and wizards 
give up their magical wonders, Only the other 
pieces of the regalia (if available) and the most 
humble of dress and weapons (all nonmagical) 
may be retained. Anything given up cannot be 

Resonating Powers (two items): If any two 
items of the regalia are held by a single character, 
additional benefits accrue. Upon gaining the sec- 
ond item, the character immediately gains one 
level of experience, and his or her experience 
point total is set halfway to the next level, The 
character gains all benefits of the new level. This 
can only happen once to a character or adventur- 
ing party (unless the current owner dies). Even if 
the items are stolen and then returned to a differ- 
ent member of the group, the benefit will not 
appear. 

Possessing two of the three items also adds one 
power from Artifact Tables 1-10: Elemental 
Earth and 1-18: Offensive Powers, 

Resonating Powers (all items): If all three 
items are held by a single creature, all the bene- 
fits described above are received, and the regalia 
reveals another power from Artifact Tables 
1-16: Minor Powers, 1-17: Movement, and 
1-21: Personal Enhancements. These bonuses 
last only as long as the creature retains all picces 
of the regalia. If one is lost, stolen, or surren- 
dered, the benefits of possessing all three are 
immediately lost. 

Resonating Curse: Possession of any two 
pieces of the regalia causes no additional harm 
(beyond those already described). However, once 
a PC gains all three items, artifact transformation 
begins, and the character gradually becomes a 
planar aasimon (see the MONSTROUS 


COMPENDIUM, Outer Planes appendix). If the 
change is completed, a PC is forever lost (NPC 
status), but if the regalia is lost or removed prior 
to the final phase, the character slowly reverts to 
normal. 
Suggested Means of Destruction: 
+ Smelt down the items at the forges of the 
deities who fashioned them. 
Whisper the Ten Thousand Secrets of Destruc- 
tion over cach one, 
the items vanish at the end of the reign of the 
gods. 


The Crown of Neutrality 

Constant Powers: So long as this crown is 
worn, the owner can automatically distinguish 
between truth, half-truth, and lies he hears or 
reads. Only an undetectable lie can conceal the 
truth. 

Random Powers: The crown possesses two 
abilines from Artifact Table 1—06: Divination. 

Curse: The crown functions best for those of 
true neutral alignment. Characters of neutral 
good or neutral evil alignment suffer 3d6 points 
of damage (no saving throw) when first touching 
the items, and those characters can use only their 
invoked powers, Other-aligned characters who 
touch the artifact suffer Sd points of damage (no 
saving throw), 

True neutral characters are possessed by the 
impartial nature of the cold, neutral powers, and 
expose all lies they hear. No matter who speaks 
(even that PC), the wearer must reveal falschoods 
so fair judgments can be made. 


The Scepter of Neutrality 

Constant Powers: The holder of the scepter 
regenerates 2 hit points per round, but cannot 
regenerate from fire, acid, (un)holy water, or 
death, nor do severed limbs regenerate. 

Invoked Powers: Upon command, the scepter 
generates a thunderclap like a staff of thunder and 
lightning. The scepter also functions as a rod of 
beguiling. 

Random Powers: The scepter endows the 
wearer with one power from Artifact Table 
1-05: Detection. 

Curse: Characters not of the neutral alignment 
who touch the artifact for the first time suffer 5d6 
points of damage (no saving throw), and charac- 
ters of neutral good or neutral evil alignment suf- 
fer 36 points of damage (no saving throw). Such 


nS eat o ae 


942 


Ñ Regalia of Might Ii y 


characters can only use the invoked powers of the 
scepter, provided they can identify them. 
Desiring harmony and balance, the powers of 
neutrality require the holder of the scepter to seck 
a settlement to all disputes. The settlement can be 
a truce, surrender, payment, bribe, or whatever, as 
long as peace is attained, The character cannot 
allow any dispute to remain unnegotiated, be it a 
war between two kingdoms or a lover's quarrel, 


The Orb of Neutrality 

Constant Powers: When gazed, the orb func- 
tions as a gem of seeing. 

Invoked Powers: The orb creates a floating 
fiery symbol of persuasion (1 per day). 

Random Powers: The orb has two powers 
from Artifact Table 1-23: Protection. 

Curse: Characters not of the neutral alignments 
who touch the artifact for the first time suffer 5d6 
points of damage (no saving throw). Characters of 
neutral good or neutral evil alignment suffer 346 
points of damage (no saving throw). Such charac- 
ters can only use the constant powers of the orb, 
provided they can identify them. 

The bearer of the orb must always abide by the 
terms of any oath, deal, vow, treaty, pact, contract 
or other agreement that he makes. This power is 
in effect even when the character is not holding 
the orb—possession of the artifact is all that is 


Resonating Powers (two items): If any two 
pieces of the regalia of neutrality are held at the 
same time, the character who wields them imme- 
diately gains one level of experience, and his or 
her experience point total is set halfway to the 
next level. The character immediately gains all 
the benefits of the new level. This can only hap- 
pen once per character or adventuring party 
(unless the current owner dies). Even if the items 
are stolen and returned to a different party mem- 
ber, the benefit doesn’t occur. 

The holder of two parts of the regalia gains one 
additional power from Artifact Tables 1-16: 
Minor Powers and 1-15: Major Powers. 

Resonating Powers (all items): If all three 
items are held by a single creature, all the bene- 
fits described above are gained, and the regalia 
reveals another power from Artifact Tables 
1-03: Conjuration, 1-18: Offensive Powers, 
and 1-21: Personal Enhancements These 
bonuses last only as long as the creature retains 
all three pieces of the regalia. If any one of them 


is lost, stolen, or surrendered, the benefits of hav- 

ing all three are lost. 

Resonating Curse: Possession of any two 
pieces of the Regalia of Neutrality causes no 
However, once all three items are held, the 
process of artifact transformation begins, The 
character is slowly transformed into a marut (see 
the Outer Planes appendix of the MONSTROUS 
Comrenpium"). Once complete, a PC is lost for- 
ever (NPC status). Should the regalia be lost or 
removed prior to the final phase, the PC slowly 
reverts to normal, 

Suggested Means of Destruction; 

* The items vanish when good and evil reach a 
perfect stalemate. 

+ Immerse them for 1,000 years in the pure 
essences of the Positive and Negative Material 
Planes, 

* They lose power when someone buys them 
from the gods of Neutrality, 


The Crown of Evil 

Constant Powers: When worn, the crown con- 
fers fire giant Strength (Str 22; +4 on attack rolls, 
+10 damage) upon its wearer, 

Invoked Powers: By touch, the wearer of the 
crown can animate dead (3/day). 

Random Powers: The crown endows the 
wearer with one power from Artifact Table 
1-23: Protection. 

Curse: The crown is attuned only to those of 
extremely evil alignment, Neutral characters who 
touch the crown for the first time suffer 5d6 
points of damage (no saving throw), although 
neutral evil characters are allowed a saving throw 
vs. spell to halve the damage. Good characters 
who touch it for the first time must save vs. death 
magic, and those who succeed still suffer 5d6 
points of damage. Among evil characters, only 
those of chaotic bent can use all the item's pow- 
ers. For others, only the constant power functions 
correctly, 

As part of their perverse blessing on the crown, 
the powers of evil constructed the artifact so that, 
when worn, it is impossible for the owner to 
answer any question truthfully, Perhaps the ratio- 
nale behind implementation of such a power was 
to protect their champion from interrogation, or 
perhaps it was just a whim. The champion can 
speak truthfully of his or her own accord, but any 
question automatically results in a lie. 

11 


„ ae 


943 


ae EEE 


~ Regalia of Might l. * 


The Scepter of Evil 

Invoked Powers: Upon command, the scepter 
functions as a rod of terror (with no chance of 
Charisma loss). 

Random Powers: The holder of the scepter 
gains two abilitics from Artifact Table 1-18: 
Offensive Powers. 

Curse: Like the all pieces of the regalia of evil, 
the scepter is attuned only to those of evil alignment, 
Characters of differing alignments who handle the 
scepter suffer the same effects as given for the crown 
of evil, Among evil characters, only those of chaotic 
alignment can use all the item's powers. For others, 
the scepter functions only as a rod of terror 

As befits the nature of evil, the bearer of the 
scepter quickly comes to imagine that he or she is 
supreme, the natural leader and ruler of all. Only 
powers of demigod or greater status are immune 
to this, since they already consider themselves to 
be (and they are) supreme beings. Those over- 
come with selfimportance can no longer accept 
any settlement or compromise. The bearer of the 
scepter must be first in all things. The bearer does 
not relent until all those who stand in opposition 
(friend or foe) recognize his or her might, abjectly 
surrender, flee in terror, or lie crushed beneath 
the heel of evil, Indeed, the greater the foe, the 
more urgent is the desire to overthrow them. 


The Orb of Evil 

Constant Powers: When held, the orb auto- 
matically allows its owner to command any non- 
planar undead creature within 30 fect. The undead 
are controlled as long as they remain within the 
radius of effect and for 1d4+1 hours after that. 
The character need but speak the desire of his or 
her tainted heart and they are unwaveringly exe- 
cuted by the commanded undead. (Free-willed 
and mindless undead are affected equally.) 

Random Powers: The orb possesses two abili- 
ties from Artifact Table 1-15: Minor Powers. 

Curse: Like all parts of the regalia, the orb is 
attuned only to those of evil alignment. Charac- 
ters of differing alignments who handle the orb 
suffer the same effects as given for the crown of 
evil. Among evil characters, only those of chaotic 
disposition can use all the item's powers. For 
others, only the oth x invoked powers can be used. 

Furthermore, the orb itself covets worldly 
goods, particularly magical items. Before its con- 
stant power can be used, it must be activated by 
the sacrifice of a permanent magical item (includ- 


ing chargeable items). Once touched by the orb, 
the item crumbles to dust. The wielder of the orb 
also must own the magical item in question— 
merely touching the orb to someone else's magi- 
cal armor will not do, for example. Items 
destroyed by the orb are lost forever, beyond even 
the power of deities to recover. Once activated, 
the orb’s constant powers function for 24 hours. 

Resonating Powers (two items): If any two 
pieces of the regalia of evil are possessed, the 
character immediately gains one experience level, 
and his or her experience point total is set halfway 
to the next level. The character immediately gains 
all the benefits of the new level. This can only 
happen once per character or party (unless the 
current owner dies). Even if the items are stolen 
and returned to a different member of the group, 
the benefit doesn't accrue. 

In addition, the holder of two parts gains an 
extra power from both Artifact Tables 1-06: 
Divination and 1-18: Offensive Powers. 

Resonating Powers (all items): If all three 
items are held by a single creature, all the bene- 
fits described above are received. In addition, the 
regalia reveals another power from Artifact 
Tables 1-23: Protection, 1-08: Elemental Fire, 
and 1-21: Personal Enhancements. These 
bonuses last for as long as all the pieces of the 
regalia are retained. If one is lost, stolen, or sur- 
rendered, the benefits are lost. 

Resonating Curse: Possession of any two 
pieces of the regalia causes no additional harm 
(beyond those already described). However, once 
a character gains all three items, the process of 
artifact transformation begins. The character is 
gradually transformed into a bebilith, an odious 
servant of death and torture (see the Outer Planes 
appendix of the Monstrous COMPENDIUM"), 
Once the transformation is complete, the charac- 
ter is forever lost, but if the regalia is lost or 
removed prior to the final phase, the character 
slowly reverts to normal. 

Suggested Means of Destruction: 

* The powers of good utterly conquer the powers 
of evil. 
he items are buried at the very heart of the 

Positive Material Plane. 

* The powers of evil are tricked into destroying 
them. 


Combining Regalia of Various Alignments: 
Rare though it might be, it is possible for the 


4164 


— —ů — 
tsßvB̃ . ̃ FÄͤ— —i— e r 


= Rift Spanner r 


same character to come into possession of items 
of regalia from separate ethos, For instance, a 
character holding the crown of good might be 
tempted (by a devious evil deity) to pick up the 
scepter of evil. 

The result is an explosion of charged magical 
energy which, though it can vary in intensity, 
almost certainly brings woe to the unfortunate at 
the heart of the blast. This is a very bad thing, at 
least for the character, Fortunately, battling 
another champion who is using a different piece 
of regalia does not trigger any disasters (other 
than the fight it might cause). 

Possessing any piece of regalia allows the 
owner to see all others in their true form, and the 
differences in appearance should serve as a dire 
warning. Similarly, the character can also sense 
the ethos of any other piece of regalia. While 
holding the orb of neutrality, for example, the 
priestess Livaria can feel the goodness radiating 
from the crown of good before her. These two 
clues should certainly inform Livaria that she is 
attempting to combine oil and water, so to speak. 
If she fails to consider the consequences and 
claims the crown, then her mistake is soon clear. 

Depending upon the mix of artifacts, the result 
of one character holding them varies: 

Good and Neutral: As soon as a character 
acquires both items, an interplanar instability 
occurs and a rift is torn to a randomly chosen 
Upper Plane. The PC is automatically sucked 
through the gap with wrenching force (that inflicts 
3d10 points of damage). Anyone within 5 feet of 
the holder must make a saving throw vs. death 
magic or suffer the same fate. Those between 6 
and 20 fect away suffer only the 3d10 points of 
damage (save vs. breath weapon for half damage). 

The regalia then disappears, either returning 
whence they came (to wherever the deities of 
good store their items) or scattering to random 
Prime Material worlds, 

Good and Evil: As soon as both items are 
held, a massive blast occurs. The character at the 
heart of it is instantly vaporized (no saving 
throw). Those within 20 feet suffer 10d10 points 
of damage (save vs. breath weapon for half dam- 
age) and those between 21 and 40 feet away suf- 
fer 3d10 points of damage (same saving throw). 
The picces of regalia are hurled to completely 
random locations on any Prime Material world, 
although they may be quickly recovered by ser- 
vants of the deities. 


Neutral and Evil: As with good and neutral 
couplings, this pairing opens up a rift, though this 
rent leads to a Lower Plane. The effects of this rift 
are the same as those described above, but anyone 
sucked through is not likely to arrive in a hos- 
pitable location, 


Rift Spanner 
XP Value: 40,000 GP Value: 200,000 
Children of the Night 

The rift spanner is a huge device which was 
designed and built to puncture the fabric of 
Ravenloft and allow escape from the Demiplane 
of Dread. Its ability to do this makes it one of the 
most powerful magical objects ever constructed. 
When it ts fully charged, it can carry up to three 
human-sized creatures across the misty fabric of 
Ravenloft’s ethereal border and back to the Prime 
Material Plane. However, the very ties with the 
demiplane that give them their special powers 
prevent domain lords from being able to escape 
with this device. They are too firmly tied to 
Ravenloft, and would simply be left behind when 
it makes its way clear of the misty borders. 

This magical contraption, triangular in shape, 
is composed of a brass framework that stretches 
some ð feet on a side. The most obvious feature 
of the device is the great iridium orb that stands 
at its center. Fully 5 feet in diameter, this opales- 
cent sphere glimmers and pulses with the tremen- 
dous energics trapped at its heart. Three brass 
seats, positioned at the corners of the triangular 
base, face toward the orb with a small bank of 
controls before each. Leather straps on each seat 
can be used to secure an occupant. 

Although it usually rests in an inert state, the 
rift spanner has two operational modes. The first 
is used to charge the device in preparation for 
travel. The second is engaged when the machine 
is ready to attempt transit across the planes. 

Charging, the rift spanner ts a very difficult, 
time-consuming, and gruesome operation. In 
order to operate, the iridium orb must be charged 
with life energy. The more energy in the orb, the 
better the chance that the spanner will reach its 
intended destination. Anyone who is seated in 
one of the brass chairs when the spanner’s 
recharging mode is activated is instantly slain, 
drained of all life energy. If the victim is not 
strapped in, he or she may make a saving throw 
vs. death magic to leap out of the chair before 
being killed. When this happens, the victim is 

4165 


< 945 


OEE — — — — 


reduced to one half his or her current level 
(rounded down), If the victim is strapped in or 
otherwise unable to escape the brass chair, no 
saving roll is permitted. 

Each level that the device absorbs gives it a 1% 
chance of operating successfully when its transit 
mode is engaged. Thus, if the machine is able to 
drain ten Sth-level characters of life, it has a 50% 
chance of functioning when engaged, Anyone 
overseeing the charging of the device will have to 
make a Ravenloft powers check for cach life con- 
sumed by the machine. 

he orb can hold up to 100 levels of life- 
energy safely. As insurance against negative die 
modifiers, however, it can be overcharged, Each 
liſe-enetgy level beyond the 100th creates a 
cumulative 1% chance per level that the device 
will explode when activated, however, If it is ever 
charged to 200 energy levels, the device instantly 
explodes in an incredible detonation that utterly 
annihilates everything within 100 yards (no sav- 
ing throw) and forcing every creature or object 
between 100 and 1,000 yards to save vs. breath 
weapons (or disintegration, for items) or be 
utterly destroyed. 

Once the orb is charged, anyone familiar with its 
operation cun set it to travel to a specific point on 
the Prime Matcrial Plane. Activating the transit 


mode requires an operator in cach of the three chairs 
to engage a specific control at the same time. Fuil- 
ure to trigger all three switches at once bleeds off 
the orb’s energy, forcing the machine to be recharged 
before another travel attempt can be made. 

There are three steps in any journey made with 
the rift spanner; dematerialization, transit, and 
rematerialization. Each of these requires a 14100 
roll against the energy level of the Orb. Failure on 
any one of the three checks indicates that the voy- 
age has been aborted. If this happens, the spanner 
and its occupants are returned to their starting 
point with the orb utterly drained of energy. 

The journey across dimensions is quite per- 
ilous. Anyone who is not strapped in when the rift 
spanner begins its voyage has a good chance of 
being tossed clear during the voyage and lost 
somewhere between the planes. Each time that 
the dice are rolled to check on the machine's 
operation, an unsecured passenger must make 2 
saving throw vs, death magic or be torn free of 
the buffeting spanner and lost. 


Ring 

All magical rings normally radiate magic, but 
most are impossible to detect as magical without 
some mystic method, Furthermore, most magical 
rings look alike, so determination of a given 
ring’s magical powers is difficult. The ring must 
be worn and various experiments performed in 
order to find out what it docs. Rings do not usu- 
ally radiate good or evil. No more than two magi- 
cal rings can be worn by a character at the same 
time If more are worn, none function. No more 
than one magical ring can be worn on the same 
hand. A second ring worn on one hand neutral- 
izes both. Rings must be worn on the fingers 
Rings on toes or in ear lobes, for instance, do not 
function magically, 

The magical abilities of rings function as 12th- 
level magic unless the power requires a higher 
level. In cases where a higher level ts necessary, 
rings function at the minimum level of magic use 
needed to cast the equivalent spell (exccptions do 
exist, but these are explained in the ring’s descrip- 
tion). Magical rings can be worn and used by all 
character classes, humans, and humanoids if not 
specifically prohibited. A DM might allow “mon 
sters” with digits to wear rings, and some can actu- 
ally benefit from them. For example, a troll could 
wear a ring of regeneration and gain the ring’s ben- 


efits m addition to its normal regenerative abilities 
4165 


en a ee ee ee 


Ring, Animal Friendship y 


Roll Type of Ring 
01-95 With permanency 
96-00 Without permanency, containing 2d20 
charges, 
Admundfort, Ring of Leadership 
XP Value: 1,600 GP Value: 8,600 
GREYHAWK Adventures 


This silver ring was created by a wizard in the 
service of the Knights of the Shield. The ring is 
traditionally given to rangers and paladins of at 
least 9th level, in return for loyal friendship or 
unexpected favor. 

The ring allows a fighter to attract twice as 
many men-at-arms as normal as followers, The 
ring also gives a +25% bonus to the loyalty of 
such followers, If a fighter loses the ring, he or 
she retains the followers, but no longer receives 
the loyalty bonus. 


of Affliction 
XP Value: — GP Value: 1,500 
Tome of Magic 
When an identify spell is used on this cursed ring, 
it will appear to be a ring of resistance. The ring 
will function as such until the wearer makes a 
saving throw to any school in opposition to the 
school represented by the ring. The school of 
magic represented is determined by rolling 148 
on the table below. 


Illusion /Phantasm 
Invocation/Evocation 
Lesser/Greater Divination 
Necromancy 


The first time the wearer of a ring of affliction 
makes a saving throw against any school in oppo- 
sition to the school of the ring worn, a ring of 
affliction 5 true properties are revealed. The ring 
causes the wearer to suffer a A penalty on all 
saving throws vs, spell of the ring s opposing 
school or schools, Once this power is activated, 
the beneficial effects of the ring no longer oper- 
ute. Once the curse has been activated, the wearer 
can remove the ring only through a remove curse 
spell. 


of Amasis 
XP Value: 1,500 GP Value: 7,500 
Duwonons & Dragons Master Set 

Amasis, King of Egypt, advised his incredibly 
lucky friend Polycrates, King of Samos, to discard 
something of great value to balance the Fates. 
Polycrates threw a prized ring into the sea, but it 
was later found in a fish on the king's dinner table. 
Amasis promptly recognized this sign from the 
gods and broke off relations with his friend; 
shortly after that, Polycrates was brutally slain. 

This ring allows its user to detect alignment 
with 100% success, regardless of magical inter- 
ventions on the part of the person being divined. 
It also allows the user to detect lies. 


of Animal Control 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
Duncrons & Daacons Rules Cyclopedia 

The wearer of this ring may command 1d6 nor- 
mal animals (or one giant-sized), The animals are 
not allowed a saving throw to resist control. The 
ring cannot control intelligent animal species, 
fantastic, or magical monsters. The wearer must 
be able to see the animals to control them. The 
control lasts as long as the wearer concentrates on 
the animals and does not move or fight. When the 
wearer stops concentrating, the animals are free 
to attack the controller or run away (roll reactions 
with a penalty of -1 to the roll). This ring can 
only be used once per turn. 


Animal Friendship 

XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
D Master Guide 
When the wearer of this ring approaches within 
10 feet of any animals of neutral alignment and 
animal intelligence, the creatures must roll saving 
throws vs. spell, If they succeed, they move 
rapidly away from the ring wearer. If the saving 
throws fail, the creatures become docile and fol- 
low the ring wearer. The item functions at 6th- 
level, so up to 12 Hit Dice of animals can be 
affected by this ring. 

Animals feeling friendship for the wearer actu- 
ally guard and protect that indindividual if a charge 
is expended from the ring to cause such behavior, A 
ring of this sort typically has 27 charges when dis- 
covered, and cannot be recharged. A druid wearing 
this ring can influence twice the prescribed Hit 
Dice of animals (24 rather than 12), and a ranger is 
able to influence 18 Hit Dice of animals. 

410 


— |. = ne 


947 


- ꝗ—ZÄẽ: _ ee 


~ Ring, Animal Magnetism r 


Animal Magnetism 
XP Value GP Value 
Normal: 1,000 5,000 
Cursed: — 1,000 
Dracon Magazine 117 


Once placed on a character's finger, this ring 
allows communication with all animals as if the 
wearer had an 18 Charisma. The wearer may 
speak with animals for as long as the ring is 
worn, though the ring does not allow the wearer 
to charm animals in any manner, Only true ani- 
mals (mammals, marsupials, birds, fishes, 
amphibians, or reptiles) may be spoken to in 
this manner, magical creatures or “monsters” 
are not affected, For the purposes of the animal 
magnetism ring, assume that any creature capa- 
ble of using magical spells is a “monster.” Thus, 
a pegasus is an animal, but a unicorn is a mon- 
ster; an owlbear or u worg is an animal, but a 
bugbear (since bugbear priests do exist) or a 
winter wolf ts a monster. The wearer may try to 
convince animals to work or fight, and reaction 
is checked as if the animals were randomly 
encountered humans. Animals do not attack the 
wearer of the ring unless attacked first, even if 
they are hungry. 

However, 10% of these rings are cursed to 
draw any and all animals within one mile toward 
the wearer. The animals then surround the wearer 
and refuse to move, blocking the ring wearer's 
path in all directions, If the wearer or the wearer's 
party attacks any animal, all the animals attack 
the wearer at once. If the ring is removed (requir- 
ing a remove curse spell), the animals revert and 
either attack (1-2 on 1d6) or flee (3-6 on 1d6), 


Annulment 

GP Value: 2,000 
DRAGON Magazine 117 
While this ring is worn, magic controlled by the 
character has no effect. This includes magical 
items, spells, and innate magical powers. Spells 
cast at the character from an outside source, how- 
ever, act as normal. Thus, a heal or fireball 
affects the wearer normally, but the ring wearer 
cannot cure personal wounds using magic. A 
remove curse must be cast upon the ring in order 
to allow the wearer to remove it, A dispel magic 
spell has a 1% chance per level of the caster of 
negating the rings powers for one round, allow- 
ing it to be removed, 


XP Value: — 


XP Value: 5,000 GP Value: 55,000 
Unearthed Arcana 

This ring initially appears to be a standard ring 
of warmth. However, the wearer may command 
three other functions from the ring, choosing 
from among the other standard sorts of magical 
rings. The period of such functioning is one 
operation, in the case of a ring which has such a 
function type (djinni summoning, wishes, and 
the like). Otherwise the effect lasts for one day 
(24 hours). Any ring function so commanded is 
never usable again; for example the ring cannot 
be made to give more than one wish. After three 
singular uses of this sort, the ring turns into a 
nonmagical piece of jewelry worth from 100 to 
600 gp. 


of Apathy 

XP Value: — GP Value: 1,200 
Potyninkos Newszine 43 

The curse upon this ring becomes apparent only 
when it is tried on, and the ring only can be 
removed by means normally used to rid oneself 
of a cursed item, The wearer becomes listless and 
can make no decisions, offers no opinions, and 
generally must reply to all questions with expres- 
sions of ennui such as “I don't care,” “It doesn't 
matter,” “It’s all the same to me,” and similar dis- 
heartening statements. There is a 10% chance 
that, if attacked, the character won't even raise a 
hand in his or her own defence. 


nce 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
Dracon Magazine 73 
Anyone wearing this item appears io be 8 10% 
lighter in weight than actual. Generally, the effect 
is to make overweight people look normal or nor- 
mal ones look quite slim. 


of Aquatic Depth Location 

XP Value: 1,200 GP Value: 6,000 
PouwnroroNs Newazine 43 
This ring allows onc to determine the depth of 
any body of water at a given point by mercly 
observing it while wearing the ring. If used while 
in the water or underwater, it also reveals the 
approximate location of the nearest land mass 
above the water line, be it a wall, a beach, or an 
island, 


41% 


8 948 7 


x Ring, Bladeturmng * 


Arachnid Control 


XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
Dunuion Magazine 24 

The ring of arachnid control is a specialized ver- 
sion of a ring of animal control. The wearer of 
this ring may control one giant or 10-40 normal- 
sized arachnids of any type. This includes spi- 
ders, scorpions, mites, and ticks. The arachnids 
are not allowed a saving throw. 

The wearer must be able to see the arachnids to 
control them, Control lasts as long as the wearer 
concentrates on the arachnids and does not fight. 
(The wearer may move slowly if doing so does 
not break the line of sight.) When the wearer 
stops concentrating, the arachnids are free to run 
away or attack. This ring can be used for a full 
turn, once per hour. 


of Armoring 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 10,000 
Tome of Magic 


A wizard wearing this ring gains an additional +1 
bonus to any AC bonus received from casting a 
spell upon his or her own person. Thus, an armor 
spell grants a wizard AC § instead of AC 6, and a 
shield spell grants the wizard AC 1 vs. hand- 
hurled missiles instead of AC 2. Restrictions that 
apply to a spell (for example, armor does not 
affect a character already wearing armor) are in 
no way altered through use of this ring. 


of Avian Control 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
Land of Fate 

This ring enables its wearer to exercise complete 
control over birds with an intelligence of 4 or 
less. Up to 40 Hit Dice of birds may be con- 
trolled. The control is such that orders harmful to 
the birds will be followed, but complete concen- 
tration is required to maintain control. The ring 
does not affect hybrid bird creatures. If any doubt 
exists as to whether a creature is a hybrid with 
another form (such as a manticore or lammasu), 
the ring cannot function, 


Awareness 
XP Value: 1,200 GP Value: 6,000 
DRAGON Magazine 82 
This ring heightens the senses of a wearer to such 
an extent that the character can only be surprised 
ume in 20. However, for every consecutive hour 
this ring is worn, there is a cumulative 1% chance 


949 


that the wearer becomes temporarily afflicted 
with paranoia. The paranoia persists for a nurnber 
of rounds equal to the number of hours the ring 
was worn (unless cured by magical means), and 
cannot be negated by removing the ring after the 
paranoia has taken effect. If the wearer is not 
already afflicted, the cumulative chance of para- 
noia drops to zero when the ring is removed and 
begins again at 1% when it is put back on, even if 
the removal only lusts for a moment. 


Bard's 
XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 15,000 
Deacon Magazine 117 

This rare, magical ring, when worn by a charac- 
ter other than a bard, acts as a ring of protection 
+2. It can be recognized by the engraved golden 
vines encircling the band. When placed on the 
finger of a bard, it retains its protection proper- 
ties, but with a bonus, The ring then serves as a 
ring of protection +2, +4 on saving throws. It 
also raises the bard's charm percentage by 10%. 
This magic item ix usually found in a wilderness 
or forest arca. 


of Beauty 
XP Value: 1,200 GP Value: 6,000 
POLYHEDRON Introductory Issue 
This magic ring increases the wearer's Charisma 
and comeliness by 2 points, to a maximum of 18, 
or to the characters racial limitations, whichever 
is higher. 


Berronar Truesilver’s Silver 
XP Value GP Value 
Detect Lies: 1,000 5,000 
Thief Negation: 5,000 25,000 
Monster Mythology 


The avatar wears two silver rings, one of which 
allows her to automatically detect lies within 30 
feet while the other negates all thief skills within 
30 feet (save vs. spell at —2 cach round to use 
such skills), 


Bladeturning 
XP Value: 1,500 GP Value: 7,000 
Dracon Magazine 82 
This ring can deflect attacks made with metallic 
weapons, The wearer can deflect one such attack 
per round, provided he or she is engaged in per- 
sonal defense, not simply aiding someone else 


To use the ring, the wearer declares that he or she 
4184 


~ Ring, Dlink 9 


wishes to deflect an attack, and which attack is to 
be turned back, if more than one opponent is 
involved or if an opponent has more than one 
attack per round. The wearer must declare intent 
before the opponents THACO roll is made. The 
attack, whether it would have hit or not, is imme- 
diately turned aside. Each of these rings has 3410 
charges when found, and cannot be recharged. 
Note the ring cannot deflect an attack if a THACO 
roll has already been made by the opponent; if the 
attack hits, damage must be taken, and one of the 
rings charges is used anyway, even if it misses. 


Blink 
XP Value: 7,000 GP Value: 25,000 
Shadowdale 
This seemingly normal brass ring has four func- 
tions, cach usable once in any turn, It can cause 
the wearer to Alink (as the 3rd-level wizard spell), 
become invisible (as the wizard spell invisibility), 
or create mirror images of the wearer (as the 2nd- 
level spell, creating one or two images, as the 
wearer desires). It can also function as a cloak of 
displacement, but this function ends if any other 
ring powers are activated, and cannot be called 
into being again until a full turn has elapsed. 
Blink ring powers can only be newly activated 
every other round. There must be at least one 
round of inactivity between the cessation of one 
power use and the next activation of the ring. 


of Blinking 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
Dunoton MASTER Guide 

When the wearer of this ring issues the proper 
verbal command, it activates, and affects the user 
as ifa blink spell were operating upon him or her- 
self, The effect lasts for six rounds, The ring then 
ceases to function for six turns (one hour) while it 
replenishes itself, The command word is usually 
engraved somewhere on the ring. The ring acti- 
vates whenever this word is spoken, even though 
the command might be given by someone other 
than the wearer, provided that the word is spoken 
within 10 feet of the ring. 


of Boccob 
GP Value; 2,500 
Unearthed Arcana 
This ornate piece of jewelry initially appears to 
be a valuable, nonmagical ring. Even magical 
detection of the most powerful sort will not reveal 


XP Value: 500 


the dweomer of this ring. The function of the ring 
comes into play whenever the wearer is assailed 
by any magical device which actually contacts his 
or her person the device will malfunction, fail- 
ing to affect its intended target, und if it does not 
save vs. spell, it is turned into a nonmagical item. 
Whenever the ring cancels the power of an item 
in this fashion, it ceases to function for Ida hours 
aficr that. After this period of quiescence, it again 
operates normally. Note that single-use magic 
items, such as a magical arrow, a crossbow bolt, 
or a javelin of lightning, do not have their func- 
tions canceled by the ring, but merely give the 
wearer protection from their magical effects. This 
immunity from magical effect does not prevent 
normal damage from being administered by such 
an item, Saving throws for items against the can- 
cellation power of the ring are as follows: 
1 Automatic failure for any item. 
2 Saving throw for relics. 
3 — Saving throw for artifacts. 
4 Faving throw for hand held weapons. 
5 Saving throw for rods and staves. 
6 Saving throw for all other items. 
7-20 Any item saves on a roll in this range 


Bone 
XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 20,000 
Lords of Darkness 
This plain finger ring is always carved from 
human bone; the method of making such magical 
rings is secret, but their numbers seem to be 
increasing. When worn, a bone ring prevents 
energy and strength drain from any source (such 
as undead and hostile spells), Each such ring has 
d charges; cach defensive use exhausts one 
charge until the ring crumbles to dust. The wearer 
is not made aware of how many charges a given 
bone ring has remaining, Bone rings are not 


rechargeable, 


Browdow’s Ring of Utmost 
Weapon Harm 
XP Value: 7,500 GP Value: 19,000 
Potynrnkon Newszine 90 

This platinum-mithral alloy ring has a small pearl 
on the top and can be only be worn by warriors. 
Other individuals who try to wear the ring find 
that it is too small for any finger. 

Only cight such rings were fashioned, created 
nearly 200 years ago by Browdow, a dwarven 
priest of Clangeddin Silverbeard. When worn, the 


950 


x Ring of Burbul — 


ring bestows a +1 THACO and +2 to damage in 
addition to any other bonuses of the wearer or of 
his or her weapons. 

Further, the ring can grant the following abili- 
ties once a day, at the wearer’s command, The 
abilities cannot be used in concert, 

The wearer's Strength score is increased to 
18/00 for five consecutive rounds. 

During five consecutive rounds, all the 
wearer's successful hits inflict maximum dam- 
age. 

The wearer is healed of 8 hit points. 

The wearer is automatically successful with 
one weapon attack. The wearer must state that 
he or she ts calling on this ability, and does not 
make an attack roll. 

If the wearer calls upon all four of the ring’s 
special abilities in one day, he or she suffers a 
temporary loss of 2 points of Constitution. This 
can be regained after eight hours of sleep. 


of Burbul 
XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 20,000 
DUNGEON Magazine 28 

This intelligent ring is both cursed and blessed. 
Each time a person dons the ring, it instantly 
shapes itself to fit the wearer's finger, It will not 
allow itself to be removed after that time until 
cither the person dies or a remove curse spell is 
successfully cast. The ring talks out loud in a 
high-pitched voice and tries to get someone to put 
it on by bragging about its vast powers. A detect 
lie spell will not reveal anything about the truth 
or falsity of the ring 5 words. 

The ring of Burbul is actually a modified ver- 
sion of a ring of contrariness, but instead of hav- 
ing only one of the listed powers, it has access to 
all six powers, The ring has a craving for precious 
metals, the more precious the better. It eats them, 
using them as a source of power for both its exis- 
tence and spell use. It prefers coins but does not 
turn down other small metal items such as ear- 
rings or other rings, 

Each time the wearer wishes the ring to use a 
power, the DM should roll percentile dice twice. If 
the spell requested is one of the six available, there 
is a 20% chance (first roll) that the power will be 
activated. Ifthe power fails or if the power requested 
is not possessed by the ring, the innate contruriness 
of the ring causes it to claim that it doesn't have 
enough power at the time to cast that spell. In addi- 
tion, if the second roll was 10% or less, the ring’s 


contrariness affects the wearer like a ring of con- 
trariness. No save is allowed, since the person is 
wearing a cursed item, The condition of contrari- 
ness becomes permanent unless a limited wish, 
wish, alter reality, or remove curse is cast. 

The ring of Burbul has access to the following 
spell powers: fly, invisibility, levitation, shocking 
grasp, spell turning, and strength, The ring will not 
necessarily reveal to the wearer all of these powers 
at first (DM's option), it may boast of other nonex- 
istent powers. It always insists on being fed before 
it attempts a spell. The amount of metal it wants 
before casting a spell is not a fixed value and may 
be negotiated with the ring on a case-by-case basis 
that depends upon the gravity of the situation the 
wearer (and thus the ring) is in. It sometimes 
accepts a promise to feed it well in the near future 
if it will perform a task immediately, but it will 
remember if the promise is not kept. (If the ring 
perceives great danger to itself or its wearer, it may 
decide to cast any of its spells.) 

The rings mouth can stretch to accommodate 
objects up to 14 by 4 by % inch. Its interior is like 
a small bag of holding, and it can store up a great 
number of coins for later digestion. In extremely 
dire circumstances, the wearer might be clever 
enough to persuade the ring to literally “cough 
up” some coins. 

In addition to coins, the ring loves small magical 
items such as rings. It may say that, if fed a tiny 
magical item, it will gain the item powers. This is 
partially true, and only for the first time the ring is 
fed a magical item by its current owner. Thus, if the 
wearer fed it a ring of fire resistance, the ring of 
Burbul would gain the abilities of a ring of fire 
resistance. Unfortunately, it could access them only 
20% of the time, with a chance of causing the 
wearer to become contrury. After the first magical 
item is consumed, there is only a 25% chance it will 
gain a new power each time it is fed an item; other- 
wise, the item and its power are lost, If this occurs, 
the ring apologizes and claims ignorance. 

The ring does not like wizards, priests, pal- 
adins, or rangers because these classes cast 
spells. It likes to have the limelight all to itself. It 
is of neutral-good alignment and does not func- 
tion for evil persons. It loves small, fun-loving 
demihumans, like halflings and kender. The more 
mischievous the use of its powers, the more likely 
it is to perform (the DM should assign a higher 
percentile for the ring to work in such cases). 


The ring assumes the name of its current wearer 
4190 


E 


951 


~q Ring of Bureaucratie Wizardry r 


(the last wearer was Burbul, a Hairfoot). It should 
be played by the DM in a manner to add comic 
reliefas well as mystery. It instantly gains the abil- 
ity to speak the language of its current wearer, and 
thus knows many languages from across the galaxy 
(the DM should decide what these might be). It will 
sometimes recall strange tales or humorous jokes. 
The ring does not know its own origin or age, but it 
has been around for many centuries. 


of Bureaucratic Wizardry 
XP Value: GP Value: 1,500 
Tome of Magic 


This cursed ring is indistinguishable from a ring of 


wizardry, but has one important difference. When 
a wizard casts any spell while wearing the ring, a 
sheaf of papers and a quill pen suddenly appears in 
hand, The papers are forms that must be filled out 
in triplicate explaining the effects of the spell, why 
the wizard wishes to cast it, whether it is for busi- 
ness or pleasure, and so on. The forms must be 
filled out before the effects of the spell will occur, 
The higher the level of the spell cast, the more 
complicated the forms become. Filling out the 
forms requires one round per level of spell. 

As soon as the papers are filled out, the forms 
and the pen disappear and the spell effects occur 
just as the spellcaster desired, A ring of bureau- 
cratic wizardry cannot be easily removed. Remove 
curse Or a similar spell must be cast upon the 
wearer in order to remove the ring. 


of Cantrips 
XP Value: 500 GP Value; 2,500 
Wizard's Challenge 

Similar rings are known to exist, and are usually 
made of brass engraved with symbols inside and 
out, While wearing one, a wizard or bard can cast 
any cantrip magic, as described in the spell 
description. The wizard may create 1d4+4 effects 
per day, and cach effect lasts as long as the wiz- 
ard concentrates, 


Cat’s Eye 

GP Value: 2,500 
Rage of the Rakasta 
This looks like a simple gold ring set with a gem 
that looks very much like the eye of a cat. It was 
crafted several decades ago as a gift for a human 
warrior who had done a great service for the 
rakasta. When that hero died, the ring was returned 
to the rakasta, who are saving it to give to the next 


XP Value: 500 


human hero that earns their favor. When worn, it 
gives its owner infravision, just like that possessed 
by dwarves, elves, or rakasta. The ring has no effect 
if worn by a character who already has infravision. 


Chameleon Power 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
DUNGEON Master Guide, Ist Edition 

Whenever the wearer of this ring desires, he or she is 
able to blend in with the surroundings. This enables 
90% invisibility in foliage, against walls, and so 
forth. If the wearer is associating with creatures of 
Intelligence 4 or greater at a distance of 60 feet or 
less, the ring enables the wearer to seem to be one of 
those creatures, but each turn of such association 
carries a 5% cumulative chance that the creatures 
will detect the ring wearer for what him or she is. 
Thus, such an association can never persist for more 
than 20 turns without the wearer being detected—at 
the end of that time, the chance of detection has risen 
to 100%. Creatures with 16 or greater Intelligence 
use their Intelligence score as an addition to the base 
chance of detection, For example, a creature of Intel- 
ligence 16 would have a base chance of 16 + 5% = 
21% at the end of turn one, 26% at the end of turn 
two, and so forth Creatures with 3 or lower Intelli- 
gence instinctively and automatically detect the 
wearer if they come within 10 feet. 


of Cirulon 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 10,000 
Dragon Keep 
This is a clear, crystal ring that contains flecks of 
the same color as the dragon that presented it. 
The ring must be worn on the right hand. It cures 
light wounds (less than 6 points of damage) com- 
pletely and heals a mortal wound sufficiently to 
prevent death (bringing the character up to | hit 
point). The ring is activated by touch. It can be 
used only once, 


Cilidarius’s Ring of Wizardry 
XP Value: 4,500 GP Value: 56,000 
1992 Fantasy Collector Card 267 
Gilidarius placed his ring of wizardry upon the 
rune of magical absorption on the great stone table 
in Raistlin’s laboratory. He left it there for a full 
cycle of the moon, Nuitari, doing this while Raistlin 
was away from the Tower of High Sorcery. As a 
result, the ring not only doubles his 4th-level spells, 
but he can carry one extra necromantic spell of 


each level whenever Nuitari is in its full phase. 
4190 


r a ae 


952 


Ring of the Comet 


EE ee 


Clairaudience 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 7,500 
DRAGON Magazine 117 

This ring’s gem is a small amethyst with a normal 
value of 100 gp. The amethyst is easily separated 
from the ring; it can then be placed in a location 
where the owner wishes to eavesdrop. A pick 
pockets roll allows a thief to secretly slip the 
amethyst into the clothes of another character, 
Any character can hide the gem in an empty 
room, barring extraordinary circumstances, 

Whatever is said within 60 feet of the amethyst 
is magically transmitted to the ring itself, and the 
words are then heard by the ring wearer alone. 
The gem-ring connection has a range of 48 
inches, but only transmits sounds that could be 
heard by a normal human in the same location as 
the amethyst. 


Clear Thought 
XP Value: 1,500 GP Value: 7,500 
DUNGEON MAGAZINE 13 

Similar to a ring of free action, this item dimin- 
ishes the chance for others to gain control over 
the wearer. Where a ring of free action limits 
attempts to restrain the wearer's physical capabil- 
ities, a ring of clear thought is particularly 
attuned to those spells that affect mental capaci- 
ties. The wearer gains immunity to the effects of 
certain mind-based spells such as sleep, charm, 
and fear. He also gains a +4 bonus to his saving 
throw vs. the psionic blast power. 

If an undead creature wears the ring, it is 
afforded some protection against the turning abil- 
ity of priests. A priest’s chance to turn a creature 
wearing the ring is determined as if the priest 
were four levels lower than his or her actual level 
of experience. 

While the ring is worn, the wearer gains the 
temporary benefit of adding | point to Intelli- 
gence (18 maximum), as if using a scarlet and 
blue ioun stone. All effects of the ring are lost if 
the ring is removed or destroyed. 


of Cloaked Wizardry and Invisibility* 
XP Value: +500 GP Value: +2,500 
DRAGON Magazine 179 

This ring functions as a ring of invisiblity, but the 
ring, the wearer and all carried items are not only 
invisible, but undetectable by normal means, such 
as detect magic, An identify or legend lore spell 
or ability can reveals its true nature, however. 


of Clumsiness 
GP Value: 3,000 
DUNGEON Master Guide 
This cursed ring typically radiates an aura like 
another, beneficial, ring to disguise its baneful 
nature. The possible secondary powers are: 


XP Value: — 


Roll Secondary Power 


01-10 Free Action 
11-20 Feather Falling 
21-35 Invisibility 
36-50 Jumping 
51-60 Swimming 
61-80 Warmth 
81-00 Water Walking 


The secondary power works normally, except 
when the wearer is under stress—combat, stealth, 
delicate activity, and the like—at which time the 
clumsiness takes effect. Dexterity is reduced to 
half normal, rounded down. Chances for stealth 
and precise actions are also lowered by one-half, 
rounded down. Any attempt at spellcasting that 
requires the handling of a material component or 
the accomplishment of a somatic component will 
succeed only if the wearer rolls a successful sav- 
ing throw vs. spell, otherwise, the spell is botched 
and annulled. 

The ring can be taken off only by a success- 
fully cast dispel magic spell, cast at the 12th 
level. Success destroys both the primary and sec- 
ondary power of the ring. 


of the Comet 

XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 10,000 
Crystal Spheres 

This ring appears to be nothing more than a valu- 
able piece of jewelry. The band is a magically 
enhanced platinum alloy, and a large, perfectly 
cut emerald is set in the band. These elements 
alone give the ring a value in excess of 3,000 gp 
in an open market. It is worth far more than that 
due to its powerful enchantment, 

The ring is of particular value to spacefarers 
because it has the ability to summon a comet steed. 
Comet steeds are rare space-mounts that have the 
ability to travel at spelljamming speed. The ring, 
when found, has 4d4 charges. Each use, regardless 
of success, permanently drains one charge from the 
item. It cannot, by any means short of a wish, be 
recharged. Once the item's charges have been 
depleted, it is nonfunctional (but the owner still has 


420 


= 953 


P ee 


Ring of Command 


—ñ—— ö — — — R E 


E" = ai 
W 


ii, 


y 


a very beautiful, very valuable ring). 

A charge is expended any time the user 
attempts to summon a comet steed. First, the DM 
should decide if a comet steed is available in the 
area. If the DM would like to determine ran- 
domly, assume a 30% chance of a steed being 
available. The comet steed gets a saving throw vs. 
magic. If it fails, then it must travel to the sum- 
moner post-haste (which is fast for a horse that 
can spelljam!), 

A summoned comet steed must serve the 
owner of the ring unless he or she is evil. A comet 
steed never serves evil creatures. The steed will 
serye the summoncr for one mission and then it 
departs, The DM has final discretion as to what 
constitutes a mission, but in any case, the length 
of servitude cannot exceed one month, The comet 
steed will not risk its life for the summoner. 

The origin of the item is unknown. Most likely, 
it was created by spacefaring wizards for 
groundlings who would not know how to engage 
the assistance of the comet steed (or perhaps not 
even know of the existence of comet steeds!) 

It is not known how many of these rings exist, 
but there are certainly more than one and proba- 
bly several dozen. The arcane have been known to 
have the rings available for sale or trade, in their 
fashion. 


9 


54 


of Command 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 10,000 
DraGON Magazine 117 
A ring of command commonly has 3d10 charges 
when found. The ring has the following abilities, 
only one of which can be used at any given time: 

I. Command: This ability duplicates the Ist- 
level priest spell of the same name, Creatures 
with an Intelligence of 13 or better (highly Intel- 
ligent or above monsters) or with more than $ 
HD or levels are entitled to a saving throw vs. 
spell. A command uses up one charge for every 
round the command is in effect. For instance, an 
ore could be told to “die!” and would stay 
“dead” (unconscious) for 5 rounds if five 
charges were spent. 

2. Charm person: This power is the same as the 
Ist- level wizard spell. Two charges must be spent to 
charm a character and an additional charge per day 
must be expended to continue the spell each day 
after that. The victim is allowed a saving throw vs 
spell to negate the charm. A character using a ring 
of command can expend another two charges to try 
again, of course, in the event the victim saves, 

3. Suggestion: This ability is similar to the 
3rd-level wizard spell. The target of a suggestion 
is allowed a saving throw vs. spell, as with charm 
person above. A suggestion costs two charges and 
lasts for one hour. More charges can be spent for 
additional hours, at a rate of one an hour, as 
desired. 

All of these powers only work on the humanoids 
listed in the PHB under charm person, and their 
counterparts in the MONSTROUS COMPENDIUM 
Appendices, MONSTROUS MANUAL” accessory, and 
the race-oriented iH. 


of Continual Churning 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 2,500 
Wonders of LANKHMAR 

When placed on a finger, this ring does nothing. 
When it is placed on a spoon or stirrer of any sort, it 
begins to spin the spoon around, churning any liq- 
uid the spoon is placed in. If there is no liquid, it 
continues to gyrate as though liquid were present. 
The ring is designed to help alchemists who have 
delicate mixing to perform that require uninter- 
rupted stirring for great lengths of time. 

The ring could be put on a broom, but the 
broom would only sweep in a circular pattern 
over the same spot, until the ring is removed. 


4203 


x Ring, Crius 


of Contrariness 

GP Value: 1,000 
Duwonon Mastik Guide 
This magical ring is cursed, making its wearer 
unable to agree with any idea, statement, or 
action. Once put on, the ring can be removed only 
after a remove curse spell is cast upon the indi- 
vidual wearing it, Because of the curse, the 
wearer will resist any attempts to cast such a 
spell. The contrariness ring will have one of the 
following additional magical properties: 


XP Value: — 


Roll Additional Property 


01-20 Flying 

21-40 = Invisibility 

41-60 Levitation 

61-70 = Shocking Grasp (once per round) 
71-80 Spell Turning 

81-00 Strength (18/00) 


Note that contrariness can never be removed 
from the ring. The wearer uses his or her own pow- 
ers, and those of the ring, to keep it on a finger. 
The wearer of the ring never damages him or her- 
self. If, for example, other characters suggest that 
the wearer make certain that personal attacks are 
well-defended, or that the wearer should not strike 
his or her own head, the ring wearer will agree— 
possibly attacking or striking at the speaker's 
head—because obviously the result must be con- 
trary in this case. If a ring of contrariness turns 
spells, the cumulative remove curse cast upon the 
individual wearing it must equal or exceed 100%. 


of Coolness 

XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
Da a Crown* Sourcebox 

This green jade ring is similar in function to the 
ring of warmth, except that it protects against the 
heat of the desert sun, It protects its wearer from 
the effects of heat, even when fully exposed to the 
sun and wearing heavy armor, It provides restora- 
tion of heat-sustained damage at the rate of | 
point of damage per turn, It also increases saving 
throws vs, heat-based attacks by +2, and reduces 
damage sustained by I per dic, 


Corkitron’s Ring of Human Influence 
XP Value: 1,500 GP Value: 7.500 
1992 Fantasy Collector Card 191 
Corhtron’s version of a typical ring of human 
influence is very similar to the normal one. Cork- 


itron x Charisma is raised to 18 for all encounter 
reactions, and a suggestion and charm person 
spell can cach be cast once a day. Corkitron’s ring 
can charm up to 28 levels or Hit Dice of creatures 
(rather than 21). It also has the unfortunate effect 
of turning all failed encounter reaction checks 
against Corkitron to severely hostile. 


Courtly Etiquette 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 


DRAGON Magazine 73 
The ring of courtly etiquette is a simple silver 
band. The wearer of this ring is able to speak and 
act in a courtly manner, regardless of upbringing 
or familiarity with social conventions. 


Crius's 
XP Value: 3,500 GP Value: 25,000 
DRAGON Magazine 117 
Crius is the greater titan of density and gravity, and 
was one of those thrown down from power by his 
descendants. Being jealous of the new (Olympian) 
gods that the mortals worship, and wanting to con- 
trol the fate of those on the Prime Material Plane, 
Crius placed a portion of his power in a ring and 
cast it into the world. The ring is a plain copper 
band with the name Crius engraved on the inside. It 
performs simply ax a ring of feather falling until it 


e 955 


— — —— ĂÃķ‘ . . —ͤ⅛— 


~ Ring, Cursed Ring of the Great Kingdom r 


is immersed in the blood of a priest (of at least 5th 
level) of one of the Greek gods, at which time its 
true powers become known, 

At will it can: 
+ Decrease body density as per the psionic abil- 
ity body Equilibrium (the wearer takes double 
damage from all attacks at this time). 
Create a gravity field around the wearer that 
causes all launched missiles (arrows, spears, 
etc.) to fall short and miss, if they fail to save. 
Once per day it will: 
Increase body density to act as a triple strength 
stone skin spell (three attacks or attack 
sequences affected; the wearer is at half move- 
ment at this time). 
Reverse gravity as a 10th-level wizard, 
Increase gravity in a 40- by 40-foot area to such a 
degree that all creatures and objects within the 
area are immobilized. If a save vs. spell is made, 
creatures are still affected as if under a slow spell, 
A select group of the priests of Zeus has been 
chosen to search for and destroy the rings of 
crius. This brotherhood will go to any length to 
carry out its quest, for the ring is thought to be 
linked to a possible rebellion of the titans against 
the Greek gods. 


Cursed Ring of the Great Kingdom 
XP Value: GP Value: 2,000 
Gaeviawk Adventures 
This cursed magical item was created by a wizard 
who was loyal to the Great Kingdom, Though the 
ring has only limited power, its use to plague the 

diplomats of the Iron League was well known. 

Once it has been placed on a character's finger, 
the ring causes problems when the wearer 
attempts to use the charisma reaction bonus, As 
the character tries to make a good impression, the 
victim commits an embarrassing faux pas instead. 
The effect depends upon the occasion: If the 
encounter requires manners, the character might 
belch; if it is a solemn event, the wearer may gig- 
gle; if it requires silence, a loud sneeze; if it 
requires the character's full attention, a long yawn 
might be produced, and so on. 

A character making a successful saving throw 
vs. spell is unaffected and receives his normal 
charisma bonus, If the saving throw is failed, the 
character receives a -50% penalty to the reaction 
check, The ring itself can be removed from the 
unfortunate character's finger, but the curse 
remains until negated by a remove curse spell. 


Note that the ring can be passed to many owners, 
and the ring can affect them all equally. 


of Curses 
GP Value: 1,500 
Prince of LANKHMAR 
These rings come in all varieties. They can be 
very dangerous items, or excellent contingency 
objects. A cursed ring occurs when the enchant- 
ments performed on a ring fail. When this hap- 
pens, the ring tends to take on a property either 
exactly the opposite of the intended purpose, or a 
random, unguessable, property, 

For example, if an evil wizard were attempting 
to make a ring of regeneration, the failed ring 
may end up as a ring of degeneration, or else the 
ring would take on a completely random prop- 
erty. Below, there is a list of optional effects that 
can occur with a failed enchantment. 


XP Value: — 


Roll Effect 
01-50 No special effect. The item completely 
refuses to accept the enchantment. 


51-70 The effect is exactly opposite. 

71-80 The ring becomes cursed, and explodes 
when removed from the finger for 5d6 
points of damage. 

81-90 The ring can never be removed short of 
a wish, 

91-00 The ring causes everyone within 15 feet 


to roll Wisdom checks, with failure 
meaning they attack the closest charac- 
ter for 1d6 rounds. 


One thing to realize is that this ring does not reg- 
ister as cursed when an identify spell is cast upon it; 
nor does it register as evil with a know alignment 
spell. In that instance, there is a percentage chance 
equal to the wizard’s level of detecting that there is 
something terribly wrong with the ring, Of course, 
if a result of 01-50 is achieved above, the ring does 
not register as being magical. 


Dalamar’s Ring of Healing 
XP Value: 5,000 GP Value: 40,000 
DRAGONLANCE Adventures 
These rings were often used throughout the ages as 
wizards" last defenses against death. This ring works 
only for magic-users and must be worn upon the 
right hand. It can cure a light wound (less than 6 
points of damage), completely and can heal a mortal 


wound sufficiently to prevent death (it brings the 
421 


s 956 f 


` Ring of Dizziness r 


character up to | hit point). It is activated by touch. 
Once used, the ring cannot be used again by that PC. 


Dart 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 2,500 
Deacon Maguzine $ 
Created by sylvan creatures, the dart ring adjusts 
its size to fit the finger of any humanesque hand, 
The darts fired by this ring are thornlike points. 
When it hits, the dart causes | point of damage, 
but the victim struck dies of poisoning in two days 
unless a neutralize poison spell is used or a saving 
throw vs. poison with a -A penalty is made. The 
ning fires once per turn (10 rounds) at distances up 
to 30 feet. The dart ring has 10d4 charges. 
When fired, the dart attacks with a THACO of 10. 
It ignores all magical bonuses to Armor Class 
granted from rings, armor, or other items. A dart only 
takes Dexterity bonuses, and nonmagical bonuses 
from actual armor and shields. In other words, rings 
of protection, robes of protection, potions of dis- 
placements, magical bonuses from armor, and other 


of Delusion 
XP Value: GP Value: 2,000 
Dunanon Master Guide 
A delusion ring convinces the wearer that it is 
some other sort of ring—whatever sort the wearer 
really wants. The wearer is completely convinced 
that the ring is actually one with other magical 
properties, and unconsciously uses abilities of any 
sort (including those of other magical items avail- 
able) to produce a result commensurate with the 
supposed properties of the delusion ring. The DM 
determines how successful the self-delusion is, as 
well as how observers are affected and what they 
observe. The ring can be removed at any time. 


Depetrification 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 10,000 


Dunanon MAGAZINE 25 
This gold ring, set with a large red ruby, can cast 
the equivalent of a stone to flesh spell. The ring 
must be worn and touched to a stone in order to 
activate the effect. A successful depetrification 
uses up one charge, 

The ring only works on creatures that have 
been petrified by magical means, such as a flesh 
to stone spell or the gaze of a basilisk. Touching 
the ring to a normal stone has no effect. The ring 


holds 15 charges and can be recharged. 


9 


5 


7 


of Disguise 
XP Value: 600 GP Value: 3,000 
PotyHEennon Newszine 47 
Three times per day, this ring can alter the 
wearer's appearance as though the 2nd-level Wie- 
ard spell, alter self had been cast. Each change 
lasts for one turn, The ring can be used by any 


Distraction 
XP Value GP Value 
Normal: 1,000 5,000 
Rare: 1,500 7,500 
Cursed: — 1,000 


DRAGON Magazine 117 
This ring seems to be a normal ring. In combat, it 
is capable of generating a sudden burst of light 
and sound that ix perceived only by one opponent 
in melee with the ring wearer (including those 
firing or hurling missile weapons within a 60- 
foot range). The burst of light and sound is heard 
by no one else, and the target victim is designated 
by the ring wearer's mental commands. This dis- 
traction causes the attacker to suffer a A penalty 
on all attacks for the current round. If the oppo- 
nent saves vs, spell, the penalty is reduced to a 2 
to the attack roll. This attack is made at the start 
of a melee round, regardless of all other circum- 
stances, as it is a mental command. The ring may 
be used in this fashion up to five times per day. 
Once placed on a finger, the ring reveals its pow- 
ers to its wearer, One out of five (20%) of these 
rings do not operate on a conscious mental com- 
mand, however. These rings simply generate a 
flash and sound burst for the first five melee 
rounds in which the wearer is involved in combat 
in a day, As a result, the wearer might not imme- 
diately be aware that the ring is having any effect 
at all, though the ring wearer's opponents may 
appear to act strangely. Another 5% of these rings 
are cursed (and cannot be removed without a 
remove curse spell) to cause the flash and noise 
burst to affect the wearer himself and no one else, 


of Dizziness 

GP Value: 2,500 
Old Empires 

This cursed, magical item is sometimes found in 
the tombs of Mulhorand, placed there to punish 
grave robbers, This appears to be a normal magical 
ring, perhaps a ring of protection. When used in an 
actual combat where the wearer may be hurt, the 
EPELI 


XP Value: — 


Ring of Djinni Summoning 


n.. Aq q a RE 


wearer becomes violently dizzy. The wearer must 
roll a successful saving throw vs. spell or be unable 
to attack. Even if the saving throw is successful, all 
of the victim's attacks suffer a 4 penalty to attack 
rolls, and all attacks against the wearer gain a +4 
bonus to the attack roll, 


of Djinni Summoning 


XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 20,000 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide, Ist Edition 

One of the many fabled rings of fantasy legend, a 
“genie” ring is a most useful possession. It is a 
special “gate” by means of which a certain djinni 
can be summoned from the Elemental Plane of 
Air. When the ring is rubbed, the summons is 
served, and the djinni will appear on the next 
round. The djinni will faithfully obey and serve 
the wearer of the ring, but if the servant of the 
ring is ever killed, the ring becomes nonmagical 
and worthless. See the MONSTROUS MANUAL 
accessory for details of a djinni’s abilities. 

In a Dragonlance Campaign: Rings of djinni 
summoning do not exist on Ansalon. 

In Ravenloft: The djinni appears, and serves 
the wearer once, After that service, the djinni tries 
to return to its own plane—and cannot, This is a 
violation of the pact of the ring; the djinni is 
freed. If its former master was kind and reason- 


able, the djinni leaves to find its own exit from 
the demiplane. If its former master was cruel and 
harsh, the djinni attacks. 


Draupnir 
XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 20,000 
Gods, Demigods, & Herocs 
This artifact produces a similar golden ring of 
1d6(x10,000) gp value every night. Odin's avatar 
often gives these away to his faithful servants, the 
Einheriar, or those others that please him. 


Draupnir I 
XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 20,000 
Dunagons & Dragons Master Set 

In Scandinavian legend, draupnir, the famed magi- 
cal ring, was made by Odin for the dwarves. Every 
nine nights the ring produced cight nonmagical 
rings equal in size and beauty to itself, and is thus a 
fertility symbol. While this ring is worn, the user 
suffers only one-half damage from all attacks. Suc- 
cessful saving throws reduce the damage by 75%. 


Drow 
XP Value GP Value 
To Drow: 1,000 5,000 
To Nondrow: — 1,000 


DRAGON Magazine 117 

This item is made of eight strands of different, 
unique metals entwined to form a ring. The drow 
found it troublesome when their magical items 
deteriorated upon leaving their underground 
homeland for long periods of time; to combat 
this, they created this ring. The ring of the drow is 
only made in the drow homelands by the priests 
of Lolth, Its purpose is to keep drow-made items 
in possession of a wearer from deteriorating. To 
do this, the ring radiates an aura of magical 
energy that duplicates the radiations deep in the 
drow homelands. This aura only affects the 
wearer and the wearer's possessions. 

As a side effect of the ring’s magical aura, a 
detect magic spell reveals the wearer to radiate 
magic strongly. In addition, detect evil shows the 
wearer of one of these rings as evil, and Anow align- 
ment indicates that the wearer is chaotic evil, regard- 
less of the wearer's true alignment. If the wearer 
uses the psionic power of Aura Alteration to try to 
change the aura, the wearer must save vs. spell or 
else change alignment to chaotic evil. If the wearer 
saves, or if the wearer fails to save but is already 


chaotic evil, the psionic power functions normally, 
4220 


= 958 


a 


J a 


Ring of hlemental Adaptation — 


and the ring aura is temporarily changed, 

To possess one of these rings is considered a 
great honor among the drow, because it signifies 
that the wearer has traveled far from the homeland, 
and that he or she was aided by a priestess favored 
by Lolth. Drow will kill any creature other than a 
drow who possesses one of these rings. 


Fi <3 —. 
N 


of the Eagle 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
Dracon Magazine 91 

This ring allows the wearer, at will, to shape 
change into a giant eagle for an unlimited period 
of time. All of the wearer's clothing and personal 
possessions carried (except for live beings) are 
merged with the giant eagle form and are unus- 
able while the ring wearer is in that form. The 
user may fly for up to 12 hours nonstop, but suf- 
fers from exhaustion effects after that, losing | hit 
point per turn until stopping to rest for 3-6 hours. 

In eagle form, the user of the ring retains his or 
her normal hit points, Intelligence and Wisdom 
scores, and psionic abilities (if any), Spells can- 
not be cast (although the memory of spells 
already learned or prayed for is not affected), nor 
can weapons be wielded, other than the eagle's 
claw and beak attack The user has all the physi- 
cal and combat abilities of a giant cagle, includ- 


959 


ing superb vision (same effect as wearing eves of 
the eagle), The eagle’s Armor Class cannot be 
improved by any magical device; a ring of protec- 
tion slipped on a claw, for example. has no effect. 
If the user of the ring drops to less than half of his 
or her full, normal hit points, any attempt to 
Shapechange using the power of the ring fails 
until the user recovers enough hit points to bring 
the total back above the half normal amount. This 
applies whether the user is in eagle form ot in 
normal form. If the user stays in eagle form for 
longer than 24 hours at one time, there is a cumu- 
lative 1% chance per day thereafter, for as long as 
the eagle form is maintained without interrup- 
tion, that the ring’s powers will fail, rendering the 
ring powerless, and causing the wearer to remain 
in cagle form permanently unless a wish is used 
to restore the wearer. 


of the Ear 
XP Value: 600 GP Value: 3,000 
Dunarons & Dracons Rules Cyclopedia 

This ring, worn on the ear as an earring, has no 
effect when worn. However, when removed and 
placed against any surface (a door, or a chest), the 
user may hear all noises occurring within 60 feet 
of the surface. Light breathing, heartbeats, and 
even faint breezes can be heard, The ring will 
function three times per day. 


of Eelix 
XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 15,000 
DraGoN Magazine 139 
This magical ring bestows an increase of two levels 
for spelleusting when worn by a wizard; the power 
lasts one hour and can be used once per day. 


of Eclix If 

XP Value: 1,000 GP Value; 5,000 
Dracon Magazine 139 
This magical ring produces a suit of armor made 
of blue light around its wearer on demand. The 
armor is equivalent to chain mail, but weightless 
This item may be used by any class for an unlim- 
ited duration 


of Elemental Adaptation 
XP Value: 2,500 GP Value: 12,500 
Dunasoxs & Deacons Rules Cyclopedia 
There are seven different types of this ring; roll 
14100 to determine the exact type or select one as 


appropriate, 
ms 


~ Ring of Elemental Command r 


Roll Element 
01-21 = Earth 

22-42 Air 

43-63 Fire 

64-84 Water 

85-91 Earth and Fire 
92-98 Air and Water 
99-00 Al elements 


The wearer of this ring can, when in the appro- 
priate clemental plane, freely breathe and see 
through the gascous clement (the equivalent of 
air on the Prime Material Plane). 


of Elemental Command 
XP Value: 5,000 GP Value: 25,000 
Dunanon Master Guide 
The four types of elemental command rings are 
very powerful, Each appears to be nothing more 
than an ordinary ring, but each has certain other 
powers as well as the following common properties: 
1. Elementals of the plane to which the ring ts 
attuned can't attack or even approach within $ 
feet of the wearer, If the wearer desires, this pro- 
tection may be abandoned. Instead. the wearer 
can attempt to charm the elemental (saving 
throw applicable with a -2 penalty to the die). If 
the charm fails, however, total protection is lost 


and no further attempts at charming can be 
made, but the secondary properties given below 
will then function with respect to the elemental 

2. Creatures, other than normal elementals, from 
the plane to which the ring is attuned attack 
with I penalties to their attack rolls. The ring 
wearer takes damage at -I on each Hit Die and 
makes applicable saving throws from the crea- 
ture’s attacks at +2, All attacks are made by the 
wearer of the ring with a +4 bonus to the attack 
roll (or —4 on the elemental creatures saving 
throw), and the wearer inflicts +6 damage 
(total, not per dic) adjusted by any other 
applicable bonuses and penaltics. Any weapon 
used by the ring wearer can hit elementals or 
elemental creatures even if it is not magical. 

3. The wearer of the ring is able to converse with 
the elementals or elemental creatures of the 
plane to which the ring is attuned. These crea- 
tures will recognize that he wears the ring, and 
they show a healthy respect for the wearer if 
alignments are similar. If alignment is opposed, 
creatures will fear the wearer if he is strong, hate 
and desire to slay him if the wearer is weak. Fear, 
hatred, and respect are determined by the DM. 

4. The possessor of a ring of elemental command 
suffers a saving throw penalty as follows: 


Type Saving Throw Penalty 
Earth 2 vs. petrification 

Air -2 vs. fire 

Fire 2 vs. water or cold 
Water 2 vs. lightning/electricity 


S. Only one of the powers of a ring of elemen- 
tal command can be in use at any given time. In 
addition to the powers described above, the ring 
gives characters the following abilities: 


Earth 
* Stone tell (once a day) 
* Passwall (twice a day) 
* Wall of stone (once a day) 
* Stone to flesh (twice a week) 
* Move earth (once a week) 
* Featherfall 
The ring will appear to be a ring of feather falling 
until the condition established by the DM is met. 


Air 
+ Gust of wind (once per round) 
° Fly 


407 


a 


TP ð‚ỹJ́ͤD! ͤꝗ„ↄ ß mA 


* Wall of force (once a day) 

+ Control winds (once a week) 

+ Invisibility 

The ring will appear to be a ring of invisibility 
until a certain condition is met (having the ring 
blessed, slaying an air clemental, or whatever the 
DM determines as necessary to activate its full 
potential). 


Fire 

Burning hands (once per turn) 

Pyrotechnics (twice a day) 

Wall of fire (once a day) 

Flame strike (twice a week) 

Fire resistance 

The ring will appear to be a ring of fire resis- 
tance until the condition established by the DM is 
met. 


Water 

Purify water 

Create water (once a day) 

Water breathing (S-foot radius) 

Wall of ice (once a day) 

Airy water 

Lower water (twice a week) 

Part water (twice a week) 

Haterwalking 

The ring will appear to be a ring of water walking 

until the condition established by the DM is met. 
These rings operate at the 12th level, or the 

minimum level needed to perform the equivalent 

magical spell, if greater. The additional powers 

have an initiative modifier of +$, 


of Elemental Metamorphosis 
XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 15,000 
Tome of Magic 
There are four types of these rings, each corre- 
sponding to one of the four elements. When one 
of these rings is discovered, the type is deter- 
mined randomly. 


Roll Element 
l Earth 
2 Air 
3 Fire 
4 Water 


Each of these rings has the power to polymorph 
the wearer into an elemental of the appropriate 
type. When the transformation occurs, the sub- 


jects equipment is absorbed into the new form. 
The affected character retains all mental abilities, 
but cannot cast spells, 

Characters who are not accustomed to the new 
form suffer a -2 penalty on attack rolls until they 
successfully strike an opponent in two consecu- 
tive combat rounds. After this occurs, it is 
assumed they have mastered their new shape. 

The polymorphed character acquires the form 
and physical abilities of the appropriate clemen- 
tal. This includes Armor Class, but the character 
is subject to attacks by weapons of less than +2 
enchantments, movement rates, and attack rou- 
tines (including special attacks), Hit points and 
saving throws are identical to those for the char- 
acter’s natural form. 

Additionally, the character has immunity from 
damage by exposure to that element and may 
move and breathe freely within it. Thus, a charac- 
ter metamorphosed into a fire elemental could 
swim in a pool of nonmagical lava without risk of 
injury, but the same character could be damaged 
by magical fire, such as that from a fireball spell. 

The ring muy be used once per day for Ida 
turns, at which time the character reverts to his 
normal form. The wearer can end the metamor- 
phosis at any time. When returning to his or her 
own form, the wearer regains 1d12 hit points. 


amu 


961 


~ Ring of Energy r 


If a successful dispel magic spell is cast upon 
the subject at any time while the PC is trans- 
formed, the character is forced back to normal 
form and must succeed at a system shock roll or 
dic, The wearer returns to original form when 
slain or when the effect is dispelled, but no hit 
points are restored in these cases. 


of Energy 

GP Value: 6,000 
DRAGON Magazine 99 
This magical ring always has a gem of some sort in 
its setting. Upon command, a pencil-thin beam of 
energy can be made to shoot out from the gem 
toward a desired target. The beam automatically 
hits any selected target located along an unob- 
structed line of sight, within 60 feet of the ring 
wearer, A save vs. spell is allowed to avoid the 
beam and its damage, and if the intended target 
makes its saving throw, the beam continues along 
its straight-line path and may hit an unintended tar- 
get that lies within range. The power beam of the 
ring of energy loses potency as it travels outward. 


XP Value: 500 


Target Distance Damage 
1‘ to 20° Adó 
21' to 30' 3d6 
31 to 40’ 2d6 
41' to 60’ Idé 


The beam only affects living things; golems, 
undead, and creatures of similar sort are not 
injured by it, but it does hit such creatures and in 
so doing expends its energy. The ring of energy 
cannot be used more than four times in one day. 
The energy of the power beam is drawn from the 
Ethereal Plane and each usage has a 3% chance 
_,(noncumulative) of opening a passageway to that 
plane and causing a terithran to arrive on the 
Prime Material Plane. Any such creature “sum- 
moned" in this fashion appears 30 feet away from 
the ring wearer, intent upon destroying the ring 
(and its possessor, if necessary). 


ESP 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 16,500 
Dragon Magazine 188 
This plain brass ring is a magical item that 
enables an intelligent wearer of any class or race 
to use ESP as the wizard spell, up to three times a 
day, and up to a one turn duration per use; it can 
be stopped carlier by the mental command of the 


user. The wearer of such a ring gains a +1 bonus 
to all saving throws against cnchantment/charm 
spells, whether or not the ring is active when the 
spell strikes, 


of Faerie 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 7,500 
Unearthed Arcana 

This specially dweomered ring is given by the 
grey elves to their closest associates and allies 
only. Each ring is aligned either toward evil (5%), 
good (75%), or neutrality (20%). It enables the 
wearer to perform certain functions As if he or 
she were an elf: 

Concealment in woodlands is such that the 
wearer can be detected only by those creatures 
able to detect invisible objects. If alone and not in 
metal armor, the wearer can move silently with a 
66% chance of success, enabling him or her to 
achieve surprise on a roll of 1-4 on 1d6. An 
attempt to move silently will succeed on a roll of 
01-67; if the number rolled is 68 or higher, then 
noise generated by the wearer's movement will be 
discermble up to a number of feet away from the 
individual equal to the die roll divided by 10 
(rounded up). 

Infravision to a range of 60 feet is bestowed by 
the ring. 

Concealed doors are noted 16% of the time 
(roll of 1 on 1d6) when going past them, 50% of 
the time when actively searched for. 

Secret doors are found 33% of the time (1-2 
on Ido) when actively searched for. 

Rings of an alignment not corresponding to that 
of the wearer will not function. 


Famulus 

GP Value: 28,000 
IMAGEN Magazine 10 
This is a plain gold band that once belonged to a 
wizard named Famulus. It is highly magical, act- 
ing as a ring of protection +2 and conferring the 
power to feleport without error twice per day and 
cause serious wounds by touch once per day, The 
ring is not without its side cffects, however. It 
pollutes any holy water within 10 fect, and the 
touch of its wearer kills green plants. The ring is 
cursed; once placed on a finger, it cannot be 
removed except with the aid of a wish or a remove 
curse by a spelicaster of at least 18th level; the 
wearer cannot even detach the finger bound by 
the ring in order to remove it. 


XP Value: — 


8 962 3 


of Fire Resistance 


ee me 


Fashion 
XP Value GP Value 
Normal: 1,000 3,000 
Rare: 2,000 6,000 


Deacon Magazine 117 

The ring of fashion, when commanded with the 
proper key word, immediately dresses the user in 
any sort of clothing the character desires, short of 
truc armor of any sort (all costumes are AC 10). 
One out of 10 of all such rings allows the wearer 
to create heavy clothing that can be counted as 
padded armor (AC 8). 

Unfortunately, there is also a 1% chance that 
the ring will create a completely random set of 
clothing that lasts for 1d6 turns before fading, 
Such clothing appears in place of any other sort 
of clothing worn when the ring is activated, No 
metallic or metal-studded armor can be worn by 
the user when the ring is activated, or else the ring 
will not function. Magical metallic items of small 
size, such as rings, bracers, or jewelry. do not 
affect the function of this device. However, magi- 
cal and normal suits of leather or cloth armor 
vanish once the ring is activated, returning only 
when the ring k effects are dispelled or negated. 
All magical girdles, boots, cloaks, and the like, 
similarly vanish and return later, 


of Fearlessness 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 12,000 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 90 
A ring of fearlessness is a delicate band of silver 
set with a small ruby. Though dainty, it is a pow- 
erful magical item that can be worn by men or 
women of any class and race. 

It is uncertain how many of these deadly rings 
exist, A Waterdhavian wizard, Julius Silverheart, 
made several of them in 762 DR. At the time, Sil- 
verheart was instructing a rather disappointing 
apprentice named Jed. Silverheart knew that Jed 
lacked courage, and Silverheart, who was known 
for his bravery, saw Jed cowardice as a great fail- 
ing. Wanting him to lead a full and adventurous 
life, Silverheart crafted a ring of courage for him, 
and was reported to have made a few more in the 
hopes of selling them to others like his apprentice, 

Jed was given the ring on his birthday with no 
mention of its magical properties. He wore the 
ring constantly until his death 19 days later, See- 
ing a woman menaced by more than a dozen 
thugs, Jed charged to her rescue and was quickly 
slain The thug’s leader stole the ring, and a few 


days later made the mistake of provoking a 
skilled adventurer, Bonecrusher Aulwait, who 
slew the fearless thug and acquired the ring. 

During the next two decades, Bonecrusher 
killed seven dragons and many other monsters, 
and gained a reputation for deadly calm in the 
most lethal of situations. The ring was passed on 
to his son, who was more confident than capable 
in a fight. 

In the centurics that followed, one or more of 
the rings found their way onto the fingers of the 
Realms’ greatest heroes; the Paladin Sara of Tyr, 
Duke Milios, and the peasant hero, Bill. 

The number of people who died because they 
did not have the ability to match the confidence 
the ring bestowed remains unknown, 

A ring of courage makes its wearer immune to 
natural or magical fear and reduces the wearer's 
Wisdom by 2. The wearer believes that he or she 
can handle any dangerous situation and acts 
accordingly. To a skilled adventurer, such a ring 
can be an asset. To anyone else, the ring is a death 
sentence. 

The ring can be removed at any time, though 
the Wisdom loss remains. There are no restric- 
tions on who can use this ring. 


of Feather Falling 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
Dunorow Master Guide 
This ring protects its wearer by automatic activa- 
tion of a feather fall if the individual falls $ feet 
or more. (See the feather fall spell in the DMG.) 


of Fire Resistance 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 

DuncHton Master Guide 
The wearer of this ring is totally immune to the 
effects of normal fires—torches, flaming oil, 
bonfires, ete. Very large and hot fires, molten 
lava, hellhound breath, or a wall of fire spell will 
cause 10 points of damage per round if the wearer 
is directly within the conflagration. Exceptionally 
hot fires such as red dragon breath, pyrohydra 
breath, fireballs, flame strike, and fire storm, are 
saved against with a +4 bonus to the die roll, and 
all damage iscalculated at A per die, but each die 
is never less than | in any event. As a rule-of- 
thumb, consider very hot fires as those that have 
a maximum initial exposure of up to 24 hit 
points, those of exceptional heat (25 or more hit 
points). 


z 963 


SS ëy 


~ Ring of Fire Starting r 


of Fire Starting 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 3,500 
DRAGON Magazine 117 
The beauty of this ring is obvious under even the 
most casual inspection. Its band is forged from a 
bright, silvery metal and has an intricate bas- 
relief of an ancient fire tending ceremony carved 
into its surface. The stone is a 5,000 gp diamond 
and glows with a faint inner light. When it is 
worn, a slight sensation of warmth can be felt 
emanating from it. 

If the wearer touches the stone to any com- 
bustible substance and speaks the command 
word, the material must save vs. spell or burst 
into flame, The material need not be entirely dry 
or pure, and the conditions do not have to be tem- 
perate in order for the ring to function. This ring 
has an unlimited number of uses. It is itself 
immune to all fire- and heat-based effects, magi- 
cal or otherwise. 


of Flying 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 7,500 


DUNGEON MAGAZINE 14 

This magical ring allows the wearer, and up to 
600 pounds of weight, to fly at will, as the 3rd- 
level wizard spell. The ring may be used for up 
to two cumulative hours of flight per day. If 
worn in flight past that limit, the ring ceases to 
function and the user falls, One featherfall spell 
(cast at 12th level) may be used from this ring 
per day, in addition to the powers of flight; how- 
ever, the wearer should note that the featherfall 
spell has such a short duration, the wearer's 
descent is slowed for only 100 feet during that 
time. Thus, this spell should only be called upon 
when the wearer is about to strike the ground, or 
else he or she falls again when the spell's dura- 
tion expires. 


Flynn’s Ring of Fire 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
DRAGON Quest Game 

This magical ring is fashioned from a spiraling 
band of copper and is set with a small fire opal. It 
is rumored that this ring was created by a lost 
race that served fire giants in the distant past. 
Once per turn, it can be commanded to fire a 
small bolt of fire up to 60 feet. Anyone hit by the 
fire takes 2d4 points of damage. Only wizards 
and elves may use this ring, 


of Folly* 
XP Value: GP Value: +500 
DRAGON Magazine 179 
When donned, this cursed ring causes the wearer to 
lose | point of Wisdom and Intelligence per turn 
until the individual reaches a score of 3 in each abil- 
ity. The loss is not noticeable until the character is 
called upon to perform some action that requires one 
of these abilities (such as gaining spells or profi- 
ciency checks). Once the abilities reach 3, the indi- 
vidual ts under the effects of a feeblemind spell and 
may not use the abilities of his or her character class, 
nor gain further experience. The ring of folly may be 
removed only by remove curse, followed by dispel 
magic. Intelligence and Wisdom are then returned at 
the rate of | point per day of rest. The ring of folly 
may have a secondary function, such as feather 


Salling or invisibility, at the option of the DM. 


of Fortitude 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
Tome of Magic 
When worn, the ring of fortitude grants the 
wearer a bonus of +4 to one randomly selected 
ability score for the purposes of spell resolution 
ouly; roll 1d12: 


Roll Enhanced Ability 
l-6 Dexterity 

Wisdom 

12 Constitution 


It does not affect ability checks or other aspects 
of ability scores, except as a direct result of spells 
or magical abilities, For example, a character with 
a natural Constitution of 14 would have an 
enhanced score of 18 while wearing this ring. No 
extra hit points are acquired with its use, but the 
wearer's system shock when resolving the poly- 
morph other spell is increased to 99%. With a 
Constitution enhancing ring, the bonuses even 
apply to the raise dead and resurrection spells. All 
effects are lost when the wearer removes the ring. 


of Free Action 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
DUNGEON Master Guide 
This ring enables the wearer to move and attack 
freely and normally even when attacked by a web, 
hold, or slow spell, or even while underwater. The 
spells simply have no effect. While underwater, 


the individual moves at normal (surface) speed 
A248 


> 964 i 


ee 


4 Ring of U 


and docs full damage even with cutting weapons 
(like axes and scimitars) and with smashing 
weapons (like flails, hammers, and maces), since 
the weapon used is held rather than hurled, This 
will not, however, enable breathing under water 
without further appropriate magic. 


of Freedom 
GP Value: 25,000 
BLACKMOOR 
The ring of freedom allows one to move in water 
as if the character were in air. It also allows nor- 
mal (surface) damage to be inflicted upon oppo- 
nents while underwater. 


XP Value: 5,000 


of Gargoyles 
XP Value GP Value 
Gargoyle: 3,000 6,000 
Margoyle: 5,000 10,000 
The Ruins of Undermountain 


This seemingly normal brass ring has two pow- 
ers, both controlled by silent effort of will. It can 
summon one or two gargoyles at a time from 
within the ring to serve the wearer. It can also 
repel gargoyles. Each use of cither power imme- 
diately drains dog hit points from the ring 
wearer; these are regained by rest or healing 

Gargoyles summoned by the ring have 25 hit 
points, and are utterly loyal to whoever wears the 
ting. The gargoyles appear as if coming from 
another dimension, arriving within 20 to 40 feet 
from the ring wearer. They are in continuous tele- 
pathic communication with the ring wearer. This 
link prevents both gargoyles and the ring wearer 
from being successfully tricked or influenced by 
charm, hold, sleep, suggestion, and similar 
enchantment/charm spells and illusions. The 
wearer can see through the cyes of the gargoyles 
and gains their infravision. Control of the gar- 
goyles and communication with them can be 
maintained to a range of 100 miles on the same 
world or plane. 

Whenever the wearer desires (or whenever the 
ring is removed from the wearer's finger), the sum- 
moned gargoyles vanish. They can be summoned 
again, but cach gargoyle can only be summoned 
once per day, Ifa gargoyle of the ring is slain, it is 
forever gone. A ring of gargoyles can summon 
only 6 gargoyles; when the last one is destroyed, 
the ring crumbles into nothingness. Injured gar- 
goyles regain full hit points when inside the ring, 
ready at full strength the next day. 


3 f 965 3 


The ring wearer can also repel gargoyles by 
silent act of will, at any time. This power affects 
all gargoyles and margoyles; the ring wearer can 
specifically exclude loyal gargoyles summoned 
by the ring. This power is identical in effects to 
the 6th-level wizard spell repulsion, but no saving 
throw is allowed. The effects last for six rounds, 
but can be extended or started again at will. 

A rare (5%) form of this ring is the margovle 
ring The ring wearer still gams all the above pow- 
ers of the gargoyle ring with the exceptions noted 
below, This special type of ring calls forth only a 
single creature: a margoyle of maximum hit 
points (48), It also can be summoned and returned 
to the ring only once a day. For every creature of 
its own Hit Dice or greater that a “ring margoyle” 
slays or helps to destroy, it permanently gains | 
hit point (when it has so gained 8 hit points, it 
gains a Hit Die for THACO, saving throw, and 
experience point purposes). The margoyle can 
continuc this progression up to a maximum of 12 
HD, at which time it can grant a limited wish in 
exchange for its freedom. 


of Gax 

GP Value: 17,500 
Eldritch Wizardry 
This is a platinum ring set with an unusual stone, 
which cannot be identified even by a dwarf or 
jeweler. The stone has eight faces and can be 
turned so that any of the cight faces point for- 
ward. Each of these eight positions has a separate 
power, and can be used on command. However, 
the stone will frequently turn at random by itself, 
$0 it is necessary to try a random setting each 
time the ring is used. After that, the user must 
know how many faces the stone must be turned to 
the desired setting. It is impossible to mark either 
the stone or the band in any way, so the first try 
each time the ring is used must be a random try 
and is rolled for by the DM. The ring of Gax has 
the following abilities/penalties: 
‘ay 
° Wizard eve 
Detect traps and secret doors 
Conjure one elemental, djinn, efreet, or invis- 
ible stalker once per day, 
Fuer word stun once per day, 
User attacks anyone within 20 feet. 
The item destroys from 50% to 100% of the 
treasure of its owner by consuming it in order 
to sustain its own power. 


XP Value: 3,400 


* 


4231 


al 


~ Ring of Gaxx 


User cannot touch or be touched by any type of 
metal, it simply passes through him with no 
effect 

Finger of death with no saving throw twice per 
day 


of Gaxx 


XP Value: GP Value: 
Book of Artifacts 

The ring of gaxx is a nine-sided, blue gem 
mounted in a platinum base on a plain, inch 
platinum band. Inside is a string of letters—the 
only legible word is “Gaxx.” 

While wondering among the Mountains of 
Storms, a luckless fighter named Krednel discov- 
cred some old buildings. Entering to take shelter, 
Krednel discovered the remains of a creature 
unlike any he had ever seen before. Krednel 
noticed an odd ring on one of the creature's fin- 
gers, and took for his own. 

Four days later, Krednel awoke to find that his 
skin had hardened into a natural armor. Panic 
stricken, he raced for a pool of water, where he 
was horrified at his reflection. There in the 
watery mirror was a creature with 8-inch horns 
and scaled skin. He frantically pulled off the ring 
and ran to visit an old dwarf friend, Lorak Iron- 


hand, an expert on gems. Lorak could not identify 
the ring but offered to buy it from Krednel. Kred- 
nel snatched the money and disappeared 

The ring of Gaxx is a good item for creating 
some unusual mysteries to solve. One possible 
adventure could unfold with a village secking 
help in ridding itself of a fierce, hideous monster 
that is terrorizing the place, and at the same time 
solve the disappearance of the town’s rare mer- 
chandise dealer 

Constant Powers; The wearer is immune to all 
forms of disease, both normal and magical. 

Invoked Powers: Each of the nine sides of the 
gem has its own power. The active side faces the 
finger tip and the entire ring is impossible to 
mark. The gem rotates clockwise one segment 
when onc of the following occurs: it is put on, 
worn while sleeping, or the stone is tumed. Once 
all nine powers have been discovered, the wearer 
can use the powers with 90% accuracy. Two of the 
powers are stonexkin (twice a day) and invisibility 
(once a day) 

Random Powers: Two from Artifact Table 
1-13: Healing, two from Artifact Table 1-17: 
Movement, two from Artifact Table 1-18: 
Offensive Powers, and one from Artifact Table 
1-23: Protection. 

Curse: Once the ring is worn for more than 48 
continuous hours, it begins to transform the 
wearer (over the next 96 hours) into a creature of 
unknown origin. A thick pair of horns grows 2 
inches above the cars; the skin hardens into thick 
scales, providing a natural AC of 5. The eyes 
develop infravision (90 feet) and daylight 
becomes painful (~2 penalty to attack rolls). The 
lower canines extend an inch beyond the lips, 
Horn and bite attacks are possible, inflicting 
dad do points of damage. 

To reverse an incomplete transformation, the 
ring must be removed for a number of hours 
equal to the number worn, However, once the 
change is complete, it is permanent. The wearer 
now needs the ring to survive—without it death 
occurs within 72 hours 

Suggested Means of Destruction: 

* The ring must be taken by hand to the center of 

the sun 

Return it to the alien culture who crafted it 

he creatures that created the ring must be 
found and the ring returned to them. 


4253 


966 


ee [Ä 


EE EE 


Ring. Gordon's Magic 


of Genie Summoning 
XP Value GP Value 
Djinni: 3,000 15,000 
Dao: 3,000 15,000 
Efreeti: 3,000 15,000 
Marid: 3,000 15,000 
Noble djinni: 4,000 20,000 
Noble dao: 4,000 20,000 
Noble efreeti: 4,000 20,000 
Noble marid: 4,000 20,000 


DRAGON Magazine 179 

An expanded form of the ring of djinni summon- 
ing, this ring may summon a particular genie 
from its elemental plane; the genie will appear on 
the round after the ring is rubbed. The summoned 
genic will serve the master of the ring faithfully 
until slain, at which point the ring becomes non- 
magical, The type of genic summoned is deter- 
mined from the following table: 


Roll Genie 

01-24 = Djinni 

25-48 Dao 

49-73 Efreeti 

74-96 Marid 
97 Noble djinni 
98 Noble dao 
99 Noble efreeti 
00 Noble marid 


Noble genies serve to perform only three 
tasks. They use their wish granting abilitics to 
complete these, at which point they are freed. A 
sha'ir of 10th level or higher (sce Arabian 
Adventures) may free a common genie from its 
bondage to the ring. The sha’ir gains experience 
points equal to that of the genie that was freed. 
In addition, the genie will consult with its elders 
to grant the sha ir a wish, free and clear of all 
entanglements. The ring becomes nonmagical in 
these circumstances. 


Glyphs 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 10,000 
DraGoN Magazine 50 
This ring is akin to a ring of spell storing which has 
Ida predetermined glyphs in it. Each glyph may 
be cast once, but the ring may be recharged with 
the same glyphs it originally possessed. The ring 
automatically enables a priest to cast each glyph 
normally, but the glyph still needs to be learned in 
the usual fashion. The ring permits casting glyphs 


967 


that are beyond the power of a priest (it would per- 
mit a 7th-level priest to cast Yaghsa or Zic). 


Gold Seal Ring of Al-Kalim 
XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 20,000 
The Emirates of Ylaruam 

This ring, crafted by the dwarves and enchanted 
by a Makistani sorcerer, was used by Al-Kalim to 
confine unruly efreet in containers. The efreet 
must enter the container at the ring beurer com- 
mand; if the container is immediately sealed, and 
the seal ring pressed into the seal, the efreet can- 
not leave the container until the seal is broken. 

Efreeti know of this great seal ring and greatly 
fear being confined in a bottle. To avoid confine- 
ment, they will often offer to serve the ring 
bearer. The terms of service offered depend on 
the shrewdness and insincerity of the efreet, who 
are treacherous and malevolent servants. 


Golden Ring of Healing 
XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 15,000 
Tales of the Lance 

This ring appears as a band of gold braided into an 
intricate knot, It provides a wizard with a last 
defense—protection from death. The schools of 
sorcery still produce these rings to this day. Dala- 
mar, the drow black wizard, used just such a ring to 
survive the deadly attack of his master, Raistlin. 

The ring only affects the wearer. It can cure up 
to 6 points of damage once per day. Furthermore, 
it can save a wizard from one mortal blow by 
healing to 1 hit point. After saving a wizards life, 
a particular ring will never work for that wizard 
again, but it may be passed on to another wizard. 


Gordon's Magic 
GP Value: 2,000 
DUNGEON MAGAZINE 13 
Gordon's magic ring can be both a blessing and a 
curse to its owner. Sages disagree as to the origin 
of the ring, but all feel that it has abilities not yet 
revealed, Levalsa of Enstad, in her much 
acclaimed Treatise on Mystical Rings, links the 
origin of the ring to an unnamed demigod who 
enjoyed toying with the lives of mortal men. 
Arrivas of Greyhawk, on the other hand, feels that 
the ring was once a powerful magical ring but 
was damaged by a curse. 
This magical item appears to be a finely tooled 
gold ring with a human face carved on one side, The 


eyes of the ring are tiny red garnets (40 gp value 
4255 


XP value: 


Ring of the Grasshopper 


_ Se ee ²—˙¹»AAA⁰⅝'ꝛ T . 


each), On the inside of the band, the name “Gordon 
of Red Falcon” is inscribed in elvish script. The ring 
radiates magic but does not detect as good or evil. 
The intensity of the magic is always dim, and the 
type of magic can never be determined. /dentify 
spells cast on the ring always reveal false powers (as 
if the saving throw were | point short). 

Gordon s magic ring can speak elvish, gnome, 
dwarvish, halfling, thieves’ cant, hill giant, ogrish, 
and the common tongue. It can even change the fea- 
tures on its carved face to smile, frown, grimace, 
ete. It has the power to levitate its wearer at the 12th 
level of ability. It is not a living entity, but it does 
display exceptional cleverness for a magical item 
(role-play as if it had an intelligence rating of 10), It 
is very friendly, even to known enemies, and strikes 
up a conversation whenever possible. 

Sounds like a nice ring? It would be, except 
that the ring is a habitual liar. Always craving 
more adventure, it promises the world but never 
delivers, For example, it once belonged to a half- 
ling who had unfortunately been captured by a 
troll. The poor halfling, critically injured and 
bound, sat awaiting a horrible fate in the troll’s 
filthy lair when the ring proudly announced that it 
was a ring of wishes. “I wish | was back at home 
then,” cried the hairfoot, “and that | had never 
crossed this stupid bridge!” The ring chanted a 
few impressive sounding words, closed its glow- 
ing red eyes, and even sweated a little, “Oops,” it 
said. “I must have already used up that ability for 
this month. Anything else 1 could do?” 

Although the ring claims to be able to do almost 
anything, if in danger of being destroyed or 
removed it may actually /evitate the wearer (20% 
chance), whether that action helps or not. It never 
levitates on command, however, claiming it doesn't 
remember how to activate that particular ability. 

The ring is cursed so that it can only be easily 
removed from dead creatures. A PC wishing to be 
rid of the ring, once put on, must have a silence 
spell thrown on the ring, followed by dispel 
magic and remove curse. The ring saves as a 
12th-level fighter and operates at the 12th level of 
magic use. Of course, if the adventurer dies, the 
ring comes off easily. 


of the Grasshopper 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
DRAGON Magazine 91 
While wearing this ring, a character weighing up 
to 250 pounds can jump (like the wizard spell) 


9 


6: 


8 


once per turn for a number of times per day equal 
to the character's Strength score. (A strength of 
18, with or without an exceptional rating, will 
allow for 18 jumps per day.) If the wearer of a 
ring of the grasshopper attempts to jump more 
often than allowed by his or her Strength, a save 
vs. paralyzation must be made each time he or 
she lands. Failure to save indicates leg injuries, 
causes Ida points of damage, and reduces the 
victims Movement rate to 3. A character injured 
in this manner will find running, leaping, and 
other strenuous activity involving the legs to be 
impossible for 6d6 hours afterward, unless a heal 
spell is applied to neutralize the ill effects. 


Halaster’s Teleportation 

XP Value: — GP Value: 1,000 
The Ruins of Undermountain 
These plain, brass finger-rings were once com- 
mon in the Realms, but are now very rare. They 
enabled any wearer to teleport without error from 
any location to a predetermined spot on the same 
plane, either by speaking a command word or 
through force of will. 

A teleportation ring affects only the creature 
wearing it. The few that are in Undermountain are 
placed there by Halaster. Unlike the more power- 
ful horned rings of his devising, all the teleport 
rings found in these halls are cursed. They trans- 
port the wearers to a single location upon speak- 
ing a command word: “Athlas” (which means 
“lost” in a Northern dialect of long ago, one 
familiar to the wizard), The characters arrive fac- 
ing the throne itself, at the bottom of the steps. 

The teleportation rings in Undermountain are 
further tainted by Halaster’s cruel sense of 
humor—the user arrives stripped of all clothing 
and belongings, including magical items such as 
the teleportation ring itself. The ring’s magic 
scatters such objects at random all over Under- 
mountain, where some may never be found. As 
always, these secondary effects are used at the 
discretion of the DM—of course, Halaster is not 
known for either discretion or fairness himself. 


Harmlessness 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
DRAGON Magazine 179 
This ring makes the wearer appear by illusion to 
be a small, thin, ragged peasant, very nonthreat- 
ening in appearance. He or she is unlikely to be 


attacked until all others in the group have been 
426! 


‘ Ring of Holiness y> 


of Health 
XP Value GP Value 
Con 15: 1,000 5,000 
Con 16: 2,000 6,000 
Con 17: 3,000 7,000 
Con 18; 4,000 8,000 
Con 19: 5,000 9,000 


DRAGON Magazine 117 

Wearing a ring of health brings many benefits. 
The wearer is allotted the ring’s set Constitution, 
in as far as it pertains to health, recovery of hit 
points, ability to consume amounts of liquor. and 
system shock and resurrection percentages. This 
does not, however, pertain to hit points conferred 
by a high Constitution whenever a new level is 
attained, For example, wearing a ring of health 
(Constitution 16) would allot a 96% chance of 
successful revival if the wearer is killed, while a 
ring of health (Constitution 19) would give a +1 
on saving throws vs. poison. Neither ring gives 
the wearer any additional hit points. The ring 
must be worn for at least a week before the 
wearer gains its bencfits. No benefits are realized 
by placing such a ring on a dead person in an 
attempt to revive him. The type of ring is deter- 
mined by rolling percentile dice and consulting 
the table below; 


Roll Effective Constitution 


01-45 Ring of health (Con 15) 
46-90 Ring of health (Con 16) 
91-95 Ring of health (Con 17) 
96-99 Ring of health (Con 18) 

00 Ring of health (Com 19) 

of the Hierophant 
XP Value GP Value 
Earth: 4,000 20,000 
Air: 4,000 20,000 
Fire: 4,000 20,000 
Water: 4,000 20,000 
DRAGON Magazine 187 


There are only four of these powerful rings 
known to exist, one of each type. Their creation 
requires the efforts of a hierophant druid capa- 
ble of entering the elemental plane that corre- 
sponds to the powers of the ring. Each of these 
rings cnubles a druid to speak and understand 
the language of the corresponding elemental 
plane, and once a week the wearer may poly- 
morph into the form of an elemental of the 
associated type. In clemental form, the druid 


retains normal hit points, but in all other senses 
is a 12-HD elemental, The transformation oth- 
erwise functions as the druid’s 7th-level shape 
change ability, including the healing of lost hit 
points. The fransformation lasts for a maximum 
of six turns and can be reversed at any time. The 
druid radiates strong alteration magic while in 
elemental form. 

Finally, each of these rings gives the wearer the 
power to cast a certain spell once per day. The 
ring of the carth hierophant cnables the wearer to 
cast stone shape at 17th level; the ring of the fire 
hierophant enables the wearer to cast flame walk 
at 18th level; the ring of the water hierophant 
enables the wearer to cast water walk at 19th 
level; and the ring of the air hievophant enables 
the wearer to cast air walk at 20th level, 


Hoinbee’s Ring of Truth 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 10,000 
1992 Fantasy Collector Card 268 

Hoinbee, an evil transmuter and pathological liar. 
experimented for many years before he finally 
perfected this peculiar ring of truth. Now he can 
detect falsehoods told by anyone else, but he can 
continually lie himself, without having to remove 
the ring. The ring now renders his lies so convine- 
ing that even a detect lie spell cannot expose him, 
There is one drawback to the ring’s power 
Hoinbee now believes every lie he tells, for one 
day after he tells it. Thus, he must be careful not 
to tell any lics that could influence his actions 
over the next 24 hours. 


of Holiness 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 10,000 
Dunctrons & Dragons Rules Cyclopedia 

This ring is usable only by a priest or druid. If 
the ring is worn while spells are gained (usually 
during morning meditation), the priest gains 
one extra spell each of levels 1, 2, and 3 as 
appropriate. (Extra spells apply only to spell 
levels obtainable. For example, a 4th-level 
priest would not gain any 3rd level spells.) If 
the ring is removed, the spells are forgotten 
(though this has no effect if the spells are 
already cast), In addition, a priest (but not a 
druid) gains a +1 bonus to any rolls to turn 
undead, including the roll determining the Hit 
Dice of undead turned, The ring does not affect 
turn attempts not requiring a roll. 


~ Ring of the Holy Slayer r 


of the Holy Slayer 
XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 15,000 
Land of Fate 

This is a most deadly ring in the Land of Fate. 
Upon uttering a command word, it pumps a 
deadly toxin into the hand of the individual wear- 
ing the ring. A saving throw with a —4 penalty 
must be made, and failure to make the saving 
throw has the following results: (a) death, (b) the 
individual body cannot be raised or resurrected, 
and (c) the individual's departed spirit cannot be 
contacted by speak with dead spells and similar 
divinations. These rings are used by holy slayers, 
but not against their intended victims. Rather, 
slayers wear them to avoid being questioned by 
their captors—carrying their secrets to the grave. 
The ring becomes nonmagical when used. 


Horned 
XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 35,000 
The Ruins of Undermountain 
Fashioned by Halaster, these iron rings are nor- 
mally found only in Undermountain. Pairs of tiny 
curved horns rise of them, the horns curling out 
and back toward the wearer's finger. 

Horned rings function as teleportation rings 
within the dungeons of Undermountain (see 
below), though the wearers can arrive at different 
locations. The wearers can specifically define 
their “arrival” areas. They also break all wizard 
locks, walls of force, holds, webs, and other magi- 
cal barriers (except prismatic sphere and pris- 
matic wall) on contact; no harm comes to the 
wearer while disrupting magical barriers. They 
absorb magic missiles and all electrical spells and 
natural effects to repower themselves, without 
allowing these effects to harm the wearer. 

There are only eight of these rings known to 
exist, and nearly all are accounted for among 
Halaster’s ex- apprentices. Jhesiyra Kestellharp 
also had a korned ring in her possession, but its 
current whereabouts are unknown. 


of Human Control 

XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 10,000 
DUNGEONS & DRAGONS Rules Cyclopedia 
A ring of human control has the same effect as 
the potion of the same name. The effect lasts until 
canceled by the wearer of the ring, the ring is 
removed, or until a dispel magic spell removes 
the charm. 


970 


of Human Influence 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 10,000 
DUNGEON Master Guide 

This ring has the effect of raising the wearer's 
Charisma to 18 on encounter reactions with 
humans and humanoids, The wearer can make a 
suggestion to any human or humanoid (saving 
throw applies). The wearer can also charm up to 
21 levels or Hit Dice of humans and humanoids 
(saving throws apply) just as if he were using the 
wizard spell, charm person. The two latter uses of 
the ring are applicable but once per day. Sugges- 
tion or charm has an initiative penalty of +3. 


of Hunan Influence 
XP Value: 120 GP Value: 600 
DRAGON Magazine 156 

This jade ring is decorated with Oriental charac- 
ters, including Fu Manchu and Charlie Chan. It 
affects all food eaten by the wearer; there is no 
noticeable change in the taste, but one round 
after being eaten, the food begins to burn for 
da points of damage per round. Water only 
makes the burning worse (+! point ofdamage 
for one round). Only eating Ido plates of rice 
will ease the pain. However, no matter how 
much food is consumed, the wearer still feels 
hungry an hour later. 


of Ice 
XP Value: 250 GP Value: 2,500 
DraGoN Magazine 168 

Hervmister was a famous archmage devoted to 
the cause of Good. When he had to enter the Ele- 
mental Plane of Fire to rescue a dear friend, he 
created a special ring of ice. It was designed to be 
used by any class and was activated simply by 
putting it on. This ring, however, was designed to 
protect against heat and flame never experienced 
on the Prime Material Plane. If an adventurer 
activates the ring anywhere except on the Ele- 
mental Plane of Fire, he or she is protected from 
any form of flame or heat, but also receives 1-3 
points of frost damage for every round the ring is 
worn. The only known method of stopping the 
ring from producing cold (unless one owns a 
cube of frost resistance) is to take it off. However, 
the cold produced by the ring is so intense that 
the wearer must make a Dexterity check every 
round in order to remove the ring. 


E- 


x Ring of Invisibilty Negation 


Icebolts 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 7,500 
Dracon Magazine 82 

When a special command is spoken, this ring fires 
a bolt of solid ice at any target within 100 feet. The 
wearer chooses the target. The icebolt causes 2d6 
points of damage to the target, half that if a saving 
throw vs, wands is made. Creatures or beings who 
use fire or are fiery by nature (salamanders, fire 
giants, red dragons, etc.) save at -A against this 
effect; creatures who are cold-users or cold-resis- 
tant (frost giants, white dragons, etc.) save at 4. 
Each ring possesses 3410 charges when found, and 
cannot be recharged. 


of Immunity 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
Old Empires 
When this ring is worn, the wearer becomes immune 
to all diseases and infections. This includes magical 
curses, such as lycanthropy and mummy rot. The 
character regains the maximum number of hit 
points per day (3 hit points) from rest, and is not 
bothered by fever or infection, regardless of the 
level of activity. This ring is a simple, silver circle, 
and is another creation of the incarnations of Thoth. 


Impersonation 
XP Value: 400 GP Value: 2,000 
DUNGHON MAGAZINE 32 
This ring functions as a hat of disguise. If the ring 
is removed, the disguise is instantly dispelled. 


Infravision 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
Deacon Magazine 82 
This ring bestows infravision upon the wearer, as 
the spell of the same name, out to a 60-foot radius. 


of Infravision Negation 
XP Value: 950 GP Value: 7,000 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 47 
When worn, this ring creates a field around the 
wearer that hides his or her body heat from all 
forms of infravision, but negates the wearer's 
infravision. 


Intier's Ring of Shooting Stars 
XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 15,000 
1993 Collector Card 405 
Intier’s magical ring functions much as a normal 
ring of shooting stars, allowing the wearer to utilize 


various light- and lightning-related spells, either 
underground or at night. Intier’s ring. however, pro- 
vides for a rather spectacular display whenever the 
ball lightning, shooting stars, or spark shower func- 
tions are used. All of the effects are bright blue and 
accompanied by loud whistling, crackling, and pop- 
ping, along with billowing streamers of smoke. 


Invisibility 
XP Value: 1,500 GP Value: 7,500 
Dunanon Master Guide 
The wearer of an invisibility ring is able to 
become invisible at will, instantly. This nonvisi- 
ble state is the same as the wizard invisibility 
spell, except that 10% of these rings have inaudi- 
bility as well, making the wearer absolutely 
silent, If the wearer wishes to speak, he breaks all 


silence features in order to do so. 
of Invisibility Negation 
XP Value GP Value 
Clarifier: 1,000 12,000 
Killer: 1,800 20,000 
Destroyer: 1,300 7,000 
DRAGON Magazine 82 


Some years ago, a wizard invented this ring 
because he disliked invisible surprises. When it is 
worn, the ring continually generates a powerful 
magical field 60 fect in diameter that negates invis- 
ibility within its confines. Any creature with nat- 
ural or induced invisibility immediately becomes 
visible upon entering this field and remains so 
until leaving it. Furthermore, the creature becomes 
outlined in an ceric faerie fire, a green luminous 
light that gives opponents a +2 bonus to hit. The 
effects of potions of invisibility, dust of disappear- 
ance, and spells of invisibility are negated and dis- 
pelled as soon as the creature using them enters the 
magic field. Potions, dust, or spells possessed but 
not being used will not be affected. The normal 
form of this ring is called the clarifier. In addition 
to this, there are two variations. The first, the 
killer, does Ida points of damage per round (no 
saving throw) to creatures in the magic field whose 
invisibility was affected. The second variation is 
the destroyer. It drains the magical properties of 
any invisibility-related device that remains in the 
magic field for more than one round. The magical 
item in question is allowed a saving throw vs. dis- 
integration at +5 to avoid being dispelled. For ran- 
dom selection of one of the three rings, roll 
percentile dice: 

asi 


G a ae 


71 


~ Ring of invulnerability r 


Roll Ring 
01-80 Clarifier 
81-95 Killer 
96-00 Destroyer 
of Invulnerability 
XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 12,000 


POLYIIEDRON Newszine 47 

This thin band of platinum glows with a faint 
golden aura. The ring improves the wearer's AC 
by 2, and with the expenditure of one charge (a 
fully charged ring has 20), a minor globe of invul- 
nerability springs up around the wearer, lasting 
for one turn. The ring becomes nonmagical if all 
its charges ute used up. The ring can be recharged, 
and can be used by a member of any class. 


of Izmur 
XP Value: 7,000 GP Value: 35,000 
Van Richien Guide to the Lich 

This is a magical item that combines the effects of a 
ring of free action and à time stop spell. It also pro- 
vides a bonus of 3 to the Armor Class of the wearer. 
The time stop spell may be used up to three times a 
day, but not for more than 10 uses altogether. The 
Armor Class benefit remains in effect until the 
wearer is successfully struck by an enchanted melee 
weapon, whereon the bonus is lost, The free action 
aspect of the ring is continuous and permanent 

Those within the 15-foot radius of effect of the 
time stop spell make a saving throw vs. wand. Suc- 
cessful rolls negate the effects of the time stop. 


Jasmine Odor 
XP Value: 40 GP Value: 200 
Draco 30 
The ring of jasmine odor changes the body odor 
of the wearer to a pleasant jasmine scent. 


Jhessail’s Silver 
XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 11,000 

Dracon Magazine 82 
This ring confers upon the wearer protection 
from mental attack. No control magic will work 
upon the wearer, and all successful charm spells 
work upon the caster instead of the wearer, For 
example, a wizard attempts to charm the ring 
wearer, and the wearer fails a saving throw, The 
charm tums upon the wizard—who gets no initial 
saving throw—now under the control of the ring 
wearer. Any being thus charmed gets a saving 
throw to break the charm once every seven turns, 


and is instantly freed if the ring is taken off or 
destroyed, If the ring wearer makes a saving 
throw at the initial attack, the spell merely fails, 
and the ring has no effect. Note that this property 
extends to gaze charm attacks, and is a magical 
property rather than a physical “reflection.” 

The ring wearer gains a +4 saving throw bonus 
against stunning, confusion, and feeblemind, and 
the wearer gains +4 on rolls to disbelieve illu- 
sions. The ring acts as a tower af iron will (defense 
strength of 77 points, no attack strength) against 
psionic attack. 


Jolting 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
DAGON Magazine 82 
Ata word of command, the wearer of this ring can 
cast a beam of energy out to 100 feet at any single 
target. The energy beam does not cause physical 
damage, but stuns the target for 344 rounds. When 
stunned, a target can only perform self-defense and 
gains NO initiative to execute any actions. No 
psionic or magical powers may be used by the 
stunned character or creature during this time. Ifa 
saving throw ys. paralyzation is made, the victim is 


only be stunned for Ida rounds. 
of Jumping 
XP Value: GP Value: 
Dunctow Master Guide 


The wearer of this ring is able to leap 30 feet 
ahead or 10 feet backward or straight up, with an 
arc of about two feet for every 10 feet traveled 
(see the Ist-level wizard spell, jump). The wearer 
must use the power carefully, for it works only 
four times a day. 


of Keys 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 2,500 
POLYHEDRON Newszine $2 
Ten keys dangle from this large ring. Each has a 
10% chance to open any lock that requires a key. 


of Kings 
XP Value: 5,000 GP Value: 25,000 
Gods, Demigods, & Heroes 

This large ring is made out of a single rare actori- 
ous gem and has three main functions. The ring 
acts as a ring of many spells storing, in which the 
user can place any spell or spells he wishes. The 
ring is an opener of dimensional doors (gates) from 
which he is able to call on rulers of every type of 

e 


972 


A Ring, Lanolin‘ Ring of Power 


carthly creature. The ring resembles a md of ruler- 
ship in that the user can, after calling on these 
beings, ask for their assistance and expect to get it. 


Laduguer’s 
XP Value: 35,000 GP Value: 175,000 
Monster Mythology 
The avatar wears a magical ring that can be 
changed to any protective type (/eatherfalling, 
fire resistance, free action, mind shielding, pro- 
tection +5, regeneration, spell turning) once per 
day per function for up to six turns each 


of Languages 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
Deacon Magazine 117 

This ring is basically a limited version of the ring of 
tongues, Instead of gaining the ability to fully 
understand any language known by any creature 
within 30 feet, the wearer gains a number of lan- 
guages conferred by the ring while it is worn. The 
wearer not only understands these languages, but is 
also able to speak, read, and write the languages as 
ifthey wear native tongues. Note that once the ring 
is removed from the finger, the wearer loses the 
ability to understand the languages the ring pos- 
zesses. It is possible, however, for a character 
whose Intelligence has increased (thereby allowing 
the learning of one or more additional languages), 
or for a character with the ability to learn another 
language, to learn a language possessed by the ring 
merely by wearing it. This process requires the 
wearer to wear the ring consecutively for one 
month, after which time (due to the magically 
accelerated ability to learn) the PC understands the 
language entirely, without the ring's further assis- 
tance. Only one language may be learned at a time. 

The number of languages possessed by a ring 
is determined by rolling 2d4; the languages are 
picked from the table listed below or from a lan- 
guage table of the DM own devising. Duplica- 
tions on this table are merely terolled 


Roll Language Roll 

Ol Brownie 52-54 Kobold 

02-03 Bugbear 55 Lammasu 

04 Centaur 56-58 Lizard Man 

0S Dragon,Black 59 Manticore 

06 Dragon, Blue 60 = Medusian 

07 Dragon, Brass 61 Minotaur 

08 Dragon, Bronz 62 Naga, Guardian 
09 Dragon, Copper 63 Naga, Spirit 


10 Dragon, Gold 64 Naga. Water 

1) Dragon, Gren 65 Nixie 

12 Dragon, Red 66 Nymph 

13 Dragon, Silver 67-70 Ogrish 

14 Dragon, White 71 Ogre Magian 

IS Dryad 72-76 Oteich 
16-20 Dwarvish 77 Pixie 
21-25 Elvish 78 = Salamander 

26 Enin 79 = Satyr 

27 Gargoyle R0 Shodu 

28 Giant, Cloud gi Fprite 

29 Giant. Fire 82 = Sylph 

30 Giant, Frost 8&3 Titan 
31-33 Giant, Hill 84 Troll 

34 Giant, Stone 85 Korn 

35 Giant, Storm 86-93 Human (Common 

or foreign) 
36-39 Goblin 94-95 Lawful" 

40 Gnoll 96 Neutral? 
41-44 Gnome 97-98 Chaotic* 
45-49 Halfling 99 Thieves" cant 
50-51 Hobgoblin 00 Druidic tongue 
Roll 1d6: 

1-2 Good 
3-4 Neutral 
5-6 Evil 
Lanolin’s Ring of Power 
XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 20,000 
The Rogues Gallery 


This ring appears as an ordinary ring and will 

only show itself to be magical if a detect magic is 

cast upon it. Even then it only seems to be a ring 

b eRe It has, however, four powers. 
lt is a ring of protection +3 whenever it is worn. 

If the first command word is spoken, It causes 
its wearer and all his equipment to become 
ethereal. It is subject to the same effects as 
armor of etherealness. 

* Uttering the second command word gives the 
wearer Strength as in a strength spell had been 
cast by a 12th-level wizard. 

* The last command word will cast a charm 
monster at a specific target as if it had been 
cast by a 12th-level wizard, 

Each power, with the exception of the +3 pro- 
tection, has 1d6 charges. When two powers are 
completely used, the level of protection decreases 
to +2, and when three powers are drained, the ring 
becomes an ordinary ring of protection +1. The 
ring is not rechargeable. 


E 973 = 


Lantern 


XP Value: 50 GP Value: 200 
Haunted Halls of Eveningstar 
This plain, brass ring emits a single globe of light 
similar to a dancing lights spell. The globe moves 
and changes intensity in response to the wearer's 
silent will. If willed to become a beacon, the ring 
creates a brilliant shaft of white light (equal to 
full, bright noonday sunlight extending vertically 
from the ring-finger up into the sky. The light 
lasts 2 hours „less 1d4 turns per dispel magic cast 
on it), but does not function indoors or under- 
ground, In Eveningstar, these rings are worn by 
Lord Tessaril and all Purple Dragons. Tessaril 
will give them to PCs who render Eveningstar 
important aid. The local priests of Lathander also 


sell them at double list price. 
of Life 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 2,500 
Dark Sun Campaign Set 


This item protects the wearer from the effects of 
Athasian defiling magic, When worn, the charac- 
ter is immune to the initiative point loss incurred 
in the destructive diameter of a defiler’s spell. 
The ring of life also bestows upon its wearer recu- 
perative powers us if by complete bed rest; the 
wearer naturally heals 3 hit points per lay. The 
ring of life does not protect its wearer from the 
dragon’s defiling magic. 


of Life Protection 
XP Value: 5,000 GP Value: 20,000 
Dungeons & Dracons Rules Cyclopedia 

This valuable ring will negate the effects of 1d6 
energy drain attacks. If the wearer is struck by an 
energy draining undead (or effect), charges are 
drained from the ring and no levels are lost. If a 
single blow drains more experience levels than 
there are charges remaining in the ring, the ring 
disintegrates; otherwise, it becomes a ring of pro- 
tection v when all the charges are used. 


Light 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
DRAGON Magazine 82 
This ring allows the wearer to cast a continual 
light spell three times per day; the light cannot be 
dispelled except by a priest of at least 9th level. In 
addition, the ring automatically dispels all dark- 
ness spelis within 60 feet of the wearer as if the 
wearer were a 9th-level priest. 


of Lighting 

XP Value: 500 GP Value: 2,500 

POLYHEDRON Newszine 82 
This band is gaudily decorated and has a compart- 
ment that opens. Inside is a picce of smoothed and 
enchanted volcanic rock. The rock is magically 
heated, so that it sets fire to any flammable material 
it touches, The rock burns anyone touching it, caus- 
ing Ida points of damage each round. The ring can 
be used 10 times in a 24-hour period. 


Lighting Resistance 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 50 
This ring functions exactly like a ring of fire 
resistance except that it protects the wearer from 
electricity. 


Limited Telepathy 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
Dragon Magazine 117 

These ture, magical rings appear only in pairs, 
each ring perfectly matching the other in appear- 
ance, The ring combination allows the wearer to 
communicate telepathically, but only with the 
wearer of the other ring, though there are restric- 
tions, The rings have a range of 2,000 miles, 
functioning only when both the rings and their 
wearers are on the same plane of existence. The 
rings are normally made and enchanted for a spe- 
cific pair of users—for example, a husband and 
wife, a pair of allied adventurers, or a brother and 
sister, Note that in cach case, one partner must be 
male and the other female. This is a function of 
the enchantment, which enhances sympathetic 
feelings between such pairs, capitalizing on gen- 
der attraction as well. Because the rings are 
enchanted for a specific pair of wearers, the 
chance that two persons randomly finding such 
rings and being able to use them is almost nil. 

A remote chance (10%) exists that two people of 
the same gender who are very closely allied or 
related (identical twins, very close friends, or a par- 
ent and child, for example), or lovers who have 
been together for at least 10 years, can make use of 
these rings, but the effective range is reduced to 
1,000 miles. Successful use of the rings allows cach 
wearcr a +4 saving throw against any sort of 
psionic attack, psionic discipline, or magical effect 
that affects the mind and will of the wearer. This 
gestions, and holds, as well as fear, quest, and con- 

a 


974 ` 


E Á yý 


x King of Lolth r 


fusion. The use of ESP or telepathy by another per- 
son against the wearer of such a ring immediately 
reveals the use of the rings to the scryer. However, 
if the saving throw against the attacks mentioned 
above fails, the ring wearer's partner (who might 
not be present during the attack) must save vs. spell 
at +2 or else suffer the sume spell or psionic effects. 
Thus, if one ring-wearer was subjected to a scare 
spell, the other ring-wearer must save vs. spell at +2 
or else be scared as well, Use Table 5 in the PHB to 
decide which spells are applicable in these cases. 

In the event of dire need, such as when one ring- 
wearer is unconscious, dying, or in great pain, a 
strong feeling of distress is felt by the partner. By 
complete concentration, the partner can determine 
the distressed ring~wearer’s location. This takes a 
full turn to complete. If one ring-wearer is slain, the 
partner must save vs. spell (with Wisdom bonuses) 
or cise pass into a coma for ad io hours 


Liquid Identification 

XP Value: 750 GP Value: 4.000 
Deacon Magazine 82 
If the wearer passes this ring within | inch of a 
liquid, the ting rock crystal changes hue, identi- 
fying the liquid, At least four ounces of liquid 
must be present, The stone turns to one of nine 
colors; see the chart below for the meaning of 
each. If no liquid is nearby, or the fluid in range is 
not included on the chart below, the crystal 
remains colorless 


Color Liquid is 
Red Poison, potion, or magical oil 
Orange Oil or other flammable liquid 
Yellow Contaminated water 
Green Acid ot other strong corrosive 
Blue Pure water 
Indigo Brine 
Color Liquid is 
Violet Wine, ale, beer, or other alcoholic drink 
White Holy water 
Black Unholy water 
of the Little People 
XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 40,000 


Dracon Magazine 187 
The ring of the little people is usually made to scal 
a bond of friendship between a druidical circle and 
the facric folk of the forest it protects. Its manufac- 
ture requires the cooperation of six representatives 


from at least two kinds of faerie creatures. The 
wearer is immune to the spells and innate powers 
of all sylvan and facric creatures, including atom- 
ics, bookas, brownics, buckawn, dryads, korred, 
Icprechauns, nixics, nymphs, pixies, pseudodrag- 
ons, quicklings, satyrs, sprites, sylphs, and will o 
wisps. The wearer can also speak and understand 
two to five additional languages (to be determined 
by the DM) of the creatures listed above. Once a 
day, the druid may cast upon his or her person, in 
the same round, the spells reduce and improved 
invisibility, Reduction is to a height of 6 to 24 
inches, which may be modified within that range 
after the spell casting by a round of concentra- 
tion. The combined spells last for six turns; the 
druid may cancel them at any time. 


of Lolth 
XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 30,000 
Dragon Magazine 117 
On an unknown layer of the Abyss, Lolth, the 
Spider Queen, fashioned this unique ring and 
bestowed it upon her most powerful pricstess for 
her faithful service during the Age of Despair, 
when the drow were driven into the underworld. 
Using the powers of the ring, the high priestess 
ruled a vast underground empire with an iron 
hand for hundreds of years, sacrificing thousands 
upon the altar of her goddess. The reign of terror 


ended when a massive assault against the subter- 
4302 


F 975 


Ring, Lore 


— — .— 'ͤ . w. 


ranean Spider Temple was made by mercenary 

adventurers—at that time the ring was lost. It has 

reappeared from time to time, however, in the ser- 
vice of evil characters, particularly drow, 

At first glance, the ring of Lolth appears to be a 
miniature figure of a black spider with curled legs 
and glowing red eyes. The legs curved down and 
around to form the ring shape. Any character slid- 
ing a finger through the legs, thus properly wear- 
ing the ring, is pricked by a hidden needle and 
must save vs. poison at 4 or die instantly, The sav- 
ing throw is instantly made for all pure-blooded 
drow. If the save is successful, the ring gives the 
wearer the following powers and abilities: 

1. Immunity to all spider venoms. 

2. Spider climb at will. 

3. Cast a double-sized web (as per the spell) once 
per turn. 

4. Cast stones to spiders once a day. (This spell is 
identical to the priest spell sticks to snakes in 
most respects, changing six stones into large spi- 
ders, per the Monstrous Manual accessory, for 
12 rounds. All spiders so created are venomous.) 

5. Ability to sense enemies as a wand of enemy 
detection. 

6. Ability to charm and control all arachnids 
within 120° (no saving throw allowed if ring is 
worn by a drow; otherwise, a normal save vs. 
spell is given to the monsters), 

7. Ability to shift out of phase as a phase spider, 
allowing wearer to attack opponents with a +3 
bonus to surprise. 

Drow will fight to the death to recover this ring 
if it falls into the hands of nondrow. In addition, 
there is a 2% chance per day of use (noncumula- 
tive) that Lolth’s personal attention is drawn to 
any owner who is not a drow, 


Lore 
XP Value: 3,500 GP Value: 23,500 
DRAGON Magazine $2 
This ring looks much the same as any ring, but 
when worn it can be commanded to exercise vari- 
ous powers if the correct command words are 
known, The ring can act as a legend lore spell 
through mental visions to its wearer. This power 
can be called once per week, and the visions 
require the weurer's total concentration over a 
period of four turns after commanding the ring. If 
concentration is not maintained, all visions are 
lost. The ring must be touched to an item, or a 
name of a person or place must be spoken over it 


as the command is given; otherwise, the visions 
are random, having no common focus or theme. 

The ring also performs stone tell once per 
week, upon being touched to stone while the 
command “Speak!” is uttered, 

Upon the command “Shine forth!” the ring 
causes any symbols, hidden runes, or powerful 
dweomers within 10 feet to glow visibly. This 
power works once a day. 

The /ore ring can also endow the wearer with a 
power identical in effect to psionic Sensitivity to 
Psychic Impressions once a week. This power is 
not infallible; there is only a 40% chance it will be 
effective. Even if the attempt fails, the ring cannot 
operate this way again for a week. The psychic 
power is activated silently, by will, and it requires 
the wearer's complete concentration to work. 

All of the rings powers have durations identi- 
cal to the spells or effects they resemble. Any and 
all of them may be used in quick succession (but 
not simultaneously); the use of one has no effect 
on the others, Every time the ring is used, there is 
a 5% chance it will vanish forever from the 
wearer's finger without operating as desired. 


Lucky Ring of the Wild Coast 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 3,500 
GREYHAWK Adventures 
This magical ring was created by a wizard who 


liked to gamble, though his greatest gamble was 
4304 


= 976 z 


5 es — 


+ Ring of Magic Resistance y 


of Magic Detection 


to use it under the suspicious eyes of the Thieves 
Guild. The ring increases a gambler’s chances of 
winning, and is prized among the rogues of the 
Wild Coast. The user can choose to add or sub- 
tract | pip from each dic in a game of chance. The 
direction of the change must be stated before any 
roll is made, Thus, a 3d6 roll of 2, 4, and 6 can be 
decreased to 1, 3, and 5, or increased to 3, 5, and 
7. The ring is useful only to a character who is 
actually gambling, and has no effect on attack or 
damage rolls, saving throws, or checks. 


Lycanthropy 
XP Value GP Value 
Bear: 2,700 7,900 
Boar: 2,400 7,300 
Rat: 2,300 7,100 
Tiger: 2,600 7,700 
Wolf: 2,500 7,500 
Dragon Magazine $2 


Each of these rings features the head of some 
werecreature, engraved in bas-relief. With the 
utterance of the proper command word, the 
wearer is transformed into the werecreature 
engraved on the ring. The transformation is pos- 
sible only once per day, and the duration of the 
change is only one turn, To discover the com- 
mand word, the bearer of the ring must wear it 
under a full moon, at which point the word comes 
to mind, The command can also be discovered if 
a priest blesses the ring before an identify spell is 
cast upon it. 

The wearer, while transformed, gains the hit 
points and abilities of the werecreature but retains 
his or her original alignment. Lycanthrope-form 
hit points are considered separately from the 
wearer's normal hit points; if the werecreature’s hit 
points are reduced to 0, the character is instantly 
transformed back into the previous form, and the 
normal number of hit points is retained. There is a 
1% cumulative chance per use that the wearer is 
permanently transformed into a werecreature 
(including its alignment), and not even a wish can 
negate this change. For random selection of one of 


the five rings, roll percentile dice: 
Roll Ring Type 

01-50 Wolf 

51-75 Rat 

76-85 Bear 

86-95 Boar 

96-00 Tiger 


XP Value: 1,750 GP Value: 17,500 
Prince of LANKHMAR 

This ring allows the wearer to see the magical 
emanations from magical items. The more power- 
ful the magic, the deeper blue the item appears to 
be; the less powerful the magic, the lighter blue it 
appears, The wearer is also able to see the magi- 
cal emanations trom faerie fire, charms, geas, 
curses, polymorph, shape changers currently in a 
changed shape, other such quasi-magical condi- 
tions, and people under the effects of potions and 
ointments. People with magical invisibility are 
seen as well. The wearer cannot determine if the 
condition viewed on an individual is beneficial or 
malefic, only that the magical condition exists. 

A ring of magical detection may have as many as 
1d100 charges in it, and it can be recharged. The 
recharging mechanism is as simple as casting a 
detect magic spell within 20 feet of the ring. The 
spell, when cast, does not work in this case, because 
a ring of magic detection actually absorbs the detec- 
tion spell. This detect magic absorption ability works 
even when the ring is not worn; and it continues to 
absorb this spell until the ring possesses 100 charges. 
Each change invoked from the ring lasts for 1d4 turns 
or until turned off, While invoked, the ring does not 
absorb detect magic spells. Once 100 charges are 
absorbed, the ring can absorb no more. 

The ring has a verbal command word. This 
invoking word can be found by merely casting an 
identify spell on the ring. When this condition 
occurs, the caster sees the command word appear 
on the ring, as though the word were suspended 


slightly over the ting opaque stone. 

The ring, if ever found for sale, can be pur- 
chased for as little as 17,500 gp. 

of Magic Resistance 

XP Value GP Value 
5%: 1,000 2,000 
10%: 1,500 4,000 
15%: 2,000 6,000 
20%; 2,500 8,000 
25%; 3,000 10,000 
30%; 3,500 12,000 
35%; 4,000 14,000 
40%: 4,500 16,000 
45%: 5,000 18,000 
50%: 5,500 20,000 


DRAGON Magazine 117 


As their name describes, these rings impart magic 
au 


~ 977 > 


Pp a eee -w i _ ‘ili 


~ Ring of Mammal Control * 


resistance upon their wearers. These rings do not 
increase the natural magic resistance a wearer 
may have—they do not provide a cumulative fig- 
ure for magic resistance. For example, a being 
with a natural magic resistance of 50% wearing a 
ring of magic resistance 45% does not gain a 
magic resistance of 95%; rather, the wearer gains 
the higher magic resistance of the two (in this 
case, the innate figure of 50%). Consequently, the 
ring is ineffective for this wearer. The effective 
magic resistance of the ring is obtained by rolling 
percentile dice and checking the table below: 


Roll Magic Resistance 
OL-15 5% 
16-30 10% 
31-45 15% 
46-00 20% 
61-75 25% 
76-85 30% 
86-92 35% 
93-97 40% 
98-99 45% 
00 50% 


of Mammal Control 

XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
Duncron Master Guide 
This ring enables its wearer to exercise complete 
control over mammals with Intelligence of 4 or 
less (animal or semi-intelligent mammals). Up to 
30-HD of mammals can be controlled, The 
wearer's control over creatures is so great he can 
even command them to kill themselves, but com- 
plete concentration is required. (Note: the ring 
does not affect bird-mammal combinations, 
humans, semihumans, and monsters such as lam- 
masu, shedu, or manticores) If the DM is in doubt 
about whether any creature can be controlled by 
the wearer of this ring, assume it cannot be con- 
trolled. 


of Many Wishes 
XP Value: 5,000 GP Value: 25,000 
Curse of the Azure Bonds 
With an unknown number of charges left, Kanger- 
dahasts ring is only used in the most dire emer- 
gencies, such as the possible death of his Lord, 
King Azoun IV. 


978 


of Marking* 
XP Value: +200 GP Value: +1,000 
Dracon Magazine 30 
The ring of marking leaves a permanent green ring 
on the finger of anyone who puts it on, This mark is 
similar to that left by brass and can be only removed 
with a remove curse or a wish, The ring can be 
removed at any time, leaving the mark behind. 


of Materialization 
XP Value: 2,400 GP Value: 12,000 
Tales of the Outer Planes 
This item is usable only in the Border Ethereal, or 
in the Astral Plane near a color pool. In these 
cases, wearing the ring projects the wearer into 
the nearby plane until the ring is removed. At that 
point, the character is immediately launched back 
to the Border Ethereal or Astral Plane. 
When using a ring of materialization, a charac- 
ter cannot travel the planes in any other way, and 
cannot be forced to do so against his or her will. 


of Memory 
XP Value: 1,500 GP Value: 7,500 
DUN οο & Deacons Rules Cyclopedia 
This ring can only be used by a spellcaster. It 
allows the wearer to recall any one spell cast, The 
wearer must decide, within one turn of casting a 
spell, to recall it; the memory then reappears and 
the spell is instantly “relearned.” The ring can 
restore the memory of one spell per day. 


Message 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 2,500 
Draoon Magazine 179 
The message ring is used to record and convey 
messages, and it is often used to transmit “direct 
orders” from a superior to an underling. Such rings 
are used in businesses, bureaucracies, religions, 
and military units, The user of the ring looks into its 
inset gem, speaks a command word, then speaks a 
one minute message. When the command word is 
spoken again, the speaker's face appears on the 
gem and the message is repeated. The gem will 
speak three times in this fashion and is then emp- 
tied, at which point a new message may be placed. 
The command word is chosen by the holder of the 
ring, and a new wearer may choose a new com 
mand word—and, therefore, a new message. The 
command word is usually known by the two corre- 
spondents but not by the bearer, so a message may 
be lost but rarely intercepted. Spells such as * 


D mͥ-—.AA, 


s Ring, Moodarvian Ring of Emotion r 


other plane reveal the nature of the command word. 
The DM may use an intercepted message ring to 
send the herocs off on new adventures, as the mes- 
sage is usually of some import and secrecy (other- 
wise n common scroll would do the task), 
Alternately, the message ring could be found 
empty, and the heroes could use it themselves 


of Mind Shielding 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 5,000 
Dungo Master Guide 
This ring is usually of fine workmanship and 
wrought from heavy gold. The wearer is com- 
pletely immune to ESP, detect lie, and know 
alignment. 


Moodarvian Ring of Emotion 
XP Value GP Value 
Ring of Sight: 2,000 12,000 
Ring of Smell: 2,000 12,000 
Ring of Sound: 2,000 12,000 
Ring of Taste: 2,000 12,000 
Ring of Touch: 2,000 12,000 
The Book of Wondrous Inventions 


Moodarvian rings were pioncered within the last 
100 years, quickly becoming popular and wide- 
spread. Several masters of illusion have claimed 
credit for the invention, among them Percus of 
Gorias, Alstor the Magnificent, and the recluse 
Dor, but the archivist Thelma reports that one can 
only be sure of the region in which they first 
appeared, hence the name. 

A Moodarvian ring (or mood ring) consists of 
a band of woven wool, encased in amber, 
embossed around a golden ring. It can be any 
diameter, from finger-sized up to several feet 
across. A mood ring can be worn or mounted, 
perhaps around the base of a hanging cande- 
labrum or as part of a circular picture frame. It is 
not always obvious and is casily disguised. 

Construction: Ring affecting one sense: 12,000 
gp, nine days. A mood ring must be enchanted with 
the proper spells. The principal onc is a sensory 
illusion—phantasmal force when is it intended to 
affect sight, and nearly identical spells to affect 
smell, taste, sound, and touch, When it is created, a 
mood ring can be attuned to the nearest person, to a 
specific person, to one fixed image, or to the com- 
bined thoughts of a group of people. The effect is 
attuned to a specific person when that individual 
holds the ring during the casting of its final 
enchantment. To tune the effects to a specific 


image or emotion. the rin x creator must concen- 
trate on that image or emotion as the ring is com- 
pleted. In all other cases, the enchanter must take 
care to concentrate on the task emotionlessly, lest 
unintended feelings color the ring subsequent use. 

Mood rings present an illusion of appearance, 
smell, taste, sound, or touch, When attuned to a 
person, the illusion is altered by changes in the 
person emotions and thoughts. When set for a 
fixed image, the ring projects the illusion at all 
times, When attuned to a group of people, the 
illusion is influenced by the melange of emotions 
of all within its range 

Mood rings have proven useful for a wide vuriety 
of applications, from the preparation of gourmet 
food to warding unwary intruders, When tuned to a 
specific person, a personal ring of sight can 
enhance its owner's presence, making plain girls 
pretty, shy men valiant, and timorous folk coura- 
geous. With practice, it can be used to disguise 
appearance when one wishes to pass unrecognized. 

A personal ring of smell acts as a deodorant, 
radiating the most expensive of sachets or 
colognes, It can clear the air of clinging odors or 
foul the nearby atmosphere to the point that no 
one would want to approach its wearer. 

A personal ring of taste most often serves as a 
shortcut to elegant dining, By imagining the dish 
desired, the most extravagant banquet can be 
served, if the chef is sufficiently skilled with the 
illusions the ring devises. Woe betide, though, if the 
chef is upsct or depressed, for these emotions will 
work their way into his creations as well. Governor 
Dmitri is well known for having lost the knight- 
hood he sought, and his head as well, after serving 
Prince Logan oysters stewed by a chef whose true 
love had just jilted him for the fishmonger. 

A personal ring of sound can be the most 
entertaining of the set, providing its wearer with 
his own individual theme music and sound 
effects. A rousing theme for adventuring, pas- 
sionate strains for courtship, and martial chords 
for combat are all within this ring’s capacity. Care 
must be taken that it does not control its wearer in 
a tense situation, however—a fearful flourish has 
served to rout more than one panicky wearer, 
unaware that he or she had provoked the very 
tremolo that caused the dear in the first place. 

A personal ring of touch, although less gener- 
ally useful than its brothers, can render the coars- 
est complexion sutin-soft and subdue the roughest 
hemp into velvety smoothness. 

4323 


979 


rr 7˙Ü ˙ . < hhUhUll 


Ring, Moodarvian Ring of Emotion 


— — — — ee 


A mood ring, when worn, generally attunes to 
the nearest person, that is, its wearer. Rings that 
enhance rooms or larger arcas are usually tuned 
to a specific individual, so that the ring’s illusion 
is not constantly shifting. 

When mounted in a nondescript room, a ring 
of sight can transform it into a scholarly study, a 
rosy boudoir, or an clegant salon. Of course, fur- 
nishings must roughly conform to the image pre- 
sented for any lengthy effect, and a ring of touch 
might be added to harmonize the impressions of 
any who come into the room. Skillfully com- 
bined, these two rings and a single room can 
serve as several distinct chambers 

Similarly, a ring of smell can impart a pine- 
fresh fragrance, a stimulating scabreeze, or other 
refreshing aromas dependent on the mood and 
impulse of its owner, 

A ring of taste, when one hasn't the skill to 
evoke savory detail in cach dish sufficient to fool a 
gourmet, can be mounted in the dining room to add 
an overall flavor to cach meal, It can serve to make 
bland food tasty, but one has heard of infamous 
dinners in which cach course was even more garlic- 
filled than the last, or so bitter that guests had to 
pry open their puckered lips with forks to voice 
their thanks for the meal and regrets for an carly 
departure. Such disasters are usually duc to an 
undiscriminating palate or taste buds temporarily 
warped by a head cold or other slight illness. 

Perhaps the most ill-used of this class of rings, 
however, is the ring of sound. Background music is 
a useful addition to any social occasion, and such 
mood rings are more versatile and prompt than 
most orchestras. They certainly require less upkeep 
This has not escaped the notice of professional 
musicians, and musical groups from all over have 
been among the most vociferous in their opposition 
to mood rings. In scattered cases, musicians have 
struck back, lurking nearby and producing discor- 
dant music calculated to jar the tinniest of cars 
when combined with a ring’s music 

One of the most memorable of such clashes 
occurred between Squire Frye, a devoted music 
lover and confirmed ring of sound user, and the 
renowned Damacron Ensemble. Pride forbade the 
ensemble from actually producing discordant 
noise, so when it attempted to disrupt one of the 
Squire's progressive mood ring musicales, Master 
Damacron chose a rousing patriotic march to clash 
with the rhapsody wafling out of the Squire’s win- 
dows, Frye was quick to respond, however, moving 


980 


swiftly into a sprightly jig in perfect counterpoint to 
the ensemble’s march. Damacron switched to a 
dirge, and the struggle was on, For hours, all within 
earshot sat enthralled as point and counterpoint 
sang through the evening. Four symphonies were 
born that night, among the most innovative in sev- 
eral centuries, though witnesses say that none do 
justice to the exhilarating chase that Damacron led 
Frye on through the enchanted night. 

Closely related to the rings just discussed are 
those tuned to one fixed image or emotion. These 
rings are particularly useful in cases where their 
users lack the expertise and emotional control to 
maintain the positive image they wish to project, 
or where only one image is necessary. Fixed per- 
sonal mood rings enhancing sight, smell, and 
touch are not uncommon, but similar rings of 
sound have proven maddening for all in range, 
particularly the wearer. After hearing the same 
tune repeatedly, without pause, for days in a row, 
most early users developed severe mental aberri- 
tions, The experiments are scldom repeated 

Fixed rings mounted in rooms are similarly 
useful, The most common place to find sucha 
ring is in a privy, where a ring of smell can over- 
come the strongest of disagreeable odors with 
rosewater freshness, Fixed rings of sound or taste 


are scldom constructed, but rings of sight or 
an 


x Ring of Multiple Wishes 


touch can perk up even the most drab chambers. 

Mood rings tuned to the combined thoughts of 
a group of people comprise the final class to be 
described. Such rings are governed by the emo- 
tions of everyone within their range, and in nor- 
mal circumstances produce pleasant but bland 
accompaniment for those gathered. Rings of sight 
and zouch bathe the setting in agreeably soft 
beige, rings of sound provide harmonious and 
inoffensive background music, rings of smell 
induce slightly sweet but unidentifiable odors, 
and rings of taste, when used in public restaurants 
and taverns, mask the food with bland flavors. 

However, such use always includes the risk of a 
strong negative emotion overriding the generally 
positive flow, When this happens, blackened 
walls, prickly seats, discordant caterwauling, and 
the stench of rotting eggs predominate. Wise 
owners make sure that such rings are easily 
removable when circumstances demand it. 

These rings are also popular in children’s play- 
rooms, although only the wealthy can afford 
them. Children's imaginations, when reinforced 
by rings, can take them anywhere, soaring above 
the clouds, battling to save a kingdom, or adven- 
turing in the depths of the earth. Strong-willed 
guardians should always be present, lest children 
literally scare themselves to death. 

Perils occur when mood rings come under the 
control of inexperienced or unaware users. Just as 
the rings provide positive feedback to positive 
emotions, anger, distrust, nervousness, and espe- 
cially fear, are reinforced by the rings in a vicious 
circle of escalating images. In particular, it was 
soon found that rings mounted to enhance social 
gatherings also provide thieves and other intrud- 
ers with those images they fear most, beginning 
with flickering shadows in the corners, the hint of 
a dragon's sulphurous breath, the sting of hidden 
traps, and the tread of approaching footsteps. The 
most imaginative fall prey to other worldly 
guardians and worse, terrors that previously 
existed only in their darkest nightmares, 


Mordmorgan’s Ring of Warmth 
XP Value: 1,500 GP Value: 7,500 
1992 Fantusy Collector Card 131 
Mordmorgan’s magical ring functions as a normal 
ring of warmth, giving him normal body heat in 
extremely cold conditions and providing a +2 bonus 
to saving throws vs. cold-based attacks and reducing 
the damage by =I per die. However, Mordmorgan’s 


ring has a 5-foot radius of effect, allowing up to six 
other individuals to huddle together with Mordmor- 
gan and benefit from the ring’s effects, 


of Movement 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 7,500 
BLACKMOOR 
This ring has the same effects as ring of flying but 
instead of air, it works when swimming in water. 


Mud 
XP Value: 3.000 GP Value: 15,000 
DUNGEON Magazine 37 

This magical ring appears to be made of dark-red 
clay, Its wearer may cast several potent carth- and 
water-based spells. The priest spells that can be cast 
(at the 14th level) are: meld into stone and water 
breathing (three times a day), stone shape (twice a 
day), and earthquake (once a month, after which 
the ring’s powers go dormant for two days). The 
wizard spells that can be cast (at the 12th level) are: 
transmute rock to mud or reverse (twice a week), 
transmute water to dust or reverse (once a week), 
conjure elemental (N- earth or water elemental) 
once a week, and airy water (once a day). 

No more than five functions may be used in a 
single day. While wearing the ring, all saves 
involving carth or water are made at +1, and 
attacks by beings from the Plane of Elemental 
Earth or Water are made at a -I penalty, with 
damage at- on each die. However, the ring 
bears some danger. Saving throws vs. all air 
(including poison gases and breath weapons) and 
fire attacks are made at I, and damage from 
these attacks are always at +1 per die. There is 
also a 2% chance each time the ring is used that 
the wearer will be plane shifted to the Elemental 
Plane of Earth or Water (50% chance of either) 
and trapped by a powerful denizen of that place. 

Wizards, priests, and rogues may use the ring, 
but thieves using it have an 8% chance of plane 
shifting per use. An individual donning the ring is 
made aware of tts powers telepathically, though 
its limitations and dangers will be discovered 
only through employing the device. 


of Multiple Wishes 
XP Value: 5,000 GP Value: 25,000 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide, Ist Edition 
This ring contains 2d4 wish spells. As with any 
wish, the DM should be very judicious in handling 


the request. If players are greedy and grasping, 
4327 


Ring of Nature's Love 


— 


interpret their wording exactly, twist the wording, 
or simply rule the request is beyond the power of 
the magic. In any case, the wish is used up, whether 
or not the wish was granted, and regardless of the 
DM's interpretation of the wisher’s request. No 
wish can cancel the decrees of godlike beings, 
unless it comes another such creature. 


of Nature’s Love 
XP Value: 7,700 GP Value: 38,500 
Tales of the Lance 
This ring appears common: it is a simple pewter 
ring carved to resemble twining branches with a 
blossoming rose at its heart. 

A long history ties this ring to the Age of 
Dreams, It passed to Lady Ellyth, who gave it to 
her son Arin for his bride. Sadly, fair Marissa, 
Arin's love, had also melted the cold heart of Kryl 
Shadestalker, a vampiric creature. Master Kryl 
stole Marissa’s life-breath, making her one of his 
ilk. To seal the pact, he forced her to slay Arin. 
Although eternally damned, fair Marissa would 
never bow to Kryl's lust. Decades later, she threw 
herself on a witch hunter’s stake both to spite 
Master Kryl and to end her torment. Kryl saved 
the ring, a token of his loss. 

Then Master Kryl retired to a manor in the deso- 
late Crumbled Spine of Abanasinia. He swore 
never to love again, One day his travels took him to 
the ramshackle port of Dering’s Way. While gaug- 
ing the cattle for his next repast, Kryl fell prey to a 
common thief, a small girl (Tika) who slipped the 
ring from his finger while feigning courtesy. Out- 
raged, Kryl sent his minions to locate the girl. They 
never returned. After a fortnight, a wizard named 
Waylan knocked at Kryl’s door. Waylan said that 
his daughter had the vampire’s ring and he pro- 
posed a game of chance to decide ownership. 
Intrigued, Kryl agreed. If he lost, he would leave 
the wizard and girl-child alone. If he won, he 
would claim both the ring and their lives. 

How the game ended, none knows. Some say 
Waylan won and Kryl, loathe though he was, 
honored the bargain, Others say the con man 
cheated Kryl, and the furious vampire swore to 
exact revenge one day, The unliving can be 
patient: Whatever happened, Waylan lived. The 
lord of deceit did eventually return to challenge 
the wizard, but Waylan had teleported Tika and 
the ring away to a new land. 

Tika wears the ring on a chain about her neck 
as a memento of her father, She does not know of 


its power, but in times of stress she will slip on 
the ring asking for her father’s guidance. This 
activates the ring. Where fate will lead her is 
unknown. A fortune-teller once said to her, 
“Nature's love will one day find its true heart and 
healing hands.” 

This ring detects only as minor magic. It acts 
as a ring of protection +2, improving AC by -2 
and adding a +2 bonus to all saves. It also pro- 
tects against the clements, halving damage from 
fire, cold, lightning, air, and water—making the 
wearer immune to up to 3 Hit Dice of nonmagical 
damage from the natural elements. 

Lastly, the ring makes the wearer immune to 
the ravages of time. It slows the aging process 
and quickens healing to double normal rates. 
Only catastrophe or violence will slay the wearer, 
Otherwise, the wearer is undying. 

The ring is one of three artifacts that make up 
the Circle of Love. These artifacts were created in 
ancient days by the god Mishakal to end a war 
between two noble families. The spirit of the 
earth wizard, Heris Jerrold, inhabits the ring of 
nature's love. Heris’s brother Trac and Trac“ 
betrothed Mirri inhabit the other two artifacts in 
the Cirele of Love. One day, destiny will reunite 
these artifacts, and the spirits within them. The 
ring of natures love is opposed by the circlet of 
pride in the Triad of Betrayal, three artifacts cre- 
ated by the Evil God Hiddukel. 


of the Necromancer 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 11,000 
DRAGON Magazine 29 

A ring of the necromancer conveys only one bene- 
fit to all characters except neutral or evil wizards or 
priests. Once per week, on command, it forms a 
sphere of protection equal in effect and duration to 
that created by a scroll af protection from undead. 
The ring must be worn for a full week prior to each 
use. If it is removed for any reason, it must be worn 
for another week before it can be used. 

However, when the ring is worn for a week by 
a neutral or evil wizard or priest, its true worth is 
revealed. Once per day the ring functions as a 
potion of undead control, and the undead it is 
used against get no saving throw. Once a week 
the ring will animate dead, Once per month the 
ring,of the necromancer will summon any one 
undead creature (excluding liches), which serves 
the wearer for one day. However, before the ring 


will summon an undead, one living, intelligent, 
4329 


g 982 F 


= Ring of Night 


conscious, aware being must be ritually sacrificed 
to the ring. This act must be repeated each time 
this power is used. 


of Neutralization 
XP Value: 1,500 GP Value: 7,500 
Dragon Magazine 117 

This magical ring can be employed by any char- 
acter class. Its sole function is to protect the 
wearer from the effects of a predetermined offen- 
sive wizard spell. Each ring has the ability to 
completely negate any damage or ill effects from 
a given, specific spell, as noted in an inscription 
on the ring itself. A ring of fireball neutralization, 
for example, allows a character to stand in the 
center of a fireball blast, totally unharmed. A ring 
of neutralization uses a charge each time a spell x 
effects are nullified. A typical ring of this sort, 
when found, has 4d4 charges. It can only be 
recharged to a maximum of 20 charges, but this 
requires a prolonged and costly ritual (one day 
and 1,000 gp per charge). A charge is lost from 
the ring for each predesignated attack made on an 
individual wearing it. A magic missile or Melſ 
minute meteor forces rings matched for those 
spells to use a charge for each separate missile 
stopped. For example, if four magic missiles are 
negated by a ring of magic-missile neutralization, 
then four charges are used. 

A ring of neutralization only nullifies one type 
of spell. For example, if a character is wearing a 
ring of cone of cold neutralization and is the target 
of an ice storm spell, he or she takes normal dam- 
age from the attack. Spells with similar effects are 
nonctheless considered different for purposes of 
using this ring; a delayed blast fireball docs normal 
damage if a character is wearing a ring of fireball 
neutralization. Similarly, a character wishing pro- 
tection from both lightning bolts and a chain light- 
ning spell would require two different rings. Only 
the person wearing the ring of neutralization is 
immune to that spell's effects. Anyone else caught 
in the area of effect takes normal damage or suffers 
the effects of that particular spell, Below is a table 
of some ring of neutralization options (roll 5d12): 


Spell Spell 
Roll Neutralized Roll Neutralized 
05 Bigbyx crushing 33 Hypnotism 
hand 34 Ice Storm 
06 Blindness 35 Imprisonment 
07 Burning hands 36 Incendiary cloud 


Spell Spell 
Roll Neutralized Roll Veutraltred 
O8 Cuntrips 37 Lightning bolt 
09 (Main lightning 38 Magic jar 
10 Charm person 39 Magic missile 
11 Chill touch 40  Massmorph 
12 Clone 44 Melf minute 
13 Cloudkill meteor 
14 Color spray 42  Melfacid arrow 
15 Cone of cold 43 Meteor swarm 
16 Confusion 44 Mind blank 
17 Delayed blast 45 Power word 
Fireball Blind 
18 Disintegrute 46 Power word Kill 
19 Domination 47 Power word Stun 
20 Energy drain 48 Prismatic sphere 
21  Enervation 49 Prismatic spray 
22 Evard’s black 50 Prismatic wall 
tentacles 51  Rayof 
23 Explosive runes enfeeblement 
24 Eyebite 52 Sepia snake sigil 
25 Fear 53 Shocking grasp 
26 Feeblemind 54 Shout 
27 Firetrap 55 Stinking cloud 
28 Fireball 56 Suggestion 
29 Flame arrow 57 Temporal stasis 
30 Flaming sphere 58 lumpirie touch 
31 Forget 59  Wallof fire 
32 Geas 60 Hall of ice 
of the Nibelungen 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 


Dunaeons & Dragons Master Set 

This item comes from several Scandinavian leg- 
ends. The ring was part of an entire hoard in the 
Rhine river, which was guarded by the Rhine 
Maidens until Alberich gained it by foreswearing 
love. The greedy dwarf cursed the item, and when 
the Ring was later taken by gods and heroes for 
various uses, it brought doom to all, resulting 
even in the destruction of Asgard and the gods. 
Every two days, the DM should roll on Artifact 
Table 1-01: Cataclysm. The ring cannot be 
removed short of a carefully worded wish. 


of Night 
XP Value: 1,500 GP Value: 7,500 
Dungeon Magazine | 
The ring of night was created by a human wizard 
named Cabilar as his “key” to get to the crown of 
Stoutwall; it also serves as a protective device, 


The ring of night is made from a dull gray metal 
4332 


983 


~ Ring, Noora’s Ring of Djinn Summoning r 


and radiates magic. It has a batlike motif, with 

the following phrase written on the inside of the 

band in magical script (requiring a read magic 

spell to translate): “Defend, deceive, destroy!” It 

expands and shrinks to fit any size hand. The ring 

* night has the following abilities: 

It acts as a ring of protection +1. 

It incurs 60' infravision (or 120“ if the wearer 

normally has infravision). 

While wearing it, the bearer never needs to eat 

or breathe. 

It adds 10 hit points to the user’s total for 20 

rounds, twice per day, When attacked, the 

character loses these extra hit points before 

any real damage is incurred. 

The user can cast burning hands at the 16th 
level, twice per day, 

The user can cast magic missile at the 16th 
level three times per day. 


Noora’s Ring of Djinn Summoning 
XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 15,000 
1993 Collector Card 410 
Noora’s ring is similar in many ways to a standard 
ring of djinn summoning. Noora ring, however, 
will summon a tasked artist genie known as Akmed. 
Akmed is a skilled weaver and can produce some 
of the finest cloth, fabrics, and rugs ever seen in 
Zakhara. Akmed often gives his work to Noora so 
that she may present them to others as gifts. Noora 
uses these gifts to solidify alliances, reward ser- 

vices well done, or simply as tokens of friendship. 


Nuggin’s Cursed Ring of Armoring 
XP Value: — GP Value: 1,000 
1992 Fantasy Collector Card 634 
Nuggin the Transmuter wanted to improve the effi- 
ciency of this ring of armoring, and he used a suit 
of magical plate armor as a component in the reen- 
chantment of the item. Unfortunately, his calcula- 
tions were incorrect and he ended up creating a 
cursed item instead. Now, when the wearer casts 
any spell that enhances AC, such as shield or armor. 
a suit of jointless plate armor (AC 3) appears on the 
caster and remains for 1d6 rounds. During this 

time, the wizard cannot move or cast any spells. 


of Oak 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 2,000 
DRAGON Magazine 45 
This is a magical item not usually found in treasure 


hoards, and its application is somewhat limited. 


Nonetheless, it can be of some use to adventurers. A 
ring of oak is a simple, flexible band of wood which, 
when taken from the home tree of a dryad and wom 
on the finger, allows the dryad to move out of the 
vicinity of her tree and roam as an adventurer. Few 
(if any) true dryads have the wanderlust. but some 
player characters may find themselves reincarnated, 
through the druidic spell of the same name, as a 
dryad, and may wish to continue adventuring. 

A small, green twig is taken from the dryad’s 
tree and is woven into a ring shape. Then an 
astral spell and a wish must be cast on the ring, 
and it is thereby attached by a silver cord through 
the astral plane to the home tree: the cord has a 
1% chance per month of breaking through any 
outside influence. The dryad will not voluntarily 
remove the ring when more than 360 feet away 
from the home tree. If the ring is lost or the cord 
breaks, the dryad loses | point of Strength per 
day until the ring is returned or she finds her way 
back to within 360 feet of her oak tree. If her 
Strength reaches 0, she will die—she will 
undergo a similar loss of Strength if her home 
tree is destroyed while she is absent, unless a 
wish is used to “resurrect” the tree. Strength is 
recovered at | point per day if death is avoided by 
the recovery of the ring of oak or a return to 
within 360 feet of the tree, 


Onyx Ring of Negative 

Plane Protection 
XP Value: 1,200 GP Value: 6,000 
Lords of Darkness 
This ring gives the same: protection as the priests’ 
spell of the same name. One charge is used each 
time the wearer is attacked by a creature tied in 
any way to the Negative Energy Plane. The 
wearer is also effective against creatures using 
negative energy attacks on the Demiplane of 
Shadows. 


of Opposition 

XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
Wonders of LANKHMAR 
This ring does the exact opposite of what the 
characters want it to do. If they hope it is a ring of 
regeneration, it becomes a ring of degeneration. 
The ring cannot be fooled once the characters 
know what it is. They cannot try to make it a ring 
of falling when they really want it to be a ring of 
flying. 


Ring of Paraclemental Command e 


Orbus 
XP Value GP Value 
+1; 2,000 18,000 
+2: 3,000 7,000 
+3: 5,000 45,000 


DRAGON Magazine 159 

This rare ring, appears to be carved from ivory 
with strands of platinum twining around the 
band. No magical effects are noted by the wearer 
of such a ring unless seated in a spelljamming 
helm. The ring, utilizing the remains of an orbus 
and its residual magic, increases a ship’s SR by 
one rank. Thus, a 7th-level transmuter seated at a 
minor helm would move the ship at SR 2; with an 
orbus ring, the ship moves with SR 3. 

These rings are highly prized by spelljamming 
wizards and have been touted as a great increase 
in spelljamming technology. Actually, the secret 
of making orbus rings was lost for nearly a cen- 
tury until a hidden cache was discovered on the 
Rock of Bral. The original rings varied in inten- 
sity, some even granting an SR bonus of +3! 
Gamalon Idogyr, an expert on spelljamming 
magic, is currently the only known distributor of 
the new orbus rings, The methods of their cre- 
ation remain a closely guarded secret, 


of Plant Control 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 2,500 
Dunanons & Dracons Rules Cyclopedia 
This ring has the same effect as a potion of plant 
control, but only lasts as long as the wearer con- 
centrates. 


of Plant Control II 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 2,500 
DUNGEONS & Dracons Expert Rules Set 

The wearer may animate and control all plants 
and plantlike creatures (including monsters) 
within a 10" by 10’ area, up to a range of 60 feet. 
The controlled plants may be forced to leave the 
area The control will last as long as the wearer 
concentrates on the desired effects. 


of Plant Control IH 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 2,500 
Curse of the Azure Bonds 
This ring is like a ring of mammal control, but it 
affects plants and vegetable monsters, including 
algoids, shambling mounds, and treants. Allows 
the user to cast one entangle spell each day. 


of Paraelemental Command 


XP Value GP Value 
Ice: 4,000 20,000 
Ooze: 4,000 20,000 
Magma: 4,000 20,000 
Smoke: 4,000 20,000 


DraGoN Magazine 120 

The four types of rings of paraelemental com- 

mand are lesser versions of the rings of elemental 

command, Each appears to be nothing more than 

a normal ring, but each has certain other powers 

as well as the following common properties: 

I. Paraelementals of the plane to which the ring 
is attuned cannot approach within 5 feet of the 
wearer or attack the wearer. If the wearer 
desires, he or she may forgo this protection 
and instead attempt to charm the paraelemen- 
tal (saving throw applicable at 2). If the latter 
fails, however, total protection is lost, and no 
further attempts at charming can be made, The 
properties below still function with respect to 
the paraclemental. 

. Creatures, other than normal paraclementals, 
from the plane to which the ring is attuned 
attack at on their THACO roll. The ring 
wearer takes damage at -I on each hit die and 
makes applicable saving throws from the crea- 
tures’ attacks at +2. In addition, all attack rolls 
made by the wearer of the ring are at +4 (or -4 
to the paraelemental creature's saving throw), 
and the wearer does +6 damage (total, not per 
die), adjusted by any other applicable bonuses 
and/or penalties. Any weapon used by the ring 
wearer can hit paraclementals or quasielemen- 
tals, even if the weapon is not magical, 

3. The wearer of the ring is able to converse with 
the paraclemental creatures of the plane to 
which the ring is attuned. Recognizing that the 
character wears the ring, the creatures show a 
healthy respect to the wearer. Note that the 
Dungeon Master is free to create any new 
paraelementals for the relevant planes as needed. 

4. In addition, the possessor of a ring of paraele- 
mental command suffers a saving throw 
penalty as shown in the table below. 

5. Only one power (major or minor) of a ring of 
paraelemental command can be used at one 
time 
Ice: At will, the wearer produces the following 

magical effects: ice storm (twice per day), wall of 

ice (twice per day), Otilute & freezing sphere 

(once per week), or warmth, The ring appears to 

4345 


N 


z 985 3 


—V... 


R 


mg of Phantom Form 


T...... N T eee 


be nothing more than a ring of warmth until the 
condition established is met. 

Magma; At will, the wearer produces the fol- 
lowing magical effects: burning hands (once per 
turn), affect normal fires (once per turn), flaming 
sphere (twice a day), or fire resistance. The ring 
appears to be nothing more than a ring of fire 
resistance until the condition established is met. 

Ooze: At will, the wearer produces the follow- 
ing magical effects: grease (once per turn), melt 
(once an hour), rock to mud (twice a day), or 
water walking, The ring appears to be nothing 
more than a ring of water walking until the condi- 
tion established is met. 

Smoke: At will, the wearer produces the follow- 
ing magical effects: wall of fire (once per hour), fog 
cloud (twice per day), solid fog (once per week), or 
free action. The ring appears to be nothing more 
than a ring of free action until a certain condition is 
met (such as having the ring blessed, slaying a 
smoke paraclemental, or whatever is determined 
necessary to activate its full potential). 

Rings operate at the 12th level or the minimum 
level needed to perform the equivalent magic 
spell (if greater), with respect to range, duration, 
or area of effect determinations that might apply. 
The additional powers each take five segments to 
bring forth. 


9 


8 


6 


Ring Type Penalty 

Smoke 2 vs. breath weapons or wind- 
based attacks. 

Ice 2 vs. fire or steam. 

Ooze 2 vs. petrification or polymorph 

Magma -2 vs. cold or water, 


of Phantom Form 
XP Value: 1,500 GP Value: 7,500 
DRAGON Magazine 117 

The user of this ring can disperse his or her 
body's molecules at will, so as to become totally 
intangible. This ring does not allow the user to 
become invisible, but rather appear translucent in 
form. Rings of invisibility and phantom form can- 
not be used together at the same time. The spell 
invisibility can be successfully cast upon the user 
of a ring of phantom form, however. An intangi- 
ble character cannot be hit by normal weapons, 
but is affected normally by weapons with a +1 or 
better magical bonus. An intangible character 
cannot physically attack, but may cast spells. 
Heat, cold, and electrical attacks (such as light- 
ning bolt and fireball) affect an intangible char- 
acter normally. The user of a ring of phantom 
form can move through screens, pipes, and other 
narrow apertures at a | 5-foot movement rate. All 
items carried by a character in phantom form are 
likewise rendered intangible, If a character fails a 
saving throw against any magical attack form that 
can harm the PC, all items carried must likewise 
save vs, that attack form or be destroyed. 


of the Phoenix 
XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 20,000 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 82 

This fine, gold band is usually mistaken for a 
ring of fire resistance, since an identify spell will 
reveal it as one. However, the ring has a special 
property that is released if its wearer dics of nat- 
ural or magical fire. If this occurs, the ring melts 
into the wearer's finger, and the wearer is reincar- 
nated into a human phoenix. Physically, the rein- 
carnated character looks the same as before 
death, except for the bright orange skin and deep 
red eyes. The character's alignment changes to 
neutral good, and he or she is instilled with the 
urge to fight evil at every opportunity. The char- 
acter retains all class powers and abilities and is 
bestowed with the following innate spell abilities, 
cast at the 12th level: 


* Fire resistance, always in effect. 
4347 


x Ring of Projection II 


* Affect normal fires, three times a day, 
* Fireball, once a day. 

* Pyrotechnics, once a day. 

* Wall of fire, once a week, 


of the Pomarj 
XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 20,000 
GrevHAwK Adventures 
This black ring was created by a wizard from the 
Wild Coast. Hating all inhabitants of the Pomarj, 
he used it to gather troops of goblins, ogres, or 
ores, He then led these troops into battle against 
the humanoids of the Pomarj. The ring is consid- 
ered a threat by many other lands as well. 

The ring allows a character of evil alignment to 
gather a horde of goblins, ogres, or ores (in much 
the same fashion as a barbarian horde is sum- 
moned). The wearer of the ring decides which 
race he wishes to gather, and can gather a number 
of creatures determined by the character's experi- 
ence point total: 


Race Horde Size 

Goblin XP divided by 750 
Ogre XP divided by 4,000 
Ore XP divided by 1,000 


The horde can be raised only on the Wild 
Coast, and must be raised for a specific, short- 
term purpose. For example, the horde might be 
gathered to attack a rival tribe, to raid the County 
of Ulek, or to destroy elves in Celene. It takes the 
horde at least a week to assemble and, whatever 
its purpose, the horde will remain together for a 
maximum number of weeks equal to half of the 
ring wielder’s level. Deviation from the stated 
purpose may cause the horde to disband sooner, 
at the DM's option, Disbanded humanoids will 
return to the Wild Coast by the quickest and 
safest route. Note that the ring does not charm, 
beguile, or otherwise compel obedience, and. that 
a ring wielder whose humanoids disband will not 
receive a warm welcome the next time he returns 
to them. The ring can be used but three times in 
one year. 


of Projection 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 10,000 
Dragons of Faith 
This magical ring can invoke a project image 
spell once per hour. The spell lasts for up to five 
rounds. 


of Projection II 

GP Value: 5,000 

Tales of the Lance 

This ring is a simple bronze band enameled in 
black. It bears a round, silver set u rosy crystal 
encircled by eight amber chips. The gem setting 
may be raised to reveal a hidden compartment 
beneath, The origin of this ring remains a mys- 
tery, although it is said to come from other lands. 
Serinda received a ring of projection from the 
black sea mage, Mellick as a memento of a battle 
against Mandracore the Reaver pirates off End- 
scape. The ring was said to wield the mirage 
magic that projects the image of an island out 
across the sea. 

When the gem is raised and the command 
word spoken, an illusion of the wearer is pro- 
jected up to 60 yards away. The duplicate of the 
wearer copies the actions of the original, or per- 
forms all actions at the caster’s command, if the 
caster limits the actions to half movement with no 
attacks, The caster must be able to see the image 
to maintain it. This can be performed once an 
hour, and lasts up to five rounds 


XP Value: 500 


Ring of Protection 
of Protection 

XP Value GP Value 
+1: 1,000 5,000 
+2: 2,000 15,000 
2: 5' radius: 2,000 15,000 
+3: 3,000 20,000 
+3: 5' radius: 3,000 25,000 
+4: +2 to saves: 4,000 24,000 
+6: +1 to saves: 6,000 30,000 


Dunganon Master Guide 
A ring of protection improves the wearer's Armor 
Class value and saving throws vs. all forms of 
attack. A ring +1 betters AC by 1 (say, from 10 to 
9) and gives a bonus of +1 on saving throw die 
rolls. The magical properties of a ring of protec- 
tion are cumulative with all other magical items 
of protection except as follows: 
* The ring does not improve Armor Class if 
magical armor is worn, but it does add to sav- 
ing throws. 
Multiple rings of protection operating on the 
same person, or in the same area, do not com- 
bine protection. Only one such ring—the 
strongest—functions, so a pair of protection 
rings +2 provides only +2 protection. To deter- 
mine the value of a protection ring, use the fol- 
lowing table: 


Roll Level of Protection 


01-70 +I 
71-82 +2 

83 2. 5“ radius protection 
84-90 +3 


91 +3, 5! radius protection 
92-97 4 on AC, +2 to saving throws 
98-00 6 on AC, +1 to saving throws 


The radius bonus of 5 feet extends to all crea- 
tures within its circle, but applies only to their 
saving throws. (In other words, only the ring 
wearer gains Armor Class additions.) 


of Protection from Charming 
XP Value: 3,600 GP Value: 18,000 
The Assassin's Knot 
This is a special limited charge ring based on 
the 8th-level spell Serten $ spell Immunity (+9 
vs. beguiling, charm, suggestion; +7 vs. com- 
mand, domination, fear, hold, scare: +5 vs. 
geas, quest), It operates automatically to ward 
its wearer, and the protection from each charge 
lasts a full 16 turns, It protects only the wearer, 


and cannot be recharged. It may have a maxi- 
mum of 12 charges. 


of Protection from the Elements 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 10,000 
Dragons of Faith 
This ring halves all damage from fire, cold, light- 
ning, air, and water, It also makes the wearer 
immune to the effects of up to 3 Hit Dice of non- 
magical damage from the natural elements. 


of Protection from Stone Guardians 

XP Value: 500 GP Value: 5,000 
The Secret of Bone Hill 
The ring protects the wearer and all persons 
within a 10-foot radius. This ring only affects 
stone guardians and no others, although kind 
DMs may include earth elementals or stone 
golems in the protection to make the item a bit 
more useful, 


of Protection From Undead 
XP Value: 2,500 GP Value: 7,500 
Old Empires 

This charged magical item is a band of white 
gold, with the insignia of Horus-Re on its front. 
When any undead tries to touch the wearer, the 
wearer has the option of using one charge to pre- 
vent contact. Use of a charge must be declared 
before the undead rolls its attack against the 
wearer. Each charge prevents the wearer from 
being struck by any undead in that round (if the 
wearer is being attacked by two wights, one 
charge prevents contact from both of them). This 
does not protect the character when surprised, 
The ring contains 3d10+25 charges. 


Pyros’s Ring of Spell Storing 
XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 15,000 
1993 Collector Card 412 

Pyros & ring of spell storing stores three spells, 
just as a typical version of this magical item 
does. However, unlike the usual ring. Pyros’s 
ring is not restricted to three specific spells. 
While it must hold detect magic and teleport, 
the third slot is open to any spell from the Ele- 
mental School of Fire, a great advantage to 
Pyros in his line of study. 


k 988 š 


0 a eee eee lee 


— Ring of Quasiclemental Command y- 


to attack rolls. Also, the ring wearer takes dam- 
age at -I on each hit die and makes applicable 
saving throws from the creatures attacks at +2. 
All attack rolls made by the wearer of the ring 
at +4 (or —4 to the quasiclemental creature's 
saving throw) and the wearer docs +6 damage 
(total, not per dic), adjusted by any other 
applicable bonuses or penalties. Any weapon 
used by the ring wearer can hit quasielemen- 
tals, even if the weapon is not magical. 

. The wearer of the ring is able to converse with 
quasielemental creatures of the plane to which 
the ring is attuned, Recognizing that the char- 
acter wears the ring, the creatures show a 
healthy respect to the ring wearer. Note that the 
DM is free to create new quasielementals for 
the relevant planes as needed. 

4. In addition, the possessor of a ring of quasiele- 
mental command suffers a saving throw 
penalty as shown on the table below. 

5. Only one power of a ring of quasielemental 
command can be used at one time. 

6. All rings of quasielemental command detect as 
magic, but do not identify precisely until a cer- 


wu 


of Quasielemental Command tain condition is met (such as having the ring 
XP Value GP Value blessed, slaying a quasielemental of the type to 
Ash: 2,000 10,000 which the ring is attuned, or whatever is deter- 
Dust: 2,000 10,000 mined necessary to activate its full potential), 
Lightning: 2,000 10,000 Ash: At will, the wearer gains the following 
Mineral: 2,000 10,000 magical effects—pass without trace (once an 
Radiance: 2,000 10,000 hour) or detect invisibility (once an hour), The 
Salts: 2,000 10,000 ring appears to be nothing more than a magical 
Steam: 2,000 10,000 ring until the condition established is met. 
Vacuum; 2,000 10,000 Dust: At will, the wearer produces the follow- 

DRAGON Magazine 120 ing magical effects: dust devil (once a day) or 

The eight types of quasielemental command rings transmute water to dust (once a day). 
are lesser versions of the paraelemental command Lightning: At will, the wearer produces the 
rings. Each has certain powers (detailed below), as following magical effects ing grasp (once 
well as the following common properties; per turn) or lightning bolt (four times a week). 
1. Quasielementals of the plane to which the ring Mineral: At will, the wearer gains the follow- 


is attuned cannot approach within 5 feet of the ing magical effects—transmute metal to wood 
wearer or attack the wearer, If the wearer (once a day) or wall of stone (once a day). 


desires, he or she may forgo this protection Radiance: At will, the wearer produces the 
and instead attempt to charm the quasielemen- following magical effects—rainbow pattern 
tal (saving throw applicable at -2 on the die) (once an hour) or sunray (twice a week). 

If the latter fails, however, total protection is Salts: At will, the wearer gains the following 


lost, and no further attempts at charming can magical effects—irritation (twice a day) or pre- 
be made, The secondary properties given serve (twice day). 


below then function with respect to the quasi- Steam: At will, the wearer produces the fol- 
elemental. lowing magical cffects—melt (once per turn) or 

2. Creatures other than quasielementals, from the fog cloud (twice a day). 
plane to which the ring is attuned attack at -! Vacuum: At will, the wearer gains the follow- 
4270 


o 


989 


~q Ring of Quick Action 7 


ing magical effects—wnseen servant (once a day) 
or negative plane protection (four times a weck). 

The rings operate at the 12th level or the mini- 
mum level needed to perform the equivalent 
magic spell or wand effect (if greater), with 
respect to range, duration, or arca of effect deter- 
minations which might apply. The powers take 
only a 2 Initiative penalty to activate, 


Ring Type Penalty 
Lightning 2 vs. water, steam, or cold. 
Steam -2 vs, lightning or electricity. 
Radiance -2 vs. paralyzation or darkness. 
Mineral 2 vs. petrification. 
Vacuum 2 vs, death magic. 
Salts 2 vs. poison. 
Ash -2 vs. water or cold. 
Dust -2 vs, disintegration. 
of Quick Action 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
Du aue Magazine 117 


A ring of quick action enables a warrior to gain ini- 
tiative at the start of melee, regardless of any other 
factors, including the condition of the opposition. 
The ring can be used 2410 times in this manner 


before it runs out of charges and becomes useless. 
Expending a charge is an automatic action requiring 
a mental command at the start of a melee round. 


of Quickness 

XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
Duxcrons & Dancons Rules Cyclopedia 
Once each day, the wearer of this ring can move 
and attack at double normal rates for | turn. The 
effect is identical to the wizard spell kaste, but 
this effect can be produced by command, not by 
spellcasting. 


Quirks of Magical Rings* 
XP Value: - GP Value: — 
DRAGON Magazine 163 
The AD&D game has one of the largest compila- 
tions of magical items in the fantasy gaming 
industry, 

The following tables have been created to add 
some spice and varicty to existing magical items 
in the AD&D game world. A table of nonstandard 
magical item abilities is offered for cach major 
type of magical item in the AD&D game. The 
rationale for such quirks is simple. 

Most items are created normally, and they 


function exactly as a standard item of the same 
type in the DMG. However, sometimes there is a 
slight mishap in the creation of the device—the 
steps are not followed in the proper order, the 
astrological signs do not bode well, the item's 
creator is disturbed to begin with, the instructions 
are incomplete, or something just plain goes 
wrong. Any of these results may cause a magical 
item to behave differently from others just like it, 

Not all quirks are bad, however. Some are detri- 
mental to the item or its user, some are neutral, and 
some are even beneficial. The possibility of quirks 
existing (and the actual number of quirks) is deter- 
mined by using the table below to determine the 


exact quirks a magical ring possesses. 
Roll Quirks Present 
01-86 No quirks 
87-94 One quirk 
95-98 Two quirks 
99.00 Three quirks 
Magical Ring Quirks 
Roll Result 


01-04 Ring is powerless during the night. 

05-08 Ring is powerless during the day. 

09-11 Ring does not function underground at 
depths greater than 100“ below the sur- 
face. 

12 Ring does not function above ground. 

13-17 Ring does not function if a second magi- 
cal ring is worn. 

18-24 Ring does not function for Ida days if it 
is taken off the wearer's finger and later 
replaced, even if it is now worn by a dif- 
ferent person. 

25-28 Ring cannot use its offensive power 
against any creature of | HD or less. 

29-30 Ring is easily damaged; it makes any sav- 
ing throw at a —2 penalty on the roll. 

31-33 Ring works erratically; there is a 5% 
chance that when its powers are used, the 
ring shorts itself out and becomes unus- 
able for 24 hours. 

34-37 Ring magically grafts itself to the 
wearer's finger and cannot be removed by 
any means other than employing a wish 
or physically removing the finger from 
the wearer's body. 

38-44 Ring glows a random color (equal to 
faerie fire) whenever its powers are in 
effect. 


Ring of the Ram ye 


45-48 Ring is unable to function when within 
30 feet of any other magical ring. 

49-53 Wearer of the ring becomes totally color- 
blind and can sce only in black and white 
for as long as the ring is worn. If the wearer 
is naturally colorblind, he or she can see 
normal colors in the visible spectrum for as 
long as the ring is worn. If the ring is taken 
off, sight returns to its natural state. 

54-59 Ring is specially enchanted and cannot be 
destroyed by fire, magical or otherwise. 

60-61 Ring causes its wearer to experience ter- 
rible nightmares if it is worn while sleep- 
ing, preventing any rest at all. If it is 
taken off prior to falling asleep, no ill 
effects occur. 

62-65 Ring is specially enchanted and is 
immune to the effects of acid of any type. 

66-69 Ring emits a hum audible to those within 
a 10-foot radius whenever its powers are 
used. 

70-72 Wearer’s metabolism is slowed by wear- 
ing the ring; consequently, only half the 
daily amounts of food needs to be con- 
sumed. 

73-76 Wearer metabolism is sped up by wear- 
ing the ring; twice the daily amounts of 
food needs to be consumed by the wearer. 

77-81 Ring functions as normal but has no 
effect on one specific creature type. 

82-83 Ring cannot be crushed by anything short 
of an irresistible force (such as a deity or 
several tons of rock). 

84-88 Ring does not work if its wearer is clad in 
metal armor. 

89-92 Ring has a command word that must be 
spoken in order for it to operate. If the 
ring has a power that operates continu- 
ously, speaking the command word oper- 
ates the ring for three turns. 

93-94 Ring drains 1 hit point for every two days 
that it is worn, or | hit point every time it 
is put on. Normal healing applies. 

95-98 Ring is inhabited by a vain, minor spirit 
who wills its wearer to polish the ring 
daily. If this is not done, the spirit with- 
holds the ting powers for one day for 
each time it is not polished. 

99-00 Ring has a 20% chance of failing to work 
each time it is put on or activated. 


of the Ram 

XP Value: 1,500 GP Value: 7,500 
Dunciow Mastr Guide 
This ornate ring can be of any hard metal, usually 
a silver alloy or iron. It has the head of a ram (ora 
buck goat) as its device. Anyone who attempts a 
detect magic on the ring discovers an evocation 
upon it. 

The wearer can cause the ring to give forth a 
rumlike force, manifested by a vaguely dis- 
cernible shape which resembles the head of a ram 
or goat, This force strikes one target for 1d6 
points of damage if one charge is expended, 2d6 
points if two charges are used, or 3d6 points if 
three charges (the maximum) are used. The ring 
is quite useful for knocking opponents off walls 
or ladders, or over ledges among other things. 
The force of the blow is considerable, and a vic- 
tim who fails to save vs. spell is knocked down. 
The range of this power is 30 feet. The target of 
the blow applies adjustments to the saving throw 
from the following list: 


Target smaller than human-sized -1 
Larger than man-sized +2 
Strength under 12 -] 
Strength of 18-20 +3 
Strength over 20 +6 
Four or more legs +4 
Over 1,000 pounds weight +2 
2 charges expended -i 
3 charges expended -2 


The DM can make circumstantial adjustments 
according to need. For instance, a fire giant bal- 
anced on a narrow ledge should not gain any bene- 
fit from Strength and weight unless he knows that 
he about to be struck by the force of the ring. This 
is u case Where common sense will serve best. 

In addition to its attack mode, the ring of the 
ram also has the power to open doors as if a per- 
son of 18/00 Strength were doing so. If two 
charges are expended, the effect is as for a char- 
acter of 19 Strength, and if three charges are 
expended, the effect is as if a 20 Strength were 
used. Magically held or locked portals can be 
opened in this manner. 

Structural damage from the ramlike force is 
identical to an actual battering ram, with double or 
triple damage according for applications of two or 
three charges. Magical items struck by the ramlike 
force must save vs. crushing blow if three charges 

am 


ß |, 


Ring of Randomness 


> el 


are used; otherwise, the force will not affect them. 
Nonmagical items which are the target of the force 
save vs. crushing blow from the impact 

A ring of this sort will have 6d10 charges when 
discovered, It can be recharged by a wizard 
employing enchant an item and Bigby & clenched 
fist in combination. 


of Randomness 
GP Value: 1,500 
Tome of Magic 
When an /dentify spell is cast on this cursed 
priests’ ring, it radiates an aura of a beneficence 
to disguise its nature. The DM should roll 14100 


XP Value: — 


to determine the rings power. 
Roll Power 
01-25 Protection from evil 
2640 Continual light 
41-60 Bless 
61-70 = Cure light wounds 
71-80 Remove fear 
81-90 Heat metal 
91-00 Cure blindness or cure deafness 


A ring can be used three times a day at 12th 
level ability, Each ring functions normally half 
the time, providing the indicated power. However, 
the ring x curse causes the reverse of the desired 
effect to manifest 50% of the time. The DM 
should roll secretly cach time the ring is used to 
determine whether the result is the desired effect 
or the reversed effect. Thus, a person casting con- 
tinual light has a 50% chance of getting either 
light or darkness. 

If the ring is used to heal blindness or deafness, 
a reversed result yields a special curse Since cause 
blindness has no effect on a blind character, the 
ting further distorts the spell effect by shifting to 
cause deafness, Thus, a priest attempting to cast 
cure blindness whose ring indicated a reversed 
result would cause the victim to become deaf. 

In addition, a priest runs the risk of spell rever- 
sal every time a reversible spell is used (even 
those cast normally), The ring can be removed 
only with a successful dispel magie spell. 


Range Extension 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 10,000 
Da acon Magazine 117 
This item allows any spellcaster (including rangers, 
paladins, and the like) to voluntarily extend the 


range of any spell cast, save those spells with 
ranges of 0 or touch. Each such ring contains 2d20 
charges and cannot be recharged. Each charge 
used increases the range of any spell cast by the 
amount listed as the normal range. Thus, if one 
charge is used, the range is doubled; two charges 


triple the range, three quadruple it, and so on. A 


ring of range extension may be successfully used 
on spells cast from scrolls or other magical devices, 
but cannot be used to cast a spell into a plane other 
than the one that the user currently occupies. 


Rapid Regeneration 
XP Value: 5,000 GP Value: 50,000 
DRacon Magazine 120 
This ring acts as a normal ring of regeneration 
with one major difference—it regenerates | hit 
point cach round rather than | each turn. The ring 
is created by combining a ring of regeneration 
with a rare distillation of troll’s blood and potions 
of speed during the enchantment process. One 
percent of rings of regeneration found will be 


rings of rapid regeneration. 


of Readiness 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 10,000 
The Complete Fighters Handbook 

This magical item consists of two plain iron rings, 
one suitable to be worn on a finger and one larger, 
some 2 inches in diameter. The larger ring 1s to be 
placed on some item. It can be sewn into or bolted 
onto a set of armor; it can be placed upon the pom- 
mel of a weapon (in which case it shrinks until it 
fits snugly); It can be attached to any item of per- 
sonal gear weighing less than 100 pounds. 

When the larger ring is attached to an object, and 
the smaller ring is worn by a character, the charac- 
ter needs only to utter the magical word inscribed 
on the inside of the smaller ring. When this is done, 
if the other ring is within 10 miles, it instanta- 
neously transports that object to the character. 

If the item attached to the other ring isa 
weapon, it will appear in his hand. If the item is a 
suit of armor, it appears on the character; if the 
character is already wearing a suit of armor, it 
appears next to him or her. If the item is some- 
thing else, it appears in a fashion dictated by the 
DM; a crown will appear on a character's head, 
while a sewing machine would appcar on the 
ground or floor, for instance. 

If the item attached to the larger ring is more 
than 10 miles away, nothing happens. 


ay 


o 


992 


— . — —————————— Ä ë ťýOģůò 


Ring of Regeneration 


The use of the rings must be announced before 
initiative in the combat turn. The use of these 
rings takes no time. A character calls out the 
magic word before initiative; then, later in the 
turn, when that character's actions come up, the 
item in question appears. 

If a character finds the smaller ring without the 
larger one, then whatever object the larger one is 
attached to may be summoned. These rings rec- 
ognize no single owner. An interesting quest in a 
campaign might be for a character to find the 
smaller of a set of rings and have to wander to 
find the larger ring and summon it and its object; 
remember, it only works within 10 miles of the 
summoned. 

The magic only works if the item attached to 
the larger ring is inanimate. Living things are not 
transported. 

Once summoned. these objects may not be sent 
back. This is a one-way trip. The rings may be 
used any number of times—they do not wear out. 

Many heroes use this magical item so that they 
never lose their weapons. If the hero finds his 
sword disarmed in combat, he can call it to his 
hand on the next round, without wasting the time 
to go get it. Some con artists use it to run a scam: 
They'll secretly attach the larger ring to some 
great item of treasure, sell it to a dealer, skip town 
with the dealer’s money and then summon the 
treasure back. This is a good tactic until the 
vengeful dealer catches up with the creative thief. 

This magical item may be used by characters 
of any class. Rings of readiness cannot be used on 
the same weapon as a bracelet of charms, 


of Regeneration 
XP Value GP Value 
Regeneration: 5,000 40,000 
Vampiric; 4,000 35,000 


Dunaton Masrer Guide 

The standard ring of regeneration restores | point 
of damage each turn (and eventually replaces lost 
limbs and organs). It will bring its wearer back 
trom death. (If death was caused by poison, how- 
ever, a saving throw must be successfully rolled 
or the wearer dies again from the poison still in 
his system.) Only total destruction of all living 
tissue by fire, acid, or similar means will prevent 
regeneration. Of course, the ring must be worn, 
and its removal stops the regeneration processes. 

A rarer kind of ring of regeneration is the vam- 
pirie regeneration ring. This bestows one-half 


(fractions dropped) of the value of points of dam- 
age the wearer inflicts upon opponents in hand- 
to-hand (melec, nonmissile, nonspell) combat 
immediately upon its wearer. It does not other- 
wise cause 

regeneration or restore life, limbs, or organs, For 
example, if a character wearing the ring inflicts 
10 points of damage, 5 points are added to that 
character's current hit point total, The creature 
struck still loses 10 points. In no case can the 
wearer's hit points exceed the amount the charac- 
ter began with, 

In Ravenloft: Undead do not provide healing 
hit points to the wearer, Instead, they send nega- 
tive plane energy through the channel created by 
the ring, inflicting as much damage as they would 
otherwise have healed. The undead monsters still 
take normal damage. Each use of this ring 
requires a Ravenloft powers check, to a maxi- 
mum of one check per week. (The ring can be 
used more often, however.) 

To determine which type of ring is discovered, 
roll percentile dice: 

Roll Ring Type 
01-90 Ring of regeneration 


91-00 Vampiric regeneration ring 


4379 


993 


~ Ring of Remedies r 


of Remedies 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 8,000 
Dunceons & Dracons Rules Cyclopedia 
Once each day, this ring will produce one rem- 
edy—a cure blindness, cure disease, remove 
curse, or neutralize poison spell effect. Each 
effect is identical to the priest spell of the same 
name and is treated as if cast by a 25th level 
priest. The ring produces the effect desired when 
the wearer concentrates and touches the recipient. 


of Resistance 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
Tome of Magic 
This ring grants a wizard a saving throw bonus 
identical to the bonus gained by a specialist in a 
particular school of magic. The magical school 
affected is randomly determined on the table 
below by rolling 1d8. 


Roll Affected School 
Abjuration 

Alteration 
Conjuration/summoning 
Enchantment/Charm 
Illusion Phantusm 
Invocation/Evocation 
Lesser/Greater Divination 
Necromancy 


o ⏑ A 


When required to save against a spell from 
that school, the wearer gains a +1 bonus to the 
saving throw. When the wearer casts a spell from 
that school, the opponent suffers a -I modifier 
to all saving throws. This ring does not allow a 
wizard to cast spells from a school in opposition 
to his or her own. These modifiers are cumula- 
tive with all others, including those in effect for 
specialization. 


of Resistance to Breath Weapons 
XP Value: 5,000 GP Value: 25,000 
The Complete Wizard's Handbook 
This ring gives the wearer complete immunity to 
all breath weapon attacks from creatures other 
than dragons; the wearer suffers half damage 
from dragon breath. 


of Reversion 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 10,000 
RDA Or“ Il: The House of Gryphon Hill 

This ring appears to be a simple iron band bearing 
a blood-red garnet and inscribed with ancient 
runes. The ring enables the wearer to restore a dis- 
possessed soul to its original body, simultaneously 
festoring the original soul of the creature to its 
original body. It can also cause a shapechanger or 
polymorphed creature to revert to original form. 

This ring can only be used by a priest, The 
priest must strike one of the bodies of the pos- 
sessed with it (Strength bonuses do not apply). 
The distance between the body touched and the 
body of the other transpossessed creature must be 
less than 50 miles. 

The condition of both bodies during this 
process is of utmost importance. If the body of 
either creature has been damaged, then it remains 
damaged and the soul being restored to that body 
must still deal with its physical impairment. If 
cither of the bodies has been slain, the soul within 
that body has been released and cannot be called 
back through use of this ring. Attempting to 
restore a soul to a dead body simply results in the 
second soul also being released and beyond recall 
other than by resurrection or raise dead. There is 
no saving throw from this device; it always 
works, and has unlimited charges. 

This is certainly not to say that there isn’t a cer- 
tain amount of danger in using this device. First 
of all, while the device is being worn, it projects 
an aura of good, alerting any creature within 300 
feet who has been transpossessed. This requires 
all random encounter checks to be made at twice 
the normal rate for the turn in which it is worn. 

Different creatures will react differently to the 
presence of this device. The converted, evil spirited 
creatures will make every effort to either destroy 
the one who bears the device or to flee from it. In 
any event, there is a 40% chance that the creatures 
know the location of the PC using the ring. This 
allows the creatures to make a special attack. The 
converted will do all they can to stay away from 
the reach of one who bears this ring. 

The transpossessed townspeople’s spirits are a 
different matter. They now inhabit the essence of 
terrible creatures, many with horrible powers. They, 
too, will feel the presence of this ring when it is in 
use and will charge toward it desperate with hope. 
These creatures are dangerous in that they may 
often damage the party with their uncontrolled abil- 


* 


= 994 3 


ities before they can be helped. This device cannot 
be used to transpossess souls, only to restore souls 
that have been previously transpossessed. 


of Reversion IT 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 10,000 
Rr Campaign Set 

This ring appears to be a simple iron band with a 
blood-red garnet. The band is inscribed with 
ancient runes, The ring enables the wearer to 
force a shapechanger or polymorphed creature to 
revert to its true, original form, The ring also can 
reverse the tranxpossession of psyches, magic jar 
spells, and spells with similar functions. Only a 
priest can use this ring. While wearing it, the ring 
must be touched to the body the pricst wishes to 
affect. The target gets no saving throw. 

If the target has been transpossessed (the vic- 
um's mind is in a strange body, while another 
mind occupies the character's original body clse- 
where), the other body must be within 50 miles— 
and it must be alive, otherwise the ring has no 
effect. The ring cannot change the condition of 
either body; damage and wounds stay the same. 
Each mind, and all its attendant problems or 
cnchantments, simply returns “home” 

A transpossessed creature can sense the power 
of the ring, even if he or she doesn’t know the 
exact effects. If the user prefers to remain in the 
current body, the creature or character feels great 
danger when the ring is near, The character will 
flee or attack, depending on situation and person- 
ality. Conversely, a transpossessed creature who 
prefers the old body feels great hope in the pres- 
ence of the ring, and will do anything to get the 
ring, even charging blindly and attacking. A 
transpossessed PC must make a Wisdom check to 
resist such bold, foolish action. 


of Reversion III 
XP Value: 3,500 GP Value: 17,500 
1992 Fantasy Collector Card 628 

With this ring, a wearer can force a shapechanger 
ot polymorphed creature to revert to true form. 
The ring can ulso reverse the transpossession of 
psyches, magic jar spells, and similar effects (the 
affected creature's body must be within 50 miles). 
f a creature does not want to be reversed, it feels 
great fear in the presence of the ring. Conversely, 
a creature that wants the exchange to occur feels 
great hope in its presence. The ring must touch 
the body to function. There is no saving throw. 


of Rhyming 


XP Value: 800 GP Value: 4,000 

POLYHEDRON Newszine 61 
This ring enables the wearer to articulate his or 
her message into rhyming couplets. The poetic 
thyme scheme tends to make the message more 
effective, as more people will listen. The ring is 
usable three hours a day, in any combination of 
time increments, 


Rocckoe’s Ring of Bureaucratic 
Wizardry 

GP Value: 1,500 
1992 Fantasy Collector Card 629 
Rocckoe attempted to magically alter the nature of 
this ring, and he succeeded—sort of. Now, when 
the ring wearer casts a spell, a sheaf of paper and 
a pen still appear, but the wizard only needs to fill 
out one set of forms explaining the details of the 
spell and its usage, not three. However, upon com- 
pletion of the form, it disappears and the wizard 
must wait 1d4 rounds for it to be approved. After 
that, the spell gocs off, and 1 point is added to each 
die of damage inflicted by the spell. A remove 
curse spell is still required to take off the ring, 


XP Value: 


of Safety 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 10,000 
Dungeons & Dragons Rules Cyclopedia 
The effect of this ring is similar to that of a potion 
of luck. It the ring wearer fails a saving throw, the 
player may “change fate” by announcing that the 
saving throw was, in fact, successful, The ring 
negates Ida failed saving throws and disintegrates. 


Samander’s 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 12,000 
Draoox Magazine 185 

Named for the wizard who devised it some 40 win- 
ters ago, this rare type of plain, brass ring protects 
a single, living being whose bare flesh must be in 
contact with it, It need not be worn to work. 

Samander 5 ring is enspelled to clude all means 
of magical detection, even when it bears another 
spell (such as Drawmij S instant summons or other 
teleportation magic, a magic mouth, or invisibility). 
It does not interfere with any magic cast upon it. 

Samander s ring has only one function—it 
absolutely prohibits any mental control, compul- 
sion, or influence from affecting the mind of its 
bearer, such as psionic attacks or orders given to 


a charmed ring-bearer. (Please note that these 
an 


— | Ca I Aa 


99 


5 


,., m~a — 


x Ring of Shapechanging y 


attacks can still cause physical damage.) The 
bearer is made aware of the details of all such 
control attempts and can therefore pretend to be 
affected. The ring does not prevent a charm, dom- 
ination, or similar enchantment or charm spell 
from being cast on the ring bearer, so that the 
caster may well believe such a spell succeeded. 
The ring has no effect on illusions (including 
shadow monsters). When functioning, Saman- 
dery ring turns invisible and intangible; it can't 
be felt, struck, or torn off by physical methods. 


Saurian 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 2,500 
Dracon Quest Game 
This plain and featureless golden ring was cre- 
ated by lizardmen long ago. The ancient and 
secret magic they used in its creation has been 
long forgotten since their race fell into savagery. 
Anyone who puts on this ring will turn invisible. 
Monsters cannot sce the character and will not 
attack unless he or she does something to give 
away the character's location. 

If the wearer attacks someone or uses a spell 
while invisible, the magic fails and visibility 
returns. The wearer can turn invisible again in the 
next turn, Anyone whe attacks an invisible hero 
suffers a A penalty to attack rolls. Any hero may 
wear this ring. 


of Seeing 
XP Value: 2,500 GP Value: 12,500 
Doncrons & Daanoxs Rules Cyclopedia 
Once cach day, the wearer of this ring can sce all 
things plainly, as if the priest spell iruesight were 
cast. All classes may wear this ring. The effect 
lasts for three turns. 


Serten’s Spell Immunity 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 10,000 
POLYHUDRON Newszine 50 
Once per day, this ring can generate one Serten 3 
spell immunity spell, duration 18 turns. The wearer 
can use the effect personally, or share it with other 
characters as explained in the spell description. 


of Servitude 
GP Value: 10,000 
Saya of the Shadew King 
These cursed rings are used by the Wraith Lord. 
and lose their power on his death. Their powers 
are the following: 


XP Value: — 


The Wraith Lord can communicate telepathi- 
cally with his NPC servants. 

A PC of Sth level or less who dons the ring is 
charmed and will obey verbal instructions 
from the Wraith Lord. Higher level characters 
are not affected. 

Undead controlled by the Wraith Lord will not 
attack a person who wears the ring, unless 
attacked by the character. 

Once donned, the ring can only be removed 
from a living character by a remove curse 
spell, even if the character is not controlled by 
the ring 


Shape Changing 
XP Value: 2,500 GP Value: 15,000 
Powvimonon Magazine 117 

This ring commonly possesses 3 to 30 charges 
when found. Each of the charges expended allows 
the wearer to shape change as per the 9th-level 
wizard spell shape change. The wearer of this 
ring may change back to original form at will, 
without expending a ring charge. However, there 
is a 2% chance per shape assumed that the wearer 
permanently assumes the form of the shape 
change, In this event, the character assumes all 
mental and personality related characteristics of 
the new form 2d8 days after taking the form. A 
character stuck in an unfamiliar form can only 
regain hix or her former shape by having dispel 
magic, alter reality, limited wish, or wish cast. 


of Shapechanging 
XP Value: 1,500 GP Value: 7,500 
Tales of the Lance 

This ring allows the wearer to change into the 
form of a specific creature. Each device produces 
one natural animal form. These shapechanging 
powers may also be infused into belts, robes, 
gauntlets, or circlets. Tasslehoff found one such 
ring: an ivory band shaped like a mouse head, It 
had two red stones for eyes, When worn, Tas 
could change into a small white mouse. 

Wearers of the ring may transform into a spe- 
cific animal either with a command word, or by 
simply willing it, Each device is limited to one 
form. All clothing and gear are abandoned when 
the person transforms except for the ring itself, 
which fuses with the new body. If the user 
remains in animal form more rounds than his 
Wisdom score, he may begin to forget that he is 


not an animal. He must make a Wisdom check 
4095 


— — 


997 


~ Ring. Sherry’s Ring of Animal Friendship r 


each round, After three failed checks, the user 
forgets there ever was another form. As long as a 
user remembers the original form (or is reminded 
by a comrade), it can be regained by merely will- 
ing it to return, 


Sherry’s Ring of Animal Friendship 
XP Value: 1,500 GP Value: 7,500 
1992 Fantasy Collector Card 270 
Sherry Feldstone is a druid, so this ring allows 
her to influence 24 Hit Dice worth of animals. 
Like other similar rings, all creatures of neutral 
alignment and animal Intelligence make a saving 
throw vs. spell when they come within 10 feet of 
it. If the roll is suecessful, they run away, if it 
fails, they become docile and follow Sherry 
around, even attempting to protect her if they per- 
ceive that she’s in danger. Unlike other rings of 
animal friendship, this one conveys the ability to 
speak with animals when the animals fail the sav- 

ing throw, 


Shield 
XP Value: 400 GP Value: 2,000 
Dracon Quest Game 
This magical ring is crafted of fine silver and 
bears the crest of an ancient and forgotten order 
of knights. The Armor Class of any hero who 
wears the ring will improve (lower) by |. In 
other words, a hero in leather armor (Armor 
Class 7) and wearing a shield ring has an Armor 
Class of 6. Any type of hero, even a wizard, may 
wear this ring. 


of Shocking Grasp 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
DUNGEON Master Guide 

This seems to be an ordinary ring that radiates 
only a faint, unidentifiable aura of magic when 
examined, but it contains a strong enchantment 
capable of inflicting damage on an opponent. If 
the wearer touches an cnemy with the hand upon 
which the ring is worn, then a successful attack 
roll delivers 1d8+6 points of damage to the target. 

After three discharges of this nature, regardless 
of the time elapsed between them, the ring 
becomes inert for one turn. When actually func- 
tioning, this ring causes a circular, charged extru- 
sion to appear on the palm of the wearer's hand. 


998 


ee N N 


WAY V \ 


of Shooting Stars 


XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 15,000 
DunceoN Master Guide 

This ring has two modes of operation—at night 

and underground—both of which work only in 

relative darkness. During night hours, under the 

open sky, the shooting stars ring will perform the 

following functions: 

Dancing lights (once an hour). 

Light, like the spell of the same name (twice a 

night), 120-foot range. 

Ball lightning, as the spell of the same name 

(once a night), 

Shooting stars (special). 

The hall lightning function releases 1d4 balls 

of lightning, at the wearer's option. These glow- 

ing globes resemble dancing lights, and the ring 

wearer controls them as he or she would control 

dancing lights. These spheres have a 120-foot 

range and a four round duration, They can be 

moved at 120 feet each round. Each sphere is 

about 3 feet in diameter, and any creature it 

touches or approaches within 5 feet dissipates its 

charge. (A successful save vs. spell halves dam- 

age—the contact was across an air gap.) The 

charge values are: 

* 4 lightning balls add points damage each 


* 3 lightning balls 2d6 points damage each 
4399 


1 %Ü˙1¹w 3 ˙¹w. . ³a T ˙Üʃ¹ͤ. Ä[k —ö—T 


y ae 


* 2 lightning balls 5d4 points damage cach 
* 1 lightning ball 4d12 points damage 

Release can be one at a time or all at once, dur- 
ing the course of one round or as needed through- 
out the night. 

The shooting stars are glowing missiles with 
fiery trails, much like a meteor swarm. Three 
shooting stars can be released from the ring each 
week, simultaneously or one at a time. They 
impact for 12 points of damage and burst (as a 
fireball) in a 10-foot-diameter sphere for 24 
points of damage. 

Any creature struck takes full damage from 
impact plus full damage from the shooting star 
burst, Creatures within the burst radius must roll 
a saving throw vs. spell to take only one-half 
damage (12 points of damage, otherwise they, 
too, receive the full 24 points of damage), Range 
is 70 feet, at the end of which the burst will occur, 
unless an object or creature is struck before that. 
The shooting stars follow a straight line path. A 
creature in the path must roll a saving throw vs. 
spell or be hit by the missile. Saving throws suffer 
a -3 penalty within 20 feet of the ring wearer, —1 
from 21 to 40 feet, normal beyond 40 feet. 

Indoore at night, or underground, the ring of 
shooting stars has the following properties: 

* Faerie fire (twice a day us the spell 
* Spark shower (once a day) 

The spark shower is a flying cloud of sizzling 
purple sparks, which fan out from the ring for a 
distance of 20 feet to a breadth of 10 feet. Crea- 
tures within this arca take 2d8 points of damage 
each if no metal armor is worn and no metal 
weapons are held. Characters wearing metal 
armor or carrying a metal weapon receive 4d4 
points of damage. Range, duration, and area of 
effect of functions are the minimums for the com- 
parable spell unless otherwise stated. Casting 
time is 5, 

In a SPELLJAMMER® Campaign: This ring 
always functions normally in space. 


Silence 
XP Value: 800 GP Value: 3,800 
POLYHEDRON Magazine 28 

This ring can function in two ways, each usable 

for up to one hour of consecutive time each day. 

* The user is made silent in all movements as if 
he had on boots of elvinkind, When he or she 
speaks, sound can only be heard if listeners are 
within 10 feet of the user. 


* The user can create a sphere of noise protec- 
tion so that no sound, including magical sounds 
and spells that must be heard to function, can 
reach his or her cars. Thus, the user is immune 
to drums of panic, suggestion or a bard's 
charm. 


Silence I 
XP Value: 600 GP Value: 3,000 
Duxorox Magazine 32 
At the wearer's mental command, this ring acts as 
a silence 15° radius, with the silence centered 
upon the wearer for Ida rounds per charge. (See 
the spell description in the PHB.) The silence 
field is immediately dispelled once the ring is 
removed or at the users mental command, 


Spellbattle 
XP Value: 2,500 GP Value: 4,000 


volo Guide to the North 

This ring gives the wearer the ability to dispel 
certain magical spells. The wearer is instantly 
made aware of any release, casting, or exercise of 
any magical or psionic power that occurs within a 
120-foot spherical radius of the ring, The general 
effects of all such power releases (for example, 
ficry attacking spell, shape transforming spell, 
illusionary magic, and the like) are identified to 
the ring-wearer. 

The wearer of the ring can choose to dispel a 
spell cast within range or to change its target. 
When the ring is told to change targets, the new 
target being gets the chance to save vs. spell at -2 
to avoid the ring’s effects. Failure means that she 
or he takes full spell effects. (Note that this does 
not change control of the spell to the ring-wearer; 
if the spell is magic that allows the caster to influ- 
ence others, the caster is still in control they te 
just affecting the wrong being.) Success means 
that the ring dispels the magic instead. This is 
also what occurs if a charm or a similar spell is 
hurled back at its caster. A caster can't be made to 
turn himself or herself to stone or addle his or her 
own thoughts, but the spell cast is instead wasted. 
Combat spells such as fireball and lightning bolt 
can be turned back at the caster for full damage. 

The ring can affect only cast spells, including 
“hung” spells that have been activated by a spell 
trigger or other action, The ring has no effect on 
magical item discharges or psionics. Otherwise, 
the ring always successfully dispels magic when 
commanded to do so. A maximum of one spell 

4402 


j 999 


Ring of Spell Eating 


oo Tee 


per round can be affected. The ring gives its 
wearer no protection against additional spells, 
except to identify all incoming spells. Thus, the 
wearer can choose the most harmful to deal with. 


of Spell Eating 
XP Value: 2,100 GP Value: 20,000 
DUNGEONS & DRAGONS Rules Cyclopedia 

Although this ring appears and functions as a 
ring of spell turning, it has an extra, detrimental 
effect if the user is a spellcaster. After the spell- 
caster has cast a spell while the ring is worn, the 
ring “eats” all the remaining spells memorized by 
the spellcaster The ring cannot be removed after 
it has eaten the wearer's spells (though spells can 
be restudied and safely cast) until a remove curse 
is applied by a 25th or higher level spellcaster. 
This remedy only permits the removal of the ring 
and does not affect its powers. Dispel evil cast by 
a 36th level caster will turn the ring into a normal 
ring of spell turning. 


Spell Holding 
XP Value: 2.000 GP Value: 10,000 
POLYHEDRON Magazine 82 

This ring, usable only by those able to cast spells, 
has the ability to indefinitely increase the duration 
of any spell cast upon the wearer by him or herself, 
until the effect is ended by removal of the ring or 
the casting of dispel magic, In order to take advan- 
tage of its powers, the ring must be removed; then 
the desired spell is cast upon the wearer, and the 
wearer must replace the ring before the spell 
duration is exhausted. The removal of the ring 
afterward ends the spell immediately. Only one 
spell at a time may be continued in this manner 
since the ring must be taken off before the new 
spell to be continued is cast. 

Note that this ring cannot continue an invisibil- 
ity spell during an attack, It does not work on 
spells with a duration of “permanent” for 
instance, a cure disease spell cannot be continued 
to give the ring wearer eternal immunity. It only 
works on spells that can be cast by the wearer 
upon his or her person. 


of Spell Storing 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 17,500 
DUNGEON Master Guide 
A ring of spell storing contains 1d4+1 spells 
which the wearer can employ as if the wearer was 
of the level required to use the stored spells. The 


class of spells contained within the ring is deter- 
mined in the same fashion as the spells on scrolls 
(see Scroll), The level of each spell is determined 
by rolling 1d6 (for priests) or 1d8 (for wizards), 
The number rolled is the level of the spell, as fol- 
lows; 
Priest: 1d6, if 6 is rolled, roll 1d4 instead. 
Wizard: 1d8, if 8 is rolled, roll 1d6 instead, 
Which spell type of any given level is con- 
tained by the ring is also randomly determined, 
The ring empathically imparts to the wearer 
the names of its spells. Once spell, class, level, 
and type are determined, the properties of the 
ring are fixed and unchangeable. Once a spell is 
cast from the ring, it can be restored only by a 
character of appropriate class and level of experi- 
ence (for example, a 12th-level wizard is needed 
to restore a 6th-level spell to the ring). Stored 
spells have a casting time of five. 


of Spell Turning 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 10,000 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 

This ring distorts the three normal dimensions, 

causing many spells cast at the wearer to rebound 

upon the spellcaster. Sometimes, a spell’s entire 

effect is turned against the caster; sometimes, a 

portion of the effect rebounds. 

Some spells are immune from the effects of a 
ring of spell turning: 

* Spells that affect an area, and which are not 
cast directly at the ring wearer, are not turned 
by the ring. 

* Spells that are delivered by touch are not 
turned. 

Magic contained in devices (rods, staves, 
wands, rings, and other items) that are trig- 
gered without spellcasting are not turned. A 
scroll spell is not considered a device. 

When a spell is cast at an individual wearing a 
ring of spell turning, Idi is rolled and the result 
is multiplied by 10. This result is what percentage 
of the spell has been turned back upon the caster, 

Once the spell is turned, the effects must be 
determined. If the spell normally allows a saving 
throw, the intended target (the one wearing the 
ring) gains an automatic plus equal to the number 
rolled on the turning die. The caster receives a 
bonus equal to the number rolled on this dic sub- 
tracted from 10, For example, a charm person 
spell is cast at a character wearing a ring of spell 


turning. A 7 is rolled on the die, turning back 
4405 


1000 


1 Ring of Stone 


70% of the effect. The ring-wearer gains a +7 to 
the saving throw; the caster has a +3. 

A saving throw is also allowed for spells that nor- 
mally do not have onc if 20% to 80% of the effect is 
tumed. The saving throw adjustment is calculated as 
given above. No further adjustments are made for 
race, magical items, or any other condition includ- 
ing existing spells. To suve, the character must have 
a modified die roll of 20 or greater. If the saving 
throw is made, the effect of the spell is negated 

For example, an illusionist casts a maze spell at a 
fighter wearing a ring of spell turning. The spell 
normally allows no saving throw, but the ring turns 
70% of the effect. The fighter is allowed a saving 
throw with a +7 modifier, The illusionist must also 
save, gaining only a +3, The fighters die roll is 15, 
which saves (15+7 = 22); the illusionist dic roll is 
a 16 which, while close, fails (16+3 = 19). The illu- 
sionist becomes trapped in his own maze spell, 

Once a spell is turned, the effects are divided 
proportionately between the two targets. If the 
spell causes damage, determine the damage nor- 
mally and then assess the amount to each accord- 
ing to the percentage determined, rounding 
fractions to the nearest whole number. If a spell 
caused 23 points of damage, and 30% of it was 
turned, the intended victim would suffer 16 points 
of damage, while the caster would suffer 7. Dura- 
tions are affected in a similar manner. In the 
above case, the spell duration would be 30% of its 
normal length for one character and 70% for the 
other. The effect of permanent spells for both 
characters remains unchanged, 

Some spells affect a certain number of levels, 
When one of these is aimed at the ring wearer, the 
spell must be able to affect as many levels as the 
wearer and the spellcaster combined. If this con- 


dition is fulfilled, then the procedure above 


applies, A ring wearer who wants to receive a 
spell must remove the ring of spell turning to be 
able to do so. 

If the spelicaster and spell recipient both wear 
spell turning rings, a resonating field is set up, 
and one of the following results will take place. 


Roll Effect 

01-70 Spell drains away without effect. 

71-80 Spell affects both at full effect. 

81-97 Both rings permanently lose their 
magic. 

98-00 Both individuals go through a rift into 


the Positive Material Plane 


of Spell “Turning” 
XP Value: — GP Value: 2,000 

PouyHEDRon Magazine 156 
This platinum ring, figured with a “T” rune, radi- 
ates a faint dweomer (extremely faint) but dis- 
plays no other capabilities under ordinary 
circumstances. When a spell is cast at its wearer 
by a hostile spellcaster, however, the ring reveals 
its true power In a clear voice, it says “Turning. 
Tee. You. Arr. En. Eye. En. Gee. Turning.” This 
ring was originally planned as one of a matched 
pair, but the wizard was not sure how many Rs 
there were in “storing.” 


XP Value: 1,600 GP Value: 7,000 
The Hidden Shrine of Tamouchan 
This golden ring is the size of a bracelet and was 
either a ring, carring, or other piece of stone giant 
jewelry. The ring contains rock magic and appears 
to have a value of 1,250 gp. When this ring is 
worn, it gives the wearer the power of the ring in 
a magical touch and also makes the new owner 
immune to that touch. The first three times this 
ring is used it turns flesh to stone as the spell. If 
this power is used against stone creatures (includ- 
ing clay golems, stone giants, carth clementals, 


and creatures with a statue spell cast on them) the 
4408 


E o” O a O 


1001 


Ring of Strength 
— —— — — ea... | 


beings save at +2 and, if successful, the ring turns 
the wearer to stone, no saving throw allowed. 
Each time this power is used the ring will 
decrease 200 gp in value. After the three initial 
charges are used, the ring becomes a ring of 
stone shape (15 cubic feet), Each time this 
mode is used, the ring devalues by 50 gp. When 
the value of the ring is reduced to 0, the ring 
turns to lead. 


of Strength 
XP Value GP Value 
Str 18/00: 1,500 7,500 
Str 19. 2,000 10,000 
Str 20: 2,500 15,000 
Cursed: 3,000 
Old Empires 


This ring, made from the finger bone of a stone 
giant, gives its wearer exceptional strength. 
Those who wear a ring of strength gain the fol- 
lowing Strength (depending on which ring they 
have): 


Roll Strength 
01-35 18/00 
36-65 19 
66-80 20 
81-00 Cursed 


A ring of strength may be worn by all classes, 
A cursed ring has the equivalent Strength of 21, 
but if the wearer is in melee, enemies are seen as 
friends, and friends are attacked as enemies. A 
ring of strength is not cumulative with other 


of Survival 
XP Value: 6,000 GP Value: 30,000 
DUNGEONS & DRAGONS Rules Cyclopedia 
The wearer can survive without air, food, or drink 
while the ring is worn by using the charges con- 
tained within it, The ring contains 1d100+100 
(101-200) charges when found, By spending one 
charge, the user needs no food or drink for 24 
hours. Survival without air requires one charge 
each hour. The ring turns black when five or 


of Sustenance 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 3,500 
Duwaron Master Guide 
This magical ring provides its wearer with life 
sustaining nourishment even though he or she 
might go for days without food or drink. The ring 
also refreshes the body and mind, so that its 
wearer needs to sleep only two hours per day to 
gain the benefit of cight hours of sleep. 

The ring must be worn for a full week in order 
to function properly, If it is removed, the wearer 
immediately loses its benefit and must wear it for 
another week to enable it to reattune itself. After 
functioning for any period of seven consecutive 
days, a ring of sustenance will cease to function 
for a week while it replenishes itself. 


of Sustenance II 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 3,500 
Land of Fate 

Also called the ring of the camel, it functions as 
noted above with the added note that the individ- 
ual still suffers the detrimental effect of wearing 
armor in the heat as regards negative modifiers to 
combat and proficiency checks, but otherwise 
does not need water or food for a number of days 
equal to his Constitution. At the end of that time, 
the individual suffers all normal effects. 


of Swimming 

XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 
A ring of swimming bestows upon the wearer the 
ability to swim at a full 21 base speed. (This 
assumes, of course, that the wearer is clad in gar- 
ments appropriate for such activity.) The ring für- 
ther enables the wearer to dive up to 50 feet into 
water without injury, providing the depth of the 
water is at least 1% feet per 10 feet of diving ele- 
vation. The wearer can stay underwater for up to 
four rounds without needing a breath of air. Sur- 
face swimming can continue for four hours 
before a one hour (floating) rest is needed. It con- 
fers the ability to stay afloat under all but typhoon 
conditions. 


Tasslehoff’s Magic Mouse 
XP Value: 200 GP Value: 1,000 
DRAGONLANCE Adventures 
This ring is made of white ivory with two red 
jewels that resemble the eyes of a mouse. Magical 


rings of this type are generally designed by 
+n 


eS a ae 


1002 


DDr 


apprentice wizards learning how to create magi- 
cal objects. Thus their use is relatively common 
(at least among wizards) and of little practical 
value. 

Undoubtedly designed by some apprentice in 
order to escape observation (and possibly caves- 
drop on conversations), the magic is activated by 
placing the ring on the finger. The wearer 
instantly becomes a white mouse. In order to 
return to his proper shape, the wearer merely 
wills it so. 


of Telekinesis 
XP Value GP Value 
25 Ibs; 2000 10,000 
50 Ibs: 2500 12,500 
100 Ibs: 3000 15,000 
200 Ibs; 3500 17,500 
400 Ibs; 4000 20,000 
Dunoon Master Guide 


This ring enables the wearer to manipulate 
objects in the same manner as the Sth-level wiz- 
ard spell, telekinesis. The amount of weight the 
wearer can move varies. Roll percentile dice to 


find the strength of the ring: 
Roll Effect 
01-25 25 pounds maximum 
26-50 50 pounds maximum 
5190 100 pounds maximum 
90-99 200 pounds maximum 
00 400 pounds maximum 
Teleportation 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 15,000 


POLYHEDRON Magazine 117 
This enchanted ring commonly has 3410 charges 
when found. The rings gem is a deep blue spindle 
worth 500 gp if sold as an ordinary gem. The gem 
is casily separated from the ring and placed any- 
where the ring’s user may wish to be (ranyported 
at a later time. By expending one charge, the 
wearer of the ring is teleported without error to a 
safe location within 5 feet of the spindle. The 
gem can be retrieved and reused as long as the 
ring retains ut least one charge. If no safe location 
exists neur the location of the gem (say, if it is 


buried under 10 feet of earth or is inside a burn- 


ing building), the ring expends four charges and 
nothing happens. The gem must be obtained in 
order for the ring to work again. 


a. Ring of Thunder y 


Thal's Ring of Mind Shielding 

XP Value: 300 GP Value: 1,500 
1992 Fantasy Collector Card 135 

When Thal wears this ring, he is completely 
immune to ESP, detect lie, know alignment, and 
mind fog spells. However, there Is a 15% chance 
each time one of the previously mentioned spells 
is cast at Thal that he will lose the last 24 hours of 
memory. So far, he has not made the connection 
between these black outs and the ring. He is gen- 
erally confused about where he is and why. 


of Three Wishes 
XP Value GP Value 
Full Wish: 4,000 20,000 
Limited Wish: 3,000 15,000 
Dämon Masten Guide 


This ring contains three wish spells instead of a 
variable number. It is otherwise the same as a 
multiple wish ring except that some three wish 
rings contain only limited, wish spells. 


Roll Wish Type 
01-25 Limited wish ring 
26-00 Full wish ring 


Three Witches 
XP Value: — GP Value: 6,000 
POLYHEDRON Magazine 35 
Rather self-explanatory. It looks like any other 
magical ring and, if detection is performed, it 
radiates a dweomer. If summoned or commanded 
to function or if a wish is made upon it, three 
chaotic evil witches (cach a 20th-level wizard) 
issue forth and wreak havoc. 


of Thunder 

GP Value: 20,000 

Old Empires 

This charged magical item was a gift to Jurnail, a 
high priest of Anhur, from his friends in the 
priesthood of Thoth several centuries ago. It was 
almost certainly crafted by Awnthoth, an incarna- 
tion of Thoth. The ring is silver with a lion face 
and topaz mane engraved in gold. 

This ring is a powerful defensive and offensive 
weapon. It can emit a bolt of lightning that 
inflicts 10d6 points of damage (successful saving 
throw ys. spell cuts the damage in half) per round 
to all creatures in a 10-foot radius except the ring 
wearer. Each charge lasts one turn; a ring of thun- 
der typically has 6d6+25 charges. 


XP Value: 4,000 


WW ee N 


1003 


dA 


Tika’s 

GP Value: 20,000 
Dragons of Faith 
To Tika, this ring (worn on a necklace) is but a 
memento of her father. She has never discovered 
its secret, In times of stress, she slips on the ring, 
asking for her father’s guidance, Unbeknownst to 
Tika, this activates the ring for the duration of the 
current problem. The DM may reveal its powers 
in other ways. 

It is both a ring of protection +2 and a ring of 
protection from the elements. In its latter func- 
tion, it halves all damage from fire, cold, light- 
ning, air, and water. It also makes the wearer 
immune to the effects of up to 3 Hit Dice of non- 
magical damage from the natural elements. 


XP Value: 4,000 


Tongues 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
Powvnenron Magazine 117 
The wearer of this magical ring can understand, 
read, write, and speak any language known by 
any creature within 30 feet of the ring, as long as 
that creature stays within the area of effect. Two 
rings of this sort within 30 feet of each other 
automatically cancel each other out, Additionally, 
it is possible for a character wearing this ring to 
learn a language where the learning is warranted, 
as by an increase in Intelligence or an increase in 
available nonweapon proficiency slots; half the 


normal time for this is required. 
of Trobriand 
XP Value GP Value 
Master: 2,000 10,000 
Normal: 1,000 5,000 
The Ruins of Undermountain 


These magical rings are the creation of Thro- 
briand, an apprentice of Halaster and creator of 
the metallic scaladar. The rings allow mental con- 
tact and command of any scaladar within 100 
feet. The rings of Throbriand also protect the 
wearer from attack by any scaladar, regardless of 
its orders; the ring causes the scaladar to shut 
itself off for 1d 12 turns immediately upon contact 
with the wearer. The only exceptions to this effect 
are scaladar under the command of Throbriand x 
master ring of the Scaladar, Vhrobriand’s ring 
can override any scaladar orders and issue new 
commands from a distance of 500 feet. 

The master ring temporarily locks out all 
other orders as the scaladar pursucs the objec- 


tives given by Throbriand and cancels the shut- 
down effect of a minor ring. Throbriand has 
eliminated hated ex-apprentices as well as rival 
wizards by attacking them with their own scal- 
adar forces, 


of Truth 

XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 

Dunoon Master Guide 
There is little doubt that wearing a ring of truth is 
a mixed blessing. The wearer can detect any lie, 
but is unable to tell any sort of falsehood himself. 
If the wearer tries to tell a lie, he or she can speak 
only the literal truth instead, On the plus side, the 
wearer is able to discern the last lie told by 
another—in fact, the power of the ring causes the 
voice of the liar to rise to a falsetto. 

If the wearer of the ring encounters magic 
that enables falsehoods to be spoken without 
detection (such as an undetectable lie spell or a 
philter of glibness), no lie is detected. However, 
the ring wearer is unable to hear the voice of the 
person so influenced, whether or not he or she 
is trying to listen, This, of course, reveals the lie 
indirectly, 


Truth I 
XP Value: 1,500 GP Value: 5,000 
POLYHEDRON Magazine 91 
Most often found in the form of an unadorned 
band of copper or silver, this ring is a scourge to 
all forms of deception. The ring allows its wearer 
to detect lie automatically and also acts as a true 
seeing spell up to three times per day on mental 
command of the wearer, 

The ring has certain side effects that may man- 
ifest themselves upon the wearer. Any character 
wearing the ring of truth cannot knowingly lic or 
participate in a deception without immediately 
suffering Ida points of damage and having his or 
her vocal cords paralyzed for 1d10 rounds, ren- 
dering the character mute for that length of time. 
If the wearer is a spellcaster, any illusion or phan- 
tasm spells cast while wearing the ring automati- 
cally fail. 


of Truthfulness 
XP Value: 500 GP Value; 2,500 
Duncnons & Dragons Rules Cyclopedia 
This item claims to be a ring of truth when worn, 
but actually it functions differently. When the 


wearer first tries to determine the truth of a state- 
+3 


1004 


Ring of the Vizier r 


ment, the statement will appear to be true but 
after that, the wearer is unable to lie. The wearer 
must provide full and completely true answers to 
any question asked so long as the ring is worn. He 
cannot remove the ring until a remove curse is 
applied by a caster of at least 26th level. 


of Truthlessness 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
Dunctons & Dracons Rules Cyclopedia 
This item also claims to be a ring of truth when 
worn, but it functions in a manner opposite that 
of a ring of truthfulness—that is, the wearer is 
unable to tell the truth and must lic at all times. 
The ring cannot be removed until a remove curse 
spell, cast by a caster of at least 26th level, is 


applied. 


of the Valiant 
XP Value: 5,000 GP Value: 35,000 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 82 

These plain, silver bands are engraved in Ancient 
Elvish with the names of the wizards who created 
them. Once the property of an order of holy war- 
nors, only 12 of the rings are known to survive, 
Each ring has the power to assume the shape of 
any melee weapon in which the wearer is profi- 
cient. The wearer simply concentrates on the 
weapon to be created. These weapons are +2 
unless they are in the hands of a paladin. In that 
case, the rings always form holy avengers. The 
created weapons cannot be affected by dispel 
magic. A rod of cancellation forces them back 
into ring form for one full day, 

Once a ring of the valiant has been placed on a 
finger, it only can be removed by a limited wish, 
wish, or the wearer's death. 


of Vapors 

XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 35,000 

PorynEokoN Magazine 117 
The origin of this unique ring is held in much dis- 
puted, but most wizards agree that a powerful fig- 
ure among the air elementals had a hand in its 
creation. The ring appears as a small circlet of 
misty vapors that continually shift and change; 
the ring, however, is solid. Any character wearing 
the ring gains the following abilities: 
* Fly (120 yds.) at will 
* Stinking cloud once a day. 
* Obscurement once a day 
ind walk three times a week. 


Wind wall three times a week. 

Aerial servant twice a week, 

Cloudkill once a week. 

Summon aid from Elemental Plane of Air once 
per month. If wearer's alignment is good, a 
djinni is summoned; if neutral, an 8-HD air 
clemental; if evil, a mihstu is summoned. 

All effects are at 16th level, Summoned mon- 
sters remain with the summoner for 4d4 rounds, 
after which they depart. They do not attack the 
summoner unless attacked first, and act in a 
friendly and helpful manner during the time they 
are present, The wearer also receives a penalty 
on saving throws vs. fire, against which he or 
she saves at 2 and takes +1 damage per die. It 
is possible that the maker of this ring is still 
hunting for it. 


Varlo’s Ring of Feather Falling 

XP Value: 1,500 GP Value: 7,500 
1992 Fantasy Collector Card 269 
Varlo’s ring imitates the feather fall spell a bit dif- 
ferently than other rings of its kind. It creates a 
10-foot, cubic area of effect, allowing not only 
Varlo, but everybody and everything within $ feet 
to feather fall with him. The area is defined when 
he grasps the ring and twists it around his finger. 
All people and objects within the area of effect 
must then leave the high point together with 
Vario. Varlo can also remain aloft for five rounds 
by constantly puffing downward while air- 
borne—this simulates a piece of down that is car- 
ried on the wind. 


of the Vizier 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
PotyHenkon Magazine 179 
This ring is similar to the message ring in that 
when the command word is spoken, the face of 
the wizard who created the ring appears in 
gem, and speaks a message up to one minute 
long. Only the wizard & face and message may 
appear, and the message may not be changed. A 
normal message may be “The bearer of this 
ring is my servant, and you should follow my 
instructions in the matter we discussed,” but it 
could be a direct order, a plea for rescue, or 
instructions to find a buried tomb. Note that 
the individual who appears to be the vizier’s 
servant may be revealed to be otherwise (such 
as the discovery that the wizard being quoted 


has been dead for a decade, or shows up won- 
44a 


—- | ĩů V .,, 


1005 


o hh 


Ring, Warding 


—— --- R . — = 


dering who has been acting in his name). More 
importantly, the wizard who created this ring 
may imbed in it a single spell of the Sth level or 
less. The spell may be used up to 10 times 
before it is exhausted, and it is cast at the wiz- 
ard's level (usually of level 1d6+14). The mes- 
sage may reveal the nature of the spell, possibly 
in code or riddle. 


Warding 
XP Value GP Value 
Normal: 1,500 7.500 
Stoneskin: 2,000 10,000 


POLYHEDRON Magazine 179 

This ring prevents any one physical attack each 
round from reaching its wearer, but costs one 
charge (two if attacker was using a magical 
weapon). The ring has a maximum of 20 charges; 
when an attack takes the final charge, the ring x 
stone shatters. The ring may simply deflect the 
attack toward another character, in the case of 
very powerful opposing magic. Optionally, the 
ring might function like the wizard’s stoneskin 
spell, 


of Warmth 

XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 
This ring provides its wearer with body heat even 
in conditions of extreme cold where the wearer 
has no clothing at all. It also restores damage 
caused by cold at the rate of one point per turn. It 
provides a saving throw bonus of +2 vs. cold- 
based attacks, and reduces damage sustained by 
=I per die. 


of Water Adaptation 
XP Value: 2,500 GP Value: 12,500 
Quagmire! 
This is a ring of elemental adaptation for water. 
The wearer of this ring can freely breathe, sce, 
and move through water as if it were air. 


of Water Walking 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 

DUNGEON MASTER Guide 
This ring enables the wearer to walk on any liquid 
without sinking into it—this includes mud, quick- 
sand, oil, running water, and even snow. Up to 
1,200 pounds can be supported by a ring of water 
walking, The ring wearer’s feet do not actually 
contact the surface being walking upon (but oval 
depressions about 1% inches deep per 100 pounds 
of weight of the walker will be observed in hard- 
ening mud or set snow). The wearer moves at a 
normal movement rate. 


of Water Walking II 
XP Value: 6,000 GP Value: 30,000 
The Minrothad Guilds 
A ring of water walking can be crafted from a 
pearl fragment. Not only can the ring's wearer 
walk on water, but so can anyone in physical con- 
tact with wearer. 


of Weakness 
XP Value GP Value 
Berserk Strength: — 1,500 
Weakness: — 1,000 


DuNGEON MAsTER Guide 

This cursed ring causes the wearer to lose | point 
of Strength and 1 point of Constitution per turn 
until the individual reaches 3 in each ability. This 
loss is not noticeable until the individual becomes 
aware of the weakened state through some exer- 
tion (such as combat or heavy lifting). The ring 
can also make the wearer invisible at will (at the 

111. 


„n aa 


1006 


Jr ⁰·ðꝛꝛꝛꝛꝛ | A 


a pm 


x Ring. Wieso% Ring of Compulsions r 


cost of double the standard rate of Strength and 
Constitution loss). When the affected abilities 
reach 3, the wearer will be unable to function. 
Points lost from the ring are restored by rest on 
z one-for-one basis, with | point of cach ability 
lost being restored in one day of rest. The ring of 
weakness can be removed only if a remove curse 
spell, followed by dispel magic, is cast upon the 


There is a 5% chance that this procedure will 
reverse the rings effect, changing it to a ring of 
berserk strength. This increases Strength and 
Constitution at a rate of | point per ability each 
turn, to a maximum of 18 each (roll percentile 
dice for bonus Strength if the wearer is a war- 
rior). However, once 18 is reached in both abili- 
ties, the wearer will immediately melee with any 
opponent met, regardless of circumstances, 
Berserk strength is lost when the ring is removed 
(by casting remove curse), as are Constitution 
points gained. 


White Copper Ring of Fire 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
Secrets of the Lamp 

This unique item was forged hy the djinn to help 
them against the efreet. When worn by a wizard 
or other spellcaster, any fire spell cast produces a 
white-hot flame rather than a red or orange fire. 
These flames draw on the energies of the Positive 
-Plane as well as the Plane of Fire and cause an 
additional +1 point of damage per die to evil 
creatures or those drawing energy from the Nega- 
live Plane, Creatures normally immune to fire 
attacks suffer normal damage when the caster 
wears the white copper ring, 


of Windwarding 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
Old Empires 

When this ring is worn, an area of protection, 10 
feet in radius, is created around the bearer, The 
wearer is protected from all winds. All within its 
area of effect are shiclded from wind storms, gust 
of wind spells, and attacks by air elementals. If 
the wearer is caught in the middle of a sandstorm 
or a blizzard, this ring prevents the wearer from 
being affected. 


of Winter 

XP Value: 40,000 GP Value: 200,000 

1992 Fantasy Collector Card 407 
Mystery shrouds the true powers of this fabled 
artifact. The ring of winter is rumored to have the 
magical might to grant its wearer immortality, 
change its appearance at a mere thought, and 
even bring a new Ice Age down upon the Western 
Realms, Cyric (now god of death), Kelemvor 
Lyonsbane, Princess Alusair, and Artus Cimber 
have hunted for the ring in recent years. 


of Wizardry 
XP Value GP Value 
Doubles Ist: 4,000 $0,000 
Doubles Ist & 2nd: 4,400 $4,000 
Doubles Ist thru 3rd: 4,600 56,000 
Doubles And: 4,200 52,000 
Doubles 3rd: 4,800 58,000 
Doubles 4th: 5,000 60,000 
Doubles 4th & Sth: 5,400 64,000 
Doubles Sth: 5,200 62,000 
Dungeon Mastex Guide 


This ring doubles the number of spells a wizard 
may prepare each day in one or more spell levels. 
Only wizards can benefit from a ring of wizardry. 
Other classes, even those with spell ability, can 
neither use nor understand the working of such a 
ring. To determine the properties of a given ring, 
use the table below: 


Roll King's Effect 

01-50 doubles Ist-level spells 

51-75 doubles 2nd-level spells 

76-82 doubles 3rd-level spells 

83-88 doubles Ist- and 2nd-level spells 

89-92 doubles 4th-level spells 

93-95 doubles 5th-level spells 

96-99 doubles Ist- through 3rd-level spells 
00 doubles 4th- and Sth-level spells 

Wizzo’s Ring of Compulsions* 
XP Value: — GP Value: 1,000 
POLYHEDRON Magazine 82 


This type of ring may compel the wearer to per- 
form certain uncxplained actions. It can be 
removed casily at any time hut the wearer will 
not want to remove the ring for any reason. Any- 
one wearing one of these rings becomes 
extremely possessive of it and will not voluntarily 
allow anyone else to touch it, Anyone who wants 


to see the ring is suspected of wanting to steal it, 
4450 


r ES 


1007 


7 ]ͤð2 d 


~ Ring of X-Ray Vision 7 


and the wearer either attacks that character or 
attempts to flee, depending on the circumstances. 
(Assign a 50% chance for cither outcome if a ràn- 
dom determination is desired.) A remove curse 
spell halts the compulsion long enough for the 
wearer to allow it to be removed. 

There is a 5% chance per waking hour that the 
ring compels its wearer to do something. Listed 
below are the compulsions the ring can cause 
(roll 1d10) 


Roll Result 
| Sleep for 1d6 turns 

Act intoxicated for Ido turns. 

Act in an amorous fashion toward the 

nearest character of the opposite sex, or 

the next one encountered, for Ida turns, 

4 Fight for 1d6 rounds against the nearest 
character, 

5 Wunder about, looking at the scenery for 
1d6 rounds, 

6 Take a bath. 

7 Cook and eat a good meal 

8 Talk for Ido rounds 

9 

0 


wm 


Change clothes. 

Find and insult the nearest monster over 
3 HD (the search, and the compulsion, 
last for no more than 10 minutes). 


While under compulsion, the ring wearer does 
nothing except try to fulfill the compulsion. If 
interrupted, the wearer becomes very hostile 
These rings function primarily as other com- 
monly found rings, /ree action, protection, water 
walking, and the like. That is, the compulsions 
provide an unusual variation for otherwise com- 
mon magical rings. Gold piece values are the 
same as those for the common rings, but the ring, 
being somewhat cursed, awards no experience 
points, 


of X-Ray Vision 

XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 35,000 
Duncannon MAster Guide 
This ring gives its possessor the ability to see 
into and through substances that are impenetra- 
ble to normal sight. Vision range is 20 feet, with 
the viewer sccing as if he were looking at some- 
thing in normal light. X-ray vision can pene- 
trate 20 feet of cloth, wood, or similar animal or 
vegetable material, and up to 10 feet of stone or 
some metals (some metals can’t be penetrated 
at all); 


Material Thickness 
Substance Penetrated per Maximum 
Scanned Round Thickness 
Animal matter 4’ 20' 
Vegetable matter 2',' 20’ 
Stone 1’ 10° 
iron, Steel, cte. i" 10" 
Lead, Gold, Platinum — 


It is possible to scan up to 100 square feet of 
area during one round. Thus, during one turn, 
the wearer of the ring could scan an area of 
stone 10 feet wide and 10 feet high. Alterna- 
tively, he could scan an area 100 feet wide and | 
foot high. 

Secret compartments, drawers, recesses, and 
doors are 90% likely to be located by X-ray 
vision scanning. Even though this ring enables its 
wearer to scan secret doors, traps, hidden items, 
and the like, it also limits the use of the power, for 
it drains | point of Constitution if used more fre- 
quently than once every six turns. If it is used 
three turns in one hour, 2 points are lost from the 
total Constitution score, 3 if used four turns, and 
so on. 

The loss of Constitution is recovered at the 


rate of 2 points per day of rest. If Constitution 
ae 


WWW 


1008 


1 Robe of the Archmagi y 
Aba of Displacement 


teaches 2, the wearer is cxhausted and must rest 
immediately. No activity, not even walking, can 
be performed until Constitution returns to 3 or 
better. 


Robe 
Robes are loose fitting outer garments usually 
long enough to reach to the ankles. Robes often 
have long, wide sleeves, attached hoods, and 
many are worn with a belt. Buttons, ties, or pins 
can keep the robe firmly wrapped around the 
wearer even in high winds. Many robes are 


large enough to allow the user to wear armor 
underneath. 


Roll Robe Type 
01-05 Caftan 
06-11 Cape 
12-16 Chador 
17-21 Cloak 
22-26 Coat 
27-32 Common Aba 
33-37 Common Robe 
3842 Dolman 
43-47 Embroidered Robe 
48-53 Happi 
54-58 Ho 
59-63 Kaftan 
64-68 Kimono 
69-74 Kosode 
75-79 Jellaba 
80-84 Mino (straw raincape) 
85-89 Poncho 
9-95 Robe 
96-00 Sumptuous Aba 
Aba of the Desert 


XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 

POLYHEDRON Magazine 179 
This magical garment of the desert tribes pro- 
vides the wearer with the effects of a cool strength 
spell, allowing comfortable movement in the 
desert. However, no armor other than leather may 
de worn with this aba. Among desert peoples, if a 
tribe possesses an aba of the desert, it is used by 
the aged or infirm to ease their discomfort in the 
desert heat. 


XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 15,000 
PoLvnEbRON Magazine 179 

These items are much the same as the magical 

cloaks of the same name (see Cloak). Like the 

aba of the desert, an aba of displacement cannot 

be worn with armor heavier than leather. 


Aba of Protection 
XP Value: l. 000 plus GP Value: 5.000 plus 
Pounenzon Magazine 179 
These items are much the same as the cloaks of 
the same name. Like the aba of the desert, they 
cannot be worn with armor heavier than leather. 


Agitator 

See Robe of Blending 

of the Archmagi 
XP Value GP Value 
Evil: 6,000 65,000 
Good: 6,000 65,000 
Neutral: 6,000 65,000 

Di,, Master Guide 


This garment looks quite normal, It can be white 
(43% good alignment), gray (30%—ncutral, 
but neither good nor evil in alignment), or black 
(25%—evil alignment), Its wearer gains the fol- 
lowing powers; 

It serves as armor equal to AC 5. 

The robe confers a $5% magic resistance. 

It adds a +1 bonus to saving throw scores. 

The robe reduces the victims magic resistance 
and saving throws by 20% A when the wearer 
casts any of the following spells: charm mon- 
ster, charm person, friends, hold monster, hold 
person, polymorph other, and suggestion. 

The color of a robe of the archmagi is not 
determined until it is donned by a wizard. Ifa 
white robe is donned by an evil wizard, he or she 
suffers 11d4+7 points of damage and loses 
18.000 51.000 experience points at the DM dis- 
cretion. The reverse is true with respect to a black 
robe donned by a good aligned wizard. An evil or 
good wizard putting on a gray robe, or a neutral 
wizard donning either a white or black robe, 
incurs odd points damage, a 6,000-24,000 XP 
loss, and is moved toward the alignment of the 
robe (feels an urgent need to change alignment to 
that of the robe; trying to maintain the old one 
takes considerable effort). 


ý 1009 z 


O Ss hLt—s 


Robe of Blending 


— — E 


of Blending 

(Agitater) 

XP value: GP Value: 4,000 
POLYHEDRON Magazine 35 

This robe radiates a dweomer if that is detected 
for, but it is otherwise indistinguishable from any 
of the other magical robe (optionally, a fragment 
of a label with Ost... = or... isinart” might be 
found on careful examination), When the robe is 
worn, its true nature becomes apparent to the 
wearer as a type of mobile blade barrier with 
three buttons near the clasp—blue (mix), yellow 
(puree), and red (blend), Unfortunately, what is 
not apparent to the wearer is that the blades form 
on the inside of the robe, turning the individual 
(briefly) into a real mixmaster. 


of Blending II 
(3-speed) 

XP Value: — GP Value: 4,000 

POLYHEDRON Magazine 156 
To all appearances, this is a perfectly ordinary 
robe. If the clasp is examined closely, however, a 
sliding switch with four settings (including “off”) 
is revealed. “Chop” does 2d10 points of damage 
to the wearer, “mix” does 4412, and “liquefy” 
makes you sick just thinking about it. 


of Blending III 

XP Value: 3,500 GP Value: 35,000 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 
This seemingly ordinary robe cannot be detected 
by magical means, When it is put on, however, 
the wearer knows that the garment has very spe- 
cial properties. A robe of blending enables its 
wearer to appear to be part of a rock wall or a 
plant—whatever is appropriate. It can even make 
the wearer appear to be a creature of his or her 
choice. 

The robe does have its limits—it does not 
make its wearer appear to be more than twice 
normal height or less than one-half normal. It 
does not impart vocal capabilities, neither under- 
standing nor imitating the creature the wearer 
looks like. (In situations where several different 
forms are appropriate. the wearer is obliged to 
state the desired form in which the robe is to 
camouflage him or her.) 

Creatures with exceptional (15+) or better 
Intelligence have a 1% per Intelligence point 
chance of detecting something amiss when they 
are within 30 feet of someone disguised with a 


robe of blending. Creatures with low Intelligence 
or less and 10 or more levels of experience or Hit 
Dice have a 10% chance per level or Hit Die of 
likewise noting something unusual about a robed 
character. (The latter is cumulative with the for- 
mer chance for detection, so an 18-Intelligence 
wizard of 12th level has a 30% chance—18% + 
12%—of noting something awry.) After an initial 
check for each eligible creature, successive 
checks should be made every turn after that, if the 
same creatures are within the 30-foot range. All 
creatures acquainted with and friendly to the 
wearer see him or her normally. 


Caftan of Protection 
XP Value: 1,000/plus GP Value; 5,000/plus 
POLYHEDRON Magazine 179 
These items are much the same as the cloaks of 
the same name (see Cloak), Like the aba of the 
desert, they cannot be worn with armor heavier 
than leather. 


Diirinka’s 
XP Value: 9,000 GP Value: 45,000 
Monster Mythology 
The avatar's magical robe allows him to draw up 
to five magical strands per day and use them for 
touch attacks when handheld. All saves are made 
with a A penalty. 


Strand Effect 
White Slay living 
Gray Disintegrate 
Black Destruction 
of Drying 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
POLYHEDRON Maguzine 30 


The robe of drying removes all the moisture from 
the skin of a human-sized user. This robe was cre- 
ated by Orlow to dry himself quickly on cold 
winter mornings, It operates similarly to the rag 
of drying, but works once a day on less than a 
quart of water. 


of Eyes 
XP Value: 4,500 GP Value: 50,000 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 
This valuable garment appears to be a normal 
robe until it is put on. Its wearer is able to “see” in 
all directions at the same time due to scores of 


magical “eyes” that adorn the robe. The wearer 
am 


= ~ 


1010 


P · es E S 


Robe, Jellaba of Eyes 


also gains infravision to 120 feet range, and the 
power to see displaced or out of phase objects and 
creatures in their actual positions, The robe of 
eyes sees all forms of invisible things within a 
240-foot normal vision range (or 120 feet if 
infravision is being used). 

Invisibility, dust of disappearance, robes of 
blending, and improved invisibility arc not proof 
against observation, but astral or ethereal things 
cannot be seen by means of this tobe. Solid 
objects obstruct even the robe’s powers of obser- 
vation. Illusions and secret doors also can't be 
scen, but creatures camouflaged or hidden in 
shadows are easily detected, so ambush or sur- 
prise of a character wearing a robe of eves is 
impossible. 

Finally, the robe enables its wearer to track as a 
12th-level ranger. A light spell thrown directly on 
a robe of eves blinds it for 1d3 rounds; continual 
light for 244 rounds. 


Ghastrobe 
GP Value: 24,000 
luz the Evil 
Usable by priests or wizards, the ghastrobe has 
the traditional black or bloodstained-white design 
of robes worn by priests of luz. It confers a base 
AC 4 protection on its wearer as if a ghast. 


XP Value: 4,000 


1011 


Undead are automatically nonhostile to charac- 
ters wearing ghastrobes, who treat them as if 
under the effects of a wraithform spell. Priests 
and clerics attempting to command undead are 
treated as two levels higher than normal for the 
purposes of such commands when they wear this 
magical item, 

In addition, the wearer of a ghastrobe radiates 
a stench identical to that of ghasts, and can create 
paralysis by touch three times a day with a dura- 
tion of 1d10 turns, A normal saving throw vs 
paralyzation applics. 


of Holding 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
POLVIIEDRON Newszine 61 
l'his magical robe looks like any other normal 
robe, but with many pockets (1d20+10). Each 
pocket has a permanent deeppockets spell. 


H'veyk's Robe of Immediate Access 
XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 15,000 
Ege of the Phoenix 
This robe allows the wearer to access objects pre 
viously stored in a corresponding H Feyk ca 
ernous cabinet, including spell components, 
weapons, and spell books. The robe's four pock- 
ets cach correspond to a shelf in the cabinet. The 
wearer must consciously think about what is 
being sought, otherwise the effect is that of 
reaching into a bag of devouring. Use is not 

restricted to wizards 


Jellaba of Concealment 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
POLYHIDRON Magazine 179 

This overgarment is similar in function to the 
cloak of elvenkind. It may be worn over any type 
of armor. Of the cloaks, 80% are from human-, 
elf-, or half-clf sized individuals; 15% are for 
smaller (dwarf, gnome, halfling, goblin, or 
kobold) individuals; and 5% for larger (ogre, 
gnoll, or hill giant) individuals. 


Jellaba of Eyes 
XP Value: 4,500 GP Value: 40,000 
POLYHEDRON Magazine 179 
This jeballa is exactly like the robe of eves. 


u» 


— ]..—— —— — me 


Jellaba of Scintillating Colors 
XP Value: 2,750 GP Value: 25,000 
A Dozen and One Adventures 
This item operates like the robe of the same 
name, 


Kaftan of Ogrishness 

XP Value: GP Value: 3,000 
Mordenkainen's Fantasuc Adventure 
When worn, a peculiarity is soon noticed by the 
wearer, After a character wears the gurment for 
one full day, he or she starts having cravings for 
progressively rawer meat, and is heard to mumble 
occasionally while leering at others. From time to 
time, the wearer is seen to be drooling. The 
wearer still remembers his or her duties and com- 
panions, although speaking with friends less and 
less frequently. 

The kaftan is casily removed. If the wearer of 
this item removes it before the end of three days, 
the effects are reversed and the character returns 
to normal within 1d6 hours. Otherwise, the char- 
acter is subjected to the full effect of the kaftan's 
curse, 

The Curse of the Kaftan: On the second day 
of wearing the garment, highly noticeable physi- 
cal and mental effects become apparent. The 
character 's bulk increases by 20 to 50 pounds, 


E | —  _——_ 


Robe, Mellifleur’s Robe of Stars 


height increases to 6 feet or 1d12 inches (if the 
character was originally under that height); the 
eyes appear squinty and filmy, the tongue is pur- 
plish-brown, the nose is longer and rubbery, the 
skull more bulbous, the talk slower and more gut- 
tural, and the walk is reduced to a stiffer, more 
lumbering gait. Strength increases to 18/00, but 
Intelligence and Wisdom decline by 6 points 
cach, or to a score of 7, whichever is lower. Dex- 
terity drops to 6 dg, Constitution remains 
unchanged, and Charisma changes to a range 
from -3 to 2 (1d6 roll). 

During this time, the wearer barely remembers 
events of only one or two days previous. His or 
her mistrust of other greatly expands—there is a 
50% chance that the victim wanders off, not 
trusting associates any more. Once departed, the 
victim either avoids or attacks former compan- 
ions (50% chance of each) if they approach. On 
the third day, wearing the kaftan, the victim irrev- 
ocably becomes a full-fledged ogre. All previous 
knowledge and lifetime experiences are wiped 
clean. The victim thinks, acts, eats, does all 
things, as an ogre. Alignment, of course, changes 
to chaotic evil. Nothing less than a wish or divine 
intervention can restore the character to his or her 
former self. 


Marion's Robe of Blending 

XP Value: GP Value: 30,000 
1992 Fantasy Collector Card 149 
Marion Robinsdottir’s robe was a normal robe 
of blending until she entered Darkon. Ravenloft 
cursed it and changed its function. Now, she 
cannot remove it for more than one turn without 
experiencing extreme pain, as if she were freez- 
ing to death. Secondly, it functions normally 
only during daylight hours—during hours of 
darkness, it becomes a robe of contrast, chang- 
ing color and texture to set it apart from its sur- 
roundings. Finally, due to its magically 
contrasting nature, this strange robe temporar- 
ily becomes a good-aligned item when touched 
by evil creatures, inflicting 1d10 points of dam- 
age per touch. 


Mellifleur’s Robe of Stars 
XP Value: 6250 GP Value: 60,000 
Monster Mythology 
The avatar wears a robe of stars that can act as a 
robe of scintillating colors when he so wills. 


dit 


1013 


Á 


~ Robe of Powerlessness r 


of Powerlessness 

GP Value: 1,000 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 
A robe of powerlessness appears to be a robe of 
another sort, and detection can discover nothing 
more than the fact that it has a magical aura, As 
soon as a character dons this garment, he or she 
drops to 3 Strength and 3 Intelligence, forgetting 
all spells and magical knowledge. The robe can 
be removed casily; to restore mind and body, a 
remove curse and then a heal spell must be cast 


XP Value: - 


of Protection 
XP Value GP Value 
AC 0: 6,000 60,000 
AC 1: 5,000 $0,000 
AC 2: 4,000 40,000 
AC 3; 3,500 35,000 
AC 4; 3,000 30,000 
AC 5; 2,500 25,000 
AC 6: 2,000 20,000 
Old Empires 


These robes were typically worn only by the 
priests of Horus-Re, but they are now worn by 
priests of many different religions. They are said 
to be sewn by the priestesses of Nephthys. 

The robes, soft to wear but solid against the 
blows of the enemy, are emblazoned with the 


„ , a 


1014 


symbol of the appropriate deity, They provide 
protection for Mulhorand priests in battle and in 
places where it is not acceptable to wear armor. 
Roll on the following table to determine the 
Armor Class protection of a particular robe: 


Roll Armor Class 
01-05 6 
06-15 5 
16-35 4 
36-50 3 
51-70 2 
71-85 l 
86-00 0 


Only members of the priest class may wear 
these robes. They are almost never seen outside 
of Mulhorand. 


of Repetition 
XP Value: 6,000 GP Value: 30,000 
Tome of Magic 

This seems to be an ordinary robe, but it radiates 
strong alteration magic if detect magic is used. 
The wearer of this robe acquires a unique and 
powerful augmentation to magic. After casting a 
spell, there is a percentage chance that a 
mnemonic/harmonic effect occurs so that the 
magical energies liberated in spelleasting are 
amplified and retained briefly. The wizard is then 
able to cast the same spell a second time. This 
must be done on the succeeding round or the 
bonus spell is lost. 

Once the spell has been cast a second time, the 
energy is completely liberated. There is no possi- 
bility of a third casting. In all cases, the spell is 
lost from the wizard's memory until memorized 
again. 

The chance of a spell being available for a sec- 
ond casting varies according to spell level: 


Spell Level Chance 
Ist Level 50% 
2nd Level 40% 
3rd Level 30% 
4th Level 20% 
Sth Level 10% 


Energy from spells of 6th level and above are 
not retained within the robe’s magical weave. 
Furthermore, a maximum of 24 spell levels per 
day can be reused with the benefit of this robe. If 


4493 


the wizard opts not to use a spell that is available 
for a second use, this counts toward the maxi- 
mum limit, 

Spelicasting while disrobed does not count 
toward the spell limit, so a wizard may remove it. 
For example, if a wizard casts 15 spell levels that 
count against the tobe x daily limit, then removes 
the robe, subsequent spells do not count against 
the robe’s limit. If the wizard then puts on the 
tobe during the same day and casts more spells, 
the robe retains the 15 spell levels that counted 
against it and all spells cast subsequently also 
count against the robe, 

Only one wizard may use the robe magic in 
a single day; if a second one trys, it will not 
function. 


Rock 
XP Value: 3,500 GP Value: 17,500 
POLYHEDRON Newszine $8 

This seemingly average garment radiates a 
strong aura of alteration magic, if detect magic 
is successful. When first donned, nothing 
unusual happens, as the robe takes 24 hours to 
attune itself to its new owner. After that time its 
powers become known to the owner. The robe 
has two powers, cach usable at will, The first 
allows the wearer to become a statue similar to 
the 7th-level wizard spell of the same name; no 
system shock roll is required, and the effect can 
be maintained indefinitely. The wearer can 
change back and forth between flesh form and 
statue, with cach change requiring one round. 
No other action can be taken during the transfor- 
mation. The second power is immunity to petri- 
fication. Furthermore, the robe can be used to 
return a petrified individual to flesh after it has 
attuned itself to that person for 24 hours. The 
robe only functions when worn, and it is usable 
by any character class, 


of Scintillating Color 
XP Value: 2,750 GP Value: 25,000 
Stratecic Review Magazince $ 
This garment, usable by any class, appears to be 
slightly better than average, in material and work- 
manship, than other robes. However, once its 
secret is mastered, it becomes anything but ordi- 
nary. Mastery of the tobe & powers takes great 
mental concentration, so the minimum unmodi- 
fied total of Intelligence and Wisdom needed to 
master its capabilities is 25. If the minimum 


Robe of Scustiliating Colors 


y mae a 


requirement is met, it is a wondrous item to pos- 
sess. By concentrating on it, the wearer can cause 
it to form scintillating bands of color that form 
dazzling patterns. The patterns cause the wearer 
to be 5% (= on 1420) harder to hit, the effect 
being cumulative. Therefore, after five melee 
rounds, the wearer is 25% harder to hit (-5), and 
so on. 

Further, any creature or person that looks at it 
has the same chance (5%) per round, of becoming 
hypnotized. Again, the effect is cumulative. For 
instance, looking at it for four rounds means that 
the observer has a 20% chance of becoming Ayp- 
notized, and subject to the command of the 
wearer, Any wizard who becomes hypnotized by 
the robe has an Intelligence of 17 or 18, has a 
10% or 20% chance, respectively, of going per- 
manently insane. 


of Scintillating Colors 

XP Value: 2,750 GP Value: 25,000 
Dunceon Master Guide 
This garment appears quite normal, but a magi- 
cal aura is detectable. Only a wearer with an 
Intelligence of 15 or higher and a Wisdom of 13 
or more can cause a mhe of scintillating colors 
to function, If Intelligence and Wisdom are suf- 
ficient, the wearer can cause the garment to 
become a shifting pattern of incredible hues, 
color after color cascading from the upper part 
of the robe to the hem in sparkling rainbows of 
dazzling light. 

This effect sheds light in a 40-foot diameter 
sphere, and has the power to Aypnotize oppo- 
nents, making them unable to attack the wearer. A 
full round passes before the colors begin “flow- 
ing” on the robe. Each round after that, any oppo- 
nent who ſuils a saving throw vs, spell (or magic 
resistance check, then save) is hypnotized and 
transfixed for 1d4+1 rounds, Even when this 
effect wears off, additional saves must be made in 
order to attack. 

Furthermore, every round of continuous scin- 
tillation of the robe makes the wearer 5% more 
difficult to hit with missile attacks and handheld 
or body weaponry (hands, fists, claws, fangs, 
horns) until a maximum of 25% (S) is attained — 
five continuous rounds of the dazzling play of 
hues. 

After the initial round of concealment, the 
wearer is able to cast spells or engage in all forms 


of activity that do not require movement of more 
AADA 


§ 1015 


.... T ?T—T 


~ Robe of Sertion 


than 10 fect from the starting position. In non- 
combat situations, the robe simply Aypnotizes 
creatures failing their saving throws vs. spell for 
Ida turns, 


of Serration 
XP Value: GP Value: 1,000 
Mordenkainen $s Fantastic Adventure 

When this cursed robe is donned, the wearer sees 
hundreds of half-inch mouths, sporting tiny teeth. 
The teeth bite the victim for 10 points of damage 
(total) per round that the robe is worn. The robe 
wraps itself around whoever dons it, and it cannot 
be removed if the victim’s strength is 14 or less. A 
character having a strength of 15 or more may 
break this devilish robe’s hold in 10 rounds, sus- 
taining only half damage while doing it. Alter- 
nately, a remove curse spell utterly destroys the 
item, leaving nothing but a heap of smoldering 
rags upon the floor in its place. 


XP Value: 4,000 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 

This rather ordinary garment seems typical of 

apparel worn by wizards. However, it radiates a 

strong aura of alteration and evocation if exam- 

ined for magic. The robe enables its wearer to 


GP Value: 12,000 


travel physically on the Astral Plane, along with 
everything that is worn or carried. The garment 
also enables the wearer to survive comfortably in 
the void of outer space. In other situations, the 
robe gives its wearer a +] bonus to all saving 
throws. 

The robe is embroidered with stars, and the 
wearer can use up to six of these as missile weap- 
ons, provided he or she is proficient with darts as 
a weapon. Each star is a throwing weapon of +5 
value, on both attack and damage rolls. Maxi- 
mum range is 60 feet and base damage is 2d4 
points per hit. The special star weapons are 
located on the chest portion of the robe. If the 
wearer does not use all of these missiles, they 
replace themselves magically at the rate of one 
per day. If all six are used, all of the robe s travel- 
ing and missile powers are gone forever. 


Stone 
XP Value: 1,250 GP Value: 14,000 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 47 
On command, the outer surface of this dark gray 
robe becomes as hard as rock, while the inner sur- 
face remains soft. When hard, the robe weighs no 
more than an ordinary cloak, but the wearer's AC is 
0. This robe can be used only by clerics and druids, 


Sulmish Robe of Magical 


Enhancement 
XP Value GP Value 
+1: 4,000 20,000 
+2: 6,000 30,000 
+3: 8,000 40,000 


Rary the Traitor 

These black robes, embroidered with complex 
patterns in red and gold, were crafted by Sulmish 
wizards to improve their casting abilities and 
protection. Several varieties exist. The most 
common acts as a cloak of protection +1 and 
enables the wearer to cast one extra Ist-, 2nd-, 
and 3rd-level spell (for a total of three extra 
spells) per day. The second variety gives +2 pro- 
tection and provides one extra spell each of Ist- 
to 4th-level (a total of four), The third, and by far 
the rarest, yields +3 protection, and provides one 
extra spell each of Ist- to 6th-level (a total of six 
extra spells per day). The robes do not confer the 
ability to cast a spell to which a wizard would 
not normally have access. For example, a 3rd- 
level wizard wearing a cloak +3 would not be 
able to cast 6th-level spells. 

4902 


1016 


a ͤðw2 ‚— fr. . ⅛Ü ˙˙¹ ⅛ ͤiĩ 


FE 


` Robe of Useless hem y 


Tvashtri’s Golden 
XP Value: 9,000 GP Value: 90,000 
Legends & Lore 
Whenever he roams the earth, Tvashtri’s avatar 
wears a golden robe that gives him an AC of 3. 


of Useful Items 

XP Value: 1,500 GP Value: 8,000 

DUNGEON Master Guide 
This appears to be an unremarkable item of 
apparel, but a wizard who dons it may note that it 
is adorned with small cloth patches of various 
shapes, Only the wearer of the robe can see, rec- 
ognize, and detach the patches. One patch can be 
detached each round. Detaching a patch causes it 
to become an actual item, as indicated below. A 
tobe of useful items always begins with two cach 
of the following patches: 
* Dagger 
* Lantern (filled and lit) 
* Mirror (large) 
Pole (100 
Rope (50° coil) 
Sack (large) 
In addition, the robe has 4d4 items for which 
the dice must be rolled.—roll 4d4 to determine 
how many additional items a robe has and then 
percentile dice to determine specific items: 


Roll Result 

01-08 Bag of 100 gold pieces. 

09-15 Coffer (4'x%' x1"), silver (500 gp 
valuc). 

16-22 Door, iron (up to 10 wide and 10 high, 


barred on one side. Placed upright, it 
attaches and hinges itself). 


23-30 Gems, 10 of 100 gp value each. 

31-44 Ladder, wooden (24 long). 

45-51 Mule (with saddle bags). 

52-59 pit (10 cubic feet), open. 

60-68 Potion of extra healing. 

69-75 Rowboat (12 long). 

76-83 Scroll of one randomly determined 
spell. 

84-90 War dogs, pair, 

91-96 Window (2'x4'—up to 2’ deep). 

97-00 Koll twice more. 


Multiple items of the same kind are permissi- 
ble. Once removed, items are never replaced. 


of Useful Items H 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
Gateway to Ravens Bury, The Living City 
This robe contains two daggers, one lantern, two 
10-foot poles, two 50-foot ropes, a large sack, 
one bag of 100 gp, an iron door, a 24-foot wooden 
ladder, and a mule with saddle bags, 


of Useless Items 
XP Value: 100 GP Value: 500 
PourHEDRON Magazine 156 

This robe appears to be a garment of no great 
value—appearances can deceive, but not in this 
case, The wearer will notice several odd-shaped 
patches on the garment—because they chafe in 
uncomfortable places. Detaching one of the 
patches causes it to actually become one of the 
following items (roll 248): 


Roll Item 

2A bag containing 1,000 lead pieces 

3 A l-inch length of rope. 
4 One pair of high. hard boots, halfling 
5 


size. 

A wooden ladder, 25’ long, with three 
rungs, 
Halfa pair of safety scissors, 

7 A String of electrical Christmas tree 
lights. 

8 A rubber dagger and a glass shield 
(matched set). 

9 A Book of Exalted Deeds, written entirely 
in Thieves’ Cant, 

10 A pint of sovereign glue (undiluted with 
oil of slipperiness) in a tightly stoppered 
unbreakable bottle. 

11 A treasure map pinpointing the exact 
location of an immense hoard, relative to 
“the old oak tree,” “the big rock,” “the 
woodcutter’s shack,” and “the bend in the 
river” (extrancous details such as the 
name of the kingdom or the continent are 
omitted). 

12 =A 25Sth-century, death-ray handgun, 
100% accurate within 300 fect, that kills 
anything it hits (batteries not included). 

13 A letter from Ed McMahon, telling the 
PCs they may already have won $20 mil- 
lion. 

14 A normal bo stick, jo stick, awl pike, 
fauchard, partisan, and mancatcher. (In 
the history of the AD&D game, has any 

4506 


1017 


Robe of Vanishing 


—— 


PC ever willingly become proficient with 
any of these weapons?) 

I5 Halfa bucket of fresh, ore beer. 

16 A wanted poster (600,000 gp bounty) for 
an ex - puludin gone really bad who’s 20 
levels higher than the highest-level char- 
acter, 


Once removed, a patch can never be replaced 
on the robe, When enough patches have been 
removed, the robe becomes very drafty, so it is 
wise to reserve the patches for emergencies. 


of Vanishing 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 20,000 
The Complete Thief’s Handbook 

This robe, quite innocent in appearance, is a boon 
for a thicf who needs to clude pursuers quickly. A 
thief needs only to grasp the hem of the robe, 
clutch it very tightly, and he or she simply seems 
to vanish, although the thief has just affected an 
escape us per a rope trick spell (no rope is visible, 
of course) and is also made invisible, detection 
resistance applies to the extradimensional space 
created, The rope trick effect lasts for up to six 
turns but the /nvisibility created is of the normal 
sort (permanent until some offensive action is 
undertaken). Wise thieves make sure that other 
magical aids to escape (notably a potion of flying) 
are on hand to maximize the value of the robe. 
The robe can be used up to three times per day to 
create its magical effects. 


of Veluna 
XP Value: 2,00 GP Value: 10,000 
Ou Adventures 

Enchanted by a wizard who enjoyed the luxuries 
of wealth, this purple garment gives its wearer the 
physical appearance of nobility—well-groomed 
hair, clean skin, and rich, colorful clothes of silk 
and fine wool, The character's Charisma rises by 
2 points (to racial maximum), and he or she tends 
to be treated with respect by members of civilized 
societies (a +15% reaction by NPCs below Upper 
Middle Class), However, etiquette and social 
graces are left to the character's Intelligence, 
Charisma, and training. In trading with others the 
robe gives its wearer a 20% chance to make a 
more favorable deal, 


1 


This garment seems to be magical and radiates a 
dim aura of enchantment if detect magic is used. 
The wearer does notice anything unusual when the 
robe is donned, and it actually conveys some magi- 
cal power at that time—protection +1. However, as 
soon as the wearer is in a situation requiring con- 
centration and action against hostile opponents, 
the true nature of the garment is revealed: The 
wearer immediately suffers a multitude of bites 
from the insects that magically infest the garment, 
He or she must ccase all other activities in order to 
scratch itches, shift the robe, and generally shows 
signs of extreme discomfort from the movement 
and bites of the annoying pests. 

The wearer is unable to gain initiative, and has 
a 50% chance of being unable to complete a spell 
due to the vermin. All other actions and attack 
forms requiring manual, locomotive, or somatic 
activity are at half normal probability. The gar- 
ment can’t be removed except by means of a 
remove curse spell or similar magic. 


Warmth 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
POLYHEDRON Magazine 73 
A robe of warmth is chamois-lined, of natural 
wool or fur that keeps the wearer 10 degrees 
warmer than would be expected of a nonmagical 
robe of similar materials. 


Wizard's 
XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 45,000 
GREVHAWK 
When garbed in this robe, a Wizard has a 95% 
chance of success casting the following spells; 
charm, hold, and polymorph. There is a 60% chance 
the robe is white (Lawful), a 30% chance it is gray 
(neutral), and a 10% chance it is black (Chaotic), 


Roll General Alignment 
01-60 Lawful 
61-90 Neutral 
91-00 Evil 
Yama’s 
XP Value: 10,000 GP Value: 75,000 
Legends & Lore 


The robes worn by Yama’ avatar protect him from 
any attack based on fire, heat, light, or electricity, 
412 


a aa 


018 


Rock, Death 


Rock 


Rocks are usually common chunks of stonc. In 
the AD&D game system, “rock” and “stone™ 
have been generally used interchangeably— 
though, at least in theory, a rock is larger than a 
stone. If you do not find your favorite piece of 
magical granite here, look under Stone 


Death 
XP Value: GP Value: 
Book of Artifacts 

The death rock is an evil relic of inky black stone, 
roughly the size of a man’s clenched fist. When 
touched, the rock pulsates faintly, like the beating 
of a heart, and leaves the sensation of warm 
greasy moistness on the fingertips. The death 
rock exudes a palpable aura of evil noticeable to 
intelligent creatures 

It is said that the death rock is the product of 
some far - distant eastern cult that worshiped the 
great salamander of a certain river. The cult was 
evil and its rites unspeakable, For years the cult 
survived openly and although it was hated by all, 
no one could act against it 

Their terror finally came to an end when a peas- 
ant woman whose sons had been taken by the cult 
took up the sword. Though she was old and scorned 
by her neighbors for her folly, the woman prayed to 
all the powers of justice for revenge. For five 
nights the five judges of men came to her, bringing 
courage, faith, purity, mercy, and might. With 
these she challenged the living god. Their battle 
was great, but in the end the old woman cut the 
ſiend heart free and cast it far away 

It is said that the heart became a stone, still 
filled with great and evil powers. Over the cen- 
turies, the death rock has found its way to the 
west, leaving ruin and destruction in its wake. It 
has not been seen for very long time and it might 
now be finally lost forever. 

Characters should only find the death rock if 
the DM sorely wants to tempt and test the heroes 
The rock grants great power, but only to one per- 
son and at terrible cost to the PC's companions. 
The DM should know the players well, for if the 
temptation succeeds, serious ill will could 
develop among the players, threatening the har- 
mony of the group 

Constant Powers: The death rock gives its 
owner all the abilities of a necromancer-wizard of 
the same level as the character. The character 


= WS 
5 N 


Fock. Death Rock of the Darad S tin r 


knows all necromancy spells appropriate to that 
level but can only memorize and use necromantic 
spells. The character gains no hit points and does 
not earn or record experience points as a necro- 
mancer. Experience and Hit Dice are gained nor- 
mally in the character's other class and cach time a 
new level is achieved, the character also advances 
as a necromancer. The character loses none of the 
abilities of the other class and can freely mix the 
powers of both classes. The most favorable adjust- 
ments to THACO, saving throws, etc. are used. If 
the character is a wizard, the selection of spells is 
doubled, although the PC is still limited to necro- 
mantic spells for the additional ones. 

Curse: To activate and maintain the power of 
the rock, the character’s closest companion must 
be claimed each week as a zombie slave. If this is 
not done, the rock instantly vanishes, never to be 
seen again. 


Suggested Means of Destruction: 

lt must be burned in the Flames of Pure Truth. 
lt must be used to slay a god of death. 

lt must be given to a man who was never alive. 


Death Rock of the Darad S’tin 
XP Value: 12,000 GP Value: 60,000 
Kara-Tur 

The Cult of the Darahd S'tin is an evil congregation 
that worships a giant river salamander, Their kio ton 
mu carries a horrible relic called the death rock 
which is an inky-black stone about the size of a fist. 
This stone is rumored to enable the possessor to cast 
the following spells: shadow door, passwall, creep- 
ing darkness, pain, mass suggestion, withering 
palm, and power word-kill. It also gives the wielder 
the ability to cast an ancient curse and cause critical 
wounds like the shukenja spells. Anyone who finds 
the death rock in their home or placed in their path 
is cursed by the cult and can expect death soon, 

It is believed the death rock is really the black 
heart of the nameless god who watches over 
assassins and murderers, often pictured in the 
shape of the giant black river salamander. It was 
given to the cult by the god himself when he 
began to encourage their worship. This cult is 
filled with unsavory types, thugs, and thieves 
with no honor, The members are believed to be 
spread throughout T'u Lung, No one knows 
where the Temple of the Darahd S’tin ts located, 
and few wish to find out, but it is rumored to be 
somewhere northwest of Kichai. 


Kereenyaga 

XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 20,000 
Champions of MysTara® 

Kereenyaga, the rock of mystery, or mystery rock 
stands at the exact center of the ring of Guardian 
Trees. Just five miles south by southwest of Shani 
of reverence, awe, and a bit of fear among the 
Karimari. They call it by many names, including 
Ulimwengu'’s Heart and Lightning & Child, The 
Karimari believe Kereenyaga is the resting place 
of Ulimwengu’s soul, and that it protects and pro- 
vides for the land and its people. 

The Karimari are right. For millennia, 
Kereenyaga has served as a receptacle for Kari- 
mari hopes, dreams, and fears. The more the 
Karimari believed their land was alive, the closer 
to the truth this became. Although Ulimwengu 
does not technically qualify as an Immortal—it 
has no personality or individuality, other than 
what Karimari beliefs give it—the land has taken 
on many of the functions and abilities of an 
Immortal Patron, Kereenyaga is, in effect, an arti- 
fact created by Ulimwengu to protect itself and 
the Karimari, 

Chief among its powers is its ability to hide the 
rock projects a sort of hallucinatory terrain effect 
over all of Ulimwengu, making it appear from the 
air to be nothing more than endless jungle, 


intelligent flying creatures, crew members aboard 
flying ships, and the like. (Those actively search- 
ing for something unusual in the jungle beneath 
them may save vs. spell to see through the illu- 
sion.) The hallucinatory terrain does not affect 
creatures under treetop level. 

Kereenyaga also protects Ulimwengu and the 
Karimari from prying eyes using crystal balls and 
similar magic. Creatures attempting to see 
Ulimwengu by these means see the same endless 
jungle as can be seen from the air, (Again, charac- 
ters may save vs. spell to see through this illusion 
if they suspect the view does not show the truth.) 

The rock has a third effect that is also always 
active. It acts as a priestly bless spell, giving the 
Karimari and anyone clse Ulimwengu considers 
friendly a +1 bonus to morale and to all attack 
and damage rolls, Enemies of the Karimari are at 
1 to morale, attack rolls, and damage rolls. 
There is no saving throw allowed. 

If the DM wishes, Karimari priests can draw 


asis 


1020 


additional powers through ceremonies conducted 
on the rock. Such powers may include any druid 
spell (cast as a 20th-level priest) or effects such as 
directing all of Ulimwengu creatures to attack 
intruders, Each ceremony costs the priest a per- 


manent loss of Ida hit points. 
Pet 
XP Value GP Value 
Beneficial: 2,000 15,000 
Cursed: — 1,000 
Deacon Magazine 45 


Pet rocks are magical items that exactly resemble 
luckstones, loadstones, and stones of controlling 
earth elementals, There are two sorts of pet rocks, 
one beneficial and one cursed. 

The former sort of pet rock, at a word of com- 
mand (such as “attack!”), leaps from the posses- 
sors hand and flies at any one opponent of the 
owner's choice within 60 feet. It hits as if the 
owner had fired a missile weapon at close range 
at the opponent, but the possessor’s dexterity 
bonuses and strength bonuses on attack and dam- 
age rolls (if any) do not count. The rock is, how- 
ever, +3 otherwise, and causes 2d6 points of 
damage upon scoring a hit. On striking a stone or 
clay golem, the per rock shatters immediately, but 
inflicts 310 points of damage upon the creature. 
If the rock misses or scores a hit and is not 
destroyed, it returns to the owner in the same 
round it was “thrown.” It may be commanded to 
attack once per round, for as many rounds as the 
owner desires. At a second word of command 
(“heel!"), the pet rock hovers 3 to 4 feet off the 
ground, within 2 to 3 fect of the owner, and fol- 
lows him or her around at a maximum movement 
speed of 12. The rock must be grasped again in 
order for it to attack an enemy, It has an AC of 4 
and takes 30 points of damage to destroy. 

Some 40% of all pet rocks are of a malevolent 
variety. Immediately upon grasping the cursed 
pet rock, the character must save vs. spell at -4 or 
become enchanted with the rock's appearance 
and refusc to set it down during all waking hours. 
The character does, of course, carry the rock in 
his or her preferred hand, making weapon use 
impossible, ruining spells involving somatic 
components, making most thieving functions 
acter. The character resists all attempts by anyone 
or anything to take the rock away, and takes pre- 
cautions to assure his or her continued possession 


of the rock, This obsession may be broken by 
casting dispel magic at 10th level or greater, a 
wish or limited wish, or the destruction of the 
rock (which the character in question trics to pre- 
vent by any means possible). 


Rods 
Rods are about 3 feet long and as thick as a 
thumb, They are normally kept in cases or protec- 
tive boxes. Rods may be metal, wood, ivory, or 
bone; they can be plain or decorated, carved, or 
tipped. 

Rods are powered by charges, unless noted 
otherwise in the description of a particular rod, 
Each time the rod is used, one or more charges 
may be expended. Characters do not automati- 
cally know the number of charges possessed by 
an item when it is discovered, although research 
and spellcasting can reveal this. 

A rod can sometimes be recharged according 
to the rules given for constructing magical items 
if its charges have not totally been used. When a 
rod is drained of all charges, it loses all its magi- 
cal propertics and can never be 

When discovered, a rod normally contains 
1d10+40 charges. However, while rods almost 
never have more than $0 charges, it is possible to 
find rods with significantly fewer charges, partic- 
ularly those captured from enemies who may 
have used them. (See also Staff and Wand.) 

Command Words (Optional Rule): Rods are 
normally activated when the wielder utters a spe- 
cific command word, This word acts like a trig- 
ger, unleashing the power stored within the item, 
Since the control of rods depends on knowledge 
of the command word, they are jealously guarded 
by their owners. An absent-minded wizard can 
etch the command word on the item or carry it on 
a piece of paper in his pocket, but this is rarely 
done, Most often a character must use spells of 
divination or consult sages to discover the correct 
command word to activate a rod. 


of Absorption 
XP Value: 7,500 GP Value: 40,000 
DUNGEON Mastek Guide 
This rod acts as a magnet, drawing magic spells 
of any nature (priest or wizard) into itself. It nul- 
lifies their effects and stores their potential until 
the wielder releases that energy as cast spells. 
The magic absorbed must have been directed at 


the character possessing the rod. The wielder 
asig 


z 1021 - 


S ", p · 


Rod of the Aendi Sea 


— . . ᷑ 5. 


instantly detects a spell level, as the rod absorbs 
the spell energy. 

A running total of absorbed (and used) spell 
levels should be kept. For example, a rod that 
absorbs a 6th-level spell and a 3rd-level spell has 
a total of nine absorbed levels. The wielder of the 
rod can use the captured spell energy to cast any 
memorized spell, at a casting time of one, with- 
out loss of spell memory. The only restriction is 
that the levels of spell energy stored in the rod 
must be equal to or greater than the level of the 
spell the wielder wants to cast. With nine 
absorbed levels, the rod wieldet could cast a max- 
imum of one 9th-level spell, one 6th level and 
one 3rd level, and so on. 

A rod of absorption can never be recharged, It 
absorbs 50 spell levels and can only discharge 
any remaining potential it may have after that. 
The wieldet knows that the rod’s limit has been 
reached upon grasping the item. Used charges 
indicate that it has already absorbed some of its 
maximum of 50 spell levels and that some of 
those have been used. 

Here is a more specific example: A priest uses a 
rod of absorption to mullify the effect of a hold per- 
son spell cast by a wizard. The rod has now absorbed 
three spell levels and can absorb 47 more. The priest 
can cast any memorized spell of Ist, 2nd, or 3rd 
level, without memory loss of them, by using the 
stored potential of the rod. Assume the priest casts a 
hold person spell back at the attacker. This spell is 
only 2nd-level for the priest, so the rod holds one 
spell level of potential, can absorb 47 more, and has 
disposed of two charges permanently. 


of the Aerdi Sea 
XP Value: 5,000 GP Value: 25,000 
GUN Adventures 
This defensive weapon, fashioned by the mer- 
chants who sail the pirate-infested waters between 
Hepmonaland and the Great Kingdom, allows the 
wielder to cast the following effects by expending 
a certain number of charges from the rod: 
Fog cloud 1 
* Spectral force 2 
* Programmed illusion 3 
The rod has a +5 initiative modifier to activate, 
and the user can move normally (not melee), con- 
centrating to maintain the effect, The rod has a 
range of 240 yards and affects an area 180 feet on 
a side. Illusions not closely related to the sea or 


sailing save at +1. 


of Alertness 
XP Value: 7,000 GP Value; 50,000 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 

This magical rod is indistinguishable from a foot- 
man mace +}, It has eight flanges on its mace- 
like head. A rod of alertness bestows +1 to die 
rolls for surprise, and in combat the owner gains 
-1 bonus on initiative die rolls. If it is grasped 
firmly, the rod enables a character to detect align- 
ment, evil, good, illusion, invisibility, lie, or 
magic. The use of these detect powers docs nol 
expend any charges. 

If a rod of alertness is planted in the ground 
and willed to an active state, the rod can “sense” 
any creature within a |20-foot radius, provided 
the creature intends to harm the possessor. Each 
flange on the rod head then casts a light spell in 
a primary direction (N, NE, E, and so on), out to 
a 60-foot range. Simultancously, the rod creates 
the effect of a prayer spell upon all creatures 
friendly to the user in a 20-foot radius. Immedi- 
ately after that, the rod sends a mental alert to 
friendly creatures, warning them of possible dan- 
ger from unfriendly creatures within the 120-foot 
radius. 

Finally, the rod can be used to simulate the 
casting of an animate object spell, using any 16 
(or fewer) objects specially designated by the 
owner and placed roughly around the perimeter 
of a 6-foot-radius circle centered on the rod. The 
selected objects can be 16 shrubs, 16 specially 
shaped branches, or anything else. 

All of the tod protective functions require one 
charge. The animate object power requires one 
additional charge, so, if all of the rod’s protective 
devices are used at once, two charges are 
expended. 

The rod can be recharged by a priest of at least 
16th-level, as long as at least one charge remains 
in the rod when recharging is attempted, 


Asmodeus’s Ruby 
XP Value: — GP Value: — 
Monster Manual 

Asmodeus has a glowing rod of pure ruby. It acts 
as a rod of absorption. It also causes serious 
wounds to anyone touched by its opaline tip. 
Upon command, it shoots a cone of frost, a jet of 
acid, or a bolt of lightning (all according to the 
appropriate dragon breath weapon). The value of 
the gems contained in this instrument is 
1,000,000 gp. 

4521 


„ 


1022 


Rod of Blind Walking 


Bample’s Rod of Distortion 

XP Value: 6,000 GP Value: 30,000 
1992 Fantasy Collector Card 627 
Bample found this rod and discovered its proper- 
tics, then he improved upon them. Like a standard 
rod of distortion, a roll of 16 to 19 on 1420 
causes all rods, wands, and staves within 20 feet 
not to function during the round it that it is used. 
A roll of 20 causes these devices to backfire and 
inflict full damage upon their users, Unlike the 
normal rod of distortion, though, Bample's rod 
deflects the effects of others rods, staves, and 
wands on a roll of 5-15 on the 1420 roll. (A roll 
of 1-5 produces no results, a roll of 16-20 makes 
Hample's rod of distortion ineffectual for 3 
rounds.) Deflected effects may still affect those 
around the rod owner. 


of Beguiling 

XP Value: 5,000 GP Value: 30,000 
Dunceon Master Guide 
This rod enables its possessor to radiate an cmo- 
tional and mental wave of fellow feeling to all 
creatures with any intelligence at all (1 or higher 
Intelligence), The rod causes all such creatures 
within a 20-foot radius of the device to regard the 
wielder as their comrade, friend, or mentor (no 
saving throw), 

The beguiled creatures now love and respect 
the rod wielder. They listen, trust, and obey him, 
as far as communication is possible the instruc- 
tions don’t consign the beguiled to needless 
Injury or destruction, or to go against their nature 
or alignment. Each charge of the rod beguiles for 
one turn, It can be recharged. 


Blackstick 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 20,000 
Saga of the Shadow King 
This item is a rod of undead rulership. Having 
taken the form of the Wraith Lord, Landryn 
Teriak requires this item to attain mastery over 
would-be legions of undead. 

Apart from its darkest purpose, the blackstick 
also functions as a rod of undead slaying and res- 
urrection. Through using specific incantations- 
decima for slaying and vifica for 
resurrection—the PCs can use this invaluable 
weapon against the forces of darkness. However, 
the Alackstick only has two charges for euch func- 
tion and may not be recharged. 

Undead who are resurrected by the blackstick 


are returned to living flesh and blood. Undead, 
slain by the rod, are blasted out of existence in an 
explosion of light 

Learning how to use the undead rulership 
function is dangerous for the owner. Studying it 
slowly taps the life force of any wizard who 
attempts to wield it. Ultimately, the user finally 
becomes a creature like the Wraith Lord. Before 
this, however, the character becomes chaotic and 
falls under evil influences. The uscr is also sub- 
ject to attack by powerful undcad who want to 
prevent the use of the rod. 


of Blind Walking 
XP Value: 1,200 GP Value: 7,000 
Realmspace 
This rod is used by many blind people in order to 
live more comfortable lives without having to trip 
over random items in roadways. This rod does not 
give the possessor a visual picture of everything 
around him or her. Instead, the item gives an 
almost psychic knowledge of objects’ locations. 
This allows one to mancuver around things with 
greater ease than most people with functional 
eyes, The rod is completely nonfunctional for 


sighted people 


4535 


1023 


~~ Kod of Building r 


of Building 
XP Value: 12,000 GP Value: 60,000 
Kingdom of Nithia 
This artifact was discovered aboard a ship belong- 
ing io Thanatos and Ranivorus. It is a testament 
to the chaotic nature of these Immortals that the 
rod of building is a benign device. Its function is 
can literally construct a pyramid, palace, statue, 
or other stone structure from the ground up. 

To use the rod, the user must first have 
detailed interior and exterior plans of the object 
to be built. Next, the fully-drawn plans must be 
laid on the ground where the structure is to be 
built, and the outside dimensions of the struc- 
ture foundation etched, using the rod, into the 
stone or soil. Once the etching is complete, the 
structure begins to build itself, block by block, 
ata rate of 10 square feet per round. Under- 
ground structures are dug, walls spring up, and 
outbuildings form under the magic of the rod of 
building. The process does not stop until the 
structure is complete. 

Over the years, the rod of building has come 
into the possession of the Templars, who strictly 
regulate its usc. Only a few structures are created 
in this fashion each year. 


of Cancellation 
XP Value: — 

DRAGON Magazine 35 
A very ancient artifact, this powerful, magical 
weapon is currently wielded by an executive at a 
broadcast network. 


GP Value: — 


of Cancellation I 
XP Value: 10,000 GP Value: 50,000 
DUNGEON Master Guide 
This dreaded rod is a bane to all classes, for its 
touch drains items of all magical properties 
unless a saving throw vs, rods against the cancel- 
lation is made. Contact is made by making an 
attack roll in combat. 


Saving 

Throw Item 
20 Potion 
19 Scroll 
17 Ring 
14 Rod 
13 Staff 
15 Wand 


12 Miscellaneous magic item 
3 Artifact or relic 
11(8) Armor or shield (if +5) 
97) Sword (holy sword) 
10 Miscellaneous weapon' 
Several small items, such as magical arrows or 
bolts together in one container, are drained 


simultaneously. 


To find out if the draining can be prevented, a 
1d20 roll is made for the target item, If the die 
roll results in a number equal to or higher than 
the number listed on the table above, the target is 
unaffected. If the roll is lower, the item is drained. 
Upon draining an item, the rod itself becomes 
brittle and cannot be used again. Drained items 
are not restorable, even by wish. 

In a SPELLJAMMER Campaign: The spelljam- 
ming devices are treated as relics for determining 
the effects of the rod. 


of Climbing 

XP Value: 900 GP Value: 4,500 
Thieves of LANKHMAR 
This item is similar in appearance to a rod of 
lordly might and can be used by any character 
class. When a concealed stud is pressed, a spike 
that magically pierces and anchors in any solid 
rock extends from one end of the rod, while the 
other cnd sprouts three sharp hooks. The rod then 
lengthens 5 to 50 feet in a single round, stopping 
when a second stud is pushed. Horizontal bars, 3 
inches long, fold out from the sides, I foot apart, 
in staggered progression, The rod is firmly held 
by the spike and hooks and bears up to 4,000 
pounds of weight, It completely retracts by push- 
ing a third stud. 

The rod can also be used to force open doors. 
(The rod’s base spike is planted 30 inches or less 
from the portal to be forced, and in line with it, 
then the rod is extended), The force exerted is 
equal to storm giant strength. 


of Death 
XP Value: 7,500 GP Value: 37,500 
Lost Ships 
This rod may be fashioned of black obsidian or 
human bone. The secrets of its making are known 
to few, and so it is thankfully rare. The rod must 
touch a being with a successful attack roll in 
order to function, This operates only when the 


wielder silently wills it to work. The wielder is 
4s 


z 1024 5 


Rod of Distortion 


immune to the tod effects while holding it, and 
for dd rounds after releasing it (even if 
another being directs the rod against its former 
wielder), 

A rod of death can animate dead (as the 3rd- 
level priest spell). The undead rise on the next 
round and loyally serve the rod's wieldet. This 
function drains three charges. The rod can also dis- 
rupt undead, destroying them forever. An undead 
target need not be in solid form to be affected, and 
is destroyed despite phylacteries or other aids and 
properties that usually permit it to rise again (such 
as a Vampire's coffin of soil). All undead are 
allowed saving throws to gain immunity to the dis- 
ruption attack of a particular rod of death, An 
undead saves vs. rods as a wizard of the same level 
as it has Hit Dice. Undead disruption drains two 
charges, whether successful or not. 

A rod of death may also cause death by touch. 
This power docs not require a successful attack 
roll if the target is unmoving, and is effective only 
against beings that currently have less than half 
their total hit points remaining, The being touched 
must save vs, death magic. If successful, the rod 
causes 2d6 damage. If the save fails, they are 
instantly slain (and may, if touched again on the 
next round, be animated as undead). Use of the 
tod in this manner drains five charges, regardless 


of whether or not the victim is slain. 

The wielder of the rod can also will it to cause 
creatures to collapse. At the touch of the rod, the 
victim loses | hit point and must save vs. rods at 
~3 or fall to the ground, apparently lifeless, This 
state lasts three rounds, despite any attempts to 
revive the victim or dispel magic. This attack 
drains | charge cach time it is used, whether suc- 
cessful or not. 

\A rod of death can also cause plants to wither 
and shrivel upon touch, losing blossoms or 
spores. This action docs not kill the plants, and 
the rod cannot animate dead plant material. 


Diplomacy Rod of Furyondy 

XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 15,000 
GREYHAWK Adventures 

This rod was created for use by the Prince of 
Furyondy, though his disappearance left it in the 
hands of less noble officials, The rod gives the 
holder a +15% reaction bonus when negotiating 
or debating with other intelligent creatures. 

Once per day the rod allows the holder to cast a 
suggestion spell by spending a charge from the 
rod. The suggestion must involve matters of 
peace or cooperation, or the subjects of the spell 
receive a +1 saving throw bonus. The rod holds 
up to 25 charges and is rechargeable. 


of Distortion 
XP Value: 5,000 GP Value: 25,000 
Tome of Magic 
This unpredictable device is capable of affecting 
the operation of all rods, staves, and wands within 
a 20-foot radius for a single round. The wielder 
rolls 1d20. The rod of distortion cannot be 


recharged. 


Roll Effect 
01-15 The red of distortion docs not influence 
other items. 
16-19 The rod acts as a wand of negation and 


rods, staves, and wands within 20 feet 
simply do not function during that 
round (but are otherwise unaffected). 
20 The rod of distortion completely dis- 
rupts the functioning of rods, staves, 
and wands, The distortion results in the 
backfiring of these devices, causing 
maximum damage to their users if the 
item is used during that round (a wand 


of lightning fires rear-directed bolt 
4532 


1025 


~ Rod, Diviner of Life 


striking its user, a rod of cancellation 
affects one random magical item pos- 
sessed by its owner, and so on). Items 
used by the wielder of the rod are unaf- 
fected, 


Diviner of Life 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
DRAGONLANCE Adventures 

Often called a baton, the diviner of life was used 
during the Age of Might by commanders who 
wished to determine the general condition of 
their troops. After first finding the army's top 
condition during a long rest, a commander could 
get a good view of the troop’s degree of readiness 
by referring to this baton. 

This magical object is a 4-foot long rod, Each 
end is capped by a 6-inch wide band of gold and 
steel, The rod has a 3-foot long section of what 
appears to be clear crystal in the middle (it with- 
stands 20 points of damage before breaking). If 
the glass breaks, the staff is useless. 

There seems to be a swirling white fog within 
the glass section. When the keyword is spoken, 
the fog clears completely. If the staff then touches 
any living being, the life force (hit points) of that 
being registers as a bright green line, I- inch long 
per 10 hit points. 


of 
XP Value: 3,500 GP Value: 17,500 
Dank Sun Campaign Boxed Set 
This item is a small “Y” shaped stick that must be 
held in both hands to use. With each charge 
expended, this item will locate and draw its 
holder toward any accumulation of water of at 
least one gallon, within 1,000 yards, The end of 
the rod points toward the water and gently pulls 
the character that way. The quality of the water 
need not be such that the character can easily 
obtain it. For instance, the rod might point down 
to an underground water source up to 1,000 yards 
beneath the caster. It might also locate moisture 
within a large plant (if it amounts to one gallon or 
more) or that hidden by invisibility or other con- 
cealing magic, but it ignores moisture within liv- 
ing beings (every PC holds far more than a gallon 
of water.) If multiple accumulations of water 
reside in the rod’s range, it draws itself to the 


largest one. 


of Dominion 
XP Value: 7,000 GP Value: 45,000 
Dungeons & Dxaoons Rules Cyclopedia 

Usable by any character, this rod aids in ruling. If 
a ruler carries it on a tour throughout his or her 
dominion, the rod adds a bonus to all morale 
rolls, based on the percentage of residents view- 
ing it (roll 14100 for the result). 


Roll Morale Bonus 
01-50 +2 
51-75 a4 
76-90 +6 
91-99 iR 

00 +10 


When not on display, the rod must be kept in 
the tulet's stronghold. The effects last for three 
months, but the rod may be shown again to the 
populace when needed. 


of Electrification 
XP Value: 2,400 GP Value: 12,000 
The Hidden Shrine of Tamoachan 

This is a silvery rod, actually a copper-nickel 
alloy, which detects as magical, It strikes as a 
mace and causes 1d4+1 points of damage. This 
attack uses a charge. This rod has a resilient black 
handle (rubber), and discharges every time the 
metal end is brought into contact with wet flesh 
or metal. For safety, the rod should be insulated 
with cloth or fur when carried, but players should 
not be told this. This rod may be recharged. To 
recharge it, the rod must be stuck in the earth, 
handle first, and a lightning bolt fired at it. The 
rod receives one charge for cach dic of damage 
the lightning bolt docs, 


of Elemental Fire 
XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 20,000 
World of Krynn 

Lord Soth carries the legendary rod of elemental 
fire that only he can use The rod of elemental fire 
was won by Lord Soth in a battle long ago on the 
Plane of Fire. The rod is 3 feet long, decorated 
with carved skulls and leering faces, It exudes 4 
constant stream of gray smoke from the tip. 
When manually triggered by Soth, It randomly 
does one of the following (rol! 1410): 


1026 


q Rod of Expoditious Transport — 


Result 

Fireball (10 HD) 

Fire Shield 

Wall of Fire 

Summon 4 Fire Elementals 
Summon 4 Efrecti 
Summon 10 Lava Mephits 
Summon 5 Salamanders 
Summon 20 Fire Bats 
Summon 10 Azer (HD 5+4) 
Summon | Imix 

(Prince of Evil Fire Elementals: hp 90; Dmg 6- 
36; AC +4; MV 18) 


cece K wn — 


Entrapment 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 8,000 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 47 
Crafted of ivory and tipped with amber, this rod 
has the power to do one of the following when 
one charge is used: entangle, paralyzation, and 
web, Each effect lasts for 2d8+1 rounds. All crea- 
tures get saving throws against the effects, The 
rod may only be used by priests and wizards. 


of Equestrians 

XP Value: 5,000 GP Value: 23,000 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 90 

A rod of equestrians can be identified by the styl- 
ized horse's head ornately crafted, surmounting 
the top. The other end of this 3-foot shaft is cither 
plain or has a horseshoe or ball at the base. The 
tod is most often carved of wood, though a few 
metal versions have been reported. 

A rod of equestrians has 4410 charges when 
discovered and can be 

A single charge allows the wielder to cast a 
mount spell as an 8th-level wizard. Expending 
two charges allows the user to cast a special ver- 
sion of phantom steed as a \4th-level wizard. The 
“spooking” affect the phantom steed usually has 
on animals does not apply. 

To use this item, the wielder must grip the rod 
with both hands at the top, just below the horse's 
head, hold it in front of the body at waist height, 
incline the top of the rod forwards at a 45° angle, 
and then gallop forward 3 yards while saying the 
command word. 

About 25% of these rods have the added utility of 
serving magical weapons The bottom is used as a 
bludgeoning instrument as powerful as a horse's 
kick; 1d6+1 points of damage are delivered on a suc- 
cessful attack roll, which is made with a +3 bonus. 


Excellent Rod of Engineering 
XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 20,000 
DRAGON Magazine 178 

A highly prized accessory for a military cngineer, 

this plain, rechargeable, 2-foot metal rod has sev- 

cral different functions: 

On command, it extends up to 12 feet in length, 
while its surface roughens in alternating bands 
to allow the engineer to use it as a ruler and 
measure. This form uses no charges and is too 
slender and unwieldy to use as a weapon, 
though doing so causes the device no damage 
(nor can it cause damage, except to small 
insects), 

* The rod always shows magnetic north on com- 
mand, expending no charges. 

If rapped firmly against stonework, the rod 
will reveal to the user, by telepathy, the 
stonework’s thickness and composition for no 
charges (this is useful for gauging the thick- 
ness of walls). 

For one charge, the rod may cast a dig spell 
with a duration of one turn. 

* The power of the rod can function as a move 
earth spell for two charges per turn, or three if 
the effect is to move features rather than col- 
lapse them (as though an carth elemental were 
being used). 

A wall of stone (at 12th level) may be created 
for one charge. 

* For one charge, the user can summon 10 
unseen servants for one hour. They operate as 
the spell, but are each twice as strong as usual 
and can be used for stacking timber, grading 


roads, and other manual labor. 
of Expeditious Transport 
XP Value GP Value 
Normal: 3,500 35,000 
Shadow Walking: 5,500 $5,000 
New Item 


Created over 100 years ago by a famous wander- 
ing wizard, the rod of transport is prized by trav- 
elets. The rod is a thick baton of rune-carved 
wood about 1 fect in length, bound at both ends 
by iron bands, Any mount an owner happens to 
ride will never bolt, shy, panic, or attempt to 
throw the rider. Secondly, the owner will find that 
at the end of a day of walking, he or she suffers 
exhaustion or fatigue only half the distance was 
traveled. Once the possessor becomes used to this 


benefit, he or she can effectively extend the daily 
a) 


r — A ĩ˙ rv) 


1027 


... d d w v 


Rod, Extendable Hand of Enjoyment 


ia i ̃ĩ⅛ ʃv— — 


movement by 25% and suffer no ill effects, Nei- 
ther of these powers uses any charges. 

The chief power of the rod of transport lies in 
its ability to conjure a mount for the owner. The 
mount is created for a 12-hour period, as though 
the owner of the rod has cast the Ist- level wizard 
spell mount. Expending one charge conjures a 
mule or light horse; two charges conjure a draft 
horse, war horse, or camel; three charges conjure 
an elephant with howdah; and five charges con- 
jure an air elemental who will carry the character 
for the day, flying at a Movement rate of 36. The 
mounts will fight as appropriate, but the air ele- 
mental will only defend itself. One in ten rods of 
transport also possesses the ability to shadow 
walk, as the 7th-level wizard spell. Shadow walk- 
ing costs one charge per turn, and allows move- 
ment at a rate of seven miles each turn. 

The rod of expeditious transport may be 
recharged by a 13th-level wizard. Charges used 
by shadow walking must be recharged by a 15th- 
level wizard. 


Extendable Hand of Enjoyment 
XP Value: 300 GP Value: 1,500 
Dracow Magazine 134 

This device is an iron rod 18 inches in length with 
a hand mounted on the end. The hand is wrapped 
in leather and feels warm; it is also jointed as a 
normal hand, and can grasp objects like a normal 
hand with 18 Strength on mental command. In 
addition, the rod can extend up to 30 feet at the 
jester’s mental command, without gaining any 
weight, The jester can mentally create two differ- 
ent joints (or elbows) in the rod wherever he 
wishes. The extendable hand of enjoyment can be 
used to pick pockets at the same chances for suc- 
cess as the character using it has, but it cannot 
catch hurled objects. 


of Flailing 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 20,000 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 

This magical weapon faintly radiates alteration 
magic when subjected to a detect magic spell. 
Upon the command of its possessor, the weapon 
activates, changing from a rod of normal appear- 
ance to a double-headed flail. In close quarters, 
or if the wielder is mounted, it is the small, horse- 
man’s weapon (base damage 1d4+1, S-M/L); oth- 
erwise, it is a footman’s weapon (base damage 
1d6+1/2d4, S-M/L), 


In cither form, the weapon has a +3 bonus to 
attack and damage rolls. Each of the weapon's 
two heads can be used to attack, so double hits 
can be scored, either on a single opponent or on 
two opponents who are man-sized or smaller and 
standing side by side. < 

If the holder of the rod expends one charge, +4 
bonuses are gained on Armor Class and saving 
throws for one turn. The rod need not be in 
weapon-form for this protection benefit to be 
employed, Transforming it into a weapon (or 
back into a rod) does not expend any charges. 


of Generalship 
XP Value: 5,000 GP Value: 25,000 
Old Empires 
This magical rod is a 2-foot-long scepter of pure 
gold, decorated with rubies, diamonds, and 
pearls. When this rod is raised in battle, the 
troops commanded by the general holding it gain 
a +2 bonus on attack and damage rolls and 
morale, and a 2 bonus to Armor Class. 

This effect lasts 3d4 turns and may be used 
only once per day, The rod may be used once per 
day; it has a radial area of effect of 200 yards. It is 
a favored battlefield piece of the priests of 
Aosuran of the Three Thunders. It has also been 
used by the priests of Horus-Re and Anhur. Three 
of these items are known to exist. 


of Glyph Creation 
XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 15,000 
DRAGON Magazine 50 

This is a charged item whose sole function is to 
create certain glyphs of warding. The rod would 
have a predetermined set of glyphs (up to three), 
each of which would require more charges. For 
example, a rod might contain Fryz, cast by using 
one charge, Cino using two, and Wod using three 
charges—the name of the glyph being the appro- 
priate command word. The item would be used by 
touching it to the area to be warded (the size of 
which should also be predetermined and con- 
stant). Only a priest can use it, and it does not 
automatically give the priest the power to cast 
that particular glyph. 


of Health 
XP Value: 6,000 GP Value: 25,000 
DUNGEONS & DRAGONS Rules Cyclopedia 
Usable only by priests, this rod has all the powers 


of a staff of healing, but expends no charges. It 
4547 


1028 


ae 


x Rod Iron Rod of Pam se 


can affect any one creature once a day, despite the 
effect chosen. 


of Indestructibility 
XP Value: 2,500 GP Value: 17,500 

POLYHEDRON Newszine 43 
This 3-foot-long, 4-inch-diameter rod resists 
almost any attempts to bend or break it. (The DM 
may grant a 1% chance of breakage only if the 
rod is subjected to extreme forces driven by mag- 
ical power.) The rod can be used to thrust into 
trap works or to stop a descending ceiling by 
wedging it against the floor. Oddly enough, the 
rod cannot be used as a weapon. Any blow struck 
with it does no damage at all, despite its hefty 
feel and obvious durability. 


of Inertia 
XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 15,000 
Dunceons & Draoows Rules Cyclopedia 

Only a priest or fighter may use this unusual 
item. It may be used as a spear +3 in all respects. 
On command of the user, it stops wherever it is, 
and it cannot be moved by any means except a 
wish. A second command releases it. If the rod 
is in motion when stopped, it continues its direc- 
tion when released, For example, it may be 
thrown at a door and commanded to stop and 
luter released. If an enemy enters when the rod 
is released, it continues toward the enemy (a 
normal attack roll is made). If the user falls, a 
command will stop the rod suddenly, and the 
user may hold onto the rod. 


Iron Rod of Parn 
XP Value: 14,000 GP Value: 70,000 
Duncwon Magazine 15 
The iron rod of Parn, made of a light alloy of 
iron, is 4-feet in length and has a dull black fin- 
ish. Seven magical runes are engraved in crimson 
along its length, each rune representing a facet of 
the rod x power: cause fear (as an adult dragon) at 
will; speak with dead once a day; cloudburst 
twice a day; animate dead three times a day; con- 
trol weather twice a week; earthquake once a 
month; control up to 10 Hit Dice of undead, with 
concentration (as a conjure elemental spell) once 
a week. All these powers are at the 12th level. 
The cause fear power activates instantly at 
will, while the other powers take two segments to 
activate, Only priests and fighters can control the 
tod powers, If it is used by a priest of evil align- 


ment, the rod can control triple the number of Hit 
Dice of undead (30). The appropriate rune must 
be touched to activate each facet of the rod’s 
power, A read magic spell identifies each of the 
seven runes on the rod, six per round. In order 
from top to bottom they are: “fea” for fear, 
“necros” for communication with the dead, 
mimbros for precipitation, necronꝰ for anima- 
tion of the dead, “meteris” for weather control, 
“terron” for carth movement, and “necrinis” for 
control of undead. The rod has no charges, but its 
abilities are limited to the number of uses listed 
previously. 

In its cursed state, the rod has a mind of its 
own (being possessed by its evil creator's will) 
and uses its powers to transform the wielder into 
a shade as described below. The rod can be used 
as a melee weapon, striking as a +2 magical 
weapon for Id points of damage. Unless the 
curse is removed, the rod radiates strong evil 
under scrutiny of a detect evil spell. It radiates 
very strong magic if scanned with a detect 
magic spell. 

If the curse is successfully removed, the 
essence of the captive evil priest is detached from 
the rod and sent into oblivion. The device can 
then be used without danger of its wielder being 
transformed into a shade, However, the rod must 
additionally make a saving throw vs. spell (as if it 
were a 12th-level priest). If it fails this save, one 
to four powers (numbers 2-7 only) are lost for- 
ever as a result of severing the strong bond 
between the evil priest's will and the magic of the 
iron rod of Parn. 

If the current shade under the rod’s influence is 
destroyed without first removing the curse, the 
device tries to entice another living victim to take 
hold of it. Treat this action as if the rod has cast a 
suggestion spell on everyone in a 20-foot radius 
Those who fail to save vs. spell (wisdom bonuses 
applicable) feel an immediate and uncontrollable 
urge to grasp the rod, Should more than one crea- 
ture be affected, an initiative roll modified by 
Dexterity must be made for cach victim to deter- 
mine who gets to the device first. Once held by a 
living being, the rod begins the transformation of 
the holder into a shade by slowly stripping the 
wielder of his positive life force (which also 
serves to power the device). As long as a living 
being holds onto the rod or is within 100 feet 
after initial contact, he or she becomes a shade 
within 3 to 8 hours. If the intended victim moves 

4550 


J 1029 = 


...ͤö;2 


~ Rod of Justice 7 


farther than 100 feet from the rod, the transfor- 
mation is negated. 

A fully transformed shade retains all of the 
equipment it had before the transformation. It 
takes up the rod upon completion of the transfor- 
mation (if it does not have hold of it already) and 
uses it along with its own equipment to destroy 
all living creatures in sight. 

If a remove curse spell is successfully cast 
upon the rod before the shade under its influence 
is destroyed, the curse is removed and the shade 
is released from the device's control. However, 
the shade remains a shade unless a wish spell is 
cast to reverse the transformation, 


of Justice 

GP Value: 10.000 
The Five Shires 
A rod of justice is an iron rod +2 that smites for 
2d4 points of damage. On command, it can hold 
person by touch, rather than doing damage such 
immobility affecting only one target per round, 
lasting for 1d4+1 rounds, and being in all other 
respects like the priest spell. 


XP Value: 2,000 


of Leadership 
XP Value: 5,000 GP Value: 30,000 
Land of Fate 

This powerful rod may be wielded by either a 
fighter or a priest, and is prized by military units 
for its effects. All friendly individuals and crea- 
tures within 120 yards of the wielder have their 
morale increased to fanatic (17) status. In addi- 
tion, friendly and allied beings within 30 yards 
are immune to fear and gain a +4 on saving 
throws that otherwise affect emotions, 

In addition, the rod may be used as a mace 
that inflicts 1d10+6 points of damage and can 
paralyze the target on touch, at the user's mental 
command, This last effect drains the rod com- 
pletely. Once the rod of leadership has been 
drained, it loses all other functions and becomes 
nonmagical, 


XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 30,000 
Dracon Quest Game 

This plain shaft of black wrought iron is warm to 

the touch and tingles when a hero holds it. Three 

times a day, it can be used to cast a lightning bolt 

spell. Like the spell, this rod causes 2d6 points of 

damage per bolt. Only wizards can use this item. 


of Lordly Might 
XP Value: 6,000 GP Value: 20,000 


Dunanon Master Guide 
This rod has magical abilities, but it can also be 
used as a magic weapon—several different magi- 
cal weapons, in fact. It also has several more 
mundane uses. The rod of lordly might is metal, 
thicker than other rods, with a flanged ball at one 
end and a series of studs set along its length. lt 
weighs 10 pounds, and requires 16 or greater 

Strength to wield properly (I penalty to attack 

rolls for cach point of Strength below 16). 

The magical abilities of the rod are: 

* Paralyzation upon touch, if the wielder com- 
mands. 

* Fear upon all enemies viewing it, if the wieldet 
desires (6-foot maximum range). 

* Drain 2d4 hit points from a touched opponent 
and bestow them upon the rod wielder, up to 
the rod wielder’s normal maximum. 

Each such function draws off one charge from 
the rod. These functions entitle victims to saving 
throws vs. spell, except for the draining function 
above—this requires a successful hit during 
melee combat. 

The weapon uses of the rod do not use charges, 
These are: 

Mace +2 

* Sword of flame +1 when stud #1 is pushed. A 
blade springs from the ball; the ball becomes a 
hilt. The weapon shortens to an overall length 
of 3 feet. 

+ Battle axe +4 when stud #2 is pushed. Again, a 
blade springs forth at the ball, and the whole 
lengthens to a length of 4 feet. 

* Spear +3 when stud #3 is pushed. The sword 
blade springs forth, and the handle can be 
lengthened up to 12 feet, to total length of 
from 6 feet to 15 feet. In 1S-foot length, the 
rod is suitable for a lance. 

The following mundane uses of the rod do not 
use changes: 

Climbing pole. When stud #4 is pushed, a 
spike that can anchor in granite is extruded 
from the ball, while the other end sprouts three 
sharp hooks. The rod lengthens from 5 to 50 
feet in a single round, stopping when stud #4 is 
pushed. Horizontal bars, 3 inches long, fold 
out from the sides, |-foot apart, in staggered 
progression. The rod is firmly held by spike 
and hooks and bears up to 4,000 pounds of 


weight. It retracts when stud #5 is pushed. 
4 


1030 


* The ladder function can also be used to force 
open doors. The rod’s base is planted 30 feet or 
less from the portal to be forced and in line 
with it. The force exerted is equal to storm 
giant Strength, 

When stud #6 is pushed, the rod shows mag- 
netic north and gives the owner an approxi- 
mate depth beneath the surface (or height 
above it). 

The rod of lordly might cannot be recharged, 
When its charges are exhausted, all magical abili- 
ties cease, as do all weapon functions except the 
mace +2. The rod continues to work in all other 
ways. 


Malice's Rod of Reincarnation 
XP Value: 12,000 GP Value: 60,000 
1992 Fantasy Collector Card 266 
This rod was bestowed upon Matron Malice 
Do'Urden when she was high in the favor of 
Lolth, but she kept its existence a secret and it 
passed out of knowledge with her death. It has 
the powers of a rod of resurrection, but it has a 
horribly evil power as well when its wielder 
scores a hit (two uses only), the victim is 
instantly destroyed and reincarnated as a com- 
pletely new character! (Saving throw allowed 
for no effect.) All character attributes, including 


031 


Rod of Many Things 


class and race, are randomly determined, but 
the resurrected character will have the same 
level as its predecessor. 


of Many Things 
XP Value: 7,500 GP Value: 25,000 
Dragon Magazine 91 
In its inactive state, a rod of many things scems a 
featureless shaft of silver, 3 feet long and 1 inch 
in diameter, An identify spell reveals that this 
device can be commanded to form itself into 
many other items, but the spell does not reveal 
what shapes can be assumed or the means of get- 
ting the rod to take on those shapes. 

In truth, all that is required to cause the rod to 
take on a particular shape is a specific mental 
command naming the desired object. The wielder 
of the rod can also issue a general command for 
the rod to “do something,” which causes the rod 
to shape itself into one of the forms given on the 
following table. (This often happens when a new 
owner is trying to figure out what the rod can do.) 
Every time the rod of many things assumes a cer- 
tain shape, the owner of the rod is thereafter able 
to “call up” that particular item by name. The 
owner may use guesswork to find out if a certain 
shape is possible, and if he guesses correctly, the 
desired object takes form. If a specific guess 
names an item the rod is incapable of forming, 
the wielder must save vs. spell or suffer 246 
points of electrical shock damage. It is possible 
for one owner to pass down information to a new 
owner about what a rod of many things can or 
cannot do. If a rod is offered for sale along with 
an extensive list of shapes it can assume, the gold 
piece value would be increased by a significant 
amount over the base figure given at the begin- 
ning of this description 

Because the rod is made of pure silver, any 
weapon shape it forms can be used to attack mon- 
stets that are vulnerable to silver weapons. 
Though weapons “created” by use of the rod have 
no attack roll or damage bonuses, they can be 
used to attack any creature hit only by a +1 or 
better weapon. The user suffers an attack roll 
penalty when attempting to use a weapon for 
which he or she has no proficiency. All class 
restrictions on weapons still apply, too—a priest 
could make a rod of many things into a dagger (or 
any other edged weapon) to cut a rope, but could 
not use the dagger in combat, 


The rod retains any shape into which it is 
4556 


= Rod, Monadic Deva y- 


formed until the wielder issues a mental com- 
mand for it to change back to its inactive state. 
The rod cannot change directly from one shape 
into another, and any attempt to command it to do 
80 has no effect. (A treasure hoard might contain 
a weapon or other item that is actually a rod of 
many things in disguise, having been changed to 
a certain form but then separated from its owner 
before being commanded to change back.) 


Roll Item formed Roll Item formed 
01-04 Axe, hand 51 Jostick 
05-06 = Broom 52-53 Lance, light 

07 Bostick 54-57 Mace, footman’s 
08-09 Cable, 50° long 58 Needle 

10 Candlestick holder 59-61 Oar 

1 Club 62 Pick, military 
12-13 Crowbar 63-65 Poker, fireplace 
14-16 Dagger 66-67 Pole. 10° long 
17-19 Dart 68-69 Scimitar 
20-21 Flail, footman’s 70-71 Spade 
22-24 Fork (for dining) 72-75 Spear 
25-27 Fork, hay 76-78 Staff, quarter 
28-30 Fork, military 79-80 Sword, bastard 
31-32 Guisarme 81-83 Sword, broad 
33-36 Halberd 84-89 Sword, long 
37-41 Hammer 90-93 Sword, short 
42-46 Hoe 94-95 Sword, 2-handed 
47-48 Hoof pick 96-98 Trident 
49-50 Javelin 99-00 Toothpick 

of Melting 
XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 12,000 
DRAGON Magazine 99 


This item, usable by a member of any character 
class, is the bane of all magical swords, particu- 
larly those with innate intelligence. It destroys 
magical swords through heat, which an intelligent 
sword perceives as pain, If used to destroy a 
sword when not in combat, the user simply 
touches the rod to the sword and gives the com- 
mand word to activate it. If the sword fails a sav- 
ing throw vs. disintegration (as hard metal), the 
sword melts within a single round. Anyone touch- 
ing the liquefied sword or holding the sword as it 
melts takes 4d6 points of damage (save vs. rods 
for half damage). 

In combat, the wielder of the rod must con- 
centrate on striking the opponent’s sword, which 
is considered to have a base AC 0 (with bonuses 
for magical protective devices applicable, such 
as from a ring of protection, but not from brac- 


ers of defense). Any misses against the sword do 
not strike the sword’s wielder. If a sword is 
struck while in combat, it gains a +2 bonus to its 
saving throw due to the circumstances of com- 
bat. If this save fails, however, the sword quickly 
accumulates dangerous thermal energy, and the 
wielder takes the damage and drops the weapon 
(no saving throw). The sword often sprays a 5- 
foot area around it with sparks and pyrotechnic 
light as it melts, though this display is not dan- 
gerous. A sword with speech capability emits a 
death shriek that deafens all within 30 feet of it 
for 1d6 turns, if the effected creatures fail to 
save vs. wands. 

There is a 5% chance per ego point of a given 
sword that it explodes when it fails to save against 
the rod of melting. Such a blast causes | point of 
damage per ego point the sword possessed to all 
beings within 30 fect of it. If this occurs, the rod 
must save vs. disintegration (as hard metal), or it, 
too, is destroyed, forcing its wielder to take 4d4 
points of damage and drop it as well. 

A rod of melting cannot be recharged. Each 
time an attempt is made to destroy a sword, 
whether successful or not, a charge is used for 
every point of Ego that the sword possesses, if it 
is intelligent. If the sword is mundane, the rod 
uses one charge per attack bonus of the sword, 
The rod does not affect nonmagical swords or any 
other magical or nonmagical weapons or items. If 
used against a living creature, it may be treated as 
a jo stick for damage. It has no effect at all 
against iron golems. 


Monadie Deva 

XP Value: N/A GP Value: N/A 

Outer Planes MC Appendix 
The strong stewards of the gods, the monadic 
devas, carry great metal rods that are enchanted 
to give an additional +3 on all attack and damage 
rolls. This weapon has all properties of a rod of 
smiting. These powers can never be employed by 
anyone save the monadic deva that owns the 
weapon. The rod never runs out of charges. If a 
solid creature (for example, one made of stone) 
or a metal-armored opponent is struck, the target 
suffers an additional 1d8 points of damage per hit 
above the powers of a rod of smiting. 


4538 


ea . 


1033 


Rod of the Monolith 


— : - ᷑ ]]“ . ²—àũ . 


of the Monolith 
XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 15,000 
Land of Fate 

This magical rod allows an individual to control 
the creature summoned by the elemental mono- 
lith spell, to direct its actions, and to send it back 
into its native plane. The monolith must fail a 
saving throw against death magic for the rod to 
function this way; control may be attempted cach 
round, and the rod expends no charges until con- 
trol is established. Then, one charge is expended 
for each round of control. 


Moto moto Rod 
Moto moto rods have their own entry, see M. 


of Onnwal 
XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 15,000 
GREYHAWK Adventures 

This magical rod was originally created to help 
protect the inhabitants of Onnwal against the 
fierce storms that regularly lash the Sea of Gear- 
nat. It is also known to have been used effectively 
against dust storms in the Bright Desert, blizzards 
in the northern countries and on the windy peaks 
of various mountain ranges. 

Upon command, the rod causes air in a $0-foot 
radius to become calm, wind velocity 0. It can 
negate damage to structures as long as the side 
the wind is blowing against can be included in the 
rod’s radius of effect. However, the rod does not 
influence rain, snow, or any solid objects carried 
upon the wind and hurled into its area of effect. 
The rod cannot protect a flight of missiles that is 
fired or hurled outside its area of effect. 

The rod prevents damage from creatures 
employing high winds as a special form of attack. 
For example, an air elemental could attack nor- 
mally, but couldn't attack in whirlwind form, Each 
use of the rod drains one charge. Each charge lasts 
one hour, and the rod can be recharged. 


of Orbs 

GP Value: Priceless 
Lost Ships 
The secret of making these rare rods is now lost. 
Some believe they are relics of vanished human 
spacefaring races. Others think they were devised by 
the arcane, to prevail in early conflicts with behold- 
ers. Several archmages are known to be researching 
a means to recharge them; if any have accomplished 
this, the achievement remains a secret. The rods 


XP Value: N/A 


crumble instantly to dust when drained. 

A rod of orbs is easily told from most other 
rods. Fashioned of brass or bronze, it has two bul- 
bous, eye shaped ends. When grasped, the rod 
gives the holder infravision to a 90-foot range 
(draining no charges). 

Once per turn, the bearer can mentally com- 
mand the rod to bestow x-ray vision (as the magi- 
cal ring) for a continuous four-round period. The 
power can be ended earlier if the rod wielder 
wills, but unused time cannot be saved for later or 
used in a succession of shorter amounts. This 
drains | charge per activation. 

Once per day (a 144-turn period), the rod can 
be willed to give the wielder an indivisible, con- 
tinuous, five turn period of true seeing (as the 
5th-level priest spell, save that the rod gives no 
vision into the Ethereal or adjacent planes). This 
function drains 2 charges. 

The rod also confers immunity to all gaze- 
related attacks (beholder, catoblepas, medusa, 
umber hulk, vampire, all others), at a cost of | 
charge per attack. The rod must be held to confer 
such protection, but need not be wielded. When 
in such a state, the holder is automatically pro- 
tected—and may not even be aware that a particu- 
lar attack has been made (if the rod is not held, its 
protection is not used, and no charges are lost to 
gaze-related attacks of any sort). 

The wielder can will the rod to provide reflec- 
tion, which costs 2 charges per attack protected 
against, instead of one. Unlike a gaze reflection 
spell, the rod's protection and reflection work 
against all forms of eye-related attacks, including 
the passive sort (medusa, umber hulk), the pow- 
ers of magical items such as cusps, eyes, and 
orbs, and magical powers that are released from 
living orbs, such as a beholder’s eyes. 


of Parrying 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 10,000 
DUNGEONS & Dracons Rules Cyclopedia 
This rod +5 can be used as a melee weapon, 
inflicting 1d8+5 points of damage per hit (but no 
Strength bonus applies). It may also be used to 
parry attacks, if the user chooses this ability at the 
beginning of a round. When attacked in melee, the 
user ð Armor Class gains a +5 bonus while parry- 
ing; however, this does not apply to avoiding mis- 
sile fire. While using the rod of parrying, no other 
action is possible except a fighting withdrawal 


maneuver. This rod is usable by any character. 
4862 


> 1034 ; 


x Rod. Quirks of r 


of Passage 
XP Value: 5,000 GP Value: 50,000 
Dunaron Master Guide 

This potent item allows its wieldet to perform 
any of the following, one at a time, each round: 
astral travel, dimension door, passwall, phase 
door, and teleport without error. It is necessary to 
expend one charge to activate the rod, but once it 
is activated the owner can perform cach of the 
listed functions once. The rod remains charged 
for one day, or until each of the five functions is 
used. None of the functions can be used a second 
time unless another charge is expended, when all 
five of the functions again become available. 

With respect to astral travel, the wielder can 
elect to use the rod on as many as five creatures 
(one of which must be the wielder himself), Each 
creature then takes on and can travel in astral 
form, Any remaining functions of the rod are can- 
celed by this action. The rod travels into the 
Astral Plunc along with the wieldet and any other 
affected creatures. It cannot be used or reacti- 
vated until it is returned from the Astral plane. 

This five-in-one effect doesn't work with 
respect to the rod’s other powers; only astral 
travel can be used more than once per activation, 
and only in the manner described. The rod exudes 
4 magical aura of alteration and evocation, 
Because the physical bodies of the travelers, and 
their possessions, are actually empowered to 
become astral, recharging the rod requires a wiz- 
ard of at least the 20th level. 


Quirks of Magical Rods* 
XP Value: — GP Value: — 
DRAGON Magazine 163 

The AD&D game has one of the largest compila- 
tions of magical items in the fantasy gaming 
industry. The following tables have been created 
to add some spice and variety to existing magical 
items in the AD&D game world. A table of non- 
standard magical item abilities is offered for cach 
major type of magical item in the AD&D game. 
The rationale for such quirks is simple. 

Most items are created normally, and they 
function exactly as a standard item of the same 
type in the DMG. However, sometimes there is a 
slight mixhap in the creation of the device; the 
steps ure not followed in the proper order, the 
astrological signs do not bode well, the item's 
creator is disturbed to begin with, the instructions 
are incomplete, or something just plain goes 


wrong. Any of these results may cause a magical 
item to behave differently from others just like it. 

Not all quirks are bad, however. Some are detri- 
mental to the item or its user, some are neutral, and 
some are even beneficial, The possibility of quirks 
existing (and the actual number of quirks) is deter- 
mined by using the table below to determine the 


exact quirks a magical rod possesses. 
Roll Quirks Present 

01-86 No quirks 

87-94 One quirk 

95-98 Two quirks 

99-00 Three quirks 

Magical Rod Quirks 
Roll Result 

01-04 Rod is inefficient; double the number 
of charges expended for cach use. 

05-07 Rod has an extra command word that 
allows it to shrink to half its normal size 
or return to its normal size. 

08-13 Rod is made of metal and is magnetic; 
consequently, the rod is attracted to any 
large concentration of metal of at least 
30 pounds, 

14-18 Rod glows a random color (as faerie 


fire) whenever its powers are used. 
Rod radiates nondetection and registers 
negatively at any attempt to detect 


magic 

Rod does | point of damage to its 
wielder each time that the rod’s powers 
are used. 

Rod ts easily broken; the rod must make 
all saving throws at ~2 to the roll, 
Somatic gestures and a command word 
are necessary for activating the rod’s 
powers, The gestures force the user to 
suffer a Id initiative penalty. If the 
gestures cannot be performed (say, if 
the wieldet' arms are tied), the rod 
does not work. 

Rod does not work if the wielder’s hand 
is covered, gloved, or gauntleted. 

Rod is unstable; it fizzles out and docs 
nothing 10% of the time that is acti- 
vated, 

Rod is unaffected by fire, magical or 
normal, 

Rod is invisible to everyone except its 


35-39 


48 


Jod Ranike r 


53-55 Rod's wielder must concentrate for one Intelligence Table (see Sword, Special) 
round when speaking the command and disregard any result of no intelli- 
word to activate the rod’s powers. gence. The rod also has an ego; its per- 

56-60 Rod is unaffected by acid. sonality must be determined as well. 

6l- Rod cannot be snapped or broken by any Though the rod does tell its owner of 
creature of less than 18/50 Strength. This the powers it offers, it never reveals the 
also applies to any retributive strike made number of charges it possesses. Note 
by another wand, staff, or rod. that an intelligent rod never willingly 

64-68 Rod does not work if the wielder is uses its last few charges. These rods can 
wearing metal armor of any kind always be recharged, regardless of type. 
(including elven chain mail). 

69-71 Rod tends to overload. It can be used up Ranike 
to three times in a 24-hour period. Any XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
attempted uses beyond that limit cause Dracon Magazine 197 
the rod to short itself out for 24 hours, This rod, made of the wood of the ranike tree, is a 
and the charges activated are lost. useful weapon against the giant insects of Athas. In 

72-74 Rod is extremely powerful; any saves combat, it strikes as a club +7 and may be used by 
against its effects are at—2 to the die any PC class that can wield a club. Whenever it 
roll. strikes a giant insect, including thri-kreen, it gives 

75-79 Rod is unable to function in environ- off a puff of smoke like that created by burning 
ments colder than freezing. ranike sap, expending one of its 41-50 (1d10+40) 

80-83 Rodis unable to function in environ- charges in the process. This cloud stays around the 
ments warmer than normal human body target, no matter what the victim does, reducing it 
temperature, to utter helplessness if a saving throw vs. rods fails 

84-86 Rod does not function underwater. at 4 on the roll. The enemy can neither attack nor 

87-89) Rod activates whenever the command defend, and its only movement is to fall to the 
word is spoken by anyone within 30 ground and thrash blindly in agony. Its helplessness 
feet, whether it is held or not, gives any enemy that strikes at the victim a +! 

90-93 Rod can be used as a weapon (ifitisnot bonus to attack rolls until the cloud dissipates. If 
already one). It has a +1 bonus with the manike rod is used in further attacks, it does not 
respect to hitting creatures unharmed by release more clouds on an already-struck victim 
normal weapons, but has no actual bonus until the original one has dissipated in four rounds, 
to hit or on damage A wand does damage thus saving charges. It may not be recharged. 
as a jo stick; a rod does damage as a club; 
and a staff does damage as a quarterstaff. of Rastinon 

94-96 Ifall of the rod charges are used, the XP Value: 5,000 GP Value: 40,000 
rod explodes in a fiery blast. The blast The House of Gryphon Hill 
has a radius of 15 feet and does Sd4 This transforming crystal of wondrous power 
points of damage to anyone therein. operates the soul transport function of the alche- 
Those within $ feet of the rod receive ist 3 apparatus. Without this rod, the alchemists 
no saving throw; others may save vs, machine can only perform transference; the union 
breath weapons for half damage. and splitting of souls will not occur. The rod is a 

97-99 Rod is capable of being placed in auto- crystalline shaft 2 feet long and - inch in diame- 
matic mode; every round, it performs ter Silvery sparks occasionally flicker along the 
one function as designated by the inside its length, crackling quictly. 
wieldet, using the normal amount of ‘There is a 5% cumulative chance per round that 
charges, until it is taken out of auto- a deliberate attempt to break the device will work. 
matic mode. During this time, the _If this takes place, then only the destruction of the 
wielder can cast short spells (initiative apparatus can resolve the dilemma posed by evil. 
modified spells of three or less), or Transpossession may take place, but the alchemist 
melee with a -I penalty on attack rolls. is without hope, the nightmare continues, and the 

00 Rod is intelligent; roll on the Sword PCs carn the full wrath of the Creature 
4565 
—: naa 
1036 


ee 


The secret of making the rod has been lost. 
According to legend, several were made, but only 
this one, so far, has been recovered. 


of Resurrection 
XP Value: 10,000 GP Value: 35,000 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 
This rod enables a priest to resurrect the dead, 
even clf, dwarf, gnome, or hafling dead, as if he 
or she were of high enough level to cast the resur- 
rection spell, No rest is required, since the rod 
bestows the life giving effects. 

The rod can be used once per day. The number 
of charges used to resurrect a character depends 
on class and race, Total the number of charges 
indicated for the characters class and race; 


Priest 1 Dwarf 3 
Druid 2 Elf 4 
Fighter 2 Gnome 3 
Paladin | Half-elf 2 
Ranger 2 Halfling 2 
Wizard 3 Human | 
Illusionist 3 
Thief 3 
Bard 2 


Multiclassed characters use the least favorable 
category; do not add the charges for the two or 
three classes, The rod cannot be recharged. 

In Kara-Tur: Include these in the rod of resur- 


rection tables: 
Class Charges Race Charges 
Barbarian 3 Ninja 4 
Bushi 2 Samurai 3 
Hengeyokai 3 Shukenja 1 
Human 1 Sohei l 
Kensai 2 Spirit folk 4 
Korobokuru 3 Wu jen 3 
Monk 3 Yakuza 3 
of Rulership 

XP Value: 8,000 GP Value: 35,000 

DUNGEON Mastex Guide 


The individual who possesses this magic rod can 
command the obedience and fealty of creatures 
within 120 feet when he or she activates the 
device, From 200 to 500 Hit Dice (or levels of 
experience) can be ruled, but creatures with 15 or 
greater Intelligence and 12 or more Hit Dice or 


levels are entitled to a saving throw vs. spell. 
Ruled creatures obey the wielder of the rod of 
rulership as if he or she were their absolute sover- 
eign. Still, if the wielder gives a command that is 
absolutely contrary to the nature of those com- 
manded, the magic is broken. The rod has a cast- 
ing time of $. Each charge lasts for one turn, The 
rod cannot be recharged. 

In Ravenloft: Anyone controlling undead or 
extremely evil creatures for personal gain is at 
risk. In this case, the user of the rod must make 
Ravenloft powers check. 


of Security 

XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 30,000 

DuNGboN Mastex Guide 
Each time a charge is expended, this rod creates a 
nondimensional space, a “pocket paradise.” There 
the rod’s possessor and as many as 199 other 
creatures can stay in complete safety for a period 
of time—the maximum being 200 days divided 
by the number of creatures affected. The rod 
owner can stay for 200 days; four creatures can 
stay for 50 days; a group of 60 creatures can stay 
for three days. All fractions are rounded down, so 
that a group numbering between 101 and 200 
inclusive can stay for one day only. 

In this “paradise,” creatures don’t age (except 
from magical causes such us the casting of a wish 
spell), and natural healing and curing take place 
at twice the normal tate. Fresh water and food 
(fruits and vegetables only) are in abundance. The 
climate is comfortable for all creatures involved, 
so that protection from the elements is not neces- 
sary. 

Activation of the rod causes the wielder and as 
many creatures as were touched with it to be 
transported instantaneously to the paradise. 
(Members of large groups can hold hands or oth- 
erwise touch cach other, allowing everyone to be 
“touched” by the rod at once.) 

When the rod effect is canceled or expires, all 
of the effected creatures instantly reappear in the 
If something else occupies the space that a trav- 
eler returns to, the traveler's body is displaced a 
sufficient distance to provide the space required. 

The rod can be recharged by the joint efforts of 
a priest of at least 16th level and a wizard of at 
least 18th level. 


4558 


E o Cen "eae a 


1037 


.. 


Rod Segojan Earthcaller’s 


— ͤ — — — — — (— 


Segojan Earthcaller’s Rod 
XP Value: GP Value: — 
Monster Mythology 
Segojan wields a quartz rod +3. It can be touched W z 
to stone to bring forth a stone golem, once per day, N 
which stays for the whole day to serve Segojan 8 N 


of Seven Parts 
XP Value: — GP Value: — 
Eldritch Wizardry 

The seven parts of this rod are scattered in various 
spots around the world. When the first part (the 
smallest) is found, it appears as a small wand, but 
does nothing and has no power. It will, however, 
lead its user in the direction of the second part of 
the rod, if the user wishes to find it. If the second 
part of the rod is found, it must be connected to the 
first part until the third part is found. If the parts 
are not found in order, the out-of-order parts ran- 
domly teleport away from the user. From then on, 
until the last part is found and assembled, the user 
may not let go of the rod (unless, of course, death 

.). The first two parts of the assembled rod have 
the effect of one power stated below, and lead the 
user to the third part. When found and assembled, 
the third part stops the second part from having 
any further effect, gives the user one new power, 
and leads to the fourth part. The addition of cach 
new picce gives the rod only the power of the new 
piece. Once the assembly process has begun, the 
rod cannot be disassembled, but once it is com- 
pletely assembled, there is a 5% chance each time 
it is used that all the pieces separate and must be 
assembled again in the proper order (and with the 
effect of each piece), Once assembled, the rod has 
the following powers: 


Assembled 
Pieces Power 
I None 
1-2 User attacks anyone within 20 feet. 
1-3 Move at double speed. 
| 


User cannot touch or be touched by 

any type of metal, it simply passes 

through the body with no effect. 

1-5 Generate a 20-Hit Die lightning bolt 
once per day. 

1-6 User sustains double damage when 
attacked while using artifact or relic, 

1-7 All of user's abilities are raised to 

scores of 18 (18/00 for Strength), as 

long as user owns the relic. 


Ea Rod of Seven Parts I y 


of Seven Parts II 
XP Value: — GP Value: — 
Book of Artifacts 

The Rod of Seven Parts is a 5-foot-long black, 
unadorned pole, broken into pieces measuring 4, 
$, 6, 8, 10, 12, and 15 inches in length. The parts 
fit together in order of ascending length; the 4- 
inch tip (which resembles a short wand) is the 
thinnest part, the 15-inch head is the widest, and 
the rest of the pieces broaden steadily from the tip 
to the head. The rod originated in Greyhawk. 

Eons ago, a great war was waged between the 
Wind Dukes of Aaqa (the guardians of Law) and 
the Queen of Chaos. Those polar forces each 
craved the annihilation of the other, and were so 
obsessed with enforcing their ideologies that they 
spared no thought for good and evil. For many 
years the balance of power shifted back and forth, 
and neither side could achieve the upper hand. 

Then the Queen of Chaos found a new com- 
mander—Miska the Wolf-Spider, who was so 
brutal and terrible to behold that the queen also 
took him for her consort. With the arrival of the 
evil Miska, the forces of Chaos were bolstered 
and the Wind Dukes began to fear eventual 
defeat 

Therefore, they left the Captains of Law to 
hold the line while they combined all of their 
powers and created a magnificent ebony rod. 
With the newly created artifact in hand, the Wind 
Dukes rejoined the war at the battle of Pesh. The 
Dukes gave the rod to the Captains of Law and 
bade them vanquish Chaos. 

A fearsome battle raged for weeks, and the 
advantage shifted repeatedly between the foes. 
Finally, the Captains of Law surrounded the 
Wolf-Spider, and before the legions of Chaos 
could swarm to their leader's side, the rod was 
driven through Miska’s body. For a moment, 
every soldicr stood terrified by the horrible 
scream of the general. Miska’s foul blood covered 
the rod and penctrated it as he writhed on the 
ground, and the magical forces of law that had 
been infused into the rod were combined with the 
essence of chaos in Miska’s blood, which rup- 
tured the rod and shattered it into seven pieces. 
Meanwhile, the Wolf-Spider was cast through a 
planar rip created by the explosion, and he is still 
lost on an unknown plane. The queen’s soldiers 
converged upon the site in an attempt to capture 
the parts of the rod, but the Wind Dukes inter- 
vened and magically scattered the picces across 


the world. 

Ever since that time, agents of the quecn have 
been ordered to seek out the rod at any cost. It is 
rumored that if she regains all the parts, she can 
use the reconstructed rod to find the Wolf-Spider 
and return him to her side, when the wars will 
begin anew. 

The DM may decide that the rod of seven parts 
is best used by nonplayer characters, for those 
who use the rod suffer an immediate shift to an 
ultra-lawful alignment that would make a paladin 
cem unprincipled good and evil become thor- 
oughly irrelevant to the user, so long as Law is 
maintained, This renders most characters effec- 
to attempt it. 

No adventure with the rod is complete with- 
out the Queen of Chaos, who dwells upon the 
artifact. A campaign with the rod would typi- 
cally involve a clash between the PCs and agents 
of the queen as pieces of the rod begin to sur- 
face, Perhaps the PCs might “accidentally” find 
a piece of the rod and then find themselves 
harassed by the soldiers of Chaos, who try to 
take it from them. 

The adventurers also might discover that 
agents of the queen have found four segments of 
the rod. To prevent war and a major shift in the 
balance of power, the party must cither steal the 
recovered pieces or beat the queen's servants to 
the next part, 

Constant Powers: Each part of the rod con- 
veys an impression of the direction in which the 
next larger piece lies 

Invoked Powers: Each piece of the rod has its 
own minor power: The 4-inch tip can cure light 
wounds (1/day), the 5-inch segment can slow 
(day, 23 rounds), the 6-inch part will kaste 
(Uday. 23 rounds—owner doesn't age); the 8- 
inch piece can create a 10- by 200-yard gust of 
wind (5/day), the 10-inch part affords true seeing 
(day., 20 rounds); the 12-inch segment can hold 
monster (1/day, 20 rounds), and the 15-inch part 
heals (\/day), 

Resonating Powers: As the segments come 
together, the rod increases in power. The con- 
nected pieces retain their minor powers, but a 
major power manifests with the addition of cach 
part, Invoked major powers are cast at the 20th 
level. 

With two parts, the character can fly at will; 


three segments add 20% to the character's magic 
4ů⁰1 


—ů . 7˖7v1 


1039 


— o 


~ Rod of Singing - 


resistance; four segments allow the user to con- 
trol winds (2/day); five pieces grant the power to 
shape change (2/day); six segments enable the 
owner to wind walk (1/day); and with the seventh 
and final piece assembled, the character can cast 
restoration (\/day). 

In addition, the fully assembled rod radiates an 
aura of fearsome, icy law, affecting anyone within 
a 20-foot radius. All enemies (as defined under 
curse) who fail to successfully save vs. spell must 
flee in panic. 

Curse: Created to serve order, the rod immedi- 
ately changes any character possessing one or 
more of its segments to an absolute follower of 
law, beyond the most rigid standards of lawful 
goodness, The character feels compelled to inter- 
vene in all things and maintain the primacy of law 
over chaos, no matter the consequences for good 
and evil. Anyone, even close friends and other 
party members, not following the owner's strict 
views is perceived as an enemy. 

Upon assembling three pieces, the owner 
refuses to part with the rod at any time, under any 
circumstances, 

Assembling the rod can be a very difficult 
task, requiring extensive wards and glyphs (that 
take a full day to inscribe) to be placed upon each 
segment before they can be joined. Bringing two 
segments within a foot of each other without first 
taking these precautions causes the newest, 
largest piece of the rod to teleport 14100 miles in 
a random direction— roll Id 10: 1) north, 2) north 
east, 3) cast, 4) south east, 5) south, 6) south 
west, 7) west, N) northwest, 9) straight up (1d10 
miles), and 10) straight down (1d10 miles), 

Having been violently shattered, the rod’s new 
connections are very fragile, even with the best 
wards and glyphs. Anytime a major power is 
invoked, there is a 5% cumulative chance the rod 
breaks apart and cach individual piece (except the 
segment held) will feleport in a random direction 
as described above, but twice as far. When the rod 
breaks apart, the teleported pieces lose all of their 
wards and glyphs. 

All effects of the rod disappear with it. 
Suggested Means of Destruction: 

All seven parts are simultaneously joined in 
the improper order, resulting in a 7d12x10 
explosion. 

urn the rod over to the Queen of Chaos, who 
will attempt to pervert its nature and neutralize 
it in the process. (Characters who do this are 


not treated with respect by the queen.) 
Find Miska the Wolf-Spider and force both 
him and the rod to enter the Plane of Concor- 


dant Opposition together. 
of Singing 
XP Value: — GP Value: 750 
. Dracon Magazine 37 


The rod of singing is a magical item usable by 
both priests and wizards, although neither class 
will appreciate its charms. When discovered, the 
rod behaves like any useful rod, but 5 to 30 min- 
utes after picking up this device, a wizard or 
priest will begin to wave it as if conducting an 
imaginary band, and sings loudly and off-key. 
This noise has a one-third chance per turn of 
attracting wandering monsters and, if the mon- 
sters are intelligent, I the singer's reaction dice 
(due to the poor music quality). 

The rod prevents the casting of spells by inter- 
fering with speaking and gesturing. It adheres 
magically, and can be removed only by a remove 
curse or wish spell. The person under the tod 
control will continue singing as long as he or she 
is conscious, and resists all attempts change the 
situation. 


of Smiting 
XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 15,000 
DUNGEON Masten Guide 

This rod is a +3 magical weapon that inflicts 
1d8+3 points of damage. Against golcms, the rod 
causes 2d8+6 points of damage, and any score of 
20 or better destroys the golem. Any hit on a 
golem drains one charge. 

The rod causes normal damage (1d8+3) vs. 
creatures of the Outer Planes. Any score of 20 or 
better draws off one charge and causes triple 


damage (1d8+33). It cannot be recharged. 


of Smiting II 
XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 15,000 
A Dozen and One Adventures 

Besides the powers described for the rod of smit- 
ing, this rod inflicts double damage (2d8+6) 
when wielded against a copper automaton or liv- 
ing idol, and destroys an automaton or idol on a 
natural roll of 18-20. 


1 


Rod of Teeth 


asin 


of Splendor 

XP Value; 2,500 GP Value: 25,000 

DUNGEON Master Guide 
The owner of this rod receives a Charisma of 18 
for as long as the rod is carried on his or her per- 
son, All garments of the user (including armor) 
seem to be of the finest quality and condition, 
although no special magical benefit (such as a 
change in Armor Class) is granted. 

If the user already has a Charisma score of 18 or 
better, the rod does nothing. When the user 
expends one charge, the rod actually creates and 
garbs the character in clothing of the finest fabrics, 
and adornments of furs and jewels. Apparel cre- 
ated by the magic of the rod remains in existence 
unless the owner attempts to sell any part of it, or if 
any of the garb is forcibly taken, In either of these 
cases, all of the apparel immediately disappears. 
The garments may be freely given to other charac- 
ters or creatures, however, and remain whole and 
sound afterward. Characters bedecked in a magi- 
cally created outfit can’t replace or add garments 
by expending another charge—if the user tries this, 
the charge is simply wasted. 

The value of any noble garb created by the 
wand is from 7,000 to 10,000 gp (1d4+6), the 
fabric worth 1,000 gp, furs 5,000 gp, and jeweled 
trim from 1,000 to 4,000 gp (10 gems of 100 gp 
value each, 10 gems of 200 gp value each or 20 
gems of 100 gp value, and so forth). 

The second power of the rod also requires one 
charge, this is the creation of a palatial tent—a 
huge pavilion of silk encompassing between 
1,500 and 3,000 square feet. Inside the tent, tem- 
porary furnishings and food suitable for the 
splendor of the pavilion can be found, in suffi- 
cient quantity to entertain 100 persons. 

The tent and its trappings will last for one day. 
At the end of that time, the pavilion may be main- 
tained by expending another charge. If the extra 
charge isn’t spent, the tent and everything associ- 
ated with it (including any items taken out of the 
tent) disappear. This rod cannot be recharged, 


of Teeth 
XP Value: GP Value: — 
Book of Artifacts 
The rod of teeth is a sturdy length of bone, stud- 
ded with human teeth, It appears to have been 
carved from a human femur, and the tecth are 
sunk into the bone root-first. Strange runes and 


whorls are carved into the rod, and inix leather 


provides its grip. 

It is thought that the rod of teeth was originally 
carved by a powerful defiler named Atlak-Ta, 
who was the fetish-keeper of Lalali-Puy over 600 
years ago and served the Oba of Gulg loyally for 
more than 1] decades, When Atlak-Ta died, an 
apprentice named Habbak claimed the rod and 
disappeared. It was last known to be in the pos- 
session of a defiler named Xactan, who lived 
alone in the Tablelands, Xactan was a traveler and 
explorer of ancient ruins, but seven years ago he 
vanished during one of his expeditions. 

The rod of teeth makes an excellent addition to 
any villainous wizard’s arsenal. It is an evil thing, 
but it is not overwhelmingly powerful. It can exist 
in the campaign as a temptation to magic-using 
characters once they start to use it, it is difficult to 
stop using it! Optionally, the rod makes a great 
object for a search expedition. A powerful wizard 
or sorcerer-monarch may demand that the PCs find 
the rod and return with it in payment of some debt, 
or simply under the threat of some horrible fate. 

Constant Powers: The rod of teeth acts as a 
rod of absorption, able to store spell levels equal 
to the number of teeth in the rod. Currently, there 
are 33 tecth in the rod. Each time a charge is 
expended, there is a 10% chance one of the teeth 
falls out. The rod of teeth is a +2 weapon that 

4560 


~ Rod of Terror r 


inflicts 1d8 + damage per hit. The rod of teeth 
also provides a +2 bonus to saving throws vs. 
necromantic spells. 

Invoked Powers: Any wizard struck by the rod 
must make a saving throw vs. spell, in addition to 
the damage sustained. If the saving throw fails, 
do spells are immediately drained from the vic- 
tim’s memory (highest-level spells first). Those 
spells are transferred to the wiclder, who can cast 
them as a wizard (Wizards add these spells to 
those memorized.) 

Curse: The user risks artifact transformation, 
as his or her alignment shifts to chaotic evil. 
Worse still, every time the spell-stealing power of 
the rod is used, there is a 5% chance the rod trans- 
fers the victim's psyche instead, suddenly replac- 
ing the wielder’s psyche with the intended 
victim. (PCs are then treated as NPCs.) Psyche- 
displaced characters retain the physical statistics 
of the host, but have the mental capabilities (pro- 
ficiencies, spells, and psionics) of the victim. 
Meanwhile, the psyche-evacuated victim’s body 
becomes a mindless husk that dies in Ida days. 

This effect can be undone by triggering the 
power in reverse or by a wish. 

Suggested Means of Destruction: 

When all teeth fall out, the rod is inert. 

* Return all the remaining tecth to their original 
hosts (now long since buried). 


of Terror 
XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 15,000 
Duncton Master Guide 

This rod is a +2 magical weapon that can inflict 
1d6+3 points of damage per hit. Furthermore, the 
wielder can expend a charge to envelop him or 
herself in a terrifying aura. Clothing and appear- 
ance transforms the character into an illusion of 
darkest horror, such that all within 30 feet who 
view the apparition must roll successful saving 
throws vs. rods or be struck motionless with ter- 
rot. Those who succeed on their save suffer a! 
penalty to their morale and must make immediate 
morale checks. However, each time the rod is 
used, there is a 20% chance the wielder perma- 
nently loses 1 point of Charisma. 


of Victory 
XP Value: 6,000 GP Value: 20,000 
Dunatons & Dragons Rules Cyclopedia 
Usable by any character, this rod makes the user 
lucky in war (when the War Machine mass combat 


system from the D&D” Rules Cyclopedia is used). 

The following bonuses apply to that system; 

* A +25 bonus applies to the Combat Results 
roll (to a maximum total of 100). 

On the Combat Results Table, if the differ- 
ence in overall totals is 101 or more, the 
result for “91—100" is used, limiting the num- 
ber of casualties. 


of Weaponry 
XP Value: 3,500 GP Value: 25,000 
Duncrons & Dracons Rules Cyclopedia 

This rod +5 is only usable by a dwarf, halfling, 
fighter, thief, or mystic. On command of the user, 
it elongates and may be divided into two weapons 
of the same size, each +2. Each of those may be 
similarly divided into two +1 weapons, The rod 
cannot be divided accidentally, and it can be 
reassembled simply by placing the parts together. 
Each weapon, of whatever size, inflicts 1d6 
points of damage per hit, and magic bonuses (but 
not Strength bonuses). 


of Welkwood 
XP Value: 5,000 GP Value: 25,000 
GREYHAWK Adventures 
Fashioned from an oak branch, this item was cre- 
ated by druids serving the woodsmen who inhabit 
the majestic forest of Welkwood. When they 
enchanted the branch, they instilled in it their awe 
and respect for the great trees and vegetation that 
set this woodland apart, 

The rod can be used as a shillelagh (magical 
weapon, +1 attack bonus, damage 2d4 ys. S/M or 
1d4+1 vs. L). If charges are expended, the following 
effects can he created as if by an Sᷣth- level druid: 

* Entangle l 

* Plant growth 2 

* Wall of thorns 3 

The rod has up to 25 charges and can be 
recharged. 


Whisper’s Rod of Transportation 


XP Value GP Value 
Lesser; 5,000 15,000 
Greater: 7,000 20,000 


The Magister 
This rod, devised by the wizard Whisper, allows the 
bearer to change location (initiative modifier of 
+2). He or she may dlink (drains one charge), 
dimension door (drains two charges), or teleport 


(drains three charges). Each of these functions may 
4572 


x Rape of Entanglement y 


be used twice a day. Five percent of these rods can 
also plane shift (drains five charges), but the desti- 
nation is unknown, nor is it under the control of, the 
tod employer. The rod powers may affect not 
only the bearer but other creatures and objects in 
direct physical contact with the bearer, up to a limit 
of 666 pounds in weight. The rod may be deliber- 
ately “boosted” to affect 777 pounds in weight by 
the bearer, but this drains one additional charge, 
and drains a magical item (at random) within 20 
feet, If no such item is present, the boost does not 
work, and someone or something is left behind 
(determine at random). If a large group of people 
blink, they must hold firmly together or scatter. 

The rod cannot transport objects that are firmly 
anchored (walls, most altars, and bridges for 
example), and if the rod ever lacks enough charges 
to fulfil the desired function, a lesser function for 
Which changes remain operates instead, 


of the Wyrm 
XP Value: 5,000 GP Value: 25,000 
Duncions & Dragons Rules Cyclopedia 
Usable by any character, there are three types of 
these rods; determine the type randomly or select 
one. 


Roll Alignment Dragon AC Breath 


l-5 Lawful Gold 2 Fire/Gas 
6-8 Neutral Blue 0 Lightning 
9-10 Chaotic Black 2 Acid 


Euch is a md +5 and each inflicts 1d8+5 (6-13) 
points of damage per hit (but without Strength 
bonuses). Once per day, the rod may be turned into 
a small dragon of the appropriate type. The created 
dragon has 30 hit points and can only be affected 
by magical weapons, item, and spells, It can under- 
stand and will faithfully serve the user of the rod to 
the best of its ability; it can act as messenger, steed, 
or guard. It fights to the death unless commanded 
otherwise. The dragon knows no spells, It returns 
to rod form on command; if slain in dragon form, 
however, it cannot return to rod form and is forever 
destroyed, Spells and other magical forms of heal- 
ing can be used to heal the creature, if desired, but 
not after it is killed. 

If a dragon is created by a user of a different 
alignment, the dragon attacks the user immedi- 
ately, fighting to the death, When this occurs, it 
cannot be commanded to return to rod form, 


Rope 
Any magical rope that is broken or severed 
immediately loses its special properties. 


of Climbing 

XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 10,000 
Dunanow Masten Guide 
A 60-foot-long rope of climbing is no thicker 
than a slender wand and weighs no more than 
three pounds, but it is strong enough to support 
3,000 pounds. Upon command, the rope snakes 
forward, up, down, or any other direction, at 10 
feet per round and attaches itself securely wher- 
ever desired. It returns or unfastens itselſ in a 
similar manner. A rope of climbing can also be 
commanded to knot itself. This causes large 
knots to appear at |-foot intervals along the 
rope, Knotting shortens the rope to 50-foot 
length until the knots are untied, One end of the 
rope must be held by a character when its magic 
is invoked. 


of Constriction 

GP Value: 1,000 
Duncuon Master Guide 
This rope looks exactly like a rope of climbing or 
a rope of entanglement, As soon as it is com- 
manded to perform some action, however, it 
lashes itself about the neck of the character hold- 
ing it, and from 1d4 others within 10 fect. Every- 
one caught by the rope is entitled to a saving 
throw vs, spell. Anyone failing the saving throw 
is strangled and crushed (2d6 points of damage), 
and the rope continues to constrict until a dispel 
magic is cast upon it, 

Creatures entwined by the rope cannot cast 
spells or free themselves. An unentangled charac- 
ter can cast dispel magic ot try to cut through the 
tope ii is AC —2 and takes 22 points of damage 
to cut through; all damage must be inflicted by 
the same creature (not the one entangled). 


XP Value: 


of Entanglement 
XP Value: 1,500 GP Value: 12,000 
Duncon Masten Guide 
A rope of entanglement looks just like any other 
magical rope. Upon command, the rope lashes 
forward 20 feet or upward 10 feet to entangle up 
to eight human-sized creatures, For purposes of 
entanglement, creatures of different sizes are 
assigned values, as follows: 


- | | <—— 


1043 


r 


~ Rope, Hrulgia’s Rope of Entanglement r 


Size Value 
Tiny 33* 
Small 8 
Medium 1 
Large 3 
Huge 4 
Gigantic 8 
Round 


Add the values of all creatures entangled to 
determine how many are affected by the rope. For 
example, the rope could entangle up to 24 Tiny 
creatures or 2 Huge creatures, Any combination of 
sizes is possible as long as the total value doesn’t 
exceed cight, 

The rope cannot be broken by sheer 
strength—it must be hit by an edged weapon. 
The rope is AC 2 and takes 22 points of dam- 
age to cut through; all damage must be inflicted 
by the same creature (not the one entangled). 
Damage under 22 points repairs itself in six 
turns. If a rope of entanglement is severed, it is 
destroyed. 


Hrulgin’s Rope of Entanglement 

XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 10,000 
1002 Fantasy Collector Card 14 
This item has been personalized for Hrulgin 
Beefbone, a dwarf bounty hunter, Like other 
similar, magical ropes, this one lashes forward 
20 feet or upward 10 feet to entangle as many 
as eight man-sized creatures, It cannot be bro- 
ken by sheer strength, but can be severed by an 
edged weapon (AC —2; requiring 22 points of 
damage to cut, and can only be cut by someone 
who is not entangled). Insufficient damage to 
sever the rope repairs itself in six turns. Unlike 
other ropes of entanglement, this one keeps one 
ond free, to tie itself to Hrulgin pack horse, 
allowing him to drag his prey home without 
untying it, 


Infinite 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 10,000 
Wildspece 
Many versions of this useful item appear through- 
out the spheres. An infinite rope, since it can be 
nearly any length needed, is valuable to climbers, 
miners, and spacefarers. 

Only the rarest infinite ropes are truly of infi- 
nite length. The great majority (99%) reach only 
a finite length. Usually, a rope cun stretch to a 
maximum of slightly over one mile for cach foot 


of its original length. However, wide variation 
among ropes is possible. 

Depending on the manufacturer of the item, 
the rope can be of many different varicties, from 
thin cord to a 6-inch thickness. Very rarely, the 
rope has other properties; elven rope and combi- 
nation infinite/climbing ropes are obviously usé- 
ful. The initial length of the rope also varies 
considerably, from pocket models | or 2 feet 
long. to the standard 50-foot coil. 

Each rope stretches when the user speaks a 
unique command word and pulls. When the com- 
mand word is spoken a second time, the rope 
stops stretching and can be anchored and used 
normally. The speaker must be touching the rope 
when using the command. 

Speaking a second unique command word 
causes the rope to return to its original size, 
shrinking 10 feet per round. The shrinking can be 
stopped by speaking the second command word 
again. If the rope has been tied, it automatically 
unties itself unless the knot is secured with a wis- 
ard lock or other magical protection. It is risky to 
use the rope in long-term applications. 

The rope cannot be used to compress or crush, 
If it is kept from retracting, it stops at the length 
where it met resistance. The rope must then save 
vs. crushing blow; if it fails, it snaps and is 
destroyed. When the command word is spoken 
again, it tries to retract again, It keeps doing so 
every time the command word is used until the 


Tallin’s Tightrope 

XP Value: 1,250 GP Value: 12,500 
The Complete Thief’s Handbook 
This modified rope of climbing will only snake 
forward at an angle of up to 45° upward or 
downward, but it also enables its owner and up 
to five human size or smaller creatures touched 
by its owner to walk upon it as if they had the 
tightrope walking proficiency, with a +4 bonus 
to any proficiency checks required. Anyone not 
touched by the rope owner attempting to walk 
on it will suffer a -4 penalty to any saves or 
checks made while on the rope. In all other 
ways, this item is identical to a normal rope of 
climbing. 


Rose of Ravenioft 


eee eee 


around the neck of a vampire has the same 
Rose effect as full sunlight. Weak vampires (those 
less than 100 years old) are rendered immedi- 
ately powerless while older vampires can resist 
the wreath 'y effects for a limited duration, 
depending on their age. The older vampires try 
everything in their power to remove or destroy 
the wrearh before it renders them powerless. A 
vampire can destroy the wreath with a success- 
ful bend bars/lift gates roll but suffers 8d4+4 
hp damage in the process 
A bush of roses of eternal slumber can grow 
only on ground consecrated to a lawful good 
deity. The bush continues to thrive until all of its 
flowers are cut off, after that it quickly dies. The 
secret of cultivating these flowers is closely 
guarded by lawful good temples 


of Ravenloft 
XP Value: GP Value: 
PouyHEnKoN Newszine 82 

Deep in the murky forests of the Demiplane of 
Dread, scattered rose bushes grow. These rare 
plants, believed to have been created by one of 
the demiplane’s powerful lords, are enchanted in 
a most foul and insidious manner. 

The roses on the bush possess an unearthly 


of Eternal Slumber beauty. While the stems are a dull greenish-gray, 
XP Value GP Value the petals are the deepest blood red. The supernat- 
Single Rose ural beauty and scent of the roses entice any living 
Wreath: 1,500 5,250 human or demihuman coming within 15 feet of the 
Bush: 3,000 10,500 garden to save vs. spell or pick at least one rose 
DUNGEON Magazine 42 The effects of the roses are as follows 
These powerful symbols of good were created to Anyone who picks a rose gains a +1 Charisma 
combat vampires. Once cut from a parent bush, the bonus. 
roses retain their magical potency for seven days. * The character's skin and hair coloration 
During that time, they have the following powers becomes exaggerated; the skin becomes pale 
Anyone holding a rose is immune to a vam- white, jet black, bright yellow, or another color 
pire's charm, The rose breaks charms previ as appropriate for the character's original skin 
ously placed by a vampire, though victims do color. Blond hair becomes platinum or white, 
feel an unexplainable aversion to holding the while dark hair turns raven black 
flower * The individual who picked the rose no longer 
I presented forcefully to a vampire, the rose ages, nor does any object that he or she is 
acts as a lawful-good holy symbol touching or wearing. The possessor of the rose 
* If placed on a coffin, a rose of eternal slumber in effect becomes immortal, although death 
traps the vampire inside until it is removed by can still occur through physical means. 
another creature. This gave the rove its name, Any object the owner of the rose touches and 
* [fused to strike a vampire (requiring a suc- then releases immediately ages at a rapid rate, 
cessful attack roll in combat), a rose inflicts disintegrating into dust within moments 
the same damage as holy water (2d4+1), This * If the possessor of the rose attempts to get rid 
also destroys the rose of it, or if it should be lost, the owner quickly 
* A wreath fashioned from four roses and placed ages also—one year for cach round free of the 
4583 
/ S 
1045 


~ Rore of Forgetfulness r 


bloom. Only a wish allows the holder of a rose 
to drop it without ill effects. The bushes die if 
they are dug up or transplanted, 


of Forgetfulness 

XP Value: 500 GP Value: 5,000 
A Dozen and One Adventures 
These enchanted flowers cause forgetfulness in 
all who inhale their magical fragrance. Spell- 
casters wandering within 5 feet of a rose of for- 
gelfulness must save vs. poison or lose one 
randomly determined spell per round; the loss 
is not realized until the spellcaster attempts to 
use the spell. 

Those inhaling directly from one of these roses 
experience amnesia (complete loss of identity, 
memory, and memorized spells) unless they make 
a save VS. poison at a —4 penalty. The loss of 
memory and identity is permanent unless a heal, 
wish, or restoration spell is employed, though 
new spells can be memorized to replace erased 
ones, The roses are typically discovered in bushes 
bearing 2d6 blooms and retain their potency for 
do weeks after cutting. 


Rudder 


A ship's rudder is what steers its course. 
Enchanted rudders generally perform the same 
funtion, but require no manual labor. 


of Guidance 

XP Value: 5,000 GP Value: 10,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
This rudder must be properly mounted and 
manned to function, and works only if the vessel 
is at least 50 feet long, When the rudder is used, 
the vessel cannot be forced off course the user 
has chosen, whatever the winds (normal or magi- 
cal) or other conditions may be. The vessel may, 
however, be forced backward or forward along 
that course, and a wish can override the entire 
effect 


of Guidance I 
XP Value: 5,000 GP Value: 10,000 
Champions of MYSTARA 
This enchanted rudder takes the place of a nor- 
mal skyship's rudder. It must be properly 
mounted and manned—it will not work on any 
skyship not designed to have a rudder, When the 
rudder is used, the skyship cannot be forced 
from the course her user has chosen, whatever 


the winds and other conditions may be. The sky- 
ship may, however, be forced backward or for- 
ward along her course (by powerful winds, 
magic, or ram attacks, for instance) and a wish 
overrides the effect. 


of Maneuverability 
XP Valuc GP Value 
E: 2,000 10,000 
D: 4,000 20,000 
C: 6,000 30,000 
B: 8,000 40,000 
G (cursed): — 1,000 — 
War Captain's Companion 


This item grants a vessel a higher Mancuverabil- 
ity Class score. The chart above shows these MC 
ranges and their values. 


of Mancuverability II 
XP Value: 5,000 GP Value: 25,000+ 


Greyspace 

This device looks like a normal rudder that one 
would find on any terrestrial watercraft. It is 
highly enchanted, however, radiating a strong 
aura of evocation magic. It is often mistaken for 
the rudder of propulsion created by the wizards 
of Wa on Toril, but it serves a completely differ- — 
ent purpose, 

When installed on the stern of a spelljamming 
vessel it improves the ship's Mancuverability 
Class by one category. It has no effect on vessels 
that are already Mancuverability Class A. 
Unlike the rudder of propulsion, the rudder of 
maneuverability does not work on a vessel that 
does not already have some form of spelljam- 
ming propulsion, 

A rudder saves as hard wood against magical 
attacks, acid, fire, crushing blows, and so forth. It 
is particularly susceptible to electricity-based 
attacks, however, and suffers a - penalty to sav- 
ing throws against these threats. 

Rudders of maneuverability are created by 
elven wizards working in the shipyards of Cen- 
brea in the Greela cluster. Originally designed 
for ships of the Elven Imperial Navy, wizards 
are permitted to sell them to elven crewed ves- 
sels. A buyer can expect to pay a lot of gold for 
this item. No one else is allowed to purchase a 
rudder from the Cenbrea shipyards, The punish- 
ment for breaking the law is severe, sometimes 
death ſot both the buyer and the seller. Enter- 
prising individuals might be able to persuade an 

4 


x Rudder of Propulsion I 


civen captain to sell a rudder, or could try brib 
ing a shipyard worker at Cenbreae. In either 
case, the rudder costs at least 25,000 gp, not 
including the bribe. 


of Propulsion 
XP Value: 600 GP Value: 3,000 
War Captain Companion 

This magical rudder is a specialized item devel- 
oped by the Kara-Tur empire of Wa to propel 
their tiny Locust ships. The item is able to propel 
ships greater than 1,000 pounds ( ton) and less 
than 4,000 pounds (two tons), whether in water, 
wildspace, or the phlogixton. This item gives the 
craft an MC of A and an SR of 6 (it is unknown 
whether the rudder will work on a ship con- 
structed of any material other than “thin wood") 
The rudder looks like a normal rudder one would 
sce on a small oriental rivercrafi. The rudder cre- 
ales a small gravitational force behind the ship, 
pushing it forward 

There are limitations to the item, however, It 
saves vs. fire at A. Further, it has insufficient 
power to escape the gravity well of a planetary 
body larger than Class A. If the pilot desired, he 
or she could land on such a planet. or continually 
fly about at any altitude desired. The ship could 
not leave the atmosphere, however, without out- 


side help (though another spelljamming ship 
could carry the vessel out of the gravity well of 
the planet) 

The rudder costs an average of 3,000 gp, 
assuming someone can find a citizen willing to 
risk dying for treason to part with it. 


of Propulsion II 
XP Value: 600 GP Value: 3,000 
Realmspace 

This item is used strictly by the Kara-Tur Empire 
of Wa to propel the tiny gun ships they call 
locusts, A rudder of propulsion gives these spell- 
jamming ships a mancuverability class of A and a 
speed of 6 

The rudder looks just like a normal rudder one 
would expect to see on any watercraft found in the 
east. It creates a force of +1 Gees behind the rud- 
der, pushing the ship away from the gravitational 
excess and suppling the propulsion it requires 

There are limitations to the rudder, however. It 
gets absolutely no saving throw vs, fire. This is a 
dangerous side effect, which makes manning the 
locusts, or any other ship these rudders are 
attached to, somewhat hazardous. The item is 
able to propel a ship smaller than two tons and 
larger than 4 ton, whether in water, phlogiston, or 
wildspace. The rudder propels a ship through the 
phlogiston at spelljamming speeds as well. The 
item does not have power sufficient to allow it to 
escape the gravity well of a planetary body 
greater than size A, because these bodies have a 
gravitational force of | Gee, while the rudder 
produces an equal force for propulsion. These 
two forces cancel each other out. This does not 
mean that the ship would fall to the planet. invok- 
ing instant death at the end of the fall. There 
would be an equal balance between the two, 
which would make the ship levitate. If the pilot 
desired, he or she could land on such a planet, or 
continually fly about at any altitude desired. The 
only problem is that the ship attached to the rud- 
der could never leave the planet without outside 
help, nor could it cver fly upward, The only pos- 
sible flight directions would be down or side- 
ways. If more than one rudder is attached to any 
one ship without a spelljamming helm, every pair 
cancels each other out. If an odd number of rud- 
ders are used, the unpaired rudder supplies the 
standard power. If a rudder is bolted to a ship 
with a spelljamming helm, there are a number of 


side effects. The magic in the helm, not being 
4400 


Rutterkin Snap- Tong 7 


sympathetic with the magic in the rudder, causes 


one of the follow ing eflects to occur 


Roll Result 

01-10 The helmsman suffers spelljammer 
shock 

11-50 The helm works at —1 SR for every rud- 
der on board, to a minimum of 0, until 
the rudders are removed, 

51-60 The rudders explode, inflicting 1d4 
points of damage to all within 20 feet. 

61-65 The ship moves straight ahead at an SR 
of 30, Nothing can stop it until the rud 
ders are removed. Once removed, they 
lose their magic 

66-80 The gravity plane of the ship is reversed 
for 1d10 segments. Then the magic of the 
rudders dispels, rendering them useless 

81-98 The helm simply does not function until 
the rudders are removed 

99-00 The helm melts, the wizard suffering 
dio points of heat damage. The helm 
is forever useless. The rudders still 
function 


of Speed 
XP Value GP Value 
+1: 2,000 10,000 
+2: 4,000 20.000 
+3; 8.000 40.000 
Cursed —1; 1,000 5.000 


War Captains Companion 
This item grants a vessel a bonus to its Ship's 
Rating (SR). The chart below shows the ranges 


Roll SR Bonus 


01-08 +1 
09-14 +2 
15-18 H3 


19-20 Cursed =I 


Rutterkin Snap-Tong 

XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
Mes Outer Planes Appendix 
The least tanar'ri, rutterkins, use a snap-tong 
device that inflicts 2d4 points upon hitting and 
then continues to inflict like damage each round 
until the opponent breaks free by scoring a hit on 
the weapon (AC 5). The weapon weighs five 
pounds, is Size M, has a Speed Factor of 8, and 
causes 244/144 points damage. The weapon gains 
a +2 on the attack roll 


1048 f 


Saddle 

A saddle is used to help secure a rider or 
cargo onto a mount or pack animal. The saddle 
has evolved through many changes in design. 
The basic saddle includes a frame (the trec), a 
front (the pommel), and a back (the cantle). 
Elven saddles are often made of wood and pli- 
able, fibrous plants. Halfling saddles are soft 
and well cushioned, while gnomish versions are 
painted and decorated with thin layers of gold, 
silver, or semiprecious gems. Ores and goblins 
use saddles that are quite small, with fairly dis- 
tinct pommels and nearly invisible cantles. 
Saddle use is assumed in the land-based riding 
proficiency unless the character is specifically 
from a culture proficient in riding bareback. 
Other characters who try to ride without a 
saddle are subject to special riding checks at the 
Dungeon Master's discretion. 


Roll Saddle Type 
01-20 Howdah 
21-40 packsaddle 
41-60  Pillion 
6l-80 Saddle 
81-00 War Saddle 
of Flying 
XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 20,000 
Tome of Magic 


This saddle resembles a normal leather saddle 
with a small, silver buckle near the pommel. 
When the saddle is secured to a horse or any 
other nonmagical mount and the silver buckle is 
fastened, the mount sprouts wings and acquires 
the ability to fly at its normal movement rate 
(Maneuverability Class D). The flying mount can 
carry its normal encumbrance. 

A saddle of flying functions for only one 
hour per day. When the silver buckle is unfas- 
tened or the duration expires, the wings disap- 
pear and all flying ability is immediately lost, 
regardless of whether the mount is airborne or 
on the ground. 


of Secure Riding 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
DraGoN Magazine 73 
A horse’s saddle, This saddle will never fall off a 
horse, even if the straps are undone and the rider 
is inexperienced, 


we 


A 
EPIA ee SY 


Saddle of the Spirit Hourse 


of the Spirit Horse 


XP Value: 1,200 GP Value: 6,000 

The Complete Fighters Handbook 
This is a very strange magical item which may 
only be used by warriors (either single class, mul- 
ticlass, or dualclass), To all appearances, it is an 
ordinary, worn leather saddle of good quality. 
However, it is a magical item. If worn by a single 
horse, it attunes itself to that horse when worn for 
three days. (It doesn’t have to be worn continu- 
ously for 72 hours—just worn as an ordinary 
saddle is.) 

Once it is attuned to the horse, nothing remark- 
able happens—unless the horse dies while wear- 
ing the saddle. If it does, the spirit of the horse 
stays with the saddle for another 24 hours. Half 
an hour after the horse dies, the spirit of the horse 
will “awaken,” climb to its unseen feet, and pre- 
pare to carry its master wherever he or she wants 
to go. The ghost horse continues to wear the 
saddle and to carry it around—and the horse's 
master or other favorite riders may ride it during 
that time. 

For the next 24 hours, the ghost horse will tire- 


lessly carry its rider wherever he wants to go, at 
4595 


z 1049 ? 


.. ͤͤ 


Saddle of Stubility 


— — A TE E N 


the full running speed the horse could manage 
when it was alive. But it’s a spooky sight: The 
saddle floats tn the air, 4 or $ feet up (at the 
height the living horse carried it); the rider must 
mount normally, treat the horse normally, and 
pretend that the animal is all is as it ever was. 

Other than running, the horse spirit has no 
unusual abilities. It cannot be seen or touched. It 
can whinny and neigh, and it can buck though 
only the saddle is seen to buck in the air. It cannot 
truly fly; when it comes to a ravine, for instance, 
it must descend to the bottom and climb the other 
slope as it would have had to do if it were alive. 

This frightens living horses. No normal horse 
will approach the animated saddle within 100 
feet. For this reason, it is best used when a char- 
acter is alone and whose horse has died. 

If a character kills his horse to get 24 hours of 
fast, tireless service, the ghost horse will remem- 
ber this and be offended by ii even if the char- 
acter did it secretly, by poison or long-distance 
magic, the horse will know it. It will allow the 
character to mount the floating saddle, and 
behave normally for a while, but at some cata- 
strophic time, it will try to kill the character. It 
may jump off a cliff, or ride straight hack at the 
enemy the rider is trying to elude, or buck the 
miscreant into a pit of snakes. 

These saddles may also be made for donkeys, 
camels, or any other ground animals. They don't 
work with pegasi, griffons, or other flying beasts. 


of Stability 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
DRAGON Magazine 73 
This saddle enables even a novice rider to remain 
on a speeding horse, provided the rider is in con- 
trol of his or her own faculties. 


of Taming 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 10,000 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 82 

This saddle appears to be an ordinary horse 
saddle. However, it will fit most four-legged 
mounts, including rhinoceros, hippogriffs and 
pegasi. Its magic is revealed when it is placed on 
a wild or untamed animal, The animal is immedi- 
ately tamed and will respond to the rider's com- 
mands as long as the saddle remains on it. If the 
saddle is removed, the mount reverts to its origi- 
nal temperament. 


Torloch’s Saddle of Comforts 

XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 20,000 
Dragon Dawn 

Most dragon knights use saddles for a comfort- 

able ride on their mounts. Torloch & saddle, how- 

ever, was created to case the rigors of long 

cross-country journeys on dragon-back. Its scat 

and safety straps offer a pleasant, secure ride, but 

its main attractions are the various pouches and 

what is concealed within them. 

A saddle of comforts contains the following 
items in its pouches. Each may be used and 
replaced, then used again after at least 24 hours 
have passed. If the original item is not returned to 
its pouch within 24 hours, it loses its dweomer 
and no other magical item appears to take its 
place. There is a 30% chance for any saddle that 
is found to be missing Id of its items. 

* Potion of dragon sight 

* Decanter of endless water 

* Cloak of warmth 

+ Potion of fire resistance 

* Rope of climbing 

+ Tent of shelter 

+ Serpentine owl (a figurine of wondrous power) 

+ Harn of fog 

Pouch of food 

+ Iridescent spindle ioun stone (sustains without 
air), 

Most of the above items are self-explanatory, 
The ioun stone is used when facing hostile 
dragons with breath weapons; the potion of fire 
resistance is similarly useful, The horn of fog is 
used for concealment. 


Sail 

Sails are large pieces of shaped, sturdy cloth that 
are strung onto the masts of a ship ora 
spelljammer. As the wind blows, the sail bellows, 
fills with air, and forces the vessel in the direction 
of the wind. By manipulating the sail relative to 
the wind, and by working the ship’s rudder or 
steering oar, the vessel can travel in nearly any 
direction, 


Roll Sail Type 


01-08 Forecourse 
09-15 Foresail 
16-23 Gaffsail 
24-31 Jib 

32-38 Lover topsail 
39-46 Maincourse 


4598 


= 1050 7 


0 Se SSE CCC eS SS 


x Sail of Mancuverability 


47-54 Mainsail 
$5562 Royal 
63-69 Skysail 
70-77 Spanker 
78-85  Staysail 


93-00 Upper topsail 


74 


Black Sail of Schnai 


XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 

Grevnawx Adventures 
Enchanted in the land of Snow Barbarians and 
blessed by shamans of their barbaric gods, these 
square sails are hoisted only on the funeral ships 
of great barbarian heroes and lords. The 
deceased warrior's body is burned along with 
the ship and all but a small piece of the sail. 
Afterwards, the character's spirit can be called 
on by the tribal chiefs in time of battle by burn- 
ing the remainder of the sail, The spirit appears 
gs a spectral cinheriar (spirit warrior) and fights 
on the side of the tribe until destroyed. The ein- 
heriar will usually have 4 to 12 Hit Dice and 
require +1 weapons to hit. They will bear the 
equipment they used in life. Such creatures can 
be turned as special undead. It is reported that 
several villages have up to 10 of these spirit 
warriors on call. 


Invisible 
XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 10,000 
Krynnspace 
Invisible sails come in many shapes and sizes, as 
are required for the variety of spelljamming 
galleons and other ships that use sails. These sails 
simply cannot be scen—they have no other magi- 
cal properties, The sails are in great demand by 
gnomes and pirates the former because the 
gnomes like the idea of having invisible sails, and 
the latter because the pirates can make their ves- 
sels appear to be unable to move. 


of Maneuverability 
XP Value GP Value 
+1: 1,000 6,000 
+2: 2,000 12,000 
+3: 4,000 24,000 
Cursed: 3.000 
Realmspace 


These sails are made of the same material that 
cloaks of protection are tailored from. When they 
are stretched across the rigging. they allow a ship 
to perform as though it were one maneuvering 
class better than it actually is. There are, however, 
four different kinds of sails of maneuverability, 
Each one has a different MR bonus to it, rated at 
+ 1, +2, +3, and the cursed -I. The price of each 
is listed in the following chart. 


Plus Cost 
+1 10,000 gp 
+2 20,000 gp 
+3 40,000 gp 
-l 5,000 gp 


The cursed sails are usually the result of a 
failed enchantment, so they do not register as a 
purposely cursed or evil item. When more than 
one set of sails is used on a single ship, the ship 
moves at the maneuverability bonus of the high- 
est magical sail. In other words, if one ship had 
both a + 1 and a +2 sail, it would have a MR 
bonus of +2. The bonus from the sails is never 
added together, Whenever required to make a 
saving throw, these sails save as cloth with the 
MR bonus added to the roll. 


1051 `> | 
4 ³˙ꝛiꝛ ðUͤſ 


Salve of Far Seeing 


pr ee t ³˙ A] wü q 


Salve 
Salves are thick liquids that must be rubbed or 
dripped into the skin, ears, or eyes to activate 
their magical properties, If a salve is imbibed, the 
magic is wasted. See also Ointment and Oil. 


of Far Seeing 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
Tome of Magic 

These salves allow a character who puts a drop of 
it into cach eye to sce as well as if it were a 
brightly lit day on the Prime Material Plane. The 
proper salve also serves as a protection against 
blindness on planes where protection is neces- 
sary. Several types of salves exist for the different 
Elemental, Paraelemental, and Quasielemental 
Planes. The salves have no effect on blindness. 

The salves are found in small metal containers 
made of precious metals. A container contains 
4d12 drops of salve. One drop in each eye 
bestows the magical property for one day. A drop 
must be placed in every usable eye for the magic 
to work. 

A different salve exists for each of the planes 
where such a salve is required, and cach has a dis- 
tinct look and feel, The following table lists the 
planes that limit sight and the color and texture of 
each respective salve. The salves function only on 
their respective planes. 


Roll Plane Color Texture 
01-07 Water Blue Smooth 
08-14 Earth Black Grainy, Thick 
15-21 Positive White Opaque Liquid 
22-29 Negative Clear Liquid 
30-36 Smoke Ashen Liquid 
37-43 lee Lt. Blue Thick 
44-50 Ooze Gray Rubbery 
51-57 Magma Copper Thick 
58-64 Steam Gray Liquid 
65-71 Salt White Grainy 
72-79 Radiance Golden Smooth 
80-86 Ash Gray Grainy 
87-93 Minerals Silver Grainy 
94-00 Dust Black Dry 
of Healing 
XP Value: 200 GP Value: 400 


Gods, Demigods, & Heroes 
This healing salve needs but one application to 
heal all wounds. 


of Scar Removal 
XP Value: 300 GP Value: 500 
DRAGON Magazine 73 

A thick, creamy and oily concoction that may be 
found in virtually any type of container. Ifa 
quantity is used to cover a scar, within a few days 
the scar sloughs off and the skin is seen to be nor- 
mal, This is much sought after by the vain “upper 
crust,” and it is fairly common, because it is diffi- 
cult to avoid acquiring scars from childhood dis- 
eases or from the blades of armed adversaries. 


Salver of Growth 

XP Value: 400 GP Value: 1,200 
Dungeonland 
This serving tray bears strange runes. Read magic 
reveals the phrase “Eat Me,” and a loaf of bread is 
always on the salver. When at least a fist-sized 
amount of the loaf is eaten, the eater experiences 
a growth to 10 times normal size. This effect is 
permanent until a potion from the flagon of 
diminution is consumed or until dispel magic is 
cast. 


Sand of Truth 

XP Value: 900 GP Value: 2,700 
Assassin Mountain 
This coarse, blue-grey sand is a magical dust 
formed from the dusty remains of a slain sand- 
man. It can reveal illusions, geniework, false 
auras, and polymorphed or otherwise altered 
creatures—in short, it acts as a gem of seeing, 
but it physically returns things to true shape 
when thrown into the air or sprinkled on objects, 
rather than merely revealing them to a single 
viewer, Sand of truth can be applied to creatures 
or objects only once, and its enchantment fades 
after that, In combat, the wielder must make a 
successful attack against AC 10 to coat an 
unwilling target. 


Sargasso Detector 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 10,000 
Greyspace 
Another item based on breakthroughs of the sil- 
ver dragons of Edill, this device allows spelljam- 
mers to avoid the dangerous sargasso 
magic-free-zones that can be found in many crys- 
tal spheres. It is a complex device: a base of fine 
mahogany on which are set two circular bands of 
gold. The bands stand on edge on the mahogany 


base, intersecting each other at 90°, They are 10 
4610 


= , 


1052 


~ BL pi 


` Sash, Shimmering 


inches in diameter, l · inch wide, and . inch thick; 
and around their circumferences, tiny magical 
runes of great complexity have been engraved. 
The base on which they stand is rectangular, | 
foot long by | foot wide, and 2 inches thick. At 
each corner of the base, set vertically, is a thin 
spindle of a silver-gold alloy, about A. inch thick 
and 12 inches long. Hanging within the intersect- 
ing bands, from the upper point where they meet, 
is a platinum needle, suspended horizontally by a 
single human hair attached at its midpoint. The 
whole device weighs about 10 pounds. 

The detector can sense the presence of a sar- 
gasso at a range of one million miles. When it is 
within this range, the four alloy spindles vibrate 
rapidly, causing a soft, high-pitched hum. The 
suspended needle then rotates so it is pointing 
toward the sargasso, 

The detector gives no indication of the range to 
the sargasso. Neither the volume nor the pitch of 
the humming varies with distance. If the ship is 
heading directly toward the sargasso, then the nec- 
dle points directly toward the vessel's bow. If the 
ship is moving latcrally relative to the sargasso, 
however, the needle moves to remain pointing 
directly at it, From the speed with which the needle 
is moving and the speed of the vessel, it is possible 
to calculate the distance to the sargasso, 

The first sargasso detector was created 100 
years ago by the elven wizard Thalia, after a pro- 
tracted visit with the Edill silver dragons. Since 
then, many other wizards throughout the universe 
have learned how to replicate her cunning cre- 
ation. Nevertheless, the demand for these items is 
much greater than the supply. The smallest price 
a detector would fetch on the open market is 
10,000 gp, but depending on circumstance the 
price can be much higher, 


Sash 
A sash is a long piece of sloth used most often as 
a decorative belt. Often, however, swords or other 
relatively lightweight items can be suspended 
from a sash 


of Fire Resistance 
XP Value: 1,750 GP Value: 2,500 
A Dozen and One Adventures 
This red silk sash, elegantly brocaded with plat- 
inum thread, is made exclusively by the Brother- 
hood of the Truc Flame for use by ranking 
members of the order after reaching 9th level. 


Like its lesser cousin, this sash cannot be com- 
bined with heavy armor. 

Donning the sash confers complete immunity 
to normal fires and fire-based warding spells, 
like wall of fire and fire trap, In addition, the 
wearer takes half or no damage from offensive 
fire-based spells (such as burning hands, fireball, 
and sunfire) or attacks, as a ring of fire resis- 
tance. The sash imparts a +4 bonus on saving 
throws against such attacks. 


of Heat Endurance 
XP Value: 750 GP Value: 1,500 
A Dozen and One Adventures 

This red silk sash, elegantly brocaded with gold 
thread to depict writhing flames, is made by the 
Brotherhood of the True Flame for use by the 
lesser members of the order. It cannot be worn 
over armor heavier than leather (AC 8), though it 
can be combined with less bulky protective magi- 
cal items (such as bracers of defense and rings of 
protection) without ill effect. 

The sash imparts a +2 on saving throws vs. 
fire-related attacks and allows the wearer to with- 
stand the effects of small, normal fires (no larger 
than a lamp flame) without ill effect. The wearer 
is also comfortable in temperatures up to 130° F 
and does not suffer the ill effects of dehydration 
in the desert while the sash is worn, High temper- 
atures inflict | point of damage per degree in 
excess of 130° F for cach round the wearer 
remains in contact with the heat source. 


of Immolation 
XP Value: — GP Value: 1,000 
Mordenkainen's Fantastic Adventure 


Once wrapped around the waist, this sash 
explodes in a sheet of whirling flame about the 
wearer. This item causes a 1d10+20 points total 
damage and then “burns out,” falling to the 
ground in a stream of damp, black ash. 


Shimmering 

GP Value: 3,000 
Assassin Mountain 
This brightly-colored sash is always embroidered 
with layers of holy texts of protection and ward- 
ing. It allows the wearer to appear as a blur, often 
indistinguishable from the shimmering heat of 
the desert air. The effect is equal to a blur spell 
with a 10-round duration and can be called upon 
at will up to three times per day. 


XP Value: 600 


4l 


Saw of Cutting 


jy aa .. 


Saw 
These common tools usually consist of a metal 
blade with one or two jagged edges, mounted to a 
firm wooden handle. 


of Cutting 

XP Value: 700 GP Value: 7,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
When commanded to function, this item can cut 
through any normal (nonmagical) wood, iron, or 
stone, making a groove l- foot deep per turn. It 
functions only once a day, for up to one hour per 
use, 


of Mighty Cutting 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 12,500 

DUNGEON MASTER Guide 
This notched adamantite blade is 12 feet long and 
over a foot wide. It requires 18/00 or greater 
Strength to operate alone, or two people of 17 or 
greater Strength working in tandem. The blade 
will slice through a |-foot-diameter tree in three 
rounds, a 2-foot thick hardwood tree in one turn, 
or a 4-foot-thick trunk in three turns. After six 
turns (cumulative) of cutting with the saw, char- 
acters must rest for six turns before doing any 
further work. 


of Snoring 
XP Value: 200 GP Value: 2,000 
The Book of Murvelous Magic 

Whenever it is touched, this saw causes the user 
to snore very loudly when sleeping, This does not 
affect the victim directly, but all within 60 feet of 
the snoring must make a saving throw vs. death 
magic or have fitful sleep at best and suffer a —1 
penalty to attack and damage rolls for the next 12 
waking hours. In addition, snoring may attract 
monsters during the night. The snoring can be 
stopped if a remove curse is applied by a caster of 
at least | Sth-level. 


Scabbard 
A scabbard is a sheath for a bladed weapon, 
There are as many types of scabbards as there are 
bladed weapons. For additional possibilities, see 
Sheath. 


Roll = Scabbard Type 
01-20 _Dagger-sized Sheath 
21-30 False Scabbard* 


31-50 Long Sword Scabbard 
51-60 Secret Spring Sheath* 
61-80 Short Sword Scabbard 
81-00 Wrist Sheath 


yt 


97 
alll : 


of Holding 
XP Value GP Value 
Large: 1,000 5,000 
Small: 500 2,500 
The Complete Fighter's Handbook 


This item looks like an ordinary sheath fora 
large knife; the “sheath” is anywhere from 6 to 
10 inches long, including its belt loop. But it 
doesn't hold a knife. It holds a sword—a full- 
sized sword, With magic rather like that found 
in the bag of holding, this item slides most of 
the length of the blade into a pocket dimension, 
so that only the weapon's hilt shows, with the 
“sheath” suggesting another 5 inches or so of 
blade. (This looks rather strange when it holds a 
bastard sword, where the hilt is longer than the 
apparent blade, but a scabbard of holding can 
do it.) 

Each scabbard of holding is designed to hold 
one type of sword. The DM can decide which sort 
of sword it’s designed to hold, or can roll on the 
table below, The scabbard will not hold a sword it 


is not built to hold. 
4619 


nn ae — 


1054 


Scarab of Deception y 


Roll Scabbard Type 


01-40 Dagger. Roll on the Dagger random 
table. 

41-00 Sword. Roll on the Sword random 
table. 


Ignore any rolls which are not appropriate for 
your campaign setting; if you have no katanas, 
you don't need to accept any rolls for katana 
scabbards, This magical item can be used by any 
character class, but most end up in the hands of 
warriors and rogues, 


of Poison 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 5,000 
The Complete Thief Handbook 

These scabbards have reservoirs in which poi- 
sons can be stored. When a blade is placed in the 
scabbard and then drawn, the venom is automat- 
ically and magically drawn from the reservoir to 
coat the blade. The venom is wiped from the 
blade after one successful hit on a target, or it 
evaporates after 2d4 rounds. Any venom can be 
used, for the dweomer gives the venom viru- 
lence against whatever creature is struck. The 
scabbard holds enough poison for six doses, but 
must be manually refilled when empty. 25% of 
these scabbards are the right size for long 
swords, 25% suitable for short swords, and 50% 
for daggers. All restrictions which apply to the 
usc of poison weapons apply here, of course, 
and only evil characters would routinely use 
such a device. 


Scale of Weighing 
XP Value: 600 GP Value: 3,000 
Dracon Magazine 73 

This is a box about 12 by 12 by 2 inches overall. 
When a person steps onto it, numerals indicating 
the character's weight appear in the user's mind. 
Only the user can see the numbers; they do not 
appear on the box itself, 


Scarab 
A scarab is a piece of magical jewelry, frequently 
formed into a pin, but sometimes worn on a 
chain, around the neck. Scarabs were first 
designed in ancient Egypt after the form of the 
dung bectle. 


Benson's Scarab of 

Uncertain Friendship 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 

1992 Fantasy Collector Card 621 
When Benson became a druid, he went through a 
period of intense remorse for his former life as an 
animal trainer and circus performer, Self-recrimi- 
nation quickly turned him to a life as a vigilante, 
in which Benson hunted anyone who attempted to 
control animals in any way. A sympathetic wizard 
repaid Benson for saving her familiar by creating 
a scarab of uncertainty for him, but its nature was 
warped by Benson's intense aura: when anyone 
casts monster summoning or a similar spell, the 
scarab makes the creature turn on the caster 
rather than mistake Benson for the summoner. 


of Death 
XP Value: GP Value: 2,500 
Dunoon Master Guide 
This small pin appears to be any one of the vari- 
ous beneficial scarabs, However, if it is held for 
more than one round or placed within a soft con- 
tainer (a cloth bag or a pack), and within 10 feet 
of a warm, living body for one turn, it changes 
into a horrible burrowing beetlelike creature. The 
thing tears through leather and cloth, burrows 
into flesh, and reaches the victim's heart in a sin- 
gle round—causing death. It then returns its 
scarab form. (Placing the scarab in a container of 
hard wood, ceramic, bone, ivory, or metal pre- 
vents the monster from coming to life.) 


of 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 7,000 
Land of Fate 
This small brooch allows the owner to deceive 
divination magic and abilities (such as the 
hakima’s see the truth ability) of those attempting 
to gather information about the wearer. When the 
holder of this scarab is subjected to these effects, 
he or she ix aware of what divination spell or 
effect is being used (but not the identity or nature 
of the individual seeking the information). The 
scarab holder decides exactly what information is 
relayed back to the diviner (whether it is the truth 
or not). Each use expends a charge; the scarab 
has 1d6+8 charges. The scarab of deception and 
kingdoms of Nog and Kadar, and were apparently 


common there. 


4 


1055 


~ Scarab of Enraging Enemies r 


of Enraging Enemies 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 8,000 
Dungeon Master Guide 

When one of these devices is displayed and a 
command uttered, all intelligent, hostile creatures 
within a 40-foot radius must successfully save vs. 
spell or become enraged. Those whose saving 
throws succeed may perform normally; enraged 
enemics fly into a berserk fury and attack the 
nearest creature, even their own comrades (+1 
bonus to attack rolls, +2 bonus to damage, -3 to 
their own Armor Class). The rage lasts for 1d6+6 
rounds, and during this period, the enraged crea- 
tures attack continually, without reason or fear, 
moving on to attack other nearby creatures if ini- 
tial opponents are slain. A scarab of this type con- 
tains from 1d6+18 charges. 


Equus 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 8,000 
Duncron Magazine 22 

An equus is a magical picce of jewelry that, upon 
command, polymorphs into some form of a beast 
of burden. The word “equus” (plural “equi™) 
comes from an ancient language and has no lit- 
eral translation in the common tongue. The clos- 
ext translation is “beast of burden” or “horse,” but 
the word can be applied to anything that is used 
like a horse. Thus, an actual horse, mule, worg, 
camel, dogsled team, nightmare, or any other 
creature that can be ridden, used to pull a load, or 
carry goods can be termed an equus. Equi come 
in many different varieties, with the most com- 
mon listed below. While 80% of equi are cither 
good or neutrally aligned, 20% polymorph into 
evil creatures such as nightmares, worgs, and 
giant spiders. It is said that the death knight Shan 
Nikkoleth once possessed an equus that polymor- 
phed into gorgon form. 

This small figurine is carved of either onyx or 
jade in the likeness of the creature it becomes 
after polymorphing. It must be examined care- 
fully to discover the command word. The scarab 
cannot be worn on a chain or pinned to a garment 
but must be carried in a pocket or pouch like a 
coin of gem. 

Creature List: The DM may choose form of 
the creature into which the equus polymorphs 
from the following table. The jewelry form poly- 
morphs into one type of creature only, A DM who 
prefers to roll randomly should add the roll of 
ds to that of Id12 and consult the table below, 


but should use only a creature he or she feels 
comfortable with and is sure will not give the PC 
an unfair advantage in the campaign. Types of 
creatures can be added to or deleted from the list 
as the DM sees fit. Any of the following creatures 
that do not appear in ‘Table 49 of the PHB should 
be considered equal to a heavy horse in move- 
ment rate and encumbrance. 

If the equus is slain (reduced to 0 hit points or 
less) in creature form, the creature immediately 
reverts to jewelry form and cannot change into 
creature form again. Damage to the creature form 
of the equus can be healed magically by cure 
wounds spells. If the creature is allowed food and 
rest, it heals naturally at the rate of 1 hit point per 
day. However, the equus can neither heal itself 
nor be healed while in jewelry form. 


Roll Creature 

2 Unicorn: AC 2; MV 24; HD 4+4; hp 
28: THACO 15; #AT 3 (hooves and 
horn); Dmg 1d6/1d6/1d12; SA charge, 
+2 on attack rolls when attacking with 
horn, O penalty to opponents surprise 
rolls; SD teleport, immune to poison, 
charm, hold, and death spells; can sense 
approach of an enemy 240 yards dis- 
tant; makes all saving throws as 11th- 
level wizard; ML 14; AL CG, The 
unicorn’s Intelligence is 8-10 (14448). 
lt can be ridden only by female charac- 
ters; if a male character rolls the uni- 
corn, use the ultraheavy war horse 
(#20) instead. 

3 Giant stag: AC 7; MV 21; HD 5; hp 
30; THACO 15; #AT 1 (antlers) or 2 
(hooves); Dmg 4d4 or 1d4/1d4; ML 14; 
AL N. This creature’s Intelligence is 
4-7 (dag) 

+S Bull: AC 7; MV 15; HD 4; hp 24; 
THACO 15; AT 2 (horns); Dmg 
1d6/1d6; SA charge; ML 15; AL N. The 
bull has an Intelligence of 4-7 (1d4+3). 

6-8  Superheavy war horse: AC 6; MV 15; 

HD 4+4; hp 28; THACO 15; #AT 3 

(hooves and bite); Dmg 1d8/1d8/1d4; 

SD 30’ infravision, immunity to all 

hold and charm spells; ML 16; AL NG. 

This horse has an Intelligence of 7-12 

(1d6+6). 

Heavy war horse: AC 7; MV 15; HD 


4+4; hp 21; THACO 17; #AT 3 (hooves 
“a 


9-13 


ccc eee 


1056 


y Scarab of Life y 


and bite); Dmg 1d8/1d8/1d4; ML 15; 
AL N. This horse has an Intelligence of 
5-8 (1d4+4), 


14-16 Superheavy war horse (special): Same 
as above (roll of 6-8), though it has MV 
18, a 401b. bonus on its carrying capac- 
ity load limits, and no infravision. 

17-18 Camel: AC 7 MV 21; HD 3; hp 18; 


THACO 17; #AT 1 (bite); Dmg Ida: SA 
spitting; ML 14; AL N. This camel is of 
a more mellow disposition than its 
meaner cousins and has an Intelligence 
of 4-7 (1d4+3), 

19 Water buffalo: AC 7; MV 15; HD 5; 
hp 30; THACO 15; AAT 2 (horns); Dmg 
1d8/1d8; ML 16; AL N. This water buf- 
falo has an Intelligence of 4—7 (1d4+3). 

20 Ultraheavy war horse: AC 5; MV 24; 
HD 5+5; hp 35; THACO 15; #AT 3 
(hooves and bite); Dmg 148/1d8/1d4; 
SD 60(HD) infravision, immunity to 
poison and all hold and charm spells; 
ML. 18; AL LG. This special horse can 
understand but not speak the common 
tongue and can use animal friendship 
and pass without trace spells three 
times per day cach, locate animals or 
plants once per day, and water walk 
once per week. This horse has an Intel- 
ligence of 9-16 (1d8+8). 


of Golem Protection 
XP Value GP Value 
Any Golem: 1,250 6,250 
Clay: 500 2,500 
Flesh: 400 2,000 
Flesh/Clay/Wood: 900 4.500 
Iron: 800 4,000 
Stone: 600 3,000 


Dunanon Master Guide 

This magical pin enables its wearer to detect any 
golem within 60 feet, although the user must con- 
centrate in order for the detection to take place. 
Furthermore, the scarab enables its user to com- 
bat a golem, with hand-held or missile weapons, 
as if it were a normal monster with no special 
defenses. Each scarab produces this effect with 
regard to a different golem. Roll percentile dice 
and consult the table below: 


Type of Golem 
Roll Affected by Scarab 
01-30 Flesh 
31-55 Clay 
56 75 Stone 
76-85 Iron 
86-95 Flesh, Clay, Wood 
96-00 Any Golem 
of Insanity 


XP Value; 1,500 GP Value; 11,000 
DUNOLON Masten Guide 

This item is indistinguishable from any other 
scarab, When displayed and a command word is 
spoken, all other creatures within a 20-foot radius 
must save vs. spell with a -A penalty (and a 10% 
penalty to any magic resistance too). Those that fail 
to save are utterly insane for 1d4+8 rounds, unable 
to cast spells or use reasoning of any sort (treat as a 
confusion spell with no chance for acting in a non- 
confused manner), The scarab has 1d8+8 charges. 


XP Value: 3,000 


GP Value: 15,000 
Old Empires 
This is a jeweled beetle inset on an ankh. When 
worn on the brow of a priest, it allows the casting 


of cure critical wounds, once per day, and raise 
4638 


1057 


— ee 


~ Scurub. Mark's Scarab of Protection 


dead once per week. Any use of this item has a 
10% chance of rendering it inoperative; com- 
mand words are necessary to use either function, 


Mark’s Scarab of Protection 

XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 15,000 
1993 Collector Card 408 
Mark’s scarab protects him just as a normal 
scarab of protection would, except that it was 
once cursed, A powerful priest removed the curse 
for Mark, so it now provides a + saving throw 
bonus vs, spell, allows a saving throw against 
magic when that is normally not applicable, and it 
can absorb 24 levels of draining attacks. It has 
already saved Mark against such potent draining 
attacks twice—once against a vampire, and once 
against a wight. 


Mazrikoth’s Scarab of Death 

XP Value: — GP Value: 2,500 

1992 Fantasy Collector Card 151 
Since he is already dead, Mazrikoth has nothing 
to fear, wearing this ornate brooch. To him it is a 
bauble, a thing to wear to official occasions 
(especially because his lord, Azalin, gave it to 
him), Mazrikoth also wears it when delivering the 
edicts of his lord to the people of Darkon, Those 
who defy or challenge him are held terror- 
stricken by his ghastly gaze and painful, icy grip 
on their shoulders. Meanwhile, the scarab crawls 
down his arm and on to the body of his victim, 
where it burrows into the nearest arca of exposed 
flesh and then eats its way to the heart. 


Mortos’s Golem Scarab 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
1993 Collector Card 409 

Mortos s golem scarab allows Mortos to know 
whenever there is a stone golem anywhere within 
60 feet of him, As well, Mortos can engage in 
combat with a stone golem as if it were a normal 
creature without special magical defenses. In 
addition, Mortos can use the scarab to assume the 
form of a stone statue once per week, remaining 
in statue form for a maximum of 24 hours. 


of Pest Protection 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
Dracon Magazine 73 
This is a small black scarab. Anyone carrying it 
cannot be bitten or stung by common insect, 


of Protection 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 8,000 
DUNGEONS & Dracons Expert Rules Set 
This item automatically absorbs any curse 
(whether by spell, scroll, or other effect), It also 
absorbs the wizard spell finger of death (the 
reverse of the raise dead spell). The scarab has 
2d6 uses before becoming worthless. 


of Protection II 


XP Value GP Value 
+1: 1,000 5,000 
+2: 2,000 10,000 
Cursed -I: — 1,000 


DUNGEON Master Guide 
This device appears to be any magical scarab. It 
gives off a faint magical aura, however, and if it is 
held for one round, an inscription appears on its 
surface letting the holder know it is a protective 
device. 

The owner gains a +1 bonus to all saving 
throws vs. spell. If no save is normally possible, 
this scarab allows a one in 20 chance of saving, 
adjusted by any other magical protections that 
normally give bonuses to saving throws. Thus, 
this device allows a saving throw vs. spell at base 
20 against magic missile attacks, for example, If 
the target also has a +4 bonus for magical armor 
and a +1 bonus for a ring of protection, any toll 
of 15 or better would indicate that the missiles 
did no damage. 

The scarab can also absorb up to 12 level-drain- 
ing attacks (two level drains count as two absorp- 
tions), death touches, death rays, or fingers of 
death. However, after absorbing 12 such attacks 
the scarab turns to powder—totally useless. 

One in 20 of these scarabs is cursed, giving the 
owner a —2 penalty to his or her dice, However, 
one in five of these cursed items becomes a +2 
scarab if the curse is removed by a wizard of 
16th-level or higher, In this case, the scarab has 
absorption capability of 24 rather than 12. 


of Uncertainty 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
Tome of Magic 

This scarab has a specific and potentially power- 
ful effect. If the wearer is within range of a mon- 
ster summoning or similar spell (invisible stalker, 
conjure animals) when cast by another creature 
or character, the summoned creatures make a sav- 
ing throw vs. spell the instant they appear. If the 

ota 


ERC 


1058 


rr ˙’wm.. r ð?m³·Üũ0ꝛ· · mtm.wwmj.§ <= ££; 


Scarf, Rainbow Scarf of Sinbad 


— 4 


summoned creatures fail the saving throw, they 
mistakenly believe that the wearer of the scarab is 
the individual who summoned them and serve the 
wearer as best they can, rather than the caster of 
the spell, 


of Venom 
XP Value; 2,000 GP Value: 10,000 
Old Empires 
This is a scarab-shaped gem, much favored by 
warriors in the service of Set, When placed on the 
hilt of their swords, it coats their blades with poi- 
son, up to twice per day (wielder decides when). 
This poison causes an extra 3d4 points of damage 
immediately (no saving throw), and the victim 
must also roll a successful saving throw vs. poi- 
son or die in 1d4 rounds. This poison lasts 1d4 
rounds on the blade, then evaporates, 


Scarf 
A scarf is a knitted or cloth garment that is worn 
around the neck or over the head. Most scarves 
are designed to be wrapped into several layers to 
keep out the chills. Lightweight scarves provide 
colorful decoration and can help keep the wearer's 
hair from getting tangled or windblown. 


of the Dry Steppes 

XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 12,500 
GREYHAWK Adventures 

This brown garment was enchanted by an evil 
wizard who used it against the dervishes of the 
Dry Steppes. Though the dervishes eventually 
caught and imprisoned the wizard, they never 
found the item, and so it disappeared into the 
wasteland, possibly into the hands of the nomads 
or tribesmen who frequent the land. 

Once a week the scarf allows a wizard to sum- 
mon | d4 invisible stalkers, The summoner must 
save vs. spell to control the creatures, at -& if good- 
aligned and at +2 if evil-aligned. If the saving throw 
fails, then the stalkers attack, if the summoner is 
good; Otherwise, they depart. If the saving throw is 
successful, the wizard can command a service that 
can be carried out within 200 miles. 


Rainbow Scarf of Sinbad 
XP Value: — GP Value: 
DUNGEONS & Dancons Master Set 
The success of the famous adventurer Sinbad the 
Sailor (whose whereabouts and even existence 
are now dubious) is said to have been caused by 
this simple item of apparel, Especially made to 
aid the Epic Hero on his way to Immortality, this 
device must be worn at all times. It may bring 
luck and intelligence, but will bring hazardous 
adventure as well if even a tenth of the legends of 
Sinbad are truc. 

This is a silk scarf, 2 fect square, decorated in 
swirls of rainbow colors. 

The artifact is not active when acquired, If it is 
worn while the user travels by sca, the powers of 
the scarf may be read in passing sea mists, by 
using both read magic and detect invisible spells, 
at the maximum rate of one power an hour. 

Any power revealed can be produced by 
thought alone, without uttering any command 
words, However, the Intelligence 18 power is pro- 
duced automatically whenever the open locks is 
called forth unless the user specifies otherwise. 

Suggested Powers: 

* Cause Fear 

* Bless 

* Container, 1,000 pounds; Duration six hours 
Open Locks (75% success) 

* Saving Throw bonus (+2 bonus) 

* Intelligence bonus (Increase to 18) 

Suggested Handicap: When the item is first 
used, the user's Wisdom drops by 4 points. 


464) 


1059 


~ Scepter, Mast r 


Suggested Penalty: Ida hostile monsters of 
some type magically appear within 30 feet of the 
user, Select or randomly determine any monster 
from one to 12 Hit Dice. 


Scepter 
A scepter is a rod or wand of metal or rare wood; 
most scepters are engraved and gem-studded, A 
scepter is usually an emblem of imperial puis- 
sance and authority, making its use or possession 
highly illegal in many societies. (The Dungeon 
Master has final say regarding scepter use and 
possession in these countries.) 


Blast 
XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 45,000 
The Ruins of Undermountain 

These rare, ancient devices are some of the more 
unpleasant legacies of lost Netheril, the realm of 
sorcerers whose glory was swallowed by the 
Great Desert long ago. Most take the form of 
wand-sized metal rods with ornamented knobs at 
both ends, Netherese blast scepters are usable by 
all intelligent beings able to hold one, and use 
charges, typically Sd12 charges when found. Few 
wizards in the Realms today know how to 
recharge them, 

They are controlled by the silent will of the 
bearer. If two beings grasp a scepter at once, it 
does not function at all until only one being is 
touching it again. Learning to wield a scepter 
takes onc turn per power, but a single power just 
seen in operation can be activated in 1d4+1 
rounds, A blast scepter can: 

* Absorb heat attacks and natural and magical 
lightning without any harm to the bearer (no 
charge cost). 

* Automatically reflect the blast force of explo- 

sions away from the bearer. This prevents the 

bearer from being knocked over or otherwise 
moved by the blast, but docs not shield against 
missiles and debris (no charge cost), The pow- 
ers above, used in combination, enable the 
bearer to suffer only flame damage from a fire- 
ball by absorbing both heat and blast effects. 

The damage dealt by a fireball is therefore 

halved, even before any saving throws apply. 

Stun opponents by touch, a successful attack 

roll required, This attack deals Ida damage to 

victims and stuns (as a power word stun spell ) 

a victim for 1d4+1 rounds (save vs. spell at —4 

to avoid the stun effect). This can be done only 


once per round (cost: one charge). 

* Blast opponents with a soundless shock wave 
once per round. This is a cone extending up to 
30 feet long, and 20 feet wide at its furthest 
extent, Creatures within the conical area of 
effect suffer 2d6 damage (no save), and must 
make a successful saving throw vs. spell or be 
knocked off their feet, If this occurs, target 
spellcasting is ruined, and fragile items held or 
carried must make successful saving throw v£ 
falling damage (cost; two charges). 

* Powerstrike any one opponent once a day. 
This drains four charges, and can only occur 
when the scepter is touching an opponent. 
After a successful attack roll is made, the 
scepter wielder can decide to forego the Id 
damage and stunning, and instead power- 
strike for Sd damage. Targets are allowed a 
saving throw vs. spell for half damage, 
Golems are utterly destroyed by a successful 
powerstrike; using a powerstrike against a 
golem drains an additional 1d4 charges from 
the item, The Netherese blast scepter is 
reputed to be the predecessor to the more 
common rod of smiting. 


of Defense 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 4,000 
Dravon Magazine 86 

The scepter of defense is a rodlike instrument 
about 3 feet long, with a handgrip on one end. It 
may be used by all fighter classes, wizards, 
druids, thieves, and monks as a parrying device, 
When its user is in combat against a human, 
demihuman, or humanoid opponent, the scepter 
may be wielded to cause all attacks against the 
user to be made at a —4 penalty to hit. The scepter 
can parry two attacks in one melee round, regard- 
less of the user's level, so long as the attacks 
come from the user's front and sides. Attacks 
made from the rear cannot be parried. The scepter 
is useless as a parrying implement against nonhu- 
manoid creatures like dragons or black puddings, 
against blows from humanoid creatures larger 
than an ogre, and against attacks from creatures 
using weaponless combat (such as ogrillons, 
trolls, or wrestlers), 

The user's Strength bonus to hit (if any) may be 
subtracted from an opponent's chance to hit the 
scepter’s wielder, No sort of attack can be made 
in the same round that the scepter is used as a 
parrying device. The scepter functions as a club 

3 


: 1060 


1 wo Faiy o 79 
ive” : FN 2 2 
NSA 
y & 


Re 
15 
ar 


nay 
ke 


2 
. a 
hs 2 " 
21 x4 N 
* 


oe TS 


~ Scepter, Jade Scepter of Defending 7 


+/ if used offensively. And, so long as it is car- 
ried, it confers a +1 bonus to the holder's saving 
throw vs. all magical effects. This bonus is cumu- 
lative with other saving throw bonuses, as a ring 
of protection. 


Entrapment 

XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 45,000 
The Ruins of Undermountain 
These very old, rare foot-long brass scepters were 
made in long-ago Netheril, but the secrets of their 
creation are unknown today, Such scepters have 
only 3d6 charges when found or created. Each 
charge fires a translucent bubble of force at any 
single target within 90 feet of the wielder and 
within the caster’s line of sight when the scepter 
is activated. The caster’s normal THACO is used 
for the force attack, with no magical or Dexterity 
adjustments. If the bubble misses, it explodes in a 
harmless glow and a puff of smoke (which lasts 
only | round). 

If it strikes a creature, the bubble does no dam- 
age, but expands to entrap the target creature in a 
translucent bubble of foree. Air and moisture can 
pass through the bubble (thus, bubbles directed 
under water can be used to drown nonwater- 
breathing occupants). An attack against the bub- 
ble (from within or without) will fail unless it 
uses the same magic able to bring down a wall of 
force (disintegrate spells, a sphere of annihila- 
tion, or a rod of cancellation), This bubble can 
trap any creature, including undead, constructs, 
and creatures of otherplanar existences, though it 
only entraps one target at a time. 

A scepter of entrapment can only be linked to 
one bubble at a time; firing a new one automati- 
cally destroys the existing one. A scepter can 
move a bubble it has created, when the scepter is 
grasped and willed to do so. To exercise this con- 
trol, the bubble must be within 200 feet of the 
scepter, The bubble normally moves by levitation 
and flight with a MV rate of 15, at the scepter 
wielder’s direction, The bubble can also be willed 
to roll at a MV of 9, though this might be very 
upsetting for the entrapped creature! The bubble 
remains immobile whenever no concentration is 
spared for it. Bubbles can be also be moved about 
by strong winds, nets, and other artificial means, 
water currents, and so on. Noises (including 
speech) made by trapped creature can be heard 
outside the bubble; the trapped creature can cast 
spells, although these cannot take effect outside 


the bubble unless they are able to destroy the bub- 
ble in the process. 

Bubbles created by this scepter last for 6d20 
hours, or until the scepter-wielder wills them to 
collapse. A collapsing bubble does not itself 
injure the imprisoned creature; the trapped being 
can come to no harm except through drowning 
(as previously described) or starvation while in 
the bubble. However, if a bubble is destroyed in 
situations perilous to the trapped creature, such as 
high above a cliff or within the stomach of a pur- 
ple worm, the damage normally done by the sur- 
roundings applies. 


of the Forgotten City 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,500 
GrevHawk Adventures 

A relic of a lost civilization, this wand-like 
scepter is a 2-foot shaft of silver with a large red 
gem at its tip. It was used by some of the origi- 
nal lords of the Suel Imperium, and when that 
kingdom was burned into the Sea of Dust, the 
scepter was lost. A recent expedition from Yeo- 
manry rediscovered it, and those explorers 
claimed that it came from the Forgotten City 
itself. Whether or not that claim is true, the 
scepter certainly contains some of the greatness 
that built the lost empire, and much of the mad- 
ness that destroyed it. 

When the command word is spoken, the 
holder of the scepter reccives a bonus of 2 Wis- 
dom points and 4 Charisma points (to racial 
maximums) for 1d6+4 days. He or she must 
then make a successful saving throw vs. spell or 
become confused until a remove curse is 
received; this also removes the beneficial effects 
of the scepter. The scepter has 2d4+3 charges, 
Each use costs one charge, and the scepter can- 
not be recharged. A character who attempts to 
use the scepter more than once per week must 
save vs, spell or lose 4 Intelligence points per- 
manently, and then must make a successful sys- 
tem shock survival check or die. 


Jade Scepter of Defending 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 10,000 
Gods, Demigods, & Heroes 
This device will defend the user from any number 
of material weapons, not permitting any to strike 
its master. Once possessed, the user can only be 
injured by magic or magic weapons, 


4652 


1062 7 


Jade Scepter of Defending I 


XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 10,000 
Legends & Lore 

This huge scepter is made of white jade and 
constantly glows as if a continual light spell had 
been placed on it. It can be used like a mace +3 
that inflicts 1d6 points of damage (plus its 
magic bonus). It never needs to make a saving 
throw against any destructive force short of that 
delivered by a god. The scepter’s most useful 
property, however, is that it prevents any non- 
magical weapon from striking the holder for as 
long as he or she concentrates on not being hit. 
The holder may do nothing else while concen- 
trating, and the jade scepter cannot defend the 
holder from any attack inflicted by magic or 
magic weapons. 

A Charisma of at least 18 is required to wield 
the jade scepter. Any being with a Charisma 
below 18 who tries to lift the scepter loses a point 
of Constitution. 


Life 
XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 15,000 
Gods, Demigods, & Heroes 

The primary power of this scepter is the ability to 
make the being holding it unkillable. It acts like 
the magic jar spell but it holds the hit points of 
the being. The holder can be hacked forever with 
no harm because whenever he or she can restore 
hit points at will. It is made out of a pulpy wood 
material and is casily affected by anything that 
affects wood. Destroying it destroys the user 


of Light 
XP Value: 1,500 GP Value: 6,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

This scepter appears and functions as a scepter 
of power in all respects. However, it sheds light 
in a 60-foot radius—the light cannot be dimmed 
by any means, including darkness spells or 
effects. The light attracts all undead within 240 
feet of the scepter, who attack and try to destroy 
the wizard wielding the scepter. The undead 
may be turned normally. They ignore others 
unless attacked, but respond with fury if inter- 
fered with (+1 bonus to attack rolls against all 
except the wizard wiclding the scepter). If the 
undead slay the wizard and then touch the 
scepter, the light disappears and the scepter 
becomes nonmagical. 


Milenian 
XP Value: — GP Value: — 
The Milenian Scepter 
The scepter has 380 Power Points with a 
recharge rate of 20 per turn. (See the DAD 
Rules Cyclopedia). 

Long ago, when the Milenians were whisked 
from the surface of the Known World into the 
Hollow World, the Immortal Halav created the 
Milenian scepter to help them rebuild their 
Empire. It passed from Emperor to Emperor for 
many generations. However, when the scepter 
came into the possession of Emperor Olynthos, 
he used it for evil deeds, and was cursed to be the 
artifact’s undying guardian, Olynthos and the 
scepter disappeared, and were believed lost for- 
ever. In truth, the scepter rests within a forgotten 
crypt bencath the Acropolis, waiting for someone 
worthy cnough to defeat its guardian. 

The scepter is made of iron and is 2 feet long. 
Glowing runes are ctched into it, and it is set with 
a variety of glittering gemstones 

Powers: The following powers may be used 
the wielder of the Milenian scepter: 

Cause Critical Wounds (35 PP), touch only. 
Detect Lie (50 PP). 

* Mind Barrier (80 PP). 

* Protection from Evil (10 PP), 

Raise Dead Fully (85 PP). 

* Remove Geas (45 PP) 

Victory (75 PP), +25 to War Machine Combat 
Results Roll (D&D Rules Cyclopedia); loss 
results on CRT limited to 91-100 results. 

Any character of any Chaotic alignment who 
attempts to use the scepter’s powers dies immedi- 
ately with no saving throw. The wielder of the 
scepter suffers from weak magic; spells cast by him 
inflict less damage (—2 per die rolled) and are more 
easily resisted (+2 to the target's saving throws), 
The user also suffers a 2 penalty to all attack rolls. 

Each time an attempt is made to use any of the 
scepter’s powers, there exists a 20% chance of the 
wiclder fumbling and dropping it to the ground, 
negating the attempt to use the power, Whenever 
the cause critical wounds power is used, there is a 
25% chance it has the opposite effect, acting like 
a cure critical wounds spell instead. Each time 
the raise dead power is used, there is a 75% 
chance the by wielder ages Ido years, While the 
mind barrier is in effect, there is a 70% chance 
the user suffers an extra Ida points of damage 
from physical attacks. 


~ copier, Plague r 


Plague 
XP Value: 6,000 GP Value: 29,000 
Dwarven Kingdoms of Krynn 
The plague scepter serves as a footman’s mace 
+4, and allows the user to infect his victim with 
the mold plague when an attack is successfully 
delivered to bare skin. (See Dwarven Kingdoms 
of Krynn for more information on the plague.) 


of Power 
XP Value: 2,500 GP Value: 12,500 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

This scepter appears similar to a magical rod of 
an odd and ornate design, It has no magical 
power unless held by a priest or paladin. When 
the proper command word is uttered, the scepter 
boosts the priestly power; the user may turn 
undead and cast spells as if four levels higher (a 
9th-level priest can turn and cast as a 13th-level 
priest). No additional spells are gained, but the 
spells known are cast with more power and, in 
some cases, with increased range or duration 
where such details vary with the caster’s level 

If used by a paladin, the scepter only affects the 
character's priestly functions, not fighter abili- 
ties The scepter works once a day for one turn 
per use, 


of the Sorcerer-King 
XP Value: GP Value: — 
Book of Artifacts 
This seemingly innocuous scepter is made of a 
curious blue metal. One end of it is capped by a 
hollow circlet while two curved horns project 
from the other end. Overall, the scepter has the 
size and heft of a footman’s mace. The artifact 
was originally found on Toril in the Forgotten 
Realms, 

It is said that in long-ago Netheril there lived 
sorcerer-kings of such power and might that they 
arrogantly considered themselves the equals of 
gods. To prove their claim, they crafted items of 
truly reckless power. Their wanton destruction 
worried the other inhabitants of Faerun, and some 
even called on their gods to humble the mighty 
sorcerer-kings. The world shook with these bat- 
tles, or so it is said. In their arrogance, the sor- 
cerer-kings decided to rid themselves of these 
“meddling deities,” 

Instrumental in this evil plan was Glaeros 
Lhacrimm, a man many sages blame for causing 
the spread of Anauroch, the Great Desert. Glaeros 
crafted the scepter in a grim process that drained 
the lives of a dozen apprentices. Noting his ambi- 
tion, the deities sent minions to stop him, but 
each one was destroyed by the other sorcerer- 


O ͤ c. ̃ —⅝ĩ— . 


kings. Finally, as Glaeros began the final stages, 
the divine minions broke through his defenses 
and destroyed him. The unfinished scepter was 
then snatched up by another of the Netherese sor- 
cerer-kings, who used it to escape the fray. 

In the centuries since, the scepter has turned up 
in the hands of many wizards and warlords, the 
most notable being the lich known as “the Harper 
King.” Stolen from the undead ruler before his 
destruction, the scepter disappeared from view 
for many years. A dozen years ago, a mysterious 
merchant-wizard may have used it in Sembia, to 
fight free of an attack by the Red Wizards of 
Thay (who presumably knew what he bore), The 
whereabouts of this wizard and the Scepter are 
presently unknown, 

The scepter of the sorcerer-king is an 
immensely potent device that can easily wreak 
havoc on an otherwise well-balanced campaign— 
DMs are advised to think long and hard before 
introducing this item into the game! Only those 
DMs ready to mercilessly hound the PCs with the 
full consequences of its use, should introduce the 
scepter. Once a character wields its power, a 
celestial alarm is sounded and the powers will not 
rest until the scepter does. 

Clearly, finding the scepter is an adventure in 
and of itself. One excellent way to involve the 
characters is to place the scepter in someone 
else’s hands, who then uses it to separate a PC 
priest from his god. After 10 days of silence (and 
no magic), the priest receives a vision of the 
scepter, with instructions to seek it out. (The PC 
is likely to discover that he or she is not alone in 
this quest!) 

Particularly vindictive DMs might create a sit- 
uation that allows the PCs to have their cake and 
sicken on it, too: One person in the party could 
find the scepter (and usc it), only to have the 
group's priest discover he must destroy it! (This 
case of double jeopardy is only recommended for 
those players able to role-play the conflict with- 
out lingering ill feeling.) 

Anyone who finds the scepter is advised to 
keep it hidden, using the powerful item only for 
the most desperate situations and then immedi- 
ately hiding the item again. Indeed, there is even 
the possibility that the mortal owner of the 
scepter might, on the I Ith day of possession, 
receive a visit from a very irate avatar! 

Constant Powers: The scepter automatically 
rebounds any magic or psionic power targeted 


Scepter of of the Sorecrer-King 


specifically against its wielder (area effects are 
not included), and then magnifies the damage 
and duration tenfold (if possible). A magic mis- 
sile curves back on its caster and inflicts 
daI damage, for example. 

Invoked Powers: Nine times a day, a touch of 
the scepter (which requires a successful attack 
roll against unwilling targets) can heal or harm, 
as the wielder wills. In either case, the gain or 
loss is 2d12 points of damage; furthermore, | 
point is always a permanent gain or loss. The 
scepter cannot alter a creature’s permanent hit 
point total by more than 9 points, and when this 
number is reached, the creature is no longer 
affected by this property of the scepter, for good 
or ill. The creature’s death does not change the 
scepter’s count (a resurrected being doesn’t start 
over with the opportunity for another nine weals 
or woes). 

Once a day, the scepter can dispel magic auto- 
matically. The item to be dispelled must be 
touched by the scepter, and a successful attack 
roll must be made if the item is held by an oppo- 
nent. Each time this power is used, there is a 2-in- 
6 chance to drain the item as a rod of cancellation 
and to create a permanent magically dead area 
with a 60-foot radius. Only artifacts are immune 
to the effects of this magically dead zone. 

Curse: For 10 full days from the instant the 
scepter is used, the influence of a single, ran- 
domly chosen deity is banished from the world 
where the character resides, Note that this affects 
only a single world, If, for example, the deity is 
barred from Toril, it could still potentially be 
active on Selune, a moon of that world. 

While banished, the deity cannot observe, con- 
trol, contact, or influence beings and events on 
that world. The god cannot enter that world as an 
avatar, by manifestation, vision, nor possession; 
nor can the deity send any of its Outer Planar 
minions or items, except with the aid of others. 
Note that a gafe opened from the barred world to 
the deity’s plane is still possible. While the deity 
is barred, new spells cannot be gained by any 
priest, paladin, or ranger of that faith. One deity 
is affected per use of the scepter, although those 
whose area of control includes magic are 
immune. 

Given the devastating effect of this item, the 
deities of those worlds where the scepter is 
known have carefully instructed their senior 


priests as to what the scepter looks like and what 
4659 


1065 


— eee ee eee eee 


~ Scepter, Stone Scepter of Shih 


should be done if it appears. Most often, the pow- 
ers demand the death of the wiclder. Deities 
themselves are blind to the location or presence 
of the scepter, and must rely on the eyes of their 
followers. 


XP Value: — 


Suggested Means of Destruction: 

Destined to rid the world of meddling gods, 
the incomplete scepter can only be destroyed 
by using it to slay a god, 

The scepter is destroyed when the last of the 
sorcerer-kings (now potent liches) are hunted 
down and killed, Of course, the scepter is pow- 
erless against its makers. 

The scepter is destroyed when all the gods for- 
swear any further attempts to involve them- 
selves in the affairs of mortals. 


Stone Scepter of Shih 
GP Value: — 


Black Courser 


An unknown ally of the wizard Shih created the 
stone scepter of Shih for the sole purpose of over- 
throwing the evil emperor and necromancer, Tan 
Chin (now known as Ambuchar Devayam). A 
simple wooden staff capped by a stone pommel, 
the scepter must he wielded hy a character of law- 
ful good alignment to use its full benefit, although 
characters of any good alignment can use it to 
some effect as outlined below. 


* 


Minor Powers: 

Protection from Undead: as scroll spell. 
Attack noncorporeal creatures: can be used as 
a normal weapon against creatures such as 
ghosts, spectres, and groaning spirits. 
Immunities: Bearer is immune to level-drain- 
ing and magical aging, paralysis, fear, magic 
Jar, and chill touch, 

Hits at +5 in normal combat. 

Bestows 50% magic resistance upon bearer. 
Major Powers: 

Petrification: Once per day, can cause any 
intelligent being of 7 HD or less looking upon 
it to turn to stone (save vs. petrification with 
2 penalty). 

Destroy Undead: At will, can cause any undead 
creatures of 3 HD or less within 50 feet to 
burst into flames, Undead of 3+1 to 7 HD must 
save vs. rod or also be destroyed. Undead of 
more than 7 HD suffer 5d10 fire damage (save 
vs. rod for half damage). 

Rescue: At will, can negate effects of level 
draining and aging attacks, paralysis, fear, 


magic jar, and chill touch for one individual. 
Dangers: User alignment restrictions are as 
follows. 

* Lawful Good: can use any of the scepter’s 

powers. 

Chaotic and Neutral Good: can use minor 

powers only. 

+ Chaotic, Lawful, and True Neutral: can 
wield staff as normal weapon. 

« Chaotic and Neutral Evil: suffer 1d10 elec- 

trical damage per round when grasping staff 

(no powers). 

Lawful Evil: suffer 1d10 electrical damage 

per round, save vs. rod or fall unconscious for 

1d10 rounds when grasping staff (cach round). 

* Minor Power Costs: Any time a minor power 
is used or activated (even involuntarily), bearer 
loses Ida hp. 

* Major Power Costs: Any time a major power 

is used or activated (even involuntarily), bearer 

loses | point of Constitution (permanently), 

Not even a restoration or wish spell restores 

this loss. 

Use restrictions: If it becomes clear to the 

DM that the scepter bearer does not intend to 

face Tan Chin/Ambuchar Devayam, the scepter 

mysteriously stops functioning. 

+ Corrupting Effect: Bearer becomes increas- 
ingly distrustful of authority. Within one 
month, he cannot help insulting someone 
styled as emperor, king, rajah, shah, and so 
forth. 

+ Weakness: The stone scepter of Shih can only 
be destroyed by submersion in molten rock. 


of Truth 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 2,000 
Assault on Raven% Ruin 
This well-carved wooden rod with gold and silver 
inlays causes all who touch it to speak the truth, 
The effect lasts only so long as the individual 
touches the rod. The scepter does not use charges. 


Scope 
A scope resembles a foot-long brass tube with a 
clear lens at cach end. By peering through the 
eyepiece, the user can see distant objects as 
though it were much closer that it really is. See 
Telescope for more information and possibilities, 


400 


1066 


5 Scope of Seeing a 


of Celestial Analysis 


XP Value: 1,500 GP Value: 6,000 
Heart of the Enemy 

This device is a foot-long brass tube. By peering 
through the tube at a planet, star, or other celestial 
body, the user learns general information about 
the body being observed, A ring around the 
middle of the tube can be rotated to lock in any 
one of three different lenses, Each lens is a differ- 
ent color and provides different information, 
determined by the tint of the image in the lens. 
The observed body must be within 1,000 miles 
for the scope to function. Each reading has a 90% 
chance of success; if the reading is unsuccessful 
(a roll of I on 1d 10), the lens appears black. If the 
DM wishes to withhold information from the 
PCs, it may be determined that any successful 
reading is inconclusive. An inconclusive result 
means that because of unusual weather patterns, 
magical interference, or other factors, the reading 
has revealed no meaningful information. 


Red Air Quality (AQ) Lens: The red AQ lens 
gives a general indication of the breathability of 
the body’s atmosphere. 


Tint Result 

Pink The atmosphere is fresh and com- 
pletely breathable. 

Medium Red The atmosphere is foul, thin, or 


similarly difficult to breathe. Air- 
breathing characters and crea- 
tures must make all attack rolls 
and ability checks at a —2 penalty 
while operating in this atmos- 
phere. 

The atmosphere is deadly and 
unbreathable; air-breathing char- 
acters must make a saving throw 
vs, poison each turn or fall 
unconscious. A second failed 
saving throw means death, 
Inconclusive. 


Dark Red 


Purple 


Yellow Ambient Temperature (AT) Lens. The 
yellow AT lens gives a gencral indication of the 
body’s average temperature. (Note that tempera- 
ture Variants may persist in specific locations; for 
instance, a planet giving a Medium Orange read- 
ing may also have polar ice caps and scorching 
deserts, though the average temperature of the 
planet is moderate.) 


Tint Result 

Light Orange The average temperature is 
below 0° F. 

Medium Orange The average temperature is 
between 0° F and 100° F, 


Dark Orange The average temperature is 
above 100° F 
Brown Inconclusive. 


Blue Sentient Life Lens, The blue SL lens tells 
the user if any sentient life (defined here as Low 
intelligence and above) exists on the body, The 
reading gives no indication of the type of life or 
the number of sentient creatures; for instance, the 
presence of a single ore on a planet is enough to 
cause a positive reading. If the celestial body has 
only magical creatures or creatures of extraplanar 
origins such as zombies or elementals, the read- 
ing is inconclusive. (When the DM is in doubt, 
the reading is Inconclusive). 


Tint Result 

Light Blue Positive. 
Medium Blue Negative. 
Dark Blue inconclusive. 


of Seeing 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 10,000 
The Complete Wizard's Handbook 

This is a portable viewing scope with unlimited 
range. No physical barriers block the view of a 
person using the scope of seeing. The scope 
enables the user to observe the details of the sun, 
the moon, and distant worlds. It also allows the 
user to see completely through the carth to 
observe locations on the opposite side. 


Scroll 
Scrolls are generally found in cylinders—tubes 
of ivory, jade, leather, metal, or wood. Some 
tubes are inscribed with magical runes or 
strange writing the PCs must read in order to 
open the container, This is up to the DM. Tak- 
ing this approach encourages players to select 
and use the read magic or comprehend lan- 
guage spells. It also makes it possible to pro- 
tect power scrolls with traps (symbols, 

explosive runes) and curses. 
Each scroll is written in its own magical 
cypher. To understand what type of scroll has 
been found, the ability to read magic must be 


available. Once a scroll is read to find its con- 
4668 


B e 


1067 


B- l 2 a 


Scroll 


p ͤ ——ö—h— — . ——— 


tents, a read magie spell is not needed after that 
to invoke its magic. Even a scroll map appears 
unreadable until the proper spell (comprehend 
languages) is used. 

Reading a scroll to find its contents does not 
invoke its magic unless it has a specially trig- 
gered curse. A cursed scroll may appear to be a 
scroll of any sort. It radiates no evil or special 
aura beyond being magical, 

A protection scroll can be read by any class of 
character even without a read magic spell, Ifa 
scroll isn't immediately read to learn its contents, 
there is a 5% to 30% chance it will fade. The DM 
scts the percentage or rolls 1d6 to determine it for 
cach scroll. 

When a spell scroll is examined, the following 


table can be used to find its nature: 
Roll Scroll Type 

01-70 Wizard 

71-00 Priest“ 


Other classes in the priest group can, at the DM's dis- 
cretion, have unique scrolls as well, Only the indicated 
class of character can use the scroll, except thieves and 
bards, who can use any scroll, as explained in the PHB, 


Level of Scroll Spells: All scroll spells are 
written to make use as quick and casy as possible 
for the writer, The level of the spell and its char- 
acteristics (range, duration, area of effect, and so 
on) are typically one level higher than that 
required to cast the spell, but never below the 6th 
level of experience. 

Thus, a 6th-level wizard spell is written at 13th 
level of ability, a 7th-level spell at 15th level. and 
so on. The DM can make scroll spells more pow- 
erful by increasing the level at which they are 
written, This will, however, affect the chance of 
spell failure. 

Spell Failure: If any spellcaster acquires a 
scroll inscribed with a spell of a level too high to 
cast, he or she can still try to use the spell—the 
chance of failure, or other ill effects, are 5% per 
level difference between the character's present 
level and the level at which the spell could be 
used, 

For example, a Ist-level wizard finds a scroll 
with a wish spell inscribed upon it. The chance of 
failure is 85%, as wish is a 9th-level spell, 
attained at 18th level: 18 <1 = 17; 17 x 5% = 
85%. A percentile roll of 85 or less indicates fail- 
ure of some sort, and the table below should be 


consulted. In this case, the spell is 30% likely to 
fail without effect, while the chance for a reverse 


or harmful effect is 70%. 
Difference Chance for 

in Level Failure 
1-3 95% 
+6 85% 
7-9 75% 
10-12 65% 
13-15 50% 
16 and up 30% 


Use of Scroll Spells: When a scroll is copied 
into a spell book or read to release its magic, the 
writing completely and permanently disappears 
from the scroll. The magical content of the spell, 
bound up in the writing, is released and crased. 
Thus, reading a spell from a serol! of seven spells 
makes the item a scroll of six spells. No matter 
what a player may try, cach spell on a scroll is 
only usable once. Exceptions should be made 
very rarely and only when you have a very special 
magical item in mind—perhaps a scroll that can 
be read once per week—this would be potent 
magic indeed 

To use a scroll there must be enough light to 
read by and the seroll must be read aloud, A 
scroll can only be used once, for the words dis- 
appear as they are read aloud. Only wizards 
can use wizard spell scrolls, but only after a 
read magic spell has been cast to understand 
each scroll, Only priests may usc priest spell 
scrolls. Anyone may use protection scrolls and 
treasure maps. 

Casting Scroll Effects: The initiative modifier 
of a scroll is its reading time. For scroll spells, 
this is equal to the casting time of the spell. For 
protection scrolls, the reading time is given in the 
explanation of the scroll effects. The only require- 
ments for using a scroll are sufficient light to read 
by and the actual verbalization of the writings, If 
the reading of a scroll is interrupted, the scroll 
effect is lost and that spell fades away and is lost. 
Spell components are unnecessary for a scroll 
reader, and no adverse effects associated with 
casting the spell are suffered—these require- 
ments or penalties have been fulfilled or suffered 
by the creator of the scroll. 

Protection Scroll Effects: If a PC has more 
than one protection scroll, the effects are cumu- 
lative, but not the duration. Scrolls that protect 

sees 


1068 


against creatures do not create an actual, physi- 
cal globe. If the user forces the creature into a 
place from which further retreat is impossible 
(backs one into a corner, say), and then contin- 
ves forward until the creature would be within 
the radius of the circle, the creature is not 
harmed, and the protection is considered volun- 
tarily broken and disappears. There is no way in 
which a protection scroll can be used as an 
offensive weapon. 

Who Can Use Scroll Spells: Ability to use 
scroll spells does not permit a priest to use a wiz- 
ard spell, or a wizard to use a priest spell. Like- 
wise, it does not extend the ability of spell use to 
nonspellusing characters except with respect to 
protection scrolls, Anyone can use a protection 
scroll, Paladins and rangers cannot use priest 
scrolls, 

Those characters able to read and employ 
scroll spells can do so regardless of other restric- 
tions. Once the spell is known, it is not necessary 
to use a read magic spell in order to invoke its 
powers. Scrolls can be read even by wizards who 
are unable to employ the spell copied because of 
an inubility to learn it or because it is too high in 
level (although, in the latter case, there is a 
chance of spell failure). 

Spell Level Range: The level range shown in 
Mixed Priest Spheres Scroll, Priest Scroll, Priest 
Seroll of Mixed Spheres, and Wizard Scroll gives 
the parameters for random determination of spell 
level for scrolls if you choose not to set this. With 
the spell level decided, find the particular spell by 
consulting the appropriate Spell Tables in the PHB. 


of Animal Growth 
XP Value: 1,200 GP Value: 6,000 
Adventure Pack I 
This scroll works the same as the spell cast by a 
10th-level druid. It causes up to eight animals to 
grow to twice their normal size, doubling Hit 
Dice, hit points, and damage. 


Ballant’s 

XP Value: 2,500 GP Value: 25,000 
DRAGON Magazine 145 
The wizard Ballant was a man much taken with 
the theories of siege warfare, probably because 
his own castle was frequently beset with human- 
oid invaders from nearby mountains. The two 
wizard spells that he created speak of his singular 
obsession. 


Ballant's Stonestrength 

(Alteration) 

Level: 5 

Components: V, S, M 

Range: 20 yards 

Casting Time: 6 

Duration: 3 turns + 2 turns/level 

Area of Effect: Special 

Saving Throw: None 

Definition: Ballant's stonestrength causes any 
single stone structure, no matter what its size, to 
increase in structural value by 10% per level of 
the spellcustet. For example, a 13th-level wizard 
casting this spell on a stone gatehouse increases 
its structural value by 130%, from 120 to 276, 
The stone becomes tougher and more resistant to 
chipping and cracking. Any damage done to it is 
first subtracted from its magically gained struc- 
tural points (so even if greatly battered, it may 
escape uninjured at the spell’s expiration). Since 
this spell affects only stone, it cannot wholly but- 
tress a structure composed of both stone and, say, 
earth or wood. A DM may cither figure out how 
each piece of strengthened stone affects the struc- 
ture as a whole, or simply figure the new struc- 
tural value as a percentage (if a wall is 40% stone, 
the spell is 40% effective), 

Ballant x stonestrength completely repairs any 
stone creature (stone golem, xorn, galeb duhr) it 
is cast upon, though this vigor is limited to the 
spell duration. When cast upon a petrified char- 
acter (having suffered the effects of a medusa or 
flesh to stone spell), this spell provides virtual 
immunity to incidental chipping and breaking. It 
may be cast in conjunction with a wall of stone, 
The material components of this spell are a small 
granite wedge and a pinch of powdered iron, 
which is sprinkled over the wedge during the 
spell’s casting. When the spell is cast, both com- 


ponents disappear, 


Ballant's Stonesplit 

(Evocation) 

Level: 6 

Components: V, S, M 

Range: Touch 

Casting Time: 6 segments 

Duration: Permanent 

Saving Throw: Special 

Area of Effect: One 10-foot cube of stone/level 

Definition; The wizard who casts this spell 

cleaves the next stone object he or she touches, the 
* 


r wUöD 


1070 


Scroll, Cursed 


force, extending from the fingertips, manifesting 
in a spray of light and a thick, winding crack that 
appears in the stone with considerable force. The 
crack reduces an amount of stone to rubble equal 
to the spell’s area of effect, but it does nothing to 
clear the rubble away. For example, a 12th-level 
wizard touching a 100-foot long, 10-foot thick, 
and 30-foot high stone wall will crack to rubble a 
40-foot wide section. Rubble fills the gap to a 
height of half that of the original wall and sloping 
away from each side at about a 45° angle. There is 
a 3-point initiative delay between the wizard’s 
touch and the full extent of the spell damage, 
which is usually enough time for a mobile caster to 
escape being crushed by his or her own spell. A 
successful dispel magic during this interval period 
negates Ballant x stonesplit, If this spell is cast on a 
stone floor, a fissure opens and the rubble settles 
quickly, dropping the floor Ida feet and causing 
Ida points of damage to all in the area of effect. 
The devastating effect of this spell when cast on a 
stone ceiling is limited both by its range (touch) 
and by its 3 point delays (enough time for the 
caster to get out of the way is also enough time for 
anyone else to get away). 

Ballant’s stonesplit causes great damage to 
stone-composed creatures (such as galeb duhr) 
ds points of damage per level of the caster, or 


1071 


half if a save vs. spell is made—although the 
caster must first score a hit in melee. This spell 
automatically obliterates a petrified character. 
Magical items composed of stone are allowed to 
save (at 4) vs. disintegration to avoid destruc- 
tion. The material component for this spell is a 
single diamond-tipped chisel worth at least 1,000 
gp, which disappears when the spell is cast. 


of Communication 

XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 15,000 

Dunotows & Dracons Rules Cyclopedia 
This “scroll” actually consists of two scrolls, one 
wrapped inside the other. They are easily separated. 
If a message is written on one scroll, it immediately 
appears on the other. There is no limit to the range, as 
long as both scrolls are on the same plane of exis- 
tence, The message may be up to 100 words in 
length. If one message is erased, the other disappears 
as well. Euch must be crased before another can be 
written, and there is a 5% chance (not cumulative) 
that erasing destroys the magic of both Scrolls 


of Creation 
XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 20,000 
DUNGEONS & Dragons Rules Cyclopedia 
The user of this valuable scroll may draw a pic- 
ture of any normal item up to $- by 10- by 1-foot 
in size (though drawn much smaller) and up to 
5,000 cns weight. The item may then be taken off 
the scroll and used! Magical items cannot be cre- 
ated, nor can live things, but all types of armor 
and weapons, for example, are quite easily cre- 
ated. The item vanishes cither on command of the 
creator or after 24 hours. The scroll can create 


one item per day only. 


Curate's 
XP Value: 300 GP Value: 1,500 
Hall of the Fire Giant King 
This drow scroll contains the following three 
spells: gare, unholy word, and restoration. 


Cursed 
XP Value: — GP Value: 500 
Dunceon Master Guide 
Some scrolls bear powerful curses, placed inten- 
tionally or as a result of flawed scroll-making. 
Cursed scrolls take effect the instant they are 
read. A cursed scroll can have any effect the DM 
desires, although few should be outright deadly. 


Suggested curses include the following: 
“ont 


Scroll, Cursed Il 


— . SR 


2d12 Curse 
2 Bad luck (—I on attacks and saving 
throws). 


3 The characters beard grows 1” a minute. 
4 The character is teleported away from the 
rest of the party. 
5 Random monster appears and attacks. 
6 The character is polymorphed into a 
mouse. 
7 The character shrinks to half normal size. 
8 The character is stricken with weakness, 
halving his or her Strength score. 
9 The character falls into a deep sleep and 
cannot be aroused, 
10 The character develops an uncontrollable 
appetite. 
he character must always speak in rhyme 
(preventing most spellcasting). 
12 The character is blinded or deafened 
13 The character is stricken with cowardice and 
must make a morale check every time an 
enemy or monster is encountered. 
14 The character’s alignment is changed. 
15 The character suffers 2-6 points of damage. 
16 The character suffers amnesia. 
17 The character feels compelled to give away 


all belongings. 

I8 The character must save vs. paralyzation or 
petrification. 

19 The reader turns into a frog (or some other 
harmless animal). 


20 A wandcring monster of the same level as 
the reader appears and attacks the reader 
by surprise (a free attack with bonuses). 

21 One magical item owned by the reader dis- 
appears (the item is chosen or randomly 
determined by the DM). 

22 The reader loses one level of experience, 
as if struck by a wight. (The DM should 
roll again for a first-level character to 
avoid unfair “instant death.) 

23 The reader's Prime Requisite must be 
rerolled. 

24 Future wounds take twice as long to heal, 
and healing spells only restore half normal 
amounts until the curse is lifted, 

In general, the effects of a curse can be negated 
or reversed by a remove curse. Some cases (such 
as petrification) may require the use of other 
spells, Overcoming a curse should be difficult for 
the player characters, but not impossible. 


Cursed II 
XP Value: — GP Value: 500 
Land of Fate 
The entry above provides an abundance of curses, 
The lands of Zakhara, however, possess eight 
more: 
Roll Curse 

1 The PC is cursed with the evil eye. 

2 The PC is cursed with lycanthropy (DM's 
choice of creature), 

3 The PC is polymorphed into a donkey, 
goat, or camel. A hakima will be able to 
see the individual's true form. 

4 The PC's station is reduced to l. Wherever 
the character goes, he or she is reviled, 

5 The PC is smitten with the first individual 
of the same or related species and opposite 
sex that he or she sees. 

6 ‘The PC has earned the enmity of a powerful 
ruler of some town (DM’s choice). There is 
no need to tell the player about this immedi- 
ately, let the player discover this. 

7 The PC has caught the attention of a mis- 
chicvous djinni that follow the individual 
invisibly, playing practical jokes (nothing 
deadly, but the djinni will not aid the char- 
acter in danger either), If detected, the 
djinni may leave if properly bribed. 

8 The scroll is blank, save for glittering dust 
that falls from the scroll when opened. The 
dust does nothing, except to make the play- 
ers very paranoid. The DM may, at random 
moments, call for additional (ignored) sav- 
ing throws from the PC who opened the 
scroll to convince the player that some- 


thing is afoot. 
Cursed Scroll of Amber 
XP Value: — GP Value: 750 
Castle Amber 


When read, this cursed scroll turns its victim into 
a living fly trapped in a piece of amber unless a 
saving throw vs. spell is made. 


of the Death Servant 
XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 15,000 
The Hidden Shrine of Tarnoachun 
This is a scroll that always detects nonmagical. It 
reads, “For you, the greatest gift of all.” When the 
character reads the scroll he or she feels a chill 
and then a warmth drifts across his or her back. 


Unknown to the character a death servant has just 
4074 


1072 x 


PPP 


N Scroll of Five Priest Spell y 


merged with his or her shadow. Invisible to all, it 
travels with the character until he or she is about 
to receive a fatal blow or means of certain death 
for which the character has failed a saving throw. 
Then the black, shadowy form will push the char- 
acter to safety and take the death stroke intended 
for its master. Once the death servant has done 
this, it dissipates in a cloud of black vapor. 


of Delay 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
Duncnons & Dracons Rules Cyclopedia 

This is a single spell scroll. When casting the 
spell from this scroll, the user states an amount of 
delay from 0 to 12 rounds. After that, if the user 
carries the scroll, the user has complete control of 
the spell when it occurs. If the scroll is not carried 
by the user, the spell effect appears around the 
scroll itself, affecting the nearest creature if a 
recipient is part of the spell process, The spell 
does not affect the scroll. even if it is fire-based. 
For example. a wizard reads a delay lightning 
bolt scroll, delaying it eight rounds, and then puts 
the scroll away. Eight rounds later, when the 
lightning bolt actually appears, the wizard may 
choose the range and direction by mere concen 
tration, as if casting the spell at that time. 


Domination 
XP Value: 1,500 GP Value: 4,500 
DraGoN Magazine 91 

A scroll of domination is a powerful magical doc- 
ument that can cast an advanced form of charm 
spell over any one being normally affected by a 
charm person spell. The document requires a 
read magic spell to understand, and may only be 
used by wizards. When the scroll is read to per- 
form its magic, the writing disappears and the 
scroll is thercafter useless, just as if it were a 
scroll of spells. The target of the dweomer must 
be within 60 feet of the scroll reader when the 
power of the scroll is exercised, The target is 
allowed a saving throw vs. spell at -2 (with Wis- 
dom bonus or penalty applicable); if the throw 
fails, the being becomes charmed and obeys the 
castet d verbal commands. And, if both caster and 
victim share a common language, the victim also 
obeys mental commands of the wizard as well. 
This charm power is the same as that used by 
vampires, The victim will not obey a self-destruc- 
tive act, but neither is the charm broken if such a 
command is issued. 


The influence of this scroll can only be broken 
by a dispel magic or remove curse spell from a 
spellcaster of at least 12th level, or by limited wish. 
The charm power is of relatively short duration, 
lasting only 4d4 hours. The victim is freed of the 
scroll effect sooner than this if he or she is taken 
farther than 60 feet from the scroll reader (the vic- 
um cannot do so by “free” will), or iſ a magic circle 
of protection comes between wizard and victim. 


of the Efreeti 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 4,500 
Motdenkainen Fantastic Adventure 

This scroll appears wrought from some alien hide, 
Upon it are many flaming runes and sigils. In the 
possession of a wizard, this scroll acts as a ring of 
fire resistance, Uf read, an efrecti will appear 
immediately, summoned from the Elemental Plane 
of Fire. It will serve its “master” for 1d4+1 hours 
and then leave, the scroll is then useless. 


of Equipment 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
Dunorons & Deacons Rules Cyclopedia 

This parchment is inscribed with the names of six 
normal items (that the DM selects or randomly 
determines), When any item's name is read aloud, 
the item appears within 10 feet of the scroll; the 
name disappears. The item will remain for 24 
hours or until the user commands it to vanish. 
The name reappears on the scroll when the item 
vanishes. Any three of the six items listed on the 
scroll can be created euch day, 


of Erasing 
XP Value: 1,600 GP Value: 9,000 
Deacon Magazine 30 

The scroll of erasing was developed as an Orlow s 
note pad. Passing one’s palm over anything writ- 
ten on this scroll erases the scroll completely. It is 
also rumored that the wizard was enamored of a 
local lass and would compose passionate poems 
to her on this pad. Should Fran approach, he was 
able to erase the incriminating verses. 


of Five Priest Spells 

XP Value: 700 GP Value: 2,100 
The Temple of Elemental Evil 

This scroll contains magic stone, wyvern watch, 

death door, spike stones, and air walk. 


073 


~ Scroll of Five Priest Spells II r 


of Five Priest Spells H 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
The Temple of Elemental Evil 
This scroll contains endure cold/heat, aid, nega- 
tive plane protection, cloak of fear, and spike 
growth. 


of Five Wizard Spells 
XP Value: 900 GP Value: 4,500 
The Temple of Elemental Evil 
This scroll contains firewater, flaming sphere, 
chain lightning, sequester, and volley. 


of Flame Magic 
XP Value: 900 GP Value: 4,500 
Land of Fate 
Spells for these scrolls are taken from the ele- 
mental” listings for cach level. If no suitable spell 
exists at the rolled level, then the DM rolls on (or 
chooses from) the “universal” category. Spell 
lists can be found in the AL-QapIM* Arabian 
Adventures Campaign Book. 


of Four Illusionist Spells 
XP Value: 800 GP Value: 4,000 
The Temple of Elemental Evil 
This scroll contains chromatic orb, fascinate, 
delude, and dispel magic. 


Glyph 
XP Value: 100/glyph GP Value: 300/glyph 
Dragon Magazine 50 

Any scroll with a glyph of warding spell should 
be accompanied by a specific glyph. If the glyph 
can not be cast because of alignment differences, 
the scroll is useless. If the glyph is of a level 
beyond the priest, treat the casting as for a wizard 
casting a scroll spell of a level higher than his or 
her own, with the appropriate chance of failure. 


of Ha Rahni 
XP Value; 2,000 GP Value: 7,000 
Kara-Tur 
The scrolls of Ha Rahni are long silk rolls wound 
on ornate teak spools. The spools fit tightly into 
matching carved boxes, inset with gems and brass 
chasing. There are four scrolls per box and two 
boxes. Each scroll is a treatise, diary, notebook and 
spellbook of the famous wu jen of Old Banang, Ha 
Rahni. These scrolls list the following spells: accu- 
racy, bind, fire shuriken, whip, disguise, haste, fire 
rain, hold person, scry, melt metal, wall of fire, 


conjure elemental, telekinesis, enchant an item, 
surelife, and internal fire. Most of the scrolls are 
illuminated with colored threads and small illustra- 
tions, and they are nonconsecutive, as the wu jen 
wrote one day in one, the next in another. 

Ha Rahni began the scrolls after his touring 
days, when he took the profits of his adventures 
and settled down in Banang around the year 2180. 
He was a powerful and inquisitive man, setting up 
many laboratories and recording numerous arcane 
facts in his scrolls. The records remained in his 
hands until 2212, the year of Ha Rahni's death, 
when the scrolls were passed on to his students. 
Many of the illuminations to the texts are attrib- 
uted to these followers of the great wu jen. Ha 
Rahni’s house and grounds became a school for 
the methods of his magic, led by an enthusiastic 
young wu jen, Xogah Koo, who never reached Ha 
Rahni’s level of skill in magic, but far outpaced his 
teacher as a businessman. The Ha Rahni School is 
a martial magic training school in modern Banang, 
a tribute to the skills of Xogah Koo. 

In the year 2297, the main house in the school 
compound caught fire and the scrolls were rescued 
only seconds before disaster. The evil wu jen Hor- 
dolaz stole the scrolls and flew to his tower in the 
city of Ca hong Chwi, before it was flooded. Hor- 


dolaz hid them in his apartments overlooking the 
4636 


2 ß a 


1 


074 


—— — 


city, and used the knowledge they gave him for evil 
purposes. In 2315, when the city was flooded and 
destroyed, the evil Hordolaz was killed by T'u war- 
riors, but the scrolls were not recovered. It is 
rumored they still exist, perhaps hidden in the sub- 
merged tower of the wu jen. 


of Illumination 

XP Value: 500 GP Value: 2,500 
DUNGEONS & DRAGONS Rules Cyclopedia 

This scroll bears the drawing of a flame. If the scroll 
is set afire, it will burn with a clear light in a 60-foot 
radius, lasting for up to six hours per day. The burn- 
ing does not harm the scroll, but it is nevertheless 
“normal” fire (and can be used to light torches, for 
example). The flame cannot be extinguished except 
by water or on command of the user; no wind, nor- 
mal or magical, can cause it to even flicker. This 
item may already be lit when found. 


of Mapping 
XP Value: 700 GP Value: 3,500 
DUNGEONS & Draons Rules Cyclopedia 
This scroll is blank. When held and commanded to 
write, the scroll will draw a map of any area 
selected (that is, the DM accurately draws the map 
for the players). The area must be completely 
within 100 feet of the scroll, and it may be up to 
10,000 square feet in size. The scroll has | chance 
in 6 to detect secret doors, but it will not draw what 
lies beyond them. The scroll functions once per day. 


of Mapping II 
XP Value: 1,200 GP Value: 6,000 
PoLyHEDRON Newszine 58 
These scrolls, when unrolled, automatically map 
wherever its owner goes. When the command 
word is spoken within 20 feet of the scroll, it 
clears itself of all previous maps and begins 
again, The scroll’s command word is usually writ- 
ten on the scroll. If it is a common word, this 
could cause problems for the person using it, as 
the scroll would continue to erase itself. The 
scroll keeps a legend of what its possessor sees, 
noting scale, direction, and the symbols for 
doors, pits, and other features. Objects such as 
secret doors do not appear on the scroll unless the 
possessor finds them. If the scroll is not cleared 
within 10 days after it is last used, it erases itself. 
Therefore, when found as an item of treasure, it is 
likely to be blank. A typical scroll of mapping is 
18 inches long and 12 inches wide. The wielder is 


Scroll, Mondasso’s Automated Spell 


— E a a 


free to designate the scale of any map drawn, and 
the scroll automatically centers the map on the 
page. However, if the map becomes too large to 
fit, the scroll automatically clears itself, then con- 
tinucs to map. 


of Mixed Priest Spheres Spells 
XP Value: 900 GP Value: 4,500 
Land of Fate 
Some priest scrolls contain spells from mixed 
spheres. For each spell, roll on the following 
table for spheres. Spell lists can be found in the 
AL-Qapim® Arabian Adventures Campaign Book. 
Roll Sphere 


01-10 All (general) 
11-16 Animal 
17-18 Astral 
19-25 Charm 
26-35 Combat 
36-40 Creation 
41-50 Divination 
51-55 Elemental 
56-60 Guardian 
61-73 Healing 

74 76 Necromantic 
77-78 Plant 

79-85 Protection 
86-90 Summoning 
91-95 Sun 

96-00 Weather 


Mondasso’s Automated Spell 
XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 15,000 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 82 

These scrolls were developed by a wizard who 
wandered Abcir-Toril for decades creating vari- 
ous devices to speed scroll manufacture. The 
most successful of his experiments, Mondasso $ 
magical automated spell scrolls, appear as rather 
plain lengths of vellum, the only writing on them 
is a monogrammed “M” at the top. 

To use a scroll, a wizard must sleep for several 
hours, as if he needed to memorize spells. When 
the wizard awakens, he rolls out one of Mon- 
dasso 5 magical automated spell scrolls, spreads 
10 gp worth of ink on the paper, and begins to 
memorize a spell, As the spell is being memo- 
rized, instead of being inscribed in the wizard’s 
memory, the ink coalesces in magical words, 
transcribing the spell onto the scroll. A scroll can 
hold up to 20 spell levels before being filled. 
Spells can be transcribed only once. 

4691 


í 1075 : 


— 


~ Scroll, Nether 


Nether 


XP Value: 2,500 GP Value: 7,500 
The Savage Frontier 

These magical scrolls were produced by wizards 
of the creator races. Later, they became the magi- 
cal foundation of ancient Netheril, but disap- 
peared long before Netheril fell. The entire 
collection is said to number 100 scrolls, inscribed 
in exotic runes upon sheets of purest gold. Their 
true contents are unknown, but many are sus- 
pected to contain exotic spells more powerful 
than any known today, requiring components that 
no longer exist. The scrolls are an opportunity to 
introduce exotic new spells into a campaign. 


of Portals 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 10,000 
Duncrons & Dracons Rules Cyclopedia 

This scroll creates a pass-wall effect, identical to 
the wizard spell. When placed on a surface and 
commanded to function, the scroll disappears and 
a S- ſool- diameter hole appears that is up to 10 
feet deep. The scroll does not affect living or 
magical things. The hole disappears after 3 turns 
or when commanded by the reader of the scroll. 
When the hole disappears, the scroll reappears. 
The scroll may be used twice each day. 


Priest Scroll of Mixed Spheres 
XP Value: 100/level GP Value: 300/level 
DRAGON Magazine 179 
Some priest spell scrolls contain mixed spheres. 
For each spell, roll on the following table for 


sphere: 


Roll Sphere 
01-10 All (general) 
11-16 Animal 
17-18 Astral 
19-25 Charm 
26-35 Combat 
36-40 Creation 
41-50 Divination 
51-55 Elemental 
56-60 Guardian 
6173 Healing 
74-76 Necromantic 
77-78 Plant 
79-85 Proctection 
86-90 Summoning 
91-95 Sun 
96-00 Weather 


Priest Scroll of Mixed Spheres II 


XP Value: 100/level GP Value: 300/level 
Land of Fate 
Roll Spells 

01-05 Ida Spells, all (universal) sphere 
06-09 Id Spells, animal sphere 
10-11 Ido Spells, animal sphere 

12 Id2 Spells, astral sphere 
13-16 Ida Spells, charm sphere 
17-18  1d6 Spells, charm sphere 
19-21 Ida Spells, combat sphere 
22-25 1d4 Spells, creation sphere 
26-30 Ida Spells, divination sphere 
31-34 = 1d6 Spells, divination sphere 
35-38 Ida Spells, elemental sphere 
39-40  1d6 Spells, elemental sphere 

41 1d8 Spells, elemental sphere 
42-44 Ida Spells, guardian sphere 
45-55 Ida Spells, healing sphere 
56-58  2d4 Spells, healing sphere 
59-60 Ida Spells, necromantic sphere 
61-62 1d4 Spells, plant sphere 


63 2d4 Spells, plant sphere 


64-67 Ida Spells, protection sphere 
68-69 Ido Spells, protection sphere 
70-72 Id Spells, summoning sphere 
73-74 Idő Spells, summoning sphere 
75-77 Ida Spells, sun sphere 
78-80 Ida Spells, weather sphere 
81-95 ids Mixed priest spells 
96-00 Cursed scroll 

of Priest Spells 
XP Value: 800 GP Value: 4,000 

Land of Fate 


Priest spells are separated by sphere as opposed 
to level. Check the appropriate sphere and roll 
randomly or choose a spell. Spell lists are in the 
At-Qapim® Arabian Adventures Campaign Book. 


of Protection from Acid 
XP Value: 2,500 GP Value; 7,500 
DUNGEON Master Guide 
The reader is protected from all forms of acid, to 
a maximum damage of 20 Hit Dice or a maxi- 
mum duration of 1d4+8 turns, whichever occurs 
first. Reading time is 6, 


. Scroll of Protection from Elementals r 


Protection from Air 


XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 6,000 
DRAGON Magazine 179 

This scroll issues a 10-foot—diameter zone of pro- 
tection centered on the reader. All types of air- 
based attacks, including strong winds of a 
magical or natural nature and poisons carried on 
breezes, are unable to cross into this area, leaving 
the reader and those nearby untouched. The scroll 
docs not protect against poisons that are not 
blown into the area of the protection (reading the 
scroll and jumping into a cloudkill spell does not 
offer any protection, but if the cio i is carried 
by the wind toward the individual, the individual 
is protected), The protection lasts 1d4+4 turns, It 
has no effect on creatures of elemental air but can 
protect against the air-based attack forms they 
use, The reading time for this scroll is 6. 


of Protection from Baatezu 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 6,000 
DUNGEON Master Guide, ist Edition 

This scroll is nearly identical to the protection 
from tanar vi scroll, It requires one round to read 
if it is to protect against all kinds of baatezu, 
including pit fiends, a reading time of 7 is 
required to protect against greater baatezu, and a 
reading time of 3 is needed to protect against 
lesser and least. 

In Kara-Tur: This scroll is not commonly 
found in Oriental lands. The result should be 
rerolled. 


of Protection from Cold 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 6,000 
DUNGEON Master Guide 

Protection extends outward from the reader to a 
30-foot-diameter sphere. All within the area are 
protected from the effects of nonmagical cold to a 
temperature of absolute zero (~460°F). Against 
magical cold, the scroll confers a +6 bonus to 
saving throws and , damage (if the saving 
throw is made). The duration of the scroll is 
1d4+4 turns. It has a reading time of 3. 


of Protection from Divination 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 6,000 
Dragon Magazine 179 
This scroll cloaks the reader and all other things 
within 10 feet from being affected by any spells 
of the divination school. These spells fail when 
cast within this area, or when attempting to affect 


beings or items within the arca. Spells and abili- 
ties that reveal magical propertics without the use 
of divination spells (such as the hakima ability of 
seeing truth) are unaffected by this spell. The 
reading time for this scroll is 8, 


of Protection from Dragon Breath 

XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 6,000 
Duncron Master Guide 

Only the individual reading the scroll is pro- 
tected. Protection extends to all forms of dragon 
breath and lasts 2d4+4 rounds, The reading time 
varies. 

In a DRAGONLANCE Campaign: Scrolls of 
protection from dragon breath do not exist on 
Ansalon. 


of Protection from Earth 
XP Value: 1,500 GP Value: 
DraGoN Magazine 179 


This scroll protects the reader and those within 
10 feet from all forms of earth-based attacks, 
including avalanches, sand slides, quicksand, and 
carthquakes, whether magical or natural in origin, 
The reader and those who remain within 10 feet 
merely float to the surface in such cases and may 
walk across unstable ground without ill effect, 
This scroll does not provide protection against 
the physical attacks of carth elementals or dao, 
though it does protect against the magical, earth- 
based effects such beings create for 1d4+4 turns. 
The reading time for this scroll is 6. 


of Protection from Electricity 
XP Value: 1,500 GP Value: 4,500 
DUNGDON MASTER Guide 

Protection is provided in a 20-foot-diameter 
sphere centered on the reader, Those protected 
arc immune to all electrical attacks and associ- 
ated effects. The protection lasts 344 rounds. The 
reading time for this scroll is 5. 


of Protection from Elementals 
XP Value GP Value 
All: 2,000 6,000 
Earth: 1,500 4.500 
Air: 1,500 4,500 
Fire: 1,500 4,500 
Water: 1,500 4,500 
Dunoon Mastr Guide 


There are five varieties of this scroll. Roll per- 


centile dice and consult the following table: 
2 


077 


~ Scroll of Protection from Felines — 


Roll Type of Scroll 

Ol-15 Protection from air elementals (includ- 
ing aerial servants, djinn, invisible 
stalkers, and wind walkers). 

16-30 Protection from earth elementals 
(including xorn). 

31-48 Protection from fire elementals (includ- 
ing eſteeti and salamanders). 

46-60 Protection from water elementals 
(including tritons and water weirds). 

61-00 Protection from all elementals. 


The magic protects the reader and all within 10 
feet from the type of elemental noted, as well as 
elemental creatures of the same plane. The pro- 
tection affects a maximum of 24 Hit Dice of ele- 
mental creatures if the scroll is of a specific 
elemental type, and 16 Hit Dice if it is against all 
sorts of elementals. The spell lasts for 5d8 
rounds. Attack out of the circle is possible, as is 
attack into it by any clemental creature with more 
Hit Dice than are protected against or by several 
elemental creatures—those in excess of the pro- 
tected number of Hit Dice are able to enter and 
attack. This scroll has a reading time of 6. 


of Protection from Felines 

XP Value: 500 GP Value: 2,500 
The Hidden Shrine of Tamoachan 
This protection extends in a 10-foot-diameter 
sphere centered on the reader. The protection 
affects a maximum of 12 Hit Dice of feline crea- 
tures. The spell lasts for 1d4+4 turns. Attack out 
of the circle is possible, as is attack into it by any 
feline creature with more Hit Dice than are pro- 
tected against or by several feline creatures— 
those in excess of the protected number of Hit 
Dice are able to enter and attack. The reading 
time of this scroll is 6. 


of Protection from Fire 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 6,000 
DUNGEON Master Guide 
Protection extends to a 30-foot-diameter sphere 
centered on the reader. All in this area are able to 
withstand flame and heat of the hottest type, even 
of those of magical or elemental natures. The pro- 
tection lasts 1d4+4 turns. The reading time is 8. 


of Protection from Gas 
XP Value; 2,000 GP Value: 6,000 
DUNGEON Master Guide 

This scroll generates a 10- foot- diameter sphere of 
protection centered on the reader, All within the 
area are immune to the effects of any gas—poison 
gas, gascous breath weapons, spells that generate 
gas (such as stinking cloud and cloudkill), and all 
similar forms of noxious, toxic vapors, The protec- 
tion lasts for 1d4+4 rounds, Reading time 3. 


of Protection from Genies 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 10,000 
DRAGON Magazine 179 

This scroll offers protection against one or more 
of the genie peoples, including protection from 
both physical and magical attack forms. Protec- 
tion extends only to the reader and those items he 
or she carries. A genie cannot touch the reader 
nor directly attack. Area-effect attack forms 
launched by a genie affect all others in the area, 
but do not harm the protected PC. The scroll 
affects genies as follows: 


Roll Type 
1 Dao 
2 Djinni 
3 Efreeti 
4 Marid 
5 Any tasked genie 
6 All of the above 


Noble genies are not affected by the protection, 
neither are gen, jann, or other elemental crea- 
tures. The protection lasts 5d8 rounds. 


Protection from Heat 

XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
DRAGON Magazine 179 
This scroll creates a 10-yard—diameter, station- 
ary area of protection that acts as a cool strength 
spell for three days. During this time, all within 
the area are protected from the detrimental 
effects of the sun; they may wear heavy armor 
without ill effect and suffer normal require- 
ments for water. 


of Protection from Illusions 
XP Value: 1,500 GP Value: 4,500 
Unearthed Arcana 
Only the individual reading the scroll is pro- 
tected, and the benefit extends to any form of 
4715 


" te ee a ee 


10 


78 


r ²˙¹˙ ee 


illusion and phantasm magic witnessed by the 
individual. Protection lasts for 5d6 rounds. Read- 
ing time is 7. 


of Protection from Lycanthropes 


XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 3,000 
Dunoon Master Guide 

There are seven common types of this scroll. The 

DM can select one from the table below or make 

a percentile roll to decide it randomly: 


Roll Scroll Type 


01-05 Protection from Werebears 
06-10 Protection from Wercboars 
11-20 Protection from Wercrats 

21-25 Protection from Weretigers 
26-40 Protection from Werewolves 
41-98 Protection from all Lycanthropes 
99-00 Protection from Shapechangers 


The magical circle from the reading of the 
scroll extends in a 10-foot radius and moves with 
the reader. Each scroll protects against 49 Hit 
Dice of lycanthropes, rounding all pluses below 
+2 down. The protection is otherwise similar to 
that against elementals. The protection from 
shapechangers scroll protects against monsters 
(except gods and godlike creatures) able to 
change their form to that of man; dopplegangers, 
certain dragons, druids, jackalweres, and lycan- 
thropes, for example. The magic lasts for 5d6 
rounds, The reading time is 4. 

In a DRAGONLANCE Campaign: Scrolls of 
protection from lycanthropes do not exist on 
Ansalon. 

In Kara-Tur: In the Land of Fate, this scroll is 
effective against all forms of lycanthropes. 


of Protection from Magic 
XP Value: 2,500 GP Value: 6,500 
Dunaron Master Guide 

This scroll invokes a very powerful, invisible 
globe of antimagic in a 5-foot-radius from the 
reader, No form of magic can pass into or out of 
it, but physical things ure not restricted by the 
globe. As with other protections, the globe of 
antimagic moves with its invoker. The protection 
lasts for 5d6 rounds. Reading time is 8. 


Protection extends only to the reader. The form of 
magical weapon indicated is prevented from 
touching or harming the protected individual— 
but note that missile protection does not extend to 
missiles created by spellcasting (such as magic 
missile) or the use of a spell-like power. Protec- 
tion lasts for 1d4+4 rounds. Reading time is 10. 


of Protection from 

Nonmagical Weapons 

XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 3,000 
Unearthed Arcana 

Protection extends in a l- foot - diameter sphere 
centered on the reader. The form of nonmagical 
weapon indicated is prevented from touching or 
harming the protected individual—but note that 
missile protection does not extend to normal mis- 
siles of large size, such as projectiles from a cata- 
pult or objects hurled by giants. Protection lasts 
for 1d4+4 rounds. Reading time is 10. 


of Protection from Paralyzation 
XP Value; 1,500 GP Value: 4,500 
Unearthed Arcana 
Only the reader is affected by the dweomer of this 
scroll. The protection extends to all forms of par- 
alyzation, muscle and nerve paralysis included. A 
hold spell will not work upon the protected indi- 
vidual, nor will any sort of paralysis brought 
about by gas. Protection lasts for 1d4+1 turns. 


Reading time is 10. 


A 10-foot-radius circle of protection extends 
from, and moves with the reader of this scroll. 
Everyone within its confines is absolutely 
immune to all attack forms, magical or otherwise, 
that turn flesh to stone. The protection lasts for 
Ida rounds. Reading time is 5. 


of Protection from Plants 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 3,000 
Dunoon Master Guide 

A protective sphere 10 fect in diameter is cen- 
tered on the reader. No form of vegetable life 
(including fungi, slimes, molds, and the like) is 
unable to penetrate the sphere. If it is moved 

4722 


J l 1079 i 


Scroll of Protection from Poison 


| en 


toward plant life capable of movement, the plant 
will be pushed away. If the plant is immobile (a 
well-rooted shrub, bush, or tree, for instance), the 
sphere cannot be moved through or past it unless 
the reader has enough strength and mass to 
uproot the plant under normal conditions. The 
protection lasts for 1d4+4 turns. Reading time is 
round. 


of Protection from Poison 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 3,000 
DUNGEON Mastek Guide 
The protection afforded by this scroll extends 
only to the reader. No form of poison, ingested, 
contacted, or inhaled, can affect the protected 
individual, and any poison in the reader’s system 
is permanently neutralized. The protection other- 
wise lasts 1d1042 rounds. Reading time is 3. 


of Protection from Possession 

XP Value: 1,500 GP Value: 4,500 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 

This scroll generates a magical circle of 10-foot- 
radius that extends from, and moves with, the 
reader. All creatures within its confines are pro- 
tected from possession by magical spell attacks 
such as magic jar or attack forms aimed at posses- 
sion or mental control. Even the dead are protected 
if they are within the magic circle. The protection 
lasts for 10d6 rounds in 90% of these scrolls; 10% 
have power that lasts 10d6 turns, but the spell 
effect is stationary, Reading time is | round. 


of Protection from Shapechangers 

XP Value: 1,500 GP Value: 7,500 
New Item 

Protection extends in a 10-foot diameter sphere 
centered around the reader. All forms of 
shapechangers (including lycanthropes, werecrea- 
tures, polymorphed individuals, high-level 
druids, and the like) are unable to penetrate the 
protective sphere, If it is moved toward such a 
creature, the creature is simply pushed away. If 
the protective circle is positioned so the creature 
is unable to escape it (in the corner of a room, for 
example), the circle instantly drops, and the 
shapechanger is able to approach the reader, 
Under normal circumstances, the protection lasts 
1d4+6 rounds. Reading time is 5. 

In Kara-Tur: This scroll includes all 
hengeyokai and spirit creatures able to change 
form, 


of Protection from Spirits 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 6,000 
Oriental Adventures 
This scroll is identical to the other protection 
scrolls in that it can be used by any character. 
When read, the scroll casts a protection from spir- 
its spell as if cast by a 12th-level shukenja. 


of Protection from Tanar’ri 

XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 6,000 
DUNGEON Master Guide, Ist Edition 
This scroll requires 1 full round to read if it is to 
protect against all sorts of tanar'ri, including 
guardians, a reading time of 7 is required to pro- 
tect against greater, true, and guardian tanar'ri, 
and a reading time of 3 needed to protect against 
lesser and least, The circle of protection gener- 
ated springs outward from the scroll reader ina 
10-foot radius. No tanar'ri protected against can 
penetrate the circle physically or magically or in 
any way, but anyone within can launch missile 
attacks, if otherwise possible, against them. The 
protection moves with the reader of the scroll. Its 
effect lasts for 5d4 rounds. 

Note that the protection radius is not an actual 
physical globe and if the user forces a tanar’n into a 
place from which further retreat is impossible (as in 
a corner), and then continues forward until the 
tanar ri would be within the radius of the circle, itis 
unharmed, and the protection is considered volun- 
tarily broken and disappears. There is no way in 
which this can be used as an offensive weapon. 

In Kara-Tur: This scroll is not commonly 
found tn Oriental lands. The result should be 
rerolled. 


of Protection from Traps 
XP Value GP Value 
Mechanical: 2,000 6,000 
Magical: 2,000 6,000 
Any Trap: 3,000 9,000 


Unearthed Arcana 
There are three forms of this scroll—those that 
protect from mechanical traps (50%), magical 
traps (30%), and those that protect from any form 
of trap (20%). 

Mechanical: Protection extends only to the 
reader, Traps of mechanical nature do not func- 
tion against the reader, but neither are they 
revealed, Protection lasts for 5d4 rounds, Read- 
ing time is 4. 

Magical: Protection extends in a |0-foot- 

4730 


080 


r / o l 


Scroll, Quirks of 


O eae eee | 


diameter sphere centered on the reader. Magical 
traps do not function against those in the area of 
protection, but neither are they revealed. Protec- 
tion lasts for 1d10+2 rounds. Reading is time & 
Any Trap: Protection extends in a 10-foot-diame- 
ter sphere centered on the reader. The dweomer pre- 
vents the functioning of any trap, but does not reveal 
any that may exist within the protective sphere. Pro- 
tection lasts for 2d4 rounds. Reading is time 10, 


of Protection from Undead 
XP Value: 1,500 GP Value: 4,500 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 

When this scroll is read, a 5-foot-radius circle of 
protection extends from, and moves with, the 
reader. It protects everyone within it from all 
physical attacks made by undead (ghasts, ghosts, 
ghouls, shadows, skeletons, spectres, wights, 
wraiths, vampires, zombies, and all others), but 
not magical spells or other attack forms. If a crea- 
ture leaves the protected area, it is subject to 
physical attack. The protection restrains up to 35 
Hit Dice or levels of undead; those in excess of 
Hit Dice or levels can pass through the circle. It 
remains in effect for 10d8 rounds. Some protec- 
tion seralls of this nature protect only against cer- 
tain types of undead (one or more) rather than all 
undead, at the DM’s option. Reading time is 4. 

In Kara-Tur: This scroll is not commonly found 
in Oriental lands. The result should be rerolled. 

In Ravenloft: The undead are more difficult to 
control in Ravenloft. The scroll effects last only 
dds rounds and restrain only 20 Hit Dice of undead. 
Roll Undead Type 
Ghasts 


Skeletons 
Spectres 
Wights 
Wraiths 
Vampires 
Zombies 


of Protection from Water 
XP Value: 1,500 GP Value: 4,500 
Dunceow Master Guide 
This scroll’s protection extends in a 10-foot- 
diameter sphere centered on the reader. All 
forms of water—liquid, solid, and vapor, ice, 


hail, snow, sleet, steam, and so forth—are 
unable to penctrate the sphere of protection. If 
those protected come upon a form of water, the 
substance simply does not touch them; they will 
not slip on ice or sink into a body of water, for 
example. The protection lasts for 1d4+4 turns. 
Reading time is 6. 


of Questioning 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 6,000 
DUNGEONS & DRAGONS Rules Cyclopedia 

The user of this scroll may ask questions of any 
nonliving, nonmagical objects; their answers will 
appear on the scroll. The scroll can display up to 
three answers per day. The answers will be given 
as if the objects were living beings, but they will 
be limited to simple observations as if the objects 
could see, hear, and smell, The scroll cannot be 
used to question living or magical things, 


Quirks of Magical Scrolls* 
XP Value: — GP Value: — 
DRAGON Magazine 163 
The AD&D game has one of the largest compila- 
tions of magical items in the fantasy gaming 
industry 

The following tables have been created to add 
some spice and variety to existing magical items 
in the AD&D game world. A table of nonstandard 
magical item abilities is offered for each major 
type of magical item in the AD&D game. The 
rationale for such quirks is simple. 

Most items are created normally, and they 
function exactly as a standard item of the same 
type in the DMG. However, sometimes there is a 
slight mishap in the creation of the device: the 
steps are not followed in the proper order, the 
astrological signs do not bode well, the item’s 
creator is disturbed to begin with, the instructions 
are incomplete, or something just plain goes 
wrong. Any of these results may cause a magical 
item to behave differently from others just like it, 

Not all quirks are bad, however. Some are detri- 
mental to the item or its user, some are neutral, and 
some are even beneficial. The possibility of quirks 
existing (and the actual number of quirks) ts deter- 
mined by using the table below to determine the 
exact quirks a magical scroll possesses. 


Roll Quirks Present 
01-86 No quirks 
87-94 One quirk 


4755 


En Ä A ̃]⅛˙ Ü: ae ee 


1081 


FP ³˙· A ˙ T—— ——— ˙ A ˙¹¾= 


~ Scroll of Recovery r 


95-98 
99-00 


35-40 


4) 44 


45-49 


50-82 


53-57 


Two quirks 
Three quirks 


Result 

Scroll is old and brittle; any mishandling 
causes it to disintegrate. A scroll of this 
type has a —2 on all saving throws against 
fire. 

Scroll glows (equal to faerie fire) when 
used, opened, or read. 

Scroll is written in scrawled script and is 
barely legible; a 5% chance exists of 
blowing the spell in addition to any other 
such chance. 

Scroll is waterproof and can be read 
underwater. 

Scroll is exceedingly long and takes 1d3 
rounds to unroll and prepare for spell- 
casting. 

Scroll is specially treated and cannot be 
burned by normal fire. It has +2 on any 
saving throws against magical fire. 

Scroll can only be torn by someone mak- 
ing a bend bars/lift gates Strength roll. 
Scroll is written in magical hieroglyph- 
ice; 1d4+6 days must be spent translating 
the characters before the scroll is usable, 
or a comprehend languages must be cast 
upon it. 

Scroll is more powerful than normal, any 
saving throws against a spell from the 
scroll are at -I. and the duration of any 
spell is 125% normal. 

Scroll's print disorients reader for, Ida 
rounds after a spell from it is cast, During 
this time, the reader is at 2 on attack 
rolls and loses Dexterity bonuses to 
Armor Class. 

Scroll is written improperly; any spell on 
it fails 50% of the time (but the spell is 
not erased from the scroll until a second 
reading). 

Scroll contains special magic; the spells 
on it can each be used twice before they 
vanish. 

Scroll is permanently stuck in a magi- 
cally strong, rolled-up form; in order to 
cast a spell from it, the reader must make 
a Strength check with a -2 bonus to the 
roll on 1d20. If the die roll is above the 
reader's Strength, he or she is unable to 
keep the scroll held open for that round. 


Another try may be made the next round. 
The scroll cannot be nipped or torn. 
Scroll is written on a shect of thin metal 
instead of on paper; it makes all saving 
throws as soft metal does. 

Scroll’s writing is hidden by an illusory 
script or à secret page spell. 

Scroll is protected by a spell, such as 
sepia snake sigil or magic mouth. The 
protective spell is activated any time the 
scroll is opened, unless a special past 
word is spoken, 

Scroll is specially treated and is immune 
to acid and slimes of any type. 

Scroll is dust-covered when found; when 
opened, the opener must save vs. petrifica- 
tion or sneeze and choke on the dust for Ida 
rounds (no attacks or defense possible). 
Scroll’s spells are written in complicated 
terms; the casting times of all spells on 
the scrolls are doubled. 

Scroll is substandard in power, all saving 
throws against spell from the scroll are at 
+1, and the duration of any spell is 75% 
of normal. 

Scroll is slow to take effect; all spells take 
effect the round after the casting is fin- 
ished, Once the casting time is complete, 
hitting the reader does not disrupt the spell, 
Scroll is very powerful; all spells have an 
inherent 2 on any saving throw against 
them, and the duration of a spell on this 
scroll is 150% normal. 


58-63 


85-89 


95-98 


of Recovery 
XP Value: 400 GP Value: 2,000 
CARDMASTER Adventure Design Deck 
Roll 1d8 and restore that many hit points. 


of Repetition 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 3,000 
Duncsons & Daacons Rules Cyclopedia 

This scroll appears to be a normal scroll of one 
spell, and the standard restrictions apply to its 
use. However, one turn after the spell is cast, the 
scroll creates the same spell effect a second time, 
centered on the scroll or affecting the nearest 
creature if a recipient is part of the spell process. 
As with a normal spell scroll, any spell cast from 
it is then gone; however, another spell may be 
written on the scroll if it is of the same level, and 
the repetition effect again applies. 


aus 


SCC ²˙ A 


1082 


of Return 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 6,000 
Ravencort Campaign Set 

A character must spend a full turn reading this 
scroll. If the reader is interrupted, he or she can 
start again at a later time without penalty. Once the 
reading is complete, the scroll bursts into flames. 
Glowing sparks drift toward the heavens, where, 
evidently, they burn a hole through the fabric of 
space, The result ix a portal about the size of a door 
that remains open for one full turn, The door leads 
into the Prime Material Plane, The exact location is 
another question; it appears to be random. 


Rhialle’s 
XP Value: 1,500 GP Value: 6,000 
The Hidden Shrine of Tamoechan 
This scroll contains five spells: silence IS radius, 
purify food and water, and slow poison (x3). 


Sand 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 6,000 
Dracon Magazine 179 
Spells for these scrolls are taken from the “Elemen- 
tal” listings for cach level in Arabian Adventures. If 
no Suitable spell exists at the rolled level, then the 
DM rolls or chooses from the “General” category. 


Sea 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 6,000 
DRAGON Magazine 179 
Spells for these scrolls are taken from the “Elemen- 
tal” listings for cach level in Arabian Adventures. If 
no suitable spell exists at the rolled level, then the 
DM rolls or chooses from the “General” category. 


of Seeing 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
Dunatons & Dragons Rules Cyclopedia 

This scroll is blank. When held and commanded 
to write, it will draw pictures of creatures within 
100 feet in any area chosen by the user. Up to 
four different types of creatures can be pictured. 
The scroll will function once per day, regardless 
of the number of creatures pictured. 


of Seven Druid Spells 
XP Value: 1,500 GP Value: 7,500 
The Temple of Elemental Evil 
This scroll contains detect balance, detect poi- 
son, flame blade, reflecting pool, spikegrowth, 
starshine, and moonbeam. 


Scroll of Six Wizard Spells 


— 


of Seven Wizard Spells 
XP Value: 2,400 GP Value: 12,000 
The Temple of Elemental Evil 
This scroll contains taunt, wizard mark, material, 
wind wall, magic mirror, avoidance, and fabricate. 


of Shelter 
XP Value: 1,500 GP Value: 4,500 
DUNGEONS & Deacons Rules Cyclopedia 

This scroll is inscribed with an elaborate drawing 
of a 10 feet-square room, lit, with two beds, a 
table and two chairs, and food and drink for two 
on the table, This pair of normal swords hangs on 
the far wall, each above a shield. If the scroll is 
hung on any vertical surface, the room pictured 
may be entered and the items used. The food and 
drink are pure and can nourish any living thing. 
The swords and shields may be taken down and 
used. However, none of the items can be removed 
from the room. 

If the scroll is taken down, the room cannot be 
entered or left, but remains in existence in another 
dimension, If any creatures are in the room when 
the scroll is taken down, the air inside permits 
survival for up to 24 hours. No creatures caught 
in it can escape by any means other than a wish. 
The food and drink are replenished each time the 
scroll is taken down, The room can be created 
once u day and will remain for up to 12 hours per 
use; if not removed in that time, the scroll falls 
down by itself. 


of Six Priest Spells 
XP Value: 1,300 GP Value: 6,500 
The Temple of Elemental Evil 
This scroll contains precipitation, withdraw, 
cloudburst, remove paralysis, imbue with spell 
ability, and rainbow. 


of Six Ilusionist Spells 
XP Value: 1,400 GP Value: 7,000 
The Temple of Elemental Evil 
This scroll contains phantom armor, alter self, 
wraithform, rainbow pattern, advanced illusion, 
and dream. 


of Six Wizard Spells 
XP Value: 1,500 GP Value: 7,500 
The Temple of Elemental Evil 
This scroll contains run, preserve, item, stone- 
skin, contingency, and eyebite. 


aw Scroll of Six Wizard Spells I 
of Six Wizard Spells H 


XP Value: 1,600 GP Value: 8,000 
The Temple of Elemental Evil 

This scroll contains bind, irritation, vocalize, 

shout, dolor, and forcecage. 


Sorcerer’s 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 7,000 
Du acion Magazine 179 
Spells for these scrolls are taken from the “Elemen- 
tal” listings for each level in Arabian Adventures. If 
no suitable spell exists at the rolled level, then the 
DM rolls or chooses from the “General” category. 


of Spell Catching 
XP Value GP Value 
Ist~-2nd: 2,000 10,000 
Ist-4th: 4,000 20,000 
Ist-6th: 6,000 30,000 
Iat-8th: 8,000 40,000 


Dunazons & DRAGONS Rules Cyclopedia 
This scroll is blank when found. It may be used to 
“catch” a spell cast at the user. It cannot catch spell- 
like effects, nor can it catch effects produced by 
devices (such as from a wand), but a spell cast from 
a scroll can be caught. There are four types of these 
scrolls; roll Id io to find the capacity, 


Roll Capacity 

1-4 Ist- or 2nd-level spells 

5-7 Ist- to 4th-level spells 

8-9 Ist- to 6th-level spells 
10 Ist- to &th-level spells 


The user of the scroll must hold it up, like a 
shield; no other action is possible while using 
the scroll. The user must then make a saving 
throw vs. spell, with a +4 bonus to the roll; if 
successful, the incoming spell has no effect and 
is instead transferred to the scroll, appearing as 
a normal scroll spell. The exact spell caught 
cannot be known until a read magic spell is used 
to identify it. 

The scroll can only hold one spell at a time; the 
spell caught must either be used or copied into a 
spell book (wizard spells only) before the scroll 
can catch another spell. Any type of spell (magi- 
cal, priestly, or druidic) can be caught as long as 
the level does not exceed the scroll's capacity. 
The scroll of spell catching cannot affect spells of 
levels greater than the given capacity, and it can 
catch a maximum of one spell per day. 


of the Stellar Path 
XP Value: 2,500 GP Value: 7,500 
DRAGONLANCE Adventures 
The powerful magic of the scroll of the stellar 
path confers the favor of the gods of magic upon 
the user, Since the magical powers of the wizards 
of Krynn wax and wane depending upon the posi- 
tion of the moons in the sky, only rearrangement 
of the cosmos can bring additional power to a 
wizard during a time of disadvantage. This is the 
purpose of this powerful scroll. 

Reading the scroll makes the moon of the wiz- 
ard’s order appear at its most advantageous posi- 
tion in the sky, regardless of that moon natural 
position. This does not actually change the posi- 
tion of the moon in the sky, but rather creates a 
magical condition in which the wizard's powers 
are as if the moon is 
at its most advantageous position. 

How advantageous this position is will depend 
upon the natural locations of the moons of other 
orders. If reading this scroll causes a conjunction 
of one or more of the moons, that conjunction has 
its usual effect upon the ward powers. 

Once the scroll is read, it disintegrates in the 
hands of the reader. The runes of the spell can be 
copied down into spell books for safe transport, but 
the spell can only be cast from the scroll itself, 
which is the physical component of the spell. 

The enhancement of the wiæard s powers lasts 
for 48 hours and then his powers are back to the 
level dictated by the true positions of the moons. 


of the Stellar Path II 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 6,000 
Tales of the Lance 
This scroll overcomes the natural wax and wane 
of magic with the phases of the moon. The scroll 
siphons the magic of the moons through passing 
time. 

Reading this scroll creates a magical conduit 
through time that duplicates the effects of the wiz- 
ard's moon at high sanction. This effect works for the 
caster only, despite the actual position of the moon. 
‘The effect lasts for 48 hours, when the effects of the 
true cycle return. If, during this time, the other 
moons move into conjunction with the wizards illu- 
sory moon, the conjunction causes the usual effects, 
but for the one wizard only. Using this scroll exhausts 
the wizard for Ida days after the 48-hour effect, 
causing him to suffer a penalty of -2 on all rolls and 


requiring him or her to move at half speed. 
ysu 


- 1084 


x Scroll of Trapping y 


Suggestion 

GP Value: 1,000 
Dracon Magazine 91 
This scroll appears to be an official pronounce- 
ment, personal missive, or other such innocuous 
document, and may be found in treasure hoards like 
any other seroll. No magical spell is required to 
read the scroll contents. A magical curse, how- 
ever, is worked into the writing of the scroll such 
that whoever reads the scroll immediately becomes 
subject to the next normal suggestion heard as if 
under the influence of the spell suggestion. The vic- 
tim is allowed a saving throw vs. spell to avoid suc- 
cumbing to the suggestion, but at the following 
penalties: ~2 for a mildly dangerous act, 4 for a 
normal request involving little chance of personal 
danger, and -G for an extremely reasonable request 
or suggestion involving no obvious risk, Under no 
circumstances will a victim perform a life-threaten- 
ing or suicidal act, as per the provisions for the sug- 
gestion spell. Hearing such a suggestion, or making 
the saving throw allowed for other types of sugges- 
tions, voids the curse and negates the effect of the 
scroll for that character, 

The determining factor in defining a reasonable 
suggestion is ite potential to cause physical harm to 
the one acting upon it, The possibility of income- 
nience or financial loss does not make a suggestion 
unreasonable. For instance, a character under the 
effect of this scroll would save at G against a sug- 
gestion to give away a magical item or cast a certain 
spell on behalf of the one making the request—as 
long as relinquishing the item or casting the spell 
would not put the character in immediate 
danger. Because they ure reusable, scrolls of sug- 
gestion have become popular with many royal 
courts and governments, Sometimes a messenger 
bearing one is waylaid by a monster; therefore their 
appearance in treasure hoards. 

For a suggestion that is to be carried out over a 
span of time, the scroll's curse remains in effect 
after the scroll is read for a number of days equal to 
the reader's Intelligence score subtracted from 22. 
(Creatures with Intelligence scores of 22 or higher 
ure immune to the seroll's effect.) If the reader of 
the scroll does not hear anything resembling a sug- 
gestion or request by the time this duration expires, 
he or she will not be affected. (This is highly 
unlikely, since the reader is very susceptible, and 
even a bit of wishful thinking is taken seriously.) If 
the reader has been affected and is trying to fulfill a 
request that takes time, the enchantment ts broken 


XP Value: — 


when the duration expires, and the victim is there- 
after free of the obligation of the suggestion. 

The influence of this serol! upon an affected 
character may be detected by a detect charm 
spell, and its effects may be removed by a dispel 
magic or remove curse spell cast by a spelicaster 
of at least 9th level for priests, and 11th level for 
wizards, A wish, limited wish, or alter reality 
spell also removes the effect. 


Tattoo 

XP Value: 3,000 

POLYHEDRON Newszine 58 
When a wizard, or a thief who is of at least 10th 
level, reads this scroll, a dark blue and black tattoo 
of a dagger appears on the character's forearm and 
he or she suffers Ida points of burning damage 
The scroll dissolves, By placing a hand on the hilt 
of the dagger tattoo and saying “para mi” the 
wearer can remove the weapon and use it as a +3 
weapon. To return it to his or her body, the thief 
places it on the portion of the body where the tattoo 
should appear and utters, “de mi” The dagger then 
becomes a tattoo again, If the weapon leaves the 
possession of its owner it dissolves. It must always 
touch the owner's akin. Therefore, the owner cannot 
throw it, hold it in a gloved hand, or give it away. 


GP Value: 


of Transmutation 
XP Value: 100 GP Value: 1,000 
DRAGON Magazine 168 

This scroll was written by the great spellcaster 
Otspatun Mystics and scholars have known for 
centuries that Otspatun insisted he knew how to 
create valuable treasure from dross, What has been 
forgotten is that Otspatun was a druid and did not 
himself consider gold or silver especially valuable. 
When the spell on the scroll is read by a druid, it 
has no effect on any substance except gold and sil- 
ver. For 20 feet around the reader, all gold will be 
converted to mistletoe, an important element in 
many druidic spells, and all silver becomes good, 
nutritious bread. The spell’s effects are permanent 
and unalterable, Any gold or stlver magical objects 
automatically lose their special abilities, If the spell 
is read by anyone but a druid, nothing happens. 


of Trapping 
XP Value: 300 GP Value: 3,000 


Dunonons & Dracons Rules Cyclopedia 
This scroll can create one trap. The type of trap 
differs by the placement of the scroll. The scroll 


4735 


rr ee, 


1085 


x Scroll of Truth 


is destroyed when the trap is created. If placed on 
a floor, a hidden pit trap is created; if on a ceiling, 
a falling block trap appears. On walls, a poison 
dart or gas trap will be created. The exact trap is 
left for the DM's design. The trap created is quite 
real and is not illusory or magical. 


of Truth 
XP Value: 600 GP Value: 6,000 
Duncwons & Deacons Rules Cyclopedia 

This scroll is blank when found. The user may 
ask a question of any living being within 30 feet; 
the complete and true answer appears on the 
scroll, read from the victim's mind by a powerful 
version of ESP, Note that the answer is true only 
within the limits of the victim’s knowledge. The 
scroll will display one answer per day. 


of Wind Magic 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 6,000 
Land of Fate 
Spells for these scrolls are taken from the “cle- 
mental” listings for each level. If no suitable spell 
exists at the rolled level, then the DM rolls on (or 
chooses from) the “universal” category, Spell 
lists can be found in the AL-QADIM Arabian 


Adventures Campaign Book. 
Wizard 
XP Value: 100/level GP Value: 300/level 
Land of Fate 

Roll Number & Type Levels 
01-06 I Universal spell 1d4 
07-09 I Universal spell 1d6 
10-11 1 Universal spell 1d8+1 
12-17 2 Universal spells 1d 
18-19 2 Universal spells 1d8+1 
20-25 3 Universal spells id4 
26-27 3 Universal spells 1d8+1 
28-33 4 Universal spells Idé 
34-35 4 Universal spells 1d8 
36-40 5 Universal spells 1d6 
41-42 S Universal spells 1d8 
43-47 6 Universal spells 1d6 
48-49 6 Universal spells 1d6+2 
50-53 7 Universal spells 1d8 
54-55 7 Universal spells ds! 


56 7 Universal spells 


57-60 1-4 Flame magic spells ldg 
61-65 1-3 Flame magic spells = 1d8+1 
66-70 1-4 Sand magic spells 1d 
71-75 1-3 Sand magic spells id8+1 


r eee ee re 


1086 


75-80 1-4 Sca magic spells 1d8 
81-85 I- Sea magic spells 1d8+1 
86-90 1-4 Wind magic spells 144 
91-95 1-3 Wind magic spells 1d8+1 
96-00 Cursed scroll 

of Wizards 
XP Value: 400 GP Value: 2,000 


Dunatos & Dracons Rules Cyclopedia 

This scroll is blank; it is used to identify magical 
effects, The user may hold the scroll and com- 
mand it to identify any one magical effect within 
30 feet, The name of the spell or effect then 
appears on the scroll, along with the level of the 
caster of the effect. The scroll can identify one 
magical effect a day. 


Sea Dew 


The Minrothad Guilds 

To make sea dew, once each month the keeper 
must ritually bathe the pear! of power (see Pearl) 
in the seawater of the grotto, When all the seawa- 
ter but one drop has evaporated, the keeper cap- 
tures that droplet in a vial made of pearl fragment. 
This is repeated throughout the years until the 
vial is full of sea dew, a process that takes 100 
years to complete. Once the vial is full, it can be 
used to create a ship of pearl (see Ship), 


Seal 

A scal is a metal or ceramic stamp, usually a 
cylinder, that bears a raised or engraved emblem. 
They are used to impress an insignia into a soft 
medium such as wax or lead. In many cultures, 
no order or document is considered genuine 
unless it bears the writer's personal seal. Severe 
penalties await those who forge or misuse seals. 


XP Value: GP Value: 


of Deception 

GP Value: 6,000 
Oriental Adventures 
Name seals are an important part of official com- 
munications throughout Kara-Tur. No order or 
document is considered official without the per- 
sonal seal of the writer of the document. Severe 
penaltics are applicd to government officials who 
lose their name scals, since this opens the door to 
forgery and other crimes. The seal of deception isa 
magical scal that can reshape its stamp to match 
any scal a character has seen. To use the seal of 


deception, a character utters the command word 
anes 


XP Value: 600 


ee A 


5 Seal of Jafar al-Samal r 


and concentrates on the image of the seal to be 
reproduced. If the character has a stamp of the seal 
at hand to concentrate on, there is a 5% chance of 
error in the copy. If the character is concentrating 
on the seal from memory, there is a 30% the seal is 
incorrect in some way. While an incorrect seal can 
pass a cursory examination, it will be revealed as a 
forgery upon careful scrutiny. 


of Jafar al-Samal 
XP Value: GP Value: — 
Book of Artifacts 
This seal is a 3-foot—tall golden jar containing 
four gen that correspond to the four clements. 
The vessel is sealed with lead and inscribed with 
a silver talisman bearing Jafar’s name. The seal 
can only be found in Zakhara. 

Jafar the Incomparable, first sha’ir, made the 
seal in a distant age, when the four genie lords grew 
jealous of his power and sent an army to harass the 
people of Zakhara. While the seal was in his hands, 
the genies obeyed all men perforce, much as the 
dao now serve all yak-men, and Zakhara enjoyed a 
golden age. After his death, Jafar’s foolish students 
quarreled over the seal. While they squabbled, their 
own gen united against them, stole the jar, and it 
has remained hidden ever since. 

The seal has been hidden by the genies and is 
almost impossible to find—it is protected by 
guardian and slayer genies somewhere on the rim 
of the world. The PCs should find the seal only if 
the DM wants them to have unprecedented power 
over the four genie lords (to make them cooper- 
ate, for instance). The PCs should not be allowed 
to keep it, but destroying the seal has terrible con- 
sequences as well. All sha’irs will become ene- 
mies of the owner, as they covet the seal and fear 
any other who has its power. As soon as any of its 
powers are invoked, all genies are aware that it 
has a new owner, though they do not know where 
it is. Characters should soon have their hands full 
just trying to hang onto the seal. 

Therefore, once the need for the seal has passed, 
it is best removed from the campaign. The casiest 
method to accomplish this is to allow the genies to 
recover the seal, If the characters covet it, the task 
of getting the seal away from them becomes an 
adventure in itself. And when the genies regain the 
seal, it will be hidden far from mortal eyes. 

Constant Powers: The seal's owner gains the 
abilities of a sha’ir at a level equal to his or her 
own in any other class, and sha’ir gain an addi- 


tional four levels. The seal functions as a protec- 
tion from genies scroll; no genie can ever destroy 
the seal or harm the owner of the seal. 


Invoked Powers: The owner can demand three 
services (not wishes) of a number of genies not to 
exceed the owner's Wisdom score. 

Random Powers: The scal has one power cach 
from Artifact Table 1-10: Earth, Artifact Table 
1-07:Air, Artifact Table 1-08: Fire, and Arti- 
fact Table 1-09: Water. 

Curse: Whenever the owner demands a ser- 
vice from a genie, a successful Charisma check 
must be made or the genie is unmoved. Further- 
more, successfully commanded genies loathe 
their masters, and, although they cannot harm 
them, they will work indirectly against the mor- 
tal. Misfortune and woe follow the owner of the 
seal—strange accidents and coincidences caused 
by vengeful genies. 

Suggested Means of Destruction: 

* The seal must be carried by a tortoise to every 
shrine in Zakhara and blessed by a Moralist 
priest at cach one. 

* The seal must be cleansed with the breath of a 
soul, softened in the water of life, heated with a 
spark of the sun, and opened with a mountains 
heart. 

* The seal must be placed on the brow of the 
forgotten god, 


4766 


. / / ( 


1087 


— — a å OO 


~ Scal of Vigor r 


of Vigor 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 10,000 
Onental Adventures 

When found, this magical item appears as a blank 
name seal. To use, the character must inscribe the 
surface with his or her name, Once this is done, 
the magical properties of the seal are activated 

After that, the character heals at double the nor- 
mal healing rate and cure spells have maximum 
effect when cast upon the character, provided in 
both cases the character is carrying the seal. If the 
inscribed seal should fall into the hands of 
another, the character named on the seal suffers 
all damage of the new owner until he or she ts 
slain, the seal is destroyed, or the original user 
regains the scal 


Seat of Bane 
XP Value: 6,000 GP Value: 160,000 
Halls of the High King 
These cumbersome items are of ancient design 
and manufacture, found in only a few temples of 
Bane, A seat of Bane, ot chair of audience, is 
carved of black stone, Its back rises up 20 feet A wall of fire of normal effect (except that it 


above the seat, and is fashioned into a black hand. cannot give off “waves of heat” damage) with 
Senior priests of the temple clergy customarily sit red and black Names springing up in front of 
in such a chair when serving as the temporal the chair, 10“ across and as far away from the 
voice and judgment of Bane, guarding the far- foot of the chair, outward in a straight path, as 
thest point into the temple that nonclergy are the sitter desires up to a maximum distance of 
allowed to reach. A seat of Bane radiates magic, 100° (and the sitter can be damaged by the 
but has no charges nor can it be Names if he or she falls into them) 
exhausted by any known means. + Fire resistance (identical in effect to that con- 
A Seat of Bane allows any single being on its ferred by a ring of fire resistance) protects the 
seat to employ ESP with a 90-yard range, by sitter 
silent act of will. This power of the chair can be * The sitter is empowered to speak with dead (as 
used continuously and in combination with other the spell, as if cast by a 9th-level priest), regard- 
functions of the chair less of class, alignment, or level. This ability can 
In any single round, a Seat of Bane can create be used in addition to the spell of the same 
or maintain any one of the following powers: name, if the sitter is a priest. but it does not affect 
An invisible, cylindrical wal? of force sur- the spells performance, nor can a priest of è 
rounding the chair, open at top and bottom higher level than 9th impose his better perfor- 
An antimagic ray emanating from the palm of mance through the chair’s power, to augment it 
the hand (the back of the chair, above the head A seat of Bane can switch instantly from one 


of the being seated in the chair), with the same power to another, but can only have one power 
effects, range, and 90° are as the ray gencrated operating at a time (except for its ESP). Each power 
by a beholder’: central eye. functions for at least one round, once activated. 

* True seeing, 120° range, conferred upon the Once enchanted, a seat of Bane cannot be 
being sitting in the scat (lasting as long as tipped or moved without unleashing a 6d6 fire- 
desired, so long as the being remains on the seat). ball in all directions. The fireball docs no damage 

* Know alignment, 10-yard range, conferred upon to the chair, which is immune to fire and clectri- 
the being sitting in the Seat (for as long as cal attacks, whatever their origins. 


desired, so long as the being remains on the seat) If one’s campaign uses sPELLJIAMMER rules and 
ae 
1088 


+ Seed, Fire y 


settings, a seat of Bane functions as a Minor 
Helm. It is as difficult to destroy as other Minor 
Helms (treat it as an artifact for purpose of hav- 
ing PCs destroy it). 

Any evil being who can fit on the seat can use 
the powers of a seat of Bane, but it does not func- 
tion for characters of neutral or good alignments in 
any way, although contact with it does them no 
damage. If more than one evil character is vying for 


control of a seat, the one occupying the largest part 
of the actual seat of the chair wields its powers. 


Seed 

Seeds are the beginning of plants; plants of har- 
vests; and harvests of plenty. If seeds are stored in 
adry, dark, and clean place, they can be kept for 
almost indefinite periods of time. Archacologists 
who have excavated the ruins of cultures that died 
millennia ago have found seed stores that still 
were still viable, 


Dragon Lily 
XP Value: 200 GP Value: 1,000 
DRAGON Magazine 30 

The dragon lily (found in lots of Ida seeds) may 
have been developed to contain the trol/flowers. 
When the bright orange blossom of the dragon 
lily is disturbed, it spouts a small burst of fire 
(that causes | point of damage). Attempting to 
smell the blossom normally results in a singed 
beard and eyebrows. 


Enchanted Cherry Pits 
XP Value GP Value 
Brown: 1,500 7.5800 
Gold: 2,000 «10,000 
Red: 1,600 «8,000 
Night of the Seven Swords 


These magical seeds come in three varictics: 
smooth brown, spiked red, and crescent gold. 
When the seed is planted and watered, it roots 
and grows into a mature bonsai cherry tree in two 
rounds, blossoming in the third. Each plant yields 
2d4 blossoms, which must be picked for use. 
Usually, 1-3 seeds are found. 

Smooth Brown: When the blossom is picked, 
a full-grown, 3rd-level Samurai (AC 7; hp 18; 
#AT 1; THACO 18; Dmg 29) steps out of it. The 
samurai serves for one turn or until slain, then 
withers away. All samurai from the plant are iden- 
tical, because each is a facet of the plant’s spirit. 

Spiked Red: When picked, the blossom turns 


into a ripe cherry. When thrown, the fruit 
explodes on impact, causing 2d8 points of fire 
damage within a 10-foot radius. 

Cresent Gold: The 2d4 blossoms shine dimly 
with a golden light, When picked, a blossom 
shines brightly with the light of the full moon ina 
10-foot radius. Those in the arca gain +2 to 
attacks, saves, and AC when fighting evil spirits. 
Lesser evil spirits cannot enter the radius volun- 
tarily. The blossom withers after one turn. 


Fire 

GP Value: 10,000 
New Item 
These incendiary missiles come in small bags 
constructed of natural materials such as bark or 
soft leather, Each bag contains 1d10+20 missiles. 
To use the missiles, the owner reaches into the 
bag and speaks a command word while pulling 
out one of the dried seeds contained inside. The 
first command word produces a small, heavy 
missile about the size of an acorn. The fire seed 
missile can be hurled up to 40 yards with no 
penalties for range. When the strikes, it creates a 
burst of intense flame 10 feet in diameter. The 
flame sets fire to all combustible materials in the 
area and inflicts 2d8 points of damage to crea- 
tures within the area, If the missile actually 
strikes a creature (that is, the missile thrower 


XP Value: 2,500 


~ Seed of Growth r 


makes a successful attack roll), there is no saving 
throw; other creatures are allowed a saving throw 
vs, spell to reduce the damage by half. 

A second command word allows the user to 
produce a lightweight incendiary about the size 
of a holly berry. The incendiary can be tossed 
about 6 feet, but it is not intended to be used as a 
missile. Instead, the user can speak a third com- 
mand word to detonate the incendiary. The com- 
mand range is 40 yards, and the incendiary’s 
effect is the same as a fire seed missile, 

Characters looking into the bag sce a small 
assortment of dried seeds, berries, and nuts. Any 
seed withdrawn or dumped from the bag loses its 
magical properties forever. The bag crumbles to 
dust when the last seed is withdrawn. Missiles and 
incendiaries detonate if not used within 12 rounds. 


of Growth 
XP Value: 400 GP Value: 2,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

When placed or thrown on any solid surface up to 
30 feet away, cach seed grows into a large bush 
within one round. The bushes thus created can 
entrap creatures; each victim may make a saving 
throw vs. paralysis to avoid entrapment. One seed 
muy entrap a creature of human-size or larger, two 
are needed for a large or giant-sized creature. and 
three for a dragon-sized or larger being. Creatures 
over 30 fect tall cannot be trapped. One to ten seeds 
are usually discovered in a normal pouch or sack. 


Hill 
XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 20,000 
Dragon Magazine 5 

These black spheres, usually found in groups of 
143, are light and small as a human's clenched fist, 
until thrown. In flight they quickly expand in size 
and mass. By the time they have traveled 50 feet, 
they are about 2 feet in diameter. Any structure or 
individual they impact with suffers damage as 
though attacked by a heavy catapult (3d10 points or 
2d4 structure points). Range is dependant upon 
Strength—approximately 5 feet per Strength point. 


Mountain 
XP Value: 8,000 GP Value: 40,000 
DRAGON Magazine $ 
Similar to Aill seeds in function but much more 
deadly, When thrown through the air, they expand 
in size and mass. By the time they have traveled 50 
feet, they are about 4 feet in diameter. Any structure 


or individual they impact with suffers damage as 
though attacked by a great bombard (3410 points or 
3d12 structural points), Range is dependant upon 


Strength—approximately $ feet per Strength point. 

These items are found in groups of 1d3. 
Square-Meal 

XP Value GP Value 

Damage Curing: 200 2,000 

Disease Curing: 200 2,000 

Normal: 10 100 


DRAGON Magazine 187 

These magical seeds usually come in a packet of 
dio seeds. When planted in at least | inch of soil, 
and commanded in the druids’ tongue to grow, a 
seed grows in one turn into a 3-foot-tall tree with 
1d4+5 mango-sized fruits. Each fruit is sufficient 
to nourish one human, demihuman, or humanoid 
for one day. The stalk and leaves of the plant are 
sufficient to nourish as many horses or mules as 
there were fruits. There is a 5% chance that each 
fruit grown will cure cither 6d4 points of damage 
or one magical or nonmagical disease (50% chance 
of eimer. if curative ability is indicated). The druid 
who grew the plant is able to recognize such fruits. 

Square-meal seeds grow in any weather condi- 
tions. They must be planted one at a time, a 
process requiring one round, though a number 
can be invoked at once if simultancously buried. 
If a plant growth spell is cast on one before it is 
invoked, the plant grows the maximum number of 
fruits, but is not otherwise affected. The plant, 
once grown, is not unusually hardy; adverse 
weather conditions that would kill other plants 
destroy it. The tree dies (and its substance decays 
and is useless) in 1d4+2 days. Its fruit cannot be 
stored or preserved for longer than one day. Nei- 
ther the seeds nor the plants radiate magic, 
though any druid can recognize them for what 
they are. A dispel magic spell cast at a packet of 
seeds will destroy 10d10 of them. Neither the 
seeds nor the plants are sentient, and they are not 
affected by druidic spells other than plant growth, 


Sun 
XP Value: 1,500 GP Value: 7,500 
Crystal Spheres 
The legend of Faeriespace is lost in time, and 
most spacefarers do not even know of its exis- 
tence. It is a realm whose very fabric is made up 
of peculiar facrie magic. Strange and wonderful 


things abound there. 


„„ 


1090 


When worthy people come to this realm, Acli- 
vere, the One- King of Facricspacc, sometimes 
sees fit to aid them in their endeavors. To this end, 
the faerie magic weaves incantations to meet spe- 
cific needs, When Bruin Shambrath, a good- 
hearted, brave young man from Greatspace came 
to Aelivere in need, the mysterious ruler gave him 
the sun seeds 

These magical seeds resemble small grains of 
sand and are brilliant yellow in color. They are 
typically carried in a small leather pouch that 
contains a few ounces of the seed. Each pouch 
carrics enough seed for 14 uses 

The sceds ure drawn out of the fabric of light 
and have a wondrous effect when spread upon a 
dead sun, They cause the body to spring back into 
fiery life as it was when it was first created, shin- 
ing with original brilliance. There is, of course, a 
small problem involved in the use of sunseeds; a 
user must be sufficiently far from the sun so as 
not to be destroyed when the flaming body 
revives, yet close enough to sprinkle the sceds 
onto it. This is typically done with a spelljam- 
ming ship from a close orbit to the sun. There is a 
base 80% chance that the sun is successfully 
revived by the seeds. If the application is success- 
ful, the sun begins to reignite within five rounds 
(giving a spelljammer plenty of time to move 
away) and comes back to life within two turns, 


Trollflower 

GP Value: 1,000 
Deacon Magazine 30 
Tired of having to replant his flowers every time a 
dragon traipsed through his garden, Orlow devel- 
oped the trollflower (found in lots of Ida seeds). 
This is what would be described as a very hardy 
perennial. This flower grows slowly at the rate of 2 
inches per month, but regenerates (similarly to a 
Troll) within 24 hours (unless burned, or course). 


XP Value: 200 


of Wealth 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
The Complete Wizard's Handbook 
These are sceds that grow to become trees that 
bear valuable gems instead of fruit. 


Shade of the Shadow 
XP Value: GP Value: 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 43 
This interesting object is found stored in a 3-foot 
cylinder. The shade itself unrolls to a 3-foot-wide, 


7-foot-high piece that adheres to the wall. Once the 
shadow of a person or creature is cast on the shade 
(stand facing the shade and place a bright light 
behind the subject) the shadow is capable of 
detaching itself and performing simple deeds of 
movement and observation on command of the per- 
son controlling the shade, The shadow moves along 
walls, but can go through doors and walls upon 
command. The shadow has no physical properties 
or abilities and is resistant to both magical and 
weapon attacks. It has an innate ability to cause 
fear in opponents when first observed (as fear, the 
6th-level spell). The shadow lasts for 14 rounds and 
can be used once a day. If a person is killed while 
his shadow is detached, he becomes a shade as 
described in the Monstrous Manual accessory. 


Shaker 
A shaker is a vessel that can be filled with a gran- 
ular substance. The shaker is corked at the bottom 
and holes at the top allow the granulated sub- 
stance (usually salt or ground black pepper) to 
pass through in a controlled fashion, allowing the 
user to sprinkle the substance evenly over food. 


Eternal Salt 
XP Value; 300 GP Value: 1,500 
DRAGON Magazine 30 
The eternal salt shaker provides a modest amount 


of salt for the user each time it is used. (The salt 
ou 


r 


1091 


11 ˙ m ⅛ ͤ—ðuQ ˙U˙ 1 


aw Shaker, Hugrin'’s Spice r 


cannot be poured from the shaker.) The amount is 
small, perhaps % gram per shake (2 grams per 
round, or 15 hours of constant shaking to produce a 
pound), but neverending if the character's arm lasts. 


Hugrin’s Spice 
XP Value: 800 GP Value: 5,000 
PoLyHEDKON Newszine 82 

The renowned wizard and chef Hugrin created 
this magical spice shaker. It appears as a smal! 
cylinder with a large “H” written on one end 
Each shake yields an ounce of any spice desired. 
To produce a spice the user speaks the command 
word followed by the name of the desired spice, 
then shakes the spice maker with the H side 
down. Each spice shaker can be used 100 times 
before it must be recharged. 


Shard of Shielding 
XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 20,000 
Dracon Mountam* Campaign Set 
The shard of shielding is a protective magical item 
with the following powers: It acts as a ring of pro- 
tection +2, à ring of fire resistance, and a ring of 
cold resistance. Any character who touches the 
shard immediately knows its properties. 


Sheath 
A sheath is a tight-fitting cover, intended to protect 
a knife or dagger from dents, rust, and scratches. 
They also protect blade-users from accidental cuts. 
In general, sheaths are made of leather or cloth, 
bound together with thongs or cord, and secured to 


belts. (Sce Scabbard for more options.) 
of Frogs 
XP Value: — GP Value; 1,000 
New Item 


An innocuous and obnoxious item, this sheath 
appears to be a benign bargin—a cheap, magical 
sheath. The problem is that, whenever a knife or 
dagger is drawn from this sheath, 1d20 rabid 
frogs also emerge to attack the user—who must 


make a save vs. poison to escape. 
of Smallness 
XP Value: 1,500 GP Value: 15,000 
Duncron Master Guide 


A magical item of this sort appears to be nothing 
more than a well-made piece of cloth material 
possibly some sort of covering or sheet woven of 
very fine linen or silk. One side will have a larger 


pattern than the other, or perhaps one side will be 
white, the other black. In any event, there will be 
an aura of alteration detectable from this cloth if 
magic is detected. 

This item causes any magical item wrapped 
within it to shrink to Ys its normal size and weight 
If the item is then wrapped in the sheet so as to be 
touching the reverse side of the material, it will 
grow back to its normal size and weight. Note that 


tional or usable while in reduced form. Change in 
size requires two rounds to accomplish, cither in 
shrinking or restoring fo normal size. 


Zadore’s Poison 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 2,500 
New Item 

Zadore the Timid, a rather cowardly wizard, 
invented this deadly weapon case. Each time a 
blade is drawn from this sheath it is automatically 
coated with 1d6 different poisons. So virulent are 
Zadore’s poisons thal no saving throw is allowed. 
One slice of a blade enclosed by this sheath (for- 
tunately, there ig only the one), results in sudden 
death for any creature struck by it except planar 
creatures, who do get a saving throw, but at -A. 


Shield 

The shield is a protective guard made of wood, 
hide, or leather and carried on the forearm. Shields 
come in a variety of shapes and sizes. The most 
familiar is the “heater”—a flat top with a curving, 
pointed bottom to protect the body. Less popular 
are the small shields known as “bucklers,” and 
worn on the hands, Most shields are made wood or 
of metal and many wooden ones have metal rims. 

Historical Note: According to GREYHAWK, 
shields that are magically enchanted to a +4 are 
made of mithral, and those enchanted to a +5 pro- 
tection are constructed from a “strange alloy 
known as adamantite,” 


Roll Shield Type 
01-04 Ashanti 
05-07  Basketwork 
08-11 Basotho 
12-14 Body 
15-18 Buckler 
19-21 Clipei 
22-25 Darag 


a 


26-29 Dahi 
30-32 Gunsen 
33-36 Heater 
37-39 Hide 
40-43 iron 
44-46 lei Halngu 
47-50 Kote 
51-54 Large 
55-57 Madu 
58-61 Maratha 
62-64 Medium 
65-68 Parma 
69-71 = Parrying 
72-75 Round 
76-79 Scutum 
80-82 Small 
83-86 Smash 
87-89 Spiked 
90-93 Spiked Buckler 
94-96 Target 
97-00 War 
Abbathor’s 
XP Value: 1,200 GP Value: 6,000 
Monster Mythology 


This avatar’s shield can cast blindness at one 
creature per round within 30 fect (save vs. spell at 
-6 to negate, 3 if looking away). 


of Absorption 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 5,000 
Donations & Deacons Rules Cyclopedia 
If the user is hit by a blow that would cause an 
energy drain, the shield absorbs the draining 
effect and only the normal damage affects the 
user. Each energy drain causes the loss of 1 AC 
bonus modifier from the shield. When reduced to 
0 bonuses, the item crumbles to dust. (For 
instance, a shicld +3 that has absorbed two 
energy drain attacks is now only a shield +1. If it 
absorbs yet another energy drain, it is reduced to 
0 and disintegrates.) This special power is not 
under the control of the user; a character cannot 
choose to suffer the energy drain and leave the 
item intact, The normal limit of one use per day 


does not apply to this power, 


XP Value: 8,000 


GP Value: 40,000 
Dernes & Dmooons” Cyclopedia 

This magical shield can throw fear into the heart of 
any beings coming within 10 yards of it if they do 
not make their save vs. spell. It is a shield +5 and the 
fear ability must be activated by the desire of the 
holder, The shield also has the power to form itself 
into a displacer cloak with the same fear power at a 
ward command. Its primary owner is Zeus & avatar, 
though Athena's avatar often has custody of it. It is 
used by Zeus’s avatar in major battles, though, on 
rare occasions, he lends it to favored mortals. 


Aegis II 

GP Value: 40,000 
Legends & Lore 
This magical shield +5 is made from the skin of 
the golden fleece. Bearing a depiction of the head 
of a beautiful woman with snakes for hair, it has 
two magical powers. If the bearer shakes it, any- 
one looking upon it must save vs. spell or flee in 
panic for 1d10 turns. At the bearer’s command, it 
also acts as a cloak of displacement. Acgis is usu- 
ally carried by Zeus, but he sometimes lends it to 
Athena or a favorite mortal hero. 


XP Value: 8,000 


Athena’s 
XP Value: 2,400 GP Value: 12,000 
Legends & Lore 
Athena x avatar is armed with several special 
items. One of these is a shield bearing a medusa’s 
head that causes anyone looking at it to save vs. 
petrification or be turned to stone. 


of Blow Turning 
XP Value: 1,200 GP Value: 6,000 
Dragox Magazine 179 
This device makes attacks on the user less likely 
by compelling opponents to select another target, 
when possible. When a die is rolled to randomly 
determine which character is being attacked by 
an oncoming foe, it must be rerolled if the first 
roll indicates the bearer of the shield of blow 
turning. Optionally, the shield could cast a form 
of the priest spell sanctuary, 


of Charm 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
Dunatons & Dracons Rules Cyclopedia 
When the user is hit by an opponent, the oppo- 
nent must make a saving throw vs. spell or 
4795 


erer e ¹ A 


1093 


11 ³˙ AAA w ˙ũd A ñ Ü rr 7˙ i.: ] ... «—«— 


* 


~ Shield of Concealed Wizardry 


become charmed by the user of this special shield 
(as the wizard spell charm person or charm mon- 
ster), If a handheld weapon is used in the attack, 
the opponent gains a +4 bonus to the saving 
throw. Only one victim can be charmed cach day, 
but any number of saving throws may be made 
before the charm is successful. 


of Concealed Wizardry* 
XP Value: +800 GP Value: +4,000 
Land of Fate 

These shields have their magical nature con- 
cealed by powerful spells, they do not respond to 
detect magic or similar spells (see Enchanted 
Enhancements, of Concealed Wizardry in Vol- 
ume I and Weapon). 


Copper 
XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 20,000 
Kara-Tur 
The porcelain warrior, detailed in the Crystal 
Warrior entry, carries a magical copper shield 
+2 that shines like the sun, causing blindness in 
all creatures within 50 feet who fail a saving 
throw vs. spell. 


of Cure Wounds 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 10,000 
DUNGEONS & Dracons Rules Cyclopedia 

This shield can cure half of the damage the user 
has incurred, whatever that amount may be, once 
per day. It can only cure the user, not another 
creature, and it cannot affect poison, disease, or 
any other damage except wounds. 


Death Watch Beetle 
XP Value: 800 GP Value: 4,000 
GREY MC Appendix 
The wings of the death watch beetle are highly val- 
ued by skilled armorers, who can fashion them into 
very effective shields. If an expert armorer is pro- 
vided with both wings of a death watch beetle, he 
or she can make the equivalent of a body shield +1. 


Discus* 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 10,000 
DRAGON Magazine 37 
This device functions normally as a medium-sized 
shield +3, circular in shape, with edges rounded 
and turned inward (like a “flying saucer’). The user 
may cast the shield like a discus. It flies out, strikes 
a glancing blow on its target, and returns. A mini- 


mum Strength of 16 and a minimum Dexterity of 
12 are required to throw the shield properly. The 
shield is cast with one hand, Note that the caster 
need not make a die roll in order to catch the shield 
when it comes back at the end of the melee round. 
Its maximum range is 270 feet, 

The damage done when a discus shield strikes 
an opponent varies inversely with the range of the 
target, as shown in the table below. Opponents 
may attempt to catch the shield, but must roll to 
strike AC —6 and have both hands free; otherwise, 
the opponent takes the maximum possible dam- 
age. The attempt to catch the shield may only be 
made if the caster has made a successful attack 
roll. The shield’s flight path is unaffected by 
winds up to hurricane force. The caster is - to 
hit at medium range and —S to hit at long range. 


Distance of Target Damage from Shield 
Strike 
0-90 Feet 2d4 points 
91-180 Feet d points 
181-270 Feet da points 


This device must be used at a penalty to attack 
rolls unless the user has opted to take expertise 
with it as a possible weapon, Because the shield 
is blunt-edged, priests may use it as a weapon, as 
well as warriors. 


of Dragon Protection 
XP Value: 1,100 GP Value: 11,000 
Dragon Magazine 99 
This shicld has magical runes across its front and 
back rim that spell out the word “dragon.” The runes 
are magical, so that anyone who reads them sees the 
word written in their native tongue. Whenever a 
dragon comes within 30 feet of the shield, the word 
“dragon” glows softly for one round, then fade. 
The shield of dragon protection is normally a 
shield +3, but it confers +5 protection from all 
nonmagical dragon attacks (including claws and 
bite). If the word “dragon” is spoken aloud by the 
shield’s bearer, the whole shield begins to glow 
with the effect of a light spell and an additional 
bonus is conferred. If the bearer makes a saving 
throw vs. the dragon & breath weapon, no damage 
is taken and only half damage is taken if the sav- 
ing throw fails. Finally, the shield gives a +3 
bonus to the bearer’s saving throw against any 
magical spells cast by dragons against him or her, 
as a ring of protection, 
4801 


1094 = 


k = 


a ee 


y Shicid of Energy Drain Il y 


Dragonscale 

GP Value: 5,000 
Dracow Quest Game 
This shield was forged from a scale cut from a 
dragon by an ancient hero. When It Is used, it 
reduces a hero’s Armor Class by 2 places instcad 
of just 1. Thus, if a hero in plate armor (Armor 
Class 3) used this shield, his or her Armor Class 
would be reduced to 1. 


XP Value: 500 


hield 

XP Value: 1,200 GP Value: 12,000 
Dragon Knight 
This shield +2/+3 vs, dragons magically protects 
its wielder so that a successful saving throw vs. 
breath weapon means no damage from dragon 
breath, and a failed saving throw results in only 
half damage. 


Dzance’s Guardian 

XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 10,000 

DRAGON Magazine 89 
The ranger Dzance found this shield in a chest in 
the depths of Gauntulgrym, the Lost City. Its ori- 
gin is unknown, but it is thought to be of dwarven 
manufacture. Dance Journals tell us of the 
properties of this shield, When he retired from 
adventuring to live in the Lady Court at Silvery- 
moon, Dzance gave his guardian shield to Belpir, 
a young knight of that city. The new owner went 
off adventuring straightaway and has not been 
seen since. The fate of Belpir and of Drance & 
guardian shield are yet a mystery. 

The guardian is a shield +0, magical in nature 
but conferring no Armor Class bonus to its bearer 
aside from the I-place benefit provided by any 
shield. However, it has a special defensive 
power—when worn, it radiates an insubstantial 
magical energy ficld that envelops its bearer 
(only the bearer) like an aura. Any magie missile 
directed at a bearer of Dzance x guardian shield, 
strikes this field and is reflected unerringly 
straight back at the sender with no damage to the 
shieldbearer. 

The field also absorbs all clectrical discharges 
of natural or magical origins, such as shocking 
grasp, lightning bolt, ot chain lightning, without 
harm to the bearer. The attacks dissipate gradu- 
ally and harmlessly if the shield is put down, but 
if the bearer can bring the shield into physical 
contact with an enemy within four rounds of a 
discharge, the entire energy field can be transmit- 


ted to the foe (save vs. paralyzation for half dam- 
age). The bearer is immediately aware of the stor- 
age and discharge power whenever the field 
intercepts electrical energy. 

When a discharge is activated by the bearer’s 
will, there is a 30% chance that the bearer and 
shield (but not any companions or foes unless 
direct, physical contact is present at the time) are 
plane shifted to a random, known plane of exis- 
tence, This power is unknown to the bearer until it 
actually occurs; identity, sage-lore, and legend 
lore do not reveal it. 


of Electricity 
XP Value: 1,500 GP Value: 15,000 
Dunctons & Deacons Rules Cyclopedia 
The shield, on command of the user, becomes 
charged with magical clectrical force. If the user 
is hit while “charged,” the attacker takes 6d6 
points of clectrical damage, The attacker may 
make a saving throw vs. spell to take half dam- 
age; if a weapon is used in the attack, a +4 bonus 
to the saving throw applies. The shicld can be 
charged or neutralized as often as desired by 
using command words, but it can only cause 


damage (“discharge”) once a day, 


of Energy Drain 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 20,000 
Red Arrow, Black Shield 
This appears to be a normal shield +2. If the 
proper command word is spoken, the shield can 
be charged. If the shield’s user is hit while 
“charged,” the attacker must make a saving throw 
vs. spell or lose one level, as if hit by a wight. 
This special property of the shicld is usable once 
per day, and lasts until it drains a level. Use of 
this shield is an evil act. 


of Energy Drain II 
XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 40,000 
Dunokoxs & Dracons Rules Cyclopedia 
The shield can become “charged” on command 
(as described under , Special Power in 
the D&D Rules Cyclopedia), but instead of 
inflicting damage, it causes the loss of one of the 
opponent's levels or Hit Dice (as if a wight). The 
same saving throw as the electricity power applies 
(possibly with bonuses). If successful, the energy 
drain does not occur. The item can drain onc level 
or Hit Die per day, but any number of saving 


throws may be made before this occurs. 
4807 


rr a 


1095 


o 


Shield of Ethereality 


( E 


of Ethereality 
XP Value: 5,000 GP Value: 30,000 
Dunarons & Dracons Rules Cyclopedia 

The user may become ethereal on command and 
may remain ethereal for as long as desired. The 
uscr may return to the Prime Material Plane when 
a second command word is spoken. Each com- 
mand word may be used once a day. 


Fire’s 
GP Value: 10,000 
Legends & Lore 
Wind's avatar carries this shield +3 at all times. If 
a mortal touches the shield, he or she suffers Idi 
points of fire damage per round even if magi- 
cally protected from fire. 


XP Value: 1,000 


of Fly 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 7,500 
DUNGEONS & Dracons Rules Cyclopedia 
When commanded, this shield creates a fly spell 
effect on the user, which lasts for 12 turns. The user 
may then travel in the air at up to 360 feet per turn 
by mere concentration (like the 3rd-level spell). 


of Gaseous Form 
XP Value: 3.000 GP Value: 15,000 
Duncrons & Dragons Rules Cyclopedia 
This valuable shield enables the user to turn into a 
cloud of gas (like a potion of gaseous form), includ- 
ing all carried equipment (unlike the potion). The 
user can remain gaseous for up to 6 turns and can 
return to normal form by mere concentration, 


Goblin Shield of the Pomarj 
XP Value: 1,250 GP Value: 7.500 
GEA Adventures 

This metal shield bears the coat of arms of goblins 
in the Pomarj—the red face of a medusa. Its creator 
is unknown, although rumors indicate a weak and 
treacherous wizard who sought his own safety dur- 
ing the invasion of humanoids from the Lortmil 
Mountains. Now the shield is found only in the 
hands of a goblin chief While giving a +2 bonus to 
its wielder’s Armor Class, the shield can cast flesh 
to stone (reverse of stone to flesh) once per day 


of Greyhawk 
XP Value: 1,050 GP Value: 10,500 
GREYHAWK Adventures 
This metal shield bears Greyhawk’s coat of arms, 
and was created by the Society of the Magi. It now 


hangs in the audience hall of the Lord Mayor's 
mansion, and is well guarded. As well as giving its 
user a +3 Armor Class bonus, the shield can cast 
dispel evil as a th. level priest, once per day 


* 


Grimjaw 


XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 10,000 
DRAGON Magazine 89 

Named for the small Common inscription found 
deeply engraved on the inside top rim, this plain 
iron shield ts dented and black, of a normal, unas- 
suming appearance. It bears no rust, and rust does 
not affect it regardless of the handling it receives 
due to protective magic cast upon it. Grimjaw 
was first identified by the sage Ragefast of Bal- 
dur's Gate, as borne by the adventurer Krystus 
and having a certain awesome power. Krystus the 
Proud soon met his death at the hands of a dwar- 
ven patrol half a world away, in the mountains 
near Tethyamar, in a dispute over passage through 
the dwarven mines there. 

Grimjaw is known to have been in the hands of 
the ruling dwarven clan “Iron House" for many 
years, but was lost in battle when ores and evil 
wizards drove out or slew all the dwarves of 
Tethyamar. The present head of the “Iron House” 
Ghellin, wishes to regain the shield, 

Grimjaw confers no magical Armor Class 
bonus to its wearer, but it has a powerful ability to 

4815 


r, .. 


096 


y Shield, Hawkstone’s Bulwark s- 


affect any magical items that come into direct 
physical contact with it, regardless of the shield- 
bearer’s wishes. The effects of any single contact 
is determined by percentile dice roll, as follows: 


Roll Contact Effect 

01-20 ltem has one charge drained from it by 
Grimjaw, if the item has no charges as 
such, its powers are negated for 344 turns. 

21-65 Item instantly turns and attacks wielder 
for one round, cither striking as if the 
wielder were attucked by someone of 
equal class, Strength, and level (if a 
weapon), or firing one charge or magical 
attack (if a charged staff or similar item). 

66-80 Item has all magical powers and abilitics 
negated for di rounds 

81-95 nem is completely drained of all magical 
powers forever, as if struck by a rod of 
cancellation. Artifacts are likely to be 
unaffected, but may, at the Dis option, 
teleport away to a random location, with 
or without the wielder 

96-00 Grimjaw discharges some of its stored, 
magical energy into the contacting item; 
the item gains Ide additional charges 
(permanently), or a +1 on attack and 
damage bonuses for Ido turns. 


If a magical weapon or item is wielded against 
the shieldbearer, and the item misses the Armor 
Class of the shieldbearer by 1 point (scoring what 
would have been a hit except for the shield’s pres- 
ence), then it is considered to have struck the 
shield. 


of Haste 

XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 10,000 
Duncvons & Dragons Rules Cyclopedia 

When commanded, the shield creates a haste 
spell effect on the user, allowing double normal 
movement and number of attacks (as the 3rd- 
level wizard spell), The haste lasts for only 1 turn 
and is usable only once a day. 


Hastsezini’s 
XP Value: 3,500 GP Value: 35,000 
Denn & Dewicoos 
He uses a shield +5 in battle, and this item cannot 
be wiclded by any other being. In addition, he 
cannot be attacked from behind 


Hawkstone’s Bulwark 


XP Value: 1,500 GP Value: 9,000 
Deacon Magazine 89 

The ranger Hawkstone bore this shield in his war 
against the giants of the Great Glacier and the 
beust-men (ogres) of Thar. Some time after his 
death, his grave wax violated and all his treasures 
stolen, among them the blade Dure/va and this 
shield, known in ballads as Hawkstone $ Bulwark 
It is generally believed that Hawkstone won this 
shield from the board of the black dragon Ynndoth. 
Its origin is as unknown as its present fate. 

The shield is a single slab of 2-inch-thick, pol- 
ished steel, It is a beautiful shade of bluc, fine metal, 
unique in its quality in the Realms. The usual two 
straps on the back are of black bullhide, and it 
weighs no more than a wooden shield. It has the 
abilities of a shield +2, and upon command, the 
shield grows magically into a bridge. (The com- 
mand word, known through lore but not written any- 
where on the shield, is “Bu/wark.") The shield will 
disappear from the bearers possession and reappear 
ut the start of the following round as a 5-inch-thick 
span of fine steel, 2 feet wide by 60 feet long. Its 
length is not variable, and the change is not always 
automatic, if the command word is spoken when the 
Bulwark doesn't have enough room to expand, the 
power simply fails to function. The bridge extends 
out in the direction the bearer is facing, beginning 

4618 


— A” =.  —- 


1097 


—————————————— 6 ee 


~ Shield Holy 7 


just in front of the bearer’s feet. Once placed, the 
bridge cannot be moved (although it can be shrunk 
buck into a shield and reexpanded in a different 
location). It will support up to 5,000 pounds of 
weight at one time. Exceeding the weight limit 
causes it to collapse back into a normal shield (see 
below), leaving the creatures and objects upon it 
without any visible means of support. 

If the weight capacity is not overshot, the 
bridge remains in that form for 33 days, or until 
the bearer of the shield holds onto one of the 
straps and utters the reverse command word 
“Krawlub.” (When in bridge form, the shield's 
straps are located on the top surface of the bridge, 
at either end.) The shrinking process works essen- 
tially the same as the expansion process—the 
bridge disappears when the command word is 
spoken, und at the start of the following round the 
Bulwark reappears at the bearer’s feet in shield 
form. 

No magic short of a limited wish, alter reality, 
or wish will cause the bridge to shrink, shift, 
break, or otherwise move (although the ground 
on which it rests could well be affected by disin- 
tegrate, dig, or similar spells). The bridge con- 
ducts heat, electricity, and other similar forms of 
energy, and in such respects acts as normal metal 
does. 


Holy 
XP Value GP Value 
Chaotic good: 1,000 8,000 
Lawful good: 1,000 8.000 
Neutral good: 1,000 8,000 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 58 


This kite-shaped shield is medium sized and has 
a +2 enchantment, However, in the hands of a 
good-aligned priest or a paladin with spell cast- 
ing abilities it is especially useful. Each holy 
shield has a specific alignment, and this can be 
determined by rolling 1d6: 


Roll Alignment 

1-2 Lawful Good 
3-4 — Neutral Good 
S-6 Chaotic Good 


Ifa priest or spellcasting paladin is of the same 
alignment as the shield, three properties come 
into play. The shield’s face changes to depict that 
character's holy symbol; the armor class bonus of 
the shield increases to +3; and the shicld confers 


a permanent protection from evil. Holy shields are 
as light as small shields. They were rumored to 
have been created by the good gods during a 
great battle with evil many centuries ago. 


of the Holy 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 8,000 
DraGoN Magazine 179 

This medium shield is inscribed with a symbol of 
one of the enlightened deities. In the hands of an 
ordinary individual, the shield functions as a 
shield +1, However, if used by a priest of the 
same religion as the deity to which the shicld is 
dedicated, the shield gains a +2 bonus and allows 
its user to affect undead as if he or she were four 
levels higher, This ability to affect undead applies 
only if the priest ix otherwise capable of turning 
or commanding the undead in question. 


of Huma 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 8,000 
Tales of the Lance 

Huma is most famed for his use of the original 
dragonlances to banish the Queen of Darkness 
from the face of Krynn. His shield, however, fig- 
ures quite prominently in many of his lesser tales, 
It never failed him, saving his life in many battles 
against dragons before the dragonlance was 
employed. The shicld appears to be a medium 
shield, carved with intricate symbols of the 
Knights of the Crown. 

Huma shield is considered a medium shield 
+3 vs. dragons. It magically protects its wielder 
against breath-weapon attacks so that a success- 
ful save vs. breath weapon causes no damage and 
a failed save results in only half damage. 


of Invisibility 
XP Value: 1,500 GP Value: 7,500 
Dunctows & Dracons Rules Cyclopedia 
When commanded, the shield makes the user ivis- 
ible, as if the 2nd-level wizard spell were cast. In 
addition, the shield can itself become invisible three 
times a day, on command of the user. 


Kirith-Kanoi 
XP Value: 1,200 GP Value: 12,000 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 43 

This large, circular shield is fashioned of dark, 
dense wood with rough metal bands running 
across it. It confers +3 on AC for any user, but in 
the hands of a dwarf, its true magical power man- 

an 


eee ee ee 


1098 


x Shield of Medusae 
| 


ifests itself. Carried by a dwarf, it acts as a ring of 
spell turning. Its name in dwarven means “The 
Banc of Magic.” No one knows who made it or 
when it was made, but it has surfaced many times 
in dwarven legends under different names. 


Laduguer’s 
XP Value: 1,200 GP Value: 12,000 
Monster Mythology 
The avatar has a shield +/ that gives immunity to 
normal missiles. 


Laeral’s Spell 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 2,000 
The Magister 
Named for the wizardess who devised the prototype, 
these shields can still be made with much travail. 

A spell shteld protects the wearer from the fol- 
lowing spells, so that he or she suffers no dam- 
age; all Bigby x spells (note that it does not negate 
an interposiny hand), blade barrier, shillelagh, 
and spiritual hammer. in addition, there is a 60% 
chance (per missile) that the shield will negate 
magic missile attacks, 

Against normal missiles, Laeral 5 spell shield 
acts as a shield All physical missiles that 
strike the shield (if a missile attack roll directed 
at the wearer indicates a miss, roll Idi 5 or 6 
indicates that the missile struck the shield) 
rebound at the source of the missile, flying back 
al +1. A returning missile arrives on the round 
following that in which it struck the shield, strikes 
once (and is considered +1 magical for that one 
strike), and is thereafter normal and nonmagical. 


of Lorin 
XP Value: 550 GP Value: 5,500 
Dragon Keep 
This is the personal shield of the human warrior 
Lorin Starrose, a Solamnic Knight of the Rose 
The gold shield is edged in steel and bears the 
emblem of the Knights of Rose. It is considered a 
medium shield +2/+3 vs, dragons. It magically 
protects its wielder so that a successful saving 
throw vs, breath weapon means no damage and a 
failed save results in only half damage. 


Magical Defense 
XP Value: 1,200 GP Value: 6,000 
Drncon Magazine 179 
This shield offers its user a +4 bonus to save vs. 
breath weapons and ranged spells that can be 


dodged (lightning bolt), but offers no saving throw 
bonus vs. weapon blows or area-effect attacks 
(flaming oil or fireball not targeted on user). 


Medicine 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 7,500 
Dunaton Magazine 32 

This Rover shield is a hide-covered wooden 
frame with tufts of hair and feathers attached 
Mystical symbols are painted on the front. Medi- 
cine shields grant the Rover no Armor Class 
bonus beyond the normal shield bonus but give 
one protection from normal missiles, as the spell 
of the same name 


of Medusae 
XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 18,000 
The Complete Fighter's Handbook 
This magical item may only be used by warriors 
or priests (including multiclass and dualclass 
warriors or priests), 

It looks and works like a normal medium 
shield. Hut instead of a coat-of-arms, the front is 
mirror-reflective, and the inside is crystal clear. 

To use the shield of medusae, the warrior holds 
it up in front of his or her eyes. and looks through 
its clear surface. While doing so, the character is 
immune to the stoning gazes of creatures such as 


the medusa and basilisk, and to magical items 
any 


1099 


EL y 


~ Stneld, Mirror-Shield of Rheddrian à 


that duplicate their gazes. When the character 
carrying this shield confronts a stoning creature, 
he or she reflects the creature's image back at it, 
and it is the creature that must make saving throw 
vs. petrification or be turned to stone. 

Unlike ordinary shields, the shield of medusae 
has only 2 damage points before it shatters. In 
other words, if it is hit twice, it is destroyed. 


Mirror-Shield of Rheddrian 
XP Value: — GP Value: — 
Wrath of the Immortals 
This device is a bright mirror, a shiny disk- 
shaped shicld, 2 feet in diameter. The straps 
attached to the back are not artifact-quality. This 
shield grants a —6 bonus to AC. This device has 
the following powers: 
- Immortal life-trapping once per month, (Note 
that unwilling victims are not affected), 
* Teleport twice a day. Users can teleport to any 
scene projected onto the mirror. 
Legend lore once a day. The information 
gained is restricted to Beagle-type technology. 
Monster Summoning i through V once a day. 
This power may be used to create sprackles, 
ploppeds, and lightning zombies only. 
Handicaps and Penalties: Mortal users of the 
mirror-shield begin to glow the first time they 
evoke one of the artifacts powers. The second time 
the same mortal uses the artifact, he or she loses 4 
of his or her Constitution and begins to suffer 
amnesia; roughly one quarter of his or her memory 
will be gone. The third usage reduces the Constitu- 
tion score and memory by another quarter and 
gives a distinct grey pallor to the wielder’s skin. A 
fourth use turns the character into a lesser lightning 
zombie; a fifth into a greater lightning zombie. 
These effects can only be reversed by a wish spell 
cast by wizard of at least 25th-level, 


Missile Attractor 
XP Value GP Value 
Double: — 1,500 
Triple: — 2,250 


DUNGEON Master Guide 

This shield not only makes the bearer the equiva- 
lent of a shieldless person, it also attracts missiles 
of all kinds to itself. It doubles or triples the bearer’s 
chances of being selected by random die rolling 
according to the size of the party he or she is with 
(see Combat in the DMG). This cursed shield is 
not distinguishable from a useful magical shield. 


Roll Chance Increase 
01-70 Double 
71-00 Triple 


Missile Deflector 
XP Value: 400 GP Value: 4,000 
DunGeoN Master Guide 
This shield +1/+4 vs. missiles has a +1 bonus vs. 
melee attacks, but is four times more effective 
against hand-hurled and mechanically propelled 
missiles of all sorts. More importantly, the shield 
has a 20% chance of negating magic missile 
attacks (from a frontal position). 


Noj’s Missile Attractor 
XP Value: GP Value: 2,250 
1992 Fantasy Collector Card 25 

Highly magical, this unfortunate -I shield causes 
automatic hits from all types of missiles that come 
anywhere near the wielder. Nevertheless, Noj keeps 
it in his bag of misplacing because this magical 
shield also negates the damaging effects of all 
lightning bolts and fireballs that strike in the 
wielder’s area, and Noj fights a lot of spell casters. 
Unfortunately, magic missiles are also attracted to 
the point of missing another, intended target and 
pass through the shield as if it were not there, 


of Olynthos 
XP Value: 1,600 GP Value: 7,200 
The Mileniun Scepter 

Ancient texts record that this shield was once 
owned by a legendary Milenian hero named 
Bachileos before it eventually came into the hands 
of Emperor Olynthos the Undying. These same 
texts also state that the legendary shield, forged by 
the Immortal Palartarkan, ultimately vanished 
along with Olynthos and the Milenian Scepter. 

It is a normal-sized round shield made of iron 
and covered with oiled leather. Emblazoned on its 
face is the image of a fearsome griffon. It acts as 
a shield +3. In addition, once per sleep the wearer 
may call upon a special power. One claw of the 
griffon emblazoned on the shield appears to come 
to life, emerging from the surface of the shield to 
slash at one opponent. If struck, the victim suf- 
fers 2d4 points of damage and must succeed at a 
saving throw vs. spell or suffer the effects of a 
cause fear spell. The claw strikes with a THACO 
of 13, and can make any number of attacks, once 
per round, until it finally hits, when it merges 


with the shield again. 
4838 


ß 2 tia 


1100 


Petrified 


XP Value: 100 GP Value: 1,000 
Dracon Magazine 197 

These wooden shiclds have been permanently 
enchanted with petrification spells, making them 
equivalent to shiclds made of stone instcad of 
wood, These are also fireproof, and this is the 
only real benefit a wooden shield gains from this 
treatment unless it's a spiked buckler. These 
shields hardly seem worth the trouble to enchant, 
but the process is good practice for apprentice 
wizards, so petrified weapons are fairly common, 
Besides, when fighting an opponent with a torch, 
acommon enough event in the arenas of Athas, 
it's a comfort to know that a wooden shield won't 
be burned into usclessness. It is also possible to 
bury petrified items for use as hidden markers, 
since they do radiate a dweomer that can be 
located by a detect magic spell. 


of Proof Against 

XP Value: 500 GP Value: 2,500 
Dravon Magazine 179 
These medium shields provide the wielder with 
additional protection against the type of attack 
listed. Saving throws against that particular type 
of damage are at +4, provided that the wielder 
can put the shield between his or her person and 
the attack form, Damage is as normal for that 
attack form. 


Roll Proof Against 
01-10 Acid 

1120 Cold 

21-30 Electricity 
31-40 Fire 
41-50 Light 

51-60 Lightning 
61-70 Petrification 

71-80 Poison Gas 

81-90  Polymorphing 
91-00 ound Attacks 

of Proof against Cold 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 2,500 
Land of Pate 


These shiclds provide the wielder with additional 
protection against the type of attack listed. Saving 
throws against that particular type of damage are 
at +4, provided that the wiclder can put the shield 
between him or herself and the attack. Damage is 
normal for the attack form. 


of Proof against Electricity 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 2,500 
Land of Fate 

This shield provides the wielder with additional 
protection against the type of attack listed. Saving 
throws against that particular type of damage are 
at +4, provided that the wielder can put the shield 
between him or herself and the attack. Damage is 
normal for the attack form, 


of Proof against Fire 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 2,500 
Land of Pate 
These shields provide the wielder with additional 
protection against the type of attack listed. Saving 
throws against that particular type of damage are 
at +4, provided that the wielder can put the shield 
between him or herself and the attack. Damage is 
normal for the attack form. 


Quirks Of Magical Shields* 
XP Value: N/A GP Value: N/A 
Dranon Magazine 163 
The AD&D game has one of the largest compila- 
tions of magical items in the fantasy gaming 
industry. 

The following tables have been created to add 
some spice und vuricly to existing magical items 
in the AD&D game world. A table of nonstandard 
magical item abilities is offered for each major 
type of magical item in the AD&D game. The 
rationale for such quirks is simple. 

Most items are created normally, and they 
function exactly as a standard item of the same 
type in the DMG. However, sometimes there is a 
slight mishap in the creation of the device: the 
steps are not followed in the proper order, the 
astrological signs do not bode well, the item 
creator is disturbed to begin with, the instructions 
are incomplete, or something just plain gocs 
wrong. Any of these results may cause a magical 
item to behave differently from others just like it. 

Not all quirks are bad, however. Some are detri- 
mental to the item or its user, some are neutral, and 
some are even beneficial. The possibility of quirks 
existing (and the actual number of quirks) is deter- 
mined by using the table below to determine the 
exact quirks a magical shield possesses. 


Roll Quirks Present 
01-86 No quirks 


87-94 One quirk 
asao 


SS a 


1101 


. — . — O — ˖ — 


Shield, Raji’s Shield of the Holy 


—p — * 


95-98 
99-00 


22-26 


27-32 


60-64 


65-70 


Two quirks 
Three quirks 


Result 

Shield is incredibly shiny and reflects light 
of any kind; furthermore, any creature using 
a gaze attack within 10 feet of the shield has 
a 75% chance of seeing its own reflection. 
Shield is heavy; add 25% to its total 
weight and encumbrance. 

Shield is unusually large, but weighs the 
same as a medium shield. The user gains 
an additional +1 bonus to AC. 

Shield works normally but appears 
incredibly beaten up and battered, No 
amount of repair can change its appear- 
ance, (Status-conscious cavaliers and pal- 
adins will have reservations about using a 
shield that does not look good.) 

Shield is unusually small, but weighs the 
same as a medium shield. The user suf- 
fers a I penalty to AC. 

Shield glows with the light of a faerie fire 
spell, Only continual darkness can negate 
this radiation (and then for six turns plus 
one turn per level of the caster). If the 
shield is covered by cloth or leather, the 
glow still shines through. 

Shield weighs , as much as normal; 
shield is of the same type. 

Shield lacks magical protective ability 
against 1d4 specific types of creatures. 
Shield is resistant to fire; it can never be 
burned or melted by normal or magical fire. 
The shield is invisible by every means 
except true seeing, detect invisibility, 
detect magic, and wish. 

The shield automatically and immedi- 
ately teleports onto the user's offhand 
every time combat is initiated. Once 
combat ts over, the user must physically 
remove the shield. 

Shield is attuned to a place of special 
magical radiance, in much the same man- 
ner as a drow shield. If the shield is not 
exposed to this place once every 30 days, 
its magic is lost. 

Shield has complicated straps and is hard 
to strap to the arm and remove, Conse- 
quently, the time required to put on and 
take off the shield is increased by 3 rounds. 
Shield can never be scratched, stained, or 


dented. 

Shield has an inherent disruption of 
magic. While its user enjoys a +1 bonus 
on saving throws vs. spell, spells cannot 
be cast if the user is a multiclassed wiz- 
ard or a spell castingranger or paladin. 
Shield attracts monsters; any random 
encounter checks are at double normal 
Shield is a superconductor of heat and 
electricity; add +1 per die to all damage 
from fire or electricity, 

Shield does not provide magical protec- 
tion if it is covered or hidden. 

Shield is an exquisite piece of workman- 
ship and commands a price of 150% over 
normal prices duc to its quality. 

Shield is possessed by a spirit of random 
alignment, if the user's alignment differs 
from the spirit v. the shield periodically 
attempts to possess the user. Determine the 
chance of success as noted under the Sth- 
level wizard spell, magic jar. The spirit% 
intelligence can be determined by rolling 
Ido. The chance of a possession attempt 
occurring is 15% por week, cumulative, 
(Each time a possession attempt is made, 
the chance resets to 15% the next week.) 


Raji’s Shield of the Holy 
XP Value: 400 GP Value: 2,000 
1992 Pantasy Collector Card 297 
Raji’s magical shield is inscribed with the symbol of 
Najm the Adventurous. In Raji’s or any other pricst 
of Najm hands, the shield provides an Armor Class 
bonus of +2 and grants that priest the ability to affect 
undead at four levels higher than normal, 


75-78 


95-98 


of Reflection 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
DUNGEONS & DRAGONS Rules Cyclopedia 

If a light or continual light spell is cast at the user, 
the shield will automatically reflect it back at the 
caster, who must make a saving throw vs. spell or be 
blinded (as given in the respective spell descrip- 
tions), The item will reflect up to three spells per 
day. In addition, when the user is in melee against a 
creature with a gaze attack, the chances of gaze 
reflection are the same as if a mirror were held, but 
without the 2 penalty to the user's attack rolls (this 
represents the awkwardness of holding the mirror 
and attempting to attack at the same time). 


- 1102 3 


Shield, Shoon x Buckler 


—ͤ —Ai— cm mn E 


Remove Curse 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 7,500 
Dunceons & Dracons Rules Cyclopedia 

This shield cannot itself be cursed when found, 
When commanded, the item will create a remove 
curse spell effect on the user only as if by a 36th- 
level caster (automatically removing one curse). 
This item will function a total of three times, at a 
maximum rate of once a day. After its three 
charges are used, no other special abilities remain 
and it cannot be recharged; the item does remain 
magical, however, regardless of spent charges. 


Reptar’s Wall 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 10,000 
DRAGON Magazine 89 

Named for the ranger who had once borne it, the 
wall is a heavy shield constructed of iron plates 
riveted to an iron frame. Its origin, lost in antiq- 
uity, is unknown, Two words are engraved on the 
frame in Common, facing the bearer at eye level 
when the shield is held ready for combat: “Eiru- 
yan” and “Thammis.” The shield is magical, and 
has the following powers and abilities: 

Despite its construction, the wall does not rust 
or corrode, conduct heat or cold, its metal remains 
inactive. It is a shield +/, and gives no sound 
when struck or dropped. It does not ring or grate, 
but is absolutely silent; the heaviest blows falling 
upon it cannot be heard. 

When the bearer (not another creature, nor 
anyone not wearing the shield slung on an arm, 
ready for battle) speaks or whispers the word 
“Biruvan” the shield, bearer, and any accouter- 
ments worn and held, become invisible to both 
normal sight and infravision for 2d4 rounds. Dur- 
ing this time the shieldbearer moves silently, 
because of the shield’s sound-absorbing qualities, 
and can move about or strike at opponents while 
concealed. A successful attack made on an oppo- 
nent by the bearer causes the bearer and shield to 
immediately become visible. 

Carrying an active source of light does not 
affect the invisibility of the carrier, but the light 
can be clearly seen and can be used to determine 
the location of the invisible shieldbearer. The 
casting of light, detect magic, or dispel magic in 
the area where the invisible shieldbearer is sus- 
pected to be never reveals the presence or precise 
location of the shieldbearer Once exercised, this 
power will not work again for 96 turns (16 hours) 
from the cessation of invisibility. 


The shield’s major power, made active when 
the bearer speaks or whispers the word “Tham- 
mis” while holding the shield slung for use, is the 
ability to fly (as the wizard spell) for 2 turns, 
shield and bearer, plus any nonliving accouter- 
ments of up to 400 pounds, are empowered to fly 
at Mancuverability Class A, with a movement 
rate as the spell; the magic also confers full sta- 
bility to wield weapons in midair. The flight abil- 
ity lasts until two turns have elapsed or the bearer 
wills it to end, whichever occurs first. 

Use of the / power has an unexpected side 
effect in that at the onset of flight, the nearest magi- 
cal item or scroll is permanently drained of one 
charge, which serves as energy to power the shield, 
If the nearest item is of a permanent nature and has 
no charges (say, a magical dagger), all of its powers 
are negated for six turns (one hour). The item clos- 
est to the shield is always affected, regardless of the 
shieldbearer’s wishes. The shieldbearer is usually 
unaware of the “draining.” If no magical item is 
within 90 feet of the shield when its fly power is 
activated, the shield y other abilitics—including 
sound absorption and the +1 bonus—are negated 
for six turns. The wall is directed in flight by the 
will of the bearer, who must remain in full physical 
contact with it, or the shield and former bearer both 
plummet to the ground; the shield cannot fly alone. 


Shoon’s Buckler 
XP Value: 800 GP Value: 4,000 
DRAGON Magazine 89 

The adventurer Shoon briefly possessed this 
magical shield. Its true origin is unknown, but 
Shoon seized it from the body of a slain male 
drow during a battle deep beneath the Hill of Lost 
Souls. Among the drow, as speak with the dead 
has revealed, Shan x buckler was known as a 
blink shield; it was unique, and its creation a mys- 
tery. Shoon later gave the shield to the fighter 
Gorlaung “Blackhelm” in exchange for training; 
Gorlaung fell in battle with ores in the 
Stonelands, and his body was stripped of weap- 
ons and valuables by his slayers. The present 
location of the buckler is not known. 

The buckler is a 1-foot-diameter disk of black 
metal with a fist grip, all fashioned of one piece, 
and bearing no inscription, Despite its small size, 
Shoon'’s buckler functions as a shield +2. Its other 
easily discernible power is the ability to glow 
(equal in radiance to a light spell) on the mental 


command of the bearer; the /ight dics away to 
4845 


7 1103 : 


O MS 


nothing when the bearer wills it, falls asleep, 
dies, or loses sanity or consciousness. This power 
is discovered whenever a being holding the buck- 
ler thinks about the poor light, wishes he or she 
could see better, or so forth. Whenever the buck- 
ler operates in the fashion, three words in Com- 
mon appear in small glowing letters around its 
inside edge: “Tethema,” “Sekoe,” and “Brund.” 

If *Tethema” is repeated aloud by any creature 
holding the shicld, that figure becomes the master 
of the buckler until another creature holds the 
shicld and utters the word, Control of the buckler 
enables a being to override the mental commands 
of another figure holding the buckler regarding 
its radiance, even from afar (up to 160 feet dis- 
tant). Control also allows the following two pow- 
ets to be enacted when the master is not touching 
the buckler, and is up to 160 feet away. 

If the word “Sekoe” is spoken, the buckler lev- 
itates for wp to six rounds, moving about under 
the mental direction of the bearer (or the master, 
if these are two distinct beings; in that case, the 
master’s commands take precedence). The shield 
can carry or support up to 600 pounds of weight 
resting on it or suspended from it, and any num- 
ber of creatures or objects can make up the cargo 
If its load exceeds the limit, the shield instantly 
ceases to /evitate for at least six rounds and falls. 
Thus, the bearer can /evitate up or down at will, 
and move horizontally by pushing off walls, or 
the buckler’s master can move the shield from a 
distance, along with, perhaps, an unwilling cargo. 

If the word “Brund” is spoken by the master of 
the buckler, any other active shicld powers cease; 
then the shield and any creature touching it blink, 
as the wizard spell, about the location of the 
shield when it was activated, until seven rounds 
have clapsed or the master wills it to end 
(whichever occurs first). 

These powers can be used repeatedly in con- 
secutive rounds and in any order (although only 
levitate and light can be used in combination) if 
the commands are known, Anyone who discovers 
the buckler will not be informed of any facts 
about its operation by any revelation or magical 
means short of a wish, but must learn them by 
trial and error. Note that the Hint power does not 
function for anyone who discovers the shicld until 
he or she ts established as the master of the buck- 
ler by using the command word “Tethema.” 


~ Shield, Sticky p 


y Vd i oa 


= 


„5 


Po ee 


Sticky 

XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 20,000 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 90 
The sticky shield is a medium-sized shield of hard 
metal, It can carry any heraldic device, but a 
hoofless horse is the most common. The sticky 
shield acts in every respect as a shield +1. How- 
ever, in truth it is a much more powerful magical 
item. 

When the shield-bearer’s opponent gets a | on 
an attack roll, his or her weapon automatically 
becomes stuck to the shield. The weapon is tom 
from the hand grip without so much as a saving 
throw, If a magical weapon becomes stuck, the 
sticky shield becomes even more powerful. The 
magical bonus of the weapon is added to the 
shield x plus to defend its bearer. For example, if 
a long sword +2 gets stuck to the sticky shield, 
the shield's magic increases to +3, The more 
magical weapons that stick, the better the shield 
beurer armor class becomes. Up to four weap- 
ons can adhere to the shield, 

The weapons only can be released after one 
hour or if the shield bearer speaks a command 
word, At that time, the shield loses all bonuses it 
acquired from holding magical weapons. 


0 


Thurbrand’s Protector 
XP Value; 5,000 GP Value: 25,000 
Deacon Magazine 89 

Named for the fighter who found it in a dragon 
hoard, this shield was later sold to King Osbrun 
of Chessagol, whose treasury and armory were 
looted six winters ago, some say by magic. The 
protector vanished in that theft, and its present 
whereabouts and owner are unknown. This is a 
plain, battered, kite-shaped shield made of bronze 
plates bolted to a sturdy wooden frame. It bears 
no makers-mark or inscription. It is magical, and 
has the following powers and abilities: 

Any damage that pierces or parts the bronze 
plates, or cracks through or breaks the wooden 
frame, is magically mended overnight. Minor 
dents, scratches, and scars are not repaired. Man- 
ual repairs by a blacksmith or the bearer seem to 
have no effect on the shicld. 

The protector has all the powers of a ring of 
protection +1. In addition, whenever the bearer 
taps the wooden frame of the protector three 
times rapidly with a finger or knuckles, the shield 
radiates and maintains, through some unknown 
magical means, a 10-foot radius globe of air, cool 
and breezeless. This globe can withstand the 
pressures of deep water, gusts of wind, and the 
like without altering its shape or location, remain- 
ing centered upon the protector. Large, solid, 
immobile objects like stone walls cause the “air 
bubble” to flatten out along the wall or around the 
object, Creatures within the globe of air cannot 
drown, suffer harm from poisonous vapors, and 
the like, As many creatures can be protected by 
the globe as can fit into its area, usually 40 or so, 
or, if freedom to move and fight is required, 8 or 
9 human-sized beings. The air supply can never 
be used up. 

Most creatures are not physically constrained 
from entering or leaving the sphere. It seems to 
keep out only creatures who cannot breathe or 
move in air (such as living fish), and those who 
are gascous in form (air elementals, vampires in 
gascous form). The globe of air persists until the 
bearer again raps the wood frame three times; to 
be effective, rapping must be done on the inner 
side of the shield, directly on the frame, and the 
bearer must have the shield slung on the arm or 


strapped to the body. 


Tortoise 

XP Value: 500 GP Value: 5,000 
Dracon Magazine 179 
This small darag-style buckler emits a magical 
field that provides protection equal to a body 
shield, but it is only the size of a buckler, This 
enchanted daraq provides +1 protection against 
normal attacks and +2 protection against missile 
attacks. 


Thillonrian Shield of Berserking 

XP Value: 1,200 GP Value: 12,000 
Gnhevnawk Adventures 
A prized magical item of fighters in the Thillon- 
rian Peninsula (home of Frost, Ice, and Snow 
Barbarians), this shicld gives a +2 bonus to the 
wielder’s Armor Class. Its greatest benefit, how- 
ever, appears during mass combat. When held by 
a commander, at least half of whose troops are 
barbarians, the command word can cause the 
shield to cast a spell of berserking on up to 200 
warriors in the commander's troops. Those war- 
riors gain a +2 bonus to their attack rating and 
never need to check morale. They also have a dis- 
cipline rating of 0 and will not enter a closed for- 
mation. 


White 
XP Value: 7,000 GP Value: 65,000 
IMaGine Magazine 29 

This is a white dragon scale carefully worked into 
a shield +4. It provides immunity from any attack 
that causes less than 10 points of damage, and 
grants a bonus of +4 to saving throws ys, cold- 
based attacks. Also, no dragon will attack the 
wielder of this shield except in self-defense (self- 
defense includes protecting its hoard or family). 


Wood-Iron 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 2,500 
Dracos Magazine 197 

These wooden shields have been given the prop- 
erties of metallic armor through enchantment, 
thus climinating all penalties for attacks and 
damage. They are also fireproof and unbreakable. 
The shields are effectively +1 for purposes of 
defense us well as being fireproof. These shields 
are invaluable on Athas, though they would no 
doubt be disdainfully sniffed at elsewhere. They 
give fighters good armor without cutting into 
Athas’s woefully small supply of iron. 


A* 


1105 


~ Shield, Yondalla’s 


Yondalla’s 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 12,000 
Monster Mythology 
The avatar’s shield +3 reflects all bolt spells back 
at their caster, 


Ship 
“Ship” is a general term for large craft designed to 
carry cargo and passengers across great expanses 
of water or off into wildspace. For comparison’s 
sake, boats can be carried on ships but ships cannot 
be carried on boats. (However, see also Boat.) 


Earth and Sea 
(Mudship) 
XP Value: 12,000 GP Value: 60,000 
DUNGEON Mugazine 37 
Created by powerful and possessive elemental 
beings of Earth and Water, only seven of these 
sorcerous crafts are known to exist, They bear the 
names Faronos, Iquonabus, Miktyr, Ontonkolos, 
Tarjana, Ungulisar, and Uzrivoy, 

To pilot the craft, an individual must wear the 
talisman of the mudship (each talisman is named 
after the specific ship) This confers upon the 
individual knowledge of the ship's powers and 
limitations as well as the ability to command it. 

Mudships can sail upon both land and sea, as 
well as underwater. The pilot of the craft is empow- 
ered to breathe water, but all others aboard must 
stay in the decktop cabin or the hold below unless 
they can breathe water by other means. The mud- 
ship is unaffected by weather conditions, is always 
100% seaworthy, and saves vs. all attacks as an 
artifact. Its speeds are as follows: 

On water: 7/hour (14/hour emergency speed 
for one hour), 

+ On land; 4/hour (G/hour emergency speed for 
one hour). 

+ Underwater: 5/hour (7/hour emergency speed 
for one hour). 

Consult the DMG for more information on the 
functions of normal seagoing ships. When a mud- 
ship ìs sailing on land, the ground appears to part at 
the ship's prow as does water. After the ship has 
passed, the carth appears undisturbed. A mudship 
must sail around obstacles (such as buildings) or 
land masses with inclines or declines greater than 
45°, though it can pass through as much as 500 
yards of solid earth and stone (including manmade 
structures) once per week. After using this ability, 
the craft must remain inactive for a full hour. 


Frey’s 
XP Value: 6,000 GP Value: 30,000 
Gods, Demigods, & Herocs 
This boat was a gift from the dwarves (as was most 
of Frey’s magical equipment), When in use, this 
ship can hold all of the gods and their horses. It can 
travel 60 feet per round on water or through the air. 
When not in use, it may be folded up into a 1 inch 
by | inch cube and placed in Frey's pocket. 


N 


aes me 4 
Galley of the Gods 


XP Value: 12,000 GP Value: 60,000 
Old Empires 

This ship was used by the people of Unther in sev- 
eral naval battles, most notably in the defeat of the 
Narfell Armada. It is said to have been constructed 
by a deity named Enki, though he has never been 
actively worshiped in the Realms. The galley is 200 
feet long, 30 feet wide, and requires 150 oarsmen. 
It has a cargo capacity of 250 tons and can support 
up to 300 marines for an extended trip. 

The ship has a 95% seaworthiness rating, and a 
movement of 15 mph when fully crewed (450 
yards per round), or 25 mph at emergency speed 
(750 yards per round). In extreme emergencies, 
the ship can sprout dragon wings and lift off the 
water at emergency speed, The flight lasts a max- 
imum of one turn, At least 120 oarsmen are 


required for the ship to fly. 
4855 


JF. ia, a 


1106 


~ Ship, Halruan Skyship 7 


The ship has a dragon prow with multiple 
heads chained together (the symbol of the ancient 
gods’ victory over Tiamat). The prow is magical; 
it can shoot a 6d6 lightning balls (20-foot-diame- 
ter) up to 400 yards, once per turn. The lightning 
balls can be fired only when the prow is facing its 
target. Those caught in the area of effect can roll 
saving throws vs, spell; success means that the 
victim suffers only 4 damage. 

The ship and those within it are immune to 
fire and lightning. The ship itself has a 35% 
magic resistance, In times of war it is armed with 
four ballistae (two on each side) and a rear cata- 
pult. The Lords of Unther have used this as a mil- 
itary and a cargo vessel. 

Recently, this vessel has been stolen from its 
berth in Unthalass by pirates. It is believed to be 
hidden somewhere in the waters near the Ship of 
the Gods, 


Halruan Skyship 
XP Value: 8,000 GP Value: 40,000 
The Shining South 
The Hlalruan skyships are famed throughout the 
Shining South. Even Elminster has described 
such vessels in his writings, Skyships are not to 
be confused with ships capable of spelljamming, 
although it is known that one can be outfitted 
with a spelljamming helm. 

The ships were originally invented in far off 
Netheril, by the ancestors of the Halruans. The 
Red Wizards of Thay have claimed the credit for 
the invention, but Halruans know the truth, A 
skyship is a sailing vessel, broad-beamed so as to 
be able to rest easily on the ground. Its material 
tends to be light and flexible, to give and flow 
with the wind. The standard ship of Halruaa has 
three masts of flexible wood, and two panels that 
can be swung out for steering and guidance. 

While undamaged, the vessel can never be 
sunk beneath the sea, for the same power that 
holds the ship aloft affects the water that sur- 
rounds it. The ship's hull is studded with polished 
plates taken from the species of giant turtle found 
in the waters off the coast. 

The ship is at the mercy of the winds. The lec- 
ward panels do allow some control, so that it can 
run before the wind and not be buffeted by them. 

The control of the ship is tied to a special mag- 
ical rod. This rod has three parts: a central shaft 
usually made of silver, and two hollow cylinders 
of gold, one over each end. The cylinders may be 


moved toward the center of the rod, exposing the 
ends. One end dampens the /evitation fields of 
the ship, the other augments it, This allows the 
ship to climb or dive, at a rate of 120 feet per 
round. The cylinders are usually carved so that 
one can tell the difference, even in the dark, 

Obviously this is no safe and steady fighting 
platform, although wizards may cast spells from its 
deck. It is a large and clumsy target in aerial com- 
bat (Maneuverability Class E). It has a great degree 
of variability in speed and stability due to the 
chance of the wind and the turbulence created by 
other acrial bodies. Nonetheless, it is very effective 
in dropping solid missiles, flaming oil, or other 
things upon hostile forces. A skyship has its great- 
est buoyancy near the ground. At an altitude of 100 
feet a standard skyship has a cargo displacement of 
10 to 15 tons, a fraction of what a seagoing vessel 
can lift. This drops as the vessel climbs, until at 
3,600 feet it can lift littlemore than its own weight, 
and that of the crew. A standard crew is 20 to 30 
people. If the ship is operating with a short crew, it 
can carry a bit more cargo, Since the Walls of Hal- 
ruaa are much higher than 3,600 feet, such ships 
can only leave Halruaa through one of the moun- 
tain passes, by sea, or via the High Aluar. 

The control rod needs continual recharging, 
and the /evitation spells on the ship itself must be 
renewed once per year. The rod can be recharged 
by the casting of suspension or levitate spells. 
The secret of renewing the ship is known only to 
the Council of Elders. 

These ships are relatively common in Halruaa, 
but are rare anywhere else. Of all of their secrets, 
the wizards guard that of their skyships the most 
zealously. 


of Pearl 
XP Value: 70,000 GP Value: 700,000 
The Minrothad Guilds 
The keeper and his or her assistants can use the 
pearl of power to create a ship of pearl. The ves- 
sel is made in the following manner. Once cach 
month the pearl of power is ritually bathed in the 
seawater of the grotto. When all the seawater but 
one drop has evaporated, the keeper captures that 
droplet in a vial made of a pearl fragment. This is 
repeated throughout the years until the vial is full 
of sea dew, a process that takes 100 years to com- 
plete. Meanwhile, a layer of pearl the width of 
one hand is chipped off each year and set aside 


for the future construction of the ship. More frag- 
4857 


1108 


— 


x Ship-in-a Bottle r 


ments can be collected if needed, but cach in 
excess of the first reduces the pearl power. 

When cnough fragments are collected, they are 
mortared together into the shape of a ship. The 
cement is made of ground mother-of-pearl with 
half the sea dew mixed into it. Finally, at the right 
moment of the year, the ship of pear! is anointed 
with the rest of the sea dew, and the magical craft 
is ready to be used. 

The ship of pearl holds 10 elves. Obcying ver- 
bal commands, it travels on water to any place 
desired, moving 360 feet per round or 215 miles 
per day, The ride is smooth to those within the 
ship, regardless of wind, weather, or wave condi- 
tions, The ship can travel on fresh as well as salt 
water, and magically avoids navigation hazards 
such as islets and reefs. If such lies unavoidably 
between the ship and its destination, it stops short 
near the obstacle until told where to proceed. 


P 
XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 18,000 
Miles/Day: 70 Hull Points: 40-60 
Feet/Round: 120 Armor Class: 8 
Crew: G c men Cargo Hold: 1,000 pounds 
Rowers: None Artillery: 2 ballistac 
Marines: None Ramming: None 
Special Ability: Phasing Propulsion: Magic 
Into the Maelstrom 


The phaseship, or skyshark, has the approximate 
shape of a shark, with large fins at the rear and 
below, and a bent tube extending from the top. 
They average 40 to 60 feet long. 

This vessel is able to phase out of the Prime 
Material Plane, thus becoming invisible to normal 
ships, and immune to normal physical contacts. 
The hull of the ship is permanently enchanted for 
that effect. It can remain in phase for six hours per 
day. The bane of these ships is the warp wood spell 
that destroys the ability to phase out (save vs. spell 
as thick wood). Dispel magic cast at the time the 
ship phases out cancels that ability for one round. 

Special permanent fly spells cast on its bow 
enable the shyshark to maneuver in the sky. Three 
metal plates with powerful /evitation abilities are 
also located under the ship. This type of vessel is 
unable to maneuver in a liquid environment 
(unless phased out), Dispel magic cast on the 
bow would cause the vessel to drift for one round. 
The enchuntments required to create such vessels 
are not available to PCs. 

To attack, the skyshark must phase back into the 


Prime Material Planc. Round portholes open at the 

front, enabling two heavy ballistac to fire on 

enemy vessels. Treat them as catapults except that 

Javelin tips are enchanted to explode when they hit 

a hard surface, inflicting Sd6 HP of damage. 

The skyshark $ commander sits in a small tur- 
ret fitted with a long narrow tube able to penc- 
trate the Prime Material Plane while the ship is 
phased out. The commander uses it to observe 
potential victims without being spotted. Some 
commanders cast an invisibility spell on the tube. 
it may be retracted into the vessel. 

The crews are easily recognizable with their 
black leather jackets, flat caps, and harsh Gam- 
marian accent, Five crewmen are in charge of 
security on board, artillery pieces, and also con- 
trol the ship's speed and direction. For this type of 
vessel, the standard crew ix: 

One commander, |0th-level wizard 

Fre crewmen (artillerist, sailors, marines) 

* Up to five extra passengers ot prisoners may 
huddle in the back of the ship, over and above 
the 1,000-pound capacity of the cargo hold. 
Gammer has three squadrons of five phaseships 

each, called “shark-packs.” Their usual tactic is to 
spot a target with a crystal ball and ambush it, 
They concentrate their fire on one ship for one or 
two rounds, and then phase out to withdraw, ignor- 
ing the battle result. It takes one full round to phase 
in or out. In heavy battle, shark-packs never cap- 
ture ships or prisoners. Commanders usually blow 
up disabled skysharks to avoid their capture. Occa- 
sionally, a lonely “shark” on a spy mission may be 
encountered. They arc known to attack isolated 
merchant vessels, 


Ship-in-a-Bottle 
XP Value: 6,000 GP Value: 30,000 

Deacon Magazine 194 
To all appearances, this seems to be just another 
example of the sailor’s hobby of building miniature 
vessels and sealing them into large glass bottles. As 
with most of its kind, this magical model is a highly 
detailed replica, so much so that one could almost 
believe that it was a real vessel shrunken by power- 
ful magic. In fact, the magical ship-in-a-bortfe is 
actually constructed in the same way as any other 
such model, but with expensive, enchanted con- 
struction materials, The impression that it is a really 
a shrunken ship is only strengthened when the item 
is used. At the moment it is smashed against a pier 
or seashore rock, the mode! expands to form a full- 
ants 


1109 


me. | ˙—5:m ¶ A Ue 


~ Sips Wheel of Mancuverabilty 


i 
Li << 


2 / 75 2 


iia 


size version of the same ship in a — round: this 
can be anything from a two-man rowboat to a 
trireme war-galley or beyond. 

Although the enlarged vessel radiates a mild aura 
of magic, it has no magical powers and behaves 
exactly as a normal ship. The ship is permanent, 
barring accidents of fate and the depredations of 
time, tide, and barnacles. It is equipped as the 
builder depicted it in miniature, with the exception 
of a crew. Any sculpted crew members in the 
miniature become human-sized sculptures on the 
decks of the full-size ship, forcing the user to pro- 
vide living crew members to replace them. 
Although a normal model ship would probably be 
destroyed if thrown against a rock, the magic of this 
item protects the bottle’s contents until the ship-in- 
a-boitle is fully enlarged, Thus, the boat is as sea- 
worthy in fact as it was in appearance in the bottle. 

Lest anyone think this an easy way to create a 
fleet, the costs of the special materials involved in 
the creation of this item are the same as those 
required to make the full-size ships (see PHB), 
and the wizard must perform all stages of the 
construction, meaning that he or she has to study 
the art of bottled ship building before crafting 
magical models (bottled ship building non- 
weapon proficiency: General, | slot, check vs. 
Dexterity at 2). Making a simple rafi-in-a-bottle 
can take the wizard as much as a month, while a 
multideck galleon would certainly involve almost 


a year’s effort; time enough for a shipyard to pro- 
duce a small fleet. 


Ship’s Nest 


See Nest 

Ship’s Wheel of 

Maneuverability 
XP Value GP Value 
E: 1,000 10,000 
D: 2,000 20,000 
C: 4,000 40,000 
B: 8,000 80,000 
G (cursed): — 2.000 

War Captain's Companion 


When used on a ship that does not have a magical 
helm, this device gives the ship a greater MC. A 
ship cannot be helped by this item if its MC is 
already equal to or greater than that of the avail- 
able wheel, The table under XP/GP values details 
the different types of ships wheels of maneuver- 
ability, by MC, that are most commonly available. 


Shirt 
A shirt is a general purpose garment that covers 
the top half of the body. It usually has slceves. 
Generally, the more comfortable a shirt's mater- 
tal, the higher the price. Please note that the mag- 
ical possibilities listed in the Cloak and Robe 
entries can also apply to shirts. 


Roll Shirt Type 


01-13 Apron (see Apron) 
14-25 Bilaud 
26-38 Chainse 
39-50 Chemise 
51-63 Dishdashah 
64-75 Doublet 
76-88 Shirt 
89-00 Tunic (see Tunic) 

War 
XP Value GP Value 
AC 1: 5,000 $0,000 
AC 2: 4,000 40,000 
AC 3: 3,500 35,000 
AC 4: 3,000 30,000 
AC 5: 2,500 25,000 
AC 6: 2,000 20,000 


DUNGEON Magazine 32 
These shirts are more like vests, made from the 


skins of mountain sheep and are decorated with 
Ah. 


E 1110 = 


x Shor, Sandals of Speed 


beads and horsehair. A war shirt gives a Rover 
immunity to all forms of magical fear and also 
confers protection of AC | to 6. A war shirt is 
effectively weightless for combat purposes. 


Shoe 
A shoe is a sturdy article that completely encloses 
the foot. Any footwear that reaches above the 
ankle, however, is more accurately called a boot, 
A good shoe has a sturdy sole and stiff uppers 
that protect and support the ankles in all but the 
roughest terrain. 


Roll Shoe Type 

01-25 Boot 

26-50 = Sandal 

5175 Shoe 

76-00 Slipper 

of Fharlanghn 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 20,000 
The Land Beyond the Magic Mirror 


These low, thick-soled shoes are so durable and 

tough, they never wear out. Better still, the indi- 

vidual wearing this footwear never grows fatigued 

from walking, and is able to maintain a 20-30 

mile per day pace easily, If the wearer is of neu- 

tral or neutral good alignment, the following 
additional benefits are gained: 

* The wearer never trips, steps into a snare or 
pit, nor becomes entangled. 

* The dweomer of the shoes enables the wearer 
to climb up or down hills, even those with a 
45° slope, without effort. 

* The wearer becomes so surcfooted as to be 
able to walk along narrow ledges or slippery 
logs without fear of a slip or like mishap. 
Should the wearer actually be a worshiper of 

Fharlanghn, then he or she gains these additional 

benefits: 

Hecoming lost is impossible for the wearer, 

Nothing walking on the earth can surprise the 

wearer. 

The wearer can run at 18 Movement Rate and 

jump horizontal distances of up to 20 feet. 

Climbing vertical surfaces is done as if the 

wearer were a 10th-level thief. 

Wherever there ix carth (including dust, sand, 
or mud), the wearer can tread as if he or she 
were on smooth roadway. 


Hefiz’s Superb Shiny 
XP Value: — GP Value: 1,000 
POLYHEDRON Newszine $2 

These shoes are shiny shoes or soft leather boots; 
they come in all humanoid sizes. They usually are 
black and seem to be ideal shoes for moving 
silently. Also known as clown’ shoes of Hefiz, 
these cursed items were created to plague thieves 
and cutthroats, No magic radiates from the shoes, 
but they have a peculiar curse, and are often 
returned to be sold in markets or shops after the 
owner discovers their true nature, 

When first worn by a living being, the shoes 
transform themselves into a pair of shiny, noisy, 
gleaming shoes—2 foet long. Perhaps worst of all, 
they shine brightly in the dark. While wearing 
these shoes, it is impossible to run, leap, spring, 
walk silently, hide in shadows, be invisible, or 
tightrope walk. To remove these obnoxious shoes, 
a dispel magic, ot remove curse spell must be 
used. The shoes can be peeled off if 20 points of 
damage are done to them. If the latter method is 
used, 20 points of damage (probably self-inflicted) 
are also inflicted upon the wearer. This process 
renders the victim's fect rather tender. Until all the 
damage is healed, the victim's movement is 
reduced to | and Dexterity is reduced by . 

After being removed and abandoned by their 
possessor, the shoes transform back into their 
appealing appearance of magnificent shiny 
shoes, or superb soft boots 


Iron Shoe of Vidar 
XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 20,000 
Gods, Demigods, & Heroes 
Vidar cannot be when wearing this shoe, 
for it holds him firm to the carth in those emer- 
gencics. Likewise any object or person Vidar 
steps upon are trapped beneath the shoe. In 
mythology, Vidar slew the Fenris wolf by placing 
his ironbound foot upon the jaw of Fenris and at 
the same time lifting upwards with all of his 
strength upon the upper extremities of the wolf 
thus ripping Fenris asunder, 


Sandals of Speed 
XP Value: 2,500 GP Value: 20,000 
Martica Campaign Set 
These stout leather sandals increase the wearer's 
speed to 18 base movement rate Unlike boots of 
speed, they convey no AC benefit to the wearer; 


however, neither do they require any special 
4570 


1111 ~ 


. O O OO 


Shoes of White Bronze 


period of rest. A character can cover vast dis- 
tances, jogging along for 16 hours a day. 


of White Bronze 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
Tall Tales of the Wee Folk 
Famed as cobblers, the leprechauns manufacture 
this enchanted footwear, which magically adjust 
to the size of a foot small as a leprechaun’s or 
large as a storm giants. Wearing these shoes, one 
can walk on water as cusily as on land. 


Woodland 
XP Value: 750 GP Value: 2,500 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 47 

When these soft, brown shoes are worn, the wearer's 
lower body is transformed into that of a medium 
war horse, but his or her upper body remains 
unchanged—in effect transforming the character 
into a centaur, In this form, the character can cover 
40 miles of normal terrain, 20 miles of rugged ter- 
rain, or 5 miles of very rugged terrain per day. He 
or she can also carry a passenger. When the trans- 
formation occurs, the shoes change into metal 
bands on cach of the character's hooves. If the 
bands are removed, the transformation is reversed 
and the bands turn into shoes again. 


Shot 


Shot is enchanted ammunition used by spelljam- 
ming ships’ range weapons. Shot or “mage shot” 
usually disperses harmlessly, if the fired shot 
misses. 


Elmarin Cannon Call 
XP Value: 300 GP Value: 3,000 
Realmspace 

These items are not necessarily magical. When- 
ever a cannon ball is made, there is a | in 10,000 
chance that it resonates at a particular tone that 
attracts elmarin. Unfortunately, elfmarin cannon 
calls are a onetime shot. When used once, they 
are damaged and will never ring that specific 
tone again. The magical e/murin cannon calls can 
be used again and again. When they hit, they ring 
for 2d8 turns, which attracts 1d10 elmarin within 
2d12 rounds. The cannon shot must hit its target 
in order to ring. The ringing is out of the hearing 
range of all humans, elves, and other humanoids, 
If recovered, this shot can be used by the attacked 
ship against a future enemy. See the SPELLIAMMER 
boxed set for information regarding the elmarin. 


Mage 
XP Value GP Value 
Dust: 100 950 
Ring: 100 950 
Snow: 90 850 
War Captain's Companion 


Mage shot is the common name for unusual 
enchanted accelerator, bombard, catapult, or jetti- 
son ammunition. Mage shot that misses dissi- 
pates harmlessly. 

Dust shot causes an incredible number of fine 
white particles to spread throughout the air enve- 
lope of the ship. It causes all attack die rolls from 
the ship to be penalized by 4. During that time, 
all attacks against the ship are made at a -2 
penalty (except helmseeker weapons), since the 
powdery material blocks complete view of the 
ship within. This dust is not flammable, and mag- 
ically dissipates in 1d4 rounds. 

Ring shot causes any ship constructed in part or 
wholly of metal to ring for Ida rounds. At the 
start of the ringing, every crew member must roll 
a saving throw vs. spell or be incapacitated with 
agony one round longer than the ringing. 

Snow-shot causes a large snow storm, with 
clouds above the gravity plane forming above and 
below the ship. The snow is so fierce and frigid, it 
causes Ida points of damage to all on the exposed 
decks (save vs. spell for half damage), unless 
winter clothing is worn. The snow storm lasts for 
2d4 rounds, during which time the target ship is 
obscured, and the snow immediately dissipates at 
the end of the last round When the snow disap- 
pears it leaves behind a water damaged vessel 
(1d2 hull points). 


Mage II 
XP Value GP Value 
Mage: Varied Varied 
Shatter: 80 750 
Skunk; 50 450 
Termite: 70 630 


Dragon Magazine 159 

Mage shot is a generic term used for a number of 
magical weapons found in Realmspace. The term 
refers to ceramic catapult shot, either enchanted 
or filled with potions. All mage short is weighted 
for a light catapult, and only one shot can be fired 
at a time. 

Mage shat can be filled with any potion that 
has external effects, such as oil of impact or oil 


of fiery burning. Some mage shots’ contents are 
4880 


se . ß a ee 


1112 


` Shovel of Digging y- 


new and do not conform to any of the known 
magical oils. A few of the more common mis- 
siles are described below. The cost of mage shot 
depends upon the potion it holds. The light 
ceramic of the mage shot is quite strong and does 
not shatter while in storage or while rolling loose 
on deck. Only high-speed impact with a target 
causes the shot to break open, releasing its magi- 
cal contents. Note that giants, with their missile- 
throwing abilities, are strong enough to use mage 
shot effectively. 

Shatter shot is a variant of mage shot filled 
with a mixture that causes an explosion upon 
impact. The fluid expands rapidly when it comes 
into contact with air, and it blows the stone apart 
when it hits, Persons within 30 feet of the impact 
area take 1d12 points of damage from shrapnel. If 
a shatter shot hits a ship’s hull, it causes 1d2 hull 
points damage. 

Skunk shot is a catapult stone filled with a liq- 
uid that evaporates quickly in open air; the thick 
grcen liquid combines with the air in a ship’s 
atmospheric envelope and generates a greenish, 
billowing fog. The fog expands to a 20-foot- 
radius cloud centered on the point of impact, 
duplicating the effects of a stinking cloud on crew 
members within its confines, and obscures nor- 
mal vision within the cloud. This malodorous fog 
dissipates in 2d4 rounds, but its stench lingers for 
an additional 2412 rounds. If the optional morale 
rules are used, the effect of skunk shor weakens 
the morale and fighting spirit of the crew by —2. 
In addition, the cloud mingles with the atmos- 
pheric envelope of the ship, reducing fresh air in 
the atmosphere by one week's supply and possi- 
bly causing premature fouling of the atmosphere. 
Skunk shot does not deplete the quality of air in 
an atmosphere envelope if the envelope is already 
fouled. 

Termite shot is a magical catapult stone that 
releases a brown, molasseslike syrup upon 
impact. The syrup immediately bubbles and 
spreads out over a 1d6+4-foot-diameter area, 
eating away at the wood of the target ship this 
substance dissolves and weakens the wood, each 
successful hit causing 1d4 hull points damage 
per round for 1d3 rounds, No known substance 
stops this effect, but dispel magic halts its 
progress after one round. It is rumored that wiz- 
ards are working on a variant of termite shot that 
is equally effective on the rock and ceramic 
ships of the illithids and the neogi The research 


process goes slowly, as the blood of purple 
worms and umber hulks cannot be found with- 
out great risk. 


Mage III 
XP Value GP Value 
Warp: 90 850 
Shrapnel: 200 1,500 
Realmspuce 


This magical shot is used in catapults and jetti- 
sons, There are several different types of shot; 
below we list only two. 

Warp Shot: This ceramic shot is filled with a 
liquid that easily warps the wood of an enemy 
ship, causing | hull point of damage per shot. 
Any ship struck must roll a saving throw vs. fire 
or be rendered unsafe to float in water. 

Shrapnel Shot: This shot is very rare. When 
fired at an enemy ship, it explodes on contact, 
sending razor-sharp, red-hot splinters of metal 
shavings throughout a $0-foot—radius. All within 
range suffer 3d4 points of damage, as well as one 
additional point per five of the original damage 
per round, until wounds are bound. Anyone fac- 
ing the shrapnel shot when it hits must roll a sav- 
ing throw vs. spell for each eye, or be blinded. 


Shovel 
A magical shovel is identical to most ordinary 
shovels, having a 4-foot-long wooden handle and 
a metal blade. 


of Animation 
XP Value: 400 GP Value: 4,200 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
This shovel seems to be a shovel of digging in all 
respects. However, it can also animate a human or 
demihuman body within 30 feet on command (as 
an animate dead spell), producing an animated 
skeleton or zombie that obeys the user of the 
shovel, It can animate one body per 24 hours but 
only in moonlight, If the shovel is damaged in the 
least, all undead animated by it are instantly slain, 


of Digging 
XP Value GP Value 
Cursed: — 1,000 
Normal: 600 3,600 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 


On command, this shovel digs by itself. It can 
affect only soil or sand, not solid stone. It digs | 


cubic foot per round, If commanded to refill a 
4835 


1113 


O T S a T 


~ Shovel of Gravedigging ro 


hole it has already dug, it uses the same soil and 
fills the hole in only six rounds, regardless of the 
size of the hole. The shovel functions three times 
per day for up to one hour per use. 

A cursed shovel of digging functions as a 
shovel of gravedigging and forces its owner 
awake whenever struck by moonlight. It guides 
its user to the nearest graveyard, making the user 
wait while it unearths a grave, It then guides the 
user home (if still alive) or buries the unfortunate 
wretch (if slain), The curse erases all memory of 
the excursion, and the user might thus be unaware 
of any nocturnal activities, A remove curse spell 
from a caster of 26th level or higher removes this 
side effect, and the normal shovel of digging 
remains, 


of Gravedigging 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 3,000 


The Book of Marvelous Magic 

This shovel appears to be and functions as a 
shovel of digging in all respects. However, it 
constantly emits a soundless call to undead; any 
such creatures within 120 feet of the shovel hear 
and come to it, attacking anyone touching or 
using the shovel and all others within 30 feet of 
it, The undead want the shovel, and depart if 
allowed to take it. They will keep it with them 
after that. 


of Internment 

XP Value: 400 GP Value: 2,400 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
This shovel seems to be a shovel of digging in all 
respects, but after digging its hole, it forces the 
person using it to jump into the hole (no saving 
throw). The shovel then paralyzes its victim 
(again, no saving throw) and starts refilling the 
hole immediately and completely. If a remove 
curse is cast on the shovel before it finishes, it 
becomes nonmagical and stops. The curse cannot 
be removed before the shovel begins filling the 
hole or after it finishes except with a wish, The 
paralysis is permanent unless removed with a 
wish or remove curse. Any interred victim suffo- 
cates in 1d4+2 rounds unless able to survive 
without air. 


Spade of Colossal Excavation 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 6,500 
Dunceon Master Guide 
This digging tool is 8 fect long with a spadelike 


blade 2 feet wide and 3 feet long. Any fighter 
with 18 Strength can use this magical shovel to 
dig great holes. One cubic yard of normal earth 
can be excavated in one round, After 10 rounds of 
digging, the user must rest for five rounds. Hard 
packed clay takes twice as long to dig, as does 
gravel. Loose soil takes only half as long. 

In a SPELLJAMMER Campaign: If used against 
ships made of carth or soil (not stone), the spade 
inflicts Ida hull points of damage each round. 


Shurikin 


Sce Throwing Stars 
Sickle 


A sickle is a farm tool consisting of a crescent- 
shaped blade mounted on a short handle. It is 
used for cutting weeds, grass, and grains. Peas- 
ants and adventurers who have no weapons are 
forced to make do with whatever they find. Many 
resort to this common farm tool. Druids favor the 
sickle, and golden sickles are used to harvest 
mistletoe ax a component for druidic spells. 


Roll Sickle Type 
0117 Gouge 
18-33 Battle Scythe 
34-50 Kama 
51-67 Kusari-guma 
68-83 Scythe 
84-00 Sickle 
Ahto’s 
XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 25,000 
Dornes & Dexaooos Cyclopedia 
Ahto avatar fights with a sickle +5 that causes 
2d10 points of damage per strike. 
Black 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 10,000 
Moonshae 


The black sickle, also known as the Blighthringer 
is an arcane device of potent evil. When it strikes 
a plant, that plant and all others within a 30- 
foot-radius immediately wither and dic. Ani- 
mated plant-type creatures, such as treants, 
shambling mounds, and mobile fungi, receive u 
saving throw vs. spell to avoid the effect. Even if 
the save is successful, however, the animated 
plant must remove itself from the area of the 

blight as quickly as possible. 
In addition to the special effects listed, a magi- 
om 


2 1114 = 


Sickle of Lycanthropy — 


cal sickle can be used as a magical weapon: +2 to 
hit and inflicting 144+2 points of damage to all 
sizes of victims, 


Cronus’s 
XP Value: 6,000 GP Value: 30,000 
Legends & Lore 

Cronus's adamantite sickle cuts through any 
material it touches, effectively lowering his oppo- 
nents’ AC to a maximum of $ (unless due strictly 
to Dexterity). Beings hit by the sickle must save 
vs. death magic or lose whatever appendage the 
sickle hit (DMs should determine this randomly 
or by decree based on the situation) 


Gaea’s Black 
XP Value: 4,500 GP Value: 27,500 
Legends & Lore 
Gaca x avatar wields a black sickle that forces all 
those hit by it to save vs, death magic or be 
instantly slain, 


Golden 
XP Value: 600 GP Value: 6,000 
Moonshac 
A golden sickle contains 246 charges when 
found. It has two abilities: 
Without expending a charge, the golden sickle 
allows the user to pass without trace, exactly as 
the druid spell of the same name. This does 


115 


require the user to concentrate 

By expending a charge, the user can employ 
the plant door spell to open a pathway through 
tangled or solid plant growth, Unlike the normal 
spell, however, the plant door spell from the 
sickle always lasts one turn, and the path can be 
used by anyone, It can be up to 120 feet long. 

In addition to the special effects listed, u magi- 
cal sickle can be used as a magical weapon: +2 on 
attack rolls and inflicts 1d4+2 points of damage 
to all sizes of victims, 


of the Harvest 
XP Value: 1,300 GP Value; 13,000 
DRAGON Magazine 187 
The sickle of the harvest is a +2 weapon and has a 
limited dancing ability, functioning as a dancing 
sword, except that it dances for only two rounds 
and retains its +2 bonus for both. It is a +4 weapon 
against all plant creatures of nonncutral alignment. 

The real power of this sickle ts as a harvesting 
tool. When given a command word, it animates 
and flies through the air, harvesting edible plants 
in the area designated by a druid’s mental com- 
mand, For example, it can harvest one-half acre 
of corn or wheat per turn, continuing to do so 
indefinitely unless it is willed to stop, completes 
its task, moves a mile away from the druid who 
commands it, or is physically or magically 
attacked, In any of these cases, the sickle imme- 
diately returns to the druid’s hand, arriving within 
one round unless physically obstructed or 
destroyed, To obstruct it physically requires that it 
be completely enclosed in an object of stonc or 
metal; it slips free of any living grasp and hacks 
its way through 3 inches of wood in one round. 

The commands given to the sickle by its wielder 
can be general (“Cut down every stalk of grain and 
every picce of ripe fruit within one-half mile of 
here”), or specific (“Cut only ripe blackberries the 
size of the ball of my thumb or larger, and always 
leave half the blackberries on every bush”), 

This item is usually created by high-level 
druids to reward beneficial services performed by 
lesser members of the circle, To possess one is a 
symbol of status among other druids 


of Lycanthropy 
XP Value: 1,200 GP Value: 6,000 
Prince of LA 
These horrible weapons give the attacker a +2 
bonus to attack and damage rolls. The weapons 


es 


~ Sickie, Scythe of Pain f 


are identical to the tools used during harvest time 
in the grain fields of Lankhmar. The steel used in 
their construction is a soft, gray color, The tem- 
pered steel is very resistant to rust and repels 
stains well. It is said that even after being pulled 
from a newly created wound, the blood drips 
completely off the sickles blade. 

When this weapon is used by a character of 
alignment, such as a worshiper of the rat god, an 
attack roll of a natural 20 causes the target to fall 
prey to /ycanthropy. A saving throw vs. poly- 
morph is allowed to avoid the effect, The form of 
/ycanthropy that is incurred is wereratism. 

The sickle of lvcanthropy causes a base 1d4+1 
points of damage to small- and medium-sized 
creatures, while causing 1d4 points of damage to 
larger targets. The rat god priests, the ones who 
are the exclusive users of these weapons, boast 
that they do not function in the hands of other 
humans. This statement, however, ts a half-truth 
The weapon does work normally, but if the align- 
ment of the user does not mesh with the chaotic 
evil nature of the rat god, a critical miss of any 
kind (an attack roll of an unmodified 1) causes 
the weapon to strike its user for double damage. 
The wielder also is cursed with wererat lycan- 
thropy. No saving throw is allowed when this 
occurs 

This curse is permanent, but it can be dispelled by 
a wish, Another way to dispel the disease is to cast a 
remove curse upon the character. The spell allows 
the character to roll a saving throw vs. polymorph. If 
the save is successful, the lycanthropy is broken and 
does not affect the character again. Unless, of course 
the PC is infected by the discase again. 


Scythe of Pain 
XP Value: 5,000 GP Value: 35,000 
Kara-Tur 
The Diamond or Rainbow Warrior, detailed 
under the Crystal Warriors entry, carries the 
famous Seythe of pain +5 that immobilizes its 
target for 1d3 turns with wracking pain unless a 
saving throw vs, spell is made 


Skates of the Roller Hoopers 
XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 15,000 
Dranon Magazine 134 
Any character wearing these skates can move at a 
rate of 24 over any surface (watcr, mud, stairs 
going down)—cven over walls or ccilings. When 
doing so, a strange, soft sound may be heard 


one that resembles the purring of a giant cat (the 
whirring of the skates) 


Skull 
The skull is the bony structure that encases and 
protects the brain and most sensing organs. Many 
cultures use skulls to frighten enemies from 
sacred grounds, while others use the bones in 
mystical ceremonies 


XP Value: 6,500 


GP Value: 37,500 
luz the Eval 
This sinister, black humanoid skull, bearing glint- 
ing rubies in its eye sockets, is a potent magical 
item, which even luz has forgotten how to craft 
Only three are known to be in existence at this time 
Priests or wizards possessing such a skull have a 
considerable wealth of powers granted to them. 
The holder of an ebon skull can animate dead 
three times per day and create a bonechain, even 
without prepared bones, of up to 16 skeletons once a 
day. No form of darkness spell can affect the owner, 
who is likewise immune to cold-based attacks and 
energy drains. Spells cast at the owner that directly 
impair physical ability scores, such as ray of enfee 
blement, are negated. Magic jar spells and no illu- 
sion or phantasm spells of 3rd-level or below affect 
the skull owner. Worse still, a priestly owner of an 
ebon skull may turn good-aligned priests as if they 


4 


J ` 


1116 


. 


y aue i 


were paladins of the same level. Finally, once a day, 
the skull owner can conjure a drifting cloud of chill- 
ing black mist with an area of effect and movement 
equivalent to a cloudkill, The cloud inflicts 6d4 
points of damage on any creature caught within it. 
After two rounds of continuous exposure, any cres- 
ture upped must also make a saving throw vs, pari- 
lyzation or be unable to move for 1d10 rounds. 


Mezin’s 
XP Value: 2,400 GP Value: 12,000 
Kara-Tur 
Mezin was the first high king of the Ixsacortae, 
stain in battle against the Wu-haltai and buried 
beneath a cairn built upon the battlefield. A band of 
Wu-haltans subsequently raided the grave, intend- 
ing to carry home the head of the Issacort high king 
as a war trophy, Not long after, their village was 
annihilated by Bakemono brigands, who carried off 
the skull (which had already gained some infamy; 
in fact, most bad luck in the region was blamed 
upon it), The Bakemono were slain in 
battle with the Tayanulchi, and the skull was lost. It 
has since been reported on a number of occa- 
sions—once in the hands of a hobgoblin shaman, 
again among the curiosities of a traveling Pazruk 
wu jen, and still later in the possession of a party of 
oni, Its present location is unknown, but a number 
of respected shamans have asserted that it rests 
somewhere in the Palace of Balinaikal. 

The appearance of the skull is well known. It is 
human, of course, blackened by grime and soot 
and age. Firmly lodged in the right temple is a 
broad, iron arrowhead. 

The skull is not intrinsically magical, nor does 
it radiate magic. However, it does have two spe- 
cial properties, First, attached to the skull is a 
kuei with 6 HD, lawful neutral alignment, and 
special powers of mass suggestion (at will) and, 
once every five years, ancient curse, The duty of 
the kuei is to see that the skull is always accorded 
Proper respect, as befits the high king. If some- 
one is disrespectful to the power of the skull or 
Mezin’s name, the kuci attempts to punish that 
person until appropriate appeasement is made 
Second, because of its history, the skull has 
acquired an aura of ill fortune. If held by a nonis- 
sacortae, the owner and all associates suffer a 1 
penalty to all actions, The guilt is associative to 
all who might be culpable in the illegal posses- 
sion of the skull, Thus, if a chieftain or a shaman 
has claimed it, that person and all who serve the 


owner are affected. 

Some shamans belicve valuc of the skull lies in 
some unknown, powerful magic; but this has not 
been substantiated. Certainly possession of the 
skull is a significant moral und morale advantage 
in the Northlands. An Issacortae clan that had it 
would gain great honor, a rival nation would 
bring great dishonor to the Issacortae. This in 
itself is incentive to claim the skull. 


Singing 

XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 20,000 
The Complete Wizard's Handbook 

This item resembles a small human skull, about 3 
inches in diameter, made of ivory, Once a day, the 
owner can command the skull to sing. The singing 
skull sings eerie, depressing dirges for one hour 
(or less, if ordered by the skulls owner). All those 
within 50 feet of the singing skull must make a 
successful saving throw vs. spell or suffer the 
effects of a fear spell. The owner of the singing 
skull is immune to its effects. 


Spirit 
XP Value: 1,200 GP Value: 12,000 
Dragon Magazine 189 

This item, of limited value to travelers and none to 

civilized people, is quite valuable to tribal wizards 

and witch doctors. A spirit skull must be hung in a 

tent or tree for one week prior to its use. After that, 

the skull has taught itself about its new environ- 
ment and established a range of 1,000 fect in diam- 
eter. It then provides the following bencfits: 

1. The skull may be consulted as a sage whose field 
of study is the surrounding region. For instance, if 
hung in a jungle village, the skull will have fields 
of study in jungle fauna and flora, the history of 
any ruins or cities, and geographic features— 
everything within its range, It can tell the owner 
where to find a certain medical plant or spell 
component, what the weather will be like, and 
where a lost ring might be found. The sage func- 
tion may be consulted three times a day: once at 
dawn, once at noon, and once at dusk. 

. The skull serves as a warning system During 
the week of conditioning, the skull makes note 
of all intelligent creatures residing in the area, 
plus all unintelligent creatures with more than 
3 HD. Thereafter, any new such creature that 
enters the skull’s range causes the skull to 
keen. This sound is audible only to savage wiz- 


ards and is not loud enough to awaken one 
4 


w 


117 


~ Skull, Talking j 


Al 


from a sound sleep. Should such a creature 
come within 100 feet of the village, the skull 
wails. This sound wakes a savage wizard. 
The skull may be used to cast any detect spell 
upon a being or device brought before it. The 
skull may cast detect magic, detect evil, detect 
charm, detect lie, detect scrying, and detect 
poison, once each per day, on command. To the 
uninitiated, the spirit skull is simply the skull 
ofa large animal, painted with strange sym- 
bols and bedecked with tufts of hair, leather, 
and teeth, If detect magic is used, it shows 
strong evocation magic. A savage wizard will 
recognize it for what it is at once, on sight, 


we 


Talking 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 82 

A talking skull looks like a small human skull 
carved from ivory or polished bone. When not in 
use, its jaws are always open as though it is waiting 
to feed. When activated, the skull functions as a 
speak with dead spell cast by a 12th-level priest. To 
use the skull, a character must place a bit of a 
corpse's bone (no more than one year deceased) 
into the Skulls mouth, Once this is done, the skull 
chews the bone, destroying it. This process takes 
one round. When the skull finishes chewing, the 
owner can ask it up to four questions within a turn, 
The skull answers in the voice of the deceased. This 
item can be used once per day, but a specific spirit 
can be contacted only once a week. 

If a character tries to speak with the same spirit 
twice within a week, the skull chews the bone, but 
then violently spits out bone fragments doing 2d4 
points of damage (save for half damage) to anyone 
within a cone 5 feet long and 5 feet wide, For a 
week after this incident the skull cannot function. 
This behavior also occurs if the skull is fed a bone 
from a corpse more than a year old or from a non- 
sentient (animal intelligence or less) being. The 
skull radiates strong necromantic magic, but dis- 
plays no alignment. It is usable only by priests. 


Slate of Identification 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 10,000 
Dungeons & Dragons Rules Cyclopedia 
This valuable device, usable only by spellcasters, 
can identify most magical items. It is a piece of 
slate (stone) held firmly in an ornate wooden 
frame, usually about 3 feet square (though slates 
of many sizes are possible, both larger and 


smaller), The user holds the slate horizontally and 
places a magical item upon it, When the item is 
lifted off, the name of the item appears on the 
slate. If an item has command words, one appears 
on the slate with each identification. The slate 
will only repeat itself when all the command 
words have been revealed. 

The slate is easily fooled by cursed items, how- 
ever, And it cannot detect an item's number of 
charges or special abilities. A potion of poison will 
be mistakenly identified as some other type. Any 
cursed item will be identified as a normal item, 
(These guidelines should be strictly followed, lest 
the mystery of such items found be ruined.) 

The slate may expend up to 10 charges per day; 
items identified require the following numbers of 
charges per use. 


Temporary Magical Items Charges 
Potion 2 
Missile 3 
Wand a 
Staff 5 
Permanent Magical Items Charges 


Any permanent magical weapon 6 


Armor or shield 7 
Ring or rod 8 
Minor miscellaneous item* 10 


Major miscellaneous item* Special 

The DM's judgment should be exercised regard- 
ing the value and frequency of such items in the 
campaign, A “major” item might be identifiable, 
but only by making the slate useless for Ida days. 


Sledge 


The sledge is a large sled with runners along the 
bottom that allow the craft to be pulled by a team 
of dogs, horses, or some other creature. Usually 
sledges are used to haul cargo or a large number 
of passengers. 


Joukahainen’s Golden 
XP Value: 7,000 GP Value: 30,000 
Gods, Demigods, & Heroes 
Joukahainen’s golden sledge is pulled by an eerie 
reddish brown horse. This horse moves (pulling 
the sledge) at a rate of 20 and it attacks as any 
other heavy war horse does but with one addi- 
tion—it can breathe fire as a 7-HD Hellhound. 
Joukahainen’s avatar has one other steed that can 


pull the sledge at a movement rate of 18. 
4907 


ee 


1 


— —. — . E 


x Sting. Bolas of Sunlight ye 


Vainamoinen’s 
XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 20,000 
Gods, Demigods, & Heroes 
Customarily, people travel throughout Lapland 
with horse and sledge (sleigh). Vainamoinen’s 
horse travels at a movement rate of 24 with 
sledge in tow and it can walk upon water. This 
horse will bear any loud up to 300 pounds. 


Sleeping Bag of 

Armor Nullification 

XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
DRacon Magazine 181 

The sleeping bag of armor nullification is a good 
substitute for the various kinds of armor in which 
one can sleep. The powerful magic of this bag 
enables anyone wearing any suit of armor of any 
type to sleep in it as though he or she were unar- 
mored. As with the special types of armor, this 
enables adventurers camping out in the wilderness 
to avoid being attacked in the middle of the night 
before they can don their armor. The only problem 
is that if the enemy attacks before the character can 
get out of the bag, the PC is AC 10, as the bag 
totally nullifies any armor in it. In some circles, 
this is considered a borderline cursed item, 


Sling 
This sling is a weapon has existed since the begin- 
ning of recorded history, The basic sling consists of a 
leather or fabric strap with a pouch for a stone mis- 
sile. The sling is held by both ends of the strap and 
twirled above the user's head. When it reaches opti- 
mum speed, the missile is launched by releasing one 
of the strap’s ends. The sling is a cheap and simple 
weapon, but it takes great skill to use one accurately. 


Roll Sling Type 

01-17 Bola 

18-33 Dejala 

34-50 Fustibalus 

51-67 Garnok 

68-83 Sung 

84-00  Staff-Sling 
Blacksling 

XP Value: 20,000 GP Value: 90,000 
The Five Shires 


This rare and powerful weapon is a light, wispy 
black sling. casily concealed amid or beneath cloth- 
ing. Operating as a sling +3 (no damage bonus), 
these devices feel slippery. They are hard to snatch 


or steal (add 2 points to all ability checks involved) 
and cannot be used to tie things or creatures. 

Use of a blacksling enables nonmagical projectiles 
to strike targets that can normally be hit only by 
magical weapons. The slings THACO bonus is 
added to any bonus possessed by magical projectiles. 

A blacksling has an attached extradimensional 
space accessible only within the active radius of 
blackfame. This arsenal can hold up to 1d10+10 
objects of any sort. The objects are restricted to a 
maximum size (cach) of a halfling’s fist. Nothing 
can be added to the arsenal, which is attached to the 
central cup of the sling, except in the presence of 
blackflame, Missiles and other objects placed in the 
arsenal, such as keys, coins, or gems, can be called 
out of the arsenal at any time by grasping the sling 
and whispering a secret command word. Only one 
object will appear from the arsenal cach round, in 
the center of the sling. Objects appeuring are chosen 
randomly from the arsenal contents, the wielder of 
the sling cannot choose to have a key appear out of 
an arsenal full of sling stones, except by luck. 

Objects in a blacksling 3 arsenal cannot be 
reached, detected by, or harmed by others. Physi- 
cal destruction of the sling does cause the loss of 
the arsenal of objects into another random plane. 
A blacksling saves vs. fire and magical attacks at 
+3, and can suffer 14 points of physical damage 
before being destroyed. 

Many hin have devised glass globes filled with 
powder to irritate, blind, or mark targets, Globes 
are also often filled with oils or smokepowders. 
Objects in a blacksling 5 arsenal cannot be struck 
or otherwise broken, damaged, or stolen. 


Bolas of Sunlight 
GP Value: 150 
DRAGON Magazine 155 
These items were originally developed by the Ces- 
tian warriors to protect themselves against the 
night dragons of Oceania. Each bola consists of 
three small jars attached at the ends of three 4- 
foot-long cords. The other ends of the cords are 
knotted together. Each jar contains a different sub- 
stance (about one pint per jar). The two first jars 
contain two volatile substances that, when mixed, 
produce a blinding Nash. The third jar contains a 
glowing adhesive that retains its properties for do 
rounds after being exposed to the air. 
A Cestian warrior holds the center knot of the 
cords and carefully whirls the triple bola until the 


proper throwing speed is attained, this produces a 
4il 


XP Value: 15 


C o 


1119 


~ Sling, Finniginn’s =. 


characteristic whizzing sound. The bola is then 
relcas ed. The impact against any target is sufficient 
to break the jars and mix their contents. The bolas of 
sunlight require a full round of preparation and a 
clear space of at least S- ſoot radius around the 
thrower. The weapon causes no physical damage, 
but it has a chance of entangling a human-size target 
or catching the wings of a very small dragon. Hurl- 
ing this type of bola requires special skill on the part 
of the warrior and a minimum Strength of 16. An 
untrained user has a 75% chance of either breaking 
the jars or being trapped in the cords, and he or she 
would attack with a—5 penalty on attack rolls, 

The flash of light causes temporary blindness for 
da rounds. A successful save vs. paralysis prevents 
the target from being blinded (save at -$ during the 
night or in darkness). The flash of light is particu- 
larly suitable against creatures of darkness, such as 
shadows or night dragons (against night dragons, 
the flash causes 3d6 points of damage). The adhe- 
sive substance has the effect of revealing invisible or 
otherwise hard-to-see targets but causes no damage. 
The substances used in the bolas are extracted from 
various plants growing on the Isle of Cestia and are 
not magical. The bolas do not work underwater, and 
they cannot be used at less than the ranges indicated 
in the table below (in other words, bolas of sunlight 
can be used only at medium or long range). 


Ranges 
S M L Skill Level 
— 40 90 Nonproficient User 
— 50 120 Proficient User 
— 40 150 Specialist User 
Finniginn’s 
XP Value: 400 GP Value: 3,200 


DRAGON Quest Game 

Long ago, a halfling named Finniginn hired a 
leather worker to help him make a special sling. It 
was enchanted with the help of a wandering wiz- 
ard, and became a special, magical weapon highly 
prized by all halflings. Finniginn’s sling gives its 
owner a +1 bonus to all attack and damage rolls. 
This is a small weapon, Slings can be used only 
in ranged combat, 


of Seeking 
XP Value: 700 GP Value: 3,500 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 
This gives its user a +2 bonus for both attack and 
damage rolls, but missiles from such a weapon are 


regarded as +1 with respect to whether or not cer- 
tain creatures are affected by the weapon (a special 
defense of a +1 or better weapon means the creature 
is vulnerable to normal missiles from this sling). 


Sling Bullet of Impact 


XP Value: 150 GP Value; 800 
Unearthed Arcana 


The sling bullet of impact originally appears to be 


little more than a well-cast sling bullet. Close cxam- 
ination, however, reveals minute runes engraved 
upon these missiles, and they radiate an aura of 
enchantment. Composed of a mixed iron, silver, and 
lead alloy, each bullet is equal to a +1 missile for 
purposes of attack determination only. Thus, if one 
of these missiles is launched from a +2 magic sling, 
the total attack bonus would be +3, or equal to a +3 
magical weapon, but damage is determined exclu- 
sive of the +3 bonus. The unadjusted attack score is 
the base determinant of whether additional damage 
is done by one of these missiles. That is, if one of 
these bullets impacts its target, the sling- user x base 
chance to hit (exclusive of magical bonuses) must 
be determined. For example, assume that the target 
could be hit normally on a 12 or better. If the die 
scores a hit, without adjustment for any bonus for 
the sling used or for the bullet itself, is above the 
minimum required to hit, then the missile does 2 
additional points of damage for cach point of differ- 
ence between the die roll and the minimum required. 
A dic roll of 13 in this example indicates +2 to dam- 
age, a roll of 14 would add +4, a roll of 15 indicates 
+6, and so on, while a die roll of 12 or less means 
that no extra damage is scored on that hit. The extra 
damage (if such applies) is added to the base dam- 
age figure (1d4+1/1d6+1) for a sling bullet. 


Slingstone of Pulverizing 
XP Value: 150 GP Value: 800 
DRAGON Magazine 179 
This weapon +/ acts as a normal sling stone until 
it hits its target, then it does 4d4 points or 3struc- 
tural points of damage. The stone has one use, 
then its magic is dissipated. 


Slippers 

A slipper is an ornate piece of footwear used primar- 
ily when the user retires for the evening, Slippers are 
made of soft, comfortable materials; they allow the 
wearer to walk quietly about the house or room with- 
out waking nearby sleepers. Their primary function 
is to protect the wearers’ feet from cold floors. 

4915 


i 1120 3 


x Slippers, Ruby pa 


Bahija’s Slippers of Spider Climbing 
XP Value: 1,250 GP Value: 6,250 
1992 Fantasy Collector Card 188 
These slippers allow Bahija to move along verti- 
cal surfaces or even upside down along ceilings 
just as a normal pair of slippers of spider climb- 
ing does, When these slippers are used for such a 

purpose, the movement is 90 feet rather than 60. 


of Dancing 
XP Value: — GP Value: 5,000 
Dracon Magazine 179 
These slippers function like boots of dancing. 


Dragon 
XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 15,000 
The Complete Wizard's Handbook 

These slippers are made of green silk. The magic 
of the dragon slippers is activated if the wearer 
concentrates and speaks the word “change.” 
When activated, the dragon slippers cause the 
wearer to appear as a 20-foot dragon with bright 
yellow scales, a barbed tail, and long green fangs; 
the wearer does not gain any of the abilities of a 
dragon. While the illusion is in effect, the wearer 
retains all normal abilities and statistics The 
effect lasts for one hour, but can be canceled any 
time by the command of the wearer, 


of 
XP Value: 300 GP Value: 1,500 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
These plain glass shoes are identical to glass slip- 
pers. However, when either is touched, the victim 
immediately opens one potion bottle carried (ran- 
domly choxen), pours the liquid into the slipper, 
and drinks it (no saving throw). 


Ebomara’s Slippers of Spider Climbing 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 10,000 
1992 Fantasy Collector Card 148 
Ebomara’s slippers are enchanted with drow magic. 
They function as do other slippers of spider climb- 
ing—they enable Ebomara to move 6 per round on 
vertical surfaces or even upside down on ccilings 
while leaving her hands free to cast her horrible 
spells—but they have also been endowed with the 
ability to cast web twice a day. When she utters a 
secret command word, webs issue from the we of 
each boot (one per boot), In dedication to Lolth she 

has had them embossed with a web design. 


Glass 
XP Value: 400 GP Value: 2,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

These transparent shoes enable the wearer to 
change the appearance of all items carried and 
clothes worn once an hour. Size and shape present 
no limitations: for example, armor can be made to 
appear as normal clothing, weapons as feathers, 
and so forth. However, the movement rate of the 
wearer is reduced by 30 feet per turn. The slippers 
may be casily damaged and require careful tend- 
ing any damage destroys the enchantment. 


of Kicking 

GP Value: 3,750 
Uneurthed Arcana 
The wearer of these magical slippers is empowered 
to use his or her feet as effective weapons. The 
wearer of this footgear is able to attack twice cach 
combat round, and although his or her level of 
attack remains unchanged, the slippers enable two 
special attacks cach round if the wearer chooses to 
forego other attack methods. Damage inflicted by 
kicking with these slippers is special, The opponent 
suffering damage takes di points if human-sized 
or smaller and Ida pointe if larger than human 
sized, The dweomer of the footwear actually inflicts 
twice normal damage, but the additional effect is in 
a separate category, for such points are recovered by 
the opponent after one complete turn. For instance, 
the wearer attacks a larger than human-sized oppo- 
nent. Initial attacks are successful, and the damage 
inflicted is 3 points (+3) and 4 points (+4). At the 
beginning of the 11th round of combat (or on the 
1 Ith round thereafter, in any event), the opponent 
recovers 7 points (+3 and +4) as the effects of the 
kicks wear off. If the slippers are worn by a PC able 
to employ martial arts skills, their effect is merely 
on foot attacks and damage inflicted. 


Ruby 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
Deacon Magazine 45 

These magical slippers are bright red in color. 
They allow the wearer to teleport to his or her 
home by clicking the heels together three times 

and murmuring, “there's no place like home.” 
Ruby slippers cannot be removed intact from 
the feet (once they are put on) until the owner 
dies or a wish or limited wish spell is cast. The 
slippers are nearly indestructible, and save on the 
item saving throw matrix as hard metal, with an 
ws 


XP Value: 750 


1121 


5 Slippers, Ruby Il 


extra, +2 on the roll—they also give the wearer 
immunity from foot ailments. The slippers can 
only be used once per day. They can transport the 
wearer and up to 200 pounds of living or nonliv- 
ing matter, but only to the wearers true home, 


Ruby Il 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
This pair of fragile red slippers allows the wearer 
to travel from one plane to another by tapping the 
shoes together, They may be used once a month. 


of Slowness 
XP Value: — GP Value: 1,000 
Mordenkainen's Fantastic Adventure 
Slippers of slowness affect the wearer as a slow 
spell for as long as they are worn. They cannot be 
removed except by the use of a dispel magic spell, 
remove curse at 12th level of spell use, or by wish. 


of Soft Movement 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
Dracos Magazine 179 
The slippers are like boots of elvenkind, like all 
magical slippers, conform to the size of the feet 
of the wearer, stretching or shrinking to fit, 


of Spider Climbing 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
Dunaron Master Guide 

These slippers are unremarkable, although they 
will give off a faint aura of alteration magic if 
detection is performed. When worn, a pair of these 
slippers enables the individual to move at a 60-foot 
fate on vertical surfaces or even upside down along 
ceilings, with hands free to do whatever the wearer 
desires, Extremely slippery surfaces ice, oiled, or 
greased surfaces—makce the slippers useless. 


Smoke 


of Fire Quenching 
XP Value: 250 GP Value: 750 
DRAGON Magazine 194 
This small, fragile glass globe releases clouds of 
thick white smoke that extinguish all normal fires 
within 60 feet when shattered, Magical fires are 
entitled to a saving throw, requiring a roll of 15 or 
better, with a +1 bonus per level of the spell (so a 
fireball cast into an area protected by smoke of 
fire quenching would only ignite if a saving throw 


of 12 or better is made). 

The spell has no effect on fires created by a crea- 
ture body (such as the breath of a red dragon) but 
secondary fires sparked by these flames are affected. 
The smoke dissipates in 1d4+2 rounds, and new 
fires can be lit in the area once every trace of the 
smoke is gone. The range of the thrown globe ix 90 
feet. (See Grenade-Like Missiles in the DMG.) 


XP Value: 200 GP Value: 800 
The Ruins of Undermountain 

Sleep-smoke is a dark-gray, smoky gas that 
rapidly dissipates when released into the air. A 
flask full of it will affect a globe 10 feet in diame- 
ter on the first round, expanding outward to a 20- 
foot diameter in the second round, and being 
harmless after that. (If released in windy condi- 
tions, the globe moves with the wind.) 

All creatures within the area of effect must 
save vs. poison at 3 on the first round, and I on 
the second, or fall asleep for 1d4+1 rounds. 

Such sleep lasts only 1412/4 rounds, but can- 
not be prematurely ended by any known means. 
Alcohol fumes and intoxication provide a small 
measure of protection against the effects of 
sleepsmoke; intoxicated targcts make all saving 
throws at normal chances, 


Smoking Pipe 

Magical pipes are usually found with intelligent, 
pipe-smoking beings, most often humanoids, They 
may be held, smoked, stored, or put on display. 
Pipes are often found with canisters of tobacco and 
other smokable materials. Each pipe consists of a 
stem and a bowl, that are often detachable. A pipe 
is used by filling the bow! with smoking material 
and lighting it. The pipes of sprites and pixies may 
be only . inch long; a giant's or cyclops pipe may 
be 3 feet long, or more. Pipes may be made of 
wood, baked clay, ceramic, metal, meerschaum, or 
a combination of materials. Some pipes are huge, 
even for their users; the bow! is set on the floor and 
the user sits or stands while holding the stem. 
Assistance is needed to light pipes of this size. 


Aromatic 
XP Value: 400 GP Value: 2,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
When smoked, this pipe creates a warm, friendly 
scent in a 10 cubic foot area around the user. On 
command, it produces the aroma of any plant or 
mo 


1122 


ee O l l EE 22 


Smoking Pipe, Eversmoking 


woodland scent, including garlic (which deters 
vampires) and wolfsbane (which makes all lycan- 
thropes in the area check morale), 


Bubble 
XP Value: — GP Value: 1,000 
The Rook of Marvelous Magic 

This pipe acts as an aromatic pipe in all respects 
until used within 60 feet of a hostile creature, At 
that time it instantly produces thousands of soap 
bubbles in a 20 cubic foot volume around the user. 
The bubbles obscure vision and cause cach victim 
within them (including the smoker) to make a sav- 
ing throw vs. spell. Failure indicates that the soapy 
bubbles have gotten into the eyes, causing a —2 
penalty on attack rolls for one turn. However, this 
effect is automatic and permanent on the user of 
the pipe (no saving throw); but if a remove curse is 
applied, the pipe and the penalty both disappear. 


Eversmoking 
XP Value GP Value 
Charged Version: 1,200 13,000 
Elminster x Version: 6,000 65,000 
Permanent Version: 1,900 21,000 


POLYHEDRON Newazine 70 

This pipe was developed by the wizard Elminster, 
und was unique to him until recently, when he 
made details of its construction available to 
Sarghun of Silverymoon, a wizard who also 
enjoys a good pipe. Various wizards of the 
Forgotten Realms have since gleaned details of 
the pipe from Sarghun 

The invention looks like a lange-bowled, curved- 
stemmed meerschaum pipe. (The sort often 
depicted by artists portraying Sherlock Holmes. In 
the Realms, most such pipes actually are carved of 
felsul root.) These pipes are usually 10 inches long 
or less, and weigh less than a pound. 

Elminster’s eversmoking pipe does not produce 
large amounts of smoke. However, the smoke is 
thick, greenish-gray, and contains occasional tiny, 
winking sparks, The smoke keeps normal insects 
at bay, clearing them from a 10-foot radius 
around the user, This protection is effective even 
against magically summoned insects. 

In addition to the enchant an item spell, the pipe 
requires the following magic: pyrotechnics, wall of 
force, and Drawmij $ instant summons. Unless the 
pipe is a charged version, it must also be given per- 
manency. In D&D game campaigns, the required 
spells are wall of fire, summon object, and force 


field, plus permanence if desired. 

A nonpermanent eversmoking pipe can retain 
six charges, A single charge keeps the pipe lit for 
seven hours of continuous use (the pipe can be 
extinguished and the remaining duration on a 
charge saved for later use.) The pipe can be 
recharged, To restore a single charge to the pipe, 
a wizard must cast one spell of cach type. The 
crushed and powdered gems required for 
Drawmij$ instant summons and wall of force 
spells must be tamped into the bowl. 

The pipe's bow! has the usual cavity for 
tobacco, When the pipe is activated, tobacco is 
constantly replenished at the bottom of the cavity 
by magical means; the summons teleports 
tobacco in from a known store (usually a large 
sack or barrel in the owner's domicile). 

Neither type of pipe can stay lit if it runs out of 
tobacco, If the pipe is a “charged” version, and it 
runs out of tobacco, it uses up the current charge 
regardless of the clapsed time of use. Simply 
restoring the tobacco supply is sufficient to allow 
the pipe to function again, (Of course, a changed 
pipe without any charges cannot function, 
tobacco supply aside.) 

The pipe is smoked normally. To one side of 
the tobacco cavity is the pipestem. On the other, 


across from the stem, is a tiny cavity containing a 
“eM 


1123 


Smoking Pipe, Eversmoking 


—ĩ˙ E R OE 


flame. Whenever the smoker sucks on the pipe, 
the flame is drawn into the tobacco, igniting it. 
The pipe is activated by the direct touch (flesh to 
wood) of any being who simultaneously says, 
“Flame” or any single (usually cryptic) command 
word chosen during the initial enchantment. In 
like manner, “Out!” or an equivalent command 
word (plus simultaneous touch) deactivates the 
pipe. When activated, the pipe lights itself, and its 
bowl is shiclded from the clements by a minia- 
ture, hemispherical wall of force. This allows the 
user to keep the pipe lit even in rain, snow, gusts 
of wind, or gule-force natural winds. The bowl 
itself is magically protected against overheating 
and burning during normal use. 

Several conditions of the pipe- users surround- 
ings, such as the presence of a natural or magical 
dust storm or dust devil, a pyrotechnics spell, 
cloudkill, or stinking cloud, cause the pipe to 
ignite a fiery 3d6 fireball-like explosion. The 
pipe is allowed an item saving throw (it is thin 
wood and gets a +3 bonus as a magic item with 
fire-related powers; in this case it saves vs. magi- 
cal fire). If it fails, it is destroyed, and anyone in 
contact with it receives a penalty of —3 on their 
own saving throw against the fiery explosion. 

A pipe cannot function under water or in an 
airless void. When a lit pipe is exposed to these 
conditions, or subjected to a quench fire spell, it 
automatically is extinguished and the current 
charge ends. 

Attempts to add more than six charges to the 
pipe cause an explosion for 2d6 damage and the 
pipe is destroyed. Eversmoking pipes never indi- 
cate how many charges remain or when their 
capacity ts approaching full, but the being 
enchanting a pipe knows the pipe’s capacity (and, 
of course, its initial charges), 

If the pipe is struck or dropped, its flame may 
momentarily curl out of the bowl, or lit tobacco 
may spill out of the bow! and ignite nearby flam- 
mables, 

If the smoker of a charged version of the pipe 
blows hard through the stem, while murmuring 
the deactivation word, the pipe will drain one 
charge (the current one if lit). As it goes oul, it 
produces a single, spinning ball of flame that can 
inflict 1d4 points of damage. The ball of flame 
belches immediately up, out of the pipe. It is sim- 
ilar to a Melf s minute meteor, and the pipe 
smoker can direct it at targets up to 90 feet distant 
by pointing. No verbal command is required. 


Anything flammable struck by the ball must save 
vs. magical fire or ignite. A permanent pipe can 
produce a ball of flame once each round. 

A wizard of at least 9th level can use an 
eversmoking pipe to produce crude images, sym- 
bols, or directive arrows froni the smoke it emits, 
and can vary the hue and brightness of the smoke. 
Such displays can never trigger or substitute for 
magical symbols or runes, but they can convey 
messages to all who see them, And they can, with 
practice, work precisely enough to make the 
smoke-image resemble a specific being. Such 
images require two to five rounds to fully form, 
and last for an other two to five rounds. 

An eversmoking pipe can be commanded to 
reproduce one of the effects of a pyrotechnics 
spell once every three rounds (cach such use 
drains a charge from a nonpermanent pipe). The 
pipesmoker launching the pyrotechnics is 
immune to any effects generated by the pipe. 

Any eversmoking pipe can be commanded 
(with a single, secret word) to return to the hand 
of its owner, regardless of distance, planar sepa- 
ration, or barriers and protections. The pipe 
appears one to three rounds after the command 
word is spoken, The summoning word can be 
changed at will by holding the pipe, flesh to 
wood, and speaking a certain rhyme that includes 
the new summoning word and cancels all others. 
If the cancellation is left out of this charm, previ- 
ous words still work, and the pipe could end up 
flicking rapidly around the planes in an endless 
tug-of-war between rivals. 

The rhyme for changing the summoning word is 
a unique, 7th-level conjuration/summoning spell 
for which Elminster would give no details beyond a 
slow smile. It must be researched and developed 
independently by all wishing to exercise it. 

A wizard caught at a disadvantage by a party 
could well use the pipe’s offensive properties to 
attack an enemy, or to cause a fire in an enemy's 
spell library, foodstores, or the like, by acciden- 
tally or deliberately activating the pipe and leav- 
ing it where it will start a blaze. Despite the 
summons upon it, an eversmoking pipe cannot be 
magically traced to its owner. It can be teleported 
or telekinesed in an activated state; for example, 
into an occupied bedroom, or into a pile of 
scrolls, or onto a precious map. 

A DM could introduce an eversmoking pipe 
into play as useful treasure by using rumors or 


ancient writings that tell of a strange, wondrous 
au 


yO 


124 


Smoking Pipe of Puckering ye 


magical device that belches smoke and flame 
Upon command, and lics in a chest guarded by 
maniacal traps and fearsome monsters—the trea- 
sure, of course, being not a wand of fire or 
Jlamethrower but an innocent eversmoking pipe. 

Different substances burned in an eversmoking 
pipe have some strange effects. Experimentation 
in this field continues, but several results are 
known: 

Lamp oil and other volatile fuels cause sud- 
den jets of flame to erupt for Ida rounds 
(reflected back upon the smoker by the pipe’s 
weather shield), followed by an explosion (dam- 
age 26) that destroys the pipe. 

Wet green leaves produce a thick, black, chok- 
ing smoke, Once this has begun, the smoker can 
leave the pipe to create a smoke screen or to force 
air-breathing creatures out of a confined space 
The smoke screen lusts until the pipe q current 
charges are exhausted, plus one to three rounds 
(the smoke clears in only one round if there is a 
brisk wind), Note that smoke production docs not 
depend upon a constant supply of wet Icaves, or 
anything in the bow! at all, once begun—the 
pipe x inherent magic creates the smoke, Note 
that an eversmoking pipe that is permanent never 
stops producing smoke unless destroyed, extin- 
guished, or commanded to cease in the proper 
manner, Immersion of cither version of the pipe 
in water or another nonflammable liquid can 
extinguish the flame and end the smoke. Dispel 
magic extinguishes the pipe, but does not drain it 
of magic or permanently affect it in any way. 

A hot, white smoke, useful for smoking meats, 
concealing strong odors, and the like, of similar 
duration can be produced by using dry, dead 
leaves. 

Perfumed cloth, paper, or flower petals can 
be used to scent an area. 

Elminster y eversmoking pipe: The Old Mage 
has added at Icast three additional powers to his 
personal pipe (or pipes; he has several identical 
“backup” pipes stashed in various places around 
Ibril and Realmspace). Their powers are as follows: 
When the pipe is lit and held in the lips, the 
smoker (only) is protected as if by protection 
from normal missiles, and all magic missiles 
directed at the smoker are reflected back to 
their source, striking for their usual damage. 
When immersed in water, the pipe immedi- 
ately creates an airy water effect with a 12- 
turn duration. If the pipe is lit, it goes out at 


this time, and cannot be ignited while it 
remains underwater, 

* Nine times a day the pipe can be held and com- 
manded silently to dimension door. This trans- 
ports the bearer up to 700 yards, moving up to 
500 pounds of nonliving mutter or 250 pounds of 
living matter in contact with the bearer. This can 
be done once per round (no “round of recovery” 
is needed between dimension door attempts). 
Certain malicious rivals have spread a rumor 

that Elminster is sufficiently addled as to think of 

his pipe as a living thing, and that he often talks 
to it. This is patently false—the only time he has 
ever been heard talking to it was once when The 

Simbul used it as the focus of an audible sending 

spell that allowed her to talk back and forth with 

the Old Mage. On that occasion, he was seen 


arguing with his pipe. 


Halfling 
XP Value: 300 GP Value: 1,500 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

The famous halfling pipe has no magical effect 
unless filled with pipeweed cultivated in halfling 
strongholds, If the smoker uses both this pipe and 
the pipeweed, a phantaymal force may be created 
with the smoke from one bow! full, This illusion 
may be created within 120 feet and has a maximum 
size of cube 20 feet on a side, The illusion lasts for 
only one turn at most and disappears earlier if the 
smoker's concentration is broken. However, a half- 
ling need not concentrate and may instruct the illu- 
sion to move and react automatically. 


Lasting 
XP Value: 250 GP Value; 1,250 
DRAGON Magazine 30 
The lasting pipe may be found with the match of 
many lights and gives up to 24 hours continual 
use from one filling. This device can save a 


smoker a small fortune in pipeweed. 


of Puckering 
GP Value: 800 


The Book of Marvelous Magic 

When placed in the mouth, this pipe immediately 
causes the lips to pucker. The victim cannot talk 
or cast spells but may hum, grunt, and make other 
noises that do not require opening the lips. How- 
ever, the victim gains a +2 bonus to all saving 
throws against gas attacks, which lasts until the 
pipe is removed. The pipe may be removed only 

on 


XP Value: 


1125 


NL r 


~~ Smoking Pipe, Sclf-Lighting 7 


by a remove curse from a 26th-level caster. This 
remedy destroys the pipe. 


Self-Lighting 
XP Value: 200 GP Value: 1,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

This pipe lights itself on command. If the bowl is 
empty at the time, it produces a cone of magical fire 
10 feet long and l- ſoot wide at its far end, which 
inflicts 10 points of fire damage to all within the 
blast (area of damage may vary according to pipe 
size). When first discovered, the blast usually goes 
harmlessly upwards if the pipe is held normally. The 
pipe produces a blast only three times a day—if a 
fourth blast is called for, it is of twice normal size 
(20 feet long, 20 points) but destroys the pipe. 


of Smoke Rings 
XP Value: 200 GP Value: 1,000 
Dragon Magazine 73 
An elegant wooden pipe. A person smoking this 
pipe can blow beautiful, perfect smoke rings at will. 


of Smoking 
XP Value: 300 GP Value: 1,500 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

When lit, this pipe produces clouds of gray 
smoke that fill a 10 cubic foot area around the 
user, Each victim within the smoke must make a 
saving throw vs. poison or cough for Ida turns; 
the user is automatically affected (no saving 
throw), Coughing victims may not attack or cast 
spells, may move at only half normal rate, and 
suffer a +2 penalty to Armor Class. 


of Snake Summoning 
XP Value: 700 GP Value: 3,500 
POLYHEDRON Magazine 17 
When smoked, this pipe allows the user to cast 
Animal Summoning I twice per day, but the user 
can only summon snakes. 


Snowshoes of Speed 
and Traveling 
XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 20,000 
Gods, Demigods, & Heroes 
These shoes allow Lemmikainen’s avatar to travel 
tirelessly at MV 24 across snow-laden ground. 


Soap 
Soap is a very useful (although sometimes rare) 
commodity, When used with water, soap creates a 


slippery foam that removes the dirt, filth, and 
odor from the body, clothing, hair, or gear. Soap’s 
fat content also allows it to be used as a lubricant 
or temporary waterproofing agent. 


of Abrasion 
XP Value: 100 GP Value: 1,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

This soap appears identical to soap of washing 
but rips and shreds all items washed (no saving 
throw). Any creature washed is severely damaged 
and left with only | hit point. The soap affects 
only one creature or item; the soapy water then 
becomes nonmagical. 


of Washing 
XP Value: 200 GP Value: 2,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

This small brownish cake of soap will, when placed 
into a bucket or tub of water, dissolve completely, 
The water then becomes magical; any item or crea- 
ture placed within or doused by the water becomes 
completely clean, The soap removes all normal and 
magical stains and dyes and can even remove 
curses. However, it affects only curses removable 
by a remove curse spell from a caster of up to the 
21st level, The soap washes any number of normal 
items, its effect lasting one hour; it washes away up 
to three magical stains or dyes or one curse. Magi- 
cal water removed from the container immediately 
becomes nonmagical, 


Socks 


Socks are knitted or cloth garments worn on the 
feet. They help protect the feet from cold and 
chaffing. Socks also absorb odors, but their main 
purpose is to protect footwear from perspiration 
and the natural oils on the wearer's skin. 


of Dryness 
XP Value: 300 GP Value: 1,500 
Dragon Magazine 30 
The socks of dryness are a pair of foot wrappings 


that repel water like rubber, but allow air to pass. 


of Sweating 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
Mordenkainen’s Fantastic Adventure 

When worn, these socks protect the wearer from 
fire, just as would a ring of fire resistance, This 
protection, however, lasts but six rounds. At that 
time, the wearer starts sweating profusely, losing 

4946 


4 1126 7 


 _ ——— (MK— 


2 hit points per round to dehydration, Addition- 
ally, for every 6 points of damage accrued in this 
manner, the character's Strength, Constitution, 
and Charisma scores are cach reduced by | point. 
If any score drops below 2, the character is inca- 
pacitated. If any score drops to 0, the character ix 
dead. Lost ability points return in one day. These 
socks will continue to cause the character to 
sweat as long as they are worn. The continuous 
intake of water will lessen the damage dealt by | 
point per round, and negates the loss of the afore- 


mentioned ability score points. 
Sounder 
XP Value GP Value 
Type 1: 8,000 20,000 
Type II: 16,000 40,000 
Type I: 24,000 60,000 
Type IV. 32,000 80,000 
Krynnspace 


Sounders come in an array of sizes; however, all 
of them are square and have a glass front. By 
looking into the sounder and speaking the com- 
mand word, the user begins to hear a series of 
bleeps and witnesses wavy lines appearing on the 
glass, The sounder locates moving objects in 
wildspace and the phlogiston that are out of range 
of normal vision. The sounders range varies with 
the device. There are four sounders, and those 


with the greater ranges cost more. 
Device Range 
Type I 2,000 miles 
Type II 4,000 miles 
Type III 8,000 miles 
Type IV 10,000 miles 
Sovereign Glue 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 7,500 
DUNGEON Mastra Guide 


This pale amber substance is thick and viscous. 
Because of its particular powers, it can be con- 
tained only within a flask coated with oil of slip- 
periness, and each time any of the bonding agent 
is poured from the flask, a new application of oi/ 
of slipperiness must be applied in one round to 
prevent the remaining glue from adhering to the 
sides. 

One ounce of the adhesive covers approxi- 
mately | square foot of surface, bonding virtually 
any two substances together permanently, The 
glue takes one round to set; if the objects are 


pulled apart before that, that application of the 
gluc loses its stickiness and is worthless, If the 
glue is allowed to set, then attempting to separite 
the objects only results in the rending of one or 
the other, except when ail of etherealness or uni- 
versal solvent is applied to the bond—only those 
can dissolve sovereign glue. A typical container 
holds 1410 ounces of glue. 


Spear 
The spear dates back to the most primitive times. 
The first spears were simply wooden poles or 
sticks sharpened at one end. When fire was dis- 
covered and mastered, spear points were hard- 
ened by charring. As people became more adept 


at using tools, spears were fitted with stone 


heads, and later iron and steel points. 
Roll Item 

01-03 Artengak 

04-06 Assegai 

07-09 = Atlatl* 

10-12 Barbed 

13-15 Chijiriki 

16-18 Double-Bladed* 
19-21 Elephant goad (ankus) 

22-24 Fang 

25-27 Foot Ankus 

28-30 Goad 

31-33 Harpoon 

34-36 Hasta 

37-39 Heavy 

40-42 Javelin 

43-45 Javelin Thrower 

46-48 Kumade 

49-51 Long Spear 

52-54 Naulagak 

55-57 One- handed“ 

58-60 Paddle 

61-63 Pilum 

64-66 Riding Ankus 

67-69 Ritiik 

70-72 Sang Kauw 

73-75 Sang Kauw with Buckle 

76-78 Shakujo Yari 

79-82 Spear 

83-85 Stone“ 

86-88 Throwing 

89-91 Two-handed* 

92-94 Uchi-ne 

95-97 Onungak 

98-00 Vita 


` Spem. Gungnir y 


of Accuracy 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 6,500 
Land of Fate 
This spear has a bonus to attack and damage in 
melee and an additional +2 when hurled. 


Ares's 

XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 7,500 
Legends & Lore 

After the spear of Ates avatar hits, it opens a 
wound that will not stop bleeding until both a 
remove curse and a heal spell have becn cast 
upon it in the same round. The bleeding causes 6 
points of damage per round. 


Athena’s 
GP Value: 15,000 
Legends & Lore 
Athena's avatar is armed with several special 
items. One of these is a spear that never misses 
when she thrusts with it. 


XP Value: 2,000 


Backbiter 
XP Value GP Value 
+1:— 1,200 
+2; — 1,500 
73:— 1,800 
Duncron MASTER Guide 


Any tests conducted on this spear will only reveal 
that it is a magical spear with a +1 bonus (or at the 
DM option +2 or +3). It may even function nor- 
mally in combat against a deadly enemy, but each 
time it is used in melee against a foe, there is a 1 in 
20 cumulative chance that it turns against its 
wielder, Once it begins functioning in this way, it 
can't be gotten rid without a remove curse spell. 
The character always seems to find the spear in his 
or her hand despite all efforts and intentions. When 
the curse takes effect, the spear curls around to 
strike its wielder in the back, negating any shield or 
Dexterity bonuses to Armor Class, and inflicting 
normal damage. The curse even functions when the 
spear is hurled, but if the wielder has hurled the 
spear, it is released; the damage done to the hurler 
is doubled, however. Once the spear has returned, 
the character is again compelled to use the spear. 


Black Kumade 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 10,000 
Kara-Tur 
The black kumade is an obsidian weapon that is 
carried by Lin Goh, the clanmaster of the Panthers 


of Xi, This magical javelin returns to its thrower 
and can be spun like a deadly baton forming a 
shield + 3. \t has been taken as the symbol of the 
ninja X passing or actions in Xi, a kumade painted 
black. This group controls the mountains cast to the 
Malu River and they have a continuing war with the 
ninja clan of Manchar, the Vi'oontu (which means 
“evening swallow that calls death"). 


Demeter“ 
XP Value: 8,000 GP Value: 40,000 
Legends & Lore 
In five rounds, a tree sprouts from any wound 
made by the spear of Demeter x avatar. Two 
rounds after it sprouts, the tree becomes so large 
that the victim must lie on the ground until the 
roots are torn from his or her body (doing an 
additional 1d10 damage). 


Gae Bolg 
XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 20,000 
Legends & Lore 
Cu Chulainn’s avatar wields a spear called Gac 
Bolg, and is made from the bones of a sea dragon. 
He is the only mortal who can heft it, and while 
he has it in his hands he cannot be surprised. The 
weapon is a spear +4. 


Goibhniu's 

GP Value: 25,000 
Legends & Lore 
Once per turn, Goibhniu’s avatar may automati- 
cally slay any living creature that he hits with this 
spear +5, no saving throw allowed. 


XP Value: 5,000 


Gruumsh’s 
XP Value: 5,500 GP Value: 27,500 
Monster Mythology 
The avatar’s spear +4 paralyzes for 2d4 turns 
when it strikes (saving throw vs. paralyzation at 
—4 to negate). 


Gungnir 
XP Value: 6,000 GP Value: 30,000 
Gods, Demigods, & Herocs 
Gungnir is Odin’s spear +5, This spear, when 
used in battle, always points to the strongest 
member of the opposition. Furthermore, all 
adversaries within a 20-foot-radius when Odin's 
avatar holds it aloft are stricken with fear (as a 
fear symbol). Those whom Odins avatar allows to 


touch Gungnir (usually before a battle) will be 
am) 


1129 


B = ES een 


~ Spear, Gungnir II 


blessed with a double effect bless spell for the 
duration of the battle or adventure. 


Gungnir Il 

GP Value: 30,000 
Legends & Lore 
Odins avatar carries Odin X spear, a +5 weapon 
with several special abilities: in battle, it points at 
the most powerful enemy; when held aloft, all 
enemies who can see it are struck with fear; any- 
one allowed to touch the spear is blessed with a 
double effect prayer; anyone that touches the 
weapon against the avatar’s will is polymorphed 
into an ant (save to negate). 


XP Value: 6,000 


Hadrion’s 
XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 30,000 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 43 

Hadrion, a minor warlord, purchased a magical 
spear +3 for an incredible price and had wizards 
imbue it with additional magic powers. It confers 
+2 AC, +1 on Strength, and negates all surprise 
attacks, including a thief backstabbing abilities, 
warning its owner psychically of the danger as 
long as it is held in hand or is kept close to the 
body, 

Hadrion used the spear in all of his campaigns, 
and it is said to have been placed with his body in 
the family vaults, 


LA AEP > 


V Shakujo Yari 


— ml AE i. 2 


e — 
2 — 


Heartseeker 
XP Value: 1,750 GP Value: 15,000 
Maztica Campaign Sct 
This heavy spear looks almost like a footman’s 
lance. Its head, of hardened obsidian, layered 
with the power of hishna. 

The weapon has a bonus of +2 on all attack and 
damage rolls. It is immune to the effects of break- 
une for normal obsidian, But its most deadly fea- 
ture comes into play when it hits on a natural 20, 
If the target is a creature with a heart, the weapon 
strikes the heart, and the victim loses all remain- 
ing hit points, 


Heartseeker Il 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
Forbidden Lore 
This unusual wooden spear is carved from a sin- 
gle piece of ash. The tip is carved right onto the 
shaft and is obviously also wooden. It radiates an 
aura of enchantment, As a normal weapon, it has 
a +) enchantment and inflicts normal damage 
despite the apparent frailty of its tip. When used 
against a vampire, it is always capable of causing 
damage if the attack roll is successful, even if the 
vampire is immune to +L weapons. Any success: 
ful hit on a vampire is to the heart, effectively dri- 
ving the shaft through as if it were a stake. The 
vampire is then pinned according to the normal 


WY NY W PF. 


x Spear, Smokespeat 


rules for vampires. If the spear is removed with- 
out first destroying the body, the vampire is 
restored and begins to regenerate. 


Heartwood 
XP Value: 2,400 GP Value: 12,000 
1992 Fantasy Collector Card 408 

The heartwood spear is a magical artifact from the 
halfling-infested jungles of the Ringing Mountains. 
The spear came from the very core of an ancient 
and singular oak trec, taken from its place of rest by 
Nok, a halfling chief and worthy character of Good 
alignment and true principles. The spear has many 
powers, including an incredible range and ability to 
strike its intended target, and the power to pierce 
even dragon armor. Nok gave the Spear to Rikus, 
Neeva, Sadira, and Agis, who used the artifact to 
slay Kalak, the sorcerer-king of Tyr. 


Hiatea’s 
XP Value: 2,500 GP Value: 12,000 
Monster Mythology 
Her spear +3 becomes a flametongue weapon 
when she wishes. 


of Obliteration 
XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 25,000 

The Milenian Empire 
This enchanted weapon acts like a spear +/ when 
used in hand as a thrusting weapon. However, 
when it is thrown, it has a special effect, any crea- 
ture (living or undead) of 4 Hit Dice (or experi- 
ence levels) or less struck by the spear is 
obliterated in a puff of choking, black smoke (no 
saving throw). Creatures of 4 to 8 Hit Dice 
receive a saving throw vs. death magic to avoid 
obliteration, taking 648 points of damage if suc- 
cessful. Creatures of more than 8 Hit Dice or 
experience levels take 6d8 points of damage, but 
are allowed to make a saving throw vs. death 
magic for half damage. In all cases, the spear is 
itself destroyed upon being hurled and striking a 
creature. If it misses, the spear can be used again 
if it is recovered, 


of Panic 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 10,000 
Master of the Desert Nomads 
The spear of panic is a miniature 6-inch-long 
spear. When a user attempts to hit with the spear, 
it magically grows to 10 feet, allowing any target 
within 10 feet to be attacked. The spear has no 


bonuses on attack rolls and only does 1d6 points 
of damage. However, if the spear strikes an 
enchanted or undead creature, the creature will 
automatically flee from the combat. 


Paralysis 
GP Value: 4,000 
Shrine of the Kuo-Toa 
Creatures failing to save vs. poison are paralyzed 
until a neutralize poison or a dispel magic spell is 
cast upon them. 


XP Value: 800 


Returning 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
The War Rafts of Kron 

Sometimes called boomerang spears, these hand- 
hurled weapons return to the caster if they miss a 
target. Returning at the end of the round they may 
be automatically and safely caught by the charac- 
ter throwing one (unless the user is paralyzed, 
confused, or immobile). If a returning spear hits 
a target, the weapon does not return by itself. 


Sharksbane 
XP Value: 1,500 GP Value: 10,000 
Dracow Magazine 48 
Also known simply as a spear +2/+4 vs, sharks, 
this is a large lance with a point made from a 
shark's tooth. These items, originally enchanted 
by triton wizards or priests, are greatly sought 
after by mermen and sea elves, who will readily 
trade valuables to acquire one. 


Smokespear 
GP Value: 20,000 

Shadowdale 
This rare weapon appears as a brass or copper 
plated spear, made entirely of metal. It may be 
ornately worked, and is most often encountered 
as ceremonial regalia. It does normal weapon 
damage, and when grasped and a command word 
spoken, its tip can produce a 30-foot-radius globe 
of smoke (like the smoke power of a pyrotechnics 
spell) lasting for 1d4+1 rounds. This power can 
be used as often as desired; it will continue 
regardless of whether the spear is released by its 
wielder or not, and will move with the weapon. 

Once per turn, the butt end of a smokespear 
can, upon commund, cause s/eep in any one crea- 
ture touched, Creatures immune to s/eep spells 
are immune to this effect; all other creatures 


receive a saving throw vs, spell to avoid sleep. A 
4973 


XP Value: 4,000 


j 1131 j 


O ĀE ů ³˙²iA ̃ SC el ___l i 


Spear, Sparkling 


successful attack roll is required to touch and 
cause a creature to sleep. 

Once every seven turns, a smvdespeur, when 
grasped and ordered, can allow one being of size 
M or smaller to fly. Such flight is Maneuverabil- 
ity Class A, and must be continuous, lasting up to 
a maximum of 12 rounds. 


Sparkling 
XP Value: 750 GP Value: 3,500 
The Emirates of Vlaruam 

This device was crafted for Farid when he accom- 
panied Al-Kalim on his quests to other planes. On 
the Prime Material Plane it is a spear +4 vs. 
efreet and other denizens of the Plane of Fire (+6 
if wielded on the Plane of Fire). It has a detect 
invisible power and it sparkles with a dazzling 
light whenever a denizen of the Plane of Fire 
approaches within 300 feet. This is a well-known 
item on the Plane of Fire from the exploits of the 
mighty Al-Kalim, and most denizens of the Plane 
of Fire fear and respect its wielder. 


of Vix 
XP Value: 1,500 GP Value: 6,000 
The Milenian Scepter 
As the daughter of the Immortal Zargos, Vix holds 
a place of honor among the followers of Zargos. 
The fabled spear of Vix is said to have been 


enchanted by Emperor Caracanomnos himself and 
presented to Vix as a betrothal gift. Though it is 
known Vix accepted the gift, it is believed she 
rejected the Emperor's offer of marriage. 

The spear is made of a strange alloy of iron and 
glows with a bluish light. The haft is ornately 
engraved with magical sigils and runes. The spear 
has a modifier of +3 to attack and damage rolls, It 
also has the power of returning to the throwers 
hand if it misses its target. Finally, once a day the 
spear may be commanded to blind the next crea- 
ture it strikes, who must then succeed at a saving 
throw vs. spell or be unable to see for 12 turns, 


of Yang 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 2,500 
DraGoN Magazine 40 
This is like any ordinary magical spear, except 
that the user may turn on and off continual light, 
full daylight strength, an unlimited number of 
times per day. Turning the power on or off takes 
one round. 


Zeus's 
XP Value: 4,500 GP Value; 22,500 
Demes & Desucops Cyclopedia 
Zeus wields a spear that does 6410 points of 
damage 


| Spellbook 


Books, Librams, Manuals, Spellbooks, and 
Tomes: In the AD&D game system, cach of these 
terms has a unique definition: 


Books may be used only by priests and some- 
times raise a specific character statistic. 
Librams are books used only by wizards, and 
occasionally boost a specific character statistic. 
Manuals may be used by both fighrers and 
thieves, and some include boosts to stats. 
Spellbooks contain spells and suprises—some 
are even pleasant, Most are restricted to priests 
and wizards, but a few may be used by any class, 
and some can only be used by illusionists. 
Tomes may be used by all classes and some grant 
boosts to statistics. 

By the time a wizard completes his or her 
apprenticeship, one or two spell books have been 
aquired; a book of Ist-level spells and, perhaps, a 
book of cantrips as well. The latter depends upon 
the options of both the DM and the concerned 


player, The following general rules apply to all 
4077 


. S 


l 


132 


spell books. 

Types of Spellbooks: There are two varictics 
of spell books, 

Standard books contain up to 36 cantrips, up to 
24 spells of Ist to 3rd level, up to 16 spells of 4th to 
6th level, or up to eight spells of 7th to 9th level. 

Traveling books contain at most one-quarter 
of the number of possible spells contained in a 
standard spell book—cither nine cantrips; six 
spells of Ist, 2nd, and 3rd level; four spells of 4th, 
Sth, and 6th level; or two spells of 7th, 8th, and 
Sth level. 

Cost of Spellbooks: A standard spellbook costs 
1,000 gp for materials, plus an additional 100 gp 
per spell. level for each spell contained therein, 
(For this determination and all other similar ones, 
consider cantrips as Ist- level spells.) The cost of a 
new wizard’s or illusionist’s initial books is 
assumed to be borne by the new spellcaster’s for- 
mer master, so the fledgling spellcastet will have 
one or two spell books at no cost to him or her, 
Books which are prepared later in a wizard’s career 
(having higher spell-level capacity than “begin- 
ning” books) are not supplied by the character's 
master, but must be composed by the character in 
question as part of his or her training when the 
spelleaster is trying to rise to a higher experience 
level. This composition will take from 1d4+3 
weeks for each new standard book; the book is 
composed during and after the time when other 
training exercises are taking place. 

These same costs apply when a book is being 
manufactured and composed. Any standard spell- 
book requires a 1,000 gp investment for materials, 
plus 100 gp per level for cach spell entered in the 
book, payable when a wizard adds a new spell to his 
or her repertoire. (Entering a Ist- level spell costs 
100 gp, a 2nd-level spell costs 200 gp, and so on.) 

A traveling spell book costs 500 gp for materials. 
The cost of each spell contained within such a book 
is the same as the cost for entering a spell in a stan- 
dard book. All traveling spellbooks must be fabri- 
cated by the wizard, or otherwise discovered as 
treasure by the wizard or his or her associates. A 
player character cannot automatically possess a trav- 
cling spell book at the beginning of his or her career. 

Physical Aspects of Standard Spellbooks: A 
standard spellbook is approximately 16 inches in 
height, 12 inches wide, and 6 inches thick. (The 
DM has leeway to reduce or enlarge this general 
size, although nothing smaller than 12 by 12 by 6 
inches or larger than 18 by 12 by 9 inches is rec- 


Spelibook, The Alcasster 


—— a 


ommended.) The weight of a standard book of 
median size is |5 pounds (adjusted upward or 
downward for varying sizes) 

The cover of a standard book is typically heavy 
leather—dragon hide or something similar 
inlaid with metal so as to provide both extra dura- 
bility and a means to close and secure the book 
Vellum pages are sewn together and secured to a 
fine, supple leather spine backing. Pages are 
secured additionally by fine leather front and 
back pieces. It is also usual for such a tome to 
have vellum stubs at intervals for insertion of 
additional pages, although this by no means 
allows for any increase or change in the number 
and types of spells the book can contain. 

Notwithstanding any special protection placed 
upon them, a standard spellbook has a saving 
throw equal to that of “leather” or “book” and 
with +2 to die rolls made to save against acid, 
magical fire disintegration, and lighting attacks. 

Physical Aspects of Traveling Spellbooks: A 
traveling spell book is approximately 12 inches 
tall, 6 inches wide, and | inch thick; 9 by 9 by 1 is 
also a good working size. The weight of such a 
book is approximately three pounds. Five such 
books will fit within a backpack, twice that num- 
ber in a large suck. 

The cover of a traveling spellbook is strong, sup- 
ple animal skin, such as that from a giant cobra. 
The hand-sewn leaves of parchment are carefully 
secured to a fine leather backing and glued to the 
spine. The whole is further secured by front and 
back pieces of vellum. A small lock or leather ties 
are typically used to secure the whole. Pages are 
very thin and fragile, so great care must be taken to 
protect the book when it is in use, 

Notwithstanding any special protections, a trav- 
èling spell book has a saving throw equal to that of 
“leather” or “book,” with no bonuses (as a standard 
book has) against certain forms of attack. 

Value of Spelibooks: Most standard spell- 
books have an experience point value of 500 
points per spell level contained (again, consider- 
ing cantrips as Ist-level spells), and a gold piece 
valuc of 1,000 gp per spell level (applies to all 
spells, including cantrips). 


The Alcaister 
XP Value: 17,600 GP Value: 176,000 
Deacon Magazine 100 
The Alcaister is a large, ruxset-colored volume con- 
structed of metal plates covered with burlap or hes- 
* 


he —— 


1133 


J i ] ³ A O O 


Spellhook, The Alenister 


p wT —.¹[1—ͤ — 


aN Ay 
N J a E VE 

sian, tied together with a spine of waxed, intricately 
interwoven leather thongs (“like the lacings on a 
lady's high leather riding boot,” according to the 
sage Nornagrym). To the weaving are sewn 46 
pages of the finest thick parchment, cach contain- 
ing a simple magic spell or cantrips—except the 
last, which bear a curious rune, thus: 


and in Common, the word Kuhoralminthannas 
written in a circle around it. The outer covers bear 
only the inscription “The Alcaister” burned in small, 
fine flowing letters in Common, picked out in paints 
of silver. The book shows only light weathering, but 
its appearance gives the impression of some age. 
The Aleaister is of great antiquity but unknown 
origin; it was written somewhere in the North by a 
wizard of good penmanship and some powers at 
least 600 years ago, when it appears on a mer- 
chant s declared “catalogue-of-cargo” before the 
plague-masters (quarantine officers) of the time, in 
Waterdeep. It was passed into the city, and presum- 
ably sold, but does not surface again until brought 
to the sage Ardagundus in Baldur's Gate by an 
adventurer, named Wilund, in payment for informa- 
tion as to the whereabouts and uses of the Magical 


Chessmen of Ultham-Urre. Argandus gave the 


book to his apprentice Nornagrym for cataloguing 
and study, and it is from Nornagrym's exacting cat- 
alogue that precise details of The Alcaister come. 

Nornagrym is believed to have brought the book 
with him to Waterdeep upon his master’s death, 
where it reposed in his library until his own death, 
when it vanished again. It was observed by the sor- 
cerer Zemloth of Amn to be in the library of his one- 
time tutor, Orgoth the Tainted (the same who was 
later destroyed by three fiends he had summoned), 
but was not found when the party of the adventurer 
Malahuke searched the hidden, untouched tunnels 
of Orgoth’s ruined fortress. Its present whereabouts 
are a complete mystery, but Zemloth asserts that it 
must still exist, because he encountered a prestidigi- 
tator in a tavern in Zazesspur who cmployed a sting 
cantrip (set forth only, as far as Zemloth knows, in 
The Alcaister). The prestidigitator, one Mavrhune, 
was involved in a tavern brawl at the time and did 
not survive it, so Zemloth was unable to inquire 
where and from whom the cantrip had been learned. 

The Alcaister has a tradition of slaying those 
who read it; as more of the book is studied, the 
reader grows weaker and weaker, and finally slips 
into slumber from which he or she does not wake. 
Nornagrym found the cause of this regrettable 
side-effect; the edges of The Alcaisters metal 
pages are coated with a colorless, transparent 
gummy substance of unknown origin—a contact 
poison as yet unidentified and seemingly unique 
This substance works through skin (a cut is not 
necessury) and it numbs the senses subtly, so that 
the victim is not likely to notice its effects. Each 
contact with (or turning of) a page drains | hit 
point; the body recovers from such damage at 
normal healing rate. There is also a temporary 
(1d4+1 turns) loss of 1 point of Strength (IS per- 
centage to 18, 18 to 17, and so on); for every 5 
points of damage so suffered. This substance 
retains its efficacy after many years and resists 
attempts to remove it, but Nornagrym found that 
its efforts (assuming one is aware of its presence) 
can be simply avoided by wearing gloves or by 
turning the pages with a knife or other aid. 

The Aleaister x 46 pages contain the following 
inscriptions, one to a page: the unique spells cur, 
gallop, and sting (all described below), affect nor- 
mal fires, charm person, dancing lights, erase, hold 
portal, identify, magic missile, protection from evil, 
read magic, spider climb, audible glamer, ESP, 
fools gold, locate object, magic mouth, mirror 

* 


1134 


Eee... 


x Spelibook, The Alcaister ye 


image, rope trick, wizard lock, clairaudience, dispel 
magic, flame arrow, gust of wind, haste, hold per- 
son, infravision, slow, water breathing, charm 
monster, dimension door, ice storm, remove curse, 
wizard eve, Bigby X interposing hand, cone of cold, 
feeblemind, antimagic shell, death spell, geas, 
reconstruction (unique spell described below), 
reverse gravity, simulacrum, and body sympathy 
(unique spell, described below). 


Cut 

(Alteration) 

Level: | 

Range: 10 feet 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: | object, 1 inch per level 
Components: V, S 

Casting Time: | 

Saving Throw: None 

Definition: By means of this useful spell, thin 
objects such as rope, cord. delicate chain, wire, 
cloth, wax candles, sausages, and the like, up to | 
inch thick per level of the caster, can be instantly 
severed, The caster must be able to see the object to 
be cut, and it must be within 10 feet. The verbal 
component is a soft “enick” sound, and the somatic 
component is a scissoring motion made with two 
adjoining fingers, Magical (even temporarily 
enspelled) objects are unaffected by this spell. 


Gallop 

(Alteration) 

Level: | 

Range: 10 feet 

Duration: | round plus 1 round per level 

Area of Effect: One quadruped creature 
Components: V, S 

Casting Time: | 

Saving Throw: Neg. 

Definition: When this useful spell is employed, 
the caster may cause one 4-legged creature (if 
Intelligent, it gains a saving throw vs. spell—to 
negate the spell) to move at its maximum move- 
ment rate for one round, plus one additional round 
per level of the caster. The beast may be ridden or 
not; direction traveled is arrow-straight (regardless 
of mount x. or rider's wishes) in the direction 
pointed at by the caster. (If this leads into a snare, 
pit, or precipice known to the beast or any rider on 
it, a saving throw vs. spell at +3 is allowed; if suc- 
cessful, the beast will turn aside at the last moment 
and continue in a new course, detouring freely as 


terrain demands, until the spell expires.) Gallop 
has the same effect on unfamiliar, unwilling, lame, 
or exhausted creatures alike, The enspelled beast 
cannot pull a laden cart or wagon without incur- 
ring a 4-movement nite penalty, and although this 
spell can be used on exhausted creatures, they can 
be permanently damaged or even slain by the 
effort (system shock roll applies in many cases). 
The caster can ride the enspelled creature, and in 
any case can halt a gallop before its expiration 
whenever he or she wishes. The spell is cast by 
touching the target creature, making a soft kissing 
or clucking noise with the lips as contact is made, 
and continuing this noise as the caster points in the 
desired direction of travel (impossibilities, such as 
Straight up into the air or straight down into the 
ground, have no effect and merely wastes the 
magic), effects are immediate. 


Sting 

(Alteration) 

Level: | 

Range: 40 feet 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: | creature 

Components: § 

Casting Time: | 

Saving Throw: Neg. 

Definition: This spell enables the caster to harm 
a single creature up to 40 feet distant, including 
people, in a minor way: By making a buzzing 
noise and pointing an extended finger at an area 
of his or her own anatomy, the caster causes a 
brief (2 second) but intense pain in the corre- 
sponding area of the target creature (unless the 
latter saves vs. spell). This pain causes no perma- 
nent damage, but if applied to the cyes it can 
blind for one round, or it can silence coherent 
speech by afflicting the tongue, or cause delicate 
manipulation of tiny objects (jewelry, or material 
components in spellcasting) to be ruined, and the 
handled items dropped or fumbled. Thus, spell- 
casting can be ruined by successful use of this 
spell. Sting is a single-use spell, causing but one 
pain if successful. It is often used to warn or cow 
ignorant creatures who threaten the spellcaster. 


Reconstruction 
(Alteration/Phantasm) 
Level; 6 
Range: Touch 
Duration: | round + | round per level 
. 


„ff A . r 


135 


~ Spelibook, The Aleaister > 


Area of Effect: Special 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: | 

Saving Throw: None 

Definition: By means of this spell, the caster tem- 
porarily restores a broken item, even if it is badly 
shattered and portions are missing. The object is 
restored to its appearance before being broken— 
even to smell, weight, solidity, sound when struck, 
and texture, and appears whole and unbroken to 
normal scrutiny. Detect magic shows the spell's 
dweomer, and a gem of seeing or true seeing spell 
can reveal the illusion for what it is, but the item 
can be touched and used (a rope or bar to hold 
things or support weight or a weapon to strike 
with, for example) normally, without dispelling 
the illusion, and with results as though the item 
were whole. Thus, the hilt of a rusted longsword 
found in a tomb could be temporarily transformed 
into a brand-new longsword, doing the same dam- 
age in battle as the original did. Magical weapons 
can be temporarily mended by this spell, and due 
to the spell, will be magical for attack roll pur- 
poses, but do not regain any bonuses or special 
properties; a silver or gold coin can be temporar- 
ily remade into a whole coin by means of this 
spell; and crushed gemstones restored to their pre- 
cious, whole, form. Ifa reconstructed item is sub- 
jected to prolonged heat and impacts, however 
(say, a blade being reforged), or if a permanency 
or enchanted weapon spell is cast upon one, the 
magic ends, and the item will revert instantly to its 
real, damaged, form. A reconstructed item does 
not revert to its true form if its illusion is merely 
revealed, and it cannot be “disbelieved” out of 
existence by an onlooker. 

Living things cannot be affected by a recon- 
struction spell, nor can unbroken items be altered 
to the prior forms of their component materials; 
thus, a stone statue cannot be made to look like 
the boulder or the mountain from which it was 
carved, The caster need not know the original 
appearance of the whole item to duplicate it. 
Regardless of the amount of actual material 
remaining, the caster can reconstruct 10 cubic 
feet plus | cubic foot of the actual item per level 
(although the reconstructed whole may be far 
larger and will still appear in its entirety). The 
material components of this spell are the item (or 
fragment) to be reconstructed, a pinch of fine 
sand, and a pinch (of at least thumbnail size) of 
sticky sap or gum. 


1136 


Body Sympathy 
(Necromantic) 

Level: 8 

Range: Special 
Duration: | turn per level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Components: V, S 


Casting Time: 1 


Saving Throw: Special 

Definition: This spell is cast by a wizard at an 
enemy. The wizard must concentrate on the indi- 
vidual who must also be in sight. If the target is not 
in view, the spell may still be cast by visualized the 
victim and speaking the victim true name (see 
truename spell in Unearthed Arcana) during the 
casting. This links the wizard and his chosen vic- 
tim (who must save vs. spell at A to avoid the 
spell's effects), so that whatever happens to the 
wizard’s body (drowning, burning, whipping, 
wounding, strangulation, charming, or feeblemind- 
edness, insanity, unconsciousness) happens to the 
victim, if the caster dies, so does the victim, This is 
not similar to the ESP spell (neither being gains 
any hint of the other's thoughts), nor does it make 
the victim mimic the movements and speech of the 
caster. It is a two-way link; damage occurring sep- 
arately to the victim (or curative spells applied to 
the victim) will also occur to the body of the 
caster. Once cast, the spell operates regardless of 
the custer wishes or lack of concentration—he or 
she cannot willingly break the link before expira- 
tion of the spell, and can engage in other spell cast- 
ing or activities without ending the body sympathy, 
The link will work across any distance and despite 
magical protections such as antimagie shell, pris- 
matic sphere or lesser barriers, but will not work 
from one plane to another (so if either caster or 
victim plane shift, becomes astral, or employs ail 
of etherealness or another such item, the link is 
instantly broken), Movement of target or spell- 
caster within a given plane will not affect the link, 
regardless of distances moved, speed of travel, or 
how often movement occurs. This spell is some- 
times called death link by sages in the Realms. 


The Gate Page 

The last page of The Alcaister (that which bears 
the rune shown above) is a gafe that will shift any 
creature standing on the rune (or at least touching 
it), with the book open, while the word written 
around the rune is spoken aloud by the creature 


touching the rune or another. This plane shifting 
4978 


Spellbook, Arcanabula of Jume 


— — —̃ — ——̃ 


occurs regardless of the wishes of the creature 
touching the rune, and will transport only one 
living creature (plus all items worn or carried by 
that creature) at a time to one of the following 
destinations, The creature being gated must be 
holding The Aleaister with his or her bare hand as 
the word of activation is intoned to bring the rome 
along; otherwise it remains behind on the Prime 
Material Plane (If the gate is used on a plane 
other than the Prime Material Plane the book will 


always accompany the creature back.) 
Roll Resulting Plane 
01-48 Prime Material Plane (if used while on 


the Prime Material Plane, the destina- 
tion will be an alternate Crystal 


Sphere). 
49-66 Avernus (uppermost layer of the Baa- 
tor) 
67-76 The Outlands 
77-88 Mechunus 
89-92 The Demiplane of Shadow 
93-98 Any one of the five planes of Limbo 
99-00 Other (DM s choice) 
Alokkair’s 
XP Value: 17,200 GP Value: 172,000 
Lords of Darkness 


Alokkair, a 20th-level wizard-king lich, has an 
extensive spellbook containing about one-third of 
his entire repertoire. These spells include: ani- 
mate dead, chain lightning, cone of cold, confu- 
sion, darkness 15’ radius, death spell, delayed 
blast fireball, demand, dimension door, dispel 
magic, enchant an item, energy drain, ESP, fee- 
blemind, flesh to stone, hold monster, ice storm, 
imprisonment, invisibility, jump, lightning bolt, 
magic jar, magic missile (cach spell produces the 
number of missiles appropriate to the caster's 
level), maze, mind blank, minor globe of invul- 
nerability, mirror image, Nulathoe * ninemen, 
Otto x Irresistible dance, permanency, phase 
door, polymorph any object, prismatic sphere, 
project image, read magic, reverse gravity, slow, 
teleport, temporal stasis, trap the soul, vocalize, 
wizard eye, and wizard lock. 


Alterations of the Intrinsic Absolutes 
XP Value: 4,800 GP Value: 48,000 
Deacon Magazine 82 
Math penned change self, timelessness, seclusion, 
alter reality, analyze balance, telethaumaturgy, 


consequence, massmorph, spacewarp, addition, 
shape change, and alter self imo this spellbook. 


Alterations of Tangibles 
and Intangibles 
XP Value: 2,400 GP Value: 24,000 
DRAGON Magazine 82 
Yagrax penned melt, transmute water to dust, 
item, material, fabricate, and crystalbrittle into 
this spellbook. 


Ancient Cryptomancy 
XP Value: 2,400 GP Value: 24,000 
DRAGON Magazine 82 
Penned by Phandal, this spellbook contains send- 
ing, wizard mark, secret page, and sepia snake 
sigil. 


Anishta’s 
XP Value: 7,200 GP Value: 72,000 
Dragon Rest 
Anishta, a female human pricst, has a magnifi- 
cent spellbook constructed of steel plates. The 
pages are bound to the plates using white dragon 
claws and remorhaz leather. The spells contained 
herein are: animate dead, bless, command, cure 
light wounds, detect good, detect lie, enthrall, 
silence 15' radius, feign death, obscurement, pro- 
tection from good, purify food and drink, raise 
dead, speak with animals, speak with dead, spell 
immunity, spiritual hammer, and wyvern watch. 


Arcanabula of Jume 
XP Value: 6,800 GP Value: 68,000 
Dagon Magazine 181 

This is a rectangular tome, 3 handwidths across 
by 5 in height, of translucent sheets of polished 
rock crystal. The sheets are clasped separately to 
two heavy brass rings and are cut with characters 
of Ruathlek (the “secret language” of illusion- 
ists). Some of the runes are inlaid with colored 
pastes in ruby red, emerald green, and silver. 

An arcanabula in the FORGOTTEN REALMS" set- 
ting seems to be an illusionist’s workbook or trav- 
cling spellbook, as opposed to the more complete 
spell tomes kept in secret by almost all spelicast- 
ers. Most arcanabulax are nondescript, although 
illusionists in the Realms have shown a talent for 
making their books look like something else— 
such as a musical instrument, a gaming board, a 
belt of linked metal plates, and so on. 


The Arcanabula in question is uncommonly 
are 


137 


Spelldook. Arcanabule of Jume 


p EE ee 


ornate and formal (as well as unusually beauti- 
ful). Assembled by the female wizard Jume, who 
lived in Baldur's Gate several hundred winters 
ago, the Arcanabula has unusual protective magic 
upon it. It acts as a ring of spell turning with 
respect to magic of any sort cast either upon it or 
so as to include it in the area of effect. It cannot 
be shattered. From time to time (a 6% noncumu- 
lative chance checked once every 60 days), the 
book feleports to a random locale in the Realms, 
regardless of magical barricrs, prisons, safe- 
guards, and the like, All we know of Jume today 
is that she was fat, good-humored, and quite 
clever in her devising of unique illusionist spells. 
She was not a specialist in illusions, and the term 
arcanabula is thus not precisely correct when 
applied to this tome. Nonetheless, it has come 
down to present-day Realms lore by that name. 
The Arcanabula contains four of Jume’s own 
spells as well as more widely known spells. Its 22 
pages have contain the following: a front cover 
bearing Jume rune; a back cover that radiates a 
very faint silvery glow (which presumably bears 
most of the protective spells on the tome), and 20 
pages between that are either blank or bear one 
spell each. The pages contain: audible glamer, 
change self, gaze reflection, dark mirror (a 
unique spell), hypnotic pattern, magic mouth, 
misdirection, dispel magic, nondetection, phan- 
tom steed, spectral force, shadow monsters, 
shadow hand (a unique spell), shadow magic, 
prismatic eye (a unique spell), shadow gauntlet (a 
unique spell), true seeing. 


Dark Mirror 

(Abjuration/ Alteration) 

Level: 2 

Components; V, S, M 

Range: 10 feet per level 

Casting Time: 2 

Duration: | round per level 

Saving Throw: Special 

Area of Effect: Globe, radius of 10 feet per level 
Definition: This spell cnables the caster to instantly 
negate magical darkness (including continual dark- 
ness) or reflect it back upon its caster. It can alter- 
natively be used to allow the caster to see perfectly 
within or through normal or magical darkness, 
Which effect the spell will have must be chosen 
during casting and cannot be altered later. No sav- 
ing throws apply to this spell, except when dark- 
ness is to be reflected back specifically upon a 


source creature or item. In this case, a successful 
save causes the darkness to pass out of existence; 
failure means that it is successfully reflected back 
upon its source, Note that if the caster of dark mir- 
ror chooses to reflect darkness back at its original 
source area, but not upon a specific thing or being, 
no save is allowed even if the thing or being ix 
within the area at the time (a mobile being can then 
leave the dark area behind), Once cast, dark mirror 
remains in effect and can either prevent the forma- 
tion of or reflect back multiple darkness effects 
(even several in the same round) until the spell 
expires. The material components of this spell ue a 
small mirror and a candle. which need not be lit 


Shadow Hand 

(Illusion/Phantasm) 

Level: 5 

Components: V, S 

Range: 10 feet per level 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: | round per level 

Saving Throw: Special 

Area of Effect: Special 

Definition: A shadow hand is a human hand- 
shaped coalescence of force that appears in midair. 
It is shadowy or smoky in appearance, and trunslu- 
cent, but its size, initial location, handedness (lch 
or nght), and luminosity (ranging from nothing to 
a faerie fire equivalent) are all chosen during cast- 
ing and may not be altered later. A shadow hand 
moves as the caster wills, but continual concentra- 
tion is not required to maintain it, and the caster 
can perform other spellcasting. It can serve to 
point the way or indicate items of interest (such as 
concealed doors), warn away intruders, or engage 
in combat, A shadow hand cannot be dispelled by 
physical attacks, nor can it carry weight or affect 
spelicasting. 

This spell can slow to half speed any opponents 
of less than 1,000 pounds weight trying to push 
past it, moving to block different opponents as 
desired, Only one opponent per round can be so 
affected, but if the shadow hand is opcrating ina 
narrow tunnel or passage, slowing the foremost of a 
group of creatures will impede those behind it. A 
shadow hand strikes opponents only when so 
directed by its caster (the caster can physically fight 
in the same round but cannot cast a spell). An 
attack roll is required, the shadow hand having the 
same THAC as the caster. Its strike does 1 point of 
damage to targets who fail a save vs. spell, and no 

4984 


= 1138 5 


— . ( Ä—ñͤ—— T 1 —⁰-ů—im]m)m PD. q ͥ— . ˙ w ů⁴—Pᷣ ̃ ⁵ñße 


Spelibook, Arcanabula of Jume 


—— — —— ( , 


damage to those whose saving throw is successful, 
A shadow hand can attack once for every three lev- 
els of the caster in any one round, but it has no 
appreciable force (an opponent cannot be pushed 
off-balance, nor can breakables be shattered). Its 
attack, damage, and ability to slow those trying to 
pass it are all due to its effect on the nervous sys- 
tems of its opponents; thus, it has no effect against 
the undead, golems (except flesh golems), mechan- 
ical or enchanted monsters, creatures from the 
Outer Planes, or living beings having no nervous 
systems (oozes, slimes, and nonscnticnt plants) 


Prismatic Eye 
(Alteration/Evocation) 
Level: 6 
Components: V, S, M 
Range: 10 feet per level 
Casting Time: | round 
Duration: | round per level 
Saving Throw: None 
Area of Effect: Special 
Definition: This magic creates a visible orb resem- 
bling a human cyce (or wizard eye) that floats above 
one shoulder of the caster. The caster can turn the 
eye and cause it to move (at a maximum rate of 16) 
up to the limits of the spell range, and he can see 
through it as well as employing his own normal 
vision. The eye has 20-foot infravision, and normal 
vision up to 60 feet in good light. 

in the round in which it appears (the round after 
the casting) and once every four rounds after that, 
a prismatic eye can emit a beam of clashing colors 
equal in effect to a color spray. The beam is 
straight, not fan-shaped, and an attack roll using 
the caster base THACO is required to strike a tar- 
get. The beam can affect only one creature, If it 
misses or the caster docs not cause the eye to emit 
a ray, the power is lost for another four rounds 
Instead of a color spray, a prismatic eye can be 
willed by the caster to emit li as per the wizard 
spell, centered on itself; The intensity is controlled 
by the caster but cannot be so bright as to blind; it 
lasts for only two rounds. The color spray beam of 
a prismatic eye will strike unconscious (for 2d4 
rounds) creatures of up to 6 Hit Dice or levels, It 
blinds creatures with 7-8 levels or Hit Dice for Ida 
rounds, and stuns more powerful targets (as per 
power word, xtun) for one round. All creatures 
with at least 6 levels or Hit Dice are entitled to a 
saving throw vs. spell; if successful, the result is 
always a +1 penalty on the victim initiative due to 


stunning (enough to ruin spelicasting, or delay ot 
spoil a missile attack) 

If attacked, the eye is AC 3 and has 9 hit points. 
The material components of this spell are an eye- 
ball (dried or preserved) from any sort of crea- 
ture, and a polished, rainbow-hued slice of 
abalone, oyster, or tortoise shell 


Shadow Gauntlet 

¶Evocation Illusion Phantasm) 

Level: 6 

Components: V, S 

Range: 10 feet per level 

Casting Time: | round 

Duration: | round per level 

Saving Throw: Special 

Area of Effect: Special 

Definition: A shadow gauntlet is a more power- 
ful version of a shadow hand that can wield 
weapons, snatch at items, or act as a shield for the 
caster or other creatures. Like shadow hand, the 
shadow gauntlet appears in midair, moving as the 
caster wills, and may range in size from human to 
giant (12" long), varying in luminosity from dark 
to the equivalent of faerie fire. These specifics, as 
well as handedness (right or left) and the location 
of the initial appearance of a shadow gaunilet are 
determined during casting and cannot be changed 


Spellbook, Arcane Manipulations of the Entourage 


VVV 1i % ä 


after that. A shadow gauntlet appears as a gleam- 
ing, silvery metal gauntlet. The caster need not 
concentrate to maintain its existence, but he can- 
not cast a spell in any round in which the gauntlet 
is shifted to a new target or makes a direct attack, 

In a given round, a shadow gauntlet can hamper 
one creature, slowing it to half its movement rate, 
temporarily decreasing its Armor Class by | point, 
causing any attacks the victim makes to be at a —2 
penalty on attack rolls, and ruining all of the victim's 
spellcasting except verbal only spells (magical items 
can still be activated). The gauntlet can instead wield 
a weapon, striking once per round using the caster’s 
THACO. Magical weapons can be employed by a 
shadow gauntlet, but it cannot activate magical 
items, It can strike weaponless once for every three 
experience levels of its caster in a round (normal 
attack rolls apply). All weaponless attacks in a given 
round must be directed at a single target, who is 
allowed a saving throw vs. crushing blow against 
each, If failed, the target sustains 2 points of damage; 
if successful, no damage is suffered. 

A gauntlet can also snatch at items held by others. 
It lacks the strength or solidity to dislodge anything 
from any grasp, but it can foil telekinesis and ham- 
per enemy weapons as described above. It can carry 
objects weighing up to one pound (such as a key, 
ring, or a gem) for up to two rounds, Free or laden, a 
gauntlet has a movement of up to 24. A shadow 
gauntlet can also be interposed between a specific 
creature (the caster or a being the caster can see) and 
foes attacking him. (Note that attacks by someone 
striking ftom a side not protected by the gauntlet are 
determined normally.) The shadow gauntlet adds +1 
to all saving throws and ability checks against 
attacks hitting the one so protected, and it absorbs 
da points of damage from all attacks, physical or 
magical, that do manage to strike the protected 
being. The gauntlet can absorb as many hit points in 
this manner as its caster has before being destroyed. 
A gauntlet has AC 2 (AC 4 if acting as a shield). 

A shadow gauntlet can perform only one of the 
functions described here during a round. If its caster 
does not concentrate on it, it will continue to per- 
form the last function it was directed to do, moving 
about as necessary. This does not apply to attacks, 
however; inattention will cause a previously attack- 
ing shadow gauntlet to hang motionlessly in midair 
until control is reapplied. If a caster falls uncon- 
scious, the spell ceases its actions; if the caster dies, 
the gauntlet silently vanishes, If a caster goes 
insane, the gauntlet wildly attacks random living 


beings within range, at double speed (six attacks per 
round, three at one target, three at another), 


Arcane Manipulations of the Entourage 

XP Value: 2,400 GP Value: 24,000 
DRAGON Magazine 82 

Otto's first spellbook is an object sought by collec- 
tors of the works of deceased wizards. Collectors 
hope that by compiling the works of famous dead 
wizards, they can turn a huge profit years later when 
the wizard’s name has become legend. This book is 
one such treasure. It contains sleep, scare, fumble, 
geas, Otto’ irresistible dance, and confusion. 


Arcane Puissance of Memory 
XP Value: 1,600 GP Value: 16,000 
DRAGON Magazine 82 
Rary wrote Rary 5 mnemonic enhancer, forget, 
mind blank, and hypnotic pattern into this spell- 
book. 


Arcane Resistance of Dwarves and 
Halflings 
XP Value: 2,400 GP Value: 24,000 
DRAGON Magazine 82 
Serten penned dispel magic, remove curse, 
Serten y spell immunity, antimagic shell, dispel 
illusion, and dispel exhaustion into this book. 


Architecture 
XP Value: 1,600 GP Value: 16,000 
DraGoN Magazine 82 
Leomund and Mordenkainen collaborated on this 
work. It includes Leomund $ secure shelter, Leo- 
mund s tiny hut, forcecage, and Mordenkainen y 
magnificent mansion, 


Art of Communications and Sigils 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 20,000 
Dracon Magazine 82 
Flamsterd wrote this powerful spellbook, which 
includes explosive runes, power word stun, power 

word kill, power word blind, and symbol. 


Ashakar’s 
XP Value: 9,200 GP Value: 92,000 
Port of Ravin’s BLUFF 

Ashakar, a triton wizard, has a spellbook con- 
structed from seaweed and sponge. It includes the 
following wizard spells; charm monster, compre- 
hend languages, continual light, detect magic, 
dimension door, dispel magic, friends, hold person, 

4990 


1140 


Ee ͤͤ̃¹ti a ——_ 


identify, infravision, know alignment, lightning 
bolt, magic mirror, mending, mirror image, mon- 
ster summoning |, read magic, secret page, shock- 
ing grasp, whispering tide (similar to whispering 
wind), wizard lock, wizard mark, and wraithform. 


Aubavreer’s Workbook 
XP Value: 7,200 GP Value: 72,000 
Daacon Magazine 92 

This book is fashioned of a long strip of green 

hiexel bark, folded and refolded upon itself 

accordion-fashion. It is bound, protected, between 

two rectangular pieces of oiled wood held 

together with hemp cord. Upon one of the boards 

is carved a rune, and by this rune the work can be 

identified as that of the wizard Aubayrecr. 
Aubayreer was 
a wizard of the 
Dalelands in 


to what is now 
Aglarond, where he founded a sorcerous ruling 
dynasty that continues to this day, The many works 
Aubayreer made while High Mage of Aglarond. and 
later Mage-King, are kept securely in the libraries of 
the palace there, but the original workbook 
Aubayreer developed as an apprentice to the Mages 
of the Covenant has been lost. 

Early in the reign of Lurskas, grandson of 
Aubayreer, thieves broke into the royal libraries. 
Several were slain by the guardians and protective 
magic of the place, and these indeed kept the more 
powerful tomes safe, but the workbook was stolen, 
It vanished into the debatable lands east and south 
of Aglarond, and no definite trace of it has been 
found since, although reports of the activities of 
several wizards (notably Nuzar of the Seven 
Curses) have hinted that they had seen Aubayreer x 
Workbook, or at least copies of the two spells 
Aubayreer developed which close the work. 

That the book still exists is attested to by the 
unceasing efforts of the royal house of Aglarond 
to recover it. The present ruler, the shapeshifting 
Mage-Queen known as “The Simbul” is known to 
have slain the wizard Thanatus and ransacked the 
librarics of the school of magic at Mirrorstar in 
her attempts to seize the workbook. 

Aubuyteer lone apprentice, the now-dead wiz- 
ard Nytholops, set down in his Chronicles the con- 
tents of the workbook, for it was from this book 


Spelibook, Aubavreer’s Workbook 


— 


(and no other) that Aubayreer taught him the Art. 

There are (or were) 18 faces of folded bark in 
Aubayreer’s Workbook. The foremost is usually 
blank; it served as a surface for various magical 
protections (explosive runes, symbols, and the 
like) when desired. The next 14 surfaces contain 
the spells read magic, burning hands, dancing 
lights, enlarge, identify, light, message, write, 
ESP, wizard lock, dispel magic, explosive runes, 
fireball, and extension 1. Then follow three spe- 
cial spells—hailcone (Aubayreer's version of ice 
storm), and two unique spells, Aubayreer x phase 
trap and thunderlance. 


Hailcone 

(Evocation) 

Level: 4 

Components: V, S. M 

Range: 10 feet per level 

Casting Time: 6 

Duration: | round 

Saving Throw: None 

Area of Effect: 30-foot diameter cone 
Definition: The spelicaster, by use of a pinch of dust 
(a grain or two of sand will suffice) and a few drops 
of water, causes large (- inch and greater) hailstones 
to rain down in a conical area, from a focus 30 feet 
above a surface or desired target downward in a cone 
opening to 30-foot base diameter. Creatures within 
the area of effect suffer 3410 points of damage, and 
exposed items must save vs, crushing blow to remain 
undamaged. If the spell is cast in midair, creatures 
that fly as close as 6 feet below the focus and within 
the 3 feet of the diameter range of effect will take 
1d10 points of damage Only fragile items within 
this arca (from 3 to 6 feet beneath), such as glass or 
parchment, must make a saving throw. Creatures that 
fly more than 6 fect beneath the focus in the area of 
effect may be struck by hailstones and become aware 
of the spell’s effect, but these stones have no appre- 
ciable force and will do no damage. 


Phase Trap 

(Alteration) 

Level: 4 

Components: V, S, M 
Range: 20 feet 

Casting Time: 3 

Duration: | round per level 
Saving Throw: Neg 

Area of Effect: One creature 


Definition: With a word, a gesture, and the cast- 
4991 


r , O 


1141 


. — f f «f ... 


~ Spellbook, Aubavreer’s Workbook 


ing of a small, transparent colorless gem of not 
less than 50 gp value into the air (where it is con- 
sumed), the spellcaster affects any one target 
creature possessing the ability to phase shift 
(become Astral or Ethereal) that is within a radius 
of 20 feet, (If no such creature is present, nothing 
will happen, and the spell and gem are lost.) If 
the creature fails to save vs. spell, it is forced into 
its opposite phase and magically held there for 
the duration of the spell. 

An encountered phase spider, for example, that 
was “in phase,” physically attacking at the instant 
of a caster’s completion of a phase trap, would be 
forced “out of phase,” and unable to attack until the 
expiration of the spell. If it was out of phase (ethe- 
real) when affected, it would be forced back into 
phase and become vulnerable to physical attack at 
normal attack odds, until the spell was exhausted. 

This spell affects creatures employing spells or 
natural powers, and is effective against blink and 
completely and forcing them into phase on the 
Prime Material Plane. Creatures who can adjust the 
molecules of their bodies lose all such powers while 
phase trapped. These powers include the xorn’s and 
xaren’s pass through stone ability, plus the psionic 
powers of body weaponry, ethereal traveler, and 
dimension door—but not dimension walk or abili- 
ties that affect the molecules of other things, such as 
molecular agitation and molecular rearrangement. 
After the expiration of a phase trap spell, such pow- 
ers will return, unless their own duration had 
elapsed while the phase trap was in effect. A target 
creature that is plane shifting, teleporting, or using 
transport via plants, phase door, or pass plant spells 
is unaffected, but a creature in an extradimensional 
space of lesser, limited extent (such as someone 
embodied in a rope trick spell or a portable hole) 
will be forced to appear and remain on the caster x 
plane for the duration of the spell. 

Xorn and xaren, and any such creatures thai 
can “phase” their way through solid matter, save 
against this spell at 2. Note that the spellcaster 
need not know or have seen the precise location 
of a creature, or even be certain of its presence, to 
affect it. If more than one eligible target is within 
20 feet, the phase trap will affect one of them at 
random—unless the caster perceives only one 
such creature before or while casting, in which 
case that creature will be affected. 

A creature possessing the potential to become 
astral or ethereal can be affected by a phase trap if 


in range when it is cast. The affected creature will 
be unable to effectively exercise such powers until 
the spell wears off—regardless of how far the crea- 
ture might move away from the caster, If the 
affected creature is a spellcaster with an astral 
spell, for instance, the spell cannot be used while 
the victim is phase trapped—and any attempt to do 
so will ruin and waste the spell. If the affected crea- 
ture tries to use oil of etherealness or any other 
phase-shifling magical item, the magic will have no 
effect until the duration of the phase map expires. 

A creature on the Astral Plane when the phase 
trap is cast saves against this spell at +1. A cres- 
ture on the Ethereal Plane or the Prime Material 
Plane saves at normal odds. 


Thundertance 

(Evocation) 

Level: 4 

Components: V, 8 

Range: Touch 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: Sce below 

Saving Throw: None 

Area of Effeet: One creature 

Definition: Casting this spell brings into exis- 
tence a thin shaft of faint grey, shimmering force 
extending 10 feet from the caster's pointing fin- 
ger. The thunderlance is weightless and intangi- 
ble, but if any creature touches or passes through 
any part of it, the lance vanishes with a loud clap 
of thunder and the creature struck is dealt 4d6 
points of damage, The lance may be willed out of 
existence by its caster at any time without any 
discharge or harm to the caster (although the 
spell ts lost) and disappears if the caster dies, 
loses consciousness, or begins another spell. 

The caster can employ a thunderlance in many 
ways—held steady as a barrier against some crea- 
ture s passage or as a trip ite, at ankle height, to 
stop a pursuet. It is also highly effective when 
wielded as a weapon; the caster can move his or her 
arm and finger about to strike with the lance. In any 
combat situation against a thunderlance, potential 
victims are regarded as having a base Armor Class 
of 10 (before any Dexterity adjustments); the blow 
of the lance is transmitted through armor and 
shields, and the presence of such protection does 
not benefit the target of a thunderlance attack. 
However, the bonuses of magical armor and shields 
are not negated, and will improve a targct’s effective 
AC by the amount of the bonus. 

w 


e 1142 


OE . o 


à Spellbook of Rats 


The damage of the lance is a physical blow, as 
opposed to (for instance) a discharge of electric- 
ity. It is fully effective against creatures that are 
resistant or immune to either blunt or edged 
weapons (since the /ance is actually neither of 
those) 

The touch of a thunderlance destroys a shield 
spell, wall of force, or minor globe of invulnera- 
bility, but the lance itself discharges (vanishes, 
without damaging anyone) upon contact. Stronger 
protective spells (such as antimagic shell) also 
cause the lance to discharge, but will themselves 
withstand the shock of its strike and remain in 
existence. A lance penctrates fire, water (includ- 
ing ice and snow), and electrical discharges of 
natural or magical origin (wall of fire, wall of ice) 
without discharging, and thus the caster may 
strike through all such phenomena at an enemy. 

Anyone wielding a thunderlance (after the spell- 
casting is complete, before but the lance has dis- 
charged) cannot be harmed by magic missile 
spells, regardless of the direction from which they 
strike — their force passes harmlessly through the 
lance wielder to be absorbed by the lance, increas- 
ing the damage the lance does when it discharges 
by ldd points per missile. This will not occur if 
the lance wiclder has some other magical protec- 
tion against magic missiles, A thunderlance does 
not confer protection against other forms of magi- 
cal attack, nor can it be passed to any other crea- 
ture without discharging—an ally cannot wield the 
lance on the caster’s behalf. 


Avran Greenstrider’s 

XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 40,000 
Legacy of Blood 
Arran spellbook contains the following spells: 
hold portal, light, read languages, sleep, contin- 
ual light, invisibility, phantasmal force, hold per- 
son, lightning bolt, and protection from evil 10’ 
radius, 


Barrik's 
XP Value: 1,600 GP Value: 16,000 
Quest for the Silver Sword 

This book contains the following spells: charm 
person, detect magic, magic missile, and sleep. If 
the book is taken, it can be used like a magical 
scroll (with each spell being cast once and then 
fading away as its power is expended). If the book 
is not used in this manner, characters can copy 
the spells into their spell books 


Bashal's 
XP Value: 9,600 GP Value: 96,000 
Deacon Magazine 179 

Bashal y spellbook, which might still reside with 
the Cowled Mages, is bound in black leather with 
brass bindings. Within its pages, besides the for- 
mula for recreating the membrane for Bashal’s 
tendrilight, are found these spells (in order): 
armor, friends, find familiar, continual light, 
deeppockets, levitate, knock, rope trick, web, wiz- 
ard lock, knock, fly, infravision, lightning bolt, 
phantaxmal force, slow, sepia snake sigil, dimen- 
sion door, ice storm, massmorph, polymorph self, 
cloudkill, and wall of force. 


of Bats 
GP Value: 88,000 
The Magister 
This gruesome-looking tome is tall and narrow, 
being 3 handwidths across but 9 handwidths top- 
to- bottom Its 22 pages are of polished electrum, 
stamped and etched with the symbols and script 
of spells, one to a page. The book's covers are 
plates of blackened, sealed oak, bound about with 
the tattered, leathery hides and wings of black 
bats of lange size, claws still attached 
This fell tome is of unknown origin. It contains 
spells created by (or at least attributed to) the long- 
ago wizards Beltyn and Shacroon, but may well 


XP Value: 8,800 


~ Spellbook of Bats r 


have been assembled long after their deaths. It first 
appears in recorded Realmslore among a Satrap 
treasures in Calimshan some 210 winters ago, and 
since then has had a bewildering variety of owners, 
being stolen or seized many times by wizards or 
minor rulers who slew the previous owner. Its pre- 
sent location and owner are unknown; thieves plun- 
dered a ship in Calimport that was to carry it to 
Tashluta last summer, where it is believed the Arch- 
mage Malharduu had arranged its purchase. 

The wizard Khondall Sszundar catalogued the 
volume’s contents when it was (briefly) in his 
hunds he purchased it from the merchant Chulu 
Thall of Ithmong, and lost it when his tower was 
destroyed by fiends sent by an unknown foe. The 
tome reappeared in Innarlith soon after, but was 
stolen again. Khondall’s catalogue tells us that the 
book contains the following spells: the rarely- 
seen priests’ prayer censure (described below), 
and the wizard spells feign death, protection from 
good 10' radius, slow, Beltyn & burning blood (a 
unique spell, described below), dimension door, 
fear, polymorph other, wall of fire, animate dead, 
cloudkill, cone of cold, feeblemind, hold vapor (a 
unique spell, described below), telekinesis, wall 
of iron, antimagic shell, death spell, geas, invis- 
ible stalker, project image, and Shaervon $ scimi- 
tar (a unique spell described below). 


Censure 

(Conjuration/Summoning) 

Level: 4 

Components: V, S, M 

Range: Touch 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: |! hours per level 

Saving Throw: Negates 

Area of Effect: One Creature 

Definition: To enact this spell, the priest must 
touch a target creature with his or her holy sym- 
bol (the material component of the spell, which is 
not consumed in the casting). If a successful 
attack roll indicates that the priest has done so, 
the priest, by word and gesture, “casts out” the 
target of the spell. The target creature is allowed a 
save vs. spell, and if it fails, the creature is 
marked by the spell. The mark is visible only to 
the casting priest and those of the same faith. 
Other priests of the same alignment who worship 
other deities instinctively react with fear, hatred, 
and aversion to a censured creature, and do nei- 
ther trust nor willingly aid it. 


Those faithful to the same deity able to see the 
mark refuse to aid or even approach the creature, 
and ignore it if it attempts to deal with them, or 
drive it away if it tries to enter a building, home, 
or even a territory controlled by one who can see 
the mark. The mark is invisible to the one bearing 
it, who may not even know of its existence if it 
was bestowed in a battle or while the victim was 
asleep or unconscious, and shines clearly through 
clothing or disguises. 

Worshipers can thus readily spy upon and fol- 
low those marked as enemies, even in crowds or 
busy city streets. It will be revealed to others by 
detect magic, and can readily be removed by dis- 
pel magic. Priests are warned that misuse of such 
a spell brings about divine disfavor, 


Beltyn’s Burning Blood 
(Necromantic) 
Level: 4 
Components: V, S, M 
Range: 10 feet per level 
Casting Time: 4 
Duration: 3 rounds 
Saving Throw: Negates 
Area of Effect: One creature 
Definition: By means of this spell, a wizard can 
cause any creature who is presently bearing open, 
bleeding wounds (such as one who has been dam- 
aged by edged weapons recently and whose wounds 
have not yet been dressed or healed) to suffer 3d4 
points of additional damage per round, by causing a 
subtle, temporary change in the victim’s blood, 
causing it to be corrosive to adjacent tissue. 
Obviously, the creature must have blood to be 
affected (elementals, undead, and many of those 
not of the Prime Material Plane are immune as 
are all creatures immune or even resistant to cor- 
rosive or fiery damage), and the material compo- 
nents of the spell are the presence of exposed 
blood in the victim and a pinch of saltpeter The 
spell causes no damage if the target’s saving 
throws vs. spell, (at —3) are successful, For each 
of the three rounds of the spell, during which the 
caster need not concentrate, the priest may cast 
other spells. In any round in which the target 
saves, no damage is inflicted by the spell, but this 
result has no influence on the saving throws of 
any remaining rounds. A successful saving throw 
never means the spell is unable to ever affect the 
target. No attack roll is required for this spell, and 


the target need not even be visible to the caster, 
4995 


5 1144 


FFF rr ·˙·¹àꝛ-ꝛ i eee a 


Spelibook of Hats 


— ͤ?— —rv— aa i 


but the target must be within range of and known 
to the caster, and cannot be astral or ethereal, to 
be affected. The caster must visualize the target 
(or the target's location) during casting. 

Targets who have altered their shape or entered 
other objects (such as a tree, or stone) are still 
vulnerable to this spell. Creatures who have pow- 


crs of regeneration may only be vulnerable to this 
spell for a 1d2 rounds. 


Hold Vapor 

(Conjuration’Summoning) 

Level: 5 

Components: V, S, M 

Range: 10 feet per level 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: Special 

Saving Throw: Special 

Area of Effect: 20-foot-radius globe +10 feet per 
level 

Definition: This spell allows a wizard to halt or 
prevent the movement of any visible clouds or 
vapor in a given area distinct from the air around, 
such as a gascous weapon, pyrotechnics, fog cloud, 
cloudkill, or incendiary cloud, Such enforced 
immobility may be continued for as long as the 
caster continues to chant and concentrate on hold- 
ing the vapor, If such a hold is ever lost (through 
the caster being stlenced for an entire round—the 
chant can be interrupted for short periods—or ren- 
dered unconscious, or ceasing concentration to cast 
another spell) it can never be regained except by 
use of another spell; the hold is broken and the 
magic expires. The hold prevents the gas clouds 
from altering shape, breaking up, or moving about 
in any way, Oxygen (that is, “air”) may pass freely 
through and about such vapor, dissipating it if its 
formative magic expires, and allowing, for exam- 
ple, a flammable vapor to burn or explode if it is 
held by hold vapor and attacked with fire. 

The hold is absolute, even in the face of natural 
gales or magical gusts of wind (unless these affect 
the chanting wizard, not the vapor, enough to break 
the hold, as described above). If the gaseous form is 
that of an intelligent creature who is normally in 
control of personal movement, such as a wind 
walking priest or a vampire in gaseous form, the 
affected creature receives saving throws as follows: 
the hold is absolute in the first round of its exis- 
tence, a saving throw vs. spell at -G is allowed on 
the second round, at —5 on the third, at A on the 
fourth, and so on, up to a maximum of +6 on the 


14th round and any rounds after that. If such a sav- 
ing throw is successful, the spell ends instantly, and 
the creature is free to move. Until the spell is so 
broken, a gaseous-form creature cannot move, nor 
can it change to 4 nongascous form even if it nor- 
mally has the ability to do so, Note that spectral, 
ethereal, and insubstantial forms (such as those of 
many undead) that are not gaseous cannot be 
affected by this spell. This spell cannot be used to 
push or direct a vapor, or control it in any way, but 
only to halt and hold it. 

The material component of this spell is a bal- 
Joon or bladder into which the caster blows. 


Shaeroon's Scimitar 
(Evocation) 
Level: 6 
Components: V, S, M 
Range: 20 feet 
Casting Time: 6 
Duration: Special 
Saving Throw: Negates 
Area of Effect: Special 
Definition: By means of this spell, a wizard brings 
into being a shimmering, scimitar-shaped blade of 
force. This scimitar appears in the air directly above 
a target creature, hanging point downwards some 2 
feet above the head (or uppermost point) of the tar- 
get creature, Invisible to all but the caster and those 
employing detect magic, the scimitar has no physi- 
cal existence, and cannot be attacked, magically 
repulsed dispelled, or left behind by teleportation or 
travel to other planes, It will fall (upon the target 
creature only, regardless of physical or magical bar- 
riers) upon the fulfilment of a single condition set 
verbally during casting of the scimitar, doing | point 
of damage per level of the caster of the scimitar, The 
unwitting target creature is allowed a saving throw 
vs. spell at this time and if successful, the scimitar 
dissipates harmlessly into nothingness, and the spell 
is wasted. Otherwise, it plummets downwards in 10 
seconds, vanishing upon contact with the target's 
body, dealing its damage in a convulsion of wrack- 
ing pain that momentarily affects movement, 
speech, spellcasting, and even posture—victims of a 
scimitar often fall, writhing, to the ground. Typical 
conditions include the target creature uttering a cer- 
tain name or word, or commencing spellcasting, or 
drawing a weapon, or going lo sleep. The condition 
cannot be tied to a specific time or location (that is, 
it can be “entering a room,” but cannot be “entering 
a particular room only”), and in some cases many 
ams 


E a e 


1145 


..... ee 


Ji, Bighy's 


years have passed between the casting of a scimitar 
and its strike. A limited wish, wish, alter reality, or 
ur unless. of course, the casting of such a magic is 
the condition which will cause the scimitar to fall, 
The material component of this spell is a miniature 
scimitar carved of rock crystal, clear diamond, or 
clear sapphire (of a valuc of not less than 300 gp; 
miniatures of the latter two substances may cost 10 
times that much). 


This spellbook contains: affect normal fires, hold 
portal, magic missile, shield, detect evil, mirror 
image, rope trick, stinking cloud, fly, lightning bolt, 

phantasmal force, charm monster, minor globe of 
invulnerability, conjure elemental, and teleport. 


of Black Circles 
XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 40,000 
Dracon Magazine 139 

The Book of Black Circles is a finely crafted vol- 
ume 2 feet high, | foot wide, and 4 inches thick. 
The cover is made of soft black leather taken 
from the throat of a black dragon and wrapped 
around a wooden frame. The interior pages arc 
fashioned from the finest vellum and are bound 
to the spine of the book with threads of black silk. 
The cover is blank except for the inscription of 
five silver circles in the upper half of the cover; 
four are arranged in a square, with the fifth in the 
center of the square thus formed. The book's 
name is thought to refer to its creators or its 
innate powers rather than the cover design. 

Whether the Hook of Black Circles was designed 
as a single work, copies of which have appeared 
repeatedly over history in widely disparate loca- 
tions, or was designed as several works, cach with 
roughly the same power (which seems more likely), 
is currently a matter of some contention among the 
sages. Whatever the case, it is indisputable that this 
tome and its copies have been found in the strong- 
holds of many of the organizations of evil magi. 
This was particularly true of the Black Circle 
(which is thought to have created the work), The 
Circle was brought low following its attempted 
takeover of Shalom hundreds of years ago. Copies 
have also been discovered in the redoubts of the 
Hand of Destiny and the Htiaf. As these groups still 
wield considerable power in Shalom, however, it is 


uncertain where such information could be accu- 
rately obtained, and it must therefore be treated 
with skepticism. No copies of the book exist in any 
of the various libraries of Shalom at present, nor do 
any wizards who do not belong to the organizations 
mentioned above claim to have access to such 
copics, with the sole exception of the dark elf Arch- 
mage, Rathe. Information can be gleaned from var- 
ious sources, though Rathe is unwilling to reveal 
any details concerning the book. 

It is generally recognized that the Book of 
Black Circles was used to train young wizards in 
the dark arts, especially those who wish to joina 
cult or an organization of cvil design. It is appar- 
ent that the book contains a few powerful and 
unique spells to test young wizards and deter- 
mine thetr worthiness to advance through the 
ranks. Ii also contains a few less powerful, com- 
mon spells used to train young wizards. (It should 
be noted that the use of these spells, while not 
intrinsically evil, is largely limited to the holders 
of these books; however, there are persistent if 
unfounded rumors that several groups of good 
wizards have used similar spells to both locate 
and train their adepts). In addition to the spells it 
contains, The Book of Black Circles details the 
process of advancement of the wizards and the 
methods of their instruction in the dark arts, as 
well as the proper construction of magical circles. 

The only other information available on the 
Book of Black Circles comes from a page of parch- 
ment that the renowned thief Vadour stole from the 
Archmage Rathe several decades ago, when the 
wizard had considerably less power. The parch- 
ment is now kept in the Library of the Imperial 
University in Sestar. If this manuscript is to be 
relied upon, then other powers may also be attrib- 
uted to Rathe’s book and perhaps others like it. 

Each of the silver circles inscribed on the cover 
of the book triggers a continual darkness spell 
(maximum of once a week per circle, performed at 
the 18th level) if touched by any being who is not 
lawful evil. This spell is centered on the toucher, 
who may escape the effects with a saving throw vs. 
spells (in which case the spell centers on the book). 
Any lawful evil being may see through the dark- 
ness with case. Several magical protections are 
also attributed to the copy of the book in Rathe’s 
possession, which may be either standard to such a 
book or unique to Rathe’s copy, as the DM chooses. 
The protections on the book may be designed by 
the DM and should probably take the form of at 

urn 


. —!7—— re 


1146 


x Spellbook, Book of Black Circles 


least one symbvl—possibly several. The specific 
types of symbols employed are not revealed in the 
parchment stolen from Rathe. Few if any copies of 
these books have mundane protections such as 
locks, traps, or the like. The spells set down in The 
Book of Black Circles are written in standard form 
and may be found in an appendix at the back of the 
book. They include block advancement (unique 
spell), charm person, conquer self (unique spell), 
discern (unique spell), feeblemind, geas, and hold 
person. The Book of Black Circles contains all the 
information on magical circles found in the DMG, 
Ist Edition and in Unearthed Arcana. The three 
unique spells found in the book are as follows: 


Discern 

(Divination) 

Level; 7 

Components: V, S. M 

Range: Touch 

Casting Time: | turn 

Duration: Permanent 

Saving Throw; None 

Area of Effect: 10 feet 

Definition: A wizard who casts a discern spell is 
provided (or provides another) with the ability to 
determine if a person has the potential to become 
a powerful wizard, Once cast, the discern spell is 
permanent (though subject to dispel magic) and 
functions continuously, without concentration by 
the recipient of the spell. The spell may be cast by 
any wizard of the necessary level, though the 
recipient of the spell must be a wizard of at least 
Sth level; the spell may also be applied to the 
spellcaster. Discern is used primarily as a recruit- 
ing device for various magical orders and schools 
of every sort of alignment and ethic. 

Once cast, discern confers upon the recipient the 
ability to magically determine if a person has the 
potential to become a powerful wizard simply by 
being within 10 feet of that person and interacting 
in a normal fashion with the candidate for two 
rounds. The recipient of the spell perceives the 
potential for using magic by a candidate as a dim 
aura surrounding the subject. The aura is invisible 
by any other means, including true sight, true see- 
ing, infravision, or other types of magical or normal 
vision, and is so dim that it cannot be perceived in 
bright light (such as direct sunlight), The aura is of 
constant strength, regardless of the potential of the 
candidate. For game purposes, a human, elf, or 
half-elf scanned by this spell registers favorably if 


he has an Intelligence of at least 14 and scores of 6 
or better in all other characteristics, A variation of 
this spell may exist that is more selective and 
detects only those who have the potential to become 
great illusionists as well (thus including gnomes 
among the races affected, but detecting only those 
persons with Intelligence scores of 15 or better and 
Dexterity scores of 16 or better). 

Even ifa positive result is obtained, the spell in no 
way guarantees that the person will become a great 
wizard (or even a wizard at all); it simply indicates 
ability based on Intelligence, aptitude, and the will 
to achieve. The Book of Black Circles stresses the 
fact that the spell is no more than a prediction; even 
if a person has the ability, he or she may elect not to 
become a wizard, quit before reaching a high level, 
or die before achieving greatness. The DM should 
exercise some judgment regarding who is high- 
lighted by this spell use, The material component 
of the spell is a gem of seeing or a similar magical 
device (such as eyes of minute seeing) which allows 
for a special type of vision, The material component 
is consumed when the spell is cast. 


Block Advancement 

(Abjuration/Charm) 

Level; 8 

Components: V, S, M 

Range: Touch 

Casting Time: | turn 

Duration: Permanent 

Saving Throw: Neg. 

Area of Effect: | person 

Definition: When a block advancement spell is 
successfully cast upon an individual, the charac- 
ter is instantly stripped of the ability to advance 
in levels of spellcasting ability until the recipient 
successfully survives the ordeal induced by a 
conquer self spell. The spell affects only a single 
wizard of no less than Sth level, no greater than 
15th, and of an alignment identical to the caster. 
Block advancement cannot be removed otherwise 
except by the use of a wish spell. 

The recipient of the spell is allowed a saving 
throw vs. spell (which is forfeited by a willing 
subject), and the spell does not come into effect if 
the saving throw is successful because the spell 
was designed to stop the advancement of any 
wizard deemed not worthy of power until such 
time as he proved himself. The original researcher 
of the spell (most likely a member of the Black 


Circle) assumed that the recipient would be will- 
4997 


1147 à 


Spellbook. Book of Black Circles 


— . (1— —— 


ing to receive the spell (the alternative was 
death). However, if the spell is applied to an 
unwilling subject and the wizard makes a suc- 
cessful saving throw, he or she suffers damage 
points equal to twice the number of levels pos- 
sessed by the caster but is otherwise unaffected. 

Once block advancement comes into effect, the 
recipient cannot learn any new spells (though new 
spells may be recorded in the wizard’s spell books) 
nor can any spells be cast of a level above the high- 
est level that the wizard was able to use before being 
blocked. He or she may, however, gain more spells 
of the levels currently held, Thus, if cast upon a Sth- 
level wizard, block advancement would prohibit the 
wizard from casting 4th-level spells until the spell 
was removed (but would not prevent the attainment 
of additional 3rd-level spells). A block advancement 
spell does not prevent a wizard from gaining experi- 
ence points while it remains in effect, nor does it 
prohibit the wizard from gaining new weapon and 
nonweapon proficiencies and additional hit points 
when cnough experience is gained to advance in 
level. Advancement in level occurs as it normally 
would. Thus, the net effect of the spell is only to 
limit a wizard to the current level of spellcasting 
ability, Once the spell is removed, the recipient 
immediately gains all of the normal spellcasting 
abilities appropriate to his or her level. The material 
component of the spell is a small jade statue of the 
recipient of the spell, upon which a feeblemind spell 
has been cast prior to the casting of the block 
advancement spell. The statue is not consumed by 
the spell, but may only be used for one person. Once 
the block advancement spell has been removed from 
the recipient, the statue shatters. 


Conquer Self 

(Abjuration/ Alteration) 

Level: 9 

Components: V, 5, M 

Range: Touch 

Casting Time: | round 

Duration: 6 hours 

Saving Throw: See below 

Area of Effect: | person 

Definition: Upon the completion of this spell, 
the recipient of a block advancement spell begins 
a great personal ordeal which cither results in 
death or in the removal of the block advancement 
spell and the gaining of an experience-point 
bonus i the wizard is deemed worthy by the 
power of the conquer self spell. The spell is use- 


less for any other purpose. If cast upon an indi- 
vidual not under the effects of a block advance- 
ment spell, conquer self vanishes from the 
spelicaster’s memory with no effect. Conquer self 
must be cast by a wizard of the same alignment as 
the recipient, 

Once cast, the recipient undergoes a six-hour 
ordeal during which he is rendered helpless by 
wrenching pains and powerful hallucinatory 
vistons hence the recipient is usually placed in 
a special area where he is relatively safe from 
attack (Interestingly, The Book of Black Circles 
reports that the visions experienced during the 
ordeal are occasionally prophetic or based on 
actual events or arcas that the recipient may not 
have witnessed.) The outcome of the ordeal is 
dependent upon the actions of the recipient since 
he received the block advancement spell. 
Although the recipient is automatically affected 
by this spell if he meets the previous require- 
ments, the final outcome of the spell is dependent 
upon a successful saving throw of 20. This saving 
throw roll is modified by several conditions, most 
of which are dependent on the actions and perfor- 
mance of the recipient. No form of magic affects 
this saving throw (including items such as a luck- 
stone), and all other saving throw modifiers from 
which the wizard would normally benefit are 
similarly ineffective. The modifiers apply only 
from the time of the application of the block 
advancement spell. They are as follows: 


Condition Modifier 
Per 100,000 XP gained H 
Perfect alignment performance 3 
Average alignment performance +1 
Poor alignment performance -l 
Every successful (major) quest 

performed for the organization +4 
Each point of intelligence above 12+1 


Evaluation of recipient by caster of 
conquer self spell (mediated by DM), 
based on recipient's ability, ambition, 
heroic actions, ete. -3 to +3 


If the recipient makes a successful saving 
throw, the trance ends after six hours. At this 
time, spellcasting abilities appropriate to the pre- 
sent level are regained and a 10% experience 
point bonus awarded for all experience earned 
since block advancement was cast upon the char- 
acter. If the recipient fails the saving throw, death 

we 


’ ie <7 ine a 


1148 


ass... 


Spellbook, Book With No End r 


results at the end of the six hours; he of she may 
be raised or resurrected in the usual manner, 
though still suffering from the effects of the block 
advancement spell. The saving throw always fails 
if the result of the roll is 1, regardless of modi- 
fiers to the roll. The material component of the 
spell is the jade statue that was used when the 
block advancement spell was originally applied to 
the recipient; at the conclusion of the conquer 
self spell, the statue shatters. 


Blessed Book of Cures 
XP Value: 800 GP Value: 8,000 
CARDMASTER Adventure Design Deck 
Written in the Blessed Book of Cures are two 3rd- 
level healing spells. 


of the Blind 

GP Value: 4,000 
DRAGON Magazine 82 
An evil character who studies this book will lose 
the use of his or her eyes at the end of one week 
of study. A cure blindness spell will get rid of the 
affliction for 1d4 days; a remove curse spell will 
bring back the character's sight permanently. 


XP Value: 400 


Book With No End 
XP Value: — GP Value: — 
Book of Artifacts 

The Book With No End is a modestly sized tome 
with covers bound in the hide of a hatchling red 
dragon and hinged in gold. A golden clasp seals 
the volume and illuminated sigils are emblazoned 
on the front and back. The pages are made of thick 
parchment, smooth and uniform, and edged with 
gold leaf. Despite its curious name, the book has 
exactly 100 pages and weighs about 8 pounds. All 
told, the book is notably mundane in appearance. 

The Book With No End was created by a wizard 
of little note or reputation known now only as 
Magus. No direct records of this wizard, his ambi- 
tions, or the means by which he created the book 
exist, but several sages who have spent time in the 
study of this treatise agree that, based on the prop- 
erties of the tome, Magus was striving to make a 
device of some considerable power—no doubt for 
world domination or a similar unattainable goal 

Whatever Magus’s ambitions, his wizardly 
skills were not up to the task. There is little doubt 
that he created an item of considerable power, but 
his workmanship was flawed. Tules say that in his 
greed for power he rushed his work, taking short- 


cuts where time and patience would have been 
better rewarded. Blind to his own mistakes, 
Magus managed to create a device that conse- 
quently devastated the entire countryside the first 
time he attempted to use it. Instead of granting 
him the power and mastery he desired, the Book 
With No End pushed the already unstable wizard 
over the brink of sanity, 

Since Magus’s day, the book has appeared sev- 
eral times, sometimes with beneficial effect and 
sometimes to the utter woe of all who find it. It 
supposedly provided the power needed for the 
wizard Vorst Dircson to overthrow the hated lich- 
king of the North, It was also supposed to be the 
cause of the madness that seized the wizard- 
scholars at the College of Fire in Halverston (a 
madness that ended in the explosion of that acad- 
emy and the devastation of Halverston’s port). It 
is clear from these and other incidents that the 
book is intended for wizards and even they must 
handle it at their own peril. 

The current whereabouts of the book are 
unknown. Deceitful rogues have been known to 
pass fake copies onto gullible wizards. This is 
really much simpler than it sounds, since normal 
detection and magical checks are known to fail 
on items of artifact power, 

The Book With No End is an acceptable item 


for player characters to find and use, although 
s000 


r 1149 


| 1 —— — — ee G — 


~ Spcllbook, Bosero the Drunkurd 


prolonged use risks the death of the entire adven- 
turing party. Because most of its effects last only 
as long as a PC has the book, it ts possible for it 
to be introduced and removed with little long- 
term damage to a campaign. 

Because of the book’s ordinary appearance, it is 
possible for the characters to obtain it from someone 
who does not know its true value. It is equally pos- 
sible that the characters might have no idea of what 
they have. This process of discovery, either by acci- 
dent or as a result of the plots and schemes of others 
seeking the book, constitutes an adventure in itself. 

Discovering and deciphering the riddle of the 
book may also be part of a greater adventure. In 
this case, there is a greater threat to the player 
characters (and the world)—possibly the appear- 
ance of an even greater evil artifact in the wrong 
hands. The book then becomes a desperate but 
useful means of defeating the foe. 

Once the book has served its purpose, it is best 
removed from the campaign. Wise player charac- 
ters may do this on their own; otherwise, it may 
have to be stolen, or worse still, the curse trig- 
gered. Of course, at least one player character 
will have to die to save the others in this case. 

All the powers found in the Rook With No End. 
whether constant or invoked, are found on spe- 
cific pages. The book has only 100 pages (far 
shorter than the infinity its title implies) and of 
these only 27 have anything on them. Reading 
any page is possible only with the use of a read 
magic spell, one spell needed per page. 

The pages are unumbered and as the player 
characters the read pages, it is their responsibility 
to track the page numbers and spells for later use. 

Constant Powers: Wizards in possession of the 
book have all of their spell potencies increased by 
150% (range, duration, area of effect, and damage). 
In addition, the personal enhancement powers are in 
effect any time the wizard is touching the book. 

Invoked Powers: The invoked powers can only 
be used when the wizard opens the book to the 
correct page and reads it aloud. A read magic 
spell is not necessary for this second reading. 

Curse: PCs of classes other than wizard suffer 
5d10 points of electrical damage (a successful sav- 
ing throw vs. spell is necessary to halve the damage) 
upon opening the book. The user also risks artifact 
possession with cach page read. The possessed seek 
to leud in all things and eventually to rule absolutely. 

Every time an invoked power of the book is used, 
there is a 5% chance of triggering a monstrous dev- 


astation as the animus of the book drains [0d10 

points of damage from every creature within 100 

yards. An owner who is killed becomes a picture on 

one of the book's blank pages. 
Suggested Means of Destruction: 

When the blank pages are filled with images 
of its owners, its power is lost. 

* The spirits of those trapped by the book must 
be freed. 

Each page must be incinerated in the fiery 
breath of a red dragon. 


Bosero the Drunkard’s 
XP Value: 8,400 GP Value: 84,000 
City of the Gods 

Bosero’s spellbook contains the following spells: 

charm person, cloudkill, conjure elemental, contin- 
ual light, detect evil, detect invisibility, detect 
magic, dimension door, dispel magic, fireball, fly, 
hold monster, hold person, knock, polymorph 
others, projected image, protection from evil, read 
magic, remove curse, stone to flesh, and wizard eye. 


Bowgentle’s Book 
XP Value: 21,600 GP Value: 216,000 
DRAGON Magazine 97 

This slim, black volume is most expertly bound 
in glossy, tooled, black leather—the best yoxen- 
hide, from the yoke-oxen, or “yoxen” of the 
plains of Amn. This has been stitched into a full- 
fitted cover encasing two slabs of slate, and 
worked on the outside into a repeating pattern of 
a human and a dragon confronting each other, 
cach spouting flame at the other. Within are 53 
sheets of the finest white vellum, all sewn toa 
spine-cord strip of black leather with spun silk 
thread, the whole being of the most delicate 
workmanship. (Several additional pages seem to 
have been torn out.) The pattern of the covers 
extends without a break over front, back, and 
spine, leaving only a lip or border around the 
edges of the tome, and an oval plate or raised area 
in the center of the front cover, which bears the 

character known as “Bowgentle’s Rune,” thus: 
Bowgentle 
of Silvery- 
moon was a 
AN wizard of gen- 
tle speech and 
manners, 
loved and 


revered in the 
s002 


1150 


1 Spellbook, Bow gentle Book — 


North and the Sword Coast cities in his day, for 
he believed that magic belonged to all, and all 
should benefit from it. Many good works were 
ascribed to his name over the years he wandered 
the Realms, and legend has rounded out his 
deeds. Bowgentle continually sought new 
spells—and he embarked on reckless ventures to 
gain them, such as the plundering of Raurgoch 
the black dragon's hoard (slaying that monster 
with the very magic found in its treasure) and the 
breaking open of the mage-king’s tomb, where 
the legendary mage, now living in lichdom, 
guarded his spellbooks as fervently as the crum- 
bling bones of his mistresses and his dogs. 

And ever did Bowgentle give of his knowledge 
to all who had the ability, and wrote out spells 
tirelessly for those who were too young, too sick, 
or yet unborn. He paid for the hospitality given 
him on his travels with spells, cast for good ends, 
and his name is yet remembered with affection 
and awe. It is often said of a gentle, shy, and well- 
favored babe that it “has Bowgentle’s eyes,” and 
an act of selfless kindness is oftentimes agreed to 
be properly “of Bowgentle's way.” 

When he grew old, Bowgentle came to the 
School of Wonder, founded some years earlier by 
the wizards Myrdon and Salasker, and wrote down 
his spells for the apprentices there, He passed on his 
way, and, when word came shortly after that of his 
death in a snowstorm in the high forests, the Mas- 
ters commanded that Bowgentle’s written spells be 
collected from the apprentices and closely-guarded 
in the library there, for all to see and use. This was 
done, the book being constructed by elven crafts- 
men, and the cover depicting a famous scene of 
Bowgentle’s youth: his fiery battle with a red 
dragon, whom he teased (and enraged) by gouting 
flame back at it, before he vanquished the beast. 

The book did not remain at the school for long, 
however—fiends slew its masters and most of the 
apprentices, and set the towers ablaze one crisp 
winter night (fiends, some whispered, summoned 
by careless or jealous and vengeful novices who 
lost control of their Tanar'ri servitors). The school 
was no more. Thieves were the first bold enough 
to venture into the smoking ruin, and one must 
have found and safely taken away Bowgentle's 
Book, for it surfaced some years later in Scor- 
nubel, identified by the sage Laertilus as among 
the treasures he appraised for Vaerum, the Master 
Thief. Vaerum, head of a local thieves’ guild, 
soon fell victim to a “gray war” (one of the oft- 


occurring skirmishes between rival guilds), and 
the book vanished. Its present fate and where- 
abouts are unknown, but it is thought by most 
sages to still exist. 

The book's contents are all spells and cantrips in 
standard form (per the rules in the PHB) set down 
one to a page, save for two unique spells. They 
appear in the following order: the cantrips clean, 
dry, and bluelight, and the spells affect normal 
Sires, hold portal, identify, mending, push, read 
magic, sleep, continual light, darkness 15’ radius, 
detect evil, detect invisibility, dispel silence 
(unique spell), ESP, forget, knock, levitate, locate 
object, magic mouth, rope trick, strength, wizard 
lock, blink, dispel magic, fireball, fly, hold person, 
infravision, Leomund § tiny hut, lightning bolt, 
protection from evil 10' radius, protection from 
normal missiles, slow, tongues, water breathing, 
Bowgentle x fleeting journey (unique spell), charm 
monster, confusion, dimension door, enchanted 
weapon, fire shield (both versions), minor globe of 
invulnerability, polymorph other, polymorph self, 
remove curse, wizard eye, Bighy x interposing 
hand, cone of cold, hold monster, passwall, and 
wall of force. The two unique spells in Bowgentles 
Rook are detailed below: 


Dispel Silence 

(Abjuration/Alteration) 

Level; 2 

Components: S. M 

Range: 0 

Casting Time: 2 

Duration: Special 

Saving Throw: None 

Area of Effect: Sphere of 10-foot-radius per 

level of the caster 

Definition: By means of a hand gesture and the 

casting of a pinch of powdered diamond into the 

air (at least 50 gp worth of the crushed gem- 

stone), the spellcaster creates a powerful dweomer 

that negates existing magical silence within the 

area of effect, and dispels any silence created by 

spell casting or magical item within the area of 

effect for one round per level of the spell caster 

after the round of casting. Thus, dispel silence 

cast by a 12th-level wizard would negate (no sav- 

ing throw allowed) any silence cast on or about 

his or her person, and prevent such silence from 

recurring for 12 consecutive rounds after casting. 

Dispel magic will in turn destroy a dispel silence 

dweomer, but silence will not return unless 
3002 


r e D ne 


1151 


2 A ˙ w —˙ Pr ˙Ä2——U— 7 . ĩ²˙²˙ . ! ͤ —⁵ͤdZœ¹ẽl - 


Spelibook, Bricks of the Spiritual Fortification 


—v een a —y— 


recast, or if of a permanent (that is, magic item 
functions) sort, The dweomer created by this spell 
is always a sphere centered upon the spellcaster, 
extending through walls and doors, around inter- 
vening objects, and so forth. 


Bowgentle’s Fleeting Journey 
(Alteration) 


Duration: Special 

Saving Throw: Special 

Area of Effect: One being 

Definition: By the use of this spell, the caster or 
another creature touched by the caster (an unwill- 
ing creature gains a saving throw to negate the 
spell) is teleported to a specific destination 
viewed and pointed to during spellcasting, 

The location may be up to 10 feet per level of 
the caster vertically and 20 feet per level of the 
caster horizontally away from the caster x or spell 
recipient's initial position. The shift in position 
takes 10 seconds, and the caster or spell recipient 
may remain at the new location for a round (or 
less, if the spellcaster wills) before being rele- 
ported back to his or her initial location. 

During the time spent in the location journeyed 
to, the caster or recipient can make physical 
attacks, move about, pick up or leave objects, 
manipulate items, or cast any spell for which 
components are at hand and that requires a round 
or less to cast. Note that it is possible for a spell 
to take effect after the caster journeys back to his 
or her initial position; this, however, cannot hap- 
pen if the spell cast has an instantancous duration 
(such as a fireball), If not made earlier, the return 
journey always occurs at the end of the round, 
regardless of either the caster’s or the recipient's 
wishes or state of consciousness (even if dead). 

No possibility of crror exists in ¢eleportation. If 
the journey is made into an area already occupied 
by a solid body (unlikely, as the destination must be 
within the caster view), or if the area of return is 
similarly blocked, the journeyer is stunned (unable 
to cast spells) and displaced into the Astral Plane. 
Note that the journey is a form of teleportation; 
neither physical nor magical barriers can stop it nor 
the return trip. and a journeyer who is pinned down, 
constricted, or otherwise physically encumbered 
will simply vanish from such constraints on the 


return trip, All that the journeyer carries (save other 
living creatures, who are simply left behind will be 
teleported with him or her, up to a maximum 
weight of 500 pounds). 

The material component of this spell is a small 
ball of rubber (which may be uncured, just as it 
comes from the tree), Note that if the destination 
selected is beyond the caster’s range, the spell 
does not work; the caster loses a point of initia- 
tive, and a second destination may be pointed at, 
if it, too, is out of range, nothing occurs, and the 
spell is wasted. 


Bricks of the Spiritual Fortification 
XP Value: 2,800 GP Value: 28,000 
Dragon Magazine 82 
Webster compiled wind wall, wall of fire, wall of 
force, wall of iron, wall of stone, prismatic wall, 

and glassteel into this large book. 


Briel’s Book of Shadows 
XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 40,000 
DraGoN Magazine 97 

This untitled volume is a large, leather bound 
folio with 21 wrinkled, dog-cared sheets of 
parchment sewn in place. It has received heavy 
(though careful) handling, and is obviously a 
workbook, full of scribbled notes and thoughts, 
rather than a formal compendium of spells. This 
untitled, ancient volume has traditionally been 
known as Briel 5 Book of Shadows, as it is thought 
to be the work of the Archmage Briel when he 
was but an apprentice under the tutelage of the 
great Aumvor the Undying (now belicved to be a 
lich whose lair is somewhere in the vast mountain 
ranges of the North). The sage Ubergast of Amn 
points out that the informal handwriting found in 
the book closely resembles that preserved in a let- 
ter in the archives of Baldur's Gate, wherein Briel 
wrote of his intention to found a school of wiz- 
ardry there, Certainly no other claimant to author- 
ship has declared himself, nor has any name been 
advanced as more than speculation by sages. 

The book's inscriptions are rambling, and the 
pages are much stained with various liquids and 
powders used as ingredients in spells, spell inks, 
and in the making of a homunculus. Its useful 
contents are as follows: 

Complete descriptions and instructions for the 
cantrips exterminate, tie, wilt, and smokepuff. 
The complete spells affect normal fires, scat- 


terspray (a unique spell), shield, and write. 
soot 


1152 


* The magical and medicinal uses of alicorns 
(unicorn horns). 

A recipe, copied from another source, for the 
making of a homunculus (see the Monstrous 
Manual accessory), 


Scatterspray 

(Alteration) 

Level: | 

Components: V, S, M 

Range: Spell focus 10-foot distance per level 
Casting Time: | 

Duration: | round 

Area of Effect: Special 


Definition: By means of this spell, the wizard 


causes any unconfined or untethered objects the 
size of a chicken or smaller, within a 10-foot, 
spherical area of effect to spray violently outward 
in all directions, as though thrown by an explosion. 
The missiles are not created by the spell; the wizard 
must employ objects at hand or on his own person. 
Typically coins, marbles, gems, dice, sling bullets, 
and the like are employed. The scatterspray plucks 
all such objects (except those actually within the 
robes, pockets, pouches, and pack of the caster) 
within the 10-foot, radial area of effect up and hurls 
them 10 feet outward in all directions. Upon reach- 
ing the limits of this thrust, the objects rebound 
back inward and ricochet about within a 20-foot 
radius, total area, for the entire round following the 
round of casting. All human-sized creatures within 
this greater (20-foot) area take Ida points of shrap- 
nel damage (save equals half damage, round 
upwards); small-sized creatures take 1d6 points 
(successful saves halving damage); and large-sized 
creatures are unharmed. 

The material components for the scatterspray 
are the missiles (at least six egg-sized or nine 
coin-sized objects are required, but the spell 
affects up to four dozen of either), and flint and 
steel or tinder-box (not consumed in spell cast- 
ing), with which a spark must be struck. The 
caster can choose the spell focus (center of the 
10-foot radius, area of effect, and 20-foot radius 
blast area) by act of will, determining direction 
and distance (the intended focal area need not be 
seen). It can be distant from the caster by 10 feet 
per experience level of the caster. The spellcaster 
is never harmed by the missiles of his or her own 
seatterspray, Other creatures protected by force- 
cubes and the like are unaffected; shield spells 
and similar one-sided defenses reduce damage 


Spellbook, Briel's Book of Shadows 


ea a 


suffered by 1 point. If a scatterspray is cast with 
insufficient missiles, nothing will occur and the 
magic is lost, Sprites, insects of all types, and 
other flying creatures with delicate wings must 
save vs. spell when caught in a scatterspray, or be 
unable to fly (wings pierced and bruised, or torn, 
and numb) for 1—4 turns; large-sized creatures 
and those with powerful wings (such as perytons 
and pseudodragons) of sturdy construction are 
immune to this effect. 


The Uses of Alicorns: Alicorns, or the horns of 
unicorns, are rare and precious things, seldom 
gained by a user of magic, so it behooves one not to 
waste or misuse them if they are acquired. Often 
the horns of other creatures will be sold or offered 
as alicorns; the powers and properties below are 
unique to alicorns, and testing will avoid deception. 

When a unicorn lives, its intact horn has strong 
magical powers, notably the ability to call upon Sil- 
verymoon (the “divine unicorn,” of the FORGOTTEN 
REALMS pantheon; sce Dragon 54) for one priest 
spell of any sort per day, something seldom done 
(some say Silvanus grants such magic). Unicorns 
cannot be coerced into such use of their horns nor 
do the horns retain this power if removed from the 
host, or if the unicorn is slain. 

Other powers do continue after the separation 
from the living beast, and these should be carefully 
noted; most importantly, they are sovereign reme- 
dies against poison, Upon direct contact with any 
poison liquid. solid, or vapor a unicornk horn 
turns from its usual ivory hue to purple, the inten- 
sity of the color (mauve through black) deepening 
according to the efficacy of the poison. (This 
effect fades in 1d4 rounds after the cessation of 
contact), Some, very rare, alicorns are naturally of 
a hue other than ivory, but they are never purple, 
and only turn that color when poison is present. 
Powdered unicorn horn, taken internally (washed 
down with water or wine) is an antidote to all 
ingested poisons, neutralizing them immediately, 
to prevent any further damage. Rubbing an enven- 
omed blade, spearhead or arrow-tip with powdered 
or whole alicorn will remove and negate the poison 
(so effectively that the process of removal itself is 
not dangerous). A unicorn horn carricd next to the 
skin confers upon any creature a +7 bonus in all 
saving throws of any kind. 

Druids have found that a faerie fire spell cast 
upon a whole alicorn or piece of alicorn lasts for 
44 rounds. The efficacy of a mending spell is 

005 


1E ee ee 


1153 


rt ee 


y SPattoook, Bright Ages 7 


increased by touching a part ot the item to be 
mended with an alicorn during casting; magical 
items can be made whole—although their 
dweomer is not restored—and shattered items 
with many fractures (such as broken earthenware 
pots or crystal flasks) can be completely restored. 
If the cantrip bluelight is cast with an alicorn in 
hand, the glow centers upon the horn, not the 
caster’s palm, the horn can be released by the 
caster, and the caster and horn separated by any 
distance without the light ſailinꝝ - until the caster 
ceases concentration. 

Other powers of alicorns are rumored, but no 
more have yet been verified. Powdered alicorn is 
known to be a possible ingredient (there are 
herbal alternatives) in making a sweet water 
potion, 


Homunculus Creation: Being A Recipe, Most 
Complete And Correct, Prepared By The Willing 
And Allied Hands Of The Grand Alchemist Of 
Neverwinter, Askrim “the Bold,” And The Wizard 
Dauntus, Seneschal of Silverymoon: The Making 
OJA Homunculus, 

First, an acidic base of water into which is 
crushed a thousand ants, and out of which is 
strained the insect remains, is prepared in a black 
iron cauldron. Secondly, the following herbs must 
be crushed and powdered together in a separate 
vessel: an acorn and a whole plant or large leaf 
each of balmony, birthwort, fennel, and ginseng. 
Thirdly, a brass brazicr must be lit, stoked with 
charcoal, and over the flames must be cast a 
handful of rose petals, incense, and a pinch of 
fine sand, 

The cauldron of acid must now be placed on 
the brazier and heated. Straightaway, ere it comes 
to the boil, the powdered herbs must be stirred 
into it (mind that a dipper or ladle of wood and 
not metal is used), and the following ingredicnts 
must also be introduced into it, in the order given: 
the whole skin of any reptile (size is unimportant, 
so long as the skin is whole), a human eye, the 
brain of a mind flayer, the wings of a bat, and the 
mouthparts or whole head of a vampiric bat. 
These may be agitated as necessary—they must 
be wholly dissolved cre the mixture comes to a 
boil. 

As the mixture begins to bubble in carnest, the 
wizard shall let fresh blood from his own body 
into a vessel by means of an incision, and one 
pint exactly must be added to the pot. 


The alchemist then must tend the mixture con- 
stantly, allowing the brazier to burn out and the 
mixture to slowly cool, When the side of the caul- 
dron is no warmer than the room, the mixture 
may be covered (tightly, with stretched and tarred 
hide sealed with wax, to keep the air out) and left 
undisturbed for ldd weeks. When it is deemed 
ready by the alchemist (by the smell of the seal, 
which should be sharply spicy), the mixture shall 
be uncovered and put once more over a brazier 
with charcoal and incense. As it heats, the wizard 
must cast a mending spell upon the fluid, a mirror 
image, and then wizard eye. He must remain 
within the presence of the cauldron, or at least 
within the future radius of control of the creature 
(10 feet), as the mixture is heated to a boil. The 
alchemist shall then stoke the fires hotter, and 
when much of the fluid is boiled away, the com- 
pleted homunculus will be revealed in the caul- 
dron. When it has cooled (the vapors from the 
cauldron passing away), the wizard must touch it 
It will then be animate, and will survive (barring 
physical attack or misfortune) until the death of 
the wizard, when it will dissolve into boiling 
vapor and pass into nothingness. If it should die 
first and the wizard survive its death, guard and 
hide its corpse well, for whatever is done to the 
carcass shall happen also to the spell caster—do 
not burn the remains unless magic to protect 
against fire are to be had. The homunculus can 
see in the darkness where the wizard cannot, 
guarding while its creator sleeps, waking the wiz- 
ard at the approach of any creature. 


t Ages 

XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 600 
Dragon Magazine 82 

After one week of study, an evil character begins 

to grow older at twice the normal rate. This effect 

lasts until a /imited wish spell is used to counter- 

act it. 


Brother Richard, the Flying Monk's 
XP Value: 6,000 GP Value: 60,000 
City of the Gods 
Brother Richards spellbook contains the follow- 
ing spells: cure light wounds, detect evil, remove 
Sear, protection from evil, find traps, silence 15' 
radius, snake charm, hold person, continual light, 
cure blindness, growth of animals, animate dead, 
protection from evil, and cure serious wounds, 


commune, and raise dead. 
$00) 


1154 


Spellbook, Caddelyn’s Workbook 


of Cabalistic Protections 
XP Value: 1,600 GP Value: 16,000 


DraGoN Magazine 82 
Krest penned protection from evil, shield, protec- 
tion from evil I radius, and protection from 
normal missiles into this rare work. 


Caddelyn’s Workbook 
XP Value: 1,200 GP Value: 12,000 
The Magister 
This slim volume is covered with sheets of pol- 
ished silver, sealed against corrosion, over slate 
sheets, and hinged with electrum about 16 sheets 
of fine parchment, all but three are blank. 

This tome was recently plundered from the tower 
of the long-ago wizard Caddelyn, by unknown 
hands, Caddelyn tower rises from a mountain 
north of The Great Glacier, and was only recently 
discovered by the famous explorer Dabron Sashen- 
star, of Baldurs Gate, Dabron’s band examined the 
book but did not take it, and continued on in their 
expedition, On their return, they camped at the 
tower again—and found the book missing. 

Caddelyn, a good wizard who is remembered 
with respect, died peacefully while on a visit to 
Waterdeep, and is entombed with other wizards 
in The City of the Dead there. 

The tome’s three written pages (the book was 
obviously incomplete at the wizard’s death) bear 


two unique spells, described below, and the com- 
plete process of creating a minor magical item, 
The spells are Caddelyn 5 catastrophe and spell 
ward; the magical item is the magemask. The 
propertics of the finished item are given under 
Mask; Dabron’s band lacked the time to copy out 
the entire process. 


Caddelyn's Catastrophe 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
Level: $ 
Components: V, 5, M 
Range: 10 feet per level 
Casting Time: 5 
Duration: | round 
Saving Throw: 
Area of Effect: 1—4 creatures 
Definition: This improved version of the fumble 
spell allows the caster to affect up to four creatures 
if desired, all of whom must be visible to the caster 
during casting, If four creatures are attacked, their 
saving throws (vs. spell) are normal; if three are 
attacked, all save at I; if two are attacked, they 
save at 2. and if only one is attacked, the save is at 
. Creatures who make their save are slowed for 
the duration of the spell; creatures who fail imme- 
diately drop all held objects, trip or stumble if run- 
ning or charging, fall if balanced on a ledge or 
climbing, and have any spellcasting ruined, Any 
missile attack launched by an affected creature will 
miss (the spell takes effect instantly), and any phys- 
ical attack will be at —2. If a weapon attack is made, 
the weapon is dropped and the attack becomes a 
bare fist strike. Dropped items may well suffer 
damage (saving throws to avoid), Target creatures 
must be within range, but need not be together; 
they may be on opposite sides of the caster. Affected 
creatures who move out of the spell range are freed 
of the spell, but they will suffer its effects again (no 
saving throw) if they reenter spell range before the 
spell expires. (Magic may be cast normally from 
outside the spell range into it.) 

The material components for this spell are a 
banana peel or melon rind and a tallow candle or 
lump of animal fat. 


Spell Ward 
(Abjuration) 
Level: 9 
Components: V. S, M 
Range: Touch 
Casting Time: | round 
s009 


r a E ͤ—łͤ!!]n!nf! 


1155 


Spellbook, Chambeeleon 


2:22 — r 


Duration: | turn per level 

Saving Throw: None 

Area of Effect: One creature 

Definition: By means of this spell, which uses as 
its material component a drop of the caster’s 
blood and a powdered diamond (of not less than 
6,000 gp initial value), the caster confers immu- 
nity on him or herself or a single other creature 
touched by the caster during casting to a single 
spell, 

The particular spell must be chosen at the time of 
casting, and the protection does not extend to dif- 
ferent spells which have similar effects, although it 
does extend to lesser versions of the same thing 
(protection against delayed blast fireball does 
extend to fireballs, for instance, but not Mel x 
minute meteors-—and not a fireball effect created 
by a limited wish or wish spell, or an illusionist’ 
shadow magic fireball), and slightly different ver- 
sions of the chosen spell as cast by other character 
classes. Immunity is total, even where no saving 
throws are normally allowed, the protected being is 
simply unaffected by the spell, as are clothing and 
objects held or carried on his or her immediate per- 
son. The spell can be an area-effect spell, but the 
individual's protection cannot be extended to 
others, even if the protected being embraces or 
shields them. The protection lasts for one turn per 
level of the caster regardless of how many times it 
is tested. A maximum of two spell wards can be in 
place on any one person at any time. 


Chambeeleon 
XP Value: 4,400 GP Value: 44,000 

DRAGON Magazine 62 
This tome is truly resplendent. Its covers are 
sheets of polished, iridescent abalone-edged and 
cornered with beaten gold; its pages are of bur- 
nished electric, into which script has been etched 
and runes, glyphs, symbols and characters are 
embossed or raised from the surface. The work is 
demonstrably waterproof, The Chanthbeeleon 
(pronounced Kam-hee-lee-on) is probably worth 
10,000 gp in materials alone, It is worth far more 
to a wizard, however, because of its contents. 

The origin of this tome is unknown, but it is cer- 
tainly of great antiquity, Many legends exist ascrib- 
ing its authorship to various sea gods and powerful 
beings, but nothing of the books whereabouts is 
verifiable until Alacer, holder of the Dolphin Throne 
an age ago, mentions it in an inventory of the sea 
elves’ court at Thunderfoam. It was borne away 


from that city at some later time, and reappears in 
the memoirs of the hero Galadaunt, who found it 
on the deck of an abandoned, drifting “ghost ship” 
which he boarded off the Emerald Isles. He sold it 
to a wizard whose name was not recorded, who we 
know to have been the tutor of one called “The 
Mad Mage,” who in turn was master to the wizard 
Arbane. It is likely that the Chambeeleon came into 
the Mad Mages possession, but it did not pass into 
the hands of Arbane, so we have only Arbane’s rec- 
ollections to rely on for its contents. The present 
location of the Chambeeleon, or even if it still 
exists, is unknown, 

Arbane said that he often read from the Cham- 
beeleon since he was trained, but was only 
allowed to scan certain pages. Many he glimpsed 
were beyond his understanding, but he remem- 
bers that the fiend who guarded the book told him 
it had 66 pages in all and none but Arbane’s 
master had ever mastered them all. 

(Arbane’s rather brief description of the fiend 
suggests that it was a succubus. There is no men- 
tion of a guardian fiend in the legends concerned 
with the book, so it is likely that the Mad Mage 
bound the fiend to guard it, perhaps only for as 
long as Arhane was allowed access to its pages) 

All of the pages Arbane studied contained 
spells. From his notes, he gives us this list: water 
breathing, fly, lightning bolt, fire shield (cold 
flame version only), ice storm, airy water, cane of 
cold, conjure elemental (see below), disintegrate, 
glassee, part water, spiritwrack, cacodemon, 
drawmij S instant summons, reverse gravity, und 
vanish. “From the Mad Mage casual comments,” 
writes Arbane, “he believes the book also contains 
the spells imprisonment and prismatic sphere, but 
at the time lacked any means to verify this.” If the 
book is entirely full of spells, and each stands 
alone on one page (as did those Arbane studied), 
then there may be as many as 50 spells in the work 
not on Arbane’s list, One suspects, however, that 
there are far fewer, and most of the unknown pages 
contain records or other writing. Only the posses- 
sor of the work knows for sure, 

Arbane mentions one important difference 
from the norm in the spells contained in the book; 
the conjure elemental spell as it is written therein 
will summon only water clementals, but these 
will be friendly to the caster and will never attack 
him or her. Such an elemental may (5% chance) 
return to its own plane before the spell has 


expired, rather than attacking, and although 
S010 


1156 


a a | 


friendly, it will act only upon the commands of 
the spellcaster, not helping independently. 

If one may trust the more doubtful source of 
religious teachings, it must be noted that the 
priesthoods of at least seven aquatic gods wor- 
shiped by various creatures claim the Cham- 
heeleon as their own, and assert that the bulk of 
its pages contain “the” record of the Creation 
associated with their deity. If this is so, none have 
proved it. 


Chief Shaman’s 
XP Value: 2,800 GP Value: 28,000 
Danger at Dunwater 
The Chief Shaman’s spellbook contains the fol- 
lowing spells: light, remove fear, cure light 
wounds, chant, resist fire, snake charm, and 
cause blindness. 


of Clouds and Fog 
XP Value: 3,200 GP Value: 32,000 
Dragon Magazine 82 
Dahlver-Nar wrote stinking cloud, fog cloud, 
cloudkill, wall of fog, death fog, and solid fog into 
this little-known spellbook. Sarelk believes that 
the last few pages contain the recipes for a potion 
of bubbles, and the torch of continual fire, 


Collapsing* 

XP Value: +1,500 GP Value: + 7,500 
The Complete Wizard's Handbook 
This book resembles an ordinary traveling spell- 
book, except that it can be folded over and over 
until it is a square | inch on each side. The book 
can be unfolded when its owner wishes to consult 
it, then folded back into its small size for casy 
carrying. 


Components and Reactions 
of Phosphorus 
XP Value: 2,400 GP Value: 24,000 
Dracos Magazine 82 
Duern penned affect normal fires, dancing lights, 
fire charm, fireball, delayed blast fireball, and 
incendiary cloud into this clemental spellbook. 


Cosmogony of Magnetic Fluids 
XP Value: 1,600 GP Value: 16,000 
DRAGON Magazine 82 
This, one of Mordenkainen’s many spellbooks, 
includes chain lightning, volley, energy drain, 
and Mordenkainen 5 disjunction. 


Spellbook, Tome of the Covenent 
of the Covenant 
XP Value: 1,600 GP Value: 16,000 


DRAGON Magazine 92 
This book is large, square, and (judging from 
Elminster’s description) approximately 2 feet on a 
side. It is fashioned of cured white elkhide 
stretched over finger-thick boards of black wood, 
and both outside covers bear a rune in the center, 
depicting four arrows meeting in a circle, thus: 
Four white vellum 
pages are scwn to the 
hide spine within. 
The tome is the cre- 
ation of the four most 
powerful (of their 
time) wizards of the 
North, who formed 
the Covenant, an 
alliance (basically neutral good) founded to 
enforce a peace between warring tribal kingdoms, 
and to build the collective power and prosperity of 
the Northlands against the coming confrontation 
with the orcs and their kin. The Covenant has long 
been inactive: Grimwald and Presper disappeared 
on a journey of exploration into other worlds than 
this; Agannazar is believed to have perished in the 
destruction of the School of Wizardry at Never- 
winter by the Red Wizards of Thay; and Illykur is 
known to have sacrificed himself in the Green 
‘Tower of Thulnath to destroy the Archlich Ruelve, 
This book was made to commemorate the found- 
ing of the Covenant, and as a source of power and a 
worship symbol for the apprentices who were 
intended to follow in the Four Founders’ footsteps 
and become new members of the pact (none did). 
Each of the Four Founders contributed one unique 
spell to the work, and cach of these spells appears 
alone on its own page, The spells appear with no 
names; they have acquired colloquial names 
through description of the book by various writers 
in the North, and by use of the spells by the original 
apprentices of the Four (and subsequently, in turn, 
by their apprentices). These apprentices, now them- 
selves powerful workers of magic, are not identi- 
fied by Elminster. The sage does say that they did 
not cooperate as their masters had, but split in dis- 
sension, one of them presumably bearing the ‘ome. 
Its present owner and whereabouts are uncertain, 
but Elminster knows the precise spells set down on 
its pages from perusing the workbooks of the Four 
and certain of their apprentices, and has consented 
to reproduce them, below: 


s 1157 À 


2 ⁰ ͤ % — mA 


~ Spellbook, Tome of the Covenant r 


Grimwald’s Greymantle 

(Necromantic) 

Level: 5 

Components: V, S, M 

Range: Touch 

Casting Time: 6 

Duration: | round per level 

Saving Throw: Negates 

Area of Effeet: One creature 

Definition: When a wizard casts this spell, a sil- 
very-gray radiance is produced about the material 
component. If the component (a bone or small 
animal skeleton) is touched to a target creature 
(successful attack roll required), as though wield- 
ing a dagger or club, the radiance leaves the com- 
ponent (which vanishes harmlessly) and expands 
to envelop the target in an aura, or mantle. This 
shimmering radiance takes effect on the round 
following the touch, and lasts for one round per 
experience level of the caster. While it is in effect, 
curative spells, healing, and regeneration of 
either natural or magical origins are not effective 
within the confines of the greymantle; thus, a 
troll could not regenerate, a ring of regeneration 
would not operate, a potion of healing or extra- 
healing would have no effect, and so forth. 

The grevmantle may be magically dispelled, 
and fades away without effect if magic resistance 
or a saving throw vs. spell (only one allowed) tri- 
umphs over it. At the expiration of the spell, cura- 
tive forces still active will take effect 
immediately—but any such powers that were 
expended upon the victim while the mantle was 
in effect are forever lost. A cure wounds ot heal 
spell, for instance, will take effect upon the recip- 
ient if the mantle expires before the victim does; 
similarly, a ring of regeneration resumes func- 
tioning properly when the mantle disappears, and 
a creature that regenerates retains the ability to 
do so. However, the victim of the mantle gets no 
benefit from a potion of healing drunk while the 
spell is in effect, and any usage of a staff of cur- 
ing on the victim is fruitless, since those types of 
magic must take effect upon their application or 
not take effect at all. In such a case, the applica- 
tion of the magic is wasted. 

If the caster does not successfully touch a tar- 
get creature in the round of casting or the round 
immediately after that, the greymantle spreads 
from the component into (and onto) the spell- 
caster and remains in effect upon the caster for 
the full duration. There is no saving throw against 


this “back fire” but a dispel magic spell may be 
successfully employed by the caster or a compan- 
ion to bring the bad effect to a halt. 

Once the spell is cast and the mantle has cov- 
ered a target, the duration and effects of the man- 
tle are not under the caster’s control, Creatures of 
any size may be affected. Note that use of the 
mantle is not basically a good act, and the spell 
must be used with due consideration of the cir- 
cumstances and nature of the target by wizards of 
good alignment. 


Agannazar’s Scorcher 
(Evocation) 

Level: 2 

Components: V, S 


Area of Effect: Special 

Definition: With this spell a wizard calls into 
existence a jet of flame which bursts from his or 
her fingertips toward a specific creature. If the 
target creature is within 70 feet of the caster, it 
suffers 3d6 pointe of damage, with no saving 
throw (assuming it is not immune to the effects of 
heat and flame), The flamejet assumes the form 
of a 2-foot-diameter cylinder of fire, up to 70 feet 
long, with the caster at one end and the target at 
the other. This jet remains in existence for two 
rounds following casting, moving as the target or 
caster move, shifting so as to always point at the 
target, even if the target creature remains, or 
passes beyond, 70 feet distant from the caster. 
Any creatures touched by the jet as it leaps 
toward the target or moves sideways following a 
moving target will suffer 2d8 points of damage 
(save vs. spell for half damage). The touch of the 
scorcher will set alight all readily flammable 
materials (such as parchment and dry clothing). It 
may well even damage sturdier objects. 


Area of Effect: Aura about caster 


1158 


n Spellbook, Tome of the Covenant r 


Definition: When /ilykur's mantle is called into 
being, the caster is surrounded by a faintly lumi- 
nescent aura following the contours (and con- 
forming to the movements) of the caster’s body. 
Spells can be cast out of this field without it hav- 
ing any effect, but spells impinging upon the 
mantle from without are affected as follows: The 
protected caster gains +3 on saving throws vs. all 
Enchantment/Charm spells, +1 on saving throws 
vs. all other spells for which there is normally a 
saving throw, and suffers only half damage when 
affected by an electricity-related spell (such as 
shocking grasp, lightning bolt). The mantle flares 
to a vivid (not blinding) white glow when the 
caster’s mind is contacted by the psionic powers 
of another being, but does not protect against any 
psionic attacks or effects. 

The material component for the spell is a nat- 
ural (not cut) crystal of gemstone. Note that a 
small familiar or pet clinging to the spellcaster— 
there must be physical contact—can be protected 
by the mantle, but no creature the caster does not 
wish to be protected can be shielded by the man- 
tle. In no case does it protect any creature 
(whether a familiar or a normal pet) larger than a 
pseudodragon 


Presper’s Moonbow 

(Evocation) 

Level: 4 

Range: Special 

Casting Time: 9 

Duration: Special 

Saving Throw: None 

Area of Effect: Special 

Components: V, S, M 

Definition: This magic is usable only under a 
night sky in which a moon is present and cloud 
conditions allow moonlight to reach the ground. 
Presper 5 moonbow causes from 1 to 4 (caster’s 
choice) glowing motes, a form of ball lightning, 
to gather above the caster's outstretched hand. 
These grow in size and intensity, spinning slowly, 
during the round that casting takes place, and at 
this time they resemble dancing lights. On the 
following round, the caster can elect to direct one 
or more of the moonmotes at a target, which must 
be within his view. Such direction is by concen- 
tration of will, requiring no speech or gesture. 
Moonmotes directed at a target will shoot off 
after it, flying up to a Movement rate of 27, and 
will pursue the target around corners, through 


obstacles (but not closed portals or the like), and 
despite confusion spells such as invisibility, mir- 
ror image, and illusions, striking at a +3 attack 
roll upon reaching the target. 

Each striking moonmote does 2d4 points of 
electrical damage (if cast as one of four), 2d6 
damage (if cast as one of three), 3d6 damage (if 
cast as one of two), or 4d6 damage (if cast as a 
solitary missile), and is considered to be magical 
for attack roll purposes. Moonmotes that miss an 
intended target.or are blocked by barriers dwindle 
harmlessly away to nothingness. 

The spellcaster can direct the motes produced 
by a moonbow at different targets in a round, and 
must “shoot” at least one per round (but may 
shoot as many as desired, time permitting) until 
all the motes are gone. Unused motes hang spin- 
ning in the air in front of the caster, within 10 
feet, and if struck by a lightning bolt or similar 
electrical discharge while thus waiting, will 
explode—doing full damage to all within 10 feet, 
including the caster. 

On the round after the first mote has been 
fired, the caster can cast another spell and direct 
any motes still left, and continue doing both so 
long as motes are left and spellcasting times per- 
mit (directing a mote requires six seconds each 
round, so spells that take one round or longer to 
cast cannot be used). Using this tactic, a caster 
with multiple moonbow spells could gather a 
waiting arsenal of many motes. If a round passes 
without the caster firing a mote at a target, all 
motes will dissipate. Note that a caster under the 
influence of a hold spell could shoot a mote at a 
target in his present field of vision; that act is a 
function of vision and intellect, not of movement. 

A mote that is deliberately struck by a creature 
or object will discharge, doing full damage to all 
within 10 feet. The mote has AC —6 for attack roll 
purposes. Metal, it must be noted, will conduct 
the full effects of a mote to anyone in contact 
with it, regardless of distance. 

Although no saving throw is allowed, note that 
creatures immune to electrical damage or without 
tangible existence on the plane of casting will 
suffer no damage from a mote. 

The material components for this spell are a 
wisp of cobweb, an amber, glass, or crystal rod, 
and a scrap of fur. 


Milo 


1159 


~ Spellbook, Creation and Modification of Matter n 


Creation and Modification of Matter 
XP Value: 1,600 GP Value: 16,000 
DRAGON Magazine 82 
Caterpillar wrote move earth, dig, telekinesis, and 

statue into this spellbook. 


Cudzu’s 
XP Value: 5,200 GP Value: 52,000 
Nightwatch in the Living City 

Cudzu’s spellbook includes the following druidic 
spells: animal friendship, animal growth, charm, 
cure light wounds, giant insect, hold animal, 
locate animal/plant, messenger, purify food and 
water, repel insects, snake charm, speak with ani- 
mal, and summon insects. 


Cursed Tome* 

GP Value: +100 
DraGoN Magazine 82 
These books can affect characters of any align- 
ment. Generally, the owner of a cursed book can 
only be freed from the curse by getting rid of the 
book itself, and this can only be accomplished by 
a remove curse spell or something stronger (/im- 
ited wish, for example). Such a spell will either 
destroy the book outright, or negate its effect 
upon the owner (or the owner's library) and per- 
mit the book to be sold or traded like any other 
book, if the owner is successful in making a deal 
acceptable to a purchaser. The DM can use typi- 
cal curses as described below or can invent spe- 
cial curses, a few examples are offered here: 


XP Value: — 


Roll Curse 

01-25 Reader is polymorphed into a monster 
of an equal level that attacks any crea- 
tures nearby. 

26-30 Reader turned to liquid and drains 
away. 

31-40 Reader and all within 20“ radius are 
teleported 200 to 1,200 miles in a ran- 
dom direction. 

41-50 Reader and all in 200 radius transported 
to another planet. plane, or continuum. 

51-75 Disease fatal to reader in 2d4 turns 
unless cured. 

76-90 Explosive runes. 

91-99 Random magical item nearby is perma- 
nently dispelled. 

00 Randomly rolled spell affects reader at 


12th level of experience. 


Daimos’s 
XP Value: 13,600 GP Value: 136,000 
Dracon Magazine 97 

This book bears neither title nor inscription. It is 
fashioned of fine, heavy parchment pages sewn 
to a waxed cord binding. The pages are stretched 
and nailed to an oaken spine, to which in turn are 
bolted covers of fine bronze, the whole covered 
with stretched silver “dragonscale.” The spell- 
book is heavy and is 3 hand-lengths broad by 4 in 
height. It is as thick as two fingers, bearing 
within 36 pages. A permanent magic mouth has 
been cast upon it; whenever the tome is first 
touched by any creature, the mouth appears on 
the front cover, and a cold, level male voice will 
speak in Common: “Put me down, or die.” There 
are presently no magical safeguards on the vol- 
ume to back up this threat, however. The book 
shows no signs of age or ill use. 

This volume first came to light in Realmslore 
some 300 winters ago, when the caravan-mastet 
Muirhar “Duskbrow,” an Easterner, crossed Anau- 
roch (The Great Desert) at the head of a caravan 67 
wagons long. The perilous crossing was made 
safely, but gnoll bands raided the caravan in 
Bleached Bones Pass. Many were slain before 
Muirhar’s guards could overcome the attackers, The 
gnoll corpses were stripped of weapons and goods 
before the caravan continued. Strapped to one such 
corpse was found a battered leather satchel, obvi- 
ously looted from an earlier victim. Inside the case 
was a note written in Common that said simply, “I 
have no further use for this or other things of this 
world. You are my most able apprentice, so it is 
yours, Use the shout only in last resort Daimos“ 

Muirhar took book and notes to the wizard 
Ulthorn of Waterdeep, who kept the tome secret 
for many years and apparently never used its 
powers until the night of his death. His appren- 
tice, Rendergallis, who studied the tome under 
Ulthorn’s tutelage, reports that Ulthorn died in a 
sorcerous duel with a vastly more powerful foe, 
the Archmage Ahrabose, but, in defeat, slew his 
enemy by bringing the Tower of Yintros down 
upon them both with a great shout. Rendergallis 
and many other young apprentices and prestidigi- 
tators of Waterdeep searched the wreckage of the 
Tower that night, seeking items of power and 
written spells. The blasted corpse of Ulthorn was 
found, with his shattered staff and emerald sigil 
ring, but the spellbook was gone. In the ashes that 


had been Ulthorn, some being had scratched in 
5020 


60 


Spellbook, Duimos 


iced ũꝛEꝶ9ß Tg! 


Common: “Daimos reclaims his own.” 

The whereabouts of the tome after that are 
uncertain, but confused tales have come to the 
northern Realms from Ankhapur far to the south, 
and from Twostars, a trails-meet and well-stop on 
the Golden Way trade road cast of the Inner Sea, 
of two separate skirmishes in which wizards have 
employed great shouts. One of these two is 
known to a sage, Thantos of Selgaunt, who states 
that she is too young to have known the spell 
before, or immediately after, the death of Ulthorn 
in Waterdeep and, thus, must have learned it 
since. Perhaps she gleaned it from another source, 
but Thantos, the aged Rendergallis, and Elminster 
all agree that the Spellbook of Daimos is the only 
known source, Who or what “Daimos” is and the 
present location, aims, and powers (or even exis- 
tence) of such a being are presently unknown. 

The last two of the spellbook’s 36 pages are 
blank, but all others bear wizard spells, as follows 
(in order of appearance): identify, magic missile, 
invisibility, levitate, web, fireball, monster sum- 
moning I (improved), slow, suggestion, confu- 
sion, fear, fire trap, polymorph self, animate 
dead, cloudkill, feeblemind, flame shroud (unique 
spell), watchware (unique spell), anti-magic 
shell, disintegrate, geas, globe of invulnerability, 
reincarnation, repulsion, Bigby 3 grasping hand, 
duodimension, power word stun, vanish, great 
shout (unique spell), incendiary cloud, mind 
blank, astral spell, gate, and imprisonment. All 
commonly known spells are in the standard form, 
save for monster summoning J. which Daimos (or 
another being) developed so the caster can, by 
effort of will, determine the type of monsters 
summoned (75% chance of success). Casting 
time is increased to a full round (the desired crea- 
tures must be mentally pictured and concentra- 
tion must be focused on that image), and the 
number of creatures that appear is still random 
(2d4). The three unique spells in the Daimos 
Spellbook are as follows: 


Flame Shroud 

(Alteration) 

Level: 5 

Components: V, S, M 

Range: 10 feet 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: Special 

Saving Throw: Special 

Area of Effect: Aura about one creature 


Definition: By means of this spell, a wizard 
causes an aura of crackling flame to come into 
being about an unwilling target. Unless ade- 
quately protected against fire, the target takes 
fiery damage, all flammable objects upon his or 
her person (including clothing or papers such as 
scrolls and spell books) must save vs. magical 
fire or be destroyed, and other creatures within 10 
feet of the target may also suffer damage, The 
flame shroud envelopes the victim and throws off 
small gouts of flame up to 10 feet distant onto 
every creature within range. Each gout causes 
1d4 points of damage to any creature it strikes, 
and may possibly endanger other flammable 
objects carried by such creatures. The target crea- 
ture is allowed a saving throw cach round against 
the flame shroud. The first save is vs. spell at A, 
if successful, the shroud will not form, the target 
is unharmed, and the spell is lost. The second 
save (on the second round) is at 3, and so on, the 
save for the Sth round being at par, that for the 
6th at +1, and continuing until a successful sav- 
ing throw is made, whereon the shroud instantly 
vanishes, and the spell is done. For each round 
the target is enveloped by a flame shroud, he or 
she suffers 2d6 hit points of fire damage. If flam- 
mable oil is carried by the creature, its damage is 
added to this if the container of oil fails its own 
saving throw. The material components for this 
spell are a pinch of saltpeter (powdered or in a 
natural substance such as dung), a small piece of 
phosphorus, and a tiny scrap of lace, cloth, or 
thick spiderweb. 


Watchware 
(Evocation) 

Level: 5 

Components: V, S, M 
Range: Touch 

Casting Time: | round 
Duration: Special 
Saving Throw: None 
Area of Effect: One item 


Definition: When watchware is cast upon an 
item, the caster is ever thereafter warned the 
moment that the item is moved from the place or 
position in which it was set after the spellcasting, 
or whenever the item is touched by any living 
creature. A watchware spell may be cast on any 
nonliving item of any size, but is usually cast 
upon a spellbook, lock, door, wand, staff, or item 


of treasure. 
s020 


1161 


1... a OO ³ ·Ü AVA ⁵˙ —ͤ—ů K 


Spellbook, Dark Ages 


| Cae ͤ w a R 


On the first occasion after completion of cast- 
ing a watchware that the item is disturbed, the 
caster even if asleep, charmed, or unconscious, 
and even if years have passed or the caster is a 
great distance or even several planes distant— 
will receive mental images of the item and its sur- 
roundings. If living creatures are within 10 feet of 
the item or have touched it, the caster will receive 
clear images of them and of their doings for one 
round per level of the caster when he or she cast 
the watchware after they disturb the item. This is 
not an ESP or a wizard eye spell; the caster hears 
nothing, knows nothing of what such creatures 
may say or think, and cannot see their surround- 
ings or gain any hint of direction of travel after 
they leave the immediate vicinity of the disturbed 
item, The caster may touch or move an item upon 
which he or she has cast a watchware without set- 
ting off the spell. Note that carth tremors and the 
like will set off the spell, even if no deliberate 
intent to take or move the item is involved. Items 
upon which a watchware was cast radiate a faint 
dweomer; if dispel magic is cast on an item under 
watchware, the watchware will immediately be 
activated, not dispelled. Note that a watchware 
works once only and is not a permanent protec- 
tion. Death of the spellcaster ends the magic, 
even if the watchware was not activated or the 
spellcaster is subsequently raised from the dead. 
The material components of this spell are a strand 
of spiderweb, a tiny brass or silver bell, and an 
eyeglass or speculum of glass or crystal, 


Great Shout 

(Evocation) 

Level: 8 

Components: V, M 

Range: Self 

Casting Time: | 

Duration: Instantancous 

Saving Throw: Special 

Area of Effect: 20- by 90-foot cone 

Definition: Unleashing a great shout instantly 
drains the caster of 2d4 hit points, which can be 
regained by rest and curative magic; a system 
shock survival roll must also be made. The caster 
releases a wave of sound of stunning force akin to 
a horn of blasting: 18 structural points of damage 
dealt in a |-foot-wide, 8-foot-long path—suffi- 
cient to smash a drawbridge, split a boulder, or 
flatten a normal cottage. All creatures in the cone 
of sound must save vs. spell; those who save are 


stunned into inactivity for one round and deaf- 
ened for two rounds, Those who fail the save are 
deafened for four rounds, stunned for two, and 
suffer 1d10 points of physical damage. All magi- 
cal and nonmagical items in the “narrow path” 
described above must save vs. crushing blow or 
be destroyed, Creatures in the “narrow path” take 
(2d10) damage if they fail to save, and Idi if 
they successfully save. In both case, victims 
recieve two rounds of stunning and four of deaf- 
ness. The material component for this spell is any 
minor item upon which a dweomer has been cast 
(or a scroll or magical item), which is held by the 
caster and consumed by the spell during casting. 
Artifacts cannot be used to power a great shout. 


Dark Ages 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 6,000 
Dracon Magazine 82 
After one week of study, a good character begins 
to grow older at twice the normal rate. This effect 
lasts until a limited wish spell is used to counter- 
act it. 


Dark Sides of the Memory 
XP value: 2,000 GP Value: 20,000 
DRAGON Magazine 82 
Mordenkainen penned this collection of spells, 
rendering a copy of banishment, Mordenkainen 5 
lucubration, ensnarement, and contingency in its 
pages. 


Deep Fears of Humanity 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 20,000 
DRAGON Magazine 82 
Hallone wrote this treatise of morale-depriving 
spells, including shour, spook, scare, fear, and 
chaos. 


Detho's Libram 
XP Value: 8.800 GP Value: 88,000 
The Magister 
A thin, red volume consisting of dyed rothe-hide 
stretched over wooden boards and bound with 
brass hoops, enclosing 22 parchment pages. It 
bears no title or mark on the exterior. 

The libram was left to the library of Pierge- 
iron's Palace in Waterdeep by Detho son of 
Navro, a mage who disappeared seven winters 
ago and doubtless met his doom in the vast 
dungeon of Undermountain. Elminster, Laeral, 
and Khelben “Blackstaff” Arunsun all perused 

5020 


. ß e 


162 


1! üb! ²˙ m ³Ü¹¹¹³² ,. ↄ ͤ ͥ ͤ I V ee 


nat am 


the book and copied the spells they wanted from 
it, ere the book was lent to the mage Peregar “the 
Invisible” to aid him in his expedition into the 
North, Peregar himself vanished in a ball of blue 
flame north of Yartar (either a spell of his own 
that went wrong, or un attack upon him by an 
unseen enemy), and his band of adventurers scat- 
tered. The libram was in Peregar’s saddicbags, not 
on his person, when he was destroyed, and is 
widely thought to have survived and fallen into 
other hands, presently unknown. 

The book s pages contain 22 spells, one per 
page, as listed below. All spells are in standard 
form unless otherwise noted. The book's spells 
arc: burning hands, catapult (a unique spell, 
detailed below), dancing lights, detect magic, 
Detho 5 delirium (unique spell, detailed below), 
enlarge, erase, featherfall, hold portal, jump, 
light, mending, push, read magic, spider climb, 
unseen servant, continual light, decastave 
(unique spell, detailed below), detect invisibility, 
ESP, flying fist (unique spell, detailed below), 
knock 


Catapult 
(Alteration) 

Level: | 
Components: V, S, M 


„ O O a O 


1163 


Spellbook, Detho'’s Libram 


Range: 140 feet 

Casting Time: | 

Duration: | round 

Saving Throw: None 

Area of Effect: One object 

Definition: By means of this magic, the caster 
causes any single, small object (one less than 
three pounds) touched to immediately flash in a 
Straight line along the casters pointing finger to 
its maximum range (when it reaches that maxi- 
mum, the object falls harmlessly straight down to 
the ground), Although this spell is sometimes 
used to move harmful objects away or transfer 
keys, coins, and the like to other beings, it is most 
often employed as an offensive weapon. If any 
being is struck by the flying object, it does what- 
ever its normal damage would be (normal sling 
stone, bullet, dart, or dagger damage, or 1d2 for 
small stones, and 1d3 for larger stones) plus | 
point due to its velocity, It strikes as a magic mis- 
sile, considering the base hit chance as equal to 
the spellcaster’s when striking directly. This spell 
can only so affect one object. If the object (the 
spell's material component) touched is heavier 
than the spell's limitations, it quivers, but does 
not fly, and the spell is lost. 


Detho’s Delirium 

(Necromantic) 

Level: | 

Components: V, S, M 

Range: Touch 

Casting Time: 2 

Duration: | round + | round per level 

Saving Throw: Negates 

Area of Effect: One creature 

Definition: The caster of this spell touches a 
being who is drugged, drunken, sleeping, or 
unconscious, While spcaking the mystic words 
and ringing a small silver or brass bell. The 
touched creature receives a saving throw vs. spell 
at 2; if the save fails, the creature begins to 
speak (a creature feigning drunkenness or uncon- 
sciousness cannot be affected by this spell). The 
affected being speaks at random, in all languages 
known fo it, and on random topics, rambling. It 
cannot hear questions and cannot be forced by 
mental or magical control to give specific 
answers—any attempt to use such control is 96% 
likely to awaken the creature. While the creature 
speaks, there is a 22% chance per round (not 


cumulative) that it will reveal names, trucnames, 
A 


S 


Spellboak, Dot Libram 


j OE — xZ—S. 


passwords, words of activation, codes, directions, 
and other useful information. Note that the 
speaker can rarely identify such fragments of 
speech for what they truly are, and hearers must 
speculate themselves on meanings. Dreams, 
rumors, jokes, and fairy tales may be mumbled 
by a speaking creature, not merely factual infor- 
mation. The spell will be broken before its expi- 
ration if the affected creature is awakened. 


Decastave 

(Evocation) 

Level: 2 

Components: V, S, M 

Range: 0 

Casting Time: 2 

Duration: | round + | round per level 

Saving Throw: None 

Area of Effect: Special 

Definition: By means of a piece of wood and the 
gestures and phrases of casting, a magic-user can 
create a temporary 10-foot stave of force with 
this spell, The material component is instantly 
consumed, and from the caster’s forefinger a 2- 
inch-radius, 10-foot-long, faintly glowing beam 
of force springs into being. It moves as the finger 
is pointed, and lasts as long as the caster wills (or 
until the spell expires, whichever occurs first), or 
until the spellcaster casts another spell. 

The decastave cannot be cut any metal which 
passes through it will cause it to harmlessly wink 
out of existence ot bent, but will support any 
weight. It also cannot be shortened; if it strikes an 
obstacle, the caster must move it, or the obstacle, 
or will it out of existence, to proceed. It cannot be 
removed from the end of the caster’s finger, 
although the caster (and other creatures) can 
grasp it. The staff can be used as a weapon, for 
do damage, by sweeping it from side to side, or 
jabbing it forwards, by movements of the castet & 
guiding finger, Normal attack rolls apply—it is 
considered a magical weapon with no pluses. 
Note that no shock or blow felt by the magical 
staff is felt by the finger, 

A creature grasping the staff must exert a total 
of 18 Strength to hamper its movements. Once 
only, if the caster wishes, a decastave can be used 
to rob a target of Ida hit points and transfer them 
to the wielder of the staff. The target must be 
touched by the end of the staff (attack roll 
required) and the caster must will the staff to 
drain energy. It will vanish in a pulse of force, 


draining Ida hp (no saving throw) and transfer- 
ring them instantly to the caster. If the caster is 
uninjured, excess hp are lost after one turn. Any 
damage incurred by the caster during that time is 
first taken from these phantom hit points; if the 
caster is at less than full hp at the end of the turn 
and phantom hit points remain, all remaining 
points are absorbed at that time as healing, any 
excess being lost. 

The excess hit points can never be transferred 
to any other creature. Phantom hit points do not 
confer any higher level or Hit Die saving throw 
bonuses on the caster. 


Components: V, S 

Range: 10 feet distant per level 

Casting Time: 2 segments 

Duration: | round per level 

Saving Throw: None 

Area of Effect: Special 

Definition: Invented by the wizard Alcimer (and 
once known as Alcimer y flying fist, ere he died 
and his apprentices all made use of it), this spell 
enables the caster to create a “fist” of force. 
Forming at the end of the round in which the spell 
is cast, the hand is invisible to all but the caster. 

It can move 120 feet per round, but it cannot 
travel more than 10 feet per level of the caster, 
away from the caster. The fist can hover in midair, 
swoop, swerve, and dart through openings as the 
caster directs, but it will disappear if the caster 
casts another spell or is rendered unconscious. 
Physical combat, speech, climbing, movement, 
and other activities on the custer s part will not 
destroy the fist. 

Although the fist can exist for one round per 
level of the caster, it can perform only three 
things. It can grab falling, floating, or levitating 
objects of hand-size or less, and 10 gp weight or 
less and carry them about for up to two rounds 
ere it drops them. Objects may be in the posses- 
sion of another creature, but the fist does not have 
the strength to tear weapons free of fastenings, or 
material components or scrolls out of a creature's 
grasp. It can overcome magnetic pulls, but can 
only hold its own against a gust of wind or other 
severe opposing air disturbance. It can push or 
slap a single creature sufficient to cause a missile 


attack to be at -I on attack rolls, a catching 
s020 


1164 


E O o e) 


a 


~ Spellbook, Exalted Book of Ethnic Humor P 


attempt by the being to be 20% more likely to fail 
than otherwise, and to delay (not ruin) spellcast- 
ing for one round. It can also attack, striking as a 
blow (not a missile, and therefore unstoppable by 
a shield or any protection from missiles magic), 
as though it was the caster (but at +2 on attack 
rolls), doing Ida points of damage. A successful 
punching attack by the fist ruins spellcasting dur- 
ing the round it strikes. 

A flying fist can be readily dispelled by a dispel 
magic cast on the fist or on its caster; cannot pen- 
etrate walls of force, anti-magic shells, or more 
powerful magical barriers. It is AC 4 (AC 7 to 
opponents who can see invisible as an ability or 
by means of temporary magic), and can be 
destroyed by any attack that deals it 5 or more 
points of damage, or any combination of attacks 
dealing it at least 5 points of damage in a single 
round (cumulative damage does not apply to the 
fist). 


Displacements and Modeling the 
Milieu 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 20,000 
DRAGON Magazine 82 
Thurl wrote this spellbook. It contains shatter, 
enlarge, mending, stone shape, and massmorph. 


Dissimulation and Obscuration 
XP Value; 3,600 GP Value: 36,000 
DRAGON Magazine 82 
rzunk wrote this spellbook, It contains blink, 
invisibility, invisibility 10° radius, improved invis- 
ibility, darkness, continual darkness, vacancy, 
avoidance, and mass invisibility. 


Doors and Passages of Parallel Worlds 
XP Value: 1,600 GP Value: 16,000 
DRAGON Magazine 82 
Penned by Lethchauntos, this spellbook contains 

hold portal, knock, jump, and wizard lock. 


Dylan Longbranch’s 
XP Value: 6,000 GP Value: 60,000 
Legacy of Blood 
Dylan’s spellbook contains the following spells: 
detect magic, magic missile, protection from evil, 
read magic, ventriloquism, ESP. invisibility, levi- 
tate, web, clairvoyance, haste, water breathing, 
dimension door, ice storm, and remove curse. 


Echo & Resonance of the Great Void 
XP Value: 2,400 GP Value: 24,000 
DRAGON Magazine 82 
Whisper Jaanis wrote and highly promoted this 
spellbook. Unfortunately, he was never able to 
sell more than a few copies. He destroyed the 
remaining 50 copies, rendering this one of the 
most rare published spellbooks in existence. It 
contains find familiar, monster summoning J. 
monster summoning Il, monster summoning 
IHI, monster summoning IV, and monster sum- 

moning V. 


Epic Saga of the Great Conjurers 
XP Value: 1,600 GP Value: 16,000 
DRAGON Magazine 82 
Mordenkainen’s spellbook contains Mor- 
denkainen’s faithful hound, conjure animals, 

monster summoning VI, and cacodaemon. 


Evolution of Arcane Will Power 
XP Value: 1,600 GP Value: 16,000 
DRAGON Magazine 82 
Tenser, a very prolific writer, compiled poly- 
morph self, polymorph other, polymorph any 
object, and Tenser x transformation into this, his 


seventh book, 


Exalted Book of Ethnic Humor 
XP Value: 250 GP Value: 1,250 
Dragon Magazine 134 

This 9 by 12 inch spellbook is leather bound and 
appears to be quite thin. It is a magical study of 
insulting comments and gestures that a jester can 
make toward all known intelligent races and crea- 
tures, The reader need merely state the race to be 
insulted and open the book to receive the infor- 
mation, A jester using this item must fluently 
speak the creature’s language (or a mutually 
known tongue) in order to properly insult it. The 
insulted creature must save vs. spell or else have a 
90% chance of being filled with magical shame, 
causing the creature to flee and hide for 2d6 
rounds. There is a 10% chance that the taunting 
enrages any listencr of the appropriate specics, 
causing it to chase the jester regardless of other 
circumstances in an attempt to attack the reader 
in hand-to-hand combat. The enraged victim 
makes all attacks and saving throws at —2 from 
his or her blind, all-consuming rage. 


$028 


165 


Spellbook, Extreme Powers of Observation 


— ——— T Pœ n 


Extreme Powers of Observation 
XP Value: 2,400 GP Value: 24,000 
DAGON Magazine 82 
Kwalish wrote this spellbook. It contains detect 
magic, detect illusion, identify, detect invisibility, 
glassee, and locate object. 


Eyes, Vision, and Arcane Sight 
XP Value: 2,800 GP Value: 28,000 
DRAGON Magazine 82 
Alphon wrote this spellbook. It contains infravi- 
sion, clairvoyance, blur, vision, blindness, wizard 
eye, and evehite, 


Fiendomicon of Iggwilv 


XP Value: 3,600 GP Value: 36,000 

The Lost Caverns of Tsojcanth 
This brass-bound book contains a treatise on the 
powerful evil creatures of the lower planes. The 
DM may include descriptive material and per- 
sonal names as appropriate. (Note that a crea- 
ture’s personal name is always kept secret, as 
these can be used for magical purposes. Such 
creatures also have a common name, which is the 
only one they will reveal to others.) In addition, 
each of the six copies known to exist contains the 
following spells: 


Priest Spells Wizard Spells 
Abjure IV Banishment VII 
Exaction VII Binding VIII 
Henley $ Digit of Disruption Dismissal V 
Dolor 
Ensnarement VI 
Torment 


The book also includes the words of the prison 
of Zagig. 


Each copy of the work has two guardians, One 
is in the immediate vicinity of the book's hiding 
place, and will immediately attack the finder of 
the fiendomicon. If the possessor survives this 
attack, a second guardian, such as a ghost, 
nycadaemon, tanar'ri or another, will pursue and 
attack the possessor of the book within 1d6 
weeks. Pursuit continues until either the posses- 
sor or the guardian is dead. If the possessor of the 
fiendomicon is killed, the guardian will find a 
new hiding place for the book. 

(DM's Note: The spells contained in the Fien- 
domicon of Iggwilv are extremely potent, and will 
greatly enhance the power of the wizard who has 
them, especially since three of these spells would 
be available only to those who have a copy of the 
book. The DM must consider carefully the effects 
of these spells on campaign balance before intro- 
ducing them to the campaign). 

Although some of these spells require the 
caster to read a prepared incantation or text aloud 
during the specified casting time, a character who 
wishes to use such a spell must still include it in 
his or her normal spell selection. Although the 
extreme length and complexity of these incanta- 
tions require a supporting text, it also requires the 
formal casting procedures to enable the caster to 
successfully complete the reading. The cost of 
failure is fearfully high. 

The special and unique spells contained in the 
grimoire ure. 


Abjure 

(Abjuration; Reversible) 
Level: 4 

Components; V, S, M 
Range: 10 feet 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: Permanent 
Saving Throw: See below 
Area of Effect: One creature 


Definition: When a priest employs this spell, he or 
5031 


EWF eae” a 


66 


F eee... a 


K a 


x Spellbook, Ficndomicon of Iggwilv 


she is attempting to expel a creature of another 
plane from the place or person it inhabits, and force 
the creature to return to its own plane. The priest 
must name the type of creature to be abjured, If the 
creature has a personal name, the priest must speak 
that as well. The creature's magic resistance, if any, 
must be checked prior to the determination of the 
success of the spell. Only if the priest manages to 
exceed the magic resistance percentage of the crea- 
ture can the spell possibly affect it. 

The priest then compares his or her level 
against the Hit Dice of the creature being abjured. 
The priest has a base 50% chance of affecting the 
creature. However, if the pricst’s level is lower 
than the creature’s Hit Dice, the base chance is 
reduced 2% for each level the priest is below the 
creature. If the priest’s level is greater than the 
creature’s Hit Dice, the base chance is increased 
5% for each level of difference. (Note: a creature 
with an addition of +4 or better to its Hit Dice is 
treated as | Hit Die higher.) 

Percentile dice are rolled, if the roll is higher 
than the one needed to abjure, the creature can 
attack the priest. However, if the creature wishes 
to return to its own plane, attack is unlikely. 

If the roll is equal to or less than the percentage 
chance needed, the creature is driven from the 
place or person inhabited and returned to its own 
plane, The creature cannot voluntarily return to 
the place or person it had previously inhabited, 
although a magically controlled creature can 
return if ordered to do so by the person control- 
ling it. 

The reversed spell, implore, entreats some 
creature from another plane to come to the priest 
casting the spell. 

The type of creature is named, and its personal 
name, if any, is spoken by the caster. The crea- 
ture x magic resistance must first be exceeded on 
a percentage roll. Then success of the spell is 
checked, in the same way as for an abjure spell. 
The success of the spell does not guarantee that 
the creature will be friendly to the caster, nor 
does the spell give the caster any control over the 
creature, 

The material components for the abjure spell 
are holy (or unholy) water, the priest's holy (or 
unholy) symbol, and some item despised by the 
creature, In reversed form, the components are 
the same, except that the last item must be one 
that the creature desires. 


Exaction 

(Enchantment/Charm) 

Level: 7 

Components: V, S, M 

Range: 10 feet 

Casting Time: | round 

Duration: Special 

Saving Throw: None 

Area of Effect: One creature 

Definition: A priest using this spell confronts a 
creature from another plane and requires of it 
some duty or quest. 

The spell will not affect creatures with align- 
ments greatly opposed to the priest s (such as good 
vs. evil or law vs, chaos), Note that a true (absolute) 
neutral priest is greatly opposed to all other align- 
ments, for the purposes of this spell. A creature 
which can be affected receives no saving throw, nor 
will magic resistance protect it. However, this spell 
does not affect deities or divine beings. 

If the creature has received a great favor in the 
past from a person of the pricst’s alignment, the 
priest can name this as a reason for service. This 
requires that the priest know the personal history of 
the creature. If no past service is known to the 
priest, he or she must pledge a valuable gift or favor 
to the creature in return for its service. In all cases, 
the reward promised by the priest must be equiva- 
lent to the service required from the creature. The 
spell then forces the creature to perform the service 
agreed upon. If the creature fails to perform the 
mission, it will suffer the penalties of the spells 
geas and quest simultaneously, until the mission is 
completed. Creatures cannot be compelled to obey 
self-destructive or suicidal commands. 

When the service demanded from the creature 
is performed, it is instantly teleported to the 
priest's location. The priest must then perform the 
service or grant the reward agreed upon. When 
the creature's reward is granted, it is immediately 
sent back to its own plane, 

If the priest reneges on the agreement, the 
creature has two options to choose from. Each is 
a part of the original spell and does not require 
magical ability or spellcasting from the creature, 
Should the agreement be broken, the creature can 
place the priest under exaction. The priest 
receives no saving throw against this effect. Oth- 
erwise, the creature can attack the priest, Should 
it choose to do this, it will be totally unaffected 
by any spells cast by the pricst. 

The material components of this spell are: the 

$031 


5 1167 ý 


JJ / A ee 


Spellbook, Fiendomicon of Iggwilv 


b= ͤ—1ß—é—— A ˙¹¹mÃ ²⁰˙ PSE 


priest x holy (or unholy) symbol, matter from the 
home plane of the creature from whom an exac- 
tion is required, and knowledge of the creature’s 
nature or past actions written on a page of parch- 
ment which is burned to seal the bargain. 


Henley’s Digit of Disruption 

(Evocation) 

Level: 7 

Components: V, S. M 

Range: 10 feet 

Casting Time: 7 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Saving Throw: See below 

Area of Effect: One creature 

Definition: This powerful spell is used against 

undead and Negative Plane creatures, When the 

spell is cast, the priest draws upon energy from the 

Positive Plane. A bolt of energy from the priest x 

fingertip strikes the target creature. An undead 

creature must save vs. spell or be instantly dis- 

rupted, completely destroyed. An undead that saves 

takes 2d8 points of damage. Creatures from the 

Negative Plane (such as shadows and wraiths) take 

6d8 points of damage, half if they save vs. spell. 
The material components of this spell are the 

priest’s holy symbol and a powdered sunstone of 

not less than 500 gp value. 


Dismissal 

(Abjuration, Reversible) 

Level: 5 

Components: V, S, M 

Range: 10 feet 

Casting Time: ! 

Duration: Permanent 

Saving Throw: Negates 

Area of Effect: One creature 

Definition: By means of this spell, the wizard 
attempts to send a creature from another plane back 
to its own plane. The creatures magic resistance, if 
any, must be overcome before the spell takes effect. 
The wizard must name the type of creature to be 
dismissed and must speak its personal name, if any. 
The level of the wizard is then compared to the Hit 
Dice of the creature. If the creature’s Hit Dice are 
higher, the difference between its Hit Dice and the 
caster's level is added to its saving throw. If the 
caster’s level is higher, the difference is subtracted 
from its saving throw. (Note: if the creature wants 
to be sent back to its own plane, there is no adjust- 
ment to its saving throw.) 


If the spell is successful, the creature is imme- 
diately whisked away, but there is a 20% chance it 
will be sent to a plane other than its own, deter- 
mined randomly. 

The reverse of this spell, beckon, attempts to 
conjure a creature from another plane. The type 
of creature, and the personal name (if any), must 
be spoken in the spell. 

Magic resistance is checked only if the crea- 
ture has no personal name. The creature's saving 
throw is determined as in the dismissal spell, If 
the creature fails its save, it is immediately trans- 
ported to the spellcaster’s location. This does not 
guarantee that the creature will be friendly to the 
spellcaster, nor does the spell caster have any 
form of control over the creature. 

The material components of the spell vary with 
the form of the spell. Items which are despised by 
the creature are used for a dismissal, Items which 
are pleasing or desirable are used for a beckon spell. 
Certain arcane books are rumored to exist that allow 
an cnhanced chance of success for this spell. 


Dolor 

(Evocation) 

Level: 5 

Components: V, S 

Range: 10 feet 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: 2 rounds 

Saving Throw: None 

Area of Effect: One creature 

Definition: By reading this spell aloud, a wizard 
attempts to force obedience from a hostile creature 
from another plane, The creature receives no saving 
throw vs. spell when cast, nor does magic resis- 
tance protect it. However, this spell has no effect on 
deities or divine beings. The spell inflicts increas- 
ingly severe pain to the creature, causing it to save 
vs. spell or obey the caster’s orders. The creature's 
save is modified by the spell’s effects. 

The spell creates unease in the creature during 
the reading of the spell, causing it to save against 
the caster’s requests at I. 

The following round the creature becomes ner- 
vous and filled with doubts, causing a -2 to the 
save against the caster’s demands. On the last 
round of effect the creature feels a dull, all- 
encompassing dolor, causing a -3 to saves ys. the 
casters commands. 

This spell is dangerous to the caster as well as the 


creature, for it is a test of mind and will. If the crea- 
031 


s 1168 8 


% Spellbook, Fiendomicon of Iggwilv y- 


ture’s Itelligence is higher than the wizard, the crea- 
ture has a chance of charming and dominating (as 
the psionic discipline) the wizard during the time the 
spell is read. It can use this attack even if it normally 
has no mental attack at all. The chance is 5% per 
point of Intelligence higher than the spell caster. If 
the creature succeeds in charming the spellcaster, it 
will punish with the wizard as its alignment requires, 
If the spellcaster is interrupted or distracted during 
the casting of the spell, the creature will automati- 
cally be able to dominate the wizard. 

The verbal component of the spel! must include 
the type of creature and its personal name, if any. 


Ensnarement 

(Conjuration/Summoning) 

Level: 6 

Components: V, S, M 

Range: 10 yards 

Casting Time; | turn 

Duration: Special 

Saving Throw: Negates 

Area of Effect: Special 

Definition: The casting of this spell attempts a 
very dangerous act—the luring of a creature from 
another plane to a previously prepared trap where 
it will be confined until it agrees to perform a 
service in exchange for freedom. 

The spell causes a gatelike opening on the 
creature's home plane. A special saving throw is 
used to determine whether the creature spots the 
trap or believes it to be a gate. To save, the crea- 
ture’s intelligence or less must be rolled on 1420, 
The roll is modified by the difference between 
the caster’s Intelligence and the creature: Intelli- 
gence, If the caster’s Intelligence is higher, the 
difference is added to the roll; if the creature's 
Intelligence is higher, the difference is subtracted. 

If the saving throw succeeds, the creature 
ignores the opening. If it fails, the creature steps 
through into a confining diagram. Should this 
spell be attempted without using a magical dia- 
gram, the creature is free to immediately attack 
the caster. 

Once the creature is confined, it can be kept for 
as long as the caster dares. Long confinement is 
dangerous, since any break in the diagram imme- 
diately frees the creature, The caster can offer 
bribes, make promises, or use threats in order to 
force one service from the captive creature. The 
DM assigns a value (0 to 6) to what the wizard 
has said to the creature. The value is subtracted 


from the creature’s Intelligence. A roll on 1d20 
equal to or less than its adjusted Intelligence 
means that it has refused to obey. A higher score 
means that it has submitted. A demand can be 
made once per day. Each day of confinement in 
the diagram reduces the creature's Intelligence by 
1, to a minimum of 3. Demands can be made 
until the creature submits, or it breaks free, or the 
caster uses spells to send it back to its own plane, 

When the creature brings the caster proof that 
the task demanded of it is completed, the creature 
will be transported instantly back to its own 
plane. However, such forced service will cause 
the creature to seek revenge on the caster at every 
opportunity. 

The material component of this spell is a magi- 
cal diagram of a type appropriate to the creature 
to be ensnared. 


Banishment 

(Abjuration/Evocation) 

Level: 7 

Components: V, S, M 

Range: 20 yards 

Casting Time: 7 

Duration: Permanent 

Saving Throw: See below 

Area of Effect: 2 levels or HD/level of caster 
Definition: A banishment spell forces a creature 
from another plane to return to its own plane. The 
spell affects a single creature or a number of crea- 
tures whose combined Hit Dice are less than twice 
the level of the caster. A banished creature cannot 
voluntarily return to the plane from which it was 
banished, but it can be called back by gate or other 
spells. The spell requires that the caster name the 
type of creature to be banished. If any of the crea- 
tures has a personal name that must also be spoken. 
The caster must also name a deity or being that is 
an enemy of the creature being banished. 

If the creature saves vs. spell, the caster will 
take 2d6 points of damage from a backlash of 
magical energy and will be stunned for 1d4 
rounds. If the creature fails its saving throw, it is 
immediately sent back to its own plane. The sav- 
ing throw can be reduced by the type of compo- 
nents used in the spell. 

The material components of the spell are sub- 
stances and items hateful to the creature being ban- 
ished, Rare items are more potent than common 
ones. Common items such as holy or unholy water, 


or powdered gems with magical properties will 
s031 


rr ee ee ee eee aS 


1169 


B... E M aa es Be, ts 4S S -o 


Spellbook, Fiendomicon of Ipgwilv 


1＋—.— 


provide a -2 modifier on the saving throw roll. Spe- 
cial items that might be used against evil creatures 
are couatl feathers, powdered unicorn horn, or hair 
from the tail of a ki-rin. Good creatures would be 
repelled by such items as vampire dust, brain mat- 
ter from a mind flayer, or the skin from a succubus’ 
wing. Neutral creatures, such as elementals, would 
be affected by items relating to neutrals of opposite 
nature, such as the essence of a fire elemental could 
be used against a water elemental. A special com- 
ponent could reduce the saving throw die roll by 
or —4, especially if the spellcaster personally 
obtains these items through adventuring. The DM 
may choose the exact special components that 
would be effective against any particular creature. 
Common and special components can be combined 
in the casting of the spell, but the saving throw dic 
roll cannot be reduced by more than 8. 

Note: This spell requires an appeal to divine or 
other powerful beings as part of its yerbal compo- 
nent. At the DM's option, a wizard can receive help 
from a patron deity if the wizard’s devotion has 
been outstanding. A deity can modify the saving 
throw die roll by an additional I to -6, depending 
on the worthiness of the wizard. However, such 
direct intervention should be extremely rare. and 
happen only if the success of the banishment is in 
the vital interests of all of the deity’s followers. 


Torment 

(Evocation-Alteration) 

Level: 7 

Components: V, S, M 

Range: 10 feet 

Casting Time: | Round 

Duration: 6 rounds 

Saving Throw: Special 

Area of Effect: One creature 

Definition: When this spell is cast, the wizard 

seeks to force submission and obedience from a 

captive otherplanar creature. The initial prepara- 

tion of this spell requires the preparation of a spe- 

cial scroll, on which is inscribed the spell itself, 

the type of creature to be affected, the creature’s 

personal name, if any, and the name of the wizard 

casting the spell. The naming of both the creature 

and the caster establishes a magical link between 

the two and is needed to lend power to the spell. 
When the spell is read, there is a 1% chance 

per point of the creature's Intelligence that it will 

control the wizard. There is a 5% chance per 

point of the creature’s Intelligence that it will gain 


control if the caster is interrupted. If the creature 
gains control, it will command the caster to step 
into the confining diagram. The creature will 
then carry the caster away to its own plane. 

If the spell is cast successfully, the wizard con- 
tinues to read from the parchment, causing 
increasing pain to the creature with cach round of 
reading. After each round of reading, the caster 
can try to force obedience from the creature. The 
creature's saving throw against the orders of the 
caster is modified by the spell’s effects. The first 
two rounds of reading cause twinges, the third 
and fourth rounds cause shooting pains, and the 
last two rounds cause aches and cramps. The 
creature saves vs. the caster’s orders as follows: 


First round —1 
Second round -2 
Third round -3 
Fourth round 4 
Fifth round -6 
Sixth round -& 


If the creature fails its saving throw during the 
reading, it has submitted and will obey the 
caster’s commands to the letter. Naturally, the 
creature feels intense hatred for the caster and 
will seek revenge at any opportunity. 

The material component of the spell is the 
scroll. The special inks needed to inscribe the 
scroll cost 1,000 gp per Hit Die of the creature to 
be affected. 


Binding 

(Enchantment/Evocation) 

Level: 8 

Components: V, S, M 

Range: 10 feet 

Casting Time: Special 

Duration: Special 

Saving Throw: Negates 

Area of Effect: One creature 

Definition: A binding spell enables the caster to 
securely imprison an otherplanar creature. The 
subject of the spell must already be confined 
within an appropriate magical diagram. The 
material components vary according to the type 
of creature being imprisoned and the type of 
binding being attempted. The duration of the 
spell depends upon the type of binding and the 
effective level of the primary spellcaster. The pri- 


mary spellcaster can have up to six assistants, 3rd 
$031 


i 1170 f 


+ Spellbook. Foundations of Secret Authority r 


level or higher, in the casting of this spell. The 
assisting wizards add their levels to that of the 
primary caster as follows: the primary caster’s 
level is increased by one-third the level of cach 
assistant of 9th level or higher. The primary 
caster’s level is increased by one for every assis- 
tant of 3rd to 8th level, 

The creature’s magic resistance (if any) is not 
effective against the spell, nor is it allowed a sav- 
ing throw if the effective level of the primary 
caster is at least twice the creature's Hit Dice. If 
the caster’s level is less than twice as high, the 
creature gets a saving throw vs. spell, modified 
by the form of binding being attempted. Forms of 
binding are: 

Chaining: The creature is confined by 
restraints that create an antipathy (as the 8th-level 
wizard spell). This affects all who approach the 
creature, except for the caster. The creature is 
chained for one year per level of the caster. 

Slumber: The creature is affected by a 
comatose sleep that lasts one year per level of the 
caster. 

Bound Slumber: This is a combination of 
chaining and slumber that lasts for one month per 
level of the caster. 

Hedged Prison: The creature is teleported 
within a magically created prison, which must 
have been prepared previously by the caster, The 
creature remains there until released by the caster 
or until the prison is broken by some outside per- 
son or power. 

Metamorphosis: The creature becomes non- 
corporeal, except for its face or head. This effect 
lasts until the spell is broken by some outside per- 
son or power. 

Minimus Containment: The creature shrinks 
to a height of 1 inch and is teleported within a 
gem that serves as a hedged prison. The effect 
lasts until the creature is freed by some outside 
person or power. 

The confinement created by the binding spell 
is in addition to that provided by the magical 
diagram. Even if the spell fails, the diagram is 
still effective against the creature. Once the spell 
has taken effect, the accidental or deliberate 
destruction of the magical diagram does not 
negate the spell. 

The saving throw against this spell is modi- 
fied by the type of binding attempted. Chaining 
has a normal save, slumber is at +1, bound 
slumber at +2, hedged prison at +3, metamor- 


phosis at +4, and minimum containment at +5, 
However, if the creature is first weakened by 
dolor or torment spells, the saving throw die roll 
is adjusted by =I for dolor, -2 for torment, or 4 
if both are used. A successful save means that 
the creature is unaffected. 

A creature under chaining, slumber, or bound 
slumber receives a normal saving throw vs. spell 
after each full year of confinement. Success 
means that the creature has broken the spell. 

The components for the spell include a contin- 
uous chanting of the spell from a scroll or Fien- 
domicon containing the spell, gestures 
appropriate for each form of binding, rare 
soporific herbs, a diamond or corundum gem of 
1,000 gp value for each Hit Dice of the creature, a 
portrait on vellum or a statuette of the creature, 
and miniature chains of precious metal (such as 
iron for tanar’ri, silver for yugoloths, and nickel 
for creatures from The Gray Waste). The exact 
material components depend on the type of crea- 
ture and its alignment, and can be chosen by the. 
DM. At the DM’s option, the exact materials 
needed can be regarded as secret, requiring 
research on the part of characters using the spell. 


Forgotten Arts of Oratory Magnetism 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 20,000 
DRAGON Magazine 82 
Penned by long-ago by the wizard, Leomund, this 
valuable manuscript contains fascinate, taunt, 
irritation, truename, and Leamund'’s lamentable 

belabourment. 


Foundations of Secret Authority 
XP Value: 1,600 GP Value: 16,000 
Dnacd˙- Magazine 82 
Deuschechen was a little-known wizard who 
spent most of his career forcing others to do his 
bidding. Lazy by nature, he had his “charges” 
adventure while he sat in a chair and felt their 
emotions and experiences without ever leaving 
the safety of his home. Unfortunately, as thieves 
ransacked Deuschechen's house one evening 
while he was astrally entranced with an adven- 
ture, the thieves slit his neck, fearing the wizard 
would catch them and enact some horrible ven- 
geance upon them. It is believed that his life force 
is still confined to the barrier of the Prime Mater- 
ial Plane, unable to venture forth to its true desti- 
nation. Deuschechen’s spellbook contains binding 


Vll. demand VIII, torment, and dismissal V. 
$033 


„„ . aa a XI ne ae 


1171 


SS ee —— ͤ˙¹! 


Spellbook. Galadaster’s Orizon 


Galadaster’s Orizon 


XP Value: 2,400 GP Value: 24,000 
DRAGON Magazine 181 

Two circular, bucklerlike cover plates of pol- 

ished electrum, 4 handwidths across and having 

rolled edges, make this tome resemble a gigantic 

coin from a distance. The cover-plates are joined 

by a spiral wire hinge. Between them, wired to 


the hinge, are six pages: circular frames of 


stretched vellum, cach bearing the runes of and 
directions for one spell. The frames are var- 
nished and smooth-carved whistlecane that 
resembles bamboo. 

Galadaster was a famous wizard of what ts 
now Amn in the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting, who 
made his name long ago by his daring explo- 
rations of the wilder lands of the Sword Coast 
North. With a party of adventuring companions, 
Galadaster fought many ores, elves, and horrific 
monsters, always returning to his isolated tower 
with gold and magical riches. Often, his compan- 
ions did not return with him 

A hundred years or more the wizard passed in 
this way, never seeming to age much, Rivals and 
would-be apprentices alike he dealt with coldly 
and efficiently. Galadaster’s hawklike face was 
seldom seen in the lands around his abode, and 
ever-more-powerful enchanted guardians 


ensured his privacy. When he encountered other 
wizards, he took what he wanted of their magic 
and mercilessly, tirelessly destroyed them, let- 
ting none escape. Then off he would go on 
another adventure 

Neighboring wizards grew ever more fearful, 
and at length began to work against Galadaster, 
poisoning the game, flora, and the very air around 
the wizard’s tower. Only in his absence the wiz- 
ards worked, patiently and stealthily. Years 
passed—as did several of the wizards, at Gal- 
adaster’s hands—and there came a time when the 
lone tower fell silent and Galadaster came forth 
no more, 

Emboldened, the wizards gathered and talked 
each other into courage enough to investigate the 
tower. They braved fiendish traps and vicious 
guardian monsters to find—Galadaster waiting 
for them, a hideously discolored and bloated lich 
Galadaster coldly set about ensuring that none of 
the wizards would leave the tower alive. As he 
slew them, the remaining wizards grew so des- 
perate that they called upon all their allies, ser- 
vants, and powers. The tower of Galadaster 
toppled amid many cxplosions, but the wizards 
perished anyway. Galadaster survived, walking 
away west to the Nelanther (Pirate Isles), where 
he is said to dwell still, ageless and terrible in hts 
power. 

The Orizon, a trifle in Galadaster’s eyes, is all 
that survived the ruin of his tower. A workbook in 
which the young Galadaster copied spells in his 
travels, it contains only six spells, as follows: spi- 
der climb, firestaff (unique spell), slumberward 
(unique spell), web, Geirdorn & grappling grasp 
(unique spell), and Morgannaver x sting (unique 
spell). The spells of spider climb and web are well 
known, but the other four spells are rare indeed 
Where Galadaster gained them is unknown; they 
may survive in the spell books of other wizards of 
the North. 

The Orizon was stolen from a wizard in Crim- 
mor some 90 winters ago. [ts present where- 
abouts are unknown. Details of the rare spells in 
the Orizon are given here, from the Bibliamagus 
of Thelonn Bedelzar of Crimmor, an apprentice 
permitted to view the work when it was held by 
the Archmage Elthong of Crimmor. 


s034 


1172 


y Spelibook, Galadaster (N y 


Firestaff 

(Evocation) 

Level: 2 

Components: V, S. M 

Range: 0 

Casting Time: 2 

Duration: 1 round per level 

Saving Throw: None 

Area of Effect: Special 

Definition: By means of this spell, a spellcaster 
can cause balls of blue Name to come into being 
at both ends of a nonmagical staff, pole, log, club, 
or tree limb. The object must be of wood and have 
two discernible ends; it is not consumed or 
altered by the spell or the spell’s flames, The wiz- 
ard cannot choose to cause only one end of the 
staff to be alight, and he or she cannot extinguish 
the flames at will; the spell must be allowed to 
expire or dispel magic must be used. 

The burning staff does 1d6 points of damage, 
plus 2d4 points flame damage, per blow (the staff 
is considered a magical weapon for deciding 
what creatures it can hit, but it has no attack 
bonuses). The staff can be wielded by creatures 
other than the caster and can ignite flammable 
materials as well as being used as a weapon. The 
material components of this spell are a piece of 
phosphorous or a fame of any sort, the wooden 
object to be used, and a pinch of iron filings. 


Slumberward 

(Abjuration) 

Level: 2 

Components: V, S 

Range: Touch 

Casting Time: 2 

Duration: 2 rounds per level 

Saving Throw: None 

Area of Effect: | creature 

Definition: This spell protects one creature 
against drowsiness and similar conditions caused 
by magic. Unconsciousness, stunning (however 
caused), and all forms of sleep cannot occur or 
have any effect upon the protected being, who 
also gains a +! bonus on saving throws against 
charm, suggestion, command, hold, and similar 
magic of the will and natural magical abilities. 
The caster may use this spell on himself or 
others. 


Geirdorn’s Grappling Grasp 

(Evocation) 

Level: 4 

Components: V, S, M 

Range: 10 feet per level 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: 2 rounds per level 

Saving Throw: None 

Area of Effect: Special 

Definition: This magic brings into being a hand- 
shaped force, invisible to all but the caster, that 
can be used to grapple objects and even certain 
spell effects. Only the caster can direct the hand, 
which is twice the size of the caster’s own lefi 
hand, Directing Geirdorn ¥ grappling grasp pre- 
cludes spell-casting; if such is undertaken, the 
magical hand merely hangs motionless until con- 
centrated upon again or until the spell expires 
(control can be assumed and neglected several 
times, if desired), This hand can move through 
the air as rapidly as the caster normally moves. 
The hand can grip but not strike: it cannot even 
touch living matter, but it can grasp parapets, 
locks, keys, levers, weapons, etc. with the same 
strength as the caster. Small objects can be car- 
ried about, The hand cannot manipulate things 
with any delicacy, but it can slow or prevent their 
movement for one round, Weapons cannot be 
wiclded by the spell force, but the hand can act 
against any nonliving enemy x weapon so as to 
cause a -2 THACO penalty. 

The primary use of this spell is to combat the 
various Bigby hand spells, This spell can lessen 
the damage dealt by the Bighy hund spells by 
1d4+1 hit points. If a Bigby X hand spell causes 
no damage, Geirdorn x grappling grasp will keep 
the former from taking effect for one round, The 
material component of this spell is a glove or a 
human finger bone. 


Morgannaver's Sting 

(Necromancy) 

Level: 5 

Components: V, S 

Range: Touch 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: Permanent 

Saving Throw: Special 

Area of Effect: Special 

Definition: This spell enables the caster to drain 

3d4 hit points from any single creature. The crea- 

ture must be touched within three rounds of the 
s04 


e rr 


1173 


~ Spelibook, Guxzette of the Norse Climates r 


spell being cast (a successful attack roll is 
required), or the spell is lost If the caster begins 
casting another spell before touching another 
being, the spell will also be lost. The first touched 
being is affected, regardless of the caster’s inten- 
tions. The touched victim makes a save vs. spell. If 
the saving throw is successful, the loss is reduced 
to 1d6*1, and the caster gains no points. If the save 
fails, the caster gains the 3d4 hit points drained 
from the victim as healing energy, and the victim is 
wreaked by intense pain for 1d3 rounds. The vic- 
tim suffers a penalty of +2 on Armor Class and 
attack rolls during this time, and is unable to cast 
spells or perform other activities requiring concen- 
tration. Morgannaver y sting does not confer extra 
hit points upon the caster; if the caster is at full hit 
points or becomes fully healed, excess hit points 
drained by the spell are simply lost and cannot be 
applied to damage suffered on the following 
round. A victim can regain lost hit points by nor- 
mal rest or mundane or magical curative means. 


Gazette of the Norse Climates 
XP Value: 2,400 GP Value: 24,000 
Dagon Magazine 82 
Otiluke wrote the spells gust of wind, ice storm, 
control weather, Otiluke & freezing sphere, cone 
of cold, and wall of ice into this work. 


Glandar’s Grimoire 

XP Value: 1,600 GP Value: 16,000 

Dracon Magazine 164 
This book is only a burned remnant; its original, 
undamaged appearance is unknown. All that sur- 
vives is a front cover of black dragon hide 
stretched over a sheet of slate and stitched with 
wire, and five scorched, fire-browned pages that 
it protected. The rest of the book—its back cover 
and an unknown number of additional pages—is 
lost, probably destroyed by flames. 

The cover and surviving pages have been kept 
together over the years by storage in a flat octago- 
nal coffer of ornately carved ivory. The coffer has a 
clasp and hinges of electrum, and its cover is 
worked in a stylized relief design of waves, clouds, 
trees, and seabirds, with a lateen-rigged ship visi- 
ble far off on the waves. The coffer is worth 150 gp 
or so for materials, plus a subjective amount 
(50-500 gp) for the workmanship, believed to be 
that of an artisan of Calimport or Tashluta. A shal- 
low secret compartment on the underside of the 
coffer is known to have held (at various times) 


lockpicks, keys, amulets, needles, and the like. 

The Glandar was a wizard-king of long ago, 
whose lands were somewhere near the Vilhon 
Reach. “The Glandar” is actually a title; his real 
name has been forgotten. It is known that the 
Glandar was an intelligent, powerful wizard 
whose Art was skillful enough to create aerial 
craft even in those dim days, 
and whose small kingdom boasted irrigation, 
medicine, and Art far more advanced than those 
of neighboring lands. 

The Glandar was also a cruel tyrant who per- 
mitted no other being beside himself to study Art 
in his lunds und this policy proved to be his 
undoing. He was alone when attacked by a group 
of young, ambitious wizards of Unther. Although 
he slew many of them, he was overwhelmed and 
utterly destroyed. His grimoire (so named because 
its first page bears only the inscription: The Gri- 
moire Most Perilous of The Immortal Glandar, 
Lord of the Undying. Scepter of Glandara) was 
seized by his slayers, who battled each other for 
the spoils, wreaking much havoc in the fallen 
wizard's realm of Glandara. (“Scepter™ was the 
title the Glandar ruled by; “Lord of the Undying” 
is believed to refer to his mastery of the undead, 
through dark art.) The other four surviving pages 
of the Grimoire contain a single spell each—four 
unique spells, all described below. 


Fellblade 

(Abjuration/Evocation/Necromancy) 

Level: 5 

Components: V, S, M 

Range: 0 

Casting Time: | round 

Duration: | turn per level 

Saving Throw: None 

Area of Effect: Special 

Definition: The casting of this spell brings into 
being a smoky-gray, blade-shaped bar of force 
(up to 4 feet in length) in the caster's grip. A fèll- 
blade passes into nothingness in an instant if it 
leaves the caster's hand (it cannot be sheathed to 
be wielded again later): Its use therefore pre- 
cludes spelloasting. It also vanishes instantly if 
the caster dies or becomes unconscious or feeble- 
minded, but it can otherwise be wielded for one 
strike per round (normal attack roll required). The 
feliblade 5 strike can have one of three fell effects. 
One function must be selected by the caster prior 


to attacking. 
sota 


OA a aaa 


1174 


Spellbook, Glandar's Grimoire 


S eee mE 


The fellblade can do 2d4 points of damage, 
functioning as a weapon able to hit all crea- 
tures (except those immune to low level magi- 
cal weapons) at normal chances. 

The fellblade can drain from any creature it 
hits the exact hit points necessary to heal all 
current damage to the sword-wielder (up to the 
maximum possessed by the target). 

The touch of the blade can do | point of physi- 
cal damage and bestow curse (as the reverse 
form of the priest spell remove curse). This 
power can be used only three times in every 
111 turns (18% hours) by any spellcaster 
(regardless of how many fellblade spells that 
being casts). 

The material components of this spell are a 
drop of the caster’s blood, a piece (any size) of 
cold iron, and a drop of unholy water (that the 
caster need not touch directly), 


Melisander’s Harp 
(Alteration) 
Level: 5 
Components: V, 5, M 
Range: 10 feet per level 
Casting Time: 5 
Duration: | round per level 
Saving Throw: Neg. 
Area of Effect: Special 
Definition: This spell is named for its creator, the 
elven wizard and harper hero known to Realm- 
slore as “The Last Lonely Harpist” It brings into 
being the spectral, shadowy illusion of a harp that 
plays by itself, floating in midair. The harp can be 
up to 10 feet per level distant from the caster, and 
while within range can be moved at a rate of up to 
10 feet per round according to the caster’s will, 
The harp's playing can be turned on and off 
instantly and repeatedly by the silent will of the 
caster, but this does not affect spell duration, 
While the harp is playing, all creatures within 20 
fect of it are affected as if by a slow spell (no saving 
throw). All sound is hushed (but not negated), 
available light dims, and all creatures of 4+4 HD or 
less within 40 feet must make a saving throw vs. 
spell or be affected as if by a sleep spell. All crea- 
tures and objects within 60 feet of a Melisander 5 
harp are also affected as if by a feather fall spell 
(no saving throw) while the harp is playing. 
A Melisander’s harp is unaffected by dispel 
magic or silence spells. A limited wish or stronger 
spell is required to destroy such a harp. The pow- 


ers of a harp cannot pass through magical barri- 
ers (such as a wall of force), and a spellcaster can- 
not cause a harp to come into being beyond or to 
move to the other side of such a barrier, 

The material components of this spell are a sil- 
ver harp-string and at least three tears (the tears 
of an elf, a maiden who sings, a harpist or other 
musician, or the caster; tears from different indi- 
viduals may be combined in the casting), 


Disruption 

(Alteration/Necromancy) 

Level: 9 

Components: V, S 

Range: 10 feet per level 

Casting Time: 3 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Saving Throw: Special 

Area of Effect: 40-foot-radius sphere 
Definition: This powerful spell causes undead 
and other magically animated creatures (such as 
golems) to be utterly destroyed. Summoned, 
enchanted (controlled by magical means), and 
charmed creatures are instantly freed from any 
controls upon them. Any ongoing spell casting in 
the area of effect is ruined (magical item effects 
are delayed for a round but are not otherwise 
affected; artifact powers are unaffected). 

All effects of a disruption occur only within a 
globe of 40-foot-radius. The range of the spell 
refers to how distant the center of the globe may be 
from the caster. The spell takes effect instantly and 
then is gone; its area of effect cannot be moved. 

The spell affects creatures within the area of 
effect who are of only three specific sorts: 
undead, magically created or animated creatures, 
and magically controlled creatures. Target crea- 
tures that have fewer than 6-HD are automatically 
affected. Any creature of this sort who has 6 HD 
or more must save vs. spell to avoid being affected 
by a disruption spell (even if it wants to be 
affected). If the save succeeds, the creature 
escapes disruption but is stunned for 1d2 rounds. 


Immunity to Undeath 
(Abjuration/Alteration/Necromancy) 
Level: 9 

Components: V, S, M 

Range: 0 

Casting Time: | round 

Duration: | round per level 

Saving Throw: None 


2 es 


1175 


I O .. 


Spellbook, Glanvyl’s Workbook 


. ͤ— — = = 


Area of Effect: 40. foot- radius sphere 
Definition: This spell creates a globe that moves 
with and is centered on the caster. The perimeter 
of this protected area glows with a very faint 
blue-white radiance, visible only in gloomy or 
dark surroundings. All creatures can freely pass 
into and out of the globe. 

Within the globe, all beings are rendered 
immune to energy-draining attacks, Strength- 
draining attacks, mental control (even of one 
undead by another), and all undead powers that 
cause fear, paralyzation, aging, or death (such as 
the wail of a banshee), 

A creature leaving the globe becomes normally 
vulnerable to undead attacks but can regain protec- 
tion by reentering the globe any number of times 
until the spell expires. A being on the perimeter 
remains completely protected as long as any part 
of its body is in contact with the globe. Undead 
can freely enter or leave the globe, and their physi- 
cal attacks do normal physical damage. Undead 
can be turned with the usual chances within the 
globe. Undead cannot change form within the 
globe (a vampire cannot turn from gaseous to solid 
form or vice versa), nor can undead be animated 
by any creature or means within the globe. Shad- 
ows and other hard-to-discern undead are clearly 
outlined at all times while within the globe and are 
rendered vulnerable to all weapons. 

The caster cannot end the spell effects before 
the spell expires. Only dispel magic spell can 
destroy the globe. Otherwise, spellcasting may be 
freely undertaken within the globe, by the caster of 
the immunity spell or by others, The material com- 
ponents of this spell are a drop of the caster’s blood, 
a seed from any plant, and a drop of holy water. 


Glanvyl’s Workbook 
XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 40,000 
DRAGON Magazine 100 

Glanvyl $ workbook is a small (1 handspan in height, 
7 fingers wide, and 2 thick) volume constructed 
from two leather-covered boards held together by 
brass triangular- head nails, through a central spine of 
heavy hide to which are sewn a dozen parchment 
sheets. The outside front cover bears a personal rune, 
thus: 

Beneath it, an inscription 

in Common: “Glanvyl— 

his Workbook.” Both 

rune and inscription are 

burned into the leather, 


and the grooves filled with molten copper, which 
has hardened into rainbow-scarred, predominantly 
orange metal traceries. 

Glanvy! is an unknown magic-user who assem- 
bled this workbook—probably under the tutelage 
of one or more wizards of greater power—in the 
caravan-crossroads city of Scornubel some 300 
years ago. It was hidden in a chest of silk gowns, 
behind a loose stone, in a cellar wall of a house 
owned by the merchant Pentle, and before him by 
the illusionist and adventurer Alkunda Gar. After 
Pentle’s house was destroyed by a fire, one of the 
rebuilders found the book and took it with stealth 
to the sage Bendulphin, who gave him 500 pieces 
of gold for it. 

Bendulphin died of natural causes, shortly 
after that, and his son Tresk took the Workbook to 
Waterdeep, where he sold it to a conjurer, one 
Braszetor. This new owner disappeared shortly 
after that, and his rooms were rifled by the Master 
Thief Nighteye—or someone else who dared to 
use his mark. The whereabouts of the Workbook 
at present are unknown; Nightcye has probably 
traded or sold it, but he could have done cither of 
these things with almost anyone, anywhere. 

From Bendulphin’s notes, we learn that the 
workbook's 12 pages bear the following spells 
and writings: the unique cantrips horn, listen, and 
scorch (all described hereafter), set forth one to a 
page, and the spells write, detect magic, Leo- 
mund & trap, and Nystul s magic aura, one to a 
page, in the order given. These are followed by a 
page of notes on the intensities and hues of vari- 
ous dweomers viewed by detect magic (confused 
and subjective—of little practical usc), and then a 
unique druid spell, smoke ghost (presumably 
copied by Glanvy! through use of a write spell, 
and then found to be an untranslatable druidic 
prayer—or perhaps never identified by him at 
all). Particulars of this spell are given below. The 
last two pages of the workbook contain spell-ink 
formulae for writing the spells haste and light- 
ning bolt, respectively (these are also reproduced 
below), 


Horn 

(Evocation) 

Area of Effect: Special 

Casting Time: Special 

Definition: A haunting-sound Aorn cantrip 
causes the sound of a nonexistent horn or trumpet 


being winded to be heard within 20 feet (60 feet 
£037 


1176 


Spellhook, Glamvyl’s Workhook 


— — . . (—j— 


if loud). The pitch, volume, apparent distance 
(echo and muffling), and length of note (only a 
single call is permitted) are all controllable by the 
caster. The caster faintly or inaudibly hums a tone 
to set the pitch, and then opens his or her mouth 
into an O-shape while cupping the fingers of one 
hand over it. The trumpet call will last as long as 
the mouth is open in an O. The volume and 
steadiness of the note are controlled by the fin- 
gers (which flare open to increase volume, and 
pinch shut to mute it) and can be shaken to give a 
tremulous note A caster practiced in the use of 
this cantrip can imitate horn blasts perfectly. 


Listen 

(Alteration) 

Area of Effect: | creature 

Casting Time: | 

Definition: A person-affecting listen cantrip 
enables the caster to attract the attention of a target 
creature within 60 feet. The cantrip is activated by 
the caster’s pointing at the target and then at himself, 
while simultaneously saying, “Ahem.” The target 
will then be alerted to the message subsequently 
(beginning the round of the casting) spoken by the 
caster—nernss a wide street or a crowded room. The 
cantrip does not act as a message spell; there must 
be no barriers to sound between caster and target, 
and the cantrip does not improve the target% hearing 
or the volume of the casters voice—nor does it cap- 
ture the target's full concentration, so it will not ruin 
or delay spelicasting. If the message is spoken in a 
language not understood by the target, the cantrip 
does not translate it. The cantrip is ideal for alerting 
a friend to the presence of the caster. A Jisten cantrip 
is never cast upon the wrong target due to move- 
ment during the caster’s pointing, the caster view 
of the target determines the target. 


Scorch 

(Alteration) 

Area of Effect: | object 

Casting Time: | 

Definition: This reversed cantrip, despite its 
name, creates neither flame nor heat. Instead, by 
magically exciting the molecules of any flamma- 
ble nonliving object (of up to 10 pounds in 
weight), it causes the object to char without 
noise, smell, or smoke. The caster must touch the 
object (attack roll required if another creature is 
attempting to protect the object or keep the caster 
from it), and the object is allowed a saving throw 


vs. magical fire. If the save fails, the object is 
consumed. This cantrip will readily destroy magi- 
cal writings such as spellbooks and scrolls. The 
verbal component ix a hissing noise; the somatic 
component is merely touching the object to be 
affected. 


Smoke Ghost 

(Alteration) 

Level: 4 

Range: 10 feet per level 

Duration: | round per level 

Area of Effect: Special 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 4 

Saving Throw: 

Definition: By means of a pinch of dust and 
mistletoe, cast into an existing fire ot cloud of 
smoke (of magical or natural origin), a druid can 
affect smoke, drawing it into a wraithlike cowled 
form which will fly or glide up to 140 feet per 
round in the direction he or she wishes. The smoke 
ghost is not a living creature or sentient force, and 
cannot wear clothing, carry things, or can be made 
to speak. It is merely an apparition with one attack 
ability: it can envelop an opponent and suffocate it 
with thick, choking smoke and ash. 

This causes | point of damage per round the vic- 
tim is within the ghost (the druid can cause the 
smoke ghost to move with an opponent) and blinds 
the victim so that all attacks are at -2 on attack 
rolls. Spelicasting and even normal speech is 
impossible for the victim (violent retchhing and 
coughing will occur when these are tried). The vic- 
tim is rendered unconscious through suffocation 
after 1d6+3 successive rounds of envelopment, 

A successful saving throw vs, breath weapon 
must be made cuch time a creature is enveloped, 
even if the same creature has escaped from within 
the ghost once or several times before); reduces 
the victim's attacks to -1 and damage to -I point 
at the end of cach two successive rounds of envel- 
opment (no damage for lesser time periods, or 
fractions). This means that suffocation occurs at 
the end of nine successive rounds of envelopment. 
Creatures who make a successful saving throw vs. 
spell can manage to utter item command words, 
power words, or cast some other spells and cantrips 
that require only a single spoken word; doing so 
usually wracks them with uncontrollable coughing 
fits for the following round. A smoke ghost is a 
cloud of thick, billowing gray smoke approxi- 

n 


1177 


Spellbook, Glyph Books 


nn... ̃²˙ . EE O —ieÜ 


matcly 9 fect high by 2 fect in diameter, and cannot 
achieve a greater stable volume, but its precise 
form is variable, in accordance with the caster’s 
wishes. A smoke ghost can rise up into the air 10 
feet per level of the druid or be made to sink to the 
ground, flowing along the earth like some sort of 
living blanket, and can swoop and maneuver 
through cracks and crevices precisely as the druid 
wills. It can shift into a globe-form or wall-form in 
one-quarter round. A druid who cannot see his or 
her smoke ghost cannot direct it, nor can a druid 
whose concentration is turned elsewhere (such as 
casting another spell) do so. In both cases, the 
smoke ghost will hang motionlessly until it is dis- 
pelled or the spell expires—a ghost that reaches 
the caster’s maximum range will also stop and 
remain in place until disappearing or until directed 
elsewhere by the caster. The caster can will the 
ghost to disappear into nothingness at any time 
(which takes one-half round). It can also be 
destroyed by a gust of wind, dispel magic, or 
strong natural winds. 


Haste Ink Preparation 

ounce giant squid sepia 

large, fine diamond, powdered 

large blue sapphire, powdered 

drops of lemming blood 

pegasus heart, whole 

drops of cheetah blood (or 2 drops of 

baku blood) 

2 birthwort leaves 

3 foxglove flowers, intact, and 6 leaves 

4 drops holy water (or 1 drop of a potion of 
speed) 

2 drops quicksilver (mercury) 

6 drops human blood 


3 A= = = 


Crush the birthwort and foxglove, and sprinkle 
into a crucible containing the liquid sepia, lem- 
ming blood, cheetah blood, and holy water. Stir 
well, and place over a well-established fire. 
Immerse the pegasus heart in crucible and heat 
mixture steadily to boiling, stirring occasionally, 
The heart will dissolve slowly; when it is gone, 
add the powdered gems, and remove from heat, 
allowing the crucible to cool undisturbed. When 
cool, add the quicksilver; do not stir. Cover, keep 
in a dark place for at least four days and nights, 
and then uncover under the light of the moon 
(which must be waxing or full). Decant into a 
flask or vial, add human blood, shake well. 


„ !!! ee . 


Lightning Bolt Ink Preparation 
l ounce giant octopus ink 
l ounce crushed amber (may be several 
gemstones or fragments; a honey-orange 
color is best) 
l large blue sapphire, powdered 
l ounce powdered copper—pure, not sul- 
fate (or 1 ounce powdered gold) 
l volt tail, intact 
6 or more drops volt blood (or 12 or more 
drops electric eel ichor) 
6 ounces or more umpleby flesh 
water 
metal rod (ferrous metal, any type) 


Boil the umpleby flesh and volt tail in a copper ves- 
sel, until the liquid has boiled away, Remove from 
heat and add the giant octopus ink and powdered 
copper, gemstones, stirring with the rod of ferrous 
metal. Pour into a stone bow! or depression and add 
the volt blood, a drop at a time. Leave an end of the 
rod in the mixture. Lightning must then be induced 
to strike the rod; lightning of a natural storm is best, 
although magic such as lightning bolt, call light- 
ning, and control weather-induced storms will do. 
Electrical charges of smaller magnitude (such as 
those produced by an umpleby, an electric eel, or a 
shocking grasp spell) can also be used, but these 
must be applied repeatedly; once a night for six 
successive nights, (A combination of these sources 
may be employed.) After that, let stand. When the 
mixture turns blue, it is ready for use. 


Glyph 
XP Value: 400/glyph GP Value: 4,000/glyph 
DRAGON Magazine 50 

Glyph books give only the names of certain 
glyphs and their functions. If magical, they would 
permit a priest to thereafter cast that glyph. If 
merely records kept by another priest, they would 
at least impart the name of the g/yph and its 
effect. In no case would they permit a priest to 
cast a spell of opposite alignment or beyond his 
or her level. 


Great Paravisual Emanations 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 20,000 
Dracon Magazine 82 
The incredible Nystul, the author of over 15 
spellbooks, penned his own versions of shadow 
magic and demishadow magic, as well as Nystul $ 


magic aura, shades, and Leumund x trap. 
3039 


1178 


Hand of Helm 
XP Value: 10,800 GP Value: 108,000 
DRAGON Magazine 164 

This book is 6 handwidths across by 12 hand- 
widths tall and is fashioned of sheets of polished 
electrum, The pages are stamped and graven with 
the runes and glyphs of prayers (priest spells), one 
prayer per page. Each page is linked by two bind- 
ing rings. The rings are welded to inch-thick steel 
covers worked to resemble overlapping, riveted 
armor plates radiating outward from a single, large 
staring cyc (the badge of Helm, god of guardians), 

The tome is heavy (30 pounds) and is custom- 
arily wrapped in turquoise-colored velvet and 
borne about upon an upturned shield slung 
between two pikes and carried on the shoulders 
of four priests of Helm. 

The origins of the hand of Helm (both the book 
and the reason for the name it bears) are lost in the 
mists of time. This volume was used by the travel- 
ing priest Helbrace “Stormhammer™ Orthorn in the 
early days of human settlement of the North. It 
served to guide the prayers of the acolytes and 
lesser brothers in Helbrace’s service. Helbrace was 
crippled in body and mind at his greatest victory, 
the destruction of the illithid-led ore horde, known 
to bards as the Everhorde, at the battle of Firetears 
in the year 612 (Northreckoning). He was taken to 
Neverwinter, where he lived out the last of his days 
in peaceful idleness, his mind clouded and wander- 
ing. The Hand of Helm disappeared during the bat- 
tle; none knows if Helbrace gave it to someone, hid 
it, or lost it to misadventure or a foc. Its present 
whereabouts are unknown. Many priests of Helm 
read from its pages when Helbrace was active and 
were free to copy what they needed from it, 

The Hand of Helm contains 27 spells, one spell 
per page, as follows: bless, command, cure light 
wounds, detect evil, detect magic, light, protection 
from evil, remove fear, resist fire, resist cold, detect 
charm, hold person, know alignment, continual 
light, cure blindness or deafness, dispel magic, 
exaltation (unique spell), forceward (unique spell), 
glyph of warding, mace of Odo (unique spell), 
remove curse, speak with dead, abjure, detect lie, 
neutralize poison, protection from evil 10° radius, 
seeking sword (unique spell), and tongues, 


Exaltation 
(Abjuration/Conjuration/Summoning) 
Level: 3 

Components: V, S, M 


Spellbook, Hand of Helm 


——— aaa 4 


Range: Touch 

Casting Time: | round 

Duration: | round per level 

Saving Throw: Special 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 

Definition: This spel! enables a priest to aid and 
protect any one other being. By touch, the caster 
removes the effects of fear, sleep, feebleminded- 
ness, hunger, pain, nausea, unconsciousness, 
intoxication, and insanity from the spell recipient. 
The recipient is protected against spells and other 
attacks that cause these effects for the duration of 
the spell. Such effects ure negated, not postponed 
until the spell expires. When this spell is cast on a 
being of a different alignment and faith than the 
caster, the recipient makes a saving throw vs. spell 
(even if willing). If the save is successful, the spell 
is lost and has no effect. If the spell recipient is of 
the same alignment as the priest but of a different 
faith, the saving throw is at A. If the spell is suc- 
cessful, the exalted recipient receives a +1 bonus 
to morale reactions, and attacks. If the spell recip- 
ient worships the same deity as the caster but is of 
another alignment, the saving throw is at —6; a 
successfully exalted recipient gets a +1 morale 
bonus. A recipient of the same faith and alignment 
as the caster needs no saving throw, gets a +2 
morale bonus for the spell duration, and (if the 
priest desires) will radiate a white, blue-white, or 
amber faerie fire radiance for the duration of the 
spell (if chosen, the radiance is evoked immedi- 
ately and cannot be ended before the spell 
expires). A priest cannot cast this spell upon him 
or herself. The material components are a flask of 
holy water and a powdered sapphire or diamond 
of at least 1,000 gp in value. 


Forceward 

(Abjuration) 

Level: 3 

Components: V, S. M 

Range: Touch 

Casting Time: | round 

Duration: | round per level 

Saving Throw: Special 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 

Definition: By means of a string of gems, rock 

crystals, or glass beads, and his or her holy sym- 

bol, a priest can call into being a forceward, The 

air within this spherical area of protection glows 

faintly; it is barely visible in full sunlight but 

clearly lit in darkness. All creatures except those 
sou 


z 1179 — 


Spellbook, History of Evil Mages and Apprentices 


— — —— 


touched or named by the priest in the spellcasting 
must make a saving throw vs. spell or be forced 
away from the caster (for 10 fect per level of the 
caster), withdrawing immediately, Warded crea- 
tures must remain outside the protected area for 
the spell duration unless they save vs. spell at -3 
to successfully break into the warded area (one 
save per round for cach being attempting to 
enter). Any creature breaking through the force- 
ward may move and act freely but cannot confer 
freedom from the ward to others, even by attempt- 
ing to drag them along. 

Any creature may freely leave the warded area 
but must successfully save to reenter, even if orig- 
inally named as protected or if successful carlier 
in breaching the ward, Missiles and spells may be 
launched freely into and out of the warded area, 
The forceward ends instantly if the casting priest 
leaves its confines, is slain or rendered uncon- 
scious, or wills the ward out of existence, The 
caster may engage in spellcasting without affect- 
ing a forceward; continuous concentration is not 
required to maintain it. A dispel magic spell 


destroys a forceward instantly. 


Mace of Odo 

(Evocation) 

Level: 3 

Components; V, S, M 

Range: 0 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: 1-4 rounds 

Saving Throw: Special 

Area of Effect: Special 

Definition: By means of a stone, a piece of 
wood, and two drops of holy water, this spell 
enables a priest to create a magical mace, A mace 
of Odo is actually a mace-shaped construct of 
force, It is translucent but glows bright white (its 
radiance equal in effects to a light spell), The 
mace can be wielded immediately when casting 
is complete, or it can be held for up to three 
rounds, All spells cast at the bearer of a mace of 
Odo are absorbed harmlessly by the mace (arca- 
effect spells are not affected by such a mace). 

A mace of Odo strikes at +5 on attack rolls and 
does 3d6 points of damage to creatures with more 
than 2 HD (4d6 hp to undead), Whenever it 
strikes, or four rounds after the round of its cast- 
ing (whichever comes first), the mace vanishes 
instantly in a burst of white radiance. Creatures of 
2 HD or less suffer only 1 point of damage when 


struck by a mace of Odo but must save vs. para- 
lyzation ot be paralyzed for 1d4+1 turns. 


Seeking Sword 
(Evocation) 

Level: 4 
Components: V, S, M 
Range: 30 feer 


Area of Effect: Special 

Definition: This spell brings into being a shim- 
mering blade of force that appears as a sword of 
any description the caster desires. The sword 
forms in midair and is animated by the will of the 
caster (who need not ever touch it), flashing 
about as it attacks, 

The blade is silent, numble (Maneuverability 
Class A), and fast (able to catch a quickling), 
although it cannot move beyond spell range from 
the caster. The blade can strike four times per 
round, doing 244 points of damage with cach suc- 
cessful hit. 

Although it has no attack bonuses, a seeking 
sword is considered a +4 magical weapon for 
determining what sorts of beings it can strike, It 
can strike nonliving objects and can be wielded 
dexterously enough to lift latches, slide bolts 
open or shut, turn pages of books, and so on. The 
caster may freely move the sword from target to 
target unless physical or magical barriers (such as 
a wall of force) are in the way, but must concen- 
trate on the blade to maintain its existence and 
direct it (other spellcasting is impossible), 

A seeking sword moves with strength enough 
to parry and hold back another blade wielded by 
a strong human or humanoid, It can be used to 
shatter glass objects, spike open doors, puncture 
sacks, or search for unseen opponents by sweep- 
ing through apparently empty spaces or across 
windowsills and thresholds. The material compo- 
nents are a drop of mercury and a human hair. 


History of Evil Mages and 
Apprentices 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 10,000 
DRAGON Magazine 82 
After one week of studying this book, an evil 
owner must save vs. spell at A every week after 
that or be imprisoned in the book in a manner 


similar to a magic jar spell. A brief recounting of 
$04) 


- 1180 N 


! i 


the owner's life and times will then appear on one 
or more of the book’s blank pages. (Other previ- 
ous owners are described on other pages; their 
life essences are also held within the book.) A 
single owner can be released from this captivity 
by a limited wish or alter reality spell. If the book 
is burned, damaged, or destroyed by nonmagical 
means, the trapped characters are still imprisoned 
within the remains, and now cannot be released 
singly by anything short of a wish spell. If the 
book or its remains are burned, damaged, or 
destroyed by magical means, the captives will be 
released, all at once, but cach must roll less than 
their Intelligence on 1d20 or be afflicted with 
some form of insanity. 


History of Good Mages and 
Apprentices 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 10,000 
DRAGON Magazine 82 
After one week of studying this book, a good- 
aligned owner must save vs. spell at 2 every 
weck after that or be imprisoned in the book in a 
manner similar to a magic jar spell. A brief 
recounting of the owner’s life and times will 
then appear on one or more of the book’s blank 
pages. (Other previous owners are described; 
their life essences are also held within the 
book.) A single owner can be released from this 


= Spellbook, Influences and Suggestions 


captivity by a limited wish or alter reality spell. 
If the book is burned, damaged, or destroyed by 
nonmagical means, those trapped are still 
imprisoned, and now cannot be released singly 
by anything short of a wish. If the book or its 
remains are burned, damaged, or destroyed by 
magical means, the captives will be released all 
at once, but cach must roll less than their Intelli- 
gence on Ida or be afflicted with some form of 
insanity. 


of Hope 
XP Value: 1,200 GP Value: 9,000 
New ltem 
This slim volume was penned by Azigreth Gold- 
entoe. When last seen, it had golden covers 
engraved with Azigreth’s sigil, It is said to con- 
tain protection from evil, limited wish, and wish 
among others. The book was stolen from Azi- 
greth’s library 16 years ago. A reward of twice its 
gp value has been offered for its return, 


Idioms & Rare Cryptographs 
XP Value: 2,400 GP Value: 24,000 
DRAGON Magazine 82 
This spellbook was written by the wizard Elmin- 
ster. It contains the following spells: message, 
write, illusionary script, tongues, audible glamer, 
and magic mouth. 


Inexplicable Reflections 
XP Value: 1,200 GP Value: 12,000 
Dracos Magazine 82 
Bucknard compiled mirror image, magic mirror, 
and gaze reflection in this small, pocket-sized 
spellbook. 


Influence on Solid Corpus 
XP Value: 2,400 GP Value: 24,000 
DRAGON Magazine 82 
Mentor penned fool's gold, transmute rock to 
mud, stone tò flesh, plant growth, animal growth, 
and shape change into this rare spellbook. 


Influences and Suggestions 
XP Value; 2,800 GP Value: 28,000 
Dracon Magazine 82 
One of the few actual “published” works by 
Arunsun, this spellbook contains charm person, 
ray of enfeeblement, scare, suggestion, antipa- 
thy/sympathy, and mass suggestion. 


Spellbook, Intelligence and Intuitive Domination 


p Sn Ta O 


Intelligence and Intuitive 
Domination 
XP Value: 1,600 GP Value: 16,000 
DraGoN Magazine 82 
Zagy wrote this spellbook with life-essence spe- 
cialty spells. They are ESP, trap the soul, spir- 
itwrack, and magic jar. 


Irid Newleaf’s 

XP Value: 8,000 GP Value: 80,000 
Legacy of Blood 
Irid’s spellbook contains the following spells: 
charm person, detect magic, magic missile, pro- 
tection from evil, read magic. sleep, detect invis- 
ible, ESP. mirror image, phantasmal force, web, 
fireball, fly, hold person, lightning bolt, confu- 
sion, hallucinatory terrain, wizard eve, cloudkill, 
and teleport. 


Jaluster's Orizon 

XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 20,000 
The Magister 
A stout, battered book of embossed and painted 
cowhide stretched over wooden boards, edged 
and clasped about with iron. It is battered, 
brown, and radiates a faint dweomer (see below). 
It contains 12 pages, each a thin plate of slate 
upon which vellum has been stretched and 
clamped with beaten electrum edging, Seven of 
its pages are blank; the first five bear spells, one 
to a page. 

An orizon is a book in which a far-traveling 
wizard inscribes spells found or gained while 
exploring or traveling far from home. This is 
done also when one belicves a spell can be 
improved or ian i quite right; it is only later, at 
home and leisure, and with the spell perfected, 
that the wizard scts down spells in the orizon into 
his or her proper, level-by-level spell books. 
Thus, an orizon is usually a jumble of spells of 
varying levels, sometimes interspersed with spell 
research notes or other information, or even 
spells usable only by other classes, 

Jaluster was a wizard who never ceased to 
travel; he filled many orisons, but always sold 
them after transcribing the spells into his proper 
books. The orizon that bears his name today is 
the one he carried, incomplete, at his death. 
Jaluster was torn apart by fiends in Ascalhorn 
(now known as Hellgate Keep) as he tried to 
save that city from their domination. He is said 
to have destroyed three liches and at least five 


demons that day, ere he died. His orizon was 
borne out of the city by the bard Maerstar, one 
of the four survivors of the fall of Ascalhorn 
Muerstur was later robbed of it in Everlund, and 
a trail of mysteriously-slain owners led west- 
ward, but the tome’s present whereabouts are 
unknown, 

The volume is guarded by a strange creature, a 
tome guardian. The five spells it contains are 
rope trick, Quimby s enchanting gourmet (u 
unique spell), feign death, waves of weariness 
(unique spell), and Adelimer x aural augmenter, 
This latter spell is merely a variation of extension 
/ that has a somatic as well as a verbal compo- 
nent, but requires a casting time of but one round 
(it remains 4th level). 


Tome Guardian 
FREQUENCY: Very Rare 

NO. APPEARING: | 

ARMOR CLASS: 2 

MOVE: 12 (or as guarded object moves) 
HIT DICE; 4+4 

TREASURE TYPE: Sce below 
NO. OF ATTACKS: | 
DAMAGE/ATTACK: See below 
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Nil 
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Nil 
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Sce below 
INTELLIGENCE: Average 
ALIGNMENT: Neutral 

SIZE: 5 


The tome guardian (sometimes mistakenly heard 
and passed on as “tomb guardian” ) is a creature 
of the Elemental Plane of Fire. Its nature and 
activities there are unknown, but it can be sum- 
moned to the Prime Material Plane by magical 
means to serve as a guardian. 

A wizard summons the tome guardian by casting 
an ensnarement (sending or demand will work if 
the guardian's name is known; they do have per- 
sonal names), and compels it to service by the use 
of a truename or binding spell. The object to be 
guarded must be visible to the wizard, who indi- 
cates it (by pointing and speaking) to the guardian. 
Tome guardians do not mind protecting an object, 
for unknown reasons of their own, and unless oth- 
erwise attacked are not hostile. Door and torment 
spells do not affect guardians, and are viewed as 
attacks. Charms of all sorts except a geas do not 
affect tome guardians; they cannot be psionically 

$050 


= 1182 * 


x Spellbook, Jaluster’s Orizon — 


dominated, and anyone attempting ESP or similar 
mind magic, by spell, item, or natural ability, finds 
that attempts to attack, control, or change a 
guardian cause it to attack—and that it can some- 
how employ its fireburst attack (see below) through 
such a mental link. 

The guardian envelops, and appears to merge 
with, the object it has been bound to, becoming 
invisible. The object radiates a faint dweomer, 
and infravision detects the presence of the 
guardian but the creature cannot be telepathi- 
cally contacted or in any way coerced, tricked, or 
forced to leave its object except as described 
below. A guardian can only guard one physical 
object—and if the object is composed of readily 
separable parts, only one part (a sword or its 
scabbard, not both). The guarded object must be 
small (of less than 4 cubic feet volume), and non- 
living. Usually magical tomes of lore are so 
guarded, therefore the guardian's name. 

An individual can summon only one tome 
guardian per 24 hours. Only one guardian can be 
bound to any object, (Guardians who are sum- 
moned to the Prime Material Plane but not suc- 
cessfully bound to an object, or who have been 
driven forth [see below] from the object they 
were guarding, assume what is known as their 
“free form" and remain on the Prime Material 
Plane for 2420 turns before “dwindling away,” 
returning to their own plane by natural means. 
They are not under any beings control during this 
time and attack any creature who attacks (or 
attempts to control) them. Otherwise, they are 
attracted to large fires of natural (volcanoes and 
forest fires) or human (bonfires, forges, even iso- 
lated campfires) origin. 

A tome guardian can absorb fiery energy 
impinging upon it (when it guards an object, it 
envelops it, and thus absorbs all fire directed at 
the object), whether natural or magical (such as a 
fireball). It gains a number of points equal to the 
number of points of damage the fire would deal 
to an unprotected creature, which replenish any 
damage it has suffered and then increase its own 
hit points temporarily (for the next 24 hours). 
During this time, the tome guardian can add any 
or all of this additional fiery energy directly to 
the damage dealt by any fireburst attack. Heat 
energy (such as that caused by melt or heat metal 
spells) that the guardian merely absorbs. 

If it wishes, a tome guardian can deliver a fire- 
burst attack 3 times over a 24 hour period to any 


creature touching it or the object it guards (it 
never attacks the master for whom it stands 
guard). A fireburst is a pencil-thin, white-hot 
flame that strikes directly into the target creature 
(thus, it cannot miss) and does not generate any 
incidental heat or flame that might damage sur- 
rounding creatures ot objects such as the item 
being guarded. If two or more creatures laid 
hands on a guarded object simultancously, and 
the guardian generated a fireburst in one of them, 
the other would not even feel it. 

Only one such attack can be unleashed in a 
round, A fireburst can operate through clothing 
or armor; it deals 6d4 points of internal damage 
(no saving throw) to all creatures not immune to 
the effects of heat or fire. A tome guardian always 
uses this attack against a bookworm or any other 
creature attempting to consume or strike the 
object it is guarding unless they save vs. poison at 
-, human, demihuman, and humanoid beings 
who survive a fireburst attack are rendered 
unconscious for 1d4+1 turns due to the shock of 
their blood boiling momentarily in the area 
affected by the fireburst. 

Tome guardians can be affected by all spells 
save (as noted earlier) enchantment and charm 
magic such as maze, sleep, and suggestion 
(although geas is an exception), Cold does them 
double damage (water, it should be noted, does 
not), and all physical attacks upon the object they 
are guarding do not harm the object until the 
guardian is destroyed, as it gathers its form into a 
rigid shell to ward off blows; but because of this, 
all such attacks do the maximum possible damage 
to the guardian. When in free form, physical 
attacks do it normal (not necessarily full) damage. 

Note that fiery protective spells such as explo- 
sive runes and fire trap can be cast upon an item 
guarded by a tome guardian, but the creature 
absorbs the spell energy as it is being cast, so that 
the spell's protection does not exist (and the 
guardian gains for a day hit points equal to the 
maximum damage these spells would have dealt), 

Symbols and glyphs can be cast upon a guarded 
object without affecting it, and function normally 
(without harming the guardian). Save for the 
exceptions noted above, tome guardians have 

A tome guardian can be driven out of the object 
it is guarding by the casting of dispel magic (the 
guardian gains a save vs. spell; if successful it is 
unaffected). Even the individual who bound the 

030 


BOO ee 


1183 


r r r 


~ Spelibook, Korr'’s Book of Infinite Spells — 


guardian to the object can dismiss it only in this 
way. The guardian will be seen leaving the object, 
even in darkness. A tome guardian is immune to the 
attacks of, but cannot itself harm, a fire elemental, 
salamander, will o wisp, and xag-ya. If a guardian 
is brought into the presence of a xeg-yi, they attack 
each other at once, Tome guardians can coexist 
peacefully with guardian tanar’ri, guardian famil- 
iars, homonculi, and the like. More than one tome 
guardian can guard the same object, although it is 
very rare, Tome guardians can conduct their fire- 
burst attacks through metal weapons and armor if 
they wish, and gain hit points from electrical 
attacks just as from fiery attacks. They can appar- 
ently hear and understand Common and perhaps 
other languages, but not speak them. 


Quimby’s Enchanting Gourmet 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 


Casting Time: 2 

Duration: 6 turns + | turn per level 

Saving Throws: None 

Area of Effect: 40-foot-radius of spellcaster 
Definition: The fat, food-loving wizard Quimby 
devised this improved unseen servant magic as a 
means of providing himself with gourmet meals 
while studying in solitude or traveling alone. It 
is a magical force under the control of the wiz- 
ard, able to stir, carry pots, measure ingredients, 
cut, garnish, turn hot food while it is cooking, 
and so on. It is no stronger than an unseen ser- 
vant, nor more dexterous than its caster, but it 
can cook without the direct concentration of 
supervision of the caster, if the menu is a meal 
the wizard has prepared or has seen prepared at 
some time, The enchanting gourmet can be dis- 
pelled (at will by the caster, and by the use of 
dispel magic by others), or destroyed by dealing 
it six points of damage. The material compo- 
nents are the foodstuffs to be prepared, a drop of 
the casters blood, a piece of string, and a block 
of wood of any size. 


Waves of Weariness 
(Enchantment Charm) 
Level: 2 
Components: V, S, M 
Range: 120 feet 
Casting Time: 2 


= 1184 


Duration: | round 

Saving Throw: Nogates 

Area of Effect: One creature 

Definition: By means of this spell, the caster 
causes all movements (including speech) of one 
creature to be slowed down enough to delay spell- 
casting and physical attacks for one round. Mis- 
sile attacks and attacks using magic wands, rings, 
and similar items can be performed in the same 
round they were begun by a determined victim of 
this spell who continues to struggle against its 
effects (that is, to utter a word of activation), but 
this attack always takes effect last in the round. 
Any intended target of this spell must be seen by 
the caster at some point during spellcasting. must 
be pointed at, and must be within range for the 
spell to take effect, Intended targets save vs. spell 
(no modifiers apply) to avoid. 

Only targets with cither Intelligence or Wis- 
dom of greater than 12 can struggle against the 
weariness effect of this spell enough to deliver 
the aforementioned attacks; all others collapse 
for the round duc to the intense sleepy, tired, 
worn-out feclings the spell causes. Climbing 
beings must make a Strength check to avoid 
falling. 


Korr’s Book of Infinite Spells 

XP Value: 9,000 GP Value: 45,000 
1992 Fantasy Collector Card 155 
Korr the dwarf pulled off the heist of a lifetime 
when he laid hands on this item (while his partner 
was “busy” with the wizard who owned it). He 
thought it was just a lousy spell book and was 
going to sell it, but first he opened it to see what 
was inside. After suffering 11 points of damage 
and laying stunned on the floor for over two 
hours, he went to close the book, caught a glimpse 
of the contents, and realized that he could under- 
stand the writing on the page! Accidentally 
killing his fence with a magic missile the next 
day, Korr dares not use the book again until he 
finds out how it works. 


Laeral’s Libram 
XP Value: 3.200 GP Value: 32,000 
DRAGON Magazine 181 
The covers of Laeral’s Libram are two circular 
plates of polished, blue-sheen electrum, joined at 
one edge with a ring that also binds seven parch- 
ment pages to the plates, The electrum discs have 
a clasp opposite the ring, worked in the shape of a 
sn 


+ Spellbook, Lucral’s Libram y- 


moon with an arc of stars around it, to hold them 
closed. The parchment pages are circular and 
touched with silvergilt all around their edges. 

Laeral is a famous adventuress of the Sword 
Coast North, who was apprenticed to Khelben 
Blackstaff Arunsun of Waterdeep, and she still 
aids him in Blackstaff Tower as his companion 
and lover. Once leader of the adventuring group 
known as The Nine, Laerd fell under the influ- 
ence of the crown of horns for a time. Rescued by 
Khelben and the High Lady Alustriel of Silvery- 
moon, Laeral created a simulacrum of herself that 
she placed in the Stronghold of the Nine to 
deceive treasure-seekers. Freed from her reputa- 
tion and her responsibilities, Laeral again became 
the gentle, merry girl she used to be 20 winters 
ago. 

Lost in her recent madness, however, was her 
libram, a small traveling “handybook” of her 
favorite spells. It has only seven pages, cach bear- 
ing a single spell. Their contents are as follows: 
feather fall, magic missile, spider climb, force- 
wave, Laerals aqueous column, Jhanifers deli- 
quescence, and blackstaff. The last four spells in 
the Libram are rare and are described hereafter. 
The aqueous column is a spell created by Laeral 
herself (as part of her training under Khelben), 
and blackstaff is one of the more powerful spells 


devised by Khelben himself, Jhanifer was a sor- 
ceress of the long-ago North, a friend (some say 
lover) of Ahghairon, the Founder of Waterdeep. 
No one knows what became of her, 


Forcewave 

(Abjuration, Evocation) 

Level: 2 

Components: V, S, M 

Range: 10 feet per level 

Casting Time: 2 

Duration: | round 

Saving Throw: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 creature 

Definition: This spell enables a wizard to hamper 
the activities of a single creature for one round. A 
wave of translucent, silent, colorless force, visu- 
ally resembling an ocean wave breaking on a 
beach, comes into being in front of the caster and 
sweeps toward a target creature. The caster must 
point to, name, or concentrate upon the intended 
target during the casting. The wave rushes toward 
the target with a movement rate of 30. It has no 
effect on nonliving objects or any creature except 
the intended target. 

If the target creature is within range, the force- 
wave automatically strikes it, however, the target 
is permitted a save vs. spell to determine the 
forcewave 5 effects. If the save is successful, the 
creature suffers | point impact damage and is 
thrown off-balance; a running or charging crea- 
ture, or one on a narrow bridge or high place, 
must then make a Dexterity check on 1420 to 
avoid falling. If the target fails its saving throw, it 
suffers 1d4+1 points impact damage, is repulsed 
(forced away from the caster) to 10 feet, and has 
any ongoing spell-casting ruined, Only missile 
attacks are permitted on the round during which 
it is struck. A Dexterity check must be made to 
avoid falling (at -I if the target creature is small, 
weak, surprised, or precariously situated). Ethe- 
real beings cannot be affected by u forcewave, but 
a being employing blink or a displacement effect 
that shifis rapidly from one plane to another can 
be affected by this spell. The material compo- 
nents of this spell are a small piece of rope or 
string and a drop of water, spittle, or a tear. 


Laeral’s Aqueous Column 
(Alteration/Evocation) 
Level: 4 
Components: V, S, M 
$052 


ee AAT ee 


1185 


~ Spellbook, Lacral’s Libram 7 


Range: 10 feet per level 

Casting Time: 2 rounds 

Duration: 10 rounds per level 

Save: None 

Area of Effect: 10-foot-diameter cylinder, 10- 
foot-length per level 

Definition: By means of this spell, a wizard can 
transmute the air in a particular area into water, a 
free standing cylindrical volume 10 feet in diam- 
eter is created. It will be pure water, cither fresh 
or salty as the caster decrees in casting, and will 
circulate freely within itself, drawing oxygen into 
itself to support any marine life inside it. The 
water is held in a cylindrical shape by the spell's 
dweomer, the cylinder expanding lengthwise with 
an increasing area of effect—10 feet per level of 
the caster. Multiple spells (cast by the same being 
or by several spellcasters) can be used to extend 
the cylinder even further. The column can run 
horizontally, vertically, at an angle, or even make 
turns as desired, but once established its location 
cannot change. 

Creatures and objects can pass freely through 
the cylinder of water without spilling water or 
disturbing the stability of the column, but crea- 
tures not able to breathe in water are not empow- 
ered to do so by the spell. This spell is often used 
to introduce marine creatures into an otherwise 
“dry” environment for purposes of imprisonment, 
conferences, or transportation. The cylinders are 
usually vertical and may connect with other bod- 
ies of water, such as sewers beneath buildings or 
the sca beneath a ship. At the spell’s expiration, 
the water simply vanishes; marine creatures can 
thus be stranded. Varying water pressures are 
equalized by the magic so as to harm neither 
creatures in the column nor structures entered by 
the column (a column connected to the sea from a 
cellar will not then cause the sea to flood the cel- 
lar). The material components of this spell are a 
hair from any sort of creature and a drop of water, 
spittle, dew, juice, sap, or a tear. 


Jhanifer’s Deliquescence 
(Alteration) 

Level: 5 

Components: WS. M 

Range: Touch 

Casting Time: | round 

Duration: Permanent 

Saving Throw: Special 

Area of Effect: 10 cubic feet per level 


Definition: This spell enables a wizard to 
instantly melt ice, frozen liquids, and other sub- 
stances that freeze within 10° of water's freezing 
point (32° F). Such melting does not involve heat, 
steam, or the consumption of fuel. A wall of ice, 
for instance, could be turned into water that falls 
to the ground, or a frozen lock or sleigh runner 
could be freed. Repeated applications of this spell 
have been known to turn solids into liquid form, 
and 10 deliquescence spells equal the effects of 
transmute rock to mud. The details of this use of 
the spell are little known and poorly understood. 
(The DM should sharply limit the combat effec- 
tiveness of dissolving solids, although a wizard 
could use the spell repeatedly to escape froma 
stonewalled cell.) 

Animated or enchanted stone creatures, such 
as stone golems, receive a saving throw vs. spell 
equal to the saving throw (at the time) of the 
being who enchanted them, as do all stone or 
other solid objects bearing a dweomer. If success- 
ful, that application of the spell does not affect 
them and is entirely wasted. Living creatures, 
even if stony, are unaffected by this spell, The 
material components of this spell are a tiny piece 
of amber and a piece of ice. 


Blackstaff 

(Alteration, Evocation) 

Level: 8 

Components: V, S, M 

Range: 0 

Casting Time: 1 round 

Duration: 1 round per level 

Saving Throw: Special 

Area of Effect: Special 

Definition: This is the famous spell that gave its 
creator, the Archmage Khelben Arunsun of 
Waterdeep, his nickname. The magic causes any 
nonmagical staff, club, piece of wood, or pole 
arm held by the caster to shimmer with a black, 
crawling radiance. A blackstaff weapon has the 
following properties: 

* It can never harm the caster or any other 
beings touching the staff during the casting of 
the spell. 

It strikes as a +4 magical weapon to hit (no 
damage bonus). 

Its touch drains | hit point automatically (the 
target gets a saving throw vs. death magic to 
avoid losing the point permanently— failure 


means the hit point is unrecoverable except by 
SOS? 


186 


) 


use of a wish), and 1d8 points normal damage, 
regardless of the weapon's size and shape. 

Its touch acts as a dispel magic spell (at the 
caster’s level) on all magical barriers, weap- 
ons, or effects, at all times; the wielder cannot 
turn this power on and off. 

Its touch causes mental damage, as follows: 


Roll Effect 
01-45 Target unaffected. 
46-65 Target confused (as per the wizard spell 


confusion) for Ida rounds. 


66-75 Target stunned (as per a symbol of stun- 
ning) for 1d3 rounds. 

76-85 ‘Target affected by fear (as per the spell) 
for 1d2 rounds. 

86-95 Target affected by repulsion. 

96-00 Target affected by feeblemind. 


Its touch causes any spellcaster to forget one 
memorized spell or be unable to use one nat- 
ural spell-like power for two rounds (if a 
choice exists, determine which spell or ability 
at random; save vs. paralyzation to avoid this 
effect entirely). 

* Its touch causes beings possessing psionic 
skills or wild talents to be psionically “scram- 
bled” (unable to use any powers except 
defenses) for 1d4 rounds. 

it absorbs magic cast upon it, without conse- 
quence, and is apparently unaffected by any 
magic except a wish, which can negate it. 

A blackstaff may be wielded by any creature 
able to use a polearm, club, or staff who can with- 
stand (or is immune to) its effects. A blackstaff 
will prevent spelleasting by any being who is 
contact with it during a given round. It can there- 
fore be used to ruin enemy spellcasting with a 
successful attack. (It cannot be easily thrown and 
resists telekinesis and similar movements as it 
does almost all other magic.) At the spell’s expi- 
ration, the material component (the staff) is 
instantly and completely consumed. 


Laeyndr’s Book of Metamorphoses 
XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 40,000 
DRAGON Magazine 139 
The value of this cnormous compendium of lore 
is only enhanced by the valuable materials from 
which it is fashioned—and the monetary value of 
the spells found within it is certainly large. The 
work is contained between two thin slabs of deep- 


Spelibook, Lacyndr’s Book of Metamorphoses 


blue lapis lazuli (cach ) inch thick) that are 2 
feet tall and 1% feet wide. The spine is also 
formed from lapis lazuli and is bound to the cov- 
ers by platinum hinges. Ten sheets of thin mithral 
rest between the covers but are not bound to the 
spine, The lapis lazuli forms more of a folder for 
the mithral pages than actual book covers. 

That this book originally belonged to the wiz- 
ard Laeyndar, called “The Lame,” is obvious, for 
its cover bears a golden wizard mark in the form 
which Laeyndar chose as his sign—that of a 
wave, symbolizing the fluidity of water and muta- 
bility of form. Laeyndar, the lame wizard from 
the famed waterfall city of Escatlar, lived over 
700 years ago. Although born with a club foot 
and hunchback, he did not let that deter him from 
the life of magic use. Lacyndar rose to extreme 
power but was turned away from the White Circle 
because of his deformities. After that, he became 
obsessed with the study of transformations of 
form. The Book of Metamorphoses was evidently 
created many years later, for it contains numerous 
high-level spells which appear to be the result of 
his researches into the subject of the alterations 
of form, including some spells that even enable 
mental transformation. Unfortunately, Laeyndar's 
obsession evidently twisted his mind as well as 
his body, and he apparently never used the mar- 
velous results of his research to improve his own 
appearance, as he originally intended. After he 
was denied entry into the White Circle, he van- 
ished from sight. His sole apprentice, Moytaire, 
recorded in his diary that he always knew his 
master as deformed. 

Upon his death, Laeyndar passed the book on 
to Moytaire, who learned of the book’s powerful 
curse shortly thereafter but was tragically unable 
to avoid it. The one time he appeared in public in 
later years, Moytaire had already begun his trans- 
formation into a crippled kuo-toa, Moytaire was 
grief-stricken at his change, and shortly before it 
was complete he went into absolute isolation. At 
a time unknown, Moytaire died, and the book 
remained in his lonely tomb for many years as 
tomb robbers were reluctant to chance entry into 
his crypt on the off chance that the wizard had 
become a lich (despite his neutral stance) or had 
secretly warded his tomb, 

That the tomb was eventually plundered is evi- 
dent, for some 330 years after the beginning of 
Moytaire’s isolation the book was examined by 


the master of the wizards’ college in Sestar, 
5053 


X 1187 š 


SET S SSS r ee a eee A 


Spellbook, Lacyndr’s Book of Metamorphoses 


Ikeda, who also fell under its curse but hid the 
book so that it could not exercise its fell powers 
again, The book's location once again remained 
unknown for another 200 years until it was 
uncovered and again it worked its twisted magic, 
this time upon the mage-king of the Kingdom of 
the Coral Throne. The fall of the so-called Aqua 
Kingdom was the result, as the mage-king, 
Plautes, betrayed his subjects to their enemies, 
the kuo-toa. The Book of Metamorphoses has not 
been scen since, and certainly there is no record 
of it transforming any other in the interim. Thus, 
although its whereabouts remain uncertain, the 
sage Needram asserts that it remains in the ruined 
palace of Plautes, untouched even after the 
resumption of the Kingdom of the Coral Throne 
from its present capital, 

The writings of Ikeda provide the only clues 
as to the contents of the book. Ikeda claims that 
the book contains the following spells, one per 
page: change form (unique spell), clone, enlarge, 
graft (unique spell), massmorph, polymorph any 
object, polymorph other, polymorph self, shape 
change, and statue, The book's curse affects any 
creature the first time it opens the tome, causing 
the being to change form into a kuo-toa with a 
club foot and a hunched back, as per the change 


form spell within it. A saving throw vs. poly- 
morph is allowed, however. The two unique spells 
are as follows; 


Graft 

(Alteration) 

Level; 6 

Components: V, S, M 

Range: Touch 

Casting Time: | turn 

Duration: Permanent 

Saving Throw: See below 

Area of Effect: Recipient 

Definition: When a spellcaster invokes a graft 
spell, he or she may attach an appendage of 
another creature m place of a missing limb on the 
recipients body. The appendage must take the 
place of a lost limb—the caster cannot place the 
arm of another creature onto a body that had no 
such limb before, nor add an cxtra arm in the 
middle of a chest. Additionally, the limb to be 
grafted must also perform roughly the same func- 
tion as the old one; consequently, a wizard may not 
attach a foot to an arm stump. The appendage may 
be of any size, but the recipient of the limb must be 
able to manipulate it with the character's current 
Strength, If the limb is overly cumbersome or 
exceptionally different from the original, the limb 
may inhibit movement or limit spellcasting ability. 
The appendage to be replaced may be anywhere on 
the body—arms, legs, fect, or hands, or parts 
thereof, but never the head. The replacement may 
also be of any form, thus a fiend’s claws, a bear's 
forepaw, or another human hand could take the 
place of a lost hand claw, or paw. 

The appendage to be grafted must have been 
alive within the hour before the spell is cast, or 
the graft will not take. The member to be grafted 
may be successfully joined, provided that the 
recipient of the limb makes a successful system 
shock roll upon completion of the casting. A 
failed roll indicates that the graft does not take, 
and the limb withers and dies in one day. 

If the graft does take, then the new member 
will remain in place and function normally. Fur- 
thermore, the recipient even receives all the 
Strength and Dexterity bonuses or penalties the 
limb had previously. The grafted appendage also 
has all the immunities and weaknesses, including 
Armor Class and damage ability, that the 
appendage had previously, so long as such 


bonuses and penalties did not result from special 
wt 


r ae mea 


188 


Spellbook. Lacyndr'’s Book of Metamorphoses 


— a ¢ 


characteristics of the limb original body (thus, 
innate spelicasting abilities, psionic ability, magic 
resistance, and Strength bonuses do not apply). 
For example, if a wizard were to graft on the hand 
of an aracnaloth, the new hand would have a +1 
shield bonus, could be harmed only by weapons 
of +1 or greater magical enhancement, and would 
cause 1d4 points of clawing damage, The hand 
would no longer be magic resistant (as is an 
arcanaloth’s hand). If a wizard were to graft on 
the forefoot of a lizard, though the wizard may 
gain an improved Armor Class for that hand, he 
would probably not be able to cast spells due to 
the low Dexterity potential of a lizard’s claw, The 
hand of an ogre (the largest humanlike being 
whose limbs may be used) would allow for a 
grasping Strength equal to an 18 (nonpercentile) 
Strength. However, the wizard could not lift 
weights at the same Strength level(unless he pre- 
viously had an 18 Strength), since only his hand 
has this ability. 

The material components of the spell are the 
appendage to be grafted and a mixture made up 
of the blood of the being to which the member 
originally belonged, the blood of the caster, a 
potion of polymorphing, a potion of extra-heal- 
ing, and at least 10,000 gp worth of powdered 
moonstone. The components are consumed when 
the spell is cast. 


Change Form 
(Alteration) 


Casting Time: 8 

Duration: Permanent 

Saving Throw: Neg 

Area of Effect: Recipient 

Definition: When the change form spell is 
evoked, the caster begins a process that will even- 
tually end with the complete metamorphosis of 
the recipient into an entirely new creature. The 
change induced by the spell is total in every 
respect and occurs regardless of the size of the 
recipient and the size of the creature chosen by 
the caster. 

An initial saving throw vs. polymorph is 
allowed to negate the effects of change form, but 
if this is failed, only a wish can stop the transfor- 
mation. Furthermore, a wish can only stop the 
Process, not reverse it, once the physical phase of 


the transformation is complete. A second wish 
can be used to reverse the process so that the vic- 
tim will return to normal at the same rate as the 
initial change occurs. A third wish speeds up the 
rate of backward change so that it takes but one 
day The ultimate form of the recipient is chosen 
by the caster but cannot have more Hit Dice than 
the recipient presently possesses and must be a 
native of the Prime Material Plane (thus fiends, 
undead, elemental creatures, and other unique 
entities are not possible choices). 

Immediately after the spell is completed, all 
characteristics of the target, including ability 
scores, alignment, form, Armor Class, and HD, 
move l place toward those of the final creature. For 
every 10 days following the spell’s casting, the 
characteristics change one further position. Size is 
altered at the rate of inch and 10 pounds of gain 
or loss per day. For example, an 8th-level fighter 
who began to change form into a pech would 
immediately gain a natural Armor Class of 9; 10 
days later he gains AC 8; 20 days later he gains AC 
7; and 40 days after that, AC 3. During this time, 
the fighter would have lost 4 Hit Dice, become neu- 
tral good, and otherwise assumed the appearance, 
size, form, and general characteristics of an average 
pech, The DM should arbitrate these changes. 

When all mundane statistics have conformed 
to those of the new form, the recipient loses all 
class abilities he possessed previously. Thus, if 
we assume that our fighter’s change is complete 
on the 70th day, all fighter abilities have been lost 
and the recipient now attacks as a 4-HD monster. 
One week after this phase of the transformation is 
complete, the subject loses all previous memories 
(except for rudimentary facts about himself, such 
as his name, place of birth, and so forth) and 
such as racial abilities. Instead, he gains all spe- 
cial abilities (such as magic resistance, special 
attucks, special defenses, ete.) of his new form, 
becoming in every respect a member of his new 
race. However, in some cases, even the change 
form spell is not totally efficacious in this respect; 
some memorics and other mental functions, such 
as Intelligence and psionics, may be retained in 
the new form if the new form is basically the 
same as the old (humanoid to humanoid, avian to 
avian, and the like). 

Once the metamorphosis is complete, the 
recipient grows and ages normally, as would any 
other member of his or her new race. He or she 

* 


á 1189 = 


Spellbook, Lareth's 


z c 


is able to use all natural abilities of the new 
form, such as flying, swimming, and other spe- 
cial movements, as if born to them, although he 
or she may not be able to speak the language of 
the new race. 

The material component of the spell is a vial of 
acid, in which at least 5,000 gp worth of pow- 
dered moonstone has been dissolved during a full 
moon. The vial must be broken upon the recipient 
within one round of the completion of the spell. 
The acid will cause no damage to the recipient of 
the spell, unless a successful saving throw is 
made, in which case he or she takes 2d4 points of 
damage. 


Lareth’s 
XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 40,000 
The Village of Hommlet 
This unique spellbook contains the following 
spells: command, cure light wounds, protection 
from good, sanctuary, hold person, know align- 
ment, resist fire, silence 15' radius, cause blind- 
ness, continual darkness. 


of Lathintel 
XP Value: 6,400 GP Value: 64.000 
The Magister 
This is a square, thick, maroon-colored volume 
with maple boards covered in tanned leather, and 
bound with wire in six circlets to which have 
been sewn 16 parchment pages. The book looks 
well used but not dilapidated. It has no known 
traps or defenses, 

Lathintel was a dignified wizard of Athkatla 
who perished some 70 winters ago of a winter 
fever, His effects were sold by a merchant of 
Amn, Oristel—almost certainly after several wiz- 
ards had been allowed to copy individual spells 
from the book upon payment of stiff fees. The 
purchaser of the libram, and its present where- 
abouts, are unknown. 

From Oristel notes and the spells copied by 
the wizard Narlbar, the libram’s contents are 
known to be as follows (one spell to a page, all 
standard spells except as otherwise noted): 
enlarge, featherfall, light, read magic, sleep, spi- 
dereyes (a unique spell), unseen servant, audible 
glamer, invisibility, locate object, wizard lock, 
dispel magic, fly, ghost pipes (unique spell, 
described hereafter), hover (unique spell), and 
tongues. 


Spidereyes 
(Alteration) 
Level; 1 
Components: V, S. M 
Range: Special 
Casting Time: | 
Duration: | round per level 
Saving Throw: None 
Area of Effect: Special 
Definition: By means of this spell, a wizard can 
temporarily see through the eyes of any living 
arachnid (material component of the spell), which 
the caster must touch. Small, harmless living spi- 
ders are usually employed, the caster using them as 
spies to see things where the caster dare not go. 
More rarely, this spell is cast on a giant spider 
(successful attack roll is required if the spider is 
hostile and not surprised) to see through its eyes 
while battling it, so that its opponents can take 
advantage of striking from where it cannot see. 
This spell does not give the caster any control 
over the arachnid nor even direct mental contact 
with it, merely a mystical linkage with its eyes. 
Most spiders have eight eyes—simple eyes 
whose vision ts readily understandable to most 
intelligent races, not compound eyes. The sight 
afforded by the spell has the effectiveness (range 
and possible infravision) of the spider, and unlim- 
ited range as long as the spell duration lasts 
limited, of course, by how far the spider travels. 
Usually this spell is used to try to spy outa 
cavern, hall, or other guarded area before the 
caster or Companions enter or attack it—but 
often, frustratingly, the chosen spider refuses to 
cooperate and look where the caster wants it to, 
unless controlled or influenced by additional 
spells. Certain magical barriers sever the link 
between spellcaster and spider. (The caster can- 
not continue to see through the spider's eyes if 
either arachnid or caster move to another plane of 
existence, including the Astral or Ethereal.) 


Ghost Pipes 

(Alteration/Illusion/Phantasm) 

Level: 3 

Components: V, S 

Range: Touch 

Casting Time: 1 round 

Duration: Permanent 

Saving Throw: None 

Area of Effect: One instrument 

Definition: By means of this spell, the magic-user 
5055 


90 


. 


Spellbook, Lexon of Spirits r 


causes any one musical instrument, which must be 
nonmagical in nature, and whole and unbroken, to 
play by itself. The instrument need not be one the 
spellcaster knows how to play; he or she merely 
hums or whistles a short tune after the initial cast- 
ing, while touching the instrument, When the 
instrument is released, it glows with a faint, amber 
faerie firelike radiance, levitates in the position in 
which it was released, not moving about but not 
falling to the ground, and plays the tune, parts of 
the instrument (such as strings) moving as if it were 
actually being played by an invisible being. When 
touched, the instrument instantly stops playing and 
falls to the ground, its radiance winking out. This 
spell was devised as a court entertainment by 
Vangerdahast, Royal Magician of Suzail. 

No known way has yet been devised to trigger 
it with other spells or barriers, to serve as a warn- 
ing. Various magical means used to cause tempo- 
rary silence mute the music normally without 
stopping the playing of an enspelled instrument. 


Components: V, S 
Range: 10 feet per level 
Casting Time: 3 segments 
Duration: 4 rounds 
Saving Throw: Special 
Area of Effect: One creature 
Definition: By means of this spell, a wizard can 
instantly arrest the movement of a falling, jump- 
ing, or flying creature within spell range (including 
the caster), stopping’all movement for a short time. 
This allows the Aovering creature to launch 
missile weapons, cast spells (the lack of mobility 
is an absolutely stable fix), read scrolls, open 
locks, shout instructions, catch ropes or thrown 
items, and the like. The spell affects only one 
creature, of the caster’s choice und thus the 
magic can readily serve to separate a being nding 
an acrial steed from the (unaffected) mount. 
Willing or not, target creatures visualized or 
seen and concentrated upon by the caster of this 
spell are affected for one round. (Thus, a Necing 
monster could be halted to receive a round's- 
worth of spells or missile weapons.) On the next 
round, the creature (even if willing) receives a 
saving throw vs. spell; if successfully made, 
movement begins again, magically slowed for 
one round to featherfall rate, and thereafter con- 


tinues normally. 

If the save fails, hovering continues as long as 
the caster concentrates on it, However, the target 
gets a saving throw every round it is held, whether 
willing or not. No powers can affect these saving 
throws or the initial stoppage (even a dispel magic 
cast on itself by the affected creature), but crea- 
tures able to become astral or ethereal or plane 
shift may escape the spell in this way. Creatures 
wearing a ring of free action are halted for one 
round by a hover spell, but are thereafter free to 
move normally without being slowed in any way. 


Legendary of Great Arms 
and Fabulous Heroes 
XP Value: 2,400 GP Value: 24,000 
DRAGON Magazine 82 
Kas penned armor, phantom armor, stoneskin, 
protection from normal missiles, shield, and 


forcecage into this highly defense-oriented spell- 
book. 


Legendary of Phantoms and Ghosts 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 20,000 
Dragon Magazine 82 
This spellbook was written by Evard. It contains 
the following spells; phantom armor, phantom 
steed, phantom wind, Evard y black tentacles, and 


wraithform, 


Lexicon of Spirits 
XP Value: 10,000 GP Value: 50,000 
DuNGHON Magazine 33 
This book is an encyclopedia of spirits, alphabet- 
ized in the style of the Kozakura writing system. 
Due to the technical nature of its script, it can be 
read by only wu jen or shukenja of greater than 
3rd level. Each entry is followed by general infor- 
mation concerning the spirit x habitat, origin, and 
general nature, as well as random folklore about 
the spirit, although this information is less reli- 
able than the rest. This can be a very useful item, 
depending on the amount of information the DM 
decides to provide under cach entry, or if an entry 
for a particular type even exists. 
One lexicon in particular, found on Miyashima, 
has the following special entry under “Tkiryo": 
“The ikiryo is the psychic extension of the 
emotions of hatred from one person to anather, It 
is thought to be not so much a spirit as a negative 
channel, since it cannot exist without its creator, 
although it works independently and without the 
n 


„ß  - s 


1191 


— Eee 


~ pelibook, Life of Nature: lis Secrets 7 


knowledge of its creator. It continues to exist 
exactly as long as it takes to drain the life from its 
victim, usually one to two weeks, unless the ikiryo 
is exorcised. There is no known way to destroy an 
ikiryo other than exorcism. 

“Rarely, an ikiryo will be derived from such 
powerful feelings of hate that, with the aid of sor- 
cery, it can become an evil spirit with its own 
identity, usually taking the form of an animal. 
This spirit continues to exist long after its first 
victim is dead and often seeks out new victims, 
especially the kin of the original. This type of 
ikiryo can be destroyed only after its spirit form 
has been seen through truc sight, and this form 
must then be named in its exorcism, This spirit 
actually feeds off the life force of its creator; if it 
is destroyed, its creator dies,” 


Life of Nature: Its Secrets 
XP Value: 3,200 GP Value: 32,000 
DRAGON Magazine 82 
Caligarde penned feather fall, levitate, spider 
climb, web, fly, mount, Caligarde x claw, and 
bind into this spellbook. 


Lord Yaras’s 
XP Value: 12,800 GP Value: 128,000 
Dragons of War 

Yaras’s spellbook (from the world of Ansalon), 
contains the following prayers: animate dead, 
animate object, augury, blade barrier, bless, 
commune, conjure animals, continual light, cure 
blindness, cure critical wounds, cure light 
wounds, cure serious wounds, detect magic, dis- 
pel evil, dispel magic, divination, earthquake, 
flame strike, heal, hold person, holy word, insect 
plague, lower water, prayer, protection from evil 
10' radius, raise dead, remove curse, resist fire, 
sanctuary, silence 15’ radius, spiritual hammer, 
and word of recall. 


Lore of Fiendkind* 

XP Value: 300+ GP Value: 500+ 
DraGoN Magazine $2 
This is a false spellbook, carefully and cleverly 
designed to appear genuine—but none of its 
spells and magical recipes actually work. At the 
end of cach week that this book is studied, there 
is a 10% cumulative chance that a baatezu will 
gate in and attempt to destroy the owner. The type 
of baatezu is dependant on the value of the book 
(see table below), 


XP Value 
Of Book Baatezu Gated In 
000-500 Nupperibo 
501—1,000 Spinagon 
1,001-1,500 Black Abishai 
1,501-2,000 Green Abishai 
2,001-2,500 Barbazu 
2,501-3,000 Osyluth 
3,001-3,500 Amnizu 
3,501-4,000 Cornugon 
4,001-4,500 Gelugon 
4,501+ Pit Fiend 
Lore of Subtle Communication 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 20,000 
Dranon Magazine 82 


This spellbook was penned by Tasha. It contains 
ventriloquism, message, comprehend languages, 
lore, and Tasha 5 uncontrollable hideous laugh- 
ter. 


Luminescence and Coloration 
XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 40,000 
DRAGON Magazine 82 

Nchaser & Tulrun wrote this spellbook, featuring 
light, calor spray, continual light, darkness 15' 
radius, prismatic spray, project image, projected 
image, chromatic orb, Nchaser x glowing globe, 
and Tidrun X tracer. 


Mad Dog of the Desert's 
XP Value: 10,400 GP Value: 104,000 
Day of Al’ Akbar 

Mad Dog's spellbook contains the following 
spells: affect normal fires, burning hands, firewa- 
ter, read magic, flaming sphere, pyrotechnics, 
shatter, zephyr, cloudburst, explosive runes, fire- 
ball, flame arrow, fire charm, fire shield, fire 
trap, wall of fire, avoidance, cloudkill, Leamund s 
lamentable belabourment, teleport, contingency, 
disintegrate, enchant an item, move earth, 
delayed blast fireball, and sequester. 

Original AD&D spell, see Unearthed Arcana. 


of a Magic-User 
(of a Spellcaster) 

XP Value: Varies GP Value: Varies 

DRAGON Magazine 28 
The resale value of these books varies, naturally. 
It will contain a number of wizard spells and is 
04% likely per spell to have an explosive rune on 
any particular spell. If the book contains an 8th- 
Sons 


s 1192 > 


x Spelibook, The Magister y» 


level spell then there is a 40% chance that a sym- 
bol will also be in the book. To find the gp value, 
multiply the XP value x 10. 


Roll Book Contents XP Value 
01-40 ldd Ist-level spells 100/spell 
41-60 Ide Ist-level spells 100/spell 
da 2nd-level spells 200/spell 

61-75 ids e Ist-level spells 100/spell 
do 2nd-level spells 200/spell 

1d3 3rd-level spells 300/spell 

76-85 — 2d6 Ist-level spells 100/spell 
dg 2nd-level spells 200/spell 

1d4+1 3rd-level spells 300/spell 

» 1d3 4th-level spells 400/spell 

86-90 4d4- Ist-level spells 100/spell 
344 2nd-level spells 200/spell 

2d4 3rd-level spells 300/spell 

1d4+1 4th-level spells 400/spell 

1d3 Sth-level spells 500/spell 

91-94  5d4 I st-level spells 100/spell 
ada 2nd-level spells 200/spell 

304 Ird- level spells 300/spell 

2d4 4th-level spells 400/spell 

Id4+1 Sth-level spells 500/spell 

103 6th-level spells 600/spell 

95-97 Sad I st-level spells 100/spell 
4d4 2nd-level spells 200/spell 

3d4 3rd-level spells 300/spell 

2d4 4th-level spells 400/spell 

1d4+1 Sth-level spells 500/spell 

Id 6th-level spells 600/spell 

Ida 7th-level spells 700/spell 

98-99 q I s1-level spells 100/spell 
4d4 2nd-level spells 200/spell 

Ida 3rd-level spells 300/spell 

2d4 4th-level spells 400/spell 

1d4+1 Sth-level spells 500/spell 

1d3 6th-level spells 600/spell 

Ida 7th-level spells 700/spell 

1 8th-level spell 800/spell 

00 Sd4 Ist- level spells 100/spell 
add 2nd-level spells 200/spell 

. 3d4 3rd-level spells 300/spell 

2d4 4th-level spells 400/spell 

Id4+1 Sth-level spells $00/spell 

143 6th-level spells 600/spell 

1d2 7th-level spells 700/spell 

1 8th-level spell $00/spell 

1 9th-level spell 900/spell 


The Magister 
XP Value: 5,000 GP Value: 50,000 
DRAGON Magazine 69 

This tome bears no title, and consists of 16 shects 
of parchment bound with gilded cord to two pol- 
ished plates of ivory. The plates measure 4 hands 
across by 7 hands in length, and are only a little 
less than a finger thick. (A “hand,” or “handwidth,” 
is about 3% inches, a measurement based on the 
size of the delicate hand of the scholar Aleric.) The 
back ivory plate is scarred and scratched, and 
marked with burns and bloodstains, but both plates 
are by all accounts solid and of surprising strength. 
The book has reportedly been dropped at least four 
times, and hurled at a person once, and yet the 
ivory shows no signs of chipping or shattcring. It 
with an cerie “dead-white” or “pearly” radiance 
while a spell was being read aloud (that is, being 
cast) from the tome 

This book is commonly called The Magister 
after the title of the wizard who is believed to 
have written it, (The Magister s tale is too long to 
be recorded here; suffice it to say that he was 
regarded as an unmuatchable wizard and a neutral 
force of what he saw as justice and reason, and is 
remembered with awe and respect for his deeds, 
He disappeared some 90 years ago; some say he 
now dwells on another plane. Since the bulk of 
the volume under discussion lies clearly in the 
province of the illusionist, The Magister may well 
not be the author of it.) 

Reports vary concerning its contents (some 
clearly do so in a deliberate attempt to deceive 
and conceal), but a significant number of 
observers quite independent of one another state 
that The Magister opens with a brief and general 
discussion of the uses of illusion and the extent of 
knowledge concerning magical illusions (in 
Common, and surprisingly current, suggesting 
that the art of the illusionist has advanced but 
little in the last 100 years), and then lays down (in 
the Ruathlek or “secret language”) the spells 
change self, color spray, phantasmal force, detect 
illusion, mirror image, dispel illusion, nondetec- 
tion, massmorph, shadow door, programmed illu- 
sion, and true sight in full, none varying from the 
accepted form (revealed in the PHB). 

These are followed (here the text again reverts 
to the common tongue) by a brief description of 
the casting of three spells, two of which are 


clearly rope trick and summon shadow, the third 
5066 


1193 


J ³˙ m. ³¹¹ ˙ümmAm ð- T 


~ Spelibook, Magnetic and Electric Waves r 


being a shades spell or similar magic (such as 
shadow monsters or demishadow monsters). 
Details and formulae are not given, but enough of 
the somatic and material components arc 
described to allow a nonillusionist to recognize 
these spells as an illusionist begins to cast them. 

The book closes with what is clearly a clone 
spell, followed by a last page whose contents are 
given differently by each source. Some mention a 
curse, others an illusion which appears in the air 
each time the page is exposed, and others state 
that it presents this or that spell in full—all giving 
a different spell. Several of the sources are known 
to be absolutely accurate in other accounts, and 
yet all conflict on this point. Elminster says 
emphatically that it is not possible that several 
volumes exist that are identical, save for the con- 
tents of this last page—and so the only explana- 
tion left is that the contents of this last page may 
change from time to time, either at random or in a 
set sequence or cycle. This is by no means cer- 
tain, and it is hoped that the present owner of The 
Magister, if it still exists, or anyone coming into 
possession of it in the future, will (in confidence 
as to the identity and whereabouts of himself or 
herself) reveal to this seribe the true nature of this 
Last Page. It should also be noted here that Sul- 
jack of the High Captains of Luskan has made a 
standing offer of 55,000 pieces of gold for deliv- 
cry io him of the complete Magister. 


Magnetic and Electric Waves 

XP Value: 1,600 GP Value: 16,000 
DRAGON Magazine & 
Geeh of Longport wrote this spellbook, placing 
shocking grasp, lightning bolt, repulsion, and 
reverse gravity between beautifully rendered 
illustrations. The sage Sarelk believes that Geeh 
painted the illustrations, but there is no signature 
on the works to validate this theory. The value of 
the paintings far outweigh the value of the spells, 
since it ix believed that one of the spells is a 
flawed prismatic sphere spell that calls forth a 
legion of tanar'ri, Unfortunately, no one can 
remember which spell is faulty, and no one is 
willing to try them all. Sarelk, however, after 
careful perusal of the written work, has con- 
cluded that the reverse gravity is that faulty spell. 
If pinned down, however, he still will not commit 
himself. 


Manor’s Manual of Sight 
XP Value: 2.400 GP Value: 24,000 
Dracon Magazine 166 

This book has no cover or spine, but consists 
rather of several plates of silver tied together with 
a cord woven from gold thread, Each sheet of sil- 
ver is about 1% feet long and a foot wide. The 
front and back sheets are blank and much thicker 
than the middle sheets. There are no distinguish- 
ing marks on either cover. 

Manor x Manual of Sight has an ancient but rel- 
atively well-known history, and can be traced back 
many centuries. The exact origin of the book is not 
precisely known, however, and it is acknowledged 
that cither Manor “the Blind” or his apprentice, the 
elven Lord Beltrin, could have fashioned the book. 
Manor is certainly the most likely author, for the 
theme of the work, vision, is in keeping with his 
completely black in color, but he surmounted all 
odds and survived to become a powerful wizard, 
Manor is probably most famous for his highly effi- 
cacious crystal balls, in addition to the large num- 
ber of spells he researched and 

If Manor truly did lay down the spells i in the 
Manual af Sight, he must have willed the book to 
Beltrin before his disappearance, for Beltrin is 
known to have wielded the mind vision spell during 
the attack on the Crystal Palace, in order to avoid 
the treachery of the priest Patoun. Upon his own 
death, Beltrin willed the book to the Elven College 
of Arcane Arts in the Twilight Forest, bequeathing 
it and other powerful volumes to the university in 
the hope that other clves would not need to leave 
their homeland, as he did, to learn magic. 

Shortly after that, the Manual of Sight was stolen 
from the elves in an arrogant and brilliant act of 
thievery committed by the talented master thief 
Tribur, evidently so that he could gain profit from its 
sale to the dark elves of the Low Empire. It remained 
in the Silent School of the drow for over 300 years, 
during which time the dark elves evidently benefit- 
ted from its presence in their continued wars with the 
other members of the Underdark. This fact was 
demonstrated by their brilliant tactical victories in 
the battles of Umphelyon and Dark Reach Caverns, 
both of which were fought in total darkness, 

After that, the Manual of Sight was stolen from 
the Silent School by the dark elf defectors Rathe 
and his brother Sallas (the latter named “the 
Seething” by his brethren) and taken along with 
several other magical tomes of great value to the 


1194 


5 Spellbook, Manor's Manual of Sight y- 


surface realms of Shalom. Sallas retained posses- 
sion of the book for several decades until he traded 
it back to the elves of the Twilight Forest in return 
for protection from reprisals from the Silent 
School. The Twilight elves maintained possession 
of the tome for several decades until they again 
relinquished the book, willingly this time, as they 
granted it to Iminthrese, the wizard ruler of the 
free city of Bluc Bay in return for his gift of sev- 
eral Jost elven tomes. The book was thought to 
have been lost in the fantastic and fatal magical 
duel Iminthrese waged decades later with a lich of 
unknown identity, The book was believed to have 
been destroyed in the fire that consumed the 
majority of Iminthrese’s library. Recently, however, 
several of the Winter Wizards have appeared in 
strange locations, inexplicably avoided all manner 
of traps, and made off with several valuable trea- 
sures. These actions caused the wizard Needram to 
speculate that the mysterious Winter Wizards have 
gained possession of the Manual of Sight. 

The notes of the scholars of the Twilight elves, 
in addition to those of Iminthrese provide full 
details about the magic found within the book. The 
script of the book is clean and flowing, perhaps 
showing that Beltrin wrote the book, not Manor, 
whose writing was somewhat stiff and difficult to 
read even after he gained his magical form of 
sight. The spells contained in the book are all in 
standard form, and each takes up one silver sheet. 
They are as follows: clairvoyance, darksense 
(unique spell), infravision, Manor's mindsight 
(unique spell), Manor's mind vision (unique spell), 
and magic mirror. The three unique spells in the 
Manual of Sight are detailed below. 


Darksense 

(Alteration) 

Level; 3 

Components; V, S, M 

Range: 120 feet 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: | hour per level 

Saving Throw: None 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 

Definition: When a wizard evokes the power of a 
darksense spell, high pitched sounds are transmit- 
ted and received in the manner of bats. From the 
transmission and reception of these sounds, the 
caster is able to gain a clear “picture” of the physi- 
cal, surrounding area. Colors are not perceived nor 
are variations in heat levels, not distinctions 


between light and dark. Therefore, some actions 
such as the reading of scrolls are not possible while 
the caster is under the influence of a darksense 
spell. The caster is unable to detect any visual illu- 
sions, colored gases, clouds of dust or mist, mirror 
images, or insubstantial beings such as certain 
undead. Any spell of silence will nullify this spell. 

The caster does not need to use any other sen- 
sory organs besides his mouth and cars (and thus 
cannot be gagged or have plugged cars when using 
this spell) indeed. the caster may even be blind. 
No concentration is required to maintain the spell, 
but the caster may end the spell at any time before 
it expires. For the duration of the darksense spell, 
the wizard will suffer no penalties for being in 
darkness or light. One drawback to this spell is that 
creatures that are gaseous or insubstantial in nature 
are able to attack the caster as if he or she were 
blind, gaining +4 on attack rolls. 

The material components of the spell are two 
bats’ cars and a small, silver tuning fork. The tun- 
ing fork must be sounded audibly upon comple- 
tion of the spell's casting. The components are 
hot consumed, 


Manor’s Mindsight 

(Alteration) 

Level: 5 

Components: V, S, M 

Range: Special 

Casting Time: 6 

Duration: | turn per level 

Saving Throw: None 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 

Definition: By means of this spell, a wizard gains 

the ability to “see” everything within a range of 20 

feet plus 10 feet per two levels of the caster, 

regardless of any intervening objects. No actual 

sensory organs are needed for the spell to function, 

and thus the wizard may be blindfolded or in a 

completely dark room and still be able to cast 

mindsight. Furthermore, everything within the 

radius of the spell is perceived simultaneously; 

Therefore there is no need for the wizard to look 

up or down to “see” objects above or below. Mind- 

sight does not light a darkened area, though, so the 

wizard would still perceive a dark room as a dark 

room, not a lighted one, The wizard may overcome 

this obstacle by using the mindsight spell in con- 

junction with a darksense or infravision spell. 
When using Manor ¥ mindsight, a wizard may 

not perceive illusions or phantasms for what they 

suor 


a ee e a 


1195 


~q Spellbook, Manual of Powers Beyond Life r 


really are (unless the users Intelligence would nor- 
mally allow distinguishing between the illusion and 
reality), nor may he or she distinguish between 
magical objects and nonmagical items, or make dis- 
tinctions of alignment. Similarly, the wizard cannot 
see traps, tricks, pits, magical symbols, or other 
invisible or magically concealed iterns or objects, 
unless he would be able to detect such items nor- 
mally. A wizard may also surmount the problem by 
casting spells such as detect invisible, detect evil, 
detect magic, and similar spells before the actual 
casting of mindsight. These spells may be used with 
mindsight even if the radius of such spells are not 
equal to the radius of the mindsight spell. 

The wizard may maintain the mindsight spell 
without concentration, and may move, cast spells, 
and engage in other activities while mindsight is 
in effect. If the wizard wishes to view anything 
through the spell, however, he or she must con- 
centrate and is then unable to move, cast spells, or 
engage in any strenuous activities. Ii the wizard is 
attacked while concentrating on the mindsight, 
the spell is not ruined and the caster may resume 
viewing after combat is resolved. The material 
component of the spell is the preserved eye of a 
blink dog, which is reusable. 


Manor's Mind Vision 
(Alteration/Divination) 


Duration: 3 rounds per level 

Saving Threw: None 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 

Definition: Manors mind vision is essentially a 
more powerful version of Manor y mindsight. It is 
subject to the same restrictions and bonuses in 
terms of movement, combat, and concentration, 
as the mindsight spell, and has the same range (20 
feet plus 10 feet per two levels of the caster). The 
mind vision spell also allows the caster to view all 
objects within the radius of the spell simultane- 
ously, as the mindsight spell does, However, 
while using the mind vision spell, the wizard may 
also view unlit areas as if they were brightly light. 
Furthermore, any illusions viewed will be appar- 
ent as such, and the true form of any item or 
object viewed can be easily determined. In addi- 
tion, all invisible objects and creatures may be 


seen, and all polymorphed objects and creatures 


are secn as they are, in a hazy image superim- 
posed, showing the polymorphed form. 

Any magical item viewed with a mind vision 
spell is recognized as such, as if the wizard were 
secing it while using a detect magic spell. Pits, traps, 
secret and concealed doors, symbols, magical traps, 
and so on, are seen in reality. Furthermore, the wiz- 
ard correctly perceives the alignment of any crea- 
ture viewed by the aura it projects (barring the use 
of psionic disciplines). Finally, the wizard may opt 
to forgo the ability to view dark areas as if they were 
lit, and may instead view them with infravision, 
though once a particular mode of vision is chosen it 
may not be changed for the duration of the spell. 

The wizard does not need any functioning sen- 
sory organs for this spell to work, and he may in 
fact be blind, blindfolded, or even without eyes, The 
caster of the spell may view all objects within a 
line-of-sight that he would normally perceive, 
vision through the mind vision, while casting other 
spells or engaging in combat. If the wizard wishes 
to view more distant areas or areas on the other side 
of solid barriers, concentration must be maintained. 
The material components of the spell are two eyes 
from a being originating on a plane other than the 
Prime Material Plane, immersed in a potion of ESP 
and a potion of gaseous form. The components of 
the spell are consumed upon its completion. 


Manual of Powers Beyond Life 
XP Value: 2,400 GP Value: 24,000 
DRAGON Magazine 82 
This penned spellbook, written by Bigby, con- 
tains burning hands, Bigby 3 interposing hand, 
Bigby 3 forceful hand, Rigby x grasping hand, 
Bigby 5 crushing hand, and Bigby 5 clenched fist. 


Mental Impressions of the Retina 
XP Value: 1,600 GP Value: 16,000 
Dancon Magazine 82 
Johydee, an illusion specialist, penned phantas- 
mal force, improved phantasmal force, permanent 
illusion, programmed illusion into this much- 

sought-after booklet. 


Minds of The Unknown 
XP Value: 1,600 GP Value: 16,000 
DRAGON Magazine 82 
Lum, a specialist in consciousness, penned fee- 
blemind, mind blank, dismind, and forget into this 
spellbook. 


sm 


32 c 


1196 


~ Spelibook, Ny Codex of Contention — 


Mordenkainen's 


XP Value: 7,600 GP Value: 76,000 
Mordenkainen’s Fantastic Adventure 
This book contains the following spells: charm 
person, Jump, magic missile, protection from evil, 
continual light, locate object, ray of enfeeblement, 
web, dispel magic, fireball, haste, slow, fire shield, 
ice storm, wizard eye, monster summoning III, 
teleport, wall of force, and globe of invulnerability. 


Multiple Applications of Percep- 
tomancy 
XP Value: 2,800 GP Value: 28,000 
DRaGoN Magazine $2 
Lacral penned this spellbook that contains alarm, 
detect illusion, mislead, dream, dolor, sequester, 
and Laeral y dancing dweomer. 


Mylsibis’s Codex of Contention 
XP Value; 11,600 GP Value: 116,000 
Dracon Magazine 166 
The Codex of Contention is a small magical vol- 
ume, 6 inches long and 3 inches wide. Both cov- 
ers and the spine of the book are fashioned from 
burnished and oiled shadow wood, which still 
possesses a dull gray shine despite the book's 
antiquity. On the inside is a spine made of leather, 
glued to a wooden spine, to which are sewn 28 
pages of high quality vellum. The corners of the 
covers are reinforced by silver corner caps. Silver 
hinges attach the covers to the spine, and both 
covers are joined together on the right side by a 
silver clasp with a simple lock on it, which was 
broken the last time the book was examined. The 
symbol of Myilsibis (a red rose) has been scribed 
on the cover with crimson lacquer, 

The Codex of Contention was first mentioned 
in history when the elven sage Anficl acknowl- 
edged its existence in his diary $2 years ago, after 
visiting the wizard Mylsibis, Anfiel died shortly 
after that under mysterious circumstances. No 
other known record exists from that time describ- 
ing the book. Mylsibis seems to have shown it to 
no other, and none of her six apprentices ever 
mentioned secing the text. Two years later, fol- 
lowing the death of her friend Anfiel, Mylsibis 
journeyed north to fight a lich—Atropos, Master 
of the Mages of the Black Circle, and conjectured 
to be an avatar—who had reunited the forces of 
the Circle after several hundred years of inactiv- 
ity. Mylsibis was convinced that Atropos was 
involved in the death of Anfiel, and she vowed to 


avenge her friend’s death and bring down the 
hated and feared Black Circle. 

Mylsibis met the lich in a sorcerous battle and 
bested him in the previously unheard of arcane 
contention, scattering the remains of the alliance 
of evil wizards. She returned to her tower in 
Wraith Vale to heal from her wounds, but was sur- 
prised by the Shadowflight assassins of Urckene, 
The assassins had been hired by the remnants of 
the Black Circle, and she fell beneath their poiso- 
nous blades. The Codex of Contention vanished 
after her death and was not among the works 
recorded by her apprentices as being in her library 

Three decades later, the work was apparently 
scen by the hard Vadour in the library of the oracle 
at Starfall, though the sighting was never verified. 
Vadour returned to “liberate” the book but could not 
find it. Twelve years later, the book was found 
among the treasures in the lair of the red dragon 
Sthicyns, after the mighty wyrm was brought down 
by a dwarven war party from the Emerald Moun- 
tains assembled for that purpose. The dwarves 
apparently retained possession of the book for 
nearly several decades, until recently, when the 
dwarven king gave the book to a mysterious figure 
called the Mountain Muge (thought by some to be a 
dwarf) in return for his services in fashioning a new 
magical throne for the dwarf king. The Mountain 
Mage is believed to currently possess the book. 

The court magister of the dwarf king renders a 
complete description of the book, a copy of 
which was sent to the Sestarian Imperial Univer- 
sity. The magister claims that the book set forth 
many great offensive incantations, seemingly all 
that Mylsibis knew. The book also apparently 
contained a scrap of papyrus upon which Mylsi- 
bis had hastily written down a new spell, balance, 
that she had just finished researching. The other 
spells were all set down in standard form, one per 
page, and included: burning hands, Bighy 's 
clenched fist, Rigby s crushing hand, High 


forceful hand, Bigby’s grasping hand, Bigby x 


interposing hand, chain lightning, cone of cold, 
cloudkill, erystalbrittle, delayed blast fireball, 
energy drain, evebite, feeblemind, fireball, ice 
storm, incendiary cloud, lightning bolt, magic 
missile, Aſelſ & acid arrow, Melf’s minute mete- 
ors, meteor swarm, Mylsibis * arcane contention 
(unique spell), Otiluke x freezing sphere, power 
word blind, power word xtun, ray of enfeeble- 
ment, and shocking grasp, The two unique spells 
found in Mylsibis $ Codex of Contention follow. 


974 


2 J ieee o 


197 


~ Spelibook, Mylsibis's Codex of Contention 7 


Balance 

(Enchantment) 

Level: | 

Components: V, S, M 

Range: Touch 

Casting Time: 2 

Duration: 2 rounds per level 

Saving Throw: None 

Area of Effect: | person 

Definition: When a wizard casts a balance spell, 
the recipient is able to balance on one or both feet 
in a precarious position that would normally 
cause a fall. Thus, the wizard or a companion 
may walk a tightrope, cross a narrow or unstable 
ledge, or fight near the edge of a cliff without 
fear of falling. Any unhindered balancing action 
requiring a Dexterity check will automatically 
pass. This spell does not modify the recipient's 
Armor Class, missile bonuses, or climbing 
bonuses, though no penalties to these factors are 
taken from balancing. If other factors are intro- 
duced, such as being pushed, injured, or exposed 
to high winds, the recipient must make a Dexter- 
ity check, success meaning that the recipient sim- 
ply moves to recover from the force exerted), The 
material component of the spell is the hoof of a 
mountain goat, which is reusable, 


Mylsibis’s Arcane Contention 
(Enchantment/Evocation/Ilusion/Phantasm) 
Level: 9 

Components: V, S, M 

Range: 10 feet per level 

Casting Time: Special 

Duration: Special 

Saving Throw: Special 

Area of Effect: Special 

Definition: When a wizard or a pair of wizards 
unleashes the spell of arcane contention, they 
enter into a magical duel of extreme efficacy and 
potentially catastrophic effects for the partici- 
pants. The arcane contention creates twin phan- 
tasmal creatures of awesome size, controlled by 
the participants, which vie magically and physi- 
cally to determine a victor. The spell has been 
used historically primarily as a means for settling 
disputes between powerful wizards, and as a 
device that keeps the devastating forces wizards 
wicld against cach other limited in effect to the 
wizards involved. At the same time, the con- 
tention docs not significantly reduce the magical 
arsenal of the victor, and is useful in its capacity 


to inspire awe or fear among any onlookers. 

When the contention is initially entered, only 
one wizard needs to have memorized the spell of 
contention, although both participants may do so. 
If only one wizard has memorized the spell, or if 
but one of the ducling wizards undertakes to cast 
the spell, that wizard must initially issue challenge 
to his opponent. The challenging wizard must then 
cast the first part of the spell, including the chal- 
lenge, A challenge may be issued to any wizard 
within the range of the normal vision of the chal- 
lenger (thus, items such as a crystal ball or eyes of 
the eagle may not be employed), regardless of 
intervening magical barriers or mundane obstacles 
that would otherwise prevent the opponcnt from 
hearing the challenge. The challenge may then be 
accepted or denied by the opponent. 

If the challenge is accepted, the wizard who is 
challenged to the contention must cast at least 10 
levels of spells (for example, one 8th-level spell 
and one 2nd-level spell, or five 2nd-level spells), 
or respond by casting an arcane contention spell 
All of these spells are absorbed to power the con- 
tention, and none of their normal effects manifest 
themselves in any way whatsoever. Once the wiz- 
ard has accepted the challenge, all possible effort 
to cast the spells must be made as soon as pos- 
sible; if there is any delays, the wizard will be 

4 


r CC 


1198 


n 


compelled to cast the necessary levels of spells. 
When the wizard who was challenged completes 
the casting of the requisite spell levels, the arcane 
contention proper is joined. 

If an opponent desires to deny the challenge, a 
saving throw vs. spell must be made to avoid 
being inadvertently drawn into the contention. If 
the saving throw is successful, the wizard may 
ignore the challenge, and the spell will be lost 
from the challenger’s mind. If the saving throw 
fails, however, the challenged wizard is automati- 
cally drawn into the contention and compelled to 
cast the necessary spell levels to power the con- 
tention, If two wizards simultancously cast Mylsi- 
bis v arcane contention, or if one wizard casts the 
spell in response to another's challenge (instead 
of casting 10 levels of spells), then no saving 
throw applies for either wizard, and the con- 
tention must be joined without further delay. 

Once the arcane contention proper begins, both 
wizards become immobile and absolutely vulnera- 
ble. So, although the honor of most creatures pre- 
vents them from attacking a vulnerable wizard 
(much as they would refuse to throw an axe at the 
back of a ducling fighter), it is best for a wizard to 
be in a friendly territory when the contention 
begins or to have prepared some form of magical 
defense, As the duel begins, each wizard must 
choose a monster type to represent him in the bat- 
tle. Any monster may be chosen but it must be a 
monster the wizard has observed before or has 
read or heard about in detail. The monster cannot 
be one that the wizard has merely heard about in 
passing or a beast from legend. The monster docs 
not need to be of the same alignment as the wizard, 
but it cannot be a unique being or specific individ- 
ual, Once both wizards have selected their cham- 
pion monster,” an insubstantial phantasm 
(apparently “real” to observers) of each monster 
forms, at 10 times the creature's normal size 
(which affects apparent size, number of Hit Dice, 
and other applicable clements by a factor of 10, 
except damage per attack, which is three times 
normal). Hit points are rolled for the monsters, and 
2 hp are added to cach monster's total for cach 
level of the controlling wizard. 

Each champion monster that is created has sev- 
eral abilities it may use during the contention. 
Primary among these is the ability to cast spells 
as the wizard controlling it, with the actual type 
and level of spells available to the champion cor- 
responding to those currently memorized by the 


Spelldook. Mylsibis’s Codex of Contention 


— ——ỹ—êy 4 


controlling wizard (material spell components are 
not needed. and the monsters may not learn Afyl- 
sibis x arcane contention). The magical monsters 
are in all other respects identical to the stock 
from which they are envisioned, including aspects 
such as special abilities, resistances, Intelligence, 
immunities, and so on, and may draw on these 
often considerable powers during the combat. 
Fortunately, the magical monsters may damage 
only each other, whether the damage is caused by 
weapons, natural weaponry, or spells, and may 
take damage from only another phantasmal mon- 
ster created by an arcane contention spell. 

The champion monsters proceed to do battle 
with each other, under the direction of the control- 
ling wizards, who select the type of attack the mon- 
sters make and the spells they cast. All movements, 
attack rolls, damage rolls, and saving throws are 
made exactly as they would be for a normal battle. 
During the battle, cach wizard must maintain con- 
centration, or contro! of the monster is lost during 
the interruption. If “uncontrolled,” a monster may 
attack only physically (it cannot employ spells 
unless the wizard maintains concentration). 

The monsters may not attempt to end the battle 
prematurely by using spells or physical movements 
to leave, and may not willingly move out of sight of 
either of the controlling wizards, The battle is con- 
cluded when one monster dies as a result of dam- 
age accrued from the attacks of the other monster. 

The efficacy of the monsters is not totally pre- 
determined by the conditions mentioned, and 
cach wizard may affect the condition or effective- 
ness of his or her phantasm in one of several 
ways, though at considerable personal loss in 
many cases. The hit point total of the monsters 
may be increased by channeling hit points from 
the controlling wizard to the phantasm, at a direct 
one-to-one ratio, for hit points gained per hit 
points lost. Also, the damage caused by spells or 
other attacks cast by the phantasms may be 
increased in strength if the wizard is willing to 
suffer a loss of ability score points. The wizard 
may use all ability scores for this purpose, every 
point sacrificed increases the damage of the 
attack by | point. Lost ability score points are 
regained at the rate of | every two rounds for 
each ability below normal, The loss of ability 
points is only illusory, but no score may be 
reduced below 0; if any score is at 0 at the end of 

Additionally, the wizards involved may also 

8 


. 1199 g 


| ee ee ]⅛˙ '⁵A⁵ 4 ⅛˙ͤL—Lm—22 


Spellbook, The Nathlum 


— caasa — 


influence the monsters by expending charges 
from any magical items they possess. Each 
charge may increase the monster s hit point total 
by 1, or increase the amount of damage done in 
an attack by | point. Any healing the wizard 
receives during the contention may optionally be 
applied to the champion, with the exccption of a 
heal spell. Magical healing received by the mon- 
ster becomes ineffective once it has received 
more than twice its original number of hit points. 

For example; A wizard with 56 hp wishes to 
increase the hit point total of his monster (which 
currently has 200 hp) by 40. The wizard's new 
total will be 16 hp, and the monster's new total 
will be 240. The wizard also has a Strength of 16 
and a Constitution of 17, If the champion monster 
is directed to cast a fireball spell that would nor- 
mally do 67 points of damage, the wizard may 
opt to reduce both Strength and Constitution 
scores by 10, to 6 and 7, respectively. The mon- 
ster then inflicts 87 points of damage to its oppo- 
nent (saving throw applicable). Much later, the 
monster is severely wounded and has but 42 hp 
remaining. The wizard drinks a potion of extra- 
healing and opts to use half of the 20 hp gained 
for self-heuling, bringing the wizard’s total up to 
26 hp, and the monster's hit point total up to 52. 

When the battle is concluded, both phantasms 
vanish, and the wizard whose champion has lost the 
battle takes damage equal to one-tenth of the total 
number of points of damage the champion suffered 
(no saving throw). In addition, the wizard loses 
from memory all the spells the champion cast dur- 
ing the battle. The victor of the arcane contention 
loses one-twenticth of the total points of damage his 
or her champion suffered, but docs not lose any 
memorized spells (besides Mylsibis ů arcane con- 
tention, of course). The victor also gains experience 
points equal to half the experience point value of the 
vanquished wizard. Additionally, enemies of the 
victor under 2 HD who viewed the battle must make 
morale checks or suffer from the effects of a fear 
spell, and those of 2-4 HD must make a saving 
throw vs. spell or suffer from the effects of a scare 
spell. All those friendly to the victor gain a bonus of 
+1 on their next morale check. 


The Nathlum 
XP Value: 6,400 GP Value: 64,000 
Dracon Magazine 69 
A nondescript volume of brown, curling parch- 
ment leaves sewn to a gray canvas cover, the Nath- 


lum is powerful and wholly evil. Its protective 
magic cannot be dispelled (at least, not by the spell 
commonly known as dispel magic), and these pro- 
tections cause all creatures of good alignment and 
instinct to suffer blinding, burning pain in the eyes 
and head. (Elminster offers a confusing descrip- 
tion of the symptoms which need not be detailed 
here but can be interpreted thus: Anyone of good 
alignment will suffer Ida points of damage per 
round that the book is in his or her hands.) Its ori- 
gin and the reason for its name are unknown; its 
first definite identification is in the catalog of 
Tymor Threeshields, an inventory of the booty he 
brought back from the Orcfastings war, but hints 
of it can be traced through the scanty written 
records of the orcs under the leadership of Wund 
and Orfidel writes almost 400 years ago of his 
mecting with the evil wizard Lethchauntos the 
Black, who went to dwell among the ores, and 
describes what could well be the Vathlum in 
Lethehuuntos possession. From Tymor’s hall. the 
volume went to Neverwinter as part of the dowry 
of Tymor's daughter Nulauznee (Elminster sus- 
pects that Tymor wished to be rid of it), Nothing 
more is heard of the book until it passes unexpect- 
edly into the hands of Phrandjas of Port I last (a 
northern town), a thaumaturge whose careful and 
exacting studies enabled him to subsequently rise 
quickly in the ranks of the Art. Phrandjas takes 
characteristic pains over his notes regarding the 
Nathlum;, we learn that it appeared to be complete 
when he received it, and held 16 recipes for poi- 
sons, four glyphs of warding set down nowhere 
else, and the formula of the spell maze. Phrandjas, 
despite the pain caused him by perusing the book 
(because he was good), copied certain of the 
recipes for later sale to the alchemists of the town, 
and all of the glyphs, and Elminster has passed on 
some of this information. 

The poison recipes have not been made known 
by Elminster; in his words, “They are largely sim- 
ple to make, and recipes will undoubtedly fall 
into the wrong hands, given your sometimes too 
efficient communications.” For adventurers, how- 
ever, he hus provided the means of identifying the 
substances. 


The Poisons of the Nathlum 

Belpren is a luminescent blue. acidic substance 
that does 1412 points of damage instantly upon 
contact with skin or internal tissues (no save). 


Further applications of belpren to affected arcas 
ns 


8 1200 X 


ee űE 


Spellbook, The Nathium r 


will not cause any additional harm, but the dam- 
age given above is for a roughly hand-sized area 
of body exposure; for cach additional such arca 
of skin affected, an additional 1d12 points of 
damage will be suffered. However, no additional 
damage from ingestion is possible; immediate 
and involuntary vomiting will be induced by any 
added belpren applied to affected internal areas. 
Belpren will not corrode metal, nor will it harm 
cloth or cured leather. It dries and becomes inef- 
fective in just over one round if exposed to air, 
and so cannot be used on weapons. Belpren can 
be neutralized by the application of lamp oil. It is 
effective on all creatures. 

Dwarfbane is a rare, gummy oil that is poiso- 
nous only to dwarves, Insinuative, it is commonly 
smeared on weapons, It does not dry oul, but pro- 
longed exposure to air lessens its potency; it is 
effective only for 1d6+25 days. Upon contact, 
dwarfbane does 1d8 points of damage with a pain 
“like blazing skewers,” and a further 1d6 points 
on cach of the following three rounds. (A suc- 
cessful saving throw will cut all damage by half.) 

Huld (also called “Leap” or “Deathdance”) is 
an odorless oil that is effective on nonhumanoid 
creatures (it is not effective on demihumans and 
humans) and works only by insinuation. Its 
effects are the same regardless of dosage, and 
appear Ida rounds after the application. (Save for 
no damage.) Huld causes severe muscle spasms 
involving nausea and the loss of motor control, 
balance, and speech, lasting for 1d6 rounds. Dur- 
ing this time a victim is helpless but by no means 
an casy target for physical attack. since he or she 
is usually thrashing and moving about rapidly and 
wildly. Mental processes are entirely unaffected 
(psionic or other communication can be initiated 
or will continue, and in some cases can be used 
by the victim, as well as others, to control the poi- 
son's effects), A particular individual will be 95% 
resistant to huld for a period of 1d10+10 days 
after an exposure to it, and thus repeated dosages 
in a single encounter will almost always not be 
effective, Huld is generally thought to affect all 
nonhumanoids, but some apparent immunities 
are reported and conjectured. 

Jeteye is a glossy, reflective black liquid that 
affects all mammals upon ingestion, (Ineffective if 
insinuative contact only; save for half damage.) It 
causes the pupils of the eyes to go black (although 
this does not affect vision) and causes 1d8 points 
of neural damage immediately. No pain is felt by 


1201 


the victim, however, for Jeteye kills all pain and 
tactile sensation for a period of 1d8+8 rounds (the 
“black eyes” sign will be of the same duration as 
this anesthetic effect), Jeteye is sometimes volun- 
tarily used before torture or immediately after bat- 
tle injuries (preventing a system shock survival 
roll). It has a bitter, black walnut flavor and is hard 
to conceal in food or drink. 

Lhurdas (also known as “the yellow death” 
and “Beltyn'’s Last Drink”) is a wine-based poi- 
son. It has a sharp, dry white-grape flavor, and 
will readily mix with white wine. It reacts with the 
digestive acids in the stomach (and ts cffectual in 
human, orc, and elvish body chemistrics) to cat 
away internal organ tissues, Ingestion produces 
rapid (within 2 rounds) nausea, convulsions, and 
terrific internal cramps and burning pain, doing 
do points of damage in its first effective round, 
2d6 in the second, and Ida in the third. After that 
it does no more damage, regardless of dose, and 
further exposure to Ihurdas will cause discomfort 
and inhibit healing, but cause no more damage for 
a period of 3d8 days; ineffective if applied exter- 
nally. (Save for half damage.) 

Orvas is a translucent liquid with a green cast 
and a bittersweet taste, It does ldi points of dam- 
age upon entering the bloodstream (immediately 
if by insinuation, which must be through a scrape 
or wound, or in 1d6+18 turns if by ingestion), and 
Ida points of damage each round for the follow- 
ing two rounds, A successful saving throw means 
that orvas is ineffective against the target creature. 
Orvas is an antidote to varrakas (see below) if it is 
introduced into the bloodstream before varrakas 
has run its course, Orvas works on all mammals, 

Prespra (also known as Mother S Bane”) is an 
odorless, colorless liquid that mixes readily with all 
drinkable liquids except milk and dairy products, 
from which it separates. Effective only in humans 
and only when ingested, it causes sudden dizzy 
spells and visual distortion, beginning 1d3 rounds 
after contact and lasting for Id la rounds. During 
this time the victim moves unstcadily and fights at 
to hit, +2 penalty on AC if only normal (dis- 
torted) vision is owned, or I on attack rolls and +2 
on AC if endowed with infravision or heightened 
visual senses, At the same time the victim endures 
da points of damage per round as surface blood 
vessels burst all over the body (giving a blotched, 
reddened appearance to the skin), Each round a 
successful saving throw will avoid such damage, 
but if the victim suffers an injury through combat 

sors 


X.. e.. [Z! 


x Spelibook, Nehaser's Elyromancia r 


or misadventure during the round no saving throw 
is allowed (the cause and shock of the injury aggra- 
vates the sudden fluctuations in blood flow and 
pressure prespra causes, it works by alternately and 
erratically constricting and expanding blood ves- 
sels throughout the victim body). 

Ulerun is a milky-white, viscous liquid that is 
effective on all warm-blooded creatures, by insin- 
uation only (no saving throw). Two rounds after 
contact, it causes 1d4 points of muscular damage 
weakening and softening tendons, ligaments, 
bones, and cartilage. On the following round it 
causes 1d12 points of damage, and 1d4 points on 
the round thereafter, when its effects pass. Until 
healing processes (natural or magical) counter its 
effects, the creature affected will have lost 1d4 
points of Strength and | point of Dexterity. 

Varrakas is a black, thick syrup. To avoid 
detection, single drops are usually added to 
gravics or dark sauces, but the effects increase 
with the dose ingested. Varrakas has a slightly 
oily taste, but no strong flavor. Every drop of var- 
rakas does ldd points of damage when it enters 
the bloodstream (it passes the digestive system 
masquerading as a nutrient), and does not act for 
a period of 1d6+18 turns after ingestion. Varrakas 
is harmless if applied externally, Effective on all 
mammals, (Save for half damage.) 


The Glyphs of the Nathlum 

The glyphs of warding found in Nathlum 
reflect its evil nature. All may be used only by 
wizards of evil alignment, and can only harm 
beings of good alignments. Anyone of good 
alignment may pass a glyph x location unharmed 
by speaking its name or by destroying the glyph. 
The passage of neutral or evil characters will not 
trigger any of these g/yphs. They are: 

Curtal can be cast only by a priest of at least 
10th level. Attempts to pass this glyph causes arms 
of fire to burst from its three pointed ends and 
strike the creature or creatures attempting to pass, 
each arm doing 44 points of damage. Each arm of 
fire strikes a different target if there are three or 
more targets available; otherwise two will strike 
the nearest target and one another, or all three will 
strike at a solitary target. (Save for half damage.) 
Activation of this glyph always alerts a guardian, 
sometimes summoning a fiend or tanar'ri to the 
spot instantly, but more often warning spellcasters 
or beastkeepers to ready their charges. The glyph 


remains until erased, striking out with arms of 


flame every time it ts activated. Dispel magic 
causes one of the arms of fire to shrink back and 
not strike for that activation. In cach round that 
creatures stand before the glyph but do not speak 
its name (that is, not having passed it, but within 
15 feet), curtal will activate—so slow moving 
creatures could be struck several times. 

Hlack can be cast only by priest of at least the 
Oth level. This functions as a magical barrier pre- 
venting those of good alignment from passing. 
The barrier of force will stand until the actual 
area on which the g/yph was cast is destroyed, 
thus breaking the g/yph, or until a Anock, erase, or 
similar spell is employed, Anyone of good align- 
ment will strike an invisible wall and suffer 1d6 
points of electrical damage. Further contact with 
the barrier will cause I- points of electrical 
damage per round (no save). 

Yammas can be cast only by priests of 8th level or 
higher. When activated, 1d8+10 screaming, chitter- 
ing mouths appear all about the g/yph, and shoot 
forth on long (up to 20 feet long) snakelike necks to 
bite at the creature activating the glyph. The victim 
must save against cach manifestation or be struck 
by it, suffering Ida points of damage. The fangs dig 
in, much like a lamprey attack, and the mouths 
drain ] point of blood each per round (AC 7) after 
that until they or the victim are destroyed. Each can 
be severed by inflicting 7 points of damage on it (as 
long as at least the seventh point is caused by an 
edged weapon), or by the victim pulling free of its 
grasp. Any character with a Strength of 16 or more 
is allowed to attempt saving throws against three of 
the mouths cach round— if a particular save is suc- 
cessful, the mouih x grip breaks, it does not drain 
blood on that round, and it shrinks back into the 
wall or hangs lifeless. This glyph does not vanish 
after one activation; it will retract its surviving 
mouths and wait for the next victim until all the 
mouths have been i 

Zuth can be cast only by priests of at least 6th 
level, It is cast upon a door or the frame of an 
opening; anyone of good alignment passing 
through or under the portal suffers 2d6 points of 
electrical damage arcing from side to side of the 
frame at many points around it, across the opening. 


Nehaser’s Elyromancia 
XP Value: 1,600 GP Value: 16,000 
Dragon Magazine 62 
This tome is thin, bound in black leather, and 
bears the title E/vromancia on the cover, stamped 


w16 


. 


1202 


D 


Spelibook, Nchaser's Elyromancia 


DMA R E 


and inlaid with mother-of-pearl. The edges of the 
tome have all about been protected with beaten 
copper strips, and these are fitted with two clasps. 
The clasps are unlatched by twisting a silver knob 
on each, if the bottom knob is twisted without 
first twisting and removing the top one, a poi- 
soned needle springs up the side of the knob, The 
assassin Nathode says it is coated with Type D (or 
equivalent intensity) insinuative poison, appar- 
ently renewed from a reservoir under the binding. 
Nathode did not handle the tome himself, but 
observed its effect upon another. His testimony 
verifies a folk legend which says that all who try 
to open Nehaser $ Elyromancia die. 

Nathode’s recollection dates back seven win- 
ters, when the book was brought to the court of 
Lord Nasher by a merchant, one Furjur the Flip- 
pant, who told the Lord that the tome was sold to 
him by a band of adventuring dwarves he encoun- 
tered in a clearing deep in the northern forests, 
One of the members of Nasher’s court attempted 
to open the book, with fatal results (this is what 
Nathode observed), and it was placed unopened 
in the Lord's library (Furjur had gifted it to the 
Lord in return for a charter). It was subsequently 
stolen during the riots of the Five Fires Rising, 
and its present whereabouts are unknown, 

The wizard Nehaser has not been seen for 
neurly 20 winters. Before his disappearance 
Nehaser wandered the Realms, working and 
seeking after magic, and upon two occasions 
served as an advisor to a local ruler. On the sec- 
ond of these occasions, while serving the High 
Captains of the city of Luskan, Nchaser wrote the 
Elyromancia and gave it to the High Captain 
Taerl, Some time after Nchascr’s departure, the 
tome was stolen, and like its author it has wan- 
dered the Realms ever since. Alustriel, the High 
Lady of Silverymoon, had it bricfly, gifting it to a 
dwarf of the Citadel Adbar. The dwarf never 
returned home, and the book was lost again—and 
so it has gone through the years. 

The wizard Arbane, who saw the book bricfly 
while it was at Luskan (he was friend to the High 
Captain Suljack), reports that it contains four wiz- 
ard spells: Nulathoe Hine n (pronounced Nin- 
em-en), a unique spell of the Sth-level used to 
protect and preserve a dead body; Nchaser 5 glow- 
ing globe, a unique spell of the 4th-level which is 
used in the creation of luminous globes, and the 
rare spells part water and statue. (A “unique” spell 
is a spell not commonly available, found only in the 


text in question or else believed to have been first 
set down therein, In some cases it means only that 
the text in question is the earliest surviving source 
of the spell.) The first of the unique spells were 
devised by Nchaser’s tutor Nulathoe, and the sco- 
ond is of Nchaser’s invention: By the kindness of 
Arbane the Mighty, both are reproduced below, 


9 Wann 7 
N > f 
ù N j 


Nulathoe’s Ninemen 

Level: 5 

Range: Touch 

Duration: Permanent 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 5 

Saving Throw: None 

Area of Effect: One corpse 

Definition: This spell serves to protect dead crea- 
tures of all sorts against normal decay, magically 
strengthening the joints of corpses or corpse 
limbs to keep them supple and usable. Its most 
prevalent practical use is to preserve dead com- 
rades for placing atop a bier in a sepulcher, or in 
hopes that they may be raised. The wizard 
requires fresh blood from a creature of the same 
race or species as the subject, and the dust or 
powder resulting from the crushing of a moon- 
stone of not less than 7 gp value. As the words of 


the spell ure spoken, the most vital areas of the 
4074 


1204 


Spellbook of Num the Mad 


— (— e a 


body (chest cavity, head and neck, joints of 
extremities) are sprinkled with a small amount of 
blood, and the whole body is then sprinkled with 
the moonstone dust. The closing gesture of the 
spell is the touching of the corpse, when the spell 
will take immediate effect. Note that this spell 
does not heal wounds or staunch bleeding. 


Nchaser’s Glowing Globe 

Level: 4 

Components: V, S, M 

Range: Touch 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: Permanent 

Saving Throw: None 

Area of Effect: Special 

Definition: This spell requires a globe of blown 
glass of the finest quality, and a spark. By the use 
of this spell the caster creates an effect identical 
to a continual light spell centered within a trans- 
parent object, but with the brightness of the light 
under the caster’s mental control. Continuous 
control need not be maintained; the caster can 
merely exert concentration to change the current 
luminosity of the globe, and it will continue to 
emit the desired amount of light until a new men- 
tal command is received (unless, of course, it 
should be destroyed). Mental control may be 
maintained over a globe from a distance of 90 
feet per level of the caster (plus 40 feet per point 
of Intelligence over 15). Control of a globe can- 
not be wrested from another except by means of a 
wish or limited wish—or upon the death of the 
owner, when the expectant owner must touch the 
globe to take mastery over it. 


Nonsubstance Encyclopaedia 
XP Value: 1,600 GP Value: 16,000 
DRAGON Magazine 82 
This spellbook, penned by Asmiak, contains 
erase, nondetection, misdirection, and improved 
phantasmal force. 


of Num the Mad 
XP Value: 9,600 GP Value: 96,000 
Dracon Magazine 97 
This work is a slim volume of rough slabs of 
ironwood, tied together by leather thongs in a 
“sandwich” around 24 loose, unbound sheets of 
fine parchment. Num “the Mad” (no relation to 
“Lum the Mad”) was crippled from birth and 
grew up, ridiculed and teased, in the alleys of Sel- 


gaunt port, His only place of refuge was the 
splendid Hunting Garden of the Hulorn of Sel- 
gaunt, a vast, high-walled preserve within the city 
forbidden to all save the Hulorn’s guests (Num 
found an old sewer that led into its grounds). Able 
only to crawl, Num was seen one day and casily 
chased down by one of the Hulorn’s huntsmen, 
who rode him over and unrested a lance to slay 
the intruder—and was himself slain by the fall of 


a dead tree. Num left hastily and made for the 
inland forests. 


Although hitherto cynical and god-derisive, he 
saw the tree’s fall not as chance but as the direct 
work of Silvanus, and he began to worship the 
god with devotion. Seeking out a druid of the Cir- 
cle nigh Shadowdale, he learned the basics of 
woodlore and worship, and soon became a her- 
mit, holding himself apart from men and working 
tirelessly to improve the forest At length he was 


healed of his disabilities by grateful sylvan elves, 


and he lived long in solitude and serenity, devel- 
oping special prayers to Silvanus—for which, and 
for his works, he was rewarded with special pow- 
ers from the god of the forest. Upon his death, the 
elves kept his grove and cave-home from fortune 
hunters and searching druids alike, and it was 


many years before raiding ores under Gorth 
s078 


1205 


bo Žž . —— — — ȘT 


Spellbook of Num the Mad 


— . + 


gaincd Num prayer book, stealing it away to 
unknown hands. Num was not mad, but had 
strange manners of speech and thought, and was 
popularly believed among men to be so, hence his 
nickname. His prayers are finely written in a 
flowing hand, and are well thought of by elves 
and druids alike. 

It is from the writings of the elf Ruven Mithal- 
varin that we have a record of the book’s contents. 
Each page contains a single prayer. The first is a 
general thanksgiving (a nonmagical ritual) to Sil- 
vanus. The other 23 are specific instructions and 
litanies on how to pray to the Silvanus for spe- 
cific spells, as follows: faerie fire, invisibility to 
animals, paxs without trace, purify water, fire 
trap, obscurement, hold animal, snare, tree, 
water breathing, briartangle (unique prayer), call 
woodland beings, plant door, thorn spray (anique 
prayer), commune with nature, control winds, 
pass plant, turn wood, weather summoning, ani- 
mate rock, confusion, death chariot (unique 
prayer), and fransmute metal to wood. The special 
prayers devised by Num (or inspired in him by 
Silvanus) are as follows: 


Briartangle 

(Alteration) 

Level: 4 

Sphere: Plant 

Components: V, S. M 

Range: | yd per 2 levels (from caster to spell 
focus) 

Casting Time: 6 

Duration: | round per level 

Saving Thron: 

Area of Effect: Special 

Definition: A briartangle spell causes living 

shrubbery or undergrowth of any type to be 

instantly changed to densely tangled briars of the 

thorniest sort, growing to 6 feet in height and 

increasing in horizontal volume to a 10 yard 

radius, plus | yard additional radius for every two 

levels of experience of the caster (thus, a 10th- 

level druid would cause a briartangle of 15 yard 

radius). The briars can be readily forced through, 

but will snag and halt missiles, thrown objects, or 

flying creatures within their confines; all crea- 

tures trapped within a briartangle when it forms, 

or those that enter it after that, suffer 1d4+2 

points of piercing and scratching damage per 

round, or portion of it, that they remain in contact 

with the spell. Beings clad in banded, scale, or 


plate mail have all damage reduced to 1d3 points 
per round, This also applies to creatures made of 
rock or with skin of comparable hardness, but 
creatures with lesser armor, such as chain, take 
full damage, with or without a shield. In all cases, 
a successful save vs, spells equals half damage. 
Spell casting requiring a somatic component is 
impossible within a briartangle, and cloth rai- 
ment and items must save vs. acid once per round 
(or portion of it) that they are within the briartan- 
gle y confines or be rent and torn. A briartangle 
will vanish instantly if the caster so wills, but oth- 
erwise exists for one round per experience level 
of the caster, the plants afterwards reverting to 
their former state. 

The material components of the spell are living 
plants of any type (which are transformed into the 
briartangle), mistletoe, a thorn from any plant, 
and a bud, petal, or leaf from a briar (wild rose). 
Fire will destroy a briartangle in a round, but 
creatures within it take adi points of fire damage 
(no saving throw). The area where a briartangle 
was cast radiates a faint dweomer for 2d3 turns 
after the spell has expired, and can be used to 
confuse creatures following a pass without trace 
trail by detecting a dweomer. 


Thorn Spray 
(Alteration) 
Level: 4 


Area of Effect: Special 
Definition: By means of this spell, a druid can 
cause barbs, spikes, thorns, or spines, either natu- 
tally growing or magically created (that is, by use 
of a spike growth, wall of thorns, or briartangle 
spell), to spring with force from his or her hand, 
or from bushes or resting places (which must be 
within 10 feet of the druid), and serve as missiles, 
The thorns will do point of damage cach, and 
can fly up to 12 yards away, within the round of 
casting, striking as many targets as the druid 
wishes and the spell allows. The druid may direct 
the thorns in any combination at any living or 
nonliving (a scroll, lantern, or wineskin) targets 
that he or she can see. The thorns strike only if a 
successful attack roll is made (at +4) for each, as 
e 


— 1206 z 


Oa qq ²oꝛ¹ w a SÁ 


ID d A a ae 


Spellbook, Ocrthmagik y- 


though they were directly wielded by the druid 
(no range penalties apply). Sleepvenomed 
wooden darts are sometimes carried by druids 
who use this spell often. The missiles of a thorn 
spray twist and turn in flight to follow moving 
targets and avoid obstructions, and are fast 
enough to catch most birds on the wing (moving 
approximately 1200 yards per round), A maxi- 
mum of four thorns per experience level of the 
druid can be animated by means of this spell. 
This spell will work underwater, but the thorns 
roll to hit at normal to-hit odds, and the range is 
reduced to 6 yards. 


Death Chariot 
(Evocation/Conjuration/Summoning) 

Sphere; Creation, elemental (fire) 

Level: 7 

Components: V, S, M 

Range: N/A 

Casting Time: | turn 

Duration: Special 

Saving Throw: Special 

Area of Effect: Special 

Definition: When this spell is cast, a clap of thun- 
der sounds and a billowing cloud of smoke erupts 
from the caster. Within this cloud appears a flam- 
ing chariot pulled by two fiery horses. The chariot 
moves 240 feet on the ground, 480 feet flying, and 
can carry up to nine human-sized creatures (the 
caster need not be among them). The chariot feels 
uncomfortably hot to approach, and merely touch- 
ing one of the horses will do 3d8 points of fire 
damage, but boarding or touching the chariot will 
do no damage. Anyone in the chariot may control 
its path by verbal command, causing the flaming 
steeds to stop or go, walk, trot, run or fly, turn left 
or right, rise, or descend. The vehicle and steeds 
can be harmed by water (one quart will cause | 
point of damage) or by magical weapons. The 
steeds are AC 2, and can be dispelled by inflicting 
30 points of damage each. The steeds and chariots 
can be forcibly returned to the Elemental Plane of 
Fire by use of such spells as dispel magic and 
holy/unholy word. Fire and electricity will harm 
neither the chariot nor steeds, but cold-, ice-, and 
water-based magic causes double damage. 

A death chariot closely resembles a chariot of 
sustarre, save that its enchantments are less stable 
and more temporary; at the end of one turn after 
casting (or at any time previous to that, if the 
caster wishes), the death chariot will suddenly 


explode in a gigantic ball of fire and vanish 
(along with its steeds). All in the chariot or within 
30 feet will take 10d4 points of fire damage (save 
equals half damage); passengers suffer a further 2 
points of blast shock (as oxygen is consumed in 
the blast, and air rushes back in to fill the void), 
and if the chariot vanishes in midair— falling 
damage unless magical items or spells afford 
escape. Readily combustible materials such as 
cloth, wood, paper, and oil are consumed in the 
blast (add flaming oil damage to any chariot pas- 
senger carrying oil on their person). All other 
items (including scrolls and spell books) gain a 
saving throw vs. fireball, If items also suffer a fall 
from a midair death chariot blast, they must also 
save against its cffects. Bringing an alchemy jug 
or a decanter of endless water into the chariot 
causes it to explode immediately. 

The material components of the spell are a small 
piece of wood, bark, or handful of shavings, two 
holly berries, and a fire source at least equal to a 
torch. Note that a druid could well deceive others 
into thinking the death chariot is a chariot of sus- 
tarre by touching them before they enter the char- 
iot and accompanying them. The druid causes the 
chariot to explode by act of will, not verbal com- 
mand, so he or she could “bail out” before igniting 
the trap—or, alternatively, ride the chariot in safety 
for a short trip (across a chasm, down from a cliff, 
tower, or battlement for example), and then leave it 
as a fiery trap, or even send it back at a pursuing 
enemy before causing it to explode. Attempts to 
charm, sleep, or hold the fiery steeds will be 
unsuccessful, The maximum duration of existence 
of a death chariot (if it does not explode) is one 
round per level of the caster; if kept for maximum 
duration, the chariot fades away harmlessly, 


Oerthmagik 
XP Value: 4,800 GP Value: 48,000 
Dracon Magazine 200 

Nazralte GrvnClithe (Naz) was born to human par- 
ents of mixed Suloise and Ocridean stock in the 
isolated realm of Celene in Greyhawk. Although it 
is Widely believed that Naz has some elven blood 
in him, he did not get along well with the elves in 
his native land. This fact, combined with a thirst 
for knowledge and a curiosity that would drive him 
to the corners of the known worlds, spurred Naz to 
seek his fortune outside Celene. 

Naz roamed far and wide over the lands of 


Oerth, Along with his wanderlust, Naz felt a 
5079 


* 1207 z 


P. ˙ mA S E S 


Spellbook, Oerthmagik 


.. —uͥ2g— . m: 


burning need to push hack the boundaries of 
magical theory, especially those regarding the 
elemental planes and their magic. Naz’s drive for 
knowledge made him quite an experimenter; his 
tinkering with the elemental and quasielemental 
forces destroyed not only his labs, but neighbor- 
ing buildings, on several occasions. 

Naz kept records of his wanderings and his 
experiment’s results, These records he condensed to 
one volume: Oerthmagik. All that is known about 
Oerthmagik is that it’s a large 12 by 9 by 3 inch vol- 
ume bound in bronze and covered with gorgon hide. 
Inscribed upon the hide in Common are the title of 
the work and its original author, Nazralte G.C. 

The current location of Naz and his spellbook are 
unknown. Speculation is that Naz fell or was lost on 
one of his extraplanar journeys. As Oerthmagik was 
not among the belongings Naz left behind, he either 
took it with him, or it has been stolen since Naz’s 
disappearance. Most believe the fate of the man and 
the book to be linked somehow. Adventurers, espe- 
cially wizards, are advised to remain cognizant of 
the missing wizard and his spellbook. 

Inside are details of some of the most intensive 
research undertaken by Naz. The first 40 pages 
are full of notes and hypotheses about the Ele- 
mental Planes of Fire and Water, and the Paraele- 
mental Plane of Ice and the Quasielemental Plane 
of Lightning. (In game terms, these notes provide 
a reader with knowledge of the best ways to sur- 
vive trips to these planes—sce the PLANESCAPE 
Campaign setting for specific information.) 

Following these pages are recipes for the cre- 
ation of potions of fire breath and healing. The 
last 70 pages of Oerthmagik relate the spells that 
Naz successfully researched, including several of 
his own manufacture. Written upon these pages 
are the following spells: flaming sphere, frostfire, 
lightning bolt, proficiency, bands of ice, stone- 
skin, wizard eye, lightning curtain, lightning- 
cloak, vanish, deathshroud, and meteor swarm. 
The spells that Naz created are the following: 


Frostfire 

(Alteration) 

Level: 2 

Components: V, S, M 
Range: 10 yards per level 


Definition: Through the use of the frostfire spell, 
the wizard is able to change the normally hot radi- 
ance of fires to a cold radiance. Two effects may be 
produced through the use of this spell. The first is a 
total absence of heat radiation (/ight spell); the 
flame will continue to burn and give off light, but 
no heat is produced. The second category causes 
the flames to burn cold, and they will inflict frost 
damage to anyone who comes into contact with 
them. For example, a torch normally causes Ida 
points of heat damage. If the cold version of the 
spell is cast upon the torch, it will now inflict 1d3 
points of cold damage to anyone struck by the 
torch. The flames subjected to this spell become 
tinged with blue for the duration of the spell. 

As a rule, the wizard can affect an amount of 
flame equal to one torch or four candles for every 
level that she possesses. For the purposes of this 
spell, a small campfire is considered to be equal 
to three torches, a bonfire equal to six, and a wall 
of fire, eight. If fire under the effect of a frostfire 
spell goes out, the effects of the spell cease 
immediately. 

As a last option, this spell may be cast upon a 
fire-dwelling or fire-using creature such as an 
efreeti, or a fire elemental. The creature is 
allowed a saving throw; success indicates that the 
spell has no effect, but a failed saving throw 
causes the victim to suffer 2d4 points of damage. 
Only one creature can be affected by this use of 
the spell. 

The material components for this spell are a 
picce of ivory and a pinch of soot if the heatless 
version of the spell is cast. In the cold version of 
the spell, a piece of ice and a clear crystal of at 
least 10 gp value are required. 


Proficiency 

(Alteration) 

Level: 3 

Components: V, S, M 

Range: Touch 

Casting Time: 3 

Duration: One hour per level 

Saving Throw: None 

Area of Effect: One creature 

Definition: Upon casting this spell, the wizard is 
magically empowered or empowers another to use 


Casting Time: 2 one or more weapons in which he or she is not pro- 
Duration: 2 turns per level ficient. The affected individual will be able to use 
Saving Throw: Special the weapon in combat without nonproficiency 
Area of Effect: Special penalties of any kind for the duration of the spell. 
3079 

a ee ee ² a 


1208 


1 ͤ A A SS 


ddr . ⁊ eee / / / /// /// a ae a a 


Spellbook, Oerthmagik 


——̃— . ( ( 


The base number of weapons that proficiency is 
gained is one, and one extra weapon can be gained 
for every three levels above Sth that the wizard 
possesses, (an 8th- level wizard can empower two 
proficiencies). The proficiencies cannot be split 
among different individuals. 

Care must be taken when allotting a weapon 
proficiency for use; if a priest who worships a god 
of peace suddenly gains proficiency with a two- 
handed sword, he may have some atoning to do. 

Because the spell only grants a nominal degree 
of skill with a weapon, it cannot be used to aug- 
ment the abilities of a character who is already 
proficient with a weapon. Thus, a fighter who can 
already use a long sword cannot have: his skill with 
the weapon improved to “specialized” through the 
use of this spell. The material components for the 
proficiency spell are a bit of fleece and a miniature 
bronze weapon of the type in which the spell’s 
recipient will gain the proficiency. 


Bands of Ice 
(Evocation) 

Level: 4 

Components: V, S, M 
Range: 10 yards per level 
Casting Time: 3 
Duration: Special 


Saving Throw: Negates 

Area of Effect: One creature 

Definition: When this spell is cast. the wizard is 
able to trap a chosen victim in thick hands of ice. 
The spellcaster can create bands sufficient to 
hold a creature I- foot tall for every level that he 
or she possesses (a | 0th-level spellcaster may 
capture any creature of 10 fect or less in height), 
Ifthe affected being is very broad, such as an 
umber hulk, add | or 2 feet to its effective height 
for the purposes of determining whom or what 
the wizard can capture. 

The victim immediately receives a saving 
throw to determine the effectiveness of the bunds 
of ice. If the save is successful, the ice is brittle 
and easily broken, allowing the creature to escape 
in one combat round. Otherwise, the being is 
trapped for at least one turn. Once a turn has 
passed, the victim is allowed a bend bars/lift gates 
roll to determine if the ice has melted to the point 
where the creature can escape. If the roll is suc- 
cessful, the creature breaks free of the ice and is 
no longer effected by the spell. The normal dura- 
tion of the bands of ice is two turns. If the spell is 
cast in a cold environment (40° F or lower), the 
duration is doubled to four turns, and if the sur- 
roundings are very cold (0° F or below), the dura- 
tion is increased to six turns (one hour). 

Applying a torch to the bands will shorten the 
duration by one round for each round that heat is 
applied. Magical fires such as a fireball will melt 
the ice, but the trapped being will be injured in 
the process. 

Creatures trapped within the bands of ice suf- 
fer Ido points of frost damage each turn the ice 
encircles them, Cold-dwelling creatures do not 
receive any damage, while fire-dwelling beings 
suffer double damage. The extra damage suffered 
by heat-based creatures is offset by the monster's 
body heat, which will cause the ice to melt twice 
as fast, halving the spell effective duration. 

The material components for this spell are sev- 
eral chain links made of nickel, a piece of iron in 
the shape of a hoop, and a bit of snow. 


Lightning Curtain 
(Evocation) 
Level: 5 
Components: V, S. M 
Range: 60 yards 
Casting Time: 5 
Duration: Special 
$079 


~ Spelibook, Ocrthmagik 


Saving Throw: Special 

Area of Effect: 20 square feet per level 
Definition: When this spell is cast, a crackling, 
shimmering plane of electrical force comes into 
being. Anyone passing through the lighting cur- 
tain suffers 2d8 points of damage plus 1 point for 
every level that the spellcaster possesses. If the 
individual passing through the curtain is wearing 
metal armor or carrying conductive objects 
(swords or iron spikes, for example) of at least 
four pounds weight, the damage inflicted by the 
lightning curtain is increased to 3d8 points plus | 
point per level of the wizard. No saving throw is 
allowed tor creatures who pass through the cur- 
tain, and touching the curtain with a metal object 
has the same cffect as if that person had walked 
through the curtain, 

The lightning curtain is also attracted to 
nearby metal objects; anyone wearing or carrying 
such an item will be sparked by the wall if he or 
she approaches to within 5 feet of the electrical 
plane. Such a spark inflicts 1d8 points of damage 
upon the unlucky victim, Only the wizard who 
creates the lightning curtain can cause it part and 
the curtain does not spark during this time. 

The lightning curtain is fairly transparent, 
allowing persons on opposite sides of it to sce 
each other. In addition, the glow of the lightning 
is sufficient to illuminate the area on either side 
of it up to a distance of 10 feet, Spells and mis- 
siles may be cast through the lightning curtain, 
but all missiles must successfully save vs. elec- 
tricity or be destroyed. The curtain does not hin- 
der any spells except for electrical attacks, which 
it absorbs. The /ightning curtain persists for as 
long as the wizard concentrates upon it, or for 
two rounds plus one round per level if concentra- 
tion is not maintained, The material components 
necessary for the spell are a piece of amber, a bit 
of fur, and a square of fine velvet. 


Lightningcloak 

(Alteration/Evocation) 

Level: 6 

Components: V, S. M 

Range: 0 

Casting Time: | round 

Duration: Special 

Saving Throw: Special 

Area of Effect: The caster 

Definition: Upon casting this spell, a shimmer- 
ing aura of lightning surrounds the wizard. This 


lightning produces a crackling sound that is audi- 
ble at a 5-foot range, and in dark arcas the li- 
ningcloak outlines the spellcaster as if a faerie 
Jire spell had been cast. 

Under the effects of the lightningcloak, a wizard 
is a giant battery capable of discharging lightning 
bolts as he or she sees fit. The maximum damage 
of the bolts is 10d6 for cach level of the wizard, 
and they can be discharged at the rate of one per 
round, The amount of damage caused by each bolt 
can be varied by the spelleaster—a | 2th-level wiz- 
ard can cast two 6-HD bolts, four 3-HD bolts, a 9- 
HD bolt and three 1 HD bolts, or any combination 
that adds up to 12 Hit Dice. Saving throws are 
allowed against these bolts, with success indicating 
that the victim suffers half damage. 

The /ightningcloak also protects the wizard 
from the effects of electricity and clectrical 
attacks. These attacks are absorbed with no harm 
to the wizard up to a maximum of 8 points of 
absorption per level of the spellcaster (80 points 
for a lOth- level wizard, for example). 

The spell will end if the /ighiningcloak absorbs 
its full capacity of electrical damage. In addition, 
anyone who attempts to touch a wizard wearing a 
lightningcloak is shocked for 1d6 points of dam- 
age. If a metal object (such as a metal weapon) is 
the touching agent, the maximum of 6 points of 
damage will be sustained by the attacker, No sav- 
ing throws apply against this property of the 
lightningcloak. 

The lightingcloak spell will end when all its 
lightning bolts have been used or if it absorbs its 
maximum capacity of clectrical damage as noted. 
Otherwise, the duration of the lightningcloak 
spell is one turn plus one round for each level of 
the wizard. 

The material components for this spell include 
powdered amber and rose quartz (100 gp total 
value), a bit of phosphorous, and a finely woven 
cloak of no less than 500 gp value. The cloak 
must be worn for the spell to take effect, but the 
cloak may be reused for subsequent castings of 
the spell. 


Deathshroud 


i 1210 = 


book, Orjalun’s Arbatel 


————— -< i ii 


Saving Throw: Negates 

Area of Effect: | creature each 2 levels of the 
caster 

Definition: By casting this spell, the wizard 

draws upon the Negative Material Plane and is 

surrounded with a shroud of negative power. 

While the spellcaster suffers no ill effects from 

this magical energy, it may have dire conse- 

quences for anyone who comes into contact with 

the caster. 

To activate the deadly power of this spell, the 
wizard must touch the victim by successfully 
rolling an attack roll against his target. Any 
creature touched must immediately make a sav- 
ing throw vs, death magic with a 4 penalty. If 
the roll is successful, the victim is unharmed. If 
the save fails, a black haze forms about the vic- 
tim, draining 20% of the victim's current hit 
points cach round until the unlucky individual 
dics at the end of the fifth round. The 
deathshroud also protects the wizard; anyone 
who touches the spellcaster or attempts to strike 
him with any handheld object or weapon must 
make a saving throw vs. death magic at normal 
chances or be affected by the deathshroud in the 
same manner, 

The following spells remove the deathshroud 
from an affected individual: eure critical wounds, 
heal, limited wish, wish, or a successful dispel 
magic spell. As a last possibility, if the afflicted 
individual is somehow able to reach the Positive 
Material Plane within five rounds, the negative 
energy of the spell is destroyed and the victim 
saved, Once a being has successfully saved 
against the effects of a particular deathshroud 
that being cannot be affected again during that 
spell duration, 

A deathshroud remains in effect until the wiz- 
ard has attacked or been attacked by a number of 
creatures equal to 4 of the castet s level (round 
down), or the spell’s duration of two rounds per 
level of the wizard has elapsed. Creatures from 
the Outer Planes and undead beings are not 
affected by this spell; if an undead creature is 
attacked with a deathshroud, it immediately gains 
| HD and the wizard must save against death 
magic or suffer the effects of the spell. 

In order to cast this spell, the spellcaster must 
have the following material components avail- 
able: a mixture of crushed black opal and dia- 
mond (worth 5,000 gp), dust from either a 


vampire or lich, and a picce of smoky quartz. 


Occult Magnetism 
XP Value: 2,400 GP Value: 24,000 
DRAGON Magazine 82 
Nolzur, a wizard made famous by the use of pig- 
mentation, penned friends, hold person, charm 
monster, hold monster, charm plants, and mass 
charm into this sought-after spellbook. 


Occult Observations on Fluids 

XP Value: 5,200 GP Value: 52,000 
Daacon Magazine 82 
Koorz compiled water breathing, airy water, 
lower water, part water, sink, grease, Spende- 
larde s chaser, metamorphose liquids, Alamir ¥ 
fundamental breakdown, watery double, acid 
storm, Abi-Dalzim x horrid wilting, and elemental 
aura into this extensive work on the clement of 
water. 


Ordinary Necromancy 
XP Value: 1,600 GP Value: 16,000 
Daauon Magazine 82 

Vecna, before he lost his various body parts, 
compiled several works. Fortunately, most of 
these books have been destroyed by curses, 
quests of overzealous paladins, and divine inter- 
vention of good- and lawful-aligned deities. This 
piece of magical literature, however, is one of the 
few to survive. It is believed to be his first official 
publication. It contains animate dead, death 
spell, reincarnation, and clone. Unfortunately, 
about 50 pages in the middle of the book are 
removed. Sarclk suspects that they contained 
spells that someone decided to censor. 


Origins of the Hour Glass Symbology 
XP Value: 1,600 GP Value: 16,000 
Deacon Magazine 82 
Nulathoe penned preserve, tempus fugit, 

Nulathoe 3 ninemen, and haste into this work. 


Orjalun’s Arbatel 
XP Value: 2,800 GP Value: 28,000 
DraGoN Magazine 92 

This volume consists of nine plates of beaten and 
polished mithral, stamped by the elvish smiths of 
Silverymoon with Ictters of the High Tongue, 
engraved on small dics that are positioned on the 
page and then struck sharply with a hammer so as 
to leave a distinct impression. The plates are 
pierced at the top and bottom on the left side, and 
fastened together with bronze rings. The work 

sosa 


1211 = 


— eee eee, eae 


Spellbook, Orjalun'’s Arbatel 


once had an ornate case of stained wood with a 
wrapping of embroidered canvas, but these may 
well have perished. 

Orjaluh, the white-haired High Wizard of Sil- 
verymoon in the early days of the North (now 
believed dead), oversaw the construction of this 
work, It was designed to be a permanent reposi- 
tory for the most useful defensive spells he could 
provide for the continued safety and security of 
his beloved city in the years to come, But it never 
served so, for when Orjalun gave his staff of 
office to his chosen successor, Sepur and left the 
city, Sepur revealed his true nature—taking the 
Arbatel and staff as his own, he also left that fair 
city, 

Sepur's fate is unknown, although the sage 
Alphontras recounts finding a broken staff atop a 
lonely, scorched tor in the Trollmoors. The Arba- 
tel is first identified in the village of Longsaddle 
by Alphontras’s colleague Eclombur the Learned, 
who observed it in the possession of the sorcerer 
Arathur Harpell. Arathur was later slain in a mag- 
ical duel by the necromancer Marune, who held 
the Arbatel but briefly. Marune lost it somewhere 
in the winter snows, fleeing from the Lords of 
Waterdeep, and it must have changed hands sev- 
eral times in the following decade, for many hints 
of it are found in various records of the North 


ies SS a oe Se ee ee re 


212 


It is mentioned once in this period by the sage 
Maerlus, who is represented in the Letters to the 
Court of Elfrin (“Collected by the King's Own 
Hand, being a record and discourse most fascinat- 
ing upon our lands and times”) by a letter he 
penned to the monarch, King Elfrin, wherein the 
sorcerer-sage described a number of items of 
power known to be within Elfrin’s realm. In the 
letter, Maerlus describes several works and spec- 
ulates on their locations; the Arbatel, he says, is 
in the hands of the reclusive wizard Lios—unless 
Marune has overcome him and regained it. 

Elminster believes that Marune did slay Lios, 
but says that the activities of Marune from that 
time to the present reveal that he has not recov- 
ered the Arbatel, despite his repeated attempts to 
do so. Its recent and present whereabouts are 
unknown. 

Orjalun was tutored by The Masked, most mys- 
terious of the Seven Wizards of Myth Drannor, 
and two of the spells in the book are believed to 
be of his tutor’s personal crafting: encrypt and 
secure (an improved version of wizard lock), 

The first and last plates of the Arbatel are fea- 
tureless, so as to reveal nothing of the contents 
within, but the seven interior plates bear one spell 
each (the method of scripting allows only one 
side of a plate to be used). These are, in order of 
appearance, mending, charm person, encrypt, 
dispel magic, identify, guards and wards, and 
secure. All of the commonly known spells in the 
Arbatel appear in the standard form, and the two 
unique spells therein are reproduced below, from 
the books of Vauth, another apprentice of The 
Masked. 


Encrypt 

(Ilusion/Phantasm) 

Level: 4 

Components: V, S, M 

Range: 10 feet + | foot per level 

Casting Time: 4 + writing time 

Duration: Permanent 

Saving Throw: None 

Area of Effect: See below 

Definition: By means of this spell, a normal 
message containing up to 66 characters or letters 
written on parchment, stone, or the like can be 
made unreadable (even with magic like compre- 
hend languages, read magic, and true seeing) to 
all but the spellcaster, any being named in the 


message (regardless of the caster's wishes in this 
s084 


- Spellbook, Orjalun's Arbatel — 


regard) and a specific recipient, who must be 
named aloud and pictured mentally by the caster 
at the time of casting. Such a message will appear 
to all others as an illegible, smudged area radiat- 
ing a dweomer. 

A cryptic message will remain until erased 
magically, willed to disappear by the caster (who 
may be at any distance, but must be on the same 
plane to do so), or dispel magic is cast so that the 
message is within its area of effect. Weathering 
and other physical effects such as burning, scrub- 
bing, or defacing the smudged area will not 
destroy the message as long as the actual surface 
on which it was written survives (encrypr can be 
safely cast on any reasonably stable surface, such 
as stone, wood, or paper, but not usually with suc- 
cess on messages scrawled in soot, dust, or 
snow); it will still be clearly legible to those able 
to perceive it. 

The message does not glow or in any way 
attract attention to itself an intended recipient 
may well not see it if not looking for a message or 
chancing not to look in the right place. A message 
encrypted in a language unknown to the intended 
recipient is not made intelligible by means of this 
spell: nor will it magnify script ton small for the 
recipient to read. The text of a spell may not be 
concealed by encryption, but writing related to 
magic such as spell ink formulae, magical item 
command words, and directions for magical 
processes such as enchanting a certain item or 
constructing a golem may be so concealed. 

No part of any message longer than the first 66 
characters will be obscured or protected by this 
magic—attempting to encrypt such an overlong 
message would result in wasting the spell; the 
entire message could be read (or destroyed) nor- 
mally. Additional writing in the same area after 
the spell is cast will not affect an encrypted mes- 
sage—thus, a second message can be written on 
top of an encrypted one to further conceal it, 
without rendering the original message unread- 
able by those for whom it is intended. Moreover, 
adding words or characters to a message known 
to be encrypted will not cause it to appear; the 
additions will remain clearly visible and the orig- 
inal will remain concealed. Multiple encrypt 
spells cast on the same or adjacent areas will not 
allow messages longer than 66 characters to be 
concealed, rather, when a second encrypt spell is 
cast, the concealed message of the first encrypt 
spell will vanish forever, replaced by the second 


message. “Adjacent” in this case extends to areas 
of effect that are up to 10 feet distant, so that dif- 
ferent walls in a small room cannot be used to 
encrypt multiple messages. Different sides of a 
wall or object cannot be used, either, unless the 
distance separating them is more than 10 feet. 
Writing used in encrypted messages can be very 
large or very small, written on walls, mountain 
sides, or even small bones or slivers of wood, and 
still be concealed so long as the maximum of 66 
characters is not exceeded. 

Encrypt may be used to conceal messages writ- 
ten by others, regardless of time elapsed since the 
writing, and will be effective in obscuring even 
runes deeply graven in stone, or letters formed by 
patterns of colored mosaic tiles, In such a case, 
the surface will appear faded, stained, discolored, 
or even covered with a smoky, sooty deposit so 
that the message ts concealed, No amount of 
physical cleaning will reveal the concealed mes- 
sage. The figure given for range in the above text 
is the distance at which the caster can obscure a 
message with the encrypt spell. 

A true seeing spell will reveal clearly the out- 
lines of an encrypt spell’s dweomer, but will not 
allow the message to be read, unless the viewer 
can deduce by the shape of the dweomer what is 
concealed. Written or engraved symbols can be 
encrypted, but magical symbols or glyphs will be 
unaffected. Encrypt will conceal, but not harm, 
the efficacy of protective symbols, thaumaturgic 
triangles, and the like. 

If the caster of encrypt writes the message to 
be concealed himself or herself, this writing must 
be done directly; the spell cannot cause it to be 
magically written from afar. The material compo- 
nents for this spell are a pinch of dust or gray lint 
“fluff,” and a feather, and are consumed in the 
casting. 


Secure 

(Alteration) 

Level: 4 

Components: V, S. M 

Range: Touch 

Casting Time: 6 

Duration: Permanent 

Saving Throw: None 

Area of Effect: 30 square feet per level 

Definition: By means of this spell, and employing 

a small piece of iron (or filings) and a tiny gem (or 

a like amount of gem fragments or powdered rem- 
5064 


S 1213 


A eS = 


Spellbook, Peregrin’s Treatise on Fixed Portals 


ge Sy eS 


nants), a spellcaster can make a door, chest, or por- 
tal secure. An object or area that is secured cannot 
be opened by any means except the physical 
destruction of the object or area, or by dispel magic 
(or limited wish, alter reality, or similar spell, 
worded to achieve the same effect). Unlike one 
affected by a wizard lock, a portal that is secured 
cannot be passed through by wizards of any level 
(including the spellcaster), and can be passed other- 
wise only by avoiding it through astral, ethereal, or 
dimension-altering means such as blink and dimen- 
sion door. The dweomer will resist fire, cold, and 
electrical attacks of natural or magical origin with- 
out allowing any damage to the secured item or 
area, Thus, a closed and secured door will deflect a 
magical lightning bolt back on its caster, and will 
escape unscathed from a fireball blast. Physical 
attacks on a secured area are ineffective, totally 
negated, for one round per level of the caster 
(beginning with the round after casting). At the end 
of this time, the secure spell remains, but no longer 
affords any protection from physical attack. 

When a secured area is touched, tested, or 
attacked in any way, a white radiance will flash 
on all sides and surfaces of the area. A knock 
spell is ineffective against a secured portal. Any 
spell, spell-like natural power, or magical item 
effect that attempts to alter the shape and nature 
of a secured area will be reflected back on the 
caster with full effects. If the power affects an 
area rather than an individual, the user of the 
power will immediately become the central 
point of the area of effect. Magical powers that 
are “reversed” in this fashion include, but are 
not limited to: enlarge, reduce, levitate, shatter, 
dig, passwall, stone shape, transmute rock to 
mud, move earth, stone to flesh, vanish, turn 
wood, and animate rock, If the magic does not 
affect living creatures (such as animate rock or 
move earth), the usage of the magic is simply 
wasted. Powers that are directly under the con- 
trol of the user (such as psionics or natural mag- 
ical powers, but not spellcasting) will have no 
effect on a secured area or object, but the power 
is counted as having been used. In all cases 
where the spell can be turned back upon the 
user, all who could be affected are entitled to 
saving throws if a save is normally allowed 
against the type of magic in question. 

Light spells, magic mouth, Nystul’s magic 
aura, and Leomund s trap cannot successfully be 
cast within, or upon any surface of, a secured 


= UU eee aa” 


1214 


area. Any glyph of warding, explosive runes, or 
symbol written upon any surface within a secured 
area discharges immediately upon completion, 
possibly injuring the writer, his companions, or 
other nearby creatures. A disintegrate spell that 
destroys a secured area has the effect of negating 
the secure spell. A glassee spell has its normal 
effect on a secured area, Find traps cannot reveal 
the presence of a secure spell, but detect magic 
does reveal the extent of its dweomer. Illusions 
and other spells of concealment can be success- 
fully cast upon a secured area. 


Peregrin’s Treatise on Fixed Portals 
XP Value: 1,200 GP Value: 12,000 
DUNGEON Magazine 43 
Although fixed portals have existed in the Astral 
Plane long before recorded time, even before 
Gith liberated her children from the illithids, no 
one devoted much time to studying them before 
Archmage Peregrin Graycloak decided to settle in 
the Silver Realm. Long after his fleet of void 
cruisers had become a reality (see “Voidjam- 
mers,” DRAGON Magazine 159), Peregrin pursued 

the mystery of fixed portals. 

Peregrin x Treatise can be used by any wizard 
(or psionicist with access to the Psychoportation 
discipline) of at least 10th level. This work 
describes how to create (or destroy) a permanent, 
stable gate between any reality and the Astral 
Plane. The instructions in this book are written in 
a special magical script that cannot be copied 
without destroying the book. 

To successfully open a gate, the builder must 
be personally familiar with both end points of the 
gate. The portal builder must assemble rare magi- 
cal inks and powdered components from the des- 
tination plane (taking 14 weeks and costing no 
less that 50,000 gp, plus 6,000 gp per level below 
18th) and inscribe elaborate magical runes at 
each of the portal x intended end points. 

Drawing the inscriptions at each of the gate Y 
end points takes at least one week, plus one week 
per level of the caster below 18. Once the inscrip- 
tions are properly completed (roll an Intelligence 
check), the ritual for creating a gate takes an 
entire week, permanently drains the caster of | 
point of Constitution, and ages the caster for 10% 
of his or her natural life span (all regardless of 
success). The base chance of success for an 18th- 
level wizard or psionicist is 95%; for each level 


below 18, subtract 5% from the chance of success 
5085 


Spelibook of Rathdacn ye 


and add 5% to the chance of catastrophic failure. 

For example, a 12th-level wizard decides to cre- 
ate a portal between a FORGOTTEN REALMS Cam- 
paign and the Astral Plane using the rites described 
in Peregrin 3 Treatise. After studying the book for at 
least a month, and consulting the apothecaries in 
Calimport, as well as rounding up the desired com- 
ponents within three weeks, the wizard will spend 
80,000 gp in the process, The wizard spends the 
next seven weeks inscribing the runes in the Astral 
Plane and on Toril, and then spends an additional 
week performing the rite, losing a point of Consti- 
tution and aging 10 years. Even after all this time 
and effort, there is only a 65% chance of success, 
and a 30% chance of catastrophic failure (perhaps 
galing in a powerful creature from the Lower 
Planes that is not at all happy about it, or even gat- 
ing the wizard to the Lower Planes). 

In order to destroy a fixed portal, the essential 
step is to find the keyrune at the heart of the rune 
network inscribed when the fixed portal was cre- 
ated (there is one keyrune on each side of the 
gate), If the keyrune on either side is located, the 
fixed portal can be destroyed by successfully 
casting a dispel magic spell on the keyrune, 
against a spell cast at the 18th level of experience 
(a dispel magic spell cast on the portal in general 
will have no effect), Peregrin did many experi- 
ments with psionics and determined that concen- 
trating 500 PSPs on the keyrune via any 
destructive psionic discipline would accomplish 
the same result. 

In the dedication, Peregrin 5 Treatise contains a 
short passage that can be used once per month as 
an “escape hatch.” By reading it, the Treatises 
owner can cast a rope trick spell that lasts for 24 
hours on any plane 


Planes of Antimatter 
XP Value: 3,200 GP Value: 32,000 
Dracon Magazine 82 

Leomund placed the spells rope trick, distance 
distortion, astral spell, disintegrate, Leomund x 
secret chest, duodimension, and deeppockets, as 
well as an alternative recipe for potions of diminu- 
nion into this spellbook. 


Poison Pages* 

GP Value: +300 
Deacon Magazine $2 
The owner must save vs. poison after each day of 
studying, or die. Some of these books do not 


XP Value: 


require immediate saving throws, but their poison 
is addictive. If the owner stops studying the book, 
he or she must save vs. poison every week there- 
after or lose | point of Constitution upon cach 
failed save. 


Powers of the Spiritual Will 
XP Value: 1,600 GP Value: 16,000 
Deacon Magazine 82 
Phrandjas wrote emotion, chaos, feeblemind, and 
confusion into this unknown work. 


Raistlin’s 
XP Value: 4,800 GP Value: 48,000 
Dragons of Mystery 

Raistlin spellbook contains the following spells: 
audible glamer, burning hands, charm persan, 
comprehend language, darkness IS radius, 
detect invisibility, detect magic, ESP, floating 

isc, hold portal, invisibility, magic missile, mir- 
ror image, read magic, sleep, and web. 


Raistlin’s II 
XP Value: 11,200 GP Value: 112,000 
Dragons of Faith 
Raistlin’s spellhook contains the following spells: 
audible glamer, bind, burning hands, charm per- 
son, comprehend languages, confusion, darkness 
15' radius, detect invisibility, detect magic, ESP, 
Evard black tentacles, grease, hold portal, 
invisibility, knock, lightning bolt, magic missile, 
mirror image, phantasmal force, push, read 
magic, sleep, stinking cloud, suggestion, Tenser 5 
floating disc, tongues, web, and wizard lock. 


of Rathdaen 
GP Value: 16,000 

The Magister 
This “book” consists of four scorched pages of 
parchment—three complete, one only partially 
preserved kept within a folder of finest parch- 
ment sandwiched between two polished ivory 
plates, 

Rathdaen was a wizard of note some 700 
years ago, who explored the Realms extensively, 
traveling much and making many friends by aid- 
ing others with his Art. He was sometimes 
repaid with magic, and his spellbook is said to 
have contained close to 60 of the most colorful 
and potent magic known to the spellcasters of 
five races. When he died he bequeathed the 
book to his apprentice, the weakling Narsel, a 


w 


XP Value: 1,600 


1215 


— SS SS — — — — ——ñ—ñ— — aS — 


Spellbook of Rathdacn 


vain and foolish braggart given to insulting 
others and carelessly harming creatures and 
property with his magic. Four pages are all that 
is left of it now; the rest were destroyed when 
Narsel, who was carrying it in his pack at the 
time, was slain in the sky above Ironmaster by 
the wizard Sapphail, with whom he was 
duelling. Sapphail slew Narsel with a meteor 
swarm, and in the conflagration and subsequent 
fall of Narsel’s charred corpse to earth, the 
Tome was reduced to ashes, two cracked slates, 
and these pages, rescued by Sapphail and passed 
on to her apprentices Jorzoon and Iliphel. 

The partial page preserves a fragment of poly- 
morph any object (too incomplete to use, but 
enough to substantially aid spell research and/or 
recognition of the spell written down elsewhere). 
The remaining three pages each bear a single 
unique spell, detailed hereafter; ray of Ondovir, 
icelance, and Xult s magical doom. 


Ray of Ondovir 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
Level: 2 
Components: V, S 
Range: 80 fect 
Casting Time: 2 
Duration: | round 


Saving Throw: Negates 

Area of Effect: One creature 

Definition: By means of this magic, the caster 
creates a ray of glowing light that leaps from his 
or her fingertips to one target creature. This 
beam fades out at 80 feet distant and has no 
effect beyond that; if the target creature is 
beyond range, and no other creature intercepts 
the ray before a has round passed, the magic has 
no effect and is lost. But if one living creature is 
touched by the ray (if several touch it, only the 
first to do so is affected, regardless of the caster’s 
wishes), the ray of Ondovir takes effect. A saving 
throw vs. spell at 3 is allowed to any creature so 
touched by the ray; if failed, the victim attempts 
to exactly repeat the actions it took in the preced- 
ing round, Any attacks and spellcasting begun in 
the round in which the victim was struck by the 
ray are ruined. The victim moves about in exactly 
the same way as he or she did on the previous 
round, although such actions are not in exactly 
the same spot as in the previous round if the vic- 
tim made any movements during the second 
round, prior to the ray s strike. Such movements 
are carried out even if they lead into obstacles or 
over cliffs or into chasms. If the target spent the 
previous round readying weapons, it spends this 
round doing so too; if it fought with weapons, it 
duplicates its movements (thus a mobile oppo- 
nent can easily avoid the victim’s attacks, and 
strike the victim with relative ease; consider the 
victim to be A on AC). If a spell was cast on the 
previous round, the victim again attempts to cast 
the spell, but if a second identical spell has not 
been memorized by the victim, no spell effect 
occurs, When this round of helpless repetition is 
complete, the victim is instantly released from 
all control. 


Icelance 

(Alteration) 

Level: 3 

Components: V, S, M 

Range: 10 feet per level 

Casting Time: 3 

Duration: Special 

Saving Throw: None 

Area of Effect: Special 

Definition: This spell only works if ice is present 
(in a cold or an arctic condition, or on the round 
following the release of an ice storm or similar 


spell). Using a piece of ice and a drop of his or 
s091) 


Er 


1216 


Spellbook of Rathdaen 


5 a: = 


her own spittle, the caster causes scattered pieces 
of ice, augmented if necessary by water, snow, or 
even moisture from the air, to form a solid lance 
of ice, The lance, a slender, pointed cylinder 12 
feet in length, forms in midair in front of the 
caster, floating horizontally, within the round of 
casting. It is vulnerable to physical and magical 
attack in the half round in which it is forming; in 
the seventh it flies with blinding speed at a target 
pointed to by the caster, up to 10 feet distant per 
level of the caster. If it strikes nothing before 
reaching its maximum range, it falls apart in 
midair into a cloud of water droplets. The target 
(which must be a single creature) or any creature 
that intercepts the lance’s path suffers the lance’s 
effects. An icelance strikes as if it were its own 
caster striking, at +4 to hit, and is for striking pur- 
poses (not damage) considered a +4 magical 
weapon. 

Any creature struck is stunned for one round 
and thrown to the ground violently if they are pro- 
tected by a wall of force, shield, or similar magic 
(the lance is not a “normal missile”). Unprotected 
structures suffer | point of structural damage. 
Smaller objects are affected as if by a “crushing 
blow” An unprotected creature suffers 5d6 points 
of damage. An icelance is never deflected to strike 
something to one side; it shatters completely upon 
striking any solid object. This spell creates only 
one lance, and it can only strike once, without 
delay. If the spell is attempted without ice present, 
it is wasted; no spell effect occurs. 


Xult’s Magical Doom 

(Alteration) 

Level: 5 

Components: V, S, M 

Range: Touch 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: Special 

Saving Throw: Negates 

Area of Effect: 10-foot-radius 

Definition: By means of a caterpillar cocoon, a 
pinch of dust, and the tracing of runes during the 
casting, a magic-user scals a certain object with 
Xult's magical doom. The runes are traced with 
one fingertip over the pages of a book, or a map, 
and are visible only to a detect magic (they may 
be harmlessly removed by dispel magic). They 
prevent unauthorized perusal of the guarded 
object. Only the caster or someone who is (by 
chance or deliberately) named in or on the mater- 


ial viewed, or who utters the secret word of deac- 
tivation (determined during casting) when touch- 
ing the guarded object, can safely examine the 
object without suffering the doom, 

The doom affects all creatures within a 10-foot 
radius when it is activated (the activator saves vs. 
spell at i; other beings within that radius save at 
1). The doom is a specialized polymorph other 
spell that works instantly upon creatures within 
its radius who fail their saving throws. Affected 
beings suffer a system shock roll during their 
transformations. 

Transformation is permanent, and is always 
into the form of a bat, frog, toad, or snake (deter- 
mine randomly). The intelligence of affected 
beings is not altered, so if the transformed victims 
can activate magical items or communicate with 
others so as to bring about their release (another 
system shock roll applies) they are free to do so. 

The doom lasts only for one activation if cast 
by a wizard of | 1th-level or less, A wizard of 
12th to 23rd level may make the doom last for up 
to four activations. Wizards of higher levels can 
elect to have their dooms last for one additional 
activation per level above 24th. Note that the pas- 
sage of time has no effect on a doom unless the 
object it guards is destroyed, and that a single 
activation can affect more than one creature. 

Transformed creatures affected by this spell 
typically go insane if of over 7 Intelligence, as 
follows: 


Intelligence Time before Insanity 

01-07 No Danger. 

08-12 After 6 months. 

13-16 After 8 months. 
17 After 12 months. 
18 After 24 months. 
19+ 13% chance (noncumulative) per 

year. 


Insanity is one of the following forms (from 
the DMG; roll 1d4 to determine which, for each 
creature): 


Roll Insanity Type 


l Homicidal mania. 
2 Hebephrenia. 

3 Suicidal mania. 

4 Catatonia. 


5 1217 F 


i TT 


* e i 


Spellbook, Red Book of War 


— — — — A 


Red Book of War 
XP Value: 20,400 GP Value: 204,000 

DRAGON Magazine 100 
This is a large, impressive volume (2 cubits 
across by 3 cubits high), Its covers are worked, 
bloodstained armor plates beaten flat, carefully 
shaped, and hinged at the spine, forming a very 
strong binding. Between its covers are 51 thin, 
burnished copper pages, cach carefully stamped 
in letters, runes, and sigils. Each page contains 
one prayer or priest spell on one side of the sheet. 
No markings or stamping mar the outer covers. A 
permanent, pale-red, flicker of faerie fire 
emanates from the books pages. 

Worship of the war-god Tempus is well estab- 
lished in the more lawless and troubled lands of 
the Realms, and a large, well-organized priest- 
hood has come into being over the years. More of 
Tempus need not be said here; the Red Book of 
Hur is one of half a dozen or so similar volumes, 
temple tomes containing prayers for use by the 
priests of Tempus However, the Red Book, unlike 
its fellows, has gone missing—lost to thieves in 
Telflamm when the great Tower of Tempus there 
was robbed one night three winters ago by repre- 
sentatives of the local thieves’ guild. It seems that 
Taeron, High Priest and Champion Rampant of 
Tempus in Telflamm, refused to render unto Vol- 
ludan, Guildmaster of the Shadowmasters of 
Telflamm, certain protective monies—and so the 
Shadowmasters relieved the temple of several of 
its greatest treasures, including two great magical 
blades, a helm of brilliance, and the Red Book. 

The Shadowmasters promptly quarreled over 
their booty (aided by vengeful priests and wor- 
shipers of Tempus—that is, most of the mercenar- 
ies in the city), and Volludan and several of his 
lieutenants perished. All of the temple treasures 
were recovered except the Red Book, which is 
still actively sought by all priests of Tempus; a 
reward of 25,000 pieces of gold (plus, if the 
finder is a faithful of Tempus, a promotion of one 
rank in the priesthood) can be claimed at any 
temple of the Wargod in return for the complete 
Red Book of War. The Red Book will be recog- 
nized on sight by all canons and higher-ranking 
priests of Tempus, and they will do anything— 
including mounting an ambush or pitched battle 
with all the armed men they can muster—neces- 
sary to regain it. Its present whereabouts are 
unknown, but it is thought that thieves conveyed 
it far from Telflamm, and that it may have 


changed hands several times since its thefi. 

The Red Book contains the following priest 
spells, one to a page, appearing in the order men- 
tioned (all are in standard PHB form except for 
some unique spells, which are described below 
these unique prayers being special to the priests 
of Tempus; they may or may not be heard, and 
answered identically, by other deities): bless, 
command, cure light wounds, detect magic, 
remove fear, augury, chant, hold person, know 
alignment, resist fire, slow poison, spiritual ham- 
mer, animate dead, continual light, cure blind- 
ness, cure disease, dispel magic, feign death, holy 
flail (special prayer; see below), locate object, 
prayer, remove curse, speak with dead, cure seri- 
ous wounds, detect lie, divination, exorcise, neu- 
tralize poison, protection from evil 10' radius, 
reveal (special prayer; see below), tongues, 
atonement, commune, dispel evil, flame strike, 
quest, raise dead, true seeing, blade barrier, 
heal, speak with monsters, stone tell, word of 
recall, bladebless (special prayer; see below), 
gate, regenerate, restoration, resurrection, sacred 
link (special prayer; see below), symbol, and wind 
walk, The special prayers to Tempus contained in 
the Red Book are as follows: 


Holy Flail 

(Invocation/Alteration) 

Level: 3 

Sphere: Combat 

Components: V, S, M 

Range: Touch 

Casting Time: 3 

Duration: | round per level 

Saving Throw: None 

Area of Effect: Special 

Definition: By calling upon his or her deity, the 

priest casting a holy flail spell temporarily trans- 

forms his or her own holy symbol, or any non- 

bladed weapon the priest touches that is wielded 

by another being, into a magical holy flail. For 

one round per experience level of the priest, the 

holy symbol or transformed weapon becomes a 

snakelike, flexible field of force attached to a 

rigid handhold; an invisible, crackling spectral 

flail that is +2 on attack rolls when wielded in 

bartle, and is considered a magical weapon for 

attack purposes, A strike from a holy flail does 

des points of damage and, if wielded by a 

priest, an additional | point of damage per expe- 

rience level of the priest per strike to all undead, 
$092 


a ia als” 


1218 


OO eS a... 


SO ̃ i ˙—ñ—ͤ— TTE 


or any creature of a greatly different alignment 
than that of the priest (sec below). If a holy flail 
spell is cast upon a bladed weapon, nothing will 
happen, and the spell will be lost. If it is cast 
upon a weapon held by a creature of a greatly dif- 
ferent alignment than that of the casting priest 
(good vs, evil; lawful, chaotic, and neutral con- 
siderations do not matter in this case), the flail 
will not form, A Aoly flail will always vanish if it 
is transferred from one creature to another, unless 
the being receiving it is the spellcaster or another 
priest of the same deity, A Hy flail does not need 
continued concentration on the part of the priest 
to maintain it, and can be dropped to enable spell- 
casting (or thrown as a weapon) without vanish- 
ing. A holy flail created from a holy symbol can 
only be wielded by a pricst of the same deity as 
the symbol, or it will vanish. The material com- 
ponents of this spell are the holy symbol or 
weapon (which is not consumed or damaged in 
any way by the spell) and a pinch of powdered 
gemstone (of any type). 


Reveal 

(Divination, Reversible) 

Level: 4 

Sphere: Divination 

Components: V, S, M 

Range: Touch 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: 4 rounds 

Saving Throw: None 

Area of Effect: 120 yard sight range 

Definition: This spell is cast upon the priest or 

another (willing) creature into whose eyes the 

priest induces the material component of the 

spell. It allows the affected being to see clearly 

the location and outline of symbols, glyphs of 

warding, magically concealed inscriptions, and 

dweomers existing upon surfaces viewed, even if 

there ure not yet activated (such as magic mouth, 

Mordenkainen X faithful hound, Leumund & trap, 

Nystul s magic aura, hallucinatory terrain, wall 

of force), No clue as to the precise nature of the 

magic is given by the spell, but protective circles, 

symbols, and glyphs can all be scrutinized in 

detail and might well be identified by someone 

familiar with them or recorded for later study. 
Reveal will show the presence of gates (or 

other links between planes, including the pres- 

ence of an astral silvery cond), inactive or not, but 

will not reveal astral, ethereal or invisible crea- 


i Red Book of War 


Er HENNE 


tures or things. Unlike true seeing, the auras of 
creatures are not shown; nor are polymorphed or 
magically changed things shown. 

The spell requires an ointment composed of 
four drops of the priest's (or spell recipient's) 
blood; two drops of water; two drops of giant 
squid sepia; a pinch of the powdered herb eye- 
bright; and two powdered gemstones, a large blue 
sapphire and a carbuncle of at least medium size. 
The priest mixes these in a bow! or depression of 
stone, china, or earthenware (not wood or metal) 
with his or her finger, speaks the words of the 
spell while holding his or her holy symbol over 
the paste, and then applies it to the eyes. 

The reverse of the spell, conceal, will mask all 
the above things from any creature to whom the 
ointment (composed in this case of a pinch of 
powdered monkshood (aconite); six drops of 
onion juice; a pinch of dust; and seven drops of 
water, mixed and enspelled as above is applied 
for one turn per level of the priest casting con- 
ceal, and if during this time the affected being 
employs true seeing, detect magic or equivalent 
magic, these spells will appear to work, but the 
phenomena listed above will simply not be seen 
hy the affected creature, Awake, mobile creatures 
unwilling to have the ointment for cither version 
of the spell applied to their eyes must be con- 
tacted by the priest twice (two successful attack 
rolls require), but washing or any means short of 
dispel magic, exorcise, or a limited wish will not 
prevent the ointment from working. 


Bladebless 

(Necromantic) 

Level:“ 

Sphere: Healing, Necromantic 

Components: V, S, M 

Range: Special 

Casting Time: | 

Duration: Permanent 

Saving Throw: Special 

Area of Effect: Special 

Definition: By use of this spell, a priest heals a 

specific wound by bestowing a blessing on the 

weapon that caused it. This magic works only 

upon a nonmagical bladed weapon, which the 

priest must touch and hold as he or she intones 

the blessing. Immediately upon this being done, 

the last wound caused by that blade (if any 

wound has been so caused, to any living thing, 

within one turn per experience level of the 
en 


s 1219 8 


~ Wellbook, Repertoire of [Ihestrous Conjuranons p 


priest) will instantly be fully and completely 
healed, even if the blade was poisoned, a disease 
conferred, or à limb or head was severed. Such 
healing occurs even if the affected creature is 
several planes distant at the casting of the Wade- 
hless—and if death occurred due to a failed sys- 
tem shock roll or poison saving throw, when life 
is restored, (If death was due to cumulative hit 
point loss, life is not restored; nor will this 
magic heal other wounds upon the victim's 
body.) The healed creature need not ever be 
seen, touched, or even known to the priest. If 
such a wound has already healed or been magi- 
cally healed, it is unaffected, and the bladebless 
magic is lost. The material components for this 
spell ate the weapon in question, the priest's 
holy symbol. and a drop of the priest's own 
blood. 


Sacred Link 

(Evocation/ Alteration) 

Level: 7 

Sphere: Summoning, Wards, Law 

Components: V, S. M 

Range: Touch 

Casting Time: 2 rounds 

Duration: Special 

Saving Throw: None 

Area of Effect: Special 

Definition: To bring about a sacred link, a 
priest must hold in his or her hands the two 
objects to be linked, and then cast the spell. The 
two items must be fashioned of the same mate- 
rials and be roughly the same size; they cannot 
be living creatures; and ideally they will be 
nearly identical (such as, matching swords, 
scrolls, and statuettes), The sacred link spell 
causes an invisible magical bond to be created 
between the two items, both will radiate a very 
faint dweomer, and although the /ink is not a 
tangible pathway or thread that one can follow, 
what happens to one item will also happen to 
the other, even if they are separated by myriad 
planes or any distance. 

The /ink lasts until one of the items is 
destroyed (or until a dispel magic is cast upon 
one of the items, which negates the /ink), For 
instance, if a map or scroll is sold to an enemy 
and the match for it is retained by the priest, his 
or her temple, or even another being, several 
days after the sale, could burn his or her copy 
and the enemy s copy would also be consumed, 


regardless of its location or situation (if the map 
was buried or underwater, no flames would 
occur, but the map or scroll would still turn to 
ashes and be destroyed, in unison with its burn- 
ing twin; on the other hand, if the enemy's copy 
is in a backpack or on a desk with other papers, 
its immolation could well ignite other, adjacent 
flammable materials). 

By means of this spell, a weapon can be dam- 
aged or destroyed by affecting its twin—or con- 
versely, any item could be improved by plating 
with gold, adorning with gems, or careful carv- 
ing. This spell can be used to link magic items, 
and thus, recharging or activating one would 
identically affect the other but there is a 3% 
cumulative chance per use of the lin (which is 
involuntary and not under the control of the 
priest or another being; one cannot choose to 
have one action duplicated in the twin item, and 
another not) that one of the items will shatter or 
explode (discharging all of its functions or 
charges), and end the /ink. The material compo- 
nents for this spell are the two items, the priest's 
holy symbol and a strand of find wire, human 
hair or spiderweb, 


Repertoire of Illustrious Conjurations 
XP Value: 2,400 GP Value: 24,000 
DRAGON Magazine 82 
Drawmij, that favorite wizard of many a traveler 
to the lands of Oerth, penned this spellbook with 
the following spells: conjure elemental, 
Drawmijs instant summons, monster summoning 
VII, summon shadow, invisible stalker, and 

guards and wards. 


Repertoire of Subconscious 
Apparitions 
XP Value: 1,600 GP Value: 16,000 
DRAGON Magazine 82 
Gaxx wrote spectral force, shadow monsters, 
demishadow monsters, and simulacrum into this 
spellbook. 


Representations of the Sentient Plane 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 20,000 
DRAGON Magazine 82 
Rialissom penned phantasmagoria, weird, mirage 
arcane, advanced illusion, and delude into this 

spellbook. 


sons 


2 1220 = 


+ A 


Spellbook, Runes of Norzahk 


— — — — EEE 


Riggby's 
XP Value: 5,600 GP Value: 56,000 
Mordenkainen’s Fantastic Adventure 

This libram contains the following spells: cure 
light wounds, detect magic, remove fear, sanctu- 
ary, hold person, find traps, resist fire, silence 15’ 
radius, speak with animals, create food and 
water, cure disease, remove curse, cure serious 
wounds, and raise dead, 


Runes of Norzahk 

XP Value: 7,200 GP Value: 72,000 

Kara-Tur 
This book is bound with the hide of a ki-rin, a sil- 
very-blue fur of silky texture. The beautiful hide 
was stretched over two thin slices of bamboo that 
were sewn together at the spinc. It ts only | hand 
width wide, 3 hands tall, and | finger thick. The 
pages are laminated silk, with different colored 
enamels highlighting the most important runes. 
The first page in the tome holds a cursed rune 
that turns the reader to stone. 

The legends and myths of the mighty wu jen 
Norzahk abound in the eastern lands of the 
Banang district. Coming from a poor family with 
very little honor, Norzahk showed aptitude for 
wizardry and called his own familiar by the age 
of 12. He studied under four different masters, 
outpacing each before he moved on to the next. 
By middle age, Norzahk had captured a river 
dragon and rode a foo dog as a mount. He built a 
secret fortress with a series of catacombs beneath 
it and sponsored a school for his followers. 

Norzahks accomplishments include destroying 
the coven of Jurindo and dispelling many malig- 
nant spirits. It is believed he moved the course of 
the Fenghsintzu River and that he could fly faster 
than any bird. As he grew older he became a her- 
mit, studying the arcane magic of necromancy in 
order to prolong his life. But evil magic perverted 
his neutral nature, and the mighty wu jen grew 
hateful and corrupt, Soon he was murdering 
innocents to extend his own life, and his powers 
were a blight on the land. Many heroes and war- 
riors lost their lives attempting to rid the world of 
Norzahk. The evil wu jen finally disappeared and 
ceased to haunt the southern villages. 

Norzahk’s students told a story of the wu jen's 
Book of Runes, a powerful book of magic that 
listed all the necromancer’s spells. The wu jen 
carried it with him when he taught in his school, 
and took it into his hidden fortress when he 


(U 


160 
ed 
weeny 


became a hermit, It was filled with enlightened 
runes of magical powers that held the knowledge 
of all Norzahk's spells. Many of his students 
searched in vain for the ancient wu jen’s fortress 
when it was believed that he had died, but it is 
said that the tome still lies undisturbed with its 
dead master 

The runes contain an assortment of 16 typical 
spells known throughout the land, ranging from 
Ist to &th level, but also include two unique 
spells, Year stealing and tharnbush arrows 


Year Stealing 

(Necromantic, Reversible) 

Level: 8 

Components: V, S, M 

Range: Special 

Casting Time: 6 

Duration: Special 

Saving Throw: 1 

Area of Effect: Special 

Definition: An evil wu jen can steal years from a 

victim's life and add them to his or her own life, 

but draining of a life force demands special 

preparations. It is an arcane art, lost for hundreds 

of years. This spell is the reality behind the old 

wives tales that a wu jen could steal a man’s life. 
Before attempting to steal years, a wu jen must 

* 


> 1221 j 


. — — — — . . ß 


Spellbook, Runes of Possession 


„ — Ee 


gather blood from the intended victim. which is 
mixed with the wu jen’s own and water, then the 
liquid is placed in a special glass screen made for 
this purpose. The glass screen must be at least 
waist high, formed of two panels with a thin 
channel between, and a hole bored through the 
center. An unlit black candle is placed on the vic- 
tim’s side of the glass pane and a white candle is 
lit on the wu jen’s side (this is reversed to reverse 
the spell). A unicorn’s horn is stuck through the 
glass pane in the hole left for this reason, and this 
as a conduit for the magic. When the wu jen casts 
the spell, the glass screen glows with the light of 
the candle and the light builds in intensity until a 
flash of white light envelopes all components, 
including the people, When the light recedes, the 
white candle has blackened and is blown out 
while the unlit candle is now streaked with gray 
and burns with a blue flame. The wu jen becomes 
2d6 years younger, and the victim adds the same 
amount of years to his age. The unicorn’s horn 
turns to dust, now useless. 


Thornbush Arrows 

(Alteration) 

Level: 5 

Components: V, M 

Range: Touch 

Casting Time: | round 

Duration: | round 

Saving Throw: None 

Area of Effect: 5 thorns per level 

Definition: Thorns are the most important com- 
ponent of this spell. Whole thorns must be sliced 
from a rose bush and kept with petals from the 
same plant's blossoms. When the spell is cast, the 
wu jen must hold the thorns on open palm and 
wave a feather of a phoenix over them, then direct 
them toward a target. The thorns will fly up and 
strike with a +4 to the attack roll. The little barbs 
cause 1-2 points of damage but they can be 
dipped in various poisons before being launched. 
They all must be used in one shot, but can be 
spread out over an area to strike multiple targets. 
These magical rhorns only hit targets a wu jen 
can see, and cannot follow a flecing or evading 
individual. 

The phoenix feather is useless after the spell, 
blackened with spent energy. Wu jens who have 
learned this spell are constantly on the lookout 
for nice rose bushes or flowering thorn trees. 


Runes of Possession* 
XP Value: +1,500 GP Value: +8,000 
DRAGON Magazine 82 

This type of book has a magical intelligence. An 
evil character who studies it for as much as one 
week must save vs. spell at 2 each day thereafter 
or be possessed by the book. The effect of posses- 
sion is similar to a guest spell, forcing the owner 
to attempt to make amends for all the evil acts he 
has performed. Each time a major act of evil is 
undone (DM defines “major”), the owner is enti- 
tled to a saving throw vs. spell to see if freedom 
from possession is gained. If the possession is 
neutralized by some magical means, the owner 
will be freed but will lose 10,000 XP or one level 
of experience, whichever is greater, 


Sabirine’s Specular 
XP Value: 11,600 GP Value: 116,000 
DRAGON Magazine 100 
Sabirine’s Specular is a large, heavy tome (5 
handwidths across by 10 handwidths high, 2 fin- 
gers thick) of 28 fine vellum pages with stamped 
brass corner-pieces, with covers of thin black 
marble affixed to the thinnest of suth-wood 
sheets by large brass corner caps. 

Sabirine was a wizard of long ago, instrumen- 
tal in the exploration of the North; her adventures 
are a part of the fireside lore of traders and travel- 
ers there yet. She compiled and concealed spell- 
books in various caches and favorite haunts about 
the wilderlands, and the one known as The Speeu- 
lar has survived, for it is known to have been in 
the library of the sage Eiron the Old in Neverwin- 
ter until his death—and the subsequent pillaging 
of his house by thieves of the Red Hand guild 
only four winters ago. 

Sabirine learned the secrets of lichdom but 
chose to die a natural death instead. She was a 
wizard with an overt interest in cantrips, and was 
an enthusiastic advocate of the continued use and 
refinement of cantrips by wizards of long career 
and high level. The Specular, for instance, con- 
tains three unique cantrips developed by Sabirine: 
catfeet, snatch, and spark. 

Each cantrip and spell in the Specular is set 
forth alone on a page, and there are two addi- 
tional pages at either end of the book; those at the 
beginning being an inscription identifying the 
tome as belonging to Sabirine, with her rune (an 
“S” depicted as a swan), and those at the end 


bearing a curious piece of black felt in the shape 
5099 


= 1222 T 


= Spelibook, Sabirine'’s Specular y 


of a vial. The frontispiece page is actually a 
unique spell, spell engine (detailed below) of 
unknown authorship, which has been concealed 
by use of a secret page spell. The command word 
of the secret page is not known. The last page is 
thought to be an unused magical useful item (see 
Robe, of Useful ltems)—a potion of extraheal- 
ing, Elminster believes. 

The pages between bear six cantrips: catfeet 
(detailed below), clean, freshen, snatch (detailed 
below), spark (detailed below), and unlock, and 
spells as follows: comprehend languages, enlarge, 
light, Nystul n magic aura, sleep, bladethirst (u 
unique spell, detailed below), detect evil, ESP, 
clairaudience, gust of wind, tongues, charm mon- 
ster, dig, fire charm, Merald 5 murderous mist (a 
unique spell taught to Sabirine by her tutor, the 
mighty Archmage Merald; the spell is detailed 
hereafter), polymorph other, Bigby 5 interposing 


Spell Engine 

(Abjuration/Alteration) 

Level: 8 

Components: V, S, M 

Range: 0 

Casting Time: | turn 

Duration: Special 

Saving Throw: None 

Arca of Effect: Sphere about caster, 10-foot- 
radius per level 

Definition: This rare and powerful magic does not 
come into operation until another spell is cast 
within its area of effect. When that occurs, a huge, 
shining wheel or vertical disc of glowing white 
light will instantly appear (some inches above any 
ground or floor that was there at the time of cast- 
ing, or is there at the time of activation) where the 
caster stood while casting the engine (even if that 
spellcasting occurred centuries before). It will 
begin to turn, with a gentle rushing noise, and will 
ubsorb the energy of all spells cast within its area 
of eſſeci o that they are wasted and do not work, 
but serve instead to power the turning wheel. The 
wheel does nothing except turn, light up an area, 
and benefit wizards and illusionists with a curious 
side-effect: Its sound and energies aid magical 
concentration, and spell memorizing times for 
spelicasters who study within its area of effect are 
halved. Once activated, an engine will not disap- 
pear until dispelled; if starved for magical energy, 
it will merely turn more and more slowly, and 


gradually grow dim, until it hangs motionless, 
translucent and ghostly. 

A spell engine cannot be dispelled by dispel 
magic (which it will absorb), nor affected by nor- 
mal weapons (which pass through it as though it 
does not exist), A wish, limited wish, or alter reality 
spell, properly worded, will destroy it, as will con- 
tact with any magical item or artifact—which 
causes a magical explosion doing 1d20 points of 
damage to all within 10 feet (1d8 to those from 11 
to 20 feet away), and destroys the magical item; an 
artifact must make a saving throw, If such an arti- 
fact is not destroyed, there is a 75% chance that it 
will be shifted (with or without any creature wield- 
ing it) into another plane of existence. 

Magic mouths, glyphs, symbols, and protective 
circles or other runic magic will not be affected by 
a spell engine; thus, a doorway can be guarded by 
a symbol, and a spell engine cast in front of the 
doorway will prevent the symbol from being dis- 
pelled, Detect magic will reveal the presence and 
shape of an inactivated spell engine; the wheel is 
typically 12 feet in diameter and two fect thick, 
standing upright on edge, although it will grow 
marginally larger if charged by many spells and the 
surroundings permit such growth (its area of effect 
remaining unchanged), It is often cast in a narrow 
passageway before a door, Until activated, the 
wheel of a spell engine has no physical existence 
and cannot be touched. A disintegrate spell will 
have no effect on an inactivated spell engine, but it 
will destroy an activated spell engine, with an 
explosion identical in effect to that caused by con- 
tact between a spell engine and a magic item or 
artifact. Note that a spell engine x area of effect 
extends through rock and void alike in a perfect 
sphere; it cannot be casily avoided by use of a 
passwall, dig, or phase door. 

Living creatures that do not possess magical 
items can pass through the area of effect of an 
active spell engine without effect; it does not 
“drain” spells from minds, Inactive spell engines 
cannot be contacted by a living creature, magic 
item, or artifact, and thus cannot be so activated; 
nor will the presence of a functioning spell, 
psionic effect, or magic item function activate a 
spell engine—it is only the actual casting of a 
spell that activates the engine. 

The material components for this spell are a 
small disc of fine, polished ivory, bone, shell, or 
marble; a drop of water or one of the caster’ tears; 


and a gem (any type) of at least 1,000 gp value. 
sone 


eC | / es 


1223 


eee — 


~ Spelilbook, Subirine’s Specular * 


Catfeet 

(Alteration) 

Area of Effect: | pair of feet (self) 

Definition: This persona! cantrip, enacted by mak- 
ing a stroking motion with the fingers of one hand, 
acts upon the caster (and cannot be made to affeet 
another person) for one round (plus one additional 
round per experience level of the caster, above first 
level), Movement, regardless of the surface being 
walked upon or climbed, is rendered silent. This 
does not cloak any other sounds made by the 
caster, such as breathing, the swish of clothing, or 
sounds made with the hands grasping or moving. 
Anything dislodged or broken by the casters feet 
will make whatever noise it normally would, and 
traps or other devices triggered by a footstep will 
also function normally. In addition, the caster will 
land, balanced and unwinded, on his or her feet, 
from a fall of any height suffered while the cantrip 
is in effect (and a modifier of —1 from each die of 
falling damage suffered applies) 

The dweomer also lends some surety of trac- 
tion and movement; a —15% chance of slipping 
or falling in damp, greasy, or otherwise slightly 
slippery conditions underfoot. Note that this 
does not enable the caster to climb or walk upon 
walls or ceilings unless other magic is employed 
(such as a spider climb spell), but will reinforce 
all such magic to lend increased safety in haz- 
ardous conditions. 


Snatch 

(Evocation) 

Area of Effect: | person 

Definition: This cantrip affects people, it 
causes a brief, violent jerking force to act upon 
a body portion or limb of a subject creature, 
The force has little strength, but may serve to 
cause a running being to stumble or turn about, 
or cause someone to fumble or drop small 
objects such as keys, material components, 
gems, coins, and the like. A saving throw (of 
the subject, vs. spell) determines whether such 
objects ure actually dropped, or a fall or mishap 
actually occurs—or whether the snatch merely 
delays the subject for an initiative penalty of 
1d3 for the next round. In no case can success- 
fully snatched objects be animated or conveyed 
magically by the caster; the snatch is a brief 
tug, not an unseen servant. The caster hisses 
softly at the subject (who must be within 20 feet 
of the caster-—10 feet if the caster is a O-level 


apprentice), and simultaneously makes a jerk- 
ing motion with a hooked finger, visualizing 
the location and precise direction of the desired 
snatching, to enact the cantrip 


Spark 

(Evocation) 

Area of Effect: Special 

Definition: This personal cantrip is enacted by the 
caster snapping his or her fingers and making a 
popping verbal noise simultancously; this causes a 
large, powerful blue spark to come into being at any 
precise location (familiar, or unseen and merely 
chosen by direction and distance) within a range of 
10 feet per level of the caster, The energy of the 
spark will be transmitted by any conducting materi- 

als it contacts, but the spark does not require the 
presence of electrical (or any other) energy, and is 
not affected by dampness or other atmospheric con- 
ditions. If the caster is of 6th level or higher, the 
cantrip will produce Ida sparks in the same spot, 
in rapid succession, 


Components: V, S. M 
Range: Touch 
Casting Time: | 
Duration: | round 
Saving Throw: None 
Area of Effect: Blade of one weapon 
Definition: By means of a pinch of powdered 
silver, adamantite, or mithral, and at least a drop 
of (human) blood, the caster endows the blade 
(or blades) of an edged weapon with a +3 bonus 
on the attack roll in the following round only. 
This temporary magic is visible as a blue-white 
glow about the weapon, and fades when the 
blade strikes a creature or the spell expires, 
whichever first occurs. The weapon must be 
touched by the caster, and can be wielded by the 
caster or any creature—but if it is thrown, cast, 
or launched (a fired missile weapon such as an 
arrow), the +3 bonus will not apply. (Note that 
an arrow held to stab like a dagger would gain 
the bonus.) The weapon does not gain a +3 
bonus on damage, but is considered magical for 
attack purposes on the round following spell- 
casting, and if it must make a saving throw dur- 
ing that round, it gains a +3 bonus on the save. 
(Polearms such as spears and halberds are edged 
5099 


aa) aT 


1224 


à Spell. Scalamapdnon y 


weapons, but spiked weapons such as a flail or a 
morning star are not.) 


Merald’s Murderous Mist 

(Evocation) 

Level: 4 

Components: V, S, M 

Range: 0 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: 2 rounds 

Saving Throw: Neg 

Area of Effect: 20-foot-radius sphere 
Definition: A billowing cloud of misty vapors is 
created by the use of this spell; it radiates out- 
ward from the caster to fill a 20-foot radius, a 
spherical area above and below the caster’s 
ground level, penetrating all obstructions; at the 
end of the round of casting, the magic takes 
effect, and the mist changes in hue from blue- 
gray to green, becoming poisonous, All breath- 
ing creatures within the area of effect not 
possessing a (magical) separate air supply— 
except the caster, who is immune to the effects 
of his or her own murderous mist—must imme- 
diately save ys. spell. Those who save are 
unharmed, Those who do not take 2d4 points of 
damage from the vapor, which is corrosive to 
flesh but does not affect clothing or items, Crea- 
tures which can’t move out of the area of effect 
within the round take a further Ida points of 
damage on the following round, as the vapors 
begin to combine with the air and disappear. The 
globe of murderous mist is a magically bound, 
precise area unaffected by natural or magical 
winds. Dispel magic or part water will cause it 
to disappear before expiration of the spell, and 
various magic or items (such as rope trick or a 
portable hole) will protect an individual by pro- 
viding escape from the mist, but it is otherwise 
unaffected by natural or magical forces. 


Scalamagdrion 
XP Value: 9,200 GP Value: 92,000 
DRAGON Magazine 92 
This is a large volume fashioned of parchment, 
bound between slabs of wood and sewn to the 
black hide of an unknown creature, which has 
been stretched over the boards to form a cover. It 
bears no external markings of any kind. Its covers 
are edged with beaten copper, now discolored to a 
vivid green by the elements. There are 26 yel- 
lowed and curling pages within, and some owners 


2 a 


report a binding strip of black hide that the book 
now apparently lacks. The size and weight of the 
tome precludes its easy transportation by hand, 
under arm, or in a satchel, and indeed it does not 
show the wear (scratched cover or corners, 
blotched or warped parchment due to wetness) 
typical of books that have seen much traveling. 

The true origin of the Scalamagdrion is 
unknown. It is first mentioned in the writings of 
the wizard Hethcanter, who owned the book in his 
youth. He does not mention how he acquired it, 
but does record that he gave the book to Hym 
Kraaven (one of the Seven Wizards of Myth Dran- 
nor) in payment for magical training. Shortly after 
that his writings end. Hethcanter is remembered 
today chiefly for his spectacular suicide, hurling 
himself to his death from the highest pinnacle of 
the crag now known as Hethcantcr’s Leap, He did 
this when chased by almost a score of illithids, 
and the sage Orfidel belicves that these hated 
creatures sought the Scalamagdrion itself—an 
opinion shared by Elminster. 

Hym Kraaven never revealed or used the work 
in his teachings at the school in Myth Drannor 
(see the Workbook) possibly because of the con- 
tents of one of its pages. Of Hym Kraaven’s fate, 
or the means by which the book passed into the 
hands of its next known owner, nothing is 
recorded, but the sages Orfidel and Macrlus of 
the North were both present on Watchers Tor 
when a hitherto unknown wizard named 
Valathond used its spells to destroy the wizard 
Gaerlammon in a formal duel. 

Valathond was later slain by the Company of 
the Raven, but his killers did not discover the 
book in the treasure in his keep, nor does an 
examination of their tales of encounters and skir- 
mishes with the wizard over an entire season 
before his fall suggest that he still possessed it. 
Auvidarus, sage of Hillsfar, and Laeral, wiz- 
ardess and leader of the adventurers known as 
The Nine tuo observers almost a world apart— 
have both recorded rumors ascribing ownership 
of the book to this or that wizard. One of Lacral’s 
collected rumors, interestingly, again mentions a 
group of illithids, But the veracity of these 
rumors is untested; the present whereabouts of 
the work are a matter of conjecture. 

Elminster described the tome’s contents, draw- 
ing upon his study of Hethcanter’s careful notes, 
as follows: 

The Scalamagdrion y first and last pages are 


3100 


1225 


Spelldook. Science of Metaenchantment 


"| eel 


blank. The remainder bear 23 spells, one to a page 
and with each page having a blank (rear) face, and 
one page containing only a curious illustration. The 
contents of the pages are as follows, in order of 
appearance from the front of the book: (blank), 
write, erase, fangues, message, unseen servant, 
wizard lock, identify, enchant an item, permanency, 
blink, disintegration, (illustration), feeblemind, fly, 
death spell, flame arrow, delayed blast fireball, 
invisibility, levitate, conjure elemental, minor globe 
of invulnerability, wall of force, remove curse, dis- 
pel magic, and (blank). All spells appear in stan- 
dard form. The irregular order of the spells suggests 
that the book was created with its spells arranged 
according to the creator's wishes, and thus was not 
the workbook of a wizard progressing slowly in 
magical ability under tutelage. 

‘The unique feature of the work is the illustration 
found on the page between disintegration and fee- 
Alemind. It is of “a warm, velvety texture” accord- 
ing to Hethcanter’s notes, and is a strikingly 
realistic painting of some unknown, seemingly 
endless caverns (perhaps on some other planc), in 
which crouches a dimly visible, winged, reptilian 
monster on a bed of human bones. A word or name 
has been spelled out clearly in Common across the 
bottom of the page, by the arrangement of bones: 
“Ningulfim.” Hethcanter notes that if this word is 
spoken over the open page or if one stares too long 
at the illustration, the monster begins to move. 

From other sources not divulged, Elminster 
states with certainty that the page is a gafe or portal 
to some unidentified plane or extradimensional 
space of endless caverns, and passage through the 
gate is two-way. Once the gate is activated, the 
monster will emerge from the page into the Prime 
Material Plane and attack all creatures nearby, 
secking to slay and carry the prey back into the cav- 
ems to devour. Its true nature is a mystery, but what 
is known of it can be summarized as follows: 


Scalamagdrion 

Aka: Guardian of the Tome, Ninggulfim 
CLIMATE/TERRAIN: The Scalamagdrion 
FREQUENCY: Very Rare 
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any 

DIET: Carnivore 

INTELLIGENCE: Average (8-12) 
TREASURE: S, Q, Vx3 (in lair) 
ALIGNMENT: Neutral 

NO. APPEARING: | 

ARMOR CLASS: 6 


MOVEMENT: 15, Sw 8 

HIT DICE: 6+6 

THACO; 15 

NO. OF ATTACKS: 4 
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 2d6/1d6/1d6/2d4 
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Nil 
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Sce below 
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Sce below 
SIZE: L (20 long) 

MORALE: Fearless (19-20) 

XP VALUE: 2,000 


The scalamagdrion resembles a grey-scaled, green- 
eyed dragon with stubby wings and a long, bonc- 
spiked prehensile tail. If it pounces upon a victim 
from above, it can rake with all four of its claws 
(each causing 1d6 damage), or pin the victim with 
its great bulk and use its foreclaws to attack. The 
Scalamagdrion’s tail does 3d4 points of damage. It 
is fearless, enjoys human flesh, and ts cunning 
enough to take a victim's body, fallen items and all, 
back to its lair to avoid being caught cating. 

The scalamagdrion radiates silence, 15’ radius 
about itself, and has a natural spell turning ability 
(as a ring of spell turning, including gaining a suv- 
ing throw for spells for which there is normally 
none). This makes it a deadly foe for wizards, and, 
indeed, none have yet prevailed against it. 

Several wands and rings can be seen amid the 
bones upon which the scalamagdrion crouches. 
The monster and the gate to and from its abode 
cannot be destroyed or harmed by tearing out or 
destroying the page on which it appears, although 
any attempt at such activities will certainly cause 
it to issue forth. 


Science of Metaenchantment 
XP Value: 8,400 GP Value: 84,000 
New Item 

Sarclk, always interested in magic that affects 
other magic (usually referred to as metamagic), 
compiled an extensive list of metamagic spells 
collected into two volumes. The first volume 
includes extension I, extension II, extension III, 
permanency, sense shifting, alacrity, Alamir 3 
fundamental breakdown, augmentation J. far 
reaching I. minor malison, squaring the circle, 
dilation 1, divination enhancement, far reaching 
ll, greater malison, minor spell turning. Mar- 
dentainen & celerity, unluck, far reaching HI, 
Khazid x procurement, and lower resistance. 


stot 


~ Spellbook, Selvar's Ineffabte Conjurations, Magic, and Phantasms cr 


Science of Metaenchantment I 

XP Value: 5,200 GP Value: 52,000 
New item 

Sarelk, compiled an extensive list of metamagic 
spells collected into two volumes, The second 
volume includes mind fog, safeguarding, aug- 
mentation Ii. dilation I, hatch the stone from the 
egg, Hornung 5 surge selector, intensify summon- 
ing, spell shape, steal enchantment, chain contin- 
gency, glorious transmutation, and stabilize, as 
well as the recipe for the philosopher x stone 


Selvar’s Ineffable 
Conjurations, Magic, and Phantasms 
XP Value: 12,800 GP Value: 128,000 
The Magister 
A medium-sized tome (3 handwidths broad by 4 
handwidths tall) of ash boards covered with 
stretched, white-tanned cowhide. The covers have 
brass corner-caps, and a binding of brass rings, 
which hold 33 parchment pages, cach containing a 
spell, one to a page, except for the first page. It is a 

title page, and bears Selvar’s personal rune, thus: 
Selvar was a wizard of 
Taruin, in the southern realm 
of Samarach, who in his lat- 
ter days became involved in 
a feud with another local 
wizard, Phelpar of Rassatan. 
For some years Selvar 
hopped about as a frog 
thanks to Phelpar s spells, 
and during that time Phelpar 
stole all of Selvur s spells and magical treasures. 
Selvur hopped for many miles across Samarach to a 
cave in the mountains north of Sorlmar Pass, where 
he had hidden a cache of magic, and by means of 
the powers there regained his own form, He then set 
about trapping Phelpar, whom he eventually 
enspelled into the form of a horse and rode to death, 
Employing magic to speak with Phelpar's corpse, 
Selvar learned the location of Phelpar’s cache, 
wherein his own stolen magic was hid, and went 
there to a tomb in the Rathgaunt Hills, on the south- 
ern edge of the great plains of the Shaar. There the 
elderly wizard set about collecting and refining his 
spells, and setting them down in books—one of 
which, the /neffable Conjurations, Magic, and 
Phantasms, he gave to the young maid llistar, who 
later became an apprentice of Khelben “Blackstaff” 
Arunsun. Ilistur set down Khelben warding whip 
on the hitherto blank last page of the book. 


The book is unusual in that it begins with a sec- 
tion of illusionist spells, written in the magical 
secret language of that class, Ruathlek, and con- 
cludes with a section of wizard spells. These spells 
are listed hereafter: Color spray, detect invisibility, 
gaze reflection, phantasmal force, blacklight (a 
unique spell, detailed below), Aypnotic pattern, 
invisibility, magic mouth, mirror image, plague (a 
unique spell, described below), dispel illusion, fear, 
mailed might (a unique spell, described below), 
paralyzation, spectral force, dispel exhaustion, 
phantasmal killer, maze, shadow door, dem- 
ishadow magic, turnshadow (a unique spell, 
described below), web, dispel magic, haste, water 
breathing, ice storm, remove curse, hold monster, 
wall of force, globe of invulnerability, power word 
silence (a unique spell, detailed below), Khelhen x 
warding whip (a unique spell, detailed below). 


Blacklight 

(Alteration) 

Level; 2 

Components: V, S, M 

Range: 10 feet per level 

Casting Time: 2 

Duration: | round per level 

Saving Throw: Negates 

Area of Effect: 20-foot-rudius; globe 
Definition: By means of this spell, an illusionist 
creates a stationary, temporary area of darkness. 
The darkness is total and impenetrable, foiling 
even infravision. 

Normal and magical light is negated unless 
light or continual light magic, or a dispel magic, 
is used to destroy the area of blacklight. This spell 
is different from the usual magical darkness in 
that the caster can sce normally in the area of 
effect, secing the spell effect only as a faint, 
smoky gray or blue haze Thus the illusionist can 
move, attack, cast spells, and the like normally. 

Creatures within the area of effect are adversely 
affected in combat by the darkness, although a 
blindfighting proficiency aids against this. Crea- 
tures in the area of effect of blacklight are allowed 
a saving throw vs. spell (at -) for each round in 
which they remain in the blacklight area; if suc- 
cessful, they can see as well as the illusionist who 
cast the spell can, for that round only (a saving 
throw must be made each round; if made one 
round and then failed the next, a creature's blind- 
ness will return), The caster of a blacklight can 
end it at will, although continual concentration is 

sion 


T 


1227 


a EE ee 


Spellbonk, Selvar y Inctfuble Conjurations, Magic, and Phantasms 


— 


nol necessary to maintain its existence, and the 
illusionist may cast other spells after the black- 
light is created, without destroying it. (Note that 
spells that depend upon victims seeing the spell 
effect will not work if the victims are blinded by 
the backlight.) The material components of this 
spell are a piece of coal and an eyeball (from any 
creature; it may be dried and preserved). 


Plague 
(Illusion Phantasm) 


Range: Touch 

Casting Time: 2 

Duration: 100 turns per level 

Saving Throws: Negates 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 

Definition: This spell allows an illusionist to cast 
a special type of spectral force requiring no con- 
tinued concentration, on any one creature. The 
illusion created involves smell, texture of skin, 
appearance, and the like, in a simulation of the 
symptoms of any severe contagious discase the 
caster has closely seen examples of before. If the 
caster has never observed such a disease, he or 
she can invent and visualize symptoms, but they 
are 30% likely to be seen as false and magically 
created, Otherwise, such an illusion is only 6% 
likely to be detected. The victim suffers no dam- 
age (and indeed, may not be aware that the illu- 
sion exists, as the victim cannot sec the illusion, 
but only his or her real form), but may well be 
slain or driven away by others ere the spell 
expires. Cure disease and similar magic have no 
effect on the plague illusion, but dispel magic has 
its normal chances for dispelling the magic. 

The material components of this spell are a 
scrap of human skin (from any source, of a size at 
least as large as a gold piece) and a pinch of soot 
or charcoal or black mold or fungus growth. 


Range: Touch (or self) 

Casting Time; 3 

Duration; | round per level 

Saving Throw: None 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 

Definition: By means of this spell, a wizard pro- 


tects herself or another touched creature with tem- 
porary, illusory armor. The armor has no weight, 
nor does it encumber its wearer or in any way affect 
movement or the drawing of weapons or rearrange- 
ment of clothing “under” the armor. To the wearer, 
it is “not there“ invisible and undetectable, mak- 
ing no metallic sounds when struck or moving, and 
so on. To others, it appears as translucent, ghostly 
armor, visible in outline but nonreflective and 
soundless. It protects the wearer as if it were real 
plate mail (AC 3), but is immune to rust monster 
attacks and does not conduct electrical discharges. 
It cannot be dishelieved by opponents, and lasts for 
the spell duration regardless of how much damage 
it absorbs (it absorbs 3 points of damage per attack 
directed at the wearer), This improved phantom 
armor does not hamper spellcasting or the exercise 
of any class abilities, confers a +1 bonus against all 
attacks protected against by magic armor, and com- 
pletely covers the protected creature, who may be 
of any size (such as a horse or mule), fitting per- 
fectly. The armor wearer looks as if it were shad- 
owed by far larger, more powerfully armored 
creatures who stand behind it and move with it. 
Creatures of 2-7 Intelligence (“semi-” and “low” ) 
who observe this effect will flee in fear of the 
strange armored creature they face; more intelli- 
gent creatures are disconcerted and may respect the 
potential powers of the recipient being more than 
they otherwise would, The material component of 
this spell is a small fragment of real armor—plate 
or metal mail-weave. 


Turnshadow 

(Abjuration) 

Level: 6 

Components: V, S 

Range: 60 feet 

Casting Time: | 

Duration: | round per level 

Saving Throw: None 

Area of Effect: 40 by 40 feet 

Definition: This spell allows a wizard to turn 

shadow monsters, demishadow monsters, shades, 

and shadows (cither those conjured up and con- 

trolled by means of a summon shadow spell, or 

encountered undead) and cause them to flee away 

from the caster and any companions in a chosen 

direction at 100 feet per turn or to attack a single 

target creature of the caster’s choice. Thus, a 

shade of a dragonne created by one illusionist and 

directed at another wizard could be turned against 
$103 


ea ee eas 


1228 


. Spellbook, Selvars Inciiable Conjuratians, Magic, and Phantasm — 


the initial caster (who would lose control of the 
dragonne, including any ability to dispel it with- 
out a separate spell). 


Casting Time: | 

Duration: 2 rounds 

Saving Throw: None 

Area of Effect: Special 

Definition: This spell enables a wizard to magi- 
cally silence one creature and an arca extending 
all about that creature to a distance of | foot. The 
silence occurs instantly upon the utterance of the 
power word, ruining any spellcasting in progress, 
and continuing in the round following the round 
in which the power word was uttered. The silence 
foils spelicasting, the utterance of any word of 
activation or command words, normal speech or 
shouted alarms, banging noises, and blocks all 
sound, effectively deafening the target. 

The target can of course move, breathe, or even 
ring a gong or operate a magical noisemaker 
(including such items as a horn of Valhalla or 
blasting and a chime of opening) without any 
effect except the expenditure of charges, if 
applicable. Dispel magic or dispel silence will not 
affect the silence created by a power word, a lim- 
ited wish or more powerful spell is required. 


Khelben’s Warding Whip 
(Abjuration/Evocation) 
Level: 7 

Components: V, S, M 
Range: 10 fect per level 


Area of Effect: Special 
Definition: Developed specifically as a counter 
to the various Bighy s hand spells, this magic 
enables a caster to combat magical attacks which 
take the form of pushing, striking, or crushing 
forces. It creates a whiplike, ſlexible lash of invis- 
ible force directed by one of the caster’s hands, 
which when directed aguinst magical forces has 
the following effects; 
* All cantrips that cause loss of balance or affect 
physical person: presence of whip confers 


immunity on Whip-wieldet. 

* Push: Presence of whip confers immunity on 
whip-wielder. 

* Shield: Touch of whip instantly dissipates 

shield; whip unaffected. 

Tenser'’s Floating Disc: Touch of whip has 

40% chance (per strike; one per round) of 

destroying disc, whip unaffected. 

* Bigby's Interposing Hand: Touch of whip 
instantly destroys hand; 20% chance of whip 
being destroyed too. 

* Bighy’s Forceful Hand; Huch strike of whip on 
hand (one per round) has a 90% chance of 
destroying the hand and a 30% chance of 
destroying the whip. 

High x Grasping Hand: Same as above, except 

the chances are 80% und 40%. 

Bigby x Clenched Fist: Same as above, except 

the chances are 70% and 50%. 

* Bighy Crushing Hand: Same as above, except 
the chances are 65% and 60%. 

The caster need not concentrate on the whip to 
maintain its existence, but can cast solely verbal- 
only spells to avoid destroying it before the spell 
expiration. No THACO roll is required to strike of 
parry with the whip, but the caster cannot wield 
other physical weapons without causing the whip to 
dissipate. The material components of this spell are 
a piece of wire and a pinch of powdered electrum 

The whip has no effect on such spells as gust of 
wind, levitate, hold person, slow, fumble, repulsion, 
reverse gravity, trip, and various nonmoving magi- 
cal barriers, from wall of force up to prismatic 
sphere, and cannot itself be used as a weapon—it 
simply and harmlessly passes through living 
objects as though they did not exist, It may be used 
to parry the physical attacks of normal and magical 
weapons, including telekinesed missiles and other 
weaponlike spell effects (such as spirimal hammer, 
Name blade, and Mordenkainen x sword) and of 
magical items (such as a shillelagh or ring of the 
ram), with a base 60% chance of success, plus 2% 
per level of the caster of the whip. Thus a l4th-level 
wizard, the lowest level able to use 7th-level spells, 
will have an 88% chance of parrying, whether the 
attack be a +1 dagger or a flame blade, with a max- 
imum chance (regardless of level) of 96%. The 
whip can parry only one attack in a round, so it can 
foil only single-missile magic missile attacks, and 
remove only | point of damage (per round) from 
blade barrier attacks, 


4103 


q SPelibook, Sakatha’s r 


Sakatha’s 
XP Value: 30,400 GP Value: 304,000 
Tomb of the Lizard King 

Sukuthu x spellbook is clearly just that, and will be 
recognized as a book of spells as soon as it is seen, 
The book is a lange, thick volume with gold-plated 
wooden covers. It is closed and locked with a sim- 
ple clasp lock, there are no runes or inscriptions of 
any kind on the cover. The book, however, carries a 
special curse; any person (other than Sakatha) who 
ever uses the book can never be rid of it, and that 
person will lose | point of Intelligence per week 
(save vs. spell cach week applicable), When the 
Intelligence score is reduced to 0, the person dies 
(no save), If buried, the dead person will awaken as 
a vampire in 1d10 weeks. A remove curse spell 
will enable the victim to be nd of the book and will 
stop the drain on Intelligence, but will not restore 
lost Intelligence points. 

Sakatha § Spellbook contains the following spells: 
affect normal fires, burning hands, comprehend lan- 
guages, detect magic, erase, featherfall, hold portal, 
identify, jump, light, magic missile, enlarge, read 
magic, spider climb, sleep, ventriloquism, shocking 
grasp, Nystul magic aura, darkness, 15’ radius, 
detect evil, detect invisibility, ESP, forget, invisibility, 
Leomund x trap, knock, magic mouth, mirror image, 
ray of enfeeblement, rope trick, seare, shatter, stink- 
ing cloud, web, wizard lock, blink, clairaudience, 
clairvoyance, dispel magic, explosive runes, fireball, 
gust of wind, haste, hold person, invisibility, 10° 
radius, lightning bolt, Leomund 5 tiny hut, protection 
from evil, IU radius, protection from normal mis- 
siles, slow, suggestion, tongues, water breathing, 
charm monster, confusion, dig, dimension doar, 
extension I, fear, fire shield, fumble, ice storm, minor 
globe of invulnerability, polymorph other, Rary x 
mnemonic enhancer, remove curse, wall of fire, wall 
of ice, wizard eye, hallucinatory terrain, plant 
growth, Bigby 5 interposing hand, cloudkill, magic 


Jar, feeblemind, and teleport. 
Serpin Lexicon 
XP Value: 10,400 GP Value: 104,000 


DuNGEON Magazine 17 
The Serpin Lexicon is an eldrich work dedicated 
to evil and the spread of chaos, It deals primarily 
with the conjuration and summoning of extrapla- 
nar creatures, particularly those from the lower 
planes, with secondary spells pertaining to death 
and necromancy. In addition to long sections of 
narrative describing Imbindarla’s sect and its cer- 


emonies (these arc unpleasant but not dangerous 
to peruse), the book contains the following spells: 


Priest Wizard 
Protection from evil Protection from evil 
Detect life Protection from evil, 
Animate dead 10" radius 
Feign death Animate dead 
Negative plane protection Contact other plane 
Speak with dead Dismissal 
Abjure Dolor 
Exorcise Sending 
Protection from evil, Ensnarement 

10’ radius Invisible stalker 
Animate dead monsters Spiritwrack 
Commune with Imbrindarla' Banishment 
Dispel evil Torment 
Slay living 


This spell cannot function, since that deity is 
currently in an inactive void state for want of 


worshipers. 


Since Imbindarla is a demigoddess, she cannot 
grant spells over Sth level to her priests. All of 
these spells are designed to be used in specially 
prepared ritual rooms, Using them outside this 
room does not prevent the spells from working, 
but it docs prevent the user from being able to 
control the effects. A dispel evil spell cast outside 
a ritual chamber simply fails, as does any other 
spell that cannot otherwise go awry. 

Anyone may open the book and thumb through 
it without penalty. If someone attempts to use a 
spell, however, there will be trouble. Any good- 
aligned spelloaster using this evil work suffers 
Ido points of damage and loses 1d6(x1,000) XP 
immediately, with no saving throw allowed. In 
addition, a guardian creature is summoned (see 
below for descriptions of guardian creatures). 
Likewise, if a PC who cannot normally use spells 
tries to utter any of the incantations, the spell fails 
and the attempt immediately summons a guardian 
creature. 

Only neutral and evil priests and wizards (not 
their subclasses) may use this work without harm, 
and the DM should monitor neutral PCs closely, 
Even evil PCs cannot cast spells that would nor- 
mally be beyond their levels to cast any attempt 
to do so summons a guardian creature. Evil spell- 
casters may use each spell they understand and 


are of a high enough level to cast, once per week, 
5105 


1230 


T 


Shadowtorme 


ne cr 


reading the spell out of the book as if it were a 
scroll. The spell does not vanish when the book is 
used in this way. Spells may not be copied out of 
this work; if a spell is copied, both the copy and 
the original spell fade away, 

The Serpin Lexicon has many extradimensional 
spaces built into its pages, most of these holding 
guardian creatures. Whenever the book is improp- 
erly used, one of the creatures appears in Ida rounds 
to attack the reader. Possible guardian creatures 
include imp (1), quasit (1), dretch (1), manes (2-5), 
larva (2-8), lemures (1-3), and rutterkin (1), (See the 
PLANECAPE™ Monstrous COMPENDIUM Appendix). 
A guardian creature attacks the reader first, fighting 
until either that person or the guardian is dead, then it 
attacks the reader's compatriots, Guardians attack 
until destroyed. The DM can add more creatures if 
the PCs decide to keep the book, making the 
guardians minor in power but potent enough to make 
the PCs think twice about using the book frivolously. 

The book provides an extradimensional space, 
much like a coffin, where the head priest's 
remains go if it is destroyed in combat. In this 
limbo the creature forms a new body to emerge 
from the book in 24 hours. The emerging creature 
looks like a heavy mist issuing from the book's 
pages, The mist forms into the head priest in one 
round, at the stage of development it had when 
destroyed. For example, if it was at the skelctal 
stage of development, the creature that cmanates 
from the book is a skeleton. 

The book also serves as a focal point for the 
magic that allows the head pricst to transform in 
the first place. If the book is destroyed before the 
PCs battle the head priest, it remains a skeleton 
permanently. It docs not come back if it is 
destroyed and does not turn into a vampire if it 
drains blood, By the same token, if the head priest 
is killed and escapes into its extradimensional cof- 
fin, destruction of the book within the nest 24 
hours also permanently destroys the creature. 

The book may be destroyed by any method that 
destroys a normal book. Use the Saving Throw 
Table for magical and nonmagical items in the 
DMG for the book's saving throws; treat the Serpin 
Lexicon as a book with a +3 on all saving throws. 

The Serpin Lexicon is a powerful item and has 
severe limitations because its frequent use could 
easily upset any campaign. It is an evil item and 
should be destroyed, though this is not manda- 
tory. It is worth 1,500 XP and 15,000 gp to evil 
PCs or NPCs, and an equal amount of experience 


1231 


to any good or neutral PC who destroys it. The 
relatively low value for PCs who can use the book 
reflects the fact that the user must have a special 
room to properly use the spells, so the book is not 
as versatile as most magical volumes. Setting up 
such a room is expensive (10,000-40,000 gp) and 
time consuming (6-9 months, during which time 
no adventuring is possible while the user oversees 
construction). Directions for setting up special 
rooms are given in the Serpin Lexicon itself. 


Senshock’s 
XP Value: 10,800 GP Value: 108,000 
The Temple of Elemental Evil 

Senshock's spellbook contains the following 
spells: charm person, detect magic, featherfall, 
magic missile, read magic, shield, unseen servant, 
write, detect invisibility, invisibility, knock, magic 
mouth, web, wizard lock, dispel magic, fireball, fly, 
haste, lightning bolt, tongues, charm monster, 
dimension door, fire trap, polymorph self, conjure 
elemental, teleport, and wall of stone. 


Serinda’s 

GP Value: 72,000 
Drapons of Paith 
Serinda x Spellbook contains the following spells: 
dancing lights, detect invisibility, detect magic, 
dispel magic, enlarge, haste, invisibility, item, 
levitate, light, lightning bolt, magic missile, 
Melf’s acid arrow, message, read magic, sleep, 
unseen servant, and vocalize. 


XP Value: 7,200 


Seven Skies of The Universe 
XP Value: 2,400 GP Value: 24,000 
Deacon Magazine 82 
Written by Casimur, this spellbook contains gust 
of wind, whispering wind, rainbow pattern, prë- 
cipitation, cloudburst, and wind wall. 


Shadowtome 
XP Value: 3,200 GP Value: 32,000 
The Magister 

This octagonal volume of two wooden board cov- 
ers, over which are stretched sections of black- 
and-silver crocodile skin, encloses nine sheets of 
beaten electrum each bearing, stamped and 
etched, a single spell. The book is fastened with a 
clasp opposite the electrum hinges—a black left 
human hand that swivels at its wrist to grasp a 
black bestial hooked tail. The book bears no title. 
The book was compiled by the wizard known 
sin 


Spellbook, Shadowtome 


[ie N R EE 


only as Shadowhands, licutenant to Nelazra, the 
Old Mother (though she was never called that to 
her face twice), Guildmaster of the Nighteyes, the 
guilded thieves of Culimport. Shadowhands, whose 
real name has never been known, is believed to 
have been Nelazra’s lover and confidant, and is 
believed to have been slain in a battle with The 
Brothers Six, a group of wizards who sought to 
control much merchant trade in Calimshan, and 
saw climination of the Nighteyes as necessary to 
the success of their ventures, The Brothers Six had 
been reduced to just two in number by the time they 
finally slew Nelazra and broke the power of the 
Nighteyes in Calimport—and they were in turn 
slain by Khelben “Blackstaff” Arunsun when they 
attempted to control trade entering and leaving the 
harbors of Baldur's Gate and Waterdeep. 

The Shadowtome was found in a concealed 
room in the back wall of the temple of Mystra in 
Calimport by the wizard Azkhazan, who was 
slain by hobgoblins when adventuring in the 
mountains north of Iriaebor, and the tome traded 
by them to the evil wizard Maerglor of Elturel, in 
return for weapons, food, and fine armor. Maer- 
glor sold it to Elminster, who after copying what 
of its contents he needed, sold it to Evinther the 
Blue of Neverwinter, who was blasted to nothing- 
ness two winters later by an unknown magical 
assailant who presumably has the book now, 
unless mecting with subsequent misfortune. 

The Shadowtome & pages bear the following 
spells: dispel magic, missile mastery (a unique 
spell, detailed below), night scar (a unique spell, 
detailed below), polymorph other, animate dead, 
cloudkill, ironguard (a unique spell, detailed 
below), death spell. 


Missile Mastery 

(Alteration) 

Level: 3 

Components: V, S 

Range: 10 feet per level 

Casting Time: 3 

Duration: 3 rounds 

Saving Throws: Special 

Area of Effect: One missile 

Definition: This spell allows its caster to change 
the flight of a single missile (per round) in 
midair, hurling it back at its sender or at any other 
creature. Such a missile strikes as though wielded 
by the caster as a proficient weapon at +4 on 
attack rolls. and does its normal damage. They 


may in turn be readily deflected by magical 
means (such as shield or gust of wind). 

Magical missiles only gain a saving throw vs. 
spell (that of their caster or sender), aided by any 
pluses they have. A single magic missile can be 
deflected; multiple attacks from a magie missile 
spell hit normally. Further spellcasting is impos- 
sible while a wizard is using mastery; it can, how- 
ever, be ended instantly by the cessation of the 
wizard’s concentration. Concentration is not bro- 
ken by physical attacks on the wizard, who can 
freely engage in physical combat without wasting 
the second and third rounds of the spell, 

The only benefit this spell gains a wizard 
trapped in a blade barrier is a +1 to the initial 
saving throw representing the wizard's chance to 
escape the forming blades. The mastery must 
have already been in effect, however: if the time 
is taken to cast it, the blade barrier will have fully 
formed—no saving throw is then allowable, and 
there are far too many blades moving about for 
mastery to be of any use against them. 


Night Scar 

(Illusion/Phantasm) 

Level: 3 

Components: S 

Range: 30 feet 

Casting Time: 3 

Duration: 10 turns per level 

Saving Throw: Negates 

Area of Effect: One creature or object 
Definition: This magic is brought about by will 
and gesture only; it creates an invisible, unique 
mark (the night scar) on a creature or object. The 
target is entitled to a saving throw vs. spell to avoid 
the mark, but unless the target is a creature who 
both observes and recognizes the gestures of cast- 
ing, the target will be unaware that any spell has 
been attempted. This mark is visible only to the 
caster and those creatures who touch the caster 
during the casting of the scar (up to seven M-sized 
creatures could conceivably do s0). The scar is not 
revealed by true seeing or the like because it is not 
really there, nor can another creature be enabled to 
see it by having the caster (or another who can sec 
it) describe it to them. The scar fades at the spell 
expiration, and can be removed by dispel magic or 
remove curse. It does not radiate magic, and can- 
not be thus detected. The scar shows through 
clothing and disguises, and to those who can see it, 


appears to glow slightly—thus, a marked person 
3109 


1232 


eS A A. i -—vuH 


~ Spellbook, Shandaril’s Workbook r 


can be readily distinguished in a crowd if one is 
within visual range. This spell is primarily used to 
trace thieves or murderers who escape from the 
scene of a crime but live or remain in the area (so 
that they can be apprehended later), 


Area of Effect: One creature 
Definition: By means of this spell, a wizard can 
affect another spellcaster. (This spell will not work 
on creatures who have spell-like natural powers.) 
The magic is lost and wasted if cast on a nonspell- 
caster. The backlash leaves only a faint magical 
trace, and can only be removed by a remove curse or 
stronger spell, but not by dispel magic; it does not 
take effect until the victim employs an offensive 
spell that fails (regardless of distance or time 
removed from the placing of the backlash). A back- 
lash will occur when a victim's target is unaffected 
by making its saving throw, when the victim has 
spellcasting interrupted or ruined, or when an offen- 
sive spell is incorrectly used on a target that is 
immune to it. The backlash causes the spell to work 
(even if the casting was botched) with full effects 
upon the caster of the offensive spell, who is 
allowed no saving throws or immunities in this case. 
The backlash only works once, although any 
number of backlash spells may be placed on a sin- 
gle spellcaster; only one will take effect at a time. 


Ironguard 
(Abjuration/Alteration) 
Level: 5 
Components: V, S, M 
Range: 0 


Area of Effect: 10-foot sphere 

Definition: By means of this spell, the caster con- 
fers immunity from any normal metallic weapons 
upon him or herself or any other creature the caster 
touches during the casting. Such weapons pass 
through the protected person as though he or she 
were a phantasm, and not solid flesh. Such contact 


does no harm whatsoever, and the protected person 
can pass through iron bars, gates, and other metal- 
lic objects. The protected person cannot grasp or 
pick up metallic objects, cither, and thus cannot 
open most locks, carry metal chests, or even put on 
or take off a metal helm. or wield most weapons, 
Note that the protected person still suffers damage 
from heat (hot metal) and flame (flaming blades), 
poison on metal spikes, and so on. 

Magical weapons do damage according to their 
pluses (a long sword +2 will do a protected being 
2 points of damage per strike). Metal bars and 
gates that carry any sort of dweomer cannot be 
passed through by means of this spell, and spells 
and magical items that use metal in their attacks 
(blade barrier, for example) but do not have 
pluses do half damage if they cannot be avoided 
by the protected being. Such protected beings can 
clearly see (and smell, if hot or smeared with poi- 
son or tar) metal objects. 

The material components for this spell are a 
handful of iron filings and a drop of aqua regia. 


Shandaril’s Workbook 
XP Value: 10,000 GP Value: 100,000 
The Magister 
This crescent-shaped tome, 5 handwidths in height 
by 3 handwidths across, has two glossy, polished 
black covers of ebony, The covers are hinged with 
copper at the center of their curve and enclose 26 
pages of thin, burnished copper shects. 

Shandaril is a wizard of great power, now 
coldly evil and selfish. She uses this workbook as 
a means of ensnaring other wizards, so that she 
may lessen potential competition by slaying 
them, after first strengthening herself by learning 
what she can of their unique magic. 

Born in Telflamm, Shandaril was brought to 
Sembia by her merchant parents when young, and 
is known to have studied under the wizards Halak- 
oun (good) and later Mairgaer (neutral) in Sel- 
gaunt. She was of great beauty from childhood, and 
soon learned to manipulate men masterfully. While 
still a girl, she became apprentice to the adventurer- 
wizard Thalaver, of The Company in Crimson, and 

ied the band on a perilous adventure into 
the ruins of The Stonelands. There she slew 
Thalaver and all his companions at some point, and 
acquired their magic, in particular Thalaver’s staff 
of power and spellbooks, Returning to Suzail to 
ransack I halaver x Tower, she was confronted by 
Vangerdahast and other wizards of note in the city 


3110 


r a eee 


1233 


TT ˙²— : 6 ö ˙⁰¹ü ˙ tt,. uM) 


Spellbook, Shandaril’s Workbook 


— — —— e 


who demanded to know of the whereabouts of the 
Company. She barely escaped alive, by means of a 
teleportation device. Before doing so, she tri- 
umphantly admitted her deeds; there is still a royal 
warrant for her arrest outstanding in Cormyr. 


Shandaril’s present lair is unknown, but she is 
thought to dwell somewhere to the sduth, and is 
, known to have grown greatly in power. She has 
released her workbook into circulation amongst 
wizards as a trap, to gain her yet more magic. 
Few know or even suspect its true nature. 
The first page of the crescentiform tome bears 
Shandaril’s sigil, thus: 
It also bears the 
invisible activa- 
tion rune of a 
tracer Shandaril 
has cast upon the 
tome, which if 
revealed by detect 
magie (note that the rune itself is not a “trap”) 
looks like this: 
The pages after that bear the 
following spells, one to a page 
(all are in standard form, unless 
otherwise noted): burning 
hands, dancing lights, detect 
magic, hold portal, shocking 
grasp, sleep (this spell has been incorrectly written; 
the sleep it causes lasts only one round, and its 


range fluctuates from casting to casting, from 10 
feet to 30 fect at random), spider climb, audible 
glamer, circle dance (a unique spell, detailed here- 
after), detect evil (this spell has also been botched; 
all creatures receive a saving throw against it; if 
made, they do not detect as evil if truly evil, and if 
good or neutral, they may falsely detect as evil), 
fools gold, rope trick, shatter, skyhook (a unique 
spell, detailed hereafter), dispel magic, gust of 
wind, Leomund § tiny hut, suggestion, tongues, con- 
fusion, dimension door, firebrand (a unique spell, 
detailed hereafter), fumble, polymorph self, and 
wall of ice. 


Circle Dance 

(Divination, Reversible) 

Level: 2 

Components: V, S, M 

Range: 0 

Casting Time: 2 rounds 

Duration: | round 

Saving Throw: None 

Area of Effect: The caster 

Definition: This spell enables the caster to learn 
something of another creature, A gem or gems of 
not less than 1,000 gp total value are powdered 
prior to spellcasting, The caster sprinkles this 
powder in a circle of at least 10 feet in diameter 
on any solid surface (even if temporary), and 
dances an intricate, weaving pattern within it 
while concentrating on the target creature and 
singing a repetitive rhyme (“Reveal to me/For | 
would sce”) which names the individual creature 
concentrated upon. 

This naming need not be accurate; it is only a 
focussing aid to the caster, and nicknames and 
descriptions can be used. If successful, at the end 
of the dance the caster receives mental images 
and impressions of the target creature s gencral 
direction from the caster—if on another planc, 
that is clear, but which plane, and any details of 
the current surroundings and state of the target, 
remains entirely a mystery. 

If the target creature is on the same plane as the 
caster, a confused impression of how distant the 
target is, and something of the targets current sur- 
roundings and mental (dead, asleep, unconscious, 
spellcasting, alert, happy, or sad) and physical state 
may be apparent. The base chance of success of 4% 
per level of caster, plus: +25% if the target is fairly 
well known to the caster, +40% if the target is inti- 


mately known to the caster, +10% if the target is 
s110 


2 


34 


~ Spellbook. Shandaril’s Workbook r 


upset or excited, +15% if the target is currently 
using magic items or is spelicasting, +5% if the tar- 
get is close to the caster (that is, within a radius of 
one mile per level of the caster). 

DMs must determine how much a circle dance 
reveals by the percentile total of the caster; 100% 
should give a clear mental picture of the target's sur- 
roundings and precise distance and direction of such 
whereabouts, Note that this is not an ESP spell, nor 
does it allow hearing or spellcasting at a target (it is 
hot seeing the target for the purposes of casting a 
magic missile, but may well aid in teleportation). 

The reverse of the spell, circle charm, involves 
the same material components, but a reversed 
dance, and has the effect of hiding the caster (only) 
and objects on his or her person from all locate 
object, ESP, know alignment, and other spells that 
locate and divine the thoughts of other creatures, 
including circle dance. Wizard eye, sending, and 
the like are not affected by a circle dance, nor does 
it provide a mental barrier or protective aid. 


Skyhook 

(Evocation) 

Level: 2 

Components: VS, M 

Range: 60 feet 

Casting Time: 2 

Duration; 3 turns + | turn per level 

Saving Throw: None 

Area of Effect: Special 

Definition: With this spell, the wizard creates a 
solid hook of force, invisible to all but the caster, 
at a desired location. The hook need not be 
attached to anything, and indeed is usually cre- 
ated in midair over a pit or chasm, but remains 
absolutely immobile. Creatures can hang onto it, 
ropes can be tied to or hooked over it, and so on. 
It supports weights up to 650,000 gold pieces. 

If the weight limit is exceeded, the skyhook 
instantly vanishes, Otherwise, it lasts until the spell 
expires, fading out of the caster view as a warn- 
ing in the final two rounds of its existence. It is too 
small to stand on (to climb further, or cast spells or 
fire missile weapons from), but its hook is large 
enough to permit thick cables and many grasping 
hands to find purchase. A skyhook, once created, 
can never move, Ropes secured to it appear to 
creatures other than the caster to be tied to nothing. 
The skyhook is solid enough to harm creatures fly- 
ing into it or striking it, cannot itself be physically 
harmed, and, aside from /imited wish and more 


powerful magic of the same sort, can only be 
affected by a disintegrate spell which usually 
destroys a skyhook instantly (the skyhook saves as 
if it were its own caster), A dispel magic can only 
$0 affect it if the skyhook fails a saving throw equal 
to its casters save vs. spell with a +4 bonus. 

The caster of a skyhook can will it out of exis- 
tence instantly, but need not concentrate upon it 
to maintain its existence. The material component 
of this spell is a miniature metal fishhook, 


Firebrand 

(Evocation, Reversible) 

Level: 4 

Components: V, S, M 

Range: Touch 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: 2 rounds plus 1 round per level 
Saving Throw: None 

Area of Effect: Special 

Definition: By means of this spell, which involves a 
pinch of sulphur and a spark of normal flame, the 
caster creates everburning flame that blazes until the 
spell duration expires without consuming the object 
or location upon which it is cast. Instead, the confla- 
gration sucks air into itself and somehow feeds upon 
the ether and the spell energy for its burning. 

The spell must be cust on an object or particular 
physical spot, and cannot be subsequently trans- 
ferred to another. It can be ended at any time by 
deliberate will of the caster, but does not require 
continued concentration on the casters part for its 
existence, The maximum spread of flames created 
by means of a firebrand is a volume the size of the 
caster’s fist, times the caster’ level. This spell is 
usually used to make a sword into a flaming-blade 
weapon. The spell renders it magical for attack pur- 
poses, and adds normal ficry damage and chances 
of causing further combustion, but does not make 
any weapon a flametongue or give it any magical 
pluses. It can also be used to create a torch (cast 
upon a stick or pole) that remains alight underwater 
and despite gusty of wind and the like. 

The spell can also give a caster or fellow creature 
touched by the caster a nonpainful, noninjurious 
Naming hand or limb, equal in effect to a normal 
torch or lamp, able to readily burn hair, paper, cob- 
webs, cloth, and other flammables, and able to deal 
to others not protected by the spell 1d6+1 points of 
damage per contact (1d4+1 for a blow, 1d4+3 for a 
firm grip upon an unarmored area). Note that 


although this latter application of the spell can be 
s110 


00G c 


1235 


~p 5Pelibook of Shangalar the Black a 


visually impressive, care must be taken or damage 
results due to the flamehand thus created touching its 
owner's own hair, clothing, or flammable oil (which, 
if ignited, will burn any part of the creature it 
touches, including the flaming areas), Note that 
more than one hand or foot can be so affected by a 
single spell, if the caster is of high enough level (a 
surface area of 6 square inches per level is affected 
by such a spell) and these are placed together 
(clasped hands) when the spell is cast upon them, 
Nonliving matter used as a spell focus and then sepa- 
rated into smaller pieces (a flaming stick broken, or a 
flaming blade shattered) does not become many 
smaller fires; only one fragment retains the magical 
effect, and the others do not. Note also that the 
bearer of such everlasting flame is in no way immune 
to the effects (heat, flame, smoke) of other fires. 

The reverse, quenchtouch, requires a drop of 
water as an additional material component, and is 
cast upon a limb or object in identical manner to 
firebrand, having identical duration and area of 
effect properties. The effect created is painless, shim- 
mering black flames that give off no heat nor cold, 
and do no damage. Whenever they come into contact 
with flame of any sort, however, that flame is 
instantly and utterly quenched, Any heat in excess of 
its surroundings is drained as well. Normal fires may 
be extinguished in this way, as can minute meteors 
and delayed blast fireballs ere they go off, by some- 
one adroit enough to touch or grasp them. Perma- 
nent or longlasting magical (flametongue swords, 
fire traps, walls of fire) or natural (red dragon breath, 
fiend flames) sources of fire are instantly quenched 
and prevented from reigniting or being set off for 
da rounds, determined randomly for each instance. 
Fires of great extent are quenched in a 40-foot, radial 
globe per touch of black antiflame and real flame. 
Fiery explosions within 40 feet of guenchtouch dark- 
flames neutralize and destroy the darkflames, but 
they dwindle into nothingness in a scattering of 
sparks, doing Ida points of damage only to any crea- 
tures who are within 40 feet of the darkflames (saves 
vs. the explosions—fireball still limits such injury to 
half damage if successfully made). 


Shandaril’s Tracer 
(Divination) 

Level: 5 

Components: V, S, M 
Range: 0 

Casting Time: | round 
Duration: Permanent 


Saving Throw: None 
Area of Effect: | object of up to | foot cubic 
volume 
Definition: By means of this spell, a wizard places 
a normally-invisible rune on a single, nonliving, 
solid object (typically a chest, book, wand, or gem), 
Unless dispelled, or destroyed when the object it 
guards is destroyed (both occurrences its caster is 
immediately aware of), it is permanent, Whenever 
the protected object is concentrated upon, the spell 
provides the caster with an awareness of the direc- 
tion and distance between caster and object even 
if on another plane—and whether the object is being 
handled or used by another creature or creatures, 

Creatures coming into contact with the object 
are only hazily revealed to the caster of the tracer, 
who can learn of each its alignment, race, and 
presence or absence or magical ability hut not a 
creatures name, description, or level. 

This precise fix on the location of the object pro- 
vides the caster with a focus for teleportation or 
sending other creatures to the traced object. Various 
magical means can reveal the presence of a tracer, 
but the caster of the tracer is always aware of their 
being used, and can act accordingly to prevent him- 
or herself from being traced in turn, if desired. 

Shandaril always promptly sends two invisible 
stalkers off after anyone with magic ability who han- 
dles the tome with instructions to disable, disarm, 
strip and render unconscious without slaying or 
mentally damaging any such being, and then bring 
tome, beings belongings, and being to her. She then 
sends the tome elsewhere by means of magic or ser- 
vant creatures to where another may find it, and sets 
to work to wrest what magical knowledge she can 
out of the unfortunate being ere slaying it. 

If the two stalkers are defeated, Shandaril sends 
more powerful creatures. She takes great interest in 
who has her workbook, but she also takes care to 
conceal herself from magical tracing, and does not 
herself come after the book and risk an ambush or 
facing a much-superior foe on its own home 
ground. Shandaril is thought to be a 19th-level CE 
archmage, and the possessor of many magical 
items. She is known to wear two magical rings and 
bear a wand and a staff at all times. 


of Shangalar the Black 
XP Value: 1,600 GP Value: 16,000 
DRAGON Magazine 164 
This volume of beaten electrum pages is stamped 


and etched with the runes of the spells set down 
Stil 


1236 


ee ee a 


a ad 


within. The four pages are secured by small rings to 
covers of polished silver (that have tarnished to a 
smoky black appearance). The name of Shangalar 
is written in Thora on the lower right of the front 
cover, and is the only lettering or adornment that 
the cover bears. The book ts surprisingly heavy, but 
it is less than a finger thick, and its cover is 3 hand- 
widths across by 7 hand-widths in height. 

Shangalar was a wizard of Calimshan some 
700 winters ago Rechusive and secretive from the 
first, he gained experience and much treasure by 
exploring and pillaging ruins of the lost king- 
doms of men, elves, and dwarves, making exten- 
sive use of animated undead servitors, summoned 
monsters, and charmed hirelings. 

Deeply paranoid, Shangalar believed that every 
creature in the Realms was out to get him, and so 
he trusted no one and laid many elaborate plans, 
backup strategies, and double-crosses to protect 
himself from betrayal, These undoubtedly saved 
his life on the several occasions when he did 
encounter deceit and treachery, but they won him 
no friends and caused many blameless individu- 
als to be slain or ruined along the way—Shangalar 
cared nol. 

He rapidly grew in power and built himself a 
hidden keep somewhere in the northeast of Cal- 
imshan, killing any who learned of its location or 
even its appearance, It remains hidden to this day, 
perhaps as the lair of a lich. All that is known to 
men is the suspicion (perhaps false) that it is an 
acrial dwelling, concealed amid mountain peaks, 

Shangalar is known to have specialized in the 
dark arts and was once robbed by the master 
thief, Athchos the Black, while exploring a ruined 
desert city. Athchos emerged from Anauroch with 
the book that bears Shangalar’s name, obviously a 
volume compiled by Shangalar in his early 
researches. 

Athchos recited the book in Iriacbor to a cabal of 
evil wizards led by Orlstar Meir for copying; it is 
from their various records that Elise knows the 
book's contents. Athchos then tried to lease the book 
to a wizard in Elture! but was slain by a swarm of 
hundreds of crawling claws. The book vanished in 
the attack, and it is widely believed that Shangalar 
was responsible, for he thereafter styled himself 
Shangalar “the Black” (thought to be a proud refer- 
ence to his slaying of the notorious thicf). Perhaps 
Shangalar did not regain the book—or perhaps he 
allowed it to pass into the hands of others for coin or 
for his own fell reasons because the book turned 


Spellbook of Shangalar the Black y 


up again in Neverwinter, where it was unmistakably 
described by Ourgos, u minor sage. The book was 
promptly stolen by evil wizards of Luskan or agents 
working for them, but it is believed to have since 
vanished again (and is being sought by those of 
Luskan who desire to retrieve it). 

The tome four pages each contain a single spell 
dealing with the dead, undead, or necromancy. The 
book itself bears no alignment nor known traps 
(although Athchos spoke, perhaps falscly, of a pui- 
soned clasp, to deter theft by those to whom he lent 
it), and the spells it contains seem more protective 
than actively evil in nature, These spells are bone 
javelin (a unique spell), Negative Plane protection 
(a wizard’s equivalent of the widely known priest 
spell), repel undead (a unique spell), and hone 
blade (u unique spell), All are described below. 


Bone Javelin 

(Alteration/Evocation) 

Level: 7 

Components: V. S, M 

Range: 10 feet per level 

Casting Time: 7 

Duration: | round per level 

Saving Throw: None 

Area of Effect: Special 

Definition: This magic requires a drop of the 
castet blood, a tiny carved replica of a javelin 
fashioned of any organic material, and a bone or 
bone fragment. A javelin of bone springs into 
being in the air above one of the caster’s hands 
(caster's choice) and flashes (at a speed of 300 
feet per round) in the direction pointed by the 
caster, The javelin turns after striking a living 
creature or obstacle, or when it reaches its maxi- 
mum range, then returns at the same speed to the 
caster, It then floats above the castet hand until 
directed forth again, Spellcasting or other activi- 
ties may be undertaken without unintentionally 
sending forth or dissipating the javelin. 

A bone javelin strikes only once per round. A 
successful attack roll is required (all creatures in 
the javelin's path are imperiled if the javelin 
misses the target chosen by the caster), A bone 
javelin is AC A, shatters if dealt at least 7 points 
of damage, and does | point of damage per level 
of the caster to the creatures it strikes. It can dam- 
age ethereal, undcad, other-planar, and creatures 
of the Prime Material Plane alike. A bone javelin 
can twist and turn as necessary to overcome bar- 
riers and return to its caster, 


suit 


F r OO o 


1237 


~ Spellbook of Shangalar the Black 7 


Negative Plane Protection 
(Abjuration/Necromancy) 

Level: 7 

Components: V, 5, M 

Range: Touch 

Casting Time: | 

Duration: | turn per level 

Saving Throw: None 

Area of Effect: | creature 

Definition: By means of three drops of the caster’s 
blood (plus one drop from the creature to be pro- 
tected by the spell, if it is not the caster), this spell 
protects against energy drain spells and undead 
powers. The caster or any eligible creature touched 
by the caster is partially protected against one 
undead attack per level of the caster (this differs 
from the priest spell of the same name). 

Undead that exist partially on the Negative 
Material Plane (such as shadows, wights, wraiths, 
spectres, and vampires) do physical damage by any 
attack, but if the protected individual saves vs. 
death magic, no drain of experience or strength 
results. Instead, the attacking undead suffers 2d6 
points damage (attackers using energy drain spells 
are not so harmed). Unlike the priest spell, failure 
to save vs, death magic does not cause the pro- 
tected being double physical damage. 


Repel Undead 

(Abjuration/ Necromancy) 

Level; 7 

Components: V, S, M 

Range: Touch 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: | round per level 

Saving Throw: Special 

Area of Effect: Special 

Definition: This spell enables a caster to force 

away undead, Repelled undead move away at their 

top rate of movement to the limit of the spell’s 

range and cannot move closer, If solid barriers pre- 

vent them from fleeing out of spell range, the 

undead are held against the barrier until the spell 

expires or the caster moves away. The spell effect 

remains centered on and moves with the caster, 
Undead that are able to launch missile or spell 

attacks are free to do so, but even by magical means 

they cannot approach creatures who are within this 

spells range, regardless of further spellcasting, slum- 

ber, or unconsciousness on the part of the caster, and 

regardless of attacks made against the undead. 
Undead who successfully save vs. spell at —3 


may enter or remain in spell range (and attack 
other creatures or otherwise take normal actions) 
for one round, but they must save cach and every 
round, On any round in which the save fails, the 
spell forces the undead to move directly away 
from the caster at full movement rate. In places 
dedicated to evil, evil undead may save at 2. —1, 
or normally, at the DM's discretion. The material 
component of this spell is a magnet in bar form, 
with a drop of the caster’s blood placed on one 
end and a fragment of bone or tissue from any 
undead wired or tied to the other end. 


Bone Blade 

(Alteration/Evocation/ Necromancy) 

Level: 8 

Components: V, S, M 

Range: 0 

Casting Time: 8 

Duration: 1 round per level 

Saving Throw: None 

Area of Effect: Special 

Definition: From a normal bladed weapon and a 

bone from any source (both consumed in the cast- 

ing), this spell creates a temporary, but very 

effective, weapon. A bone blade so created can be 

wielded by any being normally able to wield 

edged weapons. It is identical in size, weight, and 

damage to the blade weapon that served as a 
sin 


1238 


~ Spelibook of the Silver Talon y» 


matcrial component of the spell. 

The bone blade does normal damage with the fol- 
lowing exceptions—it is unbreakable until it crum- 
bles into dust at the spell x expiration, it counts as a 
+0 magical weapon for attack purposes, and it 
deals damage against undead as a sword of wound- 
ing. Any wounds it causes cannot be healed by 
regeneration or magical means short of a /imited 
wish spell, Normal rest and time cure the wounds 
caused by a bone blade. Until such wounds are ban- 
daged or one turn passes, the victim loses | addi- 
tional point per round, per wound, over and above 
the initial damage (a being hit for 4 points of dam- 
age suffers I additional point on the following 
round, the round after that, and so on), 

Against undead, a bone blade does double nor- 
mal damage. If the undead fails to save vs. death 
magic (it must save only at the first contact with a 
particular bone biade, not at each strike), it is 
instantly blasted out of existence. 


Sibylline Book 
XP Value: GP Value: — 
DUNGEONS & Dragons Master Set 

These were written prophecies, carefully preserved 
in ancient Rome and occasionally consulted on 
matters of great import. There were nine scrolls at 
first, offered for sale to Rome by the seeress 
Almathaca; the Romans refused her price. She held 
her price and burned three of the books, but again 
was turned down. She sold the remaining three at 
the asking price. They were preserved in a stone 
chest, with two custodians (later increased to 10 
and then 15). Finally placed in gilt cases at the base 
of the statue of Apollo on Palatine Hill, they were 
burned in Nero's Great Fire. 


of the Sighted 
XP Value: 600 GP Value: 400 
DRAGON Magazine 82 
A good character who studies this book will lose 
the use of his eyes at the end of one weck of 
study. A cure blindness spell will get rid of the 
affliction for 1d4 days; a remove curse spell 


brings back the characters sight permanently. 


of the Silver Talon 
XP Value: 13,600 GP Value; 136,000 
Dragon Magazine 62 
This book is of papyrus, with 26 leaves sewn into a 
leather binding. The leather has been dyed black 
with some thick, durable dye that remains supple 


and covers the hide deeply, preserving the tome 
somewhat. Into the front cover of this is inset a sil- 
ver claw or talon (held by means of its nails, which 
pass through the hide and have been folded under 
shrewdly with a hammer so as to close the grip), 
from which the book has gained its name, The 
edges of the leaves have been painted red, rather 
unevenly, mottling the border of each page. 

The book is belicved to have been the workbook 
of the famous and much-feared Archmage Asmiak, 
the “One Without Fear,” when he was but an appren- 
tice to the wizard Thurl. The strongest proof of this 
conjecture lies in the talon device set in the cover 
(the book is untitled and unsigned), which Asmiak 
used at the time, This does not mean the book was 
necessarily his, but a study of Asmiak’s deeds 
reveals his recurring attempts to obtain the book (or 
reacquire it, assuming he once possessed it). This 
indicates he knows the book exists, but its contents 
would be so superfluous to him now, at the height of 
his power, that his attempts seem to be evidence of 
an emotional attachment to the tome. Asmiak’s 
attempts to possess the book have never been car- 
ried out personally, always by agents. At least eight 
former owners of the book, all of them wizards of 
low level, have met death at the hands of Asmiak’s 
servants, and other owners of relatively higher levels 
have narrowly escaped the same fate. Their reports 
indicate that Asmiak employs a varied complement 
of servants, many of them not human. One survivor 
by the name of Casimur, a former magic-user who 
now runs the Whistling Wizard Inn, relates that he 
was slain by three gargoyles, who fled with nothing 
but that one book from among those in his library, 
and that he found this out when he was subsequently 
raised by the pricst Steeleye. 

The adventurer Stecleye confirms this incident, 
and adds that the gargoyles were slain with a shower 
of silver arrows by the clves of the High Forest as 
the creatures swooped low over the treetops, looking 
for a place to rest. The gargoyles were flying cast at 
the time, and Asmiak is rumored to live in that 
direction, far across deserts and mountains. The 
book fell into the forest, but was not recovered by 
the elves, and somehow found its way to a bazaar 
some winters later where it was purchased by the 
astonished magician Phandal, He in tum exchanged 
it for other spells with the thaumaturgist Alphon, 
who fled with the book into a forest to escape 
repeated goblin raids against his property. It is not 
known how Alphon fared after that, but the druid 
Rairun “Blackbrow” was the next person known to 

su 


7 1239 ~ 


Spelibook of the Silver Talon 


— —Vx—ůů eee EES 


have possessed the book. He tried to send it over- 
land to a colleaguc, but the caravan taking it to the 
wizard vanished in the moorlands. 

Although no trace of the caravan itself was 
ever found, an adventurer named Shoon later 
came across the book in the dungeons of a 
deserted castle and brought it to the city of Water- 
deep. There he sold it to the merchant Deragus, 
who never had a chance to sell it, since his shop 
was robbed later the same night. The master thief 
Dunas is known to have had the book one winter 
later, and he traded it to an unknown wizard for 
three magical weapons. The book's whereabouts 
at present are unknown. Dunas has been heard to 
say he's glad to be rid of the Book of The Silver 
Talon, and any who find it would do well to con- 
ceal it, or risk attack from the servants of Asmiak 

The first 22 leaves of the book contain spells, all 
written in magical inks upon the papyrus, ina 
slanted, beautiful hand, including the necessary 
runes, glyphs, symbols, and notes on necessary 
conditions and components. The spells, in order of 
their appearance in the book, are: read magic, 
burning hands, comprehend languages, detect 
magic, erase, write, identify, message, shocking 
grasp, shield, darkness, 15° radius, detect invisibil- 
ity, knock, ray of enfeeblement, web, wizard lock, 
blink, dispel magic, gust of wind, infravision, phan 
tasmal force, and protection from normal missiles 


Peculiar to the work are slight variations in the 
spells that appear to be Asmiak’s own. The magician 
Phandal, who copied from the work spells he needed 
and noted the changes in those he already knew, 
notes that the burning hands spell developed by 
Asmiak (or taught to him by the wizard Thurl) took 
longer to cast (initiative modifier of 4) because of its 
longer verbal component, and took the form of a thin 
beam of flame like a rod or staff extending from the 
caster’s forefinger. The beam can be varied in length 
from 2 feet to 8 feet by force of will, but is stopped 
(and deflected—possible hazard to the caster) by 
stone, thick wood, earth, and the like. Casimur, who 
retains this spell in his books, notes that it can be 
fanned back and forth rapidly by merely waving 
one’s finger, and is therefore far more than a parlor 
trick for cutting ropes or lighting candles. 

Page 23 of the book, which was beyond 
Casimur’s masicry when he possessed it, contains 
notes on how to strengthen the spell’s flame into a 
more potent weapon. This improved version is of 
the 2nd level of spells, and the theurgist Alphon is 
thought to have employed it when battling trolls 
on the Evermoors. Casters suffer an initiative 
modifier of 6 to cast, lasts for two rounds, and 
consists of a cone of flame extending 20 feet 
from the forefinger, 6 feet in diameter at its fur- 
thest extent. The intonation of the verbal compo 
nent dictates how hot the flames will be; they 


Ibook of the Silver Talon 


i o saia 


may be so hot as to create a breeze and cause tar- 
get creatures to fall back from the heat. The flame 
docs +1 damage (caster’s level +1, expressed in 
hit points) in the first round after being cast, and 
damage equal to the caster level (rounded up) 
in the second round. Thus, a 7th-level caster does 
8 points of damage to those struck in the first 
round, and 4 points to cach victim in the second 
round, Phandal dubbed this spell the flame ray. 

Other spell variations are minor. Asmiak's 
darkness, 15' radius uses a tiny vial of ink 
smashed on the ground to serve as the center of 
the spell effect, as well as bat fur, Thus, the spell 
cannot be moved once cast, and the ink seems 
less effective than pitch or coal, because the spell 
lasts only eight rounds, plus one round per level 
of the caster. Asmiak specifies giant octopus ink, 
but Casimur has subsequently experimented with 
giant squid sepia, and reports that it also pro- 
duces darkness, although of but six rounds (plus 
one round per level of the caster) in duration. 

Asmiak’s version of the ray of enfeeblement has 
a different verbal component than the accepted 
norm (casting time of 3). It has a fixed range of 60 
feet, and a fixed duration of eight rounds. 

Similarly, Asmiak's blink spell has a fixed 
duration of four rounds, caused by the differences 
in both verbal and somatic components (the level 
and casting time remain the same). 

Asmiuk’s gust of wind spell is an improved ver- 
sion. It emanates from a self-chosen extremity of 
the caster, and is thus directional, and the caster can 
rapidly change the direction. Its somatic compo- 
nent differs from the norm, and its material compo- 
nent is a sycamore seed cluster or milkweed pod 
(or similar seed or pod, of the type with hairlike 
fibers that enables it to be borne alofi on a breeze). 

The last three pages of the book are careful 
notes on the preparation of magical inks for all 
the Ist-level spells in the book, Users of the Art 
will notice that these are not the only known ink 
formulas for these spells. Note that the formula 
for burning hands will probably not work for 
writing the spell in its usual form, Asmiak’s notes 
follow: The following instructions in each case 
will make ink sufficient to write a single spell. In 
such writing a quill from a magical beast must be 
used. (Asmiak does not define “magical beast 


Read Magic 
1 ounce giant squid sepia 
1 large blue sapphire, powdered 


1241 


medium carbuncle, powdered (or substi- 
tute: | large rock crystal and | eagle eye. 
Alternatively: blue quartz equal in size to a 
man’s fist and 2 eyes from a black falcon) 

1 drop of the writer's blood 

1 pinch of earth 

1 sprinkle of water 


Powder the rocks and gems in a mortar, and to 
them add the blood, the earth, and the water. Stir 
with a finger or a stick (or anything, so long as it is 
not metal) and mix into a paste, Put this into a cru- 
cible, and pass it into the tongue of an open flame, 
If eyes are used, hold these in the flame just above 
the open crucible and allow them to be consumed, 
so that any ash or juices produced will fall into the 
crucible, Allow the crucible to cool in a dark place. 
Then, under the light of a waxing or full moon, 
pour the brew into a fask or vial and stir in the 
sepia with a finger or other nonmetal object. 


Burning Hands 
1 ounce giant octopus ink 
3 drops of the blood of a red or gold dragon, 
or 2 ounces fire elemental phlogiston, or 6 
salamander scales, or | efreeti horn 
2 ounces green plant matter 
4 ounces flesh (from a meaty mammal, but 
not human or humanoid) 
Wood, | plank or log 
Cloth, | scrap 
Parchment, | sheet 


A fire must be built in a brazier, stoked until hot, 
and fed in full sunlight with the wood, cloth, parch- 
ment, flesh, plants—all types of flammable or 
burnable things the spell will is able to affect. To 
this add the dragon blood or an alternative ingredi- 
ent. Allow the fire to burn down, then remove one 
ounce of coals by hand and immerse them in the 
ink, Stir the mixture to break up the ash, but do not 
remove the sediment from the ink container—let 
the undissolved solids settle to the bottom and 
remain there, Cover and keep from air until cool. 


esc ate pu 
ounce giant squid sepia 

fresh tongue (from any mammal) 

medium sard (onyx), or powdered sard of 
equivalent amount 
The brain of a sage (see below) 

The sard should be crushed into powder if it is not 

si 


Spellbook of the Silver Talon 


>» GCM¢« , 2 


already in that form. The brain should be placed in a 
crucible and boiled, while the preparer sprinkles the 
powdered sard into the fluid thus produced. The 
tongue (and any parts of the brain not reduced to liq- 
uid) should be put whole into the heart of a fire, per- 
haps suspended in a metal pot or otherwise 
contained—the ashes of those ingredients must be 
kept separate from the ashes of the fire's fuel. When 
the fire burns down, the ashes should be stirred into 
the fluid first obtained. Allow this mixture to stand 
for 13 hours, and then pour it into a flask containing 
the sepia. Place the flask over a fire and bring the 
mixture slowly to a hoil do not stir. When the ris- 
ing vapors darken from red to black, take the flask 
away from the heat and seal the contents from the air 
until use. Note: Some users of the book report that 
the brain of any intelligent creature that uses and 
comprchends languages may be used with success. 


Detect Magic 

1 ounce giant squid sepia 

small sapphire, powdered 

drop of the writer's blood 

drop of spring water 

l object which radiates a dweomer 
Ouk, ash, and thorn branches sufficient for a 
small fire 


Heat the squid sepia in a fire built of oak, ash, 
and thorn. Place the object or creature partially or 
wholly in the sepia, and let it remain there until the 
fire has burned out and the sepia ix cool. While the 
fire is strong, add first the powdered sapphire, then 
the drop of water, and then the drop of blood, stir- 
ring with a mixthorn branch. Ensure that the branch 
is then consumed in the fire. Let the fire burn out, 
remove the cooled mixture, and pour it into a flask, 
taking care that the object with the dweomer is not 
admitted into the flask. 


Erase 
| ounce of giant squid sepia 
1 ounce acid 
3 dozen caraway seeds, crushed 
1 chrysolite 
black pearl 


The gems must be placed whole into the acid 
and allowed to dissolve. This can take up to two 
days. When the last trace of the gems is gone 
(there must be no precipitant), the acid should be 
boiled, and while it is boiling vigorously, the car- 


away should be added. Ii will neutralize the acid 
and leave the resulting liquid slightly colored, 
with a small amount of precipitant matter. This 
must be allowed to cool slowly, and then stirred 
into the sepia with a rod or bar of cold iron, 


Write 

ounce giant octopus ink 

pinch graphite 

drop of the writer blood 

basilisk eye 

whole plant (including roots), lady x mantle 


Chop up the basilisk eye and the plant together, 
cover in a crucible, and burn to ash over a slow fire 
of seaborne drift wood or acorns, Add the graphite 
to the ink, and then the ash. Stir once witha 
wooden spoon or rod and then add the drop of 
blood. Cover quickly, shake, and let stand in the 
moonlight for a night. When employing the spell, 
the desired writing must be copied with a special 
ink. Thurl says there are at least four known for- 
mulas for this ink; the intent is to create a neutral 
ink receptive to a dweomer, so as to capture the 
essence of a spell. The following ingredients will 
produce ink sufficient to write one spell, and the 
ingredients may be increased proportionally; add 
extra owl's eyes, spikenard, and ichor, but the 


ounce giant octopus ink 

ounce ichor of slithering tracker 
owl eye 

blue-green sapphires, as large and as fine 
as possible 

ruby (deep crimson) 

piece of jet 

piece of obsidian 

spikenard (root) 

pinch of sand 

drop of water 

ounce of lead 

sprig of mistictoc 


5 = 


we 


—— — ee ee 


Boil the spikenard, mistictoe, and owl eye in the 
ichor over a blazing fire. Pulverize and add the lead 
and the gems when the mixture is at a full boil, in 
the following order—sapphires, jet, lead, obsidian, 
and ruby, sprinkling each over the full surface of 
the boiling mixture. Take the mixture from the 
flames, stir in the giant octopus ink, and allow to 


sis 


i i aaa 


1242 


eee ‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚ͥ‚‚ͥͥͥͥͥ‚‚‚‚ff æ'ꝙ=ÜõmUiÄ80ʃ ͤ ¼ꝶʃ̃ ͤ ˙XU!l wp ... 


Spelibook, Sir Celadon Kierney's 


. .]]] ⁰ u ica 


cool uncapped in a windy place. Then add the sand 
and water, and allow the container to stand for a full 
day and night, making sure it is exposed both to 
brilliant sunlight and bright moonlight. 


Identify 
1 ounce giant octopus ink 

clump of honey fungus plant 

bunch of fennel 

fist-sized piece of rose quartz 

drop of holy water 

saffron plant 

small, Nawless diamond 


Bottle the octopus ink in a silver vial, and take it 
to the woods at night. Live honey fungus is found on 
rotting bark and is readily identified by its pale 
green glow. Pluck it from the bark and submerge it 
straightaway in the vial, adding the drop of holy 
water immediately afterward. Cap the vial and 
warm it in a small fire, Meanwhile, crush and slice 
the fennel and saffron into a bow! of water, and 
powder the rose quartz. Add the powder to the silver 
vial, and shake, Then take the vial from the fire, and 
allow it to cool in a dark place. Place the bow! over 
the fire und let the water boil away. Powder the dia- 
mond and add it to the water during boiling. Add the 
residue to the silver vial, seal, and place under pure, 
fast-running spring water for at least six days. Store 
the ink in the silver vial when not in use. 


Message 
1 ounce giant squid sepia 
1 human or humanoid ear 
human tongue (from a different body than 
the ear) 
floral crown from an angelica plant 
turnip 
shoots of fox-tail grass 
hedge mustard leaves 
drop of dew 


2000 = 


Harvest a drop of dew from fern leaves beneath 
the light of a full moon. Place a cauldron of water 
over a fire, add the dew, and heat to a boil. Dice 
the organic ingredients separately, and add them 
to the boiling mixture in the following order— 
tongue, angelica, hedge mustard, foxtail, turnip, 
and finally the ear, stirring well with a wooden 
rod or spoon after cach infusion. Allow the mix- 
ture to boil gently until the liquid is vaporized. 
Gently warm the sepia over a small flame. Scrape 


the residue from the inside of the cauldron and 
stir it into the sepia. Keep heating the mixture for 
one hour, stirring frequently. Allow it to cool 
slowly and stand undisturbed for one day. 


Shocking Grasp 
l ounce giant octopus ink 
l ounce of ash from a lightning-struck tree 
4 drops holy water 
l sapphire, powdered 
1 pinch powdered gold 
Asafetida 
Balm of gilead 
Ginseng 
Mace (or masterwort) 


The herbal ingredients must be burnt to ash in 
an oak fire, The resulting ash is then added to the 
ash of the lightning-struck tree in a small metal 
bow! (copper or gold is best). Add two drops of 
holy water and stir the mixture into a paste, Then 
add the powdered gold and sapphire and stir in the 
other two drops of holy water. When the paste is 
thoroughly mixed, add it to the ink and heat to a 
boil, stirring until the paste is dissolved. Allow the 
mixture to stand out of doors for a day and a night. 


Shield 

ounce giant octopus ink 
human thumbnail 
pinch of iron (filings) 
picce of rock crystal 


Burn the thumbnail to ash. Pulverize the rock 
crystal and the pebble separately, then do likewise 
with cach of the two gems. Heat the octopus ink 
over a small fire but do not let it come to a boil, 
Add, stirring widdershins, the other ingredients in 
this order—pebble dust, iron filings, rock crystal 
dust, bery! dust, and the dust of the sapphire. Stir 
until all of these have been thoroughly mixed and 
partially dissolved, and then add the thumbnail 
ash. Allow to cool slowly as the fire dies. 


Sir Celedon Kierney’s 
XP Value: 12,800 GP Value: 128,000 
The Mines of Bloodstone 
Sir Celedon Kierney, an 8th-level half-elven wiz- 
ard and 2 l- level thief, has a spellbook contain- 


suis 


„„ u S 


1243 


a 


Spellbook, Sir Olwyn Forestfriend's 


— — — a (—„—ͤ 


ing the following spells: audible glamer, bind, 
cantrip, clairaudience, confusion, dancing lights, 
darkness, 13’ radius, deeppockets, dimension 
door, dispel magic, featherfall, feign death, fire 
charm, fly, fools gold, friends, grease, item, jump, 
knock, Leomund x secure shelter, magic missile, 
magic mirror, mirror image, mount, phantasmal 
force, polymorph self, read magic, rope trick, spi- 
der climb, Tasha uncontrollable hideous laugh- 
ter, and wizard eve. 


Sir Olwyn Forestfriend’s 
XP Value: 4,800 GP Value: 48,000 
The Mines of Bloodstone 
Sir Olwyn Forestfriend, a | 7th-level human ranger 
carries a spellbook containing every spell to which 
he has access. These include affect normal fires, 
darkness, 15° radius, detect magic, featherfall, 
invisibility, jump, levitate, magic missile, read 


magic, rope trick, spider climb, and strength. 


Slack’s Seamless* 
XP Value: +2,000 GP Value: +10,000 
Poynton Newszine 82 
This is a spellbook with a special ability, When the 
command word is uttered, the binding seals to cre 
ate a seamless cover that cannot be opened without 
damaging the book A separate command word is 
used to unseal the book. If the book is forced open, 
the book and all spells within it are destroyed. 
Knock and dispel magic spells are ineffective on 
this magical item. To date, only traveling spell 
books with this ability have been created. 


Spells Written in Code* 
XP Value: 000 GP Value: +5,000 
Dracox Magazine 82 

If the owner of the book breaks the code and is able 
to use the spell deciphered, it can be added to the 
spell repertoire immediately, Breaking the code 
requires a minimum of 1d4 weeks of study, after 
which the owner must roll her experience level or 
less on 1420, Failure to make this roll means that 
the code was not solved, and no further attempt will 
have a chance of succeeding until the owner attains 
the next highest expenence level. 


Spherogenesis of the Multiverses 
XP Value: 2,400 GP Value: 24,000 
Dravon Magazine 82 
Otiluke penned Oriluke's resilient sphere, 
Otiluke 5 telekinetic sphere, Otiluke’s freezing 


sphere, globe of invulnerability, flaming sphere, 
and prismatic sphere into this speilbook. 


Studies on the Fourth Dimension 
XP Value: 7,600 GP Value: 76,000 
DRAGON Magazine 82 
Selk compiled the spells temporal stasés, time 
stop, know age, know time, hesitate, nap, acceler- 
ate healing, choose future, age plant, body clock, 
modify memory, age object (and reverse), repeat 
action, time pool, age creature (and reverse), 
reverse time, skip day, age dragon, and imprison- 
ment in this spellbook. The author dedicates the 
book: “To my lovely bride. Planar Dabria,” 
Sarelk believes Planar Dabria refers to a suc- 
cubus, which, if he’s right, would explain Seik’s 
sudden disappearance shortly after this work was 

completed. 


Subconscious Repercussions 
of Pyromancy 
XP Value: 1,600 GP Value: 16,000 
Dracon Magazine 82 
Penned by Quaal, this valuable spellbook con- 
tains fire trap, wall of fire, firewater, and flaming 
sphere, 


Sublimated Oneiromancy 
XP Value: 1,600 GP Value: 16,000 
DRAGON Magazine 82 
Tasirin, a specialist in manipulating the subcon- 
scious through magical methodology, compiled 
his versions of sleep, dream, feign death, as well 
as the unique spell Tasirin s haunted sleep. 


Sulphur: Influence and Actions 
XP Value: 1,600 GP Value: 16,000 
Dracon Magazine 82 
Arbane penned pyrotechnics, flame arrow, fire 
charm, and fire shield into this rare spellbook. 


Talel el Hareidhin’s 
XP Value: 6,400 GP Value: 64,000 
Master of the Desert Nomads 
Talel’s spellbook contains the following spells: cure 
light wounds, detect evil, purify food and water, 
remove fear, bless, know alignment, hold person, 
silence, 15° radius, cure disease, remove curse, 
striking, create water, cure serious wounds, neu- 


~ Spellbook, Tassos Arcanabula 


Tasso’s Arcanabula 
XP Value: 6,400 GP Value: 64,000 
Dragon Magazine 181 

This volume is a tall, thin tome (2 hand-widths 
across by 6 high) of black-edged parchment 
pages bound between thin boards of duskwood, 
covered with mauve-dyed pseudodragon hide, 
The tome has 16 pages. 

Tasso is an infamous illusionist active in the 
Inner Sea lands of the Forgotten Realms. The 
leader of a band of thieves and adventurers, the AIl- 
Seeing Eyo, Tasso robbed many a royal treasury 
and temple vault in Chessenta; Mulhorand, and the 
independent cities of the Vilhon and the Near 
South. He became the eagerly sought target of 
many hired bounty hunters and assassins, and he 
survived many spectacular battles as he escaped 
one ambush after another. About four winters ago, 
Tasso vanished, either fleeing to another plane or 
being slain by a killer who was luckier or more per- 
sistent than the rest. An early casualty of raiding 
bounty-hunters, Tasso * Arcanabula (spell work- 
book) was seized from his cave abode near Star- 
mantle and presented to the patron of the bounty 
hunters, the Marcrowne of Turmish. It was soon 
stolen from the Marcrowne’s palace vaults, and its 
present whereabouts are unknown 

From the accounts of Sleem, Court Wizard to the 
Marcrowne, we have the following record of the 
volumes contents, one spell to a page: audible 
glamer, change self, dancing lights, phantasmal 
force, Tasso X shriek (a unique spell), detect magic, 
invisibility, magic mouth, misdirection, dimension 
door, fear, illusionary wall, shadow bolt (a rare 
spell), shadow skeleton (a unique spell), permanent 
illusion, and chromatic blade (a rare spell). All 
unique and rare spells are detailed hereafter. 


Tasso’s Shriek 

(Illusion Phantasm) 

Level: | 

Components: V 

Range: 10 feet per level 

Casting Time: | 

Duration: | round per level 

Saving Throw: Special 

Area of Effect: Hearing range 

Definition: This specialized form of an audible 
glamer spell is released by the caster with only 
minimal utterance. Thus, casting it is all but 
silent, untraceable, and requires a minimum of 
concentration (enabling it to be cast during melee — — — 


e a e e 


Spelibook, Tasso's Arcanabula 


jy wn — -e 


or when the caster is in pain, constrained, or the 
like). The magic causes a shricking, crying, 
shouting, or other verbal utterance. The spell- 
caster must emit all of these sounds while memo- 
rizing (not casting) the spell, and he cannot 
subsequently alter them. Once cast, the sounds 
cannot be ended before the spell expiration. The 
sounds carried by this magic are limited to those 
produced by the caster’s voice (although mimicry 
is possible), and are typically used to produce 
shouted warnings or cries to suggest a fight or 
attack “offstage,” or the presence of unseen 
intruders, so as to distract opponents of the caster. 


Shadow Bolt 
(luston/Phantasm) 
Level: 3 

Components: V, S 
Range: 10 feet per level 


Saving Throw: Special 

Area of Effect: | creature 

Definition: By means of this spell, the caster 
brings into being a semi-real phantasm of an 
onrushing missile. The large, gray teardrop- 
shaped illusory projectile can be made to glow 
with a faerie fire like radiance of any hue the 
caster desires; it appears behind the caster and 
rushes at any one creature upon which the caster 
concentrates. (The caster must be able to see the 
target as the spell is cast, but need not name or 
visibly indicate the target.) The projectile will 
begin as a tiny, silent mote that rapidly grows in 
size with a frightening, increasing moan of rush- 
ing air, so that it appears to have come from a 
great distance at great speed (a shadow bolt wetu- 
ally travels at a movement rate of 26), It can 
swerve to follow the target (as a magic missile 
does) even if the target teleports or otherwise 
escapes the caster’s view. Any other creature 
struck by the moving bolt cn route to its target will 
suffer its effects instead and if the target shifts to 
another plane of existence, the bolt will return to 
strike at its caster. A shadow bolt can otherwise be 
affected only by magical barriers, not by spells or 
physical attacks, It does 1d8 damage, plus | point 
per level of the caster. If disbelieved (the target 
makes a successful save vs. spell) a bolt will do 
only half damage. (Note that a being unfamiliar 
with the details of magical illusions who encoun- 
ters a shadow bolt for the first time will have no 


r 1246 2 


reason to disbelieve such an attack.) 

A shadow bolt strikes in the round following 
casting—unless the target shifts out of range, in 
which case it will travel for a second round to 
strike (or return upon the caster). A shadow bolt 
will teleport or dimension door to follow its tar- 
get if the target docs so, but if the target does so 
twice (that is, evades the bolt for the full two 
rounds), the shadow bolt will dissipate harm- 
lessly. The strike of a shadow bolt is a consider- 
able blow; the victim must make a Strength check 
to avoid falling, and if fragile items are carried, 
make a successful Dexterity check to protect such 
items (otherwise, they must make saving throws 
vs. crushing blow to escape damage from the 
characters fall), 


Shadow Skeleton 
(Iltuston/Phantasm) 
Level: 4 
Components: V, S. M 
Range: 90 fect 
Casting Time: 4 
Duration: | round + | round per level 
Saving Throw: None 
Area of Effect: Special 
Definition; This spell allows the caster to create 
semi-real phantasms of human, demihuman, or 
humanoid skeletons. All the skeletons created by 
a single shadow skeleton spell must be of the 
same type. One skeletal image per level of the 
caster can be created; the caster can choose to 
create fewer images, but such a decision does not 
result in stronger skeletons. Shadow skeletons 
cannot grasp, carry, or wield solid objects such as 
weapons. They appear smoky and vague in out- 
line, of ivory or bloody hue, and may have any 
configuration (split skulls, missing limbs, and the 
like) the caster wishes, They are silent and cannot 
be turned, dispelled, or affected by heat, fire, or 
cold; they are under the control of the caster just 
as a priest controls skeletons animated by use of 
animate dead. Shadow skeletons have these sta- 
tistics: AC 6; MV 14; 2 hp cach; #AT 1; Dmg 
Ida. They can be equipped with illusory clothes 
and weapons, 0 as to appear from a distance as 
living guards or servants. The spell cannot be 
worked to give the illusion of life or flesh. 
Shadow skeletons vanish at the spell's expira- 
tion or upon the death or unconsciousness of the 
caster. Solid matter, including living creatures, 
can pass through shadow skeletons without resis- 
s125 


| 


tance. All living creatures who come into direct 
contact with a shadow skeleton must save vs, 
spells at +2 or be stunned for one round. Such 
contact does not harm or dispel a shadow skele- 
fon, but it does permit a living creature to charge 
through a skeleton. The material component is a 
piece of bone. It serves as a focal point for the 
spellcaster’s concentration and is not consumed 
or altered by the magic. 


Chromatic Blade 

(Alteration) 

Level: 7 

Components: V, S, M 

Range: 0 

Casting Time: | round 

Duration: | round per level 

Saving Throw: None 

Area of Effect: Special 

Definition: This spell creates a shimmering blade 
of constantly changing hue, of needle-width and 
magical sharpness, It can be wielded by any crea- 
ture, although the caster can will the blade out of 
existence when he chooses. The blade is consid- 
ered a +2 magical weapon for attack purposes (no 
damage bonus), weighs nothing, and makes no 
sound upon impact. Its touch does 2d6 points of 
damage and can sever extremities as a sword of 


~ Spellbook, Thesis on Conditional Ruptures r 


sharpness does. 

The bearer of a chromatic blade receives a +3 
bonus to saving throws vs. color spray attacks, 
and the blade’s attack can destroy one globe of a 
prismatic sphere or one layer of a prismatic 
wall upon contact, without harm to the wielder. 
Similarly, a prismatic spray is scattered upon 
contact with such a blade. A chromatic blade 
glows with a bright, gleaming radiance equiva- 
lent in illumination effects to a faerie fire at all 
times, regardless of the caster's or bearer’s 
wishes, The color of this glow changes continu- 
ally and is uncontrollable. 

A chromatic blade can be destroyed by dispel 
magic, disintegrate, or properly worded limited 
wish. It cannot be physically damaged in any way 
(although it can be parried or blocked like a nor- 
mal, physical blade). A chromatic blade is not 
affected by changes in light or darkness (mun- 
dane or magical) or magnetic effects, and it can- 
not be mentally wielded or influenced from a 
distance, except for the caster willing it out of 
existence. It is safe to touch a chromatic blade 
only at its hilt or guard; the blade itself is all 
edges its lightest touch will cause harm. 

A wizard or other spellcaster can wield a chro 
matic blade without nonproficiency or class 
penalties. The material component of this spell is 
an edged metal weapon of any size and quality, 
which is consumed in the spellcasting. 


Tharadodus’s 
XP Value: 11,600 GP Value: 116,000 
Quest for the Heartstone 

Tharadodus the Wizard has an extensive spell- 
book that contains the following spells: anti- 
magic shell, charm monster, charm person, 
clairvoyance, confusion, conjure elemental, 
detect invisible, detect magic, dimension door, 
dispel magic, hallucinatory terrain, hold mon- 
ster, ice storm, invisibility, invisible stalker, 
knack, lightning bolt, magic missile, passwall, 
polymorph self, projected image, remove curse, 
shield, sleep, teleport, wall of stone, wall of ice, 
wizard eye, and wizard lack 


Thesis on Conditional Ruptures 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 20,000 
Dragon Magazine 82 
Archveult penned teleport, phase door, shadow 
door, maze, and Archveult 5 skybolt in this spell- 
book. 


$127 


rau 


SA 


EN i 
* 
ner 


n paea 


SU 


* „ 


e 


fR (E «J 
‘at ab 


