"I ~ ti * 

; > a ele, 

= a he 

; SCS Oa aai 
= Sag _ 

I 4 a > A 

£ ai: Gg s è Se 
a ee ĝi ~- 
e eas y KAELAS 
° ——, x ne 


: A unséons& Dragons’ 


| a - 3 Volume One 


oe | Priest Spell i 


4 
¥ 
r - 
«ae g < 
/ 
à 
4 
' sha, 
Aas 
Re a 
es ma ki 
a 4 
r 
à ? 
+ 
ei s ~ 
A ve 
S a 
4 i å 
E ṣ 
pe í ' 
al es 
lad i 
a F r: 
s I 
` ag 3 ‘ k unus gt 
b >. + pn ~~ et ae 
b C a 
sg si ™ MAS Ai ; la Y ers 
e tng Go ES a ee 
x $ 
z ` f yE p eN 4% +o $ — 
a orrs, 
> eS ai 
Xe» -2 ARS Ye 
ion. Y - 
„Š —— ` v 2 ¥ on 


Priest’s Spell Compendium 
Credits 


Design: It is impossible to list all the creators of the spells cataloged in these volumes, but credit goes to everyone who 
created a spell in a module, boxed set, accessory, hardbound book or magazine article published in the last 20 years. 
Compilation: Mark Middleton 


Development 
Project Coordination: Keith Strohm with Ed Stark 
Interior Black and White Art: Glen Michael Angus and David Martin 

Art Director: Dawn Murin 

Graphic Design: Tanya Matson and Nathan Tucker 

Project Manager: Larry Weiner 
Typesetting: Eric Haddock 
Acknowledgments: L. Richard Baker III, Brad Bolas, Ed Greenwood, Miranda Horner, Julia Martin, Mark 
Middleton, Roger E. Moore, John Rateliff, Cindi Rice, Thomas M. Reid, Steven E. Schend, and Skip Williams. 


Based on the original DUNGEONS & Dracons rules created by E. Gary Gygax and Dave Arneson. 


Volume One 
A Day in the Life to Frost Whip 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 
Prem a a sass la eis as E aise a 6-5 Se aE Sais iw aie 1s SRNR a ate te et ilova late ot A AR E E OE 2 
inrodicton i eo me wad co SIE Rein ve a ete ow SLT SLES Be Meikle c Sie aierei a mye Gee are ace 9, noia 3 
How to Use Bie Broke, Oe PR a Is BE OI vcs 3 
Spell Pisquency LAE sre casa eet s abbey agit decals pelea ray wee tase AE e Spite y i 
aa RSN T ET E AA E A REEN EE A E E A E r r ET A LET 9 
| E E ER SPs pe AE T A A A A E I o 1 ARRA 10 
o PE OO O VORI AA E A E EOE EEE A LAL Saas SD A E A E Cee ves 52 
CAS SS A EEN N T A A ATTENT E E ETT E RE EE E EE D Vi 88 
s n ROEA E BOE E WORE IEEE ERE ERE RAT, EOE NE OOE EEES ETIE E 176 
Boas eG) PEE EE A EA T E E EE EO AOE E AO EE CRA i E E E T A 228 
F.. FRL Na WSs es Sala AMER mel els SO te a aa a COUR 5 257 


U.S., CANADA IA ` EUROPEAN HEADQUARTERS 

ASIA, PACIFIC, & LATIN AMERICA CR $ Wizands of the Coast, Belgium 

Wizards of the Coast, Inc Ge PB, 203] 

P.O. Box 707 2600 Berchem 

Renton, WA 98057-0707 Y Belgium 

+1- 800-324-6496 +32-70-23-32-77 
Visit our website at www.tsr.com 


AD&D, ee ee ee ee DARK SUN, DRAGON, DRAGONLANCE, DUNGEON, 
DUNGEON FIEND FOLIO, FORGOTTEN REALMS, GREYHAWK, MONSTROUS COMPENDIUM, MYSTARA, PLANESCAPE. POLYHEDRON, 


All TSR characters, character names, spell names, magical item names, monster names, unique place locations, and the distinct likenesses thereof are trademarks 
owned by TSR, Inc. 


adrien oe ripe rdr ra ae puea maaan hoonena 
Wizards of the Coast, Inc. and regional distributors. This Smee EAn An 
aon ome eapereun baddai anag rages pokekore ary tote phen the express written permission of TSR, Inc, 


©1999 TSR, Inc. All Rights Reserved, Made in the U.S.A. 
TSR, Inc. is a subsidiary of Wizards of the Coast, Inc. 
11359XXX1501 0-7869-1359-2 


Foreword 


This foreword discusses rules issues encountered in the preparation 
of this work. Those not interested or generally unfamiliar with the system 
details can skip directly to the Introduction. 


£4 3, he purpose of this series is to provide a companion to the Wizard Spell 
si as Compendium set. However, as this project was begun, a number of 

sYa complicating factors absent from the previous books soon surfaced. 
Sie K į} They have shaped the development of this work, and understanding 
Rp Ke WE these factors is useful for any DM or player who wishes to derive full 
COIR SAS) value from this series. 

In brief, it is more important with this series than with the wizard series that the DM use 
careful judgment and firmly control priest spell availability. Specialty spells for priest 
characters should be set within the context of the individual campaign—completely free 
spell selection from these series should not be allowed. This general advice has its roots 
in how the collection of priest spells has developed over the years. 

First, the combination of priest spell spheres introduced in the 2nd Ed. Rules and the 
specialized deity portfolios in The Complete Priest's Handbook completely shattered the 
cohesion of the priest as a character group (clerics, druids, specialty priests). These ef- 
fects have proved far greater than the changes wrought in the wizard character group by 
the introduction of specialty schools. 

Second, the concept of a deity providing special granted powers has broadened over 
time. Instead of a few free spell uses (or access to such nonpriest spells as fly), nonspell 
abilities like berserker rage have been introduced, as well as other abilities that are nearly 
spells in all but name (but without such details as level and casting time). A more recent 
development has been the deliberate placement of specialty spells on a deity-specific 
spell list several levels lower than their game effects would suggest, as a special boon 
granted by that deity alone. At the same time, such lists have also been used to bring back 
older spells from out-of-print sources. 

The result has been two-fold. On an individual case basis, priests of specific deities are 
more interesting. However, the general utility of spell level as a measure of power for 
priests has been badly eroded. This effect is becoming more pronounced as the line be- 
tween granted special powers and a list of spells specific to each power steadily blurs. 
Guiding players and DMs through this particular thicket of options has been a major con- 
cern in preparing this series. 

Third, the priest spell list (always growing more slowly than the wizard list, and heav- 
ily weighted toward druids) has experienced a phenomenal growth spurt. Between the 
time the first comprehensive priest spell list was assembled in 1995 and closed in 
December of 1997, more than 400 new priest spells have been published in official mate- 
rials. This number of new priest spells is about the same as the number of wizard spells in 
the 2nd Ed. Player's Handbook! At the time of this compilation, the new material is only 
beginning to make its impact felt. 

While DMs of considerable experience should fare well, those with a lesser degree of 
mastery should proceed with caution. The Introduction has been deliberately slanted 
toward a conservative approach for the sake of the latter. Experienced DMs are encour- 
aged to use this material in any way they desire to enhance the enjoyment of their players. 
That is, after all, what it’s all about. 


Good Gaming, 
Joo Pine 


Spring, 1999 


ee ee A 


Introduction 

The first volume of the Priest’s Spell Compendium 
continues the work of the Wizard's Spell Compendium 
series. It creating an alphabetical reference to priest 
spells of the AD&D” game system, covering the letters 
A through F. The full series covers priest spells created 
for the game from 1975 to 1995. 

For the uninitiated, this is not a book of “real” 
magical spells. In a fantasy game world, characters 
like Merlin the Magician create marvelous magical 
effects with a wave of the hand. This is a book of mar- 
velous effects that can be used by the good guys (and 
the bad guys) in the course of a game session. The key 
to the game is, as always, the decisions made by the 
players (heroic or otherwise), and the impact those de- 
cisions have on the ongoing plot of the game, New 
spells are fun, but it’s even more fun figuring out un- 
usual ways to use them. 

Up to this time, lists of spell effects have been 
keyed to spell level; that is, relative spell power. In 
other words, if all a gamer or Dungeon Master knew 
was a spell name, each level's list of spells had to be 
checked. While the last volume of the series will in- 
clude level lists (as well as lists by race and specialty), 
the most important principle of organization used in 
the series as a whole is alphabetical. 

The material in these books is presented in the 
most current game format: that of the 2nd Edition 
rules. Some descriptions have been updated or com- 
bined with similar spell effects to eliminate duplica- 
tion; some have been modified for better play, and a 
very few have been dropped entirely 

Generally, “granted powers” of specialty priests 
are beyond the scope of this series, although a few 
have been configured as spells. Variant magical sys- 
tems, such as the kingdom-level magic of the 
BIRTHRIGHT setting are also beyond the scope of this 
book. However, the optional Sphere of War, intro- 
duced in the Tome orf MaGic book (essentially a 
BATTLESYSTEM rules variant) and the psionics-based 
spells of the Dragon-Kings of the DARK SUN setting 
are close enough to standard spells to be included in a 
special section in the final volume. Clerical cantrips, or 
orisons, will be included in the final volume as well. 


About This Book 
The spells listed in this book are given alphabeti- 
cally. Spell names that include a proper name are 
given a primary listing under that name. For example, 
for Abbathor’s greed, the primary entry is under “A.” 
Another reference to the main entry will be found at 
the second word of the spell name; in this case, the 

entry would read: “Greed, Abbathor’s.” 


Be aware that many spell names are irregular com- 
pound words, and that standard alphabetical order fol- 
lows complete words, Thus, dark road will appear 
before darkbolt. If you can’t find a spell, try looking 
for it as a compound form. 

Some spells may have the same name; or the 
name of a spell might have been changed. Where two 
spells have the same name but come from different 
cultures, the spell from the culture most similar to 
Medieval Europe is given first. Renamed spells have a 
short reference under the original name. 

Spells associated with specific campaign worlds 
(other than the FORGOTTEN REALMS and WORLD OF 
GREYHAWK settings) are marked with a special 
symbol so they can be easily recognized. See page 9 
for a summary of these symbols. Spells associated 
with a specific monster or nonhuman race (dragons, 
elves, and so on) are noted; the race name is separated 
from the spell name by a dash. Specialized priests 
with unique spell lists, such as the NPC savant-cleric, 
from DRAGON Magazine are also specially noted. 

Generally, spell names and secondary game ef- 
fects are italicized. For example, the symbol spell has 
a secondary effect called discord. 


How to Use This Book 

Each spell in this book is organized along the 
same general lines, Each is listed by its name, school, 
sphere, and a number of statistics that govern its use 
such as Level (of power), Range, Casting Time, and 
so on. The game powers of each spell are described, 
along with any special rules that govern its use, how 
the spell target can avoid or counter its effects, any 
limitations on how the spell can be used, and any spe- 
cial preparations or materials that needed for a suc- 
cessful casting. Next, the details of any reversed form 
the spell might have are given. Finally, a section called 
Notes has been appended to each spell; this deals with 
patron power, the spell’s rarity, and any special restric- 
tions on who (or what) can use it. 

Having covered the field briefly, a more detailed 
look is in order: 


Name: This is the name by which the spell is gener- 
ally known. Although we have tried to ensure unique 
names, this has not always been possible. For exam- 
ple, dark fire, a minor spell that gives heat without 
light, is very different from darkfire, an evil and pow- 
erful black flame commanded by the drow elves. 
Where two spells have the same name, the most gen- 
eral version is given first, while variants cast by other 
races or found in specialized campaign settings are 
given later. A name marked with an asterisk (*) is a 


I rr en ee aaa 


I 


cooperative magic spell in which a circle of priests 
combines their efforts (cooperative magic is discussed 
in the final book). 


School: Each school governs a type of magic, accord- 
ing to the type of energy its spells employ and the spe- 
cial practices and methods used in casting them. The 
basic schools are: 


SCHOOLS OF MAGIC (PHILOSOPHY) 
Abjuration: Protective, warding, or banishing 
magics. 
Alteration: Magic that changes physical properties 
of an object, creature, or condition. 
Conjuration/Summoning: Magic that calls or 
brings objects or creatures from elsewhere. 
Divination: Magic that uncovers what is lost or 
hidden in the past, present, or future. 
properties on objects or influences creatures magi- 
cally, 
Ilusion/Phantasm: Illusions create and alter ap- 
pearances; phantasms affect the mind. 
Invocation/Evocation: Magic that channels and 
shapes magical energy to create an effect or object. 
Necromancy: Magic that works on life energy, in- 
cluding the negative energy of the undead. 


Sphere: Priest spells are grouped into a number of 
spheres of influence, or spheres. These spheres are the 
building blocks of a divine power’s portfolio, and de- 
termine which spells are made available to priests of 
that faith. For the most part, the revised sphere assign- 
ments from the PLAYER'S OPTION: Spells & Magic 
assignments are official errata. For the purpose of this 
series, spheres are grouped into three categories: 
Clerical Spheres, Druidical Spheres, and Specialty 
Spheres. In addition, there is an All sphere, to which 
all priests have access. 

Clerical Spheres are those governed by the powers 
of the Outer Planes. These are spheres to which the 
cleric class has access. In the DARK SUN setting, these 
are collectively grouped as the Sphere of Cosmos. 

Druidical spheres are primarily those concemed 
with the Prime Material Plane and Elemental Planes. 
They are drawn upon by religions of the natural 
world: animism, shamanism, and druidism. 

Specialty spheres include spheres created for spe- 
cialty priesthoods, concerned with specialized knowl- 
edge, and are generally closed to the clerical class. 
Most were introduced in the Tome oF MAGIC book. 

Priests have either major or minor sphere access. 

Major access to a sphere allows the priest to cast 


all spells in the sphere. 
Minor access to a sphere allows the priest to cast 
spells of 1st to 3rd level in the sphere. 
Complete lists of spells by sphere appear in the 
final volume of this set. 


CLERICAL SPHERES 

Astral spells are those that allow access to the 
Astral Plane, for purposes of movement and commu- 

Charm spells affect attitudes and actions of 
people. Powers of love, trickery, or art, often grant 
access to this sphere. Expansive faiths deal with this 
sphere as well. 

Combat spells are often granted by powers of war 
or strife. Many faiths that defend themselves by force 
have access to this sphere. 

Creation spells can produce something from noth- 
ing, often to benefit the followers. Prime creator 
powers often grant access to this sphere. 

Divination spells recover long-lost information or 
at least minor access to this sphere. 

Guardian spells summon an actual guardian of 
some sort. 

Healing spells remove afflictions or heal wounds. 
They cannot restore life or lost limbs. Reversal of 
these spells is restricted to evil priests. 

Necromantic spells restore destroyed life force 
such as life, limbs, and experience levels. Reversal of 
these spells is restricted to evil priests. 

Protection spells that provide personal protection 
to the caster or creatures aided. 

Summoning spells call creatures from other places 
or dimensions to serve the caster, This is usually risky, 
as the service is often against the will of such crea- 
tures. 

Clerics have major access all Clerical Spheres, 
and minor access to the Elemental Spheres of Earth 
and Water, 

Paladins have access to the spheres of Combat, 
Divination, Healing, and Protection. 


DRUIDIC SPHERES 

Animal spells affect or alter creatures. This sphere 
does not include spells that affect people. Powers of 
nature or husbandry often grant access to this sphere. 

Elemental spells affect the four basic elements of 
air, earth, fire, and water. Powers of nature or powers 
with elemental interests typically grant access to at 
least part of this sphere. Few priests have access to all 
four elements. 

Plant spells affect plants, ranging from simple 


ee a eee ee 


) eam A 


sculture (i ing crop yields) to cae 
with plantlike creatures. Powers of nature or agricul- 
ture often grant access to this sphere. 

Sun spells deal in the basic powers of the solar uni- 
verse—the purity of light and its counterpart darkness. 

Weather spells enable the priest to manipulate 
forces of weather. Powers of nature and tempests 
often grant access to this sphere. 


Druids have access to the Druidic Spheres and to 


the Sphere of Healing. 
Rangers have the spheres of Animal and Plant. 


SPECIALTY SPHERES 

In general, specialty spheres include those spheres 
introduced either in the Tome OF MAGIC or in other 
sources. 

Chaos spells add randomness and confusion to the 
world around the caster. The results are i 
and uncertain. Powers of mischief and ill luck often 
grant access to this sphere, 

Law spells increase order in the world around the 
caster. This may enhance cooperation or limit individ- 
ual thought or action. Powers of community and 
rulership often grant access to this sphere. 

Numbers spells are based on the theory that num- 
bers and mathematical relationships provide insight 
into the nature of the universe. Powers of arcane lore 
sometimes grant access to this sphere. 

Thought spells concern such abstract topics as 
thought, time, and boundaries. Powers concerned 
with the mind or knowledge often grant access to this 
sphere. 

Time spells manipulate the effects of time on ob- 
jects and creatures, as well as the passage of time 
itself. 

Travelers spells aid and comfort the traveler, 
making such endeavors safer, easier, and more enjoy- 


War spells are battlefield spells granted when 
large-scale battles are imminent. 

Wards spells seal and area against intrusion, either 
by creating a barrier or forbidden zone, or by inflict- 
ing a magical effect. 


Specialty priests might have access to one or more 
specialty spheres, in addition to certain Clerical or 
and type of spheres available to a power or deity. 


THE “ALL” SPHERE 

This special list of spells is common to all priests. 
This group includes spells a priest needs to perform 
basic functions. Paladins and Rangers do not receive 
access to the All sphere. 


Reversed Form: An entry of “Reversible” means the 
spell can be cast with the opposite effect. For exam- 
ple, the cure light wounds spell which restores lost hit 
points, can be reversed as cause light wounds, which 
inflicts damage. Often, a reversed form of a clerical 
spell will be favored by evil clerics, Usually, a priest 
must memorize the exact form of the reversible spell 
he wants available. 


Level: This is the relative power level of the spell, 
ranging from Ist level (weakest) to 7th level (most 
powerful). A high priest in a major city generally has 
access to a 6th-level spell, a few Sth-level spells, and 
an increasing number of 4th- through Ist-level spells 
each day. 


Range: The distance from the caster at which the mag- 
ical effect occurs. A range of “0” means the effect is 
centered on the caster’s person or location; in the latter 
case the effect is usually immobile. “Touch” means the 
effect can be used on another creature or object, and 
generally on the caster as well. Unless otherwise spec- 
ified, ranged spells are centered on a point visible to 
the caster and within the spell’s range; this can be a 
specific creature or object if desired. Most ranges are 
measured in yards; some are measured in feet. 

Components: These are the types of components 


that the spell requires; if the components are not pres- 
ent, the casting fails. “V” is verbal; that is, a spoken 


ee 


eee a 


incantation the priest is assumed to deliver while 
casting. “S” is somatic; that is, measured and precise 
gestures with the hands, which the priest is assumed 
to make while casting. “M” is for material; that is, 
physical substances or objects that are annihilated by 
the spell energies in the casting process. This abbre- 
viation sometimes signifies a focus, or device that is 
reusable; sometimes this is a temporary focus whose 
premature destruction ends the spell. 

Often the components are merely suggestive or 
colorful, at other times they will be a significant re- 
striction on how often a spell can be cast. Unless a 
cost for a component is given in the description 
(which means the component is intended as a limit), 
the cost is negligible and can be assumed as part of the 
priest’s daily or monthly general expenses. 


Casting Time: This is relative time required to cast a 
spell. Unless rounds, tums, or a longer casting time is 
specified, the casting will be completed in the same 
round it is started. A casting time less than one round is 
a modifier to the initiative roll, and is essentially the 
same as a weapon speed factor. A spell that takes a full 
round to cast comes into effect at the end of that round. 


Duration: This is how long the magical energy of the 
spell lasts. An instantaneous duration means the spell 
energy comes and goes the instant the spell is cast, 
though the spell effect might be long lasting. A dura- 
tion of permanent means the spell energy remains as 
long as the effect does; this means that the spell is vul- 
nerable to a dispel magic spell. This is an altered 
usage. Many spells listed in earlier sources as having a 
“permanent” duration (such as cure light wounds) are 
altered in this series and in future to “instantaneous.” 

Spells with a set duration (such as | round per 
level) must be kept track of by the player; those with a 
variable duration are secretly rolled by the DM. 

Some spells can be ended by the caster at will; the 
caster must be in range of the center of the spell’s 
effect and must usually (though not always) speak 
words of dismissal. 


Area of Effect: This entry lists the creatures, dimen- 
sions, volume, weight, and so on, that the spell can 
affect. Some spells have areas that can be shaped by 
the caster; of these, no dimension can be Jess than 10 
feet unless the spell specifically allows it. Many areas 
are given as Cubes to make it easy to figure out areas 
of effect when using maps gridded into 10-foot or 5- 
foot squares. Three-dimensional volumes are most 
often needed to resolve aerial or underwater effects. 
Unless specifically stated otherwise in the descrip- 


tion, areas of effect conform to their physical sur- 
roundings; for example, a light spell with a 60-foot 
radius centered in a closed room that is a 20-foot cube 
will light the room. It will not penetrate a solid wall to 
light a room beyond. 

Many areas are given as geometric shapes. 

Radius: This might yield a circle, hemisphere, or 
sphere, depending on the situation. 

Cloud; Usually given as a block of cubes for con- 
venience, although it’s actually amorphous and billowy. 

Cone: This projects outward from the caster, with 
the smallest end toward the caster and the largest di- 
ameter farthest from the caster. 

Path: This is usually a 10-foot wide line starting at 
the caster projecting away in a straight line to a speci- 
fied length. 

Spells that affect the caster’s friends or enemies 
are based on the current perceptions of the caster. 


Saving Throw: This entry lists whether a spell allows 
a saving throw and, often, the effect of a successful 
saving throw: “Neg.” means the spell is negated and 
has no effect; “1⁄2” means that the spell inflicts damage 
and that a successful saving throw halves the damage 
taken; “None” means no saving throw is allowed to an 
unwilling subject. The result of a saving throw for a 
reversed spell is given in the paragraph that details the 
reversed form. 

The saving throw itself is a roll on a 20-sided die; 
high numbers are generally good. 

Wisdom allows adjustments to saving throws 
against enchantment/charm spells. Dexterity may 
provide adjustments against spells that affect a large 
area. 

Solid physical barriers may give saving throw 
modifiers and reduce damage. Cover and conceal- 
ment may also affect saving throws. The DUNGEON 
MASTER Guide (DMG) has more information. 

A creature that successfully saves against a spell 
without obvious physical effects often feels a hostile 
force or tingle, but the exact nature of the attack 
cannot be deduced. 

Unless the spell specifies otherwise, if a character 
makes a saving throw, all items carried and worm are 
assumed to survive the attack. If the character fails the 
saving throw, exposed items must make saving throws 
against the attack form. An item exposed by the de- 
struction of a covering (a parchment scroll protected 
by a bone scroll case, for example) must also save 
against the attack. 

Unless specifically forbidden, a character can vol- 
untarily forego a saving throw and willingly accept 
the spell result. Even a character with a special resist- 


a ee ee ae 


a eee 6A 


ance to magic (for example, an elf’s resistance to a 
charm spell) can voluntarily suppress this if he wants. 


Spell Description: This contains the details of what 
the spell does and how it works. Spells with multiple 
functions usually allow the caster to pick the desired 
function at the time of casting (for example, the emo- 
tion spell can create fear, courage, hope, despair, joy, 
and several other effects). 

Spells that give bonuses or penalties to attack 
rolls, damage rolls, saving throws, and so on, are usu- 
ally not cumulative; only the strongest magic is effec- 
tive. However, duration may be a factor, and spell 
effects might overlap in different ways at different 
times. 

Notes: This new section deals with the spell’s rec- 
ommended rarity on the following scale; common, 
uncommon, rare, very rare, and unique. These are dis- 
cussed in detail in the Definitions of Spell Frequency 
section. Spells of any rarity also may be restricted to 
certain races or specialty casters. Any notes on a 
spell’s source or origin, such as a game world or a 
magazine, are given here. 


Monster Details: Some of the spells summon or 
monster details given later. Not all monsters will use 
all abbreviations. 

AC: Armor Class 

MV: Movement— FI: fly 

(MC) = Maneuverability Class (A to E) 

HD: Hit Dice 

#AT: Number of Attacks 

THACO; To Hit Armor Class 0 


Common Spell: The details and effects of a common 
spell are generally known, even by priests who may not 
have access to the spell. All spells in the Player's 
Handbook are common spells. Spells listed for the basic 
priest class in world-specific material (such as the DARK 
Sun* campaign set) are common for priests of that 
world, but might be rarer or even unknown elsewhere. 

Player character priests of Ist level can choose 
Ist-level spells given in the Player's Handbook from 
allowed spheres. Any limitation on spell selection— 
such as those for specialty priesthood or kit—apply 
even to common spells. Note also that DMs may have 
their own campaign guidelines. For example, the DM 
restricting any spells not included in the specific list. 
A DM might rule that named spells (such as Henley's 
disrupting digit) are uncommon or restricted spells, as 
well. 

Players and DMs should be aware that while the 
standard rule is that priests have free access to all 
spells on their respective lists, a more useful ruling is 
to use all common spells in allowed spheres. This 
gives the maximum ability to the DM to reward play- 
ers occasionally with new spells and to encourage 
magical research as a campaign activity. We highly 
recommend that additions to priest spell lists be al- 
lowed only through research or through the recovery 
of certain lost tomes. 


The DM always decides whether a 
priesthood is allowed a spell if 
there is any question. 


Uncommon Spell: Priest spells found in the Tome of 
Magic and PO: Spells & Magic fall into this cate- 
gory. These spells are less well known, but not re- 
stricted to a race or special group like, for example, 
druids, dragons, or the Emerald Enclave. A kit, 
school, or other specialty might allow some uncom- 


Gevesally, a player character will not start with an 
uncommon spell or learn it in the course of normal 
level advancement (unless a divine patron allows it). 
Such spells enter play when found on a magical scroll 
or in a special book, or when developed as a result of 
spell research. In the average AD&D campaign, find- 
ing a new common or uncommon spell is a little more 
common that a fighter class character finding a +1 
magical sword. Some uncommon spells may be re- 
stricted (see Restricted Spells). 


ee RS 


Yel 


Rare Spell: Rare spells are specialized or hidden 
magic, such as those introduced in modules or ac- 
cessories. Besides spells that are just less well 
known, two special types of rare spells exist: 1) 
Spells known by a specific nonhuman race (like 
elven spells from the Complete Book of Elves); and 
2) Spells of a specialty or campaign-specific group 
that is not given in the Player's Handbook (like the 
spells of the Thornwater Circle, the spells from the 
Complete Necromancer’s Handbook, or spells of a 
defiler priest who specializes in Elemental Fire 
magic). Rare spells are likely to be restricted (see 
Restricted Spells). 

A specialty priest treats the spells allowed by the 
specialty as common. 

Player characters have access to rare magics only 
as a result of campaign-specific conditions. Priest re- 
search of rare magics has a base —15% penalty to the 
research success rolls, unless the character has 
access to some sort of knowledge or resource that 
would offset this. Of course, a spell not pleasing to 
the divine patron will not be granted at all. 

Certain campaign-specific or storyline condi- 
tions might allow rare spell research at common 
spell chances. For example, if a human priest's 
reward for an adventure on behalf of the elves is 
elven lore (a race-specific spell), the DM may 
choose to waive some or all of the research cost, 
and/or the research success roll (time requirements 
should not be waived under any circumstances), 


Very Rare Spell: Spells that appear only in maga- 
zine articles, or are otherwise variant, should be clas- 
sified as very rare. Spells newly introduced in 
Prayers From the Faithful fall into this category as 
well (this makes those special tomes a treat to find). 
The DM should closely control very rare spells. For 
example, they might be available only in a single 
special book or tome in which they were recorded. 
Many very rare spells are also restricted (see 
Restricted Spells). 

A DM who allows the spell to be researched at 
all rolls for the success of the research secretly and 
announces the result to the player. At the DM's 
option, the standard research success chances may 
be halved, or even quartered. 

Classifying a spell as very rare is one way for a 
DM to handle an experimental spell that is too pow- 
erful or one that encroaches too much on the class 
abilities of nonpriests. It is also possible, over time, 
for a spell devised by a player character to become 
rare, uncommon, or even common, either within a 
specific sect, or generally. 


Unique Spell: This spell is known only to its orig- 
inal creator and is intrinsic to the creator’s cam- 
paign function. Some spelis of this type might be 
available only to a character holding a certain posi- 
tion or office. Most unique spells are of the 6th- 
spell level or higher; the creator is nearly always of 
12th level or higher. Such spells are marked with a 
double dagger (tt). 

There are fewer priest than wizard spells of this 
type, since a patron deity is more likely to grant or 
withhold spells of this type directly. 

The acquisition of a unique spell, or the cre- 
ation of one by a player character, is a major cam- 
paign event, similar in campaign impact to the 
completion of an epic high-level quest, the open- 
ing of a fixed interplanar gate, the founding of a 
barony, the destruction of an artifact, and so on. 


Other Definitions 


Lost Spell: Rarely, a spell is mentioned for which 
no 2nd Edition detail exists (including a few spells 
deliberately withdrawn from the system). No de- 
tails are given for these other than the spell name. 
They are “lost knowledge,” included only to con- 
firm their one-time existence for the curious. 


Restricted Spell: A restricted spell is barred to 
generalists (that is, the cleric class), and to all 
other priests except those specifically allowed in 
the spell description or by the DM. Optionally, an 
independently researched spell that matches the 
effects of a restricted spell might be possible, but 
at no less than two levels above the listed level. 


Optional Priest Magic: In addition to normal 
priest spells, three other types of priest magic are 
optional. 

Quest spells are special campaign-affecting 
spells occasionally made available to priests of at 
least 10th level and possessing a Wisdom ability 
score of at least 17. Quest spells are located in a 
special appendix in the final book. 

Faith Magic involves the harnessing of the de- 
votional power of priests and worshipers to am- 
plify the effect of certain spells. A discussion of 
faith magic is found in the final book. 

Cooperative Magic involves the linking of two 
or more priests who are of the same ethos (the 
Law-Neutral-Chaos axis) in order to increase the 
effectiveness of a joint spellcasting. A more com- 
plete discussion appears in the final book. 


ep aaa aaa 


A Guide to Spell Icons 


ey 


AL-QADIM* 
Arabian Setting 


2 


Kara-Tur/The Horde 
Oriental Setting 


we 


RED STEEL” 
Swashbuckling 
Fantasy Setting 


DRAGONLANCE® 
Epic Romance 
Setting 


rome 


RAVENLOFT® 
Gothic Fantasy Setting 


— 


Setting of Kings 


Savage Lands’ Setting 


she 


DARK SuN® 
Psionic World Setting 


A X 


PLANESCAPE” 
Other Planes’ 
Setting 


Maztica 
Aztec/New 
World Setting 


L a 


SPELLJAMMER® 
Fantasy Space Setting 


! Although there is no specific setting for savage spellcasters, many worlds have areas from which these might 
come. This icon marks spells particularly suited to an outland “savage” wizard or witch-doctor. 


Elemental magic in the traditional FORGOTTEN 
REALMS, WORLD OF GREYHAWK, DRAGONLANCE, 
and MYSTARA settings is based on air, earth, fire, 
and water. This varies in other settings: In the ori- 
ental setting, air, earth, fire, and water are joined 
by a fifth element, wood, and priests are called 
shukenja. In the AL-QapIM setting, the four basic 
elements are traditional, but are called the 
Provinces of Flame, Sand, Sea, and Wind. In the 


not their magic drains the living energy of that 
world. Here, psionics are as important as magic. In 
the BIRTHRIGHT setting, bloodline abilities augment 
normal magics; scions of evil bloodlines are called 
awnsheglien, and those of heroic bloodlines are 
called ensheglien. In the SPELLIAMMING setting, 


in baneful mutations (the Red Curse) unless con- 
trolled by exposure to the rare ore cinnabryl. The 
depletion of this ore is cause for concern. In the 
RAVENLOFT setting, the Demiplane of Dread, 
gothic horror in form of Dark Lords, each a god- 
like power trapped in a private domain, keeps ad- 
venturers on the run, looking for a way out and 
making special fear, horror, and Ravenloft powers 
settings from the inner (Elemental) Planes to the 
Outer Planes, where the gods live. Casting magic 


Abbreviations referring to Source Material 
PHB = ADVANCED DUNGEONS & DRAGONS” 
Player's Handbook 

DMG = ADVANCED DUNGEONS & DRAGONS” 
DUNGEON MASTER® Guide 

PO:SM = PLAYER'S OPTION: Spells & Magic 
WoG = WORLD OF GREYHAWK® setting — 


A Day in the Life — Halfling 


A Day in the Life — Halfling 
(Alteration, Abjuration) 
Sphere: Law, Combat 


Level: 5 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 8 

Duration: | day 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell transforms a living, sentient, intelli- 
gent creature touched by the caster (successful 
attack roll required) into a normal halfling with no 
character class abilities (see the Monstrous MANUAL 
tome) provided the creature fails a saving throw vs. 
spell. The creature transformed retains its alignment, 
its memory and mental capacity, its normal saving 
throws, and its hit points. It does not gain the saving 
throw bonuses that halflings normally possess; the 
spell gives halfling form and THACO. Items carried 
or worn are not changed with the creature, which 
may now be awash in ill-fitting armor or holding a 
weapon too big to wield effectively. Magical items 
usable only by character classes other than fighters 
no longer function for the creature. The casting of 
spells by a creature transformed by a day in the life 
is not possible, although they are not forgotten and 
can be cast when the creature once again assumes its 
normal form; similarly, the use of psionic capabili- 
ties granted by the psionicist class is not possible. 
The spell does not require a system shock roll for the 
creature when it is transformed or when it assumes 
its normal form; at the spell’s expiration. 

The material components are the priest's holy 
symbol and a hair from a halfling’s foot. 

Notes: Granted by the halfling deity Yondalla. 


Abbathor’s Greed — Dwarf 


Casting Time: 6 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: 10-ft.-path, 10 ft/level 
Saving Throw: None 


The priest who casts this spell can determine 
the single most valuable item within the spell’s 


Ae 


area of effect. This information gained 
W involves the item's monetary value only. 
Magical items are revealed to be only as 
valuable as the materials from which they 
are made. This aside, the caster learns the item's 
exact value (in terms of gold pieces). 

For every 1,000 gp value of the item, there is a 
1% cumulative chance that Abbathor himself takes 
notice of the item and desires it for himself. If this 
occurs, there is an equal chance that Abbathor 
sends an avatar to retrieve the object. The total 
chance won't exceed 95%. 

The avatar’s sole purpose is to retrieve the de- 
sired item and return with it to the Gray Wastes. 
Under no circumstances does the avatar of 
Abbathor become involved in the affairs of the 
priest. Any attempt to prevent the avatar from car- 
rying out its duty is dealt with accordingly. 

Notes: Granted by the evil dwarven deity 
Abbathor. 


Abeyance 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: All 


Level: 5 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 8 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 focal stone or | magical item 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell can be cast in one of two forms. In the 
most commonly used form, this magic freezes an- 
other spell that has earlier been cast into a focal 
stone, delaying its execution indefinitely. The 
frozen dweomer may not take effect for years, until 
released by a dweomerflow, wondrous web, or holy 
vesting spell; by the shattering of the focal stone; or 
by certain other spells that can extract magics from 
within such a magical prison. (Dispel magic is not 
one of these) The abeyance is broken by any such 
contact, freeing the spell to take instant effect, but 
if the contact is with a dweomerflow, wondrous 
web, or holy vesting spell, the abeyance fades but 
the stored magic is not released, being conveyed in- 
stead to another magical receptacle. 

The second way that abeyance can be used af- 
fects only magical items (not artifacts). If the 
caster of the abeyance manages to directly touch a 
magical item with his or her bare flesh as this spell 
is cast, the next time the magical item is activated, 


Ee aw dR cer oe cin) oes as 


Accelerate Healing 


a ae 4 


its effect is delayed from taking effect for 1 round, 
and the abeyance dissipates thereafter. 

Notes: Very rare spell from the FORGOTTEN 
REALMS setting. 


Ability Alteration 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Creation 


Level: 3 

Range: 0 

Components: V 

Casting Time: 6 

Duration: | turn + 5 rds./level 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


By means of this spell, the priest can enhance 
one or more of his physical abilities by temporar- 
ily suppressing another physical ability. The priest 
can expend ability points from one physical ability 
to gain ability points in another. The ratio is 2 
points expended to | gained. No ability score can 
be reduced below 8 by this spell, nor can racial 
maximums or minimums be exceeded. 
Exceptional strength is possible, but costs 2 points 
spent per 10% gain. Example: A priest with 
Strength 17 and Dexterity 16 could expend up to 8 
points of Dexterity to increment Strength to 18/30 
(17 to 18 to 18/10 to 18/20 to 18/30). When the 
spell expires, the original ability score is restored. 

Notes: Granted by Wee Jas, intermediate 
power of magic and death, of the WORLD OF 
GREYHAWK Setting. 


Abjure 
(Abjuration) 
Sphere: Guardian, Summoning 
Level: 4 
Range: 10 ft. 


Components: V, S,M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: | creature 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell can send an extraplanar creature 
back to its own plane of existence. The spell fails 
against entities of demigod status or greater, but 
their servants or minions can be abjured. If the 
creature has a specific (proper) name, then that 
must be known and used. Any magic resistance of 


the subject must be overcome, or the spell fails. 
The priest has a 50% chance of success (a roll of 
11 or better on 1d20). 

The roll is adjusted by the difference in level or 
Hit Dice between the caster and the creature being 
abjured: the number needed is decreased if the 
priest has more Hit Dice and increased if the crea- 
ture has more Hit Dice. If the spell is successful, the 
creature is instantly hurled back to its own plane. 

The affected creature must survive a system 
shock check. If the creature does not have a 
Constitution score, the required roll is 70%, plus 
2% per Hit Die or level. The caster has no control 
over where in the creature's plane the abjured crea- 
ture arrives. If the attempt fails, the priest must 
gain another level before another attempt can be 
made on that particular creature. 

The spell requires the priest's holy symbol, holy 
water, and some material inimical to the creature. 

Notes: Common spell for clerics (PHB). 


Abjure — Shukenja 
The oriental (shukenja) version of this spell is the 
same, except that it is reversible. 
The spell’s reverse, implore, can 
summon a specific creature, of the 
same alignment as the shukenja, from 
another plane, Success is the same as for abjure, 
and the exact and proper names of the creature 
must be known. The implore does not restrain a 
summoned creature, and neither version affects en- 
tities of deity or demigod power 
The material components include the holy 
symbol of the shukenja, holy water, and any sub- 
stance the creature craves or respects. 


Abundance 
Quest spell, see appendix in Vol. 3. 


Accelerate Erosion 
Reversed form, sands of time. 


Accelerate Healing 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Time 


Level: 3 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 1 turn 

Duration: 1—4 days 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


oe ee en 


Acid Rain - 


This spell enables the affected creature to expe- 
rience natural healing at twice the normal rate for 
1—4 days. In other words, an individual affected by 
accelerate healing regains 2 hit points per day of 
normal rest or 6 hit points per day spent resting in 
bed. The spell has no effect on potions of healing 
or other magical forms of healing. 

Notes: Uncommon spell; a specialty for priests 
of Time (ToM). 


Acid Rain 
(Conjuration) 
Sphere: Elemental Water 
Range: 120 yds. 


Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 3 rds. 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: 20-ft. X 20-ft. cube 
Saving Throw: Special 


This terrible conjuration creates a toxic shower 
that covers all within its area of effect. The droplets 
are a corrosive acid that eats through metal, cloth, 
and flesh. Creatures caught beneath the rain take 
2d6 points of damage. It is easy enough to move 
out of the cube, but those who cannot continue to 
take 1d6 points of damage for each round spent in 
the rain. Anyone who fails to make a successful 
saving throw vs. spell must make item saving 
throws vs. acid for exposed equipment as well. 

Notes: Common for Elemental Water priests 
from the DARK SUN setting. 


Acorn Barrage — Elf 
(Enchantment) 
Sphere: Plant 


Level: 2 

Range: 10 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 5 

Duration: 1 rd. 

Area of Effect: 1 acorn/level 
Saving Throw: None 


By means of this spell, the priest can cause a 
barrage of acorns to launch from his or her hand, 
from the ground, or from an oak tree within 10 
yards. The acorns, up to one acorn per level of the 
caster, fly up to 40 yards in the round of casting. 
The priest can direct them in any combination 


against any living or nonliving targets in sight. 

Each acom requires a successful attack roll to hit 
its target. Each attack is made as if the priest was hurl- 
ing the acorns with a sling. Each acorn that hits a crea- 
ture inflicts 1d2 points of damage. Although they are 
magically propelled, the acorns are nonmagical mis- 
siles and range modifiers apply (10/20/40). Dexterity 
modifiers apply only if the acorns are hurled from the 
hand. The spell is ineffective underwater. 

The material components of this spell are the 
priest’s holy symbol and as many acorns as 


Notes: Granted by the elven deity Rillifane 
Rallathil. 


Accounts Ela’s 


See Ela’s accounts. 


Adamantite Mace 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Elemental Earth 


Level: 4 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 7 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: The caster's weapon 
Saving Throw: None 


By means of this spell, the priest transmutes his 
own cudgel, mace, or staff into an enchanted 
weapon of adamantite. The adamantite mace gains 
a +2 bonus to attack and damage rolls and can 
strike creatures hit by +4 weapons or less. As an 
incarnation of elemental earth, the mace inflicts up 
to twice the damage (roll damage dice twice) 
against creatures of elemental air and magical 
avians, such as griffons, perytons, pegasi, and 
winged baatezu or tanar’ri. The adamantite mace 
retains its special properties for one round per 
level of the caster. 

The material component is a special powder 
made from a diamond worth 100 gp, sprinkled 
over the weapon. 

Notes: Uncommon spell for druids and spe- 
cialty priests of Elemental Earth. (PO:SM) 


Adaptation 
A 3rd-level spell from the sphere of War. See ap- 
pendix in Vol. 3. 


Me ca ge a ee ee 


Adaptation 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Protection 
Level: 5 
Range: Touch 


Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 8 

Duration: 24 hrs. 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell allows the recipient to ignore gases 
affecting respiration, to breathe underwater, or 
even to exist in airless space for the duration of the 
spell (much like the magical item, necklace of 
adaptation). The priest can divide the base dura- 
tion between multiple beings, to a minimum of 
one half hour each. 

The material component is holy water. 

Notes: Very rare spell for clerics. (Updated 
from POLYHEDRON Newszine.) 


Addition 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Numbers 


Level: 4 

Range: 30 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


The Sphere of Numbers holds that the structure 
of reality, the equation of the moment, can be ana- 
lyzed and modified by someone with sufficient 
knowledge and power. The addition spell allows a 
priest to add a new mathematical term to the equa- 
tion of the moment. This effectively allows a new 
object or even a living creature to be brought into 
existence temporarily. 

The effect of this spell varies depending on the 
level of the caster. A caster of 10th level or less can 
create a single, inanimate object weighing up to 10 
pounds. The caster’s control is rudimentary, the 
object cannot be complex. The object must be de- 
scribed in a single word or short phrase (for exam- 
ple, a water pitcher or a block of stone). The caster 
has no control over elements such as shape or color; 
thus, the water pitcher might be short, squat, and 
blue, or tall, slender, and red. Objects created with 


Addition 


this spell cannot be of any greater mechanical com- 
plexity or technological level than a crossbow. If the 
priest tries to create an object that breaks this prohi- 
bition, the spell fails and nothing is created. Thus, if 
the priest tried to create a pistol, assuming he had 
heard the word somewhere, the spell would fail. 

Objects cannot contain any information in an 
abstract form such as writing or diagrams. If the 
priest tries to create an object that breaks this pro- 
hibition, there are two possible results: the spell 
may fail, or the object may be created without the 
information. Thus, if the priest were to attempt to 
create a spellbook, the result would be either a 
book similar to a spellbook with blank pages or 
nothing at all. 

The object appears at whatever location the 
caster wills, as long as it is within spell range. The 
object cannot appear in the same space occupied 
by another object or creature, or within a hollow 
object (for example, the priest cannot create an 
object blocking the trachea of an enemy). 

The created object exists for 1 turn per level of 
the caster. During this time, it obeys all the laws of 
physics as if it were a real object. The object cannot 
be disbelieved and spells such as true seeing cannot 
distinguish it from a naturally occurring object. 


er a ee ee 


Advanced Sunshine 


a eee a 


Priests of 11th to 15th level can create a single 
inanimate object of up to 20 pounds in mass or two 
identical objects, each of up to five pounds in 
mass. The object(s) so created exists for two hours 
(12 turns) per level of the caster. 

Priests of 16th to 19th level can create a single 
inanimate object of up to 50 pounds in mass or up 
to 10 identical objects, each of up to five pounds in 
mass. The object(s) is permanent unless destroyed. 
Since these objects are not magical constructs, but 
real additions to the equation of the moment, 
dispel magic has no effect on them. Alternatively, 
the caster can create a single normal (nonmon- 
strous) living creature of up to 20 pounds in 
weight. The creature, once created, behaves as a 
normal member of its species; the caster has no 
control over its actions. This creature remains in 
existence for 5 rounds per level of the caster. 

Priests of 20th level and above can create a 
single inanimate object of up to 100 pounds in 
mass or up to 10 identical objects, each of up to 10 
pounds in mass. The object(s) are permanent, 
Alternatively, the caster can create a single normal 
(nonmonstrous) living creature of up to 100 
pounds in weight and up to 2 Hit Dice. The crea- 
ture, once created, behaves as a normal member of 
its species; the caster has no control over its ac- 
tions. This creature remains in existence for 2 
turns per level of the caster. 

The material component is a small table of nu- 
merological formulae inscribed on an ivory 
plaque, plus a length of silken cord. During the 
casting, the priest ties the cord into a complex 
knot. As the magical energy is discharged, the cord 
vanishes in a flash of light. The plaque is not con- 
sumed in the casting. 

Notes: Common spell for priests with major 
access to the sphere of Numbers (ToM). 


Advanced Sunshine 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Sun 


Level: 4 

Range: 5 yds./level 
Components: V, M 
Casting Time: 7 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 15 ft/level 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell is a multi-use incantation that can be 
cast in one of three forms. The spell borrows the 


sunshine from the day it is cast (or the next day if 
cast at night) to render these effects. This spell is 
unpopular among farmers and herders, who see it 
as a miscarriage of divine intervention. 

Light: This form of the spell borrows sunshine 
to create a light spell lasting one turn per level of 
the caster. It shortens the day's sunshine by one 
minute per level of the caster. 

Fireball: A piece of the sun's energy can be 
converted into a fireball as though cast by a mage 
of the casting priest’s level. This lowers the tem- 
perature within a 90-mile radius by 1 degree 
Fahrenheit for a tenday each time it is cast. This 
aspect of the spell cannot be cast at night or during 
cloudy days. 

Illumination: This version of advanced sun- 
shine can be used to borrow sunlight from later in 
the day (or the next day if at night) to cast contin- 
ual light at double the range and effect for the 
caster’s level. This shortens the day’s sunshine by 
one hour. 

Notes: Granted by the sun god Amaunator of 
the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Range: | 

Components: V 

Casting Time: 5 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell allows the shukenja to give profound 
and thoughtful advice to any creature of at least low 
intelligence The two must also share a common lan- 
guage. When cast, the creature is allowed a saving 
throw vs. spell to avoid the effect. If this is failed, 
the shukenja can give the creature instructions in the 
form of advice. These can be instructions to do any- 
thing, including acts obviously foolish or destruc- 
tive. The advised creature then does its best to obey 
the instructions. However, if the advice would place 
the creature in great peril or cause its death, the 
creature is allowed a second saving throw vs. spell 
with a +4 bonus just before committing the act. 
Should, for example, the shukenja give advice to go 
to a nearby cliff and jump off (and the creature 
cannot fly), the second saving throw would be al- 
lowed just before, the creature took the fatal step. 


a ee ee T 


Age Creature 


N 


The spell does not in any way conceal the identity 
of the one who gave the advice, and bad advice can 
often cause trouble for the shukenja, should those 
who follow it survive. 

Notes: Common for oriental priests; otherwise, 
very rare, 


Aerial Servant 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 
Sphere: Summoning 


Level: 6 

Range: 10 yds. 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 9 
Duration: | day/level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell summons an invisible aerial servant 
to find and bring back an object or creature de- 
scribed to it by the priest. Unlike an elemental, an 
aerial servant cannot be commanded to fight for the 
caster. When it is summoned, the priest must have 
cast a protection from evil spell, be within a protec- 
tive circle, or have a special item used to control the 
aerial servant. Otherwise, it attempts to slay its 
summoner and return from whence it came. 

The object or creature to be brought must be 
such as to allow the aerial servant to physically 
bring it to the priest (an aerial servant can carry at 
least 1,000 pounds). If prevented, for any reason, 
from completing the assigned duty, the aerial ser- 
vant returns to its own plane whenever the spell 
lapses, its duty is fulfilled, it is dispelled, the priest 
releases it, or the priest is slain. The spell lasts for 
a maximum of one day for each level of experi- 
ence of the priest who cast it. 

If the creature to be fetched cannot detect invis- 
ible objects, the aerial servant attacks, automati- 
cally gaining surprise. If the creature involved can 
detect invisible objects, it still suffers a -2 penalty 
to all surprise rolls caused by the aerial servant. 
Each round of combat, the aerial servant must roll 
to attack. When a hit is scored, the aerial servant 
has grabbed the item or creature it was sent for. A 
creature with a Strength rating is allowed an eva- 
sion roll, equal to twice its bend bars chance, to 
escape the hold. If the creature in question does 
not have a Strength rating, roll 1d8 for each Hit 
Die the aerial servant and the creature grabbed 
have. The higher total is the stronger. Once seized, 
the creature cannot free itself by Strength or 


Dexterity and is flown to the priest forthwith. 
Notes: Common spell for clerics (PHB). 


Age Creature 
(Alteration) 
Reversible 
Sphere: Time 


Level: 6 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell ages the affected creature one year 
per level of the caster. Unwilling creatures are al- 
lowed a saving throw vs. spell to negate the effect. 
Those affected must make a successful system 
shock roll to survive the aging. 

A creature cannot be aged beyond its natural 
life span. If the priest’s level indicates that a crea- 
ture would be aged beyond this point, the creature 
is aged to one year short of its maximum age. The 
spell cannot cause a creature to die of old age. 

Humans and humanoids affected by the spell 
experience changes in appearance associated with 
increased age, such as gray hair and wrinkles. 
More significantly, they suffer losses in Strength, 
Dexterity, and Constitution when they reach cer- 
tain age levels. These are summarized in Table 12: 
Aging Effects in the Player's Handbook 

Nonmagical monsters can be affected. The DM 
determines a monster’s current age and natural life 
span based on its description in the MONSTROUS 
COMPENDIUM or based on his own judgment. To 
determine the effects of aging on a monster, 
assume the following: A monster is middle-aged 
when it reaches half its natural life span; a monster 
reaches old age at two-thirds of its natural life 
span; a monster reaches venerable age in the last 
one-sixth of its years. A monster suffers the penal- 
ties that follow when it reaches these age levels. 
The penalties are cumulative and permanent 
(unless the affected monster becomes younger). 


Age Penalty 

Middle Age —1 to all saving throws 

Old Age =l to all saving throws 
=] to all attack rolls 

Venerable —1 to all saving throws 


—I to all attack rolls 


A 15 he 


~ 28° Dragon a 


The material component is a pinch of pow- 
dered emerald. 

The reverse of this spell, restore youth, perma- 
nently restores age that has been lost as a result of 
magic in which aging is the primary effect, such as 
an age creature spell, staff of withering, and at- 
tacks by ghosts. It does not reverse incidental 
aging effects, such as those inflicted by casting a 
wish or receiving a haste spell. Restore youth re- 
duces the creature’s age by one year per level of 
the caster. The creature must make a successful 
system shock roll to survive the change. Creatures 
that become younger regain the lost ability scores 
described above. A creature cannot become 
younger than its actual age as a result of this spell. 

The material component is a pinch of pow- 
dered ruby. 

Notes: Common for to priests with major 
access to the sphere of Time (ToM). 


Age Dragon 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Time 


Level: 7 

Range: 30 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: 1 dragon 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell allows the caster to cause any dragon 
to temporarily gain or lose one age level per five 
levels of the caster. For instance, a 14th-level 
caster could cause a dragon to gain or lose two age 
levels; a mature adult dragon could be temporarily 
transformed into a young adult dragon or into a 
very old dragon. A dragon’s age cannot be reduced 
below hatchling or increased beyond great wyrm. 

Unwilling dragons are allowed a saving throw 
vs, spell with a —4 penalty to avoid the effect. 

A dragon affected by age dragon temporarily 
acquires the armor class, hit points, spell abilities, 
combat modifiers, size, and other attributes of his 
new age level. The dragon retains its memories 
and personality. At the end of the spell’s duration, 
the dragon returns to its normal age level. 

Damage suffered at the modified age remains 
when the dragon resumes its normal age. A dragon 
losing more hit points at the modified age than it 
has at its actual age dies when the spell expires. 
For example, a young adult bronze dragon with 


110 hit points is aged to a mature adult with 120 
hit points. The dragon suffers 115 hit points in 
combat. Unless the dragon is healed of 6 points of 
damage before the spell expires, the dragon dies 
when the spell ends. A dragon is killed while under 
the effect of age dragon is dead at the end of the 
spell’s duration. 

The material component is a handful of dirt 
taken from a dragon's footprint. 

Notes: Common for to priests with major 
access to the sphere of Time (ToM). 


Age Object 


Range: 10 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: | rd. 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: 1 cu. ft./level 
Saving Throw: None 


With this spell, the caster can cause an amount 
of nonliving, nonmagical matter to age dramati- 
cally. Matter can be aged up to 20 years per level 
of the caster. The following table gives typical re- 
sults of 100 years of aging for various objects, 


arranged in order of descending severity: 
Object Result of Aging 
Diamond None 
Silver Becomes tarnished 
Masonry Cracks and weakens 
Iron Rusts and corrodes 
Parchment Cracks, turns brittle 
Wood Rots, crumbles, turns to sawdust 


The caster controls the extent of the aging: 
thus, he could age a book so its pages become yel- 
lowed and brittle but stop short of causing the 
book to crumble to dust. As a guideline, each addi- 
tional 100 years of aging causes an increasingly 
severe reaction. Thus, after 200 years, parchment 
might become little more than powder, while iron 
might begin to flake away at a touch. 

Many items (especially gems) show little reac- 
tion to age. The DM must adjudicate all effects. 

The material components are a flask of seawa- 
ter and a piece of coal. 

The reverse of this spell, youthful object, re- 


ere nan ee Pe ey 


Air Lens 


De nem 4 


turns an object ravaged by the effects of time to its 
original condition; thus, rusty iron becomes strong 
and shiny, crumbled masonry becomes firm, and 
rotten wood becomes solid. The age of matter can 
be reduced by 20 years per level of the caster. 

The material components for youthful object 
are a piece of eggshell and a hair from the head of 
a human or humanoid infant. 

Notes: Common for to priests with major 
access to the sphere of Time (ToM). 


Age Plant 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Time 


Level: 4 

Range: 30 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: 1 plant, seed, or tree/level 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell enables the caster to affect the aging 
of any plant, seed, or tree. The process can operate 
either forward or backward, causing flowers to 
blossom, seeds to sprout and grow, and trees to 
bear fruit; or fruit to turn to blossoms, trees to 
become saplings, and new shoots to turn to seeds. 

The change in age, either forward or backward, 
is chosen by the priest at the time of casting. The 
changes associated with normal or reversed 
growth occur instantaneously. Plants can be al- 
tered in age up to 10 years per level of the caster. 
The caster can stop the aging at any point within 
the limits imposed by his level: He could cause a 
tree to grow from a sapling until it withers and dies 
from old age or he could stop the tree’s growth at a 
stage at which it would shelter his home. 

The spell does not alter the appearance or char- 
acteristics of a plant except those that result from 
normal aging (or regression). Age plant has no 
effect on magically generated plants or plant- 
based monsters. 

The material components are the priest's holy 
symbol and the petal from an apple blossom. 

Notes: Common for to priests with major 
access to the sphere of Time (ToM). 


Aid 


(Necromancy, Conjuration) 
Sphere: Combat, Necromantic 


Level: 2 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: | rd. + 1 rd. level 
Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


The recipient of this spell gains the benefit of a 
bless spell (+1 to attack rolls and saving throws) 
and a special bonus of 1d8 additional hit points for 
the duration of the spell. The aid spell enables the 
recipient to actually have more bit points than his 
full normal total. The bonus hit points are lost first 
when the recipient takes damage; they cannot be 
regained by curative magic. Example: A Ist-level 
fighter has 8 hit points, suffers 2 points of damage 
(8 — 2 =6), and then receives an aid spell that gives 
5 additional hit points. The fighter now has 11 hit 
points, 5 of which are temporary. If he is then hit 
for 7 points of damage, 2 normal hit points and all 
5 temporary hit points are lost. He then receives a 
cure light wounds spell that heals 4 points of 
damage, restoring him to his original 8 hit points. 

Note that the operation of the spell is unaf- 
fected by permanent hit point losses due to energy 
drain, Hit Die losses, the loss of a familiar, or the 
operation of certain artifacts; the temporary hit 
point gain is figured from the new, lower total. 

The material components of this spell are a tiny 
strip of white cloth with a sticky substance (such as 
tree sap) on the ends, plus the priest's holy symbol. 

Notes: Common for clerics (PHB). 


Air Breathing 
Reversed form, water breathing. 


Air Lens 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Elemental Air 


Level: 3 

Range: 90 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 3 

Duration: 3 rds. + 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


whe. 


aaa i nee © 


Air of Permanence 


By means of this spell, the priest creates a mag- 
ical lens high in the air, with which he can direct 
intensified rays of the sun against his enemies. The 
caster must be in the sunlight for the duration of 
the spell. Once cast, the priest can attack with the 
lens twice per round, against one or two creatures 
within range of the spell. Attack rolls are made for 
each attack, and the priest suffers no nonprofi- 
ciency penalty. Targets under cover receive bene- 
fits for both cover and concealment. Each hit 
inflicts 2d6 points of damage. Creatures resistant 
to heat or fire take only half damage. 

The spell can be used to ignite flammable ma- 
terials. When doing so against non-mobile targets, 
no attack roll is necessary—any normally com- 
bustible materials (cloth, wood, paper, and so on) 
ignite. Personal equipment can be targeted, but the 
priest must, make a successful attack roll with a —4 
penalty, If hit, the article of equipment ignites; 
burning clothing inflicts 1d6 points of damage for 
1d6 rounds or until discarded. Burning shields 
become useless. The flames so created are not 
magical and can be extinguished normally. 
Magical darkness can negate the effects of this 
spell, magical shade reduces damage by half. 

The material component for this spell is a 


small, round piece of glass. 
Notes: Common for priests from the DARK SUN 
setting; otherwise, very rare. 


Air of Permanence 


Athasian Dragon King magic, 9th wie 
level; psionic component renders 


the spell uncastable by priests. 


Air Tread — Drow 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Necromantic 


Level: 6 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 9 

Duration: 1 rd. + 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell, a more powerful version of the air 
walk spell, temporarily alters the body weight of 
the priest or a touched being (of large size or less), 
so that the creature can walk upon liquid or air 
with normal balance and at normal movement rate. 
Unlike the 3rd-level spell, water walk, the being’s 
feet do contact any liquid walked upon. 

If cast upon a falling creature, this spell stops 
the descent within a further drop of one body 
length of the creature. If any surface is struck 
during this time, base falling damage is halved. 
Using the spell duration to walk straight down- 
wards and lessen the height of a remaining un- 
avoidable fall can lessen damage from long falls. 
When the spell ends, normal descent (with possi- 
ble falling damage) occurs. 

This spell is often used to walk across chasms, 
or from one rooftop to another, but can be used to 
cast a single spell while stationary in midair. This 
use of the air tread spell exhausts it immediately 
upon the completion of casting the other spell, so 
the caster immediately begins to fall. 

The material components are a feather, a pinch 
of dust, and a sandal or shoe of any size. 

Notes: Granted by the drow god Vhaeroon. 


ee eS eR ee es ee 


Akadi's Vortex 


p ———————————————LLLLLLL—L————————E—EEeEE A 


Air Walk 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Elemental Air 
Level: 5 
Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 8 


Duration: | hr. + | turn/level 
Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell enables a creature, which can be as large 
as the largest giant, to tread upon air can just as if it 
were walking on solid ground. Moving upward is 
similar to walking up a hill; a maximum upward angle 
of 45 degrees is possible at one-half the creature’s 
movement rate, as is a maximum downward angle of 
45 degrees at the normal movement rate is possible. 
An air-walking creature is in control of its movement 
rate, except when a strong wind is blowing. In this 
case the creature gains or loses 10 feet of movement 
for every 10 miles per hour of wind velocity. The crea- 
ture may be, subject to additional penalties in excep- 
tionally strong or turbulent winds, such as loss of 
control of movement or suffering physical damage. 

The spell can be placed upon a trained mount, 
so it can be ridden through the air. Of course, a 
mount not accustomed to such movement would 
certainly need careful and lengthy training, the de- 
tails for which are up to the DM. 

The material components for the spell are the 
priest's holy symbol and a bit of thistledown. 

Notes: Common for druids (PHB). 


Akadi, Winds of 
See winds of Akadi. 


Akadi’s Vortex 
(Alteration, Invocation/Evocation) 
Sphere: Elemental Air 


Level: 7 

Range: 100 yds. 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: | rd. 
Duration: | turn 

Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: 1⁄2 


This spell is similar to the winds of Akadi spell, 
except it emits chain lightning every third round as 
the 6th-level wizard spell. A 30-foot-diameter 


sphere of whirling air comes into existence at a 
point indicated by the caster. Creatures in the area 
of effect, or entering while the spell is in effect, 
must make a successful saving throw vs. spell or 
suffer 1d4 points of damage from the winds. 

Every third round (3rd, 6th, and 9th), the cloud 
releases one chain lightning bolt in a manner and 
at a target selected by the caster. While directing 
the initial strike of the bolt, the priest loses his or 
her normal action for the round. 

The chain lightning stroke inflicts 1d6 points of 
damage per level of the caster to a maximum of 12d6 
points. The bolt initially inflicts 1d6 points of damage 
per level of the caster, to a maximum of 12d6 (half 
damage if the object or creature rolls a successful 
saving throw vs. spell). After the first strike, the light- 
ning arcs to the next nearest object or creature. Each 
jump reduces the strength of the lightning by 1d6. 
Each creature or magical object hit receives a saving 
throw vs. spell. Success on this save indicates the 
creature suffers only half damage from the bolt. 

The lightning can strike as many times (includ- 
ing the first object or creature) as the spellcaster 
has levels, although each creature or object can be 
struck only once. Thus, a bolt cast by a 12th-level 
wizard strikes up to 12 times, causing less damage 
with each strike. The bolt continues to arc until it 
has struck the appropriate number of objects or 
creatures, until it strikes an object that grounds it 
(interconnecting iron bars of a large cell or cage, a 
large pool of liquid, etc.), or until there are no 
more objects or creatures to strike. 

Direction is not a consideration when plotting 
chain lightning arcs. Distance is a factor—an arc 
cannot exceed 40 yards, plus 5 yards per caster 
level. If the only possible arc is greater than the 
this, the stroke fades into nothingness. Creatures 
immune to electrical attack can be struck, though 
no damage is taken. It is possible for the chain to 
arc back to the caster! 

Affected creatures are allowed a saving throw 
vs. spell for half damage. Creatures within the 
cloud in a round when lightning is projected make 
their saving throws with a —4 penalty. 

On the tenth round, the spell expires abruptly in 
a normal lightning bolt (1d6 points of damage per 
level of the caster to a maximum of 10d6 points, 
save vs. spell for half damage). 

Notes: Granted by the elven air god Akadi. 


Ge ar ee 


Alert Allies — Dwarf, Gnome 


Alert Allies — Dwarf, Gnome 
(Divination, Alteration) 
Sphere: Thought 


Level: 2 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: | rd. + 1 rd. per creature touched 
Duration: 8 hrs. maximum 

Area of Effect: 90-ft. radius 

Saving Throw: None 


This spell enables the priest to send an instanta- 
neous mental missive to his comrades alerting 
them to a dangerous situation. It is not possible to 
send any message other than “Alert” by means of 
this spell, nor is two-way communication of any 
sort possible, but the true meaning of the mental 
missive, other than the fact that a dangerous situa- 
tion exists, can be prearranged if so desired. 

Alert allies can be cast only on awake, living, 
and sentient creatures (Animal Intelligence or 
higher). The somatic component involves the 
priest physically touching foreheads for one full 
round with each recipient. One ally per level of the 
spellcaster, up to a maximum of ten individuals, 
can be linked by means of this spell. 

Once cast, the mental links forged by means of 
this spell last until the alert is broadcast or for at 
most eight hours. An alert has a maximum range 
of 90 feet around the priest. Anyone beyond that 
range won't hear the alert, although the spell effect 
(and the mental link) ends nonetheless. 

Likewise, anyone maintaining a psionic de- 
fense shield, wearing a ring of mind shielding, or 
employing similar magics won't receive the 
mental warning. However, if a recipient is asleep 
and that condition is not maintained by chemical 
or magical means (although it may have been in- 
duced by such), he or she immediately awakens 
and is aware that an alert has been issued. 

It is possible to issue a mental missive and then 
perform another action aside from spell casting in 
the same round. The alert broadcast effectively 
imposes an initiative penalty of 1 on any other 
course of action attempted in the same round. 

Notes: Granted by the dwarven god Gorm 
Gulthyn. Granted by the gnome god Gaerdal 
Ironhand. 


Alert Vigil 
(Enchantment/Charm, Necromancy) 
Sphere: Charm, Necromantic 


Level: | 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: 7 turns + 1 turn/level 
Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell causes the creature touched to remain 
awake and alert for the spell’s duration (determined 
by the caster’s level). Even an exhausted creature 
won't doze or fall asleep, and all of its senses per- 
form at peak ability (tired eyes keep focus and so 
on). A creature under the effects of an alert vigil is 
not “resting” (healing), but the magic does not 
make the recipient more weary when it expires. 

Notes: Granted by the war god Torm in the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. This spell is found 
only in a few exceptionally rare tomes. 


Alicorn Lance 
(Invocation/Evocation) 
Sphere: Combat 


Level: 2 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: 1 rd./level maximum 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: 2 


This spell creates a silver-hued, partially ethereal 
lance shaped in the form of an alicorn (a unicorn 
horn). The alicorn lance hovers above the brow of 
the spellcaster for a maximum of 1 round per level of 
the spellcaster. By a silent act of will, any time before 
the spell expires, the spellcaster can choose a target 
within 40 yards. The alicorn lance instantaneously 
fires at it. For the purpose of the types of creatures it 
can damage, the lance is +1 if the caster is less than 
7th level and +2 if the caster is of 7th level or greater. 
The alicorn lance inflicts 3d6 points of piercing 
damage. It never misses, but a target creature can par- 
tially avoid its effects (taking only half damage) by 
making a successful saving throw vs. spell. 

After striking, the lance dissipates into nothing- 
ness, leaving only a silvery faerie fire radiance out- 
lining the creature, with all the combat penalties of 


aceasta ees. 7 


Alteration Mantle, Azuth’s 


N 


that spell, for 1d4 rounds. 
The material components for this spell are the 
priestess’s holy symbol and a lock of unicom mane. 
Notes: Granted by the sylvan deity Luru the 
Unicorn Queen of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


All-Seeing Crystal Ball 
(Divination, Alteration) 
Sphere: Divination 


Level: 6 

Range: 0 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 turn 
Duration: 1 day/level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell enables thè priest to create a tempo- 
rary crystal sphere about 6 inches in diameter with 
all of the powers of a crystal ball, as described in 
the DUNGEON MASTER Guide. In addition, the priest 
can cast any memorized spell that is solely from 
the school of divination or the sphere of divination 
through the all-seeing crystal ball. All other stric- 
tures associated with normal crystal balls apply. 

Priests of 15th level or above can create an all- 
seeing crystal ball with clairaudience. 
Spellcasters who are 17th level or above can create 
an all-seeing crystal ball with ESP. Spellcasters 
who are 19th level or above can create an all- 
seeing crystal ball with telepathy (communication 
only). These creations have the same abilities as 
the magical items of the same name, as well as the 
improved capability for casting divination spells 
through them mentioned above. 

The material components of this spell are the 
priest's holy symbol and a ball of snow and ice or a 
pile of fine sand of the volume of a 6-inch sphere. 

Notes: Granted by the divinational deity 
Savrath in the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Allergy Field 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Plant 


Level: | 

Range: 10 yds. /level 
Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: 3 rds. + 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: Cube, 5-ft./level 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell can be cast on any field, meadow, 
forest, or other outdoor area with an abundance of 
plant life. It causes the plants to-produce pollen, 
antigens, or similar allergens. Creatures in or en- 
tering with the affected area must make a success- 
ful saving throw vs. spell. A creature failing the 
save experiences swelling of the eyes, fits of 
sneezing, and dull headaches for the next 1d4+1 
turns. All attack rolls and ability checks for this 
time suffer a —1 penalty. 

The spell affects a cubic volume whose sides 
are 5 feet long per level of the caster; thus, a 9th- 
level caster could affect a 45-foot cube. The spell 
lasts for the given duration, or until the first frost, 
whichever comes first. 

The material component is a pinch of ragweed. 

Notes: Uncommon for rangers, rare for druids 
and other nature priests. 


Alter Luck 
(Abjuration, Divination) 
Sphere: Divination 


Level: 6 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, M 
Casting Time: 1 turn 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell alters the luck of the recipient, allow- 
ing three chances to avoid bad luck. At any time 
within the next month of campaign time, the charac- 
ter’s player can reroll a total three failed dice rolls, 
in effect getting a second chance at success. Typical 
rolls include: attack rolls, saving throws, system 
shock or resurrection survival rolls, damage rolls 
that inflict less than maximum damage, treasure dis- 
tribution rolls, and the like. Only one reroll per 
event is allowed, and the creature must abide by the 
result, whatever it is. This protection lasts for up to a 
full month, but any benefit not used within that time 
is lost. The spell itself can be cast only once per 
month, lest an unspecified doom strike the caster. 

Notes: Very rare spell. (Updated from DRAGON 
magazine.) 


Alteration Mantle, Azuth’s 
See Azuth’s alteration mantle. 


ae aaa (aaa aaa mae 


Altruism r 


(Invocation) 
Sphere: Cosmos 


Level: 2 
Range: Touch 


Altruism 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 5 


Duration: Instantaneous 


Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


With this spell, a priest can transfer as many of his 
hit points as desired to heal a willing, living being of 
any alignment not directly opposed to his own (good 
vs. evil or lawful vs. chaotic). Each hit point transferred 
restores one hit point lost by the subject creature. These 
hit points cannot be taken back once the spell has been 
cast. The priest’s current hit points are reduced by the 
amount actually transferred, and these can be restored 
by normal or magical healing. The creature cannot re- 
ceive more hit points than its normal maximum. 

Notes: Common for priests from the DARK SUN 
setting. 


Amanuensis 
(Alteration, Evocation) 
Sphere: Creation 


Level: 3 

Range: 10 ft. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 6 
Duration: 1 turn/level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


When cast, this spell generates its own ink and 
animates a quill pen as if it were in an invisible 
scribe’s hand (though there is in fact nothing tangi- 
ble or sentient present) to precisely duplicate non- 
magical writing. The animated quill writes as fast 
as the caster, and copies as much of any writing the 
caster assigns it as can be duplicated before the 
spell expires. The quill vanishes when the spell is 
done or earlier if the caster wills the magic to end. 

Though the ink created by amanuensis is 
unique and does not duplicate the copied work, the 
penmanship of the copy is exacting. Perfect for- 
geries can be made by means of this spell. 

Once the quill is set to its task, the caster need 
not be present or in range for it to continue; only 
destruction of the writing surface or the casting of 


dispel magic upon the quill prevents the writing 
from being completed. If necessary to complete its 
assigned task, the quill becomes intangible and 
follows the writing surface if it is moved; it cannot 
be grasped or struck aside in an effort to make it 
cease. No being except the caster can control or in- 
fluence the moving quill. If the quill finishes its 
copying and some time remains, the caster can 
direct it to begin copying a second writing or 
making a second copy of the same writing, if 
within range. 

An amanuensis spell cannot copy any magical 
writing or markings. If directed to do so, the quill 
hangs motionless. A diary, grimoire, or other work 
containing passages of text interspersed with 
spells and magical symbols is copied as text with 
gaps where the original displays magical mark- 
ings. Many powerful priests have pleaded with 
Deneir to allow this spell to be modified so that 
their prayers would allow them to copy spells, but 
Deneir has steadfastly refused to grant this power. 

The material components of this spell are a 
quill pen and a blank sheet or sheets of parch- 
ment, some vellum scrip, a chapbook, or another 
writing surface onto which the writing will be 
copied. The quill vanishes when the spell ends. 

Notes: Granted by the god Deneir, Lord of 
Glyphs, of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Amaunator’s Uncertainty 


Range: 30 yds. 
Components: V, M 

Casting Time: | 

Duration: | rd./level 

Area of Effect: 40-ft. sphere 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


Creatures affected by this spell pause in uncer- 
tainty before executing their intended actions, In a 
combat situation, this equates to an initiative 
penalty equal to one-third the spellcaster’s level 
(rounded down). This reaction penalty begins the 
round after the spell is cast. In a noncombat situa- 
tion, the creature pauses one-third of a round 
(about 20 seconds) per level of the caster before 
executing an action. 

The spell affects 2d4 plus one-half the caster’s 
level in Hit Dice or levels of creatures within the 
area of effect. Each affected creature is allowed a 


Re 


Amorphous Form — Drow 


LS aa A 


saving throw vs. spell to avoid the effect. Affected 
creatures that leave the area still suffer the effect 
until the spell expires. 

The material component of the spell is a frag- 
ment of a turtle’s shell. 

Notes: Granted by the sun god Amaunator of 
the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Amber Prison — Elf 
(Conjuration) 
Sphere: Plant 


Level: 4 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 7 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell encases the target creature in a hard, 
translucent coating of fossil resin of yellow, 
orange, or brownish-yellow hue. If the creature 
makes a successful saving throw vs. spell, this 
spell dissipates without effect. If the creature is al- 
ready covered in tree sap (such as by a sap spell), 
the saving throw against the amber prison has a 
penalty of —4. The caster can choose to leave part 
of the target creature free. If the priest attempts to 
leave a significant part of the creature’s anatomy 
free, such as a head or a hand, then the creature re- 
ceives a +2 bonus to the saving throw. (Pinpoint 
accuracy, such as leaving just a nose or a finger 
free, is not possible.) 

An amber prison takes some time to harden; the 
creature can break free or be broken free from the 
solidifying resin during this time. Creatures of huge 
size or larger can shatter the amber prison in one 
round. Otherwise, each round after the spell is cast, 
the trapped creature can attempt a bend bars/lift 
gates roll, success indicating the amber prison has 
shattered. The chance of success drops by 1% every 
round, to a minimum of 0. An amber prison is AC 0 
for purposes of attempting to shatter it with a 
weapon. For every 3 points of physical damage in- 
flicted on an amber prison, the imprisoned creature 
suffers 1 point of damage but his or her chance to 
bend bars/lift gates increases by 3%. If a total of 30 
or more points of physical damage are inflicted on 
an amber prison, it shatters, freeing the trapped 
creature. A shatter spell causes an amber prison to 
crumble completely if it fails an item saving throw 
vs. crushing blow as rock or crystal. 


If the creature’s air passages are covered by the 
amber prison, the creature still receives some air 
through the semipermeable encasement as it hard- 
ens. As such, suffocation will occur much more 
slowly than might be imagined. Every round, an 
encased creature must make a successful 
Constitution check. Every time a Constitution 
check is failed, the effective Constitution drops by 
one. When the effective Constitution score reaches 
zero, the creature dies from suffocation. If freed 
before suffocation occurs, the creature regains 
Constitution at a rate of one point per round. 

When the effects of an amber prison end, no 
matter how the subject is freed (even after death), 
all remaining shards of amber melt into worthless, 
nonmagical tree sap. 

The material components of this spell are the 
priest's holy symbol, a chunk of amber worth at 
least 100 gp, and a drop of sap. 

Notes: Granted by the elven deity Rillifane 
Rallathil. 


Amorphous Form — Drow 
(Alteration) 


Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: | rd. 
Duration: | turn/level 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


By means of this spell, the spellcaster can 
assume the form of an deadly pudding, ooze, 
slime, jelly, or roper. Like a polymorph self (the 
4th-level wizard spell), this spell grants the spell- 
caster the form, physical mode of locomotion, 
and mode of breathing of the selected creature. 
No system shock roll is required. Unlike a poly- 
morph self spell, this spell also gives the new 
form's other abilities (attack, magic, special 
movement, etc.), with the exception of the ability 
of those creatures that can split into multiple 
forms (voluntarily or involuntarily) and attack. 
Situations that would normally cause the caster to 
split do so, but the multiple shapes only rejoin the 
next round into one form. The caster cannot 
assume a different form than the form selected 
when the spell is cast at any time, except to 
resume his original form, which immediately 
ends the spell. 


A 23 a 


Amulet 


OT a 6 


The form to be assumed depends on the level of 
the caster; of course, a caster can choose a lesser 
form if desired (see table). 


Caster 

Level Form 

9-10 Gray ooze, crystal ooze, gelatinous cube 
11-12 Mustard jelly, ochre jelly, slithering tracker 
13-14 Deadly pudding (black, white, dun, or brown) 
15+ Roper 


When amorphous form is cast, the caster’s 
equipment, if any, melds into the new form. (In 
particularly challenging campaigns, the DM may 
allow protective devices, such as rings of protec- 
tion, to continue operating effectively.) The caster 
retains all mental abilities, but she or he cannot 
cast spells or use psionic abilities derived from the 
psionicist class. A caster not used to a new form 
might be penalized at the DM’s option (for exam- 
ple, a -2 penalty to attack rolls) until she or he 
practices sufficiently to master it. 

Employing this spell does not run the risk of 
the priest changing personality and/or mentality. 
However, there is a 1% noncumulative chance per 
use of this spell that the spellcaster is permanently 
transformed into a ghaunadan (with attendant loss 
of priest abilities) when this spell expires. 

The material component of this spell is a vial of 
ichor/fluid from the kind of amorph into which the 
priest wishes to transform. 

Notes: Granted by the drow deity Ghaunadaur. 


Amulet 
(Abjuration) 
Sphere: Creation 


Level: 2 

Range: 5-ft. radius 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 hr. 
Duration: | wk./level 
Area of Effect: 1 object 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell allows a barbarian cleric to create a 
token that repels one specific, feared being. The 
wearer of the amulet gains a +1 bonus to all saving 
throws and Armor Class when facing the individ- 
ual against whom the amulet is designed. That 
being, upon coming within 10 feet of the amulet, 
must make a successful saving throw vs. spell or 
be affected as if the amulet’s creator had success- 


fully cast cause fear. 

To make the amulet, the cleric requires an 
object worth no less than 5 gp donated by another 
individual, and a relic of the foe to be affected 
(hair, clothing, etc.). If the material components 
are inordinately valuable or obtained from distant 
locations (farther than 100 miles), the amulet has 
doubled effects (+2 to saves and AC). 

When the spell expires, the amulet becomes 
forever worthless. This spell is also used (along 
with chattel spirit) when creating a sacred bundle. 

Notes: Restricted to barbarian clerics and 
. (Updated from DraGon Magazine.) 


he - at 


> 7 Fei: B. Nap” ee 


a | 
f 


yh -m - Fen 


"E | = i - oF 


"< BA 


Analyze Opponent 


"\ ll 


Level: 1 

Range: 80 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: 5 rds. + 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: 1 creature, object, or 10-ft. square 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell allows a priest to sense how far an in- 
dividual, creature, object, or area is from a condition 
of balance—in other words, the degree to which its 
alignment is removed from True Neutral. The spell 
indicates along which axis or axes of alignment the 
variation lies, but gives no indication of the direc- 
tion in which the alignment is removed from True 
Neutral except under certain conditions that follow. 

For example, a priest uses this spell to analyze the 
balance of a chaotic neutral creature. The spell indi- 
cates that the creature is removed from True Neutral 
by one grade along the law/chaos axis; thus, the crea- 
ture must be either chaotic neutral or lawful neutral. If 
the creature was chaotic evil, the spell would indicate 
that it was removed from balance by two grades, one 
along each axis; thus, the creature must be chaotic 
evil, chaotic good, lawful evil, or lawful good. 

The priest also has a 5% chance per level of 
correctly determining the direction of variation 
along one randomly chosen axis. Thus, a 10th- 
level priest evaluating the balance of a chaotic neu- 
tral creature has a 50% chance to learn that the 
creature is chaotic (and hence chaotic neutral, 
since it is only one step away from balance. 

Similar to spells such as detect evil, this spell 
won't reveal a hidden trap. If cast on a creature 
with an intelligence level of Animal or Non-, it 
always reads True Neutral. 

The spell requires are four iron coins, which 
the priest tosses in his hand while concentrating on 
the spell (these are not consumed in the casting). 

Notes: Common for to priests with access to 
the spheres of Divination and Numbers. 


Analyze Contraption — Gnome 


Level: 3 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 6 

Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: 1 contraption 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell enables the caster to determine the 
intended purpose of unfamiliar mechanical de- 
vices. The priest touches the object in question and 
receives a mental picture depicting what the object 
is supposed to do. Note that what a contraption is 
supposed to do is not necessarily the same as what 
the contraption will do; contraptions are notorious 
for reacting in unexpected ways. While this spell 
tells the caster how a device works; it does not tell 
the caster how to operate the device. 

In addition to the complex machines typically 
associated with gnomes, this spell can be used to 
analyze contraptions like mechanical traps and 
locks, clockwork monsters and devices, even 
unique artifacts like the apparatus of Kwalish, and 
even unique artifacts. 

The material component is the caster’s holy 
symbol. 

Notes: Granted by the gnome god Nebelun the 
Meddler. 


Analyze Opponent 
) 
Sphere: Divination 


Level: 1 

Range: 10 yds. /level 
Components: S, M 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: 1 rd. 

Area of Effect: 1 creature/level 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell facilitates the quick analysis of a 
single opponent by the priest. Up to five weak- 
nesses or strengths can be learned. At 1st level, the 
priest can divine one salient weakness or strength; 
at 3rd level, the caster learns a second piece of in- 
formation; at 5th a third; at 7th a fourth; and at 9th 
a fifth. The opponent is allowed a saving throw vs. 
spell; if this is successful, nothing is learned. 


aaa ee 


Ancestral Blessing — Oriental 


For example, if a Sth-level priest casts this spell 
on a troll, she might learn that trolls can regenerate 
(a strength), that they are particularly susceptible 
to fire (a weakness), and that this particular troll 
was partially blind in his left eye. The last nugget 
of information might translate into a +1 bonus to 
hit, at the DM's discretion, if the priest attacked so 
as to exploit the troll's weakness. 

According to legend, one of the earliest priests 
of Tempus, to win the Red Knight's favor, em- 
ployed this spell before battling a rakshasa. With 
it, he divined that race’s weakness to blessed 
crossbow bolts, a fact that is now known by many 
adventurers throughout the Realms. 

The material component of this spell is the 
priest’s holy symbol, which needs simply to be 
touched to cast the spell. 

Notes: Granted to priests of The Red Knight, a 
war god of the FoRGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Ancestral Blessing — Oriental 
(Necromancy) 
Sphere: Ward 


Level: 2 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 person or house 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell can be used by a character of any 
class who is at least 3rd level or higher and the 
head of his or her household. 

The caster of this spell calls upon the spirits of 
his ancestors for advice or protection. Providing 
the caster maintains an altar to his ancestors in his 
home and sacrifices food to them each day, the 
spirit of one of the individual's ancestors answers 
the summons. 

The ancestor spirit either answers one question 
(with 75% accuracy), or bestows a blessing on one 
individual of the caster’s choice. This blessing is a 
+1 modifier to the individual's saving throws, last- 
ing for one day per level of the caster. 

Alternatively, the caster can ask the spirit to 
guard his home. In this case, the spirit acts as an 
infallible alarm against all nonmagical intrusions 
for one month. The spirit won't protect the home, 
it simply alerts the caster to an intrusion (no matter 
where the caster happens to be at the moment). 

The material components of this spell are a 


dozen grains of any cereal or grain and a thimble 
filled with wine. 

Notes: Restricted to individuals from an orien- 
tal culture. Common for China-based cultures, un- 
common to very rare for others. 


Ancient Curse 
(Abjuration) 
Sphere: Guardian 


Level: 7 

Range: Special 
Components: V 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell allows the priest to call down the wrath 
of the patron power in the form of a terrible and last- 
ing curse on those who commit acts of great wicked- 
ness against that power. Typical acts include the 
desecration of a major temple or burial place, the 
massacre of a congregation, the theft of an important 
relic or artifact, and the like. In all cases, the princi- 
ple of retribution is central to successful casting of 


2 


6 


Animal Companion 


"nll 


the spell. The DM adjudicates the spell; misuse or 
overuse may result in its failure, or even visit its 
effect upon the caster. The ancient curse must be 
spoken in the presence of the malefactor and its con- 
ditions clearly announced. Thereafter, it is in effect. 

The caster decides what form the curse takes, 
subject to the approval of the DM. The effects are 
long-term, developing over months and years and 
extending for centuries. These affect not only the 
original recipient, but descendants as well. Typical 
ancient curses include poverty, ill luck, a haunting, 
the onset of a degenerative disease, the periodic 
devastation of a household or property, and so on. 

The spell is not necessarily permanent. It can 
be countered by an atonement spell or divine inter- 
vention in conjunction with a quest involving 
deeds of a magnitude equal to those for which the 
ancient curse was invoked. A curse brought on by 
greed that destroyed a village could be lifted by 
devoting one’s life to poverty and charity. 

The material component for this spell is a tiny 
silver gong and the priest's holy symbol. 

Notes: Common for priests from an oriental 
setting; otherwise, uncommon. 


Ancient Curse 


anal” 


Animal Animosity 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Animal 


Level: 1 

Range: 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: | day/level 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


A 7th-level variation of 
divine curse that affects the 
descendants of the subject as 
well. 


A creature affected by this spell exudes an aura 
that draws a hostile reaction from all animals 
within 50 feet. Only animals that can be influenced 
by an animal friendship spell (animals. with an 
Intelligence rating of 1-4) react in this way. When 
this spell is cast, a single creature determined by 
the priest during casting must make a successful 
saving throw vs. spell or be affected. If the saving 
throw is failed, all animals within 50 feet become 


hostile to the affected creature. Thus, normally ag- 
gressive and temperamental animals instantly 
attack, while normally passive animals react to 
moderately dangerous situations as if trapped in a 
comer or protecting young. (DMs should adjust a 
given animal’s morale by 5 points to determine 
whether or not it feels threatened enough to attack.) 

This spell does not function at its full potential if 
cast upon rangers or other beings who possess a nat- 
ural ability that allows them to alter an animal's dis- 
position. This spell simply prevents such beings 
from changing an animal's emotional state, but the 
animal does not become more hostile toward the 
creature, The spell and the natural ability effectively 
cancel out one another for the duration of the spell. 

Similarly, spells that allow a caster to influence 
animals (e.g., animal friendship, charm person or 
mammal, etc.) fail when cast by an individual af- 
fected by this spell. 

Animal animosity lasts for its full duration, 
unless removed with a remove curse, dispel magic, 
or a more potent spell. 

The use of this spell is the province of Rillifane 
Rallathil, and those who have been subject to it 
often refer to it as Rillifane’s Curse. 

Notes: Granted to priests of Rillifane Rallathil. 


Animal Call 
Aka call animal or bird. 


Animal Companion 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
Sphere: Animal 


Level: 1 

Range: |-mi. radius 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: | turn 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: | creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell is only effective outdoors. When cast 
by the shukenja, it summons one normal woodland 
creature that is within a mile of the caster. The crea- 
ture is allowed a saving throw vs. spell. The DM de- 
termines the type of creature summoned, depending 
on terrain and level of the caster. The creature’s Hit 
Dice must be equal to or less than half the level of the 
caster. This beast is friendly toward the shukenja. It 
remains with the caster so long as he travels through 
the wilderness, but won't go more than 20 miles from 
its home. Upon entering any large encampment, vil- 


4 27 x 


Animal Eyes 


lage, or other settlement, the beast parts company 
with the shukenja. In addition, mistreating the beast 
causes it to leave or even turn on the shukenja. 

The spell does not provide telepathic or perfect 
communication with the beast; however, it does un- 
derstand the general meaning of spoken commands 
and gestures. The animal is still a wild beast and can 
be dangerous, especially misinterpreting common sit- 
uations as threatening. If well treated, the animal de- 
fends and serves the shukenja to the best of its ability 
and nature. Thus, a monkey would prefer harassment 
and tricks to outright combat, while a tiger would 
fearlessly spring into the midst of the shukenja’s foes. 
Common animals summoned include monkeys, 
hawks, badgers, boars, bears, tigers, and serpents. 

The spell requires a piece of candy, sugar, or 
other tasty morsel for the creature summoned. 

Notes: Common for priests from an oriental 
setting; otherwise, very rare (animal friendship is 
the norm in Western cultures). 


Animal Eyes 
(Necromancy) 
Sphere: Animal 


Level: 2 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 5 

Duration: 3 rds. + 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: None 


By using this spell, the caster can temporarily 
see through the eyes of any animal. The caster 
points at any single animal within 100 yards, then 
closes his eyes and remains stationary. In his 
mind’s eye, he sees whatever the animal is seeing. 
If the subject animal is a squirrel studying the 
party from a tree branch, the caster sees himself 
and the party from the perspective of the squirrel. 
If the subject animal is a bird soaring overhead, the 
caster gets a bird's eye view of the area below. 

The spell has no effect on the animal, nor can the 
caster control the animal's actions in any way. The 
animal is unaware of the spell and acts as it nor- 
mally would. The spell lasts for the given duration 
or until the caster moves or takes another action. 
The caster can voluntarily end the spell by opening 
his eyes. The spell also ends if the animal is killed, 
or moves more than 100 yards away from the caster. 

The animal must be one normally found in 
nature. It cannot be supernatural, human, demihu- 


man, nor of extraplanar origin. 

The spell requires a glass lens no larger than 
one inch in diameter as a focus, which is not con- 
sumed in the casting. 

Notes: Uncommon for rangers; rare for druids 
and similar priests. 


Casting Time: 1 hr. 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: | animal 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


By means of this spell, the caster is able to 
show any animal of animal intelligence to semi-in- 
telligence (Intelligence 1—4) that he desires friend- 
ship. If the animal does not make a successful 
saving throw vs. spell immediately when the spell 
is begun, it stands quietly while the caster finishes 
the spell. Thereafter, it follows the caster about. 
The spell functions only if the caster actually 
wishes to be the animal’s friend. If the caster has 
ulterior motives, the animal always senses them 
(for example, if the caster intends to eat the 
animal, send it ahead to set off traps, etc.). 

The caster can teach the befriended animal 
three specific tricks or tasks for each point of 
Intelligence it possesses. Typical tasks are those 
taught to a dog or similar pet (they cannot be com- 
plex). Training for each such trick must be done 
over a period of one week, and all must be done 
within three months of acquiring the creature. 
During the three-month period, the animal won't 
harm the caster, but if the creature is left alone for 
more than a week, it will revert to its natural state 
and act accordingly. 

The caster can use this spell to attract up to 2 
Hit Dice of animal(s) per level of experience he 
possesses. This is also the maximum total Hit Dice 
of the animals that can be attracted and trained at 
One time: no more than twice the caster’s experi- 
ence level. Only unaligned animals can be at- 
tracted, befriended, and trained. 

The material components of this spell are the 
caster’s holy symbol and food. 

Notes: Common for druids (PHB). 


\ ee eee eee ee, 


Duration: 2 rds./level 
Area of Effect: Up to 8 animals in a 20-ft.-cube 
Saving Throw: None 


When this spell is released, the caster causes up 
to eight animals within a 20-foot-cube to grow to 
twice their normal size. The effects of this growth 
are doubled Hit Dice (with resultant improvement 
in attack potential), doubled hit points (except hit 
points added to Hit Dice), and doubled damage in 
combat. Movement and Armor Class are not af- 
fected. The spell lasts for two rounds for each level 
of the caster. The spell is particularly useful in 
conjunction with a charm person or mammal spell. 

The material components for this spell are the 
caster’s holy symbol and a scrap of food. 

The reverse, shrink animal, reduces animal size 
by one half, and likewise reduces Hit Dice, hit 
points, attacks, damage, and so on. The material 
components for the reverse are the caster’s holy 
symbol and a scrap of food. 

Notes: Common for druids (PHB). 


Animal Horde 
Quest spell, see appendix in Vol. 3. 


Animal Sanctuary 
(Abjuration) 
Sphere: Animal 


Level: 1 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 3 

Duration: 1 hr/level 

Area of Effect: Animal touched 
Saving Throw: Special 


An animal protected by this spell is overlooked 
and cannot be directly attacked any creature that 
fails a saving throw vs. spell. If the protected 
animal attacks, this effect is immediately negated. 
In any case, attack rolls and damage against an 
animal protected by this spell suffer a -4 penalty 


Animal Speech 


for the duration of the spell. 

The material component is a feather, bit of fur, 
or a scale from the animal to be protected. 

Notes: Very rare for druids and similar priests. 
(Updated from POLYHEDRON Newszine.) 


Animal Sight 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Animal 


Level: 4 

Range: Touch 

Components: S 

Casting Time: | turn 

Duration: | turn/level 

Area of Effect: Animal touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell is often used by priests with animal 
companions. By casting this spell upon an animal, 
the priest literally sees through that creature’s 
eyes. Wherever the animal travels for the duration 
of the spell, the priest sees what it sees. 

During this time, the priest must remain sta- 
tionary and concentrate on the animal. Damage 
caused to the priest interrupts the spell. 

This spell is especially useful when the priest 
wishes to spy on other individuals or discover the 
lay of a territory before entering it personally. 

Notes: Granted by the evil god Malar the 
Beastlord of the FoRGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Level: 2 

Range: 10 yds/level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 5 
Duration: 1 turn/level 
Area of Effect: 1 animal 
Saving Throw: None 


With this spell, the caster can bestow upon an 
animal the ability to speak any specified language 
known by the caster. The animal can talk to any 
creature within normal speaking distance that un- 
derstands the bestowed language, though the 
animal’s intelligence remains the same as it was 
prior to casting. The affected animal is basically 
well disposed toward the caster while the spell 
lasts. 


A 29 a 


Animal Spy 


The material component is mistletoe. 
Notes: Rare for druids and similar priests. 
(Updated from POLYHEDRON Newszine.) 


Animal Spy 
(Divination) 
Sphere: Animal 


Level: 2 

Range: 10 yds. 
Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: | turn/ 2 levels 
Area of Effect: 1 animal 
Saving Throw: None or neg. 


Only a normal animal (including a giant version) 
can become an animal spy. This spell enables the 
caster to share the animal's senses: see through the 
animal’s eyes, hear with its ears, smell with its nose, 
and so on. The animal is completely unaware of the 
spell’s effect, unless the druid warns the beast before 
casting. Animal spy grants no control over the crea- 
ture. However, most casters use it on a trained animal 
or one befriended with the animal friendship spell. 

An animal with a special bond to another, such 
as a familiar, receives a saving throw vs. spell to 
negate the effect if unwilling to submit to the cast- 
ing or unaware. 

For the duration of the spell, the caster remains 
in a trance, unable to move or use human senses. 
This can prove dangerous; for instance, those at- 
tacked while using the spell cannot feel injuries to 
their bodies. However, at the start of any round, the 
caster can return the animal's senses to the crea- 
ture and resume control of the human body. This 
decision ends the spell immediately. The spell also 
ends if the animal travels more than 100 yards 
away per caster level. 

Notes: Uncommon for druids; rare for other 
nature priests, 


Animal Spy — Shaman 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
Sphere: Animal 


Level: 2 

Range: 0 

Components: S 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: 2 turns/level 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: None 


f 
ah 


The shaman holds a creature, which must be no 
larger than a domestic cat and nonmagical, and 
stares intently into its eyes for one round. The 
creature then fulfills the caster’s subsequent orders 
for the duration of the spell. 


The animal temporarily receives an 
Intelligence boost of 1d3 points and the ability to 
understand the caster’s words, while the caster can 
understand the creature’s natural mode of commu- 
nication. 

The creature retains its own personality 
throughout this spell, and cannot be forced to per- 
form deeds that are against its basic nature. 

Further, the animal still views the world in a 
different way than the caster. It cannot recognize 
individual humans, except by the most blatant fea- 
tures—like huge weapons, extra limbs, bright 
clothing, or unique odors. The animal cannot inter- 
pret human interaction, unless the humans ob- 
served are eating, fighting or similar easily 
interpreted activity, and cannot understand any 
speech besides the caster’s. 

The animal upon which the spell is cast must 
be held in the hands, thus, a shaman may capture 
or tame animals to carry in cages or in his pockets. 


ee ae a we eine ed Sa 


Rats and mice are favored, because they are easy 
to conceal and carry. 
Notes: Restricted to shamans, uncommon. 


Animal Summoning I 


(Conjuration/Summoning) 
Sphere: Animal, Summoning 


Level: 4 

Range: l-mi. radius 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 7 
Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


By means of this spell, the caster calls up to 
eight animals of 4 Hit Dice or less, of whatever 
sort the caster names when the summoning is 
made. Only animals within range of the caster at 
the time the spell is cast will come. The caster can 
try three times to summon three different types of 
animals. For example, the caster first sammons 
wild dogs to no avail, then unsuccessfully tries to 
call hawks, and finally calls wild horses that may 
or may not be within summoning range. The DM 
determines the chance for a summoned animal 
type to be within the range of the spell. The sum- 
moned animals aid the caster by whatever means 
they possess, staying until a fight is over, a specific 
mission is finished, the caster is safe, he sends 
them away, and so on. Only normal or giant ani- 
mals can be summoned; fantastic animals or mon- 
sters cannot be summoned by this spell; (no 
chimeras, dragons, gorgons, manticores, etc.). 

Notes: Common for clerics and druids (PHB). 


Animal Summoning IT 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 
Sphere: Animal, Summoning 


Level; 5 

Range: 60 yds./level 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 8 
Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


By means of this spell, the caster calls up to six 
animals of 8 Hit Dice or less, or 12 animals of 4 
Hit Dice or less—of whatever sort the caster 
names. Only animals within range of the caster at 


Animal Summoning MHI 


the time the spell is cast will come. The caster can 
try three times to summon three different types of 
animals. For example, the caster first summons 
wild dogs to no avail, then unsuccessfully tries to 
call hawks, and finally calls wild horses that may 
or may not be within summoning range. The DM 
determines the chance for a summoned animal 
type to be within the range of the spell. The sum- 
moned animals aid the caster by whatever means 
they possess, staying until a fight is over, a specific 
mission is finished, the caster is safe, he sends 
them away, and so on. Only normal or giant ani- 
mals can be summoned; fantastic animals or mon- 
sters cannot be summoned by this spell; (no 
chimeras, dragons, gorgons, manticores, etc.). 
Notes: Common for clerics and druids (PHB). 


Level: 6 

Range: 100 yds./level 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 9 
Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell is the same in duration and effect as the 
4th-level animal summoning I spell, except that up 
to four animals of no more than 16 Hit Dice each can 
be summoned, or eight of no more than 8 Hit Dice, 
or 16 creatures of no more than 4 Hit Dice. Only an- 
imals within range of the caster at the time the spell 
is cast will come. The caster can try three times to 
summon three different types of animals: For exam- 
ple, the caster first summons wild dogs to no avail, 
then unsuccessfully tries to call hawks, and finally 
calls wild horses that may or may not be within sum- 
moning range. The DM determines the chance for a 
summoned animal type to be within the range of the 
spell. The summoned animals aid the caster by 
whatever means they possess, staying until a fight is 
over, a specific mission is finished, the caster is safe, 
he sends them away, and so on. Only normal or giant 
animals can be summoned; fantastic animals or 
monsters cannot be summoned by this spell; (no 
chimeras, dragons, gorgons, manticores, etc.). 

Notes: Common for clerics and druids (PHB). 


Sa eR at aa as 


Animal Transfer 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Animal 


Level: 6 

Range: 60 yds. 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 1 turn 

Duration: 3 turns + | turn/level 
Area of Effect: | creature 
Saving Throw: None or neg. 


Casting this spell transfers the priest’s mind 
into the body of a designated animal. The priest 
can use all the senses and abilities of the animal, 
and is in full command of the animal form. For ex- 
ample, a priest could elect to transfer his mind into 
the body of a hawk and fly over an area to deter- 
mine the terrain, occupants, and other conditions. 

If cast on a warm-blooded creature of animal 
intelligence or less, the animal does not receive a 
saving throw. Animals of greater intelligence, such 
as blink dogs, displacer beasts, and other such 
creatures receive a saving throw vs. spell. A suc- 
cessful saving throw means the spell is wasted and 
the animal is unaffected. An attempt to transfer 
into the body of another’s animal companion or a 
wizard’s familiar always fails and wastes the spell. 

The animal's mind is suppressed throughout 
the duration of the spell. If the animal dies while 
the spell is in effect, the priest’s mind returns to the 
human body. The priest suffers 1d12 points of 
damage and must make a successful Wisdom 
check or suffer a mild form of insanity for a 
number of rounds equal to the elapsed time of the 
spell. In this case, the priest behaves like the 
animal, terrified and hurt. He or she may hiss, spit, 
move about on all fours or as if trying to fly; howl, 
meow, or otherwise vocalize as the animal; and 
will be generally uncontrollable until the insanity 
passes. 

While the spell is in effect, the priest’s body is 
motionless and vulnerable. The priest is unaware 
of his body or anything that might be happening to 
it. If the body is slain, the priest’s mind is impris- 
oned in the animal's body until the animal dies or a 
wish is cast to alter the priest's situation. 

Notes: Granted by the evil god Malar the 
Beastlord of the FoRGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Animal Trick 
(Enchantment) 
Sphere: Animal 


Level: 3 

Range: 30 yds, 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 6 
Duration: 1 rd/level 
Area of Effect: | animal 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell temporarily enables any animal to 
perform a trick it normally doesn’t know or lacks 
the intelligence to execute. The animal must be 
within 30 yards of the caster and must be able to 
hear spoken commands. If these conditions are 
met, the animal will do exactly what the caster 
tells it. A lion will batter down the door of a cell, a 
cat will fetch a key and carry it in its mouth, a 
parrot will draw a circle in the sand with its claw. 
A creature with less than 5 Hit Dice and no prior 
allegiances receives no saving throw. Any willing 
creature predisposed to aid the caster (such as an 
animal follower) will not resist this spell at all. 

The animal can’t execute a trick or task that ex- 
ceeds its physical limitations. A snake can’t pick a 
lock, and a horse can’t play a trumpet. Note also 
that the caster must give specific instructions, not 
general commands. If the caster commands a lion 
to “Get something to help me put out this fire,” the 
puzzled lion won’t know what do to. However, if 
the caster says, “Take this bucket in your mouth, 
dip it in the stream, and carry the water back to 
me,” then the lion will do as it’s told. 

The caster can take other actions while the 
animal is completing the trick. Once the animal 
completes its trick, the caster can give it additional 
tricks to complete until the spell expires. If the 
spell expires while the animal is in the middle of a 
trick, or if the spell is broken by some means, the 
animal immediately stops what it’s doing. 

Notes: Uncommon for rangers; rare for druids 
and similar specialty priests. 


Animate Dead 


DE eee A 


Animal Vision — Old Empire 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Animal 


Level: 4 
Range: 100 yds. + 20 yds. /level 


Saving Throw: None 


This spell links the vision of the priest to that of 
a single animal in sight or touched, be it mammal, 
reptile, bird, fish, or insect. Typically, the animal is 
one sacred to the priest's religion, but need not be. 
As long as the animal remains within the range of 
the spell, the caster can see through its eyes, using 
whatever normal or special vision it possesses. 
There is no other link between the caster and the 
animal. The priest has no control over where the 
animal goes (unless employing other spells for this 
purpose), and the priest suffers no damage if the 
creature is killed. 

The material component for this spell is a 
morsel that is desired by the animal (for example, 
if it is a cat, then catnip is a suitable component). 

Notes: Granted by the Mulhorandi deity Osiris 
of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Animal’s View — Shaman 


(Necromancy) 
Sphere: Animal 


Level: 5 

Range: 10 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: | turn/level 
Area of Effect: | animal 
Saving Throw: None 


The caster selects one animal within 10 yards, 
and through this spell becomes able to hear through 
the creature’s ears and see through its eyes, per- 
ceiving the world as the animal does. The caster 
can then cause the animal to move in any direction 
that he wishes (to follow a person, check out a path, 
or scout the surrounding area, for example), but 
cannot make the animal attack. The spell works 
only on normal animals, including giant varieties. 
While under the spell, the animal is not at the 
mercy of its instincts; it is not sidetracked by the 


desire to eat, mate, or perform similar activities. 
The shaman is in effective control of its actions. 

For the duration of the spell however, the 
shaman is unaware of his or her own body, which 
sits, stands or lies in a deep trance. The caster 
won’t even realize if his or her body is attacked or 
manhandled. If the shaman’s body dies, the spell 
immediately comes to an end, and the shaman’s 
life force leaves the Prime Material Plane. 

A minor disadvantage of the spell is that if 
someone manages to look into the animal's eyes 
the caster’s face is reflected back in the pupils. 

The material component of the spell is a hand- 
ful of clear, clean water. 

Notes: Restricted to shamans, uncommon. 


Animal/Bird Call 
Aka call animal or bird. 


Animate Dead 


(Necromancy) 
Sphere: Necromantic 


Level: 3 

Range: 10 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 

This spell creates the lowest of the undead 
monsters, skeletons or zombies, usually from the 
bones or bodies of dead humans, demihumans, or 
humanoids. The spell causes these remains to 
become animated and obey the simple verbal com- 
mands of the caster, regardless of how they com- 
municated in life. The skeletons or zombies can 
follow the caster, remain in an area and attack any 
creature (or just a specific type of creature) enter- 
ing the place, etc. The undead remain animated 
until they are destroyed in combat or are turned; 
the magic cannot be dispelled. 

The priest can animate one skeleton or one 
zombie for each experience level he has attained. 
If creatures with more than 1+ Hit Dice are ani- 
mated, the number is determined by the monster 
Hit Dice. Skeletal forms have the Hit Dice of the 
original creature, while zombie forms have | more 
Hit Die, Thus, a 12th-level priest could animate 12 
dwarven skeletons (or six zombies), four zombie 
gnolls, or a single zombie fire giant. Note that this 
is based on the standard racial Hit Die norm; thus, 
a high-level adventurer would be animated as a 


4 33 


Animate Dead Monsters 


skeleton or zombie of 1 or 2 Hit Dice, and without 
special class or racial abilities. The caster can, al- 
ternatively, animate two small animal skeletons 
(1-1 Hit Die or less) for every level of experience 
he has achieved. 

The spell requires a drop of blood, a piece of 
flesh of the type of creature being animated, and a 
pinch of bone powder or a bone shard to complete 
the spell. Casting this spell is not a good act, and 
only evil priests use it frequently. 

Notes: Common for evil clerics (PHB). 


Animate Dead Monsters 
(Necromancy) 
Sphere: Necromantic 


Level: 5 

Range: 10 ft. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 7 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 creature/4 levels 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell enables the caster to animate one hu- 
manoid skeleton or corpse for every four experi- 
ence levels of the caster. Such creatures are the 
animated remains of bipedal monsters of more than 
3 Hit Dice and with endoskeletons similar to those 
of humans except in size, which must be 7 feet or 
greater in height. Typical subjects are ettins, ogres, 
trolls, giants, carnivorous apes, and the like. 

The dweomer empowers the caster to give any 
number of direct commands or instructions that 
will be obeyed, up to 12 words long, much like the 
animate dead spell. 

A skeletal form has Hit Dice equal to the basic 
monster Hit Dice. A zombie form has one addi- 
tional Hit Die. Animated monsters receive their 
normal physical attacks, but have no special attrib- 
utes other than those possessed by skeletons or 
zombies. 

A monster zombie is turned as an undead with 
the base creature’s Hit Dice, while a skeletal mon- 
ster is turned as the next weaker type of undead. 
For example, a zombie ogre would be turned as a 
shadow, while a skeletal ogre would be turned as a 
ghoul. 

The material components for the spell are the 
cleric’s holy/unholy symbol and a small specimen 
from the type of creature that is to be animated. 

Notes: Uncommon for evil priests. 


Animate Flame 


(Alteration) 
Sphere: Elemental Fire 


Level: 5 

Range: 120 yds. 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time; 8 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: 1-ft. diameter/level 
Saving Throw: None 


While using this spell, the priest can com- 
mand a flame to leave its source of fuel and move 
at his direction. The flame is magically preserved 
at the intensity it possessed when animated and 
does not weaken or fail even if it has nothing to 
burn. The priest can animate any natural fire 
within range, but magical fires (including breath 
weapons) can be animated only on a roll of 11 or 
higher on 1d20, adjusted by | per level or Hit 
Dice difference between the caster and the origi- 
nator of the magical flame. For example, a 9th- 
level priest can animate a flaming sphere cast by 
a 4th-level wizard on a 1d20 roll of 6 or better. 

To animate instantaneous effects such as a red 


"aaa aaa 


Animate Object 


em A 


dragon’s breath or a fireball, the priest must both 
beat his opponent's initiative in the round of cast- 
ing and successfully take control of the flame. 

Under the priest's direction, an animated 
flame can move at a rate of 12, although it cannot 
cross water or wet or muddy ground. If the priest 
directs the flame to leave the spell’s range, the 
spell ends and the flame stops, burning whatever 
it may be resting on. Animated flame attacks with 
a THACO of 10 and may be able to strike several 
creatures in the same round, depending on its size 
(see table). 

Creatures within the fire's diameter are hit 
without an attack roll for the listed damage. Very 
hot or unusually cold fires may inflict damage (at 
the DM’s discretion) as if category larger or 
smaller, In addition to attacking the caster’s ene- 
mies, the fire ignites combustibles. An animated 
fire can easily torch a small town, given time to 
move from building to building. 

The animated flame spell can be dispelled. It 
can be quenched by contact with a significant 
volume of water, ice, cold, earth, or dirt, just as a 
normal fire can be drowned or smothered. 

The priest can animate a single fire of up to | 
foot in diameter per level of experience. Part of a 
natural fire can be controlled, but magical fires 
cannot be divided—only a very high-level priest 
can deflect the breath weapon of a red dragon! 

Notes; Uncommon for druids (PO:SM). 


Number of 

Size Diameter Targets Damage 
Torch or lantern under 1 ft. l 1d3 
Small campfire 1-2 ft. l 1d4 
Large campfire 3-5 ft. 2 1d6 
Bonfire 6-10 ft. 4 2d6 
Conflagration 11-20 ft. 8 3d6 
Inferno 21+ ft. 20 5d6 

Animate Object 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Creation, Summoning 
Level: 6 
Range: 30 yds. 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 9 


Duration: 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: 1 cu. ft/level 
Saving Throw: None 


This powerful spell enables the priest casting it 
to imbue inanimate objects with mobility and a 
semblance of life. The animated object, or objects, 
then attacks whomever or whatever the priest first 
designates. The animated object can be of any 
nonmagical material whatsoever —wood, metal, 
stone, fabric, leather, ceramic, glass, etc. 
Attempting to animate an object in someone’s pos- 
session grants that person a saving throw to pre- 
vent the spell’s effect. 

The speed of movement of the object depends 
on its means of propulsion and its weight. A large 
wooden table would be rather heavy, but its legs 
would give it speed. A rug could only slither along. 
A jar would roll. Thus a large stone pedestal would 
rock forward at 10 feet per round, a stone statue 
would move at 40 feet per round, a wooden statue 
80 feet per round, an ivory stool of light weight 
would move at 120 feet per round. Slithering 
movement is about 10 feet to 20 feet per round; 
rolling is 30 feet to 60 feet per round. 

The damage caused by the attack of an ani- 
mated object depends on its form and composi- 
tion. Light, supple objects can only obscure vision, 
obstruct movement, bind, trip, smother, etc. Light, 
hard objects can fall upon or otherwise strike for 
1d2 points of damage or possibly obstruct and trip, 
as do light, supple objects. Hard, medium-weight 
objects can crush or strike for 2d4 points of 
damage, while larger and heavier objects may in- 
flict 3d4, 4d4, or even 5d4 points of damage. 

The frequency of attack of animated objects 
depends on their method of locomotion, ap- 
pendages, and method of attack. This varies from 
as seldom as once every five melee rounds to as 
frequently as once per round. The Armor Class of 
the object animated is basically a function of mate- 
rial and movement ability. Damage depends on the 
type of weapon and the object struck. A sharp cut- 
ting weapon is effective against fabric, leather, 
wood, and like substances. Heavy smashing and 
crushing weapons are useful against wood, stone, 
and metal objects. Your DM determines all of 
these factors, as well as how much damage the an- 
imated object can sustain before being destroyed. 

The priest can animate one cubic foot of mate- 
rial for each experience level he has attained. 
Thus, a 14th-level priest could animate one or 
more objects whose solid volume did not exceed 
14 cubic feet—a large statue, two rugs, three 
chairs, or a dozen average crocks. 

Notes: Common for clerics (PHB). 


Na i aii |e la ata denna 


Animate Rock 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Elemental Earth 


Level: 7 

Range: 40 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: | rd./level 

Area of Effect: 2 cu. ft./level 
Saving Throw: None 


By employing an animate rock spell, the caster 
causes a stone object of up to the indicated size to 
move (see the 6th-level animate object spell.) The 
animated stone object must be separate (not a part 
of a huge boulder or the like). It follows the desire 
of the caster—attacking, breaking objects, block- 
ing—while the magic lasts. It has no intelligence or 
volition of its own, but it follows instructions ex- 
actly as spoken. Note that only one set of instruc- 
tions for one single action (the whole being simply 
worded and very brief—12 words or so) can be 
given to the animated rock. The rock remains ani- 
mated for one round per experience level of the 
caster. The volume of rock that can be animated is 
also based on the experience level of the caster— 
two cubic feet of stone per level—for example, 24 
cubic feet, a mass of about man-sized, at 12th level. 

While the exact details of the animated rock are 
decided by the DM, its Armor Class is no worse than 
5, and it has 1d3 hit points per cubic foot of volume. 
It uses the attack roll of the caster, The maximum 
damage it can inflict is 1d2 points per caster level 
(thus, a 12th-level caster’s rock might inflict 1d12 to 
2d12 points of damage). Movement for a man-sized 
rock is 60 feet per round. A rock generally weighs 
from 100 to 300 pounds per cubic foot. 

The material components for the spell are a 
stone and drop of the caster’s blood. 

Notes; Common for druids (PHB). 


Animate Stalactite — Gnome 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Elemental Earth 


Level: | 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Duration: Special 

Casting Time: 1 round 
Area of Effect: 1 stalactite 
Saving Throw: None 


Animate stalactite temporarily awakens a sta- 
lactite to act like a piercer (see the MONSTROUS 
MANUAL tome). A stalactite animated by this spell 
Temains active until it detects prey, at which point 
it reacts exactly as a living piercer. When it can 
attack, the animated stalactite drops from the ceil- 
ing and attempts to impale prey with its sharp tip. 
Whether or not the attack succeeds, the stalactite 
the animation ends and the stalactite shatters on 
impact if it does not successfully pierce a creature. 

The size of the piercer (and thus its THACO) 
depends on the size of the stalactite and the level 
of the priest. The size of the stalactite gives a base 
value of | Hit Die if Small-sized, 2 Hit Dice if 
Man-sized, and 3 Hit Dice if Large-sized or more. 
The priest's level adds +1 Hit Die per three levels 
(round down). The maximum bonus is +3, giving a 
range of 1 to 6 Hit Dice. A successful dispel magic 
deactivates the animated stalactite, returning it to 
its normal state. The priest can animate and control 
up to one stalactite per experience level. 

Notes: Granted by the gnome god Callarduran 
Smoothhands. 


Duration; 3 rds. + 1 rd/level 
Area of Effect: 20-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell allows the caster to animate a normal 
statue and have it fight for him. The statue can be 
from 3 to 12 feet tall and can be made of wood, 
stone, or crystal. When animated, the statue has AC 
5, 4d8 hit points, attacks as a 4-HD monster, and 
can be damaged only by magical weapons. The 
statue has one attack per round, either by weapon 
or a blow for 1d8 points of damage. The statue can 
be deactivated by a successful dispel magic spell. 


SS a 


Anti-Animal Shell 


N 


If the spell is cast on a statue that is already 
magical, the statue animates and attacks the caster, 
pursuing until the caster successfully escapes it or 
is slain. 

Notes: Very rare spell. (Updated from DRAGON 
Magazine.) 


Animate Tree 
(Enchantment) 
Sphere: Plant 


Level: 5 

Range: 5 yds/level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: | rd./level 
Area of Effect: 1 tree 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell enables the druid to animate a tree. 
The animated tree has the same Hit Dice and gen- 
eral characteristics as a treant of the same size 
(MONSTROUS MANUAL tome). A tree whose resulting 
Hit Dice would exceed the caster’s druidical level 
cannot be animated, and the selection is further 
limited by the actual size of the trees available. 
Intelligent or aligned trees are allowed a saving 
throw vs. spell to avoid the effect, and the spell has 
no effect on actual treants and similar extraordinary 
creatures. The animated tree follows simple com- 
mands. At the end of the spell's duration, the tree 
returns to its original location and reroots itself. 

The material component is mistletoe. 

Notes: Very rare for druids. (Updated from 
POLYHEDRON Newszine.) 


Animate Weapon 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
Sphere: Combat 


Level: 1 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: 3 rds. + 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: Weapon touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell enables the priest to animate one 
weapon to fight for him, much like a sword of 
dancing. If the priest is of 2nd level or less, the 
only type of weapon this spell can animate is a 
warhammer. Once the spell is cast, the weapon 


hovers a few feet in front of the priest and a few 
feet above the ground. It attacks as if wielded by 
the priest, but only once per round, and it cannot 
parry attacks against the priest. The weapon is ef- 
fectively Armor Class 0. If more than 4 points of 
damage, plus | point of damage per level of the 
priest, are inflicted upon it in one round, the ani- 
mated weapon drops to the ground, undamaged, 
and the spell immediately ends. 

While this spell is in effect, it is possible for the 
priest to cast other spells or perform any other 
action except attack with a melee weapon. The 
latter interferes with the animated weapon's ability 
to fight, ending the spell immediately. 

The material component of this spell is the 
priest's holy symbol. 

Notes: Granted by the dwarven god, Moradin. 
This is an update of a previous version. 


Anti-Animal Shell 
(Abjuration) 
Sphere: Animal, Protection 


Level: 6 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: | turn/level 

Area of Effect: 20-ft. diameter 
Saving Throw: None 


By casting this spell, the caster brings into 
being a hemispherical force field that prevents the 
entry of any sort of living creature that is wholly or 
partially animal (not magical or extraplanar). Thus 
a sprite, a giant, or a chimera would be kept out, but 
an undead or conjured creature could pass through 
the shell of force, as could such creatures as aerial 
servants, imps, quasits, golems, elementals, and so 
on. The anti-animal shell functions normally 
against crossbreeds, such as cambions, and lasts for 
one turn for each level of experience the caster has 
attained. Forcing the barrier against a creature 
strains and ultimately collapses the field. 

The spell requires the caster’s holy symbol and 
a handful of pepper. 

Notes: Common for clerics and druids (PHB). 


a ee 


Anti-Mineral Shell 


Anti-Mineral Shell 
(Abjuration) 
Sphere: Protection, Elemental Earth 


Level: 7 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: | rd. 
Duration: 1 turn/level 

Area of Effect; 10-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: None 


The anti-mineral shell spell creates an invisible, 
mobile barrier that keeps out living or animated 
mineral creatures and animated mineral objects. It 
is effective against elementals and creatures of ele- 
mental origin, such as crysmals and certain 
mephits; constructs, such as golems and living stat- 
ues; creatures of living stone, such as galeb duhr or 
xorn; and mineral objects, weapons, or armor ani- 
mated by some outside force Any attempt to force 
the barrier against such creatures or objects shatters 
the barrier immediately. The spell lasts for one turn 
for each experience level of the caster. 

The material component is a drop of some 
caustic solvent, such as acid from a black dragon. 

Notes: Uncommon for druids (PO:SM). 
Updated from previous publication. 


Anti-Plant Shell 
(Abjuration) 
Sphere: Plant, Protection 


Level: 5 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 8 

Duration: | turn/level 

Area of Effect: 15-ft. diameter 
Saving Throw: None 


The anti-plant shell spell creates an invisible, 
mobile barrier that keeps all creatures within the 
shell protected from attacking plants or vegetable 
creatures such as shambling mounds or treants. 
Any attempt to force the barrier against such crea- 
tures shatters the barrier immediately. The spell 
lasts for one turn for each experience level of the 
caster. 

Notes: Common for clerics and druids (PHB). 


Anti-Vermin Barrier 
(Abjuration) 
Sphere: Wards 


Level: 1 

Range: 30 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 

Duration: 1 hr./level 

Area of Effect: 10-ft/level cube 
Saving Throw: None 


With this spell, the caster creates an invisible 
force field that repels nonmagical insects, rodents, 
spiders, snakes, worms, and similar vermin of less 
than | Hit Die. The spell has no effect on giant-sized 
versions of these creatures unless they are less than 1 
Hit Die. The barrier affects summoned creatures, 
such as those called by a summon insects spell. 

Vermin in the area of effect when the spell is 
cast are not affected; however, if these creatures 
exit the area, they cannot return. 

The spell affects a cubic area whose sides are 10 
feet times the caster’s level (for instance, a 2nd-level 
priest could affect a 20 X 20 x 20-foot cube), 

The material components are the caster’s holy 


ee ee a, 


Arboreal Scamper — Gnome 


p EEE 4 


symbol and a rodent’s whisker. 
Notes: Common for to priests with access to 
the sphere of Wards (ToM). 


Anyspell 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Charm, Creation 


Level: 4 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 7 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell allows the caster to read and then later 
cast any wizard spell of Ist through Sth level. Such a 
spell is readable via a read magic ability conferred 
with the casting of anyspell, but only one spell can 
be read and cast for each casting of anyspell. Merely 
reading the titles of spells on scrolls or in spellbooks 
to find a desired spell does not exhaust the magic of 
the anyspell; an entire spell must be read. Once 
anyspell is cast and a wizard spell is read, the wizard 
spell is retained in the priest's mind until the priest 
casts it. Such wizard spells are cast precisely as if by 
a wizard of the same level as the casting priest, 
except that the user of an anyspell needs no material 
components to work the wizard spell. 

While the priest has the wizard spell in mind, she 
or he cannot pray for a spell to replace the still-pend- 
ing anyspell. In effect, one 4th-level spell slot is lost 
until the wizard spell is cast, at which point the 
anyspell ends. To make effective use of this spell, the 
priest must borrow the spellbook of a wizard friend or 
use a found wizard scroll. (Priests of Mystra are not 
otherwise able to use wizard scrolls.) Using a scroll in 
this fashion expends the spell from the scroll. 

Notes: Restricted to priests of Mystra, from the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Aranen’s Divinial Armor 
(Abjuration) 
Sphere: Combat 


Level: | 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 or more warriors 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell is effective only upon those warriors 
of the same alignment as the priest who are also 
wearing metal armor. The spell temporarily turns 
the warriors into holy warriors, with hit point and 
Armor Class benefits tied to the caster’s level. The 
priest casting the spell can affect one warrior for 
every two levels of experience (round up), to a 
maximum of 5 warriors. For example, a 3rd level 
priest can affect two warriors. The spell duration is 
two rounds, plus two rounds per caster level. Thus, 
a divinial armor spell cast by a 6th-level priest 
lasts 14 rounds. 

The material component is the caster’s holy 
symbol. 

Notes: Very rare spell. (Updated from DRAGON 
Magazine.) 


Caster’s Hit Points | Armor Class 
Level Below 0° Bonus 
1-2 -5 1 

3-4 -6 l 

5-6 -7 1 

7-8 -8 2 

9-10 -9 2 

11+ -10 2 


'The warriors can fight without penalty at negative hit 
points. Those reduced below —10 hit points die at once. 


Arboreal Scamper — Gnome 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Plant 


Level: 1 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Duration: 1 hr/level 

Casting Time: 4 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


An arboreal scamper spell enables the recipient 
to climb about or hang from trees as easily as a 
squirrel. The affected creature can be no larger than 
man-sized (7 feet tall), and must have bare hands 
and feet to climb in this manner, at a movement rate 
of 6 (3 if encumbered). A creature under the effects 
of this spell, barring outside interference, won't fall 
from a tree. The arboreal scamper permits jumping 
up to ten feet to a neighboring limb, although a suc- 
cessful Dexterity check is required to accomplish 
the feat. Even falling is not necessarily disastrous as 
the creature can easily grab any tree limb contacted. 

The caster can divide the base duration 


” a ee 


Archer's Redoubt — Elf 


0 eT EOE 


between multiple creatures, to a minimum of one- 
half hour per creature. Thus, a 3rd-level caster can 
confer this ability on two creatures for 11⁄2 hours. 
The recipient can end the spell's effect on himself 
with a word. 

The material components of this spell are the 
priest’s holy symbol and an acorn purloined from a 
squirrel’s secret stash. 

Notes: Granted by the forest gnome god, 
Baervan Wildwanderer. 


Archer’s Redoubt — Elf 
(Evocation) 
Sphere: Protection 


Level: 3 

Range: 0 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 6 
Duration: 5 rås./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


When this spell is cast, an immobile, invisible 
barrier, pierced only by a narrow arrow slit, comes 
into being and totally encompasses the caster. This 
shield provides protection equal to Armor Class 2 
against frontal attacks and Armor Class 0 against 
all other attacks. The barrier also adds a +1 bonus 
to the priest's saving throws. 

It is not possible to move an archer's redoubt, 
and leaving its confines ends the spell. However, 
the arrow slit can change position as mentally di- 
rected by the caster. Although a melee weapon or 
hurled weapon can’t be used from an archer’s re- 
doubt, any sort of bow or crossbow can be fired 
without hindrance. 

The material component of this spell is the 
priest's holy symbol. 

Notes: Granted by the elven god Solonor 
Thelandira. 


Arm Hammers — Old Empire 
(Invocation/Evocation) 
Sphere: Combat 


Level: 2 

Range: 0 

Components; V, S, M 
Casting Time: 6 
Duration: | turn/level 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell transforms the priest’s forearms and 
hands into nonmagical adamantine hammers able to 
chip away solid rock. The priest can hammer away with 
both arms at an incredibly rapid pace, inflicting | point 
of structural damage to unmoving structures per tum 
(see earthshake spell). When tunneling into rock, the 
caster can create a passage at a rate of | foot deep per 
round, or 10 feet per turn. This passage is large enough 
for a creature of the caster’s size to walk through. 

The heavy weight of the hammers makes it difficult 
for the caster to maintain balance if not striking a fixed, 
only two attacks per round (one with each arm hammer), 
all against a single opponent. Each attack strikes with a 
-3 penalty to hit and inflicts only 1d8 points of damage, 
as most hits with these cumbersome weapons are merely 
glancing blows. On a natural roll of 20, the priest con- 
nects solidly for 2d10 points of damage. 

The spell can be ended at any time by the casting 
priest. Each turn, the caster must make a successful 
an additional Constitution check every round thereafter. 
If this Constitution check is failed at any point, the priest 
must make a successful system shock survival roll or die 
from the exertion. If the system shock survival roll suc- 
ceeds, the spell ends immediately and the caster is ex- 
hausted—immediate and complete rest is required for at 
least 8 hours (not even walking is possible). 

If an opponent casts shatter or a similar incantation 
on a priest employing arm hammers, the arm hammer 
spell effect ends immediately, and the priest suffers 2d8 
points of damage. While under the effects of this spell, 
haste and slow spells have no effect on the spellcaster. 
Casting spells with somatic or material components is 
impossible while under the effects of this spell. 

The material components of this spell are the 
priest's holy symbol and two miniature stone ham- 
mers carved from a single stone using only stone 
implements. 

Notes: Granted by the Mulhorandi earth god 
Geb of the FoRGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Armor of Darkness 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Protection, Sun 


Level: 3 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 6 

Duration: 1 rd/level 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


SO ee ee ie 


Assess Value — Old Empire 


———EEEEEE—EE—>EEEE——— Es J 


This spell creates an impressive, flickering 
shroud of magical darkness around the creature 
touched. The aura can, if the caster desires, con- 
ceal the creature's features. In any case, it im- 
proves the creature’s Armor Class by | point for 
every four experience levels of the caster (round 
down), It also reduces all nonmagical damage suf- 
fered by the wearer by 1d4 points per round. (This 
reduction changes to 2d4 points if the caster is of 
12th level or greater.) For example, a warrior pro- 
tected by a S5th-level caster who is shot with a 
magic arrow for 5 points of damage and clawed for 
7 points of damage in the same round takes a total 
of 8 to 11 points of damage for the round. 

The wearer of armor of darkness can see 
through the armor as if it did not exist and is also 
afforded 60-foot-range infravision by the spell. The 
protected creature is immune to hypnotic magic 
and other effects that depend on vision. Further, the 
protected creature receives a +2 bonus on saving 
throws vs. enchantment/charm school spells, 
charm sphere spells, and psionics of similar effect. 

Undead creatures wearing armor of darkness are 
immune to turning and dispelling attempts caused 
by things that they must see—the blow of a mace of 
disruption, for instance, still destroys one that fails 
its saving throw against the disruptive effect. 

Notes: Granted by the evil god Shar of the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Armor, Segojan’s 


See Segojan’s armor. 


Arumdina, Edge of 
See edge of Arumdina. 


Asphyxiate 
(Necromancy) 
Sphere: Necromantic 


Level: 6 

Range: 120 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 9 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: 1 individual/2 levels 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell asphyxiates individuals (chosen by 
the priest) who fail a saving throw vs. death magic. 
If fewer than six individuals are targeted with this 
spell, each receives a —1 penalty on their save (—2 
for three creatures or less, —4 if the entire spell is fo- 


cused on a single creature). This necromancy in- 
duces the throat to constrict and the lungs to swell 
shut, similar to a severe allergic reaction, for so long 
as the subject remains within range of the spell. 

Each round, a subject must attempt a 
Constitution check. If failed, the subject suffers 1d6 
points of damage. If successful, the subject manages 
to gasp in enough air to reduce the damage to 1d3 
points. During its struggles against asphyxiation, the 
affected creature becomes effectively slowed (as per 
the 3rd-level wizard spell). A subject who fails three 
consecutive Constitution checks has been smothered 
and dies automatically on the following round. 

The effects of asphyxiate continue until either 
the spell expires, a subject withdraws beyond 
range of the spell, or a successful dispel magic is 
employed on a subject. Subjects remain slowed for 
1-3 rounds after the spell ends. This spell nor- 
mally affects only humans or demihumans, though 
the DM may extend the spell to include man-sized 
or smaller animals and monsters. Obviously, crea- 
tures (such as undead and plant creatures) that 
don’t breathe are affected by this spell. 

The material component is an unholy symbol 
and a (symbolic) silken gag, which the priest 
loosely wraps around his or her own mouth after 
casting the spell. The asphyxiate spell is granted 
only to priests serving evil deities. 

Notes: Common for evil necromancer priests. 


Assess Value — Old Empire 
(Divination) 
Sphere: Divination 


Level: 1 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 4 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: 1 object 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell enables the caster to determine the fair 
market value of an object based on the materials 
used in its construction simply by handling it. The 
spell does not enable the caster to assess the artistic 
or cultural value of an object, its magical properties, 
or even determine if the object is magical. 

The object to be evaluated must be physically 
smaller in size than the caster. The spell enables 
the caster to determine the item’s value to the near- 
est gold piece in value to within (plus or minus) 
2d10% minus the caster’s level. Hence, at 20th 


" ta aaa aaa aria alii aaa, 


Assume Amorphous Form = 


me 4, 
4 S 
Wy 


f- TO a 


level and above, there is no possibility of error. 
Notes: Granted by the Mulhorandi goddess 
Nephthys of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Assume Amorphous Form 
Assume Gaseous Form 
Assume Sylvan Form 


Assume Undead Form 
See amorphous form, gaseous form, sylvan form, 
and undead form. 


Astaroth’s Augmentation 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: All 


Level: 3 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: | rd. 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


When cast, this spell permanently raises one abil- 
ity score (or two subability scores if the optional rules 
from Player’s Option: Skills & Powers are employed) 
by } point, to a maximum of 18. To maintain this 
augmentation, the spellcaster must corrupt one indi- 
vidual in a position of power or sacrifice one helpless 
sentient every quarter (three months) in Gargauth’s 
name. If this diabolical contract is ever broken for 
any reason, the spellcaster immediately loses 3 points 
in the augmented ability (or subabilities), for a net 
loss of 2 points in the ability (or subability) score(s). 

Multiple castings of Astaroth's augmentation can 
be used by the same spellcaster. Dispel magic and sim- 
ilar spells have no effect on the augmentation. No one 
short of a demipower and nothing short of a wish, arti- 
fact, or relic can end this spell’s contract without caus- 
ing the increased ability score loss above and beyond 
the spell-given gain. Users of Astaroth's augmentation 
often fall into a trap of casting this spell, failing to ful- 
fill the contract, and then having to cast the spell twice 
again just to regain their original abilities. If any ability 
score falls below 3 due to the cumulative accumulation 
of this spell’s penalties, the spellcaster is immediately 
transformed into a lemure (the lowest form of baatezu) 
and transported to Baator. The spelicaster is then irrev- 
ocably dead, short of a wish. All such subjects’ items 
are randomly teleported about the plane of their death 

This spell enables spellcasters to draw upon 
Gargauth’s divine power to permanently augment 
their abilities. In exchange for this beneficence, 
Gargauth extracts a dreadful price, and due to the 
price he requires, the casting of this spell is a 
patently evil act. 

The material components of this spell is the 
priest’s holy symbol (not necessarily one conse- 
crated to Gargauth), three yellow feathers, and a 
ruby worth at least 25 gp. 

Notes: Granted by the evil demigod Gargauth 
of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Astral Awareness 
(Divination) 
Sphere: Astral 


Level: 2 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 5 
Duration: | hr/level 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


ee ee T 


Astral Spell 


Dm 4 


This divination attunes the caster’s perceptions to 
the silver void of the Astral Plane or the misty gray- 
ness of the Ethereal Plane. It allows the caster to the 
approach of astral or ethereal phenomena, including 
shifting conduits, the psychic wind, an ethereal cy- 
clone, demiplanes and debris, color pools, and cur- 
tains of vaporous color. The caster has a 90% chance 
to detect a color pool from its invisible side and a 5% 
chance per level to determine which plane a curtain 
or pool leads to simply by studying its color. 

In addition to the awareness of physical phe- 
nomena, the caster gains a +2 bonus to any check 
against surprise by astral or ethereal monsters. The 
caster also has a 5% chance per level to detect the 
threat of creatures whose gaze extends into the 
Ethereal Plane (basilisks, for instance) before en- 
tering the range of the gaze weapon. 

Notes: Uncommon spell (PO:SM). 


Astral Celerity 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Astral 


Level: 1 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 4 
Duration: 1 hr./level 

Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell enhances the caster’s movement ca- 
pabilities in extraplanar settings by attuning him to 
his new surroundings. While very few Ist-level 
priests find themselves in this situation, higher 
level priests often make use of this spell. The 
astral celerity spell doubles the priest’s movement 
rate on the Astral Plane. As an incidental benefit, 
the caster also attunes himself to the plane much 
faster and suffers no penalties for missile fire 
while astral. 

While astral celerity is most often used in the 
Astral Plane, it also offers a small benefit to ethe- 
real individuals: their movement rates are in- 
creased by 50%. Thus, an individual with a 
movement rate of 12 has a movement rate of 18 on 
the Ethereal Plane while this spell is in effect. 
While time and distance have little meaning in the 
overall scheme of the Astral or Ethereal Planes, 
relative speed might be very important in avoiding 
an unpleasant encounter or escaping from pursuit 
of some kind. 

_ Notes: Uncommon spell (PO:SM). 


Astral Spell 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Astral 


Level: 7 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 2 hr. 
Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


By means of this spell, a priest is able to project 
his astral body into the Astral Plane, leaving his 
physical body and material possessions behind on 
the Prime Material Plane. As the Astral Plane 
touches upon the first levels of all the Outer 
Planes, the priest can travel astrally to the first 
level of any of these outer planes as he wills. The 
priest then leaves the Astral Plane, forming a body 
on the plane of existence he has chosen to enter. It 
is also possible to travel astrally anywhere in the 
Prime Material Plane by means of the astral spell 
However, a second body cannot be formed on the 
Prime Material Plane. 

As a general rule, a person astrally projected 
can be seen only by creatures on the Astral Plane. 
The astral body is connected at all times to the ma- 
terial body by a silvery cord. If the cord is broken, 
the affected person is killed, astrally and materi- 
ally, but generally, only the psychic wind can 
cause the cord to break. When a second body is 
formed on a different plane, the silvery cord re- 
mains invisibly attached to the new body. If the 
second body or astral form is slain, the cord simply 
returns to the caster’s body where the body rests 
on the Prime Material Plane, reviving it from its 
state of suspended animation. Although astral pro- 
jections are able to function on the Astral Plane, 
their actions affect only creatures existing on the 
Astral Plane; a physical body must be materialized 
on other planes. 

The spell lasts until the priest desires to end it, or 
until it is terminated by some outside means, such 
as a dispel magic spell or destruction of the priest's 
body on the Prime Material Plane—which kills the 
priest. The priest can project the astral forms of up 
to seven other creatures with himself by means of 
the astral spell, providing the creatures are linked in 
a circle with the priest. These fellow travelers are 
dependent upon the priest and can be stranded if 
something happens to the priest. Travel in the Astral 
Plane can be slow or fast, according to the priest’s 


' a ee ee 


Astral Window 


desire. The ultimate destination arrived at is subject 
to the desire of the priest. 
Notes: Common for clerics (PHB). 


Astral Window 
(Divination) 
Sphere: Astral 


Level: 3 

Range: 5 yds. 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 3 

Duration: 2 rds./level 

Area of Effect: 1 ft. to 10 ft. X 10 ft. area 
Saving Throw: None 


When this spell is cast, a window appears in the 
air before the priest, through which he (and any 
others present) can see into the Astral Plane. The 
astral window ranges in size from one square foot 
up to a 10-foot x 10-foot square, at the caster’s 
choosing. The window is not mobile; if the priest 
moves more than 5 yards away from it, then it im- 
mediately vanishes and the spell ends. 

By stating a subject's name, the priest can view 
a specific creature or object in the window. More 
than one subject can be viewed during the spell's 
duration. Each time a new subject is chosen, the 
window becomes streaked with gray as the Astral 
Plane flies past. This continues for 1d4 rounds, 
until the window finally focuses upon the chosen 
subject. If the subject is not on the Astral Plane, 
the window instead chooses a random location. 

The window operates from both sides; crea- 
tures in the Astral Plane can see the priest as easily 
as he can see them. Verbal communication is not 
possible, however. 

Normally, creatures cannot pass through the 
window. If an attempt is made, there is a base 5% 
chance of success, This is modified by +1% per 
level or Hit Dice of the individual. To pass 
through, the creature or object must be small 
enough to fit through the window; otherwise, only 
a portion of the subject may reach through (such as 
a monster’s arm or searching tongue). 

By casting the astral window spell, a priest 
who subsequently casts the 7th-level astral spell 
can choose to arrive in the Astral Plane at the place 
shown in the window. 

Notes: Uncommon spell (PO:SM). 


Atonement 
(Abjuration) 
Sphere: All 


Level: 5 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: | turn 
Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: Person touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell is used by the priest to remove the 
burden of unwilling or unknown deeds from the 
person who is the subject of the atonement. The 
spell removes the effects of magical alignment 
changes as well. The person seeking the atonement 
spell must be either truly repentant or not have been 
in command of his own will when the acts to be 
atoned for were committed. The DM judges this 
spell in this regard, noting any past instances of its 
use upon the person. Deliberate misdeeds and acts 
of knowing and willful nature cannot be atoned for 
with this spell (see the guest spell). An individual 
who refuses to accept an atonement is automatically 
considered to have committed a willful misdeed. 

The priest needs his religious symbol, prayer 
beads or wheel or book, and burning incense. 

Notes: Common spell for all priests (PHB). 


Attraction 
Reversed form, deflection. 
Attraction 
(Alteration) 
Reversible 
Sphere: Charm 
Level: 2 
Range: Touch 


Components; V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: 1 hr/level 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


Attraction replaces any negative emotions the 
target creature has toward the spellcaster with op- 
posite positive emotions if the creature being fails 
a saving throw vs. spell. Repulsion becomes at- 
traction, hatred becomes love, etc. The spell also 
temporarily raises the caster’s Charisma by 1d4+2 
points in respect to the creature for the spell’s du- 


Ore ee ee ee ee 


Augment Artistry — Elf 


) ee A 


ration, making its reactions to and loyalty to the 
caster much more likely to be positive and helpful. 

If the emotions to be changed are extremely in- 
tense, the saving throw against this spell has a 
modifier of +1 to +5, as adjudicated by the DM. 
Thus, it is more useful as a ploy to make a date 
with a barmaid (who is motivated to please cus- 
tomers anyway) than to convert one’s enemies. 
This spell is much used by priests of Bhaal be- 
cause of their ambient air of death. 

The material component of this spell is the holy 
symbol of the casting priest. 

The reverse of this spell, disdain, replaces all 
positive feelings a creature has toward a named 
being (which can be the caster) with opposite neg- 
ative emotions. It also temporarily lowers the 
named being’s Charisma by 1d4+2 points with re- 
spect to the subject for the spell’s duration, making 
the creature’s reactions to and loyalty to the named 
being much more likely to be negative and hostile. 

Notes: Granted by the evil god Bhaal of the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Attunement — Drow 
(Alteration, Necromancy) 
Sphere: Guardian 


Level: 4 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: | rd. 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell enables the affected being to safely use 
the magical powers of house insignia, and all other 
items bearing the same House identifier as part of 
their enchantment. It also allows a being to pass the 
traps and wards of House defenses without harm. 

The spell places knowledge of how to wield in- 
signia powers in the recipient’s subconscious 
mind—but does not identify any of the powers, or 
give any idea of their nature and numbers. 

The effects of this spell last until the insignia’s 
accompanying curse is triggered, or the attuned 
being is slain. 

The material components of this spell are the holy 
symbol of the caster, at least one drop of the recipi- 
ent’s tears, and a tiny moonstone or diamond (all but 
the holy symbol are consumed in the spellcasting). 

Notes: Common for drow priests trained by 
any of the Underdark houses. (An illustration of 29 


4 


5 


House symbols and 9 power suffixes are shown in 
#9326 Drow of the Underdark, p.108.) 


Augment Artistry — Elf 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Creation 


Level: 1 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: | rd. 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell combines magic with the act of cre- 
ation to enhance the artistry of any work created 
by the recipient of this spell. For every three levels 
of experience of the priest (round up), the recipient 
of this spell receives a +1 bonus to his or her next 
nonweapon proficiency check against an ability 
requiring artistic ability. This bonus cannot exceed 
+3. While the effects of this spell last only until the 
next such nonweapon proficiency check, the re- 
sults of the augmented artistry are permanent. 

In addition to the nonweapon proficiency artis- 


Augment Psionics — Duergar 


N 


tic ability, this spell can augment a proficiency. 
check for dancing, gem cutting, singing, or any 
other skill that is traditionally considered an artis- 
tic endeavor. This spell doesn’t affect traditional 
crafts where functionality is emphasized over 
artistry, including proficiencies such as armorer, 
blacksmithing, leatherworking, seamstress/tailor, 
weaving, or weaponsmithing, unless the profi- 
ciency check is specifically for the esthetic appeal 
of the finished item. In all cases, the applicability 
of this enchantment to a particular endeavor is ad- 
judicated by the DM. 

The material components are the priest’s holy 
symbol and a scroll bearing a piece of epic poetry 
(not necessarily the original work). 

Notes: Granted by the elven god Corellon 
Larethian. 


Augment Psionics — Duergar 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Thought 


Level: 2 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: | rd. + 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: Psionic creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


The recipient of this spell receives a special 
bonus of 3d8 additional PSPs for the duration of 
the spell. The augment psionics spell enables the 
recipient to actually have more PSPs than his full 
normal total. The bonus PSPs are used first when 
the recipient engages in psionic activity, whether it 
be a psionic attack, defense, or power. 

This spell has no effect on individuals without 
any psionic ability and is wasted if used on them. 

The material component of this spell is the 
priestess’s holy symbol 

Notes: Granted by the duergar goddess Deep 
Duerra. 


Augmentation, Astaroth’s 
See Astaroth’s augmentation. 


Augury 
(Divination) 
Sphere: Divination 


Level: 2 

Range: 0 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 2 rds. 
Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


The priest casting an augury spell seeks to divine 
whether an action in the immediate future (within 
one-half hour) will benefit or harm the party. For ex- 
ample, if a party is considering the destruction of a 
weird seal that closes a portal, an augury spell can be 
used to find if weal or woe will be the immediate 
result. If the spell is successful, the DM yields some 
indication of the probable outcome: “weal,” “woe,” or 
possibly a cryptic puzzle or rhyme. The base chance 
for receiving a meaningful reply is 70%, plus 1% for 
each level of the priest casting the spell, e.g., 71% at 
Ist level, 72% at 2nd, etc. The DM determines any ad- 
justments for the particular conditions of each augury. 

For example, if the question is “Will we do 
well if we venture to the third level?” and a terrible 
troll guarding 10,000 sp and a shield +/ lurks near 
the entrance to the level (which the DM estimates 
the party could beat after a hard fight) the augury 
might be: “Great risk brings great reward.” If the 
troll is too strong for the party, the augury might 
be: “Woe and destruction await!” Likewise, a party 
casting several auguries about the same action in 
quick succession might receive identical answers, 
regardless of the dice rolls. 

The material component for an augury spell is 
a set of gem-inlaid sticks, dragon bones, or similar 
tokens of at least 1,000 gp value (which are not ex- 
pended in casting). 

Notes: Common for clerics (PHB). 


Augury — Shukenja 


This spell is identical to the 
normal augury spell except that it is 
Ist level, and the material compo- 
nent is a set of straight willow sticks 
or carved bones. 


Awaken Magical Item 


"\ el 


Aura of Comfort 
(Evocation) 
Sphere: Travelers 


Level: 2 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 2 

Duration: 1 hr./level 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


When this spell is cast, a faintly shimmering aura 
surrounds the recipient. The aura insulates the recip- 
ient from the effects of nonmagical heat and cold in 
a range of -20° F. to 140° F. A creature encountering 
temperatures in this range maintains a comfortable 
temperature of 70° F., regardless of prevailing 
weather conditions. Also, the spell shields the crea- 
ture from rain, snow, and hail. 

If a creature encounters a temperature above or 
below the stated range, the temperature within the 
aura is altered by an equal number of degrees. For 
example, a creature encountering a 150° tempera- 
ture actually experiences a temperature of 90° F. 

All physical objects other than rain, snow, and 
hail can pass through the aura. The creature can 
cast spells normally while the aura of comfort is 
in effect. The spell offers no protection against 
magically generated weather, such as that caused 
by weather summoning and ice storm. It does not 
protect against fire, nor does it shield against fire- 
or cold-based attacks. 

The reversed form, aura of discomfort, subjects 
the recipient to an uncomfortable environment for 
the duration of the spell. The caster can choose a 
temperature from —20° to 140° F., and an unseen 
weather effect, such as rain, sleet, or snow. The re- 
cipient has a —1 penalty (or —5%) to all actions that 
require a die roll for success, including attacks, 
saving throws, and ability checks. Other adjust- 
ments may apply at the discretion of the DM, and 
the individual may have to dress according to the 
perceived conditions, rather than actual conditions 
(an individual wearing loincloth in a tropical 
jungle might actually suffer frostbite as a result of 
this spell). 

Notes: Uncommon spells (ToM). 


Aura of Discomfort 


Reversed form, aura of comfort. 


Saving Throw: Special 


This spell is used to activate a touched magical 
item bearing multiple enchantments or exhibiting 
multiple functions. It is an alternative to the better- 
known enchant an item spell, but accomplishes 
less. To create a magical item with an awakening 
spell, several other spells must be used first, in- 
cluding eternal flame and usually wondrous web 
or holy vesting and various dweomerflow castings. 
Awakening can be used on a magical item that has 
been created with an enchant an item spell if addi- 
tional powers are added to the item after its initial 
creation and enough use of the item has occurred 
to call upon all of the original powers at least once. 

When the spell is cast, the item must make a 
saving throw to determine if the awakening has 
been successful. The item’s base saving throw is the 
same as the caster’s saving throw vs. spell, modified 
as follows: a —-1 penalty per being other than the 
spelicaster who cast spells on the item during prepa- 
ration or contributed magics that were put into the 
item before the awakening attempt (unless those 
beings are clergy members of the same faith as the 
caster of the awakening), a +1 bonus per meld and 
crown meld spell existing on the item, and a +1 
bonus if both an eternal flame and a Veladar’s vam- 
brace, holy might, or Nulathoe's ninemen spell were 
cast on the item before the awakening attempt, and 
a +1 bonus if the awakening is cast on or before an 
altar of the deity of the caster’s faith. These bonuses 
are cumulative, but a roll of | is always a failure. 

The failure of an awakening attempt means 
either the item crumbles to worthless dust or ex- 
plodes violently. Roll 1d6; a result of 1 or 2 means 
an explosion occurs similar to a fireball centered on 
the item that deals 1d6 points of damage per level of 
the awakening caster and in addition destroys the 
item utterly. A roll of 4-6 means that the item 


tt a en, 


Awakening m 


collapses into dust. A wind will rise from nowhere to 
carry this dust away, and even if some dust is some- 
how retained, it is magically inert and worthless. 
Success of the awakening attempt means the 
item is awakened instantly into operation. It func- 
tions perfectly, though if the creator has been care- 
less or inattentive in his or her preparations, the 
item’s performance may involve some surprises. A 
successful awakening may be heralded by a flash 
of light from the item, but this effect is never a 
harmful discharge of wild magic or item powers. 
The material components for this spell are a 
single priest spell scroll bearing at least as many 
spells as the item has functions, a gem of any sort 
of not less than 2,500 gp value each for each item 
function, and a living plant that has been altered by 
magic. Some sages believe an awakening is more 
likely to succeed (an additional +1 bonus to the 
item saving throw at the DM's discretion) if a 
random dweomer-bearing component is also used. 
Notes: Very rare spell, recorded by Volo. 


Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: Special 

This spell breaks holds, interrupts natural and 
magical sleep, dispels temporal stasis, releases 
suspended animation and voids charms. It also 
springs both natural and magical traps, regardless 
of whether the caster is aware of them or not, and 
breaks all magical webs and wizard locks. 

The spell creates a flickering wave of light ra- 
diating out from its caster for 15 feet in all direc- 
tions (as a sphere) and thrice that distance (45 feet) 
directly ahead of the caster, in a “tongue” of spell 
effect. The caster of the awakening must then save 
vs. spell. If the saving throw is successful, the full 
effects occur within the area. If the saving throw 
fails, none of the above occur, and the magic 
merely identifies all of those conditions within 
spell range that it could have affected if the spell 
had been wholly successful (as glowing auras out- 
lining them visible only to the caster). 

Notes: Granted by the god of dawn Lathander 
of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Awakening 


A 7th level spell, see awaken magical item. 


Axe Storm of Clangeddin — Dwarf 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Combat 


Level: 4 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 7 

Duration: 3 rds. 

Area of Effect: 40-ft. cube, | dwarf/level 
Saving Throw: None 


When this spell is cast, each affected dwarf 
gains an additional attack per round with every 
axe wielded in melee combat or hurled at an op- 
ponent. Movement, spellcasting, spell effects, or 
attacks with weapons other than axes are not 
speeded up. For the purposes of this spell, axes in- 
clude battle axes, hand axes, hatchets, throwing 
axes, and two-handed battle axes; these may be 
nonmagical or magical. 

This spell is not cumulative with itself or with 
other similar magic. A slow spell will negate the 
effects of an axe storm of Clangeddin but other- 
wise have no effect, and a haste spell will negate 
the effects of this spell and function normally. 

The material components of this spell are the 
priest's holy symbol and a small, sealed glass vial 
of air capped in the midst of a thunderstorm. 

Notes: Granted by the dwarven god 
Clangeddin Silverbeard. 


Azuth’s Alteration Mantle 


Casting Time: 9 

Duration: 4 rds /level 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell creates an invisible magical aura 
around a willing (or unaware) creature. When 
either one of two specific spells or magical item 
effects chosen during casting impinges on any part 
of this aura, the mantle instantly absorbs the ef- 
fects and presents the mantle-wearer with a three- 


Se ce eee ar 


fold choice: use the spell energy for healing (either 
self-healing or healing a touched being), convert it 
to a single predetermined specific spell and hurl it 
back at the source, or convert it to the same prede- 
termined specific spell and cast it at another target. 
If the mantle-wearer is not the caster, the caster 
can elect, when bestowing the spell, to force the 
magic to always make one of those choices or to 
leave each decision up to the mantle-wearer. 
(Nevertheless, the “free choice” cannot be re- 
stricted to two of the three options, nor can any of 
the “predetermined” spells be left unselected.) 

A) Healing: If an incoming magic is used for 
healing, only lost hit points are restored. This heal- 
ing can be used upon one creature only—it cannot 
be split. 

A given being can be protected by only one al- 
teration mantle at a time, and the mantle won't sur- 
vive any contact with a dispel magic effect. Despite 
the fact that it can guard against two different spell 
attacks, they can only be transformed into a single 
magic. Over the years, Azuth has ignored the re- 
peated supplications of his most powerful and de- 
voted followers to provide two “end result” magics 
as well as two magics protected against. 

B) Return Casting: The spell sent forth behaves 
as if cast by the original source in terms of level, 
alignment, and abilities. Targeting, however, de- 
pends on the vision and abilities of the mantle- 
wearer. (For instance, if an incoming polymorph 
other attack is converted to magic missile and 
hurled at a third party, the mantle-wearer, not the 
original attacker, must be able to see the chosen 
target for the magic missile.) 

Both the specific spells to be defended against 
and the spell they are to be converted to must be 
chosen by the caster of the alteration mantle during 
its casting and cannot be altered thereafter. The 
magic defended against must be one the mantle- 
caster has cast, felt the effects of, or observed the 
effects of, and he must know its specific name. The 
magic sent forth must be a spell he has personally 
cast. The magic sent forth cannot exceed the magic 
defended against in spell level (for instance, poly- 
morph other cannot be converted to flame strike). 
Azuth’s alteration mantle defends against multiple 
attacks of the same sort of spell, and is not ex- 
hausted by one incoming spell. 

This spell is a variant of the greater mantle of 
Mystra spell used by priests of the goddess of magic. 

Notes: Granted by the Azuth, god of wizards, 
of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. This spell is 
found only in a few exceptionally rare tomes. 


Azuth’s Exalted Triad 


Azuth’s Exalted Triad 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Thought 


Level: 5 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 8 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: | memorized spell 
Saving Throw: None 


This magic can affect any one Ist- through Sth- 
level spell that the caster of the exalted triad already 
has in memory. Once this spell is chosen by silent will 
of the caster, the triad cannot be shifted to another 
spell. The chosen spell becomes castable thrice with- 
out any additional memorization, loss of other memo- 
rized spells, or loss of spell memorization slots. 

The first use of the spell chosen to be affected by 
Azuth’s exalted triad is cast as normal in all respects, 
but the second and third castings of the chosen spell 
require no material or verbal components and their 
casting time changes to 2. 

An exalted triad spell cannot affect another ex- 
alted triad spell in memory. Only one exalted triad 


ee ee 


Azuth’s Fedensor 


jh eana R 


spell can be in use on a given spell slot at a time; any 
attempt to use multiple exalted triad spells on a given 
spell in memory results in the spellcaster being feeble- 
minded. Azuth’s fedensor cannot be used on Azuth’s 
exalted triad or on any spell affected by Azuth's ex- 
alted triad. 

No more than two exalted triad spells can be in 
use (on different spells in memory) at a time. The 
spells gained by use of an exalted triad all take up the 
same spell slot; that spell slot is considered in use until 
all the copies created by the exalted triad are used or 
discarded, at which time the exalted triad ends. 

Notes: Granted by the Azuth, god of wizards, 
of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Azuth’s Fedensor 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Thought 


Level: 4 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 7 

Duration: Up to 1 turn 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell allows the next Ist- through Sth-level 
spell cast by the caster of Azuth’s fedensor or an- 
other touched spellcasting being to be unleashed 
without any normally necessary material compo- 
nents (unless crucial to a spell, such as the gem 
used in a magic jar spell) and without being for- 
gotten, The affected spell is not erased from 
memory and can be cast again as normal at a later 
time. The spell to be effected must be cast within a 
turn of the casting of Azuth's fedensor, or the fe- 
densor is lost and wasted. Azuth's fedensor does 
not work on Azuth’s fedensor, such a use results in 
the loss of both fedensors. 

Notes: Granted by the Azuth, god of wizards, 
of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Azuth’s Firing Frenzy 


Level: 6 

Range: 60 yds. +10 yds./level 
Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 9 

Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell allows the priest casting it to unleash 
three bursts of magic missiles (almost identical to 
those created by the wizard spell, magic missile) at 
once. Each burst consists of five such missiles. All 
of the missiles in a burst are directed at the same 
target, which they strike unerringly (doing no 
damage to nonliving materials, but inflicting 
1d4+1 points of damage each to creatures). Each 
burst must be fired at a different target (in other 
words, five missiles strike at one target, five at an- 
other, and five at a third—even if this means wast- 
ing 10 of the missiles). Missiles fired into empty 
air fade away at the limits of spell range. 

Certain veteran priests speak of the magical 
items of foes discharging involuntarily when 
struck by a burst from a firing frenzy, but this 
seems to be a rare and unpredictable occurrence. 

Notes: Granted by the Azuth, god of wizards, 
of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. This spell is 
found only in a few exceptionally rare tomes. 


Level: 5 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 8 

Duration: 3 rds. 

Area of Effect: 20-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell locks all creatures within 20 feet of the 
caster as a hold person or hold monster spell for three 
rounds. A creature making a successful saving throw 
vs. spell is unaffected. The saving throw is made at 
—6 for 1st-level or 1 Hit Die creatures, -4 for beings 
of 2nd level or 2 Hit Dice, and at -2 for those of 3rd 
level or 3 Hit Dice, unadjusted for those of 4th level 
or 4 Hit Dice, +2 for beings of Sth level, and so on. 


ee mR ce 


Azuth’s Spell Shield 


eee 4 


All affected creatures are freed instantly if the 
caster of the immobility touches or magically at- 
tacks any one of the held beings (or any item one is 
directly holding, wearing, or carrying), although 
the magic does, of course, give the caster one 
attack that automatically hits that target being. 

If those other than the caster strike an affected 
creature, the individual creature struck is freed, but 
not the others affected by the spell. The caster can 
move out of spell range without ending the spell 
(and indeed this magic is usually employed to 
allow the caster to escape). 

Notes: Granted by the Azuth, god of wizards, 
of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. This spell is 
found only in a few exceptionally rare tomes. 


Azuth’s Spell Shield 


(Abjuration) 
Sphere: Protection 


Level: 7 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: | rd. 

Duration: 1 rd. 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell renders the recipient immune to all 
magical effects on the round after this spell is cast. 
The spell shield also suppresses previously applied 
protections, aids, and ongoing effects of a benefi- 
cial nature as well. The spell does not prevent such 
magics from operating; it simply prevents the pro- 
tected being from being affected by them for one 
round, 

Notes: Granted by the Azuth, god of wizards, 
of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Bad Medicine T M 
VA ys 
ae £ 
Bad Medicine HNM he] Badger Form — Halfling 
(Enchantment/Charm) A Ñ (Alteration) 
Reversible a a Sphere: Animal 
Sphere: Charm TEES 
Level: 4 
Level: 4 Range: 0 


Range: Line of sight 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 2 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: Individual (or village) 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


Bad medicine is a powerful spell most often 
used by irate shaman to avenge themselves on 
those who have angered them. Bad medicine mod- 
ifies the target's THACO, saving throws, morale, 
and damage by.—2. It is usually cast upon a single 
individual, but a priest of 16th level or greater can 
cast this spell upon as many as 300 beings (animal 
or human), as long as they are gathered in an area 
of an acre or less. The character with the lowest 
saving throw score saves for the entire village. 

To cancel bad medicine, a priest of equal or 
greater level than the original caster must cast the 
reverse of the spell upon the victim(s). If this is not 
possible, the spell can also be removed by remove 
curse or wish spell. 

If not cast in order to cancel bad medicine, the 
spell’s reverse, good medicine, is not nearly as 
powerful as its vengeful form. It raises the 
THACO, saving throws, morale, and damage of the 
target by +1 for 1d10 rounds. Good medicine can 
be cast on an entire village, but only if all occu- 
pants are gathered together in an area no greater 
than 100 feet in diameter. 

The material components of either spell are a 
handful of herbs common to the area, the claw of 
an eagle (for bad medicine). the feather of an 
eagle (for good medicine), and the venom of a 
poisonous snake. 

Notes: Common for Amerind cultures. 


Bad Weather 
Reversed form, good weather. 


Badberry 
Reversed form, goodberry. 


Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: | rd. 
Duration: 2 turns/level 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell transforms the priest into the form of 
a giant badger, with all the abilities and attacks 
thereof. No system shock roll is required. 

When the change in form occurs, the priest's 
equipment, if any, melds into the new form (in par- 
ticularly challenging campaigns, the DM may 
allow protective devices, such as a ring of protec- 
tion, to continue operating effectively). The priest 
retains all mental abilities and granted powers, but 
cannot cast spells. Hit points and saving throws 
remain the same as well. The priest can return to 
normal form at any time, ending the spell prema- 
turely. When the badger form ends by the priest's 
will or the duration expires, the priest returns to his 
or her own form and heals 1d12 points of damage. 
The priest also returns to his or her own form when 
slain or when the effect is dispelled, but no 
damage is healed in these cases. A system shock 
check is not required when the caster transforms 
back to normal form, whether voluntarily or invol- 
untarily. 

This spell is commonly used to help dig 
halfling burrows and to defend them against at- 
tackers. 

The material components are the priest's holy 
symbol and a claw, tooth, or tuft of hair from a 
badger (normal or giant sized). 

Notes: Granted by the halfling goddess 
Yondalla. 


Giant Badger: AC 4; MV 6, Br 3; HD 3; hp 
as caster; #AT 3, THACO 17; Dmg 1d3/1d3/1d6; 
SZ M (4! long). See also MC Annual Vol. 2. 


Bane, Death Symbol of 
See death symbol of Bane. 


Bane, Doom of 
See doom of Bane. 


ee es 


Bane of the Defilers 


Ee 4 


Bane — Old Empire 
(Abjuration) 
Reversible 
Sphere: Protection 


Level: 7 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 9 
Duration: Permanent 
Area of Effect: | creature 
Saving Throw: Special 


A priest who casts a bane spell bestows an ex- 
tremely powerful curse on a target creature. After 
casting the spell, the priest must successfully 
touch the intended target within one turn or the 
spell ends ineffectively. 

If the priest makes contact, the creature re- 
ceives a saving throw. If the saving throw is suc- 
cessful, the victim receives a curse of dire 
proportion that only a remove curse spell cast by a 
deity or a reverse bane or a wish cast by a mortal 
can remove. A creature that fails the saving throw 
suffers a —5 penalty to all attack and damage rolls, 
while opponents receive a +5 bonus to their attack 
rolls against the creature. In addition, the creature 
automatically fails all saving throws, and all at- 
tacks against him or her cause maximum damage. 

The reverse of this spell, reverse bane, removes 
the effect of any curse-type spell (including bestow 
curse, major curse, bane, and other similar spells) 
except for instantaneous curse effects. (For exam- 
ple, it does not teleport a party back to the dungeon 
after they have opened a cursed scroll that tele- 
ported them out.) 

Notes: Granted by the Mulhorandi god Horus- 
Re of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Bane of Beshaba 
(Abjuration) 
Sphere: Combat 


Level: 2 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S,M 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: Living creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell confers a curse upon a single living 
creature that cannot be ended by dispel magic or 


other magical effects. It lasts until the death of the 
target creature or until its power is exhausted by use. 

A priest of Beshaba must physically touch the 
recipient with a bare hand to cast this spell, requir- 
ing a successful attack roll if the recipient is in 
battle or not unaware or immobilized. The bane of 
Beshaba confers saving throw penalties. The first 
saving throw made by the creature receiving the 
bane is made at a —4 penalty, even if it takes place 
later in the same round as the bane took effect. The 
second saving throw has a —3 penalty, the next a —2 
penalty, and the following one at a —1 penalty. 
After four penalized saving throws occur, the 
magic is exhausted. 

Only one such spell can be in effect upon a 
creature at any one time. Additional castings of 
bane of Beshaba have no effect while one bane of 
Beshaba is still in effect. Beshaba imposes no re- 
strictions on her priests as to how many times this 
spell can be cast upon a creature. 

In a spiritual sense, the bane of Beshaba is the 
reversed version of the favor of Tymora spell em- 
ployed by the servants of Beshaba’s nemesis. The 
spells favor of Tymora and bane of Beshaba auto- 
matically cancel each other out if cast on the same 
creature, regardless of how many saving throws 
the first spell to be cast has affected. 

The material components of this spell are a 
sliver of a broken mirror and the priest's holy 
symbol (which is not consumed in casting the 
spell). 

Notes: Granted by the evil goddess Beshaba of 
the FoRGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Bane of the Defilers 


(Necromancy) 


Sphere: Cosmos 


Level: 7 

Range: 0 
Components; V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 turn 
Duration: 1 day 

Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: NA 


This spell turns an ordinary missile weapon of 
wood, metal, or stone into a deadly projectile of 
defiler slaying, adding +3 to attack rolls and in- 
flicting double damage upon defilers. 

Notes: Uncommon for priests from the DARK SUN 
setting. 


4 53 x 


Bane of Yondalla — Halfling 


Deg EEE a 


Bane of Yondalla — Halfling 
(Necromancy) 
Sphere: Necromantic 


Level: 5 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 8 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


Bane of Yondalla is similar in effect to a strike 
by a staff of withering. A target creature that fails a 
saving throw vs. spell suffers the full effects. A 
creature afflicted by the bane of Yondalla suffers 
1d4+1 points of damage and ages by 10% of its 
natural lifespan, with the corresponding adjust- 
ments to its abilities and lifespan. If the caster is 
11th level or higher, one of the creature’s limbs 
shrivels and becomes useless. (Roll randomly for 
which limb is struck, unless the priest makes a 
called shot against a specific limb; the head is not 
considered a limb.) 

Ageless creatures (undead, tanar’ri, baatezu, etc.) 
cannot be aged or withered. Aging a dwarf is of little 
effect, while aging a one hundred ninety year old 
dragon (see the Monstrous Manual™) or a forty- 
four year old human wizard (see Table 12 in the 
Player's Handbook) could actually aid the target. 

The material components of this spell are the 
priest’s holy symbol and a desiccated vine of some 
variety. Only the latter is consumed in the casting 
of the spell. 

Notes: Granted by the halfling goddess 
Yondalla. 


Banish Blight 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Plant 


Level: 2 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 5 
Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: 1 plant 
Saving Throw: None 


To enact this spell, the caster touches and 
breathes on any part of a plant. This spell wipes 
out existing plant diseases permanently, and it re- 
stores plant leaves to an uneaten, unshriveled, un- 


frozen, and unscorched condition for one day per 
level of the caster. It cannot restore dead plants to 
life, nor make ravaged plants whole, but it brings 
what remains to peak condition—wilted flowers 
bloom anew, and drooping leaves rise up green. 
Leaves that have fallen to the ground cannot be 
reattached to their plants by means of this magic, 
but withered foliage can be made green and grow- 
ing again, even in the depths of winter, as long as 
the spell lasts. In this manner, the skeleton of a 
hedge can be made opaque with thick growth in an 
instant. A flower restored by means of this magic 
can be picked without ending the magic, though it 
shrivels again when the spell expires. 

If the weather and season permit continued life, 
restorations wrought by this spell outlive it. For ex- 
ample, a diseased, shriveled plant restored to health 
will remain healthy, following its normal growing 
cycle, and not lapse back into ruin the moment the 
spell ends. To injured mobile or intelligent plant 
life (such as treants and shambling mounds), appli- 
cation of a banish blight restores 1d10+4 points of 
damage, but it cannot help healthy plants to grow 
larger or gain extra hit points. 

Mielikki crafted this spell both as a gift to 
Silvanus and to empower her faithful to give forest 
creatures endless food by restoring half-eaten veg- 
etation to a full state. 

Notes: Granted by many nature deities, includ- 
ing Mielikki of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting and 
the elven god Rillifane Rallathial 


Banish Flame 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Elemental Fire 


Level: 1 

Range: 10 yds./level 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: Cube, 10-ft/level square, to 90 ft. 
maximum 

Saving Throw: None 


This spell instantly snuffs all flames of a non- 
magical nature within the area of effect. Burning 
items are not destroyed and can be relit if another 
source of fire is applied to them. Burning items 
within the area of effect are snuffed even if they 
are in any sort of normal container that would pro- 
tect them from wind or water. Magical flames of a 
continuous nature are extinguished for one round 


ee ee ee 


Bat Sense 


DE ere 4 


and then relight. Flaming breath weapons that 
enter the area of effect during the same round as 
the spell is cast have their damage reduced by 1 
point per level of the spellcaster. Light, continual 
light, and other similar spells are unaffected by 
banish flame. 

Notes: Granted by Kossuth, a greater power of 
the elemental plane of Fire. 


Banish Mirage 


Reversed form, create mirage. 


Baravar, Mantle of 


See mantle of Baravar. 


Barkskin 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Plant 


Level: 2 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: 4 rds. + 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


When a priest casts the barkskin spell upon a 
creature, its skin becomes as tough as bark, in- 
creasing its base Armor Class to AC 6, plus 1 AC 
for every four levels of the priest: Armor Class 5 at 
4th level, Armor Class 4 at 8th, and so on. This 
spell does not function in combination with 
normal armor or any magical protection. In addi- 
tion, saving throw rolls vs. all attack forms except 
magic gain a +1 bonus. This spell can be placed on 
the caster or on any other creature he touches. 

In addition to his holy symbol, the caster must 
have a handful of bark from an oak as the material 
component of the spell. 

Notes: Common for druids (PHB). 


Barrier of Retention 
(Abjuration) 
Sphere: Wards 


Level: 5 

Range: Special 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 turn 

Duration: | turn/level 

Area of Effect: One 10-ft. cube/level 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell creates a one-way invisible force 
field around the area of effect. The spell creates 
one 10-foot X 10-foot X 10-foot cube for every 
level of the caster. These can be arranged into any 
rectangular shape the caster desires. 

Intruders entering the protected area suffer no 
ill effects, but the barrier of retention prevents 
them from leaving. The spell affects all creatures 
that fail a saving throw vs. spell. The caster can 
pass in and out of the barrier freely. 

Intruders trapped by the barrier can cast spells 
out through the barrier, and can use spells such as 
teleport to escape the protected area. Objects 
cannot be hurled out of the barrier but can be car- 
ried out by an escaping creature. A successful 
dispel magic or similar spell negates the barrier. 

The material component is a small cage made 
of silver wire. The caster must walk around the 
perimeter of the area of effect when casting. 

Notes: Common for priests with major access 


to the sphere of Wards (ToM). 
Bat Sense 

(Alteration) 

Sphere: Divination, Animal 

Level: 2 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 4 


Duration: 3 turns + 1 turn/level 
Area of Effect: Individual touched 
Saving Throw: None 


When this spell is cast, it gives the individual 
touched the echolocation powers of a bat. The 
being is able to “see” in all directions up to 60 feet, 
sensing the physical shape and position of all solid 
and liquid objects. The exact distance to any object 
can be determined in a round. To use bat sense, the 
being must close its eyes, but this causes no penal- 
ties in either movement or combat. No concentra- 
tion is required to maintain the sense. 

While using bat sense, the individual cannot be 
surprised and can “see” any invisible, displaced, or 
camouflaged item within 60 feet. Psionic invisibil- 
ity, however, cannot be detected. Mirror images 
are not detected at all; nor can the individual detect 
illusions, projected images, clouds, gases, or in- 
substantial spirits such as ghosts. If such objects 
are capable of harming the individual, the being 
won't know what is attacking until opening its 
eyes, temporarily nullifying the spell’s effects. 


a 55 z 


Battle Blessing, Haela’s 


Thus, insubstantial or gaseous creatures could 
attack with a +4 bonus to hit. 

This spell works by picking up sound waves; a 
silence, 15 radius spell will nullify the effect. 
Loud noises do not harm or hamper the recipient. 

The material component of the spell is a bit of 
fur from a bat’s ear, which must be eaten by the 
being that wants to use the sense. 

Notes: Very rare spell. (Updated from DraGon 
Magazine.) 


Battle Blessing, Haela’s 
See Haela’s battle blessing. 


Sphere: Charm, Combat 


Level: 2 

Range: 60 yds. 
Components; V, S 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: 7 rds. 

Area of Effect: 50-ft. cube 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell is readily recognizable by its ringing 
song, a loud ascending refrain that raises and re- 
leases the magic at the instant of its ending, affect- 
ing all beings within a 50-foot-cube centered on 
the point selected by the caster. This spell cannot 
be cast stealthily. Creatures in or leaving this area 
when the casting is complete are affected, but 
beings entering the area afterward are not. While it 
lasts, a battle song conveys a +1 attack bonus, a +1 
damage bonus, a +1 bonus to saving throws, and a 
+2 bonus to all ability checks. A faint echoing 
keeps the sound of the caster’s song alive until the 
spell expires; this can be readily heard by those 
who listen for it. Note that any vocal affliction or 
gag prevents the casting of this spell. This spell 
can be used in conjunction with a chant and/or 
prayer spell, but no more than one of each type of 
spell can be in effect at a time. 

Notes: Granted by the god of singers Milil of 
the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Battle Trident 
(Invocation/Evocation) 
Sphere: Combat 


Level: 4 

Range: 60 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 7 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: 1⁄2 


Like its lesser variant, the speeding trident, this 
spell brings into being a three-tined missile of tem- 
porarily hardened water, its piercing points hard 
enough to penetrate armor. This streaks at a chosen 
target creature, turning and twisting to follow any 
evasive movements, and strikes with the caster’s 
THACO, but at a +2 attack roll bonus (it is consid- 
ered a +2 magical weapon for purposes of deter- 
mining what it can hit). A battle trident deals 4d6 
points of damage, plus | additional point per level 
of its caster. A successful saving throw vs. spell re- 
duces damage by half. After striking or missing, 
the trident dissipates in a swiftly scattering mist. 

The material components of a battle trident 
spell are three drops of water and three pointed 
pieces of any sort of hard ferrous metal. 

Notes: Granted by the evil sea goddess 
Umberlee of the FORGOTTEN REALMs setting. This 
spell is found only in a few exceptionally rare 
tomes. 


Battlefate 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Chaos 


Level: 1 

Range: 20 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 4 
Duration: 2 rds./level 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell alters probability to favor one crea- 
ture locked in battle. The opponent may stumble at 
an awkward time, a clumsy parry might catch the 
enemy's weapon at just the right angle, or the crea- 
ture happens to notice the foe moving in for a flank 
attack. The more powerful the priest, the more 
potent the aid. Combat modifiers provided by bat- 
tlefate equal +1 per three levels, so a | st-level 


ee re ee ee aa 


Bear Hug 


), eee eee 


caster provides a +1 bonus, a 4th-level caster a +2 
bonus, a 7th level caster a +3, and so on to a maxi- 
mum of +5 for a 13th-level priest. The exact form 
of the aid or assistance varies from round to 
round—roll 1d6 to see which aspect of the sub- 
ject’s combat abilities are affected in any given 
round. 


1d6 Effect 
1 Nothing happens 
2 Defenses enhanced, apply bonus to subject 
AC 
3 Luck enhanced, apply bonus to saving 
throws 
4 Accuracy enhanced, apply bonus to attack 
rolls 
5 Damage enhanced, apply bonus to damage 
rolls 


6 Lucky opening! Subject gains one extra 
attack with either enhanced accuracy or 
damage (subject's choice) 


An individual who does not make a roll of the 
specified type in the round gains no benefit. For 
example, if the creature gains the saving throw 
bonus but doesn’t have to make any saving throws 
during the round in question, the battlefate spell is 
of no help that round. Of course, in the following 
round, the spell may provide a different benefit. 
Note that on a roll of 1, battlefate does not help at 
all—such is the nature of chaos. 

The material component for this spell is an 
electrum coin tossed by the priest as he casts the 
spell. 

Notes: Common for priests with access to the 
sphere of Chaos. 


Battletide 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Combat 


Level: 5 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 8 

Duration: 6 rds. 

Area of Effect: 20-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell slows all beings except the caster 
within a 20-foot spherical radius. Affected beings 
move and attack at half-speed. (The spell affects 
beings within the radius of effect at the time of cast- 


ing, not creatures who later come within range of 
the caster during the duration of the spell.) Beings 
affected by the spell remain slowed even if they 
move beyond the original area of effect of the spell. 

The magic transfers the energy it steals from 
the affected beings to the caster, who is hasted for 
the spell duration without any of the aging effects 
of a haste spell. The caster moves at double normal 
movement rate and makes physical attacks twice 
as fast (that is, a being who attacks once per round 
attacks twice—first in the round and then last). 
Battletide does not hasten spellcasting. 

All beings within range of the caster are al- 
lowed to make saving throws vs. spell once a 
round to avoid, or instantly break free of, the bat- 
tletide. The spell ends entirely when the last victim 
escapes its effects or at the end of its duration. On 
the first round, the saving throw to avoid battle- 
tide's effects is made at a -6 penalty; on the 
second, at a —5 penalty; on the third, at a —4 
penalty, and so on. 

The material component of this spell is a piece 
of cobweb, human hair, or silk thread as long as 
the caster’s hand. 

Notes: Granted by the evil gods Bane, Cyric, 
and the lesser power Iyachtu Xvim, son of Bane, 
of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Bear Hug 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Animal 


Level: 4 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S,M 

Casting Time: 1 

Duration: | rd./2 levels (round up) 
Area of Effect: The caster 

Saving Throw: None 


As a bear can crush a creature in its arms, this 
spell allows the druid to make a crushing attack. 
This type of attack is possible only against foes of 
the druid’s own size or less. Once the spell is cast, 
the druid can grab a creature, with the same attack 
chances as if using a weapon. If successful, the 
creature takes 2d8 points of damage from crushing 
in that round and every round thereafter unless the 
spell ends, the druid is killed, or the bear hug is 
broken. To break free of a bear hug, a creature must 
make a bend bars/lift gates roll (if not rated for 
Strength, use 5% per Hit Die); one such attempt is 
allowed each round,, While in a bear hug, a creature 


A 57 a 


Beast Claw 


"el 


can make attacks against the caster with a —2 
penalty. If the caster is also under the influence of a 
viperbite spell, the bite attack has a +2 bonus. 
Bear fur is the required material component. 
Notes: Very rare spell for druid’s and similar 
nature priests. (Updated from DraGon Magazine.) 


Beast Claw 
(Alteration, Necromancy) 
Sphere: Combat, Necromantic 


Level: 2 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 5 
Duration: 1 rd/level 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell temporarily transforms the caster’s 
arms into extremely durable furry limbs with 
raking talons allowing two rending attacks (one 
per claw) at a +2 bonus, for 1d4+2 points of 
damage each. The caster can use a normal weapon 
if desired. A weapon attack is made as if the caster 
had a Strength of 18/76, and the caster otherwise 


follows all normal rules for attacking with a held 
weapon. 

The spell can be ended at any time at will, and 
the caster’s limbs instantly revert back to normal. 
The reversion banishes any damage done to the 
limbs, wiping out both hit point damage, any muti- 
lations, or even magical withering. 

The claws are as dexterous as the caster’s own 
hands and are capable of manipulating small ob- 
jects and performing any delicate tasks of which 
the caster is normally capable. They are also 
immune to any magic that transforms physical 
shape. In other words, if a foe polymorphed the 
caster into a frog, the frog would retain the two 
mighty limbs—or if the caster employed shape 
change to take another form, the beast claws and 
their limbs would remain. 

Notes: Granted by the evil beast god Malar of 
the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Beast Tattoo — Elf 
(Enchantment) 
Sphere: All 


Level: 1 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: 3 hrs./level 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell enchants a tattoo depicting an animal 
or monster to imbue the caster with an ability score 
increase in an attribute related to that creature. For 
example, cats are often associated with agility, 
foxes with cunning, and so on. The exact charac- 
teristic associated with any given species may vary 
from culture to culture. 

Thus, this spell augments one ability score (the 
one most closely associated with the animal de- 
picted by 1 point, up to a maximum of 19. Thus, if 
a bear is associated with strength in the caster’s 
culture, the caster can increase his or her Strength 
by 1 point (or 10%, for characters with exceptional 
Strength). 

The material component of this spell is the 
priest’s holy symbol. The caster must also have an 
appropriate tattoo. 

Notes: Granted by the elven god Fenmarel 
Mestarine. 


Beckon — Old Empire 


pe iu 


Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: 12 hrs. 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


Beastmask can affect any single person or 
animal. It allows the subject (who may be the 
caster) to take on the illusory form of a single 
animal species—but only that species of animal 
can perceive the illusion, The subject cannot 
assume an animal form more than twice or less 
than one quarter the character’s size. 

The almost perfect illusion the spell creates de- 
ceives the animals’ sight, hearing, smell, and 
touch. For instance, if the priest casts a “bear” illu- 
sion on a subject, bears believe that subject to be a 
bear, while to humans, other races, and other crea- 
tures, the subject remains the same. 

Characters normally use beastmask to travel 
among or hunt a particular species. This spell lets a 
druid assume the guise of a caribou to move 
among a herd without causing them to panic. A 
character also could avoid being attacked by a 
pack of dire wolves by wearing a wolf's “mask.” 

Beastmask does not allow communication with 
the animal species, though it can be used with 
animal communication spells. 

The material component is a miniature wooden 
mask carved to look like the animal. 

Notes: Uncommon for druids. 


Range: 10 yds. 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 5 
Duration: 1 hr/level 
Area of Effect: 1 person 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


Beastspite afflicts a single person with a magi- 
cal aura that induces one species of animal to hate 
and fear that individual. The individual becomes 


loathed by any species of normal animal, including 
giant types. For example, if beastspite causes bats 
to hate the subject, giant bats will react similarly. 

When the individual comes within 30 yards of an 
animal from the target species, the creature makes 
warning signals (barks, growls, etc.). Its further reac- 
tion depends on the animal's nature. Aggressive ani- 
mals, including predators and most trained guard 
animals, attack. Nonaggressive beasts shun the indi- 
vidual, fleeing or attacking if approached. Owners 
can restrain their domesticated animals, but the 
beasts show obvious distress and may become very 
hostile if the character tries to touch them. 

If the subject was riding when the spell took 
effect, the mount tries to throw off the character. The 
person must make a riding proficiency check each 
round to stay astride and to avoid a fall if thrown off. 

An animal extremely loyal to the subject, such 
as a pet dog, a creature influenced by an animal 
friendship spell, a wizard's familiar, or a paladin’s 
war horse does not become utterly hostile to its 
owner. Instead it notices something “wrong” about 
the character and acts unusually nervous. 

Notes: Uncommon for druids and similar 
nature priests. 


Beckon — Old Empire 
(Conjuration, Charm) 
Sphere: Animal 


Level: 1 

Range: l-mi. radius 
Components: V, M 
Casting Time: 4 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell affects one creature of semi-intelli- 
gence or lower (Intelligence 4 or less); The crea- 
ture must either be vulnerable to an animal 
friendship spell or be a domesticated pet of the 
caster. The spell does not imbue the beckoned 
creature with a favorable attitude toward the caster 
nor does it grant the ability to communicate. When 
the beckon spell is cast, the creature hears the call- 
ing and rushes to the caster’s side as fast as possi- 
ble. Creatures outside the spell’s range do not hear 
the beckoning and are not summoned. 

The material component for this spell is a piece 
of food that is favored by the animal or pet. 

Notes: Granted by the Mulhorandi god Osiris 
of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Se Se 


Beckon Spirit 


Beckon Spirit 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 
Sphere: Summoning 


Level: 6 

Range: Special 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: | turn 
Duration: | turn 

Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


Through this spell, a shaman can ask any spirit 
to appear. It is typically used to gain audience with 
a hero spirit, ancestors, or other major spirit. 

The shaman must find a place that is holy to the 
spirits; there must be no one present of whom the 
spirit disapproves, and no person or creature of an 
alignment opposed to the spirit. 

The spirit can answer or ignore the shaman’s 
beckoning, If it chooses to come, the spirit usually 
appears from the darkness of a cave, steps out of 
swirling mists, or makes some other suitably dra- 
matic entrance. The spell is usually used by pow- 
erful shamans who wish to converse with major 
Spirits, or give a physical object to the spirit. If the 
spirit wishes, it can carry an object from material 
world into the spirit world. Once the object crosses 
over, it cannot be retrieved. Only under the most 
unusual of circumstances might a spirit give a 
character in the material world an object from the 
Spirit world (this is up to the DM). 

Notes: Uncommon for shamans. 


(Enchantment/Charm) 
Sphere: Charm 


Level: 2 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell imbues the priest’s bronzewood or 
oaken cudgel with the power to charm an oppo- 
nent by touch. The priest can make a nondamaging 
touch, or a normal melee attack. In either case, a 
target creature that is hit must make a successful 
saving throw vs. spell or be charmed. If the priest 
makes a damaging attack, the creature receives a 


saving throw bonus of +1 for each point of damage 
suffered (however, a roll of “1” always fails). If 
this spell is used in conjunction with a shillelagh 
spell, the creature saves at a —1 penalty. The 
dweomer lasts three rounds plus one round per 
caster level, or until the priest scores a successful 
hit with the cudgel, whichever occurs first, 

A charmed creature remains so for 2410 
rounds, The creature regards the priest as a com- 
rade, friend, or mentor, treating the priest with love 
and respect, and trusting him or her implicitly. If 
communication is possible, the charmed creature 
obeys the priest to the best of its ability as long as 
the instructions seem plausible and do not obvi- 
ously consign the creature to needless injury, loss, 
or violation of alignment. 

This spell is particularly useful for getting in- 
corrigibles to listen to the teachings of St. Cuthbert 
or to contribute to worthy causes, 

Notes: Granted by St. Cuthbert of the Cudgel 
of the WORLD OF GREYHAWK setting. 


Beneficence 
(Evocation) 
Sphere: All 


Level: 1 

Range: Touch 

Components: V 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: 2 turns/level 

Area of Effect: 10-ft/level radius 
Saving Throw: None 


The beneficence spell surrounds the shukenja 
in an aura of mystical harmony and wisdom. All 
who see him recognize him as a holy man of virtue 
and kindness and many are predisposed to treat 
him in a friendly and respectful manner. The spell 
gives the shukenja a bonus of +2 to encounter re- 
action rolls with most NPCs and creatures. Only 
those who are sworn enemies of the shukenja, his 
race, his class, or what he represents are immune 
to the effects of the spell. Nor does the spell work 
on creatures that have no understanding of the 
shukenja’s position or role. Thus, the spell is 
unable to affect the reactions of a den of tigers or a 
group of bandits waiting to waylay the unwary. It 
can, however, affect the reactions of a group of 
peasants or a village of ninjas, provided the latter 
are not hired to harm the shukenja. 

Beneficence does not deprive those affected of 
their free will and does not cause them to instantly 


ee ee a 


follow the suggestions of the shukenja. Their reac- 
tions are improved for every day dealings, not for 
very unusual events. 

Notes: Common for priests from an oriental 
setting; otherwise, very rare. 


Berronar, Succor of 
See succor of Berronar. 


Berronar’s Favor — Dwarf 


Level: 5 

Range: Special 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 hr. 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


When dwarven enclaves fall on hard economic 
times, this spell can be used to help put the com- 
munity back on its feet. When cast the spell sum- 
mons a lock of Berronar’s hair, which turns into 
gold within 24 hours after its arrival. The golden 
lock is worth 2,000-8,000 gp. It does not radiate 
magic, nor can it be dispelled or negated. Despite 
the usefulness of this spell, it has two important re- 
strictions: 

First, the spell must be cast on behalf of a suf- 
fering dwarven enclave, and the acquired gold 
must be used to help the enclave through its diffi- 
cult times. If the gold is used for any other pur- 
pose, especially an evil or selfish purpose (for 
example, personal gain) the gold is forfeit and van- 
ishes immediately. 

Second, the caster must be Berronar’s high 
priest in the enclave and of lawful good alignment. 

If these conditions are not met, Berronar 
simply refuses to grant the spell Obviously, 
Berronar’s adventuring priests are unlikely to re- 
ceive this spell while away from their enclave. 
This spell can be cast only by priests of Berronar 
Truesilver. 

The material component for this spell is the 
caster’s holy symbol. The casting time accounts 
for other factors in the spell’s casting such as 
prayer, meditation, and the like. 

Notes: Granted by the dwarven god Berronar 
Truesilver. 


Beshaba, Darkfire of 


(Enchantment/Charm) 
Sphere: Charm 


Level: 5 

Range: 50 ft. 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 1 

Duration: | rd./level 

Area of Effect: 1 warrior/level 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


When a berserk spell is cast upon a group of 
warriors. they change into the shapes of bears. 
Although they retain the hands and eyes of men 
and continue to wield weapons in this state, they 
lose all fear of death and enter a killing rage They 
must attack any enemy they see and cannot be 
given orders. Thus, any hope of coordinating an 
attack is completely lost. Due to their blind rage, 
they suffer a—4 modifier on ability checks involv- 
ing Intelligence, Wisdom, or Charisma, but receive 
a +2 bonus to all saving throws vs. spell. 

While the spell lasts, the warriors are immune 
to the following priest spells: charm person or 
mammal, all spells in the Charm sphere, protection 
from evil. protection from evil, 10’ radius, and 
dispel evil. They are also immune to the following 
wizard spells: protection from evil, protection from 
evil, 10’ radius, repulsion, all spells in enchant- 
ment/charm school, and all spells in the 
illusion/phantasm school. 

Warriors under the influence of a berserk spell, 
receive a +4 adjustment to their Strength score, 
with the accompanying modifiers to their attack 
and damage rolls, and their AC is modified by a +2 
(so that, for example, AC 4 becomes AC 2). A 
berserk spell frees the warriors from having to 
make a morale check, and renders them immune to 
fire damage. 

Warriors who die while under the influence of 
a berserk spell are assured of a place in Valhalla. 
This spell can only be cast on fighters, and only if 
they are willing recipients. 

Notes: Restricted to priests from a Norse cul- 
ture; rare. 


Beshaba, Bane of 
See bane of Beshaba. 


Beshaba, Darkfire of 
See darkfire of Beshaba. 


ee 


~ Bestow Curse a 


Bestow Curse The spell requires some personal possession of 
Reversed form, remove curse. This form is used by the creature (this is not consumed in the casting). 
evil priests. j The reverse of the spell, remove major curse, 
counters any of the major curse effects. 
Bestow Hit Points — Savant Notes: Very rare spell, used by evil priests, 
(Alteration) (Updated from Dragon Magazine.) 


Sphere: Necromantic 


Level: 5 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


With this spell, a clerical savant can bestow up 
to one of his hit points per level on an intelligent 
creature. This has the effect of restoring lost 
damage or even increasing the creature's hit points 
above the normal maximum. The magically be- 
stowed hit points last until they are lost through 
damage or until the savant dispels the enchant- 
ment. For the spell’s duration, the savant is without 
these hit points. In the event, the creature is slain, 
the savant permanently loses the hit points be- 
stowed—even if the creature is subsequently 
raised or resurrected. Only one such spell at a time 
can be enacted upon a creature. 

Notes: Common for clerical savants; otherwise 
virtually unknown. (Updated from DRAGON 
Magazine. ) 


By touching a creature, the caster bestows a 
major curse upon it. The caster can choose any 
effect from the list of major curse effects (see list). 
The creature is allowed a saving throw vs. spell; 
Success negates the curse, Neither dispel magic nor 
remove curse can rid a creature of this effect. Only a 
wish or remove major curse is an effective remedy. 


Ee a ae Er ee ee ee 


Errect EXPLANATIONS 
Aging: This curse ages the subject 10-60 years, or 
the demihuman equivalent. Only the disadvan- 
tages of aging are acquired in this process. 
rapidly backward, to the age of 16 minus 2d8 for a 
human, or the demihuman equivalent. The regres- 
sion might be nearly instantaneous, or might take 
place over a number of days or weeks. f 
Agonizing Pain: The PC is wracked by continual 
pain. This reduces Dexterity reaction time, attack 
rolls, and any saving throws involving Dexterity 
all by 6 points. Hit points are reduced by 25% so 
long as the curse is in effect. Furthermore, any 
spellcasting has a 50% chance of failure. 
Alter Gender: The permanent change of one’s sex 
can be most disconcerting. 
Alter Race: Changes the subject's race; an elf can 
become a dwarf; a human a halfling etc. 
Alter Sub-Race: This change involves an alteration 
within the same genus, as in a change from grey elf 
to high elf or wood elf to drow. Note the subraces of 
humanity fall into this category, as well. 
Amnesia: This is a total loss of memory (but not 
survival and self-preservation skills associated 
with being an adult). 
Aura, Antipathy: The aura causes creatures 
around the subject to have hostile feelings towards 
him. Charisma is virtually 10 points lower than 
normal even among close friends and family. All 
reaction checks register as hostile. 
Aura, Attraction: Aside from attracting the un- 
wanted affection of everyone the subject comes in 
contact with, the cursed individual might be caught 
in the middle of an armed confrontation between 
two such creatures wanting his or her attentions. 
Note that it is not healthy for some creatures to be 
to friendly toward the accursed (needle men etc.) 
Blindness: Much like the spell of the same name, 
this cannot be dispelled by any means other than a 
wish or a remove major curse spell. 
Breathing, Air: Imagine its effect on a sea dweller 
especially if the recently cursed person or creature 
is underwater at the time the spell is cast. 
Breathing, Water: This works the same as the air 
breathing curse but affects those dwelling on land 
and breathing air. 
Conditional Death: If the cursed person does a 
certain act, he dies. The caster decides the trigger, 
which must be both voluntary and unnecessary for 
survival. For example, sneezing is involuntary, 
breathing and eating are necessary, but eating meat 


Bestow Major Curse 


is not. Depending on the nature of the casting the 
subject may or may not know the nature of the 
problem. 

Conditional Petrifaction: If the cursed person 
does a certain act he turns to stone. The caster de- 
cides the trigger. For example, the PC might turn 
to stone if he is exposed to direct sunlight. 
Depending on the nature of the casting of the curse 
the accursed may or may not know the nature of 
his problem. A stone to flesh spell dispels the 
effect of this curse. 
Confusion: Under extreme stress the 
case while adventuring), the accursed acts as if 
under the effects of a confusion spell. 

Deafness: Aside from the communication prob- 
lems, a deafened spellcaster has a 25% chance of 
spell failure if casting a spell with a verbal compo- 
nent. The accursed is more easily surprised (95%) 
unless looking exactly in the right direction. 
Deafening Voice: Every word that leaves the sub- 
ject’s mouth is deafeningly loud. A whisper 
sounds like 10 men shouting, a yell like a flight of 
dragons roaring. 

Disfigurement: This is a serious deformation of 
the cursed person's body. This might affect move- 
ment, fighting ability, or the reaction of others. 
Gelatinous Form: The accursed becomes a virtual 
blob. Spellcasting and weapon use are all but im- 
possible. 

Growth: Being giant-sized isn’t a problem? It is 
up to the DM whether the subject’s clothing and 
gear grow with him. 

Halitosis, Deadly: This atrocious case of bad 
breath has an effect equal to that of a cloudkill 
spell on any creature within 10 feet of the subject’s 
mouth and standing in front of the subject. 
Insanity: Anyone attempting to remove this curse 
by any other means is also affected unless a suc- 
cessful saving throw ys. spell is made. If successful, 
a second saving throw is required against confusion, 
as the spell of the same name. 

Lycanthropy: This is the familiar age old curse. 
The caster chooses what type of were-creature the 
accursed becomes. 

Multiple Personalities: The cursed person might 
mistakenly assume the curse is temporary amne- 
sia. Each of the resulting 3-12 personalities has no 
knowledge of the others’ existence nor any recol- 
lection of memories gained by them. 
Muteness: Aside from the communication prob- 
lems, this eliminates the ability to cast spells that 
have a verbal component. 


eR a OER ee ne ere 


By touching a creature, the caster bestows a 
minor curse upon it. The caster can choose any 
effect from the minor curse list. The creature is al- 
lowed a saving throw vs. spell; if successful, the 
curse is negated. 

The reverse of the spell negates the effects of 
any minor curse. 

Notes: Very rare spell, used by evil priests. 
(Updated from DraGon Magazine.) 


Bestow Minor Curse 


Change Skin Color: The subject's skin changes to 
any hue of the caster’s choice. 

Chills; The subject suffers chills as with a fever, 
lowering reaction time and dropping overall 
Dexterity by 2 points, 

Continual Smiling: While not seeming much of a 
curse, this can result in many a skirmish. Many will 
be offended by the subject’s constant grin. 
Dancing: The subject breaks into a dance, jig, or 
caper at the most inopportune moments, Armor 
Class and saving throws have a —2 penalty, while 
spellcasting has a 20% chance of spell failure. 
Double Vision: The subject makes attack rolls at a 
—2 penalty; effective Dexterity is lowered by 2 


points. 

Elasticity: The subject can stretch his body beyond 
its normal shape. Unfortunately, the body takes 
id4 hours to return to its normal shape, during 
which time Dexterity is reduced by 4 points. 
Filthiness: The subject remains dirty no matter 
how many baths are taken. This filthiness extends 
to the clothing as well. Charisma is reduced by 2 
points. 

Floral Hair: The subject’s hair becomes like 
weeds, grass, twigs, and flowers. While possibly 
improving the reaction of woodland creatures, it 
otherwise lowers Charisma by 2 points. 
Forgetfulness: Lapses of memory triggered by 
certain events or contact with particular objects or 
creatures incur a 25% chance of spell failure. The 
effects on nonspellcasters is determined by the 
DM. 

Generosity: The subject feels an irresistible need 
to give away everything of value that he owns. 
Greed: The subject covets anything of value that 
anyone else owns. Often this leads to theft. 

Hair Growth: The subject is beset by rapid uncon- 
trollable hair growth, The caster can choose to 
make this over the entire body or just the head. 
Halitosis: The subject develops breath so foul that 
all within 10 feet have a—2 penalty to attacks and a 
20% chance of spell failure. 

Hiccuping: This increases chances of spell failure 
by 25%. It is otherwise similar to belching. 
Insatiable Appetite: The subject can’t satisfy feel- 
ings of overwhelming hunger and suffers a —2 
penalty to all actions when uneaten food is present. 
Insatiable Thirst: This curse has the same effect 
as insatiable hunger except that it causes a thirst 
that cannot be quenched. 

Insomnia: The subject is always tired, and has a 
25% chance of spell failure during casting. 
Itching: The caster chooses whether this is non- 


stop itching or triggered by an event or stress, The 
subject's Dexterity and attack rolls are reduced by 
2, and any spellcasting is 25% likely to fail 
Kleptomania: The subject has an irresistible urge 
to pilfer from others (if not a thief, he won't be 
very good at it). 

Lethargy: The subject suffers extreme drowsiness 
either all the time or when under stress. Dexterity 
and attack rolls are reduced by 2, and any spellcast- 
ing is 25% likely to fail 

Metal Allergy: Every time the subject touches 
metal, his hand breaks out in hives and blisters. 
This gives a -2 (or -10%) penalty to any activity 
requiring the use of the hands, 

Myopia (extreme near-sightedness): The subject 
has a —2 penalty to missile attacks and uses the 
grenade-like missile table to determine the center 
of area attacks. 

Narcissism: The subject becomes extremely vain, 
and quick to point out his own looks to everyone, 
while pointing out their flaws. Those spending any 
time around the subject react as if his Charisma 
was 2 points lower than normal. 

Nausea: This arises when conditions set by the 
caster are met (for example, entering a small room 
meeting a dwarf etc.). Attack rolls are at a -2 


to portray what an inability to tell the truth can 
cause. 

Profuse Sweating: While not causing any detri- 
mental effects of a physical nature, this curse might 
have deleterious effects on Charisma. It might also 
make the hands slippery at inopportune times. 
Serpent Hair: The subject can be mistaken for a 
medusa by others who may be prone to attack first 
and examine the corpse later. The subject's hair 
changes into locks of living serpents. These snakes 
are indeed poisonous to all but the victim, making 
them hazardous to those who are close to him. 
Serpent Hand: One or both of the victim's hands 
becomes the maw of a living poisonous snake. The 
type of snake is decided by the caster of the curse. 
The snakes cannot harm the victim, but are not 
under his control, attacking any else who ventures 
too close. 

Shaking: Body spasms reduce the subject's 
Dexterity and attack rolls by 2 points and cause a 
25% chance for error in casting spells with a so- 
matic portion. 

Slurred Speech; Aside from making the subject 
hard to understand, a spellcaster has a 25% chance 
of spell failure if the spell has a verbal component. 


ee eee ee 


Bind Fetish 


Smoldering: The subject constantly emits smoke 
from his skin and hair. This can cause some visual 
impairment, reducing attack rolls by 2 points and 
causing errors in distance judgment for spell cast- 
ing. Furthermore, anyone suffering from this curse 
has no chance of going undetected unless he is 
standing downwind in a gale. 

Sneezing: Sneezing fits occur when a particular 
event happens or the subject is under stress, caus- 
ing a 25% chance of spell failure during casting. 
Spike Growth: Once cursed, the subject sprouts 
spikes all over his body. While the spikes are no 
danger to the accursed, they can cause serious 
damage to clothing and to others (1d4 points of 
damage per spike). 

Stumbling: This affects Dexterity with regard to 
movement. Any walking or running requires a 
successful Dexterity check at a -2 penalty to avoid 
tripping over one’s own feet. This is in addition to 
a general penalty of —2 to the effective Dexterity 
score. 

Truth: This is the opposite of pathological lying. 
Uncontrollable Laughter: Many people find 
being laughed at insulting. This can have serious 
repercussions when the accursed laughs at the 
wrong persons in the wrong places. 
Unintentional Insulting: The cursed individual 
has no control over his tongue when around 
others. It usually only takes a few curse-inspired 
insults to cause major problems. 

Vulgarity: Insults can be forthcoming with this 
curse but unlike the unintentional insulting curse, 
profanity is uttered in some form with every 
breath. 

Wart Growth: The cursed person becomes cov- 
ered from head to toes with warts. This reduces 
Charisma by 4 points. 

Weariness: The accursed individual is always 
tired. This causes a —2 penalty to attack rolls. 
Furthermore, this curse reduces Constitution by 2 
points, This makes wearing armor or equally 
heavy objects for long periods of time nearly im- 
possible. 

Weight Gain: The subject immediately begins to 
gain weight at a rate of 5 pounds per day. The 
curse ultimately adds 100 pounds to the subject's 
original weight. Of course, clothing and armor no 
longer fit. 

Weight Loss: The exact opposite of weight gain. 
However, the subject's weight is not reduced 
below 1% of the original weight. 

Whistling: This curse appears at random times. 


When it does it has a 25% chance not only of in- 
terrupting the subject's spellcasting, but also of in- 
terrupting the spellcasting of those in the 
immediate vicinity. It also makes hiding difficult. 


Bind Fetish 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
Sphere: Summoning 


Level: 3 

Range: 10 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: | fetish spirit 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


f 
he. 


This spell permanently binds a fetish spirit to a 
solid object—thereafter also called a fetish. The 
object must be fashioned from wood, bone, pot- 
tery, or rock by a skilled craftsman (in other 
words, someone with the appropriate nonweapon 
proficiency), and may be a figurine, wand, neck- 


| ia al a ae ace es 


Bind Guardian 


a 


lace, or other thing: what is important is that the 
fetish feels at home in the object, which means— 
since they are usually cruel and nasty creatures— 
that it must look disturbing or otherwise 
unpleasant. 

The caster holds the object and casts the spell, 
but the fetish spirit is allowed a saving throw vs. 
spell. Success means it can attack the caster. 
Provided that the fetish spirit feels at home in the 
new fetish object, it remains until the object is 
broken or it is expelled by magic; if it does not feel 
at ease (because the object is inappropriate), it 
makes repeated subsequent escape attempts. 

Only one fetish spirit can dwell in a fetish 
object. There is no limit to the number of fetish ob- 
jects a shaman can create. 

Notes: Uncommon for shamans. 


Level: 5 

Range: 10 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: Permanent 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell is used to bind a guardian spirit to a new 
site or to a physical object. The spirit gets a saving 
throw vs. spell to resist. A successful save means the 
spirit remains free and can attack the shaman. 

If the spirit is currently guarding a particular 
place, the shaman can bind it into a bone (which 
must be at least as old as the spirit—tricky if the 
spirit has been there for several centuries). As long 
as the shaman carries that bone, the guardian spirit 
can be called once per week to defend the shaman 
for up to a turn. The guardian will not otherwise 
obey any commands. Only the casting shaman can 
use the bone in this way. 

The spell can also be used to reset the spirit— 
taking it from the bone and placing it as a guard 
over a new site specified by the caster. The new lo- 
cation can be no more than one hundred yards 
across, and must be a fixed, static area with clear 
boundaries. Movable objects like tents and chari- 
ots cannot have guardian spirits set over them. In 
open areas, a boundary must be defined with a 
fence, ditches, or something similar, If the new site 
has no clear perimeter, or if the boundary is de- 


stroyed, the spirit guards only an area 15 feet 
across in the very center. 

When the spirit is removed from the bone to be 
Set at a new site, the bone crumbles away. 

Notes: Uncommon for shamans. 


Bird Call 
See call animal or bird. 


Bird Of Prey — Old Empire 
(Invocation/Evocation) 
Sphere: Combat 


Level: 3 

Range: 60 yds. + 10 yds /level 
Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 6 

Duration: 2 rds /level 

Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell creates a hawk-shaped region of 
force that hovers above the targeted creature. 
Every second round, beginning the round after the 
spell is cast, the bird of prey dives down upon that 
creature, attacking with a +3 initiative bonus over 
the initiative rolled by its caster and priest's base 
THACO with a +2 bonus. Thus, if the casting priest 
has an initiative of 5 and a THACO of 16, the bird 
of prey has an initiative of 2 and a THACO of 14. 

A bird of prey that strikes inflicts 2d4+2 points 
of damage. Whether it hits or misses, it immedi- 
ately circles upward and prepares for another 
attack until the spell effect expires. When possible, 
the bird of prey climbs to 30 to 40 feet above the 
caster (though such a height is not necessary for 
the spell to function). 

The target creature cannot be changed once the 
spell is cast; however, the priest need not concen- 
trate to maintain the effect. The target creature 
need only be in range when the spell is cast; the 
bird of prey pursues its target. Invisibility offers no 
protection, assuming the spellcaster could detect 
the target while casting. 

While a bird of prey can be perceived as a 
hawk-shaped shimmering region by those who 
look carefully, attacks against it have no effect. 
Only a dispel magic or similar spell affects a bird 
of prey, ending it immediately, Otherwise, the only 
way to escape is to employ blink, dimension door, 
teleport, or similar form of travel. If the target 
creature escapes in this fashion, the bird of prey 
immediately dissipates. A shield spell, while in 


aia ai alan a alii aaron ae 


Black Talon 


"gel 


effect, causes a bird of prey to miss automatically. 
Notes: Granted by the Mulhorandi god Anhur 
of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Range: 30 yds. 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: | rd. 

Duration: 6 rds. 

Area of Effect: Up to twelve 10 X 10-ft. cubes 
Saving Throw: 1⁄4 


A more powerful version of the slicing shadow 
spell, this spell creates a smoky cloud in which 
spectral dark mouths lined with glittering black 
fangs appear and disappear. These have only mo- 
mentary solidity, yet they bite as if they were very 
powerful, very real creatures. 

A biting shadow moves as the caster desires, 
drifting at MV FI 12 (MC: E). It can change direc- 
tion only at the end of a round (once per round), 
but can move horizontally, vertically, or in any 
combination of vectors. The cloud holds its shape 
when coming into contact with walls and other 
large solid objects (that is, it does not spread out 
along the wall or become smaller, but the sliced- 
off or missing portion vanishes into extra-dimen- 
sional space, reappearing as the cloud moves away 
from the obstacle). Note that if the cloud strikes a 
solid wall without a break (or broken only by a 
snugly fitting closed door) it does not intrude into 
any room or space beyond, but if the wall is 
pierced by an open door, window, or other gap or 
hole, the cloud retains its shape and moves through 
the areas on both sides of the wall. 

The biting cloud affects only living creatures 
and undead; it does not bite tapestries, hanging 
lamps, or other solid, nonliving objects, no matter 
how delicate they may be. Any being except the 
caster who comes into contact with a biting 
shadow suffers 6d6 points of damage per round. A 
saving throw vs. spell for half damage is allowed, 
and is made every round the being is in contact 
with the cloud. The caster can move and act freely 
within the cloud without harm. 

The caster can choose what volume of area to 
affect with the spell (up to the maximum) and can 
end the spell early if desired. 

Notes: Granted by the Mask, god of thieves of 


the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. This spell is found 
only in a few exceptionally rare tomes. 


Black Cairn 


Level: 2 

Range: | mi./level radius 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 hr. 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


whe 


After this spell is cast, the priest knows the loca- 
tion of a corpse (animal or otherwise). The priest 
must first find stones, each one bigger than a fist. He 
stacks them in a small pile, or cairn, and sits and 
stares at the blackness of the stones until he receives 
a vision of the corpse’s location. If the caster has an 
item belonging to the corpse, the casting time is re- 
duced by half. Templars and druids can cast this 
spell, elemental and para-elemental clerics can not. 

Notes: Uncommon for templars and druids in 
the DARK SUN setting. 


Black Talon 


(Alteration, Necromancy) 
Sphere: Necromantic 


Level: 2 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: 1 of the caster’s arms 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell temporarily transforms the caster’s 
arm into a retractable, rubbery appendage that can 
be extended up to 10 feet and used to strike at foes 
with at +] bonus to normal attack rolls. The arm 
ends in a taloned claw that rakes foes for 1d4 points 
of physical damage, plus 1d4 (Points of unearthly 
magical cold damage (2d4 points total), Undead 
creatures are unaffected by the chilling damage. 
Other creatures struck are allowed a saving throw 
vs. spell to take only half the chilling damage. 

While his or her arm is transformed, the priest is 


unable to work spells requiring somatic components. 
Notes: Granted by the evil god Cyric in the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


ee ee 


Blackhand 
(Abjuration) 
Sphere: Combat 


Level: 3 

Range: 60 yds. 

Components: S, M 

Casting Time: 6 

Duration: Concentration + Special 
Area of Effect: | creature/round 
Saving Throw: None or '1 


This spell negates the effect of protection from 
evil spells, including the 10-foot-radius version, 
and can suppress the aura of protection paladins 
exert. When casting the spell, the priest’s hands 
become enveloped in a black aura. Each round 
thereafter, while the priest maintains concentration, 
he can point his hands at one target creature within 
the range. If that creature is in any way protected 
by protection from evil, the effect is canceled. 

A paladin making a successful saving throw vs. 
spell has his personal protection aura canceled for 
1 round per 2 levels of the priest casting blackhand 
(round fractions down). If the paladin fails this 
saving throw, his aura is canceled for 2 rounds per 
level of the priest. These durations also apply to a 
protection from evil effect generated by a magical 
item of any sort. If a creature within the area of a 
protection from evil 10’ radius spell is affected by 
a blackhand spell, but has not actually cast the pro- 
tection spell, other creatures within the radius of 
protection are unaffected. 

Notes: Granted by Iuz the Evil of the WORLD 
OF GREYHAWK setting. 


Blacklight 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Combat, Sun 


Level: 3 

Range: 10 yds/level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 6 

Duration: | rd./evel 

Area of Effect: 20-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: Special 


Upon casting this spell, the priest creates a sta- 
tionary, temporary area of total darkness. The 
darkness is impenetrable to normal vision and in- 
fravision, but the caster can see, move, attack, and 
cast spells normally in the affected area. Each 


round, others within the blacklit area are allowed a 
saving throw vs. spell at a —3 penalty. Those who 
succeed can see as the caster does for that round 
while those who fail are wrapped in total darkness. 
Creatures outside the sphere cannot see into it. 

The illumination of normal and magical light is 
negated by the blacklight. Spells that depend on 
visual effects (such as illusions) do not function if 
the victim cannot see them. 

Creatures within the blacklit area have a —4 
penalty to attack rolls and saving throws and have 
their Armor Classes reduced by 4. Characters with 
the blind-fighting nonweapon proficiency are only 
penalized by —2 to their attack rolls and saving 
throws and have no penalty to their Armor Classes. 

The caster of a blacklight spell can end it at 
will, The casting of light, continual light, or dispel 
magic specifically to counter this spell destroys the 
blacklight effect. 

The material components of this spell are a 
piece of coal and the dried eyeball of any creature. 

Notes: Granted by the god Ibrandul of the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Blade Barrier 
(Evocation) 
Sphere: Guardian, Creation 


Level: 6 

Range: 30 yds. 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 9 

Duration: 3 rds./level 
Area of Effect: 5 to 60 feet square 
Saving Throw: Special 


The priest employs this spell to set up a wall of 
circling, razor-sharp blades. These whirl and flash 
around a central point, creating an immobile bar- 
rier. Any creature attempting to pass through the 
blade barrier suffers 8d8 points of damage. The 
plane of rotation of the blades can be horizontal, 
vertical, or in between. Creatures within the area of 
the barrier when it is invoked are allowed a saving 
throw vs. spell. If this is successful, the blades are 
avoided and no damage is suffered; the creature es- 
capes the area of the blade barrier by the shortest 
possible route. The barrier remains for three rounds 
for every experience level of the priest casting it. 
The barrier can cover an area from as small as five 
feet square to as large as 60 feet square. 

Notes: Common for clerics (PHB). 


eS aaa 


Bladedance — Drow 


"\ gl 


Bladebend — Drow 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Combat 


Level: 5 

Range: 70 ft. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 8 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: 1 edged weapon 
Saving Throw: None 


Bladebend causes the blade of one unsheathed, 
edged weapon within range, mentally selected by 
the priest, to twist about to strike its bearer. 
Sentient, non-evil weapons are unaffected by this 
spell. 

The weapon strikes with the base THACO of 
the caster, plus any bonuses or penalties inherent 
to the affected weapon. Once the attack is re- 
solved, the affected weapon reverts to its normal 
state. 

This spell has only recently been perfected by 
the clergy of the Masked Lord. Earlier attempts to 
mimic Vhaeraun’s natural ability resulted in 
writhing weapons flying all about at random. 

The material component of this spell is the 
priest's holy symbol. 

Notes: Granted by the drow god Vhaeraun. 


Bladebless 
(Necromantic) 


Sphere: Healing 


Level: 7 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: 1 nonmagical blade 
Saving Throw: Special 


By use of this spell, a priest heals a specific 
wound by bestowing a blessing on the weapon that 
caused it. This magic works only upon a nonmagi- 
cal bladed weapon, which the priest must touch 
and hold as the blessing is intoned. Immediately 
upon this being done, the last wound caused by 
that blade, inflicted on a living thing within one 
turn per experience level of the priest, will in- 
stantly be fully and completely healed, even if the 
blade was poisoned, a disease conferred, or a limb 
or head was severed. Such healing occurs even if 


the affected creature is several planes distant at the 
casting of the bladebless and if death occurred due 
to a failed system shock roll or poison saving 
throw, then life is restored. (If death was due to cu- 
mulative hit point loss, life is not restored; nor will 
this magic heal other wounds upon the victim's 
body.) The healed creature need not ever be seen, 
touched, or even known to the priest. If such a 
wound has already healed, it is unaffected, and the 
bladebless magic is lost. 

The material components for this spell are the 
weapon in question, the priest’s holy symbol, and 
a drop of the priest's own blood. 

Notes: Granted by Tempus, war god of the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 6 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: 1 bladed weapon 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell enables a single bladed melee 
weapon touched by the caster to animate and attack 
a chosen creature. The spell confers only the ability 
to move and fight, it does not confer any other mag- 
ical abilities or properties. If at any time, the blade 
and the caster are separated by more than 60 feet, 
the spell ends and the weapon falls to the ground. 

Any time after the spell is cast, the bladed 
weapon can be cast into the air by the priest and 
commanded to attack. The weapon flies toward the 
target creature by the most direct route. It attacks 
any creature that tries to block its way. If left to 
itself, it will fight its way to the intended target 
through all opposition; however, the caster can, at 
will, take direct control of its flight, its positioning, 
and its attack. Doing so requires full concentration 
on the weapon for the entire round, otherwise the 
blade attacks on its own. 

The weapon attacks once per round, as if 
wielded by the caster. If bladedance is cast on a 
magical weapon that has powers activated by the 
wielder (such as the radiance effect of a sun- 
blade), the caster must concentrate on the blade in 
order to use them. The dancing weapon does not 
take normal melee damage, but any attack that 


ee es 


Blaenther’s Bowls 


might destroy the weapon under normal circum- 
stances can affect it and, of course, the bladedance 
is subject to dispelling. If the weapon is engaged in 
nonlethal combat, it defends as if it was the caster. 
While the blade is acting on its own, the caster can 
take any other actions: discharging missiles, spell- 
casting, melee, and so on. 

At Sth level, the priest can cast bladedance on 
any size S bladed melee weapon. At 7th level, the 
priest can cast the spell on a size S or M bladed 
melee weapon. At 9th level, a size S, M, or L 
bladed melee weapon can be affected. 

The material component is the priest's holy 
symbol, which is touched to the weapon. 

Notes: Granted by the drow goddess Eilistraee. 


Blaenther’s Bowls 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Summoning 


Level: 5 

Range: 20 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: 1 turn/level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell teleports small nonliving items 
placed on one surface to another. it creates a di- 
mensional linkage between the two surfaces, each 
of which must be smaller in surface area than the 
caster’s body and separated by no more than 100 
feet per level of the caster after the spell is cast. 
(The surfaces must be within 20 yards when the 
spell is first cast.) The caster must have touched 
both surfaces with his or her bare flesh at some 
time before the spell is cast. 

Items to be transported must fit totally on or 
within the enchanted surfaces. Each surface can 
send one item per round to the other, and a partic- 
ular Blaenther’s bowls spell can send an item only 
one way; it must be picked up and set down again 
on the destination surface to return to its origina- 
tion surface. When dealing with a sequence of 
items to be transported, the first item to be placed 
on a surface is transported first. If many items are 
on a surface, the one that has been there longest is 
transported before the others; for items with iden- 
tical seniority, randomly determine which moves 
first. Items that are too large are not sent, nor are 
those held by a living or dead being. Living or 
undead substances touching the linked surfaces are 
not sent. Either linked surface can be moved with- 
out breaking the magic, so long as the two never 
part more than 100 feet per caster level. 

This spell was devised long ago by Blaenther 
Oldryn, a priest of Waukeen. Blaenther used this 
spell as most priests do today: to whisk coin offer- 
ings from a bowl to an inner area and to send 
scrolls, weapons, and needed items to clergy mem- 
bers stationed by the bowl as requested (by prewrit- 
ten notes dropped into the bowl or by signal gongs). 

The material components are a pinch of gold 
dust, a spiral of fine wire, and a carved ivory or 
bone arrow of any size with arrowheads at both 
ends. 

Notes: Granted by the goddess Waukeen of the 
FORGOTTEN REALMs setting. 


ee ee ee 


Blazing Sword — Halfling 


ET ee 


Blast of Pain 
(Alteration, Evocation, Necromancy) 
Sphere: Combat, Necromantic 


Level: 5 

Range: 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 5 
Duration: 4 rds. 

Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell incapacitates and inflicts damage on 
a target creature for up to four rounds. Creatures 
above 10 Hit Dice or levels are more resistant to its 
effects. The casting creates a beam of smoky gray 
radiance that streaks unerringly from the priest to a 
single chosen target creature, which must be 
within view and range of the caster as casting 
begins. The target creature must make a saving 
throw vs. spell at a —5 penalty. If the saving throw 
is successful, the creature is overwhelmed by pain 
for one round (slowing its movement by half, 
adding 3 to all casting times, and forcing it to 
make all attack rolls at a —2 penalty) and suffers 
1d4+1 points of damage to its nervous system; it is 
then free of the spell. 

If the saving throw is failed, the creature suffers 
1 point of damage per level of the caster and is 
stunned and writhing helplessly in pain for the re- 
mainder of the current round and the following 
round (which is the second round of the spell). 
While in such pain, no spellcasting or coherent 
thought is possible. The creature drops or flings 
away all held items and moves at random. It can 
make no deliberate attacks, and its awareness of its 
surroundings is blotted out. 

At the beginning third round of the spell, the 
creature is allowed a saving throw vs. spell, this 
time at a —4 penalty. If successful, it suffers 1d4+1 
points of damage and is then free of the spell. If it 
fails, another 1 point of damage per level of the 
caster is taken, and the creature continues to be 
stunned and to writhe helplessly. 

At the beginning of the fourth round of the 
spell, the creature is allowed a saving throw vs. 
spell at a—3 penalty. If successful, it suffers 1d4+1 
points of damage and is freed from the spell. If the 
saving throw is failed, another 1 point of damage 
per level of the caster is taken, and the creature is 
stunned and writhes helplessly until the end of the 
round, when the spell ends. 

Creatures above 10th level or possessing more 


than 10 Hit Dice gain a +1 bonus to all saving 
throws related to a blast of pain per level or Hit Die 
above 10, Creatures who have no nervous systems 
or are immune to pain are immune to this spell. 
Notes: Granted by Ilmater, the One Who 
Endures, of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Blazing Sword — Halfling 
(Evocation) 
Sphere: Combat 


Level: 4 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 

Duration: 1 rd. or 4 rd. + 1 rd./level above 7th 
Area of Effect: Caster’s melee weapon 
Saving Throw: None 


When this spell is cast on the priest's melee 
weapon, it creates a bright sparkling silver glow. 
The spell has two versions; the caster chooses one 
when the spell is cast. 

A) Great Blow: The round following the cast- 
ing, the weapon has a +3 bonus to hit and a +5 
bonus to damage for its first blow. It can affect 
creatures hit only by +3 or better magical 
weapons. If the attack misses, the magic is wasted. 

B) Blazing Sword: The weapon becomes +1 to 
hit and +2 to damage. This lasts for four rounds 
plus one round per experience level of the caster 
over 7th. The weapon can strike creatures hit only 
by +1 or better magical weapons 

When either version of the spell expires, the 
weapon must make a successful item saving throw 
vs. crushing blow or be ruined. A weapon with 10 
gp or more of silver in the weapon or its hilt or 
decoration, receives a +2 bonus to the saving 
throw, 

The material component is a pinch of sulphur, 
which is tossed upon the weapon. 

Notes: Granted by the halfling god Arvoreen 
the Defender. 


Po a ee Y 


Bless 


a eee a 


Bless 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 
Reversible 
Sphere: All 
Level: | 
Range: 60 yds. 


Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: 6 rds. 

Area of Effect: 50-foot cube 
Saving Throw: None 


Upon uttering the bless spell, the caster raises 
the morale of friendly creatures and any saving 
throw rolls they make against fear effects by +1. 
Furthermore, it raises their attack dice rolls by +1. 
A blessing, however, affects only those not already 
engaged in melee combat. The caster determines at 
what range (up to 60 yards) he will cast the spell. 
At the instant the spell is completed, it affects all 
creatures in a 50-foot cube centered on the point 
selected by the caster (thus, affected creatures 
leaving the area are still subject to the spell’s 
effect; those entering the area after the casting is 
completed are not). 

A second use of this spell is to bless a single 
item (for example, a crossbow bolt for use against 
a rakshasa). The weight of the item is limited to 
one pound per caster level and the effect lasts until 
the item is used or the spell duration ends. 

Multiple bless spells are not cumulative. In ad- 
dition to the verbal and somatic gesture compo- 
nents, the bless spell requires holy water. 

This spell can be reversed by the priest to a 
curse spell that, when cast upon enemy creatures, 
lowers their morale and attack rolls by -1. The 
curse requires the sprinkling of unholy water. 

Notes: Common for all priests (PHB). 


Blessed Abundance 
(Conjuration) 
Sphere: Creation 


Level: 5 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: | rd. 
Duration: Permanent 

Area of Effect: 1 cu. ft/level 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell allows a priest to duplicate animal or 
vegetable matter. Magical items and minerals (in- 
cluding rocks, metals, and gemstones) cannot be 
duplicated. Although organic materials (such as 
food or living plants) can be duplicated, living 
creatures cannot be copied by this spell. 

The material to be duplicated must be equal to 
or less than 1 cubic foot in size or volume. The 
caster can create | cubic foot of material per expe- 
rience level. For example, a 9th-level priest can 
create up to 9 cubic feet of animal or vegetable 
matter. Using a loaf of bread 1 cubic foot in size, 
he can produce nine such loaves; using a bucket of 
apples totaling 1 cubic foot in volume, he can 
create nine such buckets. 

The material component is the priest's holy 
symbol. 

Notes: Uncommon for clerics (ToM). 


Blessed Craftsmanship — Dwarf 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
Sphere: Creation 


Level:3 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: | turn 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 craftsman and | item 
Saving Throw: None 


This enchantment augments the recipient's 
skills while working on a particular project. While 
the blessed craftsmanship is temporary, the item 
worked on is permanently enhanced. 

The recipient of this spel! can work only on the 
object selected, a minimum of 8 hours per day, 
with no significant interruption. The spell adds a 
+3 bonus to the nonweapon proficiency check for 
any artisan nonweapon proficiency. This bonus in- 
creases the chance that an object of quality is cre- 
ated. A roll of “20” is still a failure, however. 
Examples of applicable nonweapon proficiencies 
include armorer, blacksmithing, carpentry, gem 
cutting, leatherworking, pottery, stone masonry, 
weaponsmithing and weaving. 

The material components are the priest’s holy 
symbol and the materials and tools to be used in 
the craft project, all of which must be touched by 
the priest during the casting. 

Notes; Granted by the dwarven craft god 
Laduguer, 


ene cin A ee gn nee ee oe Se 


Blessed Forgetfulness — Archon 
(Alteration, Enchantment/Charm) 
Reversible 
Sphere: Necromantic, Thought 


Level: 4 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 7 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


The archon-created magic (found only on 
Mount Celestia) of blessed forgetfulness serves a 
high purpose: to ease scarred and injured minds. 
Blessed forgetfulness negates the injurious effects 
of failed fear or horror checks, and removes any 
madness suffered from contact with the howling 
winds of Pandemonium or the terrors of the Abyss. 
It does not cure the effects of magically induced 
insanity or feeblemind, however. 

The material component is a few drops of holy 
water, sprinkled on the recipient. 

The reverse form, winged memory, restores the 
memories of any creature affected by the rivers 


Blessed Watchfulness 


Lethe or Styx. It also restores memories lost to 
forget or touch of the Styx spells. If used on a spell- 
casting creature with no memory loss, it restores a 
single, previously cast spell of Ist or 2nd level to 
the recipient's mind. The priest cannot use this 
effect on himself. The material component is the 
same as for the other form of the spell 

Notes: Rare for planar priests. Unlikely to be 
learned except by visiting the Outer Planes, 


Blessed Warmth 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Sun 


Level: 4 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 4 
Duration; | rd./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


When this spell is cast, a narrow shaft of light 
shines down upon the priest, making him immune 
to the effects of natural cold (such as a blizzard) 
and granting him a +3 bonus to saving throws vs. 
magical cold (such as a white dragon’s breath 
weapon). 

For each level of the priest above 7th, an addi- 
tional beam of light can be created to protect an- 
other creature, which must be standing within 3 
feet of the priest. Thus, a 10th-level priest could 
protect four other creatures in a 3-foot radius. 

Notes: Uncommon for clerics (ToM). 


Blessed Watchfulness 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Guardian 


Level: 1 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: 4 hrs. + 1 hr/level 
Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


By casting this spell, the priest confers excep- 
tional powers of observation and alertness upon 
one creature for the duration of the spell. While 
blessed watchfulness is in effect, the designated 
sentinel remains alert, awake, and vigilant for the 
duration of the spell, and is surprised only on a roll 


" it IIR aR a Ra eae. 


Blessing of Vhaeraun — Drow 


of 1. The creature resists sleep spells and similar 
magic as if 4 levels or Hit Dice higher than his 
actual level and gains a +2 bonus to saving throws 
against other spells or effects that could lower his 
guard or force him to abandon his watch, including 
charm, beguiling, fear, emotion, and similar mind- 
affecting spells. If the effect normally allows no 
saving throw, the watcher gains no special benefit. 

Notes: Uncommon for clerics (ToM). Granted 
by the dwarven god Gorm Gulthyn. Granted by the 
gnome god Gaerdal Ironhand. Granted by the 
halfling god Arvoreen the Defender. 


Blessing of Vhaeraun — Drow 


(Conjuration/Summoning) 
Sphere: Combat 


Level: 2 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: Special (1 turn maximum) 
Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell enables the recipient to use once any 
single thief skill or single weapon attack at a +15% 
ability bonus or a +3 attack bonus. Any damage 
caused by this action (harmful or beneficial to the 
recipient) is the maximum possible on a 1d8 roll of 
1-6; otherwise, determine damage normally. The 
attack bonus does not make the attack magical. 
The spell lasts for up to | turn, or until the single 
skill use or attack is attempted. When the aid 
granted by the spell is be used, the spell recipient 
must state so aloud before making the skill check 
or attack roll. The latent bonus granted by the spell 
dissipates unused if a successful dispel magic is 
cast on the recipient before the blessing is used. 
Notes: Granted by the drow god Vhaeraun. 


Blessing, Ela’s 
See Ela’s blessing. 
Blessing, Talona’s 


See Talona’s blessing. 


Blight 
Reversed form, blossom. This form is used by evil 
priests. 


Bliss 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
Sphere: Charm 


Level: 2 
Range: 5 yds./level 
:S 


Casting Time: 5 
Duration: 4 rds. 

Area of Effect: | creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell causes a single being who fails a 
saving throw vs. spell to be lost in a trance of in- 
tense pleasure and happiness. The sensation is felt 
so acutely that the creature fails to notice the rest 
of the world, approaching danger, or pain. A bliss- 
ful being wanders aimlessly about, smiling in a 
dazed fashion and dropping any items it is holding 
or wielding. 

The saving throw vs. the spell is normal if the 
target creature has the same level or Hit Dice as 
the caster. There is a —1 penalty per Hit Die or 
level the caster has more than the target creature, 
and a +1 bonus per Hit Die or level the caster has 
less than the target creature. 

Those affected by this spell cannot perform any 
deliberate task, attack, or defend themselves— 
even if wounded during their blissful state. A crea- 
ture affected by a bliss spell is immune to other 
bliss spells for one day plus one hour per point of 
Constitution it has. 

Blissful beings are not affected by hypnosis or 
any attempts (magical or psionic) to control or influ- 
ence their minds (for example, charm person spells). 

Notes: Granted by the goddess Lliira, Mistress 
of Revels, of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Blistering Rays 
Reversed form, merciful shadows. 


Blood Bank 


Duration: 1 wk./level 
Area of Effect: | individual 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


ee ee ee ee 


Blood Bond 


N Ř 


By use of this spell, a priest can transfer a indi- 
vidual’s bloodline and blood abilities into a magi- 
cal container. The container must be at least the 
size of a man’s hand and must have a material cost 
of at least 500 gp. The scion may be a willing par- 
ticipant in this spell, but the spell can be cast on an 
unwilling subject. A scion that resists is allowed a 
saving throw vs. death magic with a +1 bonus for 
every 10 points of bloodline strength. 

Once the bloodline is transferred, the scion can 
access the bloodline by placing himself in contact 
with the container. This also grants access to any 
accumulated Regency Points (RP), and the charac- 
ter can collect and spend RP normally. 

If the scion and the container are separated by 
more than 10 feet, the bloodline is rendered inert for 
as long as they remain apart. If the scion is a regent, 
he cannot perform domain actions, collect RP, or 
spend RP while separated from his bloodline. The 
character is treated in all ways as if unblooded. This 
can prevent a true wizard from casting spells. 

If the container is broken or seriously damaged 
(a metal vessel might be crushed flat, for example) 
but remains within 10 feet of the regent, the blood- 
line immediately reverts to its owner and the spell is 
broken. If the container is broken or seriously dam- 
aged at a distance of more than 10 feet from the 
scion, the bloodline and regency are lost forever. 

When the spell’s duration elapses, the magic of 
the blood bank spell transfers the bloodline back to 
the scion if he is within one mile of the container. 
If the scion is more than one mile from the vessel, 
the bloodline and regency are lost forever. 

No known magic can transfer a bloodline from 
a container into another individual while the scion 
lives. Bloodtheft is impossible while a bloodline is 
banked; if the regent dies by any means (including 
tighmaevril) while the bloodline resides within the 
vessel, it is immediately transferred to a desig- 
nated heir. Without an heir, the land chooses the 
recipient of the bloodline. 

The material components are a lock of the 
scion’s hair, a handful of dirt from his domain (if a 
regent) or homeland (if a nonregent), and a garnet 
worth 100 gp. 

Notes: Uncommon for priests from Cerilia, the 
BIRTHRIGHT Setting; virtually unknown elsewhere. 


Blood Bond 
(Enchantment) 
Sphere: Combat 
Level: 1 =p 
Range: Touch 


Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 turn 

Duration: 5 rds/level 

Area of Effect: Two individuals 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


Despite its name, blood bond has no effect on 
bloodlines. Rather, it is an infamous spell that was 
once granted to Azrai’s followers and, eventually, 
to Belinik’s. Now, war priests all over Cerilia have 
learned its power. 

The spell, which links the health of those joined, 
is cast on two individuals simultaneously. Both are 
allowed a saving throw vs. spell, but willing partici- 
pants can forego the saving throw if they wish. If 
either saving throw succeeds, the spell fails. 

Blood bond links the health of the two individ- 
uals. When one suffers damage, both split the 
points of damage (if the damage is an odd number, 
the one actually struck takes the extra point). If 
either of the two individuals dies, the spell ends. 
The shared effect applies only to hit points—it 
does not apply to actual burns, acid damage, etc. A 
character struck by a fireball, for example, would 
roll his saving throw to determine full or half 
damage, then divide the damage between the two 
bonded characters. The second character would 
not receive a saving throw, but also would not 
suffer burns and would not have to roll saving 
throws for items. 

Vos war priests commonly cast this spell on 
one Vos warrior and one prisoner, effectively dou- 
bling the damage the warrior can take in battle, as- 
suming the prisoner survives the trauma. The 
bonded individuals share damage regardless of 
distance between the two. 

Non-evil priests normally cast this spell only 
on two willing comrades. Paladins of Haelyn often 
use blood bond to fortify their own shield brothers 
in battle. 

The material components are the priest's holy 
symbol and a length of red silk ribbon. 

Notes: Common for priests from Cerilia, the 
BIRTHRIGHT setting. 


a die een: 


Blood Link 
(Necromantic) 
Sphere: Necromantic 


Level: 7 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: | rd. 

Duration: | turn 

Area of Effect: 1 sentient creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


A blood link enabies a caster to drain another 
sentient creature of the !-point Constitution loss 
involved in casting a permanency-related magic. 
This spell can be used only in conjunction with a 
permanency wizard spell or a permanency prayer 
priest spell. It must be cast within | turn preceding 
either of these spells to have any effect at all. 

The caster must touch the target creature. If the 
creature is able to move, hostile, or suspicious, a 
successful attack roll is required. An unwitting or 
unwilling creature is allowed saving throw vs. 
spell to break a blood link, avoiding the 
Constitution loss. 

The use of this spell is not a good act; good- 
and neutral-aligned casters imperil their standing 
unless divine commands or other circumstances 
mitigate the spell’s use (such as a willing wor- 
shiper of the same faith, or a loved one desiring to 
make the sacrifice for the spellcaster), The DM ad- 
judicates such situations. 

The material components of this spell are a 
short length of chain carved from zalantar wood, a 
drop of blood, a drop of holy water, and a drop of 
unholy water. 

Notes: Rare spell from the FORGOTTEN REALMS 
setting. 


Blood Lust 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
Sphere: Charm 


Level: 2 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: 1 rd/level 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell gives the recipient a morale of 20, 
immunity to all forms of fear, freedom from the 


adverse effects of pain and nausea (the causes of 
these sensations will still affect the being governed 
by blood lust, but shuddering or other results of the 
pain and nausea will not), a heightened sense of 
smell, and the ability to track as a ranger (which 
functions without level-related modifiers). The ef- 
fects of this spell are instant and banish any preex- 
isting conditions in the recipient that the magic 
normally affects. The DM must adjudicate the ef- 
fects of keener olfactory abilities. Typically, the 
spell allows identification of even faint smells at 
an increased range, but only if they are odors the 
being has previously encountered. 

Notes: Granted by the evil god Malar the 
Beastlord of the FORGOTTEN REALMs setting. This 
spell is found only in a few exceptionally rare 
tomes. 


Blood Mantle 
(Alteration, Necromancy) 
Sphere: Protection, Necromantic 


Level: 4 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S,M 
Casting Time: 7 
Duration: 5 rds/level 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell enshrouds the priest in a cloak of 
swirling blood-red droplets. This magical mantle 
seems to shimmer and swirl, even if there is no 
wind present, and moves to interpose itself be- 
tween any attack and the priest. Any weapon used 
to strike the priest seems to strike an iron wall as 
the ferrous droplets momentarily coagulate to 
form a bulwark against the imminent attack. 

While protected by a blood mantle, the spell- 
caster has a +3 bonus to Armor Class and a +3 
saving throw bonus against fire and cold (magical 
and nonmagical). A blood mantle is particularly 
conductive to electrical attacks, however, and the 
wearer has a -3 penalty to saving throws vs. light- 
ning and electricity (magical and nonmagical) 
while protected by this spell. 

In addition, the caster can remove the blood 
mantle and hurl it up to 10 feet away to form a 10- 
foot-square curtain of droplets. Once it reaches its 
desired position and configuration (mentally se- 
lected by the spellcaster as the blood mantle is 
hurled), the curtain is immovable until the spell 
expires. In this form, the blood mantle acts as a 


a aa ta 


Bloodgloat 


N 


wall of iron identical to the barrier created by the 
5th-level wizard spell wall of iron except that it is 
impervious to the attacks of rust monsters and sim- 
ilar corrosion attacks, is much smaller in area of 
effect, and is of limited duration. 

The material components of this spell are a 
ruby or other red gemstone of at least 24 gp value 
and the priest’s holy symbol. 

Notes: Granted by Garagos the Reaver, a war 
god of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Blood Rage 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
Sphere: Combat 


Level: 4 

Range: 10 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 7 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell imbues a living, sentient being with the 
battle rage and blood lust of a berserker. Although it 
can be cast on the spellcaster or his allies, many 
priests of the Reaver enjoy surreptitiously casting 
this spell on an opponent in a group of his friends 
and then quietly leaving the scene. All attacks by the 
target creature are made in a mad frenzy with no 
thought to tactics, personal risk, or the consequences 
of any action. Unlike a true berserker, the subject of 
a blood rage spell has no ability to tell friend from 
foe. While under this spell’s effects, a creature fre- 
netically attempts to shed the blood of any being it 
encounters, moving from one opponent to the next 
based on proximity and noticeability. (For example, 
the target of a blood rage spell would ignore a pixie 
5 feet away in lieu of attacking an ogre 10 feet away, 
but if the ogre was 50 feet away, the pixie would be 
attacked first.) Aside from the situations mentioned 
below, a blood rage spell ends only when the subject 
goes three continuous rounds without a warm- 
blooded creature within 50 yards to attack. 

Those in a blood rage receive a +1 bonus to 
attack rolls, a +3 bonus to damage, and 5 bonus hit 
points that are subtracted first when damage is suf- 
fered (and disappear when the spell ends if not 
used). While in a blood rage, beings have phe- 
nomenal resistance to pain and some forms of 
magic. They are immune to the wizard spells 
charm person, friends, hypnotism, sleep, irritation, 
ray of enfeeblement, scare, geas, and similar incan- 


tations. They are immune to the priest spells com- 
mand, charm person or mammal, enthrall, cloak of 
bravery, symbol, and similar magics. They receive 
a +4 bonus to saving throws against the wizard 
spells blindness, Tasha’s uncontrollable hideous 
laughter, hold person, charm monster, and confu- 
sion, and the priest spells hold person and hold 
animal. The emotion spell has no effect unless the 
fear result is chosen. In that case, enraged beings 
who successfully save vs. spell are unaffected, but 
those who fail recover from the blood rage spell 
immediately. The effects of a finger of death spell, 
whether the saving throw is successful or not, are 
delayed until the blood rage ends. 

Entering a blood rage has numerous disadvan- 
tages as well: Those affected have no real sense of 
how much damage they have taken (the DM keeps 
track of hit points, not any player). They cannot use 
ranged weapons and cannot take cover from ranged 
missile fire. Spells such as bless, cure light wounds, 
aid, cure serious wounds, cure critical wounds, heal, 
and regenerate are delayed from taking effect until 
after the blood rage ends. The taunt spell is automat- 
ically successful. At the blood rage’s conclusion, the 
subject automatically suffers from exhaustion—an 
effect identical to that of a ray of enfeeblement spell. 

An unwilling creature is unaffected by the blood 
rage spell if a saving throw vs. spell is successful. 
The spell can be dispelled prematurely with a suc- 
cessful dispel magic or a spell or spell-like effect 
that removes mind-affecting magics. The blood 
rage spell has no effect on berserk berserkers, en- 
raged dwarf battleragers, berserk bloodreavers, or 
other blood-crazed warriors who have already en- 
tered a state similar to that created by this spell. 

The material components for this spell are a 
bloodstone or pieces of bloodstone and the priest’s 
holy symbol. 

Notes: Granted by Garagos the Reaver, a war 
god of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Bloodgloat 
(Conjuration/Summoning, Necromancy) 
Sphere: Necromantic 


Level: 5 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 5 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: 30 yd. radius 
Saving Throw: Special 


re ee en ee eg aes 


Blossom P 


This horrific spell permits the priest to convert 
a deadly triumph into magic effects baneful to his 
adversaries. It can be cast only on a round follow- 
ing the slaying of a sentient, genuine opponent in 
hand-to-hand combat by the priest. 

On the round following this slaying, the priest 
touches the body of the slain enemy and exhales a 
cry of exultation. One effect of this cry is to estab- 
lish a magical effect identical to a prayer spell in 
the area of effect of the bloodgloat. Also, creatures 
in the area of effect that are enemies of the priest 
suffer an additional -1 penalty to attack and 
damage rolls, saving throws, and morale unless 
they make a successful saving throw vs. spell. 
Finally, any creature hostile to the priest that fails 
its save by a margin of —6 or worse is subject to a 
magical effect identical to that of a symbol of 
hopelessness. Thus, if the creature requires a 13 to 
save and rolls 7 or less, it is affected by the hope- 
lessness (such creatures turn back in dejection or 
surrender; the effect lasts for 3d4 turns). 

The spell requires an immediately slain enemy 
as the spell focus: 

Notes: Granted by Iuz the Evil of the WORLD 
OF GREYHAWK setting. 


Blossom 
(Necromantic) 
Reversible 
Sphere: Plant 


Level: 6 

Range: 30 yds. 

Components; V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: 1 vegetable object 
Saving Throw: Special 


The blossom spell causes any object of veg- 
etable matter, living or non-living, to sprout leaves, 
buds, and blossoms. The effects produced are 
living, but if produced from a dead source (for ex- 
ample, making an oaken door sprout leaves and 
acorns), these growths eventually die from lack of 
sustenance. Living plants react normally to the 
new shoots and blossoms. A plant-based creature 
gains | hit point per Hit Die, up to its maximum 
limit, for a full week. Blossom can be very useful 
in aiding victims of starvation (one could produce 
immature wheat ears from straw). 

The reverse of this spell, blight, causes any 
object of vegetable matter, to have its appendages 


shrivel up and drop off. A solid object (for exam- 
ple., an oaken beam) is not affected. Any fruit, 
blooms, buds, leaves, and so forth are instantly de- 
stroyed. A plantlike creature, such as a shambling 
mound, must make a successful saving throw vs. 
death magic or take 6d4 points damage. Blight is 
extraordinarily useful against a yellow musk 
creeper (all its blossoms fall off harmlessly). 
Notes: Very rare for druids and other nature 
priests. (Updated from Dragon Magazine.) 


Body Blades 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Combat 


Level: 2 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 5 
Duration: 4 rds. 

Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell causes many daggerlike blades to 
sprout from all surfaces of the caster’s body. They 
appear to be metallic but are not actually metal 
(and are therefore unaffected by heat metal spells, 
Magnetic attraction, and the like). They material- 
ize through or out of any armor, gear, or clothing 
worn, but don’t obscure the senses or affect 
Dexterity. Even if they grow from the face, vision 
is unimpaired; if they grow from the hands, spell- 
casting and the like is unimpeded; and if “stick- 
ing” into adjacent body parts, they do no damage 
and act as if they were mere illusions.) The blades 
never harm gear worn or carried by the caster. 

To others, the spiny forest of blades augments 
the caster’s Armor Class by 2 points, and inflicts 
harm as follows: If the caster charges, the blades 
impale for 1d4+2 points of damage. If the caster 
hugs, overbears, or drives a foe against a solid sur- 
face, such as a wall, damage is doubled (a success- 
ful attack roll, without bonuses, is required to 
manage such maneuvers). 

If a caster with body blades is caught in a con- 
stricting situation (such as a closing door or com- 
pressing, moving wall), the blades halt the 
movement, preventing damage, though the caster 
will be wedged in tightly. 

The material components are two shards of metal 
that each possess at least one sharp edge or point 
(bladed weapons can be used), and one shard of bone 
with at least on sharp edge or point (from any source). 


ge a 


Body Link 


) ee 4 


Notes: Granted by the evil goddess Loviatar of 
the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. This spell is found 
only in a few exceptionally rare tomes. 


Body Clock 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Time 


Level; 4 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: 1 hr./level 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


Body clock affects a subject in the following 
ways: 
e The subject’s need for sleep is reduced. Every 
hour a subject sleeps is as refreshing as 10 hours. 
Every two hours the subject sleeps during the spell 
restores hit points as a day of complete rest. 
However, wizards are not able to memorize spells; 
real time must pass for this to occur. 
e The subject’s need to breathe is reduced. He 
breathes only 10% as often as normal for the dura- 
tion of the spell, enabling him to hold his breath 10 
times longer than normal and use less air in en- 
closed situations. 
e The subject can set an internal alarm clock to 
alert him when a specific amount of time has 
passed. The subject then hears a brief ringing in 
his ears, audible only to him. The ringing is loud 
enough to wake the subject. He can set as many in- 
ternal alarm clocks as he wishes, as long as they all 
occur within the duration of the spell. 

The spell has no effect on movement, spellcast- 
ing, or any other normal activities. 

The material components are a kernel of corn, a 
drop of water, and a stoppered glass bottle. 

Notes: Common for priests with major access 
to the sphere of Time. 


Body Link 
(Necromancy) 
Sphere: Necromantic 
Level: 7 ite 
Range: 0 


Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


Using this spell, a priest can prevent death from 
decapitation or dismemberment. The spell links 
the parts of the caster’s body, so that separation 
from the main body will not impair them in any 
way. For instance, a priest’s head could be cut off 
yet still talk, or even eat, as if it were still attached 
to the caster’s body; if an arm is cut off, the caster 
still has muscular control and can even wield 
weapons. If the head is cut off, the body falls limp 
unless the caster rolls a successful Wisdom check. 

The base duration of the spell is one turn per 
caster level, during which time the spell sits pas- 
sive, waiting to take effect. Once the head or any 
limb is cut off, the spell continues for one round 
per caster level. During this time, if the limb or 
head is placed back on the trunk, it immediately 
reattaches. 

This prevents harm only from decapitation or 
dismemberment; other damage applies normally. 
Thus, while the spell is proof against beheading or 
vorpal swords, the caster can be killed by an accu- 
rate sword thrust. Also, since the body sometimes 
falls limp when the caster loses his head, it is a 
good idea to have a friend nearby to reattach the 
head before the spell’s duration ends. 

The material components of the body link spell 
are a pearl worth at least 500 gp, which is de- 
stroyed during casting, and a small amount of tree 
sap, which must be consumed by the caster. 

Notes: Common for priests from an arabian 
setting; otherwise very rare. 


A 81 


Bolt of Glory 


Bolt of Glory 
(Invocation/Evocation) 
Sphere: Sun 


Level: 6 

Range: 20 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 4 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: | creature 
Saving Throw: '/2 


By casting this spell, the priest projects a bolt 
of energy from the Positive Material Plane against 
one creature. No attack roll is needed. A creature 
struck suffers varying damage, depending on its 
nature and home plane of existence. 


Creature’s Home Plane Damage 
Prime Material 5d6 
Elemental, Outer Planes of Neutrality 5d4 


Positive Material, Outer Planes of Good None 
Outer Planes of Evil, undead creatures 
Negative Material 


10d6 
15d6 


8 


2 


A saving throw vs. spell is allowed for half 
damage. For fiends, undead, and Negative 
Material Plane creatures, the saving throw has a —2 
penalty. 

The material component of this spell is a small 
amber rod banded with bronze. 

Notes: Granted by Heironeous the Invincible, 
of the WORLD OF GREYHAWK setting, and by Torm, 
god of duty, of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Bone Bite 
(Alteration, Evocation, Necromancy) 
Sphere: Combat, Necromantic 


Level: 2 

Range: 5 yds./level 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: | bone or fragment 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell causes any bone or bone fragment to 
become a razor-sharp pair of jaws that bites any 
living being it strikes except the caster, The jaws 
either bite someone they are in contact with or 
someone they are thrown at and strike, The caster 
throws the bone jaws at his or her normal THACO. 
The jaws bite once for 1d6+4 points of damage and 
remain attached, bony fangs clinging, as they trans- 
form into a second, arching pair of jaws on the next 
round that automatically strikes for an additional 
1d4+2 points of damage. Undead are unaffected by 
this spell; bone bite jaws do not bite them. 

Any amount of time can elapse between the 
casting of the spell and its biting attacks; a caster 
who fails to hit can pick up and throw the bone or 
fragment later, or leave it in a niche or corridor as a 
trap. The effect even functions underwater and so 
can be hidden in a pool or bucket of water. A priest 
can have no more undischarged bone bite spells 
than four times his or her level. Additional bone 
bite spells can be memorized, but fail to work 
when cast if they exceed the limit. Bone bite teeth 
can puncture armor, carapaces or bony plates, 
dragon hide, and all known nonmagical barriers 
and substances. 

The material component of this spell is a bone 
or bone fragment. 

Notes: Granted by the evil god Myrkul in the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Bonechain 


(Necromancy) 
Sphere: Necromantic 


Level: 4 

Range: Special 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 7 
Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


A bonechain spell causes a chain of skeletons 
under the caster’s control to suddenly spring from 
scattered bones. It requires special preparation in 
the form of material components. For each link in 
the chain, the priest must have one bone from a de- 
ceased human or humanoid creature. Any bone can 
be employed, although tradition prefers finger or 
rib bones. Each bone must come from a separate 
creature; the spell fails the instant a second bone 
from the same creature is activated. The maximum 
number of bones usable in the spellcasting is equal 
to the priest’s experience level. Each bone can be 
placed up to 20 feet from any other bone employed 
in the spell. A distance of greater than 20 feet 
negates the continuation of the bonechain. 

When the spell is cast, at the point where each 
bone is placed, a skeleton springs up and will do 
the bidding of the priest casting the spell, automat- 
ically fighting the nearest enemy of the priest, if 
appropriate. Skeletons activate rapidly and se- 
quentially from the bone nearest the caster out- 
ward, at the rate of 5 per round. Each activated 
skeleton has a minimum of 5 hit points, but is oth- 
erwise a normal animated skeleton. Concealed or 
covered bones might be used. Bones buried in 
earth, hidden in plasterwork or within wooden 
paneling, and so on, can spring forth as skeletons; 
bones buried below foot-thick marble slabs could 
not (the DM decides doubtful cases). Skeletons an- 
imated by a bonechain remain in existence until 
the dawn following the casting of the bonechain 
spell, unless destroyed earlier. 

This spell was specifically developed to enable 
ambushes, with bones planted in the ground in a 
circle or column, and for protection, with ranks of 
bones hidden in alcoves, urns and the like along 
corridors and passages. 

The material components for the spell are the 
bones employed and an unholy symbol of Tuz. 

Notes: Granted by Iuz the Evil of the WorLp 
OF GREYHAWK setting. 


Boneiron 
(Enchantment) 
Sphere: Animal, Combat 
Level: 2 
Range: Touch 


Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 turn 
Duration: 5 rds./level 
Area of Effect: Weapon(s) touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This lesser version of the 4th-level wizard spell 
enchanted weapon transforms bone weapons into 
their metal counterparts with regard to attack and 
damage capabilities. Any penalty for material 
strength is thus removed, and the weapon has no 
more chance of breaking than if it was iron. Multiple 
castings of the spell on a single weapon have no addi- 
tional effect. If cast on a missile, the spell ends when 
the missile hits a target. The spell also can be used in 
the creation of permanent magical weapons of bone. 

The material component for this spell is the 
tooth of a carnivorous animal. 

Notes: Rare spell for shamans and other priests 
from savage settings. 


Bonewood 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Plant, Combat 
Level: 2 
Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 


Duration: 5 rds./level 
Area of Effect: Weapon(s) touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell toughens crude wooden weapons to 
the equivalent of a bone counterpart. The weapons 
are also fireproof while the spell lasts. One large, 
one medium, or two small weapons can be affected 
by a single casting of this spell; missiles revert to 
normal upon hitting a target. Repeated castings on 
the same weapon provide no additional benefits. 

Anyone wishing to create a permanently 
strengthened bone weapon must use enchant an 
item and permanency spells as well. Aside from 
being fireproof, normal wooden weapons such as 
clubs and staves gain no additional benefit. 

The material components for this spell are a 3- 
inch strip of wood and a bone of roughly equal length. 


a 0 ne 


Boon of Fortune 


Notes: Rare spell for shamans and other priests 
from savage settings. 


Boon of Fortune 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Combat 


Level: 3 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 6 

Duration: 7 rds. 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell temporarily increases an adventurer’s 
skills and abilities. While a boon of fortune is in effect, 
its recipient can wield an unfamiliar weapon as if pro- 
ficient in its use. Also, the recipient has an attack and 
damage bonus of +2 for all weapons with which he is 
normally proficient (not unfamiliar weapons this spell 
grants temporary familiarity with). Further, the recipi- 
ent has +2 bonus to all ability checks. Boons of for- 
tune are only effective on bipedal land mammals (and 
not even on them when underwater). Once cast, the 
boon doesn't expire before its normal duration, unless 
magically countered, even if its caster no longer 
wishes the recipient to enjoy it. 

It is considered sinful for a priest of Tymora to 
use this spell on himself, unless not doing so di- 
rectly Jeads to a frustration of the aims of the god- 
dess or causes immediate harm to her sacred 
property or faithful worshipers other than the caster. 

The material component of a boon of fortune 
spell is a four-leaf clover (or, alternatively, a piece 
of amber of any size—but the use of this compo- 
nent reduces the duration of the spell to 6 rounds). 

Notes: Granted by Tymora, goddess of luck of 
the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. This spell is found 
only in a few exceptionally rare tomes. 


Boon of Lathander 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 
Sphere: Combat 


Level: 4 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 7 

Duration: 6 rds. 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


On the six rounds following the round of cast- 
ing, the recipient receives an additional attack per 
round. Further, all attack rolls and saving throws 
have a +1 bonus. The recipient glows with a rose- 
red radiance during the time of augmented ability. 

Notes: Granted by Lathander, Morninglord, of 
the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Boon of the God 
(Alteration, Necromancy) 
Sphere: Combat, Healing 


Level: 4 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell enables its caster to temporarily trade 
his sight for renewed vitality, and it is usually used by 
Tyrran clergy only in desperate combat situations. As 
the last gesture of spellcasting is completed, the caster 
is instantly restored to unharmed condition, even if 
previously sorely wounded (hit points and ability 
scores are restored in full, missing limbs reappear, 
damaged organs function as if whole, and so on}—but 
the caster also goes blind. The boon lasts for only 6 
rounds, and during that time the caster functions as if 
unharmed, without regard for additional, or even fatal, 
damage suffered during that time. No spell short of a 
wish spell affect the caster until the boon expires, such 
effects are delayed. When the spell expires, all previ- 
ous damage returns, and any additional harm taken 
during the boon is applied to the caster. 

The blinded caster suffers a +2 penalty to ini- 
tiative rolls, a +4 penalty to Armor Class, a —4 
penalty to attack rolls, and a —2 penalty to saving 
throws and proficiency checks (greater, if the DM 
judges it appropriate to the situation). This total 
blindness lasts for 1 month per level of the caster 
unless magically cured. (A cure blindness spell ap- 
plied to the caster during the 6 rounds of the boon 
automatically fails; only a full wish spell can over- 
come the lack of sight caused by a boon during 
this period.) The caster can drink healing potions 
and receive healing and other beneficial spells 
during the boon, and the results of these also apply 
at the expiration of the boon. (They are applied 
before new or returning damage.) 

Notes: Granted by the war god Tyr of the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


" ey ee ee 


Breath of Life 


"\ eel 


Borogar, Hand of 
See hand of Borogar. 


Bowls, Blaenther’s 
See Blaenther’s bowls. 


Bramblestaff 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Earth, Water 


Level: 3 

Range: 0 wie. 
Components: S, M 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: | turn 

Area of Effect: 1 wooden staff or club 

Saving Throw: None 


This spell causes an ordinary wooden staff or 
club to sprout thick, extremely hard spikes on one 
end, just like a staff made from bramblewood. The 
staff adds +2 to the caster’s attack roll and inflicts 
double damage for the duration of the spell. A 
bramblestaff can affect any creature harmed only 
by magical weapons. 

Notes: Uncommon for druids from the DARK SUN 
setting. 


Brandobaris Stealth 
See stealth of Brandobaris. 


Break Camp 
Reversed form, create campsite. 


Break Limb 
(Alteration) 
Reversible 
Sphere: Healing, Necromantic 


Level: 6 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 9 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: Limb touched 
Saving Throw; Special 


anal” 


This devastating spell enables the caster to 
break an opponent’2 arm or leg by touching it. A 
successful attack roll is required to touch a victim 
who is not unconscious or restrained,) in addition 
to snapping the limb, break limb inflicts 1d10 point 
of damage. If the target creature makes a successful 


saving throw vs. spell, the break does not occur, but 
the individual still suffers 1d10 points of damage. 

The effects of the spell vary, based on the limb 
touched. For example, if the priest breaks an indi- 
vidual’s weapon arm, that individual cannot wield 
a weapon. If the priest breaks an individual's 
shield arm, that individual cannot use a shield with 
that arm. If the caster breaks a creature’s leg, the 
individual cannot stand without aid and is reduced 
to a movement rate of 3, crawling or hobbling 
about on one leg. Breaking both legs (two castings 
required) incapacitates the victim. Necks cannot 
be broken with this spell. A limb broken by this 
spell can be mended only by a month of bed rest 
(which can be accelerated under the watchful eye 
of someone with the healing nonweapon profi- 
ciency, a mend limb spell, or a heal spell. 

The material component is a broken bone from 
any animal. 

The reverse of this spell, mend limb, causes 
broken bones to fuse correctly together. Its material 
component is a small piece of bandage and two sticks, 

Notes: Known to be uncommon in the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS and RAVENLOFT settings. 


Breath of Death 
Reversed form, breath of life. This form is used by 
evil priests. 


Breath of Life 
(Necromancy) 
Reversible 
Sphere: Necromantic 
Level: 7 
Range: 0 


Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 turn 
Duration: 1 hr./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This powerful spell enables the caster to cure 
many persons (even an entire community) who are 
afflicted with a nonmagical disease. The priest 
need not touch or even see the diseased people for 
the spell to be effective, although recipients must 
be within the area of effect, 

This spell does not cure all diseases in the com- 
munity at one time; the caster must specifically 
state which disease is to be eliminated (black 
plague or yellow fever, for example) with each 
casting of the spell. 


4 85 x 


Breath of the Elements 


j e E 4 


When the spell is cast, the priest exhales a sweet- 
smelling breath. This forms into a breeze that radiates 
outward, forming a circle that expands in a 50-yard 
radius per hour. During this time, the caster must 
remain at the center of the area of effect. For exam- 
ple, after 12 hours, the breath of life would cover a 
circle 1,200 yards in diameter (600-yard radius). The 
breath is of a magical nature rather than a physical 
nature therefore, it is unaffected by prevailing winds. 

The breeze blows through the community, in- 
stantly eliminating the specified disease from all 
afflicted citizens. The breath of life spell does not 
destroy parasitic monsters (such as green slime, rot 
grubs, and others), nor does it cure lycanthropy or 
other magical afflictions. The spell does not pre- 
vent recurrence of a disease if the subjects are ex- 
posed again. 

The material components are the priest's holy 
symbol and a cone of incense that has been blessed 
by the highest priest of the caster’s religion. 

The reverse, breath of death, produces a foul- 
smelling wind that inflicts with a nonmagical, fatal 
disease. To determine the results of this spell, the 
DM should roll saving throws for major NPCs in the 
area of effect. The effect on the rest of the commu- 
nity can be calculated as a percentage, based on the 
saving throw. Infected creatures do not regain lost hit 
points until the disease is cured. The disease is fatal 
within 1d6 weeks (the duration varies from person to 
person), but can be cured with the breath of life spell. 
The casting of this version of the spell is an evil act. 

The material components are the priest’s holy 
symbol and a handful of dust taken from a 
mummy's corpse. 

Notes: Uncommon spell (ToM). 


Breath Of The Elements 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Elemental (All) 


Level: 4 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 7 

Duration: 1 hr./level 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


Breath of the elements enables the recipient to 
breathe freely in a single element for the duration 
of the spell. At the time of casting, the priest names 
the appropriate element: fire, salt, ash, earth, and so 
forth. The ability to breathe in one element doesn’t 


grant the ability to breathe in a similar one, so a 
creature traveling from the plane of Fire to the 
plane of Magma must recast the spell for Magma. 
This spell transforms the element into a breathable 
atmosphere for the affected creature. Since the 
planes of Vacuum, Positive Energy, and Negative 
Energy have no such atmosphere, the spell is inef- 
fectual on those planes. The priest can divide the 
base duration of the spell between multiple charac- 
ters, to a minimum of one half-hour per recipient. 

A group of planewalker priests, tired of de- 
pending on their wizard companions for spells that 
allowed them to breathe on the Elemental Planes, 
devised this considerably more useful spell. Rather 
than create a specific spell for each plane, they pe- 
titioned their powers for a single spell that would 
adapt to any element. 

Notes: Rare spell, unlikely to be known by 
priests without plane-traveling experience. 


Briartangle 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Plant 


Level: 4 

Range: 10 yds./level 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 7 

Duration: | rd./Alevel 

Area of Effect: 10-ft. radius+10 ft./2 levels 
Saving Throw: '/2 


A briartangle spell causes living shrubbery or un- 
dergrowth of any type to be instantly changed to 
densely tangled briars of the thorniest sort, grow- 
ing to 6 feet in height and increasing in horizontal 
volume to a radius of 10 feet plus 10 additional 
feet radius for every two levels of experience of 
the caster, rounded down (thus, a 7th-level priest 
would cause a briartangle of 40-foot radius), 
Creatures can force their way through the briar- 
tangle readily, but the briars snag and halt missiles, 
thrown objects, or flying creatures within their con- 
fines. All creatures trapped within a briartangle when 
it forms—or those that enter it thereafter—suffer 
1d4+2 points of piercing and scratching damage per 
round (or portion thereof) that they remain moving 
and in contact with the spell. Those clad in banded, 
scale, or plate mail have all damage reduced to 1d3 
to creatures made of rock or with skin of comparable 
hardness, but creatures with lesser armor, such as 
chain, take full damage, even if a shield is carried. 


Burrow — Gnome 


———E————EeEx———EEE 4 


Beings who do not move at all after the first round 
take only the damage from the first round of contact. 
In all cases, a successful saving throw vs. spell results 
in half damage (round up). 

Spelicasting requiring a somatic component is im- 
possible within a briartangle. If the owner is moving, 
cloth raiment and exposed cloth, paper, or vellum 
items must save vs. acid once per round (or portion 
thereof) within the briartangle or they are rent and 
torn. Such items must make at least one item saving 
throw (for the initial round of contact), Magical items 
receive a +2 bonus to this saving throw. 

Fire destroys a briartangle in a round (regard- 
less of the size of its area of effect), but creatures 
within it take 2d6 points of fire damage and re- 
ceive no saving throw against this damage. The 
area where a briartangle was cast radiates a faint 
dweomer for 1d4+2 turns after the spell has ex- 
pired, and this aftereffect can be used to confuse 
creatures who are following a pass without trace 
trail by detecting that spell’s dweomer. 

A briartangle vanishes instantly if the caster so 
wills, but otherwise exists until the spell expires or 
is dispelled. When the briartangle ends, the af- 
fected plants revert to their former state. 

The material components are mistletoe, a thorn 
from any plant, and a bud, petal, or leaf from a 
briar (wild rose). 

Notes: Granted by the god Silvanus, the Forest 
Father, of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Brightmantle — Dwarf 
(Abjuration) 
Sphere: Protection 


Level: 2 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell envelops the recipient's head in a 
nimbus of faint, flickering blue light. While under the 
influence of a brightmantle, the creature’s thinking is 
clear and unimpaired. Intelligence checks are made 
with a +2 bonus. Alcohol, drugs, and poisons are not 
removed from the recipient's system, but their side 
effects that muddle the brain temporarily abate. 

Spells from the school of enchantment/charm 
and the spheres of charm and thought that impede 
the ability of the creature to think clearly, such as 


chaos, charm monster, charm person, command, 
confusion, delude, feeblemind, friends, forget, 
magic jar, maze, mental domination, or scare, 
have no effect while the creature is protected by a 
brightmantle. At the DM’s option, a being afflicted 
with insanity may have a lucid period. The spell 
duration is 1 hour per caster level when cast on 
dwarves; otherwise, it is | turn per caster level. 

The material components are the priest's holy 
symbol and a pinch of smelling salts (any restorative 
whose preparation is based on spirits of ammonia). 

Notes: Granted by the dwarven god Dugmaren 
Brightmantle. 


Burning Rays 


Reversed form, healing rays. 


Burrow — Gnome 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Earth 


Level: 2 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 5 

Duration: | turn +1 rd/level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


When the spell is cast, the priest's fingernails 
lengthen and become as hard as stone. For the du- 
ration of the spell, the caster can use these claws to 
burrow through earth, sand, clay, and gravel (but 
not solid rock), excavating with enough speed to 
provide a burrowing rate of 3, much like a badger 
or other burrowing mammal 

In addition, the caster can use these claws as 
weapons. The priest can attack with both claws, 
each successful attack inflicting 1d4+1 points of 
damage, plus any Strength damage adjustment. 

This spell ends early if subjected to a success- 
ful dispel magic, if the caster dies or by the caster’s 
silent command. 

The material components for this spell include 
the caster’s holy symbol, a tuft of fur from a bur- 
rowing mammal, and a tiny replica of a shovel. 

Notes: Granted by the gnome gods Segojan 
Earthcaller and Urdlen. 


a ee 


Cairn 


(Conjuration/Summoning) Z 
Sphere: Elemental Earth > 


Level: 4 

Range: 30 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 7 

Duration: 1 rd. 

Area of Effect: Creates a pile of stones 5 ft. in di- 
ameter and up to 15 ft. tall 

Saving Throw: 1⁄2 


This spell transports rocks from random 
sources to rain down out of the sky onto a single 
surface location within spell range, chosen by the 
caster, who must be able to see it. The rocks 
appear 20 feet above the chosen spot and fall 
straight down. (Some may bounce off rocks below 
and roll away; however, the spell tends to create a 
rising column of rubble.) The individual rocks are 
generally about as large as the caster’s head. 

Usually used to mark a grave, a cairn spell can 
be employed to create a trail marker, as a means to 
reach a high window, or to bury food or other 
items that must be hidden or kept secure from pil- 
ferage. It can also, of course, be used as a weapon, 
crushing a creature under the arriving stones for 
4d6 points of damage. The rocks fall with little 
force; a creature struck is allowed saving throw vs. 
spell for half damage. 

The material component for a cairn spell is a 
handful of pebbles. These can be of any type or 
size, so long as at least eight pebbles fit into the 
caster’s cupped palm. 

Notes: Granted by Ilmater, the One Who 
Endures, of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. This 
spell is found only in a few exceptionally rare 
tomes. 


Calculate 
(Divination) 
Sphere: Numbers 


Level: 1 

Range: 0 

Components: S, M 
Casting Time: 4 

Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


By means of this spell, the priest can accurately 


= N 
En A 


4 estimate the chance of success of one 
specific action, such as climbing a dan- 


A 
=A gerous cliff, making a trick bowshot, 


crossing a burning room unharmed, or 
even striking an enemy. The action in question 
must be one that would normally be resolved by a 
die roll, but the priest doesn’t have to be the person 
who attempts the feat; he can use calculate to esti- 
mate the odds for anyone taking an action in his 
sight. The priest has a 70% chance, +2% per level, 
of making an accurate estimate. 

If successful, the DM reveals to the player the 
action’s chance for success or any modifiers that 
may be in play. For example, he could reveal a par- 
ticular opponent’s Armor Class or THACO, the 
saving throw an opponent would require in order 
to save against a particular spell cast by the priest 
or the priest’s wizard companion, or a character’s 
chance to open doors, bend bars, or use a thief 
ability. The priest could even calculate his odds for 
actions that might be resolved by a die roll or DM 
caprice, such as his chance to avoid detection by 
hiding behind a rock. This spell takes into account 
factors that the priest himself may not be aware of, 
so from time to time a caster may receive some 
confusing results from this spell. For instance, if 
the priest doesn't know that an orc chieftain is ac- 
tually a polymorphed tanar'ri masquerading as an 
orc, he may be astonished to learn that the “orc” 
has a THACO of 7! A priest who fails the calcula- 
tion check with a roll of 99 or 00 has the calcula- 
tion wildly skewed in a random fashion. 

The spell requires a miniature abacus of ivory 
worth at least 100 gp, which is not consumed in 
the casting of the spell. 

Notes: Common for a priest with access to the 
sphere of Numbers (PO:SM),. 


Call Aerial Beings 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 
Sphere: Summoning 


Level: 4 

Range: 100 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: Special 
Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


By means of this spell, the caster is able to 
summon certain aerial creatures to his location. 
Naturally, this spell works only outdoors, but not 


a a 


Call Animal — Shaman 


a Se A 


necessarily only at high altitudes. The caster 
begins the incantation and continues uninterrupted 
until some called creature appears or two turns 
have elapsed. (The verbalization and somatic ges- 
turing are easy, so this is not particularly exhaust- 
ing to the spellcaster.) Only one type of the 
following sorts of beings can be summoned by the 
spell. They come only if they are within range of 
the call. 

The caster can call three times, for a different 
type each time. Once a call is successful, no other 
type can be called without another casting of the 
spell. (The DM consults his outdoor map or bases 
the chance of any such creature being within spell 
range upon the caster’s altitude and the terrain the 
caster is above at the time of spellcasting.) 

The creature(s) called by the spell are allowed 
a saving throw vs. spell with a —4 penalty to avoid 
the summons. Aerial beings answering the call are 
favorably disposed to the spellicaster and give 
whatever aid they can. However, if the caller or 
members of the caller's party are of evil alignment, 
the creatures are allowed another saving throw vs. 
spell, this time with a +4 bonus, when they come 
within 10 yards of the caster or an evil individual 
with him. These beings immediately seek to 


8 


escape if their saving throws are successful. In any 
event, if the caster requests that the summoned 
creatures engage in combat on his behalf, they are 
required to roll a loyalty reaction check based on 
the caster’s Charisma and whatever dealings he 
has had with them. 

This spell works with respect to neutral or good 
aerial creatures, as determined by the DM. Thus 
the DM can freely add to or alter the list as he sees 
fit. 

If the caster personally knows a certain individ- 
ual aerial being, that being can be summoned at 
double the normal range. If this is done, no other 
aerial creatures are affected. 

If a percentage chance is given in the accompa- 
nying table, halcyons and winged elves add 1% per 
caster level. These chances can be used if no other 
campaign information on the area is available. 

The material components of this spell are three 
feathers from three different winged—not neces- 
sarily avian—species. 

Notes: Granted by the elven goddess Aerdrie 
Faenya. 


Creature Altitude 
Type Called Low Medium High 
1d4 asperii 5% 10% 20% 
1d6 gianteagles 30% 20% 10% 
1 ki-rin 10% 10% 5% 
id2 lammasu 10% 5% 1% 
ld2 pegataurs 10% 5% 1% 
1d2 pegasi 20% 10% 5% 
1 sylph 5% 10% 20% 

Call Animal — Shaman 

(Summoning) 
Sphere: Animal 
Level: 2 
Range: | mi. 
Components: 


Casting Time: | rd. 
Duration: | hr/level 
Area of Effect: 1 mile 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell calls to the caster one animal of any 
given species. The only requisites are that such an 
animal exists within one mile of the caster—and is 
capable of coming to him—and that the caster 
hold in one hand a bone, tooth, tail, paw or feather 
from an animal of the species called. This token is 
not destroyed by the casting. 


9 


Call Animal or Bird 


The called animal typically arrives in 1d20 
rounds, and then behaves as a semi-intelligent pet 
for the duration of the spell. The animal trusts and 
respects the caster, protects and serves him as 
faithfully as possible, but retains its natural per- 
sonality and instincts. Further, the animal can 
carry out only simple commands, such as “leave 
him alone,” “follow that,” “take this to the top of 
the hill,” and “kill any horses you see.” The crea- 
tures do not act suicidally, and are not capable of 
understanding words like “castle,” “barbarian,” 
“thief,” and other subjective descriptions. 

Intelligent or magical creatures are immune to 
the effects of this spell. 

Notes: Restricted to shamans, uncommon. 


Call Animal or Bird 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 
Sphere: Animal 


Level: 1 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: | round 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 120 yds. 
Saving Throw: None 


Before casting this weaker form of animal sum- 
moning, the druid must decide if the spell is an 
animal call or a bird call, as the verbal and material 
components are different. After casting, all animals 
(or birds) of size T within the area of effect that are 
susceptible to the animal friendship spell come to the 
druid; this takes 1 to 4 rounds. Once most of the ani- 
mals or birds arrive, the spell lasts for three rounds, 
plus one round per caster level. During this time, the 
called animals (or birds) are charmed; they will stay 
and not harm the calling druid or other animals or 
birds called. They act normally with respect to other 
creatures, fighting if attacked as if they were cor- 
nered; no other control is evident to onlookers with- 
out the use of further spells (such as, detect charm). 
After the spell has expired, the called animals or birds 
return to their normal territories, the charm lifted. The 
spell typically calls 3d6 creatures with ' HD or less, 
or 2d6 creatures with / HD or less. 

The material components are two handfuls of 
food appropriate to the type creatures summoned; 
the food is eaten by the animals (or birds) called. 

Notes: Very rare spell for druids and similar 
specialty priests. (Updated from DRAGON 
Magazine.) 


Call Avatar 
A rare variation of the gate spell that specifically 
summons an avatar. The only difference is a ]-hour 
casting time and the required presence of a relic of 
the deity, which the avatar takes when it departs. 


Call (The) Council of Spirits 
See Council of Spirits 


Call Dinosaurs 


(Conjuration/Summoning) 
Sphere: Animal 


Level: 5 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: I-mi. radius 
Saving Throw: None 


When this spell is cast, a dinosaur or small 
group of dinosaurs is compelled to come to the 
priest at top speed, and act in a way to aid the 
caster. This spell summons a single gargantuan- or 
huge-sized dinosaur or an individual or small 
group of smaller dinosaurs, at the DM’s discretion, 
The creatures are not under the direct control of 
the caster, but they do as the caster verbally or 
physically indicates, provided this is also the will 
of the greater Power that rules them. The priest 
cannot specify the type of dinosaur summoned— 
that is left to the will of the Power (the DM de- 
cides). If there are no suitable dinosaurs in range, 
the spell fails. 

This spell serves as a minor form of divine aid 
to the caster. For instance, if a fighter in the priest's 
care falls into a swamp or river and is drowning, 
this spell might summon a large water-dwelling di- 
nosaur to pull, carry, or lift the fighter out of the 
water. If the priest is tied up, it might summon a 
small group of rat-sized dinosaurs to chew through 
the bonds. If a group of ivory hunters has killed a 
number of dinosaurs for their teeth, it might 
summon a gigantic carnivorous dinosaur to wreck 
their camp and savage them—or it might summon 
a group of tiny dinosaurs to eat all their supplies 
and carry off their goods, forcing them to leave. 

Dinosaurs summoned by this spell do not 
attack the summoner. When the single, immediate 
task for which they were summoned is completed, 
the dinosaurs retreat into the jungle and resume 
their normal behavior. Summoning dinosaurs to 


I ee gn NE gee ee en 


aid in protracted, vague, or abstract plans, such as 
“to drive all foreigners from this land” or “to kill 
all evil men in this village” does not work. The di- 
nosaur or dinosaurs arrive, but then become agi- 
tated and leave after no direct, immediate actions 
are put forth. 

In the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting, through this 
spell, the divine aid of Ubtao is invoked and mani- 
fested through the actions of dinosaurs of Chult 
(the Children of Ubtao). Any priest of Ubtao who 
abuses this spell by summoning dinosaurs in order 
to facilitate a hunt invariably suffers a gruesome, 
painful death in the jaws of a dinosaur for violat- 
ing the divine intent of the spell. 

The material component for this spell is the 
priest’s holy symbol. 

Notes: Granted by the Chultan jungle god 
Ubtao of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting, 


Call Follower — Ranger 


(Conjuration/Summoning) 
Sphere: Animal 


Level: 3 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 6 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 10 mi. radius/level 
Saving Throw: None 


A ranger who has not yet received his full allot- 
ment of followers can use this spell in an attempt to 
summon one, After the spell is cast, the DM secretly 
consults an appropriate table or a list of followers 
he’s chosen for the ranger. If the DM decides that a 
potential follower is within the area of effect, the 
follower appears within the next 24 hours. If the 
DM decides that a follower isn’t available nothing 
happens (no follower appears). The ranger can’t call 
a specific type of follower; as always, the type of 
follower is up to the DM. This spell can be at- 
tempted no more than once per month. 

Notes: Uncommon for rangers. Optional notes 
on staging the arrival of a new follower can be 
found in the Complete Ranger's Handbook. 


Call Ghost Pack 


Call Ghost Pack 
(Summoning) 
Sphere: Animal 


Level: 5 

Range: 3 mi. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: | turn/level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell calls any ghost pack within three 
miles, to come to the caster. 

The pack travels to the caster at a normal walk- 
ing pace, and once there it loyally obeys any one 
simple command issued by the caster, for example, 
“kill them” or “protect me.” When the task is com- 
pleted or the spell ends the pack leaves. The dura- 
tion is measured from the time the pack arrives, 
not from when the call was issued. 

Affected ghost packs become tame and loyal, 
not obsessive and suicidal. They still have their 
normal urges and instincts (for example, to hunt), 
and have no desire to be destroyed. They might be 
distracted by apparent prey, mates, and so on. They 
never obey suicidal commands. 

As a general rule, in any place where a ghost 
pack can be found (towns, farmland, etc.) there is 
still only a 25% chance of such a pack actually ex- 
isting. To cast this spell with any certainty, the 
shaman must pick a place where he or she knows 
that a ghost pack roams. 

The spell requires the tail, pelt, claw, or skull of 
any predatory animal, which is not consumed in 
the casting of the spell. 

Notes: Restricted to shamans, uncommon. 


east AC As animal; MV As animal; 
i blind a fe 


r bette c: E NT a 
eth wheat cahang E fees 
HD. These are predators, eG as wolves or 


Level: 4 
Range: 10 ft. radius 


Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


The casting of this spell causes a pair of jet- 
black hounds to appear anywhere within the 
spell’s range, as the caster desires. The hounds are 
completely loyal and attempt to carry out the 
caster’s every command. The caster’s control over 
the hounds is nearly absolute, only a full wish or 
divine intervention is sufficient to subvert the 
hounds’ loyalty to the priest. 

The hounds are considered war dogs, with 
maximum hit points (18 hp) and lawful neutral 
alignment. They are more intelligent than normal 
war dogs (rated as Low), and are capable of under- 
standing complex instructions. 

The call hounds spell cannot be dispelled. It 
ends if the hounds are slain or subjected to a ban- 
ishment spell, if the caster is slain or rendered un- 
conscious, or if the caster wills the spell to cease. 
Protection from good and similar effects can keep 
the hounds at bay. If the hounds are ordered to per- 
form a task that contradicts the tenets of their 
patron Power, they simply vanish, ending the spell. 

The spell requires the caster’s holy symbol and 
a silver dog whistle worth at least 50 gp, which the 
caster sounds during casting. Neither is destroyed 
in the casting 

Notes: Granted by the halfling god Urogalan. 


This truly awful spell summons the Wild Hunt. 
The druid selects a location to which the Hunt will 
be summoned (see “The Wild Hunt” section), and 
begins to cast the spell. The spell cannot be started 
until the full darkness of night sets in, though 
moonlight is no hindrance. The caster must call the 
Hunt until it is heard in the distance, or until the 
first light of dawn. If first light comes, the spell did 
not succeed. The Hunt is not under the caller's 
control in any way if it does come. 

The Master of the Hunt has a saving throw of 2 
in all categories, and this saving throw is used to 
determine the success of this spell. Every half hour 
that the druid continues to cast the spell, 1d20 is 
rolled. A 1 indicates that the Master has felt the 
summons and his horn is heard in the night, 10 
miles away. Thereafter, the Hunt proceeds nor- 
mally. While casting this spell, the druid can spend 
only one round every half hour in other activities. 

Notes: Restricted to druids. (Updated from 
DRAGON Magazine.) 


Call Phoenix 


ee aoe ae Cin ith ee 
‘rs tb Cie jeabyiag a laeghs 

spem ponsins a an anderea eet and ving 

not fight until most of the 


oe ioe kash du A usually an 
immediate frontal assault on oat 


Hounds (20): AC 2; MV 21; HD 5; hp 30; 
THACO 14; #AT i as as Se a 
pursued being, swarm (no limit on ni 
tacking one foe), flame tongue (\/turn, +5 ohne 
a e e eee 
from evil, cannot die, if slain returns with next 
Hunt; MR 15%; AL LG; SZ M (3' at shoulder); 


ML Fearless (20). The hounds are as huge beasts 
‘that may appear normal but can transform into 
onan gia flame iat from 
and eyes. jal 
Call Lightning 

(Alteration) 

Sphere: Weather 

Level: 3 

Range: 360 yds. 

Components: V, S 


Casting Time: | turn 
Duration: | turn/level 

Area of Effect: 10-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: 1⁄2 


When a call lightning spell is cast, there must be 
a storm of some sort in the area—a rain shower, 
clouds and wind, hot and cloudy conditions, or even 
a tornado (including a whirlwind formed by a djinn 
or air elemental of 7 Hit Dice or more). The caster is 
then able to call down bolts of lightning. The caster 
can call down one bolt per turn. The caster need not 
call a bolt of lightning immediately—other actions, 
even spellcasting, can be performed; however, the 
caster must remain stationary and concentrate for a 
full round each time a bolt is called. The spell has a 
duration of one turn per caster level. Each bolt 
causes 2d8 points of electrical damage, plus an ad- 
ditional 1d8 points for each of the caster’s experi- 
ence levels. Thus, a 4th-level caster calls down a 
6d8 bolt (2d8 + 4d8), 

The bolt of lightning flashes down in a vertical 
stroke at whatever distance the spellcaster decides, 


up to 360 yards away. Any creature within a 10- 
foot radius of the path or the point where the light- 
ning strikes suffers full damage unless a successful 
saving throw vs. spell is rolled, in which case only 
one-half damage is taken. 

Because it requires a storm overhead, this spell 
can only be used outdoors. It does not function 
under ground or under water, 

Notes: Common for druids (PHB). 


Call Pack 


(Summoning) 
Sphere: Animal 


Level: 3 

Range: | mi. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: | turn/level (Special) 
Area of Effect: Special 

Saving Throw: None 


This spell calls a number of animals (including 
giant varieties) of a species specified by the caster, 
who then perform one simple command given to 
them by the caster. The spell attracts 2d10 animals, 
or however many the DM considers are within 
range, whichever is lower. 

The animals continue to follow the caster’s 
command until it has been fulfilled or the spell’s 
duration has expired. The spell duration begins 
from the time the animals arrive (usually 1d10 
rounds), not from the time that the spell is cast. 
Commands must be extremely simple—usually 
one word only: “Kill” or “Pursue” (while pointing 
at the target) are both acceptable. 

The material components are the shaman’s 
drum and a small amount of food preferred by the 
animal type the shaman is calling. 

Notes: Restricted to shamans, uncommon. 


Call Phoenix 


(Conjuration/Summoning) 
Sphere: Elemental Fire 


Level: 6 

Range: 0 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 2 rds. 
Duration: 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


“a a: 


Call Spirit — Savant 


) A 


This potent spell enables the priest to summon 
a phoenix to his or her aid. The caster must be of 
good alignment or a druid. Evil or nondruid neu- 
tral priests cannot summon a phoenix. 

A phoenix will always answer this spell. 
However, depending on how far away the nearest 
one is, the phoenix may take some time to appear. 
The phoenix appears in 1d8-1 rounds. A roll of 
“0” indicates that the phoenix appears immedi- 
ately, in a huge burst of smoke and flame. 

Because the caster must be good or be a druid, 
there is seldom a conflict of interest between the 
phoenix and the summoner. However, a phoenix 
won't attack beings of good alignment (unless ex- 
traordinary circumstances exist). It will risk its 
own life if the cause mandates such action, and if 
this furthers the aims of good that the summoner 
has undertaken. 

When the spell expires, the phoenix does not 
disappear, but is instead free to do as it will. This 
may be why the caster summoned it. On the other 
hand, the phoenix may leave if it feels the reason 
for its summoning was insufficient. 

The material components are three diamonds 
of at least 500 gp value (which are consumed by 
the energies of the spell) and a red hot coal. 

Notes: Restricted to priests of good alignment 
and druids. 


Sphere: Divination 


Level: 3 

Range: 10 ft. 

Components: V, M 

Casting Time: 1 turn 

Duration: 1 rd./level. 

Area of Effect: 1 dead human or demihuman 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell allows the savant to summon forth 
the spirit of a dead human or demihuman, which is 
bound to answer all questions fully and truthfully. 
While the spell is in effect, anyone who speaks 
(other than the savant or the spirit) breaks the spell 
and causes the spirit to return from whence it 
came. While the spirit answers truthfully, its 
knowledge may be limited. 

The material components are a relic of the de- 
ceased, or some fragment of a personal possession 
of the deceased. An iron censer is also required, in 
which must be burnt incense of a minimum value 


of 100 gp per level of the deceased, Failure to burn 
sufficient incense causes the spell to fail. 
Notes: Restricted to cleric-savants, common. 


Call Stone Guardian — Gnome 


(Conjuration) 
Sphere: Elemental Earth 


Level: 5 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time; | turn 

Duration: | turn/level 

Area of Effect: 3,000 Ibs. of stone 
Saving Throw: None 


This powerful spell enables the priest to tem- 
porarily form a stone guardian from a solid block 
of stone of sufficient volume (3,000 pounds mini- 
mum), The stone guardian has all the abilities and 
restrictions of a creature of this type. The guardian 
called forth is nonintelligent and can follow only 
simple commands issued by the priest, involving 
direct actions with simple conditional modifiers. 

The material components are the priest's holy 
symbol and a specially crafted rod of pure quartz 
(this requires at least 10 days to shape at the cost of 
1,000 gp). The priest holds the rod to control the 
guardian; its premature shattering ends the spell. 
When the spell ends, the rod shatters into worth- 
less shards. 

Notes: Granted by the gnome god Segojan 
Earthcaller. 


Stone Guardian: AC 2; MV 9; HD 4+4; #AT 
2, THACO 15; Dmg 1d8+1/1d8+1; SD One- 


Call The Council Of Spirits 


See council of spirits. 


oe ee ae 


Call Woodland Beings 


p ee 4 


Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 

Duration: 1 rd. 

Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


Before attempting a difficult task, the priest can 
cast call upon faith to aid his performance. If the 
priest has been true to his faith (as determined by 
the DM), the priest gains a +3 (or +15%) bonus to 
one die roll (his choice) needed to complete the 
task. The bonus can affect a saving throw, attack 
roll, ability check, etc. For example, if a priest who 
was about to cross a narrow log high above a 
chasm could cast this spell and gain a +3 bonus to 
his Dexterity check. 

The material component is the priest's holy 
symbol. 

Notes: Uncommon for clerics (ToM). 


Call Upon Gargauth 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 
Sphere: Summoning 


Level: 7 

Range: Special 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: | hr. 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell enables the spellcaster to contact 
Gargauth, wherever he is on Toril, in Realmspace, or 
on the Outer Planes, and request his assistance. 
Gargauth is by no means obligated to respond to the 
request. He is not under the command of the spell- 
caster, but if the situation catches his interest or the 
bribe offered is enticing, he commonly appears on 
the scene in avatar form and acts as he wishes. 
Gargauth sticks to the letter of any agreement 
reached, but he violates the spirit of any agreement 
to his own advantage whenever possible. 

Gargauth delights in disseminating disinforma- 
tion about this spell by inaccurately describing the 
situation of the caster as somehow being in control 
of Gargauth. He often deliberately deludes casters 


into obtaining particular items that he desires by 
spreading word that possessing them and casting 
this spell will place him at the caster’s beck and 
call, and then he seizes the items when a spell- 
caster calls. 

The material components of this spell are an 
unblessed broken horn manifested by Gargauth 
and the priest's holy symbol. 

Notes: Granted by the evil demipower 
Gargauth the Outcast of the FORGOTTEN REALMS 
setting. 


Call Woodland Beings 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 
Sphere: Animal 


Level: 4 

Range: 100 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: Special 
Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


By means of this spell, the caster is able to 
summon certain woodland creatures to his loca- 
tion. Naturally, this spell works only outdoors, but 
not necessarily only in wooded areas. The caster 
begins the incantation and continues uninterrupted 
until some called creature appears or two turns 
have elapsed. (The verbalization and somatic ges- 
turing are easy, so this is not particularly exhaust- 
ing to the spellcaster.) Only one type of the 
following sorts of beings can be summoned by the 
spell. They come only if they are within the range 
of the call. 

The caster can call three times, for a different 
type each time. Once a call is successful, no other 
type can be called without another casting of the 
spell. (Your DM will consult his outdoor map or 
base the probability of any such creature being 
within spell range upon the nature of the area the 
caster is in at the time of spellcasting.) 

The creature(s) called by the spell are allowed a 
saving throw vs. spell (with a -4 penalty) to avoid 
the summons. Any woodland beings answering the 
call are favorably disposed to the spellicaster and 
give whatever aid they can. However, if the caller 
or members of the caller’s party are of evil align- 
ment, the creatures are allowed another saving 
throw vs. spell (this time with a +4 bonus) when 
they come within 10 yards of the caster or another 
evil character with him. These beings immediately 


a a a ea 


Calling Melody — Shaman 


seek to escape if their saving throws are successful. 
In any event, if the caster requests that the sum- 
moned creatures engage in combat on his behalf, 
they are required to roll a loyalty reaction check 
based on the caster’s Charisma and whatever deal- 
ings he has had with them. This spell works with 
respect to neutral or good woodland creatures, as 
determined by the DM. Thus the DM can freely 
add to or alter the list as he sees fit. 

If the caster personally knows a certain individ- 
ual woodland being, that being can be summoned 
at double the normal range. If this is done, then no 
other woodland creatures are affected. 

The material components of this spell are a 
pine cone and eight holly berries. 

If a percentage chance is given, druids and 
other nature-based priests add 1% per caster level. 
These chances can be used if no other campaign 
information on the area is available. 

Notes: Common for druids (PHB). 


Type of Woodlands 
Creature Light Moderate/ Virgin/ 
Type Called Dense Sylvan 
2d8 brownies 30% 20% 10% 
1d4 centaurs 5% 30% 5% 
1d4 dryads 1% 25% 15% 
1d8 pixies 10% 20% 10% 
1d4 satyrs 1% 30% 10% 
1d6 sprites 0% 5% 25% 
1 treant - 5% 25% 
1 unicorn - 15% 20% 
Calling Melody — Shaman 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
Sphere: Charm 
Level: 7 
Range: 15 yds. 


Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: | turn 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: | creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell is cast much like the 3rd-level haunt- 
ing notes spell: The shaman plays a tune within 15 
yards of the target creature, and thus creates a 
small mindless spirit that possesses the creature. 
The creature is allowed a saving throw vs. para- 
lyzation at this stage in order to avoid being the 
unknowing host to the spirit. The creature must be 


within range of the spell for the full duration of the 
tune (1 turn), or the spell fails. 

Thereafter, the caster can summon the creature 
by playing the tune again. This power works regard- 
less of the distance separating the two, but the crea- 
ture can resist the effect by making a successful 
saving throw vs. spell. The creature can try to break 
free of the control once every turn, and is affected 
only for as long as the caster keeps playing the tune. 

For as long as the creature is drawn to the 
caster (until a successful saving throw or until the 
caster stops playing), it moves towards the caster’s 
location at a moderate speed (walking quickly but 
not running, trotting a horse but not galloping, 
etc.), attempting to evade any obstructions in its 
path. The creature is capable of speech, but speaks 
slowly, as if drunk or very tired, and is capable of 
hatching basic, simple plans to get to the caster 
(for example, hiring a ferry across a river, bribing a 
gate guard to enter a city, etc.). However, the crea- 
ture does not act against its alignment. 

Throughout this, the creature can hear the 
melody in its head, and is aware only of an over- 
riding urge to go in a particular direction. It is un- 
aware of the reason for this compulsion, or the 
eventual destination. 


9 


6 


Denna a 


As with the haunting melody spell, the shaman 
can maintain contact with only one creature. If the 
spell is cast on a second creature, the link with the 
previous creature is lost. 

The spell requires an instrument with which the 
caster is proficient an on which the tune is played. 
The other components are the sound made by the 
instrument and the movements required to play it. 

Notes: Restricted to shamans; uncommon. 


Calm 
Reversed form, effervescence. 
Calm 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
Sphere: Charm 
Level: 1 
Range: 3’ 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 51 


Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: Creatures, 1 HD/level 
Saving Throw: Special 


By using this spell, the shukenja is able to 
soothe the minds of those affected by fear, tempo- 
rary insanity, confusion, and other forms of mental 
distress. It cancels the effect on the recipients, 
restoring them to their normal mental state. The 
shukenja points at the recipients and utters a few 
holy scriptures, triggering the spell. However, the 
recipients, since their mental distress makes them 
unwilling targets, must each make a saving throw 
vs. spell, attempting to avoid the effect. If the 
saving throw is successful, the spell has no effect. 
If the save is failed, the creature is calmed. 

The material component for this spell is a 
prayer wheel or a page of sutras. 

Notes: Common for priests of an oriental cul- 
ture; otherwise, very rare. 


Calm Animals 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
Sphere: Animal 


Level: 1 

Range: 60 yds. 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: | turn + | rd./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell soothes and quiets normal animals, 
rendering them docile and harmless. Only crea- 
tures with Intelligence ratings of 1 to 4 (in other 
words, animal- or semi-intelligent creatures) are 
affected by this spell. The caster can calm 2d4 Hit 
Dice of animals, plus 1 Hit Die per level, so a 4th- 
level priest could affect 2d4+4 Hit Dice of crea- 
tures. The caster can affect any animals he wishes 
to within the spell’s range, but all the animals must 
be of the same species. Normal animals generally 
have no saving throw, but exceptional individuals 
may receive one at the DM’s discretion. 

While under the influence of this spell, the af- 
fected animals remain where they are and do not 
attack or flee, unless they are attacked or con- 
fronted by a significant hazard such as a fire or a 
hungry predator. Once an affected animal is 
roused, the spell’s magic is broken and the animal 
is free to act in whatever fashion it normally 
would. Animals affected by this spell are not help- 
less and defend themselves normally if attacked. 

Notes: Uncommon for druids (PO:SM). This 
spell has been updated. 


Calm Chaos 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
Sphere: Law 
Level: 2 
Range: 20 yds. 

Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 1 
Duration: Special 


Area of Effect: 1d6 creatures/level 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell temporarily calms a chaotic situation 
involving a group of people. The situation may in- 
volve any range of emotions from violence (as in a 
barroom brawl) to joy and merrymaking (as in a 
festival or carnival). 


ee i i ee ae Oe ae 


Calm Water 


pee A 


Unlike the emotion spell, calm chaos does not 
cause a change in the emotions of affected crea- 
tures—anger, fear, or intense joy remain in each in- 
dividual. The emotion is simply restrained rather 
than released. Thus, an angry creature intent on at- 
tacking still feels the desire to do so, but will with- 
hold the action as long as the spell remains in effect. 

Each creatures to be affected is allowed a 
saving throw vs. spell at a —4 penalty to avoid the 
effect. If more creatures are present than can be af- 
fected, those nearest the caster are affected first. 

After casting the spell, the priest makes a 
Charisma check. If successful, all those affected 
by the spell are compelled to stop what they are 
doing. They are filled with the sensation that 
something important is about to occur. At this 
time, the priest or someone of his or her choosing 
must gain the attention of the affected creatures by 
giving a speech, performing for the crowd, or cast- 
ing spells with intriguing visual effects (such as 
dancing lights). The attention of the crowd is then 
held for as long as the distraction continues. An in- 
dividual might filibuster and maintain control over 
the affected creatures for hours or days. 

Two conditions cause the group to resume its 
original actions. In the first condition, the method 
of entertaining the crowd ceases for one round 
when the speech ends or the spell expires. If this 
action is not replaced with another distraction 
within one round, the crowd is freed of the spell. 

In the second condition, if an event occurs that 
is more immediate than the distraction, the crowd 
diverts its attention to that event. Thus, if the 
spell was used to stop a barroom brawl and the 
building caught fire or was attacked, the crowd’s 
attention would be diverted and the individuals 
could act freely. 

Creatures whose attention is held by the spell 
cannot be instructed to attack or perform any 
action. Such creatures ignore suggestions of this 
nature. Depending on the nature of the request, the 
DM may deem that the suggestion causes a dis- 
traction that ends the spell. 

Notes: Common for priests with access to the 
sphere of Law (ToM). 


Calm Water 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Elemental Water 


Level: 5 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 8 

Duration: 1 turn/level 

Area of Effect: 120-ft. diameter sphere 
Saving Throw: Special 


This incantation inhibits natural or magical dis- 
turbances in water within its area of effect. Aquatic 
or water-based creatures with fewer Hit Dice than 
the caster’s level flee the area if possible, and 
water-based creatures (water weirds, elementals, 
etc.) of this type cannot form. Aquatic and water- 
based creatures whose Hit Dice equal or exceed 
the caster’s level must make a successful saving 
throw vs. spell to form, then save each round to 
operate in the affected area. The effect moves with 
the caster. (Note that while this spell would calm 
the waters of a hurricane, it would not affect the 
gale-force winds.) 

The material component is a drop of oil. 

Notes: Very rare spell. (Updated from 
POLYHEDRON Newszine.) 


Calm Winds 
(Invocation/Evocation) 
Sphere: Elemental Air 


Level: 4 

Range: 0 

Components: V, M 

Casting Time: 7 

Duration: | turn + 1 rd//level 
Area of Effect: 20-ft.-radius globe 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell creates an area in which the air re- 
mains perfectly calm. Calm winds negates the ef- 
fects of whirlwinds and spells such as dust devil 
and gust of wind within the protected area, al- 
though such spells are not ended. Creatures from 
the Elemental Plane of Air and wind-based crea- 
tures such as vortices and windwalkers shun and 
seek to leave the area at the earliest opportunity. 
The calmed area is mobile with the caster, and 
lasts as long as the caster concentrates undisturbed 
or until the spell duration expires. The caster can 
move at up to half movement rate and maintain 


ee 


Caress, Loviatar’s 


a aaa A 


concentration, but no other strenuous actions are 
allowed. 

The material component for this spell is the 
priest’s holy symbol. 

Notes: Granted by the wind god Akadi of the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting Granted by the elven 
goddess Aerdrie Faenya. 


Caltrops 
A Sth-level spell of the sphere of War. See appendix 
in Vol. 3. 


Camouflage — Elf 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Animal, Plant 


Level: 2 

Range: 20 ft. radius 
Components; S, M 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: | turn/level 

Area of Effect: 1 person/level 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


The elves jealously guard this spell. It func- 
tions only in the wilderness settings, allowing the 
priest to instantly and completely hide one person 
per level of experience, concealing them against 
even thorough searches. The spell changes the col- 
oring and shadowing of the affected individuals to 
blend with the natural surroundings. It is effective 
against infravision and ultravision, and is espe- 
cially useful for spies and infiltrators. Spell-cam- 
ouflaged individuals retain all their faculties and 
abilities, and can emerge from the magical con- 
cealment at any time they desire. 

The concealed individuals can move while 
magically camouflaged, creeping slowly up to 10 
feet each round. Trying to move faster dissipates 
the spell. As long as the movement is surreptitious 
and stealthy (“Look, Thrag! That bush is 
moving!”), the spell holds. As with the invisibility 
spell, if the warded individuals attack, they gain a 
surprise bonus of initiative and a +4 bonus to hit, 
but the spell is immediately broken. 

The concealed individuals cannot be detected 
except by magic or by moving stupidly. Until the 
spell wears off, they enjoy near-total invisibility. 
The material components are the priest's holy 
symbol and a mistletoe berry. 

Notes: Restricted to elves; uncommon. 


Candle of Calm 
(Enchantment/Charm, Evocation) 
Sphere: Charm, Protection 


Level: 5 

Range; 10 yds./level 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: 1 rd. 

Area of Effect: 70-ft.-radius sphere 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell creates the illusion of a lit, levitating 
candle—an illusion that gives off very real, flick- 
ering light, bright enough to read by but without 
any real flame or heat. The spell affects all beings 
within 70 feet of the candle at any time during the 
round of its existence. On the round the candle 
burns, a saving throw vs. spell must successfully 
be made by any such creatures desiring to cast any 
spell, launch an attack, or even act to defend them- 
selves in any way beyond movement. (In other 
words, they can freely move aside from an attack, 
but cannot ready a weapon or raise a shield with- 
out making a successful saving throw). Any at- 
tacks by a creature who does make a successful 
saving throw are made with a —7 penalty to attack 
rolls. On the following round, creatures affected 
by the candle of calm can act freely, but their 
attack rolls are at a -6 penalty. On the second 
round after the candle vanishes, attack rolls at a -5 
penalty, and on the third round, they are at a 4 
penalty, and so on until the penalty vanishes on the 
seventh round after the disappearance of the 
candle of calm. 

The radiance of the candle also causes the same 
happiness effect in creatures as the 4th-level 
wizard spell emotion and banishes any existing 
natural or magical discord, fear, hate, hopeless- 
ness, and sadness. Once the candle has been cre- 
ated, its caster is free to engage in other 
spellcasting without harming its magic. 

The material components of this spell are an 
unlit candle of any sort and a piece of clear crystal 
or glass. 

Notes: Granted by Lliira, Mistress of Revels, 
of the FORGOTTEN Reams setting. 


Caress, Loviatar’s 


See Loviatar's caress. 


" a a. 


Castigate 


Castigate 
(Abjuration) 
Sphere: Combat 


Level: 3 

Range: 60 yards 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 3 

Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: 20-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: Special 


By means of this spell, the shukenja can deliver 
a blasting rebuke upon his foes. The spell’s effect 
depends on the alignment of those within the area 
of effect. Foes of the same alignment as the 
shukenja must make a successful saving throw vs. 
spell or be deafened for 1d3 rounds by the blister- 
ing words of the caster. Foes with a difference of 
one alignment component (lawful, neutral, 
chaotic, good, or evil) suffer | point of damage per 
level of the caster. A successful saving throw vs. 
spell reduces this damage to 2 point per level. 
Foes with both alignment components different 
from that of the caster suffer 1d4 points of damage 
per level of the caster Again, a successful saving 
throw vs. spell reduces the damage by half. A 
lawful good shukenja casting this spell would 
deafen foes of lawful good alignment, inflict 1 
point of damage per level upon foes of lawful neu- 
tral, lawful evil, chaotic good, and neutral good 
alignments, and would inflict 1d4 points of 
damage per level to foes of true neutral, neutral 
evil, chaotic neutral, and chaotic evil alignment. 

The material component is the shukenja’s holy 
symbol. 

Notes: Common for priests from an oriental 
setting; otherwise, very rare. 


Casting Out 
(Abjuration) 
Sphere: Summoning 
Level: 2 
Range: 10 yds. 


Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 1 turn 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: | spirit 
Saving Throw: Special 


Through this spell a shaman can attempt to dis- 
miss any spirit that is forcibly possessing a person 


00 


or object. The spell does not drive spirits out of ob- 
jects that are their proper homes (such as trees or 
fetishes), nor out of a willing host. 

The exact performance of this spell varies from 
shaman to shaman. Some conduct formal rituals, 
ending with the sacrifice of an animal to appease 
the spirit; others prefer long and passionate exhor- 
tations, insulting, threatening, flattering, and plead- 
ing with the spirit to leave; a third method is to beat 
the subject until the possessing spirit departs. Each 
shaman, when first learning this spell, determines 
which of these three methods he or she uses. Often 
this choice is culturally determined; no shaman can 
switch between methods at whim. 

The first method requires proper ritual equipment, 
and an appropriate animal to sacrifice. The second 
method requires a successful Charisma check from 
the shaman (and/or a particularly fine piece of role- 
playing from the player). The third inflicts 1d3 points 
of damage upon a creature that is host to a spirit. 

The spirit is allowed a saving throw vs. spell to 
partially resist the casting out.. If successful, the 
spirit has been cast out, but can return to its victim, 
or perhaps another person or object in the area. 

Notes: Restricted to shamans, uncommon. 


Cause Blindness 
Cause Blindness or Deafness 
Cause Critical Wounds 
Cause Disease 
Cause Fear 
Cause Insanity 
Cause Intermediate Wounds 
Cause Light Wounds 
Cause Moderate Wounds 
Cause Paralysis 


Cause Scurvy 
Cause Serious Wounds 


Reversed forms of the corresponding cure spells 
(and remove fear). These reversed forms are used 
by evil priests. 


Ceremony — Cleric 


Level: 6 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 8 

Duration: | turn/level 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell allows a priest to channel the patron 
deity’s power to mimic the protection a celestial 
being, such as a deva, has. This protection is de- 
fined by the following: 


e Subject suffers half damage from acid, cold, and 
electricity. 

eè Subject is immune to poison of all types. 

e Subject can be struck only by weapons of +1 or 
better enchantment. 


This spell can be cast upon another or on the 
caster, In addition to standard sphere limitations, 
this spell is available only to priests worshipping 
deities of good alignment. 

The material component is a vial of holy water, 
which must be used to anoint the subject's head. 

Notes: Granted only by deities of good align- 
ment. 


Celestian, Meteors of 


See meteors of Celestian. 


Censure 
(Alteration, [lusion/Phantasm) 
Sphere: All 


Level: 4 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 7 

Duration: 12 hrs./level 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


To enact this spell, the priest must touch the 
subject creature with his holy symbol. If a success- 
ful attack roll shows the priest has done so, the 
priest then, by word and gesture, “casts out” the 
creature, which is allowed a saving throw vs. spell. 
If the saving throw fails, the creature is marked by 


101 


the spell. The mark is visible to the casting priest 
and all followers of the same faith. Priests of the 
same alignment who worship other deities cannot 
see the mark, but instinctively react to a censured 
creature with fear, hatred, and aversion and do not 
trust nor willingly aid it. 

Those of the caster’s faith refuse to aid or even 
approach the censured creature, ignoring it if it at- 
tempts to deal with them and driving it away if it 
tries to enter a building, a home, or even a territory 
controlled by one who can see the mark. Members 
of the caster’s faith strike at the marked creature if 
necessary to drive it away from places they con- 
trol; they feel compelled to do so if the creature 
does not quickly leave after less violent means of 
persuasion are tried first. 

To those of the caster’s faith, the mark shines 
clearly through clothing and disguises, including 
magic such as alter self and shapeshifting, and 
even invisibility. However, the mark is invisible to 
the one bearing it—who may not even know of its 
existence if it was bestowed in a battle or while the 
creature was asleep or unconscious. Worshipers 
can thus readily spy upon and follow those marked 
as enemies even in crowds or busy city streets. 

The mark is revealed by detect magic or a sim- 
ilar spell and can readily be removed by means of 
a dispel magic spell. Priests are warned that 
misuse of such a spell brings about swift divine 
disfavor. 

The material component of this spell is the 
caster’s holy symbol. 

Notes: Known to be uncommon in the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Ceremony — Cleric 
(Invocation) 
Sphere: All 


Level: 1 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 hr. 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 creature, one item, or area 
Saving Throw: Special 


The ceremony spell represents certain func- 
tions carried out by religious organizations, and 
has various applications, depending on the level of 
the priest. A ceremony does not leave behind an 
aura of magic (although in some cases an aura of 
good or evil might be present and thus detectable), 


Ceremony — Cleric 


and the effects of a ceremony cannot be dispelled. 
Specific ceremonies vary from religion to religion, 
but usually encompass these functions: 


Ist-level cleric: coming of age, burial, marriage 

3rd-level cleric: dedication, investiture, consecrate 
item 

Sth-level cleric: ordination, special vows 

7th-level cleric: consecrate ground 

9th-level cleric: anathematize 


Each of these varieties of the ceremony spell 
requires a priest of the indicated level or a higher 
one, with additional restrictions as described 
below. All ceremony spells except anathematize 
have no saving throw, since the recipient is either 
inanimate or presumed to be willing; these simply 
fail if performed on someone who is unwilling to 
receive the benefit. Briefly, the ceremonies listed 
do the following things: 


Coming of age is a limited form of bless spell that is 
performed upon a young man (and in some cultures 
a young woman) at some point relatively early in 
life, often the age of 12. A young person who under- 
goes this ceremony receives a +1 bonus to any single 


saving throw, which can be taken at any time after 
the coming of age ceremony is completed. In some 
cultures, the coming of age ceremony has a symbolic 
significance, such that an adolescent must receive 
this blessing before he or she can enjoy the rights 
and privileges of adulthood. 


Burial magically protects a corpse, and bestows it 
with the blessing of the religious organization. The 
body is shielded for one week as if by a protection 
from evil spell, and anyone trying to disinter the 
corpse within that time must make a saving throw 
vs. spell or stop and flee in fear for one turn. 


Marriage has no tangible after-effect (it does not 
guarantee happiness or harmony), but it usually 
carries a moral or legal significance, not dissimilar 
to the various rites of marriage that are performed 
in our real world. 


Dedication allows the recipient of the spell to be 
taken into the ranks of the performing priest's reli- 
gion, making that person a sanctioned worshiper 
of the priest’s deity. The effect of a dedication is 
permanent, unless the worshiper demonstrates a 
desire to change allegiance to a different deity. In 


A 102 \ 


Ceremony — Cleric 


N 


such a case, the earlier dedication can be overrid- 
den by a new dedication performed by a priest of a 
higher level than the one who performed the previ- 
ous dedication, 


Investiture must be performed on any aspiring 
priest before that individual can achieve the status 
of a Ist-level priest. 


Consecrate item must be performed on any object 
to be placed on an altar or in some other location 
within a religious edifice. Holy (or unholy) water 
must be kept in a properly consecrated container, 
to prevent it from losing its potency. 


Ordination must be performed on a priest before 
the individual can assume responsibility for a con- 
gregation or assume similar duties, and even an ad- 
venturing priest must be ordained before he or she 
can gain followers and establish a following or 
other sort of group. In all cases, the priest perform- 
ing the ordination must be of higher level than the 
recipient; this ceremony is often conducted as part 
of the training a priest receives in order to advance 
from 2nd to 3rd level. 


Special vows can be received by a would-be pal- 
adin or knight before that individual embarks upon 
a career in the desired profession. The effects last 
for as long as it takes the individual to gain enough 
experience points to rise to the upper limit of the 
current level. The special vows can then be re- 
newed as part of the individual's training between 
levels, or at any time during advancement through 
the next higher level. A paladin who has received 
special vows is immune to the effects of bestow 
curse spells (but not cursed items) for as long as 
the special vows remain in effect. Additionally, 
this ceremony renders the subject more susceptible 
(4 on saving throw) to any quest spell cast upon 
him or her by a priest of the same alignment as the 
one who performed the special vows ceremony. 


Consecrate ground should be performed upon an 
area before any holy (unholy) structure is built on 
the site. A religious edifice constructed on ground 
that has not been consecrated will slowly but irrev- 
ocably fall into a state of disrepair, having a 1% 
chance per year cumulative, of actually collapsing 
as a result of this oversight. This ceremony must 
be performed before the area in question is altered 
in any way (for example, landscaping) and before 
any construction materials are brought to the site; 


103 


it has no effect if it is done as an afterthought. 
Consecrate ground can be used on a plot of land 
destined for use as a graveyard, and in such a case 
the graveyard itself automatically turns undead 
each round with the same effectiveness as a 3rd- 
level cleric. (Or, if the consecration of a would-be 
graveyard is performed by an evil cleric, any 
undead creatures occupying the area are treated as 
if they were being protected and controlled by an 
evil cleric of 3rd level.) 


Anathematize is a form of excommunication by 
means of which the offender is literally branded on 
the cheek, forehead, arm, or hand with a symbol, 
sigil, or sign that identifies the subject (to those who 
understand the symbol) as someone who has com- 
mitted a serious offense in the eyes of his or her 
deity. An unwilling subject of this spell is allowed a 
saving throw vs. spell, at 4, to escape its effects. If 
the recipient is not truly deserving of the telling 
brand, the ceremony fails when performed. A suc- 
cessful atonement causes the brand to fade, and pos- 
sibly vanish, If the offending actions were caused 
magically or by some other external force, the brand 
utterly disappears. If the offending actions were 
willful, the brand cannot be completely removed. 


The components for the various ceremony spells 
vary from religion to religion, but the material 
component always involves the use of the cleric’s 
holy symbol in one way or another. 

Standard costs for performing these cere- 
monies are as follows: coming of age, 5-15 sp; 
burial 5-50 gp; marriage, 1-20 gp; dedication, 
1-10 sp (or sometimes free); investiture, 1-100 gp 
(or sometimes free); consecrate item, usually free; 
ordination, usually free but possibly as much as 
200 gp, special vows, \-100 gp (or sometimes 
free); consecrate ground, 100-600 gp depending 
on the size of the area and the level of the priest; 
and anathematize is always performed at no 
charge, since this ceremony is always deemed to 
be in the best interests of the priest’s religion. 

Notes: Common for clerics. 


Area of Effect: 1 creature, item, or area 
Saving Throw: Special 


The druidic ceremony is similar to the priest 
version, having a number of applications within 
the hierarchy of druids. The ceremony spell does 
not leave behind an aura of magic (although a 
know alignment spell or similar magic might 
reveal the force of true neutrality involved), and 
the effect cannot be dispelled. Druidic ceremonies 
include the following, which can be performed by 
a druid of the indicated or higher level: 


Ist-level druid: coming of age, rest eternal, 
marriage 
3rd-level druid: dedication, investiture 
7th-level druid: initiation, special vows 
9th-level druid: hallowed ground 
12th-level druid: cast out 


The characteristics of the various types of druidic 
ceremony spells are as follows: 


Coming of age is performed upon young people in 
druidic societies, usually when they reach the age 
of 14, and is symbolic of the young man's or 
young woman’s entrance into adulthood. A young 
person receives a +1 bonus to any single saving 
throw, which can be taken at any time after the 
coming of age ceremony is completed. The coming 
of age ceremony has a symbolic significance in 
that the adolescent can thereafter enjoy the rights 
and privileges of adulthood. 


Rest eternal is performed upon the body of a de- 
ceased creature, and hastens the journey of the 
soul/spirit to its final resting place. The spirit of 
the deceased will not return to haunt the living 


Marriage is essentially identical to the clerical cer- 
emony of the same name. 


Dedication allows the recipient of the spell to be 
taken into the ranks of the druid's followers/wor- 


WE ee 


Ceremony — Druid 


NN 


shipers, provided the individual has a neutral align- 
ment. A recipient of this spell is charged, as are 
druids, with the responsibility to preserve and pro- 
tect nature and the balance of forces in the world. 


Investiture must be performed upon an individual 
of true neutral alignment before he or she can 
become a Ist-level druid). 


Initiation imbues the druid with the shape-chang- 
ing and immunity to woodland charm powers that 
become available upon attaining 7th level. This 
ceremony must be performed upon a druid imme- 
diately after he or she begins to advance upward 
through the 7th level of experience; if cast earlier 
than this, it does not work, and the druid does not 
have the benefit of the above-mentioned special 
powers until receiving initiation. Usually a druid 
must seek out another druid of 7th or higher level 
to perform the ceremony, but in unusual cases a 
druid can cast it upon himself or herself. 


Special vows is a ceremony that operates in the 
same fashion as the clerical rite of the same name. 
It does not work upon paladins, but will function 
upon cavaliers of any alignment. 


Hallowed ground is cast by the druid on his or her 
permanent grove. This ceremony ensorcelled the 
trees of the grove so that they will never be af- 
fected by disease or other natural disasters The 
ground remains hallowed for as long as the druid 
maintains this grove as his or her permanent base. 


Cast out is a form of excommunication or punish- 
ment that can be performed by a druid upon some- 
one who has committed sacrilege upon the natural 
environment or in some other way violated the 
principles and standards of druids. Its effects can 
be lessened at a later date by the casting of a re- 
versed version of this ceremony, either by the same 
druid another one of at least as high a level as the 
original caster, but the casting out can never be 
completely neutralized except by a Hierophant 
Druid of any level. A individual who has been cast 
out exudes a powerful negative aura, causing any 
natural creature encountered to react negatively to 
the individual. This includes all normal (nonmagi- 
cal) animals, monsters native to the woodlands, 
domesticated beasts such as horses and dogs, and 
all druids and their followers. 

Casting out is a very powerful form of punish- 
ment, and can only be performed by a druid who 


105 


has received permission from his or her Archdruid 
to do so. Similarly, an Archdruid must get permis- 
sion from the Great Druid, and the Great Druid 
from the Grand Druid. The Grand Druid does not 
need to obtain permission, but his or her actions 
can be reversed by a Hierophant Druid at any time. 

This ceremony is usually only used on occa- 
sions where the severity of an offense warrants 
such extreme punishment; a druid who asks for 
and is denied permission to perform it, or one who 
later has his or her actions offset by another druid, 
may be subject to punishment by higher-ranking 
members of the hierarchy. An intended recipient of 
this ceremony who is unwilling receives a saving 
throw vs. spell, at —4, to negate its effects. 


The components of a ceremony spell always in- 
clude mistletoe, and the rite (of any sort) must be 
performed in a druid grove or some other natural, 
healthy patch of forest. Such ceremonies are nor- 
mally conducted at either dawn or dusk, the times 
when night and day are in balance. 

Notes: Restricted to druids, common. 


Ceremony — Druid 


OTHER Drumic CEREMONIES 


These ceremonies have been published in 
DRAGON Magazine and other sources as spells. 
Here, they have been reconfigured as additional 
ceremonies, 


3rd level druid: witness 
14th-level druid: anointing 


Witness: Within their society, druids are legal of- 
ficials as well as religious leaders. Having a 
druid witness an oath makes it binding. The 
oathtaker pronounces the vow, usually an act to 
be completed within a specified time, calling 
upon the powers that be, and specifying a 
penalty if the oath goes unfulfilled. After the cer- 
emony is completed, the oathtaker must fulfill 
his literal word, or suffer the consequences. The 
druid may advise the against rash promises or 
suggest suitable modifications to an oath, but the 
final say is the oathtaker’s. After an oath is wit- 
nessed, nothing more can be done about it, 
Warriors often take oaths to perform certain 
deeds, While an unfulfilled oath may be binding 
for years, the death of the oathtaker breaks all 
but the most terrible oaths. 


Anointing (14th level): This ceremony is used to 
raise kings, high-level druids, and other impor- 
tant persons to their stations, In the Celtic view 
of things, Sovereignty is a goddess to be wooed 
and wedded. The candidate is expected to make 
offerings to the holy groves, conduct great sacri- 
fices, and give away vast amounts of wealth to 
the poor to please his bride. Displays of the can- 
didate’s physical prowess lead up to the anoint- 
ing, Finally, the anointing takes place. If the 
powerful, he is accepted by the Sovereignty, and 
is allowed to take up his station. At Tara, the 
kingstone upon which the new High King stood 
was supposed to cry out for the true king when 
he stood upon it. (King Arthur's pulling the 
sword from the stone is much the same.) 

While the anointing is the seal of station, dis- 
putes can arise about whether a person is the 
rightful possessor of the office. A successful 
anointing raises the recipient's Wisdom and 
Charisma by one point each (to a maximum of 
18). The saving throw for this spell is special. 

Assuming the candidate is properly qualified, 


a ee 


he is rated on a scale of 1—4 (1 being highest) in 
each of five areas by the DM. The rating in each 
area is added, generating a saving throw of 5 to 
20. If the number or above is rolled on 1d20, the 
individual is confirmed as not only the lawful, 
but the rightful possessor of the office. 


Alignment: Has the recipient displayed good 
character and faithfulness to the druidic cult? 

Duty: Has the recipient shown himself re- 
sponsible and reliable in all his past dealings, 
and loyal to the kingdom, sect, or organization? 

Leadership: Has the recipient been a strong 
and fair leader? 

Performance: Did the candidate perform well 
in the rituals, games, demonstrations, offerings, 
and generosity during the festivities prior to his 
anointing? 

Breeding: Is the recipient of good family 
connections and does he act as befits his station? 


SEASONAL CEREMONIES 


The seasonal spells of spring, summer, 
autumn, and winter have the following in 
common, These affect the land and people under 
the druid’s care, large or small. (A druid is off on 
his own is in his own charge; a party of adven- 
turers of the druidic religion also might be con- 
sidered his charge.) 

A druid of insufficient level to conduct a sea- 
sonal ceremony is part of another druid’s 
charge, as are the people and lands under the 
lower-level druid. The junior druid must partici- 
pate in the ceremony conducted by the senior 
druid for those in his charge to benefit. The 
lower-level druid is expected to conduct the cer- 
emonies of which he is capable and to attend and 
assist when senior druids conduct seasonal cere- 
monies that he cannot). Failure in either case 
could mean disaster for the druid’s charges. 

These ceremonies are all-night affairs, 
during which the druids keep vigil, chant, make 
offerings, and perform certain actions important 
to the community's or kingdom's welfare for the 
coming year, Ordinary worshipers are also par- 
ticipants, although the druids do much of their 
work withdrawn from the masses (and in secret). 


5th level druid: Spring (Beltane) 

7th level druid: Summer (Lugnasad) 

9th level druid: Autumn (Samain) 
12th level druid: Winter (Imbalc) 


This spell is similar to the 9th-level wizard 
spell shapechange, but it only allows the caster to 
assume the form of a cetacean or partial cetacean 
of any species except giant whales or leviathans. 
Commonly assumed forms include that of a dol- 
phin or narwhal. The caster gains all of the chosen 
creature’s abilities except for innate magical abili- 
ties, magic resistance, and those abilities depend- 
ent upon Intelligence. 


107 


The caster also adopts the form's vulnerabili- 
ties. For example, a priest who becomes a dolphin 
still cannot breathe out of the water for more than 
24 hours. Like the shapechange spell, a priest who 
is killed while in another form does not revert to 
his or original shape, which may disallow certain 
types of revivification. 

The caster can change forms as many times as 
desired within the duration of the spell. For exam- 
ple, she can into a dolphin while swimming in 
shallow seas, then to a sperm whale to dive to great 
depths. The first form adopted has whatever hit 
points the casting priest had at the time of the cast- 
ing of the cetacean form spell, and subsequent 
forms carry the current total hit points with them. 
Each alteration in form takes only a second, and no 
system shock survival roll is required. 

The material component is a small pinch of 
ambergris and the priest’s holy symbol. 

Notes: Granted by the sea elf god, Deep 
Sashelas. 


Chain Creation 


Chain Creation 
(Invocation/E vocation) 
Sphere: Creation 


Level: 5 

Range: 30 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 8 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 created item 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell works only on the output of priestly 
spells in the sphere of creation and on those pro- 
duced by a wizard's use of the minor creation spell. 

When such magics are successfully worked, a 
chain creation spell cast within | turn after their 
casting makes three identical copies of whatever the 
other magic created. A chain creation spell fails if it 
is cast later than a turn after those other magics, or if 
cast on anything involving active undeath. 

The three copies produced by this spell last just 
as long as the copied item (that is, the length of ex- 
istence is governed by the original magic, from a 
few rounds to permanent). Permanent items cre- 
ated by this spell are independently permanent and 
not destroyed by the destruction of the original. 

The material components of a chain creation 
spell are three rubies of any size worth a total of at 
least 100 gp, crushed during casting, or the powder 
of four rubies (worth the same amount), prepared 
beforehand. 

Notes: Granted by Lathander Morninglord of 
the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. This spell is found 
only in a few exceptionally rare tomes. 


Chain Madness 
(Illusion, Phantasm) 
Sphere: Charm 


Level: 6 

Range: 30 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 9 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: | creature 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell allows a priest to create insanity in 
the mind of a target creature, which then becomes 
contagious. A creature must have an Intelligence 
score of 5 or above to be subject to the effects of 
chain madness. When the priest casts the spell, the 


target creature is allowed a saving throw vs. spell 
with a —4 penalty to avoid the effects. These effects 
are not immediately obvious; there is a minimum 
latency period of 48 hours. After this time, the af- 
flicted creature must make a daily Wisdom check 
and, when this fails, the creature develops the 
symptoms of a fevered, agitated, severe depression. 

An affected creature has a -3 penalty to all 
attack rolls, damage rolls, saving throws, and ability 
checks, The creature must also make a successful 
Wisdom check to perform any premeditated action 
(as decided by the DM). For example, a creature 
fights as best it can to defend itself if attacked, but a 
Wisdom check is required to initiate an aggressive 
action of its own, plan a trap or ambush, and so on. 

The duration of the madness is 1d4+4 days, but 
at the end of this time the creature must make a 
system shock roll. If this fails, the insanity contin- 
ues for a further 1d4+4 days. This continues until a 
successful system shock roll is made or the creature 
dies, A creature that fails an initial system shock 
roll loses | point of Constitution permanently for 
each subsequent system shock roll failure. A crea- 
ture reduced to 0 Constitution dies. 

The great danger of chain madness lies in its 
contagion. Each affected creature can infect up to 
six other creatures per day. The effect spreads 
through physical contact, including during the orig- 
inal latency period. Even a shake of a hand is 
enough to convey the madness. Each potential sec- 
ondary victim is permitted a saving throw vs. spell 
to negate the effect. If affected, secondary victims 
develop the same madness after the same latency 
period and are themselves contagious. However, 
tertiary victims save vs. spell at +1, later victims 
save at +2, and so on along the chain. 

Chain madness can be cured by a successful 
dispel magic spell, a remove curse, or a heal spell. 
Detection spells that read a creature’s nature (for ex- 
ample, know alignment, detect good/evil) have a 5% 
chance per level of the caster to reveal that some- 
thing is subtly wrong in the mind of an affected crea- 
ture, This may be crucial to containing the outbreak 
when the malady is still in its latency phase. 

This spell is rarely used, for it is hazardous to 
the priest casting it. If the casting priest rolls below 
his Wisdom score on d100 when casting the spell, 
then he suffers the effects of chain madness, but 
without becoming contagious. 

The material component for this spell is a small 
vial of brain tissue from an illithid. 

Notes: Granted by Iuz the Evil of the WorLD 
OF GREYHAWK setting. 


ee ne eee ene, 


Changestaff 


EE a 


Champion’s Strength 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Law 


Level: 5 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 2 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 2 or more persons in a 30-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: None 


Champion's strength bestows upon one person 
who is a member of a group the attack and damage 
bonuses from the rest of the group. The recipient 
can then fight as the group’s champion. 

The spell draws bonuses from one person for 
every two levels of the priest. All those involved 
must be within a 30-foot-radius of the priest. At 
the time of casting, the priest designates the cham- 
pion and the contributors. All those who contribute 
to the spell must do so willingly. 

When the spell is completed, the designated 
champion gains any nonmagical bonuses to THACO 
and damage possessed by those who contributed to 
the spell. Those without bonuses or with combat 


penalties could conceivably be included in the spell; 
such individuals count against the maximum 
number of persons who can be affected. Penalties 
are likewise applied to the champion—contributors 
to this spell must be chosen carefully. 

The bonuses gained through this spell are 
added to the champion’s own bonuses (if any). The 
champion channels the energy of others through 
himself, improving his fighting ability. 

The champion must be in the line of sight and 
within 30 feet of the characters aiding him. Those 
who contribute their bonuses must concentrate on 
the champion for the duration of the spell. If this 
concentration is broken (by moving more than 10 
feet per round, fighting, being struck, or losing 
sight of the champion), that person’s contribution 
is immediately lost. 

The spell expires when the last person contribut- 
ing power to the champion ceases concentration. 

A champion can benefit from only one cham- 
pion’s strength spell at one time. Contributors can 
aid only one champion at one time. 

The material component is a chain of five gold 
links worth at least 1,000 gp. 

Notes: Common for to priests with major 
access to the sphere of Law (ToM). 


Changestaff 
(Evocation, Enchantment) 
Sphere: Plant 
Level: 7 
Range: Touch 


Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: The caster’s staff 
Saving Throw: None 


By means of this spell, the caster is able to 
change a specially prepared staff into a treant-like 
creature of the largest size, about 24 feet tall. 
When the priest plants the end of the staff in the 
ground and speaks a special command and invoca- 
tion, the staff turns into a treant-like creature with 
12 Hit Dice, 40 hit points, and Armor Class 0, It at- 
tacks twice per round, inflicting 4d6 points of 
damage with every successful attack. The staff- 
treant defends the caster and obeys any spoken 
commands. However, it is by no means a true 
treant; it cannot converse with actual treants or 
control trees. The transformation lasts either for as 
many turns as the caster has experience levels, 


A 109 R 


Channel Flame 


until the caster commands the staff to return to its 
true form, or until the staff is destroyed, whichever 
occurs first. If the staff-treant is reduced to 0 hit 
points or less, it crumbles to a sawdust-like 
powder and the staff is destroyed. Otherwise, the 
staff can be used again after 24 hours and the staff- 
treant is at full strength. 

To cast a changestaff spell, the caster must have 
either his holy symbol or leaves (ash, oak, or yew) 
of the same sort as the staff. 

The staff for the changestaff spell must be spe- 
cially prepared. The staff must be a sound limb cut 
from an ash, oak, or yew tree struck by lightning 
no more than 24 hours before the limb is cut. The 
limb must then be cured by sun drying and special 
smoke for 28 days. Then it must be shaped, 
carved, and polished for another 28 days. The 
caster cannot adventure or engage in other strenu- 
ous activity during either of these periods. The fin- 
ished staff, engraved with woodland scenes, is 
then rubbed with the juice of holly berries, and the 
end of it is thrust into the earth of the caster’s 
grove while he casts a speak with plant spell, call- 
ing upon the staff to assist in time of need. The 
item is then charged with a magic that will last for 
many changes from staff to treant and back again. 

Notes: Common for druids (PHB). 


Channel Flame 


whe. 


(Evocation) 
Sphere: Elemental Fire 


Level: 4 

Range: 30 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 5 rds. 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 10 ft. cube 
Saving Throw: None 


A priest who casts this spell channels energy 
from burning materials through himself to attack 
his enemies. When within 30 yards of 100 pounds 
or more of burning matter, the caster can direct the 
flame to an area within a range of 30 yards of his 
or her location. The flame from the original source 
is not extinguished. The damage from this attack is 
1d4 points for every level of the priest. 

The spell remains in effect as long as the origi- 
nal burning material remains alight, usually one 
turn. A magical flame that feeds on nothing cannot 
be tapped for this spell, nor can a torch, but a burn- 
ing cottage would. 


110 


Notes: Uncommon for priests from the DARK SUN 
setting, 


Level: 2 
Range: 0 


Channel Stench 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 3 


(Summoning) 
Sphere: Elemental Air 

Duration: 3 rds. 

Area of Effect: Cone, 20-ft. long, 10 ft. diameter 
Saving Throw: Special 


The priest draws in a deep breath and expels it 
toward his opponent. All noxious odors from up to 
two miles away are channeled through the priest’s 
breath and ejected in a vile cone of stench. All 
breathing creatures in the cone must make a suc- 
cessful saving throw vs. poison. Those who fail re- 
treat and gag for 1d6 rounds; those who succeed 
fight at a —Ipenalty to attacks for 1d6 rounds due 
to teared eyes and labored breathing. Strong winds 
or a source of fresh air reduce this time by half. 
Creatures with more than 5 Hit Dice or levels can 
ignore channel stench. 

Notes: Common for elemental priests from the 
DARK SUN setting. 


Chant 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 
Sphere: All 


Level: 2 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 2 rds. 
Duration: Time of chanting 
Area of Effect: 30-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: None 


By means of the chant spell, the priest brings 
special favor upon himself and his party, and 
causes harm to his enemies, When the chant spell 
is completed, all attack and damage rolls and 
saving throws made by those in the area of effect 
who are friendly to the priest gain +1 bonuses, 
while those of the priest’s enemies suffer —1 
penalties. This bonus/penalty continues as long as 
the caster continues to chant the mystic syllables 
and is stationary. However, an interruption (such 
as an attack that succeeds and causes damage, 


Chaos Ward 


"eet 


grappling the chanter, or a silence spell) breaks 
the spell. Multiple chants are not cumulative; 
however, if the 3rd-level prayer spell is spoken 
while a priest of the same religious persuasion 
(not merely alignment) is chanting, the effect is 
increased to +2 and —2. 

Notes: Common for clerics (PHB). 


Chant of Fangs 
(Invocation/Evocation, Necromancy) 
Sphere: Combat 


Level: 3 

Range: 0 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 6 
Duration: 2 rds. 

Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: 1⁄2 


This spell is cast by chanting loudly (hence its 
name). It causes a pair of spectral jaws, or rather, 
rings of floating fangs, arranged as if fixed in in- 
visible jaws, to appear out of the caster’s hand or 
chest and fly at a desired target at MV FI 15 (A). 
The fangs have no Armor Class or physical solid- 
ity. They can be destroyed only by dispel magic or 
certain magical barriers and powerful spells. They 
strike twice per round at the caster’s THACO and 
operate independently of the caster. (In other 
words, the caster can engage in other spellcasting, 
attacks, or activities while the fangs attack a 
chosen target.) The target can be changed by the 
caster with a momentary, silent exertion of will at 
the end of the first round of the existence of the 
fangs, but not otherwise. (That is, the fangs bite at 
two opponents twice, or one target four times). 

The fangs do nothing (until redirected) if their 
chosen target dies or uses any sort of teleportation 
magic to vanish. The fangs can detect and attack 
invisible creatures, even when their caster cannot; 
but the caster must have some indication that an 
invisible creature is present to direct the fangs to 
attack, The bite of these fangs inflicts 2d4 points 
of damage (save for half), as an energy-stealing 
attack rather than a physical ravaging. The fangs 
are able to penetrate any physical protection up to 
and including plate armor. 

The material component of a chant of fangs 
spell is a tooth from any wild mammalian predator 
(that is, one not slain while in captivity or reared 
domestically). 

Notes: Granted by the evil god Malar the 


Ili 


Beastlord of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. This 
spell is found only in a few exceptionally rare tomes. 


Chaos Ward 
(Abjuration) 
Sphere: Chaos 


Level: 2 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: 2 rds./level 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


By using this spell, the priest can create a shim- 
mering aura of whirling light that surrounds the 
chosen creature. This protective aura makes the crea- 
ture more difficult to hit in hand-to-hand combat by 
providing a +1 bonus to Armor Class. Against missile 
attacks or ranged spells aimed directly at the creature, 
the chaos ward is even more effective, providing a +2 
bonus to Armor Class and a +2 bonus to saving 
throws. In addition, missile attacks or directed spells 
might be deflected or reflected by the chaotic energy 
of the shield, as shown below: 


d%' 
01-85 


Effect 

No unusual effect, creature gains normal 
benefits of chaos ward. 

Spell or attack automatically defeated 
Spell or attack ricochets, affecting a 
random creature within 30 feet—normal 
attack roll or saving throw is rolled for the 
random creature to be affected 

Spell or attack reflected back at origina- 
tor, normal attack roll or saving throw ap- 
plies 


96-99 


' Add the caster’s level to the d% roll. 


To qualify as a directly aimed spell, the spell 
must affect only the target creature in question. A 
spell such as hold person or sleep that happens to 
include the creature in its area of effect does not 
count as a directed spell and does not trigger the 
chaos ward. 

The material component is a playing card used 
by a rogue of chaotic alignment. 

Notes: Uncommon for priests with access to 
the sphere of Chaos (PO:SM). 


Chaotic Combat 


Chaotic Combat 
(Invocation, Evocation) 
Sphere: Chaos 


Level: 4 

Range: 30 yds. 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 3 
Duration: 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: 1 warrior 
Saving Throw: None 


The spell affects only warriors. When cast on a 
warrior, that individual is inspired beyond his 
years of training and is suddenly struck with nu- 
merous insights for variations on the standard 
moves of attack and defense. 

However, these insights are helpful in only two- 
thirds of the warrior’s attacks. In the remaining at- 
tacks, the spell actually impairs the warrior’s 
standard performance. At the beginning of each 
round, after the player has declared his character's 
actions, 1d6 is rolled for the affected warrior. On a 
roll of 1, 2, 3, or 4, the warrior gains bonuses of +2 
to attack rolls and +2 to Armor Class. On a roll of 5 
or 6, the warrior suffers a —2 penalty to attack rolls 
and a —2 penalty to Armor Class. This must be de- 
termined at the beginning of each round of combat. 

The insight imparted by this spell is lost when 
the spell expires. The warrior remembers the battle 
but not the specifics of his actions. He is unable to 
duplicate the maneuvers. 

Notes: Common for priests with major access 
to the sphere of Chaos (ToM). 


Chaotic Commands 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
Sphere: Chaos 


Level: 5 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 3 
Duration: | turn/level 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Special 


Chaotic commands renders a creature immune 
to magical commands. Taunt, forget, suggestion, 
domination, geas, demand, succor, command, en- 
thrall, quest, exaction, and other spells that issue a 
direct verbal command to a single individual auto- 
matically fail. 


112 


In addition, anyone casting one of these spells 
on a creature protected by chaotic commands must 
make a successful saving throw vs. spell. Failure 
means the caster must obey his own magic; the 
spell’s effect has backfired on the caster. 

The material component is a piece of eelskin. 

Notes: Common for priests with major access 
to the sphere of Chaos (ToM). 


Chaotic Sleep 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Chaos 


Level: 4 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: | turn 

Duration: Permanent 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


After casting this spell, the priest must success- 
fully touch the target creature, which is allowed a 
saving throw vs. spell to avoid the effect. Failure 
means the spell takes effect at the next sunrise or 
sunset, whichever comes first. 

From the time the spell takes effect until it is 
negated, the sleeping pattern of the affected crea- 
ture is randomly disrupted. At sunset and sunrise 
of every day, a check is made to determine the ef- 
fects of chaotic sleep. In the 12-hour period that 
follows the check, there is an equal chance that the 
creature will be unable to sleep or unable to 
remain awake (roll 1d6; on a roll of 1-3, the crea- 
ture is awake, on a roll of 4—6, it sleeps). This con- 
dition lasts until the next sunrise (or sunset) when 
the check is made again. 

For example, a fighter fails to save against a 
chaotic sleep spell. For the next few hours, the 
spell has no effect. At sundown, the first check is 
made, resulting in a 2. The fighter does not notice 
anything until he tries to sleep that night, at which 
time he’s wide awake, fidgeting, and restless. At 
sunrise, another die roll is made, a 6. The fighter is 
suddenly exhausted and sleeps until sunset. 

Creatures who sleep as a result of this spell can 
be roused only by a physical stimulus, a slap or a 
wound, for example. Once awake, the creature re- 
mains conscious only as long as there are active 
stimuli around him, such as a fight. Walking 
through caves or riding a horse will not keep the in- 
dividual awake. Unlike a sleep spell, a being af- 
fected by a chaotic sleep spell dozes off as soon as 


Charm of Brandobaris — Halfling 


”"\ eee 


he or she is left relatively undisturbed. Keeping an 
affected being awake is difficult at best. 

Lack of sleep eventually takes a physical toll 
on any creature under the influence of the spell. 
Each 12 hours a creature remains awake beyond 
the first, inflicts a—1 penalty to THACO. The crea- 
ture does not regain hit points as a result of normal 
rest. Spellcasters cannot memorize spells until 
they have had sufficient sleep. 

Chaotic sleep can be removed with a remove 
curse spell; it cannot be dispelled. 

The material components are a pinch of sand 
and three coffee beans. 

Notes: Common for priests with major access 
to the sphere of Chaos (ToM). 


Chariot of Sustarre 
(Evocation) 
Sphere: Elemental Fire 


Level: 7 

Range: 10 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 turn 
Duration: 12 hrs. 

Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


When this spell is cast, it brings forth a large, 
flaming chariot pulled by two fiery horses from the 
elemental plane of Fire. These appear in a clap of 
thunder amid a cloud of smoke. The vehicle moves 
at 24 on the ground, 48 flying, and can carry the 
caster and up to seven other creatures of man-size or 
less. The passengers must be touched by the caster 
to protect them from the flames of the chariot. 
Creatures other than the caster and his designated 
passengers sustain 2d4 points of fire damage each 
round if they come within five feet of the horses or 
chariot. Such creatures suffer no damage if they 
evade the area by rolling successful saving throws 
vs. petrifaction, with Dexterity adjustments. 

The caster controls the chariot by verbal com- 
mand, causing the flaming steeds to stop or go, 
walk, trot, run or fly, and turn left or right as he de- 
sires. Note that the chariot of Sustarre is a physical 
manifestation and can sustain damage. The vehicle 
and steeds are struck only by magical weapons or 
by water (one quart of which inflicts 1 point of 
damage), they are Armor Class 2, and each requires 
30 points of damage to dispel. Naturally, fire has no 
effect upon either the vehicle or its steeds, but mag- 
ical fires other than those of the chariot can affect 


the riders. Other spells, such as a successful dispel 
magic ot holy word, force the chariot back to its 
home plane, without its passengers. The chariot can 
be summoned only once per week. 

The material components are a small piece of 
wood, two holly berries, and a fire source at least 
equal to a torch. 

Notes: Common for clerics and druids (PHB). 


Charm of Brandobaris — Halfling 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Travelers 


Level: 2 

Range: 0 

Components; V 

Duration: | day/level 

Casting Time: | 

Area of Effect: 1d4 beings in a 30-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell is useful when the caster has been cap- 
tured. The spell convinces one to four creatures that 
the caster is too valuable a prize to execute (or eat) 
out of hand. It creates lingering doubts in the 
captor’s minds that make them think that the caster is 
worth ransoming, that higher authorities should be 
consulted, or in the case of evil beings, that it might 
be more fun to forcibly interrogate the caster later. In 
any case, if the spell is successful, the caster is not 
killed immediately, thus allowing a possible escape. 
Even creatures of animal intelligence or less are 
easily distracted from the caster—for example, other 
creatures available for consumption are eaten first. 

The charm of Brandobaris does not affect the 
caster’s ability to communicate with his or her 
captors, nor does it otherwise alter their behavior. 
It does not, for example, make guards less watch- 
ful than usual. 

The effect is centered on the caster, and affects 
beings selected by the caster within the area of 
effect. If the spell is cast at three beings, each gets a 
normal saving throw vs. spell. If only two beings are 
to be affected, each has a—1 saving throw penalty. If 
the spell is cast at one being, the saving throw has a 
-2 penalty. Saving throws are adjusted for Wisdom. 

The verbal component of this spell varies ac- 
cording to the situation, but typically the charm of 
Brandobaris is invoked with a comment along the 
lines of: “This isn’t exactly what it looks like . . .” 
or “Let me explain... .” 

Notes: Granted by the halfling god, 
Brandobaris. 


A 113 ks 


Charm of Isis — Old Empire 


DN EEE a 


Charm of Isis — Old Empire 
(Abjuration) 
Sphere: Protection 


Level: 3 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 hr. 

Duration: | day/level 

Area of Effect: 1 charm of 25 gp or greater value 
Saving Throw: None 


Charm of Isis enspells a small item—an 
amulet, talisman, or fetish selected by the spell- 
caster—to serve as a protective charm. It functions 
only for only the person selected to use it by the 
priestess of Isis when it is enchanted. It lasts only 
for as long as that being’s actions are viewed fa- 
vorably by Isis. The charm only functions while 
physically touching its owner's skin and is usually 
worn on a simple necklace beneath the owner's 
armor or shirt. 

A charm of Isis can provide a bonus to Armor 
Class or saving throws, but not both. In either case, 
a charm of Isis provides a +1 bonus for every three 
levels of the priestess casting the spell (rounded 
down), to a maximum of +5 at 15th level or higher. 
A priestess cannot have more than three charms of 
Isis created by her in existence at any time; hence, 
if a priestess has three in existence at once, the 
magic of one of the three must expire before an- 
other can be created. A priestess of Isis can create 
a charm for herself only when adventuring or trav- 
eling beyond the borders of the Old Empires. 

The material component is the priestess’s holy 
symbol. 

Notes: Granted by the Mulhorandi goddess Isis 
of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Charm Person or Mammal 
(Enchantment/Charm ) 
Sphere: Animal 


Level: 2 

Range: 80 yds. 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 person or mammal 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell affects any single person or mammal 
it is cast upon. The creature then regards the caster 


114 


as a trusted friend and ally to be heeded and pro- 
tected. The term person includes any bipedal 
human, demihuman or humanoid of man-size or 
smaller, including brownies, dryads, dwarves, 
elves, gnolls, gnomes, goblins, half-elves, 
halflings, half-orcs, hobgoblins, humans, kobolds, 
lizard men, nixies, orcs, pixies, sprites, 
troglodytes, and others. Thus, a 10th-level fighter 
is included, while an ogre is not. 

The spell does not enable the caster to control 
the charmed creature as if it were an automaton, 
but any word or action of the caster is viewed in 
the most favorable way. Thus a charmed creature 
would not obey a suicide command, but might be- 
lieve the caster if assured that the only chance to 
save the caster’s life is for the creature to hold back 
an onrushing red dragon for “just a minute or two” 
and if the charmed creature's view of the situation 
suggests that this course of action still allows a 
reasonable chance of survival. 

The subject's attitudes and priorities are 
changed with respect to the caster, but basic per- 
sonality and alignment are not. A request that a 
creature make itself defenseless, give up a valued 
item, or even use a charge from a valued item (es- 
pecially against former associates or allies) might 
allow an immediate saving throw to see if the 
charm is thrown off. Likewise, a charmed creature 
does not necessarily reveal everything it knows or 
draw maps of entire areas. Any request may be re- 
fused, if such refusal is in character and does not 
directly harm the caster. The creature’s regard for 
the caster does not necessarily extend to the 
caster’s friends or allies. The creature does not 
react well to the charmer’s allies making sugges- 
tions such as, “Ask him this question...," nor does 
the charmed creature put up with verbal or physi- 
cal abuse from the charmer’s associates, if this is 
out of character. 

Note also that the spell does not empower the 
caster with linguistic capabilities beyond those he 
normally has. The duration of the spell is a func- 
tion of the charmed creature’s Intelligence, and it 
is tied to the saving throw. The spell can be broken 
if a successful saving throw is rolled. This saving 
throw is checked on a periodic basis according to 
the creature’s Intelligence, even if the caster has 
not overly strained the relationship. 

If the caster harms, or attempts to harm, the 
charmed creature by some overt action, or if a 
dispel magic spell is successfully cast upon the 
charmed creature, the charm is broken automati- 
cally. 


Chatterbark — Ranger 


Intelligence Period Between 
Score Checks 
3 or less 3 months 
4to6 2 months 
709 1 month 
10 to 12 3 weeks 
1310 14 2 weeks 
15 to 16 1 week 
17 3 days 
18 2 days 
19 or more 1 day 


If the subject of the charm person/charm 
mammal spell successfully rolls its saving throw 
vs. the spell, the effect is negated. 

This spell, if used in conjunction with the 
animal friendship spell, can keep the animal near 
the caster’s home base, if the caster must leave for 
an extended period. 

Notes: Common for druids (PHB). 


Charm Shark 
Aka shark charm. 


Charm Spirit 
(Necromancy) 
Sphere: Charm 


Level: 5 

Range: Special 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: | rd. 
Duration: | rd /level 
Area of Effect: 10 yds. 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell allows the caster to charm any speci- 
fied spirit within range. The caster must be able to 
see or otherwise know the location of the spirit. 
The spirit might be bound into an object; possess- 
ing a person, animal or object; or free. The spell 
cannot be used to charm spirits that are naturally 
bound, such as nature spirits. 

If the chosen spirit fails to roll a successful 
saving throw vs. spell, then it obeys the caster as a 
faithful servant for the duration of the spell, even at- 
tacking its own allies. However, no spirit can be 
forced to perform actions against its own alignment. 

The material component is a crystal ball, worth 
at least 50 gp. 

Notes: Restricted to shamans, uncommon. 


Chattel Spirit 
(Enchantment, Summoning) 
Sphere: Summoning 


Level: 3 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 3 turns 

Duration: 2 turns/level 

Area of Effect: 1 supernatural being 
Saving Throw: None 


Any nemesis spirit that the caster has defeated 
can be summoned with this spell. It appears with 
whatever powers and hit points it had when the 
barbarian cleric fought it. It must serve the caster 
or answer the caster’s questions to the best of its 
ability. When the spell ends, the spirit vanishes, 
even if its task is incomplete. Although the spirit 
may complain or attempt to bend the meaning of a 
command, it is bound to carry out orders, even if 
these could result in the spirit’s destruction. Once 
slain in an assignment, a spirit cannot be called on 
again. Only three services can be asked of any in- 
dividual nemesis spirit. 

The material components are 100 gp of very 
rare herbs, which are burned as the caster performs 
a chant, dances, and gestures with a holy symbol. 

Notes: Restricted to barbarian clerics and other 
savages. (Updated from DRAGON Magazine.) 


Chatterbark — Ranger 
(Divination) 
Sphere: Plant 


Level: 3 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: | turn 
Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: | tree 
Saving Throw: None 


A variation of the 4th-level priest spell, speak 
with plants, this spell enables a ranger to ask a 
simple question of a tree and receive a spoken re- 
sponse. The tree can be any species, so long as its 
trunk is at least 1 foot in diameter. Before casting 
the spell, the ranger must spend at least an hour 
carving a humanoid face in the trunk. A ranger 
with proficiency in wood carving (a variation of 
artistic ability) can carve a suitable face in one 
turn. 


4 115 a 


Chill — Old Empire 


N 


After carving the face, the ranger spends | turn 
casting the spell, at which time the face becomes 
animated, twitching and grimacing.as if just awak- 
ening from a long sleep. The tree face then looks at 
the ranger expectantly, waiting for a question. The 
ranger can ask the tree any single question that can 
be answered in a single word or short phrase. 
Typical questions might include: “Has a dragon 
passed this way within the last few days?” “Has it 
rained here recently?” “Are there any fruit trees 
nearby?” The tree answers the question honestly. 
If the question is beyond the scope of its knowl- 
edge, the tree says, “I don’t known After answer- 
ing, the face disappears. 

The DM should keep in mind that a typical tree 
doesn’t know very much, as it has little experi- 
ence, never travels, and rarely interacts with other 
living things in meaningful ways. As a rule of 
thumb, a tree’s knowledge is limited to things it 
has observed (passersby, weather conditions) and 
general information about the immediate area 
(animal populations, location of landmarks). A 
tree can’t give dependable advice or make judg- 
ments. If the DM is in doubt about what a particu- 
lar tree knows, the tree answers, “I don’t know.” 

Notes: Uncommon for rangers; otherwise, very 
rare. 


Chill — Old Empire 
(Alteration, Evocation) 
Sphere: Combat 


Level: 3 

Range: 50 yds. + 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 6 

Duration: | rd/level 

Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: '/2 


This spell creates a 30-foot-radius sphere of 
cold air. The caster can focus the cold on one crea- 
ture in that area, inflicting 1 point of damage per 
caster level (to a maximum of 10 points). If the 
creature makes a successful saving throw vs. spell, 
the damage is halved. Each succeeding round, the 
caster can focus on the same or another creature in 
the area of effect, inflicting 1 point of damage per 
level (to a maximum of 10 points) to any one crea- 
ture in the area of effect. Creatures in the area of 
effect other than the target feel an unpleasant chill, 
but are not damaged by it. 

The spell does not cause any damage during a 


116 


round that the caster is struck before his or her ini- 
tiative, since the caster must concentrate to target 
the spell. However, striking the caster does not end 
the spell; it merely prevents its energies from 
being focused that round. The caster can take ac- 
tions other than focusing the spell, such as a phys- 
ical attack, and resume focusing in a later round, 
but casting any subsequent spell terminates the 
chill spell. In addition, if all creatures leave the 
area of effect, the spell ends. 
The material component for this spell is a feather. 
Notes: Granted by the Mulhorandi god Osiris 
of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Chill Metal 
Reversed form, heat metal. 


Chilling Scythe 


(Evocation, Necromancy) 
Sphere: Combat, Necromantic 


Level: 2 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 5 
Duration: 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: 1 scythe 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell creates an oversized but weightless 
scythe that can be wielded by any living creature 
either as a tool or as weapon. The scythe appears in 
the hands of the spellcaster, but can be given to an- 
other to be wielded. The scythe is a two-handed, 7- 
foot-long device that is a +2 enchanted weapon, 
dealing 2d4+2 points of piercing and slashing (Type 
P/S) physical damage (1d8+2 vs. L-sized or larger 
creatures) plus chilling for a further 1d4 points of 
damage (no saving throw). This chilling damage is 
caused by draining life force, not by cold; however, 
the damage can be healed normally. A chilling scythe 
has a speed factor of 5, and its dweomer enables the 
wielder to use it with no nonproficiency penalty. 

If a chilling scythe even touches an undead 
creature it inflicts 4d6 points of damage and hurls 
the creature helplessly 20 feet away from the 
scythe. The undead creature cannot advance again 
until the next round even if creature hit a barrier 
before traveling the full distance. 

The material component for this spell is a frag- 
ment of bone. 

Notes: Granted by the god Kelemvor, Judge of 
the Damned, of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Circle of Life 


> ee Eee A 


Chimes of Finding 


(Enchantment) 


Sphere: Elemental Air 


Level: 4 

Range: 0 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 turn 
Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


Missing and wanted individuals can be located 
with the chimes of finding spell. The spell does not 
work on inanimate objects. This complicated 
dweomer requires a set of wind chimes, a rela- 
tively detailed map of the area to be searched, a 
personal item of the desired being, and a still, 
windless day. 

The caster spreads the map out and suspends a 
set of normal wind chimes above it; then passes 
the point of his or her finger over the map. When 
the chimes sound, the person’s location is re- 
vealed. The better the map, the easier it is to even- 
tually find the desired person. 

The chimes work even if the person is dead; 


cin 

{ut 

| HHL 
fists 


117 


then, the chimes toll more slowly, sadly. A suc- 
cessful Wisdom check allows the caster to manip- 
ulate the sound for the benefit of any listeners. 

Notes: Uncommon for priests from the DARK SUN 
setting. 


Choose Future 
(Divination) 
Sphere: Time 


Level: 3 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 6 

Duration: 1 rd. 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


In the round immediately following the casting 
of this spell, the affected creature is allowed two 
rolls for any single normal attack roll, initiative 
roll, or saving throw. The affected creature can 
then choose the best roll. 

For example, a priest casts choose future on 
warrior companion. In the next round, the warrior 
attacks an enemy with her sword. The warrior 
makes two attack rolls instead of one, then chooses 
which roll will determine the outcome of her 
attack 

The material components are two grains of 
sand and a rose petal. 

Notes: Common for priests with access to the 
sphere of Time (ToM). 


Circle of Life 


hie 


(Alteration) 
Sphere: Elemental Water 


Level: 3 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 4 rds. 

Duration: | day 

Area of Effect: 3 creatures/level 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell enables a number of creatures to sur- 
vive in arid, inhospitable terrain. Those affected by 
the spell need only half their water requirements 
per day, and regain 1 extra hit point every 24 hours. 

The spell does not help the caster in any way, in 
fact, the caster requires twice the normal amount 
of water. The priest transfers his own bodily water 


Circle of Privacy 


"gn 


to those within the circle of life, and the constant 
drain needs to be replenished. 

Notes: Common for priests of Water; other- 
wise, uncommon in the DARK SUN setting. 


Circle of Privacy 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Travelers 


Level: 4 

Range: Special 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: 1 hr./level 

Area of Effect: 50-ft.-diameter circle 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell helps to discourage predators and 
trespassers from disturbing a campsite. The caster 
sprinkles salt in a circle enclosing an area up to 50 
feet in diameter. For the duration of the spell, all 
sounds and scents generated within the circle are 
muted, making the area less noticeable to those 
outside the circle. The group’s chance for encoun- 
ters is reduced by 50% for the duration of the spell. 
The spell provides no protection against infravi- 
sion of other forms of magical detection. 

The material components are a hair from a 
skunk, a whisker from a mouse, and enough salt to 
make a 50-foot-diameter circle. 

Notes: Common for priests with access to the 
sphere of Travelers (ToM). 


Circle of Protection from Spirits 
(Abjuration) 
Sphere: Wards 


Level: 2 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 3 ft./level 
Saving Throw: None 


The shaman must draw or form a circle on the 
ground, and so long as he or she does not move out 
of the circle, any mortals within the circle are 
immune to possession attempts by spirits, and re- 
ceive a —2 Armor Class bonus against any spirit’s 
attack. The circle has no adverse effects on the 
shaman's own spells or powers, but does affect the 


118 


attacks made by owned or allied spirits. As soon as 
the caster leaves the circle it ceases to function. 
The material component of the spell is dust from 
the bones of an animal or person killed by a spirit, 
which must be sprinkled over the area of the circle. 
Notes: Restricted to shamans, uncommon. 


Circle of Secrets* 


(Alteration) 


Sphere: All 


Level: 3 

Range: Special 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 3 
Duration: Concentration 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This cooperative magic spell allows a mini- 
mum of two and a maximum of twelve priests to 
make themselves and a number of allies unde- 
tectable by normal means. The priests stand or sit 
in a circle (two priests position themselves face-to- 
face, while three make a triangle) so that they are 
within arms’ reach of each other. They then close 
their eyes and concentrate. The DM may rule that 
both priests must follow the same deity, or they 
may be followers of allied deities. 

The spell’s magic changes the appearance of 
each priest into some natural terrain feature for as 
long as the priests maintain their concentration. 
The terrain feature is dictated by the deity wor- 
shiped and the situation (a priest of Erik in a forest, 
for example, might Jook like a tree, but might 
appear to be a cactus in the desert). 

While the spell lasts, the priests look, feel, and 
smell like the object of their transformation. They 
remain aware of their surroundings and are able to 
hear and smell activities around them. They do not 
actually polymorph into these magical forms, 
however. A priest who assumes the form of a boul- 
der, for example, can feel rough or smooth like a 
boulder, but isn’t actually as hard as rock. 

All passersby, even those searching for the 
priests, are affected by the magic. Unless greatly 
motivated, even those familiar with the ground 
often assume that these natural features are normal 
for the landscape. Those suspicious of the land- 
scape (“Hey, that boulder wasn’t here a minute 
ago!”) are allowed a saving throw vs. spell with a 
—1 bonus for every priest participating in the circle 
of secrets, Success means the individual knows the 


Clawcloud 


4 


natural features weren't there previously (but does 
not actually see the priests); failure means the indi- 
vidual dismisses his or her suspicions. 

In addition to their own forms, the casting 
priests can affect one additional individual for 
every two priests casting the spell. These addi- 
tional individuals stand between the priests or 
within the circle and change shape along with the 
priests. These beings need not concentrate or 
remain still, but cannot move out of their places. 

Any participant moves significantly or breaks 
the circle, reverts to normal. As long as two or more 
priests maintain their concentration, however, the 
rest of the circle remains disguised, no matter how 
many beings are enclosed. Thus, six priests could 
cast the spell to include three allies, then four of the 
priests could move away to pursue other activities. 
Two priests must remain in concentration to safe- 
guard themselves and the three allies. 

A true seeing spell or gem can penetrate a 
circle of secrets. Detect magic shows only that 
magic is present, but not the nature of the magic. 

Notes: Uncommon for priests from Cerilia, the 
BIRTHRIGHT setting. 


Circle of Stone* —Dwarf 
(Evocation) 
Sphere: Protection 


Level: 5 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: | rd./level of lowest caster 
Area of Effect: Special 

Saving Throw: None 


This spell can be cast in any location in which 
pieces of stone larger than the caster surround him 
or her on at least three sides. The spell involves a 
short chant and the physical linkage (touching) of 
all the beings to be encircled. It creates an invisi- 
ble, magical field around them. 

The field is spherical, with a 10 foot radius 
per caster involved. While it lasts, it confers a 
bonus of +4 to the saving throws of all beings in 
the circle, and a 5-in-6 chance that any spell or 
magical item effect originating outside the circle 
is reflected back at full power on its source. 

Dwarves within a circle of stone gain a +3 
bonus to attack rolls (not damage) and are empow- 
ered to hit all opponents, even those normally 
struck only by magical weapons of certain bonuses. 


119 


Notes: Rare spell, granted only by dwarven 
gods. 


Circle of Sunmotes 
Quest spell, see appendix in Vol. 3. 


Clangeddin, Axe Storm of 
See axe storm of Clangeddin. 


Clawcloud 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 
Sphere: Summoning 


Level: 4 

Range: | mi//level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: 1d4 hrs./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


By casting this spell, the priest summons a 
flock of huge ravens (or giant ravens as the priest 
desires), if such birds are within range. The 
number appearing is 20+3d20 huge ravens or 
10+2d6 giant ravens. 

The flock to the summoning priest, who then 
instructs them as if using a speak with animals 
spell. The ravens faithfully carry out the instruc- 
tions of the priest, so far as their intelligence 
allows. They can follow simple instructions, such 
as; “Follow those fleeing figures and attack them,” 
or instructions to trail a target and report back to 
the priest, but not complex or abstract ones. The 
DM determine the actions of ravens according to 
their Intelligence, Giant ravens (Intelligence 5-7) 
are capable of cunning maneuvers, such as follow- 
ing a party of adventurers while staying a safe dis- 
tance away from ranged attacks, and peeling off at 
a rate of one per hour or so to report back to the 
summoning priest. 

The flock of ravens summoned by the claw- 
cloud spell returns to a wild, self-determined state 
on the first dawn following their summoning. 

The material component is a raven’s feather. 

Notes: Granted by luz the Evil of the WORLD 
OF GREYHAWK setting. 


Claws of Thard Harr — Dwarf 


T_e 


Claws of Thard Harr — Dwarf 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Combat 


Level: 1 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 4 

Duration: 3 rds. + 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: 1 dwarf 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell transforms the hands of a willing 
dwarf into rending talons known as the claws of 
Thard Harr. Each talon inflicts 1d4+2 points of 
damage with a successful attack. Two attacks are 
possible per round, one with each claw. The long 
claws prevent the dwarf from wielding a weapon 
for the duration of the spell. 

The spell requires the priest’s holy symbol and. 
a preserved talon of a wild beast personally slain 
by the caster. Neither is destroyed by the casting. 

Notes: Granted by the dwarven god Thard 
Harr. 


Claws of Velsharoon 


(Necromancy) 
Sphere: Necromantic 


Level: 1 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 4 per claw 

Duration: Permanent 

Area of Effect: 1 severed limb/level 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell enables the caster to animate one 
crawling claw per level of experience, Once created, 
crawling claws can be directed by the telepathic 
commands of the creator or given duties similar to 
that of a skeleton. If any crawling claws are later de- 
stroyed, the spellcaster can animate additional sev- 
ered limbs, but the caster’s total number of animate 
crawling claws cannot exceed his or her level. 

The material components for this spell are a 
number severed limbs equal to the number of 
crawling claws to be animated and the priest's holy 
symbol. 

Notes: Granted by the god Velsharoon the Lich 
Lord of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


120 


This spell causes all grime, dirt and stains to be 
removed from the caster and his vestments, en- 
abling the priest to present himself to his congre- 
gation in immaculate condition. All clothing that 
the caster wears is restored to its original color. If 
the caster was exposed to any minor incidental dis- 
eases, these are cured, provided they have not al- 
ready reached a noticeable level. This does not 
affect diseases such as mummy rot, rat bites, or ly- 
canthropy. Even wounds are cleansed and infec- 
tions are purified (healing | point of damage, if no 
cure wounds spells had been applied previously). 

The material component for this spell is a 
handful of clean sand. 

Notes: Rare spell for Mulhorandi priests in the 


FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Cleanse 


Athasian Dragon King 
magic; psionic component 
renders this 10th level spell 
uncastable by priests. 


Clear Air 


Cleanse Community 


(Abjuration) 
Sphere: Protection 


Level: 5 

Range: Special 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 3 hrs. 
Duration: | year 

Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell works in much the same way as the 
3rd-level spell cleanse hearth, driving possessing 
spirits from an area for one year. The casting 
shaman, and any assistants rampage through the 
village or community, striking at the air, ritually 
beating buildings, furniture, animals, and people. 

The spell affects any group of dwellings con- 
sidered by the inhabitants to form a single commu- 
nity. Most often this is a single village, but might 
be a valley or similar area, or even a city neighbor- 
hood inhabited by an isolated cultural or demihu- 
man enclave. 

No spirit is immune to the spell (unless bound), 
regardless of Hit Dice. However, such spirits remain 
unaffected if the person, beast or object they inhab- 
ited is not struck by any of the shamans. Further, 
any spirit making a successful saving throw vs. spell 
can return to the area after 1d10 months. 

The material components for the spell are the 
branches and plants used to beat the spirits away. 

Notes: Restricted to shamans, uncommon. 


Cleanse Hearth 
(Abjuration) 
Sphere: Protection 


Level: 3 

Range: Special 
Components; V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 turn 
Duration: 3 mo. 

Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: ‘A 


This spell is used to cast out spirits from any 
one hearth (home). A “hearth” might be as small as 
a beggar’s shack, or as large as a whole farmstead 
(including barns and outbuildings) or a royal 
palace, but it must be the residence of a single 
family. The spell’s casting time is therefore ap- 
proximate: it takes only one round to cleanse a 


121 


small shack, but might take a whole day for a 
palace. Shamans can shorten the casting time by 
enlisting the aid of other shamans. 

To cast the spell, the shaman and any assistants 
first take supple boughs and clumps of leafy plants. 
Thus armed, they rampage around the dwelling, 
shouting threats and calling down curses upon any 
spirit that might resist them. Lashing at the air with 
their boughs, they strike at the walls, floors and 
beams, and items of furniture. Any weapons, 
people, or domestic animals inside the home they 
beat with clumps of plants, while ornaments are 
shaken and clothes flung about. Nothing is left un- 
touched. Furniture is emptied, sides of meat beaten 
against each other and sacks of grain torn open. In 
this way, the shamans charge around the house, 
driving the spirits out. 

Spirits whose Hit Dice exceed the caster’s 
level, are unaffected. Each other spirit in the home 
is allowed a saving throw vs. spell. If successful, 
the spirit must leave for 2d6 weeks; failure means 
the spirit is driven out and cannot return. 

Note that the spell also affects spirits possessing 
people and domestic beasts in the home (provided 
that they are present when the spell is cast), as well 
as those inhabiting buildings or objects there. If for 
any reason the shamans fail to beat any room, 
animal, person or object in the house, then any spir- 
its possessing that thing remain unaffected by the 
spell. Spirits living in the rooms without possessing 
any particular object, and those in wild animals 
(like mice) inside the house, are all affected by the 
spell. However, the spell has no effect on bound 
spirits, like fetish spirits bound into objects, or spir- 
its that naturally live in plants or animals. 

The material components for the spell are 
simply the branches and plants used to beat the 
spirits away. 

Notes: Restricted to shamans, uncommon. 


Clear Air 
(Invocation/Evocation) 
Sphere: Elemental Air 


Level: 4 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, M 

Casting Time: 7 

Duration: | turn + 1 rd,/level 
Area of Effect: 20-ft.-radius globe 
Saving Throw: Special 


Clear Path 


This spell creates an area in which the air remains 
perfectly clear. Clear air banishes smoke, gas, fog, 
and instantly settles particles such as blowing 
sand, soot, or grit. Creatures in gaseous form are 
immediately expelled from its confines, and they 
cannot enter the area while the spell is in effect. 
The spell affects the area surrounding the creature 
touched, and it is mobile with that creature. 

The material component for this spell is the 
priest's holy symbol. 

Notes: Granted by the wind god Akadi of the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Clear Path 
(Alteration) 
Reversible 
Sphere: Travelers 
Level: 5 
Range: 0 


Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 5 
Duration: | hr/level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell clears away weeds, stones, and other 
debris in a 10-foot-wide path extending 10 feet in 
front of the caster. The caster can create a continu- 
ous path for the duration of the spell, clearing a 10- 
foot-square ahead of him as long as he continues 
to move forward. The spell affects jungles, forests, 
rocky ground, and snow. 

The result of the cleared path is that movement 
costs are reduced by half. This is reflected in a re- 
duction of the penalty against movement in rough 
terrain. (See the DMG for terrain costs for move- 
ment.) For example, if clear path is used in heavy 
jungle, the movement cost is reduced from 8 to 4. 
In no case can clear path reduce movement cost 
below 1. 

The magic has no effect on rivers, lakes, or 
other bodies of water, nor does it affect quicksand, 
lava, or similar natural obstacles. It also has no 
effect on magically-created terrain or manmade 
barricades. It does not excavate or clear collapsed 
tunnels. A priest using the clear path spell can be 
tracked easily (tracking proficiency is not re- 
quired), 

The material components are a knife blade and 
a straw from a broom. 

The reverse, clutter path, causes weeds, small 
stones, and similar debris to litter a 10-foot path 
extending 10 feet behind the caster. This hides a 
trail, making tracking more difficult. The caster 
can create a continuous path for the duration of the 
spell. The chance to successfully track on a clut- 
tered path is reduced by 50%. 

The material components are a handful of peb- 
bles and a handful of weeds. 

Notes: Common for to priests with major 
access to the sphere of Travelers. 


Clear Water 
(Alteration) 
Reversible 
Sphere: Elemental Water 
Level: 2 wie 
Range: Touch 


Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 2 

Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: 1 gallon/level 
Saving Throw: None 


With this spell, the priest can bring Athasian 
water closer to its true elemental form. Impurities 
and imperfections are removed, making it more ef- 


Cloak of Fear 


a EE A 


fective at quenching thirst and nourishing plant 
life. A creature requires only half as much cleared 
water as normal water for drinking. An active 
human, for instance, needs only 2 gallon of 
cleared water per day to avoid dehydration. 

When used to grow plants, cleared water can 
double the yield of fruit or grain bearing plants. 
This also applies to trees of life and magical fruit 
trees, but only if cleared water is used to nurture 
the trees for every day of their growing life. 

The material component is a single drop of dis- 
tilled water. 

The reverse of this spell, muddy water, has ex- 
actly the opposite effect. Creatures must drink 
twice as much and plants yield half as much. The 
effects of muddy water are not readily apparent— 
creatures may think they are taking their fill of 
water but find themselves suffering from dehydra- 
tion anyway; farmers may not realize until the 
crops are in and it’s too late. 

The material component of the reverse is a 
rotted seed. 

Notes: Uncommon for priests from the DARK SUN 
setting. 


Range: Touch 


Area of Effect: 1 to 4 creatures touched 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


The cloak of bravery spell can be cast upon any 
willing creature. The protected individual gains a 
bonus to a saving throw against any form of fear 
(but not awe—an ability of some Lesser and 
Greater Powers). When cast, the spell can affect 
one to four creatures of the caster’s choice. If only 
one is affected, the saving throw bonus is +4. If 
two are affected, the bonus is +3, and so forth, 
until four creatures are protected by a +1 bonus. 
The magic of the cloak of bravery spell works only 
once and then the spell ends, whether or not the 
creature’s saving throw is successful. The spell 
ends after eight hours if no saving throw is re- 
quired before then. 

The material component for the cloak of brav- 


ery spell is the feather of an eagle or hawk. 

The reverse of this spell, cloak of fear, empowers a 
single creature touched to radiate a personal aura of 
fear, at will, out to a 3-foot radius. All other charac- 
ters and creatures within this aura must roll suc- 
cessful saving throws vs. spell or run away in panic 
for 2d8 rounds. Affected individuals may or may 
not drop items, at the DM’s option. 

The spell has no effect upon undead of any 
sort. The effect can be used but once, and the spell 
expires after eight hours if not brought down ear- 
lier. Members of the recipient’s party are not 
immune to the effects of the spell. 

The material component for the reverse is the 
tail feather of a vulture or chicken. 

Notes: Common for clerics (PHB). 


Cloak of Dark Power — Drow 
(Alteration, Evocation) 
Sphere: Necromantic 


Level: | 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: 3 rds. + | rd./level 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell creates a dark aura of coursing, 
swirling power around the caster. The priest's 
body and anything worn or carried are protected 
by this aura from the effects of full sunlight, even 
under the open, daytime sky of the surface world. 
Arms and armor imbued with the radiations of the 
Underdark do not begin to lose their power, and 
the drow caster suffers no bright light combat 
penalties while under the effect of the cloak. A 
continual light spell cast directly against the cloak 
of dark power negates both spells. 

A priest shrouded in a cloak of dark power func- 
tions as if one experience level higher in all dealings 
with undead. Arachnids (and others using arachnid 
forms) attack a cloak-wearer at penalty of —3. 

Notes: Granted by the drow goddess Lolth. 


Cloak of Fear 
Reversed form, cloak of bravery. This form is used 
by evil priests. 


st t~CSC<‘<(Stltlme 


Cloak of Gaer — Drow 


Cloak of Gaer — Drow 


(Necromancy) 
Sphere: Healing 


Level: 7 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This powerful spell surrounds the protected 
creature with a faint magical aura. It takes effect 
(days or perhaps years later) when the being it is 
cast on must make a system shock survival roll, or 
when the being reaches 6 hit points or less. It can 
be cast on a just-injured being. When either of the 
triggering conditions occurs, the following happen: 
è A system shock survival roll, if required, is auto- 

matically successful, regardless of the creature's 
Constitution. 

o The creature regenerates severed or missing 
limbs or body extremities. 

e The cloak purges the body of all poisons, dis- 
eases, insanity, charms and outside mental influ- 
ences, curses and geas effects, possession or 
symbiotic life (even if friendly and desired), and 
feeblemindedness. It also cancels the effects of 
any forget spells previously cast on the being; 

e The creature is restored to full wakefulness, 
alertness, sobriety, and a pain-free state. 

e The cloak heals 4d8 hit points of damage. 


If this spell is cast on an hurt creature within 2 
rounds of an injury major enough to activate the 
cloak, the spell has the effects noted above, and 
allows a being who has failed a system shock sur- 
vival roll a second chance. This roll is made at a 
+22% bonus. Failure means death occurs, but the 
purge and regenerate effects occur to the corpse. 

If this spell is applied 3 to 9 rounds after a being 
has been stricken, it allows a second system shock 
survival roll, but without any bonus; other spell ef- 
fects occur as noted here. If the spell is applied later, 
it only purges and regenerates (even on bodies). 

The spell’s material components are four drops 
each of holy water, the caster’s blood, and dew. A 
dispel magic cannot end this spell if it has not been 
activated. This magic has enabled many dead drow 
to return and hunt down foes. Certain drow wiz- 
ards are rumored to use a similar spell. 

Notes: Granted by the drow goddess Lolth. 


124 


Cloud of Pestilence 
(Alteration, Evocation) 
Sphere: Combat, Elemental Air 


Level: 4 

Range: 10 yds./level 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 7 

Duration: 4 rds. 

Area of Effect: 40-ft.-wide, 20-ft.-high, 20-ft.- 
deep cloud 

Saving Throw: Special 


This spell creates a billowing cloud of yellow- 
ish-green vapors that resembles the 5th-level 
wizard spell, cloudkill—but a cloud of pestilence 
cannot be moved by any known means (though 
dispel magic causes it to fade into nothingness); it 
sits motionless until the spell expires. The caster is 
unaffected by his or her own cloud of pestilence, as 
is any creature wearing or bearing a consecrated 
holy symbol of Talona. All other creatures caught 
in or entering the acrid, foul-smelling vapor cloud 
must make a saving throw vs. spell. 

The first round of exposure to the vapors (or 
during initial exposure in the case of those who 
leave and reenter the area of effect), those who 
succeed at the saving throw are unaffected. Those 
who fail the saving throw take 1d4 points of 
damage and begin coughing violently. 
Spellcasting, normal speech, and tasks requiring 
dexterity, such as opening locks, writing, and the 
like, are impossible. 

On the second round of exposure (or second ex- 
posure in the case of those who leave and reenter 
the area of effect), another saving throw is made. If 
successful, the victim continues to cough and suf- 
fers another 1d4 points of damage. If unsuccessful, 
the vapors inflict 3d4 points of damage, the victim 
is slowed (as the spell), the continues to cough, and 
suffers blurred vision, resulting in a —2 penalty to all 
attack rolls, difficulty in telling friend from foe 
when the two are near each other, and an increased 
possibility of tripping, bumping into things or 
people, and like effects. 

On the third round of exposure (or third exposure 
to the same cloud of pestilence), another saving 
throw must be rolled. If successful, the victim takes 
1d4 points of damage and the coughing continues. If 
unsuccessful, the victim sinks into unconsciousness 
and takes 4d6 points of additional damage. 

On the fourth round (or fourth exposure), an- 
other saving throw must be rolled. If successful, 


Cloudburst 


>) R a 


the victim takes 1d4 points of damage and suffers 
a coughing fit until the spell expires. If unsuccess- 
ful, the victim suffers 4d6 points of damage, 
coughing continues, and the victim is slowed for 
1d4+1 rounds after the cloud dissipates and con- 
tracts a lung disease. This reduces movement rate 
by 1, makes facial muscles twitch and tremble 
from time to time, and steals | hit point every 2 
days. The lost hit points cannot be restored until 
the disease is cured; loss continues at the rate of 1 
hit point every 2 days until the disease is banished 
or the victim dies. The disease, known as Talona’s 
grimace by the facial twitch it causes, is curable by 
magic and by the proper use of some herbal medi- 
cines, but not through simple rest. 

Notes: Granted by Talona, Mistress of Disease, 
of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Cloud of Purification 
(Evocation) 
Sphere: Elemental Air, Elemental Water 


Level: 5 

Range: 30 yds. 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 5 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: 20-ft. cube 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell creates a billowy cloud of magical 
vapors that moves with the prevailing wind at a rate 
of 20 feet per round. A strong wind (greater than 18 
miles per hour) breaks it up in 4 rounds, and a 
greater wind (a gust of wind spell, for example) dis- 
perses it in one round, as does thick vegetation. 

The cloud of purification transmutes organic 
filth, garbage, and vermin (mice, rats, rot grubs, and 
so on) into an equal quantity of pure water. For ex- 
ample, a nest of rot grubs caught in the cloud would 
melt, becoming small puddles of clean water, If the 
spell is cast over a body of water, the cloud merges 
with a portion of the water equal to its own size, 
transmuting any filth, microbes, small fish, or other 
impurities into clean water. 

The cloud’s vapors are heavier than air, so they 
sink to the lowest level of the land (even down 
holes in the ground). Thus, this spell is useful for 
cleansing a sewer or well. 

This spell in no way affects magical creatures 
or any creature larger than a normal rat. 

Notes: Uncommon for druids (ToM). 


Cloud of Putrefaction 
(Evocation) 
Reversible 
Sphere: Elemental Air, Elemental Water 
Level: 5 a i 
Range: 30 yds. 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 8 
Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: 20-ft. cube 
Saving Throw: None 


This reverse of cloud of purification creates a 
billowy cloud of vile vapors that moves with the 
prevailing wind at a rate of 20 feet per round. A 
strong wind (more than 18 mph) breaks it up in 
four rounds, and a greater wind (a gust of wind 
spell, for example) disperses it in one round, as 
does thick vegetation. 

The cloud transmutes pure water into organic 
filth and rotting garbage. Small animals (mice. 
squirrels, etc.) mutate into rats and rot grubs. Flies 
and other foul insects immediately rise from the 
mess. If cast over a sewer or garbage heap, the 
spell doubles the filth created. The cloud itself 
lasts for only one round per level, but the effects 
are nonmagical and permanent until magically pu- 
rified or negated by time (though flowing water 
also tends to eliminate the effects relatively 
quickly). This spell can spoil a castle’s water 
supply or foul a small river. Depending upon what 
the caster uses this spell for, it may well require a 
RAVENLOFT powers check. 

Notes: Common on the Demiplane of Dread; 
used mostly by evil priests. 


Cloudburst 
(Invocation, Evocation) 
Sphere: Elemental Air, Elemental Water, Weather 


Level: 3 

Range: 10 yds./level 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 6 

Duration: | rd. 

Area of Effect: 30-ft. diameter cylinder, up to 60 
ft. high 

Saving Throw: None 


This spell precipitates a rush of water out of the 
air, instantly drenching everything in the area of 
effect. Normal fires are extinguished. Permanent 


A 125 S 


Cloudscape r 


magical fires go out, but re-light in 1d2 rounds 
(weapons in | round). Fire-based spells of Ist or 
2nd level are negated immediately. 

Fire-based spells of 3rd level or higher are also 
negated, but create a steam cloud with a 120-ft. di- 
ameter. Those within the steam cloud are scalded 
for 1d3 points of damage per round (twice this for 
cold-based creatures). The steam cloud lasts 
1d4+1 rounds, half that in a breeze, and but one 
round in a strong wind. 

This spell has doubled effect in humid climes, 
causes a heavy dampness in arid climes, produces 
slush and sleet at temperatures near freezing, and 
creates up to 10 inches of snow if the temperature 
is below freezing. 

Notes: Uncommon for druids (originally pub- 
lished in Unearthed Arcana). Granted by Istishia 
the Water Lord of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Cloudscape 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Weather 


Level: 5 

Range: 120 yds. 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 8 

Duration: 3 turns/level of caster 

Area of Effect: 1,000 cu. ft/level of caster 
Saving Throw: None 


A character can cast cloudscape on a single 
cloud or part of a cloud bank, usually from a nearby 
mountaintop or while flying. h causes 1,000 cubic 
feet of cloud per level of the caster to become solid 
enough to support any weight. The solidified clouds 
remain airborne and feel like a thick carpet. 

A creature that falls onto the magically 
strengthened cloud sustains falling damage. An 
animal or individual that flies into the solidified 
cloud falls, stunned, for a round, and must make a 
successful Dexterity check to recover. A creature 
flying through a cloud at the moment the cloud so- 
lidifies is allowed a saving throw vs. petrifaction. 
Success means the creature escapes; failure means 
the creature is trapped as the cloud solidifies 
around it. However, as the cloud is porous, such 
creatures can continue to breathe until the spell’s 
duration elapses. 

The solidified cloud itself continues to drift 
with the wind as usual. While the caster cannot use 
this particular spell to propel the cloud, a control 
winds spell can summon a great gust of air to tum 


126 


the cloudscape into a unique flying conveyance 


easily enough. 
Notes: Uncommon for druids. 
Clues of Ash 
(Divination) 
Sphere: Elemental Fire 
seis J 
Range: 0 


Components: S, M 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 10 ft/level radius 
Saving Throw: NA 


Casting this spell on a pile of ashes gives the caster 
a smoky vision of the scene before an item or creature 
was destroyed. The vision ends at the time the thing 
was ruined or killed and begins 1 round per level of the 
caster sooner. Thus, a 4th-level priest sees the last four 
minutes of a destroyed object’s existence. Clues of ash 
reveals whether the thing was an item or a living crea- 
ture, and whether it was destroyed by fire or by defil- 
ing magic. If the caster is examining vegetable matter 
destroyed by defiling magic, there is a 10% chance the 
priest can identify the spell that destroyed it. 

Notes: Uncommon for priests from the DARK 
Sun setting. 


Clutter Path 
Reversed form, clear path. 


Coalstone 
Lost spell. This is reputed to allow the creation of 
a special stone, the known properties of which 
follow. (Updated from DRAGON magazine). 


Cold Hand 


, lO EO —__eeeeT Le 


ble l TON il in one roon d (oil, tinder candles 

torches, and so on). When dropped ; piui, i 

the stone is not extinguished; it can be us 

cooking or can be carried in a fireproof con- 

tainer for warmth. a j 
Coat of Mist 

(Summoning) 


Sphere: Elemental Air, Elemental Water 
kpas aie 
Range: 0 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: Self 

Saving Throw: NA 


A priest can use this spell to create a magical 
mist about himself. The spell can be used only at 
night, during a rainstorm, or at any other time nat- 
ural mists might be present. The coat of mist im- 
proves the caster’s Armor Class by 2, and gives a 
+2 saving throw bonus against fire- or sun-based 
attacks. These modifiers are cumulative with other 
bonuses the priest might have, but the caster can 
benefit from only one coat of mist at a time 

Notes: Uncommon for priests from the DARK 
SUN setting. 


Code of Secrecy 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
Sphere: Charm 


Level: 5 

Range: Touch 
Components; V, S, M 
Casting Time: | rd. 
Duration: Varies 

Area of Effect: | individual 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


A successful casting of this spell prevents the 
individual from any communication whatsoever 
about a topic forbidden by the caster. The spell can 
be cast only upon a creature with an Intelligence 
score of at least 3. Wisdom adjustments apply to 
the saving throw. 

If the individual fails a saving throw vs. spell, all 
communication concerning the secret is blocked: 
speech, writing, hand signals, painting, symbology, 


and so on. An attempt to break the code of secrecy 

communicates a completely unrelated matter: the 

menu at lunch, an opinion of the mayor's recent 
speech, and so on, as the DM decides. 

During the casting, the priest exhorts the crea- 
ture to remain silent about a certain fact. The more 
general the forbidden topic is, the shorter the 
spell’s duration. For example, consider the various 
degrees of secrecy: 

o General Secret: “A guild called Ela’s Quick 
Fingers exists in Muden.” Duration: | day/caster 
level. 

e Uncommon Secret: “Ela’s Quick Fingers guild 
works in conjunction with the temple of El(*)a” 
Duration: 1 week/ caster level. 

o Specific Secret: “Fulda spiritwalker leads both 
Ela’s Quick Fingers guild and the temple of Ela. 
Duration: | month per caster level. 

e Exacting Secret: “Behind a plaque of a black 
dagger in the east hall of the Basilica’s basement 
level lies a secret door that will open up onto a 
staircase leading down into the Quick fingers 
guild's headquarters if one speaks the password 
correctly.” Duration: | year/ caster level. 

Each secret to be enforced requires a separate 
casting. 

The spell’s material component is a piece of 
animal tongue. 

Notes: Known to priests of Ela’s Temple. 
(Updated from DraGon Magazine.) 


Cold Hand 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Combat, Elemental Water 


Level: 5 

Range: Touch 

Components; V, S 

Casting Time: 8 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: 1 touched creature 
Saving Throw: None 


Despite its name, this spell works through the 
entire body of the caster, not just a hand. The caster 
is unaffected by this magic (and can even undertake 
other spelicasting or activities for an indefinite 
period of time without disturbing the cast-and-wait- 
ing cold hand magic), but the first being touched 
suffers its effects. A successful attack roll is re- 
quired in most situations, although this spell is 
sometimes used in rituals to harm a willing devotee 
of Auril, as a sign of the “cold favor of the goddess.” 


A 127 K 


Combine* - 


A cold hand touch causes | point of damage to 
any touched target, plus 1 point per level of its 
caster to a maximum of 21 points of damage. No 
saving throw is allowed against the magic, but nat- 
ural or magical resistance to cold can reduce 
damage by as much as half (and in some excep- 
tional cases to nothing). 

Notes: Granted by Auril Frostmaiden of the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. This spell is found 
only in a few exceptionally rare tomes. 


Combine* 
(Evocation) 
Sphere: All 


Level: 1 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: Circle of priests 
Saving Throw: None 


Using this spell, three to five priests combine 
their abilities so that one of them casts spells and 
turns undead at an enhanced level. The highest 
level priest (or one of them, if two or more are tied 
for highest) stands alone, while the others join 
hands in a surrounding circle. The central priest 
casts the combine spell. He temporarily gains one 
level for each priest in the circle, up to a maximum 
gain of four levels. The level increase affects turn- 
ing undead and spell details that vary with the 
caster’s level. The central priest gains no addi- 
tional spells and the group is limited to his cur- 
rently memorized spells. 

The encircling priests must concentrate on 
maintaining the combine effect. They lose all 
Armor Class bonuses for shield and Dexterity. If 
any of them has his concentration broken, the com- 
bine spell ends immediately. If the combine spell is 
broken while the central priest is in the act of cast- 
ing a spell, that spell is ruined just as if the caster 
was disturbed. Spells cast in combination have the 
full, enhanced effect, even if the combine is 
broken before the duration of the enhanced spell 
ends. The combination is not broken if only the 
central caster is disturbed. 

Notes: Common for priests (PHB). 


128 


Comforts of Home —Halfling 


Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: 8 hrs. 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This simple spell allows a willing recipient to 
pamper himself or herself with all the comforts of 
home. For the duration of the spell, even the most 
meager trail rations warm the belly like a favorite 
home cooked meal, the hard-packed ground feels 
like a soft, warm bed, upon awakening the recipi- 
ent feels like he or she has bathed and changed into 
a fresh, clean set of clothes, etc. While this spell 
does not alter the reality of the recipient’s current 
environment, it does alter his or her perception of 
that environment, mitigating the psychological 
rigors of travel. 

This spell does provide one tangible benefit: 
Any night’s sleep had while under the effects of 
this spell is equivalent to complete bed-rest, allow- 
ing the recipient of the comforts of home to regain 
3 hit points for the day and be fully rested for the 
purpose of praying for spells. 

The material components of this spell are the 
priest's holy symbol. 

Notes: Granted by the halfling goddess 
Cyrrollalee. 


Command 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
Sphere: Charm, Combat, Law 


Level: 1 

Range: 30 yds. 
Components: V 

Casting Time: 1 
Duration: | rd. 

Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell enables the priest to command an- 
other creature with a single word. The command 
must be uttered in a language understood by the 
creature. The subject will obey to the best of his/its 
ability only as long as the command is absolutely 
clear and unequivocal; hence, a command of 


Command Forest — Treant 


mm 4 


“Suicide!” is ignored. A command to “Die!” 
causes the creature to fall in a faint or cataleptic 
state for one round, but thereafter the creature re- 
vives and is alive and well. Typical commands are 
back, halt, flee, run, stop, fall, go, leave, surrender, 
sleep, rest, etc. No command affects a creature for 
more than one round; undead are not affected at 
all. Creatures with Intelligence of 13 (high) or 
more, or those with 6 or more Hit Dice (or experi- 
ence levels) are allowed a saving throw vs. spell, 
adjusted for Wisdom. (Creatures with 13 or higher 
Intelligence and 6 Hit Dice/levels get only one 
saving throw.) 
Notes: Common for clerics (PHB). 


Command Another’s Pet — Shaman 


Area of Effect: 1 animal 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell allows the shaman to gain the imme- 
diate loyalty of any tame, normal animal, includ- 
ing giant varieties thereof. The animal views the 
caster as its true master, forgetting all previous 
loyalties. It obeys any commands that it has been 
trained to obey, but does not gain any special abil- 
ity to understand the caster, and no additional in- 
telligence; it also retains its natural instincts and 
character, likes and dislikes. 

To cast this spell, the caster takes a piece if 
food suitable for the animal, and tosses it to the 
creature. This is the spell’s material component, 
and cannot be reused. While most people know 
that dogs eat meat, for example, more exotic pets 
may baffle a shaman. To correctly deduce the diet 
of an unusual animal, the shaman must make a 
successful Animal Lore proficiency check. 

Notes: Restricted to shamans, uncommon. 


129 


Command Earth 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Elemental Earth 


Level: 6 

Range: Special 

Components: V, M 

Casting Time: 9 

Duration: 6 turns + | turn/level 
Area of Effect: Special 

Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell grants the priest limited power over 
creatures from the elemental plane of Earth (earth 
elementals, galeb duhr, xom, and so on). While the 
spell is in effect, such creatures cannot approach 
within five feet of or attack the priest. 

The priest can forego this protection and at- 
tempt to charm one creature of elemental earth if 
desired. The creature receives a saving throw vs. 
spell at a -2 penalty. If the charm fails, the caster 
might be attacked by the creature. A charmed crea- 
ture performs services for the priest for the spell 
duration, as normal for charm spells. 

While the spell is in effect, the priest can com- 
municate with creatures from the elemental plane 
of Earth, and their basic reaction to the priest is not 
hostile. This spell does not grant any ability to ac- 
tually conjure or summon creatures. 

The material components for the spell are a 
holy symbol and an opaque gemstone. 

Notes: Granted by the goddess Ulaa, patron of 
miners of the WoRLD oF GREYHAWK setting. 


Command Forest — Treant 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
Sphere: Plant 


Level: 5 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 1 turn 

Duration: | day 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


When cast on a treant noble, this spell allows 
the noble to reverse its rapport with the forest, 
sending out commands through the same process it 
normally receives information. 

Because of the limited awareness trees have of 
the world around them and the time delay in com- 
munication, commanding a forest through this 


Command Monster 


rapport is unwieldy at best. Simply getting all the 
trees to start moving, stop moving, or change di- 
rection at the same time requires conscientious 
planning and several hours to execute (a minimum 
of one hour per mile the treant noble is from the 
farthest edge of the forest.) So, while trees com- 
manded in this way theoretically have all the abil- 
ities of any other treant-animated trees, speaking 
practically they can be commanded only to move, 
and the full movement capability of the trees is 
rarely employed by the commanding noble. A 
forest charging full tilt across the countryside 
could get into trouble before the noble became 
aware there was a problem. 

Notes: Very rare spell, known to treants. 
(Updated from DUNGEON Magazine.) 


Command Monster 


(Enchantment/Charm) 
Sphere: Charm 


Level: 6 

Range: 60 yds. 
Components: V 

Casting Time: 1 
Duration: | rd./2 levels 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell allows the priest to issue a command to 
any one creature within the spell’s range. The 
magic of the spell translates the priest's order into a 
language or form the subject creature can under- 
stand. The creature must have an Intelligence of at 
least 1 in order to be affected by this spell; those 
with a score of 0 cannot comprehend any order, no 
matter how the priest phrases it. Undead creatures 
are immune to this spell. Other creatures may be al- 
lowed a saving throw vs. spell to resist command 
monster, but only if their Intelligence is 
Exceptional (15) or better, or their Hit Dice or 
levels are equal to or greater than the caster’s level. 

Just like the Ist-level spell command, the sub- 
jects obeys the priest's one-word order to the best 
of its ability. The order must be absolutely clear 
and unequivocal; the subject will continue to obey 
for one round per two caster levels—six rounds at 
12th level, seven at 14th, and so on. If this action 
places the subject in mortal peril, a saving throw 
vs. spell is allowed, whether the subject was origi- 
nally allowed one or not, to break free of the 
spell’s power. Therefore, ordering a character 
standing at the edge of a cliff to “jump” creates an 


130 


opportunity for the subject to break free. A com- 
mand to “die” or “sleep” renders the creature un- 
conscious for the spell’s duration. 

Notes: Uncommon for clerics (PO:SM). 


Commune 


Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


By use of a commune spell, the priest is able to 
contact his divinity—or agents thereof—and re- 
quest information in the form of questions that can 
be answered by a simple “yes” or “no.” The priest 
is allowed one such question for every experience 
level he has attained. The answers given are cor- 
rect within the limits of the entity’s knowledge ("T 
don’t know” is a legitimate answer, as powerful 
outer planar beings are not necessarily omnis- 
cient). Optionally, the DM may give a single short 
answer, of five words or less. The spell will, at 
best, provide information to aid character deci- 
sions. Entities communed will structure their an- 
swers to further their own purposes. It is probable 
that the DM will limit the use of commune spells 
to one per adventure, one per week, or even one 
per month, for the greater powers dislike frequent 
interruptions. Likewise, if the caster lags, dis- 
cusses the answers, or goes off to do anything else, 
the spell immediately ends. 

The material components necessary to a com- 
mune spell are the priest’s religious symbol, holy 
(unholy) water, and incense. If a particularly 
potent commune is needed, a sacrifice proportion- 
ate with the difficulty of obtaining the information 
is required, and if the offering is insufficient, only 
partial or no information is gained. 

Notes: Common for clerics (PHB). 


Commune With Earth — Dwarf 
(Divination) 
Sphere: Divination 


Level: 5 

Range: 0 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: | turn 
Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell enables a dwarven priest to become 
one with the surrounding earth. The priest is able to 
learn one fact about the surrounding area for each 
level of experience, in much the same manner as the 
druid’s commune with nature spell. The caster can 
“know” facts—ahead, left, right, (and up, level or 
down) about the following subjects: the ground, 
minerals, bodies of water, people, general animal 
population, burrowing or subterranean creatures, 
fungi, and so on. The presence of powerful unnatu- 
ral creatures can be detected, as can the general state 
of the earth. This spell is only effective in rocky 
hills, mountains, or underground caverns or mines. 


131 


Commune With Lesser Spirit 


The spell operates in a radius of one-half mile per 
level of the priest and to a depth of one-quarter mile 
per level. The DM may limit the casting of this spell 
to once per month. 

The material components are the priest’s holy 
symbol and a bit of earth, rock, or clay. 

Notes: Restricted to dwarven priests. (Updated 
from DRAGON Magazine.) 


Commune With Greater Spirit 
(Divination) 
Sphere: Divination 


Level: 5 

Range: 0 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: | turn 
Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell is similar to the commune with lesser 
spirit spell. The points of difference are that any 
type of spirit, including the shukenja’s deity, can 
be contacted by this spell and the questions are 
limited to yes or no answers (although “maybe” 
and “I don’t know” are also acceptable replies). 

The material component for this spell is an of- 
fering of appropriate type and value to the spirit 
contacted, 

Notes: Common for priests from an oriental 
setting; otherwise, very rare. 


Commune With Lesser Spirit 
(Divination) 
Sphere: Divination 


Level: 2 

Range: 10 ft. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: | turn 
Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


By use of the commune with lesser spirit spell, 
the shukenja is able to contact any of the hundreds 
of local spirits that dwell in the land. Local spirits 
are those with limited range and power—lesser 
spirits (as listed in the Monster section)}—the spir- 
its of a particular tree, rock, or stream are typical 
lesser nature spirits. A spirit that haunts a single 
building or compound could also be contacted. 


Commune With Nature 


The spirit of a mountain or river is greater than a 
lesser spirit and is beyond the power of this spell. 
To contact the spirit, the shukenja must know its 
identity (which can be obtained through a trance 
spell) and must be within 10 feet of the area where 
the spirit is found. 

Once the spirit is contacted, the shukenja can 
ask it one question for every level of experience he 
has gained. The questions must be specific and 
clearly worded, but are not limited to yes or no an- 
swers. The spirit answers questions literally and 
does not volunteer any information. The answers 
are always correct if the answer is known. Good 
spirits attempt to be as helpful as possible within 
the limits of the question, neutral spirits answer in 
riddling or roundabout ways, and evil spirits 
always try to distort the answer based on the word- 
ing of the question. 

The spirit can only answer those questions con- 
cerning the immediate area it affects. Questions 
beyond the scope of the spirit are wasted. Thus, the 
spirit of a great tree in the village could not answer 
questions about events outside the village, and a 
ghost haunting a temple could not discuss events 
not related to the temple or its reasons for haunting 
it. The DM must decide if any question is within 
the realm of the local spirit. The DM can, if he 
chooses, limit the use of this spell to once a week 
(or even less) for any particular spirit, since they 
do not care to be disturbed by the trifling affairs of 
the material world. 

The material components of this spell are incense 
and an offering appropriate to the nature of the 
spirit. 

Notes: Common for priests from an oriental 
setting; otherwise, very rare. 


Commune With Nature 


Range: 0 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 1 turn 
Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell enables the caster to become one 
with nature in the area, thus being empowered 
with knowledge of the surrounding territory. For 
each level of experience of the caster, he can 


132 


“know” one fact—ahead, left, or right, about the 
following subjects: the ground, plants, minerals, 
bodies of water, people, general animal popula- 
tion, woodland creatures, and so on. 

The presence of powerful unnatural creatures 
can also be detected, as can the general state of the 
natural setting. The spell is most effective in out- 
door settings, operating in a radius of one-half 
mile for each level of the caster. In natural under- 
ground settings—caves, caverns, etc.—the range 
is limited to 10 yards per caster level. In con- 
structed settings (dungeons and towns), the spell 
will not function. The DM may limit the casting of 


this spell to once per month. 
Notes: Common for druids (PHB). 
Communicate 
(Divination) 
Sphere: Divination 
Level: 6 
Range: Unlimited 


Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 3 rds, 

Duration: | turn + 1 rd/level 

Area of Effect: Caster and one individual 
Saving Throw: None 


Via this spell, a priest can communicate with another 
individual anywhere on the Prime Material Plane. The 
individual to be contacted must be known to the priest, 
and cannot be within any type of force field like a cube 
of force, minor ward, major ward, major or minor globe 
of invulnerability, etc., nor under the protection of a 
mind blank spell or a psionic defense like tower of iron 
will, The other, if asleep, will awaken upon making a 
successful saving throw vs. spell (a new saving throw is 
allowed every other melee round). 

Once contact is established, if the subject is 
willing, the priest can see and hear, whatever that 
subject can see and hear, and vice versa. 

The communication link is so strong that the 
priest can cast a curing spell of any type upon the 
person being contacted. Casting such a spell 
breaks the link immediately. Further, the priest can 
cast no further spells for one full day plus one ad- 
ditional day for each level of the cure spell cast. 

If contact is established while the subject is oc- 
cupied (for example, casting a spell or involved in 
melee), the subject must stop any current activity to 
accept the communication. As the priest can only 
look in on and communicate with a willing recipi- 
ent, such refusal ends the spell immediately, leaving 


Compel — Shukenja 


the caster no information about the recipient. 

The spell requires a mirror as a focus. 

Notes: Very rare spell. (Updated from DraGon 
Magazine.) 


Compel 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
Sphere: Charm 
Level: 3 
Range: 30 yds. 


Components: V 

Casting Time: 1 

Duration: 2 rds. 

Area of Effect: 1 or 2 creatures 
Saving Throw: None 

This spell enables the caster to command one 
or two creatures with a single word. For the spell 
to be effective, it must be uttered in a language un- 
derstood by any creature to be affected. Like the 
Ist-level priest spell command, the subjects obey 
to the best of their ability if and only if the com- 
mand is clear and unequivocal. Similar to the com- 
mand spell, a compulsion to “Die!” causes a 
two-round cataleptic state, not death. Typical com- 
pulsions are back, halt, flee, run, stop, fall, go, 
leave, surrender, sleep, and rest. 

Undead are unaffected by this spell, but any 
two living creatures within range who are seen and 
mentally selected by the caster as the spell is cast 
are subject to its effects. Beings having either an 
Intelligence of 15 or greater or 8 or more Hit Dice 
or experience levels (or both) are allowed a saving 
throw vs. spell that is not adjusted for Wisdom. If 
this saving throw is successful, they are unaffected 
by the magic. 

A compel governs two consecutive rounds. If 
the caster desires, a second, different compulsion 
can be uttered in the second round. If this is not 
done, the initial command is followed for both 
rounds. Torm regards use of this spell to render 
foes defenseless so they can be slain on the spot to 
be a sin of the gravest sort. No priest would dare to 
do so; the penalty is a special flame strike. In addi- 
tion to the normal effects of that spell, the miscre- 
ant is stripped of all spells and cast out of the faith. 

Notes: Rare spell granted by the deity Torm in 
the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Compel — Shukenja 
(Abjuration) 
Sphere: Charm 


Level: 7 

Range: 60 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


By means of this spell, the shukenja attempts to 
correct the behavior of another by causing an 
alignment change. The shukenja points to the crea- 
ture to compel it to change its behavior. The crea- 
ture is allowed a saving throw vs. death. A creature 
with fewer Hit Dice or levels than the shukenja has 
a —4 penalty applied to this roll. Those of equal 
through 150% more Hit Dice or levels have a 
normal saving throw. Those with greater than 
150% have a +4 bonus. 

A successful saving throw means the spell has no 
effect. Failure means creature’s alignment immedi- 
ately becomes whatever the shukenja states. 
Accompanying this change of alignment is a change 
in the creature's behavior to match its new world- 
view. Thus a lawful evil NPC changed to lawful good 
alignment immediately gives up his evil ways, disas- 
sociates from his less-than-savory companions, and 
tries to atone for his past misdeeds. 

If the change is outside the alignments allowed 
by the subject’s current class, the individual does 
not lose any class-based abilities and can still ad- 
vance in level. This is a special case, since the 
deity has seen fit to make the alteration through its 
shukenja servant. It is quite likely, however, that 
the individual will use such abilities in a manner 
quite different from the norm. A ninja changed to 
good alignment would use her ninja powers 
against those seeking to cause evil or harm, often 
doing so without pay or reward. 

The material components for this spell are the 
shukenja’s holy symbol and a set of coarse white 
robes to be given to the subject once the spell has 
taken effect. 

Notes: Common for priests from oriental set- 
tings; otherwise, very rare. 


7 133 


Compulsive Order 


Compulsive Order 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
Sphere: Law 


Level: 4 

Range: 10 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 5 
Duration: Permanent 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


A being affected by compulsive order is compelled 
to place everything encountered into perfect order. For 
example, treasure will be divided into tidy piles or into 
containers of silver, gold, and copper. Reluctant to 
enter a dungeon because it is a messy place, once 
inside, the creature is obsessed with cleaning it. A crea- 
ture under the power of this spell might sweep dirt 
corpses of a defeated ore band according to size, dash 
forward to remove a bit of lint on clothing, or insists 
by size, and then by age. While the spell does not affect 
a creature’s abilities, the overwhelming desire for 
order impairs its usefulness in most adventures. 

When an individual afflicted by this spell attempts 
to undertake a new action (begin a battle, haggle with a 
merchant, and so on), the player must rationalize the 
action on the basis of the character’s compulsion for 
order. Thus, a character cannot simply attack a goblin; 
the player must announce a condition, such as attack- 
ing the tallest goblin and fighting his way down ac- 
cording to size. Once the condition stated, the 
character must follow through with the plan. 

If the player cannot conceive a rationale for the 
character’s behavior, the character's action is de- 
layed for 1d6 rounds, with this time spent in prepa- 
tation for the subsequent action. For example, the 
character might spend time arranging spell compo- 
nents artistically, deciding how to hold a sword, 
cleaning his weapon, and so on. 

Those affected by a compulsive order spell may 
become violent if prevented from being neat. They do 
what is necessary make the world around themselves 
more orderly, If allowed to organize the surroundings, 
they quickly calm down again. They constantly peti- 
tion those around them to be neat and organized. 

The target creature is allowed a saving throw to 
avoid the effects of the spell. A successful dispel 
magic spell counters the effect. 

The material component is a perfect cube made 
of metal. 


134 


Notes: Common for priests with access to the 
sphere of Law. 


Conceal 


Reversed form, reveal. 


Conceal Fire 


Reversed form, watchfire. 


Conceal Item — Drow 
(Illusion/Phantasm) 
Sphere: Protection 


Level: 3 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: | 

Duration: | turn + | rd/level 
Area of Effect: | item 
Saving Throw: None 


This magic enables the caster to render a single 
item utterly undetectable. The item can be any 
nonliving thing smaller than the caster’s total body 
mass, as long as the caster carries or touches it. 
The spell conceals even magical and alignment 
auras, and shows true seeing a blank, wavering 
area of white fog where the item is. 

This spell is usually used to conceal a carried 
magical item or weapon. Priests of Vhaeraun typi- 
cally use it to hide holy symbols (when cast on any 
holy symbol, spell duration is tripled). Developed 
by a priestess of Lolth, this spell has been re- 
quested of Vhaeraun by most of his priests and 
granted to them, also. 

Its material component is a small handful 
(about 2 ounces) of the dust of any powdered gem- 
stone (cheap stones, such as quartz, work fine). 

Notes: Granted by the drow powers Lolth and 
Vhaeraun. 


Conceal Lifeforce — Vedic 
(Abjuration) 
Sphere: Divination 


Level: 5 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 5 
Duration: | day/level 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: None 


Confusion 


p ee a 


This spell hides a being’s lifeforce (shakti) 
from detection, preventing spells like karma sight 
and reincarnation sight from working on the crea- 
ture. It can also prevent a creature from being rein- 
carnated, at least temporarily. By casting conceal 
lifeforce on a creature within an hour of its death, 
the creature’s self (atman) is hidden from the 
divine agents who attend to reincarnation. 

This spell allows the subject to be raised or res- 
urrected. (According to Legends & Lore, this is the 
only way raise dead or resurrection can be used on 
a character from this culture more than a day after 
death.) Using this spell to prevent reincarnation is 
a violation of the cosmic order and may trigger 
divine wrath. 

Notes: Common for priests from a vedic 
(Indian) culture; otherwise very rare. (Updated 
from DRAGON Magazine.) 


Conceal Motivation 


Reversed form, know motivation. 


Conceal Riches — Dwarf 
(Illusion/Phantasm) 
Sphere: Charm 


Level: 4 

Range: 80 yds. 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: Permanent 

Area of Effect: 1 being or a 20-ft. cube 
Saving Throw: Special 


The conceal riches spell makes all items worn 
or carried by one being or within an area up to 20 
X 20 X 20 feet look worthless. Fine clothes look 
shabby and new, expensive, or luxurious items 
appear old and worn. This illusion is used by 
priests of Abbathor to disguise themselves or their 
treasure hoards and abodes (or those of others, for 
a fee) to thwart robbery attempts. They also use 
this spell to avoid being detained or molested 
when traveling with great wealth. The effect is per- 
manent until successfully dispelled or until it is 
dismissed by the caster. 

Notes: Granted by the evil dwarven god 
Abbathor. 


Conformance 
Quest spell, see appendix in Vol. 3. 


Confusion 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
Sphere: Charm 


Level: 7 

Range: 80 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time; | rd. 
Duration: | rd./level 

Area of Effect: 40-ft. cube 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell causes confusion in one or more 
creatures within the area, creating indecision and 
the inability to take effective action. The spell af- 
fects 1d4 creatures, plus one creature per two 
caster levels. Thus, seven to ten creatures can be 
affected by a 12th- or 13th-level caster, eight to 11 
by a 14th- or 15th-level caster, and so on. These 
creatures are allowed saving throws vs. spell with 
—2 penalties, adjusted for Wisdom. Those success- 
fully saving are unaffected by the spell. Confused 
creatures react as indicated on the table (roll 1d10 
each). 


D10 
Roll Reaction 
1 Wander away (unless prevented) for 
duration of spell 
2-6 Stand confused one round (then roll 
again) 
7-9 Attack nearest creature for one round 
(then roll again) 
10 Act normally for one round (then roll 
again) 


The spell lasts one round for each level of the 
caster. Those who fail their saving throws are 
checked by the DM for actions each round, for the 
duration of the spell, or until the “wander away for 
the duration of the spell” result occurs. 

Wandering creatures move as far from the 
caster as possible in their most typical mode of 
movement (characters walk, fish swim, bats fly, 
etc.). This is not panicked flight. Wandering crea- 
tures also have a 50% chance of using any special 
innate movement abilities (plane shift, burrowing, 
flight, etc.). Saving throws and actions are checked 
at the beginning of each round. Any confused crea- 
ture that is attacked perceives the attacker as an 
enemy and acts according to its basic nature. 

The material component is a set of three nut 
shells. 


a 135 * 


~ Conjure Air Elemental 


Note: If there are many creatures involved, the 
DM may decide to assume average results. For ex- 
ample, if there are 16 orcs affected and 25% coulti 
be expected to successfully roll the saving throw, 
then four are assumed to have succeeded, one 
wanders away, four attack the nearest creature, six 
stand confused and the last acts normally but must 
check next round. Since the orcs are not near the 
party, the DM decides that two who are supposed 
to attack the nearest creature attack each other, one 
attacks an ore that saved, and one attacks a con- 
fused orc, which strikes back. The next round, the 
base is 11 orcs, since four originally saved and one 
wandered off. Another one wanders off, five stand 
confused, four attack, and one acts normally. 

Notes: Common for clerics (PHB). 


Conjure Air Elemental 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 
Reversible 
Sphere: Elemental Air, Summoning 


Level: 7 

Range: 40 yds. 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 1 turn 
Duration: 1 turn/level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


A caster who performs this spell summons an 
air elemental to do his or her bidding. The elemen- 
tal is 60% likely to have 12 Hit Dice, 35% likely to 
have 16 Hit Dice, and 5% likely to have 21 to 24 
Hit Dice (20+1d4). Furthermore, the caster needs 
but to command it, and it does as she or he desires, 
for the elemental regards the caster as a friend to 
be obeyed. The elemental remains until destroyed, 
dispelled, sent away by a dismissal or holy word 
spell (see the 6th-level priest spell conjure fire ele- 
mental), or the spell duration expires. 

Notes: Common for druids (PHB). Granted by 
the wind god Akadi of the FORGOTTEN REALMS set- 
ting Granted by the elven goddess Aerdrie Faenya. 


Conjure Air or Water Elemental 
See conjure air elemental (7th) and conjure water 
elemental (6th) (PO:SM). 


136 


Casting Time: 9 
Duration: 2 rds/level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


The conjure animals spell enables the priest to 
magically create one or more mammals to attack 
his opponents. The total Hit Dice of the mammals 
cannot exceed twice his level, if the creature con- 
jured is determined randomly. If a specific animal 
type is conjured, the type cannot exceed his level. 
The DM selects the type of animal that appears if it 
is randomly called. Thus, a priest of 12th level 
could randomly conjure two mammals with 12 Hit 
Dice each, four with 6 Hit Dice each, six with 4 Hit 
Dice each, eight with 3 Hit Dice each, 12 with 2 Hit 
Dice each, or 24 with 1 Hit Die each. Count every 
+! hit point added to a creature’s Hit Dice as “of a 
Hit Die. Thus, a creature with 4+3 Hit Dice equals 
a 4% Hit Dice creature. The conjured animals 
remain for two rounds for each level of the conjur- 
ing priest, or until slain, and they follow the caster’s 
verbal commands. Conjured animals unfailingly 
attack the priest's opponents, but resist being used 
for any other purpose—they do not like it, become 
noticeably more difficult to control, and may refuse 
any action, break free, or turn on the caster, de- 
pending on the nature of the creature and the details 
of the situation. The conjured animals disappear 
when slain. 

Notes: Common for clerics (PHB). 


Conjure Aurumvorax — Gnome 


Range: 30 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 8 
Duration: 2 rds./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


The conjure aurumvorax spell enables the priest 
to magically create an aurumvorax to attack his op- 


Conjure Fire Elemental 


p ee 4 


ponents. The conjured creature remains for two 
rounds for each level of the conjuring priest, or 
until slain, and it follows the caster’s verbal com- 
mands. A conjured aurumvorax unfailingly attacks 
the priest’s opponents, but resists being used for 
any other purpose aside from consuming gold. If an 
aurumvorax conjured by means of this spell is di- 
rected to act otherwise, it becomes noticeably more 
difficult to control and may refuse any action, 
break free, or turn on the caster, depending on the 
details of the situation. A conjured aurumvorax dis- 
appears when slain or when the spell expires. 

The material components of this spell are the 
priest’s holy symbol and a solid gold carved fig- 
urine of an aurumvorax worth at least 100 gp. The 
latter is consumed in the casting. 

Notes: Granted by the gnome god, Garl 
Glittergold. 


Conjure Earth Elemental 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 
Reversible 
Sphere: Elemental Earth, Summoning 


Level: 7 

Range: 40 yds. 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: | turn 
Duration: 1 turn/level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


A caster who performs a conjure earth elemental 
spell summons an earth elemental to do his bidding. 
The elemental is 60% likely to have 12 Hit Dice, 35% 
likely to have 16 Hit Dice, and 5% likely have 21 to 24 
Hit Dice (20 + 1d4). Furthermore, the caster needs but 
to command it, and it does as desired, for the elemental 
regards the caster as a friend to be obeyed. The ele- 
mental remains until destroyed, dispelled, sent away 


137 


by dismissal or a holy word spell (see the conjure fire 
elemental spell), or the spell duration expires. 
Notes: Common for druids (PHB). 


Casting Time: 5 rds. 
Duration: | turn/level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


In Dark Sun campaigns, there is no 6th-level 
conjure fire elemental or Tth-level conjure earth 
elemental spell for priests. Instead this spell allows 
the caster to open a special gate to any elemental 
plane to which he has major access and summon 
an elemental to step through. The Hit Dice of the 


elemental are determined randomly. 
Roll Hit Dice 

01-65 8 

66-90 12 

91-00 16 


The elemental will not turn on the caster, so 
concentration need not be maintained. The ele- 
mental summoned remains for maximum of one 
turn per level of the caster, or until it is slain or 
magically banished. 

Notes: Restricted to priests from a DARK SUN 
campaign setting; replaces other elemental conjur- 
ing spells, uncommon. 


Conjure Fire Elemental 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 
Reversible 


Sphere: Elemental Fire 


Level: 6 

Range: 80 yds. 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 6 rds. 
Duration: 1 turn/level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


Upon casting a conjure fire elemental spell, the 
caster opens a special gate to the elemental plane of 


Conjure Greater Elemental 


ji iii eV 


Fire, and a fire elemental is summoned to the vicinity 
of the spellcaster. It is 65% likely that a 12 Hit Dice el- 
emental appears, 20% likely that a 16 Hit Dice ele- 
mental appears, 9% likely that two to four 
salamanders appear, 4% likely that an efreeti appears, 
and 2% likely that a huge fire elemental of 21 to 24 
Hit Dice appears. The conjuring caster need not fear 
that the elemental force summoned will turn on him, 
so concentration upon the activities of the fire elemen- 
tal (or other creatures summoned) or protection from 
the creature is not necessary. The elemental sum- 
moned helps the caster however possible, including 
attacking the caster’s opponents. The fire elemental or 
other creature summoned remains for a maximum of 
one tum per level of the caster, or until it is slain, sent 
back by a dispel magic spell, the reverse of this spell 
(dismiss fire elemental), or similar magic. 

Notes: Common for druids (PHB). 


138 


Conjure Greater Elemental 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 
Reversible 


Level: 7 

Range: 60 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: | turn 

Duration: | turn/level 

Area of Effect: Summons | greater elemental 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell allows the caster to summon a single 
greater elemental from an elemental plane. The con- 
jure greater elemental spell is actually four spells, each 
of which can be cast only by a priest with access to the 
appropriate sphere. The power of the conjured greater 
elemental depends on the level of the caster. Only one 
greater elemental can be conjured in a day. 

Greater elementals are both more powerful and 
more intelligent than common elementals sum- 
moned by lesser spells. While they can be forced 
to serve in the same manner as lesser elements, a 
conjured greater elemental can be bargained with, 
if the caster can show how its actions will further 
Elemental Plane concerns. The caster must offer 
suitable inducements, or the greater elemental is 

10% likely to depart to its home plane. 

The material component of the spell (besides a 
great the quantity of the element at hand) is a small 
amount of one of the following: 


Air Elemental: Burning incense 

Earth Elemental: Soft clay 

Fire Elemental: Sulphur and phosphorus 
Water Elemental: Water and sand 


Special protection from elementals is available 
by means of a protection from evil spell. 


Caster Elemental Weapon 
Level Hit Dice to Hit 
14 12 +2 
18 16 +2 
24. 21 +2 


-Any casting is 5% likely to summon the next more pow- 
erful elemental. The greater elemental is 1% likely per Hit 
Die to be free-willed. A 24th-level caster will summon a 
greater elemental of demipower status, at least 24 Hit Dice 
and immune to weapons of less than +3 enchantment. 
Free-willed elementals of these power levels 
can be negotiated with, but tend to be more hostile 


and less tractable. Spells such as exaction and 
oathbinding might be useful. 

Notes: Common for elemental specialty 
priests; otherwise rare. 


Conjure Greater Elemental 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 
Reversible 
Sphere: Elemental 


Level: 7 

Range: 30 yds. 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 1 turn 
Duration: 1 turn/level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell allows the caster to summon a single 
greater elemental from, in the case of priests, their 
sphere of major access, or, in the case of wizards 
and templars, from any plane. The Hit Dice of the 


elemental are determined randomly. 
D100 Roll Hit Dice of Elemental 

01-65 10 

66-90 14 

91-00 18 


This spell is otherwise identical to the Sth-level 
priest spell conjure elemental. 

Notes: Common for priests and druids from the 
Dark SUN setting, barred to templars; otherwise, 
very rare. 


Conjure Jungle Minions 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Animal 


Level: 4 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 8 

Duration: 2 rds./level 

Area of Effect: 1 minion/3 levels 
Saving Throw: None 


ey 


By means of this spell, the caster can change 
baby common crocodiles or alligators (one for 
every three experience levels of the priest) into 
lesser segarrans. Thus, a 9th-level priest can change 
three crocodiles into lesser segarrans. Of course, 
the crocodiles must be at hand for this spell to func- 


Conjure Lesser Elemental 


tion. Further, they must be touched by the priest 
during the casting. These minions attack as com- 
manded by the priest for the duration of the spell 
(two rounds per level of experience of the caster). 

Lesser segarrans are compelled by the spell to 
devour the flesh of enemies who fall in combat, a 
process taking 1-3 rounds depending upon the 
victim's size. During this time, the creature 
cannot attack or follow the caster’s commands. If 
the conjured segarrans do not kill and devour at 
least one victim before the spell expires, then the 
caster must make a saving throw vs. spell or be af- 
fected by a bestow curse as a sign of Ragarra's 
displeasure. 

The material component is fresh water, spe- 
cially blessed for use in this spell. The water is 
poured on the crocodiles at the time of casting. This 
spell has no effect if cast on a giant crocodile. 

Notes: Granted by Ragarra, a jungle god found 
in arabian settings. 


Segarran, Lesser: AC 1; MV 9; HD 5+5; 
THACO 16; #AT 1; D g weapon +2 or 248 
(bite); SA as Sth-level fighter; MR 
10%; AL CE; Int Ave (8-10); SZ M (6' tall); ML- 
Fearless (20); XP 1,400. 


Conjure Lesser Elemental 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 
Reversible 
Sphere: Elemental (All) 
Range: 30 yds. 


Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 3 rds. 

Duration: | turn +1 round/level 
Area of Effect: Special 

Saving Throw: Special 


With this spell, a priest can freely summon a 
lesser elemental from his own elemental sphere. 
The lesser elemental will do anything within its 
power to aid the caster. A priest cannot summon an 
elemental from an opposing sphere (that is, a water 
priest cannot summon a fire elemental). Only cler- 
ics and druids can cast this spell; templars cannot 
conjure lesser elementals. 

Once cast, there is a 50% chance for one to 
three 2 Hit Die elementals to appear; a 25% 
chance for one or two 4 Hit Die elementals; and a 


l 


3 


9 


Conjure Nature Elemental = 


25% chance that one 6 Hit Die elemental will 
appear. The lesser elemental can be sent back by 
the caster, one at a time or all at once, at any time. 
It automatically returns to its home plane when the 
spell ends. 

Conjured lesser elementals must be controlled 
by the priest; otherwise, it will simply assume a 
defensive posture until it returns to its plane. 
Lesser elementals won't attack the priest when un- 
controlled. Lesser elementals can be controlled up 
to 30 yards away per level of the caster. Lesser 
water elementals are destroyed if they are ever 
more than 30 yards from a large body of water. 

This spell requires a handful of material repre- 
sentative of the elemental being’s home plane: 

+ Lesser Air Elemental: Breath of the caster 

+ Lesser Earth Elemental: Dirt, dust, or other earth 

+ Lesser Fire Elemental: Any burning object 

e Lesser Water Elemental: Liquid, water, sweat, 
spit, and so on. 

Notes: Common for clerics and druids from the 
Dark SuN setting, barred to templars, 


Conjure Nature Elemental 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 
Reversible 
Sphere: Plant 


Level: 7 

Range: 100 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: | turn 
Duration: Special or 24 hrs. 
Area of Effect: 1 mi. 
Saving Throw: None 


Upon the casting of this spell, the caster opens 
a direct link with Chauntea and a portion of her 
essence forms a nature elemental from the uncivi- 
lized and uncultivated portions of the priest's cur- 
rent surroundings. 

A caster of 16th level or less must make a saving 
throw vs. breath weapon. If the saving throw fails, 
the caster provides the spirit portion of the elemen- 
tal's essence (it is composed of earth, air, fire, water, 
and spirit) and departs the Prime Material Plane 
when the elemental disperses at the end of the spell’s 
duration. The caster is then dead, but his or her body 
remains intact (it is, oddly, not restructured like the 
environment) and can be raised or resurrected. 

Priests must be above 17th level to inscribe this 
spell onto a scroll, and then only someone who is in 
touch with nature (druids, clerics or specialty 


priests of nature powers, or rangers above 5th level) 
can read the scroll. When reading from a scroll, a 
caster does not need to make a saving throw. 

Nature elementals are summoned to return the 
spell’s area of effect to an uncultivated state. All 
signs of civilization and all humans or humanoids 
within the area of effect are obliterated. The only 
people immune to the elemental’s fury are the 
caster and up to 10 people per the caster’s level 
within a 100-yard-radius who are designated upon 
casting the spell. The elemental disperses into its 
environmental components when a ł-mile radius is 
renovated or after 24 hours, whichever occurs first. 

Unlike other elementals, nature elementals 
cannot be controlled. Their duties and the area in 
which they are to perform them are set at their 
summoning. If the area a nature elemental is sum- 
moned into is free of signs of civilization, the crea- 
ture disperses. Nature elementals are not affected 
by protection from evil spells and like magics that 
hold extraplanar creatures at bay. 

This spell is granted only by Chauntea to her 
clergy members after great consideration upon the 
damage it will inflict when used. (The only other 
church known able to cast a similar spell is that of 
Rillifane Rallithil, and he has refused its usage for 
over a century.) 

The reverse of this spell, dismiss nature ele- 
mental, disperses a summoned nature elemental. 

The material components for this spell are 
burning incense, soft clay, sulfur, phosphorus, 
water, sand, and a duly consecrated holy symbol. 

Notes: Restricted to priests of Chauntea in the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting; possibly available to 
priests of Rillifane Rallithil (not known to be 
granted in over a century). Optionally available to 
nature priests. 


Conjure Water Elemental 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 
Reversible 
Sphere: Elemental Water 


Level: 6 

Range: 80 yds. 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 6 rds. 
Duration: | turn/level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


Upon casting a conjure water elemental spell, 
the caster opens a special gate to the elemental 


ee ens 


Contact Home Power 


eee 4 


plane of Fire, and a water elemental is summoned 
to the vicinity of the spellcaster. It is 65% likely 
that a 12 Hit Dice elemental appears, 20% likely 
that a 16 Hit Dice elemental appears, 9% likely 
that two to four water weirds appear, 4% likely 
that an marid appears, and 2% likely that a huge 
noble water elemental of 21 to 24 Hit Dice ap- 
pears. The conjuring caster need not fear that the 
elemental force summoned will turn on him, so 
concentration upon the activities of the water ele- 
mental or other creatures summoned or protection 
from the creature is not necessary. The elemental 
summoned helps the caster however possible, in- 
cluding attacking opponents of the caster. The 
water elemental or other creature summoned re- 
mains for a maximum of one turn per level of the 
caster, or until it is slain, sent back by a dispel 
magic spell, the reverse of this spell (dismiss water 
elemental), or similar magic. 

Notes: Common for druids. Istishia of the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting and the sea elf god 
Deep Sashelas have a version that differs only in 
that the water weirds are replaced by varrdig (ele- 
mental vermin from the elemental plane of Water). 


Consequence 
(Divination) 
Sphere: Numbers, Divination 
Level: 5 
Range: 0 


Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell allows the priest to determine how 
one recent event fits into the grand scheme. By 
casting this spell, the priest can determine whether 
the sequence or situation that gave rise to the spe- 
cific event is complete or whether it is ongoing; 
whether it was a significant or insignificant event 
in the larger picture; or whether it will continue to 
have repercussions for the participants. 

Using his knowledge of circumstances, the DM 
communicates these facts to the caster’s player. 
This arcane message is normally straightforward 
and easy to understand, but in the case of highly 
complex circumstances, the message might be 
cryptic. In any case, the message is truthful. 

For example, a priest and her party are on a 
holy quest to retrieve an item of power. On the way 


14] 


to this item, the party is ambushed by evil crea- 
tures from the Inner Planes but manages to defeat 
them. Concerned that these creatures might be out- 
lying guards protecting the item of interest, the 
priest casts consequence, hoping for guidance. The 
DM knows that these creatures have nothing to do 
with the quest; the encounter was coincidental. 
However, the surviving monsters will soon be re- 
turning with reinforcements to avenge their dead. 
Therefore, the DM tells the priest’s player, “To 
your goals these have no place, but still they can 
cause more woe.” 

Casting this spell taints subsequent castings of 
the same spell within a 24-hour span. A second 
casting within this period gives the same message 
as the first, regardless of the true situation. A 
second priest who casts the spell within 24 hours 
of another casting receives an accurate reading. 

The spell requires three special coins or dice 
made of platinum (total value of at least 1,000 gp), 
which the priest tosses in his hand while concen- 
trating on the spell. The coins or dice are not con- 
sumed in the casting. 

Notes: Common for priests with major access 
to the sphere of Numbers, uncommon for priests 
with major access to the sphere of Divination 
(ToM). 


Contact Home Power 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 
Sphere: AIl 
Level: 2 Bo- 
Range: Unlimited 


Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: I turn 
Duration: 1 wk. 

Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell establishes a tenuous link through 
the Astral Plane between the caster’s present loca- 
tion and that of the patron power. This link permits 
the priest to regain spells as if the god is recog- 
nized and venerated within the crystal sphere. 

Distance has no effect upon the priest's attempt 
to contact the home power, but dimensional gates, 
antimagic fields, and the effects of dispel magic 
will prevent the use of the spell. Also, the spell will 
not function in areas from which the power has 
been specifically banished (whether from death of 
an avatar, banishment by spell, or some voluntary 
action of the god). A priest attempting to link with 


Contact Spirit — Shaman 


N 


his or her patron power in such locations become 
aware that contact with the god is not possible, but 
will not know the reason. 

The duration of the spell is one week, as long 
as the priest remains in the same crystal sphere in 
which the spell was cast. Passage into another 
plane (even the ethereal) breaks the spell, as will a 
successful dispel magic. This spell cannot be cast 
in the phlogiston. 

The material component of this spell is a small 
horn. When winded, the horn calls the attention of 
the deity to its servant (it also attracts the attention 
of others within earshot). 

Notes: Common for priests from a spelljam- 
ming culture; otherwise, very rare. 


Contain Spirit — Shaman 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
Sphere: Summoning 


Level: 2 

Range: 10 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: | spirit 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell allows the caster to trap any one 
spirit within a bottle, gourd, or other container. 

For the spell to work, the spirit must be within 
ten yards of the caster, the caster’s level must be 
equal to or greater than the spirit’s Hit Dice, and 
the caster must be holding or touching an appro- 
priate receptacle. On completing the incantation, 
the shaman seals the receptacle, and unless the 
spirit makes a successful saving throw vs. para- 
lyzation, it is trapped. The shaman cannot speak 
to, coerce, or destroy an ensnared spirit without 
casting further spells. 

The spell is, theoretically, permanent. As long 
as the receptacle remains sealed, the spirit is 
trapped and unable to use any of its powers. 
However, if the container is ever opened or broken, 
the spirit is immediately freed. 

Further, if the spirit's Hit Dice exactly equal 
the caster’s level, then it can attempt to force its 
way out. Once per week the spirit is allowed a 
saving throw vs. paralysis, and if successful, the 
spirit forces the container open and breaks free. 

Shamans wishing to prevent powerful spirits from 
escaping can use specially prepared receptacles, in- 
scribed with elaborate charms. As a rule, if the con- 


142 


tainer is worth 10 gp, the spirit suffers a —1 penalty to 
save; if itis worth 100 gp the penalty is —2; a 1,000 gp 
receptacle gives a —3 penalty, and so on. The shaman 
needs 2d6 days to prepare such a receptacle. 

The spell requires a container in which the 
spirit is to be trapped. 

Notes: Restricted to shamans, uncommon. 


Contaminate Water 
Reversed form, purify water. This form is used by 
evil priests. 


Continual Darkness 
Reversed form, continual light. This form is used 
by evil priests. 


Continual Faerie Fire 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Weather 


Level: 3 

Range: 120 yds. 

Components: V, M 

Casting Time: 6 

Duration: Permanent 

Area of Effect: 25 sq. ft./level, within a 70-ft. 
radius 

Saving Throw: None 


This spell is most often used to illuminate tem- 
ples or temporary places of worship. Continual 
faerie fire allows a priest to cover an area with a 
pale, glowing light. This radiance can be of any 
color desired by the caster. Amber, green, red, ale- 
brown, and purple, in that order, seem the most 
popular, Crafty spellcasters sometimes employ 
blue-white or specific aura hues to simulate magi- 
cal auras. The spell's area of effect can be of any 
size up to the limit imposed by the priest’s level, 
but it must be continuous. A row of patches of light 
the size of coins would require a row of spells, 
whereas a ribbon or circle of light in the same area 
could be created with a single spell. 

When in contact with the lit area, all beings and 
objects are outlined with a slightly more intense light 
than their surroundings. Invisible creatures are also 
surrounded with a nimbus and revealed if in contact 
with continual faerie fire, but noncorporeal, ethereal, 
or gaseous Creatures are unaffected. Undead crea- 
tures, however disguised, display an aura of black- 
ness when in contact with continual faerie fire. 

All creatures and objects possessing or under the 
current influence of cast magic that is not part of their 


Continual Shadow 


eee A 


essential nature radiate an additional flickering white 
aura. (The magic that animates some undead crea- 
tures is part of their essential nature; they would not 
cause a white aura unless they also bore some special 
magical item or cast dweomer.) Spellcasting or acti- 
vating a magical item while in contact with the radi- 
ance of continual faerie fire is accompanied by tiny, 
winking white motes of light. (A flickering white 
aura is not displayed by beings that have only memo- 
rized spells and not yet cast them.) The white aura 
concentrates around magical items and surrounds 
beings under a dweomer. In other words, a magical 
sword or potion flask would display this flickering 
white aura, and the entire person of a polymorphed 
being would glow. The whole of any illusion also 
glows with this flickering white aura. Aura effects are 
cumulative: An undead creature imbued with spell 
ability or disguised by an illusion would have a black 
aura haloed with a flickering white one. 

The radiance does not harm undead or creatures 
that dwell in darkness and doesn’t approach the in- 
tensity of sunlight, but creatures with normal vision 
can attack and function as in normal light. The radi- 
ance does not alter or damage objects or creatures 
within its area of effect in any way. Moving objects 
and creatures retain a glowing outline for one 
round after they leave the area lit by the spell. 

Continual faerie fire operates independently of 
magical light and darkness, functioning as if nei- 
ther existed. Within areas of bright light, the wink- 
ing white lights of magical outlines are hard to see, 
and the colored outlines around beings and objects 
appear as a faint fuzziness around the perceived 
edges of their outlined forms. 

The material components of this spell are a 
piece of foxfire, a drop of water, a pinch of ashes, 
and pinch of bone dust. 

Notes: Uncommon for priests in the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Continual Light 
(Alteration) 

Reversible 

Sphere: Creation, Guardian, Sun 


Level: 3 

Range: 120 yds. 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 6 

Duration: Permanent 

Area of Effect: 60-ft.-radius globe 
Saving Throw: Special 


143 


This spell is similar to a light spell, except that 
it is as bright as full daylight and lasts until 
negated by magical darkness or by a dispel magic 
spell. Creatures with penalties in bright light suffer 
them in this spell’s area of effect. As with the light 
spell, this can be cast into air, onto an object, or at 
a creature. In the third case, the continual light af- 
fects the space about one foot behind a creature 
that successfully rolls its saving throw vs. spell (a 
failed saving throw means the continual light is 
centered on the creature and moves as it moves). 
Note that this spell also blinds a creature if it is 
successfully cast upon the creature's visual organs. 
If the spell is cast on a small object that is then 
placed in a light-proof covering, the spell effects 
are blocked until the covering is removed. 

Continual light brought into an area of magical 
darkness (or vice versa) cancels the darkness so 
that the otherwise prevailing light conditions exist 
in the overlapping areas of effect. A direct casting 
of a continual light spell against a similar or 
weaker magical darkness cancels both. 

This spell eventually consumes the material it 
is cast upon, but the process takes far longer than 
the time in a typical campaign. Extremely hard and 
expensive materials might last hundreds or even 
thousands of years. 

The reverse spell, continual darkness, causes 
complete absence of light (pitch blackness), similar 
to the darkness spell but of greater duration and area. 

Notes: Common for priests and druids (PHB). 


Continual Shadow 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Sun 


Level: 3 

Range: 120 yds. 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 6 

Duration: Permanent 

Area of Effect: 60-ft.-radius globe 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell is similar to a continual light or con- 
tinual darkness spell, except it creates an area of 
perpetual shadow and gloom and lasts until 
negated by magical light, magical darkness, or a 
successful dispel magic spell. Creatures with 
penalties or bonuses in areas of shadow receive 
them in this spell’s area of effect. As with the con- 
tinual light and continual darkness spells, this 
spell can be cast into the air, onto an object, or at a 


Contract of Nephthys — Old Empire 


creature. In the third case, the continual shadow 
affects the space about 1 foot behind a creature 
that makes a successful saving throw vs. spell; a 
failed saving throw means the continual shadow is 
centered on and moves with the creature. If the 
spell is cast on a small object that is then placed in 
a light-proof covering, the spell effects are blocked 
until the covering is removed. 

Continual shadow brought into an area of mag- 
ical darkness or magical light temporarily cancels 
the light or darkness so that otherwise prevailing 
light conditions exist in the overlapping areas of 
effect. A direct casting of a continual shadow spell 
against a similar or weaker magical light or magi- 
cal darkness cancels both. 

This spell eventually consumes the material it 
is cast upon, but the process takes far longer than 
the time in a typical campaign. Extremely hard and 
expensive materials might last hundreds or even 
thousands of years. 

Notes: Granted by the Chultan god Eshowdow 
of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Contract of Nephthys — Old Empire 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
Sphere: Charm 


Level: 4 

Range: Touch 
Components; V, S, M 
Casting Time: Special 
Duration: | year 

Area of Effect: 2 beings 
Saving Throw: None 


A contract of Nephthys binds two individuals 
into a mutually acceptable agreement, the break- 
ing of which carries severe consequences. 

During the casting, the priest must recite all the 
terms of the contract, down to the most exacting 
detail (thus the variable casting time). The spell 
fails if either party is not a willing participant, is 
under the effects of a charm spell (or similar effect 
or ability), or is not in their right mind, as adjudi- 
cated by the DM. 

If either party fails to meet the terms of the con- 
tract due to factors beyond their control and despite 
their best efforts, the contractor finds the hand of 
Nephthys rests heavy on his or her business. Any at- 
tempt to earn a profit that would normally succeed, 
either for a business or for personal use, suffers the 
whims of fate and results in no net gain. (All losses 
are fully realized and breaking even can also occur.) 


If either party deliberately chooses to not meet 
the terms of the contract, Nephthys’s heel grinds 
the erring contractor's wealth into dust. In a short 
period of time, the whims of fate inexorably drive 
that party into bankruptcy, destroy his or her busi- 
ness, and separate the contractor permanently 
from any remaining wealth. 

Any penalties imposed by this spell cease one 
year after the creation of the contract, regardless of 
when the contract was violated. Lost wealth is re- 
gained only through renewed effort, however. The 
contract of Nephthys can be negated (through a 
short ritual statement) by the original caster with 
the willing agreement of both parties before its du- 
ration expires, provided a forfeiture price is paid to 
the caster. The caster decides what forfeiture price 
is sufficient, but impoverishing the contractors is 
not desirable or allowed. If the original caster has 
died, a contract can be negated by a higher level 
priestess of Nephthys in the same manner. 

The use of this spell is standard practice in im- 
portant business dealings in Mulhorand. Temples 
of Nephthys typically demand 1% to 5% of both 
parties’ profit on any contract enforced by the 
magic of this spell, plus the cost of the gold dust 
material component. Failure to pay for the spell’s 
casting has the same effect as deliberately violat- 
ing the contract. 

The material component of this spell is a hair 
from each participant and a handful of gold dust 
worth at least 100 gp that is thrown in the air over 
both contractors. 

Notes: Granted by the Mulhorandi god 
Nephthys of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Control Animal 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
Sphere: Animal 


Level: 3 

Range: 60 yds. + 10 yds /level 
Components; V, S 

Casting Time: 6 

Duration: | rd/level 

Area of Effect: 1 animal 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


A priest casts this spell to force an animal to do 
his bidding. The creature is allowed a saving throw 
vs. spell; if it fails, the caster can direct it with 
simple commands to act in any fashion desired. 
Sample commands include “Attack,” “Run,” 
“Fetch,” etc. Suicidal or self-destructive com- 


ee 


Control Giant Insext 


p nnn nnn A 


mands allow another saving throw to break free of 
the caster’s control, with a +1 to +4 bonus depend- 
ing on the extremity of the caster’s orders. 
Ordering an animal to engage in combat is not 
necessarily self-destructive, as long as the foe is 
not more than three times the animal's Hit Dice or 
more than two size categories larger than the sub- 
ject. For example, a wolf (2+2 Hit Dice, size M) 
would attack a troll (6+6 Hit Dice, size L) without 
hesitation, but it might break free of the caster's 
control if ordered to attack a huge (size H) dragon 
or an 8+8 HD umber hulk. 

Control animal establishes a mental link be- 
tween the caster and the subject, and the animal 
can be directed by silent mental command as long 
as it remains within range. Because the caster’s in- 
telligence directs the animal, the creature may be 
able to take actions normally beyond its own com- 
prehension, such as manipulating objects with its 
paws and mouth. The caster need not concentrate 
in order to maintain control of the creature unless 
trying to direct it to do something it normally 
wouldn't. 

Control animal only works on normal or giant- 
sized animals with Intelligence ratings between 1 
and 4. Magical animals, monsters, and creatures of 
low Intelligence or higher are immune to the ef- 
fects of this spell. Druids never use this spell. 

Notes: Uncommon for priests with access to 
the Animal sphere; barred to druids. 


Control Aratha 
See control giant insect. 


Control Death Tyrant — Beholder 


(Necromancy) 
Sphere: Necromantic 


Level: 4 

Range: 0 

Components: V 

Casting Time: 7 

Duration: | day 

Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None. 


This spell enables an elder orb to control any 
death tyrant within one mile per current Hit Die of 
the elder. This control is like a charm person influ- 
ences humans. The elder orb can simultaneously 
control one death tyrant per point of Intelligence it 
currently possesses. If faced with more tyrants that 
its control limit, it can drop control of one in one 


145 


round and assume control of another the next. The 
tyrants involved will do nothing during those two 
rounds. Death tyrants cannot rebel against this 
control, which overrides and always supersedes 
their directives. 

Only an elder orb or an evil priest of 18 or 
greater Intelligence can use this spell. 

Notes: Restricted to elder orbs (common) and 
evil priests or 18 or better Intelligence (very rare). 


Control Giant Insect 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
Sphere: Animal 


Level: 4 

Range: 100 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 7 

Duration: 1 turn + 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: | giant insect 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell works on any giant or magically en- 
larged insect that fails a saving throw vs. spell. 
Only one insect can be controlled per spell. The 
insect cannot be used as a steed by the caster be- 
cause of the particular nature of the magic, which 
enables the caster to precisely control the insect 
from afar. This involves the caster making move- 
ments that are imitated as precisely as possible by 
the insect (given differing body types). Thus, a 
priest could force a beetle to follow a complex 
route, pull a lever, push chess pieces about on a 
board, and perform other complex tasks, to the 
limits its body allows. 

This spell (originally known as control aratha) 
was developed by the priests of the Dawnspire in 
Myth Drannor to enable them to control local giant 
killer beetles, or arathas, and force them to serve 
as temple guardians. 

The material component is a scale, piece of 
chitin, or body part of the same type of insect. This 
can be a dried husk or remnant, and can be from any 
size of related insect (for example, a giant wasp can 
be controlled using the wing of a normal wasp). 

Notes: Common for priests of Lathander of the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting; otherwise, uncom- 
mon to very rare. 


Control Lycanthropes r 


Control Lycanthropes 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
Sphere: Charm 


Level: 6 

Range: 60 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 3 
Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


One werebear or weretiger, 1-2 wereboars, 1-3 
werewolves or wolfweres, 1—4 wererats, or | jack- 
alwere can be controlled by means of this spell. 
Control of only one type of lycanthrope can be at- 
tempted with a single use of this spell. If the lycan- 
thrope is in human form, the druid need not say 
what type of lycanthrope is affected, but if lycan- 
thropes of more than one type are present in 
human form, only those of one type (druid’s 
choice or choice at random on basis of lycan- 
thropic Hit Dice) is affected. Control lasts as long 
as the lycanthropes continue to fail their saving 
throws. A new check is made every night during 
the week of the full moon (seven nights); between 
full moons, control is automatic. The effects of the 
spell are like those of the 4th-level wizard spell, 
charm monster. The caster can force controlled ly- 
canthropes into and out of wereform by means of a 
simple command, 

Notes: Very rare for druids. (Updated from 
DRAGON Magazine.) 


Control Temperature, 10' Radius 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Weather 


Level: 4 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 7 

Duration: 4 turns + | turn/level 
Area of Effect: 10-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: None 


When this spell is cast, the temperature sur- 
rounding the caster can be altered by 10° F., either 
upward or downward, per level of experience of the 
spellcaster. Thus, a 10th-level caster could raise or 
lower the surrounding temperature from 1 to 100 
degrees. The spell can be used to ensure the com- 
fort of the caster and those with him in extreme 


weather conditions. The party could stand about in 
shirt sleeves during the worst blizzard (although it 
would be raining on them) or make ice for their 
drinks during a scorching heat wave. 

The spell also provides protection from intense 
normal and magical attacks. If the extreme of tem- 
perature is beyond what could be affected by the 
spell (a searing blast of a fireball or the icy chill of 
a white dragon), the spell reduces the damage 
caused by 5 points for every level of the caster. 
Normal saving throws are still allowed, and the re- 
duction is taken after the saving throw is made or 
failed. Once struck by such an attack, the spell im- 
mediately collapses. 

The material component for this spell is a strip 
of willow bark (to lower temperatures) or rasp- 
berry leaves (to raise temperatures). 

Notes: Common for druids (PHB). 


Control Vapor 


(Alteration, Conjuration/Summoning) 
Sphere: Elemental Air, Elemental Water 


Level: 5 

Range: 40 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 8 

Duration: | rd./level 

Area of Effect: 10-ft/level-radius sphere 
Saving Throw: None 


By means of this spell, the caster can alter the 
movement rate and direction of natural or magical 
smokes and vapors, including incendiary clouds, 
smoke ghosts, gaseous breath weapons, fog cloud, 
and cloudkill, as well as the smoky effects of py- 
rotechnics and creatures in gaseous form. Within 
the area of effect, wind effects are negated, even if 
of magical origin, and the caster can hold a vapor 
stationary or move it up to 10 feet per level each 
round in any desired direction. If the vapor passes 
out of the stationary area of effect, control is lost. 

Creatures in gaseous form (such as vampires) 
and those wind walking receive no saving throw 
against the spell. A vapor cannot alter its form, be 
altered in form, nor be split into several vapors 
unless the caster so wills; however, creatures nor- 
mally able to alter their nongaseous form into an- 
other form (such as a corporeal one) can do so 
whether the caster desires them to or not. The 
process of changing form takes twice as long as 
usual while they are affected by control vapor. 
Clouds of insects and similar insubstantial or 


CO ee he 


Control Weather 


) a 


amorphously formed but nongaseous creatures are 
not affected by this spell. 

The drow of the Underdark are reputed to use 
a parallel form of this spell in one or more of 
their faiths. 

The material component is the priest’s holy 
symbol (which is not destroyed in casting the 
spell) and a bean or pea. 

Notes: Granted by the god Eldath of the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Control Weather 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Weather 


Level: 7 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 turn 
Duration: 4d12 hrs. 

Area of Effect: 4d4 sq. mi. 
Saving Throw: None 


The control weather spell enables a priest to 
change the weather in the local area. The spell af- 
fects the weather for 4d12 hours in an area of 4d4 
square miles. It requires one turn to cast the spell, 
and an additional 1d4 turns for the effects of the 
spell to be felt. The current weather conditions are 


Precipitation 


CLEAR WEATHER HOT 
Very clear 


Temperature 


Sweltering heat 
Light clouds or hazy Warm 


decided by the DM, depending on the climate and 
season. Weather conditions have three compo- 
nents: precipitation, temperature, and wind. The 
spell can change these conditions according to the 
weather chart. 

The upper-case headings represent existing 
weather conditions. The lower-case headings 
below each upper-case heading are the new condi- 
tions to which the caster can change the existing 
conditions. Furthermore, the caster can control the 
direction of the wind. For example, a day that is 
clear, warm, and with moderate wind can be con- 
trolled to become hazy, hot, and calm. 
Contradictions are not possible—fog and strong 
wind, for example. Multiple control weather spells 
can be used only in succession. 

The material components for this spell are the 
priest’s religious symbol, incense, and prayer 
beads or similar prayer object. Obviously, this 
spell functions only in areas where there are ap- 
propriate climatic conditions. 

If Weather is a major sphere for the priest (as it 
is for druids), duration and area are doubled, and 
the caster can change the prevailing weather by 
two places (for example precipitation can be 
changed from partly cloudy to heavy sleet, tem- 
perature from cool to arctic, and wind from calm 
to strong). 

Notes: Common for druids (PHB). 


Wind 


CALM 
Dead calm 
Light wind 
Moderate wind 


PARTLY CLOUDY WARM 
Clear weather Hot 
Cloudy Cool 
Mist/Light rain 

/small hail COOL 
Sleet/Light snow Warm 
Cold 


CLOUDY COLD 
Partly cloudy Cool 
Deep clouds Arctic cold 
Fog 
Heavy rain/large hail 
Driving sleet/heavy snow 


MODERATE WIND 
Calm 
Strong wind 


STRONG WIND 
Moderate wind 
Gale 


GALE 
Strong wind 


Control Winds 


Control Winds 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Elemental Air, Weather 
Level: 5 
Range: 0 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 8 


Duration: 1 turn/level 
Area of Effect: 40-ft./level radius 
Saving Throw: None 


By means of a control winds spell, the caster is 
able to alter wind force in the area of effect. For 
every three levels of experience, the caster can in- 
crease or decrease wind force by one level of 
strength. Wind strengths are given on the table. 
Wind Force Miles Per Hour 
LightBreze mic i aaien 

Moderate Breeze ssb aey, 


Strong Breeze 19-31 
Gale 32-54 
)¢ Sipe: Evi a ER ttr 


Hurricane = 73-176 taafi 


Winds in excess of 19 miles per hour drive 
small flying creatures—those eagle-sized and 
under—from the skies, severely affect missile ac- 
curacy, and make sailing difficult. Winds in excess 
of 32 miles per hour drive even man-sized flying 
creatures from the skies and cause minor ship 
damage. Winds in excess of 55 miles per hour 
drive all flying creatures from the skies, uproot 
trees of small size, knock down wooden structures, 
tear off roofs, and endanger ships. Winds in excess 
of 73 miles per hour are of hurricane force. 

An “eye” of 40-foot radius, in which the wind 
is calm, exists around the caster. Note that while 
the spell can be used in underground places, the 
eye shrinks one foot for every foot of confinement, 
if the spell is cast in an area smaller than the area 
of effect. For example, if the area of effect is a 360 
foot radius, and the space only allows a 350 foot 
area, the eye shrinks by 10 feet to a 30-foot radius; 
a space under 320 feet in radius would eliminate 
the eye and subject the spellcaster to the effects of 
the wind. 

Once the spell is cast, the wind force increases 
or decreases by 3 miles per hour per round until 
the maximum or minimum speed is attained. The 
caster, with one round of complete concentration, 
can stabilize the wind at its current strength, or set 


it to increase or decrease. However, the rate of the 
change cannot be altered. The spell remains in 
force for one turn for each level of experience of 
the caster. When the spell is exhausted, the force of 
the wind wanes or waxes at the same rate, until it 
reaches the level it was at before the spell took 
effect. Another caster can use a control winds spell 
to counter the effects of a like spell up to the limits 
of his own ability. 
Notes: Common for druids (PHB). 


Converse — Shaman 
(Invocation) 
Sphere: Animal, Plant, Elemental (All) 


Level: 5 

Range: 15 yds. 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: | rd. 
Duration: 1 turn/level 
Area of Effect: Caster 
Saving Throw: None 


Converse allows a shaman to hold a brief conver- 
sation with the natural world. Instead of asking a 
single question of all within range, the shaman picks 
a single target (a tree, a bird, a stream, etc.) and asks a 
single question of the spirit that dwells within it. The 
thing then replies, and the shaman can continue to 
ask subsequent questions of the same or another 
thing within the range of the spell. A total of 2d6 
questions (rolled in secret by the DM) can be asked. 
The spirits will answer to the best of their abilities. 

The objects of which questions are asked must 
be natural, living things with spirits in them. Dead 
or artificial objects (like a felled tree or a sword) 
cannot be questioned. 

The spirits’ answers are imperceptible to any 
others present at the casting, and the same concen- 
tration and silence are required to hear the words 
of the natural world. When asking questions the 
shaman can sing (to the wind), make animal noises 
(to the animals), or sit in silence (asking the earth), 
as seems appropriate. 

Notes: Restricted to shamans, uncommon. 


Mo ee eee ee re 


Corpse Whisper 


eee Em A 


Converse with Sea Creatures 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Animal, Divination 


Level: 3 

Range: 0 

Components: V, M 

Casting Time: 3 

Duration: | rd./level 

Area of Effect: 10-yd. radius/level 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell allows the caster to communicate 
with any sea creature of Animal intelligence or 
greater. The caster can understand such creatures 
and respond in the correct tongue. Conversation 
with some or all of the sea creatures within the area 
of effect is possible, even if they are of different 
races and do not speak each other's languages. 

Like the 2nd-level priest spell, speak with ani- 
mals, this spell does not guarantee that the sea crea- 
tures will be friendly toward the caster; they are free 
to forgo speech and attack him if they wish. Nor 
does this spell allow the caster to breathe underwa- 
ter, Furthermore, conversation is still subject to any 
hearing limitations imposed by the environment. 


149 


The material component of this spell is a small 
trumpet made of shell (which is destroyed in the 
casting) and the caster’s holy symbol. 

Notes: Uncommon for aquatic or seagoing 
priests; otherwise, rare 


Corpse Whisper 


(Necromancy) 


Sphere: Necromantic 


Level: 3 

Range: 60 ft. 

Components: S, M 

Casting Time: 3 

Duration: Special, up to | day 
Area of Effect: 1 undead creature 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell enables the caster to transmit a mes- 
sage to an undead creature. The message forms 
silently in the mind of the corpse in the natural 
voice of the caster. The caster does not need to be 
within line of sight of the undead creature, if it is 
one he currently controls. The caster is not privy to 
the mind or thoughts of the undead creature. 

The undead recipient is forced to obey only if it 
is not a self-willed undead (zombies and skele- 
tons) and not under the current control of the 
caster. Self-willed undead can do as they please, 
but fear of their master may be enough to spur 
them into immediate obedience. 

The spell establishes a link with the undead 
creature that enables up to half as many one-round, 
one-sentence messages to be sent as the caster has 
levels, rounded down. For example, a 9th level 
caster could send four messages to an undead crea- 
ture that received this spell, each message requir- 
ing a single round to send and consisting of a 
single sentence. Even if no commands are sent, the 
spell wears off after a day. 

Although the creature must be within 40 feet of 
the necromancer when the spell is cast, after that 
the creature can travel up to a mile away and still 
receive commands’. As you might expect, the spell 
will not function if the caster and undead minion 
are in different domains and the borders of either 
domain (or any intervening domain) are closed. 

The material component of this spell is the 
tongue of a dead man. Casting this spell requires a 
Ravenloft powers check. 

Notes: Common for priests on the Demiplane 
of Dread; otherwise, known mostly by necro- 
mancer-priests. 


Corrupt 


Corrupt 
(Alteration, Necromancy) 
Sphere: Necromantic 


Level: 4 

Range: 5 yds,/level 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: | rd. 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell enables a priest to contaminate pure 
water or substances, create a weak spot or irregu- 
larity (handhold or visible mark) in a wall of solid 
stone or surface of armor plate, and otherwise 
modify substances harmfully. Magical potions af- 
fected by a corrupt spell are reduced in the healing 
they bestow by Id4 points; if no hit points are in- 
volved in their effect, their durations are reduced 
by 1d4 rounds. Holy water becomes merely water, 
but unholy water is doubled in efficacy (harmful 
effects). Normal drinking water remains drinkable, 
but it tastes tainted and does not cleanse things 
washed with it. Corrupted items have all their item 
saving throws against harm reduced by 3 points, 
unless they are magical. In addition, if an item is 
used as a weapon, the damage it inflicts is reduced 
by 2 points per attack for 1d3 turns. All magical 
functions and properties of enchanted items cease 
for 1d3 turns, though their own item saving throws 
are unaffected. 

The caster of this spell must choose a single 
nonliving item or body of liquid to be affected by 
the spell. The magic does not affect all of a solid 
item larger in volume than the caster’s body. In 
such cases, only a localized area is affected. For 
instance, a priest trying to contaminate a lake or 
large pool would succeed only in harming the 
water closest to the chosen area of effect that 
equals his body volume, not all the water). The 
corrupt spell creates a momentary flickering green 
radiance over the spot or item to be affected, but 
operates silently. 

If three corrupt spells are cast on a single non- 
magical item or on a specific spot in a large item 
(for instance, a place on a wall), the item must suc- 
ceed at an item saving throw vs. acid or 
shatter/collapse/fall away, causing a hole at that lo- 
cation. Minor breakage in large items (in other 
words, a hole or cavity reaching a few inches into a 
thick stone wall) can be expanded by casting addi- 
tional trios of corrupt spells. Thus, an imprisoned 


150 


priest of Myrkul could, over time, breach a cell 
wall or cause manacles to fail. 

Notes: Granted by the Myrkul, Lord of the 
Dead, of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Council Of Spirits — Shaman 
(Divination) 
Sphere: Summoning 


Level: 7 

Range: Special 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: | day 
Duration: 1 turn/level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


The casting shaman stakes out an area up to 100 
feet across, marking the boundaries with the skulls 
of animals, sacred fires, and posts engraved with 
depictions of the spirits. At dusk, the shaman sacri- 
fices fifty cattle (or their gp equivalent), and waits. 

A single group of spirits can be called to this 
council—all the tribe's heroes for example, or all 
the ancestors; or the spirits who are the villains of 
the tribe’s legends, or all the totem spirits. If the 
spirits have reason to distrust the shaman, they may 
refrain from attending, but usually all those called 
arrive within one turn after the spell is completed. 

Thereafter, the council is convened, the most 
respected spirit taking the lead in organizing the 
discussion. The spirits ask the shaman why he or 
she called them, and debate the issues put before 
them: Only important matters affecting the tribe's 
well-being, ancient evils, and epic quests are con- 
sidered worthy of a council, and the spirits may 
punish shamans who call them to resolve petty, 
routine, or personal problems. 

Once the council has begun, the shaman (as a 
mere mortal) is relegated to the sidelines, and is 
wise to be quiet unless the spirits (as his betters) 
ask for an opinion or information. The whole dis- 
cussion often has a dreamlike quality—voices 
echoing, mists swirling, space and time becoming 
confused—and when the duration expires, the 
whole council simply fades away, leaving the 
shaman alone. 

The material components of the spell are the 
markers that identify the spell’s area, which crum- 
ble when the spell expires. Although they are not 
valuable, it takes several days or more to assemble 
them, and the cooperation of other members of the 
tribe is usually required (groups of hunters stalk- 


ing rare animals whose skulls are needed, for ex- 
ample). The only other requirements for the spell 
are that there are no mortals besides the shaman 
present, and that the area chosen be on the tribe’s 
own territory. 

Notes: Restricted to shamans, uncommon. 


Courage 
A Ist-level spell of the sphere of War. See appendix 
in Vol. 3. 


Crawling Darkness 
(Invocation/Evocation) 
Sphere: Protection 


Level: 6 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: | rd. 
Duration: | rd/level 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell brings into being a shroud of dark, 
writhing tentacles around the caster, extending 3 
feet in all directions from the caster’s body. The 
caster can see, move, cast spells, and otherwise act 
normally (including engaging in hand-to-hand 
combat). Others can no longer see the caster’s real 
body, and are hampered by the semi-solid, thrash- 
ing tentacles. Thus, the caster cannot be identified 
(except by true seeing or other prying spells), 
gains an Armor Class bonus of +4, and also re- 
ceives a bonus of +2 on all attack rolls. 

The crawling darkness moves with the caster, 
and confers the following additional benefits: 
Feather fall whenever needed; water walk when- 
ever desired, and slay insect (any number or size, 
including monster insects). This last power oper- 
ates against all insects in contact with the shroud. 
It is effective against creeping doom, insect 
plague, and other magically summoned or con- 
trolled insects, and exhausts the spell—in other 
words, it slays all insects in contact with it and 
then vanishes (providing no protection against 
other insects that may have accompanied those it 
destroyed but that were outside its area of effect). 
The crawling darkness spell can be ended in- 
stantly at any time by the caster’s will. 

The material components of this spell are a 
strand of spider web, a pinch of soot or pitch, and a 
tentacle of any size from an octopus, cuttlefish, jel- 
lyfish, or other marine life form. 


151 


Notes: Granted by Shar, Mistress of the Night, 
of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. This spell is 
found only in a few exceptionally rare tomes. 


Create Air 
(Alteration) 
Reversible 
Sphere: Elemental Air 
Level: 1 
Range: 30 yds. 


Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 2 rds. 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: | creature/2 levels 
Saving Throw: None 


By means of this spell, a priest can generate a 
bubble of fresh, breathable air around a creature. 
This air drives out the stale air and restores it to the 
“fresh” state. It also replaces befouled air, includ- 
ing air that is poisoned or tainted by a cloudkill or 
stinking cloud spell. 

In cases of individuals adrift in space, this per- 
mits another check to determine the duration of the 
fresh air. Within a larger envelope of air (such as 
the deck of a spelljamming ship or the atmosphere 
of a planet), the freshened air will drift off, com- 
bining with the existing air. 

For every two levels over first, the priest can 
create sufficient air for an additional person. A 
3rd-level priest can create air for two man-sized 
creatures, a Sth-level priest sufficient air for five, 
and so on. Creating additional air around a single 
individual does not create a larger envelope; the 
excess air simply drifts off. The caster can refresh 
the air within his own personal air envelope and 
that of others within the range of the spell, without 
needing to touch those individuals. 

The reverse of this spell, destroy air, immedi- 
ately reduces the air around one creature to fouled 
(—2 penalty to attacks and ability checks). 

If the create air spell is used within a gravity 
field, inside otherwise hostile surroundings (such 
as inside a cloudkill or stinking cloud), it allows 
the recipient a single clean breath before the cre- 
ated air bubbles to the surface. 

The material component for the spell is a small, 
stoppered flask. 

Notes: Common for priests from a spelljam- 
ming culture; otherwise, very rare. 


[A note about air in space follows. ] 


Create Ancient Dead — Old Empire 


Create Ancient Dead — Old Empire 


(Necromancy) 
Sphere: Necromantic 


Level: 6 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: | turn 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 preserved corpse 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell defiles the corporeal body of the 
carefully preserved and sanctified dead and ani- 
mates the deceased corpse as a mummy, with all 
the abilities thereof, as specified in the Monstrous 
MANUAL tome. 

If the defiled corpse was the body of someone 
with a predilection toward evil or who did not live in 
accordance with the principles of maat, the corpse 
becomes a fully aware, free-willed mummy as its ba 
(the life force of the deceased, but not his or her per- 
sonality), driven to a crazed and insane state, reani- 
mates the corporeal body and the ka (the personality 
spirit of the deceased) flees its final home in the 
Outer Planes and returns to the corporeal body. This 
effect is permanent until the mummy is destroyed. 

If the defiled corpse was the body of someone 
true to the principles of maat, the corporeal body is 
temporarily possessed by the spirit of a divine 
minion of Set and is animated as a mummy under 
the control of the spelleaster for 1 turn per level of 
the caster. When the spell expires, the body is re- 
stored to the control of its ba and walks or crawls to 
its place of eternal rest (if possible—or as close as it 
can get) to collapse to the ground, lifeless again. 

The material components for this spell are the 
priest's holy symbol and scrap of the burial shroud 
of a free-willed mummy. 

Notes: Granted by the evil Mulhorandi god Set 
of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


152 


Create Atmosphere 
(Alteration) 
Reversible 
Sphere: Elemental Air 


Level: 7 

Range: 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 4 turns 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 cu. mi./level 
Saving Throw: Special 


This difficult spell creates not merely air, but a 
magically self-renewing atmosphere that survives 
for one standard (28-day) month per level of the 
caster. It lasts until exhausted or until countered by 
the reverse; dispel magic has no effect. 

The create atmosphere spell can be cast on an 
object of any size, and remains with it regardless 
of the object's gravity or state (for example, if a 
ship is destroyed, the spell remains centered on the 
largest chunk, or a random fragment, as the DM 
desires). This created atmosphere replenishes the 
atmosphere of another ship it encounters if their 
combined atmospheres are within the spell’s 
volume limit, at the rate of 1 ship-ton per turn (that 
is, the atmosphere of a 24-ton ship can be renewed 
completely in 1 day). This spell cannot be cast on a 
creature of any sort. 

This spell requires a small, stoppered flask and 
a drop of water. One hit point is permanently 
drained from the caster each and every time this 
spell is cast (a limited wish or wish can restore a hit 
point lost in this manner). 

The reverse, destroy atmosphere, does not de- 
stroy an existing atmosphere, but alters it from 
fresh to foul (or from foul to deadly). This alter- 
ation can quench flames or lessen fiery damage in 
some cases. Note that the reverse differs from the 
wizard's version, 

Notes: Common for priests from a spelljam- 
ming culture; otherwise, very rare. 


Create Campsite 


a eee 2 


Create Baneguard 
(Necromancy) 
Sphere: Necromantic 


Level: 6 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 9 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 skeletal body 
Saving Throw: None 


The casting of this spell transforms one inani- 
mate skeleton of size M or smaller into a 
Baneguard, a skeletal undead creature gifted with a 
degree of malicious intelligence. The Baneguard is 
capable of using its abilities the round following 
creation and needs no special commands to attack. 

The material components of this spell are the 
holy symbol of the priest and at least 20 drops of 
the blood of any sort of true dragon. 

Notes: Granted by the death god Bane of the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


153 


Baneguard: AC 7; MV 12; HD 4+4; THACO 
15; #AT 1; Dmg By weapon or 1d6; SA magic 
missile (1missile/3 rds. to 70 yds.); SD blink, 
half damage from S or P weapons, immune to 
charm, hold, sleep, and cold-based attacks, 
turned as wight; AL NE; Int Ave (8-10); SZ M 
(5'—6' tall); ML Steady (11-12); XP 975. 


Create Campsite 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 
Reversible 
Sphere: Travelers 


Level: 3 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 3 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 50-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: None 


With this spell, the caster generates a squadron of 
tiny invisible servants who create a campsite for the 
caster and his companions. The caster indicates the 
desired area for the campsite (an area of 50-foot 
radius or less) and the number of people the campsite 
is to accommodate, up to three per level of the caster. 

The servants clear the area of debris, set up 
tents and bedrolls, start a campfire, fetch water, 
and prepare a bland meal. The campsite is so skill- 
fully prepared that it blends with the surrounding 
terrain, reducing the chance that the camp might 
be noticed by 50%. Campfires, loud noises, and 
other activities can negate this. The entire process 
takes 4d4 rounds to complete. 

The servants make camp with the gear and 
equipment provided for them; otherwise, they im- 
provise with materials available in the immediate 
area (within 50 yards of the designated campsite). 
For instance, if the party has no tents or beds, the ser- 
vants will construct crude but comfortable beds of 
weeds and grass and temporary shelters of leaves 
and branches. If no materials are available, such as in 
the desert or similarly barren terrain, the servants 
will do their best to make the party as comfortable as 
possible within the environmental limitations. 

The servants cannot fight for the party, deliver 
messages, or take any other actions other than cre- 
ating the campsite. 

The material components are a piece of string, 
a bit of wood, and a drop of water. 


Create Crypt Servant 


b EEE 4 


The reverse, break camp, causes the invisible 
servants to strike a campsite (an area of 50-foot 
radius or less). The servants extinguish fires, dis- 
pose of debris, and pack gear for a number of 
people equal to three times the level of the caster. 
The entire process takes 4d4 rounds to complete. 
When completed, all traces of the campsite are 
eliminated. The material components are the same 
as those for create campsite. 

Notes: Common for priests with access to the 
sphere of Travelers (ToM). 


Create Crypt Servant 
(Necromantic) 
Reversible 
Sphere: Necromantic 


Level: 7 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: | turn 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: | corpse 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell animates a corpse as a crypt servant. 
The corpse must be in reasonably good condition, 
and many are prepared in advance of their master’s 
death. The spell must be cast in the tomb in which 
the creature is to serve. A crypt servant cares for its 
deceased master and all the rooms and possessions 
in the master’s tomb: cleaning and repairing, pol- 
ishing valuables, lighting candles, and guarding 
the tomb from intruders. 

A successful dispel magic ends the crypt ser- 
vant’s animation, while destroy crypt thing (the re- 
verse of create crypt thing) annihilates the crypt 
servant if it fails a saving throw vs. death magic. 

Notes: Very rare spell, found only in arabian 
settings. 


Range: Touch 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: Permanent 
Area of Effect: 1 corpse 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell enables the caster to cause a single 
dead body to animate and assume the status of a 
crypt thing. This spell can be cast only in the tomb 
or grave area the crypt thing is to protect; the spell 
requires that the caster touch the skull of the sub- 
until destroyed, Only one crypt thing can guard a 
given tomb. 

A successful dispel magic spell returns the 
crypt thing to its original unanimated state. 
Attempts to restore the crypt thing before this is 
done fail for any magic short of a wish. 

The reverse of this spell, destroy crypt thing, 
utterly annihilates any one such being as soon as it 
is touched by the caster. The crypt thing receives a 
saving throw vs. death magic to avoid destruction. 

Notes: Very rare spell, used only by evil 
priests. 


Create Death Tyrant — Beholder 


Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 3 Turns 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 dead beholder 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell imbues a dead beholder with energy 
from the Negative Material Plane, permanently trans- 
forming it into a death tyrant. In addition, the spell 
allows the priest to instruct the death tyrant as to how it 
will receive orders in the future. The death tyrant will 
obey the caster for 1d6 rounds plus 1 round for every 
level of the caster. After that, the caster must use the 
control death tyrant spell in order to maintain control. 

Good-aligned priests suffer great punishment 
for using this spell (decided by the DM). 

The creation of a death tyrant requires an elab- 
orate ritual. The cost of the material components is 
about 3,000 gp. 

Notes: Restricted to elder orbs (common) and 
evil priests or 18 or better Intelligence (very rare). 


Create Direguard 
(Necromancy) 
Sphere: Necromantic 


Level: 7 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 skeletal body 
Saving Throw: None 


The casting of this spell transforms an inani- 
mate skeleton of size M or smaller into a dire- 
guard, gifted with a degree of malicious 
intelligence. Only one direguard can be created at 
a time using this spell. The direguard is capable of 
using its abilities the round following creation. and 
needs no special commands to attack. 

The material components are the holy symbol 
of the priest and at least 20 drops of the blood of 
any sort of true dragon. 

Notes: Granted by the evil death god Cyric of 
the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. The spell is jeal- 
ously guarded by the clergy of Cyric. 


155 


Dmg E or 1d6; SA magic 
nissile/ s.); SD detect in- 
D ’ n! or Pw A p ¢ i 


aaj} Teer res 


Create Food & Water 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Creation 


Level: 3 

Range: 10 yds. 
Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 1 tum 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 cu, ft/level 
Saving Throw: None 


When this spell is cast, the priest causes food 
and water to appear. The food thus created is highly 
nourishing if rather bland; each cubic foot of the 
material sustains three human-sized creatures or 
one horse-sized creature for a full day. The food 
decays and becomes inedible within 24 hours, al- 
though it can be restored for another 24 hours by 
casting a purify food and water spell upon it. The 
water created by this spell is the same as that cre- 
ated by the Ist-level priest spell create water, For 
each experience level the priest has attained, one 
cubic foot of food or water is created by the spell. 
For example, a 3rd-level priest could create two 
cubic feet of food and one cubic foot of water. 

Notes: Common for clerics (PHB). 


Create Holy Symbol 
See holy symbol. 


Create Ibrandlin 
(Abjuration) 
Sphere: Guardian 


Level: 6 

Range: Special 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 7 hrs. 

Duration: Permanent 

Area of Effect: 1 fire lizard egg 
Saving Throw: None 


Create Jungle Minions r 


Ibrandlin are created by magically altering fire 
lizard eggs to create the trainable monster lizards. 
Those who cast this spell must prepare themselves 
with a tenday of prayer and fasting before attempt- 
ing the casting. The spellcaster must then coat a 
fertilized, living fire lizard egg with a mixture of 
holy oil and diamond dust and perform a seven- 
hour ritual prayer dance around the egg. Each hour 
of the dance, the spellcaster must make a 
Constitution check. Failure of any Constitution 
check results in the complete failure of the spell. 
The spell can be attempted once again one tenday 
later on the same egg with new material compo- 
nents. A second failure kills the unhatched fire 
lizard in the egg, rendering it useless. When create 
ibrandlin is successfully cast, the material compo- 
nents are absorbed into the egg and an untrained 
hatchling ibrandlin emerges from the egg one 
tenday later. 

This spell was developed centuries ago by 
priests of Ibrandul to facilitate the creation of fear- 
some guardians for the temple of Ibrandul located 
in the Underdark. Since the Time of Troubles, 
ibrandlin have begun to breed true. As a result, this 
spell is likely to lapse into relative disuse, given Create Jungle Minions 
the expense of the spell components. (Alteration) 

The material components of this spell are Sphere: Animal 
Se ean e a 


Level: 5 
pea Granted by Ibrandul, the Skulking God, Range: 5 yds./level 
of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: Permanent 


Area of Effect: 1 creature/3 levels 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell permanently changes common 
crocodiles or alligators (one for every three expe- 
rience levels of the caster) into lesser segarrans. 
Unlike conjure jungle minions, this spell can also 
transform humans, demihumans. and, humanoid 
creatures. Those to be affected by this spell need 
only be within sight and range of the caster. 
Willing creatures are transformed; unwilling 
creatures receive a saving throw vs. spell to avoid 
the effect. Those who change must make a suc- 
cessful system shock roll to survive the transfor- 
mation. Minions attack as commanded by the 
priest. The spell is permanent, unless reversed by 
a successful dispel magic. 

Lesser segarrans are compelled to devour the 
flesh of enemies who fall in combat, a process 
taking 1-3 rounds, depending upon the victim's 


ee ee 


size. During this time, the segarran cannot attack 
or follow the caster’s commands. If the segarrans 
do not kill and devour at least one victim slain in 
the encounter, then the caster must make a saving 
throw vs. spell or be affected by a bestow curse as 
a sign of Ragarra’s displeasure. 

The material components are the powdered 
claws of an alligator or crocodile, which are scat- 
tered in the direction of the recipients at the time 
of casting. 

Notes: Granted by Ragarra, a jungle god found 
in arabian settings. 


Segarran, Lesser: AC 1; MV 9; HD 
5+5;THACO 16; #AT 1; Dmg weapon +2 or 2d8 
(bite); SA Fights/saves as Sth-level fighter; MR 
10%; AL CE; Int Ave (8-10); SZ M (6' tall); ML 
Fearless (20); XP 1,400. 


Create Machine* — Dwarf 


Create Machine* — Dwarf 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 
Sphere: Creation 


Level: 6 

Range: 20 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 hr. 
Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell is used to finish the process of fabri- 
cating magical machines and constructs, such as 
magical automatons. With this spell, dwarven 
priests can create a variety useful devices, such as 
mining machines, pumps, elevators, water wheels, 
load-carrying carts, and similar machines. 

The machine must be made from the finest ma- 
terials. Then, a circle of dwarven priests linked by 
combine spells must cast commune, prayer, ani- 
mate object, and finally, create machine, upon the 
device. A period of prayer, fasting, and meditation 
must is observed until the machine is enchanted, 
just as with any other magical items fabricated by 
priests (see the DMG). 

The machine is nonintelligent and, when cre- 
ated, can be programmed to follow up to 10 simple 
orders (such machines are typically controlled by 
manual controls rather than by verbal commands). 

A device created by this spell functions without 
fail or error for centuries, never requiring major repair 
other than common-sense maintenance unless it has 
been severely damaged. Armor Class and hit point 
values for the machine are assigned by the DM. These 
vary with function and the materials used to construct 
the device: Armor Class 4 to Armor Class 1 and 
30-50 hit points are typical. The cost of a machine is 
usually between 1,000 and 4,000 gp per hit point. 

The power and range of abilities of any machine 
must be strictly regulated by the DM, just as with 
any other magical item created for the campaign. A 
machines comparable in power to an artifact can be 
created only by NPCs of legendary status. No ma- 
chine with obvious military function can be made 
with this spell. An enchanted waterwheel that runs 
forever or an underground mining machine can be 
created, but not a magical siege machine or ar- 
mored attack vehicle, Such powerful military ma- 
chines come under the heading of artifacts, and so 
are usually beyond this spell’s power and effects. 

Notes: Very rare spell, granted by some dwar- 
ven gods. (Updated from DraGon Magazine.) 


4 157 a 


Create Mask — Shaman 


Create Mask — Shaman 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
Sphere: Summoning 


Level: 3 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: | wk. 
Duration: Permanent 
Area of Effect: 1 Object 
Saving Throw: None 


With this spell, a shaman creates a mask to be 
used when dealing with a specific spirit or spirit 
type. Examples would include masks designed to 
be used for a specific spirit, the ancestors of a 
single tribe, or all guardian spirits. Generally, a 
mask affects either a single powerful spirit (6 or 
more Hit Dice), or a group of less notable spirits. 

The caster must create the mask without the aid 
of others (and thus must have a proficiency in car- 
pentry, pottery, or a similar field) and casts the 
spell as work progresses. The finished product 
must resemble the spirit it is designed for use with 
(at least symbolically), and is generally decorated 
with rare feathers, shells, bones, and similar mate- 
rials. At the DM's discretion, a mask may require 
specific, rare decorations that may cost more, or 
even require the shaman to undertake a quest. 

When worn, the mask provides a —1 bonus to 
most rolls made by a shaman while interacting 
with the spirit or spirits for which the mask was 
designed. That means a +! bonus for shamanic rit- 
uals, Charisma checks when using persuasion or 
guile, etc. It does not affect saving throws against 
powers wielded by the spirit. 

The mask can only depict a spirit of the same 
alignment as the spirit that granted the shaman this 
spell. For example, if the casting shaman gained 
the spell from a lawful neutral spirit, he or she 
could only create masks designed to affect lawful 
neutral spirits. 

Furthermore, the spirits inevitably hold 
shamans responsible if the masks that they create 
are misused, Thus, most shamans create them only 
for their own use or the use of their tribe, and 
guard them well. 

The material components are those items incor- 
porated into the finished mask. These materials 
cost the creator at least 50 gp. 

Notes: Taught to shamans by specific spirits. 


158 


Create Minor Helm 
(Enchantment/Charm ) 
Sphere: Creation 
Level: 5 
Range: 10 yds. 


Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 turn/level 
Duration: 1 wk./level 
Area of Effect: 1 item 
Saving Throw: None 


By casting this spell, the priest can transform a 
normal chair or seat into a minor spelljammer 
helm suitable for powering a ship through space. 
This spell does not replace the need for a perma- 
nent magical helm onboard, and is used primarily 
as a back-up system or in emergency situations. 
Casting this spell ages the caster one year, 

The minor helm can power a ship of no more 
than twice the caster’s level in tonnage; a 20th-level 
priest can therefore create a helm capable of pow- 
ering a 40-ton ship. In operation, a minor helm cre- 
ated in such a fashion is identical to a regular, 
permanent spelljammer helm, with one exception. 
If a helm created by this spell is successfully dis- 
pelled, it disappears and must be created anew. 

The spell requires a chair, stool, or other seat 
suitable for use as a helm. 

Notes: Uncommon for priests from a spelljam- 
ming culture; otherwise, very rare. 


Create Mirage 
(Illusion) 
Reversible 
Sphere: Elemental Sun 
Level: 2 


wie 


Range: 60 yds. + 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: Concentration 

Area of Effect: Cube, 10-ft./level 
Saving Throw: Special 


Under the heat of the sun, a priest can cause an il- 
lusory image exactly like the |st-level wizard spell 
phantasmal force. The spell can be cast only in bright 
sunlight. It creates the illusion of any object, creature, 
or force within the boundaries of the spell’s area of 
effect. This is a cube, 10 feet on a side per level of the 
caster, Thus, a 3rd-level priest can create a mirage in 
a 30-foot by 30-foot area with a height of 30 feet as 


Create Sanctuary 


> ene 4 


well. The illusion is visual; the spell does not create 
sound, smell, or temperature. The mirage instantly 
disappears if touched, or if the caster ceases concen- 
tration. The mirage can be moved by the caster 
within the area of effect. 

The reverse, reveal mirage, reveals things as they 
really are, negating natural or magical mirages. 

Notes: Uncommon for priests of the DARK SUN 


setting; otherwise, very rare. 
Create Oasis 
Create Sanctuary 
(Abjuration) 
Sphere: Animal 


Athasian Dragon King magic; 
psionic component renders this 
8th level spell uncastable by 
priests. 


Level: 4 

Range: 100 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: | turn 
Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 

A shaman who casts this spell designates an 
area of up to 100 square yards to become a per- 
sonal sanctuary. 

The spell is cast by sacrificing a small, normal 
animal and muttering the correct invocation, (The 
ceremony requires a single shamanic ritual profi- 
ciency check.) Every animal of the species sacri- 
ficed, within one mile of the caster, is then drawn to 
the site. They are thenceforth bound to the shaman, 
recognizing the shaman as their leader. Within one 
mile of the site, these creatures gain a higher-than 
normal intelligence (+1 Intelligence to their normal 
scores), though their natures remain unaltered 
(mice are timid, cats are curious, and so on). 
Offspring of such animals are similarly bound to 
the caster and endowed with these faculties. 

The shaman gains the ability to communicate 
with the creatures, but only while within the sanctu- 
ary. He or she can understand their grunts, squeaks, 
etc., and they can understand his human speech. 

Each of the creatures can act as a guard for the 
sanctuary, Or a spy for the shaman (see animal 
spy), with certain limitations: Creatures with 
animal intelligence cannot convey details of a situ- 
ation effectively. For example, two hundred heay- 


159 


ily armored soldiers might be reported as “lots of 
people, making clanking sounds.” Further, such 
creatures cannot understand human conversation 
or recognize social interaction, Nonetheless, these 
animals can serve as an early warning system for 
the shaman. 

The animals are not made suicidally or slav- 
ishly loyal by this spell, but merely see the shaman 
as their leader—a rank that may confer responsibil- 
ities as well as privileges: A pack of dogs, for ex- 
ample, might expect their pack leader to organize 
their hunting and the division of the kills, and 
might desert a leader who fails in these duties. 

The spell’s duration is effectively permanent, 
but the sanctuary is destroyed if the shaman recasts 
the spell in a second location. Each shaman can 
have only one sanctuary. The sanctuary also fades 
upon the caster’s death, unless the shaman chooses 
to inhabit it as a ghost. Any strong supernatural 
presence might also dispel the sanctuary (such as 
the entrance of a powerful extraplanar being, or 
sprinkling the area with copious quantities of holy 
or unholy water), 

Typical spiritualist shaman sanctuaries include 
sewers and cellars (where hundreds of rats may 
breed), graveyards (often accompanied by a pack of 
dogs), or ruined towers (housing bats, crows, or cats). 

Casting this spell requires a successful Shamanic 
Ritual check, as a sacrifice is made as part of the 
casting (this is the material component). The sacri- 
fice is received by the totem spirit of the animals 
who are to make up the sanctuary’s guardians. 
Shamans who maltreat their animals may have to 
answer to the totem spirit of their kind. 

Notes: Restricted to shamans, uncommon. 


Create Shrine r 


Create Shrine 


A 


(Invocation) 
Sphere: Elemental (All) 


Level: 7 

Range: Special 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 3 mo. 
Duration; Permanent 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: NA 


An elemental priest of Athas who finds a power 
conjunction will often begin the magical process 
of turning it into an elemental shrine. The entire 
process takes about 3 months and requires a sub- 
stantial investment of time and energy. 

The first requirement of the spell is to find a 
natural area where the priest’s patron element is 
strong. 

Shrines of rain must be in special places where 
natural rainfall is common. Sun priests may build 
their shrines on high mountains. Shrines to the 
lords of fire require more effort. First, the priest 
must create an eternal flame. Atop this fire, the 
priest must place an item of great value to himself. 
When the blaze finally dies to the size of a camp- 
fire, the priest begins the create shrine spell, and 
the flame burns forever. The item is sacrificed to 
the lords of fire and destroyed in the conflagration. 

Once the area has been prepared and any 
threats removed from it, the priest sits and medi- 
tates on the nature of his element. This continues 
for at least eight hours every day for the next three 
months. Any time missed negates the spell, and the 
priest must begin again from scratch. 

When three months have passed, the shrine 
grants the caster a number of special, temporary 
hit points, equal to 12 times the caster’s level. 
These are good only while the priest is actually at 
the shrine, and can be used only to absorb damage 
from defiling magic. 

Also, while on the grounds of the shrine, the 
priest can exercise his ability to ignore the ele- 
ments an unlimited number of times per day. The 
power continues if the priest leaves the shrine, but 
then it expires normally. This counts as a use for 
that day, so the priest can only exploit this ability 
again by returning to the shrine. 

There is no limit to the number of priests who 
can benefit from being at a shrine, and none can be 
affected by spells of that element while there. 

The priest is under no obligation to remain at 


the shrine after it is created, but many do, insuring 
its protection. 

Notes: Uncommon for elemental priests in the 
Dark SUN setting; virtually unknown elsewhere, 


Create Smoke 


Sphere: Elemental Air, Elemental Fire 
Range: 10 yds. + 10 yds/ 
level 
Components: V, M 
Casting Time: 6 
Duration; 4 rds. 
Area of Effect: 90-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: Special 


By igniting even a tiny spark of flame, the 
priest creates a dense plume of smoke that ob- 
scures vision in 90-foot radius and makes breath- 
ing in the area difficult. Any air-breathing creature 
within the cloud must make a saving throw vs. 
death magic. Failure means the creature can only 
retreat from the cloud, coughing and rubbing its 
eyes. Such creatures have a —4 penalty to their 
attack rolls for 4 rounds after they leave the cloud. 
Those who make their saving throws can remain in 
the cloud, but fight at a —4 penalty while there. 
Those who make the saving throw and leave the 
cloud suffer no further ill effects. The smoke cloud 
lasts for 4 rounds and then dissipates. Strong 
winds will reduce the duration by half and gale 
force winds dissipate the smoke immediately, 

The reverse of the spell, dissipate smoke, clears 
smoke from the area for the duration of the spell. It 
affects only smoke, not mists, fog, vapors, or other 
visible gases. 

Notes: Uncommon for priests of the DARK SUN 
setting. 


Create Spiritknife —Shaman 
(Necromancy) 
Sphere: Summoning 


Area of Effect: 1 weapon 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


60 


Create Thassaloss 


A spiritknife is created by binding a spirit 
within range—any spirit, free or bound—into a 
weapon made of a natural material. The purpose of 
such weapons is to cause damage to spirits on the 
Prime Material Plane. 

The spell generally only works on spirits with 1 
Hit Die. A spirit that does not wish to be bound is al- 
lowed a saving throw vs. spell to avoid the effect. 
More powerful spirits can be bound with their own 
consent, and usually demand assurances that they 
are to be freed after a certain period of time. 

Bound spirits retain full use and control of all 
powers they had before bound (it can attack the 
knife'’s creator or wielder if it wishes, even if 
bound); it is wise to use a compliant or harmless 
spirit. Many shamans prefer to take only willing 
spirits for these knives, and may rescue dying spir- 
its from trees ravaged by fire, or streams drying in 
a drought, for use in these weapons. 

Any spirit hit by a spiritknife (normal attack 
roll, with adjustments for invisibility applied as 
normal) takes 2d4 points of damage for each Hit 
Die of the spirit bound within the weapon. Spirits 
currently possessing objects or people, and spirits 
in the spirit world, are invulnerable to this damage 
(although the base damage of the weapon will still 
be inflicted on the vessel, if appropriate). 

Spiritknives must be slashing weapons (usually 
knives or daggers). The material from which a 
spiritknife is made cannot have been contami- 
nated, purified or altered, though the maker may 
change the shape of the material. Thus, metals (ex- 
tracted from ores) cannot be used, but stone, bone, 
and wood are acceptable. Most spiritknives are 
made from flint or wood, though obsidian, marble 
and other substances are usable. 

The material component for this spell is the 
weapon itself, which is not destroyed on casting. 

Notes: Restricted to shamans, uncommon. 


Create Spring 
(Alteration) 
Reversible 
Sphere: Elemental Water 
Level: 2 
Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: Permanent 
Area of Effect: Special 


Saving Throw: None 


This spell causes a spring of fresh water to 
bubble forth at the shukenja’s command. The 
spring can appear only from natural rock or earth, 
never from creatures, plants, or man-made con- 
structions. The spring puts forth one gallon of 
water per level per turn. The water is fresh, clear, 
and cool. 

The reverse of this spell, dry spring, causes any 
natural or created spring to lessen its flow by the 
same amount. 

The material component for this spell is a 
bamboo cane. 

Notes: Common for priests from an oriental 
setting; otherwise, very rare. 


This spell enables a priest of luz to meld a basic 
matrix of magic into a skeletal form, for the specific 
purpose of animating a thassaloss and rendering the 
creation permanent. A skeleton with two extra sets 
of arm bones is so enchanted. For creation of a 
lesser thassaloss, the body fluids of a ghoul are 
mixed with the oil and resin instead. If no additional 
wizard spells are cast into the thassaloss within 24 
hours of the casting of the create thassaloss spell, 
the creature becomes simply an animated skeleton 
with 1 Hit Die and an Armor Class of 2. 

A priest who wishes to create a greater thassa- 
loss must also mix into the bones a vial of wraith 


A 161 a 


Create Treant 


dust together with the oils and resins. 
Notes: Granted by luz the Evil of the WORLD 
or GREYHAWK setting. 


Thassaloss, Lesser: AC 2 (base); MV 6; HD 
6; THACO 15; #AT 4; Dmg 1d6+1 each; SA 
gaze (paralyzation,10 yd. range, for 2d8 rds.); 
SD Immune to illusions, mind-affecting spells, 
poison, paralyzation, hold, and sleep, vorpal at- 
tacks only eliminate gaze, half damage from 
edged weapons other than hewing weapons such 
as axes, half damage from cold; MR 5%; AL N; 
Int Non- (0); SZ M (6' tall); ML Fearless 
(19-20), XP 2,000. 

Thassaloss, Greater: AC 0 (base); MV 9; 
HD 10+20; THACO 9; #AT 4; Dmg 1d8+4 each; 
SA gaze (feeblemind, 10 yd. range, for 2410 
rds.); SD Immune to illusions, mind-affecting 
spells, poison, paralyzation, hold, and sleep, 
vorpal attack reduces Int to 0 and loses gaze, 
half damage from edged weapons other than 
hewing weapons such as axes, half damage from 
cold; MR 25%; AL NE; Int Ave (8); SZ M (7' 
tall); ML Fearless (19-20); XP 9,000. 


i E] 


ont ig N Noa 


‘aL 


S 1 enue 


162 


Creating a Thassaloss 

To create a lesser thassaloss, a wizard of at 
least 14th level must next cast the following 
spells into the prepared thassaloss matrix: para- 
lyzation, permanency, limited wish, To create a 
greater thassaloss, a wizard of at least 16th level 
must cast the following spells into the thassaloss 
matrix: feeblemind, geas, permanency, strength, 
limited wish, These spells must be cast within 24 
hours of the create thassaloss spell. 

While only a limited wish need be used, a 
full wish allows the following: A simple magical 
weapon can be dispersed into the matrix so that 
its lowest basic attack and damage bonuses 
become part of the thassaloss’ basic attack and 
damage rolls; any special ability is lost. 
Likewise, a magical shield can be used improve 
the base Armor Class. 


Create Treant 
(Alteration, Invocation/Evocation) 
Sphere: Plant 


Level: 7 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: | day/level 

Area of Effect: One twig, bough, shrub, 
or living tree 

Saving Throw: None 


This spell temporarily transforms the basic ma- 
terial into a treant that serves the caster with utmost 
loyalty until destroyed or the spell expires. When 
the spell ends, the treant dwindles to nothingness 
and is gone. The type of material component deter- 
mines the size of the created treant: Twigs produce 
7-HD treants, boughs create 8-HD treants, shrubs 
9- or 10-HD treants, and trees 11- or 12-HD tre- 
ants. Since the material component is consumed, 
priests of Mielikki use this spell sparingly. 

Notes: Granted by Mielikki, Lady of the 
Forest, of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting and the 
elven god Rillifane Rallathial, Most druids use 
changestaff. 


Create Water 


DEE a 


Create Tree of Life 
(Alteration, Enchantment) 
Sphere: Cosmos 
Range: 0 


Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 turn 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: 1 tree 
Saving Throw: None 


By means of this spell a priest of Athas can en- 
chant a living sapling to become a magical tree of 
life, a magical item of tremendous power. Any tree 
less than one year old will suffice; it cannot be cast 
on an older tree. The sapling must have already 
sprouted from the ground, though the priest can 
transplant such a sapling before casting the spell. 
The sapling grows to its full size in only one week, 
but has its full powers and capabilities immedi- 
ately after the spell is cast. 

The material component is a piece of copper 
wire formed in the shape of a tree. 

Notes: Usable only on Athas (the DARK SUN 
setting), where it is common. The basic DARK SUN 
setting has full details of the tree of life in the mag- 
ical item section. 


Create Undead Minion 


(Alteration, Necromancy) 
Sphere: Necromantic 


Level: 7 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 turn 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


The caster of this spell creates a form of 
undead. The type of undead created depends upon 
the level of the caster and the condition of the sub- 
ject. The spell can be cast on a living or a dead 
human, demihuman, or humanoid of small to man- 
size. The individual must have died within 24 
hours, and the body must be in good shape. Only a 
ghoul can be created from a dead subject. 

Living subjects become more powerful undead 
minions, transforming into a type of undead given 
on the table, depending on the casting priest's 
level. A caster can create any type of undead on the 


table, up to the level limit. Thus, a 18th-level priest 
can create a ghoul or a ghast as easily as a wraith. 
A undead creatures created by this spell does not 
retain character abilities. 


Priest Level Type of Undead 
14th Ghoul 
15th Ghast 
16th Ju-ju Zombie 
17th Wight 
18th Wraith 
19th Spectre 
20th Vampire 


The transformation into an undead creature 
takes the full turn of the casting time to be com- 
plete. A living subject receives a saving throw vs. 
death magic negate the spell. If the spell is inter- 
rupted or dispelled before the casting is complete, 
the subject is rendered unconscious for a turn and 
returns to normal at the end of that turn. The 
undead creature created is under the complete con- 
trol of the caster. If the controlling priest is later 
killed, the undead minion must make a successful 
saving throw vs. death magic or perish as well. 
Surviving undead become free-willed. 

The components of this spell are the holy 
symbol of the caster, dirt from a graveyard, and the 
fingernail of one of the forms of corporeal undead 
listed on the table above. 

Notes: Granted by death gods such as Bane 
and Cyric of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Create Water 
(Alteration) 
Reversible 
Sphere: Elemental Water 
Level: 1 
Range: 30 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 


Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: Up to 27 cu. ft. 
Saving Throw: None 


L 163 a 


Creature of Darkness 


When the priest casts a create water spell, up to 
four gallons of water are generated for every expe- 
rience level of the caster (for example, a 2nd-level 
priest creates up to 8 gallons of water, a 3rd-level 
priest up to 12 gallons, etc.). The water is clean 
and drinkable (it is just like rain water). The cre- 
ated water can be dispelled within a round of its 
creation, otherwise its magic fades, leaving normal 
water that can be used, spilled, evaporated, etc. 

The reverse of the spell, destroy water, obliter- 
ates without trace (no vapor, mist, fog, or steam) a 
like quantity of water. Water can be created or de- 
stroyed in an area as small as will actually contain 
the liquid, or in an area as large as 27 cubic feet (1 
cubic yard). 

The spell requires at least a drop of water to 
create, or a pinch of dust to destroy water. 

Note that water can neither be created nor de- 
stroyed within a creature. For reference purposes, 
water weighs about 8⁄2 pounds per gallon, and a 
cubic foot of water weighs approximately 64 
pounds. 

Notes: Common for clerics and druids (PHB). 


Creature of Darkness 
(Alteration, Ulusion/Phantasm) 
Sphere: Sun 


Level: 4 

Range: 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 7 
Duration: | rd./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell creates a mobile, upright, vaguely 
human-shaped, bipedal field of magical darkness. 
The shadow quenches magical light and continual 
light on contact without itself being affected. The 
priest can control it to a distance of 10 yards per 
caster level, float it at MV 12, and send it into areas 
where the caster cannot go. The caster then per- 
ceives the shadow creature’s surroundings dimly, 
as if seeing through eyes the creature does not in 
fact possess—this vision is not sufficient to read 
by, see expressions, or recognize the features of a 
being. This shadow creature cannot carry solid ob- 
jects or convey touch attacks, though rumors per- 
sist that the most powerful Sharran priests employ 
an improved version of this spell that can do both 
those things. The shadow creature can be used to 
lure, to warn (pointing to beings, objects, or even 


markings on a map), or to conceal. Living beings 
can attack or freely pass into, out of, and through a 
creature of darkness without dispelling it 

A living being walking within the creature of 
darkness is completely cloaked, concealing its 
identity; the magic expands as necessary. The 
cloaked being can see as if the gloom of the 
shadow creature did not exist. A caster within his 
or her own creature of darkness can its magic to 
levitate for up to four consecutive rounds or as a 
feather fall. Either use ends the spell. 

The material components are a bit of black or 
gray fur or down from any flying creature, a pinch 
of soot, and a strand of spider web. 

Notes: Granted by the Shar, Mistress of the 
Night, of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Range: 0 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: | rd. 
Duration: 4 rds./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


When the caster utters the spell of creeping 
doom, he calls forth a mass of from 500 to 1,000 
({1d6 + 4] X 100) venomous, biting and stinging 
arachnids, insects, and myriapods. This carpet-like 
mass swarms in an area 20 feet square. Upon com- 
mand from the caster, the swarm creeps forth at 10 
feet per round toward any prey within 80 yards, 
moving in the direction in which the caster com- 
mands. The creeping doom slays any creature sub- 
ject to normal attacks, as each of the small horrors 
inflicts 1 point of damage (each then dies after its 
attack), so that up to 1,000 points of damage can 
be inflicted on creatures within the path of the 
creeping doom. If the creeping doom goes more 
than 80 yards away from the summoner, it loses 50 
of its number for each 10 yards beyond 80 yards 
(e.g., at 100 yards, its number has shrunk by 100). 
There are a number of ways to thwart or destroy 
the creatures forming the swarm, The solutions are 
left to the imaginations of players and DMs. 

Notes: Common for druids (PHB). 


oe a ee 


Crown of Flame — Archon 


mn aa 


Crocodile Tears — Old Empire 
(Enchantment/Charm, Illusion) 
Sphere: Charm 


Level: 2 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 5 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 120-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell makes the priest appear weak, sick, in- 
jured, and emotionally distressed so as to engender a 
sympathetic response in anyone encountering the 
priest. It effectively disguises any unusual physical 
characteristics of the caster that might be taken to be 
menacing (fangs or claws, for example) and makes 
any drawn weapons or worn armor appear to be non- 
menacing objects or heavy, but tattered, clothing (such 
as making a sword appear to be a walking staff). While 
this spell is in effect, any creature of Low intelligence 
or greater (Intelligence 5+)—except a crocodile or 
werecrocodile—that enters the area of effect must 
make a successful saving throw vs. spell or immedi- 
ately move to the priest’s side at its full normal move- 
ment rate or faster to offer assistance. Weapons and 
shields are dropped in the haste to provide aid unless 
already sheathed or strapped on. Should the priest 
choose to attack as would-be benefactors approach, 
the latter are automatically surprised, and the priest has 
a +4 attack bonus during the round of surprise. 

This spell lasts for up to 1 hour per level of the 
priest. Any attack by the priest instantly ends the 
spell. Those who observe the priest cast the spell 
are also immune to its effects. 

The material component of this spell is a hand- 
ful of water splashed on the face. 

Notes: Granted by the Mulhorandi god Sebek, 
Lord of Crocodiles, of the FORGOTTEN REALMS 
setting. 


Crown of Brilliance — Archon 
(Invocation/Evocation) 
Sphere: Sun 


Level: 6 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 9 
Duration: | rd./2 levels 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


165 


This spell turns a piece of headgear into a blazing 
source of golden light as soon as the wearer engages 
in hand-to-hand combat. All opponents in hand-to- 
hand combat with the caster must make a successful 
saving throw vs. spell or be blinded for 1d4 rounds 
(-4 to attack rolls), If not blinded, the opponent suf- 
fers a -2 penalty to attack rolls against the wearer 
due to the dazzling brilliance of the headgear. 

Creatures with an aversion to sunlight or a 
penalty when fighting in bright light are affected 
more severely (drow, derro, duergar, goblins, 
many undead, etc.). Those within a 30-foot radius 
must save vs. spells or flee. Those who do not flee 
will suffer their usual penalty for fighting in bright 
light. Undead other than skeletons or zombies take 
an additional 1d6 points of damage each round 
they stay within the affected area. 

The spell must be cast on some piece of head- 
gear (hat, crown, helm, tiara, circlet, etc.), The 
headgear must be properly worn or the spell will 
not function. The spell effect is triggered as soon 
as the wearer strikes a blow in melee. The effect 
lasts one round for every two levels of the caster 
(round up). 

This spell was developed on Mount Celestia 
with the aid of the archons. It is frequently used by 
priests of good deities, and the archons are more 
than happy to share the spell with them. 

The material component is an opal worth at 
least 100 gp, carried on the caster’s person. It shat- 
ters upon the completion of the spell (if it is shat- 
tered prematurely, the spell ends). 

Notes: A planar priest spell, uncommon for 
good priests who traffic with archons; otherwise, 
very rare. 


Range: 0 

Components: V, M 
Casting Time: 8 
Duration: | turn/level 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


The crown of flame makes the caster a blaz- 
ingly hot beacon of the powers of good, burning 
all innately evil creatures within 10 feet for 2d6 
points of damage per round. This includes fiends, 
undead, evil spirits, and evil faeries, but not merely 


Crown of Glory — Archon 


Ere 4 


evil individuals. The crown of flame is part of the 
magic used when enchanting a helm of brilliance. 
The spell is often seen among the sword archons, 
who invoke it before going into battle. 

The material component is the priest’s holy 
symbol and a small circlet appropriate to the 
priest’s specific power (branches for a god of 
nature, iron for a war god, and so on). 

Notes: A planar priest spell, uncommon for 
good priests who traffic with archons; otherwise, 
very rare. 


Crown Of Glory — Archon 
(Invocation/Evocation) 
Sphere: Sun 


Level: 7 

Range: 0 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: | rd/level 
Area of Effect: Caster 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell temporarily bestows the aura of 
planar authority on the caster, inspiring awe in all 
lesser creatures with the priest's terrible perfection 
and righteousness. The aura so affects creatures 
with fewer than 6 Hit Dice that they cease what- 
ever they are doing and turn to face the caster. 
When the caster speaks, his or her words are 
treated as a suggestion spells and are telepathically 
understood by the listeners, even if the caster does 
not speak any language intelligible to the listening 
creatures. 

Creatures making a successful saving throw vs. 
spell are not awed by the caster and can continue 
their actions normally. Creatures with more than 6 
HD are immune to the effect of the spell. 

This spell was developed by the archons of 
Mount Celestia, but it more widely used now. 

The material component is an opal worth at 
least 200 gp, carried on the caster’s person. It shat- 
ters upon the completion of the spell (if it is shat- 
tered prematurely, the spell ends). 

Notes: A planar priest spell, uncommon for 
good priests who traffic with archons; otherwise, 
very rare. 


Crumble 


(Alteration) 
Sphere: Elemental Earth, Elemental Water 


hie 


Level: 5 

Range: 10 yds /level 
Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 8 

Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: 1 cu. ft.evel 
Saving Throw: None 


The crumble spell instantly reduces an inani- 
mate object’s water content to zero. Up to one 
cubic foot of clay, rock, soil, or other solid per 
level of the caster can be desiccated to the point 
that it loses cohesion, cracks, and crumbles. A 7th- 
level priest could affect 7 axes, or a stone of 7 
cubic feet or less. 

Nonliving organic materials such as hide, 
leather, bone, and wood split and crumble into dust 
when affected by this spell. Liquids disappear in- 
stantly and fruit-potions turn to withered husks. 
Permanent magical items receive a saving throw 
vs. spell equal to that of the original creator 
(assume 12th level if this is unknown). 

Metals, living organic material, and silicates 
such as glass are entirely unaffected. Mindless cor- 
poreal undead like zombies and skeletons take 1d6 
points of damage for every 3 levels of the caster. 

Notes: Uncommon for priests of the DARK SUN 
setting. 


Crush Of The Depths — Sahuagin 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Combat 


Level: 4 

Range: 20 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 6 

Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: 20-ft. cube 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


Crush of the depths momentarily increases the 
air or water pressure within its area of effect. 
Everything within the area experiences a pressure 
of 1,000 pounds per square inch (equivalent to that 
found at more than 2,000 feet beneath sea). All 
creatures in the area of effect are allowed a saving 
throw vs. spell. Creatures that fail the saving throw 
can’t perform any action more complex than 


a a ee eee 


Crypt Ward — Dwarf 


"\ gel 


normal movement or speech for 1d4 rounds. 
During this time, affected creatures suffer a -4 
penalty to all saving throws, and attack rolls made 
against them have a +4 bonus. Creatures unable to 
dive to a depth of 2,000 feet also suffer 2d4 points 
of damage if the saving throw is failed. This spell 
has no appreciable effects when cast at depths 
greater than 1, 500 feet. 
Notes: Common for sahuagin. 


Crushing Walls 
(Enchantment) 
Sphere: Wards 


Level: 6 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 turn 
Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell enables the caster to enchant a floor, 
ceiling, or single wall of a room to crush intruders. 
The enchanted surface can be no larger than a 
square whose sides equal the caster’s level times 2 
feet (a 13th-level priest could affect a 26-foot x 
26-foot surface). 

The spell activates 1d4 rounds after any crea- 
ture other than the caster enters the room. The in- 
truder must be larger than a normal rat (larger than 
one-half cubic foot or weighing more than three 
pounds). When activated, the enchanted surface 
moves toward the opposite surface at a rate of 3 
feet per round. Unless the spell is canceled by the 
caster, the enchanted surface continues to move 
until one of the following events occurs: 

e A creature with sufficient strength (minimum 
score of 19) stops the enchanted surface from 
moving by succeeding a Strength check. Such a 
creature suffers no damage from the enchanted 
surface. If the creature prevents the enchanted 
surface from moving for three consecutive 
rounds, the wall returns to its original position 
and the spell is negated. If multiple creatures try 
to stop the wall, the highest Strength score is 
used as a base score; one point is added for each 
creature assisting. Thus, a creature with 16 
Strength assisted by three creatures could try to 
stop the wall. 

e A strong or heavy object made of stone, wood, or 
metal is placed in the path of the wall. If the item 
survives a saving throw vs. crushing blow, the 


167 


object successfully braces the wall for a round. If 
the object holds for three consecutive rounds, the 
surface returns to its original position and the 
spell ends. The DM should use discretion in de- 
termining which types of objects can brace the 
wall. 

e A dispel magic or a similar spell effect is used to 
negate the crushing wall spell. 


If the wall is not stopped, creatures can avoid 
being crushed by using a potion of diminution, 
potion of gaseous form, or similar devices or spells. 
The crushing wall almost never touches the oppo- 
site wall; it is usually stopped by debris. A gap of 
two inches or more between the walls is common. 

If the wall is not stopped, it causes crushing 
damage to everyone in the room. All creatures 
must make a saving throw ys. death. Those who 
fail are crushed to death. Those who save success- 
fully suffer 5d10 points of damage. When the wall 
can move no farther, it returns to its original posi- 
tion and the spell ends. 

The material components are a l-inch iron 
cube and a walnut shell. 

Notes: Common for priests with major access 
to the sphere of Wards (ToM). 


Crypt Ward — Dwarf 
(Abjuration) 
Reversible 
Sphere: Wards 


Level: 4 

Range: Special 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 hr. 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 100 sq. ft. 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell is cast over a dwarven tomb or crypt. 
If the tomb is larger than the spell’s area of effect, 
additional castings can ensure that the entire crypt 
complex benefits from the spell. Otherwise, it is 
effective only within its 100-square-foot area. 

Once the crypt ward is in place it causes the 
dwarven remains interred therein to animate tem- 
porarily in order to protect the tomb from grave 
robbers. When an intruder enters the spell’s area of 
effect, the dwarven bones contained therein rise 
and attack. The bones attack as fighters equal to 
one-third of the caster’s level at the time the crypt 


Crystallize 
h ee 2 


ward was set up (fractions dropped) and possess 5 
hit points per one-third level of the caster. Thus, a 
crypt ward cast by a 12th-level priest produces 
4th-level bones that possess 20 hit points each. The 
bones are not undead creatures; the effect is simi- 
lar to animated weapons. The dwarven bones do 
not animate and attack if the intruders are other 
dwarves, so long as the visitors do not attempt to 
plunder the tomb. Other races will be attacked if 
not accompanied by a dwarf. 

In any case, the dwarven bones animated by this 
spell cannot leave the area of effect. If intruders flee 
that area, the dwarven bones return to their resting 
places until the next intrusion. If the animated 
dwarves are slain, the remains have been destroyed. 

Dispel magic cannot negate a crypt ward, but a 
limited wish, wish, or remove crypt ward can. The 
destruction of all the dwarven bones in the tomb 
complex also negates the spell. 

The reverse of this spell remove crypt ward, en- 
ables the caster to negate a crypt ward. In most 
dwarven enclaves, remove crypt ward is reserved 
for those rare times when dwarven remains must 
be transported to a new site. A priest attempting to 
remove the crypt ward must be of equal or greater 
level than the caster who set the spell in place. 

This spell is available to priests of all dwarven 
religions, but is typically reserved for the priests of 
Dumathoin, who are generally regarded as the 
keepers of the dead. It is said that the dwarven 
priests of old were far stronger than those of today, 
so it is likely that, in truly ancient dwarven strong- 
holds, there are crypt wards that cannot be re- 
moved by modern priests. 

The material components for both versions of 
this spell are the casters holy symbol and the ritual 
sacrifice of 10,000 gp worth of precious metals 
and minerals. 

Notes: Restricted to dwarven priests; typically 
granted by Dumathoin. 


Crystallize 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Elemental Water 


Level: 2 

Range: 30 yds. 
Components; V, S 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: 1 cu. ft./level 
Saving Throw: None 


whe 


This spell turns | cubic foot of water per level of 
the caster into ice, or forms a |-inch thick layer of ice 
over an existing pool of water. Many of the people and 
creatures of Athas have never seen ice, and may con- 
sider it a treasure, even if told it will last only for a 
short time. Of course, the priest doesn’t have to tell 
them the ice will melt. Anyone walking on a patch of 
ice must make a successful saving throw vs. paralyza- 
tion to remain standing. If failed, the individual falls 
and spends the rest of the round trying to stand up. 

Notes: Uncommon for priests of the DARK SUN 
setting. 


Crystallomancy — Elf 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Divination 


Level: 5 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: | gemstone 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell causes a clear or translucent crys- 
talline gemstone to serve as a scrying device. The 
spell does not function unless the priest is in good 
standing with Corellon Larethian. The gemstone 
becomes similar to a crystal ball. For every 1,000 
gp value of the gemstone, the priest can scry for 
one round, up to a maximum of | hour. 

For every three levels of the priest about 7th, it 
is possible to cast a single divination spell of 4th 
level or less through the gemstone into the area 
under observation (thus, one at 10th, two at 13th, 
three at 16th, etc.). Only detection spells, such as 
detect magic and detect evil/good, can be so cast, 
as adjudicated by the DM. 

The spell requires the priest’s holy symbol and 
a crystalline gemstone, which must be of at least 
1,000 gp value. Neither is consumed in the casting 
of this spell. 

Notes: Granted by the elven god Corellon 
Larethian. 


Cure Blindness 
A 3rd-level shukenja spell, replaced with cure 
blindness or deafness. 


sana, mai. 


Cure Disease 


N, 


Cure Blindness or Deafness 
(Abjuration) 
Reversible 
Sphere: Healing, Necromantic 


Level: 3 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: Special 


By touching the creature afflicted, the priest 
employing the spell can permanently cure some 
forms of blindness or deafness. This spell does not 
restore or repair visual or auditory organs dam- 
aged by injury or disease. 

Its reverse, cause blindness or deafness, re- 
quires a successful touch (successful attack roll) 
on the creature, If the creature rolls a successful 
saving throw, the effect is negated. If the saving 
throw is failed, a non-damaging magical blindness 
or deafness results. 

A deafened creature suffers a —1 penalty to sur- 
prise rolls, a +1 penalty to its initiative rolls, a 20% 
chance of spell failure for spells with verbal com- 
ponents, and can react only to what it can see or 
feel. A blinded creature suffers a —4 penalty to its 
attack rolls, a +4 penalty to its Armor Class, and a 
+2 penalty to its initiative rolis. 

Notes: Common for clerics and druids (PHB). 


Cure Critical Wounds 
(Necromancy) 
Reversible 
Sphere: Healing 


Level: 5 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 8 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


The cure critical wounds spell is a very potent 
version of the cure light wounds spell. The priest 
lays his hand upon a creature and heals 3d8+3 
points of damage from wounds or other damage. 
The spell does not affect creatures without corpo- 
real bodies, those of extraplanar origin, or those 


not living, 


169 


The reversed spell, cause critical wounds, op- 
erates in the same fashion as other cause wounds 
spells, requiring a successful touch to inflict the 
3d8+3 points of damage. Caused wounds heal as 
do wounds of other sorts. 

Notes: Common for clerics (PHB). 


Cure Disease 
(Abjuration) 


Level: 3 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell enables the caster to cure most dis- 
eases by placing his hand upon the diseased crea- 
ture. The affliction rapidly disappears thereafter, 
making the cured creature whole and well in from 
one turn to 10 days, depending on the type of dis- 
ease and the state of its advancement when the cure 
took place. (The DM adjudicates these conditions.) 
The spell is also effective against parasitic mon- 
sters such as green slime, rot grubs, and others, 
When cast by a priest of at least 12th level, this 
spell cures lycanthropy if cast within three days of 
the infection. The spell does not prevent reoccur- 
rence of a disease if the recipient is again exposed. 

The reverse of the spell is cause disease. To be ef- 
the creature must fail a saving throw vs. spell. The 
severity of the disease is decided by the priest (debil- 
itating or fatal). The exact details of the disease are 
decided by the DM, but the following are typical: 

e Debilitating: The disease takes effect in 1d6 
turns, after which the creature loses 1 point of 
Strength per hour until his Strength is reduced to 
2 or less, at which time the recipient is weak and 
virtually helpless. If a creature has no Strength 
rating, it loses 10% of its hit points per Strength 
loss, down to 10% of its original hit points. If the 
disease also affects hit points, use the more 
severe penalty. Recovery requires a period of 
1d3 weeks. 

e Fatal: This wasting disease is effective immedi- 
ately. Infected creatures receive no benefit from 
cure wound spells while the disease is in effect; 
wounds heal at only 10% of the natural rate. The 


~ Cure Insanity 


disease proves fatal within 1d6 months and can 
be cured only by magical means. Each month the 
disease progresses, the creature loses 2 points of 
Charisma, permanently. 
The inflicted disease can be cured by the cure 
disease spell. Lycanthropy cannot be caused. 
Notes: Common for clerics and druids (PHB). 


Cure Insanity 
(Necromancy) 
Reversible 


Sphere; Necromantic 


Level: 5 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect; Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


wai Ae Se ee Te m Se aH 


The cure insanity spell, if administered while the 
patient is exhibiting symptoms of the affliction, im- 
spell can heal a conscious victim of the effects of 
hallucinatory spores and repair psychic trauma, such 
as that resulting from a mindwipe or other psionic 
assault. It counters the effects of spells such as con- 
fusion, chaos, contact other plane, feeblemind, 
symbol of insanity, prismatic spray, prismatic wall, 
and prismatic sphere and such magical items as an 
elixir of madness or a scarab of insanity. However, 
the spell does not counter aberrant behavior caused 


ity may temporarily calm the demented behavior of 
certain extraplanar creatures such as slaad. 

The reverse, cause insanity, drives insane a victim 
who fails a saving throw vs. spell. The DM can con- 
sult the table or choose another form of insanity. For 
example, an exaggerated fear of dying (requiring the 
creature to make a saving throw vs. paralyzation to 
avoid the effect of a fear spell whenever encountering 
a cadaver, human bones, a graveyard, or even an open 
coffin). On the other hand, the victim might become 
convinced that all corpses were undead, waiting to rip 
him or her to shreds. In a combat situation, an oppo- 
nent can be neutralized with an incapacitating form of 
insanity, such as confusion or feeblemind. The insan- 
ity is permanent and cannot be dispelled except by 
casting cure insanity, heal, restoration, or wish. 

Notes: Rare spell. The reverse is common for 
necromancer-priests, for whom it is 4th level. 


É 
e 
3 
` 
G: 
y 
4 
of 
a 
a 
s 
‘a 
Di 
2 
ivin 
‘ 
p 
rii 
l 
TUR 
$e. 


170 


Cure Moderate Wounds 


DT etm A 


Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


When casting this spell and laying his hand upon 
a creature, the priest causes 1d8 points of wound or 
other injury damage to the creature’s body to be 
healed. This healing cannot affect creatures without 
corporal bodies, nor can it cure wounds or creatures 
not living or of extraplanar origin. 

The reverse of the spell, cause light wounds, op- 
erates in the same manner, inflicting 1d8 points of 


171 


damage. If a creature is avoiding this touch, an attack 
roll is needed to determine if the priest's hand strikes 
the opponent and causes such a wound. 

Curing is permanent only insofar as the crea- 
ture does not sustain further damage; caused 
wounds will heal—or can be cured just as any 
normal injury. 

Notes: Common for clerics and druids (PHB). 


Cure Madness — Elf 


(Abjuration) 
Sphere: Necromantic 


Level: 2 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell enables the caster to cure most dis- 
eases that affect the mind by placing his hand upon 
the mad creature's brow. The affliction rapidly dis- 
appears thereafter, making the cured creature whole 
and well in from one turn to 10 days, depending 
upon the type of insanity and the state of advance- 
ment when the cure took place. (The DM must adju- 
dicate these conditions.) The spell is also effective 
against the aftereffects of psionic abilities that 
damage the target’s mind and in countering feeble- 
mind. This spell does not prevent reoccurrence of a 
form of insanity if the recipient again succumbs to 
madness, nor does it exorcise a possessing spirit. 

Notes: This spell is granted as a special boon 
only by the elf deity Sehanine. Other priests have 
access to the 4th-level spell, cure insanity. 


Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


Somewhat less common than the well-known 
cure light wounds and cure serious wounds, the cure 


~ Cure Rot 


moderate wound spell is similar. By laying his hand 
on a creature’s body, the priest can heal 1d10+1 
points of damage. This healing cannot affect crea- 
tures without corporal bodies, nor can it cure wounds 
or creatures not living or of extraplanar origin. 

The reverse of this spell, cause moderate 
wounds, requires the priest to successfully touch 
the victim and inflicts 1d10+1 points of damage. 

Notes: Uncommon spell for clerics and druids 
(PO:SM). 


Cure Rot 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Plant 


Level: 5 

Range: 30 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 8 
Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell is a more powerful version of the 
prevent rot spell. If cast upon a wooden object af- 
fected by a wood rot spell, this spell completely 
cures the wood rot at a rate of 1 cubic foot per 
round until the object is restored to its original 
condition. At least part of the original wood must 
be intact for this spell to cure the rot; an object that 
has totally rotted into dust cannot be cured. 

This spell also cures any rotting, decay, or 
damage to living trees or plants caused by natural 
disease or parasites, Damage is cured at a rate of | 
cubic foot of wood per round, or | square yard of 
plant growth per round. At least part of the original 
plant life must remain intact for the spell to take 
effect. This spell can cure up to one acre of plant 
life, so the spell can treat a small grove of diseased 
trees or a garden plot partly destroyed by insects. 

The material components for this spel) are 
mistletoe and a dead woodborer beetle. 

Notes: Uncommon for priests from a seafaring 
culture; otherwise very rare. (Updated from 
DRAGON Magazine.) 


172 


Cure Scurvy 
(Abjuration) 
Reversible 
Sphere: Healing, Necromantic 


Level: 2 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: 1 creature/level 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell cures scurvy, a disease common 
among sailors and caused by a vitamin deficiency. 
It works only on scurvy, not other diseases. 

The material components of this spell are the priest's 
holy symbol and the salt-encrusted pit of a fruit. 

The reverse of this spell, inflict scurvy, afflicts 
a single target with scurvy, The range of inflict 
scurvy is 90 yards. Inflict scurvy has no effect on 
targets who succeed at a saving throw vs. spell. 
Targets who fail the saving throw feel extremely 
weak and their Strength and Constitution ability 
scores drop to one-third of their current value. 
They suffer 1d3 points of damage immediately and 
1 point per day thereafter due to painful, bleeding 
gums and bleeding beneath the skin. 

These effects of inflict scurvy can be ended im- 
mediately with a cure disease spell or similar in- 
cantation. Otherwise, the afflicted can recover 
only with a huge daily intake of fresh fruit. Each 
day triple the normal diet of fruit is eaten, they re- 
cover | point each of Strength and Constitution, 
and no additional damage is taken from the dis- 
ease. The disease ends when Strength and 
Constitution have returned to their original values. 

Notes: Granted as a special boon by Valkur, 
Captain of the Waves, of the FORGOTTEN REALMS 
setting. Other priests have access to cure disease. 


Cure Serious Wounds 
(Necromancy) 
Reversible 
Sphere: Healing 


Level: 4 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 7 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


Curse of the Everbleeding Wounds — Gnome 


eee a 


This spell is a more potent version of the cure 
light wounds spell. When laying his hand upon a 
creature, the priest heals 2d8+1 points of wound or 
other injury damage to the creature's body. This 
healing cannot affect noncorporeal, nonliving, or 
extraplanar creatures. 

Cause serious wounds, the reverse of the spell, 
operates similarly to the cause light wounds spell, 
the victim having to be touched first. If the touch is 
successful, 2d8+1 points of damage are inflicted. 

Notes: Common for clerics (PHB). 


Curse 
Reversed form, bless (Ist level). This form is used 
by evil priests. 


Curse 
See bestow curse, (4th level). This form is used by 
evil priests. 


Curse of Black Sand/Silt 


(Alteration) 


Sphere: Elemental Earth 


Level: 3 

Range: 10 yds. 
Components: S 

Casting Time: 6 
Duration: | day/level 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


When this curse is cast and a save vs. spell 
fails, the victim leaves black, oily, footprints in the 
earth or on silt. The prints are easily tracked, and 
cannot be erased or destroyed until the spell ex- 
pires. They can be covered, but not by earth. A 
giant leaf, for example, could hide a few foot- 
prints, but this would be a temporary measure at 
best. A creature that flies or takes to the trees 
leaves no footprints until returning to the ground. 

In silty areas, a black streak resembling a slow cur- 
rent follows the cursed creature whenever it touches 
the surface. This includes wading, swimming, or 
walking on the silt via spell or magical device. It does 
not affect those who fly or use teleportation. 

A priest who casts several of these spells on 
different creatures can tell the trails apart, even if 
they cross or overlap. 

The trail disappears when the spell expires. 

Notes: Uncommon for priests of the DARK SUN 
setting. 


173 


Curse of the Choking Sands 


(Alteration) 


Sphere: Elemental Water 


Level: 4 

Range: 30 yds. 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 7 
Duration: 1 day/level 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


Priests of elemental water use this spell only 
against those who have truly angered them, for it 
transforms good water into lifeless sand. 

When cast on a creature that fails a saving 
throw vs. spell, the creature is unable to drink liq- 
uids for one day per level of the caster. Liquids 
turn to sand as they touch the victim’s lips. Every 8 
hours under the curse, the victim must make a suc- 
cessful Constitution check or lose 2 points of 
Strength. Constitution checks are made with a cu- 
mulative —1 penalty (—1 the first period, -2 the 
second period, —3 the third period, and so on). 
Death occurs when Strength is reduced to 0, A 
victim who has not died from dehydration when 
the spell ends can begin to drink normally. Liquids 
turned to sand by the curse remain sand. 

A remove curse spell ends the curse of the 
choking sands immediately. Overloading the spell 
by completely immersing the cursed creature in 
water also terminates the curse. 

Notes: Uncommon for priests of elemental 
Water from the DARK SUN setting. 


Curse of the 
Everbleeding Wounds — Gnome 


(Necromancy) 
Sphere: Necromantic 


Level: 6 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 8 

Duration: 1 turn 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell inflicts a curse similar to the effects of 
a sword of wounding. If the creature fails a saving 
throw vs, spell, all wounds suffered during the next 
full turn cannot be regenerated or cured by any sort 
of potion, spell, or other magic, short of a remove 


Curse of the Revenancer — Drow 


curse, limited wish, or wish. Such wounds must heal 
naturally. The creature suffers an additional point of 
damage each round after a wound (of type P or S) is 
inflicted, until the wound is bandaged or the spell 
expires. Multiple wounds are cumulative. A periapt 
of wound closure provides complete protection 
from this damage, as may other spells or magical 
items that prevent ongoing bleeding. 

A round of tending a particular wound, with no 
other actions taken or enemy interference is suffi- 
cient to bandage an everbleeding wound and halt 
its ongoing damage. Those with the healing profi- 
ciency who succeed at a proficiency check can 
bandage a second wound in the same round. 

The curse of the everbleeding wound requires 
the caster’s holy symbol, and a small knife or 
sharp item the is used to nick the creature for l 
point of damage as the priest’s hand comes in con- 
tact with the creature. 

Notes: Granted by the evil gnome god Urdlen. 


Curse of the Revenancer — Drow 


(Necromancy) 
Sphere: Necromantic 


Level: 6 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 8 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: | living creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell curses a single creature to be 
haunted by the vengeful spirits of the dead. The 
priest must make a successful touch attack within 
three rounds of casting this spell or it dissipates 
harmlessly. A victim touched in this time can 
avoid the effects with a successful saving throw vs. 
spell; otherwise, nothing short of a wish or a 
remove curse cast by a 14th-level spellcaster can 
end the curse of the Revenancer. 

Once the curse of the Revenancer is success- 
fully laid on a victim, any foe killed by the subject 
has a 5% chance of rising from the grave as a 
revenant, regardless of ability scores. If the foe's 
Constitution is at least 18 and either Intelligence or 
Wisdom is 17 or greater, the chance is 30%. If the 
foe is a follower of Kiaransalee the chance is 50%, 
and if the foe is the priest who cast the curse, the 
chance is 100%. 

The effects of the curse of the Revenancer 
become more pronounced the more deaths the 


174 


victim of the curse is responsible for. Thus, some- 
one who kills a large number of creatures shortly 
after the curse is laid might awaken an army of 
revenants seeking vengeance before the presence 
of the curse is realized. For the purposes of this 
spell, the victim is deemed to have killed a foe if 
he or she delivers the killing blow via magical, 
psionic, or physical assault, or by poison. 

The material components of this spell are a 
pinch of dirt from a freshly dug grave and the 
priestess’s holy symbol. 

Notes: Granted by the drow goddess 
Kiaransalee. 


Curse of Tongues 


(Alteration) 


Sphere: Elemental Air 


Level: 1 

Range: 5 yds./level 
Components: V, M 
Casting Time: 4 
Duration: 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: | creature 
Saving Throw: None 


This minor spell makes its target’s speech com- 
pletely unintelligible by distorting the airwaves 
that project the voice and dispersing them. This in- 
terrupts and prevents any spell casting requiring 
verbal components. 

The material component is a piece of string or 
cord tied in a knot. 

Notes: Uncommon for priests of the DARK SUN 
setting. 


Curse of Yondalla 
(Abjuration, Alteration) 
Sphere: Time 


Level: 7 

Range: 20 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Duration: Special 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


The curse of Yondalla is reserved for creatures 
that have done something horrible to offend 
Yondalla—for example, destroying a halfling 
community completely or killing innocent and de- 
fenseless halflings, such as the aged or children. A 


Cyrollalee, Seal of 


EE 4 


creature afflicted by the curse of Yondalla is 
stunned and unable to act offensively if it fails a 
saving throw vs. spell. It then returns to infancy 
over the period of a turn, growing younger slowly 
at first and then rapidly until it is once again an 
infant of its species. No system shock survival roil 
is required. The infant has no memory of its previ- 
ous life. Commonly, a halfling community or the 
priest then raises the infant to respect halflings and 
the ways of Yondalla. An infant of a species inher- 
ently unsafe to raise (say, a troll or a dragon), it is 
placed with a foster parent of a species able to 
properly raise it in a positive moral and ethical 
fashion. 

An undead creature of less than divine status 
that fails its saving throw is destroyed by this spell, 
but a creature of extraplanar origin is merely cast 
back to its home plane and unable to return to the 
Prime Material Plane for 10d10 years. A creature 
with magic resistance has it reduced by a -25% 
penalty against the effects of a curse of Yondalla. A 
creature that successfully saves still suffers 3d8+3 
points of damage or half its remaining hit points in 
damage, whichever is less. 

The bestowed curse of Yondalla cannot be dis- 
pelled, though it can be removed by a remove 
curse cast by the same priest of Yondalla who cast 
it or by any good priest whose level exceeds the 
original caster’s level; it can also be negated by a 
full wish. When the curse is removed, the creature 
returns to its normal age over the course of | turn 
(requiring no system shock survival roll). It re- 
members events that took place during its second 
youth in addition to those of its previous older life. 
Destroyed undead creatures can be restored or ex- 
traplanar creatures can be allowed to return before 
the end of the allotted time only by a full wish or 
divine intervention. 

Priests of Yondalla do not cast this spell lightly. 
Yondalla’s divine servitors or Yondalla herself are 
said to watch over its use and prevent it from being 
successfully cast if they feel its use is an abuse of 
the divine privilege. 

The material component of this spell is the 
priest's holy symbol. 


Cyrrollalee, Seal of 
See seal of Cyrrollalee. 


175 


Dance of Life* — Old Empire 


Dance of Life* — Old Empire The material component of this spell is 
(Enchantment/Charm) several gallons of milk spilled on the 
Sphere: Healing N ground at the center of the dance before 

beginning the spell. 

Level: 6 Notes: Granted by the Mulhorandi god Hathor, 
Range: Special in the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 hr. Dance of Pain 
Duration: Special (Alteration, Necromancy) 
Area of Effect: Special Sphere: Necromantic 
Saving Throw: None 

Level: 3 


This spell is a form of cooperative faith magic, Range: Touch 
a spiritual renewal that invigorates the old, heals Components: V, S 
the sick, banishes pestilence, and nourishes the Casting Time: 6 
stomach. Duration: 4 rds. 
Like all faith magic, this spell is preceded by Area of Effect: 1 creature (size L or smaller) 
the casting of the 4th-level focus spell, and its cast- Saving Throw: Special 
ing must begin within 1 turn of the completion of 
the focus spell, or the casting fails. The dance of This spell affects only a recently injured crea- 
life can be cast only in a community, and at least ture (defined as having lost some hit points within 
90% of the female inhabitants of that community the preceding 24 hours). It is wasted if cast on a 
must participate for it to have any effect. Male healthy, unharmed being, or a creature larger than 
members of a community are welcome to partici- size L, the spell cannot form around larger beasts. 
pate, as are outsiders, but nonresidents cannot When the caster successfully touches the subject, a 
number more than 5% of the participants. A dance spiral of illusory blades whirls around the creature, 
of life cannot be performed more than once per marking the boundaries of a field of sharp-edged, 
year in a community. invisible lines of force that cut and buffet it. If free 
All participants dance in a ring in a leaping, to move, a creature subjected to this spell is jerked 
chaotic, free-form dance for an hour, at which point about in an uncontrollable dance that causes a -2 
they collapse exhausted and exhilarated. Even the penalty to its attack rolls, worsens its Armor Class 
old, crippled, and the infirm find they can partici- by 4 points, and makes intricate tasks (such as 
pate, magically invigorated by the deity’s power. opening locks or casting spells) impossible. The 
This spell affects the general health of the com- unseen cutting edges slice and slash for 2d4+4 
munity as well as the participants. Everyone par- points of damage per round. Restrained or immo- 
ticipating in the dance is cured of all diseases (with bile creatures simply suffer damage. 
the exception of magical diseases such as mummy A creature affected by this spell is allowed a 
rot or lycanthropy) and receives the benefit of a saving throw vs. spell each round. Success means 
cure light wounds spell and a neutralize poison the creature takes only 2 points of damage on that 
spell. At the conclusion of the dance, the partici- round and can manage at least one semi-intricate 
pants find themselves fully nourished and full. task (such as hurling a missile weapon, getting an 
Those who have suffered a decline in their physi- item from pouch or belt and readying it for use, 
cal abilities (Strength, Constitution, or Dexterity) and so on), but still cannot cast spells. 
due to aging find themselves restored to the vigor Notes: Granted by the evil goddess Loviatar of 
of youth for the remainder of the day. The commu- the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 
nity is cleansed of any pestilence and morale is 
raised to at least 12 (Steady) or increased by 2 if 
already at 12 or above (maximum 20). 
This spell has been employed by priestesses of 
Hathor in the villages of Mulhorand for centuries. 
The requirement for female participation, how- 
ever, effectively prevents its use in the cities of 
Mulhorand. 


176 


Dark Aura 


ro 


Dance of the Fallen 
(Evocation, Necromantic) 
Sphere: Guardian, Necromantic 


Level: 6 

Range: 30 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 9 

Duration: 3 rds/level 

Area of Effect: 5-ft. to 60-ft.-diameter cylinder, 5- 
to 20-ft. high 

Saving Throw: Special 


Dance of the fallen is often used to capture, 
disarm, or force to flee foes to whom the caster has 
no wish to do lasting harm. Dance of the fallen a 
whirling cloud of severed limbs, some bony and 
some still bearing flesh, but all curiously blood- 
less. These remains are said to be summoned from 
recent battlefields, and they rotate at high speed 
around a central point, forming an immobile bar- 
rier. The plane of rotation of the body parts can be 
horizontal, vertical, or any angle in between the 
two. The area of effect of the dance of the fallen is 
set mentally by the caster upon casting the spell 
(from as little as a 5-foot-diameter cylinder that is 
5 feet tall or thick to as large as a 60-foot-diameter 
cylinder that is 20 feet tall or thick) and cannot be 
altered thereafter. 

Any creature trying to pass through the barrier 
suffers 4d6 points of damage and must make a 
Constitution check to avoid being struck senseless. 
Fragile worn or carried items must make a suc- 
cessful item saving throw vs. crushing blow or be 
destroyed. Beings trying to move through the 
dance of the fallen require 1d3+2 rounds to cross 
the area of effect, taking damage and making 
Constitution checks each round. 

Beings within the barrier’s area of effect when 
it forms must make a saving throw vs. spell. If the 
saving throw succeeds, they escape the barrier by 
the most direct route and suffer no damage. If they 
saving throw fails, they suffer the full damage of 
the dance of the fallen. Any other intended action 
than leaving the area when the barrier is formed— 
such as a charge toward the caster—invites the full 
effects of the dance of the fallen. 

Only 25% of the damage done by dance of the 
fallen is permanent; the rest is temporary and re- 
turns after 1d4 hours are spent resting. Beings re- 
duced to 0 hit points or lower by this spell are 
tendered unconscious and ejected from the area of 
effect. They regain consciousness in 1d6 turns or 


177 


more quickly (1d6 rounds) if a successful healing 
proficiency check is made upon them. The cloud 
of limbs remains until the spell expires and then 
fades silently away. It can be dismissed instantly 
by the caster at any time. 

The material component of this spell is a hand- 
ful of bone shards or hair of any type. 

Notes: Granted by the god war god Tempus of 
the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Dance of the Unicorns 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Combat 


Level: 5 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 8 

Duration: 6 rds. 

Area of Effect: 1 sentient being 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell is a priestly variant of the 7th-level 
wizard spell teleport without error and the 3rd- 
level wizard spell blink. Once per round, by silent 
act of will, the recipient can teleport without error 
with a range of 360 yards. The recipient can take a 
maximum weight of 250 pounds plus 150 pounds 
for each level of the casting priest above 10th. 

The teleportation effect can occur at the end of 
the round or at a random time during the round. In 
the latter case, the spell operates identically to a 
blink spell, but the range and direction are chosen 
by the spell recipient. 

The material components for this spell are a 
smali vial of clear fresh water from a river or 
stream stirred by a unicorn with its horn, and the 
priestess’s holy symbol, 

Notes: Granted by Lurue, the Unicorn Queen, 
of the FORGOTTEN REALMS. 


Dark Aura 
(Alteration, Invocation/Evocation) 
Sphere: Combat 


Level: 4 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 7 

Duration; 1 rd//level 

Area of Effect: 20 ft. diameter/level 
Saving Throw: Special 


Dark Embrace — Drow = 


This spell creates a spherical miasma of gloom 
and menace centered on the caster. Within this area 
of visible (but not vision-clouding) dimness, all 
evil-aligned beings attack at a +1 bonus to their 
attack and damage rolls, all good-aligned creatures 
strike at a —1 penalty to their attack and damage 
rolls, Further, the caster is personally empowered 
to strike at with +3 bonus to attack and damage 
rolls. Neutral-aligned beings (with respect to good 
and evil) are unaffected by this spell. Once cast, 
the spell moves with the caster; no concentration is 
required to maintain it. (The caster also receives 
the bonuses from the dark aura whenever these are 
relevant in spells cast subsequently.) 

Good-aligned creature are allowed a saving 
throw vs. spell at a —2 penalty to avoid the detri- 
mental effects of the aura for the current round. 
This saving throw is made each round, regardless 
of the results of previous rounds. 

The spell outlines all good-aligned beings 
within it in amber (lawful), orange (neutral), or 
scarlet (chaotic) auras that serve only to identify 
their alignment and do no harm. 

Notes: Granted by the death god Cyric of the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Dark Embrace — Drow 


(Conjuration/Summoning) 
Sphere: Combat 


Level: 4 

Range: 10 yds. + 10 yds./level 
Components: V 

Casting Time: 7 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell manifests as a dark shadow that flits 
about the spellcaster for a few moments before co- 
alescing into a half-mask of black velvet on the 
spellcaster’s face. Vhaeraun’s dark embrace lasts 
for at most 1 turn plus 1 round per level of the 
spellcaster before dissipating into nothingness. 

Once clad by the black half-mask created by 
the dark embrace—although not in the same round 
in which the dark embrace is cast—a priest can 
unleash another memorized spell of 3rd level or 
less with a single word of power; that is, with a 
casting time of 1. Such a spell must be either a 
touch-delivered or an area-effect spell that has no 
physical manifestation. For example, cause light 


178 


wounds and hold person can delivered by a dark 
embrace spell, but a flame strike cannot. 

Upon the utterance of the command word, the 
black half-mask dissolves once again into a dark 
shadow that then moves to envelop the intended 
target. The dark embrace acts as a carrier of the 
second spell: No saving throw or magic resistance 
check is allowed against it. Instead, the target crea- 
ture receives magic resistance checks and saving 
throws only against the spell delivered. Such 
magic resistance checks are made with a 10% 
penalty, and any saving throw is made with a -3 
penalty. Only the target creature is affected by the 
transferred spell, even if it is normally an area- 
effect spell. 

If the carried spell requires the caster’s holy 
symbol as a material component, the black half- 
mask created by the dark embrace serves as such. 

Notes: Granted by the drow god Vhaeraun. 


Dark Fire 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Travelers 


Level: 2 

Range: Touch 
Components: S, M 
Casting Time: 2 

Duration: 1 hr. + 1 hr/level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


The dark fire spell provides a small, lightless 
campfire when cast on a bronze brazier. This fire 
puts out heat and burns, but emits no light in the 
normal visible spectrum, nor does it create smoke. 
Objects set ablaze by the dark fire burn normally, 
emitting both smoke and light. The area of effect is 
equal to the size of the brazier, to a maximum di- 
ameter of one foot per level of the caster. 

The material components is a small piece of 
charcoal. A bronze brazier is also required. 

Notes: Very rare spell (Updated from 
POLYHEDRON Newszine.) Not to be confused with 


darkfire. 


Dark Promise 


eee A 


Dark Path 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Sun, Travelers 
Level: 1 
Range: Touch 


Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: I rd. 
Duration: 3 hrs./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell enables willing recipients to move in 
complete darkness without hindrance or risk. The 
night sky is not usually considered complete dark- 
ness, but a cave lined with luminescent lichens is. 
This spell works for blinded creatures as well. 
Those affected suffer no penalties for darkness or 
blindness. While affected creatures are completely 
aware of all natural and unnatural hazards and 
creatures that they could perceive in fully illumi- 
nated conditions, the spell does not allow the de- 
tection of invisible or magically silenced creatures 
or hazards. 

Although this spell can be cast only on a single 
creature, any living creature in physical contact 
with the recipient when the spell is cast (or part of 
a chain of creatures in physical contact with each 
other and the recipient) receives the benefit of the 
dark path as well while contact is maintained. 
Creatures not in the chain when the spell is cast 
cannot receive the spell’s benefits later. Such crea- 
tures later entering a chain break it; cutting off 
those after them until the chaìn is rearranged. 

Relying on chains of contact is dangerous 
during combat, since the benefit of the spell stops 
immediately for any creature losing physical con- 
tact with the spell recipient—the effects stop as 
well for anyone further down the chain. 
Reestablishing contact reestablishes the dark path 
if the spell has not ended. 

If the recipient or chain member enters an area 
of illumination (that is, comes within 15 feet of a 
lit torch, within an appropriate distance of another 
light source such as a lamp or lantern, or enters the 
area of a light or continual light spell), the dark 
path spell ends immediately, and those affected by 
the dark path spell must make a successful saving 
throw vs. spell or be stunned for 1 round and 
blinded for 1d6 rounds. 

The material component of this spell is a small 
piece of luminescent lichen and the priest's holy 
symbol. 


179 


Notes: Granted by the Ibrandul, the Skulking 
One, of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Dark Promise 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
Sphere: Charm, Necromantic 


Level: 5 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: | rd. 
Duration: Permanent 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell sets in motion a set of circumstances 
that an affected creature must follow to the letter (a 
promise, of sorts). The dark promise must serve 
the interests of the caster’s patron Power, but 
cannot be suicidal for the creature. Dark promises 
such as “Never eat,” “Never breathe,” and “Never 
wear armor” fail. Functional dark promises in- 
clude: “Do not return to (name of place)” or 
“Never again attack a priest of Bane.” A target 
creature that makes a successful saving throw vs. 
spell is not affected. 

If the promise is violated, the affected creature 
permanently loses 1 hit point per violation (it can 
lose hit points in this way until it dies). Curing and 
other means of recovering hit points do not restore 
damage inflicted by this spell; these hit points are 
permanently gone (short of a wish spell). The dark 
promise can be lifted by the original caster, by a 
wish spell, or by a remove curse spell cast by a 
good priest of higher level than the original caster. 

Only one dark promise can affect a being at 
one time. Any dark promise spell cast against a 
creature already subject to one fails. 

The main components of a dark promise spell 
are the name of the recipient a carefully worded 
promise statement. 

The dark promise spell was used exclusively by 
priests of Bane centuries ago to make sure their 
hidden cults, temples, and covert members were 
protected from the bias of the general populace. As 
Bane’s power grew to a point where Banites were 
no longer hunted, the spell was no longer needed, 
and its use has since dwindled away. 

Notes: Granted by death gods such as Bane 
and Cyric of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Dark Road P 


Dark Road 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Elemental Earth 
Level: 6 
Range: 0 


Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell serves as an unerring direction finder 
underground or in darkness, to an item, chosen 
during the casting, that the caster has handled 
before. Once during the course of the spell, if the 
direction to the object lies through a wall, includ- 
ing the natural rock of a cavern, the caster can 
touch the wall and create as passage much like the 
Sth-level wizard spell, passwall. 

The object sought must be a specific, portable 
item, well known to the caster, typically a spare 
holy symbol, undergarment, memento, or even a 
nondescript stone that the priest keeps hidden in 
his abode. The spell points to it even if the item has 
moved for any reason, and thus a priest can be de- 
ceived when using this spell to learn directions. 
Conversely, when the item is being carried on a 
known journey, the priest can use multiple dark 
road spells to trace the progress of the carrier. 

A dark road spell operates correctly even when 
miles underground, in areas of strong natural or 
magical radiations, and through most known mag- 
ical barriers. 

The passage power creates a temporary open 
ing four feet wide, six feet high, and 20 feet 5 ty 
through solid stone, earth and rocks, mud, sand, 
wood, plaster, metal, and even magical barriers 
created by spells of 6th level or less. The tunnel 
can slope and curve, changing its grade or shifting 
one foot for each foot of its run. (Up or down and 
left or right, but never changing its direction to 
zigzag, or to rise and then fall. Only one change in 
gradient or shift in direction from the straight is 
possible.) The passage lasts for one round per level 
of the caster, and cannot be ended at will. It can be 
traversed by any being or thrown item regardless 
of the caster’s will, and can be combined with 
other dark road spells to create a longer passage. 
When it closes, the passage expels items and 
beings within it; there is no known way to entomb 
a Creature or object by closing a dark road tunnel 
upon it. Dark road tunnels are unaffected by dispel 


magic spells, but limited wish (and stronger 
magics) prevail against them. 

The material components of a dark road spell 
are a straight bone that has been touched to the 
item sought, and a preserved eye (or tears from the 
eye) of any burrowing or earth-phasing creature, 
from a mole to a xorn. 

Notes: Granted by the Shar, Mistress of the 
Night, evil goddess of the FORGOTTEN REALMS set- 
ting. This spell is found only in a few exception- 
ally rare tomes. 


Area of Effect: 2. wide X Linch thick X up to 
20 ft. long X the caster’s level 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell instantly brings into being a ribbon- 
like, weightless but unbreakable black bridge. The 
matte black strip of force is straight, 2 feet wide, 
an inch thick, has no side rails, and can be as long 
as 20 feet per caster’s level. Its length may be only 
inches, or it may stretch to the maximum allowed 
by the spell range but the dark way must be created 
so that both ends are anchored to stationary, stable, 
solid objects such as roofs, walls, or cliff faces, not 
dirt slopes or tree branches. It cannot bend, but can 
climb or dip if the caster desires. 

A dark way spell need not span a chasm, but 
can be created inches above the floor of a room 
(running from wall to wall) to allow its caster to 
take advantage of its other properties. 

Once created, the dark way is immobile, and 
withstands all known spells and attacks. It cannot 
be destroyed (even by will of the caster) before the 
spell ends. It can be traversed by all creatures and 
does not conduct electricity, heat, or magical ef- 
fects, The caster cannot fall from or be struck or 
swept from the dark way (though he can deliber- 
ately jump), and while in contact with any part of 
the way, can lift, carry, and wield any weight (of 
beings, items, or both) as if they weighed nothing. 

This allows a caster to stand on the way in defi- 
ance of gale-force winds or even elude attacks by 
walking on the edges or bottom of its span. The 


ee ee ee en 


Darkfire — Drow 


“weightless” property of the span has been used by 
some priests to dupe others into thinking that the 
caster possesses mighty strength (lifting a horse, 
for instance, while standing on a dark way hidden 
behind an altar). 

This property does not apply to other creatures. 
Any being who overloads the way (stepping onto it 
with a total burdened weight half again as much as 
the caster’s burdened body weight at the time of 
casting) falls through the dark way, even though it 
remains solid to all other creatures. In other words, 
if the caster of dark way plus what the caster is 
wearing and carrying weighs 100 pounds,. and he 
flees along the span, a pursuing monster who 
weighs 150 pounds or more plunges through it. 
Obviously, creatures other than the caster can fall 
from the way, as they could from any narrow bridge. 

The material components of a dark way spell 
are one of the caster’s hairs, some spiderweb, and 
a Shard of black glass (man-made or obsidian). 

Notes: Granted by the god Mask of the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. This spell is found 
only in a few exceptionally rare tomes. 


Darkbolt 
(Invocation/Evocation) 
Sphere: Combat 


Level: 4 

Range: 5 yds/level 
Components: S, 

Casting Time: 7 
Duration: 1 rd/level 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell unleashes a 4-inch beam of darkness 
in a straight line from the caster’s hand. The beam 
ends whenever it strikes a creature within range. 
One darkbolt can be hurled per round until the 
spell expires or the caster works another spell. A 
darkbolt chills living creatures for 2d4 points of 
damage and acts as a one-round hold spell on 
undead creatures. (A successful saving throw vs. 
paralyzation negates this effect on undead.) Struck 
creatures are also afflicted with magical silence 
lasting 1d4 rounds; a creature making a successful 
saving throw vs. spell is not silenced, but only 
takes damage if living. 

Notes: Granted by the Shar, Mistress of the 
Night, evil goddess of the FORGOTTEN REALMS 
setting. 


181 


Darkfire 
Aka darkfire of Beshaba. 


Darkfire — Drow 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Elemental Fire 


Level: 2 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 5 

Duration: 2 rds./level 

Area of Effect: 1 fire source 
Saving Throw: Special 


Darkfire flames give no light at all, although 
creatures with infravision see a signature brighter 
than normal flame. Contact with a brazier or hand- 
lamp of darkfire typically inflicts 2d4 points of 
damage; flammable items or garments require 
item saving throws vs. magical fire. 

In battle, darkfire can be cast to emanate from 
one of the caster’s hands. It does not harm the 
caster at all, except to burn away clothing it 
touches. A blow from a flaming hand inflicts 1d8 
points of fire-based damage. 


Darkfire of Beshaba 


Darkfire from the hand can be willed into hand- 
fuls and thrown. One ball of flame can be hurled up 
to 10 feet, as if the caster was attacking directly. 
Thrown darkfire inflicts 1d3 points of damage plus 
1 additional point per caster level, to a maximum of 
1d3+10 points of damage at 10th level. The DM 
should use the grenadelike missile table to deter- 
mine where misses land—such misses have the 
usual incendiary effect and the darkfire itself rages 
for 1d2 rounds before burning out. 

This magic was developed for use in rituals of 
worship to Lolth, but has since been adapted into 
an offensive battle spell. This spell transforms a 
normal fire or ignites unlit fuel with darkfire. 

Notes: Granted by the drow goddess Lolth. 


Darkfire of Beshaba 


(Necromancy) 
Sphere: Combat, Necromantic 


Level: 2 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: Touch or 1 creature within 15 ft. 
Saving Throw: None 

This spell enables the caster to emit a jet of 
black flame from his hand or eyes. The flame is 
oily, cool to the touch, and has no effect on flam- 
mable materials—it harms only living things. If 
the flame comes from the caster’s hand, a touch 
(successful attack) by the caster inflicts 1d4 points 
of damage, plus | additional point per level 
(1d4+10 points maximum). If the flame jets from 
the caster’s eyes, it has a range of 15 feet. A suc- 
cessful attack roll is required to inflict damage, 
which is only half as much as a successful touch 
(round up). 

An undead is restored by darkfire and regains 
lost hit points equal to the damage the spell inflicts 
upon living things. This spell can also knit together 
severed undead body parts, restoring them to a 
functioning whole. The parts must be brought into 
contact and properly assembled before the darkfire 
is applied, and the spell must manifest across the 
breakage. Only one break per level of the caster can 
be rejoined by this means. Severed skeletal limbs 
often involve multiple bone breakages. 

The material component is a pinch of ash from 
a cremated mammal. 

Notes: Granted by Beshaba, the Maid of 
Misfortune, of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


182 


This spell is found only in a few exceptionally rare 
tomes. 


Darkness 
Reversed form, light. This form is used by evil 
priests. 


Day In The Life, A 
See a day in the life. 


Level: 1 

Range: 20 yds. + 10 yds level 
Components: S, M 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell causes the subject's thoughts to drift 
away from the task at hand, diminishing his or her 
chances to notice anything unusual. For the dura- 
tion of the daydream effect, small clues or discrep- 
ancies are blithely ignored, and only obvious 
events are noted, as adjudicated by the DM. A suc- 
cessful saving throw vs. spell negates the day- 
dream. If the casting of the daydream was done 
discreetly, regardless of whether the saving throw 
was made or not, the target creature may not even 
realize that a spell was cast. 

An affected creature is penalized by 10% on 
any checks related to perception or observation. 
Thus checks for surprise are made with a —1 
penalty, thief skill checks to Move Silently and 
Hide in Shadows are made with a +10% with re- 
spect to the subject of the daydream, Intelligence 
checks to notice or observe anything unusual are 
made with a —2 penalty, etc. If and when the crea- 
ture does notice anything unusual, the daydream 
ends immediately. 

The material components are the priest's holy 
symbol and a pinch of fine sand. 

Notes: Granted by the halfling god 
Brandobaris. 


Deadly Dance 


Q 


Dead Magic Shield 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Protection 


Level: 5 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 8 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: Creates shield, 2-ft. diameter 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell creates a shimmering disc-shaped 
shield of force 2 feet in diameter affixed to the left 
or right forearm of the caster as chosen during 
casting. If the caster is not wielding a weapon two- 
handed, carrying a shield, or casting a spell, the 
dead magic shield can be used to block magical at- 
tacks. If the caster wields a weapon in his or her 
other hand, the priest can attack with a melee 
weapon while employing the dead magic shield. 

A dead magic shield does not have any effect 
on Armor Class or physical attacks. However, if 
successfully interposed between the caster and a 
spell or a spell-like power, it harmlessly dissipates 
the spell. Area-of-effect spells can be blocked 
from affecting the caster and anyone physically 
shielded by him or her. Touch spells can be dissi- 
pated as well by forcing the attacker to bring his or 
her hand into contact with the dead magic shield. 

To block a spell, the caster must make a suc- 
cessful saving throw vs. spell with a +1 bonus to 
the roll for every three experience levels of the 
spellcaster, rounding up, to a maximum of +5. 
Even if a spell is not blocked (in other words, the 
saving throw is failed), if the spell normally allows 
a saving throw against its effects, the dead magic 
shield wielder is still allowed a saving throw with 
a +2 bonus. 

Notes: Granted by the lesser god Shaundakul 
of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Dead March 
(Alteration, Necromancy) 
Sphere: Necromantic 


Level: 4 

Range: 5 yds./level 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 7 

Duration: | hr/level 

Area of Effect: 10 corpses or body parts 
Saving Throw: None 


183 


This spell animates multiple corpses or body 
parts without making them undead. Up to 10 once- 
living objects per level of the caster can be raised 
up from | to 14 feet above the ground and sent in a 
single direction so that they drift along in a straight 
line on the indicated route at MV FI 10 (E). The 
caster can redirect them at any time by concentrat- 
ing, so as to allow them to follow a winding road 
or simply to change direction. The spell is not 
ended, nor contact lost, if the caster engages in 
other spellcasting. The spell works underwater, so 
that the animated army of the dead can march 
down into a river, across its bed, and up the far 
bank. The magic is not broken by long falls; an an- 
imated band that marches over a cliff continues on 
its way at the bottom. 

The animated corpses can be dressed in uni- 
forms to deceive observers or be used as light trans- 
port by strapping pouches or weapons to them, but 
the spell cannot keep single items that weigh even a 
trifle over 200 pounds aloft, so pack trains of the 
animated dead are impractical. The spell can be 
ended before it expires if the caster so wills. At the 
spell’s end the dead fall abruptly to the ground or 
sink gently down, as the caster desires. The ani- 
mated dead have no sentience or hostile intent and 
cannot be affected by magic that affects or controls 
undead creatures, neither can they be turned. 

The material components for this spell are a 
miniature or full-size drum stick or a chicken leg 
bone and a thread. 

Notes: Granted by the god Kelemvor, Judge of 
the Damned, of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Deaden Sensation 


Reversed form, intensify sensation. 


Deadly Dance 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Combat 


Level: 4 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 7 

Duration: 4 rds. 

Area of Effect: 1 four-limbed, bipedal creature 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell affects the caster, another touched 
four-limbed bipedal creature (such as a human), or 
a creature currently using such a form. It fades, 


Deafening Clang — Gnome 


wasted, if used on another type of creature or if the 
recipient being changes its form to something 
other than a four-limbed biped. 

The recipients of a deadly dance spell moves 
with fluid grace. Remaining still takes a conscious 
effort; its wants to move. For the duration of the 
deadly dance, the Dexterity of the recipient is in- 
creased by 2 points and balance is perfect, allow- 
ing him or her to leap about and land with pinpoint 
precision—for example, on tiny ledges—and cast 
spells, catch or throw things, or launch attacks in 
mid-leap. In each round of the deadly dance, the 
recipient either can attack with a +3 bonus to 
attack rolls or take double the usual number of 
normal attacks. 

The material components of this spell are a bit 
of rubber and a scrap of silk. 

Notes: Granted by Lliira, Mistress of Revels, 
of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Deafening Clang — Gnome 
(Enchantment) 
Sphere: Combat 


Level: 1 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: Special (1 turn maximum) 
Area of Effect: 1 metal item 

Saving Throw: None 


This spell is effective only when cast upon a 
metal item. Once cast, the object enchanted by 
means of this spell rings with a deafening clang if 
struck against a hard surface and a command word 
spoken. The spell expires once three deafening 
clangs have been sounded or once ten rounds have 
passed from the time of casting. 

All creatures except the wielder within 10 feet 
of the point of contact when a deafening clang is 
sounded must make a successful saving throw vs. 
spell or be deafened for 244 rounds. An affected 
creature has a—I penalty to its surprise rolls unless 
its other senses are unusually keen. Deafened 
spellcasters have a 20% chance to miscast any 
spell with a verbal component. The deafness fades 
in 2d4 rounds or can be cured magically, for exam- 
ple, by the cure blindness or deafness spell. 

The material components are the priest's holy 
symbol and a small round metal gong. 

Notes: Granted by the dwarven god Gaerdal 
Ironhand. 


Death Candle — Shaman 
(Divination) 
Sphere: Divination 


Level: 2 

Range: Special 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: | creature 
Saving Throw: None 


P4 


This spell creates a way for the shaman to keep 
track of the health and life of another. The spell is 
cast on a single being, who must be holding a pre- 
viously unused candle: As the spell is cast the 
candle must be lit, and thereafter cannot be extin- 
guished except by magical means, such as gust of 
wind or create water spell. 

The flame burns without changing the candle, 
for as long as the subject lives. If the subject is 
ever extremely unwell (such as suffering from a 
fatal disease or wounded to the point of near 
death), or ever leaves the Prime Material Plane, the 
flame gutters and flickers low, but does not fail. 
Only if the subject dies does the candle go out. 


Death Chariot 


eee a 


Thus, the candle’s owner can tell whether the crea- 
ture lives or has died. 

The material component is a previously unlit 
candle. 

Notes: Restricted to shamans, uncommon. 


Casting Time: 1 turn 
Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: Special 


When this spell is cast, a clap of thunder 
sounds and a billowing cloud of smoke erupts 
from around the caster or at a spot within 10 yards 
of him or her. Within this cloud appears a flaming 
chariot pulled by two fiery horses. The chariot 
moves at MV 24, FI 48 (D) and can carry up to 
nine man-sized creatures. The caster need not be 
among them. The chariot feels uncomfortably hot 
to approach, and merely touching one of the horses 
inflicts 3d8 points of fire damage, but boarding or 
touching the chariot causes no damage. Anyone in 
the chariot can control its path by verbal com- 
mand, causing the flaming steeds to stop or go, 
walk, trot, run, or fly, turn left or right, or rise or 
descend. 

The vehicle and steeds can be harmed by water 
or by magical weapons. One quart of water causes 
1 point of damage. The steeds and chariot are AC 2 
and can be dispelled by inflicting 30 points of 
damage upon each of them. The steeds and chariot 
can be forcibly returned to the elemental plane of 
Fire by the use of such spells as dispel magic and 
holy word. Fire and electricity harm neither the 
chariot nor the steeds, but cold-, ice-, and water- 
based magic inflict double damage. The steeds are 
immune charm, sleep, and hold magics. Bringing 
an alchemy jug or a decanter of endless water into 
the death chariot causes the chariot to explode im- 
mediately (effects given below). 

A death chariot closely resembles a chariot of 
Sustarre, save that its enchantments are less stable 
and more temporary. The caster can set the spell to 
work one of two ways: Either the death chariot is 
preset to explode at any time from one round to the 
end of one turn after the spell is cast, or the caster 


185 


can retain detonation control of the chariot by ac- 
companying it in person. This control does not 
preclude the caster from taking other actions or 
casting spells, and does not mean that the caster 
has to personally command the death chariot. 
Note that a priest could well deceive others into 
thinking the death chariot is a chariot of Sustarre 
by touching passengers before they enter the death 
chariot and accompanying them. 

If the death chariot is preset to detonate, then at 
the designated moment it suddenly explodes in a 
gigantic ball of fire and vanishes along with its 
steeds. All in the chariot or within 30 feet take 
10d4 points of fire-based damage (half if a saving 
throw vs. spell is successful), Passengers suffer a 
further 2 points of blast shock as oxygen is con- 
sumed in the blast, and air rushes back in to fill the 
void caused by it. If the chariot vanishes in midair, 
passengers also fall unless magical items or spells 
afford escape. 

Readily combustible materials such as cloth, 
wood, paper, and oil are consumed in the blast; 
flaming oil damage should be added to the damage 
total for any chariot passengers carrying oil on 
their persons. All other items—including scrolls 
and spellbooks—receive item saving throws vs. 
magical fire to survive the blast. Items that also fall 
must make successful item saving throws vs. fall 
or be destroyed. 

A caster accompanying the chariot causes the 
death chariot to explode by act of will, not verbal 
command. The caster can bail out before igniting 
the trap, ride the death chariot in safety for a short 
trip (for example, across a chasm or down from a 
cliff, tower, battlement, etc.) and then leave it as a 
fiery trap, or even send the death chariot back at a 
pursuing enemy before causing it to explode. The 
maximum duration of a death chariot, if it is not 
detonated, is one round per level of the caster. If 
kept for its maximum duration, the death chariot 
fades away harmlessly. 

The material components are a small piece of 
wood, bark, or a handful of wood shavings, two 
holly berries, and a fire source at least equal to a 
torch. 

Notes: Granted by the nature god Silvanus of 
the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Death Curse 


NŘŮŮŮŮŮŮŮŮ A 


Death Curse 
(Alteration, Necromantic) 
Sphere: Necromantic 


Level: 2 

Range: 0 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: 1 being 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell is used to avenge the imminent death 
of the caster. The barbarian cleric can name an 
enemy and invent a curse to take effect on the 
foe—if this enemy was the direct cause of the 
caster’s death. If the caster is raised from the dead, 
the curse is broken, but otherwise it is everlasting. 
The curse is usually imaginative (and fiendish), 
but cannot exceed the power of a bestow curse 
spell (—4 penalty, ability score reduced to 3, etc.). 
If the caster commits suicide, the spell takes effect, 
but obviously this is not commonly done. 

The material component is a necklace made of 
the teeth of large carnivores. Only one enemy can 
be held under threat of a death curse at a time 

Notes: Restricted to barbarian clerics, very 
rare, (Updated from DraGon Magazine.) 


Death Dragon 
(Necromancy) 
Sphere: Necromantic 


Level: 6 

Range: 90 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell creates a weird dragon-shaped as- 
semblage of skulls, bones, hair, teeth, and other 
body remnants, apparently from many different 
creatures, held together in a macabre collection by 
magic. The result is winged, has a tail, four claws, 
and a large-jawed head, and is semi-illusory, shift- 
ing outlines and size as surroundings permit or the 
caster desires (for example, its wings and tail can 
be shrunken dramatically to fit through gaps or into 
small rooms without affecting its flying ability.) 

A death dragon cannot be made smaller than the 
caster (in other words, it can’t pass through an open- 


ing that would bar its caster). While it is unaffected 
by spells governing undead or dragons, a dispel 
magic spell causes it to melt away instantly. It flies 
about at MV FI 12 (D) and is able to attack twice 
per round. Regardless of what body part appears to 
attack, these are always THACO 10 bludgeoning 
blows that inflict 1d12 points of damage each. 

A death dragon isn’t truly solid, and therefore 
can’t be ridden by its caster or struck by oppo- 
nents—their blows pass through apparent nothing- 
ness. 
The material components of a death dragon 
spell are four bones, all of which must be complete 
and intact. One of these remnants must be from a 
reptile and one from an avian. Alternatively, a 
single fragment or whole bone from any sort of 
dragon will serve. 

Notes: Granted by the god Kelemvor, Judge of 
the Damned, of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. This 
spell is found only in a few exceptionally rare tomes. 


Death Pact 
(Invocation/Evocation) 
Sphere: Necromantic 


Level: 7 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: | turn 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 individual (usually caster) 
Saving Throw: None 


By completing this ritual, a high priest forges a 
powerful pact with his or her deity. The covenant 
ensures that a chosen individual will survive an 
untimely death. A death pact is triggered when- 
ever the protected individual is reduced to fewer 
than 0 hit points (mortally wounded) due to 
combat, spell, or accident. In the same round, the 
subject receives the following benefits: 


. ae Taka memes 


Death Prayer 


rE aa 


* The individual (or his or her remains) and all 
possessions are transported immediately back to 
a religious sanctuary as if by a word of recall (the 
location of the sanctuary must be specified at the 
time of casting). 

* Upon arrival, the individual is revived; no system 
shock roll is required. 

* Physical damage sustained by the individual is 
completely healed except for 2-5 (1d4+1) points 
of damage. 

* Severed or amputated limbs are fully restored. 

* The body is cleared of lingering enchantments 
with a dispel magic (bestowed at caster’s level), 
whether beneficial or baneful, and cleansed of all 
poisons, diseases, blindness, curses, and insanity. 


A death pact remains in effect indefinitely, 
until the conditions established at the time of its 
forging have been fulfilled. The pact can be estab- 
lished to benefit an individual other than the caster. 
However, in almost all cases, the chosen one must 
be in good standing with the caster’s religion and 
agree to undertake a mission that directly benefits 
the deity or dark power responsible for granting 
the spell. A dispel magic cannot end a death pact 
prematurely. 

This powerful spell is not without its cost, how- 
ever. Forging a death pact is an exhaustively stress- 
ful process, drawing the priest into draining 
audiences with extraplanar powers. As a result, es- 
tablishing it ages the caster five years and requires 
at least one week for complete recuperation, during 
which time the priest cannot cast spells or engage 
in any physically demanding activity. Furthermore, 
when the pact is invoked, the mystical transport 
and instantaneous healing exacts another toll, this 
time aging the recipient five years (and one point of 
Constitution permanently, if brought back from 
death). Thus, a the priest who casts the spell on 
himself might sacrifice ten years of life. 

The material components are a holy (or 
unholy) sanctuary consecrated to the caster's deity 
and seven drops of holy water (or unholy water). 
Wicked necromancers in the service of evil deities 
are rumored to have significantly reduced the per- 
sonal toll on the caster by substituting some un- 
speakably foul sacrifice. 

Notes: Uncommon for evil necromancer 
priests; otherwise very rare. 


Death Pact, Velsharoon’s 
See Velsharoon’s death pact. 


187 


Death Prayer 
(Invocation) 
Sphere: Protection 


Level: 2 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 turn 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: 1 corpse 
Saving Throw: Special 


The priest can, by use of this spell, reduce the 
chance that a corpse will rise later as an undead 
creature. It prevents both the magical animation of 
a corpse and the seizure of the body by an intrud- 
ing spirit. Once the protection is placed, the 
dweomer fades, and the fact that the death prayer 
was cast can be detected only by a greater divina- 
tion spell of at least 5th level. 

If a corpse would rise as an undead creature, 
this protection allows a saving throw based on its 
level in life. The saving throw cannot be better than 
6 or more on 1d20 in any event (75%), even if mag- 
ically augmented. Failure means the corpse will 
rise as the appropriate type of undead. Success 
means that the corpse is merely dead. This prevents 
the corpse from returning, for example, as a ghoul, 
ghast, wight, wraith, spectre, or even a vampire. 

While the corpse is sealed, a speak with dead 
spell or its equivalent cannot contact the spirit 
unless the caster is of higher level than the caster 
of the death prayer. Also, while the corpse is pro- 
tected, any resurrection survival roll it requires is 
penalized by 25%. The death prayer cannot be re- 
moved with a dispel magic spell, but it can be re- 
moved with a limited wish or restoration. 

This speil does not function on the Demiplane 
of Dread. 

The material component is the priest’s holy 
symbol and a vial of holy water, which is sprinkled 
over the body. 

Notes: Very rare for clerics. (Updated from 
DraGoN Magazine.) 


Death Symbol of Bane 


Death Symbol of Bane 


(Conjuration/Summoning) 
Sphere: Guardian 


Level: 7 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 3 
Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


The Risen Cult of Bane uses a special symbol 
created long ago with the direct assistance of the 
god Bane. The death symbol of Bane is extremely 
long-lasting; it lasts for one discharge per creature 
whose blood is used in its making. The casting of 
most death symbols of Bane involves the sacrifice 
of at least 30 creatures whose blood is mixed into a 
paste with ground black opal dust and diamond 
dust (no less than 5,000 gp value of each type of 
dust). (Only three drops of each creature’s blood 
are required, though Banites usually kill whole 
creatures and use all their blood.) The symbol is 
drawn with this grisly paste. 

A death symbol of Bane vanishes, once cast, 
and glows only when activated. It can be detected 
by magics that allow the reading or detection of in- 
visible things or writings. It cannot be activated by 
any creature bearing a holy symbol of Bane. 
Typically, it is cast on a door or portal. It is acti- 
vated when any creature of the types whose blood 
was used in its creation who is not carrying a holy 
symbol of Bane touches the door or attempts to 
pass through the portal. 

When activated, it explodes outward in de- 
structive, life-draining energy. Any being within 
10 feet of the death symbol of Bane must make a 
successful saving throw vs. death magic or be 
slain. (Any being touching the death symbol itself, 
even if using a weapon or tool to do so, saves at a 
—1 penalty.) Any being within 20 feet must make a 
successful saving throw vs. paralyzation or suffer a 
chilling withering that causes 1d12 points of 
damage; there is a 30% chance that 1 hit point of 
such damage is permanently lost. Any being 
within 40 feet must make a successful saving 
throw vs. breath weapon or be wracked by fierce 
stabbing pains for 2d10 rounds. These cause a —2 
penalty to attack rolls and a —1 penalty to 
Dexterity ability scores. 

These effects are cumulative. A creature touch- 
ing a death symbol-guarded door or area has to 


188 


save against all three effects each time the symbol 
is activated. 

If a death symbol of Bane is cast upon a surface 
that is destroyed or broken before the death 
symbol is exhausted (usually in an attempt to de- 
stroy or bypass the death symbol), the death 
symbol's magical energy is instantly released in an 
explosion. This energy blast does 3d8 points of 
damage to all creatures within 10 feet, 2d8 points 
to all within 11 to 20 feet, 1d8 to all within 21 to 
30 feet, and 1d4 to all within 31 to 40 feet. 

The material component of this spell is the 
paste (described above) with which the symbol is 
drawn. 

Notes: Granted by the evil death god Bane of 
the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Death Talisman 
(Divination, Enchantment, Necromancy) 


“ee 


Level: 2 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: | wk./level 
Area of Effect: 1 object 
Saving Throw: None 


Using this spell, a caster can enchant a small 
item, usually a polished knife or other shiny metal 
object, linking it to the caster’s health. 

As long as the caster stays healthy, the object 
remains in the same condition as it was in at the 
time of casting. When the caster dies or is other- 
wise permanently disabled (for instance, turned to 
stone), the enchanted object becomes corroded 
and dull. 

The divination effect lasts as tong as the caster 
stays within 1,000 miles of the enchanted item. 

The spell focus is the item to be enchanted, 
which is not destroyed in the casting. 

Notes: Uncommon for priests from an arabian 
setting; otherwise, very rare. 


Death Touch 


(Necromancy) 
Sphere: Necromantic 


Level: 6 

Range: 0 

Components: V, M 
Casting Time: 6 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: See below 


By casting this spell, the priest slays another 
living creature and transfers part of its life energy to 
himself. To cast the spell successfully, the priest must 
make a successful attack roll. The creature is allowed 
a saving throw vs. death magic at a—2 penalty. If suc- 
cessful, the creature suffers the effects of a cause crit- 
ical wounds spell (3d8+3 points of damage). 
Otherwise, the creature is slain and the priest gains 
ld4 hit points per Hit Die or level of the creature slain, 
up to the priest’s normal hit point maximum. 

The material component for this spell is a spe- 
cially prepared skull decorated with gold filigree and 
moonstones worth 500 gp, which is consumed in the 
spellcasting, whether the attack is successful or not. 

Notes: Granted by Iuz the Evil of the WORLD 
OF GREYHAWK setting. 


Death’s Door 
(Necromancy) 
Sphere: Necromantic 


Level: 3 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 6 

Duration: } hr. / level 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


A priest who employs this spell touches a being 
who is injured, unconscious and “at death's door” 
(—1 to -9 hit points). The spell immediately brings 
the wounded individual to 0 hit points. Although 
the individual remains unconscious, bleeding and 
deterioration are stopped for the duration of the 
spell. The subject (now at 0 hit points) can be 
brought immediately to consciousness by spells or 
items that restore lost hit points. 

The material components are the priest’s holy 
symbol, a bit of white linen, and an unguent. 

Notes: Uncommon for clerics. 


189 


Optional: If characters an sad at O hit 

points, the DM shoul ‘to revive 

points; P viaas T to 9 hit 
pewviding ti ; 


st within 10 to | 


rab eins Sein: A coved ba or is 
required to survive the transition. If successful, 
the subject a AE ADA a re 
Constitutic creature restored to Ai 
point, which can be fu 
healing. If the time limit is exceeded, then the 
mi be evnet ony by a mae dea 
or similar magic. = 

Debris Barrier 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Guardian 
Level: 5 


Range: 5 yds./level ie 
Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 5 rds. 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: Up to 5 objects/level 

Saving Throw: Special 


This spell allows a priest to animate nonliving 
chunks of space debris (man-size or smaller) into 
motion. It is effective in wildspace, phlogiston, 
and atmosphere alike. 

The debris must be present already, not con- 
tained by or part of a larger mass. The debris 
whirls about within an oval area, no more that 10 
feet per level long and 5 feet per level wide or 
deep. The priest can use the field as a barrier or 
direct it as an offensive weapon. Those contacted 
by or within the field suffer 4d4 points of damage 
per round. Exposed ceramic, bone, or glass items 
in a debris barrier must make a successful item 
saving throw vs. crushing blow each round or be 
destroyed. 

The debris field moves at a rate of 18 (MC: C). 
The caster can move the field about within the 
spell range by concentration. The field remains 
stationary if the priest casts another spell or is ren- 
dered unconscious. A successful dispel magic 
spell causes the objects to disperse immediately. 

Notes: Common for priests from a spelljam- 
ming culture; otherwise, very rare. 


Decay 
A 3rd level spell, see druid’s decay. 


Decay 


Decay 


A 6th level spell, see greater decay. 


Decay 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Time 


Level: 3 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: 1 cu, fl. /level 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell accelerates the aging of any item. It 
has no effect on living matter. For every hour that 
passes, the object decays a day. Equally, any abra- 
sion or strain to the article is increased twenty-fold. 


After an appropriate amount of time has passed, 
most objects break, rust or corrode, decay into 
powder, or otherwise become useless. A successful 
dispel magic halts the accelerated decay process 
and return’s an item’s aging to normal rates; aging 
that has already taken effect is permanent, however. 

Normal items do not receive a saving throw 
against this spell’s effects. Magical items receive a 
saving throw against the spell; they must make a 
successful item saving throw vs. lightning at a -2 
penalty or be affected by the spell. Artifacts and 
relics are unaffected by this spell. To affect an item 
being carried or worn by someone, the casting 
priest must make a successful attack roll with his 
or her hand. 

The material component of this spell is the holy 
symbol of the casting priest. 

Notes: Granted by the evil death god Bhaal of 
the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Deep Breath 


eee 4 


Decay, Dolorous 
See dolorous decay. 


Deceive Prying — Drow 
(Divination) 
Sphere: All 


Level: 6 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 9 

Duration: | hr/level (maximum | day) 
Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell protects the priest or another touched 
being from magical and psionic examination (not 
attack). The alignment aura, faith, and thoughts of 
the recipient are overlaid by a false alignment and 
set of beliefs (chosen during casting), and random 
surface thoughts are supplied by the spell, in re- 
sponse to what the being sees happening and the 
false alignment and faith chosen. The being can 
cast spells without breaking this protection, and 
conduct any mental activity desired (including the 
use of psionics or telepathy) behind the mental 
screen. A deceive prying spell provides no protec- 
tion against enchantment/charm spells or psionic 
attacks except to give a +1 bonus to the initial 
saving throw against a charm person magic (not 
the more powerful charm monster), by making the 
attacker’s mind assault less precise. Priests of 
Vhaeraun use this spell to hide from those trying 
to discover their identities. 

The material components area drop of cranial 
fluid and a small cube of iron. 

Notes: Granted by the drow god Vhaeraun. 


Decompose 
(Necromancy) 
Sphere: Animal, Plant 


Level: 4 

Range: 5 yds./level 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 7 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: 150 lbs. maximum 
Saving Throw: None or Neg. 


This spell causes organic material to turn into 
humus or compost instantly. Up to 150 pounds of 
material can be affected. Living matter is not af- 


191 


fected by this spell, although a corpse (even a fresh 
one) would be. Undead creatures that have corpo- 
real forms are affected if they fail a saving throw 
vs. death magic. A magical item composed of or- 
ganic materials (for example, a wooden spear +/) 
must make a saving throw vs. disintegration. 
Nonmagical items of organic composition (doors, 
rugs, etc.) receive no saving throw. Decomposed 
creatures can be raised, resurrected, or reincar- 
nated if the dust is carefully collected and pre- 
served. 
The material component is a pinch of puffball 
dust. 

Notes: Very rare spell, most common for 
druids. (Updated from DraGon Magazine.) 


Deep Breath 


Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


With this spell, the caster allows one creature to 
take a single breath that lasts for the duration of the 
spell. The spell bestows no ability to maneuver or 
function underwater or while buried in sand but it 
does temporarily remove the need to breathe. Once 
the spell ends, an individual who cannot breathe 
normally begins to suffocate after ⁄3 his 
Constitution score in rounds (a Constitution check 
is required each round, with a —2 cumulative 
penalty; after failing a check 1d6 points of damage 
is taken per round). 

If the deep breath spell is cast on a creature that 
has already held its breath for a few rounds, the 
spell acts as a clean gulp of air—when the spell 
wears off the creature begins the suffocation pro- 
cedure fresh. The spell also lets an individual 
avoid the ill effects of most gases, magical and 
otherwise. 

The material component for this spell is a tiny 
bladder of air, usually made from animal skins, 
which ts burst over the recipient’s mouth and nose. 

Notes: Uncommon for priests from the DARK SUN 
Setting; otherwise, very rare. See steal breath for the 
reversed form. 


Defensive Harmony 


Defensive Harmony 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
Sphere: Law 


Level: 4 

Range: 5 yds. 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 1 

Duration: | rd. + 2d4 rds. 

Area of Effect: 1 creature/two levels 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell must be cast on at least two crea- 
tures. The priest can affect one creature per two 
experience levels, and all creatures to be affected 
must be within three feet of each other at the time 
of casting. After the spell is completed, affected 
individuals can move about freely. 

The spell grants the creatures a defensive bonus 
by bestowing an enhanced coordination of their at- 
tacks and defenses. The affected creatures must be 
involved in a single battle so that their efforts har- 
monize to the benefit of all involved. For example, 
the affected creatures can attack one dragon or a 
group of orcs in a single area. They can also attack 
additional enemy forces that arrive during the same 
combat. If the enemy forces divide and flee, the af- 
fected creatures can follow, continue to aftack, and 
benefit from the spell. If the affected group is split 
into two smaller groups when attacked, however, it 
gains no benefit from defensive harmony. 

While the spell is in effect, each affected crea- 
ture gains a +1 bonus to Armor Class for each 
creature other than itself benefiting from the spell, 
to a maximum bonus of +5 (although more than 
five can be affected by the spell). Thus, if four 
creatures are affected each creature gains a +3 
Armor Class bonus. 

This bonus represents a mystical coordination 
of effort on the part of all affected creatures. A 
fighter will naturally wage his attack to distract the 
troll attacking the thief. The ranger will instinc- 
tively block the swing of an orc, thereby protecting 
the wizard. Creatures affected by the spell are not 
consciously aware of these efforts, and they are 
unable to create specific strategies and tactics. 

Notes: Common for to priests with major 
access to the sphere of Law (ToM). 


Defile 


Reversed form, sanctify. 


Defiler Scent 
(Divination) 
Sphere: Elemental Air 


Level: 4 

Range: 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 5 rds. 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: None 


whi 


Using this spell a priest can discern whether a 
particular being is a defiler, although it doesn’t tell 
him if the creature is a spellcaster. 

A priest picks a creature in an radius of 10 
yards for each level he has attained. He concen- 
trates for one round and waits as the spiritual odors 
of the suspected defiler waft toward him. 
Preservers and creatures by race and species smell 
normally, Defilers carry the bitter scent of smol- 
dering meat. 

Notes: Uncommon for priests from the DARK SUN 
setting; otherwise, very rare. 


Deflect Psionics — Duergar 
(Abjuration) 
Sphere: Thought 


Level: 4 

Range: 0 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 7 
Duration: 7 rds. 

Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell employs magic to deflect psionic at- 
tacks against the priest. For the duration of the 
spell, any being directing a psionic attack at the 
caster must first make a successful saving throw 
vs. spell. Success means the psionic attack pro- 
ceeds normally. Failure means, the attack is shifted 
to take effect against another being within 30 feet 
of the priest, other than the original attacker. If no 
suitable individual is in this range the attack pro- 
ceeds normally against the priest. 

If the psionic attack can be deflected to more 
than one individual, the one affected is determined 
by the following priorities: 1) the most PSPs, 2) 
the highest Intelligence score, and 3) a random die 
roll. Neither priest nor the attacker has any control 
over the target of the deflected attack. 


Ss ee eae ee 


Deny Death 


The material component is the priest’s holy 
symbol. 

Notes: Granted by the duergar goddess Deep 
Duerra. 


Deflection 
(Evocation) 
Reversible 
Sphere: Protection 
Level: 1 
Range: 120 yds. 


Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: 2 rds./level 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Special 


When the shukenja casts this spell, a chosen 
creature within range is surrounded by a mystical 
shield, protecting it from missiles and blows. The 
creature is allowed a saving throw vs. death 
against any attack for which a successful hit roll is 
scored. If the saving throw is successful, the crea- 
ture takes no damage from missile weapons and 
half damage from melee attacks. Through the 
power of the spell, the creature has managed to 
nimbly sidestep the shot or deflect the blow of the 
attacker. 

The reverse of this spell, attraction, can be cast 
on an unwilling opponent who is allowed a saving 
throw vs. spell to avoid the effect. If the saving 
throw is failed, the creature suffers 1 point of addi- 
tional damage for every level of the caster when hit 
(to a maximum of +10), unless a successful saving 
throw vs. death is made for that hit. 

Notes: Common for a priest from an oriental 
setting; otherwise, very rare. 


Degenerate Critical Wounds 
Degenerate Light Wounds 
Degenerate Serious Wounds 


Reversed forms, regenerate critical wounds, regen- 
erate light wounds, regenerate serious wounds. 
These forms are used by evil priests. 


Degenerative Harm 
Reversed form, regenerative heal. This form is used 
by evil priests. 


193 


Dehydrate 
(Evocation) 
Sphere: Sun, Elemental Sun 


Level: 7 

Range: 5 yds./level 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: | rd. 
Duration: Concentration 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: None 


This awful spell causes water to evaporate rap- 
idly from the target creature’s body. The creature 
loses 1 hit point per round as its body fluids seep 
to the surface of the skin and are absorbed by the 
spell. This continues until either the creature is 
dead or the spelicaster is disrupted. Drinking a 
canteen of water stops all damage for 4 rounds and 
restores 1d4 points of damage taken from this 
spell. The spell not only steals its creature’s water, 
it transfers it to the caster as well. The priest does- 
n't have to drink again for a number of days equal 
to 10% of the stolen hit points. If 20 hit points 
were stolen, the priest does not have to drink for 2 
days. 

If the creature survives, drinking good water 
returns all but 1d6 of the lost hit points, and heal- 
ing spells work normally,. 

Notes: Uncommon for priests from the Dark SUN 
setting; otherwise, very rare. 


tize 
Reversed form, magnetism. 


Deny Death 
(Alteration, Necromancy) 
Sphere: Necromantic 


Level: 5 

Range: 30 yds. 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 8 
Duration: | hr/level 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell places willing or senseless beings 
that have suffered injury within the previous turn 
into a type of suspended animation. It does not 
work on hostile beings who are still conscious or 
who are under the effects of a magical or psionic 
charm or sleep effects. This suspended sleep pre- 


Depress Resistance — Elf, Gnome 


h eee Le 


vents further loss of blood, vital fluids, and hit 
points and prevents foreign substances and poi- 
sons that are propelled through the body by the 
natural actions of breathing, blood pumping, or di- 
gestion from dispersing any further. It thus keeps 
poisoned or sorely wounded beings alive for the 
spell duration. 

The spell also protects the subject against addi- 
tional damage from nonmagical attacks or han- 
dling. For example, it allows the caster to drag a 
sorely injured companion over rough ground with- 
out causing further harm. The caster can end the 
effect instantly at will regardless of how much dis- 
tance separates him or her from the affected being. 
Recipients of deny death cannot rouse themselves, 
nor are they awakened by attacks upon themselves. 

Notes: Granted by the god Kelemvor, Judge of 
the Damned, of the FoRGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Depress Resistance — Elf, Gnome 
(Abjuration, Alteration) 
Sphere: Combat 


Level: 3 

Range: 60 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 6 
Duration: 1 turn 

Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: None 


Using this spell, a priest can temporarily 
reduce the magic resistance of a target creature. 
The magic resistance of the creature works against 
the depress resistance spell at half its normal 
value, and no saving throw is allowed. The spell 
has no effect on creatures that have no magic re- 
sistance. 

If the creature does not resist this spell, its 
magic resistance is reduced by 10% for one turn. 
However, drow magic resistance is reduced by 
50%, plus 2% per level of the caster. 

The material components of this spell are the 
priest’s holy symbol and a broken iron rod. 

Notes: Granted by the elven god Shevarash. 
Granted by the gnome god, Callarduran 
Smoothhands. 


Desecrate Ghi 
Reversed form, sanctify ghi. 


Destroy Air 


Reversed form, create air. 


Destroy Atmosphere 
Reversed form, create atmosphere. 


Destroy Bloodline 
Reversed form, create bloodline. 


Destroy Crypt Thing 
Reversed form, create crypt thing. 


Destroy Water 
Reversed form, create water. This form is used by 
evil priests. 


Destruction 
Reversed form, resurrection. This form is used by 
evil priests. 


Level: 7 

Range: 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: | magedoom 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell has no effect on any creature except 
a magedoom. It is unaffected by a magedoom’s 
100% magic resistance. When cast on a mage- 
doom, the creature must make a successful saving 
throw vs. spell or be destroyed. If the saving throw 
is successful, the magedoom takes 10d8 points of 
damage, which might destroy it, anyway. 

The spell was developed by the church of 
Azuth in response to the creation of a mage-killing 
horror known as a magedoom by the powerful 
wizards of the Zhentarim. Azuth only grants this 
special spell to high-level specialty priests and 
wizards who serve him well. 

The material components are a holy symbol of 
Azuth, and a magical item (which is consumed in 
the casting). Unique items, artifacts, and relics (as 
adjudicated by the DM) cannot be used as compo- 
nents for this spell. 

Notes: Granted by the god Azuth of the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


o. a 


Level: 3 

Range: 50 yds. + 10 yds/level 
Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: | turn/level 

Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell detects sentient creatures of hostile 
intent within range that mean to do harm to the 
caster by lying in ambush. It does not detect traps 
that might surprise the caster or hostile creatures 
that might do harm to the caster if encountered; 
only those expecting the caster and lying in wait to 
harm him or her are detected. 

The reverse of this spell, undetectable ambush, 
makes one sentient being waiting in ambush proof 
against this spell or any other divination spell 
(from the school or the sphere) that would have the 
same effect. For example, undetectable ambush 
would prevent an ambush from being detected by a 
detect evil or detect magic spell. 

The material component for this spell is a pos- 
session taken from an enemy (not necessarily the 
one who is lying in ambush). 

Notes: Granted by the Mulhorandi god Anhur of 
the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Detect Animal Attacker 
(Divination) 
Sphere: Animal 


Level: 4 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: | turn 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: None 


Depending on how it is cast, detect animal at- 
tacker gives the druid a visual image either of a 
creature that injured an animal or of an animal that 
attacked any victim. The spell works only within 
one hour per level of the caster after the injury is 
inflicted, and is effective regardless of whether or 
not the attack was fatal. 

While casting, the druid touches the wound 


195 


Detect Balance 


briefly. This touch gives the caster a fleeting vision 
of the animal or creature that caused the injuries as 
it looked at the time of the attack. 

Even a caster who receives a vision of an unfa- 
miliar attacker can get an idea of its size, primary 
attack method, and alignment (good, evil, or neu- 
tral). In addition, if the attacker still lives and fails 
a saving throw vs. spell, the caster senses its cur- 
rent position, location, and direction of travel. 

The material component is the priest's holy 
symbol. 

Notes: Uncommon for druids and similar 
nature priests. 


Detect Balance 
(Divination) 
Sphere: Divination 


Level: 1 

Range: 60 yds.’ 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: 1 object or creature per rd. 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell allows the druid to determine if non- 
neutral forces and alignments are at work in the 
area of effect (upon or in the object or creature 
being examined). An alignment that is partly neu- 
tral (such as that of a neutral good priest) radiates a 
mild aura, while an alignment that has no neutral 
component (such as that of a chaotic good fighter) 
gives off a strong aura. The spell does not deter- 
mine exact alignment, but only tells the druid if the 
object or creature being examined is something 
other than true neutral; a paladin and a chaotic evil 
thief, for instance, radiates the same aura at the 
same strength. 

The spell doesn’t function on nonliving items 
that do not have a natural aura (such as a vial of 
poison), but works on an object such as an aligned 
magical sword. Creatures that are under the effect 
of an unknowable alignment spell or similar magic 
don’t radiate any aura when this spell is used upon 
them. If the magic is used upon something or 
someone that exudes a true neutral alignment (such 
as another druid), it produces a smooth, well-bal- 
anced aura identifiable as one of neutrality. 

Notes: Restricted to druids and other true neu- 
tral preservers of balance. 


Detect Charm 


Detect Charm 
(Divination) 
Reversible 
Sphere: Charm, Divination 


Level: 2 

Range: 30 yds. 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: 1 turn 

Area of Effect: 1 creature/rd. 
Saving Throw: None 


When used by a priest, this spell can detect if a 
person or monster is under the influence of a 
charm spell, or similar control such as hypnosis, 
suggestion, beguiling, possession, etc. The crea- 
ture rolls a saving throw vs. spell and, if success- 
ful, the caster learns nothing about that particular 
creature from the casting. A caster who learns that 
a creature is being influenced has a 5% chance per 
level to determine the exact type of influence. Up 
to 10 different creatures can be checked before the 
spell wanes. If the creature is under more than one 
such effect, only the information that the charms 
exist is gained. The type (since there are conflict- 
ing emanations) is impossible to determine. 

The reverse of the spell, undetectable charm, 
completely masks all charms on a single creature 
for 24 hours. 

Notes: Common for clerics and druids (PHB). 


Detect Curse 
Aka, detect cursed item. 


Detect Curse — Old Empire 
(Divination) 
Sphere: Divination 


Level: 3 

Range: 10 yds. 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 6 

Duration: | rd./level 

Area of Effect: | object or being/rd. 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell enables the caster to magically exam- 
ine an item or creature to see if it has been subject to 
a curse spell. To the spellcaster, such cursed items 
or beings appear to be radiating a black aura. At 
12th level, the caster is able to determine if a curse 
spell so detected is bestow curse, major curse, dying 


curse, bane, or some other similar spell. This spell 
does not detect magical items that have malign ef- 
fects, such as a necklace of strangulation. 

Notes: Granted by the Mulhorandi god Thoth of 
the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Detect Curse — Shukenja 
(Divination) 
Sphere: Divination 


Level: 3 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: Path, 10 wide X 30 ft. long 
Saving Throw: None 


With this spell, the shukenja has a 5% chance 
per level of detecting any cursed item, person, or 
place. One man-sized object or one square yard of 
area can be checked each round. Once a cursed 
item has been discovered, the shukenja has the 
same percentage chance of determining the gen- 
eral nature of the curse, although its precise trig- 
gers and effects remain a mystery. For example, in 
examining a cursed scroll, the shukenja could 
learn the curse causes misfortune to the reader, but 
could not discern that it lowers saving throws and 
attack rolls by 1 until removed. Each item or area 
can be checked only once by the shukenja, subse- 
quent results will not vary. 

The material components for this spell are a 
gem of at least 2 chi'en (10 gp, given to the 
shukenja’s deity as an offering) and a fresh spray 
of cherry or plum blossoms. 

Notes: Common for priests from an oriental 
setting; otherwise, very rare. 


Detect Cursed Item 
(Divination) 
Sphere: Divination 


Level: 3 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: | item or person 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


A priest using this spell may be able to tell if an 
item is cursed. The priest must touch item (in some 


Se i a ee ee 


cases, this might release the curse effect). Cursed 
scrolls must be opened, but not read, for the spell 
to have an effect. Artifacts give no reading to this 
spell in any case. This spell does not detect charm 
effects; though it can detect a curse on a creature. 
An unwilling subject receives a saving throw vs. 
spell to negate the effect. 

The basic saving throw of an item is 13, though 
a very powerful cursed item might have a saving 
throw as low as 5 (the DM decides saving throws 
on an item-by-item basis). Failure to detect a curse 
means the caster has no chance to cast this spell 
successfully upon the item or creature before gain- 
ing another experience level. 

Casting this spell affects the priest so strongly 
that no other spells can be cast for four hours, 
though currently memorized spells are not lost. 

Notes: Very rare spell. (Updated from DRAGON 
Magazine.) 


Detect Disease 
(Divination) 
Sphere: Divination 


Level: 1 

Range: 10 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: 1 creature or object/level 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell reveals whether a creature or object 
carries a disease (including lycanthropy, mummy 
rot, or a magical disease), and whether the caster 
can cure the affliction. The caster has a 10% 
chance per level to correctly identify the disease; 
failure results in no identification at all. 

The material component is the priest's holy 
symbol. 

Notes: Common for specialty priests of heal- 
ing; otherwise; uncommon. 


Detect Disease 


The oriental version differs only in 
the material component, which is a 
bamboo wand with prayer-inscribed 
paper strips attached to it. 


197 


Detect Drow — Dwarf, Gnome 


Detect Drow — Dwarf, Gnome 
(Divination) 
Sphere: Divination 


Level: 1 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: 1 turn 

Area of Effect: 10 ft. X 30 yds. 
Saving Throw: None 


When a detect drow spell is cast, the priest de- 
tects the presence of night elves and their kin ina 
path 10 feet wide and up to 30 yards long, in the 
direction he is facing. The exact number of drow 
can be determined. The caster has a 10% chance 
per level to determine the level and class of any 
drow so detected. The caster can turn, scanning a 
60° arc per round. The spell is blocked by solid 
stone at least 1 foot thick, solid metal at least 1 
inch thick, or solid wood at least | yard thick. 

The material component of this spell is the 
priest’s holy symbol. 

Notes: Granted by the dwarven god Shevarash, 
and by the gnome god Callarduran Smoothhands. 


Detect Dwarves — Dwarf 


"gel 


Detect Dwarves — Dwarf 
(Divination) 
Sphere: Divination 


Level: 1 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: } turn 
Area of Effect: 10 ft. X 90 ft. 
Saving Throw: None 


When the detect dwarves spell is cast, the priest 
detects living dwarves, dead dwarves, azer, duergar, 
derro, half-dwarves, and spilled dwarven blood, 
even if these are invisible, shapechanged, concealed 
by illusions, and so on, in a path 10 feet wide and up 
to 90 feet long, in the direction he or she is facing. 
The approximate number of dwarves in the area of 
effect can also be determined within 10%. The 
caster also has a 10% chance per level to determine 
the subrace and gender of dwarves detected, to a 
maximum chance of 75%. The caster can turn, 
scanning a 60° arc per round. The spell is blocked 
by solid stone at least 1 foot thick, solid metal at 
least 1 inch thick, or solid wood at least ] yard thick. 

The material component is the priestess holy 
symbol. 

Notes: Granted by the dwarven goddess 
Sharindlar. 


Area of Effect: Path, 10 ft. x 60-ft. 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell detects the presence and direction of 
any creature within a 60-foot radius that has imme- 
diately hostile intentions toward the caster. The crea- 
ture or creatures can be invisible, ethereal, astral, out 
of phase, hidden, disguised, or in plain sight. The 
priest feels a compulsion to face each individual 
enemy in range. The priest need not do so, but unerr- 
ingly recognizes as hostile any such creature the 
priest sees. Unseen enemies are sufficiently detected 
to negate surprise attack rounds, and a thief position- 


198 


ing for a backstab has the relevant thief skill score 
halved (usually hide in shadows or move silently). 

The caster also has a 5% chance per level to 
detect longer term hostility toward himself or her- 
self, even if no direct attack is imminent. 

The material components of this spell are the 
priest's holy symbol and a drop of blood from a 
former enemy. It is not necessary to display either 
in an obvious fashion, allowing the priest to cast 
this spell without alerting opponents that he is 
doing so. 

Notes: Granted by the dwarven god Vergadain 
the Trickster. 


Detect Evil 
(Divination) 
Reversible 
Sphere: Divination 
Level: 1 
Range: 0 


Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: | turn + /2 turn. /level 

Area of Effect: 10-ft. path X 120 yds. 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell discovers emanations of evil, from 
any creature, object, or area. Character alignment, 
however, is revealed only under unusual circum- 
stances: characters who are strongly aligned, who 
do not stray from their faith, and who are of at 
least 9th level might radiate evil if intent upon ap- 
propriate actions. Powerful monsters, such as rak- 
shasas or ki-rin, send forth emanations of evil or 
good, even if polymorphed. Aligned undead radi- 
ate evil, for it is this power and negative force that 
enable them to continue existing. An evilly cursed 
object or unholy water radiates evil, but a hidden 
trap or an unintelligent viper does not. 

The degree of evil (faint, moderate, strong, over- 
whelming) and possibly its general nature (expec- 
tant, malignant, gloating, etc.) can be noted. If the 
evil is overwhelming, the priest has a 10% chance 
per level of detecting its general bent (/awful, neu- 
tral, chaotic). The duration of a detect evil spell is 
one turn plus five rounds per level of the priest. 
Thus a Ist-level priest can cast a spell with a 15- 
round duration, a 2nd-level priest can cast a spell 
with a 20-round duration, etc, The spell has a path 
of detection 10 feet wide in the direction in which 
the priest is facing. The priest must concentrate— 
stop, have quiet, and intently seek to detect the 


Detect Illusion 


aura—for at least one round—to receive a reading. 
The spell requires the use of the priest’s holy 
symbol as its material component, with the priest 
holding it before him. 
The reverse spell, detect good, operates the 
same way, but good emanations are discovered. 
Notes: Common for clerics (PHB). 


Detect Good 
Reversed form, detect evil. This form is used by 
evil priests. 


Detect Harmful Gas — Dwarf 
(Divination) 
Sphere: Divination 


Level: 1 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: | turn + 4 turn/level 

Area of Effect: 60-ft. diameter. sphere 
Saving Throw: None 


Useful in mining and underground exploration, 
this spell enables the caster to detect the presence 
of harmful gas in a sphere 60 feet in diameter 
around the caster. The primary use of this spell is 
to detect underground hazardous natural gases 
such as explosive methane or poisonous sulphur, 
or toxic gases like carbon monoxide, but this spell 
can also detect any other harmful gas that occurs 
naturally or is produced by alchemy or magic. 

In addition to revealing the presence of such 
gases, the caster has a 5% chance per level to iden- 
tify the specific type of gas found (for example, 
chlorine gas, methane, or carbon monoxide), to a 
maximum chance of 75%. Some rare, exotic gases 
might be beyond a priest's ability to identify ex- 
actly, although the identification roll may indicate 
the possible danger from or effect of the gas. 

The material component of this spell is the 
priest's holy symbol. 

Notes: Very rare spell, known to dwarven 


priests. (Updated from DraGoN Magazine.) 


Detect Harmony 


(Divination) 
Sphere: Divination 


Level: 1 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 turn 

Duration; Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: 10-ft/level cube or 1 individual 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell gives the shukenja general information 
on the balances of forces—good, evil, lawful, or 
chaotic—in a given area. It does not reveal the exact 
alignment or nature of anything in the area of effect, 
only the general proportions of each element. The 
DM must consult his information about the target 
area to determine the answer. Answers are always 
vague— "there is more evil than good here! or “the 
lawful order of the universe is ascendant in this area.” 

When cast upon a living creature, the spell 
takes into account not only the creature’s given 
alignment, but also the acts they have done, the ac- 
tions they currently intend to do, and any other 
factors that may be at variance with their stated 
alignment. Thus, a lawful evil character noted for 
his occasional outbursts of compassion towards 
the helpless would be detected as being “faithful 
but in which the other forces are at struggle.” Also, 
the spell can be cast on buildings and areas in an 
attempt to learn whether there are powers at work 
in these places. A dwelling haunted by spirits 
would show the harmonies tending towards evil 
and destruction, while the cave of a noted holy 
hermit would give the opposite impression. 

The material component for this spell is a specially 
prepared scroll of sutras costing 5 chi’en (25 gp) 
for the paper and inks. 

Notes: Common for priests from an oriental 
setting; otherwise, very rare. 


Detect Illusion 
(Divination) 
Sphere: Divination 


Level: 3 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 6 
Duration: 2 rds./level 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


4 199 i. 


Detect Lie = 


This spell enables the caster to see any illusion 
for what it is, and banishes phantasms from the 
caster’s mind. Further, while the spell lasts, the 
priest can allow one creature per round a new 
saving throw vs. spell against any illusion or phan- 
tasm created by a spell of 6th level or less. To do 
this, the caster must touch the creature (which 
might require a successful attack roll) taking no 
other significant action in the round. 

Notes: Uncommon spell. 


Detect Lie 
(Divination) 
Reversible 
Sphere: Divination 


Level: 4 

Range: 30 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 7 
Duration: | rd./level 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


A priest who casts this spell is immediately 
able to determine if the subject creature deliber- 
ately and knowingly speaks a lie. It does not reveal 
the truth, uncover unintentional inaccuracies, or 
necessarily reveal evasions. The subject receives a 
saving throw vs. spell, which is adjusted only by 
the Wisdom of the caster—for example., if the 
caster has a Wisdom of 18, the subject's saving 
throw roll is reduced by 4 (see the Wisdom Table 
in the PHB). 

The material component for the detect lie spell 
is one gp worth of gold dust 

The spell's reverse, undetectable lie, prevents 
the magical detection of lies spoken by the crea- 
ture for 24 hours. The reverse requires brass dust 
as its material component. 

Notes: Common for priests and druids (PHB). 


Detect Life 
(Divination) 
Sphere: Divination 


Level: 2 

Range: 10 ft/level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: 5 rds. 

Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: None 


By the use of this spell, a priest can tell if a 
creature is alive. The magic detects life in the sub- 
ject of a feign death spell, or someone in a coma, 
deathlike trance, or state of suspended animation. 
If cast upon the body of a creature that is engaged 
in astral travel, it reveals that the creature is alive. 
The spell works on plants and plant creatures as 
well as animals, The spell's range is diminished if 
more than a one-inch thickness of wood or stone 
lies between the priest and the subject. Each inch 
of thickness of a wood or stone barrier is treated as 
10 feet of open space. A barrier of metal of any 
thickness causes the spell to fail and be ruined. 
Any form of mental protection, including those of 
psionic or magical nature, likewise ruins the spell 
without anything being detected. The spell detects 
the first living creature that lies along the priest's 
line of sight (and within range), or else the first 
creature that crosses the line-of-sight path before 
the duration expires. 

Notes: Common for priests of an orienta} set- 
ting. Uncommon for clerics and druids. 


Area of Effect: 60-ft.-radius 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell discovers emanations of life, making 
all living things within the area of effect glow with 
an easily discernible aura visible only to the caster. 
Intelligence is the main quality upon which the 
spell focuses, because more intelligent creatures 
glow more brightly. The spell does not allow direct 
mental contact and does not detect magically or 
psionically-shielded creatures or the wills of 
absent scryers such as wizards using wizard eyes 
or crystal balls. Beings hidden in extradimen- 
sional space are considered absent. This spell can 
detect life that is invisible, concealed, disguised 
(even trapped within solid objects or magical 
forms), astral, or ethereal, but does not reveal the 
state of the life. This spell gives no hint of the 
nature, thoughts, or inclination (that is, hostile or 
friendly) of the life detected. The area is mobile 
and centered on the caster. 


Wee a ee ao 


Detect Powers 


N 


This spell was developed by Scriveners of 
Doom, who understood that mortals often flee from 
eternal rest, too blinded by fear and ignorance to re- 
alize that a priest is trying to help them. The spell 
also serves as a defense against living adversaries 
who might try to ambush the spellcaster. 

Notes: Granted by the demipower Jergal, 
Scribe of the Doomed, of the FORGOTTEN REALMS 
setting. 


Detect Magic 
(Divination) 
Sphere: AIl 


Level: 1 

Range: 30 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: 1 turn 

Area of Effect: 10-ft. path X 30 yds. 
Saving Throw: None 


When the detect magic spell is cast, the priest 
detects magical radiations in a path 10 feet wide and 
up to 30 yards long, in the direction he is facing. 
The intensity of the magic can be detected (dim, 
faint, moderate, strong, overwhelming). The caster 
has a 10% chance per level to determine the sphere 
of the magic, but unlike the wizard version of the 
spell, the type of magic (alteration, conjuration, 
etc.) cannot be divined. The caster can turn, scan- 
ning a 60° arc per round. The spell is blocked by 
solid stone at least 1 foot thick, solid metal at least 1 
inch thick, or a solid wood at least 1 yard thick. 

The spell requires the priest’s holy symbol. 

Notes: Common for clerics and druids (PHB). 


Detect Metals and Minerals 
— Old Empire, Dwarf, Gnome 
(Divination) 
Sphere: Divination, Elemental Earth 


Level: 1 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: | turn+1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: 10-ft. X 120-ft. path 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell allows its caster to divine the loca- 
tion of a single type of ore or mineral deposit, A 
casting priest concentrates on finding a specific 


201 


type of metal or mineral (including gems), and can 
detect a different type each round, if desired. If the 
substance is within a path 10 feet wide and 120 
feet long, the exact location and approximate 
quantity of material is revealed. The caster can de- 
termine if the material is in a pure, refined form 
(pure silver, for example), raw ore (iron ore), or 
alloy form (adamantine). The caster can move at a 
walk and maintain the spell, but cannot engage in 
strenuous activity and maintain it. 

The material component of this spell is the 
priest's holy symbol. 

Notes: Granted by the Mulhorandi earth god 
Geb. Granted by dwarven gods such as Abbathor 
and Dumathoin. Granted by the gnome gods 
Callarduran Smoothhands and Flandal Steelskin. 


Detect Poison 


Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 4 

Duration: | turn + | rd./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell enables the priest to determine if an 
object has been poisoned or is poisonous. One 
object, or a 5-foot cubic mass, can be checked per 
round, The priest has a 5% chance per level of de- 
termining the exact type of poison. 

The material component is a strip of specially 
blessed vellum, which turns black if poison is 
present. 

Notes: Common for clerics and druids (PHB). 


Detect Powers 
(Divination) 
Sphere: Divination 
Level: 2 
Range: 240 yds. 


Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: | turn 

Area of Effect: I crystal shell 
Saving Throw: None 


Casting this spell outside a crystal sphere 
allows the priest to determine if there are friendly 


Detect Powers 


gods or other powers so that higher-level spells can 
be regained within its borders. The detect powers 
spell also reveals if the caster’s patron is wor- 
shipped in that sphere. 

If the sphere is one known to the DM, or one 
which has its major powers already designed, then 
the spell reveals if the priest's deity, or deities re- 
lated to the one involved (either members of the 
same pantheon or with similar attributes and port- 
folio) exist. For example, while two war gods of 
different campaigns settings may be sufficiently 
similar to justify “related” status, a god of 
smithing may have no parallel in a world without 
developed metalcraft. In that situation, a priest de- 
voted to the smithing god would not find a power 
to recharge his spells. 

If the sphere is new to the DM (that is, the ad- 
venturers just discovered it), and he or she has no 
clear idea what lies within, then roll on the table 
for a possible response to the spell. 


Die Roll 
01-10 


Response 

Power is known in this sphere. The 
priest can recharge spells normally. 
11-50 Power is unknown in sphere, but a 
related power exists. The priest can 
regain spells normally after con- 
tacting priests of the related deity 
51-90 Power is unknown in sphere. The 
priest cannot regain spells above 
2nd level until contact is restored 
with venerated power. 

91-00 Power is unknown in sphere. There 
is a related power, but his relation- 
ship is not good with the priest's 
power (whether through lack of 
knowledge, some ancient insult— 
imagined or real—or some other 
mysterious reason). The priest 
cannot regain spells above 2nd 
level until either contact is restored 
with the original power, or the 
priest performs a great task for the 
new power. 


While many powers have similar portfolios and 
areas of interest (war, healing, agriculture, death, 
and so on), they are often at varying alignments. In 
one fantasy world, a war god might be a good and 
lawful figure. On another world, a war deity may 


202 


be evil and chaotic. 

A priest is able to tell the alignment of the 
power closest to his deity through the detect 
powers spell. Accepting spells from a power of 
similar portfolio but opposite alignment is danger- 
ous, and any priest who does so must regain favor 
with his chief deity (through quest or atonement) 
before further advancement in his class is possible. 

A number of specialty faiths exist only in space 
fantasy campaigns, including the Polygots, The 
Path & the Way, Ptah, and the Planar Churches. If 
a space-going civilization of any sort exists in the 
crystal sphere, then these faiths will be represented 
somewhere in that system. 

The material component of this spell is a hand- 
ful of sand, which the priest casts onto the crystal 
shell. 

Notes: Common for priests from a spelljam- 
ming culture; otherwise, very rare. 


Detect Snares & Pits 


Detect Predator 
(Divination) 
Sphere: Divination 


Level: 1 

Range: 0 

Components: V, M 

Casting Time: 1 

Duration: 4 rds./level 

Area of Effect: 60-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell allows the caster to sense the pres- 
ence of any predatory creatures (including sharks, 
eels, rays and intelligent marine creatures such as 
locathah and sahuagin) within a 60-foot radius. 
Although the caster can magically detect the pres- 
ence of a predator and determine its location, he 
cannot actually identify its species until he physi- 
cally sees it. 

The material component is the caster’s holy 
symbol. 

Notes: Uncommon for seagoing priests or 
those from underwater cultures. 


Detect Psionic Use 
(Divination) 
Sphere: Thought 


Level: 2 

Range: 0 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: | rd. 

Duration: 5 rds/level 

Area of Effect: Path, 10-ft. wide X 90 ft. long 
Saving Throw: none 


When this spell is cast, the priest sees any 
psionic use in the area of effect as a rosy glow out- 
lining the psionic creature. The more PSPs the 
creature uses, the brighter is the glow (faint 1 to 5 
points, moderate 6 to 10 points, strong 11+points) 
The caster can turn slowly, scanning a 60-degree 
arc per round. The caster also has a 10% chance 
per level to determine the psionic discipline, attack 
mode, or defense mode being used. Any material 
barrier at least one inch thick blocks this spell. 

The spell requires the priest’s holy symbol, and 
a dew drop collected from a spider’s web. 

Notes: Very rare spell. (Updated from 
POLYHEDRON Newszine.) 


Area of Effect: 1 creature/level 
Saving Throw: None 


By means of this spell, the shukenja is able to 
see the true form of any shapechanging creature. 
The true form is the shape most commonly as- 
sumed by the creature. If the creature is currently 
in that form, the spell reveals that it is a 
shapechanger but does not reveal the other forms 
possible. The spell does not disclose the specific 
type of shapechanger, the alignment, or the inten- 
tions of the creature. One creature or one square 
yard of area can be examined each round. 

The material component for this spell is balm 
of honey and lotus flower smeared on the eyelids 
of the caster. 

Notes: Common for priests of an oriental set- 
ting; otherwise, very rare. 


Detect Snares & Pits 
(Divination) 
Sphere: Animal, Plant 


Level: 1 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: 4 rds/level 

Area of Effect: 10-ft. path, 40 ft. long 
Saving Throw: None 


Upon casting this spell, the caster is able to 
detect snares, pits, deadfalls and similar hazards 
along a 10-foot-wide by 40-foot long path. Such 
hazards include simple pits, deadfalls, snares of 
wilderness creatures (for example, trapdoor spi- 
ders, giant sundews, ant lions, etc.), and primitive 
traps constructed of natural materials (mantraps, 
missile trips, hunting snares, etc.). The spell is di- 
rectional—the caster must face the desired direc- 
tion to determine if a pit exists or a trap is laid in 
that direction. The caster experiences a feeling of 
danger from the direction of a detected hazard, 
which increases as the danger is approached. The 


ee ee 


Detect Spirits ao 


caster learns the general nature of the danger (pit, 
snare, or deadfall) but not its exact operation, nor 
how to disarm it. Close examination, however, en- 
ables the caster to sense what intended actions 
might trigger it. The spell detects certain natural 
hazards—quicksand (snare), sinkholes (pit), or 
unsafe walls of natural rock (deadfall). Other haz- 
ards, such as a cavern that floods during rain, an 
unsafe construction, or a naturally poisonous 
plant, are not revealed. The spell does not detect 
magical traps (save those that operate by pit, dead- 
fall, or snaring; see the 2nd-level spell trip and the 
3rd-level spell, snare), nor those that are mechani- 
cally complex, nor does it detect snares or dead- 
falls that have been rendered safe or inactive. 

The caster must have his holy symbol to com- 
plete the spell. 

Notes: Common for druids (PHB). 


Detect Spirits 
(Divination) 
Sphere: Divination 


Level: 3 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 6 

Duration: 1 turn + 1 turn/level 
Area of Effect: 10 ft. X 60 ft. path 
Saving Throw: None 


This divination reveals the presence of disem- 
bodied or noncorporeal spirits of all types, includ- 
ing wraiths, ghosts, spectres, astrally-projecting 
creatures, those using magic jar or possession, and 
animal and nature spirits. Those who are simply 
invisible, phased, or ethereal do not count as spir- 
its, since they are physically present in the flesh. 
The caster detects spirits in a path 10 feet wide and 
60 feet long; any spirits in the area of effect are re- 
vealed in their preferred form or appearance for all 
to see, Simply detecting a spirit doesn’t give the 
caster any special ability to communicate with or 
attack it. 

The material component for this spell is a small 
pendant of copper wire worth at least 20 gp. 

Notes: Uncommon for priests with access to 
the sphere of Divination (PO:SM). Also granted by 
the elven god Sehanine Moonbow. 


Detect Untruth — Savant 


Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: None 


A savant who employs this spell is able to note 
an untruth spoken by a creature, including even a 
minor evasion of the truth. The material compo- 
nent is the forked tongue of a snake. 

The reverse of the spell, evade truth, allows the 
savant to lie or evade the truth without being dis- 
covered by any means. The material component is 
a pinch of brass dust. 

Notes: Restricted to savant-clerics, common, 
(Updated from DraGon Magazine.) 


Detect Weapons — Dwarf 
(Divination) 
Sphere: Combat, Divination 


Level: 1 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: 1 turn 

Area of Effect: Path, 10 ft. X 90 ft. 
Saving Throw: None 


When the detect weapons spell is cast, the 
priest detects weapons in a path 10 feet wide and 
up to 90 feet long, in the direction she is facing. 
The caster can turn, scanning a 60° arc per round. 
The spell is blocked by solid stone at least 1 foot 
thick, solid metal at least 1 inch thick, or solid 
wood at least 1 yard thick. 

The spell detects concealed, invisible, and im- 
provised weapons that have been used to harm or 
are carried with intent to harm. Broken weapons 
are detected only if still usable. In some old ruins, 
this spell is rendered useless by the sheer number 
of abandoned weapons. 

The material component is the priest's holy 
symbol. 

Notes: Granted by the dwarven goddess Haela 
Brightaxe. 


” a: aaa: 


Dictate — Harmonium 


a 4 


Determine Final Rest 
(Divination) 
Sphere: Divination 


Level: 3 

Range: 10 yds. 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 6 

Duration: | turn 

Area of Effect: 1 creature or 1 corpse 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell is similar to know alignment in that it 
enables the priest to read the aura of a living or de- 
ceased creature. However, this magic is used to 
quickly determine which Outer Plane and which 
particular level within that plane (if it possesses 
more than one) the examined individual should be 
consigned to after death, as determined by a 
being’s religion, nature, and alignment. (Though 
the DM notes these, they are not revealed to the 
spellcaster). If a being has been sent to an incorrect 
final rest or redirected unwillingly en route, this 
spell notes that fact, but not the destination to 
which the being has been sent. Note that those 
spells and objects that would prevent a know align- 
ment spell from functioning also inhibit a deter- 
mine final rest spell. Corpses do not normally 
receive a saving throw vs. this spell unless they are 
actually undead creatures. 

Notes: Granted by the demipower Jergal, 
Scribe of the Doomed, of the FORGOTTEN REALMS 
setting. 


Dictate 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
Sphere: Charm, Law 
Level: 3 
Range: 30 yds. 

Components: V 
Casting Time: 6 


Duration: 1 turn + Iturn/level 
Area of Effect: Up to 6 creatures in a 20-ft. cube 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


The dictate spell is an improved version of the 
Ist-level priest spell, command, and affects up to 6 
creatures in a 20-foot cube. The caster is not lim- 
ited to a single word and can issue an order of no 
more than a dozen words in length. All the speci- 
fied creatures that fail their saving throws must at- 
tempt to obey the caster’s instructions. For 


example, a priest could issue a dictate such as 
“Stay here until I return,” “Throw down your 
weapons,” or “Seize that elf!” The subjects con- 
tinue to obey non-immediate orders for up to one 
round per experience level of the caster. 

Subjects who cannot understand the caster are 
not affected, so those who do not understand the 
caster’s language are immune to this spell. In addi- 
tion, the order must create an immediate and obvi- 
ous course of action for the subject; a dictate to 
“Die!” or “Feel sorry for him!" would simply 
cause the subject to stand still in confusion for one 
round. Poorly worded or confusing commands 
allow a +1 to +4 bonus to saving throws at the 
DM's discretion. Similarly, someone who fails a 
saving throw when given an obviously self-de- 
structive dictate simply loses the next round as he 
or she fights off the compulsion. 

Originally developed by the Harmonium fac- 
tion of the Outer Planes, this spell has come into 
more widespread use in recent years. While the 
spell is available as a 2nd-level enchantment for 
members of the Harmonium, this general version 
is not as efficient and is a 3rd-level spell. 

Notes: Uncommon for clerics and priests with 
access to the sphere of Charm or Law. 


Dictate — Harmonium 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
Sphere: Charm, Law 


Level: 2 

Range: 30 yds. 

Components: V 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: Up to 6 creatures in a 20-ft. cube 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell is a variation of the command spell. It 
can affect up to six creatures at once, and its effects 
can last more than one round. Dictate allows the 
caster to speak a short, precise phrase or order of no 
more than a dozen words that must be obeyed by all 
target creatures who fail their saving throws vs. 
spell. Examples include, “Throw down your 
weapons, “ “Stay here until I return, “ or “Seize that 
elf?’ The command must be stated in a language un- 
derstood by the target creatures or the spell fails. 

Dictate must be phrased to create an immediate 
course of physical action. Commands to “die” or 
“sleep” usually don’t work, but commands to “lie 
down and put your hands behind your head” prove 


2 205 a 


Dictation 


"\ gl 


effective. If the caster phrases the dictate spell 
poorly, the DM can assign a saving throw modifier 
of +1 to +4. If an obviously self-destructive action 
is commanded (“Throw yourself off that cliff’ or 
“Kill yourself’) any individual failing the saving 
throw stands still for one round, fighting the com- 
pulsion to obey. Such commands never work, how- 
ever. Once an order takes effect, the subject 
creature continues following it the condition is ful- 
filled or the spell ends. Therefore, when a creature 
ordered to “climb the ladder” reaches the top of 
the ladder, the spell ends. A creature ordered to 
“wait here” does so for the entire duration. 

This spell was developed by and for the 
Harmonium. Since Harmonium security is very 
tight and very effective, non-Harmonium priests 
have little chance to gain access to this spell. 

Notes: Common for Harmonium priests. A 
more general 3rd-level spell is uncommon for 
others. 


Dictation 
(Invocation/Evocation) 
Sphere: Learning 


Level: 1 

Range: 10 ft. 
Components: V, M 
Casting Time: | 
Duration: | turn/level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell causes any words spoken by the 
priest or anyone within 10 feet of him to appear on 
a piece of paper or the blank page of a book. It is 
useful for recording conversations, verbal agree- 
ments, interrogations, or even notes or observa- 
tions if the priest doesn’t want to take the time to 
write them down himself. Generally, a person 
reading aloud takes about one to five minutes to 
read a page, depending on the size of the writing 
and density of the words. 

Foreign languages are not translated, although 
foreign words are given the correct alphabetic 
spelling in the priest’s native tongue; for example, 
the phrase c’est la vie would appear as it does here, 
with no English translation, but a phrase or name 
in Arabic or Chinese would not be transcribed in 
those alphabets. Magical spells and invocations 
are not recorded, so this spell can’t be used to 
create a copy of a scroll as it is read, but a clever 
priest may be able to record a magical item’s com- 


mand word if an enemy within range uses it while 
the spell is in effect. 

The material component for this spell is the 
blank page, scroll, or paper on which the dictation 
will appear. This must be prepared with a special 
wash of vinegar, costing 10 gold pieces per page. 

Notes: Very rare spell. (Updated from DRAGON 
Magazine.) 


Digit of Disruption, Henley’s 
See Henley’s digit of disruption. 


Dimensional Anchor 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Guardian 


Level: 4 

Range: 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 1 

Duration: | turn + 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: None 


When a priest casts this spell, a green ray 
springs from his outstretched hand and unerringly 
strikes a creature within line of sight and the range 
of the spell, covering the subject with a shimmer- 
ing emerald field that completely blocks bodily 
extradimensional travel. Forms of movement 
barred by the dimensional anchor include blink- 
ing, dimension door, etherealness, gate, phasing, 
plane shift, maze, shadow walk, teleportation, and 
similar spell-like or psionic abilities. The field per- 
sists for one turn plus one round per caster level 
and has no effect other than blocking extradimen- 
sional travel. The dimensional anchor does not in- 
terfere with the movement of creatures in astral 
form, nor does it block extradimensional percep- 
tion or attack forms such as a basilisk’s gaze. 

Notes: Uncommon for clerics (PO:SM). 


Dimensional Folding 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Numbers 


Level: 4 

Range: 5 ft. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: | rd. 

Area of Effect: Circle, up to 10-ft. diameter 
Saving Throw: None 


ne aE 


Dimensional Translocation 


era 4 


This spell allows the caster to selectively warp 
the fabric of space, folding it into higher dimensions. 

This effect can be best explained through an 
example. If an ant crawling along the west edge of 
a map decided to travel to the east edge of the map, 
it would have to crawl the full width of the map. 
But if the map was folded in two so that the east 
and west edges were touching, the ant would travel 
almost no distance at all. The ant’s world (the 
map) would have been folded through the third di- 
mension. The dimensional folding spell does 
something similar with the three-dimensional 
world: it folds it through a higher dimension (the 
fourth), allowing instantaneous travel between two 
locales on the same plane of existence. 

Although this effect may seem similar to the 
wizard spell teleport, in practice, it is much differ- 
ent. The dimensional folding spell opens a gate 
that allows instantaneous, bidirectional access to a 
distant locale on the same plane. This gate is circu- 
lar, of any size up to 10 feet in diameter, and re- 
mains in existence for up to 1 full round. The 
caster and any other creatures can pass through the 
gate in either direction while it remains open. 
Missile weapons and spells can also pass through 
the gate. 

The gate appears as a shimmering ring, glow- 
ing with a faint light equivalent to starshine. Vision 
through the gate is clear and unobstructed in both 
directions, allowing the priest to look before he 
leaps. Anyone on the other side of the gate is able 
to see the priest and his point of origin. 

The near side of the gate always appears within 
5 feet of the priest. The location of the far side of 
the gate always opens within 5 feet of the place the 
priest desires. Thus, there is no chance of arriving 
at the wrong destination, as with the wizard spell, 
teleport. 

There is a risk involved in using dimensional 
folding, however. Many philosophers believe that 
what we know as time is simply another dimen- 
sion, and the behavior of this spell seems to sup- 
port this thesis. Unless the priest is extremely 
familiar with the destination, there is a significant 
chance that any creature passing through a dimen- 
sional folding gate will suffer instantaneous aging. 
Theorists believe that this is the same kind of slip- 
page that can cause a teleporting wizard to land 
high or low, except that in this case, the slippage is 
in the time dimension. 

The chance of aging depends on how familiar 
the priest is with the destination (see table). 


207 


Chance of Amount of 
Destination is aging aging 
Very familiar* 2% 1 year 
Studied carefully 5% 1d2 years 
Seen casually 10% 1d3 years 
Viewed once 15% 1d6 years 
Never seen 25% 1d10 years 


*Use this row if the desired location is within view of the 
priest. 


If aging occurs, every creature passing through 
the gate in either direction suffers the aging effect. 
All creatures passing through a given gate age by 
the same amount. 

The caster need not be the one traveling. For 
example, a priest can open the gate near a distant 
ally so the ally can join the priest. 

The material component is a sheet of platinum 
tissue worth at least 15 gp, which the priest folds 
intricately during the casting. The tissue is con- 
sumed when the gate closes. 

Notes: Common for to priests with major 
access to the sphere of Numbers; common (ToM). 


Dimensional Translocation 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Numbers, Summoning 


Level: 5 

Range: 60 yds. 
Components; S 

Casting Time: 3 
Duration: | rd./level 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Special 


By using this spell, the priest seals off the mul- 
tidimensional existence of a magical, undead, or 
extraplanar creature. The affected creature can be 
forced entirely into its extraplanar dimension, 
which removes it from the physical world, or its 
extraplanar existence can be severed, forcing it en- 
tirely into the Prime Material Plane. If the priest’s 
level exceeds the subject’s Hit Dice or level, the 
creature is not allowed a saving throw, but crea- 
tures of higher Hit Dice or level than the caster are 
allowed a saving throw vs. spell to negate the 
effect. Any magic resistance applies, as well. If 
used to banish an extraplanar or multidimensional 
creature, dimensional translocation prevents the 
creature from returning to the Prime Material 
Plane for the duration of the spell. The creature 


Dire Chant — Dragon 


may be able to take other actions, such as using 
magical items or spell-like abilities on itself while 
it waits to return. If the caster instead forces an ex- 
tradimensional creature into the Prime Material 
Plane, one or more of the following effects may 
apply, at the DM’s option: 


* The creature’s Armor Class may be reduced 
by 1d6 points for the duration of the spell. 

* The quality of a magical weapon needed to 
strike the creature may be reduced by one “plus”; 
for example, a monster normally hit by +2 or 
better weapons can become vulnerable to +1 
weapons for the spell’s duration. 

+ The creature may suffer permanent death 
upon the loss of all its hit points. 

* Use of 1d6 spell-like powers (such as gating 
in allies) may be limited or negated. 

+ Undead creatures lose the ability to drain life 
energy levels. 


This spell does not prevent extradimensional 
travel on the Prime Material Plane (for example, 
dimension door, blinking, teleport, or similar ef- 
fects), but it does prevent the subject from plane 
shifting or becoming ethereal while in effect. 

Notes: Common for priests with major access 
to the Sphere of Numbers, uncommon for clerics 
(PO:SM). 


Dire Chant — Dragon 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 


Sphere: Necromantic 


Level: 3 

Range: 0 

Components: V 

Casting Time: Special 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: Dragon fear radius 
Saving Throw: None 


A dire chant is a draconic variant of the 
common chant and prayer spells. It creates a sense 
of impending doom, an aura of decay, and lowers 
the temperature in the area of effect to just above 
freezing (if the temperature is freezing or below, 
the spell has no affect on temperature). 

Within the affected area, opponents of the 
caster suffer a —2 penalty to attack and damage 
rolis, most saving throws, and morale. Saving 
throws against dragon fear, cause fear spells, and 
similar effects suffer a 4 penalty. 


The dire chant lasts as long as the dragon con- 
tinues to chant. This precludes the use of a breath 
weapon, bite, and spellcasting with verbal compo- 
nents (though innate spell-like abilities and 
granted powers can be used). 

In subterranean and enclosed settings, the dire 
chant need only be uttered for one round. The nat- 
ural acoustics of the enclosed area are magically 
augmented to echo the initial chant for 10 rounds 
after the dragon ceases to chant. 

Notes: Restricted to dragons. Granted by Null, 
the Death Wyrm, of the FORGOTTEN REALMS set- 
ting. This spell effect is known to exist as an innate 
spell-like ability. 


Disbelief 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
Sphere: Thought 


Level: 6 

Range: 0 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 5 
Duration: 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell allows the caster to temporarily con- 
vince himself that certain objects or as many as 
four creatures within the area of effect do not actu- 
ally exist. While disbelief remains in effect, these 
objects or creatures cannot harm or hinder the 
caster. He can pass through them as if they did not 
exist and takes no damage from their attacks or ac- 
tions. However, since these objects or creatures 
temporarily do not exist for the priest, he can take 
no action against them. If the creatures attack, the 
caster receives no Dexterity bonus to armor class 
(since this bonus represents dodging, and the 
priest is unable to dodge a creature that does not 
exist for him). 

The caster can attempt to disbelieve as many as 
four creatures within 60 feet of his position at the 
time of casting. He disbelieves the same four crea- 
tures for the duration of the spell. Alternatively, the 
priest can disbelieve any or all inanimate objects 
of up to 20-cubic-yard volume (thus, he can disbe- 
lieve a 12 foot by 15 foot area of 3-foot-thick 
wall). This volume must be centered on a point no 
more than 20 yards from the caster. These two op- 
tions are mutually exclusive; the priest can disbe- 
lieve only creatures or objects, not a combination 
of both. 


” ee eee 


Discern Elven Influence 


N, 


Disbelieving a creature includes all gear, 
equipment, or treasure carried or worn by that 
creature; it does not include other objects that 
come into contact with that creature, such as walls, 
doors, chairs, and so on. 

Disbelief is not automatic; it requires an ex- 
treme effort. To successfully disbelieve, the pries 
must make a saving throw vs. paralyzation. A suc- 
cessful saving throw means the priest has disbe- 
lieved; failure means that the spell has failed and 
the priest has not convinced himself of the crea- 
tures’ or objects’ nonexistence. 

While this spell is in effect, the DM must 
record any damage suffered by the priest from dis- 
believed creatures. When the spell ends, the caster 
makes a saving throw vs. spell. If the saving throw 
is successful, the priest suffers only one-eighth of 
any damage inflicted by the creatures (round all 
fractions down), if the priest fails the saving throw, 
he suffers one-half of any damage inflicted (round 
fractions down). 

Notes: Common for to priest with major access 
to the sphere of Thought (ToM). 


Disc of Concordant Opposition 
(Evocation) 
Sphere: Combat 


Level: 6 

Range: 10 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 9 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell is a weaker version of one used by 
the Boccob the Uncaring; when it is cast, the priest 
brings into being a disc that will blast most crea- 
tures into nothingness unless they have magic re- 
sistance. No attack roll is required when the priest 
hurls the disc at a selected creature. 

A creature with fewer than 6 Hit Dice (or 
levels) and less than 35% magic resistance is de- 
stroyed if it fails a saving throw vs. spell. A crea- 
ture with 6+ Hit Dice (or levels) suffers 40 points 
of damage, with a saving throw vs. spell allowed 
for half damage. A creature with 35% or greater 
magic resistance is unaffected. 

The material components of the spell are a holy 
symbol of Boccob and a small iron and electrum 
wheel with a rod rising from the center of one side; 
this is flung at the target creature as the spell is cast. 


Notes: Granted by the greater god Boccob the 
Uncaring of the WORLD OF GREYHAWK setting. 


Discern Elven Influence 


Components: 

Casting Time: | rd. 

Duration: 1 turn +1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: 10-yd. radius/level 
Saving Throw: None 


The priest who casts this spell must hold an 
object once touched or owned by an elf or half-elf. 
The caster then concentrates on the area in ques- 
tion to determine whether elves have influenced 
the area in the recent past (one month per level of 
the caster). “Influence” could mean that a group of 
elves had passed through the area, elves or half- 
elves are present at the time of casting, or elven 
magic has shaped or affected the area. The spell 
would not normally detect a single elf or half-elf 
who moved through the area recently unless the in- 
dividual did something dramatic while there 
(killed someone, cast a powerful spell, built a 
house, etc.). 

The caster does not learn the nature of the 
elves’ activity in the area in question. He knows 
only that elves have been or are currently present. 
The sensation can vary in strength depending on 
the activity (it may be especially strong, for exam- 
ple, if a large battle had been fought there). 

The priest can probe multiple areas within the 
spell duration. Successfully probing an area takes 
a minimum of one round. Thus, a Ist-level priest 
can probe as many as 11 areas if working quickly. 

When humans first battled elves in the forests 
of Cerilia, many of the gods granted human priests 
the ability to detect elven influence wherever they 
went. Since the Battle of Mount Deismaar and the 
destruction of the old gods, this spell has helped 
many tribes of humans steer clear of elven territory 
or attack it in response to the ghealle sidhe. 

The spell requires an elven object. 

Notes: Common for priests from Cerilia, the 
BIRTHRIGHT setting. 


Disdain 
Reversed form, attraction. 


P 209 a 


Disdain 


(i EEE a 


Disentangle — Dwarf 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Protection 


Level: 2 

Range: 80 yds. 
Components: V 

Casting Time: 5 
Duration: 1 rd_/level 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell enables the recipient to escape any 
rope, web, plant, jaws, glues (of monsters or 
plants), or wrestling hold, as long as the binding is 
a physical effect. The spell does not enable the re- 
cipient to alter shape, so it is not possible to 
squeeze through a fixed restraint, such as wooden 
stocks, metal shackles, or the bars of a cage, nor 
does it aid a creature that has been swallowed. 

The disentangle spell also allows immediate 
escape from magical effects such as bind, entan- 
gle, Evard’s black tentacles, or a rope of entangle- 
ment, but has no effect on spells such as hold 
person or a ghoul's paralyzation touch. 

Notes: Granted by the dwarven god Thard 
Harr. 


A Sth-level spell of pot sa of War. See appendix 
in Vol. 3. 
Dismiss Air Elemental 
Dismiss Earth Elemental 
Dismiss Fire Elemental 
Dismiss Greater Elemental 
Dismiss Lesser Elemental 
Dismiss Nature Elemental 
Dismiss Water Elemental 


These are the reversed forms of the corresponding 
conjure elemental spells. 


210 


Dismiss Undead — Cloistered Priest 
(Abjuration) 
Sphere: Combat 


Level: 3 

Range: 0 

Components; V, S, M 

Casting Time: 2 

Duration: 3d4 rds. 

Area of Effect: Cone, 60 ft. long, 20 ft. diameter 
Saving Throw: Special 


By the casting of this spell, a cloistered priest 
can temporarily gain the ability to turn undead (if 
good or neutral) or command them into service (if 
evil). For purposes of determining success or fail- 
ure of the turning (or commanding) attempt while 
the spell is in effect, the level of the cloistered 
priest is that of an adventurer-priest minus four 
levels. Thus, a 7th-level cloistered priest turns 
undead as a 3rd-level adventurer-priest. 

Notes: Restricted to cloistered priests. 
(Updated from DraGon Magazine.) 


Dispel Darkness 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Sun 


Level: 1 

Range: 20 yds. 

Components: V, M 

Casting Time: 1 

Duration: 8 turns + 2 rds /level 

Area of Effect: Sphere, up to 30-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: None 


By casting this spell, the priest dispels all areas 
of magical darkness within the area of effect, ren- 
dering them unable to reform for at least 8 turns. 
Only magical darkness is affected by this spell. 
New spells of darkness cast within or into the area 
also fail, The spell affects magic that dims lighting 
or creates gloom or shadowy conditions as well. 

The material component is a holy symbol of 
Pholtus. 

Notes: Granted by the Pholtus of the Blinding 
Light of the WORLD OF GREYHAWK setting. 


Dispel Magic 


>, ee 4 


Dispel Evil 
(Abjuration) 
Reversible 
Sphere: Guardian, Summoning 


Level: 5 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 8 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


The priest using this spell causes a summoned 
creature of evil nature, an evil creature from an- 
other plane, or a creature summoned by an evil 
caster, to return to its own plane or place when the 
caster successfully strikes it in melee combat. 
(Examples of such creatures are aerial servants, 
djinn, efreet, elementals, and invisible stalkers.) 
An evil enchantment (such as a charm spell cast by 
an evil creature) that is subject to a normal dispel 
magic spell can be dispelled automatically by the 
dispel evil spell. Note that this spell lasts for a 
maximum of one round for each experience level 
of the caster, or until expended. While the spell is 
in effect, all creatures that could be affected by it 
attack with a —7 penalty to their attack rolls when 
engaging the spellcaster. 

In addition to driving away evil extraplanar and 
summoned creatures, this spell counters evil en- 
chantment/charm spells and all forms of magical 
domination and possession. 

The reverse of the spell, dispel good, functions 
against summoned or enchanted creatures of good 
alignment or creatures that have been sent to aid 
the cause of good. 

The material components for this spell are the 
priest's religious object and holy (or unholy) 
water. 

Notes: Common for clerics (PHB). 


Dispel Fatigue 
(Necromancy) 
Sphere: Necromantic 


Level: 1 

Range: 30 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 4 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell removes physical fatigue or exhaus- 
tion from the subject by undoing the physiological 
effects of his exertions, The subject is instantly re- 
stored to his normal, fully rested level of endurance 
or Vigor. This spell can be used to negate the penal- 
ties of forced marching, long swims, jogging, run- 
ning, or sprinting, or even accumulated fatigue 
points from either the PLAYER'S OPTION: Combat & 
Tactics rules or the magic fatigue rules from the 
PLAYER'S OPTION: Spells & Magic rules. Once this 
spell has been cast, the subject may start to accu- 
mulate fatigue or fatigue-based penalties again, de- 
pending on how he continues to exert himself. 

The material component is a sprinkle of fresh, 
blessed springwater. 

Notes: Uncommon for clerics and druids 
(PO:SM). 


Good 
Reversed form, dispel evil. This form is used by 
evil priests. 


Dispel Magic 
(Abjuration) 
Sphere: All 


Level: 3 

Range: 60 yds. 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 6 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: 30-ft. cube or | item 
Saving Throw: None 


When a priest casts this spell, it has a chance to 
neutralize or negate the magic it comes in contact 
with as follows: 

First, it has a chance to remove spells and spell- 
like effects (including device effects and innate 
abilities) from creatures or objects. Second, it can 
disrupt the casting or use of these in the area of 
effect at the instant the dispel is cast. Third, it can 
destroy magical potions (which are treated as 12th 
level for purposes of this spell). 

Each effect or potion in the spell’s area is 
checked to determine if it is dispelled. The caster 
can always dispel his own magic; otherwise the 
chance to dispel depends on the difference in level 
between the magical effect and the caster. The 
base chance is 50% (11 or higher on 1d20 to 
dispel). If the caster is higher level than the creator 
of the effect to be dispelled, the difference is sub- 
tracted from the number needed on 1d20 (making 


A 211 C 


Dispel Silence r 


it more likely that the dispel succeeds). If the 
caster is of lower level, then the difference is 
added to the number needed on 1d20 to dispel 
(making it less likely that the dispel succeeds). A 
roll of 20 always succeeds and a roll of 1 always 
fails. Thus, if a caster is 10 levels higher than the 
magic he is trying to dispel, only a roll of 1 pre- 
vents the effect from being dispelled. 

A dispel magic only affects a specially en- 
chanted item—such as a magical scroll, ring, wand, 
rod, staff, miscellaneous item, weapon, shield, or 
armor—if it is cast directly upon that item alone. 
This renders the item nonoperational for 1d4 
rounds, An item possessed or carried by a creature 
gains the creature’s saving throw against this effect; 
if unattended, an item is automatically rendered 
nonoperational for 1d4 rounds. An interdimen- 
sional interface (such as a bag of holding) rendered 
nonoperational is temporarily closed. Note that an 
item's physical properties are unchanged: a nonop- 
erational magical sword is still a sword. 

Artifacts and relics are not subject to this spell, 
but some of their spell-like effects may be, at the 
DM's option. 

Note that this spell can be very effective when 
used upon charmed and similarly beguiled crea- 
tures, Certain spells or effects cannot be dispelled; 
these are listed in the spell descriptions. 

Notes: Common for clerics and druids (PHB). 


its atA 


* Effect negated; if cast directly on item, item becomes 
nonoperational for 1d4 rounds. 


212 


Dispel Silence 
(Abjuration, Alteration) 


Sphere: Combat 


Level: 3 

Range: 0 

Components: S, M 

Casting Time: 6 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: 10-ft./level radius 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell is the priest version of the dispel si- 
lence spell. This spell negates the effect of magical 
silence within the area of the dispel silence for the 
duration of the spell. Following the casting of 
dispel silence, al) spellcasting, speaking, and ac- 
tions can proceed normally. 

For the duration of the spell, the area protected 
by dispel silence is proof against silence spells; 
they do not function within the area of the dispel 
silence. The area of effect is immobile; it does not 
move with the caster. 

The material components of this spell are a 
pinch of powdered diamond worth at least 50 gp 
that is flung into the air and the holy symbol of the 
casting priest. 

Notes: Granted by the gods Milil, Lord of 
Song, and Finder Wyvernspur of the FORGOTTEN 


Area of Effect: 30-ft. cube 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell is a more limited form of the dispel 
magic spell that is specifically designed only to 
bypass wards. Any glyph of warding, symbol, 
magic mouth, wizard lock, spell from the priest 
sphere of wards, or similar magic (as adjudicated 
by the DM) can be canceled by this spell, and 
every such ward in the area of effect must be 
checked when the spell is cast to determine if it is 
dispelled. This spell does not work against wall 
spells (wall of fire, wall of iron, etc.) or protective 


Divinati 


N 


sphere spells (prismatic sphere, antimagic shell, 
etc,). Rather, it negates spells cast upon an item or 
entrance to guard it. Unlike dispel magic, it has no 
effect on magical items. 

The chance to dispel a ward depends on the dif- 
ference in level between the caster of the ward and 
the caster of the dispel. The base chance of dis- 
pelling is 11 or higher on 1d20. As with a dispel 
magic spell, if the caster is of higher level than the 
caster of the ward to be dispelled, the difference is 
subtracted from the base number needed. If the 
caster is of lower level, the difference is added to 
the base. A die roll of 20 always succeeds and a die 
roll of 1 always fails. Thus, if a caster is 10 levels 
higher than the caster of the warding magic, only a 
roll of 1 prevents the effect from being dispelled. 

Notes: Granted by the Mulhorandi god Set of 
the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Dissension’s Feast 
(Alteration, Enchantment/Charm) 
Sphere: Chaos 


Level: 2 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 2 turns 

Duration: 5 turns + 2 turns/level 
Area of Effect: Spell 

Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell is cast by a priest during the prepara- 
tion of a meal. The spell is cast on any one quantity 
of food; thus, the priest could cast the spell on the 
batter of a wedding cake or on a quantity of onions 
as they are diced for both a salad and a stew. The 
spell affects up to 10 pounds of food per level of 
the caster. Anyone who eats the affected food 
(even one who eats the salad but not the stew) is 
subject to the spell. 

The effects of the spell begin five rounds after 
the food has been eaten. At that time, all creatures 
that have eaten the food are allowed a saving throw 
vs. spell; success means that individual is does not 
suffer the effects of the spell. 

Affected creatures quickly become agitated. 
Petty events ranging from poor table manners to 
loud talking bothers those affected. After five min- 
utes, tempers flare, affected individuals feel com- 
pelled to shout at and insult one another, and threats 
are hurled. Even those who are normally calm feel 
compelled to vent their frustrations violently. 

Creatures maintain no alliances while under the 


213 


effect of dissension’s feast. A king and his wife 
who are normally madly in love will bicker with 
each other in a matter of minutes. Members of a 
diplomatic delegation might come to blows with 
each other within minutes of eating the food. 

At the end of the spell, those affected undergo 
the sensation of waking up. All are free to behave 
as they wish. Those at the meal will still be angry, 
although they have no idea why they became angry. 

Notes: Common for to priests with access to 
the sphere of Chaos (ToM). 


Dissipate Smoke 
Reversed form, create smoke. 


Divination 


Range: 0 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: | turn 
Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


A divination spell is used to garner a useful 
piece of advice concerning a specific goal, event, 
or activity that will occur within a one-week 
period. This can be as simple as a short phrase, or 
it might take the form of a cryptic rhyme or omen. 
Unlike the augury spell, this gives a specific piece 
of advice. For example, if the question is “Will we 
do well if we venture to the third level?” and a ter- 
rible troll guarding 10,000 gp and a shield +] 
lurks near the entrance to the level (the DM esti- 
mates the party could beat the troll after a hard 
fight) the divination response might be: “Ready oil 
and open flame light your way to wealth.” In all 
cases, the DM controls what information is re- 
ceived and whether additional divinations will 
supply additional information. Note that if the in- 
formation is not acted upon, the conditions proba- 
bly change so that the information is no longer 
useful (in the example, the troll might move away 
and take the treasure with it). 

The base chance for a correct divination is 
60%, plus 1% for each experience level of the 
priest casting the spell. The DM makes adjust- 
ments to this base chance considering the actions 
being divined (if, for example, unusual precau- 
tions against the spell have been taken). If the dice 


Divination — Shukenja 


roll is failed, the caster knows the spell failed, 
unless specific magic yielding false information is 
at work. 

The material components of the divination 
spell are a sacrificial offering, incense, and the 
holy symbol of the priest. If an unusually impor- 
tant divination is attempted, sacrifice of particu- 
larly valuable gems, jewelry, or magical items may 
be required. 

Notes: Common for clerics and druids (PHB). 


Divination —Shukenja 


This 3rd-level spell is otherwise the 
same as the 4th-level spell of the 
same name. 


Divination 
The 1st Ed. form of this spell has been updated as 
lair divination. 


Divine Bloodline 
(Divination) 
Sphere: Divination 


Level: 1 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell enables the spelicaster to ascertain 
any trace of noble lineage in the affected creature. 
A successful saving throw vs. spell negates the at- 
tempted divination, and the saving throw cannot be 
foregone, even voluntarily. The divination is lim- 
ited to 100 years per caster level. 

By means of a divine bloodline spell, the spell- 
caster can determine if the affected creature is de- 
scended from any noble bloodlines, and how close 
the creature is to inheriting a noble title. A noble 
bloodline is created by any culture (no matter how 
insignificant) that recognizes a class of nobility 
commonly passed on to blood relatives. This spell 
even ascertains noble bloodlines of cultures long 
forgotten and extinct. For example, if this spell is 
cast upon an orc, it might determine that the orc is 
a descendant of the kings of the Screaming 
Banshee tribe and that he is the third surviving son 
of the reigning monarch. 

By means of this spell, the spellcaster can 


214 


divine bloodlines for titles that have been actively 
held within 100 years per experience level. For ex- 
ample, if the last king of Athalantar reigned within 
the past 900 years, the spellcaster would have to be 
at least 9th level to recognize any noble descen- 
dants of that bloodline. Even though Elminster, 
last prince of the first royal family of Athalantar 
still lives, neither he nor anyone else has held that 
throne or considered themselves “in exile” for ap- 
proximately nine centuries. 

In cases where the subject is a descendant of 
multiple noble bloodlines, the spellcaster can as- 
certain one such bloodline for every three experi- 
ence levels. The order in which such bloodlines are 
ascertained is ranked: first, by how close in line the 
subject is to inheriting the title; second, by the rel- 
ative rank or importance of the titles; and third, by 
whether a bloodline is active or dormant (that is, 
whether the culture or kingdom it is from is still 
extant or essentially extinct). 

The material component of this spell is the 
priest’s holy symbol. 

Notes: Granted by Siamorphe the Noble of the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Divine Curse 


anal” 


(Abjuration) 
Sphere: All 


Level: 6 

Range: Special 
Components: V 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell creates a terrible and lasting curse, so it 
can be cast only upon someone who has performed a 
great evil—at least in the eyes of the caster. The 
awful deed may even have been unintentional, but it 
must have yielded horrible results for the caster. The 
victim of the curse can be of any alignment. The 
caster personally chooses the punishment. Wording 
is very important, so the player must record the exact 
phrasing for future reference. The curse may fail if 
the punishment is inappropriate, too harsh, or other- 
wise lacking (at the DM's discretion). In this case, 
the DM can choose to either guide the player to a 
curse that is acceptable or make the character wait to 
see if the curse takes effect. 

The priest becomes a vessel for the divine 
wrath he invokes, He must clearly announce the 


curse in the presence of the evildoer. Thereafter, 
the curse is in effect, though its effects sometimes 
take time to surface. Instead, the curse may de- 
velop over months or years. Divine curse can be 
lifted. The victim has two means of removing the 
curse. An atonement spell can lift the curse, pro- 
vided the spell accompanies a great, heroic deed or 
similar act of expiation. Such an action must be an 
appropriate counter to the original evil deed. 
Sometimes, the curse itself may include an escape 
clause. Often the clue to lifting the curse is hidden 
somewhere within the wording. The DM should 
encourage such clauses, since they do not neces- 
sarily provide an easy escape, as illustrated by this 
sample curse: 

You have walked long upon the backs of the 
downtrodden. Now, each step you take shall be a 
painful blow to your flesh, until you stride barefoot 
to the summit of Mount Arabek between sunrise 
and sunset 

At first the escape clause seems deadly, if not 
impossible, to fulfill, but a creative DM or player 
should be able to circumvent the obvious. For in- 
stance, the cursed individual might pay someone 
cast a haste spell upon him or otherwise increase 
his rate of travel. 

Curses inflicted with evil intent may trigger a 
Ravenloft powers check. 

The material components for this spell are a 
tiny silver gong and the priest’s holy symbol. 

Notes: Common for priests on the Demiplane 
of Dread. 


Divine Event 
(Divination) 
Sphere: Divination 


Level: 6 

Range: 0 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: 1 event 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell combines three effects: divine past, 
divine present, and divine future. The form the 
spell takes is chosen by the caster at the moment of 
casting. Once the form is chosen, the priest cannot 
change it. 

In all versions, the context of the event is speci- 
fied by the caster. The chance of seeing a random 
event instead is 100%, minus 5% per caster level. 


Divine Inspiration 


Divine Future 2% 


The spell provides a vision of a single event and suf- 
ficient clues to interpret its details, possibly allow- 
ing the identification of the participants and the 
reconstruction of the sequence of events. When the 
caster receives sufficient impressions (in the form of 
figures and depictions) to allow interpretation of the 
event, usually one to three rounds, the spell ends. 

A) Divine Past: This allows the caster to divine 
a past event from 1 hour to 1 year old, depending 
on the caster’s level. A caster of 7th or 8th level can 
divine the past up to one week. A caster of 9th to 
13th level can see events up a month old. Casters of 
higher level can see events of up to a year old. 

B) Divine Present; This allows the caster to 
divine an event from the present or the immediate 
past (1 round to 4 turns).A caster of 7th or 8th level 
can divine up to one turn. A caster of 9th to 13th 
level can divine events up to two turns old. Casters 
of higher level can see events up to four turns old. 
This casting might fail against magics that prevent 
scrying. The base chance of success is 50%, plus 
5% for each level the caster is greater than the 
caster of the protection (and -5% per level the 
caster is less than the caster of the protection). 

C) Divine Future: This allows the caster to 
divine an event that will happen in the next | turn 
to 1 day. A caster of 7th or 8th level can divine up 
to one turn, A caster of 9th to 13th level can divine 
events up to one hour in the future. Casters of 
higher level can see events up to one day in the 
future. Such a future is generally one of several 
possible futures, and might be changed with pre- 
cautions based on foreknowledge. 

The material component for all versions is a 
rare incense conducive to meditation (100 gp). 

Notes: Granted by gods of divination, other- 
wise very rare. (Updated from DraGon Magazine.) 


Casting Time: 5 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 
This spell is a more powerful version of the 


216 


genius spell. The priest’s player can ask the DM 
one question about the current situation or about 
events that will occur within the next five rounds. 
Questions about the future must relate to external 
events, such as “Will the guards respond to the 
sentry’s yell?” Questions cannot refer to the out- 
come of combat, such as “Will we win the battle?” 
The priest’s player can use this spell to ask the DM 
for advice. In this case, the spell is the equivalent 
of asking the gods, “Okay, how do we get out of 
this one?” 

The DM should carefully adjudicate this spell. 
The answer to the question is always relevant and 
correct, although not necessarily complete. The 
answer may be cryptic, in the form of a riddle or 
rhyme, depending on the DM's assessment of the 
situation and how potentially unbalancing the 
answer might be. In general, the answer is a short 
phrase of no more than eight to ten words. 

The material component is a gem of at least 
500 gp value. This spell can be cast only once in 
any 24-hour period. 

Notes: Common for to priests with major 
access to the sphere of Thought or Divination 
(ToM). 


Divine Investiture 
(Enchantment/Charm, Illusion/Phantasm) 
Sphere: Law, Time 


Level: 5 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: Special 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell is often employed upon the birth of a 
noble’s heir, at a coronation, or upon the investi- 
ture of a noble’s title. It can be cast successfully 
only upon a descendant of a noble bloodline (as 
defined in the divine bloodline spell), upon the as- 
sumption of a noble title. A ceremony of divine in- 
vestiture takes at least one turn to cast, but most 
Scions of Siamorphe extend the ceremony for at 
least an hour. 

Upon the commencement of the casting of this 
spell, a willing recipient is bathed in a flickering 
nimbus of radiant light equal in effect to a faerie 
fire spell. The color of the radiance is selected by 
the spellcaster (often gold, silver, or some other 
color appropriate to the noble office) and lasts for 


Divine Purpose 


N 


the duration of the casting. During the incantation, 
the priest is empowered to create pageantry appro- 
priate to the event. The illusions created are similar 
to those of the 3rd-level wizard spell spectral 
force, but appropriate to the ceremony, as adjudi- 
cated by the DM. For example, if divine investiture 
is cast upon the crown prince during his corona- 
tion, the priest might evoke the shades of past 
kings who one by one step forward to lay their 
shadowy swords upon the prince’s shoulders. 
When the royal crown is placed on the prince's 
head, the priest might evoke a dazzling burst of 
light coming from the crown that momentarily 
blinds all in attendance. 

In addition to the pageantry of the ceremony of 
investiture, this spell creates a lasting effect known 
as the legacy of Siamorphe. The legacy varies from 
recipient to recipient (and is determined by the 
DM) and seems to loosely correspond in power to 
the relative rank of the spell recipient. Typical 
legacies are: a +1 Charisma bonus with respect to 
the recipient's subjects, a +1 bonus on saving 
throws vs. poison, a +1 bonus to hit when wielding 
the ceremonial sword of state, and so on. 

Unwilling recipients of this spell can choose to 
forego its effects. This decision is irrevocable once 
made, regardless of whether the spell is accepted 
or foregone, and it must be made at the start of the 
spell’s casting. (Infants and small children sub- 
jected to this spell are assumed to voluntarily 
accept its effects.) 

The material components for this spell are a 
chalice of holy water and a small amount of dye 
laced with gold flakes. The latter is used to sketch 
the noble’s heraldic device (or appropriate symbol 
of nobility) somewhere on the subject's body prior 
to the casting. The holy water is then poured over 
the inscribed symbol during the ceremony and the 
sketched symbol then vanishes. 

Notes: Granted by the demipower Siamorphe, 
the Noble, of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Divine Past 
Divine Present 


See divine event. 


217 


Divine Purpose 
(Divination) 
Sphere: Divination 


Level: 3 

Range: 0 

Components: S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell helps the caster to discern the pur- 
pose of an item, even if it is broken or only a part 
of it can be examined. The caster must establish 
direct flesh-to-item contact with both the mystery 
item (which can be of any size, but must be solid, 
not a gaseous cloud, illusion, or visual effect) and 
his holy symbol, then utter a specific prayer. 
Neither the item nor holy symbol is altered by the 
spell. Through divine guidance, the caster can 
glimpse a vision of what the mystery item once 
was a part of, or how it is used or functions. 
Whether or not the spell succeeds, it drains 1 hit 
point from the caster (which can be regained read- 
ily through rest or magical healing). 

The chance of learning something about an 
item has a base of 1% per level of the caster, plus 
1% per point of the caster’s Wisdom, plus 5% if 
the item was made by beings of the same race as 
the caster, plus 10% if the item is or was wholly 
nonmagical in its functioning (not necessarily in 
its making), plus 10% if the item performs a func- 
tion or has an end effect similar to one personally 
familiar to the caster. (For example: If the caster 
has shoed horses, an unfamiliar smithy tool con- 
cerned with horseshoes would gain this modifier.) 

The DM must determine how clear or extensive 
is the vision gained. This spell is very good at 
showing the nearby location (if such exists) where 
an item was used or allied items lie, but it is very 
poor at showing the identities of past users of an 
item. A priest can only work divine purpose on a 
given item once; subsequent castings fail. 

The material component of this spell is the 
priest's holy symbol. 

Notes: Granted by the god Gond, Lord of All 
Smiths, of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. This 
spell is found only in a few exceptionally rare 
tomes. 


Divine Romantic Interest — Elf 


Divine Romantic Interest — Elf 
(Divination) 
Sphere: Divination 


Level: 1 

Range: Touch 

Components: S 

Casting Time: | rd. 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell enables the priest to divine the exis- 
tence and subject or subjects of the unspoken love, 
crush, or romantic interest of the first creature 
touched by the caster. A successful saving throw 
vs. spell by a creature unwilling to share such in- 
formation prevents the caster from learning the 
identity of the romantic interest, but conveys to the 
caster whether or not the creature harbors any such 
secret affections at the time of the spell is cast. 

Curiously, this spell does not reveal whether or 
not any other creature has a romantic interest 
toward the caster, Theologians postulate that Lady 
Goldheart wishes to surprise even her most faithful 
followers with unexpected love. 

Notes: Granted by the elven goddess Hanali 
Celanil. 


Divine Truth 
(Divination) 
Sphere: Numbers 
Level: 3 
Range: 0 


Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 1 turn 
Duration: One question 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell allows the caster to determine a truth 
about one thing or matter. The caster concentrates, 
placing in his mind a series of figures and images 
that, when interpreted, may yield the guidance that 
he or she is seeking. The chance of a meaningful 
answer is 75%, plus 1% per level of the caster, to a 
maximum of 95%, Any question can be asked, but 
as the questions become more complex, the DM 
should make the answers more allegorical and 
cryptic. As the priest advances in level, the an- 
swers should become more clear. With respect to 
other creatures or characters, the DM should com- 


218 


pare their Hit Dice or levels to the caster’s when 
deciding how much to reveal. Likewise with re- 
spect to magical items, the DM should consider 
the level of the creator, the power of the item, and 
the importance of the item to campaign events 
when framing a response. 

Once an answer has been received, the spell 
ends. Multiple castings of this spell will not gener- 
ally add to the caster’s knowledge unless signifi- 
cant developments have occurred since a previous 
casting. 

Notes: Restricted to oracles and possibly sa- 
vants-clerics, very rare. (Updated from DRAGON 
Magazine.) 


Divine Wind 


(Conjuration/Summoning) 
Sphere: Weather 


Level: 7 

Range: | mile 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: } turn 

Duration: | turn/level 

Area of Effect: 1/2 sq. mile/level 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell summons mighty hurricane-force 
winds at the shukenja’s command. The force of 
these winds is such that small boats are automati- 
cally capsized, large ships are capsized 70% of the 
time, branches are doped from trees, tree trunks 
are snapped 70% of the time, heavy articles are 
blown away, medium and lightweight articles are 
torn free from their fastenings, shacks are flattened 
60% of the time, common wooden buildings are 
blown down 20% of the time, man-sized creatures 
are knocked to the ground 70% of the time, and are 
blown 10—40 feet 30% of the time (suffering 146 
points of damage for every 10 feet bowled along). 
Flying creatures are blown backwards 50-100 
feet. Reinforced buildings and stone buildings are 
relatively undamaged, generally suffering 1d4 
points of structural damage. Boats on shore are 
cast about like matchsticks. Seas become raging 
tempests, deserts are shrouded in massive dust 
storms, and snowy regions are blinded by bliz- 
zards, Small fires blow out while large fires (the 
size of a building or more) erupt into raging con- 
flagrations. Crops are 75% ruined. 

Creatures caught within the area of the divine 
wind suffer 1d10 points of damage for each full 
turn they are exposed to the weather. Creatures are 


Doom Curse — Dwarf 


eee a 


reasonably safe within shelters, but they can be 
buried in sand or snow or swamped by crashing 
waves. When moving through the area affected by 
the spell, all movement rates are reduced to 1/4 
normal, Attempting to fight under these conditions 
is nearly impossible and all creatures suffer a -8 
on all to hit rolls. Missile weapons of all types are 
impossible to use. This includes snacks by breath 
weapons and the like. Those standing next to each 
other have to shout to be heard. Flight, either natu- 
ral or magical, is impossible. 

The material component for this spell is a 
banner or flag, painted with the calligraphic char- 
acter for wind, a moderate-sized drum and the 
shukenja’s holy symbol. 

Notes: Common for priests from an oriental 
setting; otherwise, very rare. 


Divinial Armor, Aranen’s 
See Aranen’s divinial armor. 


Divining Rod 
(Divination) 
Sphere: Divination 


Level: | 

Range: 60 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: I rd./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


With this spell, the shukenja can attempt to 
locate common items or forces of nature that may 
be hidden from view. The material component for 
the spell is a wand cut from a ginkgo tree. The 
shukenja must state the particular item being 
searched for. Thereafter, the wand points in the di- 
rection of the item, pulling the caster along, pro- 
vided the item is within the spell range. If an 
impenetrable obstacle is reached (the ground, for 
example) the wand presses against it and stops. 
The shukenja must hold the wand with both hands 
for the spell to work. If there is no item matching 
the description within the spell range, the wand 
does not react, although the shukenja can move 
about searching for the item. Common uses in- 
clude locating water, buried treasure, and stolen 
goods. 

Notes: Common for priests from an oriental 
setting; otherwise, very rare. 


219 


Djalice, Veil of 
See veil of Djalice. 


Dolorous Decay 
(Alteration, Necromancy) 
Sphere: Necromantic 


Level: 6 

Range: 10 yds.Aevel 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 injured living creature 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell affects a single currently injured living 
being; undead and healthy creatures are immune. 
Dolorous decay is a rotting and withering of the 
body that spreads from existing injuries causing ad- 
ditional damage. The targeted creature receives a 
saving throw vs. spell. Success means the creature is 
slowed (as the 3rd-level wizard spell) for 1 round, 
but is then free of further effects. Failure inflicts 1 
point of damage per level of the caster, a slow effect 
for the following round, then allows a second saving 
throw. Success ends the dolorous decay spell with- 
out further effect; failure means the creature takes 
half the previous decay damage (round fractions 
down), and is slowed for a third round. 

This cycle of saving throw and damage continues, 
each bout of damage being half that suffered on the 
previous round, until a minimum loss of 1 point is 
reached, at which point a successful saving throw ends 
the spell. The cycle continues until the victim dies or 
the spell ends. Dolorous decay is not contagious, but it 
can (at the DM’s option) cause loss of mobility or the 
use of limbs if the damage is severe enough (typically 
over half the victim's hit points must be lost.) 

Notes: Granted by the evil god Myrkul, Lord of 
the Dead, of the FoRGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Doom Curse — Dwarf 
(Alteration) 
Reversible 
Sphere: Necromantic 


Level: 5 

Range: Special 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: 1 day/level 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


Doombound — Halfling P 


The effects of this harmful spell can be brought 
down on any being touched by the caster, even by 
means of a hurled axe or other missile weapon. 
The spell has no effect if the creature saves, and 
can be ended by a remove curse or this spell’s re- 
verse, a lift doom. 

The exact effect of the spell varies with the 
curse chosen; some typical dwarven curses are 
given here. The DM should feel free to devise new 
effects, in keeping with the ethos of the casting 
priest and generally of the same level of power as 
those given. Typical doom curses include: 

e Temporary loss of 3 levels, including hit points, 
THACO, spell wielding, etc. 

Slow effects, as the 3rd-level wizard spell 

e A 4-point penalty on all saving throws and abil- 
ity checks 

e Inability to speak clearly (spellcasting is impos- 
sible, messages are garbled and communication 
is difficult; possibly causing misunderstandings 
with, and hostility in, encountered creatures) 

e Inability to hold things properly (a forced 
Dexterity check each round in which a weapon 
or other item is held, manipulated, or wielded), 
with item saving throws for all fragile items 
dropped 

e Recurring blurred vision or blindness, lasting 
one round, and occurring in a | in 6 chance, 
rolled each round. Armor Class and attack penal- 
ties apply and certain activities are endangered 
(for example, walking along narrow paths with- 
out falling or bumping into surroundings) or ren- 
dered impossible (for example, catching things). 

Notes: Restricted to dwarves, rare. 


Doomhound — Halfling 
(Phantasm, Necromancy) 
Sphere: Necromantic 


Level: 3 

Range: 10 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 6 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: | creature 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell creates a shadowy mastiff visible 
only to the caster and the intended target of the 
spell. Once created, a doomhound inexorably 
stalks the creature, never approaching closer than 
10 feet or falling more than 100 yards behind. It 
creates an unshakable premonition of death, 


220 


though creatures immune to magical fear are unaf- 
fected by this spell. 

The initial appearance of a doomhound causes 
fear in the creature, as the reverse of the Ist level 
priest spell remove fear. A successful saving throw 
vs. spell negates the fear effect, but does not dispel 
the doomhound. Regardless of whether or not the 
creature attempts to flee the doomhound when it 
first appears, for as long as the doomhound stalks 
the creature, the creature rolls all subsequent 
saving throws with a —2 penalty and also all 
morale checks and saving throws against fear ef- 
fects unless a 20 is rolled. 

Only one doomhound can stalk at creature at 
any time. The effects of this spell can be ended at 
by a remove curse, limited wish, or wish or by the 
death of the target creature, but physical or magi- 
cal attacks are otherwise ineffective against a 
doomhound. 

The material component of this spell is the 
priest's holy symbol. 

Notes: Granted by the halfling god Urogalan. 


Doomtide 


(Conjuration/Summoning) 
Sphere: Combat, Guardian 


Level: 4 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 7 

Duration: 6 rds. 

Area of Effect: Eight 10-ft. x 10-ft. cubes 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell creates a black, creeping mist filling 
a maximum area of eight 10-foot by 10-foot cubes. 
It forms directly in front of the caster, who can 
choose to make it stationary or direct it to move 
away at a rate of 3 yards per round; once this 
choice is made, it cannot be altered. A doomtide is 
destroyed by a successful dispel magic spell, a 
magical gust of wind, or any magic that affects 
vapors; it is unaffected by natural winds (even if 
extremely violent). 

A doomtide has no effect on the caster and (if 
the caster desires) one other being who touches the 
caster during the casting—all others who enter it 
see hundreds of long, slender black tentacles coil- 
ing and reaching for them. 

These menaces are illusory, but the mists do 
have some real effects: All missile and other aimed 
attacks (including spells) are at -4 on attack rolls 


Dragonbane 


"anne 


due to the visual confusion, all creatures within 
suffer a —4 initiative penalty, and beings of less than 
7th level or 7 Hit Dice must make a saving throw 
vs. spell for each round in which they are in contact 
with a doomtide or do nothing for that round 
(seemingly dazed and unaware of their surround- 
ings). To the caster and the other lone protected 
being, the doomtide appears as a faint coloration in 
the air, and it offers no obstacle to vision. 

The material components of a doomtide spell 
are a pinch of soot from any fire, a piece of eel skin 
(or an eel, which can be alive or dead, whole or 
partial), and a piece of string, thread, or cord (any- 
thing flexible and organic serves) tied into at least 
three knots. 

Notes: Granted by the evil goddess Beshaba, 
Maid of Misfortune, of the FoRGOTTEN REALMS 
setting. This spell is found only in a few exception- 
ally rare tomes. 


Doublecoin 
(Evocation) 
Sphere: Creation 


Level: 4 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 7 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: 1 coin 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell consumes a single coin or metal disc 
and replaces it with two identical coins. The coins 
are absolutely identical, not just similar in type, 
and so scratches, special markings, and the like are 
reproduced. The spell destroys any dweomer that 
might be in existence on the coins. The spell is 
silent, but a faint, momentary glow accompanies 
the permanent change it causes. Each time the 
spells is cast, the caster must make a saving throw 
vs. spell. If the saving throw succeeds, the spell is 
executed as intended and nothing untoward 
occurs. If the saving throw fails, the caster suffers 
the permanent loss of 1 hit point, but gains 2d12 
additional exact duplicate coins out of thin air. 
Although this magic affects coinage of any size 
and value, it can only work on metal, not on gems, 
wooden trade tokens, or coinage made of a combi- 
nation of materials in which at least one compo- 
nent is nonmetallic. 

The material component of this spell is a single 
coin or metal disc. 


221 


Notes: Granted by the lesser power Waukeen 
Merchant's Friend of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Doubt 
Reversed form, leadership. A 4th-level spell from 
the sphere of War. See appendix in Vol. 3. 


Dragon Scales 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Protection 


Level: 4 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 7 

Duration: 1 turn/level 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell creates a plating of dragon scales 
that grow from the priest's epidermis to cover all 
of the body except the head. The dragon scales 
give the priest a base AC of 4 or a +2 AC bonus, 
whichever is better. The spellcaster determines the 
tint of the dragon scales, but the chosen hue must 
correspond to that of a chromatic dragon species 
(white, black, green, blue, or red). 

The material components for this spell are the 
priest’s holy symbol and a single dragon scale. 

Notes: Granted by the evil dragon god, Tiamat, 
to human worshipers. 


Dragonbane 
(Abjuration) 
Sphere: Wards 


Level: 6 

Range: 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: | rd. 

Duration: 1d4 rds. + 1 rd./2 levels 
Area of Effect: 5-ft.-cube/level 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell prevents any dragon that fails its 
saving throw from entering the area of effect. The 
spell affects a cubic area whose sides equal the 
caster’s level times 5 feet; thus, a 16th-level caster 
can affect a cube whose sides each equal 80 feet. The 
dragon can cast spells, blast breath weapon, or hurl 
missiles (if possible) into the area of effect. Dragons 
in the area of effect when the spell is cast are not af- 
fected. If such a dragon leaves the area of effect, it 


Drain Undead 


must make a successful saving throw vs. spell to 
reenter the area. The spell’s effectiveness can be 
greatly increased with the casting of a focus spell. 
The material components are the priest's holy 
symbol and a dragon scale of any type. 
Notes: Common for to priests with major 
access to the sphere of Wards (ToM). 


Drain Undead 
Reversed form, undead regeneration. This form is 
used by good and neutral priests. 


Draw Upon Holy Might 
(Invocation) 
Sphere: Summoning 


Level: 2 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 2 
Duration: | rd/level 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


When this spell is cast, the priest’s body shud- 
ders and glows with a shimmering aura as it be- 
comes a vessel for the power of his god. As a 
result, the caster can choose to increase one ability 
score (only Strength, Dexterity, Constitution, and 
Charisma are eligible) by +1 per three levels of his 
experience (+1 at 3rd level, +2 at 6th, etc.). 

Only one ability score can be increased. The 
effect lasts for the duration of the spell. Ability 
scores can be increased above the normal restric- 
tions due to race and class, to a maximum of +6 or 
to 25, whichever is less. All benefits for excep- 
tional ability scores listed in the Player's 
Handbook apply; however, the divine abilities 
found in the Legends & Lore book are not gained 
by use of this spell. For example, an 18th-level 
priest with Strength 15 could increase her Strength 
to 21 for 18 rounds, granting her a +4 attack 
bonus, a +9 damage adjustment, etc. 

When the spell ends, the energy abruptly leaves 
the caster’s body, leaving the priest physically and 
mentally drained. No action other than rest can be 
taken for the next 4d6 turns. A successful 
Constitution check (at the priest’s normal ability 
score) reduces this time by 50%. 

The material components are the priest's holy 
symbol and a vial of holy water that has been 
blessed by the high priest of the caster’s faith. 

Notes: Uncommon for clerics (ToM). 


Dream Sight 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Astral 


Level: 2 

Range: Special 
Components: S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: Caster 
Saving Throw: None 


When using this spell, the shukenja falls into a 
deep sleep and dreams of nearby places and 
events. The caster’s spirit is projected to the loca- 
tion within range desired. Places and events seen 
in the dreams happening at the time of the dream- 
ing, these are not past or future events. In the 
dream, the caster can both see and hear and can 
wil) his or her spirit to move about normally. 

The dream spirit can pass through solid objects 
with no difficulty, but cannot enter any area 
guarded by a protection spell (whether good, neu- 
tral, or evil), nor can sounds coming from such an 
area be heard. The shukenja’s spirit can either 
move at a rate of 36 or observe the scene during 
one round. Thus, a 3rd-level shukenja could send 
her dream spirit up to 720 feet in the first two 
rounds and then spend the third (and last) round 
observing the desired scene. 

At the end of the spell, the dream spirit of the 
shukenja automatically returns to the body. The 
shukenja can also voluntarily return before the end 
of the spell. If the shukenja's body is disturbed 
before the dream spirit returns, the shukenja must 
make a saving throw vs. death. If the save is suc- 
cessful, the dream spirit returns safely to the body 
with no ill effect. If the saving throw is unsuccess- 
ful, the body falls into a deep catatonic state and 
the dream spirit is unable to return of its own 
accord, Another shukenja can use dream sleep to 
guide the lost dream spirit back to its body, if able 
to locate it. 

Furthermore, while in dream sleep, the spirit of 
the shukenja is considered a lesser spirit for the 
purposes of all spells. Thus, it can be forced to 
answer questions by a commune with lesser spirit 
spell, cannot see things hidden by an invisibility to 
spirits spell, and can be destroyed by a smite spell. 
If the dream spirit is destroyed, the shukenja’s 
body falls into a catatonic state that can be lifted 
only by a raise dead, resurrection, limited wish, or 
wish spell. 


oa swe Se 


Druid’s Decay 


The material component for this spell is a stick of 
incense worth at least one chain (5 gp). 

Notes: Common for priests from an oriental 
setting; otherwise, very rare. 


Dream Vision 
(Invocation) 
Reversible 
Sphere: Divination 


Level: 3 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 turn 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: None 


By means of this spell, the shukenja is able to 
send messages to others in the form of dreams. At 
the beginning of the casting, the shukenja names 
whom the message is for. The shukenja must know 
the identity of the recipient or identify him by 
some title that leaves no question as to the recipi- 
ent. For example, the shukenja could send a dream 
to the governor of Changtai Province, even if he 
has never met the man, since there is only one gov- 
ernor of that province. However, he could not send 
a dream to the sake-maker of a village in that 
province, since there might be several sake-makers 
in that village. 

Upon completing the physical casting of the spell, 
which requires but a turn, the shukenja falls into a 
deep, trancelike sleep. At this point his spirit leaves 
his body and travels instantaneously to the recipient. 
Thereupon, the shukenja is able to enter the dreams 
of the recipient and deliver his message unless the re- 
cipient is magically protected from spirits. If the re- 
cipient is awake when the spell is cast, the shukenja 
can choose to regain in his trancelike sleep until the 
recipient goes to sleep or he can choose to cancel the 
spell. The shukenja does not learn anything about the 
current activities or whereabouts of the recipient, 
only whether he is asleep or awake. 

Once the shukenja enters the dreams of the re- 
cipient, he can deliver a message of any length de- 
sired, which the recipient remembers perfectly 
upon awakening. The communication is one 
way—the recipient cannot offer information or ask 
questions of the shukenja. Neither can the 
shukenja gain any information by observing the 
dreams of the recipient. Once the message is deliv- 
ered, the shukenja’s spirit returns instantly to his 


223 


body. If the body is disturbed in any way while 
using this spell, the shukenja’s spirit becomes lost. 
The body remains in its comatose state until some 
means is found to rejoin the shukenja’s spirit with 
his body, such as a restore spirit spell. 

The duration of this spell is the amount of time 
required for the shukenja to enter into the dreams 
of the other and then deliver the message. Thus, 
the duration could be as short as one round or as 
long as several hours. 

The reverse of this spell, nightmare, allows the 
shukenja to send a hideous and unsettling vision to 
the subject. The identity of the subject must be 
known, as stated above, and the subject must be 
asleep. This nightmare prevents restful sleep and 
causes the victim to lose 1d10 hit points. Since the 
individual has not rested, he is fatigued as if he had 
not had the night’s sleep and is unable to regain 
spells. The subject is allowed a saving throw vs. 
spell to avoid the effects of the nightmare. 

The material components for this spell are a 
bow! of incense and a robe of red (or white for the 
reverse) silk cloth. 

Notes: Common for priests from an oriental 
setting; otherwise, very rare. 


Druid’s Decay 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Animal, Plant 


Level: 3 

Range: 30 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 6 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: 1 dead creature or 10 cu. ft. of dead 
plant material 

Saving Throw: Special 


Upon casting this spell, the caster can cause a 
single dead creature to decompose into dust. 
Alternatively, the spell can decompose 10 cubic 
feet or less of dead plant material, including ob- 
jects made of wood. Items or constructions made 
entirely or partially of plant material (such as 
wood) must make a successful item saving throw 
vs. lightning or be destroyed. An item worn or held 
by a creature is unharmed unless the owner fails a 
saving throw vs. spell; upon failure the item must 
save vs. lightning or be destroyed. 

This spell doesn’t affect living matter. A single 
corporeal undead creature of up to 10 Hit Dice can 
be destroyed if it fails a saving throw vs. death 


Druidsight r 


magic. The spell cannot affect noncorporeal 
undead (ghosts, shadows, wraiths, etc.) or undead 
with more than 10 Hit Dice. 

The material component is the priest’s holy 
symbol. 

Notes: Very rare spell. (Updated from DRAGON 
Magazine.) 


Druidsight 
(Evocation) 
Sphere: Animal 


Level: 2 

Range: 150 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 3 rds. 
Duration: 2 hrs. + 1 turn/level 
Area of Effect: 1 animal 
Saving Throw: Special 


By means of this spell, the druid is able to see 
through the eyes of another animal and perceive 
things as that animal would. Familiars and poly- 
morphed or shapechanged creatures are not sub- 
ject to this spell. Animals on friendly terms with 
the druid, such as companions, pets or summoned 
animals, require no saving throw. Normal animals 
receive a normal saving throw vs. spell. The sub- 
ject animal can be commanded telepathically to 
scout, spy, or stand guard at distances up to 100 
yards plus 10 yards per level of the caster. 

The material components for this spell are a bit 
of food desirable to the animal. 

Notes: Restricted to druids, very rare. 
(Updated from DraGoN Magazine.) 


Dry Spring 


Reversed form, create spring. 


Dumathoin’s Rest 


(Abjuration, Necromancy) 
Sphere: Necromantic 


Level: 2 

Range: 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 5 

Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: 30-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell causes animated skeletons and zom- 
bies to collapse. Their remains cannot be reacti- 


vated or reanimated for a minimum of 24 hours, 
during which time they will presumably be prop- 
erly interred. The spell affects 2d6 Hit Dice of ani- 
mated skeletons and/or zombies, 3d6 if the 
remains are of dwarves. 

Notes: Granted by the dwarven god 
Dumathoin. 


Duplicate 
(Alteration, Evocation) 
Sphere: Creation 


Level: 4 

Range: 10 yds/evel 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 7 
Duration: 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell causes a translucent, obviously mag- 
ical quill pen to appear in midair. This animated 
pen generates its own ink and copies any writing 
or inscription of the caster’s choice that is within 
range onto any writing surface, such as paper, 
vellum, smooth painted wall, or flat wood, avail- 
able within spell range. If there is a choice of writ- 
ing surfaces available, the one chosen mentally by 
the caster is used. 

Spells can be copied by means of this spell, 
creating a copy that is identical to the original for 
purposes of study. The quill’s writing does not 
trigger explosive runes, glyphs, or other traps, and 
creates an identically functioning magical dupli- 
cate of such dangerous magic (if any is present). 

The writing of a duplicate is of identical size 
and spacing to the original, allowing perfect for- 
geries to occur. However, if the size of writing 
surface or the spell duration does not permit the 
entire writing to be copied, the entire copied writ- 
ing fades away, and the spell is lost and ruined. 
(The pen writes as fast as the caster can.) Being 
rendered unconscious or commencing other 
spellcasting ruins the magic. The caster must 
view the writing for the pen to work. (Brief 
glances away or interruptions do not harm the 
working of the spell.) 

The mind of any caster can only encompass 
one duplicate spell at a time and attempts to go 
beyond this limit result in a feeblemind effect (as 
the Sth-level wizard spell). Casting duplicate 
causes the caster to instantly lose 1 hit point per 
experience level currently possessed. The loss of 


oe ae ee 


N 


these hit points can be reversed only by the casting 
of a limited wish or wish spell or the casting of a 
heal spell on the recipient by a high priest of 
Oghma in the sanctuary of an Oghmanyte temple. 
No saving throw against the loss of the hit points is 
allowed. Death caused in this way destroys all 
spellcasting ability, so a priest who died casting 
duplicate and later raised can no longer function 
as a priest, but only a lay worshiper. 

The material component of this spell is a 
feather. 

Notes: Granted by Oghma, Lord of 
Knowledge, in the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Dust Devil 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 
Sphere: Elemental Air, Summoning 


Level: 2 

Range: 30 yds. 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 2 rds. 

Duration: 2 rds./level 

Area of Effect: Creates 1 dust devil 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell enables a priest to conjure up a weak 
air elemental—a dust devil of AC 4, 2 HD, MV 
180 feet per round, one attack for 1d4 points of 
damage—that can be hit by normal weapons. The 
dust devil appears as a small whirlwind one foot in 
diameter at its base, five feet tall, and three to four 
feet across at the top. It moves as directed by the 
priest, but dissipates if it is ever separated from the 
caster by more than 30 yards. Its winds are suffi- 
cient to put out torches, small campfires, exposed 
lanterns, and other small, open flames of nonmag- 
ical origin. The dust devil can hold a gas cloud or a 
creature in gaseous form at bay or push it away 
from the caster (though it cannot damage or dis- 
perse such a cloud). If skimming along the ground 
in an area of loose dust, sand, or ash, the dust devil 
picks up those particles and disperses them in a 
10-foot-diameter cloud centered on itself. The 
cloud obscures normal vision, and creatures 
caught within are blinded while inside and for one 
round after they emerge. A spellcaster caught in 
the dust devil or its cloud while casting must make 
a saving throw vs. spell to maintain concentration, 
or the spell is ruined. Any creature native to the el- 
emental plane of Air—even another dust devili— 
can disperse a dust devil with a single hit. 

Notes: Common for clerics and druids (PHB). 


Dust Shield — Old Empire 
(Evocation) 
Sphere: Elemental Earth 


Level: 3 

Range: 0 

Components: V, M 

Casting Time: 6 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: 1 square yd./level 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell creates a scintillating, invisible wall of 
force by causing the dust particles in the air to form an 
mentally picture the shape, size, and orientation of the 
barrier, but it must be two-dimensional. Once cast, the 
barrier is immovable and unaffected by magic except 
for a dispel magic spell or the mental command of the 
spelicaster, who can dismiss it at will. Priests of Geb 


If the barrier is smaller than 1 square yard, the 
priest can specify during casting that the dust 
shield attach itself to his or her left or right fore- 
arm. The priest can then use the barrier as a full 
“body” shield, providing a +3 (total) bonus to 
Armor Class. Such a shield cannot be dropped (as 
it is not actually held), but its presence does not 
allow the priest to do anything with the shield arm 
that someone holding a real shield could not do. 
The spell cannot be used this way in conjunction 
with a regular shield or a shield spell. 

The material components of this spell are a 
handful of dust thrown into the air and the priest's 
holy symbol. 

Notes: Granted by the Mulhorandi earth god 
Geb of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Dwoemer Divination 
(Divination) 
Sphere: Divination 


Level: 7 

Range: Touch 
Components; V, S 
Casting Time: 3 rds. 
Duration: 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: 1 item 
Saving Throw: None 


This divination reveals things about a touched 
item in an unfolding process that continues until 


a eee Sa 


Dweomerflow 
"gel 


all information about the item has been gained or 
the spell duration expires. If the same caster em- 
ploys another dweomer divination on an item al- 
ready examined by use of this spell, the magic 
reveals new information. A dweomer divination 
ends immediately if the caster neglects to touch or 
handle the item for an entire round or if the item is 
found to bear no dweomer. 

In the first round of a dweomer divination, all 
dweomers present on the item or linked to it are re- 
vealed; on the second round, any alignment or 
class restrictions or special benefits associated 
with the item are identified; in the third round, the 
primary function or most powerful dweomer on 
the item is fully revealed—in other words, how it 
works—to the dweomer divination caster; during 
the fourth round any word of activation or com- 
mand process associated with that primary power 
is revealed; and on the fifth round, anything wrong 
with, or missing from, the functioning of that 
power is clearly and fully identified. These succes- 
sive rounds of inquiry occur even if there are no 
words or magical problems associated with the 
power, and at the end of each round, the caster is 
made positively aware of such absences. 

On subsequent rounds, this process is repeated 
for any additional item powers or properties after 
the primary or most powerful one in descending 
order of intensity of their dweomer or importance 
of their effect until all item powers have been ex- 
plored. (In other words, the cycle of rounds three 
through five repeats as necessary.) The spell then 
turns to revealing any additional control words or 
Operating restrictions on the item for a round (such 
as special purposes or personal linkages), recharg- 
ing methods or the confirmed absence of same on 
the next round, and some images of how the item 
was made on subsequent rounds. 

Information gained after the first round occurs 
only for items that have been enchanted, not 
normal tools, furniture, or garments. Upon normal 
items, dweomer divination essentially performs as 
a very sophisticated, but ultimately little more in- 
formative, detect magic. 

Note that a powerful spell that touches an 
item—a fireball blast that flings a weapon down a 
hall, for example—leaves a trace dweomer on the 
item for 1 day per level of the spell, so that nonen- 
chanted items can still bear trace dweomers. 
Magics meant to be permanent or long-lasting and 
spells that wait quiescent indefinitely for specific 
trigger conditions to occur leave dweomers of 
much longer duration—months or years per spell 


level—on items in contact with them. The spell re- 
veals the approximate nature of such associate 
dweomers, but not what their precise damage, 
extent, or trigger conditions were or are. 

A dweomer divination provides no protection 
against curses or magical traps placed on items 
other than to identify them in its unfolding 
process. It does not delay or prevent such traps” or 
curses’ normal functioning in anyway. Dweomer 
divination might not reveal side effects that the 
item’s enchanter did not intend or foresee. 

Notes: Very rare spell from the FORGOTTEN 
REALMS setting. 


Dweomerflow 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: All 


Level: 4 

Range: Touch or 20 yds. 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 7 

Duration: 1 rd. 

Area of Effect: | spellcaster or magical item 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell can be cast in one of two fashions. In 
the first version, dweomerflow is cast on a spell- 
caster. It causes the next spell cast by that individual 
to flow into a prepared receptacle the caster touches 
instead of taking its usual effect. No saving throw is 
required of the spellcaster or the receptacle. Typical 
receptacles include a focal stone, a crystal ball, or 
another item that can hold magics within itself, such 
as magical items in need of recharging, crucibles 
temporarily empowered by spells to accept enchant- 
ments, artifacts, and the like. If the item is destroyed 
or later affected by spells that force it to disgorge 
stored magics, the “flowed” spell is released, often 
taking its full effect. 

Dweomerflow creates a resonating field between 
the subject spellcaster and the receptacle. If no suit- 
able item is in range, the dweomerflow creates a 
ghostly swirling radiance that lasts one round, then 
fades away. If no other receptacle becomes avail- 
able within that time, the spell is wasted. 

A holy water font or consecrated altar can 
accept up to a dozen flowed spells to be released 
separately, one per round, at any time thereafter by 
any being of the faith the holy object is conse- 
crated to who touches the altar and wills the 
magics forth. The subjects, aims, and areas of 
effect of such magics are under the silent mental 


er ee ee 


Dying Curse — Old Empire 


SS ee A 


control of the being unleashing them, who need 
not be the caster of the dweomerflow or even of a 
class or level necessary to normally wield such 
magics. Any individual who is not aware of what 
magics are stored in a holy font or altar requires 1 
round of contact with the holy object per stored 
spell to identify and gain control over such magics. 
One randomly chosen magic at a time is re- 
vealed—but only to beings of the same faith as the 
holy object or to wizards and priests employing 
dweomer divination or similar powerful magics. 

Spells of 5th level or greater must be accompa- 
nied by an abeyance spell cast on the altar or spell 
vessel within 1 turn of their being flowed into it— 
or they erupt back out at again, visiting their full 
effects, at a random time and at a random target or 
area of effect. (Previous abeyance spells cast into 
the same altar or vessel do not suffice to govern a 
newly arrived flowed magic.) 

Most temple and shrine altars are imbued with 
powerful offensive spells by high-ranking clergy 
of the faith for lesser priests to use in defending the 
holy ground against intruders. Those planning to 
despoil an altar are warned that breakage of a holy 
object; its exposure to fire, lightning, or the touch 
of unholy water; or cold iron used to chisel away 
holy symbols or inscriptions almost always awak- 
ens stored magics—to take effect right where the 
cause of their activation occurs! 

The second version of dweomerflow allows the 
spellcaster to transfer charges or stored spells from 
item to item, such as a charge from one wand of 
lightning to another or a spell from one ring of 
spell storing to another. When this version of 
dweomerfiow is cast, a saving throw vs. spell must 
be made by both items involved. If the sending 
item fails its saving throw, the dweomerflow spell 
is ruined, but no charges or stored spells are lost. If 
the receiving spell fails its saving throw, the charge 
or spell being transferred is lost—sometimes with 
spectacular effects—along with the dweomerfiow. 
In this version of the spell, the spellcaster must be 
touching both items involved to provide a bridge 
for the spell energy involved. 

Notes: Very rare spell from the FORGOTTEN 
REALMS setting. 


227 


Dying Curse — Old Empire 
(Abjuration) 
Sphere: Protection 


Level: 6 

Range: 0 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 2 turns 
Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


A priest casting a dying curse spell seeks to 
avenge a future death. Anyone who kills the 
priest—even if the priest is later resurrected—be- 
comes the victim of a major curse with no saving 
throw. The effects of the curse are determined ran- 
domly (see table).The effect is permanent until re- 
moved. Only a wish or remove major curse spell 
can remove this curse. 

Notes: Granted by the Mulhorandi god Horus- 
Re of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Major Curse Table 


14100 Roll Effect 


01-50 Reduces one ability score to 3 (DM 
determines which randomly). 

51-75 —4 penalty to subject’s attack and 
saving throw rolls. 

76-00 Subject is 50% likely to drop held 


items (or do nothing if not an item 
user). Check each round. 


Earth Anchor — Halfling 


Earth Anchor — Halfling 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Elemental Earth 


Level: 2 

Range: 10 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 5 

Duration: 5 rds. + 1 rd/level 
Area of Effect: 30-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell magically binds living, corporeal 
creatures to the ground upon which they stand. For 
the duration of the spell, such a creature can slide 
back and forth at one-third its movement rate; 
however, no part of its body in contact with the 
ground can be lifted away from the earth. Those 
potentially affected by this spell can forgo their 
saving throws if they desire. 

Those in the affected area when the spell is cast 
(or entering it later), are allowed a saving throw vs. 
spell to avoid the effect. Any creature in the area of 
effect that brings other parts of its body in contact 
with the ground finds those parts anchored as well. 
Any creature leaving the area of effect is no longer 
bound by the earth anchor. Those reentering the 
area must make anew saving throw, even if a pre- 
vious one was successful. The spell operates 
through boots, armor, clothing, and other gear 
worn by affected creatures. 

The material components of this spell are the 
priest's holy symbol and a small amount of mud. 

Notes: Granted by the halfling god Urogalan. 


Earth Sense — Dwarf 
(Divination) 
Sphere: Elemental Earth 


Level: 3 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: 3 turns/level 
Area of Effect: 30 ft./level 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell empowers a priest to key his senses into 
the surrounding earth or stone structure to monitor 
the conditions of the area. This spell can be used to 
monitor all the earth and stone in a spherical volume 
with a radius of 30 feet per level of the caster. The 
priest can note anything unusual or important hap- 


Ag pening within the area of effect through a 
J vague feeling of unease or impending 
danger. Once the feeling is experienced, 
the priest can try to concentrate on deter- 
mining the specific thing that has set off the feeling 
of alarm. The chance of identifying the specific 
event is 5% per level of the caster. Only one identifi- 
cation roll can be made for each event that may trig- 
ger the feeling. If the roll fails, the priest is unable to 
determine the exact problem, but does identify the 
general area where the problem is occurring. 

Once the spell is cast, the dwarven priest must 
remain quietly in place to continue concentrating on 
the spell. If the priest moves more than 10 feet from 
the spot where the spell was cast or engages in 
strenuous activity such as melee, the spell is broken. 

Many different things can set off the feeling of 
alarm. Digging or sapping in the area, movements 
by burrowing creatures, spells or magic that cur- 
rently affect the earth, nonsilent movement across 
the earth or through a nearby passage, strenuous 
physical activity (such as melee) occurring on a 
section of the earth, or an impending natural disas- 
ter are all things that can trigger the sense of alarm. 
A natural disaster that sets off the alarm could be 
unstable geological conditions that foreshadow a 
mine collapse or natural earthquake, a natural gas 
pocket about to explode, or volcanic or geyser ac- 
tivity that could become dangerous. 

Dwarven priests often maintain a line of sentries 
in a stronghold and use this spell to monitor any- 
thing that may signal an impending attack. Priests 
might note a section of castle wall being under- 
mined, an attempt to batter through a castle gate, 
invaders scaling a fortress wall, or a passwail spell 
suddenly cast upon a section of stone wall. The 
material components for this spell are the priest’s 
holy symbol and a small sample of earth or stone 
from the area to be monitored. 

Notes: Very rare spell. (Updated from DRAGON 
Magazine. ) 


Earth Walk — Dwarf 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Elemental Earth 


Level: 6 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: | turn/level 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: Special 


ae 


The earth walk spell enables the priest to pass 
into and through stone and earth as if he or she was 
a xorn (movement rate of 6). This ability allows 
ambushes in which foes have a —3 penalty to their 
surprise rolls. 

The spelicaster can carry up to twice his or her 
body weight (total) through the stone as well. For 
the spellcaster to use this ability offensively, the 
priest must make a successful attack roll to grab 
the subject, who is then allowed a saving throw vs. 
petrifaction to break free. If the saving throw fails, 
the spellcaster imprisons the subject (as the 9th- 
level wizard spell imprisonment). A freedom spell 
(the reversed form of imprisonment) can free the 
trapped creature. 

A phase door cast on the earth-walking priest 
instantly slays him or her. 

Notes: Granted by the dwarven god Dumathoin. 


Earthenair 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Elemental Earth 


Level: 3 

Range: 60 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 6 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: 1 creature (10-ft.-sphere) 
Saving Throw: 1⁄2 


This spell causes the earth surrounding the 
target creature to surge upward and inward in a vi- 
olent eruption of dirt and rock. The number of 
rocks created by the spell is 1d4 plus the level of 
the caster. Each rock causes 1 point of damage to 
the target, disrupting spellcasting and counting as 
one successful attack for purposes of the stoneskin 
spell. The rocks are considered magical weapons 
for purposes of determining whether a creature can 
be damaged by them. 

This spell does not work if the creature is stand- 
ing on a solid stone surface (such as bedrock, not 
flagstone) unless the caster is 10th level or higher. 
The earth remains somewhat scarred where earth- 
enair is cast unless it is physically tidied up after 
the spell is finished. 

The material component for the spell is the 
priest’s holy symbol and a handful of pebbles that 
are hurled toward the target creature. 

Notes: Granted by Grumbar, Boss of Earth 
Elementals. 


229 


Saving Throw: None 


When this spell is cast, priests becomes attuned 
to the rock surrounding them, allowing them to use 
rocks of at least the same volume as themselves 
and the nonliving material they carry as teleport 
gateways. This gives the priest (alone) the ability 
to teleport without error to any location on the 
Prime Material Plane that has a large outcropping 
of rock. Priests take 1 turn to travel from their orig- 
inal location to their new location. During the first 
five rounds they are fading into the rock from their 
starting point and during the last five rounds they 
are emerging from the rock at their destination. 
After the end of the last round of the spell’s dura- 
tion, they can act normally; until then they are vis- 
ible, but immune and intangible to all magical, 
physical, and psionic attacks except transmute 
rock to mud, dig, stoneshape or similar spells. 

The use of this spell is not without danger. 
Should the priest be the target of a transmute rock 
to mud, dig, stoneshape or similar spell during the 
spell’s duration, the priest suffers 4d6 points of 
damage (no saving throw allowed) and must make 
a successful saving throw vs. spell or be stunned 
for 1d4 rounds. 

Notes: Granted by Grumbar, Boss of Earth 
Elementals. 


Level: 4 

Range: 50 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 7 

Duration: 1 rd. 

Area of Effect: 10-ft. diameter circle 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


Earthmaw causes a patch of ground 10 feet in 
diameter to open and form a gigantic mouth with 


N 


stalactite teeth. The mouth springs forth on a short 
serpentine neck, much like a water weird, and at- 
tacks once in a direction the caster dictates. Then it 
retracts into the earth and closes solidly. The site 
of a earthmaw spell appears as if the ground has 
been tilled recently. 

The mouth can attack one large creature, two 
man-sized creatures, or four small-sized creatures 
within 10 feet of its outer edge. It can strike multi- 
ple creatures only if they remain clustered within a 
10-foot diameter circle adjacent to the maw. 

The earthmaw attacks as a monster with Hit 
Dice equal to the caster’s level. Creatures standing 
on the site of the maw suffer a +3 penalty to Armor 
Class for purposes of that attack only. Creatures 
standing next to the maw suffer no Armor Class 


A successful hit inflicts 1d4 points of damage 
per level of the caster. An unmodified roll of 19 or 
20 means the maw has swallowed the creature 
whole, burying the individual 2d4 feet below 
ground. Creatures can be dug out manually, with 
appropriate spells (such as dig), or with magical 
items (such as a spade of colossal excavation). A 
creature trapped underground suffocates unless 
freed within a number of rounds equal to one-third 
its Constitution score. 

Earthmaw can be cast on any area of loose or 
packed earth, sand, or vegetation-covered soil. It 
can be cast indoors on an earthen surface: for ex- 
ample, on the dirt floor of a barn or basement, but 
not on the marble floor of a home or temple. It 
cannot be cast on an area containing a tree, any 
portion of a building, or any type of pavement. 

An object present on the site of the maw (such 
as a campfire or a tent, etc.) counts as a creature of 
that object’s size in attacks. 

The material component is a tooth from any 
predatory creature. 

Notes: Uncommon for druids. 


uake 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Elemental Earth 


Level: 7 
Range: 120 yds. 
Components: V, S 


Area of Effect: 5-ft. diameter/level 
Saving Throw: None 


When this spell is cast by a priest, a local tremor 
of fairly high strength rips the ground. The shock 
is over in one round. The earthquake affects all ter- 
rain, vegetation, structures, and creatures in its 
area of effect. The area of effect of the earthquake 
spell is circular, with a diameter of five feet for 
every experience level of the priest casting it. 
Thus, a 20th-level priest casts an earthquake spell 
with a 100-foot-diameter area of effect. 

Solidly built structures with foundations reach- 
ing down to bedrock sustain one-half damage; 
one-quarter damage if they score above 50% on a 
saving throw. An earth elemental opposed to the 
caster in the area of effect can negate 10% to 100% 
(roll 1d10, 0 = 100%) of the effect. Other magical 
protections and wards allowed by the DM may 
also reduce or negate this effect. If cast undersea, 
this spell may, at the discretion of the DM, create a 
tsunami or tidal wave. 

The material components for this spell are a 
pinch of dirt, a piece of rock, and a lump of clay. 

Notes: Common for druids (PHB). 


| 
i 
te 
: 
4 
y 
? 
t 
f 
i 
AS 
: 


ee ee ee ee ee ` 


Earthshake* — Old Empire 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Elemental Earth 


Level: 5 

Range: 30 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: 3-ft. diameter/level 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell is a weaker and more targetable form 
of the 7th-level priest spell earthquake. The area of 
effect is circular, and the priest can specifically 
target an area as small as a 3-foot-diameter circle 
up to the entire area of effect (a circle 3 feet in di- 
ameter per the caster’s level) to suffer the effects of 
an earthshake. 

When this spell is cast, a very localized tremor 
of high strength shakes the ground. Beings stand- 
ing within the area of effect must make a success- 
ful saving throw vs. spell or be thrown to the 
ground and stunned (unable to act) for 1d4 rounds 
and take 2d8 points of damage. If they succeed at 
their saving throws, they are thrown to the ground 
and take only 1d8 points of damage. 

Buildings, mine walls, and other structures take 
2 points of structural damage from an earthshake 
spell. If a building or a targeted part of a building 
suffers full structural damage, itis thrown down in 
rubble. The average structural point values for sev- 
eral different types of buildings and parts of build- 
ings is given below. 


Earthshake can be cast as a cooperative spell. If 
multiple priests cast this spell simultaneously on 
the same area, the structural damage caused by 
each spell is multiplied by the number of casters 
participating. For example, three priests of Geb 
casting this spell could each inflict 6 points of 
structural damage (total 18), while four priests 
could each inflict 8 points of structural damage 
(total 32). A maximum of five Gebbite priests can 
cooperate in casting this spell (for a total of 50 
points of structural damage in one area at once), 
The damage caused to beings in the area of effect 
is not multiplied, however, and this spell has no 
additional effect if cast simultaneously with an 
earthquake spell (or similar spell or effect). 

The material components of this spell are a 
handful of gravel thrown to the ground and the 
priest's holy symbol. 


Notes: Granted by the Mulhorandi earth god 
Geb of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Structural Point Value 


Drawbridge 
Gate (double reinforced doors) _ 


*All buttresses must be destroyed before the structure 
they support (wall, tower, etc.) takes any damage. 

**For towers roughly 20 to 40 feet high and from 10 
to 30 feet in diameter (exterior measurements), not in- 
cluding buttresses. 

+ For towers roughly 20 to 40 feet high and from 10 to 
30 feet square (exterior measurements), not including 
buttresses. 

+ Most often used to destroy part of a larger structure, 
such as a castle or outer wall. To cause a section of wall to 
crumble, a wall must take enough damage to destroy its 
entire height, not just the bottom or top10-foot section. 


Earthwrack 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Necromantic, Plant 
Level: 6 


Range: 20 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: 2d4+10 years 

Area of Effect: 30-ft. radius/level 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell causes an area of soil to become 
barren and blighted. Healthy plants wither and die 
within 1d4 days of casting. No seed planted there 
will grow for the duration of the spell. Plant-based 
creatures entering the despoiled area can see the 
ruin and feel an intense wrongness within the soil. 
Each round such creatures remain within the area, 
they suffer 1d4 points of damage. 

The blight can be cured using a limited wish, a 


a 231 & 


Ease labor 


"el 


wish, or by casting a remove curse spell (at the 
12th level of experience) and a plant growth spell 
simultaneously, Most druids consider earthwrack 
an abomination, although some Shadow Circle 
druids use it as last-ditch scorched earth 
vengeance against an unruly hamlet. 

The material component is the priest's holy 
symbol, 

Notes: Rare for druids. 


Ease Labor 
(Alteration) 
Reversible 
Sphere: Healing 


Level: 3 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 6 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: | creature 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell enables a priestess of Shiallia to miti- 
gate the pains of giving birth. By laying both hands 
on a pregnant female's belly (or above her womb), 
the priest can ease labor pains, correct complica- 
tions like a breech birth, and otherwise make labor 
as easy and painless as possible. The spell lasts 
throughout the birth process as long as the priest 
maintains contact with the mother and/or child. 

The reverse of this spell, inflict labor, afflicts a 
creature with all the pains of labor. For the re- 
versed form, the spellcaster need not maintain con- 
tact with the target creature beyond the initial 
touch, which requires a successful attack roll if the 
creature is not immobile, restrained, or unaware. 
Males get no saving throw vs. the reverse form of 
this spell, and females are allowed a saving throw 
vs. spell to avoid the effect only if they have given 
birth at least once previously. Pregnant creatures 
of any kind cannot be affected. The effects are split 
into three phases. The first two phases last three 
rounds each, and the final phase lasts one round 
per the caster’s level to a maximum of nine rounds. 

In the first phase, the creature feels violently 
nauseated and cannot cast spells, communicate, or 
attack. It can only defend itself or move at half 
normal movement rate. 

In the second phase, the creature is fatigued and 
cannot perform any action requiring significant 
amounts of energy. Physical combat is not possi- 
ble, nor is running, but spellcasting is possible, as 


is defending oneself or moving at a normal move- 
ment rate. 

In the third phase, the creature suffers increas- 
ing amounts of pain. For each round this phase 
lasts, the creature suffers increasing amounts of 
temporary hit point damage and a temporary loss 
of Strength. In the first round, the creature suffers 
1 point of damage, in the second round 2 points, in 
the third round 4 points, etc. Strength drops at a 
similar rate (1 point, 2 points, 4 points, etc.). When 
Strength or hit points drop to zero, the creature 
falls unconscious for the rest of the spell’s dura- 
tion, Spellcasting, physical attacks, and movement 
are not possible during this phase. 

Strength and hit points lost to this spell are re- 
gained at the same rate they were lost after the 
spell ends. 

The material component for this spell is an 
acom. 

Notes: Granted by the goddess Shiallia, of the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. Granted by the dwar- 
ven goddess Sharindlar. 


Easy March 
(Invocation) 
Sphere: Travelers 
Level: 5 
Range: 50 ft 


Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: | turn 
Duration: 1 day/level 

Area of Effect: 1 creature/level 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell enables a number of creatures equal 
to the caster’s level to force march for a number of 
days equal to the caster's level. Creatures affected 
by easy march can travel 2'4 times their normal 
movement rate without any risk of fatigue; thus, 
they are not required to make a Constitution check 
at the end of the day. 

All creatures affected by this spell suffer a —1 
penalty to their attack rolls for the duration of the 
spell; this modifier is not cumulative (that is, a 
party experiencing its second day of easy march 
suffers only a —1 penalty). The modifier cannot be 
negated by resting. 

Easy march has no effect on modifiers to move- 
ment due to terrain, fatigue, weather, or other 
normal factors. (Refer to Chapter 14 of the Player's 
Handbook for more about force marching.) 

The material component is a piece of shoe leather. 


Ea en a e 


Ebony Tendrils 


DEE 4 


Notes: Common for priests with major access to 
the sphere of Travelers. 


Easy Road 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Travelers 
Level; 1 
Range: Touch 


Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: | round 

Duration: | hr/level 

Area of Effect: 1 mile of road/level 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell ensures that the passage of the priest 
and his or her party along one path or road is quick 
and without mishap. The priest can enchant up to 1 
mile of road or pathway per caster level, allowing 
the group's rate of movement along the road to be 
increased by 50% without any noticeable spell 
effect. If the priest abandons the road or path to 
move across country to the destination, the spell 
ends immediately. 

In addition, for the spell’s duration, minor acci- 
dents, such as stones caught in a horse's hoof or a 
broken axle on a wagon, do not occur. 

The material components are the priest’s holy 
symbol and a handful of dirt from the road, both of 
which are held in one hand a moment before the 
dirt is sprinkled at the feet of the priest. 

Notes: Very rare spell for priests with access to 
the sphere of Travelers. (Updated from DRAGON 
Magazine.) 


Ebony Hand 
(Evocation, Necromancy) 
Sphere: Necromantic 


Level: 1 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 4 

Duration: 3 rds. + 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


This minor meditation focus a baneful, necro- 
mantic aura in the caster’s chosen hand, envelop- 
ing the fingers in a dark, flickering radiance. The 
ebony hand enhances the delivery of harmful, 
touch-related spells (such as cause light wounds or 
cause disease) by providing a +1 bonus on the 


233 


priest’s attack roll for every three levels of experi- 
ence past the first (+2 at 4th level, +3 at 7th level, 
to a maximum of +4 at 10th level). 

A touch-delivered spell can be cast either before 
or after the creation of the ebony hand; thus, the 
hand can be used to deliver as many spells as its 
duration permits. The ebony hand does not en- 
hance attacks with weapons or ranged spells. 

The material component varies from religion to 
religion, but it is usually a piece of apparel or jew- 
elry worn on the caster’s hand (often a black glove 
or a simple silver or onyx ring). Regardless of the 
actual item employed, this focus is not destroyed 
in the casting and can be used again. The ebony 
hand is granted by malevolent deities only to their 
evil priests. 

Notes: Restricted to evil priests, including 
necromancer-priests. 


Ebony Tendrils 


(Conjuration/Summoning) 
Sphere: Necromantic 


Level: 5 

Range: 10 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 5 
Duration: $ rds. 

Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell summons a lump of blackness five 
feet in diameter with four 10-foot arms radiating 
from it, 90 degrees apart. Touching the central 
lump causes death unless a successful saving 
throw vs. death is made. The arms attack with the 
same chance to hit as the priest casting the spell, 
inflicting 1d10+2 points of corrosive and constric- 
tion damage. Creatures struck have one chance to 
break free, which is the same as the chance to open 
a door. (If the chance to open doors is unknown, 
assume that smaller than man-sized creatures 
escape on the roll of a 1 on 1d6, man-sized crea- 
tures on a roll of | or 2 on 1d6, and larger than 
man-sized creatures on a 1, 2, or 3 on 1d6), 

The round after scoring a hit, an arm retracts 
into the central lump, dragging the creature in its 
grasp against the center and forcing a saving throw 
vs. death. Thereafter, the creature is held fast, and 
continues to suffer corrosion and constriction 
damage, but continued contact with the lump does 
not require additional saves vs. death. Broken arms 
retract into the central lump without making fur- 


Ecdysis — Dragon 


jj i  ————ee 


ther attacks. Arms holding dead creatures continue 
to hold them until the spell duration expires. 

The material components for this spell are 
Nerull’s unholy symbol (the skull and scythe) and 
a small, rusty iron ball. 

Notes: Granted by the evil god Nerull of the 
WORLD OF GREYHAWK setting. 


Ecdysis — Dragon 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Animal 


Level: 2 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This insidious spell accelerates the molting that 
dragons undergo. It is effective only against drag- 
ons, dracohydrae, dragon turtles, dragonets, and the 
various draconic hybrids. Ecdysis is not effective 
against dracoliches and similar undead creatures. 

If the creature makes a successful saving throw 
vs. spell, then the ecdysis spell has no effect. 
Failure means the creature begins to rapidly molt. 
The creature sheds 10% of its scales immediately. 
By the end of one turn, another 10% are shed, and 
again after an additional turn passes, another 10% 
are shed. For each 10% of its scales shed, the 
target creature suffers a —1 penalty to its Armor 
Class (thus, after 21 rounds, the creature suffers a 
-3 penalty to its Armor Class). Scales shed in this 
manner rapidly decay to dust and are useless as 
material components for spells. 

The degenerative effects of the spell can be 
halted, but not reversed, by means of a successful 
dispel magic, remove curse, or cure disease spell. 
Only a heal, limited wish, or wish spell can speed 
recovery from an ecdysis spell. Otherwise, new 
scales grow naturally at a rate of 10% per tenday. 
Thus, it takes a full 30 days before a victim of this 
spell regains its full Armor Class. 

The material components are the priest’s holy 
symbol and a reptilian scale of any type. 

Notes: Restricted to dragons. Granted by Null, 
the Death Wyrm, of the FORGOTTEN REALMS set- 
ting. This spell is known to exist as an dragon 
innate spell-like ability. 


234 


Echolocation 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Elemental Water 


Level: 5 

Range: 0 

Components: V 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: | turn + 1 turn/2 levels 
Area of Effect: Caster 

Saving Throw: None 


This spell allows the caster to send out a large 
variety of sound pulses and receive clear, three-di- 
mensional representations of his underwater sur- 
roundings from the rebounding sound waves—just 
as a dolphin does. This process of echolocation 
gives the caster a very detailed impression of any 
object, creature, passageway, or structure in any 
direction within 300 feet. In addition, the caster 
can detect the presence of any nonmagically con- 
cealed or secret doors within range of this spell. 

The caster can engage in normal conversation and 
even cast spells with verbal components while this 
dweomer is in effect, as long as he periodically sends 
out a burst of sound. Note that other marine creatures 
can easily hear such sound bursts, making it ex- 
tremely difficult to sneak while using this spell. In 
addition, a silence spell temporarily negates the 
effect, although it will resume once the silence spell 
wears off or the caster moves out of the silenced area. 

The caster has the option of focusing his sound 
bursts into a sonic wave that inflicts 5d6 points of 
damage on one creature, stunning it for 1d4 
rounds. This use instantly ends the spell. 

Because of this spell's high demand on the vocal 
chords, the caster is incapable of speech (including 
spellcasting) for one hour after the spell ends. 

Notes: Uncommon for aquatic and sea-going 
priests. 


Edge of Arumdina — Gnome 
(Enchantment) 
Sphere: Combat 


Level: 2 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: | rd./2 levels (round down) 
Area of Effect: 1 edged weapon 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


Ela’s Accounts 


a eee 6A 


This spell enchants an edged weapon—typi- 
cally some sort of axe, dagger, knife, or sword— 
with the magical sharpness of Garl's boon 
companion. Any weapon enchanted by means of 
this spell can cut through earth, stone, or metal as 
though it did not exist. This is not to say the effects 
of this spell enable a weapon to cleave earth, stone, 
or metal. Rather, such materials are simply treated 
as air as far as the enchanted weapon—in its en- 
tirety, not just the edge—is concerned. 

While this enchantment confers no additional 
damage bonus, metal armor of any sort, stone walls, 
and the like provide no physical protection against a 
weapon enchanted with the edge of Arumdina, al- 
though their magical bonuses, if any, are unaffected. 
The Armor Class of all opponents clad in armor or 
behind such cover is adjusted accordingly. This spell 
does not give a normal weapon the ability to harm 
creatures vulnerable only to enchanted weapons. For 
example, a werewolf could not be struck by a normal 
weapon enchanted with the edge of Arumdina. 

Notes: Granted by the gnome god Garl 
Glittergold. 


Effervescence 
(Alteration) 
Reversible 
Sphere: Elemental Water 


Level: 4 

Range: 120 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: | turn/level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


By means of this spell, the caster can cause up 
to 1,000 cubic feet of liquid per caster level to 
bubble, froth, foam, and fizz like an agitated, car- 
bonated soft drink. Thus, for each additional level 
of experience, the druid affects an additional 1,000 
cubic feet. For example, at 2nd level, a druid 
would be able to effervesce 2,000 cubic feet of 
liquid, and at 3rd level, the amount would be 3,000 
cubic feet of liquid. Small objects of up to | pound 
mass are drawn to the surface by this spell. 

The reverse of this spell, calm, causes an effect 
similar to that of pouring oil on troubled waters: 
All liquids in the area of effect become calm— 
even rapids on a river or water in a boiling kettle. 

Notes: Very rare spell. (Updated from DRAGON 
Magazine. ) 


Efficacious Monster Ward 
(Abjuration) 
Sphere: Wards 


Level: 3 

Range: 30 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 3 

Duration: | rd/level 

Area of Effect: 10-ft. cube/level 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell prevents monsters of 2 or fewer Hit 
Dice from entering the area of effect. Such crea- 
tures are allowed a saving throw; success indicates 
that they avoid the spell's effects and are able to 
enter the area of effect. 

The spell affects a cubic area whose sides equal 
the caster’s level times 10 feet (for example, a 9th 
level caster could affect an area equal to a 90-foot 
by 90-foot by 90-foot cube). 

Monsters within the area of effect when the 
spell is cast are not affected; however, when they 
leave the area of effect, they cannot return. 
Monsters outside the area of effect can hurl rocks, 
spears, and other missile weapons at targets inside 
and can also cast spells into the warded area. 

The material components are the priest's holy 
symbol and a pinch of salt. 

Notes: Common for priests with access to the 
sphere of Wards. 


Ela’s Accounts 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
Sphere: Charm 


Level: 2 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: | hr. 

Area of Effect: Individual touched 
Saving Throw: Special 


When the time comes for Ela’s church to update 
its financial records, her priests each take a turn 
visiting local merchants and other business folk, 
usually in pairs. While the subject is conversing 
with one of the priests, the other casually casts 
Ela’s accounts. When the priests ask the charmed 
individual for details of his or her current financial 
situation, the subject is compelled to recount all 
properties, income, and holdings to the best of his 


4 235 k 


Ela’s Blessing 


N 


or her knowledge. The caster might ask to see var- 
ious items the subject mentions in particular, al- 
lowing the other priest to use an appraising 
proficiency to calculate the object’s approximate 
value. The subject is unable and unwilling to lie or 
to withhold such information as is requested 
specifically. 

When the priests depart, the subject has no 
memory of having divulged these details, only that 
he or she had a conversation with a couple of 
priests from the Quick Fingers temple. The spell 
does not affect the subject's attitude toward the 
caster in any way (though the church usually sends 
representatives who have a good rapport with the 
subject), nor does it give the caster control over the 
subject beyond the compulsion to reveal his or her 
financial secrets. 

Only other priests of Ela’s Quick Fingers are al- 
lowed a saving throw against this spell. If success- 
ful, the saving throw negates the spell’s effect, and 
the subject knows that a fellow priest has at- 
tempted to charm him. It is considered inappropri- 
ate to cast this spell on comrades of the faith, 
however, unless under orders from a superior. 

Notes: Granted by Ela, a goddess of thieves. 
(Updated from Dragon Magazine). 


Ela’s Blessing 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
Sphere: Charm 


Level: 3 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: 1 hr./level 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


A priest who has spent enough time in the faith 
of Éla’s Quick Fingers learns that the church em- 
braces some of the thieving habits of the denizens 
of the night, whom the goddess protects. This spell 
gives the priest the special thieving skills of a thief 
of his or her level for its duration. For example, a 
Sth-level priest, after casting this spell, gains the 
base thieving skill scores (PP 15%, OL 10%, F/RT 
5%, MS 10%, HS 5%, DN 15%, CW 60%, RL 
0%), plus racial, armor, and Dexterity adjustments 
and the 180 discretionary points the priest would 
have as a Sth-level thief. The priest can allocate the 
points differently each time the spell is cast (the 
player is encouraged to adopt a standard set of 


scores for the priest when under the effect of this 
spell, to speed play), The normal restrictions on 
point allocation described for the thief class in the 
Player's Handbook apply. The priest can cast this 
enchantment only on himself or herself. 

The material component is the symbol of Ela. 

Notes: Granted by Ela, a goddess of thieves. 
(Updated from Dracon Magazine). 


Eldath, Water of 
See water of Eldath. 


Duration: 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: Up to 1 cu. ft/level 
Saving Throw: None 


By means of this spell, the caster conjures con- 
trolled moonfire. The moonfire can range from a 
faint glow to a clear, bright (but not blinding) light. 
This can vary in hue as desired: blue-white, soft 
green, white, and silver. It serves as a source of 
light for reading, finding one’s way, and attracting 
others to a desired location. Moonfire is the same 
as the strongest moonlight for all purposes. 

Elistraee’s moonfire lasts for one round per 
level of the caster. Concentration is not required to 
maintain its, but the spell can be ended at will by 
the summoner, but a successful dispel magic spell, 
or by any darkness spell cast against it for this pur- 
pose (both are negated). 

Moonfire appears to emanate from some part of 
the caster’s body, but can move about as the caster 
wills. Priests of 4th level or higher can cause 
moonfire to move away from their bodies alto- 
gether, drifting about in a manner akin to the danc- 
ing lights spell, at a rate of up to 40 feet per round. 
It can drift through the tiniest openings, and can 
fill an area as large or small as the priest desires, 
up to a maximum of one cubic foot per level. 

Notes: Granted by the drow goddess Eilistraee. 
Also granted by the elven moon goddess Sehanine 
Moonbow. 


ee ee ee 


Elemental Bonding 


VQ 


Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 5 

Duration: 24 hrs. 

Area of Effect: 15-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell creates a peaceful aura around the 
caster that causes creatures with animal to low 
Intelligence to regard the caster and his or her 
allies as friendly. This spell is particularly useful 
when encountering a large group of hungry or en- 
raged animals. A creature with Low intelligence or 
with 6 Hit Dice or more is allowed a saving throw 
vs. spell to avoid this effect. 

The material components are a scrap of food 
and the priest's holy symbol. 

Notes: Granted by Eldath the Green Goddess of 
the ForGOTTEN REALMS setting. (Updated from 
POLYHEDRON Newszine.) 


Elder Eye — Drow 
(Abjuration) 
Sphere: Necromantic 


Level: 5 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: 7 rds. 

Area of Effect: 1 creature/round within 20 ft. 
Saving Throw: Special 


When this spell is cast, one of the caster's eyes 
is transformed into a glowing golden orb of evil 
for seven rounds. Each round, the caster can bale- 
fully glare at a single living creature within 20 feet 
with the elder eye. lf the creature fails its saving 
throw vs. spell at a —3 penalty, a nondamaging 
magical blindness results that persists until a 
dispel magic, remove curse, or cure blindness or 
deafness spell is applied (rest or cure wound spells 
will not suffice). This gaze attack is in addition to 
other actions the caster can take during a combat 
round. The gaze can be reflected back upon the 
caster by any spell or magical effect that reflects 
either spell or gaze attacks. 

There is a 1% noncumulative chance per use of 


this spell that the caster’s eye will be permanently 
blinded when the elder eye of Ghaunadaur expires. 
In such circumstances, nothing short of a heal or 
regenerate can restore sight in the affected eye. 
Notes: Granted by the drow god Ghaunadaur. 


Elemental Bonding 
(Alteration) 
Reversible 
Sphere: Elemental (Any) 


Level: 1 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: Permanent 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


With this spell the priest attempts to repair phys- 
ical damage done to another being or creature. In 
an elemental sense, part of the damage incurred by 
combat wounds or disease is, in fact, an imbalance 
created in the body's elemental proportions. 
Through this spell, the priest restores some of this 
balance 


The amount of damage healed is 1d4+1 points, 
but there are restrictions. If the damage is from 
disease or combat, the priest cannot completely 
heal the recipient with this spell. He only heals the 
recipient to within three 3 points of perfect health. 
For instance, if a warrior with 15 maximum hit 
points has 11 left, an elemental bonding spell heals 
only | point of damage, Other magic can heal the 
remaining damage. If the wounded individual took 
all damage solely from an elemental, however, the 
priest heals all damage with this spell. 

The material component for this spell is an 
amount of elemental material sufficient to cover 
the recipient’s wounds. The priest must abide by 
his sphere of elemental worship when performing 
this spell. 

Notes: Uncommon for priests from the DARK SUN 
setting. 


f-S aaa E 


Elemental Breach 


Elemental Breach 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Elemental (All) 


Level: 7 

Range: 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: 1 hr./level 
Area of Effect: One 10 ft. X 10 ft. square/level 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell rends the very fabric of space itself 
inside an Elemental Plane. The breach created by 
this spell might open into any of the adjoining 
Elemental Planes, or even one of the Energy 
Planes, causing material from that plane to spill 
forth into the caster’s plane. This material becomes 
a permanent pocket. The breach stays open for a 
considerable amount of time, allowing passage 
through it in either direction. 

The breach is an uneven tear, with the material 
of the other plane easily visible through it. The 
size of the breach is approximately a 10-foot by 
10-foot square per level of the caster, so it is possi- 
ble to create large holes. The material comes 
through the breach in a manner and rate deter- 
mined by the DM, but it should be fairly constant 
and consistent with the size of the breach and the 
nature of the intruding material. Although the ma- 
terial becomes an elemental pocket, at the breach 
itself the two elements interact, possibly forming 
dangerous conditions (fire and water produce huge 
amounts of scalding steam, for example). 

The spell might create habitable areas within the 
Elemental Planes, such as an island of earth on the 
plane of Water, or a pocket of air on the plane of 
Smoke. Many planar spellcasters choose to make 
their homes or temples in such unique and exotic 
places. 

Tearing holes in the barriers between planes 
often gains the attention of a powerful elemental 
being. This being might reside on either side of the 
breach. There is a 25% chance that a being of 
power will be alerted and annoyed enough to send 
minions to close the breach (and possibly punish 
the offender). The DM determines the nature of 
these minions. This chance is cumulative for every 
time a priest opens a breach into or out of the 
being’s plane in a given year. Obviously, if the 
priest opens the breach specifically to undermine 
or harm the being, its realm, or its minions, inter- 
vention is automatic. 


238 


The material components for the spell are sam- 
ples of the two planes’ elemental material, or silver 
symbols signifying such. 

Notes: Common for priests from the Elemental 
Planes, uncommon for other planar priests; other- 
wise virtually unknown. 


Elemental Control 
(Abjuration) 
Sphere: Summoning 


Level: 4 

Range: 10 yds. + 10 yds evel 
Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 elemental 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell allows the caster to seize control of an 
elemental summoned by someone else. The priest 
has a 50% base chance of success; the roll is ad- 
justed by the difference in level or Hit Dice be- 
tween the priest and the elemental. This roll is 
further modified by the difference between the 
original summoner’s Wisdom and the caster’s: the 
difference between the two is a bonus added to 
whomever has the greater Wisdom. 

Only one attempt can be made per creature; if 
the priest does not seize control of the elemental, 
no future efforts will succeed. If the effort is suc- 
cessful, the elemental obeys the wishes of the priest 
for the remainder of its stay on the physical plane. 

Notes: Very rare spell. (Updated from DRAGON 
Magazine. ) 


Elemental Forbiddance 
(Abjuration) 
Sphere: Wards 


Level: 5 

Range: Special 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: | turn 

Duration: | turn/level 

Area of Effect: Cube, 5-ft./level 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell prevents the entry of all elementals 
into the area of effect. Elementals outside the area 
can’t make physical attacks against those inside, 
but they can cast spells and make missile into the 
area. The spell affects a cube whose sides equal the 


Elsewhere Chant 


EEE A 


caster’s level times 5 feet (a 12th-level priest could 
affect a 60-foot x 60-foot x 60-foot cube). 
Elemental forbiddance has no effect on elementals 
that are within the area of effect when the spell is 
cast. If such elementals leave the area of effect, 
they cannot reenter. 

The material components are the priest's holy 
symbol and four glass beads, each of a different 
color (yellow, green, red, and blue). The priest 
must pace out the perimeter of the warded area at 
the time of casting. 

Notes; Common for priests with major access to 
the sphere of Wards. Optionally may be available 
to elemental specialty priests. 


Elemental Protection 


(Abjuration) 
Sphere: Elemental (All), Protection 


Level: 5 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: 1 hr/level 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: None 


The priest casting elemental protection renders 
one creature immune to the effects of one specific 
type of element (chosen by the priest at the time of 
casting) for the duration of the spell. The level of 
protection is determined by the type of damage the 
creature suffers. For purposes of this spell, there 
are two types of damage: passive and active. 

Passive damage is environmental damage. 
Passive fire damage is from heat from nearby fires 
or burns from falling into a fire pit. The fire is not 
wielded with intent to do damage. The recipient of 
the spell is completely immune to this type of 
damage. 

Active damage is the result of an attack. A red 
dragon’s breath, fireball spells, boiling oil poured 
from the top of a wall, fire elementa) strikes, and 
similar attacks are active fire damage. The recipi- 
ent of the spell suffers only half damage from such 
attacks. Any saving throws against this type of 
damage has a +4 bonus. 

This spell was developed by a planewalker 
priest who frequented the Elemental Planes, but it 
has also come into use by planewalkers visiting 
dangerous areas on the Great Ring the icy layer of 
Stygia on Baator or the fiery layer of Muspelheim 
on Ysgard, for example. Although protection from 


fire is a fine spell, elemental protection is much 
longer lasting and, over all, more effective. (This 
spell does not provide the ability to breathe on the 
plane, however.) 

The material component is the caster’s holy 
symbol, 

Notes: Uncommon for planar priests; other- 
wise, Virtually unknown. 


Elsewhere Chant 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Summoning 


Level: 7 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 1 rd. or 2 rds. 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell transports two living creatures (one of 
whom may be the caster), or a creature and an 
item, or two items, to “elsewhere” from the place 
of casting. Travel is safe (akin to a wizard’s tele- 
port without error spell), but must be to a destina- 
tion on the same plane as the caster. If the caster 
desires, only one being or item can be moved by 
the spell, but if two are moved, they must go to dif- 
ferent destinations. A being can take worn or car- 
ried gear, but no more than 400 pounds total 
weight. An item can be a single thing, a container 
holding many objects, or any number of articles 
lashed together, but weighing not more than 400 
pounds total. Nonliving material (chosen ran- 
domly) in excess of the weight limits is left 
behind, but a living being who exceeds the weight 
limit causes the spell to fail. This spell leaves 
behind parasites, rodents, and hidden creatures 
riding on a spell recipient, rather than failing be- 
cause of their presence. 

If a priest casting an elsewhere chant takes a 
single round to unleash it, both affected beings or 
items are translocated to visible nearby destina- 
tions. This use of the spell often serves to put dis- 
tance between the caster and a foe. If the caster 
chants for two rounds when casting this spell, the 
travel of one or both recipients can be to any loca- 
tion on the same plane (that is, distant, out-of-view 
spots). Destinations must be to places the caster 
can currently see or has been in at a previous time, 
not merely the other side of a mountain or an un- 
known name on a map. 


a ee 


Embattlement oo 


If a prohibited destination is chosen or some 
part of a recipient exceeds the limits of the magic, 
a random destination or part of the recipient to be 
excluded is determined (such things are never de- 
termined by the caster). 

Notes: Granted by the god Milil, Lord of All 
Songs, of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. This 
spell is found only in a few exceptionally rare 
tomes, | 


Embattlement 
(Abjuration) 
Sphere: Protection 


Level: 3 

Range: Touch 

Components; V, S 

Casting Time: 6 

Duration: 7 rds. 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


While this spell is in effect, all attacks on the 
protected creature that requires an attack are rolled 
twice. The result most favorable to the creature is 
used. 

Notes: Granted by Ilmater, the One Who 
Endures, of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. This 
spell is found only in a few exceptionally rare 
tomes, 


Emotion Control 
(Alteration, Enchantment/Charm) 
Sphere: Thought, Charm 


Level: 3 

Range: 10 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 6 
Duration: | rd./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell can be cast in one of two ways: in a 
manner that affects the priest, or in a manner that 
affects a creature other than the priest. 

A) Priest: This casting affects only the priest. It 
shields true emotions from magical examination. 
When casting the spell, the priest designates a 
false emotion to be projected. If spells such as ESP 
or emotion read are used on the priest, then the 
priest is allowed a saving throw vs. spell, with a +1 
bonus for each 5 levels of experience. Success 


means the other caster reads the false emotion; 
failure means the priest’s true emotion is revealed. 
This use also gives the priest a +2 bonus to saving 
throws against the following spells: spook, taunt, 
irritation, know alignment, scare, emotion, fear, 
and phantasmal killer. The priest instantly knows 
when any of these spells are cast on him or her, but 
the source of the spell is not revealed, 

B) Other: The second use of this spell allows the 
priest to create a single emotional reaction in one 
creature per five levels of experience, similar to the 
wizard spell emotion. All affected creatures must 
be within a 20-foot cube. All creatures possibly af- 
fected by this spell, even willing creatures, must 
make a successful saving throw vs. spell to resist 
the emotion, In addition to all other modifiers, the 
saving throw is modified by —1 for every three 
levels of the priest casting the spell. 

Some typical emotions follow, but the DM may 
allow other, similar effects. 

Courage; The subjects become berserk, gaining 
+1 to attack rolls and +3 to damage, and temporar- 
ily gaining 4 hit points (damage against the subject 
is deducted from these temporary points first). The 
subjects need never check morale, and receive a +5 
bonus to saving throws against the various forms of 
fear. Courage counters (and is countered by) fear. 

Fear: The subjects flee from the priest for the 
duration of the spell, even if this takes them out of 
spell range. Fear counters (and is countered by) 
courage. 

Friendship: The subjects react positively to any 
encounter. Any result on the Encounter Reactions 
table (Table 59 in the DMG) is moved one column 
to the left. Thus, a threatening creature becomes 
cautious, an indifferent creature becomes friendly, 
etc. Friendship counters (and is countered by) hate. 

Happiness: The subjects experience feelings of 
warmth, well-being, and confidence, modifying all 
reaction rolls by +3 . They are unlikely to attack 
unless provoked. Happiness counters (and is coun- 
tered by) sadness. 

Hate: The subjects react negatively to any en- 
counter; any result on the Encounter Reactions 
table is moved one column to the right (for exam- 
ple, a friendly creature becomes indifferent, a cau- 
tious creature becomes threatening, etc.). Hate 
counters (and is countered by) friendship. 

Hope: The subjects’ morale is improved by +2. 
Their saving throw rolls, attack, and damage rolls 
are all improved by +1 while this emotion is in 
effect. Hope counters (and is countered by) hope- 
lessness. 


ee rr ee ee 


Enchant Phylactery 


Tq 


Hopelessness: The subjects’ morale suffers a 
—10 penalty. In addition, in the round in which the 
emotion is initially established, they must immedi- 
ately make a morale check. Hopelessness counters 
(and is countered by) hope. 

Sadness: The subjects feel uncontrollably glum 
and are prone to fits of morose introspection. All 
initiative rolls suffer a +1 penalty and attack rolls 
suffer a —1 penalty. Their chance of being sur- 
prised is increased by 2. Sadness counters (and is 
countered by) happiness. 


The material component for both versions of the 
spell is a small bunch of fleece or uncarded wool 
that is consumed in the casting. 

Notes: Common for priests with major access to 
the sphere of Thought, uncommon for priests with 
major access to the sphere of Charm (ToM). 


Emotion Perception 
A 2nd-level spell of the sphere of War. See appen- 
dix in Vol. 3. 


Emotion Read 
(Divination) 
Sphere: Thought 
Level: 1 


Range: 5 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 3 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell allows the priest to perform an instan- 
taneous reading of a single subject’s emotional 
state. It can be used on any subject possessing 
Intelligence of 3 or better. This reading is neither 
deep nor specific and cannot pick out mixed emo- 
tions or intricate details. For example, it might tell 
the priest that the subject is fearful, but won't 
reveal what the subject is afraid of or why she is 
afraid. 

Emotion read does not reveal individual 
thoughts or the subject’s motivation. Thus, the 
spell might reveal that the subject is coldly unemo- 
tional at the moment, but not the fact that the sub- 
ject is contemplating the cold-blooded murder of 
the priest. 

The reading is instantaneous; it reveals only the 
emotion that is strongest at the instant the spell is 
used. While this usually is related to the subject's 


overall emotional state, the subject also might be 
distracted for a moment or remember and respond 
to past events. 

The subject is allowed a saving throw vs. spells 
to resist this spell. If the saving throw is success- 
ful, the priest receives no reading at all. If the sub- 
ject’s roll exceeds the necessary number by six or 
more, the priest perceives an emotion diametri- 
cally opposite to the subject's true emotion. 

The material component is a square of un- 
marked white wax. 

Notes: Common for a priest with access to the 
sphere of Thought. 


Empathy 
(Divination) 
Sphere: Divination 
Reversible 
Level: 1 
Range: 0 


Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: 1 turn 

Area of Effect: 10-ft. wide path, 30 ft. long 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell allows the caster to sense the basic 
needs, drives, and/or emotions of any unshielded 
mind (hunger, thirst, fear, fatigue, pain, uncer- 
tainty, rage, hatred, curiosity, hostility, friendli- 
ness, love, and so on). The spell gives no result for 
creatures protected against detection, psionic crea- 
tures, or emotionless creatures (such as slimes, 
oozes, jellies, golems, skeletons, zombies, etc.). 

The reverse of the spell, mask emotion, conceals 
the emotions of the protected creature for one turn. 

The material component is the priest's holy 
symbol. 

Notes: Very rare spell. (Updated from 
POLYHEDRON Newszine.) 


Enchant Phylactery 
(Enchantment) 
Sphere: Guardian, Protection 


Level: 5 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: Until the phylactery is opened 
Area of Effect: 1 phylactery 

Saving Throw: None 


4 241 ~ 


Enchant Runestones — Dwarf 


A phylactery is a small box that can be opened, 
and is frequently attached to straps or fine chains 
that allow it to be worn on the body. The enchant 
phylactery spell allows the priest to enchant the 
item with a spell that takes effect when the phylac- 
tery is opened. If the phylactery is to be destroyed 
upon opening, the second spell can be fire- or elec- 
tricity-based. If the phylactery is meant to survive, 
neither of those attack forms should be employed. 

The phylactery can be previously enchanted. If 
it is attuned to a being, however (the phylactery of 
a lich, for example, is specific to that one lich), the 
second spell does not takes effect if that being 
opens the phylactery, nor will the spell take effect 
if the caster opens the phylactery. 

The second spell must be cast by the same priest 
who cast the enchant phylactery spell, and this 
must be done in the immediately following round. 
The level at which the second spell takes effect is 
the same as that of the priest at the time the phy- 
lactery was enchanted. Thus, if the second spell 
was cast by a 9th-level priest, the spell takes effect 
as if cast by a 9th-level priest, regardless of how 
long it has been since the phylactery was en- 
chanted. The second spell requires its usual mate- 
rial components, but if it needs a visible target or 
operates by touch, the phylactery itself serves that 
purpose. Only one spell can be placed on a given 
phylactery with the enchant phylactery spell. A 
subsequent casting of enchant phylactery replaces 
a previous casting. 

The material components are a strand of spider- 
web and an eyelash and sliver of fingernail from 
the caster. 

Notes: Granted by Mystra, Mother of All 
Magic, of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. (This 
spell has been updated.) 


Enchant Runestones — Dwarf 
(Enchantment) 
Sphere: Creation 


Level: 2 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 turn 
Duration: 1 wk. 

Area of Effect: 6-20 stones 
Saving Throw: None 


With this spell, a dwarven priest specially pre- 
pares a set of runestones to be used in divination 


242 


spells such as augury or divination. The priest 
takes a set of 6 to 20 stones and engraves special 
dwarven runes on each stone. The exact number of 
stones and specific runes inscribed vary with the 
religion or homeland of the priest. A bless spell is 
then cast upon the runestones, followed by the en- 
chant runestones spell. The enchanted runestones 
improve the chance for an accurate divination for 
one week. 

When a divination is attempted, the stones are 
tossed upon the ground and read as part of the div- 
ination process. The reading of the runestones pro- 
vides greater accuracy with divination spells. The 
exact gain in accuracy varies from spell to spell 
(but generally on the order of +10%). 

The material component is the priest’s holy 
symbol, which is touched to the runestones. 

Notes: Very rare dwarven spell. (Updated from 
DRAGON Magazine.) 


Enchant Stones 
(Enchantment) 
Sphere: Elemental Earth 


Level: 5 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: | wk. 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: Circle of standing stones 
Saving Throw: None 


This highly specialized and rarely-granted spell 
is available only to priests of the Celtic deity 
Belenus who have attained 10th level. It is granted 
but once per year, and is the most important spell 
in the dedication of a circle of standing stones (see 
special section). The casting of the spell requires 
an entire week. Any interruption negates its ef- 
fects, and the priest must start over. A priest using 
this spell has one year to create a circle of stones. 
Failure to do so means the patron deity takes back 
this (and all the priest’s other spells), never again 
to be bestowed. (Theoretically, in an extraordinary 
case of exceptional service, a disgraced priest 
might be reinstated, but there is no evidence this 
has ever happened.) 

The deity allows only one attempt to construct a 
circle of standing stones each year. 

The material component is a small stone quar- 
ried from the same place as the stones used in the 
circle. It must be collected after the stones have 
been placed in position. 


Notes: Granted by the Celtic god Belenus, a sun Endless Dance 
god and patron of druids. (In campaigns not using (Enchantment/Charm) 
a traditional Celtic pantheon, the local equivalent Sphere: Charm 


might be substituted by the DM.) 
Level: 6 
Range: 0 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 1 rd 


Area of Effect: 10-ft. radius/level 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell seduces anyone within the area of 
effect to join a korred circle dance. Those who fail 
a saving throw vs. spell drop whatever they hold in 
their hands and begin dancing in a circle around 
the spellcaster. While dancing, affected creatures 
cannot cast spells, attack, communicate, or con- 
sciously defend themselves from attack. However, 
the wild movements of the dance enable those af- 
fected by the endless dance to avoid some attacks, 
so they receive only a -2 penalty to their Armor 
Class (to a maximum of AC 10), 

During the endless dance, affected creatures 
take 1d4 points of damage per round until the spell 
ends, death occurs, or they are restrained. Korreds, 
worshipers of Shiallia, or those who voluntarily 
forgo their saving throws take only | point of 
damage per turn and cannot be reduced below 1 hit 
point by the spell’s effects. 

There is a 1% chance per level above 9th of the 
spellcaster that Shiallia’s avatar appears during the 
casting of this spell to aid the spellcaster in what- 
ever manner is necessary. 

While this spell is in effect, the Shiallian stands 
in the center of the circle and slowly spins while 
singing the song of the korreds. The spellcaster 
cannot cast other spells or physically attack during 
this time, but she can defend herself. If the spell- 
caster stops spinning or singing, the endless dance 
ends immediately. 

Notes: Granted by the demipower Shiallia, Lady 
of the Woods, of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


4 243 k 


Endurance 


Endurance 
(Alteration) 
Reversible 
Sphere: Healing 


Level: 4 

Range: Touch 

Components: S, M 

Casting Time: 1 turn 

Duration: 24 hrs. 

Area of Effect: 1 creature/2 levels 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell allows the shukenja to banish fatigue 
caused by lack of sleep and overexertion. When 
cast, it fills the recipient with energy and vigor. For 
those who have gone without rest, it cancels the ef- 
fects of fatigue as if they had eight hours of restful 
sleep in the last 24 hours. Thus an individual could 
be active for 24 hours (out of necessity), gradually 
suffering fatigue, receive this spell, and return to 
normal functioning instantly. For those who are al- 
ready well rested, the spell cancels the need for 
sleep in the next 24 hours. It does not, however, 
allow the recovery of spells. The spell affects one 
creature for every two levels of the caster. 

The material component is a pinch of sand. 

The reverse of this spell, fatigue, tires a creature as 
if it had not slept in the last 24 hours. The creature is 
allowed a saving throw vs. spell to avoid the effects. 
An affected creature has a penalty of —2 to attack 
rolls, a penalty of —1 to all saving throws, and its 
movement is reduced to two-thirds the normal rate. 
In addition, if it does not rest within 12 hours, it col- 
lapses from exhaustion and sleeps for 10 hours. If 
sleep is impossible, the creature is unable to take any 
type of effective action. Eight hours of rest (if taken 
before collapse occurs) negates this spell. 

The material component is a small noisemaker. 

Notes: Common for priests from an oriental set- 
ting; otherwise, very rare. 


Endurance of Iimater 
(Abjuration, Alteration, Necromancy) 
Sphere: Necromantic, Protection 


Level: 4 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 7 

Duration: | rd.+1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell doubles the hit points of the spell re- 
cipient for the spell duration. Any damage suffered 
is taken first from the bonus hit points until they 
are all exhausted; damage is only then taken from 
the real hit points of the affected being. Further, all 
Strength and Constitution checks for the recipient 
succeed while the endurance of Ilmater is in 
effect. The spell also protects the vitality of the 
spell recipient so that all system shock rolls and 
checks of any sort against contracting diseases au- 
tomatically succeed, and all other saving throws 
receive a +2 bonus. In addition, no being protected 
by endurance of Ilmater can be knocked over, 
trampled, ridden down, or overthrown; all pro- 
tected beings can stand firm against all charges. 

Notes: Granted by Ilmater, the One Who 
Endures, of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Endure Cold/Endure Heat 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Protection 


Level: 1 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: 1/2 hrs./level 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


The creature receiving this spell is protected from 
normal extremes of cold or heat (depending on 
which application the priest selects at the time of 
casting). The creature can stand unprotected in tem- 
peratures as low as -30° F. or as high as 130° F. (de- 
pending on application) with no ill effect. 
Temperatures beyond these limits inflict 1 point of 
damage per hour of exposure for every degree 
beyond the limit. The spell is immediately canceled 
if the recipient is affected by any non-normal heat 
or cold, such as magic, breath weapons, and so on. 
The cancellation occurs regardless of the applica- 
tion and regardless of whether a heat or cold effect 
hits the creature (for example, an endure cold spell 
is canceled by magical heat or fire as well as by 
magical cold). The recipient of the spell does not 
suffer the first 10 points of damage (after any appli- 
cable saving throws) from the heat or cold during 
the round in which the spell is broken. The spell 
ends instantly if either resist fire or resist cold is cast 
upon the recipient. 

Notes: Common for clerics (PHB). 


ee eS 


Enhance Turning 


ee 4 


Enduring Ward — Old Empire 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Wards 


Level: 6 

Range: Special 
Components: V, S, M 
Duration: Permanent 
Casting Time: 1 turn 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell acts as a limited form of the perma- 
nency spell available to wizards. Any glyph of 
warding, symbol, or priest spell from the sphere of 
wards is made permanent if followed by the cast- 
ing of this spell. Only one such spell can be af- 
fected per casting of an enduring ward. 

This spell can be canceled by the successful 
casting of a dispel magic or Mordenkainen’s dis- 
junction spell (or similar magics), but a second 
such spell is typically required for the warding 
spell itself, whose finite duration (if applicable) 
does not commence until the ending of the endur- 
ing ward. 

The material component of this spell is a 
crushed diamond of at least 200 gp value. 

Notes: Granted by the Mulhorandi goddess 
Nephthys of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Energy Drain 
Reversed form, restoration. This form is used by 
evil priests. 


Enfeeble Water Creature 
Reversed form, enhance water creature. 


Enhance Blood Ability 
Components: V, S, M 


(Alteration, Evocation) 
Casting Time: 5 


Sphere: Necromantic 
Duration: 3 rds. +1 rd./level 


Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


Level: 2 
Range: Touch 


This spell is identical to the 3rd-level wizard 
spell of the same name. It enables the subject to tap 
the essence of his bloodline directly to temporarily 
increase the power of one existing blood ability. 


The casting priest must know the bloodline deriva- 
tion, blood ability, and ability power (minor or 
major) to be affected. When the spell is cast, the 
chosen blood ability improves one power level— 
minor to major, or major to great—for the duration 
of the spell. Blood abilities of maximum level gain 
no benefit from the spell, and blood abilities that 
have only one level of power cannot be enhanced. 

When the spell ends, the blood ability returns to 
normal. The target then cannot use the previously 
enhanced blood ability for one turn (it has been 
stretched beyond its limits). If the blood ability is 
one that normally operates continuously (such as 
enhanced sense or courage), then the creature 
loses any continuous benefits garnered by the abil- 
ity for that turn. The spell has no effect on those 
without a bloodline ability. 

The material components for this spell are two 
similar objects—one small and one large—repre- 
senting the bloodline derivation of the subject. The 
caster breaks the smaller of the two totems during 
the casting of the spell, the larger symbol shatters 
when the spell ends. 

Notes: Common for priests from Cerilia, the 
BIRTHRIGHT setting. 


Enhance Turning 
(Enchantment) 
Sphere: Combat 


Level: 2 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: 5 rds/level 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell can be cast on any individual with the 
ability to turn undead creatures. While it is in 


4 245 a 


Enhance Water Creature 


Q 


effect, the recipient turns undead as if one experi- 
ence level greater, and gains a +1 bonus to all turm- 
ing rolls, both for the initial turning result and for 
the number of undead turned or destroyed. No ad- 
ditional benefit is received from multiple castings 
of this spell. 

The material component is a silver holy symbol. 

Notes: Very rare spell. (Updated from 
POLYHEDRON Newszine.) 


Enhance Water Creature 
(Alteration) 
Reversible 
Sphere: Animal, Elemental Water 


Level: 4 

Range: 10 yds./level 

Components: V, M 

Casting Time: 2 rds. + 2 rds level 

Duration: Id4 rds. 

Area of Effect: 1 creature + 1 creature/4 levels of 
the caster 

Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell physically enhances creatures that 
live in or breathe water, as well as creatures from 
the Elemental Plane of Water. Examples include 
water weirds, water elementals, sea lions, fish, 
ocean-going mammals (such as whales and dol- 
phins), and native ocean races (such as locathah 
and sahuagin). The spell does nothing for beings 
that breathe underwater by artificial or magical 
means, nor does it affect those who merely use 
water-based spells, including most wizards. 

Because most effects of this spell are beneficial, 
many recipients waive their saving throws. All re- 
cipients gain a +1 bonus to their attack rolls, 
damage rolls, and saving throws. If damage in- 
flicted by a creature is measured by a number of 
dice, then the DM should add +1 to each die before 
making any other modification. 

Recipients from the Elemental Plane of Water 
gain 1 hit point per Hit Die, applied immediately. 
Any damage inflicted upon these creatures is sub- 
tracted from the bonus hit points first. 

In addition, creatures that need water to survive 
can survive without it for the spell’s duration. A 
thin, bluish sheen coats the bodies of all recipients, 
radiating strong alteration magic. Otherwise no 
visual change occurs. 

The reverse of this spell, enfeeble water crea- 
ture, inflicts a —I penalty to attack rolls, damage 
rolls, and saving throws for the targeted creature. 


In addition, creatures native to the Elemental Plane 
of Water subtract | hit point from each hit die. A 
successful saving throw vs. spell negates the 
effect, but each creature affected must attempt a 
separate saving throw. Note that some water 
deities may consider the use of the enfeeble water 
creature spell a hostile act. 

The material component for both versions is the 
caster’s holy symbol. 

Notes: Uncommon for aquatic or seagoing 
priests. 


Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: 30 ft. cube 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell creates a mass of weak, sticky threads 
that remain in existence for one turn. The threads 
block vision, but do not impede movement. They 
are nonflammable and can be removed only by a 
successful dispel magic spell or equivalent. 

Creatures touching the threads must make a suc- 
cessful saving throw vs. spell at -3 or be at once 
transported into a misty labyrinth of unlimited 
size. Prisoners in the labyrinth are affected by a 
form of confusion and are 50% likely to attack any 
creature they meet, friend or foe, being confused 
as to its true nature. 

Prisoners not engaged in combat are allowed a 
saving throw vs. spell each round after the first 
within the labyrinth. When a successful saving 
throw is made, the creature returns to its previous 
location (if within the threaded area, the creature 
is not subject to the spell’s effect again). 
Prisoners escape from the labyrinth when the 
spell effect expires in any event. A find the path 
spell cast in the labyrinth allows the prisoner to 
escape it automatically. 

Notes: Granted by the goddess Istus of the 
WORLD OF GREYHAWK setting, 


ae a ae a T 


Entropy Shield 


p ee eee 


Entangle 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Plant 


Level: | 

Range: 80 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 4 

Duration: 1 turn 

Area of Effect: 40-ft. cube 
Saving Throw: / 


By means of this spell, the caster is able to cause 
plants in the area of effect to entangle creatures 
within the area. The grasses, weeds, bushes, and 
even trees wrap, twist, and entwine about the crea- 
tures, holding them fast for the duration of the 
spell. Any creature entering the area is subject to 
this effect. A creature that rolls a successful saving 
throw vs. spell can escape the area, moving at only 
10 feet per round until out of the area. 
Exceptionally large (gargantuan) or strong crea- 
tures may suffer little or no distress from this spell, 
at the DM’s option, based on the strength of the 
entangling plants. 

The material component is the caster’s holy 
symbol, 

Notes: Common for druids (PHB). 


Entangle, Sheela’s 
See Sheela’s entangle. 


Enthrall 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
Sphere: Charm, Law 


Level: 2 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 90-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


A priest using this spell can enthrall an audience 
that can fully understand his language. Those in 
the area of effect must save vs. spell or give the 
caster their undivided attention, totally ignoring 
their surroundings. Those of a race or religion un- 
friendly to the caster’s have a +4 bonus to the roll. 
Any Wisdom adjustment also applies. Creatures 
with 4 or more levels or Hit Dice, or with a 
Wisdom of 16 or better, are unaffected. 


To cast the spell, the caster must speak without 
interruption for a full round. Thereafter, the en- 
chantment lasts as long as the priest speaks, to a 
maximum of one hour. Those enthralled take no 
action while the priest speaks, and for 1d3 rounds 
thereafter while they discuss the matter. Those en- 
tering the area of effect must also save or become 
enthralled. Those not enthralled are 50% likely 
every turn to hoot and jeer in unison. If there is ex- 
cessive jeering, the rest are allowed a new saving 
throw. The speech ends (but the 1d3 round delay 
still applies) if the priest is successfully attacked or 
performs any action other than speaking. 

If the audience is attacked, the spell ends and 
the audience reacts immediately, rolling a reaction 
check with respect to the source of the interrup- 
tion, at a penalty of —10. 

Note: When handling a large number of saving 
throws for similar creatures, the DM can assume an 
average to save time: for example, a crowd of 20 
men with a base saving throw of 16 (25% success 
chance) will have 15 men enthralled and five not. 

Notes: Common for clerics (PHB). 


Enthrall — Shukenja 


This oriental spell is in all ways 
similar to its western counterpart, 
except that any discussion of poli- 
ties, religion, or alignment grants a 
new saving throw at +5. 


Entrench 
A 4nd-level spell of the sphere of War. See appen- 
dix in Vol. 3. 


Entropy Shield 


Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 9 
Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


This potent defense surrounds the caster in a 
chaotic maelstrom of energy and demimatter that 
blocks or deflects many attacks. The entropy shield 
extends about two feet in all directions from the 
caster’s body. The warping effect of the field causes 


A 247 Re 


Eruption r 


any melee or hand-to-hand attack to miss 50% of 
the time—even if the roll allows an attack to con- 
tinue, the priest still gains a +2 bonus to his Armor 
Class. Normal missiles or hurled weapons miss au- 
tomatically as the entropy shield deflects them 
from the caster. Even magical missile attacks (pro- 
duce flame, magic missile, or Melf's acid arrow, for 
example), siege engines, and giant-thrown boulders 
are deflected as if they were hand-to-hand attacks. 

Against spells or effects that produce energy, 
gas, or other physical attack forms (fireball, light- 
ning bolt, cloudkill, and other such spells) the en- 
tropy shield provides a 50% chance that the attack 
simply does not affect the protected priest. Even if 
the harmful energy or matter penetrates the shield, 
the caster makes any saving throw with a +2 bonus. 
This does not cause a spell to fizzle or fail; a priest 
standing in the middle of a fireball is simply not 
touched by the spell, which inflicts its normal 
damage on anyone else in the area of effect. Any 
spell or effect that does not create matter or energy 
to harm or hinder the creature can pass through the 
entropy shield normally, so mind-based attacks and 
magical effects such as petrifaction, paralyzation, 
enfeeblement, or polymorph can affect the priest. 

In addition to its defensive benefits, the entropy 
shield has the ability to repel normal or giant-sized 
animals and creatures of lawful alignment, such as 
extraplanar monsters from the lawful planes, Any 
such creature attempting to attack the shielded 
priest in hand-to-hand combat must roll a saving 
throw vs. spell at the end of the round. If the crea- 
ture fails, it recoils from the priest and cannot 
attack him physically for the remainder of the 
spell’s duration (although it could decide to turn 
on one of the priest's companions). 

The material component for this spell is a gem- 
stone worth at least 100 gold pieces that has been 
exposed to the chaotic energies of Limbo. 

Notes: Uncommon for priests with major access 
to the sphere of Chaos (PO:SM). 


Eruption 
(Invocation) 
Sphere: Elemental Magma 


Level: 7 

Range: 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 2 rds. 

Duration: 1 rd/level 

Area of Effect: 30-ft. diameter 
Saving Throw: 4 


whe. 


248 


This spell can be cast only upon ground with a 
foundation of earth or natural rock. It causes the 
area to erupt into geysers of molten rock. Columns 
of fiery stone burst from the ground and spew 
deadly lava over everything in the area of effect. 
Creatures within the area must attempt to move out 
(unless protected from fire or heat) and take 3d8 
points of damage every round they remain in the 
area. Exposed flammable items are likely to burn. 
The molten rock sticks to skin and continues to 
burn, inflicting 1d8 points of damage per round 
until cooled or until 10 rounds have passed (im- 
mersing a creature or dowsing it with water may 
reduce the duration). The DM adjudicates the 
effect of this spell on structures; stone fortifica- 
tions are likely to survive. 

The spell leaves a scar of natural, cooling vol- 
canic rock in the area of effect when the spell ends, 
which will harden into a thin layer of stone. 

Notes: Uncommon for priests from the DARK 
Sun setting. (Updated from prior version.) 


Eternal Flame 
(Alteration, Necromancy) 
Sphere: Necromantic, Elemental Fire 


Level: 5 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 8 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: | item or body not exceeding twice 
the caster’s own body volume in size 

Saving Throw: None 


The name of this spell comes from a poetic 
name for magic attributed originally to the elves. 
Eternal flame can be cast to affect an item or a 
body. If this spell is cast on an object or body that 
has a volume more than twice that of the caster, it 
fails and is wasted. 

Transmitted only by direct touch, this spell 
imbues an item with a receptive neutral enchant- 
ment that causes it to readily accept later magics 
cast or transferred by dweomerflow spells, for ex- 
ample) into it. In other words, eternal flame allows 
magic to be fed into an item simply by casting 
spells in the normal way and choosing the item as 
the target, but then willing the spell to enter and 
not harm the item. (In other words, it makes a 
dweomerflow spell unnecessary unless a spell is 
being transferred from another item such as a focal 
stone.) One spell or magical effect per level of the 


Ethereal Barrier 


a ee A 


caster of the eternal flame can enter the affected 
item without a saving throw being needed for the 
item, any chance of the transfer failing, or any 
damage occurring to spell or item. There is no time 
limit to this entry of powers, but the opportunity to 
imbue them is ended by the casting of an awaken- 
ing spell on the item. 

Note that unlike the enchant an item spell, eter- 
nal flame merely allows an item to hold enchant- 
ments within itself—it does not enchant the item 
so as to allow it to emit enchantments flowed into 
it as controllable powers. In other words, an item 
affected by an eternal flame spell bears a dweomer 
and can hold magics within it, but it is not a usable 
magical item until the magics to give it powers 
have been conveyed into it and an awakening spell 
successfully cast upon it. (In other words, this 
spell handles only the very beginnings of the 
process that the enchant an item spell encom- 
passes.) Unless or until power transfer occurs and 
an awakening spell is cast, the item is an item stor- 
ing magic that no one can call upon in any con- 
trolled way—though if the item itself is shattered, 
the magics within it usually find instant and explo- 
sive release. 

This spell can be cast on living, dead, or undead 
mammalian bodies by touch. It completely attunes 
body tissues to fully receive a spell. The next spell 
to come into contact with a body prepared by an 
eternal flame spell takes full effect, exhibiting 
maximum possible duration, beneficial effect, 
damage, or whatever—even if a saving throw is 
normally necessary for the body to be affected at 
all—and does not require the affected being to 
make any saving throw, system shock survival roll, 
or resurrection survival roll, even if one is nor- 
mally imperative (a turning attempt is not a spell.) 
Two schools of wizardry spells are exceptions to 
this: enchantment/charm and illusion/phantasm. 
An eternal flame does not cause the effectiveness 
of enchantment/charm or illusion/phantasm spells 
to be changed for the affected body at all. 

The material component of an eternal flame 
spell is a spark struck by the impact of an item 
bearing a dweomer from a rock, bladed weapon, or 
metal item that bears some sort of dweomer. 
(Neither item is harmed in any way by the spell.) 

Notes: Very rare spell from the FORGOTTEN 
REALMS setting. 


Eternal Sleep — Dragon 


(Necromancy) 
Sphere: Necromantic 


Level: 1 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, M 

Casting Time:1 rd. 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 dragon corpse 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell ensures that a dead dragon's spirit 
passes for all eternity to the Outer Planes. Once it 
is cast on the corpse of a dragon, that corpse 
cannot be animated or resurrected, and the dragon 
itself cannot be contacted by spells such as speak 
with dead. The spell has no effect on a corpse that 
has been animated at any time before eternal sleep 
is cast, not does it have any effect on dracoliches 
or other undead creatures. 

The material component is the priest’s holy 
symbol. 

Notes: Restricted to dragons. Granted by Null, 
the Death Wyrm, of the FORGOTTEN REALMS set- 
ting. This spell is also known to exist as an innate 
spell-like ability. 


Ethereal Barrier 
(Abjuration) 
Sphere: Astral, Wards 


Level: 2 

Range: 120 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: | turn 

Duration: | turn/level 

Area of Effect: Two 10-ft. squares/level 
Saving Throw: None 


The ethereal barrier is a defense against the pas- 
sage of extradimensional creatures, including 
creatures that are phased, ethereal, or traveling via 
dimension door or shadow walk. The priest creates 
an imperceptible barrier of 10 square feet per level 
that can be arranged in any fashion desired. For ex- 
ample, a 3rd-level caster can ward six 10-foot by 
10-foot surfaces, sufficient to guard a 10-foot x 
10-foot X 10-foot room (four walls, a ceiling, and 
a floor need to be protected.) Some monsters may 
be able to abandon their ethereal approach and 
simply enter the barred area on their own feet—the 
ethereal barrier only bars their passage as long as 


4 249 k 


Etherealness P 


they are traveling in the Border Ethereal. Also, 
while this spell can’t be worn down by any form of 
attack, it does not bar teleportation, gates, or the 
passage of astral creatures. 

Ethereal barrier can be cast as cooperative 
magic by several priests working together. As long 
as all involved priests can cast the spell, their areas 
of effect added together. Take the total levels of all 
priests involved and multiply by two to find the 
number of 10-foot by 10-foot squares that can be 
warded. For example, four 6th-level casters (24 
total levels) can ward 48 10-foot by 10-foot 
squares. The duration is determined by the highest 
level priest involved, plus 1 turn for each addi- 
tional priest. In the previous example, this would 
be 6 turns plus 3 turns for three additional priests 
for a total of 9 turns. 

This spell is also suitable for focus magic (see 
the focus spell). 

The material component is a special compound 
of rare earths and lead worth at least 10 gp per ap- 
plication. One application is required for each 10- 
foot by 10-foot square to be warded. 

Notes: Uncommon for any priest with access to 
the spheres of Astral or Wards (PO;SM). 


Etherealness 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Astral, Numbers 
Level: 3 
Range: 0 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 1 
Duration: Special 


Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell resembles the Sth-level wizard spell 
etherealness in many respects, but there are a few 
important differences. First, the priest cannot leave 
the Border Ethereal and venture into the Deep 
Ethereal; therefore, at the end of the spell’s dura- 
tion, he must return to the Prime Material Plane. 
Second, the priest cannot use this spell on an un- 
willing creature—only a willing creature touching 
the priest when the spell is cast can be made ethe- 
real. The caster can bring one creature per two ex- 
perience levels (rounded up: three at Sth, four at 
7th, five at 9th, and so on) to the Ethereal Plane. 
Even if the priest abandons them in the Border 
Ethereal, stranded creatures materialize when the 
spell ends. The spell normally lasts for one turn, 


plus one round per level of the caster, unless the 
priest chooses to end the spell earlier. 

While ethereal, the priest cannot be detected by 
any means short of a true seeing or detect phase 
spell. Ethereal surroundings are misty, gray, and 
otherworldly. No action an ethereal creature takes 
can affect the physical world, but the creature can 
pass through walls, doors, and other solid objects 
without hindrance while ethereal. 

The priest can choose to end the spell voluntar- 
ily at any time, materializing in the physical world 
in one round (this ends the spell only with respect 
to himself and those he has brought back). A caster 
who occupies a solid object when the spell ends is 
hurled into the Deep Ethereal and stranded in a 
catatonic stupor until rescued. 

Notes: Common for priests with access to the 
sphere of Numbers. 


Etherwalk 
Quest spell, see appendix in Vol. 3. 


Evade Truth — Savant 


Reversed form, detect untruth. 


Everbleeding Wounds 
See curse of the everbleeding wounds. 


Everchanging Self 
(Alteration, Necromancy) 
Sphere: Chaos, Protection 


Level: 6 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 9 
Duration: 3 rds./level 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


An everchanging self spell causes the caster’s 
body to change shape and appearance constantly, 
with skin hue and texture, number of limbs, and all 
other physical attributes changing continually. 
This continual shifting ruins most clothing (and 
harms the caster if armor more rigid than studded 
leather is worn, at 1d4+1 points per round), but ef- 
fectively conceals the caster’s identity. 

The parade of everchanging limbs causes the 
caster to temporarily lose 3 points of Dexterity, 
and to make all attacks at a —1 penalty on attack 
rolls and a —2 penalty on damage rolls, but Armor 
Class benefits by 4 points. 


aia Aas iat yi al ais 


Exaction 


Ngee aa 


The spell does not change the upright, bipedal, 
flightless, air-breathing nature of the caster 
(though it can operate in conjunction with spells 
that do permit flight or underwater breathing). It 
does make the casting of many spells impossible. 
The forms taken are not controlled by the caster 
(the shapes of specific individuals or monsters 
cannot be counterfeited), and the forms change at a 
rate that the caster cannot dominate—but limbs ac- 
tually in use do not vanish, only alter in length and 
appearance. The strength and senses of the caster 
are not altered by the spell. 

The everchanging self spell requires no system 
shock rolls for the alterations it causes, and adds a 
+20% bonus to all system shock rolls forced on the 
caster by external forces while the spell lasts. 

Mask refuses to grant any variant of this spell 
that affects others. The spell is customarily em- 
ployed to carry out a fairly simple task in public, 
when the caster wishes to scare observers or not be 
identified by them. It was developed to allow 
trapped Maskarran clergy to escape through 
crowds of observers after thefts occurred. 

Notes: Granted by Mask, Lord of Shadows, of 
the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. This spell is found 
only in a few exceptionally rare tomes. 


Everfull Quiver — Elf 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Combat 


Level: 3 

Range: Touch 

Components; V, S, M 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: 1 quiver and two arrows 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell enchants a quiver that contains at 
least two arrows. In every round thereafter, the 
caster can withdraw up to two arrows per round 
without depleting the total number of arrows in the 
quiver. If more than two arrows are ever with- 
drawn in one round, the spell effect ends immedi- 
ately, and only the first two arrows withdrawn do 
not deplete the real supply. If anyone aside from 
the caster tries to withdraw an arrow from an end- 
less quiver, the spell effect ends immediately as 
well. 

The caster can withdraw any type of arrow that 
was found within the everfull quiver when the 
spell was cast. Thus if the priest casts everfull 


251 


quiver on a quiver containing one flight arrow, one 
sheaf arrow, and one silver arrow, he could then 
withdraw two silver arrows, one silver arrow and 
one flight arrow, etc. per round. No arrow drawn 
from an everfull quiver while the spell effect lasts 
is magical, even if the one or more arrows in the 
everfull quiver is magical. 

If an arrow drawn from an everfull quiver is not 
immediately employed, it fades into nothingness 
in two rounds. Once shot, an arrow drawn from an 
everfull quiver cannot be reused, but will not 
vanish. 

The material components of this spell are the 
priest's holy symbol, a quiver, and two or more 
arrows, none of which is consumed in the casting. 

Notes: Granted by the elven god Solonor 
Thelandira. 


Exaction 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
Sphere: Charm, Summoning 


Level: 7 

Range: 10 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: | rd. 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: None 


When this spell is employed, the priest con- 
fronts some powerful creature from another plane 
(including devas and other powerful minions, for 
instance, but not demigods or deities of any sort) 
and requires of it some duty or quest. A creature of 
an alignment opposed to the priest (e.g., evil if the 
priest is good, chaotic if the priest is lawful) 
cannot be ordered around unless it is willing. Note 
that an absolute (true) neutral creature is effec- 
tively opposed to both good and evil, and both law 
and chaos. 

The spellcaster must know something about the 
creature to exact service from it, or else must offer 
some fair trade in return for the service. For exam- 
ple, if the priest is aware that the creature has re- 
ceived some favor from someone of the priest's 
alignment, then the exaction spell can name this as 
cause. If no balancing reason for service is known, 
then some valuable gift or service must be pledged 
in return for the exaction. The service exacted 
must be reasonable with respect to the past or 
promised favor or reward, and with the being’s 
effort and risk. The spell then acts, subject to a 


Exaltation = 


magic resistance roll, as a quest spell on the being 
that is to perform the required service. 
Immediately upon completion of the service, the 
being is transported to the vicinity of the priest, 
and the priest must then and there return the prom- 
ised reward, whether it is irrevocable cancellation 
of a past debt or the giving of some service or 
other material reward. After this is done, the crea- 
ture is instantly freed to return to its own plane. 

The DM adjudicates when an equitable arrange- 
ment has been reached. If the caster requests too 
much, the creature is free to depart or to attack the 
priest (as if the agreement were breached) accord- 
ing to its nature. If circumstances leave the situa- 
tion unbalanced (for example, the creature dies 
while achieving a result that was not worth the 
creature dying), then this might create a debt owed 
by the caster to the creature’s surviving kith and 
kin, making the caster vulnerable to a future exac- 
tion spell from that quarter. Agreeing to a future 
exaction or release in the event of catastrophic fail- 
ure or death are common caster pledges in secur- 
ing an exaction. 

Failure to fulfill the promise to the letter results in 
the priest being subject to exaction by the subject 
creature or by its master, liege, etc., at the very least. 
At worst, the creature can attack the reneging priest 
without fear of any of his spells affecting it, for the 
priest’s failure to live up to the bargain gives the crea- 
ture total immunity from the priest’s spell powers. 

The material components of this spell are the 
priest's holy symbol, some matter or substance 
from the plane of the creature from whom an exac- 
tion is expected, and knowledge of the creature's 
nature or actions that is written out on a parchment 
that is burned to seal the pledge. 

Notes: Common for clerics (PHB). 


Exaltation 
(Abjuration, Conjuration/Summoning) 
Sphere: Combat, Healing 


Level: 3 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell enables a priest to aid and protect any 
one other being. The priest cannot cast this spell 
upon himself or herself. By touch, the caster re- 


moves the effects of fear, sleep, feebleminded- 
ness, hunger, pain, nausea, unconsciousness, in- 
toxication, and insanity from the spell recipient 
(who can be of any alignment or faith). The recip- 
ient is protected against spells and other attacks 
that cause these effects for the duration of the 
spell. Such effects are negated, not postponed 
until the spell expires. 

A recipient of a different faith and alignment 
than the caster must make a saving throw vs. spell 
even if willing. If the saving throw is successful, 
the spell is lost and has no effect. 

A recipient of a different faith and the same 
alignment as the caster makes the saving throw at 
a —4 penalty. A successfully exalted recipient (the 
saving throw failed) receives a +1 bonus to any 
morale checks and +1 reaction adjustment for sur- 
prise checks for the spell duration. 

A recipient of the same faith but a different 
alignment than the caster, makes the saving throw 
is at a—6 penalty, A successfully exalted recipient 
receives a +1 bonus to any morale checks for the 
spell duration. 

A recipient of the same faith and alignment as 
the caster receives a +2 bonus to any morale 
checks for the spell duration, and—if the caster de- 
sires—radiates a white, blue-white, or amber radi- 
ance for the duration of the spell. If the radiance is 
desired, it is evoked immediately and cannot be 
ended before the spell expires. 

The material components for this spell are a 
flask of holy water and a powdered sapphire or di- 
amond of at least 1,000 gp value. 

Notes: Granted by Helm the Vigilant of the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Exalted Triad, Azuth’s 
See Azuth’s exalted triad. 


Excessive Indulgence 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
Sphere: Charm 


Level: 1 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Duration: 1 rd/level 

Casting Time: 4 

Area of Effect: One living creature 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell causes the target creature to focus on its 
current activities to the point of overindulgence. The 


Ee ana 


Exorcism — Savant 


EEE 


creature receives a saving throw vs. spell to avoid the 
effect. If the saving throw is failed, the creature's 
current actions for that round become compulsive 
and excessive for the duration of the spell. 

Each round, the creature must make an 
Intelligence check and a Wisdom check (both at a 
—2 penalty) to perform any action besides the com- 
pulsion. For example, if Blenzer the Bulging was 
eating when the spell was cast, he feels an over- 
whelming urge to gorge himself for the duration of 
the spell. All surprise checks are made with -2 
penalty during this period. 

If a creature under the effect of this spell is at- 
tacked, the spell is instantly canceled. Likewise, an 
affected creature does not truly injure or kill itself 
while under the spell’s effects, although it may 
come close due to gluttony or some other behavior. 

The material components of this spell are the 
priest's holy symbol and three fresh flower petals. 

Notes: Granted by Sharess, the Tawny 
Temptress, of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Exorcise 
(Abjuration) 
Sphere: Necromantic 
Level: 4 
Range: | 


Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1—100* turns 
Duration: Permanent 

Area of Effect: 1 creature or object 
Saving Throw: None 


The spell of exorcism negates possession of a 
creature or an object by any outside or supernatu- 
ral force. This includes control of a creature by 
some force in an object, possession by magic jar 
spell, demonic possession, curse, and even charm, 
for the exorcise spell is similar to a dispel magic 
spell. Furthermore, it affects a magical item if such 
is the object of the exorcism. Thus, a soul object of 
any type affected by a successful exorcism expels 
the life force contained, to inhabit its nearest mate- 
rial body, wholly and completely. 

The exorcise spell, once begun, cannot be inter- 
rupted, or else it is spoiled and useless. The base 
chance for success is a random 1% to 100%. Each 
turn of exorcism the dice are rolled, and if the base 
chance number, or less, is rolled, the spell is success- 
ful. The base chance of success is modified by —1% 
for each level of difference between the priest's level 
of experience and the level of the possessor or pos- 


sessing magic, where the smaller number is the 
priest’s level. In the obverse, a +1% cumulative is 
added. The referee can assign a base chance accord- 
ing to the existing circumstances, if desired. 

The material components for this spell are the 
holy symbol of the priest and holy water (or 
unholy symbol and unholy water, in the case of 
evil priests). A religious artifact or relic can in- 
crease the chance of success by from 1% to 50%, 
according to its power. 

Notes: Uncommon for clerics. 


Exorcism — Savant 
(Abjuration) 
Sphere: Necromantic 


Level: 2 

Range: Special 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 turn/HD of spirit 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 spirit 

Saving Throw: Special 


A clerical savant casts this spell to rid one object or 
area of an evil spirit. The casting time is equal to one 
tum per hit die of the spirit, during which the caster is 
shielded as if by a protection from evil 10’ radius spell. 

Each turn of casting, the savant must roll 4d6 
for a total below his or her Constitution, subtract- 
ing one from the roll for each four levels of experi- 
ence (round fractions down). Failure ends the 
spell, subjecting the savant to possible attack from 
the enraged spirit. If the exorcism fails, another at- 
tempt can be made 24 hours later. 

At the completion of the casting time, the spirit 
must make a successful saving throw vs. spell or 
be forced back to the realm of the dead. Success 
means the creature is driven away, remaining in 
the general area but losing one-fourth of its hit 
points. If subsequent exorcisms reduce the spirit to 
zero hit points, it is permanently driven from the 
area. Any noncorporeal undead or restless life 
force can be affected, including any singular 
undead possessing or haunting an individual, 
object, hallway, room, etc. This does not include 
intelligent undead in the vicinity of a specific lair 
(vampires, liches, death knights, etc.). 

The material components of the spell are a small 
silver bell, a book of prayers, and a blessed candle 
that must remain lit throughout the ceremony. 
Upon completion of the spell, the savant snuffs out 
the candle and destroys it. 


4 253 S 


Extract Spirit — Shaman 


Notes: Restricted to savant-clerics, common. 


(Updated from DraGoN Magazine.) 


Extract Spirit — Shaman 
(Necromancy) 
Sphere: Summoning 


Level: 4 

Range: 10 yds, 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: Permanent 
Area of Effect: 1 spirit 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell allows the caster to remove a spirit 
that is bound into an object, and place it in another 
container. The spell works only on spirits bound 
into objects. This includes naturally bound spirits 
(for example, tree spirits or the spirits of springs 
and fields) and those bound by another shaman’s 
magic (such as fetish spirits). If the spirit does not 
wish to be extracted, it is allowed a saving throw 
vs. spell. The spell has no effect on spirits set to 
guard an area or merely constrained not to wander. 

Some benevolent shamans use these spells to 
rescue doomed spirits, like moving the spirits of 
dying trees into a seed or sapling. This is not as 
pointless as it might sound, as the rescued spirit is 
likely to be grateful, and may spread word of the 
caster’s kindness, which might make other, more 
potent spirits friendly towards the caster. 

Most shamans, however, use the spell to create 
spiritual alarms or guards. The two usual uses of 
such spirits are listed below. Inventive casters may 
find other uses for them, the success or failure of 
such attempts to be adjudicated by the DM. 

If the object into which the spirit is placed is 
carried by the shaman, it allows him to sense the 
approach of spirits and living creatures. The range 
of this ability depends on the power of the crea- 
ture or spirit: it extends up to a distance of 10 
yards per Hit Dice or level of the approaching 
being; a 5 Hit Die monster is detected when it 
moves within 50 yards, a 3 Hit Die monster within 
30 yards. The shaman does not know, however, in 
which direction the being is, how far away it is, 
which way it is moving, nor what it actually is. In 
crowded areas (where the number of creatures or 
spirits exceeds the shaman’s Intelligence score) 
the shaman cannot keep track of the total number 
of beings present, and the ability becomes effec- 
tively useless. 


If the spirit object is placed in a room, on a path 
or passage, or in another area, the shaman can tell 
if any creature or spirit passes through the area. An 
area up to 10 yards across can be monitored in this 
way. If several spirits are set as guards in this 
manner, the shaman cannot tell which specific one 
has been passed, only that one of them has been. 

The spell requires a container for the spirit, 
which must be an object for which the spirit has a 
natural affinity: for example, a tree spirit might be 
placed in a piece of wood, while a river spirit 
would better be stored in a jar of water. When the 
spirit is released, the object crumbles; if the object 
is broken, the spirit is also released. 

Notes: Restricted to shamans, uncommon. 


Extradimensional Detection 
(Divination) 
Sphere: Numbers, Divination 


Level: 3 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 3 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: 10-ft.-wide path, 60 -ft. long 
Saving Throw: None 


When extradimensional detection is cast, the 
priest detects the existence of any extradimen- 
sional spaces or pockets in a path 10 feet wide and 
60 feet long in the direction he is facing: The priest 
can turn, scanning a 60° arc each round, or move 
slowly while the spell is in effect to change the 
sweep of the detection. 

Extradimensional spaces include those created 
by spells such as rope trick and those within such 
items as bags of holding and portable holes. The 
priest does not know the size of the space or its 
source. The spell also detects interplanar gates and 
the gate opened by the spell extradimensional fold- 
ing. 

The spell can be blocked by a stone wall of one 
foot thickness or more, a one-inch thickness of 
solid metal, or one yard or more of solid wood. 

Notes: Common for priests with access to the 
sphere of Numbers; uncommon for priests with 
access to the sphere of divination (ToM). 


Sa en ee a eee ee ee 


Extradimensional Pocket 


h n ee a 


Extradimensional Manipulation 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Numbers 


Level: 5 

Range: 10 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: 4 rds./level + 2d12 rds. 

Area of Effect: 1 extradimensional space up to 20 
ft. X 20 ft. 

Saving Throw: Special 


This spell allows the priest to alter the charac- 
teristics of certain extradimensional spaces such as 
those created by rope trick and similar spells or 
those contained in items like bags of holding or 
portable holes. It can be used in two different 
ways. 

A) Alter Space: The spell can be used to in- 
crease or reduce the size of a single extradimen- 
sional space. The amount of increase or decrease 
depends on the level of the caster. 


Level Multiplier 
Up to 10 x2 
11 to 16 x3 
17 or above x4 


Thus, a 10th-level priest can double the capacity 
of a bag of holding or decrease it to half its normal 
size. A 15th-level priest can triple the capacity or 
reduce it to one-third capacity. 

If the size and capacity of an extradimensional 
space is decreased, any contents of the space that 
exceed the current capacity are expelled (deter- 
mined randomly). These contents are expelled 
from the space in the same way they originally en- 
tered it, if that path is still open. If the path is 
closed, as it would be if a bag of holding was tied 
shut or a portable hole was folded up, the extra 
contents are expelled into the Astral Plane. Any 
items in an enlarged space when the spell duration 
expires suffer the same fate. 

B) Seal Pocket: The spell can be used to reduce 
the danger of placing an extradimensional space 
inside an other such space, such as placing a bag of 
holding inside a portable hole. When used in this 
manner, the size of the space is not altered. 
However, the affected extradimensional space can 
be placed within another such space (or another 
extradimensional space can be placed within the 
affected space) with no adverse consequences. If 


one space is within the other when the spell ends 
the usual consequences ensue immediately, 


In both cases, if the space to be affected is being 
maintained by a spellcaster, as in the case of a rope 
trick, that spellcaster receives a saving throw vs. 
spell to resist the manipulation. If the space is cre- 
ated by a magical item, however, no saving throw 
is allowed. The duration of the spell is 4 rounds per 
level of the caster, plus an additional 2d12 rounds. 
Thus a 10th-level caster’s effect lasts 4 turns and 2 
to 24 additional rounds. 

The material component is a strip of gold tissue 
worth at least 5 gp, given a half twist and joined at 
the ends during the casting. 

Notes: Common for priests with major access to 
the sphere of Numbers (ToM). 


Extradimensional Pocket 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Numbers 


Level: 5 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: 2 turns/level + 1d12 rds. 
Area of Effect: Special 

Saving Throw: None 


This spell allows the priest to create a single ex- 
tradimensional space like that inside a bag of hold- 
ing. The spell is cast on a container such as a sack, 
bag, or backpack. Once under the influence of the 
spell, the container opens into a extradimensional 
space much larger inside than its outside dimen- 
sions. The container always weighs a fixed 
amount, regardless of what is put inside. This 
weight and the capacity of the extradimensional 
space depend on the level of the caster (see table). 
The spell lasts for 2 rounds per level of the caster, 
plus 1d12 rounds. For this duration, the extradi- 
mensional created acts in all respects as a bag of 
holding. 

If the container is overloaded or if it is pierced 
by a sharp object, the bag immediately ruptures 
and the contents are lost into the Astral Plane. Any 
items in the bag when the spell ends are also lost in 
the Astral Plane. 

The material components, in addition to the 
container, are 200 gp worth of powdered diamond 
and a sheet of platinum worth 500 gp. The plat- 
inum sheet is inscribed with a drawing of a Klein 


a 255 k 


Eye of Fire — Old Empire 


bottle (a paradoxical figure with only one sur- 
face—the three-dimensional analogue of the 
Moebius strip). The diamond dust is consumed 
during the casting, the platinum sheet is not. 
Notes: Common for priests with major access to 


the sphere of Numbers (ToM). 
Extradimensional Pocket Table 
Apparent Weight Volume 
Level Weight Cap. Cap. 
9-13 15 Ibs. 250 Ibs 30 cu. ft. 
14-16 25 Ibs 500 Ibs 70 cu. ft. 
17-19 35 Ibs 750 Ibs 100 cu. ft. 
20+ 60 Ibs 1,000 Ibs. 150 cu. ft. 
Eye of Fire — Old Empire 
(Evocation) 


Sphere: Combat, Sun 


Level: 3 

Range: 30 yds.+10 yds /evel 
Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 6 

Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: 1⁄2 


This spell causes the priest's left eye to emit a 
blazing beam of fire, which burns with the intense 
heat of the sun. The priest points at the target crea- 
ture, which the priest must be able to see, and 
utters the Mulhorandi word for vengeance. A crea- 
ture struck by the narrow beam of flame suffers 
1d4 points of damage per level of the priest, up to 
a maximum of 10d4. Undead creatures suffer 1d6 
points of damage per level of the priest, up to a 
maximum of 10d6. A target creature making a suc- 
cessful saving throw vs. spell suffers only half 
damage. 

The intense beam of heat can ignite combustible 
items or melt other items. An exposed item worn 
or carried by a creature that fails its saving throw 
vs. spell must make a successful item saving throw 
vs. magical fire to survive the beam. 

The verbal component is the Mulhorandi word 
for vengeance. 

Notes: Granted by the Mulhorandi god Horus- 
Re of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


256 


Eyes of the Undead 
(Necromancy) 
Sphere: Necromantic 
Level: 3 
Range: 40 yds. 


Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 6 

Duration: 2 hrs./level 

Area of Effect: | undead creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This caster can use this spell on any dead or 
undead body of size S (small) or larger. Once cast, 
the spell forges a link that allows the caster to see 
and hear anything that the corpse can. The caster 
cannot control the undead creature through this 
spell, but must rely upon the creature's orders and 
instincts to provide the appropriate views. The 
more self-willed and intelligent the undead, the 
better the chance the caster will see or hear some- 
thing useful. A dead body, or an undead creature 
that willingly serves the caster receives no saving 
throw. 

Although the corpse must be within 40 yards 
when the spell is cast, it can move up to 1 mile 
away and still transmit to the caster. On the 
Demiplane of Dread, the spell ceases to work if the 
caster and corpse are in different domains and the 
borders of either domain (or any intervening 
domain) close. 

The material components for this spell are an 
eye and ear of a dead man. Casting this spell on the 
Demiplane of Dread requires a Ravenloft powers 
check. 

Notes: Common for priests from the Demiplane 
of Dread with major access to the Necromantic 
sphere. 


Faerie Fire 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Weather 


Level: 1 

Range: 80 yds. 

Components: 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: 4 rds./level 

Area of Effect: 10 sq. ft/level in a 40-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell enables the caster to outline one or 
more objects or creatures with a pale glowing light. 
The number of subjects outlined depends upon the 
number of square feet the caster can affect. 
Sufficient footage enables several objects or crea- 
tures to be outlined by the faerie fire spell, but one 
must be fully outlined before the next is begun, and 
all must be within the area of effect. Outlined ob- 
jects or creatures are visible at 80 yards in the dark, 
40 yards if the viewer is near a bright light source. 
Outlined creatures are easier to strike, thus oppo- 
nents gain a +2 bonus to attack rolls in darkness (in- 
cluding moonlit nights) and a +1 bonus in twilight 
or better. Note that outlining can render otherwise 
invisible creatures visible. However, it cannot out- 
line noncorporeal, ethereal, or gaseous creatures. 
Nor does the light come anywhere close to sunlight. 
Therefore, it has no special effect on undead or 
dark-dwelling creatures. The faerie fire can be blue, 
green, or violet according to the word of the caster 
at the time of casting. The faerie fire does not cause 
any harm to the object or creature thus outlined. 

The material component is a small piece of 
foxfire. 

Notes: Common for druids (PHB). 


Faerie Flames — Elf 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Combat, Weather 


Level: 5 

Range: 80 yds. 

Components: V, M 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: 4 rds./level 

Area of Effect: 10 sq. ft-/level in a 40-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell is a variant of the 1st-level priest spell, 
faerie fire. Except as noted here, this spell conforms 
to the characteristics of the lesser spell. 


257 


Faith Armor 


In addition to the faerie fire effects, this 
spell inflicts magical damage upon crea- 
tures outlined by it. The spell inflicts 2d4 
points of damage immediately. Each 
round thereafter, the creature is allowed a saving 
throw vs. spell to end the effect. Failure means that 
another 2d4 points of damage is taken and the 
spell continues, to a maximum duration of 4 
rounds per level of the caster. 

Otherwise, the flames give off no heat and do 
not harm objects, nor do they spread to other objects 
or creatures. Any creature touching an object out- 
lined with faerie flames takes 1d3 points of damage. 

Faerie flames cannot be doused with water, 
smothering, or other methods normally used to ex- 
tinguish flames, though magical means can be 
used, including a wand of flame extinguishing or a 
successful dispel magic. 

The material components for this spell are a 
small piece of foxfire and an ounce of pure sulfur, 
both of which are consumed in the casting. 

Notes: Very rare spell granted by some elven 
gods. (Updated from DraGoN Magazine.) 


Faith Armor 
(Abjuration, Invocation/Evocation) 
Sphere: Protection 


Level: 5 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 8 

Duration: 5 rds. 

Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell brings into being a shadowy, translu- 
cent armor around the caster. The aura of this roiling 
magic can neither be removed nor cast on other 
beings. Faith armor temporarily makes the caster AC 
0 (regardless of encumbrance, Dexterity, and what- 
ever real armor or garb is worn beneath it). Further, it 
can be set during casting to render the priest immune 
to the effects of all wizard spells of a particular 
school or all priest spells of a specific sphere, so that 
the armored caster is unaffected by such magic. 

The material component of a faith armor spell 
is a handful of powdered obsidian, enough to com- 
pletely cover both of the caster’s palms if it is 
Spread out as thin as dust. 

Notes: Granted by Helm the Vigilant of the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. This spell is found 
only in a few exceptionally rare tomes. 


Faith Arrow — Elf 


N 


Faith Arrow — Elf 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
Sphere: Combat 


Level: 2 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 arrows/3 levels 
Saving Throw: None 


This speli allows the caster to enchant a 
number of nonmagical arrows with divine power. 
The arrows are considered +3 magical weapons 
for determining what creatures they can hit. 

A normal shot with a faith arrow always hits, so 
long as the target is within bow range and in the 
archer’s line of sight. A called shot can be made with 
the archer's normal chances to hit. A faith arrow 
cannot pass through any barrier that a normal arrow 
cannot penetrate, nor follow a path that a normal arrow 
could not. It inflicts double damage upon evil oppo- 
nents. A faith arrow crumbles to dust after it is used. 

A priest can create one faith arrow for every 
three levels of experience (for example a 10th- 
level priest can create three faith arrows). The 
caster cannot have more than seven faith arrows in 
existence at one time. 

The caster can give faith arrows to others, but 
any such arrow used by someone not of the 
caster’s faith crumbles to dust when fired. 

The material component is the caster’s holy 
symbol. The arrows must be made by an expert 
fletcher. 

Notes: Very rare spell granted by elven gods. 
(Updated from DraGoN Magazine.) 


Faith Magic Zone 
(Abjuration) 
Sphere: Protection, Wards 


Level: 4 
Range: 60 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 7 
Duration: 1d4 turns 
Area of Effect: 180-ft.-radius sphere 
Saving Throw: None 
This spell causes the casting of all wizard 
spells in the area of effect to be slowed, resulting 
in a +3 penalty to the casting times of wizard 
spells that normally take one round or less to cast. 


Spells that take more than a round to cast are unaf- 
fected by faith magic zone. Item effects based on 
wizard spells are likewise activated with a +3 
penalty. These penalties also affect spell casting 
and item activation in progress at the instant the 
faith magic zone spell is completed. 

The faith magic zone creates a dim silver radi- 
ance that emanates from the caster. Since the 
caster is not necessarily the center of the spell 
effect, there is no readily apparent way to know 
where the limits of the spell’s effects are located. 

Creatures in the area of effect of a faith magic 
zone gain a +3 bonus to all saving throws against 
wizard spells and effects. The zone can be dis- 
pelled normally. 

The material components for this spell are the 
priest’s holy symbol and a vial of honey collected 
from a beehive or a honeycomb. 

Notes: Granted by the nature gods Eldath, 
Mielikki, and Silvanus of the FoRGOTTEN REALMS 
setting. Known by the Emerald Enclave. 


Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 turn 

Duration: Permanent 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


Casting this spell places a mount under a pow- 
erful magic that combines the effects of charm 
mammal and speak with animals. The mount re- 
mains loyal to the priest who cast the spell, and the 
two can converse as if under a permanent speak 
with animals spell. Further, the mount receives a 
+3 bonus to saving throws against fear spells and 
effects and additional charm mammal spells or ef- 
fects directed at it after the faithful mount spell is 
cast upon it. 

Mounts that can be affected include horses, 
ponies, mules, donkeys, camels, rhinoceroses, ele- 
phants, giant stags, griffons, hippogriffs, pegasi, 
unicorns, and other animals that can be ridden. 
The mount is allowed a saving throw vs. spell, 
with a +2 bonus if it has greater than animal intel- 
ligence (Intelligence 1) and magical defense ad- 
justment modifications if it has an exceptional 
Wisdom. Success means the animal is not affected 


ee ee eS ee 


False Dawn 


EE a 


by the spell, nor can it be affected by subsequent 
castings of the spell by the same priest. 

The material component for the spell is a lump 
of sugar. 

Notes: Granted by the evil god Malar the 
Beastlord of the FoRGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Falling Wall 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Elemental Earth, Weather 


Level: 6 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 9 

Duration: Permanent 

Area of Effect: Up to 5 cu. ft-/level 
Saving Throw: Special 


This powerful spell works only upon stone, 
masonry, and mortar. The priest must touch the 
construction to be affected continuously during 
casting, and then make a saving throw vs. petrifac- 
tion. If it fails, the spell does too, and the priest im- 
mediately sustains 1d6 points of damage. If it 
succeeds, the wall is weakened. A falling wall 
spell affects such constructions as if weather had 
worked on them for long periods. It causes mortar 
to crumble, drives stones apart, and even causes 
walls to collapse. The precise effects of this spell 
are adjudicated by the DM in accordance with the 
prior condition of the wall and the situation. (For 
example, weakening a culvert through which 
water is rushing is quite likely to cause parts of it 
to break off and be carried away by the flow, en- 
larging the opening, but trying to break a hole in a 
strong, thick, unbroken, and fairly new wall is 
probably hopeless.) 

The caster can affect a maximum area of 5 
cubic feet per level, but the extent of this is up to 
the priest (it can be along a surface or directed into 
a narrow cylinder sent straight through a wall). 
Natural rock formations, however fragile or unsta- 
ble, are not affected by this magic, only artificial 
constructions. Carvings that leave a solid piece of 
rock as their result are also immune to the effects 
of this magic, which works on the joints, cements, 
and faces of joining. 

Obviously a thin, flimsy wall is more prone to 
suffer dramatic damage as a result of a falling wall 
spell, but just about any wall that is not a military 
construction can be breached by the application of 
three falling wall spells in the same place. Walls 


that are aided by spells or props before or during 
the operation of the spell are fairly likely to with- 
stand the spell, but small stone pieces are easily 
shattered by use of this spell. 

Notes: Granted by the woodland god Silvanus 
of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. This spell is 
found only in a few exceptionally rare tomes. 


False Dawn 
(Evocation) 
Sphere: Sun 


Level: 6 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 9 

Duration: | rd./level 

Area of Effect: 30-ft.-radius sphere 
Saving Throw: None 


False dawn calls into existence a bright reddish 
light, as if a sunrise was occurring, within the area 
of effect. This light is bright enough to read by, 
dispels magical darkness, and persists for the spell 
duration despite any attempts to dispel it or to es- 
tablish magical darkness in the area. 

All undead creatures within a false dawn suffer 
6d4 points of damage. Undead creatures are not al- 
lowed saving throws against this damage and, if it 
destroys them, their remains instantly crumble and 
cannot be animated as undead. Affected undead 
cannot move, launch attacks, or use specific magi- 
cal powers of their own volition. 

All creatures with infravision have it foiled 
during the false dawn and for 1d4 rounds after it 
ends or they leave its area. 

The caster cannot exempt any creatures in the 
area of effect from the spell. The spherical area of 
effect extends below the caster’s ground level and 
into the air above him or her. 

This spell consumes a clear-, red- or yellow- 
hued gemstone or gemstones of not less than 1,000 
gp total value that fades away to nothingness in the 
caster’s hand. 

Notes: Granted by Lathander the Morning 
Lord of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


F 259 a 


Fangs of Retribution ‘ 


Fangs of Retribution 
(Invocation/Evocation) 
Sphere: Combat 


Level: 2 

Range: 30 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 5 
Duration: 3 rds. 

Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell creates a spectral fanged viperlike 
mouth with a flickering forked tongue. It fades 
into view in front of the caster’s face and flies at a 
single target creature, which must be visible to the 
caster and within spell range. If the creature is out 
of range, the viper fades away instantly and the 
spell is lost. Otherwise, it darts toward the selected 
foe. If it hits, the creature suffers the same number 
of points of damage as it has caused the caster 
during the same day as the casting of fangs of ret- 
ribution (no saving throw). 

The viperlike flying mouth is AC 1 and MV FI 
15 (A), striking at THACO 15 on its first round of 
existence, THACO 12 on the second, and THACO 
10 on the third. It fades away either at the moment 
it hits (or someone else hits it) or at the end of the 
3rd round if it has failed to strike the selected crea- 
ture successfully (the caster cannot switch crea- 
tures once the spell is cast). The bite of fangs of 
retribution inflicts no damage if sent against a 
creature that has not harmed the caster. Once the 
fangs are launched, the caster is free to undertake 
other spellcasting or activities without affecting 
their operation. 

The material component of this spell is a fang 
from any type or size of snake. 

Notes: Granted by Ilmater, the One Who 
Endures, of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. This 
spell is found only in a few exceptionally rare tomes. 


Fantastic Machine 
(Alteration, Evocation, Dlusion/Phantasm) 
Sphere: Creation 


Level: 6 

Range: 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 6 
Duration: | turn 

Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell creates an illusory, many-armed, 
noisy mechanical construct of impressively mas- 
sive appearance that floats about as the caster wills 
at MV FI 4 (C) and attempts one of the following 
tasks, as determined by the caster: push, pull, lift, 
dig, throw, or thrash-and-flail with a tool or 


weapon. 


è Push: The machine can push on a boulder, on a 
building (to make it fall over), on a wall (to col- 
lapse it or break through it), on a door (to force 
it open), or simply push heavy furniture or car- 
casses. While pushing, it moves 80 feet per 
round over solid rock or stone construction, 60 
feet per round over earth and loose rock, and 40 
feet per round over loose earth or mud. Walls 
receive a saving throw of 12 or greater to be un- 
affected or to stand fast on any given round 
against its push. 

e Pull: The machine can pull massive weights up 
an incline or cliff, to a weight limit of 50 times 
the caster’s own body weight. The machine's 
grip does not mar or break the item pulled. 
Movement rates while pulling are the same as 
when pushing. 

o Lift: The machine lift with the same limitations 
as pulling. 

e Dig: The machine a 10-foot-diameter hole 80 
feet deep per round through loose earth, such as 
a mudslide. It digs 60 feet deep per round 
through earth and loose rock, or 20 feet deep per 
round through solid rock or stone construction. It 
digs a 20-foot-diameter hole at half these rates. It 
can dig a 10-foot-diameter hole horizontally (a 
tunnel) at the same rates as it digs a 20-foot-di- 
ameter hole vertically. 

e Throw: The machine throws ropes, rocks, or 
even rocks with ropes attached to them (to cross 
a chasm with a line, etc.). Its accuracy is deter- 
mined by the caster’s own THACO; misses are 
treated as grenade-like missiles. It can hurl items 
up to 1d20 X 100 feet. Hurled items deal 
damage according to their nature. The machine 
can hurl items no heavier than its pulling weight 
limit; a boulder that heavy inflicts 12d12 points 
of damage with a direct hit. 

e Thrash-and-Flail; The machine thrashes and 
flail rapidly with a tool or weapon; crushing 
thickets and brambles to pulp, threshing grain, or 
smiting all creatures within a 30-foot-wide, 20- 
foot-deep area selected by the caster with 2d4+2 
melee weapon attacks per round. The damage of 


Ce eee 


these attacks is determined by the melee weapon 
used (decided on by the priest at the spell’s cast- 
ing and limited to one-handed weapons only). 
Mobile targets are allowed a saving throw vs. 
spell each round. If the saving throw is success- 
ful, these targets suffer only half damage from 
any successful attacks. 


A fantastic machine has no tangible existence 
and performs only a single task. It fades away 
when the spell ends even if the task is unfinished 
(for example, a partially lifted item would be 
dropped). Despite the illusory nature of the bulky 
construct, the magic applies very real force to its 
surroundings. It has made Gondar priests—who 
preserve the spell as one of their most holy secrets, 
rarely writing down all of its symbols in one place 
or tome—most respected in some circles. 

The material components are a drop of water, a 
fragment of adamantite or adamant (the ore 
adamantite is derived from), a cog or toothed wheel 
fashioned of any metal, and a strand of spiderweb. 

Notes: Granted by the god Gond, Lord of All 
Smiths, of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


261 


Fate 


(Divination) 
Sphere: Divination 


Level: 4 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 6 turns 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell allows the shukenja to foresee the 
general course of a subject’s life. Both the 
shukenja and the one for whom the spell is cast 
must be present at the casting. Significant details 
of the subject's life must be known—tirth date, 
past deeds, family, etc. Upon casting the spell, the 
shukenja delves into the possible paths for the sub- 
ject’s future life. At the end of the spell, the 
shukenja is able to predict some major future event 
in the subject’s life. Neither the subject or the 
shukenja has any control over the nature of the 
event predicted; that is, specific questions cannot 
be asked or answered. Nor are the exact circum- 
stances of the event known (date, location, etc.). 


Fatigue = 


Indeed, the shukenja is only able to provide gen- 
eral statements about the future of the subject. 

When this spell is cast, there are two ways the 
DM can decide the answer. If the DM knows of 
some event that will occur, this can provide the 
answer. Thus, if the DM knows that the subject will 
shortly incur the wrath of a ninja family, he can re- 
spond “Soon you life will be fraught with danger 
from someone whose wrath you have incurred. You 
must expect danger from unexpected sources and 
friendly strangers. Courage, cunning, and caution 
should enable you to prevail.” A DM who knows of 
no particular event can roll on the table. 


FATE TABLE 


Roll Outcome 


l The subject will overcome some great 
opponent in a valiant struggle. 

2 The subject will gain a great fortune but 
lose it before he can reap the benefits. 

3 The subject will be elevated to high po- 
sition and enjoy the respect and admira- 
tion of those around him. 

4-5 The subject will be elevated to high po- 
sition but evil scheming will bring about 
his fall. 

6-7 The subject will suffer a humiliating 
defeat at the hand of some great enemy. 

8-9 The subject will come into a great for- 

tune that will bring ruin and hardship to 

his house. 

Powerful beings will take compassion 

upon the subject, sparing his life at an 

unexpected moment. 

The actions of the subject’s family will 

bring misfortune down upon the subject. 

A stranger will bring disguised good 

fortune into the subject's life. 

18 The subject will gain great favor with 
the mighty through a courageous and 
heroic action. 

19 A stranger will bring ill fortune into the 
subject's life. 

20 A fearful enemy will seek devious re- 
venge when the subject does not expect it. 


The statements given above are quite general 
and many provide the basis for adventures. The 
DM should secretly note the fate of the individual 
and then arrange for the events to come about, cre- 


ating an adventure to fit. The DM can also create 
other fates as desired. The fate is not an absolute 
event and unyielding, rather it is the potential for 
what may occur. The actions of the subject are the 
player’s choice and these may change the final out- 
come. Indeed, knowing his fate allows the individ- 
ual to better prepare himself to meet and avoid it. 

An individual can have only one fate at a time. 
Once determined, the nature of the event cannot be 
changed although the outcome can occur differ- 
ently if the subject's actions accomplish this. 
Determining a fate does not make the individual 
immune to death; that is, the subject can still die 
before his selected fate comes to pass, especially if 
he behaves in a rash or stupid manner. However, in 
most cases, the subject should live to see his fate 
fulfilled, even if he only survives for a few seconds 
after it has happened. 

The material components for this spell are in- 
cense, astrological charts, and a silver gong. 

Notes: Common for a priest from an oriental 
setting; otherwise, very rare. 


Fatigue 


Reversed form, see endurance. 


Favor 
(Invocation/Evocation) 
Sphere: Protection 


Level: 5 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 1 hr. 

Duration: | wk./level 

Area of Effect: Individual touched 
Saving Throw: None 


By casting a favor spell, the priest asks the 
deity to watch over the recipient. Usually, the 
favor spell is cast upon a great hero, such as 
Odysseus or Jason, just before the hero undertakes 
a magnificent deed. 

The effectiveness of the spell depends upon 
how the priest's god views the glory of the deed to 
be undertaken. Usually, as the god's favor is some- 
what arbitrary—this is determined by rolling 1d6. 
For the duration of the spell, the recipient's saving 
throws are modified (in the positive direction) by 
the result. In cases of especially glorious undertak- 
ings, the DM may assign a saving throw modifier. 

In addition, the subject is blessed by a pledge 
of one godly intervention. In practical terms, this 


A 262 O 


means that, during the duration of the spell, the 
subject can reroll any single die roll that affects 
him or her personally. The recipient invoke this 
pledge of intervention only once, even if the 
second roll was unsuccessful. 

The gods never grant more than one favor spell 
to a single group of adventurers or a single adven- 
turer, and usually insist that the spell be cast upon 
the group's leader. If a second favor spell is at- 
tempted, both it and the first are lost. 

Notes: Rare spell, typical of the classical 
Greek pantheon. 


Favor, Berronar’s 
See Berronar’s favor. 


Favor of Ilmater 


(Abjuration, Alteration, Necromancy) 
Sphere: Necromantic, Protection 


Level: 3 

Range: 10 yds/level 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 6 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell has two possible forms. The caster 
chooses which form is cast at the instant of casting. 

A) Banish Pain: This form banishes pain and 
nausea so that the recipient, who can be the caster, 
cannot be stunned or debilitated by amputations, 
torture, and severe injuries. Those injuries still 
deal damage—and death may occur from loss of 
blood, strangulation, and the like—but dignity and 
composure can be maintained, shock avoided, and 
clear, calm thought retained in the face of adver- 
sity. The recipient can die nobly, stay conscious 
and calm to pass on vital information, remain alert 
and aware as an observer even if dying, and so on. 
The spell also banishes feeblemindedness, delir- 
ium, and charm effects; frees the recipient from 
hypnotic effects, maze spells, and confusion; and 
revives that individual from dazed conditions and 
faints. The spell lasts 1 turn per caster level; pain 
and physical symptoms return if their causes are 
present when the spell expires. The helpful effects 
on the recipient's mind are permanent—for exam- 
ple, a broken charm is gone forever. 

B) Transfer Damage: The caster touches a 
living creature, instantly restoring its hit points and 
suffering its damage. This can be done from a dis- 


Favor of Shaundakul 


tance, so long as the spell range is not exceeded 
The transfer restores the creature to full hit points 
if possible. If not, the caster is drained to 0 hit 
points and the creature is restored to that extent. 
The caster cannot limit the number of hit points 
transferred. 

Neither the creature nor the caster must make a 
system shock check unless the caster was brought 
to 0 hit points while failing to bring the creature 
above 0 hit points. In this case, both individuals 
must make a system shock roll. Failure brings 
death, success puts that individual into a coma— 
not dead, but unable to heal without magical aid. 
Otherwise, the damage to the caster can be healed 
by the usual methods. 

Only physical damage can be transferred. The 
caster cannot take on other conditions—disease, 
parasitic infestation, drunkenness, and the like— 
with this spell. Ilmater regards the taking on of the 
pain of others as a holy act, and encourages his 
clergy to use this form of the spell whenever a real 
(not frivolous) need is present. 

Notes: Granted by Ilmater, the One Who 
Endures, of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Favor of Shaundakul 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Travelers 


Level: 2 

Range: Special 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


Favor of Shaundakul creates a serendipitous 
occurrence during a taxing or dangerous journey. 
It makes something go right when everything else 
is going wrong. The exact effect is determined by 
the DM and is in no way controlled by the caster. 
Favor of Shaundakul only functions in wilderness 
settings or severe weather conditions while the 
caster is on a journey. It does not work while the 
caster is at home. 

Typical effects include finding a safe place to 
camp, being able to start a fire in wet conditions, 
finding shelter in a blinding snowstorm, stumbling 
across an oasis while crossing the desert, finding a 
rare herb native to the region that cures a particular 
disease or neutralizes a particular poison, finding a 
light source while in darkness, etc. This favor 


4 263 es 


Favor of the Goddess 


N 


never gives bonuses or penalties to any sort of roll. 
The material component is the caster’s holy 

symbol, which is not consumed in the casting. 
Notes: Granted by the god of travel 

Shaundakul of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Favor of the Goddess 
(Alteration, Invocation/Evocation) 
Sphere: Plant 


Level: 2 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: Permanent 

Area of Effect: Two plants, vegetables, or pieces of 
fruit/level 

Saving Throw: None 


This spell confers instant fertility upon plants 
or doubles the yield of mature, growing plants. For 
example, picked fruits in a basket swell to twice 
their former size when this spell is cast on them. 
Tainted, diseased, spoiled, or poisoned plants are 
rendered wholesome by this spell, but plants natu- 
rally harmful to humans are not made safe. 

Affected plants seem to glow with life and 
goodness, and their dramatic increase in volume 
can break open containers if the chosen produce 
has strength enough. For instance, cucumbers 
would burst open a crate or barrel, but tomatoes 
would explode before such containers gave way. 
This spell can only affect a plant, vegetable, or 
piece of fruit once; further castings are ineffective. 

Notes: Granted by Chauntea, the Great 
Mother, of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Favor Of Tymora 
(Abjuration) 
Sphere: Protection 


Level: 2 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: | living creature 
Saving Throw: None 


The favor of Tymora confers bonuses upon the 
saving throws of the recipient. The first saving 
throw made after the spell is cast receives a +4 
bonus, even if this takes place later in the same 


round as the spell took effect. The second saving 
throw receives a +3 bonus, the next a +2 bonus, 
and the next a +] bonus. After the four enhanced 
saving throws, the magic is exhausted. This pro- 
tection (also known as Tymora's smile) cannot be 
ended by dispel magic or other magical effects; it 
lasts until the death of the recipient or until ex- 
hausted by use. 

A priest of Tymora must physically touch the 
recipient with a bare hand to cast this spell, requir- 
ing a successful attack roll if the subject is in battle 
or unwilling. 

Tymora does not allow her favor to be granted 
to the same creature more than once in any day 
unless there are exceptional circumstances, such 
as an individual championing Tymora’s cause in 
open battle. Any attempt to cast Tymora's favor 
more than once a:day on a nonworshipper of 
Tymora automatically fails. 

Creatures faithful to Tymora are looked upon 
with disfavor if they request the bestowal of a 
favor of Tymora more than twice in any tenday; to 
rely directly on the goddess is not to trust in her 
luck. This includes priests of Tymora, who may 
have to atone for any use of this spell on them- 
selves that exceeds this rate. 

The church of Beshaba employs a reversed 
form of this spell known as the bane of Beshaba. 
The spells favor of Tymora and bane of Beshaba 
cancel each other out if cast on the same creature, 
regardless of how many saving throws the first 
spell to be cast has affected. 

Notes: Granted by Tymora, Lady Luck of the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Favor of Valkur 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
Sphere: Charm, Elemental Water 


Level: 5 

Range: 5 yds./level 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time; 8 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 land-based creature 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell is cast on a willing, living recipient, 
typically a sailor. The lucky subjects of this spell 
are enchanted so that if they ever fall overboard or 
are shipwrecked, a chance confluence of wind and 
currents float them safely to shore—no matter 
what the weather conditions—before they drown 


’ ee “ia. 


Fedefensor, Azuth’s 


eee A 


or die of thirst or starvation. Whatever shoreline 
the creature reaches will have sufficient food and 
water to support it indefinitely (but this is no guar- 
antee against stupidity, disease, or predators 
common to the region). A creature cannot receive 
the favor of Valkur more than once in its life. 

The spell ends once the favor of Valkur has been 
used or one year expires since the spell’s casting. 

This spell can be cast on a specially prepared 
amulet. Whoever possesses the amulet can activate 
it upon himself or herself. Such amulets must be 
used within five years of their construction or their 
magic dissipates. Such an amulet of Valkur can be 
prepared only by a Valkuryte priest of 16th or 
higher level and typically sells to merchant cap- 
tains for 2,000 to 4,000 gp. 

The material component of this spell is a small 
piece of driftwood from a ship that foundered in 
years past. 

Notes: Granted by Valkur, Captain of the 
Waves, of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Favor of Yathaghera 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Animal 


Level: 3 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 6 
Duration: 1 hr/level 
Area of Effect: 1 equine 
Saving Throw: None 


The equine subject of this spell (typically a 
horse, but sometimes a centaur, unicorn, or pegasus) 
immediately sprouts a pair of wings similar to those 
borne by pegasi if it does not already have wings. 
The newly winged equine can fly with a movement 
rate of 48 and maneuverability class C (D if 
mounted). Favor of Yathaghera makes the spell- 
caster (but only the spellicaster) proficient in aerial 
riding for the duration of the spell and enables the 
equine steed to maneuver and fly as if it was born 
with wings. As part of the magic of the incantation, 
any saddle, bit, or bridle placed on the creature im- 
mediately slips off and falls to the ground; the 
winged equine must be ridden bareback. While 
under the influence of this spell, an equine can dive 
at an opponent from heights of 50 feet or higher and 
use its hoof attacks; each such attack roll is at a +2 
bonus and does double damage. 

If this spell is cast upon a pegasus or any other 


naturally winged equine, its movement rate while 
flying is doubled and its maneuverability class im- 
proves by one (to a maximum of A), 

The material components for this spell are a 
feather from a pegasus (freely granted) and the 
priestess’s holy symbol. 

Notes: Granted by Lurue, the Unicorn Queen, 
of the FORGOTTEN REALMS, setting. 


Fear Contagion 
Quest spell, see appendix in Vol. 3. 


Feat 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: All 


Level: 4 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 7 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell allows the recipient to complete one 
extremely difficult action or single-step task—in 
other words, any necessary ability checks and those 
proficiency checks not involving protracted activity 
(such as say, constructing a suit of armor) automat- 
ically succeed. The magic does not perform the ac- 
tivity for the being and does not protect the being 
from any risk or damage associated with the task, 
but merely guarantees that the specified thing to be 
done is carried out. Even if the creature dies in the 
attempt, his or her body completes the action. 
Typical feats include swinging or leaping through a 
small specific window or opening, catching a small 
thrown object, falling into a stream or hole or other 
particular location, firing an arrow through a key- 
hole, and such. The act must be performed on the 
round following the casting of the feat, otherwise, 
the magic is wasted and lost. 

Notes: Granted by Tymora, Lady Luck, of the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Fedefensor, Azuth’s 
See Azuth’s Fedefensor. 


4 265 hc, 


Feeblemind 


j maan ee  —e 


Feeblemind 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
Sphere: Charm 


Level: 6 

Range: 160 yds. 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 9 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: | creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 

A spell solely for employment against persons 
or creatures who use magical spells, feeblemind 
causes the victim’s brain to become that of a mo- 
ronic child. The individual remains in this state 
until a heal, restoration or wish spell is used to do 
away with the effects. The spell is of such a nature 
that its chance to affect the target creature is gener- 
ally enhanced (saving throws are lowered). 

The spell has no material component. 

Notes: Common for clerics (Updated from Ist 
Ed. PHB). 


Type of Spells Used Saving Throw 
by Target Creature Adjustment 
Cleric +1 
Druid -1 
Wizard (human) -4 
Illusionist -5 
Combination or nonhuman -2 
Feign Death 
(Necromancy) 
Sphere: Necromantic 
Level: 3 
Range: Touch 
Components: 
Casting Time: 1/2 


Duration: 1 turn + | rd./level 
Area of Effect: Person touched 
Saving Throw: None 


By means of this spell, the caster or any other 
willing person can be put into a cataleptic state 
that is impossible to distinguish from actual death. 
Although the person affected can smell, hear, and 
know what is going on, no feeling or sight of any 
sort is possible; thus, any wounding or mistreat- 
ment of the body is not felt, no reaction occurs, 
and damage is only one-half normal. In addition, 
paralysis, poison, or energy level drain does not 
affect a person under the influence of this spell, but 


poison injected or otherwise introduced into the 
body becomes effective when the spell recipient is 
no longer under the influence of this spell, al- 
though a saving throw is permitted. However, the 
spell offers no protection from causes of certain 
death—being crushed under a landslide, etc, Only 
a willing individual can be affected by a feign 
death spell. The priest is able to end the spell effect 
at any time, but it requires a full round for bodily 
functions to begin again. 

Note that, unlike the wizard version of this 
spell, only persons can be affected, and that those 
of any level can be affected by the priest casting 
this spell. 

Notes: Common for clerics (PHB). 


Feign Undead 


(Necromancy) 


Sphere: Necromantic 


Level: 4 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 7 

Duration: 1 turn + 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: Person touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell can make the caster or any willing 
person appear to be a zombie. The person looks 
undead, ceases to breathe, and feels no pain or 
emotion. He becomes immune to paralysis, 
poison, and attacks that drain Strength or energy 
levels. Poison attacks require a saving throw vs. 
poison only when the spell expires. The immu- 
nity to pain does not protect the person from 
damage; but does block penalties due to exces- 
sive pain. 

The person’s body looks just like an animated 
corpse—the skin color changes, and flesh shrinks 
to show bones. His joints become stiff and his 
movement jerky. When he attacks, it is as a normal 
zombie, striking last in the melee round. The 
person’s attire does not change; he must attend to 
the state of his clothes himself. Spells that nor- 
mally affect undead have no influence over him, 
which might reveal his true nature. 

Most creatures seeing the person will assume 
the individual is a zombie. Actual undead won’t 
attack the person unless ordered to do so. If the in- 
dividual does something out of character for a 
zombie, then the chances that an intelligent crea- 
ture deduces that he is not what he seems in- 


, a as 


Fertility 


> ew A 


creases. On the Demiplane of Dread, casting this 
spell requires a RAVENLOFT powers check. 

The material component for this spell is a bit of 
bone and dirt from a grave. 

Notes: Common for priests from the 
Demiplane of Dread. 


Feline Form 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Combat 
Level: 7 
Range: 0 


Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: | hr/level 

Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell is similar to the 9th-level wizard 
spell shapechange, but it only allows the caster to 
assume the form of a feline or partial feline of any 
species. Those who cast feline form become the 
creatures they wish to and have all of their abilities 
save those dependent upon Intelligence, innate 
magical abilities, and magic resistance, for the 
mind of the assumed form is that of the caster. The 
caster can change into a tressym and fly away, then 
to a sea lion to dive into a lake, and then into a 
wemic or dragonne to run across the plains. The 
first form adopted has whatever hit points the cast- 
ing priest had at the time of the casting of the feline 
form spell, and subsequent forms carry the current 
total hit points with them. Each alteration in form 
requires only a second, and no system shock sur- 
vival roll is required. 

A priest adopting another form also adopts its 
vulnerabilities. For example, a priest who becomes 
a sea lion still cannot breathe out of the water for 
more than 24 hours. Like the shapechange spell, a 
priest who is killed while in another form does not 
revert to his or original shape, which may disallow 
certain types of revivification. 

The material components for this spell are 
locks of hair from three different species of feline. 

Notes: Granted by Nobanion, the Lion King, of 
the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Ferment 
Lost spell. Rumored to be used in the making of 
wine. 


267 


Fertility 


(Necromancy) 
Sphere: Creation 


Level: 4 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: | turn 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell has two possible uses. The first is an 
enhanced version of the plant growth spell, affect- 
ing a 10-mile-square area. The DM secretly makes 
a saving throw (based on the caster’s level) vs. 
spell, and if the roll is successful, the spell renders 
plants more vigorous, fruitful, and hardy, increas- 
ing yields 30% to 80% given a normal growing 
season. The spell operates in the same way as 
plant growth, otherwise. 

The second use of the spell is often requested as 
a marital blessing. Again, the DM makes a saving 
throw based on the caster’s level, and success indi- 
cates that any creature upon whom the spell is cast 
who mates within 24 hours has a 95% chance to 
impregnate or become pregnant. Furthermore, the 
offspring inspired by this magic is certain to be de- 
livered normally and in good health provided the 
mother remains healthy and uninjured. Note that 
factors such as old age and curses may influence 
the percentage chance of becoming pregnant, as 
may magic specifically geared to preventing such 
an occurrence or a being’s inability to conceive due 
to peculiar magical factors. (For instance, many of 
Mystra’s Chosen seem unable to conceive for un- 
known reasons.) 

Shiallia knows if this magical blessing should 
not be performed and secretly informs her priest if 
this is so. Shiallia’s priest then performs a non- 
magical blessing very similar in form instead to 
prevent the couple from being embarrassed if the 
blessing was to be a public event. 

The material component of this spell is any 
seed. 

Notes: Granted by the goddess Shiallia of the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. Granted by the dwar- 
ven goddess Sharindlar. 


Fertilize 


C—O a 


Fertilize 
Aka fertility. 


Find Companion 


(Conjuration/Summoning) 
Sphere: Animal 


Level: 4 

Range: | mile/two levels 
Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 hr. 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 animal companion 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell is similar to the Ist-level wizard spell 
find familiar, but it is in some respects more pow- 
erful. A priest casting this spell is attempting to 
summon an animal for aid and companionship. A 
priest can have only one companion ata time, and 
has no control over what creature answers the spell 
call unless animal summoning is also cast. 

No matter the creature summoned, it has 
greater Intelligence and a longer life span than 
others of its kind. Priest companions have an 
intelligence of 4 or 5. A priests gains the height- 
ened senses of the companion, receiving a +1 
bonus to all surprise rolls. 

The priest is linked to the animal companion 
telepathically and can give it directions telepathi- 
cally or verbally. In return, the priest can under- 
stand the thoughts and sounds of the companion as 
if using a speak with animals spell. 

If the companion is separated from its linked 
priest by more than a mile for more than one day, it 
loses 1 hit point a day until it dies. 

Unlike a wizard’s familiar, a priest's compan- 
ion does not have the priest’s saving throws. 
However, the priest does not suffer physical 
damage if the companion dies. 

A priest can try to find a companion once a 
month until successful. The process involves an 
hour-long prayer session in which a priest asks the 
patron deity for a companion and burns 100 gp of 
incense during the process. (At this point, roll 
1d20 on the table.) Immediately after the spell is 
completed, a priest knows if the casting was suc- 
cessful. The companion arrives at the casting spot 
within 1d4 hours if the spell was successful. 

If the priest strikes the companion or withholds 
its food, the spell ends, at which time the compan- 
ion is no longer held and can freely depart. That 
type of animal won't ever again become a com- 


268 


panion to that priest. 

A priest’s companion typically has 3d4 hit 
points plus 1 hit point per level of the summoning 
priest and an Armor Class of 7. 

Notes: Granted by the evil god Malar the 
Beastlord of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


COMPANION TABLE 
Die 
Roll Sensory Powers 
1-3 Wild Dog Smell, hearing 
46 Eagle Distance vision 
7-9 Wild Boar Smell, hearing 
10-12 Fox Smell, hearing 
13-15 Giant Rat Night vision 
16-18 Badger Smell 
19-20 No companion 
in range 
Find Drinkable Water 
(Divination) 
Sphere: Divination 
Level: 1 
Range: 90 miles 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 


Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell imparts to its caster the precise direc- 
tion, approximate distance, and a vague mental 
picture of the nearest spot within spell range where 
drinkable water (that is, not tainted, diseased, or 
poisonous) can be had on the surface of the land. 

If no such water exists, the spell indicates this 
fact and shows the location (with distance and direc- 
tion) of the closest drinkable subterranean water to 
the surface, with a mental picture of what is above it 
on the surface. If only tainted or poisonous water 
exists within spell range, the spell indicates this as 
well, and points out the nearest source in a like 
manner. In all cases, the vision and sense of direction 
and distance remain with the caster until the spot is 
reached or the caster next slumbers (these memories 
do not interfere with spellcasting or concentration). 

The spell outlines the presence and location of 
holy and unholy water, as auras of differing hues, 
but also keeps to its main purpose of locating 
available natural water. It does not detect the water 
in liquids such as blood, sauces, alcoholic bever- 
ages, fruit, and the like. 


Find the Path 


a 2 A 


The material component is a drop of water that 
need not be pure, a drop of dew, or one of the 
caster’s tears, which is touched to the caster’s holy 
symbol. 

Notes: Granted by Mielikki, the Forest Lady, 
of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. This spell is 
found only in a few exceptionally rare tomes. 


Find Portal 
(Divination) 
Sphere: Divination 


Level: 3 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: 5 rds./level 

Area of Effect: 10-ft. wide X 30-ft. long path 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell reveals all normal or magical portals 
within its area of effect. This includes doors, win- 
dows, magical gates, tunnel openings, teleportals, 
shifting walls, secret doors, openings concealed by 
illusions, and similar constructions. False or illu- 
sionary doors are excluded; there must be or have 
been some possibility of function as a method of 
entrance or egress. The caster does not gain any in- 
formation about how a portal is used: locks, traps, 
method of operation, direction of operation (in the 
case of one-way doors), and similar information is 
not learned. However, if a portal itself is magical 
or if it is magically concealed, the caster has a 10% 
per level chance to determine what type of magic 
is involved. The spell is most useful for finding 
secret doors, shifting walls, and the like. 

Notes: Very rare spell. (Updated from 
POLYHEDRON Magazine.) 


Components: V, S 
Casting Time: | rd. 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


By means of this spell, the caster can find food 
and water as if he or she has the survival profi- 


ciency. After the spell is cast, the priest develops a 
sixth sense as to where to look for food and water; 
this lasts until sufficient food is found. For every 
caster level above 4th, the priest can find sufficient 
sustenance to sustain a human or demihuman for 
one day. Thus, a 7th-level priest can find sufficient 
food and water for three people. 

While food and water sources found by this 
spell may vary widely in taste, nutritional value, 
and safety, continued use of this spell allows the 
priest to locate a sufficiently diverse assortment of 
food to support life. Thus, it results in a fairly 
healthy and balanced diet without excessive risk 
of disease. 

Find sustenance fails if there is absolutely no 
food or water to be found, a situation that seldom 
occurs if the priest has unrestricted access to the 
natural world. 

Notes: Granted by the feral elven god 
Fenmarel Mestarine. 


Find the Path 
(Divination) 
Reversible 
Sphere: Divination 


Level: 6 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 3 rds. 

Duration: 1 turn/level 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


The recipient of this spell can find the shortest, 
most direct physical route that he is seeking, be it 
the way into or out of a locale. The locale can be 
outdoors or under ground, a trap, or even a maze 
spell. Note that the spell works with respect to lo- 
cales, not objects or creatures within a locale. 
Thus, the spell could not find the way to “a forest 
where a green dragon lives” or to the location of “a 
hoard of platinum pieces.” The location must be in 
the same plane as the caster. 

The spell enables the subject to sense the direc- 
tion that eventually leads to his destination, indi- 
cating at the appropriate times the exact path to 
follow (or physical actions to take—for example, 
with concentration the spell enables the subject to 
sense trip wires or the proper word to bypass a 
glyph). The spell ends when the destination is 
reached or when one turn for each caster level has 
elapsed. The spell frees the subject, and those with 


a 269 


Find the Path — Shukenja 


a ee EEO a 


him, from a maze spell in a single round, and con- 
tinues to do so as long as the spell lasts. 

This divination is keyed to the caster, not any 
companions, and that, like the find traps spell, it 
does not predict or allow for the actions of creatures. 

The spell requires a set of divination counters 
of the sort favored by the priest, bones, ivory coun- 
ters, sticks, carved runes, or whatever. 

The reverse spell, lose the path, makes a crea- 
ture totally lost and unable to find its way for the 
duration of the spell, although it can be led, of 
course. 

Notes: Common for clerics (PHB). 


Find the Path —Shukenja 


Exactly the same as the standard 
version, except the divination coun- 
ters are bone, ivory, or teak. 


Find Traps 
(Divination) 
Sphere: Divination 


Level: 2 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: 3 turns 

Area of Effect: 10-ft. x 90-ft. path 
Saving Throw: None 


When a priest casts a find traps spell, all 
traps—concealed normally or magically—of mag- 
ical or mechanical nature become apparent to him. 
This spell is directional, and the caster must face 
the desired direction in order to determine if a trap 
is laid in that particular direction. 

A trap is any device or magical ward that meets 
three criteria: It can inflict a sudden or unexpected 
result, the spelicaster would view the result as un- 
desirable or harmful, and the harmful or undesir- 
able result was specifically intended as such by the 
creator. Thus, traps include alarms, glyphs, and 
similar spells or devices. 

The caster learns the general nature of the trap 
(magical or mechanical) but not its exact effect, 
nor how to disarm it. Close examination will, how- 
ever, enable the caster to sense what intended ac- 
tions might trigger it. Note that the caster’s 
divination is limited to his: knowledge of what 


270 


might be unexpected and harmful. The spell 
cannot predict actions of creatures (hence a con- 
cealed murder hole or ambush is not a trap), nor 
are natural hazards considered traps (a cavern that 
floods during rain, a wall weakened by age, a nat- 
urally poisonous plant). If the DM is using specific 
glyphs or sigils to identify magical wards (see the 
3rd-level priest spell, glyph of warding), this spell 
shows the form of the glyph or mark. The spell 
does not detect traps that have been disarmed or 
are otherwise inactive. 
Notes: Common for clerics (PHB). 


Find Underground Water 
See find water. 


Find Water 
(Divination) 
Sphere: Divination 


Level: 1 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: 3 turns 

Area of Effect: 10-ft. wide, 90-ft. long path 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell enables the caster to find any water 
source within range of the spell, allowing him to 
estimate how plentiful the water is. After casting 
the spell, the caster can search the immediate 
vicinity, and any water within 90 feet of the druid 
in the direction of concentration along a 10-foot- 
wide path) will be detected. The caster can tell ap- 
proximately how much water there is; these 
estimations are: traces only, a small amount, a 
goodly amount, a large amount, or a vast supply. 
The caster has a 5% chance per level to know if the 
water is drinkable (fresh, salty, unfit). Thus, the 
caster might detect a water source beneath a cave 
floor, but might not know if it is potable until the 
party digs down to it. Water can be found through 
rock, metal, or any other material, as long as the 
water is within spell range and area. 

The material component for this spell is a 
forked stick (divining rod). 

Notes: Very rare spell, more commonly known 
to druids or granted by gods of divination. 
(Updated from DraGon Magazine.) 


Fire Purge* 


> ee! 


Finger of Death 


(Necromancy) 
Sphere: Animal 


Level: 7 

Range: 60 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 3 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


The finger of death spell causes a creature’s 
heart to stop. The caster utters the incantation, 
points his or her index finger at the creature to be 
slain, and unless the creature succeeds in making 
the appropriate saving throw, death occurs. A suc- 
cessful saving throw vs. death magic negates the 
spell. 

Notes: Uncommon for druids. (Updated from 
Ist Ed. PHB.) 


Fire Eyes of Gorm — Dwarf 
(Evocation) 
Sphere: Combat 


Level: 4 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: Ray, | ft/level 
Saving Throw: '2 


This spell allows the priest to emit a fiery beam 
from either one or both of his eyes. This thin, ruby- 
red beam can strike up to two opponents a round, 
attacking with the priest’s normal THACO. The 
priest can engaging in other physical activities (in- 
cluding combat) in the same round. 

The beam deals 2d8 fire damage to all crea- 
tures struck by it (save vs. spell for half damage). 
Creatures immune to flame damage are unharmed. 

The beam acts as an instant (searing-level) heat 
metal on all metal it touches. A second beam strik- 
ing the same piece or area of metal melts the 
metal, unless it makes a successful item saving 
throw vs. lightning (magical items have a saving 
throw bonus equal to any attack bonuses they pos- 
sess), 

An armored individual struck by the beam suf- 
fers both direct beam damage and the searing 
damage as from a heat metal spell. If the beam 


struck again, both types of damage are suffered 
again, and the armor collapses into liquid metal 
blobs and falls from its wearer’s body. 

The material component of this spell is the 
priest’s holy symbol, which is touched during cast- 
ing. It is not harmed, and need not be continuously 
touched as the spell continues. 

Notes: Granted by the dwarven god Gorm 
Gulthyn. 


Fire of Justice 


(Necromancy) 
Sphere: Combat 


Level: 5 

Range: 90 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: 1 being 
Saving Throw: None 


The fire of justice spell induces corrosive inter- 
nal energy surges in the recipient, causing 1d4+1 
points of damage per level of the caster (10d4+10 
points maximum). Undead suffer double damage. 
This damage is not affected by fire or heat resist- 
ance of any sort. 

This spell can be cast only by a priest of Tyr 
who has already inflicted some unhealed melee, 
missile, or magical damage on the creature. A 
single hit point inflicted by the priest is sufficient, 
but the spell fails if this is not done. 

The material components of a fire of justice 
spell are a coal that has once been in a fire (it need 
not be smoldering, or even warm) and a drop of 
holy water consecrated by a priest of Tyr. 

Notes: Granted by Tyr, the Just God, of the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. This spell is found 
only in a few exceptionally rare tomes. 


Fire Purge* 
(Abjuration) 
Sphere: Wards 


Level: 4 

Range: 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: | turn 
Duration: | turn/level 

Area of Effect: 10-yd. square 
Saving Throw: None 


A 271 e 


Fire Purge — Myrikan 


An area enchanted with fire purge is protected 
against normal and magical fires. Normal fires (in- 
cluding camp fires, torches, and oil fires) cannot 
burn in the area of effect. Magical fires (including 
fiery dragon breath, other creature-generated fires, 
and spell-related fires such as burning hands and 
fireball) cause only 50% of their normal damage. 
Additionally, any creature in the area of effect re- 
ceives a +4 bonus to its saving throws vs. fire- 
based attacks. It does not extinguish existing fires. 

The fire purge spell can be cast as cooperative 
magic. The duration of the spell becomes | turn 
per level of the most powerful priest, plus 1 addi- 
tional turn for every other contributing priest. The 
area of effect is a square whose sides equal the 
number of priests times 10 yards (thus, six priests 
could create a 60-yard square of protection). 

The material components are the priest's holy 
symbol and a scorched sliver of wood. 

Notes: Common for priests with major access 
to the sphere of Wards. 


Fire Purge — Myrikan 
Lost spell. Rumored to be known by a rare type of 
paladin-druid called a myrikan. 


Fire Quench 


Reversed form, fire storm. 


Fire Seeds 
(Conjuration) 
Sphere: Elemental Fire 


Level: 6 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd./seed 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: /: 


The fire seeds spell creates special missiles or 
timed incendiaries that burn with great heat. The spell 
can be cast to create either fire seed missiles or fire 
seed incendiaries, as chosen when the spell is cast. 

Fire Seed Missiles: This casting turns up to 
four acorns into special grenade-like missiles that 
can be hurled up to 40 yards. An attack roll is re- 
quired to strike the intended target, and profi- 
ciency penalties are considered. Each acorn bursts 
upon striking any hard surface, causing 2d8 points 
of damage and igniting any combustible materials 
within a 10-foot diameter of the point of impact. If 


272 


a successful saving throw vs. spell is made, a crea- 
ture within the burst area receives only one-half 
damage, but a creature struck directly suffers full 
damage (i.e., no saving throw). 

Fire Seed Incendiaries. This casting turns up to 
eight holly berries into special incendiaries. The 
holly berries are most often placed, being too light 
to make effective missiles (they can be tossed up to 
six feet away). They burst into flame if the caster is 
within 40 yards and speaks a word of command. 
The berries instantly ignite, causing 1d8 points of 
damage to any creature and igniting any com- 
bustible within a five-foot diameter burst area. 
Creatures within the area that successfully save vs. 
spell suffer half damage. 

All fire seeds lose their power after a duration 
equal to one turn per experience level of the 
caster—e.g., the seeds of a 13th-level caster 
remain potent for a maximum of 13 turns after 
their creation. 

No other material components beyond acorns 
or holly berries are needed for this spell. 

Notes: Common for druids (PHB). 


Fire Storm 
(Evocation) 
Reversible 
Sphere: Elemental Fire 


Level: 7 

Range: 160 yds. 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: | rd. 

Duration: 1 rd, 

Area of Effect: 20-ft. cube/level, minimum 16 10- 
ft. cubes 

Saving Throw: ⁄2 


When a fire storm spell is cast, the whole area 
is shot through with sheets of roaring flame that 
equal a wall of fire spell in effect. Creatures within 
the area of fire and 10 feet or less from the edge of 
the affected area receive 2d8 points of damage 
plus 1 additional point of damage equal per caster 
level. A successful saving throw vs. spell reduces 
damage by half. The damage is inflicted each 
round the creature stays in the area of effect. The 
area of effect is equal to two 10-foot X 10-foot 
cubes per level of the caster—for example, a 13th- 
level caster can cast a fire storm measuring 130 
feet X 20 feet X 10 feet. The height of the storm 
is 10 or 20 feet; the balance of its area is in length 
and width. 


Firebreak 


> ee 


The reverse spell, fire quench, smothers twice 
the area of effect of a fire storm spell with respect 
to normal fires, and the normal area of effect with 
respect to magical fires. Fire-based creatures, such 
as elementals, salamanders, etc., of less than 
demigod status have a 5% chance per experience 
level of the caster of being extinguished. If cast 
only against a flametongue sword, the sword must 
roll a successful item saving throw vs. crushing 
blow or be rendered nonmagical. Such a sword in 
the possession of a creature first receives the crea- 
ture’s saving throw, and if this is successful, the 
second saving throw is automatically successful. 

Notes: Common for druids (PHB). 


Fire Trap 
(Abjuration, Evocation) 
Sphere: Elemental Fire 


Level: 2 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 turn 

Duration; Permanent until discharged 
Area of Effect: Object touched 
Saving Throw: 2 


273 


Any closeable item (book, box, bottle, chest, 
coffer, coffin, door, drawer, and so forth) can be 
warded by a fire trap spell. The spell is centered on 
a point selected by the spellcaster. The item so 
trapped cannot have a second closure or warding 
spell placed upon it. A knock spell cannot affect a 
fire trap in any way—as soon as the offending party 
opens the item, the trap discharges. As with most 
magical traps, a thief has only half his normal find 
traps score to detect a fire trap. Failure to remove it 
successfully detonates it immediately. An unsuc- 
cessful dispel magic spell won't detonate the spell. 

When the trap is discharged, there is an explo- 
sion of 5-foot radius from the spell’s center. Each 
creature within this area must roll a saving throw vs. 
spell. Damage is 1d4 points, plus | additional point 
per level of the caster; those who successfully save 
take half damage. Underwater, this ward inflicts 
half damage and creates a large cloud of steam. The 
item trapped is not harmed by this explosion. 

The caster can use the trapped object without 
discharging it, as can any individual to whom the 
spell was specifically attuned when cast (the 
method usually involves a keyword). 

To place this spell, the caster traces the outline 
of the closure with a stick of charcoal and touches 
the center of the effect. Attunement to another in- 
dividual requires a hair or similar object from the 
individual. 

The material components are holly berries. 

Notes: Common for druids (PHB). 


Firebreak 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Plant 


Level: 2 

Range: 10 yds./level 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: 1 turn/level 

Area of Effect: 800 square ft./level 
Saving Throw: None 


The firebreak spell renders all living vegetation in 
the area, including plant-like monsters and animated 
plant life, immune to normal fire, and cuts all damage 
to such plants from magical fire in half Dead plant 
matter in the area of effect can still burn, as can living 
plants moved outside the area. The spell does not 
function indoors or underground. The caster can 
cover an area of 800 square feet per level (for exam- 
ple, a 10-foot wide firebreak, 80 feet long per level). 


Firelight 


"gel 


The material component is a bit of charred 
wood. 

Notes: Very rare spell (Updated from DRAGON 
Magazine). 


Firelight 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Elemental Fire 
Level: 1 
Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 4 


Duration: 4 hrs. + 1 hr./2 levels 
Area of Effect: 1 object 
Saving Throw: None 


This variant of the spell log of everburning 
changes one small fire no larger than a campfire 
into firelight The flame ceases to produce smoke 
and becomes much cooler; within | turn of the 
spell’s casting, the fire cools enough to be handled 
or touched barehanded without causing harm. The 
firelight is resistant to gusts of wind or poor burn- 
ing conditions (pouring rain, lack of air, and so on), 
but complete immersion in water, vacuum, or mag- 
ical darkness extinguishes the flame immediately. 
Firelight burns brighter and steadier than a normal 
flame, and a torch enchanted with this spell sheds 
light in a 30-foot radius instead of the normal 15- 
foot radius. The fuel source lasts throughout the 
duration of the spell. Unlike log of everburning, 
this spell is not at all useful for staying warm since 
firelight produces very little heat. 

Firelight inflicts 1d2 points of damage per 
caster level if cast on creatures of living or elemen- 
tal fire, but has no other effect on these monsters, 

The material component is a mix of resins and 
incense, thrown into the flame to be affected. 

Notes: Uncommon for druids (PO:SM). 


Fireward 
(Abjuration) 
Sphere: Elemental Fire 
Level: 5 
Range: 0 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 8 


Duration: 1 rd/level 
Area of Effect: Sphere of 1 ft. in diameter/level 
Saving Throw: None 


274 


This spell temporarily renders a spherical area 
fireproof, instantly extinguishing all fires and pre- 
venting the ignition of future conflagrations for the 
spell’s duration. Despite its name, this magic does 
not ward away flames, but rather drinks them in, 
destroying them. The sphere is centered on the 
caster but is stationary once created. The caster 
can move about, engage in other spelicasting ac- 
tivities, slumber, or even leave and reenter the 
sphere repeatedly without affecting it in any way. 

The fireward spell is effective against red dragon 
breath, fire elementals (which cannot enter or be 
summoned into the sphere), natural fires of all sizes 
(including forest fires), and fiery magic. It prevents 
heat and vapor transfer between its protected area 
and the surroundings so that smoke cannot enter a 
fireward area, a conflagration cannot roast its occu- 
pants, nor can a fire suck all the oxygen out of the 
ward to feed its own roaring flames. 

The material components of this spell are a 
pinch of sand and a drop of water. 

Notes: Granted by Silvanus Oakfather of the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Firing Frenzy, Azuth’s 
See Azuth's firing frenzy. 


Fist, Iimater’s 
See Illmater’s fist. 


Fist of Faith 
(Invocation/Evocation) 
Sphere: Combat 


Level: 2 

Range: 10 yds. 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 5 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: 1 being 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell causes an invisible fist of force to 
strike any being visible to the caster who is within 
range. The fist of faith strikes only once, but 
cannot miss. It causes no damage to items (even 
fragile ones), acting only on living or undead 
bodies, and inflicts 4d4 points of damage (4d6 to 
undead). Once struck, a creature is immune to all 
effects of other fist of faith spells until 24 hours 
have elapsed. 

Notes: Granted by Helm the Vigilant of the 


Flame Harvest 


ee eee A 


FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. This spell is found 
only in a few exceptionally rare tomes. 


Fist of Gond 
(Evocation) 
Sphere: Combat 


Level: 6 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 9 

Duration: 6 rds. 

Area of Effect: The caster’s arm 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell temporarily augments the might and 
hardness of one of the caster’s arms, encasing it in 
an invisible field of force and raising its Strength 
to 22. The caster’s muscles and joints are magi- 
cally bolstered so they are not torn when blows 
from the fist of Gond land. Such blows can punch 
through armor and stone alike, striking at a +4 
attack bonus, dealing 1d4+10 points of damage, 
and forcing saving throws vs. crushing blow on all 
items they hit. 

The material components of a fist of Gond spell 
are a cube of solid adamantine not less than 1 inch 
on a side and a diamond of not less than 500 gp 
value. 

Notes: Granted by Gond, Lord of All Smiths, 
of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting, This spell is 
found only in a few exceptionally rare tomes. 


Flame Blade 
(Evocation) 
Sphere: Elemental Fire 
Level: 2 
Range: 0 


Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: 4 rds. + 1 rd./2 levels 
Area of Effect: 3-ft. long blade 
Saving Throw: None 


With this spell, the caster causes a blazing ray 
of red-hot fire to spring forth from his hand. This 
bladelike ray is wielded as if it was a scimitar. If 
the caster successfully hits with the flame blade in 
melee combat, the creature struck suffers 1d4+4 
points of damage, with a damage bonus of +2 (that 
is, 7—10 points) if the creature is undead or is espe- 
cially vulnerable to fire. If the creature is protected 


275 


from fire, the damage inflicted is reduced by 2 
(that is, 1d4+2 points). Fire dwellers and those 
using fire as an innate attack form suffer no 
damage from the spell. The flame blade can ignite 
combustible materials such as parchment, straw, 
dry sticks, cloth, etc. However, it is not a magical 
weapon in the normal sense of the term, so crea- 
tures (other than undead) struck only by magical 
weapons are not harmed by it. This spell does not 
function underwater. 

In addition to the caster’s holy symbol, the spell 
requires a leaf of sumac as a material component. 

Notes: Common for druids (PHB). 


Flame Harvest 


(Conjuration, Invocation) 


Sphere: Elemental Fire 


Level: 5 

Range: Special 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 hr. 
Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: 2 


This powerful spell creates a trap of a large 
field, copse of trees, or other flammable area, trig- 
gered by certain, predefined conditions. 

The priest slowly walks the area to be trapped 
for a period of an hour, envisioning the rising 
flames and deciding on the conditions that trigger 
its activation. When the meditation period ends, 
the priest can leave the area and the trap remains 
set for 1 month. 

The player must write the conditions of the 
spell on paper for the DM, and the DM should take 
these words as literally as possible. The conditions 
can be as simple or as complex as the player likes, 
but they must be written. Some possible conditions 
are: whenever anyone sets foot in this grove, or, 
whenever templars draw their weapons. 

When the condition is met, the area is engulfed 
in flames, and those inside take 6d8 points of 
damage. The site continues to burn normally, and 
anyone trapped takes 1d4 points of damage until 
the fire burns itself out. 

The area affected is 90 feet square, or its equiv- 
alent, and the engulfing flames rise to a height of 
10 feet. The shape of the area does not affect the 
spell in any way. 

Notes: Uncommon for priests from the DARK SUN 
setting. 


Flame Shield 


Flame Shield 
(Evocation) 
Sphere: Elemental Fire 


Level: 3 

Range: 0 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 6 
Duration: 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell creates a pulsating, 6-foot-high 
shield of darkness at the end of the caster’s hand. 
The shield is weightless and intangible, Missiles 
and other weapons and solid objects, including 
parts of the caster’s body, pass through it without 
impediment. The shield remains attached to one of 
the caster’s hands (chosen during the casting) 
unless the casting priest touches another creature’s 
hand and wills control of the shield to pass to the 
other (who must agree to the transfer or it cannot 
occur). 

The shield works against flame. Its touch extin- 
guishes normal torches, flaming oil, and candles 
instantly. Larger fires are diminished. A fireball 
striking or exploding around the bearer of a flame 
shield, for example, causes only half damage. A 
flame blade coming into contact with a flame 
shield is harmlessly destroyed. A flame shield 
fully cancels out a flame strike if held directly in 
the path of the flame strike (over the shield- 
bearer's head); this destroys the flame shield in- 
stantly. If the flame shield is not held in such a 
fashion, the shield-bearer takes half damage. 

Flame-related illusions, hypnotic patterns, and 
the like have no effect on any being viewing them 
through a flame shield. A magical, flaming sword 
striking through a flame shield encounters no re- 
sistance and inflicts normal weapon damage but 
no flame damage. Any part of such a blade that has 
passed through the shield remains free of flames 
while any part of the blade is in contact with the 
shield; thus a flaming sword striking through a 
flame shield cannot ignite a scroll or other flam- 
mable object by touch. 

The material components for this spell are a 
piece of phosphorous, a drop of mercury, and a 
cobweb. 

Notes: Granted by nature goddess Eldath of the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


276 


Flame Strike 
(Evocation) 
Sphere: Combat 
Level: 5 
Range: 60 yds. 


Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 8 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: 5-ft. radius by 30-ft.-high column 
Saving Throw: '/2 


When the priest calls down a flame strike spell, 
a vertical column of fire roars downward in the 
exact location called for by the caster. Any crea- 
ture within the area of effect must make a saving 
throw vs. spell. Failure means the creature sustains 
6d8 points of damage; otherwise, the damage is 
halved. 

The material component is a pinch of sulphur. 

Notes: Common for priests (PHB). 


Flame Walk 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Elemental Fire 


Level: 3 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: | rd. + 1 rd /level 

Area of Effect: Creature(s) touched 
Saving Throw: None 


By means of this spell, the caster empowers 
one or more creatures to withstand nonmagical 
fires of temperatures up to 2,000° F. (enabling 
them to walk upon molten lava). It also confers a 
+2 bonus to saving throws against magical fire and 
reduces damage from such fires by one-half, even 
if the saving throw is failed. For every experience 
level above the minimum required to cast the spell 
(Sth), the priest can affect an additional creature. 
This spell is not cumulative with resist fire spells 
or similar protections. 

The material components of the spell are the 
priest’s holy symbol and at least 500 gp of pow- 
dered ruby per affected creature. 

Notes: Common for druids (PHB). The orien- 
tal (shukenja) version is identical. 


Flesh to Stone 
Reversed form, stone to flesh. 


Flowstone — Dwarf 


po a 


Float 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Creation 


Level: 5 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 5 rds. 

Duration: 2 turns+1 turn/level 
Area of Effect: Object touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell allows the priest to bestow a form of 
magical flight upon an object weighing 500 
pounds or less. The priest moves the object 
through concentration, causing it to move either 
vertically or horizontally at MV FL 6 (C) and half 
that rate if ascending or descending. Further, the 
caster can cause the object to hover motionless, 
suspended in the air. If the caster’s concentration is 
disrupted, the spell is ended. 

The material component for the spell is a bit of 
down from a duck. 

Notes: Known to be uncommon in the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting, 


Float 
A Ist-level spell that makes creatures and objects 
buoyant. See waterfloat. 


Flock of Birds — Old Empire 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 
Sphere: Animal, Summoning 


Level: 4 

Range: 120 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 7 

Duration: 2 rds./level 

Area of Effect: 30-ft.-diameter sphere 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell summons a dense flock of ordinary 
birds. In an environment free of normal birds (for 
example, underwater), the spell fails. The birds ob- 
scure vision, limiting it to 20 feet. Spellcasting 
within the flock is impossible. The 

A spellcaster of 11th level or greater can cause 
the birds to attack if desired. The flock attacks any 
one being in the area of effect, heedless of their 
own safety. A creature within the flock is subject 
to countless suicidal attacks by diving birds and 
suffer 1d2 points of damage plus 1 additional point 


277 


of damage for every four levels of the spellcaster 
(round down) per round. (Note that monsters 
immune to weapons of a nonmagical nature suffer 
no damage from the birds, which are in all respects 
ordinary avians.) Invisibility provides no protec- 
tion, and neither does protection from normal mis- 
siles, as the birds are not missile weapons. Any 
creature within the area of effect must also make a 
morale check every other round (beginning with 
the second round of the spell's effect) or flee until 
it is more than 240 yards from the birds. 

Nothing drives the flock of birds from the area of 
effect or dissuades them from attacking (if the spell- 
caster is of sufficient level and so desires). However 
any area-of-effect spell that inflicts a minimum of 4 
points of damage (assuming all saving throws would 
be successfully made by the birds), encompasses the 
entire flock, and is cast after the flock of birds is 
summoned ends the flock of birds spell effect imme- 
diately by killing all the birds. Other attacks that in- 
flict insufficient damage or have a smaller area of 
effect kill many of the birds, but do not noticeably 
decrease the size of the flock. An all-compassing 
protective barrier, such as that created by a cube of 
force, protects anyone within its confines for as long 
as the barrier exists or until the spell expires. 

Note that while the weaker version of this spell 
is fairly harmless, if the priest causes the flock of 
birds to attack, many of the birds are likely to 
perish during the aerial assault. As a result, some 
nature priests (particularly druids) are unhappy 
with the use of this spell and may seek to make the 
caster atone in some manner for its use. 

The material components for this spell are the 
priest's holy symbol and a handful of feathers. 

Notes: Granted by the Mulhorandi god Thoth 
of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Flowstone — Dwarf 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Elemental Earth 


Level: 5 

Range: 10 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 8 

Duration: 1 rd. 

Area of Effect: 3 cubic ft./level 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell makes stone flow like syrup, and 
then harden. The stone flows in response to grav- 
ity, but can be directed by beings (such as skilled 


Flyfield 


dwarves) wielding wooden paddles or erecting 
temporary dams. The flowing stone is not heated 
or altered in hue. 

Dwarves often use this spell to shape stone 
conduits, by flowing stone around logs that are 
later burnt away, and to sculpt stone into smooth 
door surrounds, covering or shielding embedded 
locks and the like. 

The spell can also allow escape from stone 
prisons, by using wooden poles to open holes in 
the melted stone of walls and to uproot manacle 
bolts or other fastenings. Its most deadly use is to 
trap beings by entombing them or encasing their 
feet or other body parts in the hardening stone. 

Any creature in contact with flowing stone is 
allowed a saving throw vs. poison. If successful, 
the creature entirely avoids having stone cling or 
envelop any part of it. It wins free of the affected 
area without harm (but must save again upon re- 
entering). 

A creature that fails this save is partially en- 
crusted with stone, slowed in movement rate, and 
suffer a two-point Dexterity penalty until the stone 
is washed off (within 2 rounds) or shattered and 
scraped off (thereafter). 

If an encrusted being is immobile, or is in the 
center of an affected area more than 10 feet across 
when the round of flowing ends, a saving throw 
vs. spell is also necessary. If it fails, the being is 
stuck. A Strength check is allowed to beings 
struggling against the hardening stone. If success- 
ful, they reach the edge of the affected area, 
emerging with one or more limbs encased in im- 
mobilizing blobs of stone. Failure traps the crea- 
ture in the hardening stone. If stone covers 
breathing organs (in most beings, the head), death 
occurs in 1d4+1 rounds. If stone merely prevents 
movement, the being dies of starvation in 
1d10+10 days, or whenever overcome by rising 
water, attacking beasts, or the like. 

Attacks on the stone transmit half damage di- 
rectly to the trapped person; an encased limb can 
typically be freed by either amputating it (loss of 
one-quarter hit points, plus an immediate system 
shock survival roll), or inflicting 20 points of 
crushing or piercing damage on the stone (10 
points to the trapped being). A second flowstone 
spell can free trapped beings without harm. 

The material components of this spell are a 
drop of water, a daub of mud, a grain of sand, and 
a pebble. 

Notes: Granted by the dwarven goddess 
Sharindlaran 


278 


Flyfield 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Guardian 


Level: 5 

Range: 20 yds. + 10 yds./ 
level 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 5 tons/level 

Saving Throw: Special 


This spell allows the caster (only) to cause a 
powerless, drifting spelljamming ship to suddenly 
lunge through space in a desired direction and dis- 
tance, up to the limits of the caster’s range. It is 
commonly used to move a ship away from ram- 
ming attempts or collisions, escape missiles in 
combat, or to dart through crystal sphere portals. 

The caster can activate the spell even if the 
words of activation cannot be heard due to magical 
silence or other circumstances. The spell activator 
has total control over the ship's direction and dis- 
tance. If no direction is chosen, the DM can 
choose one at random, using the rules governing 
grenade-like missiles in the DMG. 

The incomplete spell remains effective for one 
day per level of the caster (for example, a 16th- 
level priest could cast the spell, and at any time 
within the next 16 days speak the final words— 
and the ship she was in would instantly lunge as 
she desires). 

If the priest is killed or feebleminded between 
casting and the end of effectiveness period, the 
spell is lost (normal sleep or unconsciousness do 
not count). 

If the priest is in contact with two ships when 
the spell is activated, nothing occurs. The spell’s 
magical field can be centered only on the priest 
and on a single ship. 

This spell does not work upon any ship cur- 
rently under power (for example, being moved by 
spelljamming, a furnace, or other power source), 
but does work in wildspace, phlogiston, and atmos- 
pheres alike. It cannot affect a ship whose total ton- 
nage (atmosphere excluded) exceeds the limits of 
the caster’s area of effect—if tried, the spell is lost. 

The material components are two small pieces 
of any metallic, magnetized substance (or natural 
Jodestones) and a small sphere of crystal. 

Notes: Common for spelljamming cultures; 
otherwise very rare. 


> eee A 


Focal Stone 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: All, Elemental Earth 
Level: 5 
Range: Touch 


Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: Permanent 

Area of Effect: 1 gemstone 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell transforms the internal structure of a 
clear or translucent gemstone of crystalline struc- 
ture no larger in size than the caster’s balled fist to 
enable it to receive and hold a spell dweomer (usu- 
ally cast into it by use of a dweomerflow spell). At 
the time the spell is cast, roll an item saving throw 
for the gemstone vs. magical fire (rock, crystal vs. 
magical fire). Success means that the spell is suc- 
cessful; failure destroys the gemstone. Gemstones 
of above-normal quality may receive a bonus to 
the saving throw at the DM’s discretion (usually 
from +1 to up to +3 for flawless or otherwise ex- 
tremely exceptional quality stones). 

The gemstone glows with a soft internal radi- 
ance once focal stone is cast (which in some mar- 
kets raises its value), and it emits a faint dweomer. 
If immersed in a poisonous liquid, the focal stone 
turns a vivid purple and can be commanded by 
touch and will to neutralize poison. If so com- 
manded, the focal stone dissolves and is destroyed, 
but it leaves the liquid safe to drink or touch. 

A focal stone otherwise has no special proper- 
ties; contrary to popular belief, it cannot reach out 
and trap spells cast near it or suck in passing en- 
chanted creatures, though it is an ideal receptacle 
for the life force of a being using a magical spell. 
The focal stone spell does not prevent the focal 
stone from being shattered by deliberate attack (a 
crushing blow, for instance), but does prevent it 
from being damaged by natural and magical heat, 
flame, lava, extreme cold, or mineral contamina- 
tion. Shattering a focal stone immediately un- 
leashes the full effects of any spell stored in it in a 
manner determined by the DM. A dispel magic 
cast on such a stone does not affect it or any stored 
magics. 

The material component is a pinch of any sort 
of opal dust. 

Notes: Very rare spell in the FORGOTTEN 
REALMS setting. 


Focus 
(Invocation) 
Sphere: All 


Level: 4 

Range: 10 ft. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: | day 
Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell creates a focus through which faith 
magic can work. The focus cannot function with- 
out a source of devotional energy, such as a con- 
gregation or group of priests. The focus gathers 
devotional energy and reshapes it to amplify other 
spells (the same energy keeps the focus in exis- 
tence; if the spell is cast and there is no immediate 
source of devotional energy within 100 feet, the 
focus immediately fails). 

Once created, most foci cannot be moved. 
This condition and the need for a constant supply 
of devotional energy tends to limit the use of foci 
to temples, churches, monasteries, shrines, and 
seminaries permanent structures where followers 
of the religion gather on a regular basis. 
Sometimes a focus is created for a special gather- 
ing such as a holy day, conclave, grand wedding, 
or yearly festival. 

Not all foci are identical. The particular form of 
the focus depends on the power and nature of the 
spell being amplified. All foci can be seen by 
detect magic. There are three basic types of foci: 
site, item, and living. 

Site foci are connected to a place, whether a 
room, building, field, or forest. Once cast, the 
focus cannot be moved. It causes no disturbance in 
the surroundings; it is invisible and intangible. 

Item foci are centered on a single object. 
Customarily, this object is large and immovable, 
such as an altar, but it is possible for the focus to 
be as small as is practical. The item can be as elab- 
orate or plain as desired, but should have some sig- 
nificance to the religion. 

Living foci are the rarest of all types. In this 
case, the focus is created on a living plant, animal, 
or person, Detect charm reveals the person is 
somehow enchanted, although not under the influ- 
ence of a typical charm spell. 

The type of focus created (site, item, or living) 
depends on the religion and nature of the spell am- 
plified. These choices are listed in the table. 


A 279 k- 


Foesight 


Casting the focus spell is a long and compli- 
cated process, accompanied by many ceremonies 
and rituals. During the day spent casting the spell, 
the priest needs the assistance of at least two other 
priests of the same faith. These aides need not 
memorize the spell (or even be capable of casting 
it). Their duty is to provide the extra hands and 
voices needed at specific points of the casting. A 
large number of worshipers must be present since 
the focus requires their energy. Not surprisingly, 
the casting of this spell is often incorporated into 
important holy festivals or special occasions. 

The duration of the focus is one year. If the de- 
votional energy falls below a minimum level, the 
spell ends sooner. A focus requires the devotional 
energy of at least 100 devout worshipers. Lay 
monks (those dedicated to the religion but not 
priests) count as two worshipers, while priests (of 
any level) count as ten. A focus could be main- 
tained by a congregation of 100, a monastery of 
fifty, or a seminary of as few as 10 priests (or any 
combination of the above). The focus must receive 
this energy for at least 10 hours out of every day. If 
these conditions are not met, the focus weakens. 
The area of effect of the amplified spell decreases 
by 20% each day until it fades away completely. 

Once the focus is created, the priest or priests 
have 1 turn in which to cast the desired spell upon 
the focus. A focus can amplify only one spell, and 
each item, creature, or place can receive only one 
focus. Spells that can be cast upon a focus are 
listed on the table. 

Once the spell is cast, the normal duration and 
area of effect for that spell are ignored. The focus 
begins to increase these factors of the spell's 
power. After one day, the amplified spell reaches 
its full area of effect. Thereafter, it remains over 
that area until the focus fails. 

The area affected by the focus (and its ampli- 
fied spell) depends on the level of the caster. The 
spell expands in a radius from the focus, 20 feet 
per level of the caster, although it can be created 
smaller. Within that area of effect, the amplified 
spell exerts its normal effect. A 13th-level priest 
could create a focus up to 260 feet in diameter, 

The material components are many, including 
special vestments, incense, oils, waters, and other 
equipment the DM deems appropriate. The cost of 
these materials must be at least 1,000 gp plus 100 
gp per level of spell being amplified. These items 
are given up as offerings to the deity (perhaps to be 
distributed to the poor), and new ones are obtained 
each time the spell is cast. 


Notes: Uncommon spell (ToM). 


Spell 
Anti-animal shell 
Anti-plant shell 
Bless TATAA 100049 
Control temperature, 10’ radius.  S* 
Control winds SA* 
Cure disease VL 
Cure blindness or deafness = VL 
Detect poison erp eae: HSH ers: 
— I 
Detect magic I 
i 4 etry jouw hoes ost oh.) 
brute Teed | ey OO Ths) Bee 


Protection from lightning 
Protection He a 


Removb curse 
Repel insects 


spat sts SATEN set slew 
S/A 
True seeing S 


*The caster states a desired range (temperature, wind 
strength, etc.) within the spell’s normal limitations at 
the time it is cast. 


Foesight 
(Divination) 
Reversible 
Sphere: Divination 


Level: 4 

Range: 1⁄2 mile/level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 turn 
Duration: 24 hrs. 

Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


2 


80 


Forbiddance 


» ee 


Foesight lets the caster detect enemies at a dis- 
tance, allowing time to flee or prepare a defense. 
The effect is centered on and mobile with the caster, 
extending to a radius of /2 mile per caster level. 

If a being that means harm to the caster (or his 
group) comes within the area of the foesight, the 
caster immediately senses the enemy’s presence. 
After two rounds, the feeling grows in strength, 
and the caster knows the approximate distance of 
the foe, the general direction from which it comes, 
and the speed at which it travels. 

The spell does not in any way identify the 
enemy or provide information on its strength. It 
does, however, give the caster a sense of the foe’s 
numbers (whether it’s one or an army). The 
caster’s sense of danger doesn’t increase as the 
enemy draws closer. Rumors exist of higher-level 
variants of this spell and its reverse that affect 
more than one person—even whole armies, in 
some cases. The material component is the caster’s 
holy (or unholy) symbol. 

The reverse of this spell, hidden hatred, pre- 
vents detection by foesight until within 10 feet of 
the protected creature. At that distance, hidden 
hatred can no longer cloak the attacker's enmity. 
Unlike foesight, the hidden hatred spell can be cast 
on any creature. The material component is the 
caster’s holy (or unholy) symbol. 

Notes: Uncommon for planar priests; other- 
wise very rare. 


Footsore 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
Sphere: Travelers 


Level: 4 

Range: 20 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 7 

Duration: 1 day/level 

Area of Effect: 1 creature/level 
Saving Throw: None 


This specialized curse causes any journey of 
more than one league (three miles) to become 
twice as long as normal. Those affected drag their 
feet, walk in circles or in an irregular line, insist on 
long rests, and take other actions (or inaction’s) to 
increase the distance traveled or slow travel time 
(or both). Any normal mount ridden by those af- 
fected are affected as well. 

The only way to counteract this spell is with 
remove curse spell cast by a priest of higher level 


than the original caster, or by waiting for its dura- 
tion to run out. 

The material component is Fharlanghn’s disc 
and curved line holy symbol and a pinch of road 
dust or damp mud. 

Notes: Granted by the Fharlanghn, god of 
travel, of the WORLD OF GREYHAWK setting. 


Forbiddance 
(Abjuration) 
Sphere: Guardian, Wards 


Level: 6 

Range: 30 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 6 rds. 

Duration: Permanent 

Area of Effect: 60-ft. cube/level 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell can secure a consecrated area (see 
DMG), sealing it from teleportation, plane shifting, 
and ethereal penetration. At the option of the caster, 
the ward can be locked by a password, in which 
case it can be entered only by those speaking the 
proper words. Otherwise, the effect on those enter- 
ing the area is based on their alignment, relative to 
the caster’s. The most severe penalty is used. 

Alignment identical: No effect. if password 
locked, cannot enter area unless password is 
known (no saving throw). 

Alignment different with respect to law and 
chaos: Save vs. spell to enter the area; if failed, 
suffer 2d6 points of damage. If password locked, 
cannot enter unless password is known. 

Alignment different with respect to good and 
evil: Save vs. spell to enter this area; if failed, 
suffer 4d6 points of damage. If word locked, 
cannot enter unless password is known. The at- 
tempt does cause damage if the save is failed. 

Once a saving throw is failed, an intruder 
cannot enter the forbidden area until the spell 
ceases. The ward cannot be dispelled by a caster of 
lesser level than the one who established it. 
Intruders who enter by rolling successful saving 
throws feel uneasy and tense, despite their success. 

In addition to the priest's holy symbol, com- 
ponents include holy water and rare incenses 
worth at least 1,000 gp per 60-foot cube. If a 
password lock is desired, this also requires the 
burning of rare incenses worth at least 5,000 gp 
per 60-foot cube. 

Notes: Common for clerics and druids (PHB). 


P 281 Ss 


Force 


Shapechange sn 


Force Shapechange 


(Abjuration) 


Sphere: Protection 


Level: 6 

Range: 120 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: | 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: 1 creature/level 
Saving Throw: 1⁄2 


This spell allows the shukenja to force any 
shapechanger to reveal its true form (the form 
most commonly used). The shukenja simply points 
at those known or believed to be shapechangers. 
These creatures, if they are shapechangers, must 
make a successful saving throw vs. spell or imme- 
diately revert to their true forms. In addition, the 
change is accompanied by wracking pain, causing 
3d10 points of damage to the shapechanger. The 
shapechange takes an entire round, during which 
the creature can take no other action. If the saving 
throw is successful, the shapechanger does not 
change form. However, the strain of resisting the 
spell causes pain equal to half the normal amount. 

The material component for this spell is a live 
butterfly, released when the spell is uttered. 

Notes: Common for priests from an oriental 
setting; otherwise, very rare. 


Force Werechange 


Lost spell. Essentially a variant of force 


shapechange. 


Forceward 
(Abjuration) 
Sphere: Wards 


Level: 3 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: | rd. 

Duration: | rd./level 

Area of Effect: Sphere of 10-ft.-radius/level 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell creates an immobile, spherical area 
of protection. The air within glows faintly. This ra- 
diance is barely visible in full sunlight, but the area 
is clearly lit in darkness. When forceward is cast, 
all creatures except those touched or named by the 
priest in the spellcasting must make a successful 


282 


saving throw vs. spell or be forced away from the 
caster. Those failing are forced back 10 feet per 
level of the caster, Missiles and spells can be 
launched freely into and out of the warded area. 
The forceward remains stationary; it does not 
move with the caster. 

Creatures forced outside the protected area can 
try to break in. One attempt per creature per round 
is allowed, and a successful saving throw vs. spell 
at a—3 penalty means the creature breaks through. 
Any creature breaking through the ward can move 
and act freely within its confines, but cannot 
confer freedom from the forceward upon others, 
even by attempting to drag them along. 

Any creature can freely leave the warded area 
but must make a successful saving throw vs. spell 
(with the -3 penalty) to reenter, even if originally 
designated as protected when the spell was cast or 
if successful in breaking through earlier. 

The forceward ends instantly if the casting 
priest leaves its confines, is slain or rendered un- 
conscious, or wills the ward out of existence. The 
caster can engage in spellcasting without affecting 
the forceward; concentration is not required to 
maintain it. A successful dispel magic spell de- 
stroys a forceward instantly. 

The material components are a string of gems, 
rock crystals, or glass beads, plus the caster’s holy 
symbol. 

Notes: Granted by Helm the Vigilant of the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Foresight 
(Divination) 
Sphere: Combat, Divination 
Level: 1 
Range: 200 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 4 


Duration: 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell enables the priest to foresee the ac- 
tions of a single creature two rounds into the 
future. For every three levels of experience, the 
caster can predict the actions of the creature an ad- 
ditional round into the future (to a limit of four 
rounds). For example, a 1st- or 2nd-level priest can 
foresee the actions of the target creature in the fol- 
lowing two rounds, while a 3rd-, 4th-, or 5th-level 
priest can foresee the actions of the target creature 


Forgotten Melody 


—————————————————————EEE——— 4 


in the following three rounds. The caster must be 
able to see the creature or read its mind (through 
the use of mind read, a potion of ESP, etc.) for the 
spell to work. 

A priests benefiting from a foresight spell 
cannot be surprised by any action of the creature. 
For example, if a priest foresees that the creature 
will cast a fireball spell, she could quaff a potion of 
fire resistance. A priest who perceive that the crea- 
ture will make any sort of physical attack receives 
a +4 Armor Class bonus, for that attack only, for 
anticipating the opponent’s maneuver. The priest 
also receives a +4 saving throw bonus against at- 
tacks like area-effect spells and breath weapons, if 
a saving throw is allowed. 

The target creature is allowed a secret saving 
throw vs. spell when this spell is cast. If the saving 
throw is failed, the priest receives a true vision. If 
the saving throw is successful, the spell is wasted. 
If the target creature rolls a 1, the priest receives a 
false vision. This gives the priest a penalty of —4 
Armor Class and saving throws when trying to 
avoid the predicted attack. 

A priest who reveals the visions in any fashion 
that the target creature can understand, the creature 
might adjust its actions accordingly. For example, 
if a priest shouts “Everyone take cover, the wizard 
is casting a lighting bolt!”, the wizard might 
change her spell selection, However, if the priest 
shouts in elvish and the enemy wizard does not 
speak elvish but the priest’s comrades do, the 
wizard is unlikely to change her action. 

The spell requires the priest’s holy symbol, a 
miniature silver hourglass filled with fine white 
sand worth at least 50 gp, and a small piece of 
amber. Only the last is consumed in the casting. 

Notes: Granted by Savras the All-Seeing, of 
the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Forge Fire 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Elemental Fire 


Level: 2 

Range: 20 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: 3 turns/level 

Area of Effect: Single forge or furnace 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell enables a dwarf to create a strong, ef- 
ficient fire in a forge or furnace without burning up 


283 


large quantities of fuel. Only a small bundle of 
sticks or a single lump of coal is needed to start a 
forge fire: Thereafter, the fire burns without need for 
more fuel for the duration of the spell. No harmful 
gases are given off by the use of this spell. The spell 
only works in a smithy forge or smelting furnace 
consecrated when constructed to accept the spell, in 
a special ceremony performed by a dwarven priest 
that includes the casting of a prayer spell. 

The power and heat of the fire, and the metals 
that can be forged, increase with the caster’s level 
as follows: 

3rd level: Lead, zinc, tin. 

Sth level: Copper, silver, gold, brass, bronze, 

electrum. 

7th level: iron, common steel alloys, mete- 

oritic-steel alloy. 

9th level: Mithral steel alloy, platinum. 

16th level: Adamantite-steel alloy. 

The material components for this spell include 
the bundle of sticks or lump of coal used as starter 
fuel and a pinch of sulphur. 

Notes: Restricted to dwarven priests, very rare. 
(Updated from DraGon Magazine.) 


Forgotten Melody 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
Sphere: Charm, Combat 


Level: 5 

Range: 120 yds. 

Components: V 

Casting Time: 8 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 to 4 creatures in a 60-ft. cube 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


To set this spell in motion, the caster sings the 
first phrase or the chorus of a tuneful, catchy song. 
Those potentially affected by the forgotten melody 
must each make a successful saving throw vs. spell 
at a—4 penalty or become obsessed with that song. 
Those affected cannot get the song out of their 
heads until they finish it, and they worry the lyrics 
around in their minds over and over, trying to re- 
member them and complete the song. While trying 
to finish the song, those affected cannot cast spells 
or use psionic abilities since they cannot focus on 
any other intense mental activity other than finish- 
ing the song. 

This spell is especially devastating to very in- 
telligent beings, since it subverts their ability to 


Fortify 
j ee 


concentrate intensely. The duration is determined 
by the Intelligence of the individual affected: 
Beings who fail their saving throws are affected 
for the number of rounds equal to their 
Intelligence. This duration adjusted by their magi- 
cal defense adjustment (determined by Wisdom). 
A bonus subtracts that number of rounds from the 
spell’s duration; a penalty adds that number of 
rounds. For example, a creature with an 
Intelligence of 12 and a Wisdom of 15 is affected 
for 11 rounds. 

Mindless undead creatures and creatures with 
Animal intelligence or less (an Intelligence of 1 or 
less) cannot be affected by a forgotten melody 
spell, and neither can beings who cannot hear or 
do not understand the language of the caster. (The 
caster can use magical means to make himself or 
herself understood and then affect such creatures.) 

Notes: Granted by Milil, Lord of Song, of the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Fortify 
A 3rd-level spell from the sphere of War. See ap- 
pendix in Vol. 3. 


Fortify 


Aka fortify healing. 


Fortify Healing* 
(Necromancy) 
Sphere: Healing 


Level: 4 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 6 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This is a simple cooperative magic spell. Only 
one priest can cast the spell but, like mystic trans- 
fer, another priest is required. Through this spell, 
the priest improves the quality of another priest's 
healing spells. 

The fortify healing spell must be cast simulta- 
neously with a cure light wounds, cure serious 
wounds, or cure critical wounds. The priest casting 
fortify healing lays his or her hand on the priest at- 
tempting the cure. When both spells are cast, addi- 
tional energy flows through the second priest and 
into the creature being healed. The fortified cure 
spell function at maximum effect. Thus, a cure se- 


rious wounds spell heals 17 points of damage and 
a cure critical wounds spell heals 27 points of 


The material component is the priest’s holy 


symbol. 
Notes: Uncommon spell (ToM). 


Fortifying Stew 
(Necromancy) 
Sphere: Healing 


Level: 2 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: | turn 

Area of Effect: 1 bowl of stew, etc/level 
Saving Throw: None 


Any bowl of broth, porridge, or stew the priest 
has concocted can be affected by the fortifying 
stew spell. A priest can enchant one bowl of stew 
(about 8 ounces) per experience level. Someone 
must consume the enchanted meal within one turn 
of the casting or the effect is wasted. 

Anyone partaking of an entire bowlful reaps 
magical benefits. First, the diner gains nourish- 
ment for an entire day from the single meal. In ad- 
dition, for two hours plus one round per caster 
level, the creature receives 1d4+1 temporary hit 
points. Any damage suffered is taken from the 
bonus hit points first. The effects of multiple help- 
ings of fortifying stew are not cumulative. 

For example, Snapdragon, a 7th-level druid, 
cooks a meaty broth, casts fortifying stew on it, 
and eats the bowlful. A roll of 2 gives her 3 extra 
hit points. When the spell’s effects wear off just 
over three hours, she loses these extra points. If 
she suffers 5 points of damage in the meantime, 
she actually loses only 2 hit points of her own, 
since 3 hit points were the extra hit points. 

The material component is a vial of stock made 
of the first fruit of the harvest. 

Notes: Uncommon for druids. 


Fortitude 
See natural fortitude. 


a 284 \ 


Fortunate Fate 


EE EEE 4 


Fortitude — Drow 


(Necromancy) 
Sphere: Necromantic 


Level: 2 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: 2 rds./level 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell gives the recipient the ability to 
ignore mortal wounds and continue fighting. The 
creature, after being brought to 0 hit points or less, 
can fight normally for 1d4+1 with a hit point total 
of —1 to -9 before collapsing. A creature brought 
to —10 hit points or less dies immediately. The 
spell effect ends once the creature dies or collapses 
into unconsciousness. 

The material components are the caster’s holy 
symbol and several drops of cave bear blood 

Notes: Granted by the drow god Selvetarm, 
Champion of Lolth. 


Fortitude of Uthgar 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
Sphere: Charm 


Level: 1 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 turn 
Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: 1 being 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell fortifies the recipient with strength 
of mind and body that enables him or her to endure 
pain or adversity with courage. A shaman of 
Uthgar can cast this spell upon himself or any 
other member of his tribe. A fortitude of Uthgar 
spell has no effect on those not formally inducted 
into the shaman’s tribe. 

The affected individual passes all Constitution 
ability checks (assume a starting value of 20 in the 
case of degenerating checks such as those for 
drowning). In addition, he or she receives a +2 
bonus to all Strength and Wisdom checks. Finally, 
the individual receives a +1 magical defense ad- 
justment, identical to (and cumulative with) the 
bonus received for a high Wisdom ability score, 
against magical spells that attack the mind such as 


beguiling, charm, fear, hypnosis, illusions, posses- 
sion, suggestion, etc. 

The spell lasts one day for every two levels of 
the caster (round up). A small token of the beast 
totem, such as a bear claw or raven feather, must be 
carried by the spell recipient. If the token is lost for 
any reason during the normal duration of a fortitude 
of Uthgar spell, the spell effect ends immediately. 

The material component of this spell is the 
priest's holy symbol (the shaman’s sacred bundle). 

Notes: Granted by the barbarian demipower 
Uthgar of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Fortunate Fate 
(Abjuration, Necromancy) 
Sphere: Protection 


Level: 7 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 2 rds. 

Duration: Until the next time the spell recipient is 
reduced to 0 or fewer hit points 

Area of Effect: 1 being 

Saving Throw: None 


This powerful spell cloaks the recipient (who 
cannot be the caster) with a protective aura that 
withstands dispel magic and other destructive 
spells and lasts until expended. If the recipient ever 
reaches 0 or fewer hit points, the fortunate fate acts, 
instantly healing all damage (including diseases, 
curses, open wounds, molds, parasites, and charm, 
geas, or other mental controls) without the spell re- 
cipient needing to make a system shock roll. Death 
is prevented (it does not momentarily occur and 
then reverse), and unless the recipient is already 
unconscious when the fortunate fate acts, there is 
no loss of consciousness. This spell confers one 
such protection and is discharged in doing so. 

It is a sin to cast this spell on anyone not of 
chaotic good alignment unless they are directly 
acting as a formal champion of Tymora (or to aid 
or protect Tymoran clergy). The spell simply does 
not work if cast on an evil creature or applied to its 
caster. There are instances of rulers and rich 
people persuading Tymoran priests to give them 
fortunate fate protections, but the clergy have un- 
dertaken this the sin only in return for a service or 
donation of great value (100,000 gold pieces or 
more, or the gift of lands and legal changes that 
make more temples possible) to the faith. This is 
typically done after consultative prayer, and 


4 285 = 


Fostered Protection 


Tymora usually sends a vision of what service or 
penance the priest must perform—or a stern prohi- 
bition not to cast the spell on the supplicant at all. 
In the days when many Halruuans used skyships, a 
fortunate fate protection was a coveted protection 
against death by falling. 

Notes: Granted by Tymora, Lady of Luck, in 
the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. This spell is found 
only in a few exceptionally rare tomes. 


Fostered Protection 
(Abjuration) 
Sphere: Protection 


Level: 3 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 5 
Duration: | turn/level 
Area of Effect: | creature 
Saving Throw: None 


Fostered protection can be cast only on crea- 
tures that already possess some level of natural 
magic resistance. Other beings simply aren’t af- 
fected by the spell. 

When cast on a naturally magic-resistant crea- 
ture, fostered protection increases the resistance by 
2 percent per level of the caster for the duration of 
the spell. Under no circumstances can the crea- 
ture’s magic resistance exceed 95%. 

The material component for this spell is a drop 
of blood or ichor from a magic-resistant creature. 

Notes: Rare for planar priests; otherwise, virtu- 
ally unknown. 


Free Action 
(Abjuration, Enchantment) 
Sphere: Charm 


Level: 4 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 7 

Duration: | turn/level 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell enables the creature touched to move 
and attack normally for the duration of the spell, 
even under the influence of magic that impedes 
movement (such as web or slow spells) or while 
under water, It even negates or prevents the effects 


of paralysis and hold spells. Under water, the indi- 
vidual moves at normal (surface) speed and inflicts 
full damage, even with such cutting weapons as 
axes and swords and with such smashing weapons 
as flails, hammers, and maces, provided that the 
weapon is wielded in the hand rather than hurled. 
The free action spell does not, however, allow 
water breathing without further appropriate magic. 

The material component is a leather thong, 
bound around the arm or similar appendage, which 
disintegrates when the spell expires. 

Notes: Common for clerics (PHB). 


Free Will 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
Sphere: Charm 


Level: 2 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 5 or special 
Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell breaks all enchantments, charms, or 
psionic effects affecting the will or the mind of the 
recipient. By means of this spell, the spellcaster 
immediately ends the effects of all spells such as 
beguiling, charm, command, confusion, enthrall, 
fear, hypnosis, suggestion, etc. 

If any such spells are cast on a priest who has a 
memorized free will spell, the priest has the option 
of immediately using the free will spell, assuming 
she or he has not yet performed any action during 
the current round. (The mind-affecting magic 
cannot be structured to prevent the casting of a free 
will spell if conditions permit.) The decision 
whether or not to cast the free will spell is made 
before saving throws are rolled or magic resistance 
is checked. Casting a free will spell in this fashion 
counts as the priest’s action for the current round. 

Notes: Granted by the jungle god Ubtao of the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


DS aaa eae ian meni: | eae ails Rae i 


Frost Breath 


p ne a 


Frenzy of the Celts 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
Sphere: Combat 


Level: 3 

Range: 30 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 6 
Duration: | turn/level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This 3rd-level priest spell allows the Celtic 
priests to drive their armies into a battle frenzy 
before combat. The spell affects 20 Hit Dice of 
creatures per casting (usually ten 2nd level Celtic 
warriors). For its duration, the frenzy of the Celts 
spell allows those affected to never check morale, 
gives them a +1 to all saving throws and attack 
rolls, and allows them to move 50% more than 
their normal distance without penalty. Those af- 
fected immediately charge the closest enemy 
forces and engage them in combat, whether this is 
wise or not. Warriors under a frenzy of the Celts 
spell do not require leadership, but those who re- 
cover from the spell without a leader in sight will 
run back to their own lines or some other point of 
safety. 

The material component for this spell is a tiny 
chariot wheel and a spark created with flint and steel. 

Notes: Restricted to priests of Celtic cultures, 
common. 


Frisky Chest 
(Enchantment, Charm) 
Sphere: Wards 


Level: 2 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 2 

Duration: Permanent 
Area of Effect: 10-ft. cube 
Saving Throw: None 


With this spell, the caster can enchant a chest, 
book, or any other nonliving object no larger than a 
10-foot cube and no heavier than 100 pounds per 
level of the caster. When any creature other than the 
caster comes within three feet of the enchanted 
object, it instantly sprouts appendages and moves 
away from the creature as quickly as possible. The 
enchanted object continues to move until it is at least 


10 feet away from the nearest creatures in the area. 

After the enchanted object has moved a satis- 
factory distance from the nearest creature, the ap- 
pendages disappear. When a creature again comes 
within three feet of the enchanted object, the en- 
chanted object sprouts appendages and flees. This 
process continues until the enchantment is negated 
(through a dispel magic or similar spell) or the en- 
chanted object is subdued or destroyed. 

The enchanted object can sprout feet (MV 24), 
wings (Fl 24, MC class B), or fins (Sw 24), 
whichever is most advantageous. Thus, a book on 
a shelf might sprout wings and fly away, while a 
table might gallop around a room. The enchanted 
object can freely and instantly trade appendages as 
necessary. 

The enchanted object moves only through open 
spaces. It won’t crash through windows, shatter a 
closed door, or dig through the earth. It cannot 
attack or take any actions other than movement. If 
surrounded or cornered, the enchanted object 
moves in random directions until it is restrained or 
destroyed. 

The enchantment ends if the caster voluntarily 
negates it, if the enchanted object is destroyed (the 
object has the same vulnerabilities as it has in its 
normal state), or if the enchanted object is re- 
strained for 1d4+1 rounds. Restraint means that 
the object is prevented from fleeing; if a creature is 
able to grapple, lift, or sit on the object, it is con- 
sidered restrained. A creature capable of lifting the 
object in its normal state is considered strong 
enough to restrain it (for instance, a person capable 
of lifting a 50-pound box is also capable of re- 
straining such a box enchanted by frisky chest). 
The object can be restrained by tossing a net or 
heavy blanket over it or by surrounding it. 

The material components are a dried frog’s leg, 
a feather, and a fish scale. 

Notes: Common for priests with access to the 
sphere of Wards. (Updated from the original.) 


Frost Breath 
(Invocation/E vocation) 
Sphere: Combat, Elemental Water 


Level: 2 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: Beam, 5 ft. diameter X 20 ft. long 
Saving Throw: Special 


A 287 a 


Frost Fingers P 


This spell brings into being a straight beam that 
moves away from the caster’s chest (in the direc- 
tion the caster is facing) to a distance of 20 feet. 
The first creature to come into contact with the 
beam suffers 2d4+2 points of cold damage, and 
must make a successful saving throw vs. spell or 
be chilled and shuddering for the rest of the round 
(attacks not yet taken in the round are lost). 
Additional creatures struck by the beam suffer 1d4 
points of cold damage (half if they successfully 
save ys. spell), 

The material component is a group of three 
drops of water (or fragments of ice) held in the 
priest’s cupped palm and breathed upon. 

Notes: Granted by Auril Frostmaiden of the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. This spell is found 
only in a few exceptionally rare tomes. 


Frost Fingers 
(Evocation) 
Sphere: Combat, Weather 


Level: 1 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 3 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: ' 


Frost fingers is a cold form of the burning 
hands \st-level wizard spell. When cast, it causes 
freezing cold and shards of ice to blast from the 
caster’s fingertips to a distance of 3 feet in a 120- 
degree arc in front of the caster. Any creature in 
this area suffers 1d3 points of damage plus 2 
points for every level of the spellcaster, to a maxi- 
mum of 1d3+20 points of cold damage. Those who 
make a successful saving throw vs. spell receive 
half damage. Liquids engulfed by the cold freeze 
unless an item saving throw vs. cold is successful. 

Notes: Granted by Auril Frostmaiden of the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


288 


Frost Whip 
(Alteration, Evocation) 
Sphere: Combat, Weather 


Level: 2 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: 1 rd_/level 

Area of Effect: Flexible 6-ft.-long beam 4 inches 
in diameter 

Saving Throw: 1⁄2 


This spell creates a beam of frost stretching 
from the caster’s hand. With a one-round delay, it 
can be shifted to any other body extremity; this 
ability is normally used only when the caster is 
climbing, dangling down from a ledge, or pinned 
under foes. The beam lasts until the spell expires, 
the caster wills the magic to end, or the priest un- 
dertakes the casting of another spell. 

A frost whip is commonly swung about to lash 
foes. It can pass through them like a force, rather 
than a real whip, so that if the caster faces several 
opponents, it can be swung in an arc through all of 
them. If held in front of the body or across an 
opening, it can sometimes be made unavoidable so 
that foes must take damage from it, but it other- 
wise attacks once per round at the caster’s normal 
THACO for 4d4 points of damage. A successful 
saving throw vs. spell reduces the damage by half. 

A gently applied frost whip can also freeze 
windows shut, stop pipes, freeze water, ruin fruits 
and vegetables, and render items fragile or sur- 
faces slippery. 

Notes: Granted by Auril Frostmaiden of the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


<a 
w 


ISBN 0-7869-1359-2 


MN 


9"780786"91359 
U.S. $24.95 CAN $36.95 


