Volume Two 


E sm 


a 


Wizard’s Spell Compendium 
Volume Two 


Credits 
Design: It is impossible to list all the creators of the spells cataloged in these volumes, 
but credit goes to everyone who created a spell in a module, boxed set, accessory, hardbound 
book or magazine article published in the last 20 years. 
Compilation: Mark Middleton 
Development and Editing: Jon Pickens 
Additional Development: Richard Baker III 
Creative Director: Steve Winter 
Interior Illustrations: Glen Michael Angus, Toren Atkinson, 
Ken Frank, John Snyder, and Arnie Swekel 
Graphic Design: Eileen Mecha 
Typesetting: Nancy J. Kerkstra 
Art Director: S. Daniele 


Acknowledgements: L. Richard Baker III, Brad Bolas, Ed Greenwood, 
Bruce Heard, Miranda Horner, Julia Martin, Mark Middleton, Roger E. Moore, 
John Rateliff, Terry O'Neal, Steven E. Schend, slade, Keith Strohm, Skip Williams. 
And of course, James M. Ward, who smiles a lot. 


Eagle Form to Mnemonic Enhancer, Rary’s 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


“ae Ai NS 

t] i 
R LY, J 
` U 


D h 
IPR 


ISBN: 0-7869-0664-2 2168XXX1501 


AD&D, ADVANCED DUNGEONS & DRAGONS, AL-QADIM, BIRTHRIGHT, DARK SUN, DRAGON, DRAGONLANCE, DUNGEON, DUNGEON 
MASTER, FORGOTTEN REALMS, MONSTROUS COMPENDIUM, MYSTARA, PLANESCAPE, PLAYER'S OPTION, POLYHEDRON, 

4 SPELLJAMMER, the TSR logo, and WORLD OF GREYHAWK are registered trademarks owned by TSR, Inc, 
MANUAL is a tradernark owned by TSR, Inc, 


Beigium 
+32-14-44-30-44 


worldwide 
This material is protected under the copyright laws of the United States of America. Any reproduction or unauthorized use of the material or artwork con- 
tained herein is prohibited by law without the express written permission of TSR, Inc. 


©1997 TSR, Inc. All Rights Reserved, Made in the U.S.A. 
TSR, Inc. is a subsidiary of Wizards of the Coast, Inc. 
First Printing, September!997 


>» Sn eee 


Introduction 


The second volume of the Wizard Spell 
Compendium continues the work of the first. This 
volume provides an alphabetical reference to wiz- 
ard spells of the AD&D* game system, covering 
the letters E through Mn. The entire series of Wiz- 
ard Compendium books covers wizard spells cre- 
ated for the game from 1975 to 1995. 

For the uninitiated, this is not a book of “real” 
magical spells. In a fantasy game world there are 
characters like Merlin the Magician, who create 
marvelous magical effects with a wave of the 
hand. This is a book of marvelous effects that can 
be used by the good guys (and the bad guys) in the 
course of a game session. The key to the game is, 
as always, the decisions made by the players 
(heroic or otherwise), and the impact those deci- 
sions have on the plot of the game. New spells are 
fun, but it’s even more fun figuring out unusual 
ways to use them. 

Up to this time, lists of spell effects have been 
keyed to spell level; that is, relative spell power. In 
other words, if all a gamer or Dungeon Master 
knew was a spell name, each level’s list of spells 
had to be checked. Although the final volume of 
this series will include level lists (as well as lists by 


race and magical specialty) the most important 
principle of organization used in the series as a 
whole is alphabetical. 

The material in these books is presented in the 
most current game format, that of the 2nd Edition 
rules. Some spell descriptions have been updated 
or combined with similar spell effects to eliminate 
duplication; some have been modified for better 
play, and a very few have been dropped entirely. 

Variant magical systems, such as the rune magic 
system detailed in our Viking setting reference book; 
the kingdom-level magic of the BIRTHRIGHT" setting; 
the psionic Dragon-King magics of the DARK SuN* 
setting; and the very rare, pure-energy “spellfire” of 
the FORGOTTEN REALMS" setting are beyond the 
basic scope of this book. The emphasis here is on 
those magical effects that any magic-using character 
might find useful in the course of an adventure. 


About This Book 


The spells listed in this book are given alphabet- 
ically. Spell names that include a wizard’s name 
are given a primary listing under that name; for 
example, for Tenser s floating disk, the primary 
entry is under “T.” Another reference to the main 
entry will be found at the second word of the spell 


__———————— ee ee 


name; in this case the entry would read: “Floating 
Disk, Tenser's.” 

Be aware that many spell names are irregular 
compound words, and that standard alphabetical 
order follows complete words. Thus, fire shield 
will appear before fireball. If you can't find a 
spell, try looking for it as a compound form. 

Some spells will have multiple names; or the 
name of a spell might have been changed, either to 
avoid confusion with a better known spell with a 
similar name or to better match the spell effect. For 
example, intensify, which makes natural phenom- 
ena such as storms and earthquakes more severe, 
was renamed intensify nature to distinguish it from 
effects that might be intensified by other spells, 
such as intensify summoning. Renamed spells have 
a short reference under the original name. 

Spells associated with specific campaign worlds 
are marked with a special symbol so they can be 
easily recognized. See page 7 for a summary of 
these symbols. Also, spells that are associated with 
a specific monster or nonhuman race (such as 
dragons, elves, and so on) will be noted; the race 
name separated from the spell name by a dash. 

Generally, spell names and secondary game 
effects will be italicized. For example, the emotion 


spell has a secondary effect called hope. 
How To Use This Book 


Each spell in this book is organized along the 
same general lines. Each is listed by its name, 
school, and a number of statistics that govern its use 
such as Level (of power), Range, Casting Time, and 
so on. The game powers of each spell are described, 
along with any special rules that govern its use, how 
the spell target can avoid or counter its effects, any 
limitations on how the spell can be used, and any 
special preparations or materials that needed for a 
successful casting. The details of any reversed form 
the spell might have are given next. Finally, a sec- 
tion called Notes has been appended to each spell; 
this deals with the spell’s recommended rarity in the 
campaign, and any special restrictions on who (or 
what) can use it. 

Having covered the field briefly, a more detailed 
look is in order: 


Name: This is the name by which the spell is gen- 
erally known. Although we have tried to ensure 
unique names, this has not always been possible. 
For example, create shade, a useful shelter from 
the sun in the arabian deserts of the AL-QADIM* 
setting, is very different from create shade, the evil 
spell that turns someone into a dangerous shadow 
monster from the Plane of Shadows, a monster 


known as a shade. Where two spells have the same 
name, the most general version is given first, while 
variants cast by other races or found in specialized 


School: Each school governs a type of magic, 
according to the type of energy its spells employ 
and the special practices and methods used by its 
wizards. The basic schools are: 


SCHOOLS OF PHILOSOPHY 

Abjuration: Protective, warding, or banishing 
magics. 

Alteration: Magic that changes physical proper- 
ties of an object, creature, or condition. 

Conjuration/Summoning: Calls or brings objects 
or creatures from elsewhere. 

Divination: Uncovers what is lost or hidden in 
the past, present, or future. 

Enchantment/Charm: Bestows magical proper- 
ties on objects or influences creatures magically. 

Illusion/Phantasm: \\usions create and alter 
appearances; phantasms affect the mind. 

Invocation/Evocation: Channels and shapes 
magical energy to create an effect or object. 

Necromancy: Magics working upon life energy, 
including the negative energy of the undead. 


Optional Schools: These include two groups of 
schools beyond the original eight, 


THE SCHOOLS OF EFFECT 

Dimension: Magics that affect dimensions, or 
access extradimensional areas. 

Elemental Magic: Subdivided into Air, Earth, 
Fire, and Water specialists. Arabian and oriental 
cultures have similar divisions. 

Force: Magics dealing with fields of pure cohe- 
sive magical energies 

Shadow: Magics that deal with shadow and 
darkness, including the shadowstuff of the Demi- 
plane of Shadow. 


SCHOOLS OF THAUMATURGY 
Alchemy: Uses powders and strange reagents to 
achieve effects. 
Artifice: Uses items and devices to focus spell 
energies. 
Geometry: Uses diagrams, symbols and com- 
plex patterns to channel magical energy. 
Wild Magic: Shapes dangerously uncontrolled 
raw energies; subject to unpredictable surges. 


UNIVERSAL SCHOOL OF MAGIC 
A special list of spells to which any wizard has 
access. 


Bee ee ee ee ee 


291 


Oe a 


Reversed Form: An entry of “Reversible” means 
the spell can be cast with the opposite effect. For 
example, the flesh fo stone spell, a petrifying attack, 
can be reversed as stone to flesh, providing a way to 
recover a character otherwise lost to a petrification 
attack. Usually, a wizard must memorize the exact 
form of the reversible spell he wants available. 


Level: This is the relative power level of the spell, 
ranging from Ist level (weakest) to 9th level (most 
powerful). A king’s wizard who can create potions, 
magical scrolls, and magical items with expend- 
able charges will generally have access to a 6th- 
level spell, a few Sth-level spells, and an increasing 
number of 4th- through |st-level spells each day. 


Range: The distance from the caster at which the 
magical effect occurs. A range of “0” means the 
effect is centered on the caster’s person or his loca- 
tion; in the latter case the effect is usually immo- 
bile. “Touch” means the effect can be used on 
another creature or object. Unless otherwise speci- 
fied, spells are centered on a point visible to the 
caster and within the spell’s range; this can be a 
specific creature or object if desired. Most ranges 
are measured in yards; some are measured in feet. 


Components: These are the types of components 
that the spell requires; if the components are not 
present, the casting fails. “V” is verbal; that is, a 
spoken incantation the wizard is assumed to 
deliver while casting. “S” is somatic; that is, mea- 
sured and precise gestures with the hands, which 
the wizard is assumed to make while casting. “M” 
is for material; that is, physical substances or 
objects that are annihalated by the spell energies in 
the casting process, This abbreviation sometimes 
signifies a focus, or device that is reusable; some- 
times this is a temporary focus whose premature 
destruction will end the spell. 

Often the components are merely suggestive or 
colorful, at other times they will be a significant 
restriction on how often a spell can be cast. Unless 
a cost for a component is given in the description 
(which means the component is intended as a 
limit) the cost is negligible and can be assumed as 
part of daily or monthly general expenses. 


Casting Time: This is relative time required to 
cast a spell. Unless rounds, turns, or a longer cast- 
ing time is specified, the casting will be completed 
in the same round it is started. A casting time less 
than one round is a modifier to the initiative roll, 
and is essentially the same as a weapon speed fac- 
tor. A spell that takes a round to cast comes into 
effect at the end of that round. 


Duration: This is how long the magical energy of 
the spell lasts. An instantaneous duration means the 
spell energy comes and goes the instant the spell is 
cast, though the effects might be long-lasting. A 
duration of permanent means the spell energy 
remains as long as the effect does; this means that 
the spell is vulnerable to a dispel magic spell. This is 
an altered usage. Many spells listed in earlier 
sources as having a “permanent” duration (such as 
cure light wounds), will be altered in this series and 
in future publications to “instantaneous.” 

Spells with a set duration (such as 1 round per 
level) must be kept track of by the player; those 
with a variable duration are secretly rolled by the 
DM. 

Some spells can be ended by the caster at will; 
the caster must be in range of the center of the 
spell’s effect and must usually (though not always) 
speak words of dismissal. 


Area of Effect: This entry lists the creatures, 
dimensions, volume, weight and so on, that the 
spell can affect. Some spells have areas that can be 
shaped by the caster; of these, no dimension can be 
less than 10 feet unless the spell specifically 
allows it. Many areas are given as cubes to make it 
easy to figure out areas of effect when using map 
gridded into 10-foot or 5-foot squares. Three- 
dimensional volumes are most often needed to 
resolve aerial or underwater effects. 

Unless specifically otherwise in the description, 
areas of effect conform to their physical surround- 
ings; for example, a light spell with a 60-foot 
radius centered in a closed room that is a 20-foot 
cube will light the room. It will not penetrate a 
solid wall to light a room beyond. 

Many areas are given as geometric shapes. 

Radius: This might yield a circle, hemisphere, 
or sphere, depending on the situation. 

Cloud; Usually given as a block of cubes for 
convenience, although it's actually amorphous and 
billowy. 

Cone: This projects outward from the caster, 
with the smallest end toward the caster and the 
largest diameter farthest from the caster. 

Path; This is usually a 10-foot wide line starting 
at the caster and projecting away in a straight line 
to a specified length. 

Spells that affect the caster’s friends or enemies 
are based on the current perceptions of the caster. 


Saving Throw: This entry lists whether a spell 
allows a saving throw, and often the effect of a suc- 
cessful saving throw: “Neg.” means the spell is 
negated and has no effect; “4” means that the spell 
inflicts damage and that a successful saving throw 


a a aa | 


292 


DT a 


halves the damage taken; “None” means no saving 
throw is allowed to an unwilling subject. The result 
of a saving throw for a reversed spell is given in 
the paragraph that details the reversed form. 

The saving throw itself is a roll on a twenty- 
sided die; high numbers are generally good. 

Wisdom allows adjustments to saving throws 
against enchantment/charm spells. Dexterity may 
provide adjustments against spells that affect a 
large area. 

Solid physical barriers may give saving throw 
modifiers and reduce damage. Cover and conceal- 
ment may also affect saving throws. 

A creature that successfully saves against a spell 
without obvious physical effects often feels a hos- 
tile force or tingle, but the exact nature of the 
attack cannot be 

Unless the spell specifies otherwise, if a charac- 
ter makes a saving throw, all items carried and 
worn are assumed to survive the attack. If the char- 
acter fails the saving throw, exposed items must 
make saving throws against the attack form, An 
item exposed by the destruction of a covering (a 
parchment scroll protected by a bone scroll case, 
for example) must also save against the attack. 

Unless specifically forbidden, characters can 
voluntarily forego a saving throw and willingly 
accept the spell result. Even a character with a spe- 
cial resistance to magic (for example, an elf’s 
resistance to a charm spell) can voluntarily sup- 
press this if he wants. 


Spell Description: This contains the details of 
what the spell does and how it works. Spells with 
multiple functions usually allow the caster to pick 
the desired function at the time of casting (for 
example, the emotion spell can create fear, 
courage, hope, despair, joy, and several other 
effects). 

Spells that give bonuses or penalties to attack 
rolls, damage rolls, saving throws, and so on, are 
usually not cumulative; only the strongest magic is 
effective. However, duration may be a factor, and 
spell effects might overlap in different ways at dif- 
ferent times. 


Notes: This new section deals with the spell’s 
recommended rarity on the following scale: com- 
mon, uncommon, rare, very rare, and unique. 
These are discussed in detail in the Definitions of 
Spell Frequency. Spells of any rarity also may be 
restricted to certain races or specialty casters, 
Any unusual notes on a spell’s source, such as a 
game world of origin, or a specific magazine are 
given here. 


293 


Monster Details: Some of the spells summon 
or create monsters. The standard abbreviations 
used for monster details given later. Not all mon- 
sters will use all abbreviations. 

AC: Armor Class 

MV: Movement— FI: fly 

(MC) = Maneuverability Class 

HD: Hit Dice 

#AT: Number of Attacks 

THACO: To Hit Armor Class 0 


Dmg: Damage 

SA: Special Attacks 

SD: Special Defenses 
SW: Special Weaknesses 
MR: Magic Resistance 
SZ; Size 

ML: Morale 

AL: Alignment 


Spell Frequency 


Common Spell: The details and effects of a 
common spell are generally known, even by wiz- 
ards who may not have the spell in their books. 
All spells in the Player's Handbook are common 
spells. Spells listed for the basic wizard class in 
world-specific material (such as the DARK SUN 
campaign set) are common for wizards of that 
world, but might be rarer or even unknown else- 
where. 

Player characters can take common first level 
spells as starting spells (see Starting Spellbooks 
in the Wizard Spell Compendium Vol. |). Any 
limitation on spell selection—such as those for 
school, class, or kit—apply to all spells, even 
common ones. Note also that DMs may have 
their own campaign guidelines. For example, the 
DM might require every PC mage to have a men- 
tor wizard, restricting any “free” spells (those 
not found or directly researched) to spells in the 
books of the mentor. A DM might rule that 
named spells (such as Tenser’s floating disk) are 
uncommon spells, as well. 


a en eeE A 


Uncommon Spell: Wizard spells found in the 
Tome of Magic fall into this category. These spells 
are less well known, but not restricted to a race or 
special group like, for example, witches, dragons, 
or the Red Wizards of Thay. A kit, school, or other 
specialty might allow some uncommon spells to be 
treated as common spells. Generalist mages can 
research uncommon spells using the normal 
research rules. 

A player character cannot start with an uncom- 
mon spell or learn it in the course of normal level 
advancement (unless, perhaps, a wizardly mentor 
knows it). Such spells enter play when found on a 
magical scroll or in a spellbook, or when devel- 
oped as a result of research. In the average AD&D 
campaign, finding a new common or uncommon 
spell is a little more common than a fighter class 
character finding a +1 magical sword. Some 
uncommon spells may be restricted (see Restricted 
Spell). 


Rare Spell: Rare spells are specialized or hidden 
magic, such as those introduced in modules or 
accessories. In addition to spells that are just less 
well known, two special types of rare spells exist: 
1) Spells known by a specific nonhuman race (like 
elven spells from the Complete Book of Elves); and 
2) Spells of a specialty or campaign-specific group 
that is not given in the Player's Handbook (like the 
spells of the Red Wizards of Thay, the spells from 
the Complete Necromancer s Handbook, or spells 
of an wizard who specializes in Elemental Fire 
magic). Rare spells are likely to be restricted (see 
Restricted Spell). 

As noted in the Player's Handbook, a specialist 
has bonuses to the “Chance to Learn” and spell 
research rolls within that specialty. The specialist 
treats the spells of the specialty as common, unless 
other factors apply (an enchantment/charm spell 
known only to dragons is still considered rare for a 
wizard specializing in enchantment/charm magic.) 

Player characters have access to rare magics 
only as a result of campaign-specific conditions. 
Generalist mage research of rare magics has a base 
-15% penalty to the “Chance to Learn” and 
research success rolls, unless the character has 
access to some sort of knowledge or resource that 
would offset this, 

Certain campaign-specific or storyline condi- 
tions might allow rare spell research at common 
spell chances. For example, if a human wizard’s 
reward for an adventure on behalf of the elves is an 
elven spell, the DM may choose to waive some or 
all of the “Chance to Learn” roll, the research cost, 
and/or the research success roll (time requirements 
should not be waived under any circumstances). 


Very Rare Spell: Spells that appear only in maga- 
zine articles, or are otherwise variant should be 
classified as very rare. The DM should closely 
control very rare spells. For example, they might 
be available only in a single special book or tome 
in which they were recorded. Many very rare 
spells will also be restricted (see Restricted Spell). 

A DM who allows the spell to be researched at 
all rolls for the success of the research secretly and 
announces the result to the player. At the DM’s 
option, the standard “Chance to Learn” might be 
reduced by up to 50% and the research success 
chances halved, or even quartered. 

Classifying a spell as very rare is one way for a 
DM to handle an experimental spell that is too 
powerful or one that encroaches too much on the 
class abilities of nonwizards. It is also possible, 
over time, for a spell devised by a player character 
to become rare, uncommon, or even common. 


Unique Spell: This spell is known only to its orig- 
inal creator and is intrinsic to the creator's cam- 
paign function. Some spells of this type might be 
available only to a character holding a certain posi- 
tion or office. Most unique spells are of the 6th 
spell level or higher; the creator is nearly always of 
12th level or higher. Such spells are marked with a 
double dagger (tt). 

If a unique spell can be learned at all, it can be 
learned only from its creator (or in very rare cir- 
cumstances, from the creator's writings). Merely 
having a spellbook or scroll is not sufficient, 
though these might count as part of the creator’s 
“writings.” The Simbul’s spell trigger is a unique 
spell. 

The acquisition of a unique spell or the creation 
of one by a player character is a major campaign 
event, similar in campaign impact to the comple- 
tion of an epic high-level quest, the opening of a 
fixed interplanar gate, the founding of a barony, 
the destruction of an artifact, and so on. 


Other Definitions 


Lost Spell: Rarely, a spell is mentioned for 
which no 2nd Edition detail exists (including a 
few spells deliberately withdrawn from the sys- 
tem). No details are given for these other than 
the spell name. They are “lost knowledge,” 
included only to confirm their one-time exis- 
tence for the curious. 


At a a el as ee ce 


294 


SOO eee eee Lf 


Restricted Spell: A restricted spell is barred to 
generalists (that is, the mage class), and to all other 
wizards except those specifically allowed in the 
spell description or by the DM. Optionally, an 
independently researched spell that matches the 
effects of a restricted spell might be possible, but 
at no less than two levels above the listed level. 


Magic in the Worlds 

Elemental magic in the traditional FORGOTTEN 
REALMS, WORLD OF GREYHAWK*, DRAGONLANCE* 
and Mystara* settings is based on air, earth, fire, 
and water. This varies in other settings: In the ori- 
ental setting, air, earth, fire, and water are joined 
by a fifth element, wood, and wizards are called 
wu jen. In the AL-QaADIM setting, the four basic 
elements are traditional, but are called the 
Provinces of Flame, Sand, Sea, and Wind. Also, a 
special type of wizard here, the shai ‘ir, receives 
spells on demand from small elemental genies 
known as gen. In the Maztica setting, special 
cr\aft magics exist, called pluma (feather) and 
hishna (animal) magic. In the sword-and-sandal 
Dark SuN setting, spelicasters are preservers or 
defilers, depending on whether or not their magic 
drains the living energy of that world. Here, 
psionics are as important as magic. In the 
BIRTHRIGHT setting, bloodline abilities augment 


ey 


AL-QADIM* 
Arabian Setting 


DRAGONLANCE* 
Epic Romance 
Setting 


anal” 


RAVENLOFT* 
Gothic Fantasy Setting 


RED STEEL* 
Swashbuckling 
Fantasy Setting 


A Guide to Spell Icons 


: BIRTHRIGHT 


Setting of Kings 


he. Lands' Setting 


normal magics; scions of evil bloodlines are 
called awnsheglien, and those of heroic bloodlines 
are called ensheglien. In the SPELLJAMMER® set- 
ting, flying ships are propelled by spellcasters 
using magical power sources called major and 
minor helms. In the swashbuckling Rep STEEL* 
setting, latent magical abilities called legacies 
result in baneful mutations (the Red Curse) unless 
controlled by exposure to the rare ore cinnabryl, 
The depletion of this ore is cause for concern. In 
the RAVENLOFT® setting, the Demiplane of Dread, 
gothic horror in form of dark lords, each a godlike 
power trapped in a private domain, keeps adven- 
turers on the run, looking for a way out and mak- 
ing special fear, horror, and RAVENLOFT powers 
checks, The PLANESCAPE" setting presents new set- 
tings froms the inner Elemental Planes to the 
Outer Planes, where the gods live. Casting magic 
here requires special spel! keys, and the denizens 
are divided into factions along alignment lines. 


Abbreviations referring to Source Material 

PHB = ADVANCED DUNGEONS & DRAGONS* 
Player's Handbook 

DMG = ADVANCED DUNGEONS & DRAGONS 
DUNGEON MASTER®* Guide 

PO:SM = PLAYER'S OPTION": Spells & Magic 

WoG = WORLD OF GREYHAWK setting 


whe 


Dark SUN” 
Psionic World Setting 


World Setting 


= f 


SPELLJAMMER® 
Fantasy Space Setting 


‘Although there is no specific setting for savage spellcasters, many worlds have areas from which these might come. This icon 
marks spells particularly suited to an outland “savage” wizard or witch-doctor. 


295 


SSS 
~ 


: SR N 


Dou 


Wd. 


Racin charm Tl 
A Ws te | 
Te Bae. 


" -å ~- 
" tjl C 
AN FACIE BY 
11 EE EA. 


= weg 
pe AP Ms) 
Eagle Form — Pluma LA’ Mrz 
(Alteration) EI WAT ae 
) 3 ee OF | 
Level: 5 Level: 2 
Range: 0 Range: 0 
Components: S Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 3 Casting Time: 2 
Duration: Special Duration: 1 rd_/level 


Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


The caster can polymorph into the body of an 
eagle. Although he retains his own mentality, hit 
points, and Hit Dice, the caster cannot speak, cast 
spells, or do anything else that is beyond the 
bounds of his avian form. However, he can fly, 
and his vision is exceedingly keen—perhaps 10 
times the acuity of his human eyes. 

Notes: Common for Maztican p/uma masters 
and Eagle Knights; unknown by others. 


Eagle Vision 
(Alteration) 


Level: 3 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: 8 hrs. 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This 3rd-level wizard spell confers the ability 
to see as if the recipient was wearing eyes of the 
eagle. This gives vision 100 times greater than 
normal at distances of 1 foot or more. The crea- 
ture can see objects at 2,000 feet as clearly as it 
could normally see them at 20 feet. 

Notes: Uncommon for Air mages; otherwise 
rare. 


Earth Elemental Guide 
See elemental guide. 


Earthen Grasp, Maximilian’s 
See Maximilian’s earthen grasp. 


Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell enhances the caster’s ability to 
deliver touch attack spells. The caster’s hand 
shimmers with an evil-looking black aura. The 
dweomer decreases the opponent’s effective 
Armor Class against touch-delivered spells by 2. 
The ebony hand is useless without spells allow- 
ing a touch attack. The wizard can channel as 
many touch attack spells through the ebony hand 
as its duration and the caster’s available spells 
allow. This spell can be used in combination with 
the spectral hand spell. 

The material component is five black lotus 
seeds, 

Notes: Restricted to necromancers; rare. 
(Updated from POLYHEDRON” Newszine.) 


Echoes 
(Illusion/Phantasm) 
(Song) 
Level: 2 


Range: 30 yds. + 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 3 

Duration: 2 rds./level 

Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: 4 


This spell causes every sound within the crea- 
ture’s hearing to reverberate loudly in its mind, as 
if in an echo chamber. It becomes very difficult 
for the creature to understand speech, to pick out 
one sound from another, and the like, The recipent 
often tries to tiptoe in an exaggerated fashion, 
trying to reduce the noise level that only he hears. 

Sometimes the creature merely collapses in a 
moaning heap. No coordinated action with other 
creatures is possible for the victim, who often 
lashes out at anyone attempting to contact him 
closely. Attack rolls, saving throws, and Armor 
Class have a —2 penalty. If a saving throw vs. spell 
is successful, the penalties are reduced to —1. 

The victim's auditory nerves receive a great 
hammering. Creatures with keen hearing (such as 
cats, bats, predators in general, rabbits, and so 


SS as nee 


297 


x Effulgent Epuration, Elminster’s = 


on) flee and hide in order to find quiet, or simply 
crouch in a corner. A silence or deafness spell 
can mutually cancel the echoes spell if cast 
directly for this purpose. 

The material component is a little tin gong or 
cymbal, which is struck as the spell is cast. 

Notes: Very rare spell. Known to be in the 
Cyclopedia Phantastica Vol. II. (Updated from 
DRAGON” Magazine.) 


Effulgent Epuration, Elminster’s 
See Elminster’s effulgent epuration. 


Electric Arc, Mordenkainen’s 
See Mordenkainen’s electric arc. 


Electric Bow 
(Evocation) 


Level: 7 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 7 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: Creates | bow 
Saving Throw: None 


When cast, this spell creates a light-blue, 
glowing bow in the caster’s hands (or on the 
ground at his feet, at the caster’s option). The bow 
can take any one of many forms, depending on 
the level of the caster. 

The caster can choose any type of bow allowed 
at his level or less. The electric bow created is as 
a normal bow (ranges, firing rate, etc.), and its 
missiles can strike any creature vulnerable to +3 
weapons or less. The bow can be used by the 
caster as if he has proficiency with the weapon, 
or by anyone of the caster’s choosing who does 
have proficiency in the weapon. The bow gives 
no bonus for exceptional Strength. The bow 
exists until dispelled or it has fired all its arrows; 
it has one missile for every two levels of the 
caster. 


Caster’s 

Level Bow Created 

14th hand crossbow or short bow 

16th light crossbow or composite short bow 
18th heavy crossbow or long bow 

20th composite long bow 

22th ballista 


The bow automatically loads itself when drawn 
or cocked, a missile of lightning appearing in the 
weapon. The ballista cocks and loads itself upon 


the verbal command “Load,” and fires upon the 
command “Fire.” Each action takes one round, 
for a firing rate of 1/2. Flight arrows are created 
for short and long bows, and the appropriate 
quarrel appears for crossbows. 

The missiles of lightning are magical bolts 
with a +1 bonus to hit and damage. They inflict 
base damage according to their type, plus an 
additional point of damage for every two levels 
of the caster above 20th (+1 at 22nd, +2 at 24th, 
etc.) to a maximum of +5 at 30th level. 

However, only the special missiles of lightning 
created by the spell can be shot from the bow. If 
another missile of any sort is placed or cocked 
into the weapon, then the bow disappears and the 
spell is lost. 

The material component for this spell is a trio 
of fine tail feathers handpicked from a quail, tied 
together with the bowstring of the bow used to 
bring the bird down. The bowman who shot the 
bird must have been at least 8th level at the time 
of the kill. 

Notes: Uncommon for Weather mages; other- 
wise very rare. Known to be in the Blue Book of 
Du'Morde, Vol. III. (Updated from DRAGON 
Magazine.) 


Electrical Screen, Otiluke’s 
See Otiluke’s electrical screen. 


Electrical Wards 
(Alteration) 
(Artifice) 


Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: 1 object 
Saving Throw: None 


This variation of shocking grasp can be cast 
upon any metallic object. Items guarded by elec- 
trical wards glow with a very faint blue light and 
radiate an unnatural aura of cold. The blue glow 
can be spotted only 25% of the time in daylight, 
80% of the time in shadow or torchlight, but is 
noticed all of the time in complete darkness. 

Any creature touching the object without 
speaking a special word of release (designated by 
the wizard at the time of casting) is struck for 
2d10 points of electrical damage. A saving throw 
vs. spell for half damage is allowed. 

When the spell is cast, the wizard also desig- 
nates a word of setting that rearms the spell. The 


a en Se aera oo ee 


298 


- osmena a 


spell can be armed or disarmed by the words of 
release and setting any number of times without 
affecting spell duration; the electrical wards last 
until the spell has discharged twice or has been 
successfully dispelled. Over the long term, about 
a 3 to 5 month span, the ward begins to fade and 
must be renewed. Like most wards, this spell can- 
not be cast in combination with itself or other 

The material component is a short length of 
copper wire. 

Notes: Uncommon for transmuters and artifi- 


This spell has four very different effects 
depending on the type of elemental aura cast (air, 
earth, fire, water). The aura cannot be conferred 
upon another creature. It is not possible to benefit 
from more than one aura at one time. Elemental 
mages are restricted to the auras of their own ele- 
ment. 

Each aura is three inches thick and covers the 
caster’s entire body. An aura of air is hazy white 
in color, an aura of earth is dull gray, an aura of 
fire is flickering red, and an aura of water is 
shimmering blue. The auras have these effects. 


AIR 

* immunity to gas and air-based attacks 

* total protection from physical attacks by crea- 
tures of the elemental plane of Air 

+ ability to cast fly and protection from normal 
missiles, once each. 


EARTH 

* immunity to attacks from nonmagical weapons 
made of stone or metal 

* immunity to physical attacks by creatures of the 
elemental plane of Earth 

+ ability to breathe and move at full movement 
rate within the element of earth 

* ability to cast wall of stone once 


FIRE 

* immunity to normal and magical fire 

* total protection from physical attacks by crea- 
tures of the elemental plane of Fire 

+ ability to breathe and move at full movement 
rate within the element of fire 

* total protection from hostile environmental 
effects while traveling the plane of Fire 

* ability to cast wall of fire once 


WATER 

* immunity to water and cold-based attacks 

* total protection from physical attacks by crea- 
tures of the plane of Water 

+ ability to breathe and move at full movement 
rate within the element of water 

+ ability to cast wall of ice once 


The auras do not restrict the caster in any way. 
The caster is free to move and act normally while 
under the influence of an aura. 

Notes: Common for all Elemental mages; oth- 
erwise uncommon (ToM). 


Elemental Burst 
(Conjuration) 
(Air, Fire, Stone, Water, Wood) 


Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: 10-ft. diameter 
Saving Throw: 4 


Upon uttering a twisted phrase of great 
potency, the wu jen indicates the target point 
within the range of the spell. The target point 
must be an item composed of one of the five ele- 
ments wood, fire, water, stone, or air. The ele- 
ment then releases the magical energy within it in 
a sudden burst. In no case does the spell notice- 
ably affect the structure of the targeted item. 

Air: An air burst creates a concussive wave, 
stunning all in the area of effect for 1 to 2 rounds 


gh me Rae ca SE RT I IS Se 


299 


> Elemental Control = 


unless a successful saving throw vs. spell is made. 

Fire: A fire shoots off glowing sparks, causing 
1d4 points of damage and a successful saving 
throw vs. spell results in no damage. The sparks 
have a 5% chance of igniting flammable objects 
in the area of effect. 

Stone and Wood: Stone and wooden items 
throw off sharp slivers in all directions out to the 
radius of the spell. All within the area of effect 
must make a successful saving throw vs. spell or 
suffer 1d8 points of damage. The damage is 
halved if the saving throw is made. 

Water: Water pushes out in a strong wave, 
knocking down all who fail to make a saving 
throw vs. spell. Boats and vessels are unaffected 
by the wave. 

Notes: Common in oriental settings; uncom- 
mon for Elemental mages; otherwise very rare. 


Elemental Control 
(Abjuration) 
(Air, Earth, Fire, Water) 


Level: 5 

Range: 10 yds. + 1 yd./level 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 elemental or elemental-kin 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell allows the wizard to seize control of 
an elemental summoned by someone else. This is 
determined by the outcome of a special control 
check, described later. 

The wizard can make only one attempt per ele- 
mental; if the wizard does not seize control, no 
future efforts by the wizard to control that ele- 
mental will succeed until the wizard gains an 
experience level. If the effort is successful, the 
elemental obeys the wizard for the remainder of 
its stay on the physical plane. 

Control Check: The wizard rolls 1d20 and 
adds his Wisdom bonus. Add +1 per five levels 
the wizard has more than the elemental’s Hit Dice 
(drop fractions). The DM rolls 1d20 and adds the 
Wisdom bonus of the elemental’s summoner. He 
adds +1 for every five Hit Dice the elemental has 
more than the wizard’s level (drop fractions). 

If the wizard has a higher total, then he has 
seized control. If the rolls are tied, the wizard can 
wrestle for control (taking no other action the next 
round) or abandon the control attempt. If he wres- 
tles for control, then the elemental loses all actions 
except melee attacks and the tie is rerolled at the 
end of the next round. If the summoner has the 
higher total, then the control elemental spell fails. 

Notes: Uncommon for abjurers and Elemental 
mages; otherwise rare. (Updated from DRAGON 


Magazine.) 


Elemental Form 
(Alteration) 
(Province: Flame, Sand, Sea, Wind) 
Level: 4 i 
Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 4 
Duration; | turn + | turn/level 
Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell has four forms, one for each ele- 
ment. The caster must choose which form will be 
assumed when memorizing the spell: air, earth, 
fire, or water. In each form, the recipient can 
move and act without hindrance in a specific ele- 
mental environment at a rate of 12. The creature 
retains its hit points, THACO, and any spellcast- 
ing ability. It also gains a minimum base Armor 
Class of 4 and an element-based hand-to-hand 
attack for 1d8 points of damage. Magical weap- 
ons are required to hit the creature. Unwilling 
creatures are entitled to a saving throw vs. spell. 

A small vial of the essence of the appropriate 
type of elemental is required to cast the spell; this 


300 


m Elemental Transmogrification a 


must either be researched and distilled as a 
potion or bargained for with the genies. 

Notes: Common in arabian settings; very rare 
elsewhere, but most likely in the hands of Ele- 
mental mages. 


Elemental Guide 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 
(Province: Flame, Sand, Sea, Wind) 
Level: 2 i 
Range: 2 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 2 


Duration: | turn/level 
Area of Effect: 30-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: None 


Each elemental form of this spell is distinct, 
and must be learned and memorized separately. 

This spell is much like an elemental form of 
the spell unseen servant. It conjures a tiny fire 
sprite, dust devil, pet rock, or a friendly puddle, 
which serves the caster exactly as an unseen ser- 
vant does. The caster must conjure the guide 
from a small amount of the element: a candle 
flame, a handful of dust, a vial of water, etc. It 
can serve as a native guide to its own elemental 
plane, allowing the caster to move while on the 
plane without getting lost. 

The guide is destroyed if dispelled, sent more 
than 30 feet from the caster, or if it takes more 
than 6 points of damage from a breath weapon, 
area effect spell, or similar attack. 

The spell requires a golden bell and mallet, 
which are not consumed in the casting. 

Notes: Common in arabian settings; uncom- 
mon for Elemental mages; rare for others. 


Elemental Servant 
(Conjuration/Summoning, 
Enchantment/Charm) 

(Air, Fire, Stone, Water) 


Level: 7 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: | turn 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: | elemental 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell allows the wu jen to summon any one 
of the four types of elementals—air, fire, stone, or 
water—and compel it to perform a service for the 
wu jen, Midway through the casting, an elemental 


of 16 Hit Dice of the appropriate type appears. The 
caster then states the service he wishes completed. 
The service must be one that is within the powers 
of the elemental, can be completed in one day/level 
of experience of the wu jen or less, and can be done 
within the natural element of the elemental. Water 
elementals do not perform services that take them 
to land, and fire elementals must remain in their 
fiery realms, for example. 

If the creature makes a successful saving 
throw vs. spell it disappears instantly, returning 
to its own plane. If the saving throw is failed, the 
elemental attempts to fulfill the mission. The 
wu jen need not supervise the actions of the ele- 
mental, agreeing to meet it at some predeter- 
mined place when the mission is completed. 
Typical services include fire elementals forging 
a blade in the heat of a volcano, water elemen- 
tals recovering items from the bottom of the 
ocean, earth elementals producing rare ores 
from the center of the earth, or air elementals 
carrying the wu jen to some location. When the 
mission is completed and the meeting kept, the 
elemental instantly returns to its own plane. Ele- 
mentals resent being summoned and forced to 
perform services and may attempt to exact 
revenge at some later date. 

The material component for this spell is a large 
quantity of the appropriate element and a written 
document stating the exact nature of the service 
to be done. 

Notes: Common in oriental settings; very rare 
elsewhere. 


Elemental Transmogrification 
(Alteration) 
(Province: Flame, Sand, Sea, Wind) 
Level: 8 “Sele 
Range: 20 yds. 
Components: V, S 


Casting Time: 2 rds. 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: 10 ft. + 5 ft/level diam. circle 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This powerful spell covers an area 10 feet in 
diameter, with 5 feet being added to the circle’s 
diameter for every level of the caster, 

This spell affects those items that are com- 
posed of an elemental material. Elemental mate- 
rials are those with strong ties to one of the four 
elements. Metals, gems, and glass all have ties to 
the element of sand and would be affected. How- 
ever, such things as cloth, living creatures, and 
paper have no real ties to an elemental province 


301 


Elemental Turning 


and would be unaffected. Any item in the area of 
effect composed of an elemental material is 
allowed a saving throw vs. spell. 

If an item that could be affected fails its saving 
throw, it is immediately transformed into another 
elemental type. The type of element into which 
items are “transmogrified” is determined at the 
time of the casting. Elementalists and sorcerers 
must choose to transform items into an elemental 
province to which they are related. 

The transmogrification is permanent and irre- 
versible. The effects of transformation into most 
elements is obvious, but fire needs a bit further 
explanantion. 

When items are converted into fire, they 
become elemental fire. They burn very brightly 
but briefly for only one round. This flame is hot 
but affects nothing it touches; flesh doesn’t burn 
nor do flammable objects ignite. 

Any object affected by this spell turns into the 
appropriate element, remains in place for one 
round, and then is transported to its associated 
elemental plane. 

Notes: Uncommon in arabian settings; very 


rare elsewhere. 


Elemental Turning 
(Abjuration) 


Level: 4 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 5 

Duration: 4 + 1d4 rds. 

Area of Effect: 60-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell allows the wu jen to drive off elemen- 
tals by uttering a fearsome spell that is their bane. 
Before casting the spell, the wu jen must determine 
the type of elemental that is affected. When the 
spell is cast, all elementals of that type within the 
area of effect must make a saving throw vs. spell. If 
the save is successful, the creature can ignore the 
spell effect. If the saving throw is failed, the crea- 
ture flees the area of effect and does not enter it 
again for the duration of the spell. 

The spell centers about the wu jen and moves 
with him. If the elemental creature is forced into 
a position where it cannot escape the area of the 
spell, it disappears to its own plane instead of 
remaining. The spell does not break the concen- 
tration of any creature controlling the elemental. 

The material component for this spell is a 
pinch of the element opposed to the type being 
turned, fire for water elementals, earth for air ele- 


mentals, a puff of breath for earth elementals, and 
a drop of water for fire elementals. 

Notes: Common in oriental settings; uncom- 
mon for Elemental mages elsewhere; otherwise 


A 


Elevate I — Pluma 
(Alteration) 


Level; 1 

Range: 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: 1 turn/level 
Area of Effect: 1 item 
Saving Throw: None 


The elevate spell allows the caster to cause an 
object of pluma to float into the air. This, the 
most basic, will cause a work of featherweaving 
to float upward at 1 foot per round. It can lift an 
object of up to | pound/level of the caster in 
weight. The caster can move it toward or away 
from him, or cause gentle side to side movement, 
at no more than 10 feet per round of movement. 

Notes: Restricted to Maztican pluma mages 


and those trained by them; common. 


Elevate II — Pluma 
(Alteration) 


Level: 3 

Range: 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: 1 hr/level 
Area of Effect: | item 
Saving Throw: None 


This is a more powerful elevate spell. It is 
capable of lifting a litter of feathers into the air, 
and a considerable amount of weight with it. The 
item to be elevated must be a blanket of feather- 
weaving. (See “plumalitter” under create talis- 
man of pluma). 

The caster can lift an amount of weight on the 
featherweaving equal to his level times 20 
pounds; a |5th-level cleric could elevate 300 
pounds on the floating litter. 

The item can be raised at up to 10 feet per 
round, and can move horizontally at 120 feet per 
round. It can move into the face of moderate 
winds, but a truly severe storm will easily over- 
come it. 

Notes: Restricted to Maztican pluma mages 
and those trained by them; common. 


rr ee 


302 


~ Elminster’s Effulgent Epuration cr 


Elminster’s Effulgent Epuration 
(Abjuration) 
Level: 9 
Range: 10 ft./level 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 1 
Duration: | turn/level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This powerful spell calls into being a number 
of floating, silver spheres, up to as many spheres 
as the caster has levels. Each of these spheres has 
the ability to absorb a single spell, spell-like abil- 
ity, or magical effect of any offensive type. After 
absorbing the spell the sphere fades out, taking 
the spell energy with it. 

Offensive spells can be generally considered 
those that inflict damage on the target or place 
the target under a baneful or harmful influence. 
Passive spells (such as walls) can sometimes be 
used in situations with harmful intent. Intent and 
situation are as important as spell effect for deter- 
mining whether a spell is offensive or not for pur- 
poses of the epuration working. Various walls, 
spheres, some of Bigby’s spells, and most abjura- 
tions will not affect the epuration spell. Those 
spells that have area effects in which a silver 
sphere exists (such as a fireball) will simply not 
function—the magical energy will be sucked into 
the sphere before the damage is inflicted. 

Spells that are already in effect when the silver 
spheres enter them are not affected by this spell, 
but they are automatically negated if cast within 
10 feet of a silver sphere. Items with charges of 
offensive spells (such as wands) can be negated if 
the the sphere is placed on or in front of the 
wand. Otherwise, the spheres do not affect magi- 
cal items or weapons, or potentially lethal items 
that are not activated, such as symbols. 

The caster can direct the spheres to drift at a 
maximum movement rate of 60 feet per round, up 
to the limit of the spell range. The spheres created 
from a single epuration must move as a group, the 
caster cannot move them individually or split them 
up. The wizard creating them can cast other spells, 
but cannot move the spheres in the same round, 

The caster can move and fight and move the 
spheres at the same time. If the caster leaves the 
area without the spheres, they remain until they 
absorb an offensive spell. Similarly, if the caster 
is slain, the silver spheres remain in the area, not 
moving, but not inflicting any damage. 

The silvery spheres of epuration cannot be 
physically moved or attacked. They have no solid 
physical presence and can pass through magical 


303 


x Elminster’s Evasion 


and physical barriers alike without harm. 

Neither the caster nor anyone else can harness 
the spell energy dissipated by the spheres. Even 
the spell-like abilities of powers and creatures 
from other planes can be affected by the silvery 
spheres of an epuration, though the beings them- 
selves may not be. 

Notes: Very rare spell; known to Elminster. 


Elminster’s Evasion 
(Evocation) 


Level: 9 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 turn + total casting times 
Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: The caster 

Saving Throw: None 


A customized version of the contingency spell 
slanted toward the preservation of the caster, this 
spell will cause, under certain specific conditions, 
the caster’s body, mind, and spirit to travel to 
another location. The transfer is automatic and 
transfers only the body and those items physically 
attached to it, but leaving behind any attached 
items weighing more than 50 Ibs. individually. The 
spell brings together body, spirit, and mind, even if 
in different locations. When casting this spell, the 
wizard must detail six specific conditions that the 
evasion will function under, When any of these sit- 
uations occurs, the caster’s form is whisked away to 
the location. This location can be on the same plane 
or on any other known plane of existence or demi- 
plane that the wizard has visited. Also when casting 
the spell, the wizard indicates two other spells (cast 
immediately after the evasion by the wizard) that 
will be cast once the wizard arrives at the location. 

The material components of this spell are a pint of 
the caster’s blood and a gem worth at least 5,000 gp. 
Both are consumed in the casting of the spell. The 
wizard also immediately loses 1-4 hit points, which 
remain lost until the evasion spell is triggered, at 
which point they are immediately recovered. 

This spell was developed by Elminster of 
Shadowdale, with the intention of taking his form 
to a dimensional location he calls “Safehold” for 
cures and resurrection (if needed). As an exam- 
ple, the six clauses he says he uses are: 


1. Upon his own death; 

2. Upon loss of his mental faculties; 

3. Upon loss of his physical faculties; 

4. Upon destruction of both upper limbs; 
5. Upon destruction of total body volume; 


6. Upon his utterance of the word “Thaele.” 
Supposedly Safehold contains enough contin- 
gencies, spells, and magical items to effect a safe 
rescue of the sage of Shadowdale, should it be 
necessary. 
Notes: Rare or very rare spell from the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Elminster’s Multiple Mouths 
(Evocation) 


Level: 3 

Range: Special 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell creates one magic mouth per level of 
the caster. These are akin to those created by the 
2nd-level wizard spell of the same name. The 
mouths can appear on specific items or float in 
midair just above the head of a chosen recipient. 
A recipient must be personally known to the 
caster or met and clearly seen at least once; how- 
ever, the being’s current location need not be 
known. The multiple mouths even can be made to 
appear in a chorus in the same locale, usually in a 
ring around a specific point. 

The mouths can speak any message uttered by 
the caster during casting, duplicating tone of 
voice, hesitations, volume, and the like, and can 
pass on magical words of activation and instruc- 
tions. An actual spell incantation uttered by a 
multiple mouth would not function, nor can its 
utterances trigger magical items. Someone who 
heard the mouth and repeated its words could 
activate a magical item, however. 

This spell has often been used to spread a 
warning—of an attack or fire, for example—in 
multiple locations throughout a castle or to share 
information between widely scattered beings 
(such as all of the Seven Sisters at once). The 
multiple mouths can appear anywhere on the 
same plane of existence, regardless of magical 
barriers or distance. 

A caster of this spell who possesses 10 or more 
experience levels can, by increasing the casting time 
of the spell by one round per message, cause the 
multiple mouths to each speak different messages. 
In doing so, the caster can also vary their speaking 
times so that those mouths that appear in the same 
place can be made to speak one after another in a 
particular sequence. A caster of this spell who is 
10th level or greater can alternatively elect to create 


a a 


304 


x Eluding the Death Blow a 


only a single mouth, but have it repeat the same 
message once per round until the spell expires. 

The duration of the spell determines how long 
the mouths remain visible if the caster wants 
them to wait before triggering their speech (each 
mouth vanishes after it has spoken once). 

This spell is named for its creator, the famous 
Old Mage of Shadowdale. It is used by some 
senior Harpers and by the Seven Sisters, who 
usually change its manifestation from bearded 
mouths with Elminster’s dry voice to ruby-red 
female lips accompanied by a husky voice. 

Notes: Restricted to the Elminster, the Seven 
Sisters, Khelben, and those trained by them; 
uncommon. 


Elonia’s Bane 
Reversed form, see Elonia’s glamer. 


Elonia’s Glamer 
(Illusion/Phantasm) 
Reversible 


Level: 2 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 3 

Duration: | hr. + 2 turns/level 
Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


With this spell, the caster enhances the recipi- 
ent’s personal beauty. The recipient's eyes become 
brighter, the hair and skin become more richly 
colored and lustrous, teeth become whiter, etc. 
The recipient is surrounded by a subtle glow in 
dim light and is covered with minute sparkles in 
bright light. These effects raise the recipient’s 
Charisma (or Appearance/Comeliness) score by 
two points (19 maximum). The effect is com- 
pletely illusory and can be disbelieved. The mate- 
rial component is a pinch of ruby dust. 

The reverse of this spell, Elonia $ bane, casts a 
lackluster pall over the recipient that reduces 
Charisma by two points (minimum 2). The mater- 
ial component for this version is a pinch of chalk. 

Notes: Rare or very rare spell. (Updated from 
DRAGON Magazine.) 


Elude Blow 
(Abjuration) 
(Force) 
Reversible 


Level: 4 
Range: 10 yds./level 


nol, 


y 
f 


AI A 
AAU 
H AN j 
4 
"i 


/ hil, 
ii Hy Au 


Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 1 

Duration: 1 rd. 

Area of Effect: 20-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: None 


The wizard can select any melee strikes in the 
area of effect and make them miss. Both weap- 
ons and natural attacks (claws, teeth, etc.), 
including touch-delivered spells, appear to be 
knocked aside by an unseen force. The spell 
takes effect either in the round of casting, or in 
the following round, as the caster decides at the 
instant of casting. 

The caster can affect one creature per level. 
The spell has no effect on any creature with more 
Hit Dice or levels than the caster has experience 
levels. Creatures immune to most magic, such as 
golems, and those of demigod status or better are 
not affected. All of these count against the wiz- 
ard’s limit if targeted. 

The reverse of this spell, doomstrike, has the 
same range, area of effect, and limitations as 
elude blow, but all melee strikes selected in the 
area receive a +4 bonus to attack rolls, 

Notes: Uncommon for abjurers and Force 
mages; otherwise rare. 


Eluding the Death Blow 
A MYSTARA Setting spell, aka elude blow. 


305 


Embalm 


(Necromancy) 


Level; 2 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 2 rds. 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: 1 corpse 
Saving Throw: None 


An embalm spell enables the caster to protect a 
corpse (or a part thereof) against the natural 
forces of decay and dissolution, until some later 
time when it is needed for a spell. If the 
embalmed cadaver is later animated as a zombie, 
golem, or other form of animated undead, the 
creature gains +2 hit points per Hit Die (8 hp per 
Hit Die maximum) because of the greater 
strength and resiliency imparted by the spell to 
the dead tissue. The spell has no beneficial effect 
if cast on skeletal remains or on previously ani- 
mated undead. 

Thus preserved, a corpse permanently retains 
the same odor and appearance it had at the time 
of casting. The embalm spell does not reverse the 
effects of putrefaction, but it does prevent any 
further decay of an individual’s physical remains. 
Unlike more powerful spells (such as Nulathoe $ 
ninemen or the priest spell spirit bind), the 


embalm spell does not facilitate subsequent res- 
urrection of a corpse. 

The material component is a salve of rare 
unguents worth 100 gp. 

Notes: Restricted to necromancers; uncommon. 


Embattlement, Algarth’s 
See Algarth’s embattlement. 


Emotion 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
(Song) 


Level: 4 

Range: 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 20-ft. cube 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


When this spell is cast, the wizard can create a 
single emotional reaction in the subject creatures. 
ge following are typical: 

. Courage: This emotion causes the creatures 

affected to become berserk, fighting with a +1 

bonus to the attack dice, causing +3 points of 
damage, and temporarily gaining 5 hit points. 

The recipients fight without shield and regard- 

less of life, never checking morale. This spell 

counters (and is countered by) fear. 

. Fear: The affected creatures flee in panic for 
2d4 rounds. It counters (and is countered by) 
courage. 

. Friendship: The affected creatures react more 
positively (for example, tolerance becomes 
goodwill). It counters (and is countered by) 
hate. 

. Happiness; This effect creates joy and a feel- 
ing of complacent well-being, adding +4 to all 
reaction rolls and making attack unlikely 
unless the creatures are subject to extreme 
provocation. It counters (and is countered by) 
sadness. 

Hate: The affected creatures react more nega- 

tively (for example, tolerance becomes nega- 

tive neutrality). It counters (and is countered 
by) friendship. 

Hope: The effect of hope is to raise morale, 
saving throw rolls, attack rolls, and damage 
caused by +2. It counters (and is countered 
by) Aopelessness. 

Hopelessness: The affected creatures submit 

to the demands of any opponent: surrender, 

get out, etc. Otherwise, the creatures are 25% 

likely to do nothing in a round, and 25% likely 


ea 


306 


N Empathic Link g 


to turn back or retreat. It counters (and is 

countered by) hope. 

. Sadness: This creates unhappiness and a ten- 
dency toward maudlin introspection. This 
emotion penalizes surprise rolls by -1 and 
adds +1 to initiative rolls. It counters (and is 
countered by) happiness. 

All creatures in the area at the instant the spell 
is cast are affected unless successful saving 
throws vs. spell are made, adjusted for Wisdom. 
The spell lasts as long as the wizard continues to 
concentrate on projecting the chosen emotion. 
Those who fail the saving throw against fear 
must roll a new saving throw if they return to the 
affected area. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Empath 
Aka empathic wound transfer. 


Empathic Control 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
(Mentalism) 


Level: 2 

Range: 60 yds. 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 2 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


A more powerful version of the empathic 
seizure spell, empathic control allows the wizard 
to seize the mind and control the body of a single 
creature within the spell’s range. Creatures of 
more than 6 Hit Dice or levels, undead, nonintel- 
ligent or mindless creatures, and creatures 
warded by protection from evil are immune to 
empathic control. The subject is entitled to a sav- 
ing throw vs. spell to resist the wizard’s control. 

The creature remains aware while under the wiz- 
ard’s command. It cannot be forced to act against 
its nature or perform obviously self-destructive 
acts. For example, an orc could be compelled to 
flee or surrender, but it could not be ordered to let 
an enemy cut its throat or to fall on its sword. If 
such an order is given, the victim immediately 
gains a new saving throw with a +4 bonus to break 
free of the wizard’s influence. The caster suffers 
damage equal to 25% of the damage taken by the 
controlled creature while under his influence, due 
to empathic shock (round fractions down). 

The spell ends when the caster loses sight of the 
controlled creature for any reason, ceases to con- 
centrate on maintaining his control, or takes dam- 


age other than empathic shock. Note that the caster 
can send the controlled creature beyond the initial 
casting range, as long as it remains in sight. 
Notes: Common for mentalists; uncommon 
for necromancers or enchanters; otherwise rare. 
(Updated from POLYHEDRON Newszine.) 


Empathic Link 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
(Mentalism) 


Level: 3 

Range: 10 yds,/level 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 3 
Duration: $ rds./level 
Area of Effect; 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell allows the caster to make empathic 
contact with a creature and use its sensory abili- 
ties by concentrating on them. The caster can use 
this spell to see through another’s eyes, hear 
through his ears, and so on. No saving throw is 
allowed for creatures of animal intelligence, but 
unwilling creatures of semi-intelligence or 
greater receive a saving throw vs. spell. Nonintel- 
ligent and unratable creatures are immune, as are 
creatures warded by protection from evil (or its 
reverse, protection from good). Elves and other 
creatures with immunity to charm spells are 
affected by this spell normally. 

Once per round, the caster can try, if desired, to 
control the actions of a linked subject by concen- 
trating upon the link to the exclusion of all other 
activities, The subject receives a saving throw vs. 
spell to fight off the caster’s influence. Failure 
means that the caster can command the subject to 
perform a specific, short action. If the subject suc- 
ceeds, the empathic link remains in effect, but the 
desired action is not carried out. A third failure to 
force control in this way breaks the entire spell. 

A caster who establishes control can direct the 
subject within certain limits. The subject cannot 
be ordered to act against its nature or to engage in 
self-destruction; any such orders are ignored, and 
the creature immediately gains a new saving 
throw to break the entire spell with a +4 bonus. 

The link lasts as five rounds per level of the 
caster, although the caster can end it earlier if 
desired. Once established, the link has unlimited 
range. The caster cannot cast spells or attack 
while the link exists, 

The empathic link is somewhat dangerous, as the 
wizard takes 25% of any damage suffered by the 
subject creature due to empathic shock (round 
down). A caster who is using the subject's sensory 


S E EE SO Oe a a eR 


307 


Empathic Perception, Rary’s 


abilities can be affected by special visual, auditory, 
or olfactory attacks against the subject, such as a 
basilisk’s gaze, a banshee’s wail, or ghast stench. 
Notes: Common for mentalists; uncommon 
for enchanters and necromancers; otherwise very 
rare. (Updated from POLYHEDRON Newszine.) 


Empathic Perception, Rary’s 
See Rary’s empathic perception. 


Empathic Seizure 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
(Mentalism) 


Level: 1 

Range: 30 yds. 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: | 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell enables the caster to seize the mind 
of a single creature and hold its body rigid. Crea- 
tures of more than 6 Hit Dice or levels, mindless 
or sightless creatures, and those under the influ- 
ence of a protection from evil spell (or its reverse) 
are immune to the effects of the spell. Elves and 
other creatures with immunity to charm spells are 
affected by this spell normally. 

To establish the effect, the caster must meet the 
victim's gaze. A victim who fails a saving throw 
vs. spell is held immobile until the caster takes 
damage (other than empathic shock) or ceases to 
concentrate on maintaining the spell. If the 
immobilized creature is injured while in the 
caster’s power, the caster suffers empathic shock 
damage equal to 25% of the damage inflicted 
upon the subject (round fractions down), and 
must make a successful saving throw vs. death 
magic to maintain the seizure. 

Notes: Common for mentalists; uncommon 
for enchanters and necromancers; otherwise rare. 
(Updated from POLYHEDRON Newszine.) 


Empathic Shield 


Reversed form, see empathy. 


Empathic Wound Transfer 
(Necromancy) 


Level: 4 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: Instantaneous 


VPR HLADI IÀ 
4h 


Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


By casting this spell, a necromancer transfers 
some of the wounds of another creature to him- 
self, thereby partially curing the recipient, Up to 
2 hit points per level of the caster can be trans- 
ferred; an 8th-level necromancer could cure an 
ally of 16 points of damage (but takes 16 points 
of damage himself). 

This spell cannot restore amputated limbs, 
drained life levels, or lost life. It cannot undo any 
continuously acting poison or disease. The spell 
only temporarily reverses such harm, which will 
then continue to affect the victim. 

The caster cannot drain his or her own life. 
Normally, a wizard can transfer only his current 
hit points. However, if the DM uses the “hovering 
on death's door” rules, then a caster might volun- 
tarily drain himself to the brink of death (—9 hit 
points). The caster immediately loses conscious- 
ness in this case (as noted in the DMG), but his 
condition does not deteriorate unless he is further 
wounded by another agent. At the DM’s discre- 
tion, this spell enables the caster to immediately 
restore an incapacitated and dying victim. 

Hit points lost by the wizard can be regained 
by normal healing or magic. 

After the transfer is complete, the wizard tem- 


a a a 


308 


~ Enchant an Item r 


porarily loses 4 points of Constitution to extreme 
exhaustion; each point is recovered by one hour 
of complete rest. If the caster’s Constitution 
drops below 3, unconsciousness results, and full 
Constitution is not regained for 24 hours. 

The material components are hair and blood from 
both the recipient and the caster, two newt eyes, and 
two wolf teeth (each from a different animal). These 
components are consumed in the casting. 

Notes: Restricted to necromancers; rare. 


Empathy 
(Divination, Enchantment) 
(Mentalism) 
Reversible 
Level: 1 


Range: 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 1 

Duration: | turn 

Area of Effect: | creature/rd. 
Saving Throw: None 


By means of this spell, the caster can sense the 
basic needs, drives, and emotions of one or more 
creatures of animal intelligence or higher. Hunger, 
thirst, fear, fatigue, pain, uncertainty, rage, hatred, 
curiosity, hostility, friendliness, love, and other 
emotional states all can be detected by this spell. 

The caster can probe one mind per round, but 
the spell yields no results for creatures protected 
against such detection, psionic creatures who 
know at least one defense mode, and emotionless 
or mindless creatures such as undead, golems, 
and oozes, slimes, and jellies. If employed 
against a psionic creature, empathy permits the 
caster to form an impression of whether the crea- 
ture is a weak, moderate, or strong psionicist 
even if no emotions are revealed. 

The reverse of this spell, empathic shield, 
masks the emotions of any one creature within 
range against any magical or psionic probes for 
one full turn. 

Notes: Common for diviners and mentalists; 
otherwise rare. 


Empradweomer 
Reversed form, see maladweomer. 


Enchant an Item 
(Enchantment, Invocation) 
(Universal) 


Level: 6 
Range: Touch 


Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: Special 
Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: 1 item 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This is a spell that must be used by a wizard 
planning to create a magical item. The enchant 
an item spell prepares the object to accept the 
magic. The item must meet the following tests: 1) 
it must be in sound and undamaged condition; 2) 
the item must be the finest possible, considering 
its nature, i.e., crafted of the highest quality 
material and with the finest workmanship; and 3) 
its cost or value must reflect the second test, and 
in most cases the item must have a raw-materials 
cost in excess of 100 gp. With respect to require- 
ment 3, it is not possible to apply this test to 
items such as ropes, leather goods, cloth, and pot- 
tery not normally embroidered, bejeweled, tooled, 
carved, or engraved. If such work or materials 
can be added to an item without weakening or 
harming its normal functions, however, these are 
required for the item to be enchanted. 

The wizard must have access to a workshop or 
laboratory, properly equipped and from which 
contaminating magic can be screened. Any magi- 
cal item not related to the fabrication process 
(such as most protective devices) and within 30 
feet of the materials is a source of contaminating 
magic and will spoil the process. 

The item to be prepared must be touched by 
the spellcaster. This touching must be constant 
and continual during the casting time, which is a 
base 16 hours plus an additional 8d8 hours (as 
the wizard cannot work more than eight hours 
per day, and haste or any other spells will not 
alter the time required in any way, this effec- 
tively means that casting time for this spell is 
two days + 1d8 days). All work must be uninter- 
rupted, and during rest periods the item being 
enchanted must never be more than | foot dis- 
tant from the spellcaster; if it is, the whole spell 
is spoiled and must be begun again. (Note that 
during rest periods absolutely no other form of 
magic can be performed, and the wizard must 
remain quiet and in isolation or the enchantment 
is ruined.) 

At the end of the spell, the caster will know 
that the item is ready for the final test. He will 
then pronounce the final magical syllable, and if 
the item makes a saving throw (which is exactly 
the same as that of the wizard) vs. spell, the 
spell is completed. The spellcaster’s saving 
throw bonuses also apply to the item, up to +3. 
A result of 1 on the 1d20 roll always results in 


aa a a aa a aaa a. ~ 


309 


failure, regardless of modifications. Once the 
spell is finished, the wizard can begin to place 
the desired spell upon the item. The spell he 
plans to place must be cast within 24 hours or 
the preparatory spell fades, and the item must be 
enchanted again. 

Each spell subsequently cast upon an object 
bearing an enchant an item spell requires 2d4 
hours per spell level of the magic being cast. 
Again, during casting the item must be touched 
by the wizard, and during the rest periods it must 
be always within 1 foot of his person. This proce- 
dure holds true for any additional spells placed 
upon the item, and each successive spell must be 
begun within 24 hours of the last, even if the 
prior spell failed. 

No magic placed on an item is permanent 
unless a permanency spell is used as a finishing 
touch, This always runs a 5% risk of draining 1 
point of Constitution from the wizard casting 
the spell. Also, while it is possible to tell when 
the basic spell (enchant an item) succeeds, it is 
not possible to tell if successive castings actu- 
ally work, for each must make the same sort of 
saving throw as the item itself made. Naturally, 
an item that is charged—a rod, staff, wand, 
javelin of lightning, ring of wishes, etc.—cannot 
be made permanent. Magical devices cannot be 
used to enchant an item or cast magic upon an 
object so prepared, but scrolls can be used for 
this purpose. 

The materials needed for this spell vary 
according to both the nature of the item being 
enchanted and the magic to be cast upon it. For 
example, a cloak of displacement might require 
the hides of one or more displacer beasts, a 
sword meant to slay dragons could require the 
blood and some other part of the type(s) of 
dragon(s) it will be effective against, and a ring 
of shooting stars might require pieces of mete- 
orites and the horn of ki-rin. These specifics, as 
well as other information pertaining to this 
spell, are decided by the DM and must be dis- 
covered or researched in play. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Enchanted Armaments 


Athasian Dragon King magic; ; 


psionic component renders the 
spell uncastable by wizards. 


Enchanted Blade 
Enchanted Blade 
(Evocation) 
Level: 2 Q 
Range: Touch 


Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 turn 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


When cast, this spell causes a sword blade of 
crackling electrical energy to appear in the recip- 
ient’s hands. It is the size of a normal long sword, 
but is virtually weightless. 

Electrical sparks flash up and down the length 
of the glowing blade. The enchanted blade can be 
used in two ways—in normal melee combat, or to 
fire a bolt of crackling energy from its tip up to a 
range of 30 feet. An attack roll must be made in 
either case. Either method can be used at any 
point in a combat (the wielder decides). 

The spell has an absolute duration of 1 turn. 
However, it can disappear earlier. The sword 
can inflict damage up to the caster’s level in 
six-sided dice to a maximum of 10d6 before 
disappearing. 

Before rolling the attack, the wielder states 
how many dice will be used. If the hit is suc- 
cessful, that amount of damage is inflicted, and 
that many dice are subtracted from the sword’s 
remaining potential. However, the defender, if 
hit, is allowed a saving throw vs. death. If this 
save is successful, the damage is reduced by 
half. If a 7th-level wu jen casts the spell, one 
attack can be made doing 7d6 of damage or sev- 
eral attacks can be made whose total damage 
equals 7d6. 

The enchanted blade is magical energy and 
thus can be used to hit creatures that can be hit 
only by magical weapons. However, the magi- 
cal bonus to hit such creatures is only +1 for 
every 4 levels of the caster’s experience (+1 at 
levels 1—4, +2 at levels 5-8, and so on). This 
bonus is only used to determine if the creature 
can be struck by the weapon; it does not 
improve the chance to hit or the damage caused 
by a successful hit. 

The material components for the spell are a 
small wooden sword and a silver rod. 

Notes: Common in oriental settings; virtually 
unknown elsewhere. 


a a, 


311 


Mirrors — Paramander 


Enchanted Mirrors — Paramander 
(Alteration) 


Level: 5 

Range: Special 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: | turn 
Duration: Permanent 

Area of Effect: Two mirrors 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell requires two specially prepared mir- 
rors, These set up a resonating field that multi- 
plies the effect of the paramander’s magic. As the 
paramander casts the spell, the mirrors begin to 
emit a faint glow. They hover 3 feet apart above 
the ground, facing each other, directly in front of 
the caster, and at his eye level, so that his line of 
sight passes between them. 

In the last round of the casting time, the mir- 
rors will be in place, and the paramander 
emplaces one of a limited number of spells into 
the area between the mirrors. If this is not done 
on the final round of casting, the entire spell 
complex fails and is wasted. The first spell effect 
from the enchanted mirrors appears at the end of 
the turn in which the spell complex is completed. 
Thereafter, the effects of the emplaced spell are 
recast every third round. 

The effects of the emplaced spell are at half the 
ability level of the caster (Sth-level ability at 9th 
and 10th level, 6th-level ability at 11th and 12th 
level, etc., to 10th-level ability maximum at 20th 
level). 

Only the spells listed here can be emplaced in 
the enchanted mirrors; others will have no effect. 
If a spell is not released in a random direction or 
centered on the mirrors, then it will be projected 
in a straight line-of-sight, parallel to the mirror 
surfaces, along what was the caster’s line of sight 
when the mirrors were enchanted, Specific magi- 
cal spell effects are: 

Flare: This shoots a small ball of light, like a 
signal light, out in a random direction, The caster 
sets the range and either a color or sequence of 
colors, which will be repeated. 

Fog Cloud: Either effect can be specified at the 
time of casting. The stationary effect is centered 
on the mirrors; the mobile effect moves at a con- 
stant 10 feet per round along the line-of-sight. 

Message: The direction is random and the con- 
tent of the message is fixed; subsequent recast- 
ings repeat the original message. 

Audible Glamer: The exact sound or sequence 
of sounds is set, and repeats. 

Scare: The effect is projected along the line- 
of-sight to a set range and standard area of effect; 
the range cannot be changed. 


Detect Invisibility: The path starts with the 
mirrors and extends along the line-of-sight. The 
paramander is mentally alerted if any hidden or 
invisible creature enters the path; a caster looking 
at the path can see any hidden or invisible crea- 
ture in it. The spell duration makes this effec- 
tively continuous. 

Flaming Sphere: The sphere materializes next 
to the mirrors and rolls straight along the line-of- 
sight. 

Gust of Wind: The path starts with the mirrors 
and blows down the line-of-sight. 

Confusion: The area of effect can be set any- 
where along the line-of-sight and within range; 
the area's location cannot be changed. 

Dimension Door: The destination is fixed with 
the initial casting. A single creature standing in 
the mirror line-of-sight and within 2 feet of the 
mirrors at the appropriate instant is transported. 

Fear: The cone originates at the mirrors and 
extends along the line-of-sight. 

Guards and Wards: The spell is centered on the 
mirrors. As long as they are undisturbed, the spell 
remains in place. 

In addition, a light spell can be cast on either 
of the mirrors at any time without affecting its 

on. 

If disturbs or comes between the mir- 
rors, both the enchanted mirrors spell and the 
repeating spell are canceled, and the mirrors fall 
to the ground. 


The caster can try to change the repeating 
spell. The original spell is dispelled by the 
caster’s dispel magic spell. This is 75% likely to 
remove the repeating spell; otherwise, the entire 
enchanted mirrors spell is dispelled and ceases to 
function. A successful dispel magic spell from 
another caster ends both the enchanted mirrors 
spell and the emplaced spell. 

The material components of this spell are two 
small, matched mirrors of fine silver worth not 
less than 100 gp each. 

Notes: Restricted to paramanders (a rare form 
of paladin/mage); common. 


Enchanted Torch 
(Alteration) 
(Alchemy, Fire) 


Level; 3 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: Permanent 
Area of Effect: 1 torch 
Saving Throw: None 


ea | 


312 


This dweomer creates an everburning torch. The 
torch illuminates a 40-foot radius, The enchanted 
torch cannot be extinguished by wind, or even by a 
gust of wind spell; nor will it go out if the torch is 
dropped. It can be extinguished by submersion in 
water, lack of oxygen, or dispelling magic. The 
enchantment of this spell is not transferable; that is, 
another torch, a campfire, or a pool of oil ignited 
by an enchanted torch will burn, but could be put 
out just as could an ordinary fire. 

The material components of this spell are an 
ordinary torch and a pinch of phosphorus. When 
the spell is cast, the phosphorus is sprinkled over 
the torch, which ignites with a flame that burns 
indefinitely. 

Notes: Uncommon for Fire mages and 
alchemists, rare for transmuters; otherwise very 
rare. Known to be in the Fire-Eye Scrolls, 
(Updated from DraGoN Magazine.) 


Enchanted Weapon 
(Enchantment) 
(Alchemy, Artifice) 


Level: 4 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: | turn 

Duration: 5 rds./level 

Area of Effect: Weapon(s) touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell turns an ordinary weapon into a 
magical one. The weapon is the equivalent of a 
+1 weapon, with +1 to attack and damage rolls. 
Thus, arrows, axes, bolts, bows, daggers, ham- 
mers, maces, spears, swords, etc., can be made 
into temporarily enchanted weapons. Two small 
weapons (arrows, bolts, daggers, etc.) or one 
large weapon (axe, bow, hammer, mace, etc.) can 
be affected by the spell. The spell functions on 
existing magical weapons as long as the total 
combined bonus is +3 or less. 

Missile weapons enchanted in this way lose 
their enchantment when they successfully hit a 
target, but otherwise the spell lasts its full dura- 
tion. This spell is often used in combination with 
the enchant an item and permanency spells to 
create magical weapons, with this spell being cast 
once per desired plus of the bonus. 

The material components of this spell are pow- 
dered lime and carbon. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Enchanting Gourmet, Quimby’s 


See Quimby’s enchanting gourmet. 


Encompassing Vision, 
Mordenkainen’s 


See Mordenkainen’s encompassing vision. 


Encrypt 
(Ilusion/Phantasm) 


Level: 4 

Range: 10 ft. + 10 ft/level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 4 

Duration: Permanent 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


By means of this spell the wizard causes a 
message of no more than 66 characters or letters 
in length to be made unreadable by anyone save 
the spellcaster, one other specific individual 
named by the spelicaster, and those entities 
referred to specifically by name in that message. 
To all others, the message appears as an illegible, 
smudged scrawl. 

The magic of the spell defeats spells such as 
comprehend languages and read magic, but not 
true seeing. The message can be on any medium 
(paper, stone, wood, or even soot or snow), but if 
the medium is destroyed, the encrypted message is 


a Baal in ia EE, 


313 


~ Endless Slumber r 


destroyed as well. Otherwise, the encrypted mes- 
sage can be fully destroyed only by a dispel magic 
or erase spell or by the will of the original caster. 

The encrypted region radiates an aura of magic 
but otherwise does not call attention to its pres- 
ence. Magical spells cannot be encrypted but any 
nonmagical language can be. Individuals men- 
tioned in the encrypted see the message 
normally. If unable to understand the writing, 
they still do not know what it says. 

Within the limitations of the spell, encrypt can 
be used to conceal the messages of the caster or 
of others. Longer messages can be encrypted by 
multiple castings of the spell. 

The material components of this spell are a 
pinch of dust or fluff and a feather. 

Notes: Rare spell from the FORGOTTEN REALMS 
setting. Known to be in Orjalun 5 Arbatel. 


Endless Slumber 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
(Alchemy) 

Level: 8 


Range: Touch or special 
Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 8 

Duration: Permanent 

Area of Effect: 1 creature or object 
Saving Throw: None 


This powerful enchantment places its subject 
creature in a permanent, unbreakable sleep. While 
sleeping, the creature remains in a state of sus- 
pended animation, requiring no air, food, or water. 
Subjects of this spell do not age, but they always 
dream. Even creatures normally resistant or 
immune to sleep effects are affected by this spell. 

The endless slumber spell must be cast either 
directly on the creature by touch, or else be cast 
on an object that delivers the spell to its target. If 
cast on an unwilling, mobile subject, the caster 
must make a successful attack roll. Failure means 
the spell is lost. 

If the spell is cast on an object, the subject 
must eat the object (such as a fruit), be wounded 
by it (a dagger or arrow), or wear it (as a medal- 
lion or ring). Each method of delivering the 
spell has its own limitations. If cast on food, the 
spell dissipates if the object is not eaten within 
one day of the enchantment. If cast on a weapon, 
the enchantment fails if the first attack fails. If 
cast on a decorative object, the enchantment is 
broken when the token is removed from the 


sleeper. 
Dispel magic and limited wish spells do not 


affect this enchantment, but a full wish spell can 
cancel it. Otherwise, the only means of waking 
the subject of an endless slumber spell is a single 
strict condition chosen by the caster upon com- 
pleting the spell. The most famous conditions 
include the sleeper's return to the place of his 
birth, a solar eclipse, the death of an immortal 
dragon, the kiss of a prince or princess, or even 
the fall of a great empire. 

The material components of this spell are one 
entire, perfect, blue lotus flower and a pure chunk 
of amber. 

Notes: Uncommon for enchanters and Dream 
mages; otherwise rare. (Updated from DRAGON 
Magazine.) 


Energy Drain 
(Evocation, Necromancy) 
(Shadow) 


Level: 9 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 3 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: None 


By casting this spell, the wizard opens a 
channel between the plane he is in and the Neg- 
ative Energy plane, becoming the conductor 
between the two planes. As soon as he touches 
(equal to a hit if melee is involved) any living 
creature, the victim loses two levels (as if struck 
by a spectre). A monster loses 2 Hit Dice per- 
manently, both for hit points and attack ability. 
A character loses levels, Hit Dice, hit points, 
and abilities permanently (until regained 
through adventuring, if applicable). 

The material component of this spell is essence 
of spectre or vampire dust. Preparation requires 
mere moments; the material component is then 
cast forth, and, upon touching the victim, the wiz- 
ard speaks the triggering word, causing the spell 
to take effect instantly. 

The spell remains effective for only a single 
round. Humans or humanoids brought below zero 
energy levels by this spell can be animated as juju 
zombies under the control of the caster. 

The caster always has a 5% (1 in 20) chance to 
be affected by the dust, losing one point of Con- 
stitution at the same time as the victim is drained. 
When the number of Constitution points lost 
equals the caster’s original Constitution ability 
score, the caster dies and becomes a shade. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB), 


314 


-à Enfeeble — Old Empire g- 


Energy Transformation 
(Alteration) 


Level: 6 


Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 4 rds. 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 40-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: None 


This complex spell creates a permanent, unde- 
tectable magical field. It absorbs magical dis- 
charges, such as spell effects and item functions, 
and uses them to power (that is, to extend the 
duration of) an existing magical spell or protec- 
tion, with which the energy transformation is 
linked. The casting of the transformation must 
name this existing magic it is powering, and must 
also outline any desired limits on the absorption 
area of the transformation, within the limits of 
the “area of effect” given above. The spell field 
does not affect any magical items or weapons 
unless they are using a spelllike effect when they 
contact the field; in such cases, the energy trans- 
formation field absorbs the spell effect but has no 
further effect on the item or weapon. 

The field absorbs spells cast through its area of 
effect. It absorbs spells of all types that come in 
contact with the field save abjuration and conju- 
ration/summoning spells. Any external magical 
effects on weapons or items will be slightly ham- 
pered by the field; for example, glowing weapons 
or a continual light spell cast on a torch will visi- 
bly dim and flicker while passing through an 
energy transformation field. 

In the Undermountain complex in the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting, a wizard trying to use 
passwall, teleport, dimension door, or a similar 
spell will encounter endless, overlapping fields of 
multiple energy transformation spells. The wizard 
simply teleports or moves slightly toward the goal 
and the spell vanishes on contact with an energy 
transformation field. Many of the wizard 
Halaster’s energy transformation spells silently 
drink the spell energy, using it to further the magi- 
cal field that cloaks Undermountain’s passages 
and prevents scrying and teleportation magics of 
all types. Other uses might include a field around 
an icon, using spell energy to recharge a magical 
item within the icon itself. Only Mordenkainen'’s 
disjunction, limited wish, or a wish spell will 
destroy a single such field—a dispel magic will be 
absorbed by it without effect. 

The material components of this spell include no 
less than three “permanent” magical items (which 


are consumed in the casting), three drops of the 
caster’s blood, the eye of any living creature, and a 
powdered diamond of not less than 5,000 gp value. 

Notes: Very rare spell from the FORGOTTEN 
REALMS setting; known to Halaster. 


Enervation 


(Necromancy) 
(Shadow) 


Level: 4 

Range: 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: 1d4 hrs. + 1 hr/level 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell temporarily suppresses the subject's 
life force. The necromancer points his finger and 
utters the incantation, releasing a black bolt of 
crackling energy. The subject must roll a saving 
throw vs. spell, adjusted for Dexterity, to avoid 
the bolt. Success means the spell has no effect. 
Failure means the subject is treated exactly as if 
he had been drained of energy levels by a wight, 
one level for every four levels of the caster. Hit 
Dice, spells, and other character details depen- 
dent on level are lost or reduced. Those drained 
to 0 level must make a system shock check to 
survive and are helpless until the spell expires. 

The spell effect eventually wears off, either after 
1d4 hours plus one hour per caster level, or after 
six hours of complete and undisturbed rest. Level 
abilities are regained, but lost spells must be 

i Undead are immune to this spell. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Enfeeble — Old Empire 
(Necromancy) 


Level: 6 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 6 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell enables a wizard to weaken the physi- 
cal abilities of his target, making him weaker and 
less agile. The wizard must touch the victim within 
three rounds of casting the spell. If he connects, the 
victim loses 1 point each of Strength and Dexterity, 
permanently. Characters with exceptional S 
have their Strengths reduced to a base of 18. One 


So a Ra aa 


315 


EOE a 


point of lost Strength or Dexterity can be restored 
by a restoration, limited wish, or wish spell. Char- 
acters who have either characteristic reduced to 0 
become shadows. 

Creatures without ability scores lose | HD of 
attacking ability (but not hit points) and take a 1- 
point AC penalty (to a worst AC of 10). Creatures 
reduced to 0 Hit Dice or less cannot attack and 
must make a saving throw vs. death magic or per- 
ish (that is, a roll of 16 or better). 

The caster ages one year each time a subject is 
successfully drained. The casting of this spell is 
an evil act. 

The material component for this spell is 
essence of shadow. 

Notes: Uncommon in the Old Empire; other- 
wise very rare. As a FORGOTTEN REALMS Old 
Empire spell, initial exposure requires a mentor 


or a read Southern magic spell. 
Enhance 

(Alteration) 

Level: 8 

Range: Touch 


Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 hr. 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 person 
Saving Throw: None 


By means of an enhance spell, the wizard can 
permanently increase one ability score of his 
choice. The caster cannot cast this spell upon 
himself, and casting it upon another individual is 
so fatiguing that he must rest in bed for a full 
week (or lose one point of Strength permanently). 

On those rare occasions when a wizard does 
cast this spell, he names the ability score to be 
modified (Strength, Dexterity, Constitution, 
Intelligence, Wisdom, or Charisma). He adds one 
point to the desired ability score. The subject 
gains all of the appropriate bonuses and special 
abilities associated with the new score. 

Following the casting of this spell, however, the 
wizard loses 1d4 Constitution points. Thus, if a wiz- 
ard uses this spell and rolls a 3, the wizard himself 
loses 3 Constitution points. This loss is permanent. 

No ability score can be increased above 22 by 
this spell. If a warrior’s Strength is modified to 
18, then percentile dice are rolled to determine 
exceptional Strength. 

No ability score can be increased above 22 by 
this spell. If a warrior’s Strength is modified to 
18, then percentile dice are rolled to determine 
exceptional Strength. 


This spell is 30% likely to backfire when cast. 
This is modified by —1% for each level of the 
caster, A 16th-level wizard, for example, has a 
14% chance of a backfire (30—16=14). When the 
spell backfires, the wizard loses 1d4 points in the 
ability score named. 

Although many high-level wizards know the 
enhance spell, it is one they rarely use. It is pow- 
erful, dangerous, and exhausting, so it is 
employed only in the most dire circumstances, or 
to reward deeds truly worthy of heroic status. 

The material component of the enhance spell 
depends upon the ability score modified. 


Strength The horn of a black bull 
Dexterity The whiskers of a cat 
Constitution The claws of a bear 
Intelligence The tusks of a boar 

Wisdom Two wing feathers from an owl 
Charisma A lock of hair from a woman 


with a Charisma of 16 or more 
Notes: Uncommon spell. 
Enhance Blood Ability 
(Alteration, Evocation) 
Level: 3 ae 
Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 2 
Duration: 3 rds. + 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 

This spell enables a creature to tap the essence of 
its bloodline directly to temporarily increase the 
power of one blood ability. The caster must know 
the bloodline derivation, blood ability, and ability 
power (minor or major) to be affected. When the 
spell is cast, the chosen blood ability improves one 
power—minor to major—for the duration of the 
spell. Blood abilities of maximum level gain no 
benefit from the spell and blood abilities that have 
only one level of power cannot be enhanced. 

At the end of the spell’s duration, the blood 
ability returns to normal. The recipient then may 
not use the previously enhanced blood ability for 
one turn (he has stretched it beyond its limits). 

The material components are two similar 
objects—one large and one small—representing 
the bloodline derivation of the target. (See the 
animal affinity blood ability description in the 
BIRTHRIGHT rulebook for a list of totems.) The 
wizard breaks the smaller of the two totems dur- 
ing the casting of the spell. 


Notes: Common in the BIRTHRIGHT setting; 
virtually unknown elsewhere. 


EE Et 


316 


Enhance Plant 


Enhance Fire Creature 
(Alteration) 
(Province: Flame) ad 
Reversible 
Level: 4 


Range: 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: 1d6 rds. + 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell makes a creature of a fiery nature 
look and act tougher. (Recipients often waive 
their saving throws.) The spell can enhance crea- 
tures that dwell in fire or have the natural ability 
to manipulate fire, as well as creatures from the 
Elemental Plane of Fire. Examples include red 
dragons, hell hounds, efreet, fire elementals, 
flame monoliths, fire newts, and salamanders. 
Enhance fire creature does nothing to creatures 
who merely cast fire-based spells, such as the 
seven Mages of the True Flame. Nor does it 
affect individuals with fire-based magical items, 
such as flametongue swords. 

A recipient of this spell looks bigger and more 
vigorous than before. Its flames are charged with 
scintillating yellow and purple streaks. More 
importantly, the recipient gains a +1 bonus to its 
attack rolls and damage. If a creature inflicts 
damage expressed as a number of dice (such as a 
red dragon’s breath weapon), then the bonus is +1 
point for each die of damage before any other 
modification is made, Finally, a creature native to 
the Elemental Plane of Fire gains a +1 bonus to 
each Hit Die. Damage is subtracted from the 
bonus hit points first. 

The material component of enhance fire crea- 
ture is a rag steeped in pitch. 

The reverse of this spell, quench fire crea- 
ture, has the opposite result. The recipient looks 
less vigorous, and its flames are duller and red- 
der than usual, It suffers a —1 penalty to attack 
rolls and to each die of damage inflicted. A 
creature from the Elemental Plane of Fire suf- 
fers a -1 loss from each Hit Die immediately. A 
successful saving throw negates the effects of 
this spell. 

The material component of quench fire crea- 
ture is a piece of damp cloth. 

Notes: Common in arabian settings; very rare 
elsewhere. 


Enhance Maneuverability 


(Alteration) = 


Reversible 


Level: 5 

Range: 10 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: 1d4 rds. + 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: 1 ship, 10 tons/level maximum 
Saving Throw: None or Neg. 


This spell can be cast on any spelljamming 
ship to increase its maneuverability class (MC). 
The maneuverability class can be increased only 
one class by using this spell, for example, from 
MC C to MC B. No ship can have its maneuver- 
ability increased more than one class above its 
initial rating, regardless of the number of increase 
maneuverability spells cast upon it. 

The material component for this spell is a vial 
of wind from an air-based world. 

The reverse of this spell, decrease maneuver- 
ability, acts similarly, but worsens the maneuver- 
ability of the ship. 

Notes: Common for spellcasters from a spell- 
jamming culture; otherwise rare. 


Enhance Plant 
(Enchantment, Invocation) 


Level: 5 

Range: Special 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 day + 1-6 days 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 plant 

Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell enhances a living plant. Any natural 
plant (excluding molds, shambling mounds, 
hangman's trees, and the like) can be enhanced in 
one respect. A grapevine could be made to grow 
faster, have broader leaves, bear sweeter fruit, 
and so on. Only a single quality is enhanced, and 
only if the plant normally has that quality. The 
plant must be normal and non-motile (incapable 
of independent movement). Once cast, the 
enhancement lasts as long as the plant lives; it 
cannot be reversed by a dispel magic spell, for 
example, Enhancements by means of this spell 
alone are not passed on to the plant's offspring. 

Notes: Common for hedge wizards and spe- 
cialists in nature magic; otherwise very rare. This 
is the second version of the spell hedge enchant- 
ment. (Updated from DRAGON Magazine.) 


317 


Enhance Rating 


Enhance Rating 
(Alteration) 
Reversible i 
Level: 3 
Range: 10 yds. 


Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 3 

Duration: 1d4 rds, + 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: 1 spelljammer helmsman 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell can be cast only upon an individual 
using a major or minor spelljamming helm. This 
spell will raise the ship rating (SR, a measure of 
speed) of the spelljamming ship by 1-2 points for 
the duration of the spell. Only one enhance rating 
spell can be used at a time. A helmsman cannot 
cast it on himself. The spellcaster must be able to 
see the helmsman upon whom the spell is to be 
cast. The spell not work if the helmsman is hidden. 

The material component of this spell is a small 
ivory arrow, which is pointed upward as the spell 
is Cast. 

The reverse of this spell, decrease rating, 
reduces the SR of the spelljamming helm and its 
user by 1-2 points for the duration of the spell. 
The helmsman is allowed a saving throw vs. spell 
to avoid the effect. 

The material component is the same, but the 
ivory arrow is broken as the spell is completed. 

Notes: Common for spelicasters from a spell- 
jamming culture; otherwise rare. 


Enhanced Empathy 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
(Mentalism) 


Level: 7 

Range: 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 7 
Duration: 5 rds./level 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell improves the effect of empathic 
spells of 3rd level or less, including empathy, 
empathic seizure, empathic control, and empathic 
link. While this spell is in effect, saving throws 
against any of the caster’s empathic spells suffer a 
-4 penalty. In addition, the caster is completely 
protected against empathic shock damage. The 
enhanced empathy spell also allows the caster to 
engage in other activities such as combat or spell- 
casting while maintaining his empathic spells. 

Notes: Common for mentalists; uncommon 
for enchanters and necromancers; otherwise rare. 
(Updated from POLYHEDRON Newszine.) 


Enhanced Olfaction 
(Alteration) 
(Alchemy) 


Level: 2 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 2 
Duration: 5 rds./level 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell dramatically increases the caster’s 
sensitivity to odors, giving him a sense of smell 
equal to that of the keenest bloodhound. This 
gives the caster a +2 bonus on surprise checks, In 
addition, while the spell is in effect the caster can 
track by scent (adjudicated by the DM). 


Dy 


> Enlarge A 


However, the caster’s sensitivity gives him a —2 
penalty to any saving throw against an olfactory 
attack, such as the stench of a ghast, a troglodyte, 
a giant skunk, a stinking cloud spell, and so on. 

The material component is a piece of dried 
skunk cabbage. 

Notes: Rare spell. (Updated from POLYHEDRON 
Newszine.) 


Enlarge 
(Alteration) 
(Dimension) 
Reversible 


Level: 1 

Range: 5 yds./level 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 

Duration: 5 rds./level 

Area of Effect: | creature or object 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell causes instant growth of a creature 
or object, increasing both size and weight. It can 
be cast only upon a single creature (or a symbi- 
otic or community entity) or upon a single object 
that does not exceed 10 cubic feet in volume per 
caster level. The object or creature must be seen 
to be affected. It grows by up to 10% per level of 
experience of the wizard, increasing this amount 
in height, width, and weight. 

All equipment worn or carried by a creature is 
enlarged by the spell. Unwilling victims are enti- 
tled to a saving throw vs. spell. A successful saving 
throw means the spell fails. If insufficient room is 
available for the desired growth, the creature or 
object attains the maximum possible size, bursting 
weak enclosures in the process, but it is constrained 
without harm by stronger materials—the spell can- 
not be used to crush a creature by growth. 

Magical properties are not increased by this 
spell—a huge sword +1 is still only +1, a staff- 
sized wand is still only capable of its normal 
functions, a giant-sized potion merely requires a 
greater fluid intake to make its magical effects 
operate, etc. Weight, mass, and strength are 
affected, though. Thus, a table blocking a door 
would be heavier and more effective, a hurled 
stone would have more mass (and cause more 
damage), chains would be more massive, doors 
thicker, a thin line turned to a sizeable, longer 
rope, and so on. A creature’s hit points, Armor 
Class, and attack rolls do not change, but damage 
y Mraig a | rolls increase proportionately with size. 

j 'j it Nii For example, a fighter at 160% normal size 
i EWR) hits with his long sword and rolls a 6 for damage. 


AKE | 


HAM 
4 yh! 
í 


hi 


l 


aye Enlarge Desert Creature > 


The adjusted damage roll is 10 (that is, 6 x 1.6 = 
9.6, rounded up). Bonuses due to Strength, class, 
and magic are not altered. 

The reverse spell, reduce, negates the 
enlarge spell or makes creatures or objects 
smaller. The creature or object loses 10% of its 
original size for every level of the caster, to a 
minimum of 10% of the original size. There- 
after, the size shrinks by 1-foot increments to 
less than | foot, by l-inch increments to 1 
inch, and by Y%o-inch increments to a minimum 
of Mo of an inch—the recipient cannot dwindle 
away to nothingness. 

For example, a 16-foot-tall giant reduced by a 
15th-level wizard (15 steps) would be reduced to 
1.6 feet (in nine steps), then to “oof a foot or 7.2 
inches (in one step), and finally to 2.2 inches (in 
the last five steps). A shrinking object may dam- 
age weaker materials affixed to it, but an object 
will shrink only as long as the object itself is not 
damaged. Unwilling creatures are allowed a sav- 
ing throw vs. spell. 

The material component of this spell is a pinch 
of powdered iron. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Enlarge Desert Creature 
(Alteration) 
(Province: Sand) 
Reversible 


Level: 2 

Range: 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 2 

Duration: 1d6 rds. + 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell allows the caster to increase the size 
of a creature (including an intelligent one such as 
himself) in height, width, volume, strength, and 
weight. This increase also boosts the damage 
inflicted by the creature’s physical attacks pro- 
portionately. The wizard has no more and no less 
control over the enlarged creature after casting 
than he had before. 

The spell works best on desert creatures, but 
it can be cast on others, too. “Desert creatures” 
refers to animals and monsters that are nor- 
mally found in desert terrain, as well as individ- 
uals whose origins and backgrounds are in the 
desert (such as a desert nomad or tentdweller). 
Anything carried or worn by the target of the 
spell increases along with him except a rider, 
should the target be a mount. The target can 


grow to a size chosen by the caster, with a max- 
imum 10% growth per level of the caster. Thus, 
a 10th-level wizard can bring about 100% 
growth (doubling size), while a 20th-level wiz- 
ard can effect 200% growth (tripling the target 
creature’s original size). These are absolute 
maximums; neither the caster nor another wiz- 
ard can cast multiple enlarge spells on any 
given creature. If someone tries, the spell cast 
first is effective, but all other enlarge spells are 
lost. An ornery wizard might hope to harm the 
target by increasing its size beyond that of its 
immediate surroundings. That can’t happen. 
When the target meets a resisting force (even a 
tent ceiling), growth stops before damage is 
incurred. The DM’s best judgment applies. 

An enlarged creature can reach farther and 
move faster. (The latter is particularly useful for 
a mount, provided the rider can remain seated.) 
Its new size never hampers its normal activities, 
including flight or climbing. As noted, its dam- 
age and movement increase to the numbers 
appropriate to its new size, with all fractions 
dropped. However, the following statistics do 
not change: its Dexterity, number of attacks, Hit 
Dice, hit points, and saving throws. (For exam- 
ple, a scorpion could be increased to the size of 
a dog, but its poisonous stinger would be no 
more effective.) 

Every target of enlarge desert creature is 
allowed a saving throw vs. spell to avoid its 
effects. The save begins with a —6 penalty, but the 
penalty is adjusted by +1 for every point of Intel- 
ligence above 12, Finally, if the target is not 
native to the desert, it gains another +1 bonus. 

The reverse, diminish desert creature, allows 
the caster to shrink a creature by 10% for each 
level of the caster, to a minimum of 10% of its 
original size. Thus a 10th-level wizard can 
shrink a beefy 6-foot-tall warrior to just half a 
foot. The diminished individual retains all Hit 
Dice and hit points, but attacks and movement 
rates are reduced accordingly, with all fractions 
dropped. Otherwise, the reverse works just as 
enlarge. 

The material component of both versions of 
this, spell is a small stick of mahogany or teak. 

Notes: Common in arabian settings; very rare 
elsewhere. 


Enslave Elemental 


Athasian Dragon King magic; à i É 


psionic component renders the 
spell uncastableby wizards. 


320 


Ensnarement 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 
(Geometry) 


Level: 6 

Range: 10 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: | turn 
Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


Casting this spell attempts a dangerous act: to 
lure a powerful creature from another plane to a 
specifically prepared trap, where it will be held 
until it agrees to perform one service in return for 
freedom from the ensnarement spell. The type of 
creature to be ensnared must be known and stated, 
and if it has a specific, proper, or given name, this 
must be used in casting the ensnarement spell. The 
spell causes an awareness of a gatelike opening on 
the plane of the creature to be ensnared. A special 
saving throw is then made to determine if the crea- 
ture detects the nature of the planar opening as a 
trap or believes it to be a gate. To save, the creature 
must roll equal to or less than its Intelligence score 
on 1d20. The score is modified by the difference 
between the creature’s Intelligence and that of the 
spelicaster. If the creature has a higher score, the 
difference is subtracted from its dice roll to save. If 
the spellcaster has a higher score, the difference is 
added to the dice roll. 

If the saving throw succeeds, the creature 
ignores the spell-created opening, and the spell 
fails. If the saving throw fails, the creature steps 
into the opening and is ensnared. 

When so trapped, the otherplanar creature can 
freely attack the ensnaring wizard, unless the 
caster has created a warding circle, Such circles 
may be temporary (drawn by hand) or permanent 
(inlaid or carved). Even with such protection, the 
entrapped creature may break free and wreak its 
vengeance upon the spellcaster. 

A hand-drawn circle has a base failure chance 
of 20%, while one inlaid or carved has a base of 
10% (and that is for the first time it is used, to 
determine whether or not the job was done prop- 
erly). The base chance is modified by the differ- 
ence between the wizard’s combined Intelligence 
and experience level and the Intelligence and the 
experience level or Hit Dice of the creature 
ensnared. If the spelicaster has a higher total, that 
difference in percentage points is subtracted from 
the chance for the creature to break free. If the 
creature has a higher total, that difference is 
added to its chance to break free. 


The chance can be further reduced by careful 
preparation of the circle. If the hand-made circle 
is drawn over a longer period of time, using spe- 
cially prepared pigments (1,000 gp value per turn 
spent drawing), the chance of breaking free is 
reduced by 1% for every turn spent in prepara- 
tion. This can bring the base chance to 0%. 

Similarly, an inlaid or carved design can be 
brought to a 0% chance of the creature breaking 
free by inlaying with various metals, minerals, etc. 
This cost will require a minimum of one full 
month of time and add not less than 50,000 gp to 
the basic cost of having the circle inlaid or carved 
into stone. Any break in the circle spoils the effi- 
cacy of the spell and enables the creature to break 
free automatically. Even a straw dropped across 
the line of a magic circle destroys its power. Fortu- 
nately, the creature within cannot so much as place 
a straw upon any portion of the inscribed ward, for 
the magic of the barrier absolutely prevents it. 

Once safely ensnared, the creature can be kept for 
as long as the spellcaster dares. (Remember the 
danger of something breaking the ward!) The crea- 
ture cannot leave the circle, nor can any of its 
attacks or powers penetrate the barrier. The caster 
can offer bribes, use promises, or make threats in 
order to exact one service from the captive creature. 

The DM will then assign a value to what the 
wizard has said to the ensnared creature, rating it 


aa ae, 


Enter Dream r 


from 0 to 6 (with 6 being the most persuasive). 
This rating is then subtracted from the Intelli- 
gence score of the creature. If the creature rolls a 
successful Intelligence check against its adjusted 
Intelligence, it refuses service. New offers, 
bribes, etc., can be made, or the old ones re- 
offered 24 hours later, when the creature’s Intelli- 
gence has dropped by 1 point due to confinement. 
This can be repeated until the creature promises 
to serve, until it breaks free, or until the caster 
decides to get rid of it by means of some riddance 
spell. Impossible demands or unreasonable com- 
mands are never agreed to. 

Once the single service is completed, the crea- 
ture need only so inform the spellcaster to be 
instantly sent from whence it came. The creature 
might later seek revenge. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 
Enter Dream 
(Enchantment/Charm) 


Level: 2 

Range: 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 turn 

Duration: | turn/level 

Area of Effect: | sleeping creature 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell sends the caster into a deep sleep, 
but it also allows the caster’s own mind to enter 
the dream of another. The caster can observe the 
dreams of the spell’s target, much as an audience 
observes a play. The spellcaster remains unde- 
tected by the dreamer unless a saving throw vs. 
spell is successful (Wisdom modifiers apply). 
The caster can, however, purposefully reveal 
himself to converse with the dreamer or interact 
with the other elements of the dream. In this case, 
the dreamer perceives the spellcaster as a part of 
the dream, again unless he makes a successful 
saving throw. The spellcaster has no control over 
any aspect of the dream except his own actions. 

When he detects the intrusion, the dreamer can 
attempt to eject the spellcaster from the dream. 
The contest is a matter of will, and the spellcaster 
must roll a saving throw vs. spell. As long as the 
spellcaster succeeds, he can remain in the dream; 
if he fails, he awakes and cannot return to the 
dream without casting another enter dream spell. 
The dreamer can try to force the spellcaster out 
of the dream once each round. 

The enter dream spell has two main uses. Like 
the Sth-level dream spell, it allows the spellcaster 
to deliver a message to the dreamer. Unless the 


dreamer recognizes the caster as an intruder, or 
unless the caster announces that he is a wizard 
invading the dream, the dreamer perceives the 
message as a genuine dream, 

Alternately, the caster can remain passive and 
simply observes the dream, watching as the 
dreamer’s unconscious mind reveals itself. While 
not as discreet as an ESP spell, enter dream can 
reveal information that the sleeper may not even 
realize when awake. For instance, a man ques- 
tioned about his long-lost brother may truthfully 
answer that the boy ran away from home when 
very young. The man’s dreams, however, may 
reveal that the man saw his father murder his 
brother, yet the memory lies buried in the sub- 
conscious mind, revealed only in dreams, 

The material component of this spell is a one- 
once strip of dreamwillow bark, which the caster 
must steep in hot water and imbibe. 

Notes: Common for Dream mages; uncom- 
mon for enchanters; very rare for others. 


“ey 


Entomb 
(Alteration) 
(Province: Sand) 


Level: 3 

Range: 30 yds. 
Components: V, M 

Casting Time: 3 

Duration: | turn + | rd./level 
Area of Effect: 30-ft. cube 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell captures creatures in its area of 
effect by raising a block of solid stone out of the 
earth to engulf them. The block must be raised 
from natural earth, sand, rock or similar material, 
though it can burst through natural vegetation. 
Each target creature must make a successful sav- 
ing throw vs. Spell or be swallowed by the rock. 
Captured creatures can still breathe and speak, 
but, they cannot break free or move unless they 
can pass through solid stone. Creatures that make 
their saving throws are not enfolded by the rising 
stone and are instead flung out of the area of 
effect. 

This spell is popular among dao slavetakers. 
Because it requires no somatic component, it can 
be used to preserve the secrecy of a slaving mis- 
sion. 

The material component is a cube of stone 
scored with lines on each side. 

Notes: Common in arabian settings; very rare 
elsewhere. 


-aunn eae 


322 


= Erdlu Egg og 


Enveloping Darkness, Nystul’s 
See Nystul’s enveloping darkness. 


Erase 
(Alteration) 
(Geometry) 


Level: 1 

Range: 30 yds. 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: | 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: | scroll or 2 pages 
Saving Throw: Special 


The erase spell removes writings of either 
magical or mundane nature from a scroll or 
from one to two pages of paper, parchment, or 
similar surfaces. It removes explosive runes, 
glyphs of warding, sepia snake sigils, and wiz- 
ard marks, but it does not remove illusory script 
or symbols (see those spells). Nonmagical writ- 
ings are automatically erased if the caster is 
touching them; otherwise, the chance for suc- 
cess is 90%. Magical writings must be touched, 
and are only 30% likely to be erased, plus 5% 
per caster level, to a maximum of 90% (for 
example, 35% for a Ist-level caster, 40% for a 
2nd-level caster, etc.). 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Erasement 
Reversed form, see memory. 


Erdlu Claw 


wht 


(Alteration) 


Duration: 5 rds /level 
Area of Effect: | creature 
Saving Throw: None 


When this spell is cast on a humanoid being, 
its fingernails grow into talons, precisely like the 
claws of the erdlu bird. Once in this state, they do 
damage as Athasian hand razors (S/M: 1d6+1; L: 
1d4+1). The claws do no damage to creatures that 
can be struck only by magical weapons. In gen- 
eral, this spell is memorized by a wizard as a 
weapon of last resort, if an enemy actually closes 
for melee. There are unconfirmed rumors that the 
spell is used in the process of enchanting real 
hand razors. 


The spell was developed by elf mages (Pre- 
servers) who belonged to nomad tribes, and it has 
since been adopted by all Athasian magic-using 
races who are both humanoid and do not already 
have clawed hands. 

The material component is a single erdlu claw. 

Notes: Common in the DARK Sun setting; very 
rare elsewhere. 


(Enchantment) 


Level: 5 
Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 2 turns 
Duration: | day 

Area of Effect: 1 egg 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell causes an old erdlu egg filled with 
sand to become a fresh erdlu egg, with contents 
fit to eat. On any other world, the duration would 
be too short to do any practical good, but on 
Athas, the disappearance of the egg’s water will 
not come about until after it has already been 
sweated out of the recipient’s body. Elf nomads 
developed this spell as a means of creating an 
emergency food supply. Once the created food is 
eaten, the shell disappears, so a new shell is 
required for each casting. Thus, possession of 
this spell doubles the number of erdlu eggs any 
tribe has. 

The material component is the old erdlu egg. 

Notes: Uncommon in the Dark SuN setting; 
virtually unknown elsewhere. 


323 


~ Erdiu Hide a 


Erdlu Hide 


whe 


(Alteration) 


Level: 3 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: | rd. 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: None 


The wizards of elf nomad tribes of Athas 
developed this spell to provide an unarmored 
wizard with effective armor when he needs it the 
most. This spell causes the recipient’s skin to 
become as tough as the scaly hide of an erdlu, 
giving the equivalent of scale mail (AC 6). This 
armor adds no weight or encumbrance to the 
wearer, lasting until successfully dispelled or 
until the wearer sustains cumulative damage 
greater than 8 hit points, plus | hit point per level 
of the caster. A protected wizard can still cast 
spells. The erdlu hide spell is cumulative with 
Dexterity and shield bonuses, but not with any 
other protective spell, such as giant fur or armor. 

The material components for this spell are a 
pair of scales from an erdlu. 

Notes: Uncommon in a DARK SUN setting; vir- 
tually unknown elsewhere. 


Erik’s Quills 
(Evocation) 


Level: 3 

Range: 5 yds./level 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 3 

Duration: 1 to 3 rds. 

Area of Effect: 1 or 2 creatures within 20 ft. 
Saving Throw: Special 


This enchantment allows the caster to cause a 
number of magical quills (resembling porcupine 
quills) to fly from his hands and unerringly strike 
a chosen target. The quills reach their target even 
in a melee, and they seek chinks in armor and 
gaps in clothing when they strike. 

A wizard can conjure 2d4 quills, plus 1 quill 
for every two levels above Sth; thus a 7th-level 
caster can create 2d4+1 quills. The quills can be 
directed at no more than two opponents, who 
must be within 20 feet of each other. 

Each quill inflicts 1 point of damage on the initial 
round. In the second round, a saving throw vs. spell 
is allowed. Success ends the damage; failure means 
damage equal to that of the first round is taken. 


In the third round, another saving throw vs. 
spell is required. Success ends the damage; fail- 
ure means another round of identical damage is 
taken. At the end of the third round, all of the 
quills vanish. 

The enchantment is especially effective against 
spellcasters, who cannot cast spells while suffer- 
ing damage from quills. A shield spell requires 
the caster to make one attack roll for the burst of 
quills aimed at the protected individual. A miss 
means the shield spell stopped all of the quills 
aimed at that individual. 

The material component is a porcupine quill. 

Notes: Uncommon or rare spell in Cerilia, the 
BIRTHRIGHT setting; virtually unknown elsewhere. 


ESP 
(Divination) 
(Mentalism) 


Level; 2 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 2 

Duration: | rd./level 

Area of Effect: 5 yds./level (90 yds. maximum) 
Saving Throw: None 


When an ESP spell is used, the caster is able to 
detect the surface thoughts of any creatures in 
range—except for those of undead and creatures 
without minds (as we know them). The ESP is 
stopped by 2 feet of rock, 2 inches of any metal 
other than lead, or a thin sheet of lead foil. 

The wizard employing the spell is able to probe 
the surface thoughts of one creature per round, get- 
ting simple instinctual thoughts from lower order 
creatures. Probes can continue on the same crea- 
ture from round to round or can move on to other 
creatures. The caster can use the spell to help deter- 
mine if a creature lurks behind a door, for example, 
but the ESP does not always reveal what sort of 
creature it is. If used as part of a program of inter- 
rogation, an intelligent and wary subject receives 
an initial saving throw. Wisdom modifiers always 
apply, with a possible additional bonus up to +4 at 
the DM’s option, If successful, the creature suc- 
cessfully resists and the spell reveals no additional 
information. If the saving throw is failed, the caster 
can learn additional information, according to the 
DM’s ruling. The creature's Wisdom adjustment 
applies, as may additional bonuses up to +4, based 
on the sensitivity of the information sought. 

The material component of this spell is a cop- 
per piece. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


a a aE a a a, Y 


324 


© Ethereal Banishment "a 


ESP — Witch’s 
(Divination) 


Level: 2 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 2 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: 1 creature/rd. 
Saving Throw: None 


This version of ESP requires the caster to 
touch the subject and remain in physical contact a 
full round in order to probe his thoughts. Thus, it 
cannot be used against an unwilling subject 
unless the target is physically restrained or held 
in place. However, a clever caster could disguise 
her intent by approaching the subject in a social 
situation and trying to make the contact look 
incidental; for example, she could take the sub- 
ject’s arm while strolling together, or hold his 
hand while dancing, or some other innocuous 
activity. 

While the spell is in effect, the caster can 
probe the surface thoughts of one creature per 
round, or maintain contact with the same creature 
for several rounds to make a more exhaustive 
search. 

The material component is a pinch of pow- 
dered nightshade. 

Notes: Witches are restricted to this version of 
ESP and cannot learn the standard spell. A 
diviner or gypsy might (rarely) choose this ver- 
sion instead of the standard version if the DM 
allows. (Updated from Dr4GON Magazine.) 


Estate Transference 
(Alteration) 
(Dimension) 


Level: 9 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 10 turns 
Duration: Permanent 

Area of Effect: 2 sq. mi./level 
Saving Throw: None 


This powerful spell allows a caster to transfer a 
large area of land in the Prime Material plane to 
any of the elemental planes. All buildings, 
people, and wildlife within the area of effect are 
also transported. The land forms a pocket of the 
Prime Material plane within the elemental plane. 
The pocket is a sphere with a diameter equal to 
the diameter of the land. The surface of the 


pocket allows creatures to enter or exit the 
pocket, but prevents the elements from entering 
the pocket. 

Inside the pocket, the land is surrounded by air 
of a temperature matching that of the Prime 
Material plane at the moment the land was 
moved. In addition, a source of water is created 

Before the spell is cast, the area to be moved 
must be surrounded by solid markers of material 
from the destination plane. Thus, if a wizard 
wants to move his castle to the Elemental Plane 
of Fire, he must first surround the area with solid 
blocks of matter from the plane, such as hardened 
magma or magically crystallized fire. The blocks 
must be spaced no more than five feet apart and 
can be placed above ground or under the surface 
(at a depth of no more than three feet). 

The wizard must be within the area to be 
moved when the spell is cast. When the land 
moves, a hemispherical crater is left behind in the 
Prime Material Plane. Inside its pocket on the 
destination plane, the land continues its existence 
as if nothing changed, with the exception of occa- 
sional visits from planar creatures. 

Any land that is moved in this manner cannot 
be moved again with this spell. 

The material component (in addition to the 
markers) is the appropriate magical device to 
control elementals of the desired plane (bowl 
commanding water elementals, brazier com- 
manding fire elementals, censer controlling air 
elementals, or stone controlling earth elemen- 
tals). The item must be permanently placed at the 
heart of the area of effect and cannot be used for 
any other purpose, If the device is disturbed in 
any way, the spell immediately fails, allowing the 
energies of the elemental plane to flood into the 
protected area, 

Notes: Uncommon (ToM). 


Ethereal Banishment—Old Empire 
(Alteration) 
(Dimension) 


Level: 5 

Range: 10 yds./level 
Components: V 

Casting Time: | 
Duration: | turn/level 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell temporarily sends one creature into 
the Ethereal plane. The subject is trapped in the 
Ethereal plane for the duration of the spell unless 


a a 


325 


0 EEEEEeee——e A 


released by the caster; any other attempt to return 
to the Prime Material plane will fail, except by the 
intervention of Powers or a wish spell. At the end 
of the spell, the creature is returned to the plane it 
was banished from. An unwilling creature receives 
a saving throw vs. spell to avoid the effect. 

The material component for this spell is a one- 
eighth of a vial of oil of etherealness, or oil from 
a creature native to the Ethereal plane. 

Notes: Uncommon in the Old Empire; other- 
wise very rare. As a FORGOTTEN REALMS Old 
Empire spell, initial exposure requires a mentor 
or a read Southern magic spell. 


Etherealness 
Aka ethereal banishment (Old Empire spell). 


FF aL 


Etherealness 
(Alteration) 
(Dimension) 


Level: 6 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: | 

Duration: 1 hr./level 

Area of Effect: Creature(s) touched 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


By means of this spell, the wizard and up to six 
other creatures joined by linked hands become 
ethereal (along with their equipment). While 
ethereal, the group need not stay together. The 
group’s presence can be detected only by detect 
phase, true seeing, or similar spells and effects. 
No physical, or magical attack can affect them, 
unless the assailant is ethereal as well (although 
some monsters, such as the basilisk, have gaze 
weapons whose power extends into the Ethereal 
Plane). The spell recipients are actually in the 
Border Ethereal and can still perceive their physi- 
cal surroundings, but the world appears gray, 
misty, and indistinct to them. Note that as ethe- 
real creatures here can perceive the physical 
world, an individual could scout out his surround- 
ings or make good an escape from the safety of 
the Border Ethereal. 

The wizard and his companions can remain in 
the Border Ethereal for up to one hour per level; 
when the spell expires, they return to normal 
existence, although the wizard can choose to 
end the spell before its full duration. The wizard 
also has the option of moving himself or the 
group from the Border Ethereal into the Deep 
Ethereal, in which case they remain ethereal 
when the spell ends, He will have to use this 
spell again or find another way back in order to 
return to the home plane. 

The wizard can use etherealness to banish an 
unwilling subject. He must make a successful 
attack roll in order to touch him, and the subject 
receives a saving throw vs. spell to negate the 
effect. An unwilling subject automatically 
remains in the Border Ethereal for an amount of 
time specified by the wizard at the time of the 
casting, but no more than one hour per caster 
level. When used like this, etherealness does not 
affect the caster, only the subject. 

Notes: Uncommon for dimensionists; other- 
wise very rare (PO:SM). 


Evaporate Fluid — Witch 
(Alteration) 


(Air, Alchemy) 


Level: 6 

Range: 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 6 

Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: 50-ft. cube 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell causes any mass of exposed liquid 
designated by the caster—within the spell’s vol- 


7 T IT aia aaa: 


326 


~ Evard’s Black Tentacles cr 


ume limit—to sublimate into the atmosphere. 
Water, acid, blood, oil, chemical solutions, poi- 
son, potions, or even molten rock or metal can be 
transformed into harmless steam or vapor. Even 
if the substance would normally remain danger- 
ous as a vapor or gas, the evaporate fluid spell 
renders it inert and completely safe; dangerous 
temperatures or toxic properties are dissipated. 
The caster can affect a volume up to a 50-foot 
cube or its equivalent. 

The fluid evaporates from the entire surface, 
lowering the level of the entire body of water at 
once. This spell does not allow the caster to cre- 
ate a passage or selectively reveal a submerged 
object. In large bodies of water, the wizard’s 
efforts may produce negligible or unnoticeable 
results. 

The evaporate fluid spell can be focused to 
attack a single creature with an aqueous or liquid 
body, such as a water weird, a slime, an ooze, and 
similar monsters. The creature is allowed a saving 
throw vs. spell to ignore the effects, but if it fails 
it suffers 10d6 points of damage. Such creatures 
are likely to flee. 

The material component is a bit of salt. 

Notes: Common for witches; rare for others. 


Evard’s Black Tentacles 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 
(Shadow) 


Level: 4 

Range: 30 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: | rd. 

Duration: 1 hr/level 

Area of Effect: 30 sq. ft-/level 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell creates many rubbery, black tenta- 
cles in the area of effect. These waving members 
seem to spring forth from the earth, floor, or 
whatever surface is underfoot—including water. 
Each tentacle is 10 feet long, AC 4, and requires 
as many points of damage to destroy as the level 
of the wizard who cast the spell. There are 1d4 
such tentacles, plus one per experience level of 
the spellcaster. 

Any creature within range of the writhing ten- 
tacles is subject to attack as decermined by the 
DM. The target of a tentacle attack must roll a 
saving throw vs. spell. If this succeeds, the sub- 
ject suffers 1d4 points of damage from contact 
with the tentacle; the tentacle is then destroyed. 
Failure to save indicates that the damage inflicted 
is 2d4 points, the ebon member is wrapped 


~ Evasion, Elminster’s = 


around its subject, and damage will be 3d4 points 
on the second and all succeeding rounds. Since 
these tentacles have no intelligence to guide 
them, there is the possibility that they entwine 
any object—a tree, post, pillar, even the wizard 
himself—or continue to squeeze a dead oppo- 
nent. A grasping hold established by a tentacle 
remains until the tentacle is destroyed by some 
form of attack or until it disappears at the end of 
the spell’s duration. 

The component for this spell is a piece of ten- 
tacle from a giant octopus or giant squid. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Evasion, Elminster’s 
See Elminster's evasion. 


Everfire 
Lost spell. Supposedly from DUNGEON* Magazine, 
no trace of this spell was found while this book 
was being prepared. A reasonable substitution is 
the firebrand spell.) 


Everlasting Fire 
(Evocation) 
(Fire) 


Level: 4 

Range: 5 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: Permanent 

Area of Effect: 1 object or construct 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell creates a very small gate to the Ele- 
mental Plane of Fire, calling through flame about 
equal to that on a torch. The flame is completely 
normal in all ways, except that since it comes 
from the Elemental Plane of Fire, it needs no fuel 
and continues to burn under any circumstance— 
without air, underwater, when covered with sand, 
etc. The flame lights any flammables that touch 
it, and it never goes out unless a dispel magic 
spell (or a stronger spell, like limited wish) is 
used to extinguish it. 

The everlasting fire spell can be cast ona 
mobile or stationary object, but it burns anything 
flammable. The spell cannot be placed on any 
type of creature except a magical construct. Most 
casters place everlasting fire on an object made 
of stone or sturdy metal. 

This spell can be used to make a magical item 
in the same manner as continual light can be 
placed on a rod. Such an “everburning torch” 
must be made of some nonflammable material. In 


order for the item to be carried safely, some insu- 
lation should be used. A Daltim's proof against 
fire spell (described elsewhere) is a good way to 
make it possible to carry the “everburning torch.” 

The material components for this spell are a bit 
of wood soaked in lamp oil; the material is con- 
sumed during casting. 

Notes: Rare spell. Known to be in Daltim'’s 
Tome of Fire. 


Everpresent Record 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 


Level: 4 

Range: 15 ft. 
Components: S, M 
Casting Time: 5 
Duration: | day/level 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: None 


The everpresent record spell resembles the 1st- 
level wizard spell sorcerous scribe, except that 
the wizard can cast it on another; a magical quill 
pen appears beside the caster and begins writing 
all the subject says. Once the spell is cast, the 
subject can travel any distance away from the 
quill and it will continue to transcribe. Only a 
successful dispel magic, limited wish, or wish 
spell will halt the writing. 

Vain wizards use this spell on themselves to 
record all their words for posterity. A more useful 
application, however, is to cast it covertly on an 
enemy to learn secret information. The enchant- 
ment makes ordinary ink on the record perma- 
nent and the parchment extremely resistant to 
damage (+8 bonus to all saving throws). 

This spell can be costly. The wizard must pro- 
vide 100 sheets of parchment and a bottle of ink 
for each day the spell will last. 

Notes: Uncommon for conjurers; rare for 
others. 


~ Evolve a 


Everwatching Skull 
(Abjuration, Ilusion/Phantasm) 


Level: 2 

Range: 20 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: 1 turn/level 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell, also known as the curse of the grin- 
ning skull, creates the illusory image of a grin- 
ning human skull with twinkling eyes; it is 
visible to all, It floats at the shoulder of the vic- 
tim, looking at him and seeming to react to his 
actions, It moves to always gaze into his eyes, 
responding to head and eye movements, From 
time to time, it moves its jawbone in a soundless, 
laughing motion. 

This image is nothing more than a nuisance. It 
can serve to scare off a known thief, mark a being so 
that he can easily be followed through crowds, or 
anger a wizard into wasting destructive spells on it. 

A grinning skull reflects all dispel magic spells 
back upon the caster. It is not affected by attacks 
or spells that deal physical damage, An antimagic 
shell or any related spell of 4th level or higher 
(such as a minor globe of invulnerability) will 
destroy it. 

When the spell is cast, the target creature and 
the caster each roll 1d20 and add their level to the 
result. If the caster’s total is higher, the skull 
appears—but if the victim’s total is greater, the 
spell is lost, and a distorted skull appears only 
momentarily, flickers, and is gone. 

The spell’s material components are a piece of 
bone and a spark or flame. 

Notes: Very rare spell. (Updated from DRAGON 
Magazine.) 


Evolve 
(Necromancy) 


Level; 8 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 animal 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


With this spell, a wizard can cause a normal 
animal to evolve and change into an intelligent, 
basically humanoid lifeform. By using evolve on 
multiple specimens and exerting patience, a wiz- 


ard can potentially create an entire race of servant 
creatures. 

The creature to be affected must be a normal, 
nonmagical animal. Small creatures are usually 
the target of the spell, but a normal animal of any 
size can be used. While mammals are the best 
subjects, the spell can be successfully performed 
on all sorts of creatures, including such diverse 
animals as reptiles and insects. The spell does not 
work on plants. The animal receives a normal 
saving throw based on its Hit Dice to avoid the 
effects of the spell; the saving throw is adjusted 
according to the creature’s life order, as summa- 
rized on the table. 


Life Order Adjustment 
Mammal 0 
Bird +1 
Reptile +2 
Amphibian +3 
Fish +4 
Arthropod +5 
Other +6 


If the animal makes its saving throw, nothing 
happens, but nothing prevents the wizard from 
trying again. If the creature fails its saving throw, 
the animal begins to change; the exact change is 
left largely to the DM to determine, with the 
input of the player of the spellcaster. 

First, the creature grows or shrinks, approach- 
ing man-size. 

Second, the creature approaches a human 
appearance. An animal with four limbs becomes 
one with two arms and two legs; one with a dif- 
ferent number of limbs might have more arms, or 
in certain cases, more legs. A legless animal sub- 
jected to the spell might grow limbs, but instead 
might simply acquire a more upright appearance, 
If the resulting creature has hands, these are basi- 
cally human in appearance; the creature’s face 
might also approach a human countenance, to 
some extent. A creature without hands develops 
some way to manipulate objects. 

Third, the creature acquires an average Intelli- 
gence (8-10) and the ability to generate lan- 
guage. The being does not necessarily know 
anything, but has the ability to learn (some have 
the ability to communicate in the language of 
their creator; this seems to happen randomly). 

Fourth, the creature becomes a being with 1d3 
Hit Dice (depending mostly on its size and dispo- 
sition). As with the change in size, the creature 
approaches human norm: a creature less than | 
HD becomes a | HD creature, while one with 
more than | HD is reduced to 2 or 3 HD. A crea- 


D A a a RT en ee Eee 


329 


Evolve 


ture that starts with 1 HD might remain at that 
level, or might increase to 2 HD. 

The creature's other statistics—such as 
Armor Class, movement rate, number of 
attacks, and damage—are dependent on the 
exact type of creature in question, its final size, 
and any other factors the DM includes. In gen- 
eral, these statistics gravitate toward human 
norms, though natural attacks should carry 
through. For example, a spider subjected to the 
evolve spell might have a poisonous bite attack 
and the ability to make and move through webs; 
a dog used for the spell might have a bite attack 
and highly developed senses of hearing and 
smell; an evolved frog could hop, but must stay 
moist. 

The evolved creature should not have magical 
abilities of any kind, nor should it typically 
advance in any character classes. As a general 
guideline, refer to the numerous humanoid or 
near-humanoid monsters found in the 
Monstrous MANUAL™ accessory (see: aarakocra, 
bullywug, crabman, ettercap, gnoll, grippli, 
kenku, kuo-toa, lizard man, locathah, manscor- 
pion, sahuagin, tabaxi, tako, and thri-kreen). An 
evolved creature might develop unusual powers 
or abilities, but the DM should adjudicate the 
situations carefully. 

The evolution of the subject takes place over a 
full day, beginning when the wizard is done cast- 
ing the spell. During this time, it is wise to keep 
the creature in a secluded place, where it cannot 
harm itself, and where it can be observed, or pos- 
sibly even comforted as it goes through such 
great changes. 

The creature’s overall personality is affected 
greatly by this formative period, and while there 
are no guarantees as to its disposition, it is more 
likely to appreciate or admire an individual who 
at least appears to be caring and nurturing. 

When the day of evolution is over, the creature 
is fully functional, able to survive and learn. An 
evolved creature can likely breed with others of 
its kind, allowing the new species to proliferate. 
The change cannot be reversed once completed 
by any magic short of a full wish. 

Besides the subject animal, certain material 
components are needed: a bit of organic material 
from the caster (such as hair or blood), a pearl 
worth at least 500 gp, and a miniature tool of any 
kind. The animal changes radically and the com- 
ponents are consumed during casting. 

Notes: Rare spell. 


v 
e 
bd j 
f 
r 
U 
r 
fo 
-4 


N Expeditious Retreat 4 


Exalted Eye 
(Alteration) 
(Mentalism) 


Level: 7 

Range: Special 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 3 
Duration: 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This is a much more powerful form of the wiz- 
ard eye spell. By casting this spell, the wizard 
can view anywhere within a 10 square mile area 
per level of the caster. For example, a 10th-level 
wizard can view within a 100 square mile area. 
The exalted eye moves one mile per round, half 
that if it is searching for something, and every- 
thing in view of the eye is subject to the spell’s 
automatic clairaudience and clairvoyance abili- 
ties. Further, the caster need not concentrate to 
use the exalted eye; he can perform other duties, 
rest, or cast other spells. 

The exalted eye cannot be seen by others, but a 
detect magic spell will show its location. A suc- 
cessful dispel magic will end the spell. 

The eye can move in any direction and, unlike 
a wizard eye, it can pass through solid objects, 
including living creatures. The eye also can be 
used in conjunction with a crystal ball, giving the 
caster a much greater range. The caster uses the 
crystal ball to observe an area, and then casts the 
eye through the ball to whatever range the caster’s 
level allows the eye to wander. 

The exalted eye is in some respects an exten- 
sion of the caster’s mind. Therefore, if the caster 
has the ability to communicate telepathically, he 
can do so through the eye. 

The material component is an eyelash from the 
caster, 

Notes: Very rare spell. 


Exchange 
Aka exchange wounds. 


Exchange Wounds 
(Necromancy) 


Level: 8 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 5 rds. 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 2 creatures 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell is similar to the empathic wound 
tranfer spell, except that it allows the caster to 
transfer a hit point disability (of up to 2 hit points 
per level of the caster) between any two crea- 
tures, excluding the caster. The wizard must be 
able to the grasp both the creature with the dis- 
ability and the creature about to receive it without 
having to make attack rolls, so the two beings 
involved must either be willing to undergo the 
spell or else be sleeping or unconscious, 

The recipient of the disability is entitled to a 
saving throw vs. spell if unwilling. If the saving 
throw succeeds, the exchange is negated and 
nothing further happens. 

If the recipient fails the saving throw, the dis- 
ability passes through the wizard, inflicting him 
for an instant. If such a wound would normally 
place the wizard below zero hit points, it immedi- 
ately does so, and the spell ceases; the wounded 
creature is healed and the second (recipient) is 
unharmed. 

The material components for the spell are hair 
and blood from both creatures, two newt eyes, 
two wolf teeth (each from a different animal), and 
for a ruby (worth at least 5,000 gp), which is 
shattered as the disability passes through the 
caster, 

Notes: Restricted to necromancets; rare 


Excruciating Screen, Otiluke’s 
See Otiluke’s excruciating screen. 


Expeditious Fire Extinguisher, Nystul’s 
See Nystul’s expeditious fire extinguisher. 


Expeditious Retreat 
(Alteration) 


Casting Time: | 

Duration: 3 rds, + 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


When cast, the expeditious retreat spell pro- 
vides the wizard with an amazing fleetness of 
foot, enabling him to run in great leaps and 
bounds. The caster’s movement rate is tripled for 
the duration of the spell, so a wizard with a 
movement of 12 would be able to run at a rate of 
36 while the spell was in effect. In addition, the 
wizard can jump up to 5 feet in the air or make a 
15-foot horizontal leap with ease. 

The wizard does not have to move while the 


aa, E 


331 


~ Explosive Runes ra 


spell is in effect, but if he moves at all, his unnat- 
ural speed and bounds prevent him from taking 
any other actions except for running—in other 
words, he can’t take a half-move and throw a mis- 
sile, or charge, cast a spell, or do anything else 
except move. 

The wizard cannot increase his movement fur- 
ther by any means, including additional move- 
ment-affecting magical spells or items. 

Kerith, the spell’s creator, was a wizard noted 
for his astounding lack of courage in the face of 
even the most insignificant dangers. He devel- 
oped this spell early in his career to assist in his 
frequent and precipitous withdrawals from com- 
bat. Kerith was noted for his cynical observation 
to a companion: “I don’t have to outrun the troll. 
I just have to outrun you.” 

Notes: Uncommon spell (PO:SM) 


Explosive Runes 
(Alteration) 
(Artifice, Geometry) 


Level: 3 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 3 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 10-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: None or /4 


By tracing these mystic runes upon a book, 
map, scroll, or similar object bearing written 
information, the wizard prevents unauthorized 
persons from reading his material. The explosive 
runes are difficult to detect: 5% chance per level 
of magic-use of the reader; thieves have only a 
5% chance. Trap detection by spell or magical 
device always finds these runes. 

When read, the explosive runes detonate, 
delivering 6d4+6 points of damage to the reader, 
who gets no saving throw. A like amount, or half 
that if saving throws are made, is suffered by 
each creature within the blast radius. The wizard 
who cast the spell, as well as any he instructs, can 
read the protected writing without triggering the 
runes. Likewise, the wizard can remove the runes 
whenever desired. Others can remove them only 
with a successful dispel magic or erase spell. 
Explosive runes otherwise last until the spell is 
triggered. The item upon which the runes are 
placed is destroyed when the explosion takes 
place, unless it is not normally subject to destruc- 
tion by magical fire (see the item saving throws 
in Chapter 6 of the DUNGEON MASTER Guide). 

Note: Common spell (PHB). 


Extend Fear 
Reversed form, see focus fear. 


Extension I 
(Alteration) 


Level: 4 

Range: 0 

Components: V 
Casting Time: 2 
Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


By use of an extension I spell, the wizard pro- 
longs the duration of a previously cast Ist-, 2nd-, 
or 3rd-level spell by 50%. Thus, a levitation spell 
can be made to function 15 minutes/level, a hold 
person spell made to work for three rounds/level, 
etc. Naturally, the spell affects only spells that have 
durations. This spell must be cast immediately 
after the spell to be extended, either by the original 
caster or another wizard. If a complete round or 
more elapses, the extension fails and is wasted. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Extension H 
(Alteration) 


Level: 5 

Range: 0 

Components: V 
Casting Time: 4 
Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell is the same as the extension I spell, 
except it extends the duration of Ist-through 4th- 
level spells by 50%. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Extension MI 
(Alteration) 


Level: 6 

Range: 0 

Components: V 
Casting Time: 6 
Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell is the same as the extension I spell, 
except that it will extend Ist- through 3rd-level 
spells to double duration and will extend the 


-nG a 


332 


N Eye of Mystra rd 


duration of 4th- or 5th-leve] spells by 50%. 
Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Exterminate 
(Necromancy) 


Level: | 

Range: 5 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 

Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: 1 cu. ft./level 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell instantaneously snuffs out the life 
forces of small rodents and vermin in the area of 
effect (1 cubic foot per level), including such nor- 
mal pests as flies, mice, beetles, rats, spiders, and 
the like. Only creatures with up to 3 hit points per 
level of the caster (9 hit points maximum) and 
animal intelligence or less can be affected. 

More powerful wizards can affect bigger pests, 
including large spiders, stirges, poisonous snakes, 
and giant or huge centipedes. If the targeted crea- 
tures are extremely small (1 hit point or less), an 
area up to | cubic foot per level can be cleansed of 
pests, to a maximum of 10 cubic feet. One larger 
creature per level can be killed, up to 10 creatures 
maximum. Familiars are immune to this spell. 

This spell is well suited to indoor or outdoor 
applications and is a favorite among necro- 
mancers who live among pestilence. Cruel wiz- 
ards have been known to exterminate benign 
animals (and sometimes others’ pets) with the 
spell. The somatic gesture is a pointed finger, 
while the caster verbalizes a low zzzt sound. 

The material components are a pinch of laven- 
der and dried garlic. 

Notes: Restricted to necromancers; common. 


Eye in the Sky, Darsson’s 
See Darsson’s eye in the sky. 


Eye of Artifice 
See seven-eyes. 


Eye of Mystra 
(Alteration, Invocation) 


Level: 9 

Range: 10 ft./level 
Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 9 

Duration: 1 rd. 

Area of Effect: 1 being or item 
Saving Throw: None 


sw Eye of Power a 


This spell can be used only by true servants of 
Mystra. All others who cast it only see a floating, 
feminine eye appear. The eye winks mockingly at 
them and then vanishes. 

An eye of Mystra appears as an all-knowing, 
beautiful human orb about the size of the caster’s 
head. Its pupil is a very dark blue, and its lashes 
are long and black. It bends its gaze on a single 
being or item chosen by the caster, and a visible 
ray of cold blue light as large as the eye, and as 
long as is necessary, leaps out from it. 

The ray never misses, and when it falls on the 
chosen item or being, all magic is removed from 
that target—including memorized spells and 
enchantments that have not taken effect yet or are 
long term. Magical aging and longevity are both 
reversed, and any magical disguises or 
shapechanges are stripped away. Healing, neu- 
tralize poison magic, and the like that occurred in 
the past are unaffected. Psionics are also unaf- 
fected by this spell, as are other items or beings 
the ray may pass over or touch on. Only the cho- 
sen target is “disenchanted.” 

This spell does not remove spellcasting ability 
from any creature, though its draining effect on 
magical items is permanent. Magical artifacts are 
immune, or partially immune, to the effects of the 


An eye of Mystra fails when used against a 
being who is one of the Chosen of Mystra. If the 
caster of an eye of Mystra is forced to use the 
spell under compulsion, its effect is only the 
mocking wink. 

Notes: Restricted to true servants of Mystra 
(the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting goddess of 
magic)—the Seven Sisters, Elminster, and a few 
others; very rare. 


_ Eye of Power 
(Alteration, Evocation) 


Level: 9 

Range: 10 ft./level 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: | turn 
Duration: | rd./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell enables the caster to create a wizard 
eye that is akin in all respects to the effect of the 
4th-level wizard spell of the same name, except 
that it can appear anywhere, at any distance from 
the caster in the spell range. It is a visible, flying 
eyeball, and spells can be cast through it. 

In other words, the caster can work spells in 


the usual way, but elect to have them emitted 
silently from the eye, as if the eye was one of the 
caster’s hands. Saving throws against these mag- 
ics are permitted if the spells normally allow sav- 
ing throws. 

The caster need not concentrate on the eye to 
maintain its existence, but must do so to move it. 
Only one spell per round can be cast through the 
eye, and the eye halts during the casting. Only 
spells of 7th level or less can be cast through an 
eye of power. More powerful spells fail, simulta- 
neously causing the eye to collapse. No being 
other than the creator of an eye of power can cast 
spells through it. 

If the eye is destroyed by damage, the spell 
ends early. 

Notes: Restricted to the Seven Sisters, their 
apprentices, and select Harpers; very rare. 


Eye of Stone 


See seven-eyes. 


Eye of the Eagle, Tenser’s 
See Tenser's eye of the eagle. 


Eye of the Ma 
Eye of the Mind 
ye of the Soul 
Eye of the Sword 
See seven-eyes. 


Eye of the Tiger, Tenser’s 
See Tenser’s eye of the tiger. 


Eye of Venom 
See seven-eyes. 


Eye-Shield — Dragon Knight 
(Invocation/Evocation) 


Level: 3 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 3 

Duration: | hr./level 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: none 


This spell causes the subject’s eyes to be pro- 
tected from all dazzling conditions and targeted 
magical effects that impair vision, although there 
is no tangible barrier before the creature’s eyes. 


334 


+ Eyefire ac 


An individual protected by this spell suffers no 
penalties to vision or attack rolls due to glare 
from the sun or from spells such as blindness or a 
darkness spell cast to blind. It does not allow nor- 
mal vision in areas of magical darkness nor does 
it counter the effects of dim lighting or natural 


Notes: Restricted to Dragon Knights of Krynn 
(in the DRAGONLANCE setting) and those trained 
by them; common. 


Eyebite 
(Enchantment/Charm, [lusion/Phantasm) 
(Mentalism) 

Level: 6 

Range: 20 yds, 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 6 
Duration: | rd./3 levels 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Special 


An eyebite spell enables the caster to merely 
meet the gaze of a creature and speak a single 
word to cause an effect. This gaze attack is in 
addition to any other attacks allowed to the wiz- 
ard. The wizard selects one of four possible gaze 
attacks at the time the spell is cast, and this attack 
cannot be changed. For example, a | 2th-level 
caster who chose fear would have four opportuni- 
ties to make gaze attacks causing fear, one for 
each round of the spell’s duration. Any gaze 
attack is negated by a successful saving throw vs. 
spell, with Wisdom adjustments. The four effects 
of the spell are as follows; 

Charm: The wizard can charm a single person 
or monster by gaze and by uttering a single word. 
The effect is to make the charmed subject 
absolutely loyal and docile to the caster, even to 
the point of personal danger. It is otherwise the 
same as a charm monster spell. All creatures 
other than humans, demihumans, and humanoids 
save with +2 bonuses. 

Fear: The wizard can cause fear by gaze and 
by speaking a single word. The subject flees in 
blind terror for 1d4 rounds. After this, the crea- 
ture refuses to face the caster and cowers or 
bolts for the nearest cover if subsequently con- 
fronted by the caster (50% chance of either). 
The latter effect lasts one turn per caster level. 
This attack can be negated by spells that counter 
fear. 

Sicken: This power enables the caster to merely 
gaze, speak, a word, and cause sudden pain and 
fever to sweep over the subject's body. Creatures 


with ability scores function at half effectiveness; 
others inflict only one-half damage with physical 
attacks. Movement is at one-half normal rate. The 
subject remains stricken for one turn per level of 
the caster, after which all abilities return at the 
rate of one point per turn of complete rest or one 
point per hour of moderate activity. The effects 
cannot be negated by a cure disease or heal spell, 
but a remove curse or successful dispel magic 
spell is effective. Creatures other than humans, 
demihumans, and humanoids save with +2 
bonuses versus this attack. 

Sleep: The wizard can cause any individual 
to fall into a comatose slumber by means of a 
gaze and a single word, unless the subject suc- 
cessfully rolls its saving throw vs. spell. Crea- 
tures normally subject to a Ist-level sleep spell 
save with a —2 penalty. An affected creature 
must be shaken or otherwise shocked back to 
consciousness. 

In all cases, the gaze attack has a speed factor 
of 1. This spell does not affect undead of any 
type, or extend beyond the plane occupied by the 
caster. Note that the caster is subject to the effects 
of his reflected gaze and is allowed any applica- 
ble saving throw. In the case of a reflected charm 
gaze, the caster is paralyzed until it wears off or 
is countered. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Eyefire 
(Evocation) 


Level: 5 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: | rd./3 levels 

Area of Effect: 1 creature/round within 
20 ft. + 5 ft./level 

Saving Throw: 4 


This dramatic spell causes the caster’s eyes to 
glow a fearsome, bright emerald green. The 
round of casting, the caster’s entire countenance 
takes on such a frightening aspect that every 
creature with less than 4 Hit Dice or levels must 
pass an immediate morale check or run away in 
terror. 

The next round, the wizard can discharge 
twin bolts of crackling green energy at an oppo- 
nent, who must be within the area of effect (65 
feet at 9th level, 70 feet at 10th, etc.). The attack 
causes 1d8 points of damage per level of the 
caster (save vs. spell for half damage), to a max- 
imum of 15d8. In subsequent rounds, the caster 


a ae SP eg TT Ee EL 


335 


E Eyes of the Undead r 


can change targets and attack within a 90° field 
of vision. 

Spell duration is one round per three levels of 
the caster, to a maximum of five rounds, so a 9th- 
level caster can attack with eyefire twice, a 12th- 
level caster thrice, and so on. Exposed magical 
items carried by those who fail their saving 
throws vs. spell must save vs. magical fire or be 
rendered nonmagical. Normal items are unaf- 
fected. 

Notes: Very rare spell, originally from the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Eyes of the Undead 
(Necromancy) r 
Level: 4 
Range: 30 yds. 


Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: 1 hr./level 

Area of Effect: 1 undead creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell is cast upon any dead or undead 
body of Small size (S) or less. Once cast, a link is 


forged between the necromancer and the cadaver, 
allowing him to see and hear anything that the 
corpse can. Only an unwilling undead creature 
receives a saving throw vs. spell to avoid the 
dweomer. If the undead creature is a willing ser- 
vant of the necromancer, no saving throw is nec- 
essary, and a dead body receives no saving throw. 

Since a dead body is not able to direct its eyes, 
it is unlikely to see much of use unless prepared, 
although it can be an effective listener. An undead 
creature, able to move around, and is a better sub- 
ject for the spell. 

The necromancer cannot control the undead 
creature through this spell, but must rely upon the 
creature’s orders or instincts to provide the appro- 
priate views. The more self-willed and intelligent 
the undead, the better the chance of seeing or 
hearing something useful. 

Although the corpse must be within 30 yards 
of the necromancer when the spell is cast, the 
caster can be up to one mile away and still see 
and hear through the undead creature. In the 
RAVENLOFT setting, the spell ceases to work if the 
caster and undead are in different domains and 
the borders of either domain (or any intervening 
domain) are closed. 

The material components for this spell are an 
eye and an ear of a dead man. Casting this spell is 
cause for a RAVENLOFT powers check. 

Notes: Restricted to necromancers and undead 
spellcasters; uncommon. 


Eyesore, Drenal’s 
See Drenal’s eyesore. 


alam ea aaa 


336 


Fabricate 
(Alteration, Enchantment) 
(Alchemy, Artifice) 


Level: 5 

Range: 5 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: Special 
Duration: Permanent 

Area of Effect: 1 cu. yd./level 
Saving Throw: None 


By means of this spell, the wizard is able to con- 
vert material of one sort into a product that is of the 
same material. Thus, the spellcaster can fabricate a 
wooden bridge from a clump of trees, a rope from a 
patch of hemp, clothes from flax or wool, and so 
forth. Magical or living things cannot be created or 
altered by a fabricate spell. The quality of items 
made by this spell is commensurate with the qual- 
ity of material used as the basis for the new fabrica- 
tion. If the caster works with a mineral, the area of 
effect is reduced by a factor of 27 (1 cubic foot per 
level instead of 1 cubic yard). 

Articles requiring a high degree of craftsman- 
ship (jewelry, swords, glass, crystal, etc.) cannot 
be fabricated unless the wizard otherwise has 
great skill in the appropriate craft. 

Casting requires one full round per cubic yard 
(or foot) of material to be affected by the spell. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Fabricate — Wu Jen 
This 3rd-level spell is the same as the 
Sth-level version, except for a casting 
time of 3. It is restricted to those 
trained in oriental magic; common. 


Fabulous Fireball, Fallion’s 


See Fallion’s fabulous fireball. 


é 


Face 
(Enchantment/Charm, 
Ilusion/Phantasm) 


Level: 3 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 turn 

Duration: 2 turns/level 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: Special 


By means of this spell, the wu jen is able to cre- 
ate the illusion that he is of a higher social level, 
title, office, or position than he actually is. When 


Face-Blur — Ninja 


yy cast, the wu jen decides what particular 
thing is increased—social level, title, or 
“ office. Upon completion of the spell, the 
appropriate status is increased by 1d4 ranks. The 
spell surrounds the wu jen with the appropriate air 
of confidence, aura of power, mannerisms, speech, 
and etiquette appropriate to the rank. 

Upon those unfamiliar with the rank assumed 
the spell has a greater than normal effect. They 
give the wu jen an inordinate amount of respect, 
their encounter reaction rolls are 10% greater 
than that dictated by the assumed rank (or —2 on 
the encounter reactions, Table 59, in the DMG). 
They unhesitatingly believe the wu jen really is a 
member of the assumed position and is quite 
fearsome and powerful. The confidence he radi- 
ates impresses those affected greatly. Those 
familiar with the rank assumed are allowed a sav- 
ing throw vs. spell. If failed, they treat the wu jen 
as if he were of the assumed rank. If successful, 
they begin to notice slight flaws in the behavior 
of the wu jen. After one turn they become suspi- 
cious of the wu jen and after two turns they real- 
ize he is an impostor. Whether they communicate 
this to others and what actions they take depend 
on the situation. Those of higher status are also 
allowed a saving throw vs. spell with the same 
results for success or failure. Of course, they 
never treat the wu jen as an equal. The material 
component for this spell is a drop of honey. 

The reverse of this spell, Jose face, causes the 
victim to become socially graceless. The victim 
must be touched (normal attack roll) but no saving 
throw is allowed. The victim and those with him 
are not immediately aware of any change, but when 
social graces are important the victim somehow 
manages to do the wrong thing to the obvious 
notice of those around him. The exact effect of 
such blunders are adjudicated by the DM, depend- 
ing on the situation and NPCs involved. 

The material component for lose face is a 
small piece of charcoal. 

Notes: Common in oriental settings; very rare 


z 


Face-Blur — Ninja 
(Illusion) 


Level: | 

Range: Touch 

Components: S 

Casting Time: 4 rds. 

Duration: | hr./level 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


337 


p eee a 


The ninja casts this spell on himself or on 
another, willing subject. The spell alters the sub- 
ject's features slightly, making them unremark- 
able—neither handsome nor ugly. The gaze of 
any witness slides right off the features of a crea- 
ture affected by this spell. 

Someone who is keenly and alertly looking at 
the faces of everyone he sees, such as a dedicated 
guard scanning a crowd to find someone who has 
just disappeared into it, gets a saving throw vs. 
spell to avoid its effects. If the observer makes his 
saving throw, he sees the actual features instead of 
the nondescript face. Immunity to the spell lasts the 
length of the spell duration, but the spell itself is 
not dispelled and will work on people who have not 
fully saves against this spell has no idea that a spell 
is in effect; he does not see the false features fade 
away and feels no hint of magic. 

This spell’s success depends on the creature’s 
maintaining a mental attitude of dullness and 
boredom. When a creature deliberately does 
something interesting while wearing this spell— 
if he attacks someone, saves a life, or robs a mer- 
chant—the spell ends and every witness can see 
his true features. This spell can be canceled by a 
dispel magic spell. 

Notes: Restricted to ninja and those trained by 
them; common. 


Facet 
(Alteration) $ $ 
Level: 5 
Range: Touch 
Components: V, M 


Casting Time: 1 turn 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: 1 gem or piece of jewelry 
Saving Throw: Special 


The facet spell increases the value of a gem or 
piece of jewelry by removing flaws and improving 
the quality of the gem. When a wizard successfully 
casts facet upon a gem or item of jewelry set with 
gems, the value of the piece doubles. Thus a wizard 
successfully casting facet on an emerald valued at 
500 gp increases the gem's value to 1,000 gp. The 
gem or piece to be enchanted must succeed in an 
item saving throw vs. crushing blow. 

If the wizard has the gem cutting or appraising 
nonweapon proficiency, the saving throw is at a 
+2 bonus. If this spell is cast on the same item 
more than once, the saving throw receives a —1 
penalty for each successive casting (thus the third 
casting would receive a —2 penalty, etc.). A gem 


or piece of jewelry worth more than 25,000 gp 
cannot be enchanted by the facet spell. 

The spell was developed by a Khinasi wizard- 
merchant of Cerilia (of the BIRTHRIGHT setting). 

The material component is a jeweler’s polish- 
ing cloth, which must be rubbed across the gem 
or jewelry to be enchanted. 

Notes: Common in the BIRTHRIGHT setting; 
otherwise virtually unknown. 


Faerie Sword — Elf 
(Invocation/Evocation) 


Level: 7 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 6 
Duration: 1 rd./2 levels 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell creates a slender, shimmering sword in 
the caster’s hands. The sword gives a single-class 
mage a +4 to hit, and can hit creatures that can be 
hit only by magical weapons. The sword inflicts 4d4 
points of damage against man-sized or smaller 
opponents, and 5d4 points against larger creatures. 

A caster who successfully attacks can elect to 
inflict either damage or a random magical effect 
upon the target. If the caster elects to inflict a 
magical effect, roll d100, add the caster’s level, 
and refer to the table. 


Die Roll Effect 

01-25 No effect; victim takes no damage 

26-50 Target suffers 8d4 points of damage 

51-75 Target suffers 10d4 points of damage 

76-85 Target imprisoned in forcecage 

86-90 Target randomly polymorphed 

91-95 Target must successfully save vs. pet- 
rification or be turned to stone 

96-97 Target randomly teleported d100 yards 

98-99 Target randomly teleported 100 miles 

100+ Target dies; saving throw vs. death 

magic negates this effect 


The material component of this spell is a tiny 
gold or crystal sword (worth at least 250 gp), which 
disappears immediately after the spell is cast. 

Notes: Restricted to elves; rare. 


Faithful Hound, Mordenkainen’s 
See Mordenkainen’s faithful hound. 


Faithful Phantom Defenders, 
Mordenkainen’s 
See Mordenkainen’s faithful phantom defenders. 


a a te anan 


+ False Face. a> 


Faithful Phantom Guardian, 
Mordenkainen’s 
See Mordenkainen’s faithful phantom guardian. 


Faithful Phantom Shield-Maidens, 
Mordenkainen’s 
See Mordenkainen’s faithful phantom shield- 
maidens. 


Falling Wall 
(Evocation) 


Level: 2 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 2 

Duration: 2 rds. 

Area of Effect: 20 x 20 ft. by 4 in. thick 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell enables the caster to create a tempo- 
rary wall of armor plate, which “falls” into place 
from above. The wall is stationary once it strikes 
an immobile surface (floor or ground) and 
remains unmoving, regardless of force directed 
against it, until the spell expires (whereupon it 
melts away). It can withstand anything short of a 
dispel magic or disintegrate spell, or contact with 
prismatic magic of any sort (including the color 
spray spell). Fireballs that strike it will rebound, 
flaming spheres and the like are halted, and so on. 
Magic missiles dodge around it unless it com- 
pletely seals an opening, such as a doorway 
(which is the most common use of the spell). 

A falling wall is lightning-fast. Though it is very 
rare for one to hit a creature or moving object, if 
this occurs the wall strikes for 2d4+12 points of 
damage. More often, the wall slams down in the 
face of an onrushing missile or charging being; 
creatures that strike a falling wall will be stopped 
by it, typically taking 1d6 to 4d6 points of stunning 
damage, depending on how fast they are moving 
and how large they are (faster increases damage, 
larger body size decreases it). A running warrior in 
plate mail usually suffers 2d6 points of damage. 
Only 25% of stunning damage is permanent, the 
rest is temporary, nonlethal damage. 

Once a falling wall is created, the caster is free 
to cast another spell, flee, read a scroll, or per- 
form any other activity. A caster cannot will his 
own wall to vanish; it must be destroyed as noted 
above or expire. 

The material component of this spell is a piece 
of metal that is, or was once, part of armor worn 
into battle. 

Notes; Very rare spell. (Updated from DRAGON 


Magazine.) The damaging effects of this wall 
have been reduced from earlier versions. 


Fallion’s Fabulous Fireball 
(Evocation) 
(Fire) 


Level: 5 

Range: 100 yds. + 10 yds,/level 
Components; V, S, M 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: 5-ft. to 20-ft. radius sphere 
Saving Throw: 4 


The wizard Fallion devised this variation of the 
3rd-level wizard spell fireball for use in close 
quarters or in twisting dungeon passages. It dif- 
fers from the original fireball in two respects: 

First, the area of effect is variable, ranging 
from 5 to 20 ft. radius sphere. This allows the 
caster to use it in cramped areas without fear of 
being engulfed in his own spell. The exact area of 
effect is determined at the instant of casting. 

Second, Fallion 5 fabulous fireball can maneu- 
ver around corners. The fireball can turn 45° for 
every level the spellcaster has attained. The wiz- 
ard specifies the path at the instant of casting. 
The wizard might state that the fireball is to 
travel 50 feet, turn 90 degrees to the right, travel 
20 feet, turn 45 degrees to the left, travel 30 feet 
more, then detonate. 

If the fabulous fireball contacts an object before 
completing its path, it detonates there. Living 
beings caught in the path must individually save vs, 
spell to avoid the spell’s detonation, saving a sec- 
ond time against its effects if the first saving throw 
is failed. The spell duration is instantaneous no 
matter how complex the path is. The maximum 
range is 100 yards plus 10 yards per caster level. 

In all other respects, including damage, mater- 
ial components, and saving throws, this spell is 
identical to the 3rd-level fireball spell. 

Notes: Very rare. Known to be in the Fire-Eye 
Scrolls. (Updated from DraGoN Magazine.) 


False Face 
(Alteration, Necromancy) 


Level: 3 

Range: 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 3 
Duration: | turn/level 
Area of Effect: Caster 
Saving Throw: None 


ee 


339 


= False Tracks cr 


This spell enables a necromancer to copy the 
face of another human, demihuman, or human- 
oid, either living or dead. It has no effect on 
undead. The wizard gains the facial features of 
the chosen individual of either sex, providing the 
subject lies within range and the caster can 
clearly see the face he is trying to emulate. 

The caster does not gain any sensory abilities (or 
disabilities) associated with the new face. For exam- 
ple, if the caster copies a blind man’s face, the wizard 
still retains his or her normal sight. The caster retains 
his or her normal voice, too, as well as height, bodily 

spells and spell-like abilities. 

The false face serves as an effective disguise, 
though it radiates a magical aura of necromancy. 
Spells that detect or banish illusions have no 
effect on this disguise; the false face is not illu- 
sionary. It can be reversed with dispel magic. 

The material components are a small ball of 
natural rubber and a small mirror, both of which 
are consumed in the casting. 

Notes: Restricted to necromancers; uncommon. 


False Tracks 
(Illusion) 


Level: 1 

Range: 0 

Components: S 

Casting Time: | rd. 
Duration: | turn/level 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


D 


For the duration of this spell, the ninja leaves 
tracks appropriate to a common normal animal 
(herd beast, deer, fox, etc.). The ninja chooses the 
species when the spell is cast. His footprints will be 
those of an animal, moving at whatever pace the 
ninja maintains. (If the ninja is running, he leaves 
behind the running footprints of the animal.) If bits 
of the ninja’s clothing become snagged on under- 
brush, they will appear to be bits of animal hide. 
However, if the ninja drops an item of equipment or 
a garment, this spell will not conceal its nature. 

No saving throw is allowed. However, the spell 
can be removed by casting a dispel magic spell. If 
such a spell is cast on any part of the trail the 
ninja has left behind, the entire spell is canceled 
and all tracks revert to normal. 

The effects of this spell are entirely illusory. 

When the spell duration ends, all affected foot- 
prints revert to normal. 

Ninja use this spell to elude pursuers. When 
someone a ninja wishes to ambush is hunting a 
specific type of animal, the ninja will leave tracks 


of that animal for the quarry to follow 
Notes: Restricted to ninja spellcasters and 
those trained by them; common. 


False Vision 
(Divination) 


Level: 5 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: 1d4 rds. + 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: 30-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: None 


When this spell is cast, the wizard is able to 
confound any attempt to scry (by means of either 
a spell or a magical device) any point within the 
area of effect of the spell. To use the spell, he 
must be aware of the scrying attempt, although 
knowledge of the scryer or the scryer’s location is 
not necessary, Upon casting the spell, the caster 
and all he desires within the radius of the spell 
become undetectable to the scrying. Further- 
more, the caster is able to send whatever message 
he desires, including vision and sound, according 
to the medium of the scrying method. To do this, 
the caster must concentrate on the message he is 
sending. Once concentration is broken, no further 
images can be sent, although the caster remains 
undetectable for the duration of the spell. 

The material component for this spell is the 
ground dust of an emerald worth at least 500 gp, 
which is sprinkled into the air when the spell is cast. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Familiar Enhancer 
(Alteration, Enchantment) 


Level: Special 

Range: 10 ft. 

Components; V, S, M 

Casting Time: 72 hrs. 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: The caster’s familiar 
Saving Throw: None 

This series of related enchantments are not 
true spells. Instead, they are special processes 
developed by the wizard and keyed to a type of 
familiar (cat, toad, weasel, etc.). 

The wizard must research the process to 
enhance his type of familiar; each enhancement, 
from I to VIII, is researched as a spell of the next 
higher level (familiar enhancer I is researched as 
a 2nd-level spell, etc.) according to the DMG 
rules for spell research. No enhancer level can be 


a a ia aa nis, 


340 


N Familiar Enhancer r 


skipped: A familiar cannot receive familiar 
enhancer ITI until it has received familiar 
enhancer IT, and so on. Special familiars (imp, 
quasit, etc.) cannot be enhanced. For the purpose 
of the special powers, the spellcasting level of the 
familiar is equal to the level of its wizard. 

As the enhancement of a familiar continues, the 
familiar should develop a personality that seems 
almost human, displaying specific traits, likes, dis- 
likes, opinions, habits, and foibles (DMG Table 70 
may prove useful). Its animal qualities also develop 
as its personality matures. A black cat might 
develop discriminating and expensive tastes in food 
and creature comforts; a crow might become a col- 
lector of gemstones and jewelry; and an otter 
might develop a frolicsome personality combining 
a short attention span for serious matters with a 
love for playful pranks. 

The familiar takes on some of the alignment 
view and attitudes of its wizard, though a leaning 
toward the neutral alignment, a holdover from its 
simple animal origin, will always remain. The 
familiar may tend to become more of an indepen- 
dent NPC as it is enhanced. The DM should care- 
fully consider if relaxing the dependency of the 
familiar on the wizard will improve the campaign 
play. 

Notes: Rare. (Updated from DRAGON Magazine.) 


FAMILIAR ENHANCER I 

The familiar’s intellect improves, rising into 
the Low Intelligence range (4 + 1d3). The famil- 
iar can now think in the wizard's native tongue 
and communicate in words and simple sentences 
with its wizard through their empathic link. 

The familiar gains one special power from 
Table 1. Unless otherwise noted (or obvious), 
familiar spell abilities affect only the familiar. 


FAMILIAR ENHANCER II 

The familiar’s intellect rises into the Average 
Intelligence range (7 + 1d3). The familiar can, 
with patient tutoring by the wizard, learn to com- 
municate in other languages, up to the maximum 
number of languages permitted by its Intelli- 
gence. The acquisition of certain special powers 
may enable a familiar to learn languages from 
someone other than its wizard. 

The familiar gains another special power, as 
determined by a dice roll. Note that stronger 
powers will replace weaker powers of the same 
general type. 


1d10 Special Power 
1-8 One from Table I 
9-0 One from Table II 


FAMILIAR ENHANCER III 

The familiar’s intellect improves to the Very 
Intelligent range (10 + 1d2). The familiar can 
now be tutored to read languages as well as com- 
municate with them through the empathic link 
with its wizard. 

The familiar acquires another special power as 
decided by dice roll. 


1d10 Special Power 
1-6 One from Table I 
7-0 One from Table II 


FAMILIAR ENHANCER IV 

From this point forward, the intelligence of the 
familiar will not improve. One or more special 
powers are obtained with each additional 
enhancer, as noted. 


1d10 Enhancer IV Special Power 
1-3 One from Table I 

48 One from Table I 

9-0 One from Table III 


FAMILIAR ENHANCER V 
1d10 Enhancer V Special Power 
1-2 Two from Table I 
34 Two from Table II 
5-8 One from Table III 
9-0 One from Table IV 
FAMILIAR ENHANCER VI 
1d10 Enhancer VI Special Power 
1-2 Two from Table II 
3-5 One from Table III 


5-8 One from Table IV 
9-0 One from Table V 


FAMILIAR ENHANCER VII 
1d10 Enhancer VII Special Power 
1-3 One from Table III 
47 One from Table [V 
8-0 One from Table V 
FAMILIAR ENHANCER VIII 
1d10 Enhancer VIII Special Power 
1-2 Two from Table III 
3-5 One from Table TV 
6-0 One from Table V 


eS er eae 


341 


Fang, Alustrial’s 
See Alustrial’s fang. 


Fang Fist — Alhoon 
(Alteration, Necromancy) 


Level: 2 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 2 

Duration: | rd./level 

Area of Effect: The caster’s arm 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell temporarily transforms one of the 
caster’s arms, from elbow to fingertips, into a 
snakelike, flexible body ending in a fanged, bit- 
ing mouth. It is retractable, from a minimum of | 
foot in length to a maximum of 15 feet, and can 
lash out with lightning speed, to surprise foes 
who think they're out of reach. 

This “snake-arm” strikes with a bonus of +1 to 
all attack rolls, and bites for 1d8+4 points of dam- 
age. It can’t be combined with poison effects, and 
the caster can use only verbal-component spells 
while it’s in existence. The arm is AC 4, and will 
turn back to the caster’s real arm if dealt more than 
12 points of damage in a single round (the caster 
takes all damage suffered by the arm in the normal 
way). The caster can also return the arm to normal 
at will; however, this ends the spell. 

The snake-arm’s jaws can grip and hold items 
such as wands and ropes. By curling its lips over 
the teeth, it can grasp quite firmly without sink- 
ing its teeth into fragile objects. The snake-arm 
has the same strength as the caster’s real arm. 

Notes: Restricted to Alhoon; common. 


PRS Ea I ee ee ee ee 


343 


~ Fantastic Fencers, Bigby’s cr 


Fantastic Fencers, Bigby’s 
See Bigby’s fantastic fencers. 


Far Reaching I 
(Alteration) 


Level: 3 

Range: 0 

Components: V 

Casting Time: 2 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: Affects next spell cast 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell allows the wizard to extend the range 
of any one Ist- or 2nd-level spell by 50% or any 
one 3rd-level spell by 25%. The spell to be affected 
must be cast on the round immediately following 
the far reaching I spell. If a complete round or 
more elapses, the far reaching 1 is wasted. 

Far reaching I affects only a spell cast by the 
same wizard. It does not affect spells that have 
range of 0 or touch. 

Notes: Uncommon spell (ToM). 


Far Reaching II 
(Alteration) 


Level: 4 

Range: 0 

Components: V 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: Affects next spell cast 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell’s function is identical to the 3rd- 
level far reaching I spell, except that a spell of Ist 
or 2nd level has its range doubled and a spell of 
3rd level has its range increased by 50%. Any 
spell of 4th level has its range extended by 25%. 
The spell to be affected must be cast on the round 
immediately following the far reaching II spell or 
the latter is wasted. A wizard can use this spell 
only to affect his own dweomers. It does not 
affect spells with range 0 or touch. 

Notes: Uncommon spell (70M). 


Far Reaching III 
(Alteration) 


Level: 5 

Range: 0 
Components: V 
Casting Time: 5 
Duration: Special 


Area of Effect: Affects next spell cast 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell operates exactly like the 3rd-level 
far reaching I spell except that the range of any 
spell of levels 1-3 is increased by 150%; the 
range of any 4th- or Sth-level spell is increased 
by 50%. The spell to be affected must be cast on 
the round immediately following the far reaching 
III spell or the latter is wasted. A wizard can use 
this spell only to affect his own dweomers. It 
does not affect spells with range 0 or touch. 

Notes: Uncommon spell (ToM). 


Farscry 
(Alteration, Divination) 
(Mentalist) 


Level: 5 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: 12 rds. + 2 rds./level 
Area of Effect; Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


The caster confers upon the recipient the ability 
to hear, see, speak, and even touch distant beings 
and objects on the same plane. The spell recipi- 
ent’s normal vision and hearing can be used 
through up to three focal objects (though only one 
focal point can be used at a time). The recipient 
can transfer his senses to another focus for the next 
round, at will. The spell requires from one to three 
focal points through which the affected being can 
Jarsery; these must be solid, inorganic objects with 
a smaller surface area than the spell recipient's 
head. The objects must be touched during casting; 
they are not altered by the spell. The focal points 
radiate a magical dweomer. 

By means of the farscry spell, the recipient sees 
and hears things as if he were standing where the 
focal points are, but he cannot “turn” or move a 
focal point to change its view. The spell is not 
impaired if the focal point is moved by another 
being or by other causes. The recipient can speak 
normally through a focal point and touch what the 
focal point touches—in fact, anything that heats or 
otherwise harms a focal point harms the spell 
recipient (though he can end the spell at will). 

The transfer of the recipient’s sense of touch 
through the spell also allows him to activate magi- 
cal items by touching them with the focal point and 
speaking through it. Touch spells can be delivered 
through the focal point, and words of activation 
spoken through it. This spell is often used with an 


344 


= Fascinate cr 


accomplice who holds and directs an item triggered 
by a wizard who has cast this spell on himself. 

While the recipient’s speech is emitted from a 
focal point, other sounds around the recipient are 
not transmitted. Unlike objects enchanted with the 
magic mouth spell, the focal point does not change 
its appearance or exhibit other spell manifestations. 

The spell requires a glass, crystal, or amber 
ring (which must be transparent, not *frosted’) of 
any shape or size, that bears the engraved symbol 
of a human eye. 

Notes: Uncommon for diviners; otherwise 
very rare. Originally from the FORGOTTEN 
REALMS setting. 


Mf 


/ 


Vay M 
YU Ma 


(Alteration) 
(Artifice) 


Level: 1 

Range: Special 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: | 

Duration: 4 rds. + 1 rd/level 
Area of Effect: Field of vision 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell enables the wizard to see anything in 
plain view as if it were closer. The range of this 
spell is limited only by the caster’s line of sight, and 
the subject is seen as if roughly 10 times closer. 

The spell requires is a miniature tube of iron 
set with two quartz crystals, the whole worth not 


less than 50 gp. The device is not consumed in 
the casting. 

Notes: Common for artificers; otherwise very 
rare. (Updated from POLYHEDRON Newszine.) 


Farspeaker 
(Alteration) 
(Artifice) 


Level: 3 

Range; Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 3/box 

Duration: | hr./level 

Area of Effect: | box/level, to 12 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell enchants two or more specially con- 
structed boxes so that words spoken into one will be 
heard from all the others. The boxes must remain 
within one-half mile per level of the caster, to a 
maximum of 5 miles. Boxes taken out of range will 
become functional when brought back into range 

The boxes must be constructed of a sturdy 
ceramic material and filled with a fine silver wire; 
the cost is about 100 gp each. They are roughly 8 
inches square and weigh about two pounds each. 
The boxes are reusable. The wizard must touch 
each box in the course of casting the spell. 

The material component is heart's blood from 
a hydra with at least as many heads as the number 
of boxes to be activated. 

Notes: Common for artificers; otherwise very 
rare. (Updated from POLYHEDRON Newszine.) 


Fascinate 
(Illusion/Phantasm) 
Level: 2 
Range: 30 yds. 


Components; V, S 
Casting Time; 2 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


By means of this spell the illusionist attempts to 
captivate the subject creature’s attention and gain 
its love, friendship, and/or obedience, The spell 
creates an illusion around the spellcaster so that he 
becomes, in the eyes of the subject, a trusted and/or 
desired companion. Unless a saving throw vs. spell 
is successful, the subject will follow the illusionist 
wherever he goes, if possible without undue risk to 
life and safety. Creatures of animal intelligence can 
be affected, but non-intelligent creatures are not 
subject to a fascinate spell. 


" i Oe a ee ee ea 


345 


~ Fatigue — Elf cr 


If the illusionist is able to converse with the fasci- 
nated creature, the subject will obey requests from 
the spellcaster as long as a roll of 3d6 per request 
does not exceed the Appearance (or Comeliness) of 
the illusionist. If these sub-ability scores are not 
used, the Charisma score can be used instead. 

Requests that are obviously against the better 
interests of the creature add +1 to the dice roll, and 
the more hazardous and unreasonable of these 
requests will add from +2 to +6. The spell is shat- 
tered whenever the fascination check is failed, and 
the subject will likely be filled with rage and hate. 

Creatures of normal sort with animal Intelli- 
gence will remain fascinated for only a short time 
(1—4 days), but if the illusionist has been careful to 
treat the subject well, attend to its needs, and feed 
it, there is a 2% chance per point of Appearance 
(or Comeliness) that the subject will willingly 
befriend and follow him or her. Otherwise, the 
creature will attack (if it was not cared for) or 
leave (if it was cared for) when the spell wears off. 

Notes: Restricted to illusionists; uncommon. 


Fatigue — Elf 
(Enchantment/Charm) 


Level: 4 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: 60-ft. cone, 30-ft. diameter at 
base, 5-ft. at caster’s end 

Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell causes all creatures within its cone 
to feel weary and tired. For | round per level of 
the caster, those affected move at half rate, fight 
at —2 to hit and damage, and suffer —2 to their 
morale. Elves and other creatures resistant to 
sleep are likewise resistant to this spell. 

The material component is a small stone. 

Notes: Uncommon for elves, who jealously 
guard it; otherwise very rare. 


Fear 
(Illusion/Phantasm) 
(Shadow) 


Level: 4 

Range: 0 

Components; V, S, M 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: 60-ft. cone, 30-ft. diameter at 
end, 5-ft. at base 

Saving Throw: Neg. 


When a fear spell is cast, the wizard sends forth 
an invisible cone of terror that causes creatures 
within its area of effect to turn away from the caster 
and flee in panic. Affected creatures are likely to 
drop whatever they are holding when struck by the 
spell; the base chance of this is 60% at Ist level (or 
at 1 Hit Die), and each level (or Hit Die) above this 
reduces the probability by 5%. Thus, at 10th level 
there is only a 15% chance, and at 13th level no 
chance, of dropping items. Creatures affected by 
Jear flee at their fastest rate for a number of melee 
rounds equal to the level of experience of the spell- 
caster. Undead and creatures that successfully roll 
their saving throws vs. spell are not affected. 

The material component of this spell is either 
the heart of a hen or a white feather. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Fear Aura 
(Abjuration) 


Level: 5 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 5 

Duration: 2 rds./level 

Area of Effect: 60-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: Special 


While this spell is in effect, the mere sight of 
the caster causes all creatures of two Hit Dice or 
less within the area of effect to flee in terror. 

Creatures with more than two Hit Dice but less 
than the caster’s level must save vs. spell at —2 or be 
immobilized, unable to move or act. Creatures 
immobilized by terror can try to ward off blows, 
suffering a —1 penalty to Armor Class; they cannot 
attack. Each round, an immobilized creature can try 
a new saving throw without penalty to shake off the 
spell’s effect and regain its freedom of action. 

Creatures whose levels or Hit Dice equal or 
exceed the caster’s are unaffected, as are mindless 
creatures or creatures immune to fear. 

The material component is a scrap of cloth 
from a lich’s shroud. 

Notes: Very rare spell. (Updated from 
POLYHEDRON Newszine.) 


Fear Ward 
(Abjuration, Necromancy) 
(Geometry) 


Level: 8 

Range: 0 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: | rd. 
Duration: | turn/level 


Se ee er ee ee 


346 


~ Feather Float cr 


Area of Effect: 5-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: None 


Fear ward creates a mobile aura around the 
caster, making him and allies in the area of effect 
immune to all forms of fear. It also blocks special 
area attacks of the undead: aging, stench, wails, 
spoilage, etc. It has no effect on other attacks, 
including special undead attacks delivered by 
touch. The spell ends if the caster is slain. 

The material components for this spell are spi- 
der fangs and a hair from the head of a ghoul. 

Notes: Restricted to necromancers and abjur- 
ers; uncommon. (This version replaces the one in 


the Complete Wizard s Handbook). 
Fearfire 

(Enchantment/Charm, Illusion) 

(Fire) 

Level: 3 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 4 


Duration: 4 rds. + 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: 30-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell allows a wizard to temporarily charm 
a group of creatures, To cast the spell, the wizard 
must break a piece of wood of any size; once bro- 
ken, a 30-foot radius area around the wizard erupts 
in magical flames and energy that simulates the ret- 
ributive strike of a staff of the magi. 

Up to one creature per two levels of the caster 
within the area of effect (rounded up, with a maxi- 
mum of 5 creatures at 10th level) must make suc- 
cessful saving throws vs. spell to resist the effects; 
those who fail are in awe of the caster and will obey 
the caster’s suggestions out of sheer terror of the 
wizard’s power. Affected creatures treat the wizard 
as their all-powerful master, but effects other than 
duration duplicate those of a charm spell. 

This charm effect can affect elves and creatures 
normally immune to charm spells; subtract 20% 
from such creatures’ normal resistances to charm 
when gauging the effects of this spell. Blind crea- 
tures are immune to this particular spell. 

This spell is one of the flashiest illusions created 
within the history of the Watchful Order of Magists 
and Protectors of Waterdeep. It was granted to them 
by Alcedor Kolat the Enchanter in exchange for 
some rare material components and minor spells. 

Notes: Common for the Watchful Order and 
Alcedor Kolat in the FORGOTTEN REALMs Setting; 
otherwise very rare. 


Feather Fall 
(Alteration) 
(Air) 


Level: | 

Range: 10 yds./level 
Components; V 
Casting Time: | 
Duration: | rd./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


When this spell is cast, the creature(s) or 
object(s) affected immediately assumes the mass 
of a piece of down. The rate of falling is instantly 
changed to a mere 2 feet per second (120 feet per 
round), and no damage is incurred upon landing 
while the spell is in effect. However, when the 
spell duration ceases, a normal rate of fall occurs. 
The spell can be cast upon the wizard or some 
other creature or object up to the maximum range 
and lasts for one round for each level of the wiz- 
ard. The feather fall affects one or more objects 
or creatures in a 10-foot cube, as long as the max- 
imum weight of the creatures or objects does not 
exceed a combined total of 200 pounds plus 200 
pounds per level of the spellcaster. 

For example, a 2nd-level wizard has a range of 
20 yards, a duration of two rounds, and a weight 
limit of 600 pounds when casting this spell. The 
spell works only upon free-falling, flying, or pro- 
pelled objects (such as missiles). It does not 
affect a sword blow or a charging creature. Note 
that the spell can be effectively combined with 
gust of wind and similar spells. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Feather Float 
(Alteration) 
(Water) 


Level: 1 

Range: 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 

Duration: 3 rds, + 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: 10-ft. cube 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell prevents objects or creatures within 
the area of effect from sinking into water or other 
liquids. The caster can affect a total weight of up 
to 200 pounds, plus 100 pounds per level, divided 
between as many objects or creatures as he 
chooses to include in the spell. Affected objects 
and creatures bob to the surface and remain 


5 a a a NN 


347 


Featherfoot — Ninja 


afloat for the duration of the spell, regardless of 
subsequent drifting. 

Anything affected by this spell resists being 
pulled under with a buoyant force equal to its 
normal weight. If cast on an unwilling creature— 
for example, a merman trying to escape the wiz- 
ard by diving—a successful saving throw vs. 
spell negates the effect, though the creature 
counts toward the spell limit. 

The material component is a duck’s feather. 

Notes: Common for Sea mages; uncommon 
for Water mages; otherwise rare. (Updated from 
POLYHEDRON Newszine.) 


Featherfoot — Ninja 
(Alteration) 
Reversible 


Level: 2 

Range: Touch 
Components: S 

Casting Time: 5 rds./level 
Duration: | turn 

Area of Effect: | person 
Saving Throw: None 


The person affected by this spell gains the magi- 
cal ability to move quietly and weightlessly at a 
normal walking pace or slower. If he tries to go any 
faster, the spell is broken and lost. The person 
affected by this spell does not leave footprints, nor 
does he set off weight- or pressure-based traps. 

While the spell is in effect, the person gains 
+30% to his move silently roll. (If without this 
skill, the person has a 30% chance to move 
silently, as a thief, for the duration of the spell.) 

The reverse of this spell, /eadfoot, affects one 
creature. The victim is allowed a saving throw to 
avoid being affected by the spell. The victim of a 
leadfoot spell moves loudly and heavily. Silent 
movement and hiding in shadows is impossible; 
the creature also automatically sets off any pres- 
sure-based traps it steps on (no roll is necessary). 

A leadfooted creature inside the area of a 
silence spell moves normally; he can be heard if 
he fails to make a move silently roll. 

Notes: Restricted to ninja spellcasters and 
those trained by them, 


Featherweaving — Pluma 
(Alteration) 


Level: 1 

Range: 0 
Components: S, M 
Casting Time: Special 


Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


The featherweaving spell is a harmonious exer- 
cise, strongly Maztican in character. The caster 
must sit quietly, in peaceful surroundings. He 
works bits of down into a fine mesh of cotton or 
maguey fiber, and slowly creates a tapestry of bril- 
liant featherwork. The weaving can be worked into 
an abstract design, a symbolized image (a Mayan 
or Incan design is common), or a realistic image. 

The weaving is a relaxing, mentally healthful 
activity. For every hour that the caster spends con- 
centrating on the spell, he can recover | point of 
damage. He also weaves approximately one square 
inch of his ultimate creation during an hour. 

The weaving must be completed before the 
caster advances to the next level of ability. A first- 
level caster must weave a piece 1 square foot in 
size; at second level, 2 sq. ft, and so on. A fifth- 
level pattern weaver can create an item 5 feet by 5 
feet or larger; a truly large weaving can become a 
featherlifter (see create talisman of pluma). 

The material components of the spell are the 
feathers and mesh needed to make the piece. 

Notes: Restricted to practitioners of pluma 
magic (the Maztica setting); common. 


Feathery Flyer, Murdock’s 
See Murdock’s feathery flyer. 


Feeblemind 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
(Mentalism) 


Level: 5 

Range: 10 yds,/level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 5 
Duration: Permanent 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell is used solely against people or crea- 
tures who use magic spells. The feeblemind 
causes the subject’s intellect to degenerate to that 
of a moronic child. The subject remains in this 
state until a heal or wish spell is used to cancel 
the effects. Magic-using beings are very vulnera- 
ble to this spell; thus, their saving throws are 


made with the following adjustments: 
Saving Throw 
Spell Use of Target Adjustment 
Priest +1 
Wizard (human) 4 
Combination or nonhuman -2 


348 


~ Feign Destruction ra 


Wisdom adjustments apply to the saving throw. 

The material component of this spell is a hand- 
ful of clay, crystal, glass, or mineral spheres, 
which disappears when the spell is cast. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Feeling Fingers, Bigby’s 
See Bigby’s feeling fingers. 


Feign Death 


(Necromancy) 


Level: 3 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 1 

Duration: | hr. + | turn/level 
Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


By means of this spell, the caster (or any other 
creature whose levels of experience or Hit Dice 
do not exceed the wizard’s own level) can be put 
into a cataleptic state that is impossible to distin- 
guish from death. Although the person or crea- 
ture affected by the feign death spell can smell, 
hear, and know what is going on, no feeling or 
sight of any sort is possible. Thus, any wounding 
or mistreatment of the body is not felt and no 
reaction occurs; damage is only half normal. In 
addition, paralysis, poison, and energy-level 
drain cannot affect an individual under the influ- 
ence of this spell. Poison injected or otherwise 
introduced into the body takes effect when the 
spell recipient is no longer under the influence of 
this spell, although a saving throw is permitted. 

Note that only a willing individual can be 
affected by a feign death spell. The spelicaster 
can end the spell effects at any time desired, as 
will a successful dispel, but a full round is 
required for bodily functions to begin again. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Feign Destruction 
(Alteration, Illusion/Phantasm) 


Level: 4 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: | 

Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


This unusual spell allows the caster to feign his 
own death or destruction while actually making 


~ Feign Undead A 


good his escape. In order to prepare the spell, the 
wizard must create a replica of his own body. A 
lich can use a pile of dust and bones, but a living 
wizard may find that a preserved corpse or dead 
clone is necessary to supply a believable body. The 
caster can also choose to add duplicates of his own 
clothing and gear in order to dress the body prop- 
erly, but the only metal that can be used in prepar- 
ing the body is unenchanted iron—if the caster 
wants a copy of his golden amulet with the body, 
he’ll have to settle for a replica made from iron. 

After the fake body has been prepared, the 
wizard can cast feign destruction to switch places 
with the body. The caster must be within 1,000 
yards per level of the prepared body at the time 
the spell is cast, and the body must be in the exact 
place and position it was left by the wizard. If the 
duplicate has been undisturbed, the feign destruc- 
tion spell instantly teleports the wizard to the 
body's location while bringing the body to the 
spot of the casting. A brief illusion of the wiz- 
ard’s “death” covers the moment of the exchange. 

A lich using this spell also gains a special misdi- 
rection effect that causes detection magics to indi- 
cate that the lich’s spirit has returned to its phylactery. 
This effect lingers for 1 hour per caster level. 

While the feign destruction spell creates a very 
plausible death scene, especially if the wizard was 
badly wounded at the time, it is not infallible. 
Careful opponents may be able to discern the truth 
with a thorough examination of the “remains.” 

The material component is dirt from a vam- 
pire’s grave, sprinkled over the duplicate body. 

Notes: Uncommon for liches; very rare for 
living characters. 


Feign Undead 


anal” 


(Necromancy) 


Level: 5 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: | turn + 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: Person touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell can make the caster or any willing per- 
son appear to be a zombie. The target looks like a 
zombie, ceases to breathe, and feels no pain or 
emotion. He becomes immune to paralysis, poison, 
or attacks that drain Strength or energy levels. Poi- 
son attacks require a saving throw vs. poison only 
when the spell expires. The immunity to pain does 
not protect the person from damage, but does block 
penalties due to excessive pain. 


The person’s body lookes just like an animated 
skin color changes, and flesh shrinks 

to show the bones. His joints become stiff and his 
movements jerky. When he attacks, it is as a nor- 
mal zombie, striking last in the melee round. The 
person’s attire does not change; the individual 
must attend to the state of his clothes himself. 
Spells that normally affect undead have no influ- 
ence over him, which might reveal his true nature. 

Most creatures seeing the person will assume 
the individual is a zombie. Actual undead won't 
attack the person unless ordered to do so. If the 
individual does something out of character for a 
zombie, then the chances that an intelligent crea- 
ture deduces that he is not what he seems 
increases. On the Demiplane of Dread, casting 
this spell requires a RAVENLOFT powers check. 

The material component for this spell is a bit 
of bone and dirt from a grave. 

Notes: Uncommon in the RAVENLOFT setting; 
otherwise very rare. 


Fellblade 
(Abjuration, Evocation, Necromancy) 


Level: 6 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: | turn/level 

Area of Effect: Creates | blade 
Saving Throw: None 


The casting of this spell brings into being a 
smoky gray, blade-shaped bar of force (up to 4 feet 
in length) in the caster’s grip. A fellblade passes 
into nothingness in an instant if it leaves the 
caster’s hand. (It cannot be given away or sheathed 
to be wielded later.) Its use precludes spellcasting 
of any type. It vanishes instantly if the caster dies, 
becomes unconscious, or is feebleminded. Other- 
wise the blade can be wielded for one strike per 
round (normal attack roll required). 
The fellblade’s strike can have one of three fell 
effects, selected by the caster prior to each attack. 
¢ Damage. The blade can inflict 2d4 points of 
damage, functioning as a weapon able to hit all 
creatures at normal chances. 

¢ Drain. The blade can drain from any creature it 
hits the exact hit points necessary to heal all cur- 
rent damage to the sword-wielder, up to the maxi- 
mum possessed by the target. Each time hit points 
are actually drained, the duration of the spell 
shortens three full turns. 

e Curse. The blade can inflict 1 point of physical 
damage and bestow curse (the reversed form of 


ee 


350 


Fiery Eyes d 


the 4th-level wizard spell remove curse). This 
power can be used only thrice per day by any spell- 
caster, even if more than one fellblade spell is cast. 
The magics used evoking this blade are potent 
and extremely evil. Spellcasters of good or neu- 
tral alignment are at risk if they employ this spell. 
The material components of this spell are a 
drop of the caster’s blood, a piece (any size) of 
cold-wrought iron, and a drop of unholy water. 
Notes: Very rare, usually found in the hands of 
evil wizards. Known to be in The Glandar 5 Gri- 
moire. 


Fiendform 
(Alteration) 


Level: 5 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: 1d4 + 1 turns/2 levels 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


Only wizards of evil alignment can learn this 
spell, which grants its caster the form and abili- 
ties of a randomly selected creature from the 
Lower Planes. When cast, roll d100 on the 
following table to determine the form that the 
wizard takes. (If the DM does not have access to 
the PLANESCAPE MONSTROUS COMPENDIUM®, 
Appendix I, roll randomly for a fiend listed in the 
Monstrous MANUAL Tome.) 


Die Roll Fiend 

01-15 Tanar’ri, alu-fiend 
16-30 Tanar'ri, bar-Igura 
31-40 Tanar'ri, cambion 
41-45 Tanar’ri, succubus 
46-50 Tanar’ri, chasme 
51-55 Tanar’ri, nabassu 
56-60 Tanar’ri, balor 
61-65 Tanar'ri, vrock 
66-75 Yugoloth, dergholoth 
76-85 Yugoloth, mezzoloth 
86-90 Yugoloth, yagnoloth 
91-95 Yugoloth, arcanaloth 
96-00 Yugoloth, nycaloth 


Unlike polymorph or similar spells, fiendform 
grants its caster many abilities of the creature 
rolled, including special attacks and defenses, 
immunities, Armor Class, and hit points, Fiend- 
form does not grant abilities based on Intelli- 
gence, innate magical abilities, magic resistance, 
or the ability to gate in other extraplanar entities. 


The caster also gains the vulnerabilities of the 
form, as determined by the type of fiend rolled. 

After the spell expires, the caster returns to his 
or her original form. Any damage suffered while 
in fiendform remains when the caster takes his 
original form. A caster slain in fiend form must 
save vs. death magic or be slain in normal form 
as well. In that event, the caster reforms as a 
manes in the Abyss and is not restorable by any 
means. Even if the saving throw is successful, the 
caster immediately reverts to normal form with 0 
hit points and lies in a coma for 3d10 hours. 

The material component of the fiendform spell 
is a crystal statuette of a fiend (of any type) worth 
at least 3,000 gp. The statuette shatters when the 
spell ends; it is left behind when the spell is cast 
to focus energy required for the spell. If it is pre- 
maturely shattered the spell ends immediately. 

Notes: Rare; usually found in the hands of evil 
NPC spellcasters. 


Fiery Backlash, Gamelon’s 
See Gamelon’s fiery backlash. 


Fiery Constrictor, Forest’s 
See Forest's fiery constrictor. 


Fiery Cube, Darsson’s 
See Darsson’s fiery cube. 


Fiery Eyes 
(Alteration) 
(Fire) 


* 


Components: VS 
Casting Time: 5 
Duration: 3 rds./level 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell causes the wu jen’s eyes to glow 
with an unnatural fire. So lit, they project beams 
of bright light to a range of 3 feet, clearly illumi- 
nating the area as if lit by a lantern. Further, by 
fixing his sight on one spot for 3 rounds, the wu 
jen can cause combustible materials to burst into 
small, flickering flames if desired. 

Any creature looking at the wu jen must make a 
saving throw vs. spell. If the saving throw is failed, 
the creature hesitates for an instant, fascinated by 
the unearthly light. Creatures so affected automati- 
cally lose the initiative on the next combat round. 

If cast in conjunction with a hypnosis, hypnotic 
pattern, or mass suggestion spell, the victims suf- 


a a 


351 


~ Fiery Fists A 


fer a —l penalty to their saving throws if they are 
looking at the spellcaster. The wu jen can control 
the color of the light emitted from his eyes, rang- 
ing from a reddish glow to brilliant yellow. 
Notes: Common in oriental settings; otherwise 


very rare. 
Fiery Fists 
(Alteration) 
(Province: Flame) e g 
Level: 3 
Range: 0 


Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 2 rds. 
Duration: 2 rds. + 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


When this spell is cast the caster’s hands become 
enshrouded with blazing blue fire, making them 
deadly weapons. If the caster touches an opponent 
(a hit on AC 10, adjusted for the victim’s Dexterity 
and magical protection), the magical fire leaps up 
in a smoky explosion. The fire causes 2-7 points of 
flame damage (1d6+1), and the noxious smoke 
forces the creature struck to make a saving throw 
vs. poison or stand helplessly coughing and chok- 
ing for ld4+1 rounds thereafter (the smoke affects 
only the creature struck), Although the caster has 
two fiery fists, the spell allows only one effective 
attack per round, so roll only once to hit. 

The material component is a lump of coal held 
in the caster’s hand. 

Notes: Uncommon in arabian settings; other- 
wise very rare. 


Fiery Protector, Daltim’s 
See Daltim’s fiery protector. 


Filter 
(Abjuration) 
(Air, Alchemy) 


Level: 2 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, M 

Casting Time: 2 

Duration: | turn/level 

Area of Effect: 10-ft. radius sphere 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell creates an invisible globe of protection 
that filters out all noxious elements from poisonous 
vapors; therefore, a creature protected by filter takes 
no damage and suffers no penalties from poison gas 


of any kind, including those created by spells of 4th 
level or less (such as stinking cloud), The exceptions 
are poisonous vapors created by a creature of 8 Hit 
Dice or more, and dragons’ breath weapons (such as 
the chlorine gas of a green dragon); in these cases, 
the creature protected by filter suffers half damage 
and makes a saving throw for quarter damage. 

The material components for this spell are a 
strand of spider web and a scrap of cotton cloth 
approximately one inch square, 

Notes: Uncommon spell. 


Filth’s Bane 
(Alteration) 


Level: | 

Range: Touch 

Casting Time: | rd. 
Components: V, S 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


Casting filth $ bane completely cleans the body 
of one creature of up to huge size, clothing, and 
any equipment held. The target creature smells 
fresh and clean afterward—as does its breath. Its 
clothing, if any, appears soft, fresh, and pressed; 
however, the spell does not remove old, ground-in 
stains, nor repair rips and holes. 

Notes: Uncommon spell; originally from the 
MYSTARA setting. 


Find Direction — Ninja 


(Divination) Q 


Level: 1 

Range: 0 

Components: S 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


By performing kuji-kiri finger exercises, the 
ninja obtains a momentary understanding of his 
current direction, This can be very helpful when 
he has become lost. 

The ninja understands the actual direction in 
relation to true north, south, east, and west; the 
presence of lodestones will not affect the spell. 
The spell works underground, in darkness, when 
the ninja is upside down, and in any sort of dis- 
orienting circumstance, 

Notes: Restricted to ninja spellcasters and 
those trained by them. 


ea A a 


352 


~ Find Familiar — Dragon i 


Find Familiar 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 
(Song) 

Level: 1 

Range: | mi./level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 2d12 hrs. 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: | familiar 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell enables the caster to attempt to sum- 
mon a familiar to act as his aide and companion. 
Familiars are typically small creatures, such as cats, 
frogs, ferrets, crows, hawks, snakes, owls, ravens, 
toads, weasels, or even mice, A creature acting as a 
familiar can benefit a wizard, conveying its sensory 
powers to its master, conversing with him, and 
serving as a guard/scout/spy as well. A wizard can 
have only one familiar at a time, however, and he 
has no control over what sort of creature answers 
the summoning, if any at all comes. 

The creature is always more intelligent than 
others of its type (typically by 2 or 3 Intelligence 
points), and its bond with the wizard confers 
upon it an exceptionally long life. The wizard 
receives the heightened senses of his familiar, 
which grants the wizard a +1 bonus to all surprise 
die rolls. Normal familiars have 2—4 hit points 
plus 1 hit point per caster level, and an Armor 
Class of 7 (due to size, speed, etc.). 

The wizard has an empathic link with the 
familiar and can issue it mental commands at a 
distance of up to | mile. Note that empathic 
responses from the familiar are generally fairly 
basic—while able to communicate simple 
thoughts, these are often overwhelmed by instinc- 
tual responses. Thus, a ferret familiar spying on a 
band of orcs in the woods might lose its train of 
thought upon sighting a mouse. Certainly its 
communications to its master would be tinged 
with fear of the “big ones” it was spying on! The 
caster cannot see through the familiar’s eyes. 

If separated from the caster, the familiar loses 1 
hit point each day, and dies if reduced to 0 hit 
points. When the familiar is in physical contact 
with its wizard, it gains the wizard’s saving throws 
against special attacks. If a special attack would 
normally cause damage, the familiar suffers no 
damage if the saving throw is successful and half 
damage if the saving throw is failed. If the familiar 
dies, the wizard must successfully roll an immedi- 
ate system shock check or die. Even if he survives 
this check, the wizard loses 1 point from his Con- 
stitution when the familiar dies. 

The power of the conjuration is such that it can 


be attempted but once per year. When the wizard 
decides to find a familiar, he must load a brass bra- 
zier with charcoal. When this is burning well, he 
adds 1,000 gp worth of incense and herbs. The 
spell incantation is then begun and must be contin- 
ued until the familiar comes or the casting time is 
finished. The DM secretly determines all results. 
Note that most familiars are not inherently magical, 
nor does a dispel magic spell send them away. 
Deliberate mistreatment, failure to feed and care 
for the familiar, or continuous unreasonable 
demands have adverse effects on the familiar’s rela- 
tionship with its master. Purposely arranging the 
death of one’s own familiar incurs great disfavor 
from certain powerful entities, with dire results, 


d20 Familiar* Sensory Powers 

1-5 Cat, black Excellent night vision & 
superior hearing 

6-7 Crow Excellent vision 

8-9 Hawk Very superior distance vision 

10-11 Owl Night vision equals human 
daylight vision, superior 
hearing 

12-13 Toad Wide-angle vision 

14-15 Weasel Superior hearing & very 
superior olfactory power 

16-20 No familiar available within 
spell range 


* The DM can substitute other small animals suitable to 
the area. 


Notes: Common spell (PHB), 


Find Familiar — Dragon 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 


Level: 3 

Range: | mi./level 
Components: V 

Casting Time: 1d20 hrs. 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 familiar 
Saving Throw: Special 

This spell is similar to the wizard spell find 
familiar, except that the familiar summoned by 
this spell is a humanoid. Only races of the gobli- 
noid class are eligible to become familiars (i.c., 
kobolds, goblins, orcs, and hobgoblins). 

The humanoid so attracted is unshakably loyal 
to the dragon caster (morale 20), willingly giving 
its life for its master. The dragon and humanoid 
share the ability to communicate telepathically at 
a range of up to five miles, The dragon gains no 
sensory bonuses, and it suffers no damage should 
the humanoid familiar die. 


eee Te 


353 


N) g’ 
5, tS 


SS 
ab w 


i j; I 
ina | | 


Ah 

7 
ve 
f 


~ inabana a 


must be in a calm, relaxed state, well away from any 
distractions, and must continuously repeat a monot- 
onous, hypnotic chant until the familiar appears. It’s 
impossible for the dragon to maintain the chant for 
longer than 20 hours, so if at the end of this period 
no familiar has arrived, the spell fails. A dragon can 
cast this spell no more than once per year; it can 
have no more than one familiar at onë time. 

When the familiar arrives, it is totally loyal to 
its master. The spell is actually a form of charm, 
however; it grants its victim a similar opportunity 
to throw off its effects. On a regular basis, the 
familiar can roll a saving throw vs. spell, this roll 
suffering a penalty of —1 for each three age cate- 
gories of the casting dragon. The frequency of the 
saving throw depends on the race of the familiar. 

A successful saving throw means that the familiar 
has thrown off the effects of the spell and is totally 
free-willed again. (Its first reaction will probably be 
to escape.) If the dragon is within five miles of the 
familiar and awake when it shakes off the influence, 
it will sense the termination of the telepathic bond, 
and thus know that its familiar is free. The dragon’s 
response depends on its alignment and mood. 

The DM can select an appropriate humanoid 
candidate depending on where the dragon is cast- 
ing the spell, or he can use the table provided. 


20 Frequency 
Roll Familiar of save 
1-6 Kobold Every 2 years 
7-11 Goblin Every year 
12-14 Ore Every 9 months 
15-16 Hobgoblin Every 6 months 
17-20 No humanoid available; spell fails. 


Killing a familiar while it is still bound by the 
spell is not acceptable behavior, and will proba- 
bly bring down upon the dragon retribution from 
various celestial powers. (Killing the thing once it 
has shaken the spell is just fine, however.) 

Knowledge of the draconic spell is useless 
toward developing a human, demihuman, or 
humanoid version. The spell is too closely aligned 
to the mental architecture and innate magical 
abilities of dragons to be translated into any form 
usable by nondracoforms. 

Notes: Restricted to dragons; uncommon. 


Find Familiar — Necromancer 
(Summoning) 


Level: 2 
Range: | mi./level 
Components: V, S, M 


Casting Time: 2d6 hrs. 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: | familiar 
Saving Throw: Special 


Except for the types of familiars, the timing of 
the casting (must be under a full moon), and the 
cost for the ingredients (which is doubled to 
2,000 gp), this is much the same as the wizard’s 
find familiar spell. The necromancer uses a spe- 
cial table to determine what, ifany, familiar 
arrives. 

Imps and quasits will not serve a master of less 
than 4th level. If one arrives at the call of a necro- 
mancer of Ist to 3rd level, the creature will 
instead of serving agree to return when the necro- 
mancer is more powerful. In the meantime, the 
necromancer must find another familiar, for 
when the imp or quasit returns, it will kill and eat 
its predecessor to seal the bargain. The necro- 
mancer suffers the usual penalties for the death of 
the first familiar: a system shock survival roll is 
required and a point of Constitution lost. 


1d20 Familiar Sensory Powers 
1-3 black cat Excellent night vision 
& superior hearing 
4-5 _ giant rat Superior olfactory power 
6 Wide-angle vision 
7 g.centipede Very sensitive touch 
8 large spider Wide-angle vision 
9 bat Very superior hearing 
10 raven Excellent vision 
11 imp MONSTROUS MANUAL 
12 quasit MONSTROUS MANUAL 
13-20 No familiar, cannot try again until next 
month. 


An imp or quasit receives no bonus hit points 
based on the caster’s level, nor does it waste away 
if separated from the necromancer. If it is killed, 
the necromancer suffers the standard penalties 
for loss of familiar, 

Notes: Restricted to necromancers, who use 
this instead of the standard find familiar spell. 


Find Person 
(Divination) 


Level: 4 

Range: Infinite 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Components: V, S, M 
Duration: | turn/level 
Area of Effect: 1 person 
Saving Throw: None 


355 


q Find the Path a 


This spell reveals a person’s location as a com- 
pass direction (as well as “up” and “down”) and 
most basic life readings: alive or dead. It reveals 
less information in two cases: 

e If the person is on another plane of existence, the 
spell only reveals that the person is “outside.” 

+ If the person is imprisoned the spell reveals 
only that the person is “confined.” 

In both of these two special cases no direction 
or life reading is possible. The spell is never more 
accurate than this. 

The caster must know the name of the person 
sought or have personally seen the individual at 
least once in order for the spell to function. 


Typical readings include: 
1. South-southwest, dead. 4. North, alive. 
2. Outside. 5. Confined. 
3. East, down, dead. 6. Up, alive. 


The components of the spell are a rod or staff 
with a continual light spell cast upon it, and a 
garment of the person searched for or a personal 
article of sentimental value. 

Notes: Uncommon for diviners; otherwise 
very rare. Known to be in Prismal’s Pocket 
Library, Vol. IV. 


Find the Path 


(Divination) 
Reversible 


Level: 7 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: | rd. 
Duration: | turn/level 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


The caster can find the shortest, most direct 
physical route sought, be it the way into or out of 
a locale. The locale can be outdoors or under- 
ground, a trap, or even a maze spell. Note that the 
spell works with respect to locales, not objects or 
creatures within a locale. Thus, the spell could 
not find the way to “a forest where a green 
dragon lives” or to the location of “a hoard of 
platinum pieces.” The location must be in the 
same plane as the caster. 

The spell enables the subject to sense the cor- 
rect direction that will eventually lead him to his 
destination, indicating at the appropriate times 
the exact path to follow (or physical actions to 
take—for example, with concentration the spell 
enables the subject to sense trip wires or the 
proper word to bypass a glyph). The spell ends 


when the destination is reached or when one turn 
per caster level has elapsed. 

The spell frees the caster, and any with him, 
from a maze spell in a single round, and will con- 
tinue to do so as long as the spell lasts. 

Note that this divination is keyed to the caster, 
not his companions, and that, like the find traps 
spell, it does not predict or allow for the actions 
of creatures. 

The material component is a torch or lantern 
whose flame will always point in the correct direc- 
tion. If the flame is extinguished, the spell ends. 

The reverse spell, lose the path, makes a crea- 
ture touched totally lost and unable to find its 
way for the duration of the spell, although it can 
be led, of course. The material component is a 
torch or lantern flame, which is extinguished as 
the spell is cast. 

Notes: Restricted to diviners; uncommon. 


Find Traps — Red Wizard 
(Divination) 


Level: 3 

Range: 30 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 turn 
Duration: | turn 

Area of Effect: 10-ft. path 
Saving Throw: None 


When a diviner casts a find traps spell, all 
traps—concealed normally or magically—of 
magical or mechanical nature become apparent to 
him. This spell is directional, and the caster must 
face the desired direction in order to determine if 
a trap is laid in that particular direction. 

A trap is any device or magical ward that 
meets three criteria; It can inflict a sudden or 
unexpected result, the spellcaster would view the 
result as undesirable or harmful, and the harmful 
or undesirable result was specifically intended as 
such by the creator. Thus traps include alarms, 
glyphs, and similar spells or devices. 

The caster learns the general nature of the trap 
(magical or mechanical) but not its exact effect, 
nor how to disarm it. Close examination will 
enable the caster to sense what intended actions 
might trigger it. Note that the caster’s divination 
is limited to his knowledge of what might be 
unexpected and harmful. 

This spell cannot predict actions of creatures 
(hence a concealed murder hole or ambush is not 
a trap), nor are natural hazards considered traps 
(a cavern that floods during rain, a wall weakened 
by age, a naturally poisonous plant). If the DM is 


a 


356 


E Find Water "a 


using specific glyphs or sigils to identify magical 
wards (see the glyph of warding spell), this spell 
shows the form of the glyph or mark. The spell 
does not detect traps that have been disarmed or 
are otherwise inactive. 

The spell’s material component is a small 
string noose that must be broken. 

Notes: Restricted to diviners; uncommon. In 
the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting this spell is also 
available to the Red Wizards of Thay. 


Find Treasure 
(Divination) 


Level: 4 

Range: 60 yds. + 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: 2 rds./level 

Area of Effect: 10-ft. wide path 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell determines the direction of the near- 
est large mass of treasure (at least 5,000 coins or 
50 gems) within range, but not its distance or its 
exact composition. Only valuable metals, gems, 
and jewelry are located; worthless metals and 
those magical items with no precious metals or 
gems in their construction are not detected. The 


figs Nt || Ferm 
i) fe 


caster can scan one 10-foot wide path to the limit 
of his effective range each round, so by standing 
still and turning in a slow circle over several 
rounds he can discover if there is any treasure 
within the spell’s range. 

The spell ignores all obstacles between the 
caster and treasure, even solid stone or iron, but 
the divination can be blocked by a thin coating of 
lead or by any magical ward effective against div- 
ination spells. 

The material component is three hairs from a 
hunting hound. 

Notes: Restricted to diviners; uncommon. 


Find Water 


ey 


(Divination) 


Level: 3 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: 1d12 turns + | turn/level 
Area of Effect; 20 mi. +1d8 mi./level 
Saving Throw: None 


This involved incantation imbues one creature 
with a remarkable “nose” for water. The individ- 
ual can smell (or otherwise sense) the presence of 
water within 20 plus 1d8 miles per level of the 
caster. The recipient can identify the direction in 
which the water lies, as well as the approximate 
distance. He knows whether the water is within 
10 feet of the surface, or located deeper. How- 
ever, find water does not tell the recipient whether 
the water is pure or readily accessible. 

The spell only recognizes water sources contain- 
ing 10 gallons or more, (A nearby waterskin, for 
example, won't count.) If the recipient is above 
ground, only water lying 100 or fewer feet below 
the surface can be found. If the recipient is below 
ground himself, the spell can help him locate water 
lying up to 100 feet above or below his depth. 

The recipient’s chance of finding water equals 
the spell’s effective range in miles (roll percentile 
dice). Permanent water sources—wells, oases, 
cities, lakes, and seas—are always detected first. 
A second casting of this spell within the same 
area reveals other sources, if any exist. For each 
additional casting of the spell per day, the chance 
of finding water within range drops 10 percent. If 
the spell does not locate water, that simply means 
the magic failed; the area may or may not be dry. 

The material component of this spell is a drop 
of the caster’s sweat, spittle, or tears. 

Notes: Common in arabian settings; otherwise 
very rare. 


357 


Finding the Center 


Finding the Center 
(Alteration, Invocation) 


& 


Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell is a more powerful version of aiming 
at the target. Like that spell, finding the center 
can be cast after a spell that requires concentra- 
tion. The casting is a series of breathing exercises 
that releases the power of the spell. Once finding 
the center is cast, the wu jen no longer need con- 
centrate on the first spell for it to have effect. His 
unconscious mind maintains the concentration 
required for the spell. The wu jen is free to take 
other actions—movement, combat, casting other 
spells, or any activity he could normally under- 
take, The concentration required by the first spell 
cannot be broken unless the wu jen is slain, his 
mind enfeebled, confused, or controlled, or the 
spell’s duration ends, 

Notes: Restricted to oriental wizards and those 
trained by them; common. 


Finery, Flann’s 
Finery and Freshness 
A MYSTARA Setting spell, aka Flann’s finery. 


Finger of Death 
(Necromancy) 


Level; 7 

Range: 60 yds. 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 5 
Duration: Permanent 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


The finger of death spell snuffs out the victim's 
life force. If successful, the victim can be neither 
raised nor resurrected, In addition, in human sub- 
jects the spell initiates changes to the body such 
that after three days the caster can, by means of a 
special ceremony costing not less than 1,000 gp 
plus 500 gp per body, animate the corpse as a juju 
zombie under the control of the caster. The 
changes can be reversed before animation by a 
limited wish or similar spell cast directly upon the 
body, and a full wish restores the subject to life. 

The caster utters the finger of death spell 


incantation, points his index finger at the creature 
to be slain, and unless the victim succeeds in a 
saving throw vs. spell, death occurs. A creature 
successfully saving still receives 2d8+1 points of 
damage. If the subject dies of damage, no inter- 
nal changes occur and the victim can then be 
revived normally. 
Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Fire — Hishna 
(Invocation/E vocation) 


Level: 4 

Range: 10 yds./level 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: 1d6 + 1 rds. 

Area of Effect: 3 x 3 ft. square or | creature/level 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell allows the caster to ignite virtually 
any object, for the duration of the spell. If the 
object is flammable, it will remain burning after 
the spell expires. The fire is non-magical. 

A creature within the area of effect suffers 2d6 
points of damage per round. The spell will burn off 
hair and burnable clothing during the three rounds 
of its effectiveness. A successful saving throw vs, 
spell reduces damage by half; a target creature 
repeats the saving throw each round until it makes 
a successful roll, or the spell’s duration expires. 

Notes: Restricted to practitioners of hishna 
magic (the Maztica setting); common. 


Fire, At’ar’s 
See sunfire. 


Fire and Ice, Otiluke’s 


See Otiluke’s fire and ice. 


Fire Arrows 
(Alteration) 
(Province: Flame) 


Level: 2 

Range: 5 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 2 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: Special 


This magic causes a campfire to release fiery 
arrows on the caster’s behalf. The fire source must 
be within range but need not be seen by the caster. 
When fire arrows is cast, the fire extinguishes itself 


a a a 


358 


Fire Breath 


instantly, exploding into fiery missiles. The spell 
creates one fire arrow per level of the caster 
(regardless of the size of the original fire source). 
These short-lived streamers of flame leap from the 
fire source in a direction determined by the caster. 
If the caster does not choose a course, the arrows 
fly outward in random directions. A fire arrow trav- 
els up to 30 feet from its source, and can set fire to 
any combustibles it touches (a saving throw vs. 
magical fire is required). 

A being endangered by a fire arrow must make 
two saving throws vs. paralysis, If both are suc- 
cessful, the being avoids all harm. If one check 
succeeds, the victim suffers Id4 points of fiery 
damage. If both checks fail, the being takes 2d4 
points of flame damage. Multiple arrows force 
multiple checks. 

In addition to a fire source, this spell requires a 
handful of sand, into which a drop of the caster’s 
spittle or tears has been placed, The caster blows 
the mixture off his palm. 

Notes: Common in arabian settings; otherwise 
very rare. 


Fire Aura 
(Abjuration) 
(Fire) 


Level: 4 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 4 

Duration: 2 rds./level 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: Special 


By means of this spell, the caster surrounds his 
body with an aura of magical green fire. The fire 
aura extends | foot from the caster’s body and pro- 
vides illumination in a 10-foot radius. The fire aura 
provides complete immunity to all forms of fire, 
both natural and magical; the flames can be extin- 
guished only by dispel magic or a similar spell. 

A creature touched by the wizard suffers 2d4 
points of damage; also a victim who fails to make 
a saving throw vs. death magic is set afire with 
green flames. 

The flames persist for 2d4 rounds and can be 
extinguished by dispel magic or a similar spell. 
Each round, the victim burns for an additional 
\d6 points of damage; the victim's attack rolls are 
made with a —2 penalty during this time. 

The material components for this spell are a 
scrap of singed paper and a piece of flint. 

Notes: Restricted to abjurers and Fire mages; 
rare. 


Fire Breath 
(Evocation) 


Level: 5 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: | rd. 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: Cone, 30 ft., 15 ft. at base 
Saving Throw: 4 


This spell allows the wu jen to breathe a cone 
of magical flame into the area of effect. All 
within the cone suffer 1d6 points of damage for 
every level of the wu jen unless they make a suc- 
cessful saving throw vs. breath weapon (which 
reduces the damage to half). The maximum pos- 
sible damage is 15d6. Combustible objects (other 
than the clothing and gear of creatures in the 
cone) are ignited automatically. This may cause 
additional damage to those within the area. The 
DM must rule on these situations. 

The material component for this spell is a 
piece of red hot charcoal clenched in the teeth of 
the caster.This charcoal does no damage to the 
caster, 

Notes: Common in oriental settings; very rare 
elsewhere. 


359 


Burst 


Fire Burst 
(Alteration, Evocation) 
(Alchemy, Fire) 


Level: 1 

Range: 5 yds./level 
Components: V, S 

Casting Time: | 

Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: 10-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


When this spell is cast upon a nonmagical 
fire (such as a campfire, lantern, or candle), it 
causes the fire to flash and shoot arrows of 
flame. All creatures within 10 feet of the fire 
source suffer 1d3 + 1 point of damage per level 
of the caster (maximum of 10 points). Those 
who roll a successful saving throw vs. spell suf- 
fer no damage. 

Notes: Uncommon spell (ToM). 


Fire Charm 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
(Alchemy) 


Level: 4 

Range: 10 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 4 

Duration: 2 rds./level 

Area of Effect: 15-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: Neg. 

By means of this spell the wizard causes a 
normal fire source, such as a brazier, flambeau, 
or bonfire, to serve as a magical agent, for from 
this source he causes a gossamer veil of multi- 
hued flame to encircle the fire at a distance of 5 
feet. Any creatures observing the fire or the 
dancing circle of flame around it must success- 
fully roll a saving throw vs. spell or be charmed 
into remaining motionless and gazing, trans- 
fixed, at the flames. While so charmed, crea- 
tures are subject to suggestions of 12 or fewer 
words, saving vs. spell with a —3 penalty, 
adjusted for Wisdom. The caster can give one 
such suggestion to each creature, and the sug- 
gestions need not be the same. The maximum 
duration for such a suggestion is one hour, 
regardless of the caster’s level. 

The fire charm is broken if the charmed crea- 
ture is physically attacked, if a solid object comes 
between the creature and the veil of flames so as 
to obstruct vision, or when the duration of the 
spell expires. Those exposed to the fire charm 
again may be affected at the DM’s option, 


although bonuses may also be allowed to the sav- 
ing throws. Note that the veil of flame is not a 
magical fire, and passing through it incurs the 
same damage as would be sustained from passing 
through its original fire source. 

The material component for this spell is a 
small piece of multicolored silk of exceptional 
thinness that the spellcaster must throw into the 
fire source. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Fire Elemental Guide 
See elemental guide. 


Fire Enchantment 
(Enchantment, Charm) 
(Fire) 


Level: 4 

Range: 240 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: 10-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


vð 


By means of this spell, the wu jen is able to 
enchant a fire within range of the spell. Through 
this enchantment, the wu jen can deliver a sug- 
gestion spell coming from the dancing flames of 
the fire. All within the area of effect must make a 
successful saving throw vs. spell to avoid the 
effect of the suggestion. Those who fail to make 
the saving throw have looked at the fire and 
fallen under the spell’s effect. All the normal 
rules concerning the duration and type of sugges- 
tion apply to fire enchantment. 

The material components for this spell are a 
mirror and a lighted candle. 

Notes: Common in oriental settings; very rare 
elsewhere, 


Fire Eyes 
(Alteration) 
(Fire) 


Level: 6 

Range: | foot/level 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 6 
Duration: | rd./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: 4 


This spell causes the caster’s eyes to emit twin 
rays of fire. These are concentrated beams that 


arg ic 


360 


= Fire Phantom a 


are hot enough to burn holes in plate armor in 
one round and in most stone walls in two rounds, 
The eye-beams cause 4d8 points of damage per 
round to any creature they touch except the caster 
(including items worn or carried). 

In normal conditions, the caster can train his 
eye beams on a maximum of two creatures per 
round, Sometimes, such as when he is looking 
along a corridor at an approaching file of crea- 
tures or when multiple beings look in a win- 
dow or doorway and meet his gaze, one after 
another, the caster might be able to affect more 
creatures. 

While the caster’s eyes are emitting fire, he can 
see normally but cannot cast or wield any other 
magic. The caster can end the spell at will before 
it would expire normally. Emitting the beams can 
be interrupted temporarily, also, so that the caster 
can look at creatures and things without burning 
them. 

Contact with an eye beam instantly ignites 
flammables such as paper and cloth and forces all 
other items to make a saving throw vs. magical 
fire. Wizards employing this spell can easily— 
and sometimes inadvertently—cause fires. A 
wizard under a fire eyes spell is protected against 
all direct flame and heat effects, from any fire 
(including dragon breath) and any hot substance 
(such as hot lava). He is not protected against 
fire-related damage, such as falling timbers in a 
burning building. 

Notes: Rare in the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting; 
virtually unknown elsewhere. 


Fire Gate — Red Wizard 
(Alteration) 


Level: 4 

Range: 0 

Components: V, M 
Casting Time: 4 

Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


Upon casting this spell the caster can step into 
a large fire (with at least a 2-foot radius) and 
immediately reappear in another, similar-sized 
fire up to 50 yards per level away. If no such fires 
exist within that range, the spell does not func- 
tion and the caster remains in the initial fire. If 
multiple large fires are available, the caster can 
choose from them. 

If there is a large, solid object blocking the fire 
gate, then the caster is mired in the Elemental 
Plane of Fire and will remain so until he either 


finds another way out or is rescued. 

This spell has made its way out of the savage 
and brutal lands of the Red Wizards of Thay. It is 
recommended that the spellcaster have some form 
of protection against fire before attempting it. 

Notes: Common for the Red Wizards of Thay; 
uncommon for Fire mages; otherwise very rare. 
Known to be in Daltim 5 Tome of Fire. 


Fire Lance — Red Wizard 
(Evocation) 
(Fire) 


Level: 3 

Range: 100 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 3 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: 4 


This spell creates a burning lance of flame that 
leaps from its caster’s hand, hitting automatically 
and inflicting 1d6 points of damage per level of 
the caster, to a maximum of 10d6. Unlike many 
other fire spells, fire lance does not damage 
clothing or equipment. 

The material component is a lit torch in the 
caster’s hand or one fire source of at least torch 
size within 30 feet of the caster. Casting this spell 
extinguishes a torch-sized fire source but only 
slightly diminishes a larger source. 

Notes: Common for Red Wizards of Thay; 
uncommon for Fire mages; otherwise very rare. 


Fire Phantom 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 
(Fire) 


Level: 3 

Range: 30 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: 3 rds,/level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This is a spell used to summon a weaker fire 
elemental. 

The physical appearance of a fire phantom is 
a fiery outline of a vaguely humanoid form, 7 
feet tall. The phantom must remain within 30 
feet of the caster; if it moves beyond this range 
the spell expires. Normal fires set by the fire 
phantom continue to burn after the phantom is 
gone. 


361 


~ Fire Quench a 


The fire phantom (being of low Intelligence) 
follows all commands given by its summoner as 
long as the caster concentrates on controlling it. 
If the caster’s concentration is broken, the phan- 
tom immediately attacks its summoner. Other- 
wise, the fire phantom remains until it is 
destroyed or until the spell's duration expires, 
whereupon it vanishes. 

Any more powerful creature from the Elemen- 
tal Plane of Fire can dismiss the fire phantom at 
will, or even turn it upon its summoner, regard- 
less of other circumstances. 

The material component of this spell is a pint 
of oil, which must be poured out and ignited dur- 
ing the casting of the spell. 

Notes: Rare for Fire mages; otherwise very 
rare. Known to be in the Fire-Eye Scrolls. 


(Updated from DraGoN Magazine.) 


Fire Quench 
Reversed form, see fire storm. Not to be confused 
with Fistandantilus’s firequench or quenchtouch. 


Fire Quill 
(Alteration, Evocation) 
(Fire, Geometry) 


Level: 1 

Range: 0 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 4 
Duration: | turn/level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell transforms a feather of any size and 
type into a quill pen that writes letters of illusory 
flame. The pen can be used for up to one turn 
after the spell is cast to write 10 letters, charac- 
ters, or symbols per level of the caster. These let- 
ters appear to be made of leaping flame, and are 
bright enough to read by anyone within 7 feet. 
They can be written in the air, on a stone wall, or 
even on a person. 

Creatures unwilling to be written on receive 
a saving throw vs. spell; if the saving throw is 
successful, the letters fade as they are written. 
The pen comes to life only as the caster wills, 
The flames are not real, and cannot ignite any- 


thing, but they do not form on water or a wet 
surface. 

The flaming inscriptions last for one turn per 
level of the caster from when the spell was cast, 
not when they were actually written. They need 
not all be written in the same place, on the same 
surface, or adjacent. For example, the caster can 
draw an arrow here, another arrow with a word or 
two of instructions in the next room, another cou- 
ple of arrows down a passage, and an inscription 
in the room at its end. 

If the caster tries to use the fire quill to draw 
magical glyphs or symbols, they do not form, The 
magic only works when the caster’s hand is guid- 
ing the quill. No ink is necessary. 

The feather is the material component of the 
spell. 

Notes: Rare in the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting; 
virtually unknown elsewhere. 


Fire Rain 
(Evocation) 


Level: 3 

Range: 240 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 5 

Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: 30-ft. cube 
Saving Throw: 4 


z 


This spell causes threads of magical flame to 
stream from the sky over the target area. The 
spell is only effective outdoors and creatures in 
a building or under solid cover are protected. 
The building or protection may be set on fire, 
however. 

All exposed creatures in the area of effect 
(except those immune to fire) must make a sav- 
ing throw vs. spell. Those who fail suffer the full 
damage of the spell, while those who make the 
save suffer half damage. The spell causes 1d8 
points of damage for every two levels of the 
caster (fractions rounded down), to a maximum 
of 5d8. In addition, there is a 50% chance that 
combustible materials in the area of effect are 
ignited, starting a small fire (although this may 
quickly spread). 

The material components for this spell are a 
small blowpipe through which the caster must 
blow a mouthful of lamp oil. 

Notes: Common in oriental settings; otherwise 
very rare. 


a Re RS Re eT N 


362 


Fire Shuriken 


Fire Shield 
(Alteration, Evocation) 


Level: 4 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 4 

Duration: 2 rds. + 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell can be cast in one of two forms: a 
warm shield that protects against cold-based 
attacks, or a chill shield that protects against fire- 
based attacks. Both return damage to creatures 
making physical attacks against the wizard. The 
wizard must choose which variation he memo- 
rizes when the spell is selected. 

When casting this spell, the wizard appears to 
immolate himself, but the flames are thin and 
wispy, shedding no heat, and giving light equal to 
only half the illumination of a normal torch. The 
color of the flames is determined randomly (50% 
chance of either color)—blue or green if the chil] 
shield is cast, violet or blue if the warm shield is 
employed. The special powers of each shield are 
as follows: 

A) Warm shield, The flames are warm to the 
touch. Any cold-based attacks are saved against 


with a +2 bonus; either half normal damage or no 
damage is sustained. There is no bonus against 
fire-based attacks, but if the wizard fails to make 
the required saving throw (if any) against them, 
he sustains double normal damage. 

The material component for this variation is a 
bit of phosphorous. 

B) Chill shield. The flames are cool to the 
touch. Any fire-based attacks are saved against 
with a +2 bonus; either half normal damage or no 
damage is sustained. There is no bonus against 
cold-based attacks, but if the wizard fails to make 
the required saving throw (if any) against them, 
he sustains double normal damage. 

The material component for this variation is a 
live firefly or glow worm or the tail portions of 
four dead ones. 

Any creature striking the spellcaster with its 
body or hand-held weapons inflicts normal dam- 
age upon the wizard, but the attacker suffers the 
same amount of damage. An attacker's magical 
resistance, if any, is tested when the creature 
actually strikes the wizard. Successful resistance 
shatters the spell. Failure means the creature’s 
magic resistance does not affect that casting of 
the spell. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Fire Shuriken 
(Evocation) 


Level: 2 

Range: 60 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 3 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: One or more creatures 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell allows the wu jen to create razor- 
sharp pinwheels of fire. When cast, the wu jen 
makes a flicking gesture with his hand, firing out 
one or more shuriken-shaped wheels of magical 
fire. These fly at the desired target, throwing off 
fiery sparks as they travel. An attack roll must be 
made, using the combat table for warriors of the 
same level as the wu jen. A successful hit causes 
2d8 points of damage from the flames and the 
sharp edges. Creatures resistant to fire suffer 
only 1d4 points of damage. 

Upon striking the target (or any other solid 
object on a missed throw), the fire shuriken dis- 
appears in a burst of multi-colored smoke. This 
smoke is particularly thick, temporarily obscur- 
ing the vision of the target and causing a —2 
penalty on the creature’s next attack. The wu jen 


a eee ea 


363 


5 Fire Stones — Red Wizard 


Each ball bursts upon striking any hard surface, 
causing 2d8 points of damage and igniting any 
combustible materials within a 5-foot radius of 
the point of impact. If a successful saving throw 
vs. spell is made, a creature within the burst 
area receives only half damage, but a creature 
struck directly suffers full damage (no saving 
throw). 

o Fire Stone Incendiaries: This casting turns up to 
four small amber stones into special incendi- 
aries. The stones are most often placed, but can 
be thrown like any stone. They burst into flame 
if the caster is within 40 feet and speaks a word 
of command. The stones instantly ignite, caus- 
ing 1d8 points of damage to any creature and 
igniting any combustible within a 5-foot diame- 
ter burst area. Creatures within the area that 
successfully save vs. spell suffer half damage. 

All fire stones lose their power after a duration 
equal to one turn per experience level of the 
caster—for example, the stones of a | 2th-level 
caster remain potent for a maximum of 12 turns 
after their creation. 

The material components are small amber 
stones, of about half gem-value quality (50 gp 
each). 

Notes: Common for the Red Wizards of Thay; 
can cast one fire shuriken at Ist-6th level, two at uncommon for Fire mages; otherwise very rare. 
7th-12th level, and three at 13th level or higher. 


The material component for this spell is a tiny Fire Storm — Red Wizard 
shuriken coated with pine sap and sulphur. (Evocation) 
Notes: Common in oriental settings; very rare Reversible 
elsewhere. 
Level: 8 
Fire Stones — Red Wizard Range: 60 yds. + 5 yds./level 
(Conjuration) Components: V, S, M 
(Fire) Casting Time: 8 
Duration: | rd. 
Level: 5 Area of Effect: One 10-ft cube/level 
Range: 40 yds. Saving Throw: /4 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd./stone (4 maximum) When a fire storm spell is cast, the whole area 
Duration: Special of effect is shot through with sheets of roaring 
Area of Effect: Special flame. Creatures within the area of fire and 10 
Saving Throw: '4 feet or less from the edge of the affected area 


receive 2d6 points of damage plus | additional 
The fire stones spell creates special missiles or point per level of the caster. Creatures that roll 
timed incendiaries that burn with great heat. The successful saving throws vs. spell suffer only half 


spell can be cast to create either fire stone mis- damage. The damage is inflicted each round the 
siles or fire stone incendiaries, as chosen when creature stays in the area of effect. The area of 
the spell is cast. effect is a volume equal to one 10-foot cube per 
+ Fire Stone Missiles: This casting turns up to level of the caster; for example, a 16th-level 

four small amber stones into special grenade- caster can cast a fire storm measuring 40 x 40 x 


like missiles that can be hurled up to 40 yards. 10 feet. The height of the storm must be 10 or 20 
An attack roll is required to strike the intended feet; the balance of its effect is in length and 
target, and proficiency penalties are considered, width. 


a a 


364 


N Fire Trap g 


The reverse spell, fire quench, smothers twice 
the area of effect of a fire storm with respect to 
normal fires, and the normal area of effect with 
respect to magical fires. Fire-based creatures 
such as elementals, salamanders, ctc., of less than 
demigod status have a 5% chance per experience 
level of the caster (up to 95% total) of being 
extinguished, 

The material component for this form of the 
spell is charcoal from the cremation of a dead 
wizard. 

Notes: Common for the Red Wizards of Thay; 
uncommon for Fire mages; otherwise very rare. 


Fire Track 


(Evocation) 
(Province: Flame) 


Level: 5 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: | rd/level 

Area of Effect: Radius of 10 yds./level 
Saving Throw: None 


A fire track spell creates a fiery spark that fol- 
lows the path of a given individual as doggedly as 
a desert hound follows a scent. The caster identi- 
fies the target when casting the spell, either by 
name or by physical description (¢.g., “the man 
who stole the emir’s purse today,” or “the woman 
I saw wearing the gray eye patch”). A spark of 
flame appears harmlessly at the caster’s finger- 
tip—the faithful “hound” ready for the hunt. 

If the target has not been within the area of 
effect during the last 24 hours, then the flame 
leaps off the caster’s finger, lands on the ground 
nearby, and extinguishes itself. If the target has 
been within range, the flame leaps off the caster’s 
fingertip and flies toward the target's trail, strik- 
ing the ground as soon as it “picks up the scent.” 

The fire track is like a brilliant flame traveling 
along a fuse. In its wake is a faint line of scorched 
earth and dust, marking the path of its prey. (The 
scorch marks are easily swept clean.) The flame 
moves at a rate of 0 to 8 for the spell’s duration, 
as chosen by the caster. The fire track burns with 
the strength and brightness of a torch. It inflicts 
1d6 points of damage upon those who get in its 
way, and sets combustible materials aflame. (A 
wise wizard does not use this spell to investigate 
burglaries in a cotton warehouse.) 

The fire track can be foiled in a number of 
ways. It cannot cross water, and is extinguished 
in the attempt. It can be snuffed out while in 


motion by strong breezes, blowing sand, and 
heavy rain. If the pursued individual takes to the 
air or teleports, the fire track circles in place until 
its time expires. Mere climbing, leaping, or 
jumping (even across a chasm) cannot foil the 
fire track, however, and it always pursues in the 
correct direction. 

The material components of this spell are a 
hair or droplet of blood from a saluqui (a desert 
greyhound), wrapped in wax. The wax is melted 


to cast the spell. 

Notes: Common in arabian settings; otherwise 
very rare. 

Fire Trap 

(Abjuration, Evocation) 
(Alchemy, Fire, Geometry) 
Level: 4 
Range: Touch 


Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 turn 
Duration: Until discharged 
Area of Effect: Object touched 
Saving Throw: 4 


Any closeable item (book, box, bottle, chest, 
coffer, coffin, door, drawer, and so forth) can be 
warded by a fire trap spell. The spell is centered 
on a point selected by the spellcaster. The item so 
trapped cannot have a second closure or warding 
spell placed upon it (if such is attempted, the 
chance is 25% that the first spell fails, 25% that 
the second spell fails, or 50% that both spells 
fail). A knock spell does not affect a fire trap in 
any way—as soon as the offending party enters 
or touches the item, the trap discharges, Thieves 
and others have only half their normal chance to 
detect a fire trap (by noticing the characteristic 
markings required to cast the spell). They have 
only half their normal chance to remove the trap 
(failure detonates the trap immediately). An 
unsuccessful dispel does not detonate the spell, 
The caster can use the trapped object without dis- 
charging it, as can any individual to whom the 
spell was specifically attuned when cast (the 
exact method usually involves a keyword). When 
the trap is discharged, there is an explosion of 5- 
foot radius from the spell’s center; all creatures 
within this area must roll saving throws vs. spell. 
Damage is 1d4 points plus | point per level of the 
caster, or half this (round up) for creatures suc- 
cessfully saving. (Under water, this ward inflicts 
half damage and creates a large cloud of steam.) 
The item trapped is not harmed by this explosion. 

To place this spell, the caster must trace the 
outline of the closure with a bit of sulphur or salt- 


Rae ae eR ARE et ew Pe ee 


365 


Fire Truth 


peter and touch the center of the effect. Attune- 
ment to another individual requires a hair or sim- 
ilar object from that person. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Fire Truth 
(Divination) 
(Province: Flame) 


Level: 1 

Range: 5 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 turn 
Duration: 10 rds. 

Area of Effect: | creature 
Saving Throw: None 


ey 


By means of this spell, the caster and those 
accompanying him can determine whether some- 
one speaks the truth or knowingly lies. A special 
candle serves as the material component of this 
spell (see below). Its flame is fed by the veracity 
of the target individual's words—whether they're 
spoken aloud or given in sign language. 

When casting the spell, the wizard lights the 
candle in the presence of the target (no farther 
than 5 yards away). The wizard himself must 
question the target. The candle remains lit as long 
the target answers truthfully. An intentional half- 
truth or slight deception causes the flame to gut- 
ter. An outright lie extinguishes the flame, ending 
the spell. 

Otherwise the spell lasts 10 rounds, or for 10 
questions, whichever comes first. At the end of 
that period, the flame flares brightly, then goes 
out. Truth is subjective to the target. If the target 
truly believes something, then the candle regis- 
ters it as truth. “I don’t know” or a similar 
response has no effect on the candle if the target 
is truly ignorant. 

The fire truth spell allows no saving throw, but 
it can be rendered useless by other magics, such 
as a philter of glibness or the spell undetectable 
lie (reverse of the priest spell detect lie) or its 
equivalent. 

The fire truth spell is used most often in busi- 
ness and matters of state, where veracity is 
important, and the target creature is (supposedly) 
willing and interested in telling the truth. When 
signing a contract, for example, that target is 
often asked to verbally attest to his honesty. (“Do 
you swear that the information here is true? Do 
you plan to uphold this contract?”) 

The candle required for this spell is made of 
a rare form of desert bee's wax. It costs 300 gp 
ready-made, and is usually available only 


through holy men (usually moralists). The wiz- 
ard can make the candle himself in a week, 
after investing 100 gp in the raw materials, if 
available. 

Notes: Common in arabian settings; unknown 
elsewhere. 


Fire Wake 
(Abjuration, Evocation) 
(Fire) 
Level: 4 


Range: 10 yds./level 
Components: V, M 
Casting Time: 4 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This enchantment creates superheated air 
directly behind the target creature. The heated 
area is the height and width of the target and 
causes the target’s nonmetal and nonmagical pos- 
sessions to make a saving throw vs. magical fire 
or burst into flames. The effect causes the target 
to suffer 1d6 points of damage, plus an additional 
point of damage for every level of the caster. For 
example, an 8th-level wizard would inflict 1d6+8 
points of damage with this spell. The damage is 
halved if the target makes a successful saving 
throw vs. spell. 

Notes: Rare for Fire mages; otherwise very 
rare. (Updated from POLYHEDRON Newszine.) 


Duration: | turn 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell transforms the wu jen’s arms into 
phoenix-like wings of brilliant fire. The caster 
and all he carries suffer no damage from this 
flame, but all within 3 feet suffer 1-2 points of 
damage each round unless immune to fire. 

Since the caster’s arms are transformed, he can- 
not hold items in his hands or cast spells while 
using the fiery wings. Rings and bracers can still 
be worn, fitting around the pinions of feathery 
flames. The wings give the caster the ability to fly 


a a 


366 


x Firebrand r 


at a rate of 24 (MC: B). They cast illumination as a 
light spell to a radius of 60 feet. Although the 
wings are ill-suited to combat, the wu jen can use 
them to batter opponents. However, he does so 
using his nonproficiency penalty when determin- 
ing if he hits. A successful attack inflicts 2d6 
points of damage (no saving throw allowed). 

The wings can be snuffed out if the wu jen is 
hit by a large quantity of water, freezing cold, or a 
wind of hurricane or greater force, 

The material component is the feather of a 
bird, which must be burned upon casting. The 
spell also requires a golden amulet shaped like a 
phoenix (value of at least 50 gp), which is 
reusable. 

Notes: Common in oriental settings; otherwise 
very rare. 


Fireball 
(Evocation) 
(Fire) 
Level: 3 
Range: 10 yds. + 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 3 


Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: 20-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: 4 


A fireball is an explosive burst of flame which 
detonates with a low roar and delivers damage 
proportional to the level of the wizard who cast 
it—1d6 points of damage for each level of expe- 
rience of the spellcaster (up to a maximum of 
10d6). The burst of the fireball creates little pres- 
sure and generally conforms to the shape of the 
area in which it occurs. The fireball fills an area 
equal to its normal spherical volume (roughly 
33,000 cubic feet, that is, thirty-three 10 x 10 x 
10-foot cubes). Besides causing damage to crea- 
tures, the fireball ignites all combustible materi- 
als within its burst radius, and the heat of the 
fireball melts soft metals such as gold, copper, 
silver, etc. Exposed items require saving throws 
vs. magical fire to determine if they are affected, 
but items in the possession of a creature that rolls 
a successful saving throw are unaffected by the 
fireball. 

The wizard points his finger and speaks the 
range (distance and height) at which the fireball 
is to burst. A streak flashes from the pointing 
digit and, unless it impacts upon a material body 
or solid barrier prior to attaining the prescribed 
range, blossoms into the fireball (an early impact 
results in an early detonation). Creatures failing 


their saving throws each suffer full damage from 
the blast. Those who roll successful saving 
throws manage to dodge, fall flat, or roll aside, 
each receiving half damage (the DM rolls the 
damage and each affected creature suffers either 
full damage or half damage [round fractions 
down], depending on whether the creature saved 
or not). 

The material component of this spell is a tiny 
ball of bat guano and sulphur. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Fireball, Fallion’s Fabulous 
See Fallion’s fabulous fireball. 


Firebrand 


Casting Time: 4 

Duration: 2 rds. + 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


By means of this spell, which involves a pinch 
of sulphur and a spark of normal flame, the caster 
creates an everburning flame that blazes until the 
spell duration expires without consuming the 
object or location it is cast upon. Instead, the con- 
flagration sucks air into itself and somehow feeds 
upon the ether and spell energy for its burning. 

The spell must be cast on an object or particu- 
lar physical spot and cannot be subsequently 
transferred to another. It can be ended at any time 
by the deliberate will of the caster, but does not 
require continued concentration on the caster’s 
part for its existence. The maximum spread of 
flames created by means of a firebrand spell is a 
volume the size of the caster’s fist times the 
caster’s level. 

This spell is usually used to make a sword into 
a flaming-bladed weapon. The spell adds 1d4+1 
points of fiery damage to that of the weapon and 
chances of causing further combustion, but does 
not make any weapon a flametongue or give it 
any magical pluses. When cast upon a stick or 
pole, it can also be used to create a torch that 
remains alight underwater and despite gust of 
wind spells and the like. 

The spell can also give a caster or fellow crea- 
ture touched by the caster a nonpainful, noninju- 
rious flamehand or limb equal in effect to a 


a a 


367 


Firebrand 


normal torch or lamp. This torch is able to readily 
burn hair, paper, cobwebs, cloth, and other flam- 
mables and to deal to others not protected 1d6+1 
points of damage per extended contact (1d4+1 
for a blow, 1d4+3 for a firm grip upon an unar- 
mored area). 

Note that although this latter application of the 
spell can be visually impressive, care must be 
taken or damage results due to the flamehand 
touching its owner’s own hair, clothing, or flam- 
mable oil. Items on the caster’s person ignited by 
the flamehand cause him or her normal burn 
damage. 

More than one hand or foot can be affected by 
a single firebrand spell if the caster is of high 
enough level. When the spell is cast upon them, a 
surface area of 6 square inches per level can be 
affected if the appendages are placed together 
(for example, clasped hands). 

Nonliving matter used as a spell focus and then 
separated into smaller pieces (for instance, a 
flaming stick broken or a flaming blade shat- 
tered) does not become many smaller fires; only 
one fragment retains the magical effect, and the 
others do not. Note also that the bearer of such 
everlasting flame is in no way immune to the 
effects (heat, flame, smoke) of other fires. 

The reverse, guenchtouch, requires a drop of 
water as an additional material component and is 
cast upon a limb or object in an identical manner 
to firebrand, having identical duration and area 
of effect. The effect created is a painless, shim- 
mering black flame that gives off no heat nor cold 
and does no damage. Whenever it comes into 
contact with flame of any sort, however, that 
flame is instantly and utterly quenched. Any heat 
in excess of the surrounding ambient temperature 
is drained as well. 

Normal fires can be extinguished in this way. 
Permanent or longlasting magical (/lametongue 
sword, fire trap, wall of fire) or natural (campfire, 
flaming oil) sources of fire are instantly quenched 
and prevented from reigniting or being set off for 
1d4 rounds, determined randomly for each 
instance. Fires of great extent are quenched in a 
40-foot-radius globe per touch of black flame and 
real flame. Fiery explosions within 40 feet of 
quenchtouch dark flames neutralize and destroy 
the dark flames, but themselves dwindle into 
nothingness in a scattering of sparks, inflicting 
only 1d4 points of damage on creatures within 40 
feet of them (successful saving throws against the 
explosions, such as fireball, halve damage). 

Notes: Very rare spell from the FORGOTTEN 
REALMS setting. Known to be in Shandaril’s 
Workbook. 


368 


ES sg 


Fireflow* 
(Alteration) 
(Wild) 


Level: 3 

Range: 30 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 3 

Duration: | rd./level 

Area of Effect: | fire source 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell allows a wizard to control natural 
fires by manipulating randomness and adjusting 
probabilities to cause them to spread and take 
shape in any direction he desires. Once cast, the 
wizard points at any fire within range. He can then 
cause that fire to move in any direction desired 
within spell range, as long as the flames contact a 
solid surface (the fire cannot be raised in the air). 

The caster must maintain concentration or the 
spell fails. The flames can be spread at the rate of 
50 square feet per turn. Thus, if a caster affects a 
campfire, he could create a flaming line | foot 
wide and 50 feet long or fill a 5-foot by 10-foot 
square in a single round. 

The flames are not limited by a lack of burn- 
able material and can be directed to spread over 
water, snow, ice, and other nonflammable sur- 
faces. The surface is not harmed, but objects and 
creatures caught in the flames suffer damage as if 
they had stepped into the original fire source. 
Thus, a creature caught in flames created from a 
candle will suffer only minor damage, while one 
caught in a blaze that originated from a huge bon- 
fire will be severely burned. 

The material components are a small paint- 
brush and a pot of pitch. 

Notes: Restricted to wild mages; uncommon 


(ToM). 
Fireform, Zikalan 
See Zikalan fireform. 


Fireproof 
(Abjuration) 


Level: 2 

Range: 5 yds./level 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 2 

Duration: | turn + | turn/level 

Area of Effect: 30 ft. + 10 ft/level radius 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell is cast on objects within the spell 
radius to protect them from ordinary fires. Only 


one type of object can be protected, and that type 
must be named when the spell is cast: masts, for 
instance, or sails. If the spelicaster seeks to pro- 
tect two types of objects at the same time, two 
separate fireproof spells must be cast. 

The spell prevents ignition by normal fires. 
Against magical fires it bestows either the item 
saving throw vs. magical fire at a +1 bonus or the 
caster’s saving throw vs. spell, whichever is more 
advantageous. If the saving throw is successful, 
the object is not set afire. The DM may decide 
the degree of damage based on the circum- 
stances; for example, burning sails may need to 
be cut away, while a mast can be saved fairly 
intact if immediate countermeasures successfully 
quench the flames. 

The material component is powdered lime. 

Notes: Common for Sea mages; otherwise 


very rare, (Updated from DraGoN Magazine.) 


Firequench, Fistandantilus’s 
See Fistandantilus’s firequench. 
Firestaff 
(Evocation) 
(Fire) 
Level: 2 
Range: 0 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 2 


Duration: 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: | staff 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell causes a ball of blue flame to appear 
at each end of a nonmagical staff, pole, log, club, 
or tree limb. The object must be of wood and 
have two discernible ends. The wizard cannot 
choose to light only one end of the staff, nor can 
the staff be extinguished at will. 

The firestaff is a melee weapon that inflicts 
1d6 points of damage plus 244 points of flame 
damage per successful attack. The staff is not a 
magical weapon for determining what creatures it 
can hit. The staff can be wielded by someone 
other than the caster and can ignite flammable 
materials as well as being used as a weapon. 

The material components of this spell are a 
piece of phosphorous or a flame of any sort and a 
pinch of iron filings. The wooden object used is 
not consumed or altered by the spell or its flames. 

Notes: Rare for Fire mages; otherwise very 
rare. Known to be in Galadaster's Orizon. 


A ee PT SR ee 


369 


x Firetrail — Dragon A 


Firetrail — Dragon 
(Invocation/Evocation) 


Level: 4 

Range: Any 
Components: V 
Casting Time: 3 
Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


The firetrail spell was developed by an ancient, 
and long-dead, red dragon named Thermal for a 
specific purpose: setting fire to towns and other 
settlements that the creature wanted to attack. 
This is a very rare spell, and only a few evil 
dragons are aware of it. 

The spell must be cast by a dragon while in 
flight. As its name implies, it creates a trail of 
tiny, fiery droplets in the air behind the dragon. 
These droplets fall to the ground at a rate of 30 
feet per round. When they touch the ground or 
any solid object, they burst into flame, each 
burning for only a few seconds but with the 
same amount of heat as a burning torch. This 
fire has an 80% chance of igniting anything 
flammable (usual modifiers apply for wet mate- 
rial, etc.). The length of the trail is 40 feet per 
effective level of the casting dragon. Thus a red 
wyrm (effective level 20) could create a fire- 
trail 800 feet long. 

While the trail is still falling, it can be dis- 
rupted by spells like gust of wind or by natural 
winds. These effects won’t prevent the droplets of 
the trail from reaching the ground, however; they 
just spread it out, possibly enhancing its effects. 
(The DM must carefully adjudicate this depend- 
ing on circumstances.) 

Although the spell’s main purpose is to fire a 
town, firetrail can also cause serious personal 
damage. Anyone under the firetrail when it 
reaches the ground is struck by 1d20 droplets, 
each of which inflicts 1d2 points of damage (a 
saving throw vs. spell for half damage is allowed). 
Any creature foolish enough to fly through a 
descending firetrail is struck by 3d10 droplets, 
each inflicting 1d2 points of damage (save for 
half damage). 

Notes: Restricted to dragons; known only to 
a few evil dragons. (Updated from DRAGON 
Magazine.) 


Firewater 
(Alteration) 
(Alchemy) 


Level: 1 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: | 
Duration: | rd. 

Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


By means of this spell, the wizard changes a 
volume of water to a volatile, flammable sub- 
stance similar to alcohol and likewise lighter than 
water, If this substance is exposed to flame, fire, 
or even a spark, it will burst into flames and burn 
with a hot fire. Each creature subject to firewater 
flame suffers 2d6 points of damage. 

The caster can turn | pint of water per level 
into firewater, to a maximum of 10 pints. If 
poured on a non-porous surface, such as a stone 
floor, a line 1 foot across and 1 foot wide per 
caster level can be created. If ignited, it burns for 
an entire round. 

The firewater created will evaporate and be 
useless within 1 round, even if it is securely con- 
tained and sealed, so it must be utilized (ignited) 
the round after its creation. 

The material components of this spell are a 
few grains of sugar and a raisin. 

Notes: Uncommon spell. 


First Strike 


-— 


(Alteration) 


Level: 2 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: 1d4 rds. + 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: 30-ft. radius, 1 creature/level 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell causes a number of creatures within 
30 feet of the caster to automatically gain initia- 
tive in the ensuing combat rounds. The dweomer 
does not hasten the casting time of spells. 

Individuals under the influence of a first strike 
spell must remain within 30 feet of the caster; if 
they venture outside this area, they lose the 
effect. Re-entering the spell area does not rein- 
state the effect on those individuals. 

If both sides in a battle are affected by first 
strike spells or an individual is using a weapon 
such as a short sword of quickness, initiative is 


ee ee 


370 


Fist of the Adder 


rolled normally, Unlike a haste spell, this enchant- 
ment does not age the affected individuals. 

The material component of this spell is a hand- 
ful of purified sand, which the caster runs through 
his fingers. 

Notes: Common in Cerilia (the BIRTHRIGHT 
setting); uncastable elsewhere. 


Fisher’s Luck — Pluma 
(Summoning) 


Level: 2 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 3 turns 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 100 yds./level 
Saving Throw: None 


By means of this spell, the caster attracts all 
fish within the area. While the fish do not exactly 
fling themselves onto shore, netters or spearmen 
can take a continuous catch. Fish must be present 
for the spell to work, and those with more than 
2+1 Hit Dice receive a saving throw vs. spell to 
avoid the dweomer. The spell lasts as long as the 
caster concentrates, to a maximum of one day. 

The material components are bits of fish 
scales, 

Notes: Restricted to practitioners of pluma 
magic (the Maztica setting); common. 


Fist, Ongeldyn’s 

See Ongeldyn’s fist. 

Fist of Sand 
See desert fist. 

Fist of Stone 
(Alteration) 
(Earth) 
Level: | 
Range: 0 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 1 


Duration: | rd./level 
Area of Effect; The caster’s hand 
Saving Throw: None 


Upon completion of this spell, one of the 
caster’s hands (his choice) turns to stone. It is 
flexible and can be used to punch, smash, or 
crush objects and opponents as if the wizard had 
a Strength of 18/00. Combat bonuses for Strength 
apply only if the caster uses his fist as a weapon. 


While the spell is in effect, the wizard cannot cast 
spells requiring somatic components. 
Notes: Uncommon spell (ToM). 


Fist of the Adder 


A 


(Alteration) 


Level: 2 

Range: 0 

Components: S, M 

Casting Time: 2 

Duration: 1 attack 

Area of Effect: The caster’s arm 
Saving Throw: None 


The fist of the adder is a dreaded attack spell 
practiced most often by members of the Red Eyes 
sorcerous society. The fist causes the caster’s arm 
to elongate into a serpentine tentacle, tipped by 
an adder’s head. 

The arm streaks outward up to 5 feet per caster 
level, whipping about wildly and striking with 
deadly accuracy. The caster attacks with the arm 
as a fighter of the same level; and the fist of the 
adder can strike creatures only affected by magi- 
cal weapons. The attack inflicts 1d4 damage per 
level of the caster, to a maximum of 10d4. 

If the caster is 5th level or more, a successful 
strike also injects a Type F poison (save or die). 


ee ere 


371 


Fistandantilus'’s Firequench 


At 10th level, this becomes a Type E poison (save 
for 20 points of damage or die). A saving throw 
vs. poison is allowed against the poison. 

The material component of this spell is a shed 
skin of a poisonous snake, washed in tears. 

Notes: Common for members of the Red Eye 
sorcerous society; otherwise very rare. Virtually 
unknown outside arabian settings. 


Fistandantilus’s Firequench 
(Abjuration, Alteration) 


Level: 4 

Range: 10 yds./level 

Components; V, S, M 

Casting Time: 2 

Duration: 4 rds. 

Area of Effect: 40-ft. radius sphere 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell extinguishes fire and prevents com- 
bustible materials from igniting. Normal fires 
such as blazing arrows, campfires, even burning 
trees or thatched roofs simply go out when the 
firequench is cast. 

Fire-based spells receive a saving throw to 
resist being extinguished; this is a 1d20 roll equal 
to or less than the spell level (a wall of fire spell 
survives on a roll of | through 4). 

Magical items that cause fire-based effects 
save as |2th-level wizards, unless the item 
description specifically states otherwise (for 
example, a wand of fire saves as a 6th-level wiz- 
ard). Failure means the fire-causing functions are 
negated for the spell’s duration, Fire-based crea- 
tures, such as those from the Elemental Plane of 
Fire, receive a normal saving throw vs. spell; fail- 
ure means the creature loses the ability to cause 
fires for the duration of the spell. (Note that sec- 
ondary fires caused by the ignition of com- 
bustible materials by fire-based attacks are 
normal, not magical fires.) 

This spell can be cast on an area to prevent fiery 
attacks from taking effect. Normal fires are 
blocked; magical spells are negated unless they 
make the special saving throw (spell level or less on 
1d20). The area of effect is immobile once the spell 
is cast; it can’t be moved or travel with the caster. 
This casting is the only way this spell can defend 
against fire-based spells of instantaneous duration. 

The material component of Fistandantilus $ 
firequench can be a piece of ice, a cupped hand- 
ful of water, a pinch of sand, or a drop of the 
casters spittle. 

Notes: Restricted to Fistandantilus and those 
trained by him. (Updated from DraGoN Magazine.) 


Flame Arrow 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 
(Alchemy, Artifice, Fire) 


Level: 3 

Range: 30 yds. + 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 3 

Duration: | rd. 

Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell has two effects, First, the wizard can 
cause normal arrows or crossbow bolts to become 
magical flaming missiles for one round. The mis- 
siles must be nocked and drawn (or cocked) at 
the completion of the spell. If they are not loosed 
within one round, they are consumed by the 
magic. For every five levels the caster has 
achieved, up to 10 arrows or bolts can be affected. 
The arrows inflict normal damage, plus | point of 
fire damage to any target struck. They may also 
cause incendiary damage. This version of the 
spell is used most often in large battles. 

The second version of this spell enables the 
caster to hurl fiery bolts at opponents within 


ne A eS ie aS 


372 


N Flame Dagger — Red Wizard d 


range. Each bolt inflicts 1d6 points of piercing 
damage, plus 4d6 points of fire damage. Only 


half the fire damage is inflicted if the creature. 


struck successfully saves vs. spell. The caster 
receives one bolt for every five experience levels 
(two bolts at 10th level, three at 15th level, ete.). 
Bolts must be used on creatures within 20 yards 
of each other and in front of the wizard. 

The material components for this spell are a 
drop of oil and a small piece of flint. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Flame Chase 
(Evocation, Fire) 
(Fire) 


Level: 7 

Range: 30 yds. + 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 3 

Duration: 2 rds. + 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: $ 


Upon casting this spell, the wizard causes sev- 
eral flame paths to form on the ground, which 
then pursue target creatures chosen by the wiz- 
ard. Those caught will be engulfed either in a 
flame column or a flame burst, as described later. 
This spell is likely to cause many small incidental 
fires, These are normal, nonmagical fires that can 
be extinguished by normal means or allowed to 
burn out. Croplands, dry forest, grasslands, and 
similar areas might burn uncontrollably. 

Flame Path: The spell creates one flame path 
for every two levels of the caster, to a maximum 
of six paths at 12th level. The 3-foot-wide paths 
begin 3 feet from the caster and each travels 
straight toward one target creature. To target a 
creature, the wizard must be aware of it, it must 
be in range, and it must be in contact with the 
ground when the spell is cast. A flame path can- 
not be sent against an object. 

Each flame path travels at a rate of 24. The fire 
does not require combustible material such as 
wood, grass, or weeds; it can travel over bare out- 
door or indoor surfaces. It can travel across any 
surface except water, snow, ice, and other wet 
surfaces. A flame path is able to climb a vertical 
surface of less than 45°, as long as the surface is 
wide enough (3 feet; a rope, for example, is not 
wide enough). 

Combustible items in the flame’s path must 
Save vs. magical fire or be set ablaze. The 
flame path continues to follow the target crea- 
ture until the creature is caught, the spell ends 


or is dispelled, or until the creature crosses a 
surface where the path cannot follow. Non-tar- 
geted creatures caught in the flame’s way are 
burned for 1d6 points of damage (save for half 
damage). 

Flame Column: When a path catches its target, 
the creature is engulfed in a flame column and 
takes 3d6 points of fire damage immediately, 
plus 1d6 points of damage per round for the 
remaining duration of the spell. The flame col- 
umn stays with the creature until it burns out or is 
dispelled. Items engulfed in the column must 
save vs. magical fire or be destroyed. 

Flame Blast: Those outdistancing the pursu- 
ing flames or who evade the flame column by 
crossing a wet surfaces face one more danger. If 
a target creature is within 10 feet of the end- 
point of the flame path after the flames have 
moved for the round, and if the flames are 
unable to close the distance due to the crea- 
ture’s speed or an obstruction, then the flames 
leap to the creature instead. This flame blast 
causes double the normal flame column damage 
(6d6 points) in a burst, expending the path’s 
remaining power immediately. Creatures and 
items caught by the flame blast save vs. spell at 
a —2 penalty. 

Optionally, separate initiative rolls can be 
made for each flame path to determine when it 
moves during the round. A flame blast always 
occurs at the end of a round, after all attacks and 
movements have been made. 

The material components for this spell are a 
small pouch filled equally with sulphur and coal 
dust, a live caterpillar, and a live firefly. All are 
expended in the casting. 

Notes: Uncommon for Fire mages, otherwise 
very rare. (Updated from DRAGON Magazine.) 


Flame Dagger — Red Wizard 
(Evocation) 


Level: 2 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 3 

Duration: | rd./level 

Area of Effect: Creates 1 flame dagger 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell causes a blazing ray of red-hot fire, 
1-foot long, to spring from the caster’s hand. This 
bladelike ray is wielded as if it were a dagger. If 
the caster successfully hits with the flame dagger 
in melee, the creature struck suffers 1d4+1 points 
of damage, with a damage bonus of +1 if the 


aaa IG ee a, S 


373 


q Flame of Justice cr 


creature is undead or is especially vulnerable to 
fire. If the creature is protected from fire, the 
damage inflicted is reduced to 1d4. Fire dwellers 
and those using fire as an innate attack form suf- 
fer no damage from the spell. 

The flame blade can ignite combustible mate- 
rials such as parchment, straw, dry sticks, cloth, 
etc. However, it is not a magical weapon in the 
normal sense of the term, so creatures (other than 
undead) struck only by magical weapons are not 
harmed by it. This spell does not function under- 
water. 

The material component is a pinch of iron 
mixed with a pinch of sulphur. 

Notes: Restricted to the Red Wizards of Thay 
and those trained by them. 


Flame of Justice 


(Necromancy) Q i 


(Province: Flame) 


Level: 6 

Range: 10 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 turn 
Duration: 10 rds. 

Area of Effect: | target 
Saving Throw: Special 


The flame of justice is a more powerful (and in 
some minds, more twisted) version of the 1st- 
level fire truth spell. It is cast in much the same 
way, using a lit candle to determine truth or false- 
hood. However, the spell has two important 
c $ 
First, this spell causes part of the target's body 
to burst into flame for each untruth spoken. The 
first untruth inflicts 1d4 points of damage, and 
each additional untruth inflicts 1d6. There is no 
saving throw against the casting of the spell, but 
for each untruth told, the recipient is allowed a 
saving throw vs. spell to halve the damage. Dam- 
age still increases with each untruth; the result is 
divided by two. 

Second, the ideal of “truth” is subjective to the 
caster, not the target. If the caster believes some- 
thing to be true, even if it is incorrect, the target 
suffers the effects of telling the (unappealing) 
truth. Telling the questioner what he wants to 
hear is an excellent method of surviving the spell. 
Ignorance or silence is not a defense if the caster 
believes the target is hiding something. Half- 
truths and outright lies can spare the target, pro- 
vided that the caster believes in them. The DM 
must adjudicate in such situations, but only the 
evil and black-hearted rogue would choose to dis- 


believe everything said only for the purpose of 
inflicting damage. 

The spell is limited to 10 questions or 10 
rounds, whichever comes first. An attack on the 
caster breaks the spell, provided the attack 
inflicts damage. The flame of justice may aid a 
local ruler in trying someone accused of a serious 
crime, although in gentle, civilized lands, fire 
truth is preferred. Mages of the True Flame (wiz- 
ards who follow only the province of flame and 
persecute wizards of all others) often use the 
flame of justice to extract confessions. 

The material component of this spell is the 
same as that for fire truth—a candle made of a 
rare form of desert bee’s wax. It costs 300 gp 
ready-made, and is available only through holy 
men (usually of the moralist faction), The wizard 
can make the candle himself in a week, after 
investing 100 gp in the raw materials, if these are 
available. 

Notes: Common for the Mages of the True 
Flame; rare for others. Virtually unknown outside 
an arabian setting. 


Flame Ray 
(Alteration) 
(Fire) 


Level: 2 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 6 

Duration: 2 rds. 

Area of Effect: 20-ft. long x 5-ft. diam. cone 
Saving Throw: 4 


This spell is a stronger variation of the burn- 
ing hands spell. The cone of searing flame is 
projected from the caster’s forefinger. It inflicts 
1d3 points of damage, plus 2 points of damage 
per caster level in the first round, to a maximum 
of 1d3 plus 20 points of fire damage. In the sec- 
ond round, the ray inflicts half damage (rounded 
up). A successful saving throw vs. spell halves 
the damage in either round. The flame ray cone 
extends 20 feet, to a 5-foot diameter at its 
widest end. Its relatively long casting time is 
unusual. 

Notes: Very rare spell. Known to be in the 
Book of the Silver Talon. 


Flame Shroud 
Aka shroud of flame. 


374 


Flameproof 
(Abjuration) 
(Fire) 


Level: 6 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 6 

Duration: 1 turn/level 

Area of Effect; 1 object or creature 
Saving Throw: None 


When cast upon an item, flameproof renders 
that item immune to all flame, whether magical 
or natural in origin, for the duration of the spell. 
The item (and anything it contains) will remain at 
normal temperature and cool to the touch despite 
immersion in Java or exposure to a red dragon’s 
breath weapon. 

When cast upon a creature, the recipient gains 
full immunity to normal fires. Ordinary flame— 
even such exceptionally hot fires as molten 
lava—cannot harm him. Fire-breathing creatures 
(such as hell hounds or red dragons) and those 
made of flame (such as fire elementals) that 
attack the recipient suffer a —1 penalty to each die 
of damage inflicted. 

The recipient also gains a +2 bonus on any sav- 
ing throw against magical fire, including spells 
such as fireball. When cast upon a creature from 
the Elemental Plane of Fire, the spell has no effect. 

Flameproof cannot be combined with other 
spells or magical items that provide protection 
against flame. (Contrast this with the magical 
item ring of fire resistance.) 

The material component of this spell is a bit of 
candle wax. 

Notes: Uncommon spell. Known to be in Dal- 
tim s Tome of Fire. 


Flamespin 
(Evocation) 
(Fire) 


Level: 1 

Range: 10 feet/level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 
Duration: 3 rds. 

Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell creates a 2-foot-diameter vertical 
pinwheel of flame in midair, anywhere in spell 
range. It remains stationary unless touched by the 
caster, who can touch it without taking any harm 


and—alone of all beings—can move it about. The 
caster can throw it, bowl it, tow it along, or thrust 
it at a foe like a bludgeoning weapon. A caster 
using it as a weapon strikes once per round (at his 
THACO), instead of casting a spell that round. 
The caster need not concentrate to maintain the 
Slamespin. 

Circumstances may increase the caster’s 
chances of striking a target. Hurling the pinwheel 
through a hatchway or down a narrow passage or 
shaft, for example, might merit a bonus for the 
caster’s attack roll. A stationary flamespin cannot 
be moved by any means except the caster’s hand, 
so beings who lack a dispel magic and cannot 
wait for the spell to expire must take damage if 
they have to touch the flames. Falling through a 
flamespin in a shaft, for example, results in fire 
damage to the falling being. 

A flamespin causes 1d6+3 points of damage to 
any creature touched by it, unless the creature is 
protected against magical fire. A flamespin also 
forces all items that come into contact with it to 
make saving throws vs. magical fire (except 
those worn or carried by the caster). If a flame- 
spin remains in contact with a creature, it causes 
damage and forces exposed items to make saving 


aa eae aa ai aaa 


375 


E Flamestrike, Flamsterd’s a 


throws each round. 

The material component of this spell is a bit of 
phosphorous or saltpeter. 

Notes: Rare in the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting; 
virtually unknown elsewhere. 


Flamestrike, Flamsterd’s 
See Flamsterd’s flamestrike. 


Flaming Blade, Tenser’s 
See Tenser’s flaming blade. 


Flaming Fist, Daltim’s 
See Daltim’s flaming fist. 


Flaming Sphere 
(Evocation) 
(Fire) 


Level: 2 

Range: 10 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 2 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: Sphere, 3-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


A flaming sphere spell creates a burning globe 
of fire within 10 yards of the caster. This sphere 
rolls in whichever direction the wizard points, at 
a rate of 30 feet per round. It rolls over barriers 
less than 4 feet tall, such as furniture, low walls, 
etc. Flammable substances are set afire by con- 
tact with the sphere. Creatures in contact with the 
globe must successfully save vs. spell or suffer 
2d4 points of fire damage, Those within 5 feet of 
the sphere’s surface must also save or suffer 1d4 
points of heat damage. A successful saving throw 
means no damage is suffered. The DM may 
adjust the saving throws if there is little or no 
room to dodge the sphere. 

The sphere moves as long as the spellcaster 
actively directs it; otherwise, it merely stays at 
rest and burns. It can be extinguished by the same 
means as any normal fire of its size. The surface 
of the sphere has a spongy, yielding consistency 
and so does not cause damage except by its 
flame. It cannot push unwilling creatures aside or 
batter down large obstacles. 

The material components are a bit of tallow, a 
pinch of sulphur, and a dusting of powdered iron. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Flaming Weapon, Avissar’s 
See Avissar’s flaming weapon. 


Flamsterd’s Flamestrike 
(Evocation) 
(Fire) 


Level: 4 

Range: 10 yds./level 
Components; V, S, M 
Casting Time: | rd. 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: 4 


This specialized fire spell can be used both as 
an attack and as a guardian trap. In either case, it 
affects one creature only, its flames appearing in 
a roaring spiral around the victim for one round. 
The flamestrike inflicts 1d12 points of damage, 
plus 1 point per level of the caster, and is a men- 
ace to clothing, carried items, and other exposed 
flammable materials near to the victim (item sav- 
ing throws vs. magical fire required). 

When used as a trap, Flamsterd's flamestrike 
must be cast on a small piece of metal (typically a 
coin), and a series of specific triggering condi- 
tions (equivalent to those of a magic mouth spell) 
uttered. The trap is then “set” to activate when the 
conditions are met. It can be magically detected 
as a trap only if the detector is specifically con- 
sidering an action that would trigger it. 

The conditions involve disturbing the coin or 
piece of metal, and the dweomer can wait indefi- 
nitely until the conditions are fulfilled. Condi- 
tions that do not involve disturbing the coin are 
not valid and cause the spell to fail. 

If a dispel magic is cast on the coin before the 
trap is triggered, the spell is immediately dis- 
persed without taking effect. If several creatures 
fulfill the trap conditions, only the first to do so 
is affected; if several do so at once, determine the 
affected creature randomly. 

The material components are a pinch of salt- 
peter, filings or a small piece of any metal, a 
piece of phosphorous, and a pinch of ashes. 

Notes: Rare or very rare spell; originally from 
the FoRGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Flann’s Finery 
(Abjuration) 


Level: 2 

Range: Touch 

Components; V, S 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: | day/level 

Saving Throw: None 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 


fe aaa 


376 


~% Flash, Nystul's ge 


Using Flann 's finery, a wizard (or other spell 
recipient) can resist dirt, blood, sweat, and other 
undesirable substances that otherwise would soil 
their persons or clothing. Although this spell in 
no way protects an individual from damage due 
to acid, disease, etc., it keeps him looking good. 
It preserves metal items from rust and tarnish and 
keeps clothing from tearing or wearing thin. The 
somewhat fussy wizard Flann developed Flann 
finery to keep an appearance of nobility even 
while fighting or traveling. Flann always included 
this as a mandatory part of a student's spellbook 


to maintain standards of decorum. 

Notes: Uncommon or rare spell; originally 
from the MYSTARA setting. 

Flare 

(Evocation) 
Level: 1 
Range: Special 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 1 


Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell is typically used for long-range sig- 
naling outdoors. It produces a streak of intense 
light, of a color chosen by the caster, that shoots 
straight up into the air several hundred feet from 
the caster’s index finger and remains visible for 
about six seconds, It is equally visible in daylight 
or darkness, and can be seen from as far away as 
12 miles. 

A flare can be used to indicate the position of 
the wizard and his party, or it can be used to 
transmit simple messages. Since the flare $ color 
is controlled by the caster, a simple code can be 
devised for signaling between an army and its 
scouting parties. For instance, a red flare might 
indicate that an enemy is near, a yellow one 
might mean that the enemy is retreating, a green 
one “all clear,” and so on. 

The flare is otherwise harmless and has no 
effect on creatures or objects. Its vertical ascent 
is stopped by any physical barrier. 

Notes: Very rare. Known to be in the Fire-Eyes 
Scrolls. (Updated from DraGon Magazine.) 


377 


Flash 
(Alteration) 


Level: 2 

Range: 0 

Casting Time: | 

Components: V, S 

Duration: Special, maximum 2 rds./level 
Area of Effect: Thin beams, 90 feet long 
Saving Throw: Special 


By means of this spell, the caster can release a 
series of flashing, multi-colored beams of light 
from his fingertips in a dazzling display. 

The caster generates two light beams for each 
level of experience. These can be released as 
rapidly as three per round or as slowly as one per 
round. The beams can be of any color; they are 
90 feet long. They are stopped by physical 
objects, visual illusions, and any magical force 
spell of 4th level or greater, such as minor globe 
of invulnerability, wall of force, and similar 
spells. 

A creature is struck by a ray and dazzled 
unless the caster deliberately avoids the eyes, or 
unless the creature makes a successful saving 
throw vs. paralyzation. Dazzled creatures receive 
a penalty of —1 to attack rolls made during the 
next round. Only one creature can be dazzled by 
a single ray. The dazzling effect is not cumulative 
for multiple beams (multiple saving throws can 
be forced), but can be extended by hits in later 
rounds, Blind or eyeless creatures cannot be daz- 
zled. Multiple creatures can be dazzled, provided 
they are within 10 feet of each other. 

The caster can take actions other than spell- 
casting during the round in addition to the daz- 
zling effect, and can end this spell at will. 

Notes: Rare spell. Known to be in Myrl $ Text, 


Flash — Red Wizard 
Red Wizard spell, see flashburst. 


Flash, Nystul’s 
See Nystul’s flash. 


Flashburst — Red Wizard 


Flashburst — Red Wizard 
(Evocation) 


Level: 3 

Range: 10 yds./level 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 3 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: 20-ft. radius sphere 
Saving Throw: Special 

This spell creates a blinding flash of light. All 
sighted creatures caught in its area or looking at 
the effect when it goes off are blinded for the next 
round. Further, they must make a saving throw 
vs. spell; failure blinds a creature for 2410 
rounds, Blinded creatures have a —4 penalty to 
attack rolls. Thief skills requiring sight are at 
-20%; nonweapon proficiencies may be affected 
at the DM's option. 

Forewarned creatures can avoid the effects 
merely by closing their eyes if in the area or 
averting their eyes if not in the area. 

Notes: Common for Red Wizards of Thay; 
otherwise very rare. 


Z 
Mii" 
A P 

A Mi 


he 


li 


Flashlight 
(Alteration) 
Level: 1 
Range: 0 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: | 


Duration: 3 turns/level 
Area of Effect: Beam, 30 ft. + 10 ft/level 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell generates a beam of light a few 
inches in diameter. An opaque object can block 
the beam. The wizard can turn the beam off and 
on, instantly, at will. 

The beam is not equal to sunlight, but it can 
disorient a light-sensitive creature (drow, derro, 
duegar, svirfneblin, mind flayer, etc.) if played 
across the creature's face. One creature per round 
can be so affected and must save vs. spell, Failure 
means the creature suffers its standard penalty for 
light for 1d6 rounds, A thief hiding in shadows 
who might be caught by the beam must reroll for 
hiding and is detected if the roll fails. 

Any magical darkness cast against the wizard 
for the purpose of extinguishing the flashlight 
will do so and is expended. 

The material component for the spell is a 
dozen dried fireflies. 

Notes: Very rare spell. (Updated from 
POLYHEDRON Newszine. ) 


378 


Flensing — Red Wizard 


Flashpuff — Geisya 
(Alteration) 


Level: 2 

Range: 40 yds. 

Components: S, M 

Casting Time: 2 

Duration: | rd./level : 
Area of Effect: Cloud, 2 x 2 x 2 ft. 
Saving Throw: None 


$ 


The wu jen throws a pinch of white powder 
into a burning fire (such as a brazier), which 
causes a brilliant flash and a cloud of smoke. If a 
blinding effect is desired by the wu jen, onlook- 
ers are blinded for 2-5 rounds if a save vs. wands 
is failed; the wu jen is unaffected by the flash. 

The cloud of smoke can be any color the wu 
jen desires, and lasts for the full duration of the 
spell. This smoke can be used to form any sim- 
ple, two-dimensional image the wu jen concen- 
trates on. The painting proficiency allows the wu 
jen to create instant artwork that dissipates at the 
end of the spell. 

Notes: Common for geiysa; uncommon for wu 
jen; virtually unknown elsewhere. 


Fleet Feet 
(Alteration) 
“a whe 
Level: 3 
Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 3 


Duration: 1 day/5 levels 
Area of Effect: | individual 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell allows an individual to move more 
as if his feet and legs weighed far less then they 
actually do. For purposes of cross country move- 
ment, an affected individual can double his normal 
movement rate (and can force march beyond that, 
though still subject to the forced march effects), The 
individual's movement rate is doubled in combat sit- 
uations as well, but his balance and inertia make it 
difficult to maneuver. If moving greater than his 
normal movement rate and attempting to turn in any 
way, such as to round a comer or to avoid an obsta- 
cle, the individual must make a successful Dexterity 
check to avoid falling (failure ends his movement 
for the round and makes him prone). 

The material component for this spell is a 
feather from a flightless bird, such as an erdlu. 


The reverse of this spell, stone feet, makes the 
affected individual’s legs feel as heavy as rock, 
slowing his movement to half. A saving throw 
negates this effect. The individual's balance is 


The material component for the reverse is a 
piece of mekillot hide. 

Notes: Common on Athas (the DARK SUN set- 
ting); virtually unknown elsewhere. 


Fleeting Journey, Bowgentle’s 
See Bowgentle’s fleeting journey. 


Flensing — Red Wizard 
(Alteration) 


Level: 8 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 8 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: Special 


This horrifying spell actually strips the flesh 
from its victim. Developed by the Red Wizards 
for torture and interrogation, it can be learned 
only by spellcasters of evil alignment. 

Flensing takes four full rounds to be effective. 
+ Ist Round: The victim suffers great pain and a 

disfiguring tearing of his or her flesh but no 
actual 7 

* 2nd Round: The victim suffers 2d6 points of 
damage (saving throw vs. spell is allowed for 
half damage). 

+ 3rd Round; The victim takes 2d10 points of 
damage (save for half damage). 

* 4th Round: The victim must save vs. death 
magic or die instantly as the very flesh is torn 
from his or her bones. 

Victims of this spell often give in during the 
first round of casting and tell the Red Wizards 
what they want to know. On occasion, the wiz- 
ards let the spell complete its work even after 
they have gotten the information. 

Flensing causes extensive disfigurement, 
depending on when the spell is stopped. The vic- 
tim’s Charisma cannot be reduced below 1 in this 
manner, Charisma points can be restored by a 
regeneration effect. 

+ Ist Round: The victim must save vs. breath 
weapon or lose 1-3 points of Charisma perma- 
nently. 

e2nd—3rd Round: The victim must save vs. 
breath weapon or lose 2d4 points of Charisma 
permanently, 


oe ee ee eee al ee ee a ee 


379 


Flesh Mirage 


* 4th Round: A victim who survives the fourth 
round must save vs. breath weapon to avoid the 
permanent loss of 2d6 points of Charisma. 

The material component of flensing is an 
onion from a field plowed by rothe (see the 
MONSTROUS MANUAL Tome under “Mammal”) , 
which is peeled, one layer per round of the spell. 

Notes: Restricted to the Red Wizards of Thay 
or those trained by them. 


Flesh Mirage 
(Necromancy) 
Level: 5 dine 
Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: | turn 
Duration: | rd./level 


Area of Effect: The caster and 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell enables a wizard to “switch faces” 
with another creature, living or dead. It has no 
effect on the undead. The caster gains the touched 
individual’s facial features, while the target gains 
the caster’s. The caster must be able to see the 
features he intends to assume. 

The caster does not gain any sensory abilities 
(or disabilities) associated with his new face. For 
example, if he copies a medusa’s face, he gains 
none of the creature’s gaze attacks. Likewise, if 
he copies a blind man’s face, he still retains his 
normal sight. The reverse is also true—that is, the 
blind man remains sightless despite his “new 
eyes.” Both individuals retain their normal 
voices, as well as height, bodily appearance, 
knowledge, spells, and spell-like abilities. 

Flesh mirage compensates for any unusual 
restriction that a new visage might otherwise 
cause. For instance, even if the caster’s new face 
has no apparent breathing holes, he can still 
breathe normally. And even if his new face has no 
apparent eyes, he can still see as he did before. 

The flesh mirage serves as an effective dis- 
guise, It does radiate magic, however, which is 
identifiable as part of the Necromancy school. 
Magics that detect or remove spells of the illu- 
sion school—such as banish dazzle, dispel illu- 
sion, or dispel mirage do not affect this disguise; 
flesh mirage is not illusionary. Dispel magic or 
destroy magic can reverse the effects of this spell, 
returning each face to its origin. 

An unwilling creature touched by the caster is 
allowed a saving throw vs. spell to avoid the 
transference. As usual, a willing target can sim- 
ply forgo the saving throw. 


380 


T 


The material components of this spell are a bit 
of plaster and glue, and a mirror, all of which are 
consumed by the casting. 

Notes: Common in arabian settings; otherwise 
very rare, 


Flesh to Air 
(Necromancy) 
Reversible 


Level: 4 

Range: 10 yds. 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: Special 

Duration: Permanent 

Area of Effect: | living creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


With this spell, a wizard can vaporize the flesh 
of any one living creature, leaving it a special 
animated skeleton unless a successful saving 
throw vs. spell is made. These living skeletons 
can magically see and hear but cannot talk or cast 
spells. The creature can be controlled as if 
undead, but since it is not truly undead it cannot 
be turned or blasted out of existence by a priest's 
turning ability. The effects of this spell can be 
negated by its reverse, or by casting first a 
remove curse spell and then a dispel magic spell. 
No system shock roll is required. Restoration 
requires 5 rounds per original Hit Die of the crea- 
ture restored. 

This spell has alignment repercussions as 
decided by the DM, 

The reverse, air to flesh, clothes in flesh (a 
term including muscles, inner organs, brain tis- 
sue, etc.) any one being turned into a “living 
skeleton” by the flesh to air spell, restoring the 
body to its original appearance and abilities 
(slain special skeletons simply turn into dead 
bodies). 

Notes: Restricted to necromancers; rare. 


Flesh to Rocky 
See statue form. 


Flesh to Stone 
Reversed form, see stone to flesh. 


Fleshshiver 
(Necromancy) 


Level: 5 

Range: 10 ft/level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 2 


Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: | being 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell afflicts any single creature of large 
size or smaller the caster can see within range. 
The creature is automatically stunned (reeling, 
unable to think or act coherently) for the follow- 
ing round, and must make five Constitution 
checks (save vs. death magic for monsters with- 
out a Constitution score). For each one failed, a 
limb is broken, with an accompanying 1d6+2 
points of damage and loss of mobility. For human, 
demihuman, and humanoid, the checks are for 
left arm, right arm, left leg, right leg, and neck; if 
the last one fails, a system shock survival roll is 
required to avoid death. (DMs must rule on a 
reduction in movement rate appropriate for the 
creature if one or more limbs that provide move- 
ment are broken; a reduction by half for a bipedal 
creature, for example). 

A wizard of 18th level can affect huge creatures; 
one of 25th can affect gargantuan creatures. 

The material component for this spell is a 
bone, which is broken during the spellcasting. 
Chicken bones are often used. 

Notes: Restricted to the Seven Sisters, their 
apprentices, and select Harpers; rare. 


Float 
A spell of this name from the DRAGONLANCE set- 
ting has been combined with the spell feather 


float and appears there. 


Float 
(Alteration) 


Level: 1 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: | 

Duration: | turn/level 

Area of Effect: 1 creature or object 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


A recipient of this spell becomes more buoy- 
ant in water, The creature floats straight up to 
the surface like a cork, at a rate of 10 feet per 
level of the caster per round, carrying up to 10 
pounds of “baggage” per level of the caster. Air- 
breathing creatures benefiting from this spell 
are safe from drowning unless they are pre- 
vented from rising to the surface. At roughly 50 
feet per round, the ascent is swift, but the crea- 
ture stops if it encounters some obstacle. A 
floating creature can move around as it normally 


ae a ee eer eee 


381 


Floating Disc, Tenser's 


would; the spell does not interfere with normal 
swimming or movement, even if the recipient is 
diving or swimming downward. However, an 
individual who stops swimming floats toward 
the surface. There are no ill effects of this rapid 
rise, regardless of the original depth. The float 
spell does not imbue the creature with the swim- 
ming proficiency, but it keeps an air-breathing 
creature on the surface, where breathing is pos- 
sible, at least until the spell wears off. 

A caster touching an object instead of a crea- 
ture can successfully float a weight of up to 10 
pounds per experience level. (This is harder than 
lifting a creature, who in theory is already some- 
what buoyant.) For example, an experienced wiz- 
ard might use float to raise a treasure chest from 
the sea floor. 

The material component of float is a bit of 
cork. The wizard bites down hard on it when cast- 
ing the spell. 

Notes: Common in arabian settings; very rare 
elsewhere. 


Floating Disc, Tenser’s 
See Tenser’s floating disc. 


Fly 
(Alteration) 


Level: 3 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, $, M 

Casting Time: 3 

Duration: | turn/level + 1d6 turns 
Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell enables the wizard to bestow the 
power of magical flight. The creature affected is 
able to move vertically and horizontally at a rate 
of 18 (half that if ascending, twice that if descend- 
ing in a dive). The maneuverability class of the 
creature is B (180 degrees or less of turning in a 
round). Using the fly spell requires as much con- 
centration as walking, so most spells can be cast 
while hovering or moving slowly (movement of 
3). Possible combat penalties while flying are 
known to the DM (found in the “Aerial Combat” 
section of Chapter 9 of the DMG). The exact 
duration of the spell is always unknown to the 
spellcaster, as the variable addition is determined 
secretly by the DM. 

The material component of the fly spell is a 
wing feather of any bird. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Flyfield 
(Alteration) 


Level: 5 ah 
Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: Special 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 

Saving Throw: Special 


This spelljammer’s spell allows the caster (or 
another designated by the caster who activates the 
spell by speaking final words of power) to cause a 
powerless, drifting spelljamming ship, up to 5 tons 
per caster level, to suddenly lunge in a desired 
direction and distance, up to 30 yards plus 10 
yards per caster level. It is commonly used to foil 
ramming attempts or avoid collisions, escape mis- 
siles in combat, or to dart through crystal sphere 
portals. While the basic spell requires an entire 
round to cast, save for the final command, speak- 
ing the final command has a casting time of 1. The 
spell activator need not have any spellcasting abil- 
ity. The spell activator has total control over the 
ship’s direction and distance. If no direction is cho- 
sen, choose one at random, using the rules govern- 
ing grenadelike missiles. 

For the spellcaster to designate another as the 
spell activator, the two must touch each other as 
the spell is cast. The activator must then be taught 
the final words of power while holding the crys- 
tal sphere (see material components, below). If 
the activator speaks the key words within one day 
per level of the caster, the spell instantly takes 
effect (or is wasted; see below). 

If the activator is killed or feebleminded 
between casting and the end of the effectiveness 
period, the spell is lost (normal sleep or uncon- 
sciousness do not affect the spell). 

If the activator is in physical contact with two 
ships when he activates the spell, the spell fails. 
The flyfield’s magic can be centered only on a 
single ship. 

This spell will not work with any ship cur- 
rently under power (by a spelljamming helm, a 
furnace, or other power source) but will work in 
wildspace, phlogiston, and atmospheres alike. It 
cannot affect a ship whose total tonnage (atmos- 
phere excluded) exceeds the caster’s capability— 
if tried, the spell is lost. 

The material components are two small lode- 
stones and a small sphere of crystal, which dissi- 
pate as the spell is cast. 

Notes: Common for spellcasters from a spell- 
jamming culture; otherwise rare. 


ee aaa 


382 


N Flying Fist "i 


Flying Feat, Drawmij’s 


See Drawmij’s flying feat. 


Flying Fist 
(Evocation) 
(Force, Mentalism) 


Level: 2 

Range: 10 yds,/level 
Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 2 

Duration: | rd./level 

Area of Effect: Creates 1 fist 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell creates a small, utilitarian hand, nor- 
mally in the shape of a gloved fist of magical 
force, which is visible only to the caster (though 
detect invisibility or similar spells will allow 
others to see it). 

The hand has a movement rate of 12, but it 
must remain within 10 yards per level of the 
caster. It can hover, swoop, and dive at the mental 
command of the caster. No concentration is 
required to maintain the fist; it can follow a wiz- 
ard as he moves and fights, If the wizard casts 
another spell or is knocked unconscious, the fist 
dissipates immediately. 


A À i \ 
`A AANT 
Wijt \ 
XY i) j 
ae 


The fist can perform any one of three tasks: 

e It can grab small falling or floating objects 
weighing no more than 1 lb. and carry such 
objects for up to two rounds. The fist does not 
have the strength or the dexterity to remove 
items that are tethered, secured, or sheathed, or 
to take items from a creature’s grasp. 

e The fist can push or slap an opponent, causing a 
—] penalty to the creature's next attack. 

e The fist can physically attack an opponent, with 
the caster’s THACO and a +2 bonus, causing l-2 
points of damage. (It is not considered a mis- 
sile, magical or otherwise). 

The fist cannot penetrate solid objects or pass 
through walls of force or antimagic barriers. It 
can be destroyed physically by 5 points of dam- 
age. Its AC is 3 if invisible, 7 if the attacker can 
see it. Destroying the fist does not affect the 
caster. 

The flying fist is recorded in more ancient 
tomes as Alcimer's flying fist. Alcimer was 
extremely proud of the spell and disseminated its 
secret widely. Soon, so many mages were using it 
that they dropped Alcimer’s name from the title. 

Notes: Uncommon spell from the FoRGOTTEN 
REALMS setting; known to be in Detho 5 Libram. 


== 


on Flying Jambiya A 


Flying Jambiya 
(Alteration) 
(Province: Wind) 


Level: 2 

Range: 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time; 2 

Duration; 3 rds. + 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: 1 item 
Saving Throw: None 


. 


This specialized magic enables a wizard to send 
a blade after a target like a hawk after a desert rat. 
Only small weapons with metal blades work, such 
as the jambiya, knife, dirk, dagger, and the blade 
created by a sand jambiya spell. Otherwise, the 
weapon can be of any type. If the caster is not 
familiar or proficient with it, attacks are made 
with the usual THACO penalty (—5 for wizards). 

To cast the spell, a wizard whispers an incanta- 
tion, holds the chosen weapon in hand, blows on 
it, then throws or releases it. The caster directs 
the enchanted weapon against a specific individ- 
ual, The weapon flies about to attack that oppo- 
nent at a distance. The caster can change the 
target as long as the spell is maintained. In any 
case, he must be able to see his target; the weapon 
cannot fly without benefit of his sight. 

The caster can move the weapon 60 feet per 
round. The weapon strikes once per round with 
the caster’s normal THACO (and nonproficiency 
penalty, if applicable). It boasts a +2 bonus to 
attack rolls and is considered a +2 magical 
weapon for purposes of what it can strike. (If the 
blade was magical before this spell was cast, add 
these benefits to its usual bonuses.) 

Damage, however, is at —1, to a minimum of 1, 
While animated, the weapon has an Armor Class 
of 0 and is considered to have 12 hit points. If it's 
reduced to 0 or fewer hit points, the spell ends, 
but the weapon itself is not actually damaged. 

The caster must concentrate on the flying jambiya 
continuously to keep it animated. The spell ends 
instantly if the caster dies, begins any other spell- 
casting, falls unconscious, or goes out of range. 

While the wizard is casting a flying jambiya, 
any injury to him ruins the spell. However, if the 
weapon is already animated, injury alone doesn’t 
end control over the weapon. If control is ever 
lost, the spell ends and the weapon simply falls to 
the ground. 

In addition to a suitable blade, this spell 
requires a teardrop from the caster. 

Notes: Common in arabian settings; otherwise 
very rare. 


Focus Fear — Dragon 
(Alteration) 
Reversible 


Level: 4 

Range: 0 

Components: V 
Casting Time: 4 
Duration: | rd./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: Special 


Similar in function to the aura of terror spell, 
focus fear increases the potency of the dragon’s 
panic and fear auras. It is useful for all dragons of 
adult age or older, and it can be used in conjunc- 
tion with an aura of terror. 

By means of this spell, the dragon reduces the 
radius of its fear aura, focusing the power of that 
fear, For every 5 yards the dragon reduces its 
aura, the saving throw modifier against the 
dragon fear gains an additional —1, However, a 
dragon cannot reduce its fear aura to a radius of 
less than 15 yards in any case. An adult dragon, 
with a normal fear radius of 20 yards and a sav- 
ing throw modifier of +2, can reduce its fear 
radius to 15 yards and change the modifier to +1. 
Likewise, a great wyrm could condense its fear 
radius to 15 yards from 50 yards, changing its 
usual —4 save modifier to -1 1. A natural 20 saves 
regardless of the modifiers. 

The reverse of this spell, extend fear, allows 
the dragon to enlarge its fear radius to a maxi- 
mum of 50 yards. An extended aura is weaker, 
with saving throw modifiers changing in an 
opposite manner from that of focus fear. The 
reverse can be used by dragons as young as 
“young adults” (if they possess the required 
spellcasting ability) but is useless to a great 
wyrm. 

Both versions of this spell allow the dragon 
such fine control of the fear radius that it can 
alter the dimensions of its fear radius on a round- 
by-round basis. Of course, the aura can be altered 
only within the parameters of the version 
employed (that is, any radius between the 
dragon’s normal radius and the limits of the 
appropriate version of the spell). To change the 
radius while the spell is in effect, the dragon must 
stop what it is doing and concentrate; it cannot 
engage in other activities in that round. Other- 
wise, the dragon is free to cast spells, fight, fly, 
use its breath weapon, and so on, as the spell 
requires no concentration. The dragon can cancel 
the spell at any time. A dispel magic has no effect 
on either version of this spell, though spells such 


a aa aii 


384 


~ Fogbolt — Phaerimm a 


as wish, limited wish, and the like can end the 
dweomer immediately. 

Both versions of this spell are fairly common 
among dragons capable of casting a spell of this 
level. 

Notes: Restricted to dragons; uncommon. 
(Updated from DraGon Magazine.) 


Fog Cloud 
(Alteration) 
(Air) 


Level: 2 

Range: 10 yds. 
Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 2 

Duration: 4 rds. + 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


The fog cloud spell can be cast in one of two 
ways, at the caster’s option: as a large, stationary 
bank of normal fog, or as a harmless fog that 
resembles the Sth-level wizard spell cloudkill. 

As a fog bank, this spell creates a fog of any 
size and shape up to a maximum 20-foot cube per 
caster level. The fog obscures all sight, normal 
and infravision, beyond 2 feet. 

As a cloudkill-like fog, this is a billowing mass 


of ghastly, yellowish-green vapors, measuring 40 
feet x 20 feet x 20 feet. This moves away from 
the caster at 10 feet per round. The vapors are 
heavier than air and sink to the lowest level, even 
pouring down sinkholes and den openings. Very 
thick vegetation breaks up the fog after it has 
moved 20 feet into the vegetation. 

The only effect of either version is to obscure 
vision. A strong breeze will disperse either effect 
in one round, while a moderate breeze will 
reduce the spell duration by 50%. The spell can- 
not be cast under water. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Fogbolt — Phaerimm 
(Evocation) 


Level: | 

Range: 10 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 
Duration: 2d4 rds. 

Area of Effect; 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell creates a flying teardrop of foglike 
vapor and hurls it at any one being chosen by the 
caster. The target creature is enveloped in an aura 
of thick, smokelike fog, and temporarily shrouded 
(-3 to attack rolls, AC worsened by 2, saving 
throws reduced by 3 if based on dodging; that is, 
the “Starlight” penalties from the DMG Table 
72). All phaerimm are immune to this spell; its 
fog will not cling to them. 

Any fiery light sources (torches, candle lamps, 
and open lanterns) carried by or in contact with 
the target get a saving throw vs. magical fire. If 
this fails, the flames are instantly extinguished 
and can’t be reignited by any means (their fuel 
won't burn) for 2d4 rounds. 

The target creature is allowed a saving throw 
vs. spell. If successful, the cloud dissipates on the 
round after striking; if not, it clings to the target, 
foiling vision-related spells, missile aiming, spy- 
ing attempts on surroundings, and the like, by 
reducing the range of effective vision to less than 
1 foot. 

The fog lasts for 2d4 rounds. If an affected 
creature touches another creature within 4 rounds 
of being enveloped, the second creature must 
save vs. spell. Failure means the spell effects are 
transferred to the second creature, regardless of 
the intent of the creature already affected. This 
holds true even if only an item held, carrried, or 
worn touches the second creature. 

In hot, daytime desert conditions, the fog lasts 


SS S a 


385 


~ Fool's Speech i 


only 1d6 rounds (1d4 if strong winds are present, 
including gust of wind). 

The material component of this spell is a large 
drop of water or spittle, or a drop of sweat, let fall 
into smoke of any sort. 

Notes: Restricted to phaerimm; common. 


Fool’s Speech* 
(Alteration) 
(Wild) 


Level: 3 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: ! turn 

Duration: 1 hr/level 

Area of Effect: Caster + 1 creature/level 
Saving Throw: None 


With this spell, the wizard empowers himself 
and others of his choosing with the ability to 
speak a secret language incomprehensible to 
others. Creatures designated to speak the lan- 
guage must be touching each other when the spell 
is cast. 

Once cast, the characters can choose to speak 
normally or in their secret tongue. They can 
speak and understand this mysterious language 
fluently. 

Fool's speech is not recognizable as any known 
language, nor does it remotely sound like any 
language. A comprehend languages or tongues 
spell will not translate it. It can be understood by 
an individual wearing a helm of comprehending 
languages and reading magic, although the nor- 
mal percentage chances apply. 

The material component is a smal! whistle 
made of bone, 

Notes: Restricted to wild mages; uncommon 
(ToM). 


Fools’ Gold 
(Alteration, Iusion) 
(Alchemy, Earth) 


Level: 2 

Range: 10 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: | hr./level 

Area of Effect: 10 cu. in./level 
Saving Throw: Special 


Copper coins can temporarily be changed to 
gold pieces, or brass items turned to solid gold, 
for the spell duration by means of this magic. The 


area of effect is 10 cubic inches per level—i.e., a 
l-inch x 1-inch x 10-inch volume or equivalent, 
equal to about 150 gold coins, Any creature view- 
ing the “gold” is entitled to a saving throw vs. 
spell, which can be modified by the creature’s 
Wisdom; for every level of the wizard, the crea- 
ture must subtract 1 from his dice roll. Thus, it is 
unlikely that fools’ gold will be detected if cre- 
ated by a high-level caster. If the “gold” is struck 
hard by an object of cold-wrought iron, there is a 
slight chance it will revert to its natural state, 
depending on the material component used to 
create the “gold.” If a 25-gp citrine is powdered 
and sprinkled over the metal as this spell is cast, 
the chance that cold iron will return it to its true 
nature is 30%; if a 50-gp amber stone is pow- 
dered and used, the chance drops to 25%; if a 
250-gp topaz is powdered and used, the chance 
drops to 10%; and if a 500-gp oriental (corun- 
dum) topaz is powdered and used, there is only a 
1% chance that the cold iron will reveal that it is 
fools’ gold. 
Notes: Common spell (PHB), 


pf Nagar aga ag ae sr 


386 


a  ——————— a 


Foothold — Old Empire 
(Alteration) 
(Earth) 


Level: 3 

Range: 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 3 
Duration: 1 turn/level 
Area of Effect: 900 sq. ft. 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


A foothold spell causes stony hands to appear 
from the ground. These try to grab the legs of all 
creatures in a 30-foot by 30-foot area or a 90-foot 
by 10-foot area (depending on the desire of the 
caster). Creatures successfully held by this spell 
cannot move, but they can attack normally and 
cast spells. Those trapped by this spell are con- 
sidered to have an effective Dexterity of 1. 

The foothold spell cannot affect airborne or 
invisible creatures. A successful saving throw 
negates the effect of this spell on a target, but a 
new saving throw must be rolled every round the 
target is in the area of effect. 

The material component for this spell is a vul- 
ture’s claw. 

Notes: Rare spell. As a FORGOTTEN REALMS Old 
Empire spell, initial exposure requires a mentor 
or a read Southern magic spell. 


Footprints, Ruornil’s 
Reversed form, see Ruornil’s tracks. 


Force Missiles, Mordenkainen’s 
See Mordenkainen’s force missiles. 


Force Sculpture, Bigby’s 
See Bigby’s force sculpture. 


Force Shapechange 
(Necromancy) 


Level: 5 

Range: 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 

Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: 30-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: Special 


With this spell, the caster can force any 
shapechanger or magic-wielder using any form 
of a shapechanging spell to instantly revert to 
his true form (or his most common form). To 
use the spell, the caster points at creatures he 


knows or believes to be shapechangers. The 
spell affects one creature per level in the area of 
effect. If the creatures are indeed shapechang- 
ers, they must make a successful saving throw 
vs. spell or immediately revert to their true form 
and suffer 3d10 points of damage from the 
wracking pain caused by the forced change. The 
change takes a full round, during which time a 
victim can take no other actions. If the saving 
throw was successful, the victim does not 
change form, but still suffers half damage. 

The material components for this spell are a 
hair from the hide of any lycanthrope and a live 
butterfly, released when the verbal component is 
uttered 


Notes: Very rare spell. 


Force Umbrella, Otiluke’s 
See Otiluke’s force umbrella. 


Forcebuckler, Zala’s 
See Zala’s forcebuckler, 


Forcecage 
(Evocation) 


(Force) 


Level: 7 

Range: 10 yds./2 levels 
Components: V, S, special 
Casting Time: 3—4 
Duration: 6 turns + 1/level 
Area of Effect: 20-ft. cube 
Saving Throw: None 


This powerful spell enables the caster to bring 
into being a cube of force, but it is unlike the 
magical item of that name in one important 
respect: Instead of solid walls of force the 
forcecage has alternating bands of force with 1%- 
inch gaps between. Thus, it is truly a cage, rather 
than an enclosed space with solid walls. Crea- 
tures within the area of effect of the spell are 
caught and contained unless they are able to pass 
through the openings—and, of course, all spells 
and breath weapons can pass through the gaps in 
the bars of force of the forcecage. 

A creature with magic resistance has a single 
attempt to pass through the walls of the cage. If 
the resistance check is successful, the creature 
escapes. If it fails, the creature is caged. Note that 
a successful check does not destroy the cage, nor 
does it enable other creatures (save familiars) to 
flee with the escaping creature. The forcecage is 
also unlike the solid-walled protective device, 
cube of force, in that it can be gotten rid of only 
by means of a dispel magic spell or by the expira- 


A a aOR, pS Re Sn a a 


387 


~ Forcecube d 


tion of the spell. 

By means of special preparation at the time of 
memorization, a forcecage spell can be altered to 
a forcecube spell. The cube created is 10 feet on a 
side, and the spell then resembles that of a cube 
of force in all respects save that of the differences 
between a cast spell and the magic of a device, 
including the methods of defeating its power. 

Although the actual casting of either applica- 
tion of the spell requires no materia] component, 
the study required to commit it to memory does 
demand that the wizard powder a diamond of at 
least 1,000 gp value, using the diamond dust to 
trace the outlines of the cage or cube he desires to 
create via spellcasting at some later time. Thus, 
in memorization, the diamond dust is employed 
and expended, for upon completion of study, the 
wizard must then toss the dust into the air and it 
will disappear. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Forcecube 
See forcecage. 


Forceful Hand, Bigby’s 
See Bigby’s forceful hand. 


Forcelash — Phaerimm 
(Evocation) 


Level: 4 

Range: 0 

Components; V, S 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration; 4 rds. 

Area of Effect: | forcelash, 80 ft. long 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell creates a whip of shimmering force, 
projecting from the caster’s arm (or another limb 
or protrusion of the caster’s choice) to the limits 
of the lash’s length. Controlled by the caster’s 
will, this crackling band of force strikes at one 
being per round. It penetrates shield spells and 
other magical barriers of 3rd level or less and 
always hits, inflicting 6d4 points of damage. 

A struck being must make two saving throws 
vs. spell. The first, if successful, reduces the 
damage by half; the second governs the target’s 
mobility. If successful, the victim can move and 
act normally; if it fails, the victim is rooted to the 
spot, body convulsed with the energy discharge 
of the forcelash. This lessens Armor Class by 2 
points, denies Dexterity Armor Class adjust- 
ments, and prevents the victim from moving, 
launching attacks, aiming or readying items, and 
ruins any attempted spellcasting that round. The 


DM may require a Dexterity check to see if a 
convulsing target drops items. Fragile items 
dropped on hard surfaces might require their own 
saving throws vs. crushing blow. 

The lash wielder has the option to keep a vic- 
tim immobilized with the lash instead of striking 
with it; the whip and the arm wielding it cannot 
be used for other actions. An individual who tries 
to free an immobilized creature by seizing the 
lash immediately takes 344 points of damage, but 
the immobilized victim is instantly freed. This 
does not end the spell; the wielder is free to use 
the lash against any target on the next round. 

Notes: Restricted to phaerimm; common. 


Forcewave 
(Abjuration, Evocation) 
(Force) 
Level: 2 


Range: 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 2 
Duration: 1 rd. 

Area of Effect: | creature 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell hampers a single creature for one 
round. A wave of translucent, silent, colorless 
force, visually resembling an ocean wave break- 
ing on a beach, comes into being in front of the 
caster. The caster must point to, name, or concen- 
trate upon the creature during the casting. The 
wave rushes toward the creature a rate of 30 yards 
per round. It affects only the intended target. 

If the target creature is within range, the 
forcewave strikes it. The target receives a saving 
throw vs. spell to determine the forcewave’s 
effect. If successful, the creature suffers one 
point of impact damage and is thrown off-bal- 
ance; a running or charging creature, or one on a 
narrow bridge or high place, must make a Dex- 
terity check on 1d20 to avoid falling. A failed 
saving throw means the creature suffers 1d4+1 
points of impact damage, is repulsed (forced 
away from the caster) 10 feet, and has any ongo- 
ing spellcasting ruined. Only missile attacks are 
permitted on the round during which it is struck. 
A Dexterity check must be made to avoid falling 
(at —1 if the target creature is small, weak, sur- 
prised, or precariously situated), 

Noncorporeal beings cannot be affected by a 
Jorcewave, but a being employing a displacement 
or blink effect, or that shifts rapidly from one 
plane to another, can be affected by this spell. 

The material components of this spell are a 
small piece of rope or string and a drop of water, 


fo ee ee 


388 


raha a 


spittle, or a tear, 
Notes: Rare spell. Known to be in Laeral’s 
Libram. 
Foresight 
(Divination) 


Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: 2d4 rds. + 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: Special 

Saving Throw: None 


This spell grants the caster a powerful sixth 
sense in relation to himself or another. Although 
cast upon himself, the wizard can specify that he or 
another is the beneficiary of the spell. Once the 
spell is cast, the wizard receives instantaneous 
warnings of impending danger or harm to the 
object of the spell. Thus, if he were the object of the 
spell, the wizard would be warned in advance if a 
thief were about to attempt to backstab him, or if a 
creature were about to leap out from an unexpected 
direction, or if an attacker were specifically target- 
ing him with a spell or missile weapon. When the 
warnings are about him personally, the wizard can- 
not be surprised and always knows the direction 
from which any attack on him is made. In addition, 
the spell gives the wizard a general idea of what 
action he might take to best protect himself-—duck, 
jump right, close his eyes, etc.—and gives him a 
defensive bonus of 2 to his Armor Class. 

When another person is the object of the spell, 
the wizard receives warnings about that person. He 
must still communicate this to the other person to 
negate any surprise. Shouting a warning, yanking 
the person back, and even telepathically communi 
cating through a crystal ball can all be accom- 
plished before the trap is sprung, if the wizard does 
not hesitate. However, the object of the spel] does 
not gain the defensive bonus to his Armor Class. 

The material component for this spell is a 
hummingbird'’s feather. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Forest’s Fiery Constrictor 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 
(Fire) 


Level: 6 

Range: 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 6 

Duration: | rd./level 

Area of Effect: 1 fire source 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell causes a tentacle of magical flame to 
snake forth from any existing source of natural or 
magical fire. The flaming tendril is 10 feet long, 
has AC 7, can be hit only by magical weapons of 
+2 or better enchantment, and has hit points 
equa] to double the caster’s level (24 hit points for 
a 12th-level caster). 

Any creature within 20 feet of the tentacle is 
subject to attack as directed by the caster. The 
victim must attempt a saving throw vs. spell. If 
successful, the subject only suffers 1d6 points of 
fire damage from contact with the tendril. If the 
saving throw is failed, the victim is entangled and 
suffers 3d6 points of fire damage each round 
until the tendril is destroyed or the spell expires. 

If the fire source from which the tentacle 
emanates is extinguished, the remaining time that 
the fiery constrictor can exist is cut in half. 

The material component is a red dragon’s 
scale. 

Notes: Uncommon spell (70M). 


Forget 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
(Mentalism, Song) 


Level: 2 
Range: 30 yds. 
Components; V, S 

Casting Time: 2 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1-4 creatures in a 20-ft. cube 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


By means of this spell, the spellcaster causes 
creatures within the area of effect to forget the 
events of the previous round (the one minute of 
time previous to the utterance of the spell). For 
every three levels of experience of the spellcaster, 
another minute of past time is forgotten. This 
does not negate charm, suggestion, geas, quest, 
or similar spells, but it is possible that the being 
who placed such magic upon the recipient could 
be forgotten. From one to four creatures can be 
affected, at the discretion of the caster. If only 
one is to be affected, the recipient saves vs. spell 
with a —2 penalty; if two, they save with —1 penal- 
ties; if three or four are to be affected, they save 
normally. All saving throws are adjusted by Wis- 
dom. A priest’s heal or restoration spell, if spe- 
cially cast for this purpose, will restore the lost 
memories, as will a limited wish or wish, but no 
other means will do so. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


a Re SO ne ae ee 


389 


Fortunes of War, Tenser's 


Fortunes of War, Tenser’s 
See Tenser’s fortunes of war. 


Freedom 
Reversed form, see imprisonment. 


Freezing Sphere, Otiluke’s 
See Otiluke’s freezing sphere. 


Friends 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
(Song) 


Level: 1 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 

Duration: 144 rds. + 1 rd_/level 
Area of Effect: 60-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: Special 


A friends spell causes the wizard to temporar- 
ily gain 2d4 points of Charisma. Intelligent crea- 
tures within the area of effect at the time the spell 
is cast must make immediate reaction checks 
based on the individual's new Charisma. Those 
with favorable reactions tend to be very 
impressed with the spellcaster and make an effort 
to be his friend and help him, as appropriate to 
the situation. Officious bureaucrats might decide 
to become helpful; surly gate guards might wax 
informative; attacking orcs might spare the 
caster’s life, taking him captive instead. When the 
spell wears off, the creatures realize that they 
have been influenced, and their reactions are 
determined by the DM. 

The components for this spell are chalk (or 
white flour), lampblack (or soot), and vermilion 
applied to the face before casting the spell. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Frightful Joining, Bloodstone’s 
See Bloodstone’s frightful joining. 


Frightful Joining, Strahd’s 
See Strahd’s frightful joining. 


Frost Fingers 
(Evocation) 


Level: 1 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 1 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: % 


This is essentially a cold form of the burning 
hands spell. When cast, it causes freezing cold 
and shards of ice to blast from the caster’s fin- 
gertips to a distance of 3 feet in a 120-degree 


_arc in front of the caster, Any creature in this 


area suffers 1d3 points of damage, plus 2 
points for every level of the spellcaster, to a 
maximum of 1d3 + 20 points of cold damage. 
Those who make a successful saving throw vs. 
spell receive half damage. Liquids engulfed by 
the cold will freeze unless an item saving 
throw vs. cold is made. 

Notes: Common for Frost mages and Savage 
mages of the North; otherwise very rare. Known 
to be in The Codicil of White. 


Frost Shroud 


Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: 10-ft. square/level 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell enables a wizard to cover a surface 
of the designated size with a thick coating of 
frost. Any type of surface can be affected, but the 
spell is used to best advantage if the frost blends 
in with surrounding ice or snow, thus obscuring 
the covered surface, 

The surface to be affected must be cold enough 
to enable water to freeze. The spell remains in 
effect until temperatures warm sufficiently to 
melt surrounding ice or snow. In an arctic cli- 
mate, the spell could last permanently. Warming 
the affected surface melts the frost temporarily, 
but if temperatures are cold enough, the frost 
forms again after one round. 

Similar spells have been known to exist, creat- 
ing shrouds of moss, mold, grass, etc. 

The material component for the spe)) is a pinch 
of powdered glass mixed with several drops of 
water. 

Notes: Common for Frost mages and Savage 
mages of the North; otherwise very rare. 


390 


E Fundamental Breakdown, Alamir's a 


Frostfire 
(Alteration) 


Level: 2 

Range: 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 2 

Duration: 1 turn/level 

Area of Effect: 1 fire source 
Saving Throw: Special 


Through the use of the frostfire spell, the wiz- 
ard is able to change the normally hot radiance of 
fires to a cold radiance. Affected flames are 
tinged with blue for the duration of the spell. 
Flame magic that burns for less than one round 
cannot be affected by this spell. The dweomer 
produces one of three effects, as chosen by the 
caster at the instant of casting: 

* Cool Flame: This creates a total absence of heat 
radiation; the flame will continue to burn, con- 
sume fuel, and give off light, but it will produce 
no heat, 

* Cold Flame: This effect causes flames to burn 
cold; they will inflict frost damage on creatures 
that come into contact with them. For example, 
a torch normally causes 143 points of heat dam- 
age. If the cold flame effect is cast upon the 
torch, it will now inflict 1d3 points of cold dam- 
age to anyone struck by the torch. 

* Chill Fire-User: This spell can be cast upon a 
single fire-dwelling or fire-using creature such 
as an efreet, fire elemental, etc. The being is 
allowed a saving throw vs, spell. Success means 
the spell has no effect, but a failure inflicts 2d4 
points of damage. 

As a rule, the wizard can affect flame equal to 
one torch or four candles per experience level. 
For this purpose, a small campfire is equal to 
three torches, a bonfire, six, and a wall of fire, 
eight. If fire under the effect of a frostfire spell 
goes out, the effects of the spell cease immedi- 
ately. While an affected fire burns, it cannot 
ignite flammable materials. 

The material components for this spell are a 
piece of ivory and a pinch of soot if the cool 

flame or chill fire-user version is cast. The cold 
flame version requires a piece of ice and a clear 
crystal of at least 10 gp value. 

Notes: Uncommon for Frost mages; otherwise 
very rare. Known to be in The Book of Naz. 


391 


Frozen Moment, Storm’s 
See Storm’s frozen moment. 


Fumble 
(Enchantment/Charm) 


Level: 4 

Range: 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 4 

Duration: 1 rd/level 

Area of Effect: 30-ft. cube 
Saving Throw: Special 


When a fumble spell is cast, the wizard creates 
an area in which all creatures suddenly become 
clumsy and awkward. Running creatures trip and 
fall, those reaching for an item drop it, those 
employing weapons likewise awkwardly drop 
them, etc. Recovery from a fall or picking up a 
fumbled object typically requires a successful 
saving throw and takes one round. Note that 
breakable items might suffer damage when 
dropped. A subject succeeding with his saving 
throw can act freely that round, but if he is in the 
area at the beginning of the next round, another 
saving throw is required. Alternatively, the spell 
can be cast at an individual creature. Failure to 
save means the creature is affected for the spell’s 
entire duration; success means the creature is 
slowed (see the 3rd-level spell). 

The material component of this spell is a dab 
of solidified milk fat. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Fumble-Fingers 
Reversed form, see prestidigitation. 


Fundamental Breakdown, Alamir’s 
See Alamir’s fundamental breakdown. 


Galathar’s Gnostic Chain 
(Enchantment/Charm, Evocation) 
(Geometry) 


Level: 4 

Range: 10 ft./level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 4 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 spellcaster 
Saving Throw: Special 


Galathar’s gnostic chain is effective only 
against spellcasting beings. If cast on a being 
using psionics, natural spell-like powers, or mag- 
ical items, the spell is wasted. 

The chain appears as a glowing, snakelike spi- 
ral of light in the air above the chosen target, and 
settles down around the individual. The chain can 
form even if the target is invisible or surrounded 
by magical barriers. There is no known way to 
escape a gnostic chain as it forms. If the chosen 
target is not a spellcaster, the chain falls past the 
individual to the ground and vanishes in a harm- 
less chaos of winking lights. 

On the round after the gnostic chain is cast, it 
affects the chosen target. The victim is forced to 
cast only spells of the same level as the last spell 
cast before the chain formed; he can choose 
which spell (if more than one remains) and when 
to cast, but any spell cast must be of that spell 
level. If all memorized spells of that level have 
been exhausted, the individual has to engage in 
study before being able to cast spells again. 
Scrolls and magical items can be used normally. 

A gnostic chain cannot be dispelled. It can be 
escaped only by a successful saving throw vs. 
spell. The first saving throw allowed to the victim 
is two rounds after being affected, and it is made 
at a penalty of —6, The second saving throw, two 
rounds later, is at —5, the third is at —4, and so on. 
The penalty decreases to zero (0) and then 
becomes a bonus of +1 added every other round 
until a maximum +6 bonus is reached, where- 
upon the modifiers reduce by | again until —6 is 
reached, and the cycle begins anew. When a sav- 
ing throw is successful, the spell is broken. The 
death of the victim also ends the spell; once res- 
urrected or raised, the individual is free of it. 

Galathar was an elf mage who won many spell 
duels during his long adventuring career by 
means of this spell, until the Simbul defeated 
him. 

The material components are least three joined 
links of any sort and size of chain, a lock that has 
been used to confine any living being in the past, 


v= 


a 
rues 


Galkyn’s Bolt 


4 and a horseshoe nail. All are consumed in 
the spell’s casting. 

Notes: Restricted to the Seven Sisters, 

their apprentices, select Harpers, and an occa- 

sional geometer; rare or very rare. 


Galkyn’s Bolt 
(Alteration) 


Level: 4 

Range: 20 ft./level 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 1 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell is sometimes used by Harper mages 
who are expecting trouble but have a need to 
carry mostly nonbattle spells. Named for its 
long-dead creator, it “drinks” any spell of 3th 
level or less that is currently memorized in the 
caster’s mind, converting it into a magical bolt. 

This raw energy pulse leaps at a being of the 
caster’s choice, striking at a +4 bonus to hit and 
using the caster’s THACO. The caster can will the 
pulse to fly straight or to arc around or over barri- 


393 


os Gamalon'’s Fiery Backlash cr 


ers. A bolt that misses simply fades away and the 
magic is wasted. A hit inflicts 5d4 points of dam- 
age. Undead and other beings linked to the Nega- 
tive Material Plane suffer 5d6 points of damage 
instead. 

Notes: Restricted to the Seven Sisters, their 
apprentices and certain Harpers; uncommon or 
rare. 


Gamalon’s Fiery Backlash 
(Enchantment/Charm, Evocation) 


Level: 3 

Range: 120 yds. + 10 yds./level 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: | 

Duration: 1 turn + 1 rd./2 levels 

Area of Effect: 1 to 4 creatures or objects in a 
30-ft. radius 

Saving Throw: Neg. 


When cast, the fiery backlash spell establishes 
invisible dweomers around the targets chosen by 
the caster. Whenever the target (whether a living 
being or a magical item) casts a fire-based spell 
(fireball, burning hands, etc.), the spell is imme- 
diately redirected onto the casting being or object 
with all normal effects. For example, a wizard 
under the effect of a backlash can cast a fireball, 
but finds himself at the center of it, subject to all 
the damage (a saving throw for half damage is 
allowed). An item, such as a wand of fire, must 
make a successful saving throw vs. magical fire 
or be destroyed. 

Originally designed in Llorbauth by a starfar- 
ing mage, its primary use was to defend against 
long-distance fire attacks, a favored attack form 
in Wildspace. This spell returned and spread 
through the Realms by sources who maintain its 
origina] creator’s name. Khelben Arunsun gra- 
ciously provided the spell knowledge to the 
Watch-Wizard Corps and the Watchful Order of 
Magists & Protectors of Waterdeep, as well as the 
Harpers. 

Notes: Uncommon or rare for the Harpers, 
Watchful Order of Magists & Protectors of 
Waterdeep, and the Watch-Wizard corps; other- 


wise rare or very rare. 


Gambler’s Luck 
(Enchantment/Charm, Invocation) 


Level: 6 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: | 


Duration: | turn/level 
Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


When cast, the wu jen has no contro! over what 
form this spell takes. He must abide by the winds 
of fate. There is a 60% chance the outcome is 
good and a 40% chance the outcome is bad. A 
good outcome improves all die rolls made for the 
character by 1 (or 10% for percentile rolls) for 
the duration of the spell. A bad outcome does not 
affect the die rolls of the character but afflicts 
him with a gambling mania for the duration of 
the spell. 

The individual automatically accepts any game 
of chance or wager offered him. The game or 
wager must include some element of chance; 
thus, a dare does not fall into this category. Like- 
wise, the spell does not force the individual to 
accept suicidal wagers (the individual does not 
agree to kill himself or let another kill him) on 
the basis of a coin toss. He would, however, 
accept a bet that offered freedom or surrender on 
the basis of a roll of the die. The individual con- 
tinues to play at any game until unable to pay, 
although he attempts to borrow from others to 
remain in a game. 

The material component for this spell is a 
small statuette of the god of luck. 

Notes: Common in oriental settings; otherwise 
very rare. 


Gaseous Form 
(Alteration) 
(Alchemy) 


Level: 4 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: 2 rds./level 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell allows the recipient, plus any gear 
carried or worn, to assume gaseous form for the 
duration of the spell. In gaseous form, an indi- 
vidual is both transparent and insubstantial (and 
therefore very difficult to spot, although an alert 
observer may notice small disturbances and dis- 
tortions in the air that give away the gaseous 
form’s location). This spell allows flowing 
movement at a rate of 3 per round but not unas- 
sisted levitation or flight. A gust of wind spell, 
or even normal strong air currents, will blow the 
gaseous form at air speed. While gaseous, the 


394 


Gate Ward 


form can enter any space that is not airtight. For 
example, it could pass through a tiny crack or 
hole in a wall. 

Magical fire or lightning can harm the gaseous 
form normally. Whirlwinds and similar magical 
tempests or cyclones inflict double damage on 
the individual, but all other attack forms cannot 
harm the insubstantial individual. The creature 
can will itself back into solid form at any time, 
ending the spell. 

Notes: Very rare. (Updated from POLYHEDRON 
Newszine.) 


Gate 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 
(Dimension, Geometry) 


Level; 9 

Range: 30 yds. 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 9 

Duration: Until the summoned being leaves 
Area of Effect: Creates | gate 

Saving Throw: None 


The casting of a gate spell has two effects. 
First, it causes an interdimensional connection 
between the plane of existence the wizard is on 
and the plane on which dwells a specific being 
of great power; thus, the being is able to merely 
step through the gate or portal from its plane to 
that of the caster. Second, the utterance of the 
spell attracts the attention of the sought-after 
dweller on the other plane. When casting the 
spell, the wizard must name the entity he desires 
to use the gate and come to the wizard’s aid. 
There is a 100% certainty that something steps 
through the gate. Unless the DM has some facts 
prepared regarding the minions serving the 
being called forth by the gate spell, the being 
itself comes. 

If the matter is trifling, the being might leave, 
inflict an appropriate penalty on the wizard, or 
attack the wizard. If the matter is of middling 
importance, the being can take some positive 
action to set matters right, then demand appropri- 
ate repayment. If the matter is urgent, the being 
can act accordingly and ask whatever is its wont 
thereafter, if appropriate. The actions of the being 
that comes through depends on many factors, 
including the alignments of the wizard and the 
deity, the nature of his companions, and who or 
what opposes or threatens the wizard. Beings of 
deity status generally avoid direct conflict with 
their equals or betters. The being gated in will 
either return immediately (very unlikely) or 


remain to take action. Casting this spell ages the 
wizard five years. 
Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Gate Seal 
(Abjuration) 
Reversible 


Level: 3 

Range: 0 or special 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: | turn/level 

Area of Effect: 1 gate or battlefield 
Saving Throw: None 

The gate seal spell is a more powerful version 
of gate ward. It temporarily shuts down any one 
gate between the cubes of Acheron. If the spell is 
cast just as a creature enters a gate, the creature 
vanishes into the gate and immediately reappears 
out of it, effectively going nowhere. A sealed gate 
displays the seal of the wizard who cast the spell. 
The gate seal of a wizard who has no personal 
sigil displays the face of the caster. The gate seal 
lasts for 1 turn per caster level, and when cast on 
a battlefield, all cubehopper spells fail within the 
area of the ongoing battle. 

The material component of the spell is a bar of 
steel, 

The reversed form, unseal gate, only negates 
the gate seal and gate ward spells. Its material 
component is a twig, which is snapped as the 
spell is completed. 

Notes: Uncommon in the PLANESCAPE setting; 
otherwise, very rare (and useful primarily on 
Acheron), 


Gate Ward 
(Abjuration) 
Reversible 


Area of Effect: | gate 
Saving Throw: None 


The gate ward spell temporarily shuts down 
any one gate between the cubes of Acheron. If 
the spell is cast just as a creature enters a gate, 
the creature vanishes into the gate and immedi- 
ately reappears out of it, effectively going 
nowhere. A warded gate displays the seal of the 
caster. The gate ward of a wizard who has no 


395 


~ Gateway a 


personal sigil displays the face of the caster. 
Anonymous versions of the spell are said to 
exist, though no confirmed example of this has 
been verified. 

The material component of the spell is a bar of 
steel engraved with the wizards seal and bent 
into a circle, 

The reversed form, remove gate ward, counters 
a gate ward (but will not counter a gate seal, 
which is a more powerful spell). The material 
component is a small, flat piece of iron with a 
jagged edge. 

Notes: Uncommon in the PLANESCAPE setting; 
otherwise very rare. 


Gateway 
(Alteration) 
(Dimension) 


Level: 8 

Range: 10 yds. 

Components; V, S, M 

Casting Time: 8 

Duration: 1 rd. + 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: 10-ft. diameter disk 
Saving Throw: None 


By means of this spell, the caster creates a 
magical portal to another location on the same 
plane that the wizard has previously visited. The 
wizard and other individuals can cross freely 
between one side of the portal and the other for 
the duration of the spell. 

The gateway appears as a vertical disk 10 feet 
in diameter. Through the portal on one side, the 
terrain beyond can he clearly seen. The other side 
of the disk is a smooth gray surface. The portal 
cannot be called into being in the same space as 
another object but can be placed against a wall or 
other flat surface, 

Creatures can pass through freely from one 
side of the portal to the other, but nonliving mate- 
rial cannot unless brought by living creatures. 
Each side of the gateway maintains its own envi- 
ronment, so that opening a portal into a live vol- 
cano or at the bottom of the ocean poses no 
danger to someone on the other side unless he 
chooses to cross into such a deadly area. 

The gateway can be cast only into areas that 
the wizard has himself visited. In addition, there 
is a success rate dependent on distance from the 
source. 


396 


5 Gauntlet of Teeth a 


Distance Success 
Within 100 miles of the area 100% 
Within 500 miles of area 50% 
On different planet 10% 
In different solar system 5% 


Failure indicates that no such portal can he 
opened. Gateway portals cannot open into other 
planes of existence or be cast while on any plane 
other than the Prime Materia). 

A gateway can be dispelled by the caster at 
will, by a successful dispel magic, or by the spell 
duration elapsing. Any living thing caught in the 
portal as it collapses must make a Dexterity 
check or be sliced between two different loca- 
tions, presumably killed instantly. 

The material component of this spell is a hand- 
ful of earth or the equivalent from the caster’s 
location. 

Notes: Uncommon spell. Known to be in 


Elminster Traveling Spellbook. 
Gauntlet 

(Alteration, Evocation) 

(Force) 

Level: 1 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: | 

Duration: 9 rds. 


Area of Effect: One of the caster’s hands 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell creates a translucent, silent, noncon- 
ductive glove of magical force around one of the 
caster’s hands. This glove cannot be crushed, so 
the caster can use it to wedge doors open, keep 
even the great weight of a falling portcullis from 
slamming down, and so on. The caster can remove 
his hand from the gauntlet if it is so wedged, but 
cannot it put back in. The wedge remains in effect 
until the spel) expires or a dispel magic spell 
causes the gauntlet to vanish. 

The gauntlet can be used to strike for 2d4 
points of damage per blow, with the caster’s 
normal THACO. It it gains no attack or damage 
bonuses but is considered a +4 magical weapon 
for purposes of what it can hit. It can touch or 
handle heat, acid and other flesh-corrosive sub- 
stances, and boiling liquids or vapors without 
suffering harm. Diseases cannot be transmitted 
by it or cling to it, so molds and mummy rot can 
be freely handled and not passed on to another 
being who later touches the gauntlet. No sub- 
stance or creature can adhere to the gauntlet, 


397 


regardless of what methods are used. In other 
words, a spider climb-using mage could not, 
and neither could a viscid glob, gibbering 
mouther secretion, stirge barb, mimic pseudo- 
pod, or web spell. The glove does not grasp or 
strike with any force beyond the caster’s normal 
strength, 

A spellicaster cannot cast any spell with 
somatic components while the gauntlet is in 
place. It can be banished instantly by the caster's 
silent will, ending the spell. 

The material component of this spell is a lump 
of clear glass or rock crystal large enough to fill 
the caster’s palm. 

Notes: Uncommon in the FORGOTTEN REALMS 
setting; virtually unknown elsewhere. 


Gauntlet of Teeth 
(Evocation) 
(Force) 


Level: 6 

Range: 10 ft./level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 5 
Duration: 6 rds, 

Area of Effect; Special 
Saving Throw: 4 


This spell creates a whirling oval of disembod- 
ied teeth in midair. The countless teeth all face 
one way, and they spin around each other in ran- 
dom arcs within an oval area 8 feet long or tall 
and 4 feet across at its widest extent. The caster 
can, in any round in which he does no other spell- 
casting, mentally direct the gauntlet to fly about 
at MV FI 9 (MC: A), tilting it as desired. (Its ori- 
entation is vertical when it first appears.) If other 
spellcasting is undertaken by the caster, the teeth 
of the gauntlet whirl about in a stationary loca- 
tion until control is resumed. The gauntlet can 
form about a target creature, and it compresses to 
fit through any opening at least as large as the 
caster’s head. 

The teeth are constructs of force and can pene- 
trate any nonmagical armor. They cause any crea- 
ture 6d4 points of damage on contact (or per 
round of continued contact with immobile crea- 
tures). They do no damage to objects. If a gaunt- 
let of teeth can pass through a target 
creature—that is, move up to, envelop, and con- 
tinue onward beyond it—damage is increased by 
an additional 2d4 points. If circumstances permit 
(for example, a gauntlet of teeth moving down a 
narrow passage occupied by a file of beings), the 
dweomer can harm up to 12 beings per round, but 


p Gaze Reflection A 


it deals the specified damage to each only once. 
(In most cases, only one or two victims are 
affected in a round.) 

Magical armor of any sort (not bracers or 
rings) provides some protection from the gaunt- 
let. Its damage is reduced by 2 points for each 
magical plus of the armor worn (/eather armor 
+2 would reduce the damage by 4 points). The 
minimum damage caused by the gauntlet is 2 
points. 

The material components of this spell are at 
least seven teeth. They are consumed by the spell. 

Notes: Rare in the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting; 
virtually unknown elsewhere. 


Gaze Reflection 
(Alteration) 
(Dimension) 


Level: 1 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: ] 

Duration: 2 rds. + 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


The gaze reflection spell creates a shimmering, 
mirrorlike area of air before the wizard that 
moves with the caster. Any gaze attack that 
requires eye contact, such as that of a basilisk, 
eyes of charming, a vampire’s gaze, the 6th-level 
eyebite spell, and so on, is reflected back upon 
the gazer; the spellcaster suffers no effects from 
the gaze attack. Creatures whose gaze attacks are 
reflected receive a saving throw against their own 
gaze effect. This spell is only effective against 
attacks in which the attacker’s gaze must be met. 
The spell does not affect vision or lighting. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Geas 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
(Mentalism) 


Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: None 


A geas spell places a magical command upon a 
creature (usually human or humanoid) to carry 
out some service, or to refrain from some action 


or course of activity, as desired by the spellcaster. 
The creature must be intelligent, conscious, 
under its own volition, and able to understand the 
caster. While a geas cannot compel a creature to 
kil} itself or perform acts that are likely to result 
in certain death, it can cause almost any other 
course of action. The geased creature must follow 
the given instructions until the geas is completed. 
Failure to do so will cause the creature to grow 
sick and die within 1d4 weeks. Deviation from or 
twisting of the instructions causes a 
ing loss of Strength points until the deviation 
ceases. A geas can be done away with by a wish 
spell, but a dispel magic or remove curse spell 
will not negate it. Your DM will decide any addi- 
tional details of a geas, for its casting and fulfill- 
ment are tricky, and an improperly cast geas is 
ignored. 
Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Geirdorn’s Grappling Grasp 
(Evocation) 
(Force) 


Level: 4 

Range: 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: 2 rds./level 

Area of Effect: Creates | hand 
Saving Throw: None 


This magic brings into being a hand-shaped 
force, invisible to all but the caster, which can be 
used to grapple objects and even certain spell 
effects. 

Only the caster can direct the hand, which is 
twice the size of the caster’s own left hand. 
Directing Geirdorn'’s grappling grasp precludes 
spellcasting; if such is undertaken, the hand 
merely hangs motionless until concentrated upon 
again. Control can be assumed and neglected sev- 
eral times within the spell’s duration, if desired. 

The hand can move through the air as rapidly 
as the caster normally moves. It can grip but not 
strike: The hand cannot touch living matter, but it 
can grasp parapets, locks, keys, levers, weapons, 
etc. with the same strength as the caster. Small 
objects can be carried about, to a maximum of 10 


The hand cannot manipulate things with any 
delicacy, but it can slow or prevent their move- 
ment for one round. Weapons cannot be wielded 
by the spell force, but the hand can hinder the 
weapon of any nonliving enemy so as to cause a 
~2 attack roll penalty. 


en a 


398 


Gemidan’s Paralytic Missile 


A primary use of this spell is to combat the 
various Bigby 5 hand spells, This spell can lessen 
the damage dealt by the Bigby's hand spells by 
1d4+1 hit points. If a Bigby 5 hand spell causes 
no damage, Geirdorn 5 grappling grasp keeps the 
former from taking effect for one round. 

The material component of this spell is a glove 
or a finger bone. 

Notes: Very rare spell from the FORGOTTEN 
REALMS setting; known to be in Galadaster'’s 
Orizon. 


Geisya Cantrip 
This is the oriental form of the cantrip 
spell, see cantrip. 


Gemidan’s Icicle 
(Evocation) 


Level: 1 

Range: 20 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 
Duration: | rd. 


Area of Effect: One object or creature 
Saving Throw: None 


When cast, this spell summons an ice-blue bolt 
that streaks to its intended target like a magic 
missile. It inflicts 1d4 points of damage on one 
opponent (2d4 to fire-based or fire-using foes) 
and causes a |-foot-thick patch of ice to form 
over a 3-foot radius at its impact point, The spell 
is designed to hit foes in their eyes (blinding 
them for one round) or their hands (disrupting 
spellcasting for one round), The target area is 
named at the time of casting. The ice dissolves 
into mist after one round. 

This variant of the Snilloc s snowball spell was 
created by Gemidan, Khelben’s youngest appren- 
tice. Like its parent spell, it has the benefits of 
greater range at higher levels and can be used 
against objects (triggering traps or placing ice on 
torches to extinguish lights, etc.). 

The material component for this spell is a 
piece of ivory or a small chunk of ice. 

Notes: Known by Gemidan, Khelben, Laeral, 
and those trained by them; very rare. 


Gemidan’s Paralytic Missile 


(Evocation) 


Level: 2 

Range: 40 yds. + 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 1 

Duration: Ird./level 

Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell generates a missile of green magical 
energy that lances out of the caster’s fingertip and 
always hits its target creature or person; the target 
must be at least partially visible for the spell to 
work. A creatures struck by a paralytic missile is 
immobilized for 1 round per level of the caster. A 
successful saving throw vs. paralysis negates the 
effect. 

Originally a miscast magic missile spell, 
Gemidan and Khelben both found it to be a use- 
ful application as a defense for lower level 
mages. Khelben promptly gave the spell’s partic- 
ulars to Mage Civilar Thyriellentha Snome, the 
senior watch-wizard. 

Notes: Known by Gemidan, Khelben, Laeral, 
the Watchful Order of Magists & Protectors of 
Waterdeep, and the Watch-Wizard Corps; uncom- 
mon or rare. The effect of the saving throw has 
changed from previous versions of the spell. 


399 


Gemjump 
(Abjuration) 
(Artifice) 


Level: 7 

Range: 0 

Components; V, S, M 
Casting Time: 2 rds. 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell allows the caster to immediately 
teleport without error to the location of a spe- 
cially enchanted gem. The teleport will always be 
on target (never high or low). If the area the gem 
is in is too confined, the caster will appear in the 
nearest sufficiently large space. This transport is 
one-way, and the spellcaster cannot jump back to 
his initial location by use of this spell. 

This spell is initially cast upon a special gem 
known as a roguestone, The roguestone is not 
destroyed in the initial casting or subsequent 
activation of the spell. At any time after the 
stone is enchanted, by uttering a command 
word, the caster can immediately teleport to the 
location of the gem. The caster can use the 
roguestone to gemjump any time after the ini- 
tial casting. 

There is no time limit, and the caster can be 
slain, resurrected, reincarnated, shapechanged, 
or become undead and still he able to use the 
roguestone to gemjump, Gemjumping requires 
only the uttering of a word, whether the caster is 
in chains or otherwise bound, or within a magical 
entrapment such as a force cage. The caster can 
be on a different plane or planet than the stone 
and still have it function. The caster cannot use 
the command word if feebleminded, asleep, 
unconscious, petrified, paralyzed, or insane, nor 
will the gemjump operate if the caster or the 
roguestone is within an antimagic shell, Only the 
caster and his normal clothing will be trans- 
ported; any chains, equipment, or allies will be 
left behind. 

The roguestone itself radiates no detectable 
magical energy unless it is in the process of 
gemjumping. Multiple gemjumps can be cast on 
a single roguestone by separate wizards. These 
additional spells do not negate the previous 
gemjumps on the roguestone. A limited wish will 
reveal the number (though not the identity) of 
gemjumps cast on a roguestone. Only a full wish 
will dispel those magics on a roguestone. Physi- 
cal destruction of the roguestone will also destroy 
the magic, though spellcasters who have links 


with a roguestone will he aware of its destruction. 
The roguestone saves as rock crystal. 
Notes: Uncommon spell. Known to be in 


Elminster s Traveling Spellbook. 


Genie Contract 
(Enchantment/Charm) 


Level: 4 

Range: 0 

Components: V 

Casting Time: | turn 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 2 creatures 
Saving Throw: None 


This solemn spell binds two parties in a per- 
manent contract, the terms to which they must 
both agree. Both parties must swear to honor 
those terms; failure to do so results in a penalty to 
one or the other. Genies commonly use this spell 
to set conditions for mortal lovers, to bind them- 
selves to a sha’ir's service, to hoodwink mortals 
when making bets, or simply to outline the terms 
of an obligation or a favor. Neither remove curse 
nor dispel magic affects a genie contract. 

This spell is an absolute prerequisite if a genie 
and ins (the genie name for nongenies) intend to 
bear offspring. 

Notes: Uncommon in arabian settings; other- 
wise very rare. 


Gentle Reminder, Nybor’s 
See Nybor’s gentle reminder. 


Gesture, Laeral’s 
See Laeral’s gesture. 


Ghast Creation 
(Necromancy) 


Level: 5 


Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: | turn 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: 1 ghoul 
Saving Throw: None 


The ghast creation can be cast only on a prop- 
erly prepared ghoul; the spell creates one ghast. 
The ghoul must make a successful saving throw 
vs. death magic or be utterly destroyed by the 
process. 

The resulting ghast is normal for its type in 
every way (see the MONSTROUS MANUAL Tome). 


hp oe ner a ee ee 


Ghost Armor 


When first created, the ghast is subservient to the 
caster, This may change if the creature is not well 
treated or its needs are not supplied. 

The ghoul’s body must be infused with a spe- 
cial liquid that costs 400 gp to produce. The infu- 
sion process takes a full hour. The casting of the 
ghast creation spell must be preceded by a 
bestow curse and followed by an enchant an item 
spell. Creating a ghast is an evil act. 

Notes: Restricted to necromancers; very rare. 
(Updated from Dracon Magazine.) 


Ghastly Hands 
(Necromancy) 


Level: 3 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 3 

Duration: 2 rds./level. 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


When this spell is cast, the flesh of the wiz- 
ard’s hands changes to resemble the flesh of a 
ghast. Those within 10 feet of the wizard will 
smell a sickening stench; if they have met ghasts 
before, they will recognize the stench as being 
similar to the nauseating odor given off by those 
beasts, though it has no other adverse effect. 

Any human or demihuman (including elves) 
touched by the wizard must make a successful 
saving throw vs. paralyzation or be paralyzed for 
4 + 1d6 rounds. Only one creature can be touched 
per round, and the wizard must make a successful 
attack roll. The wizard can end the spell at will 
(but not the paralyzation, which runs its course). 

Notes: Restricted to savage mages and necro- 
mancers; very rare. (Updated from DRAGON Mag- 
azine.) 


Ghelkyn’s Wounding 
(Necromancy) 


Level: 4 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: Special (1 turn max.) 
Area of Effect; Creature touched 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell enables the caster to steal vital 
energy (hit points) from a foe that the caster 
touches. A successful attack roll is required to 
touch hostile or wary targets, but the spell need 


not be unleashed until contact is made. 

If a touch is not made within one turn of cast- 
ing, the spell is lost. The spell drains 2d8+1 hit 
points from the victim unless a successful saving 
throw vs. spell is made. One of the drained hit 
points is always lost in the transfer, but the caster 
gains the remainder as healing energy. Any exist- 
ing damage to the caster can be healed instantly 
by the influx of energy. Any excess hit points that 
are left after all damage is cured are retained for 
1 turn. Any damage to the caster during that turn 
is first taken from these excess hit points. After 
the turn ends, the excess hit points are lost. 

A target creature that successfully saves 
against Ghelkyn’s wounding loses only 1 hit 
point, which is not gained by the caster. The tar- 
get is then stunned (unable to take any action dur- 
ing the round and acts last in the following 
round), 

The caster of a Ghelkyn s wounding spell can 
also choose to give vital energy to a target. If the 
target is willing or unconscious, no saving throw 
is necessary. An undead creature is harmed by 
such a gift of energy: The caster gives up the hit 
points, and the undead creature suffers the same 
amount of damage if it fails a saving throw vs. 
spell. If a target successfully saves, it is stunned 
(unable to take any action) during the remainder 
of the round and acts last on the round following. 
In the case of creatures able to alter their state or 
location (phase, teleport, gaseous form, ete.), any 
such change is prevented until the end of the 
round following the caster’s touch, 

Notes: Very rare; virtually unknown outside 
the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Ghost Armor 
(Conjuration) 


Level: 3 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: 1 creature, size H or smaller 
Saving Throw: None 


An improved version of the armor spell, ghost 
armor provides the recipient with a suit of 
ghostly, translucent plate armor. The plate armor 
provides an Armor Class of 3 to the user, which 
can combine with Dexterity and other magical 
bonuses. If the recipient is already AC 3 or better, 
the spell has no effect. Magical bonuses from 
existing armor (leather armor +2, for example) 
are not added to the ghost armor. 


WO ee ee 


401 


x Ghost Blade a 


Ghost armor has no weight and does not 
restrict the wearer in normal movement, spell- 
casting, or thieving. The armor is magical force, 
not metal, and so is not vulnerable to attack from 
rust monsters or the heat metal spell. 

The material component of this spell is a frag- 
ment of real armor that has been worn in battle. 

Notes: Uncommon spell. Known to be in The 
Collected Wisdom of Snilloc. 


Ghost Blade 
(Alteration) 


Level: 2 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 2 

Duration: 2 rds. + 2d4 rds. 
Area of Effect: 1 wooden item 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell temporarily transforms any wooden 
object that is longer in one direction than in 
another and of less than 35 Ibs. or so (an average 
man-sized being must be able to lift it in one 
hand) into a sword. The sword can be of any one- 
handed type, from a short sword to a long sword, 
and is considered a magical weapon for purposes 
of what it can hit. It inflicts the normal damage of 
the weapon type selected (gaining neither dam- 
age nor attack bonuses from the magic), and can 
be wielded by any being as if she were proficient 
with it. The caster can cause the magic to end 
instantly before the spell duration expires. The 
wooden item—usually a staff, cudgel, furniture 
leg, or tree limb—is not consumed by the spell 
and reappears whole at the end of the spel] dura- 
tion even if the ghost blade was broken or bent 
during use. 

The spell’s material components are a handful 
of iron filings and a drop of water from any pool 
or body of water once struck by lightning. 

Notes: Known to the Seven Sisters and some 


other wizards; rare. 


Ghost Light 
(Conjuration) 


Level; 1 

Range: 120 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 5 

Duration: Concentration 
Area of Effect: 10 linear feet 
Saving Throw: None 


With this spell, the wu jen summons a ghostly 
green radiance anywhere within the range of 
the spell. The light can be used to illuminate 
some object or can be shaped in any form 
within the limits of the area of effect, Further- 
more, the caster can control the movement of 
the light. The ghost light could be formed in the 
shape of a man and then commanded to walk or 
fly, for example. 

The spell lasts as long as the caster continues 
to concentrate on it. Common superstition 
holds that various evil spirits radiate a light 
similar to that produced by the ghost light spell. 
Intelligent creatures with a low rating or those 
less than 1 Hit Die must make a saving throw 
vs. spell upon seeing the ghost light. If the sav- 
ing throw is successful, the creature stands its 
ground, albeit nervously. Those who fail panic, 
running at their full movement rate away from 
the light for 1 round. If they are unable to flee, 
they cower and attempt to hide. If forced to 
fight under these conditions, they suffer a 
penalty of -2 on attack rolls. 

The material component for this spell is a 
piece of phosphorus. 

Notes: Common in oriental settings; otherwise 
very rare. 


Ghost Pipes 
(Alteration) 
(Song) 
Level: 2 
Range: Touch 
Components: V, S 


Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: Until touched by a living creature 
Area of Effect: 1 instrument 

Saving Throw: None 


When this spell is cast, the wizard can cause 
any one nonmagical musical instrument to 
play itself. The instrument must be whole and 
in playing condition. It need not be an instru- 
ment that the wizard himself can play, but he 
must be able to softly whistle or hum the 
desired tune. This tune can be no more than 
one minute long. 

Upon releasing the instrument, it glows as if 
limned with faerie fire and levitates at the level it 
was released. The various parts of the instrument 
(keys, valves, strings, etc.) move under the con- 
trol of the magic. Upon reaching the end of the 
song, the instrument repeats the tune over and 
over until 

The ghost pipes stop playing when any living 


402 


~ Ghostgrail g 


creature touches the instrument. The radiance 
fades and the instrument slowly settles to the 


This spell was originally created by Vanger- 
dahast of Suzail, currently royal magician tọ 
King Azoun IV. It was made available through 
the Council of Mages. Royal scuttlebutt claims 
firmly that the august and puissant Vangerda- 
hast is deeply embarrassed by this early attempt 
at spell research and would have banned it 
completely except that His Majesty enjoys the 
spell as a novelty. The throne room is often 
filled with an orchestra of levitating, glowing 
instruments. 

Notes: Uncommon spell. Known to be in The 
Libram of Lathintel. (Note that this spell’s level is 
2nd, not 3rd, as has been given in some sources.) 


Ghost Production 
Lost spell. It is believed that, even if successful, 
the ghost was not under the caster 5 control. 


Ghost Rigging 
ey 


(Conjuration/Summoning 
(Province: Wind) 


Level: 4 

Range: 120 yds. 
Components; V, S, M 
Casting Time: 4 
Duration: | hr./level 
Area of Effect: 1 vessel 
Saving Throw: None 


Used primarily at sea, this magic creates a 
“ghostly” rigging on a ship or other vessel, which 
functions just as normal rigging does, Sorcerers 
typically use the spell to replace damaged sails or 
masts that have snapped—especially when the 
crew is no longer sufficient to rig the ship by 
other means, 

The rigging always matches the vessel's needs. 
Thus, an unmasted galleon gains three masts, 
each with a billowing set of sails. A raft or barge 
acquires a single sail, sufficient to help it on its 
way. The vessel moves normally for its type. 

The conjured rigging performs as normal rig- 
ging in all ways—even in combat. It is vulnerable 
to damage just as normal rigging would be. Fur- 
ther, a successful dispel magic or similar spell 
can destroy it. 

The rigging is translucent and glows dimly; 
sails provide a soft radiance even at night. The 
caster can place a personal symbol on the sails to 
advertise his presence. For instance, one sorcerer- 
pirate creates sails that resemble screaming faces, 


appearing and disappearing as the wind catches 
the ghostly fabric. 

The material components of this spell are a bit 
of canvas and string. When the spell is cast, the 
components expand and change to become the 
ghostly rigging. 

Notes: Common in arabian settings; otherwise 
very rare. 


Ghostfire 
Lost spell, referenced in the novel Prism Pentad. 


Ghostgrail 
(Abjuration, Alteration, Necromancy) 


Level: 6 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 6 

Duration: | rd./level 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell affects the caster or a single creature 
touched during spellcasting. It makes the recipi- 
ent immune to all undead special powers (level or 
Strength draining, fear, mummy rot, and the like), 
so that the protected being suffers only physical 
damage from undead attacks. A wizard under the 
effects of a ghostgrail does not age when encoun- 
tering a ghost and need not make a saving throw 
when hearing a banshee wail. 

Moreover, the spell allows the protected being 
to see, hit, and damage undead with normal 
weapons (shadows are always seen, vampires can 
be struck when gaseous, and so on). This tem- 
porarily overrides undead immunities, but also 
negates any special bonuses the recipient receives 
against undead (for example, a mace of disrup- 
tion wielded by the recipient would not blast 
undead out of existance). A ghostgrail spell does 
not negate spell-like undead powers, such as 
phasing or flying, and does not provide any pro- 
tection against spells cast by undead, such as a 
spell cast by a lich. 

The material component of the ghostgrail spell 
is the dust from a coffin or burial slab. 

Notes: Rare in the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting; 
Virtually unknown elsewhere. 


ee ee 


403 


aes 4 
AK Sey 


7 Ghoul Lattice r 


Ghostharp 
(Evocation) 
(Song) 


Level: 1 

Range: 0 

Components: S, M 
Casting Time: 1 
Duration: 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell enables a caster to silently and unob- 
trusively make harp music performed much ear- 
lier—performed or heard by himself—be heard 
again. The volume and apparent origin of the 
music are under the caster’s control. Sung or spo- 
ken words cannot be conveyed by means of this 
spell, but messages, recognition motifs, and even 
magical triggers can all be carried by the right 
tune performed in the proper manner. 

The spell can be used to play several tunes, in 
any order and sounding as if they come from var- 
ious directions and distances, so long as all of 
this music was audible while the spell was mem- 
orized and the spell duration is not exceeded. 
Silences can be placed between tunes or between 
repetitions of the same tune by the spellcaster. 

The casting of this spell requires only that the 
caster’s flesh directly touch a tiny mode] of a harp 
(which can be inside a pocket or under clothing), 
as the will is bent on unleashing the music. The 
model harp vanishes as the spell takes effect. 
This spell is usually used to distract foes or cap- 
tors, to impress folk with the caster’s powers, or 
to trick people into thinking the caster is a harpist 
or that a harpist is somewhere close by. 

Notes: Restricted to the Seven Sisters, their 
apprentices, and select Harpers; uncommon. 
Optionally available to bards and song mages; 
uncommon. 


Ghoul Gauntlet 
(Alteration, Necromancy) 


Level: 6 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 6 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 human 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This rare and horrible curse causes the victim 
to be slowly transformed into a ravening, flesh- 
eating ghoul (see the description of ghouls in the 


MonsTROUS MANUAL Tome for details). The 
transformation process usually begins at the limb 
or extremity (usually the hand or arm) closes to 
the location touched by the caster at the onset of 
the spell. The victim suffers 1d2 points of dam- 
age each round while the body slowly dies and 
transforms into a ghoul’s cold, undying flesh. 

The victim is entitled to an initial saving throw 
to resist this deadly transformation. If failed, only 
a limited wish, wish, or restoration spell will end 
the condition. A dispel magic or remove curse is 
effective only if cast within three rounds of the 
touch. During the early stages of the spell, the 
original afflicted extremity might also be severed 
and burned to terminate the spell. 

If the extremity affected by the ghoul gauntlet 
is amputated while the victim has lost less than 
20% of total hit points, then only a hand or foot 
may need to be severed (inflicting 1d4+1 points 
of damage, requiring a system shock ro}! to 
remain conscious, and resulting in the loss of the 
limb’s mobility and functions). After the victim 
has lost 20% —50% of total hit points, however, 
an entire limb must be cut off, with the loss of 
1d12+4 hit points and a required system shock 
roll. Initially, the transformed flesh of the victim 
has no paralytic powers or any of the special abil- 
ities of ghouls. As the spell unfolds, the advanc- 
ing front of dying flesh inexorably traverses the 
entire body, and the victim dies once the ghoul 
gauntlet reaches the heart or brain (that is, upon 
reaching 0 hit points due to the spell). Healing 
spells, potions, or magical items have no power to 
cure or reverse this affliction. 

One full day after the victim has died, unless 
the remains are burned, the subject awakens as a 
full-fledged ghoul. The new undead is now a 
fawning slave, utterly under the control of the 
necromancer who cast the nefarious spell. 

The material components include a fingernail 
of a corpse and a pinch of purple mandrake root. 
Both of these are consumed by the casting of the 
spell, 

Notes: Restricted to undead spellcasters; rare. 


Ghoul Lattice 
(Necromancy) 


Level: 8 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: 100 yds./level 
Saving Throw: None 


' rian ma 


405 


_ Ghoul Touch 


Stealing corpses from graveyards for raw 
materials can be a time-consuming task without 
the use of this spell. Casting it creates a small 
tunnel that extends chaotically from the point 
where the spell was cast and then divides into a 
series of shafts, connecting with any number of 
graves or other subterranean pockets within the 
area of effect, 

The tunnels are 4 feet in diameter, circular, and 
an average of 6 feet below the surface. The tun- 
nels intersect in a maze-like fashion, but the only 
place they emerge at the surface is at the point 
where the caster stands. (If cast underground, the 
tunnels never reach the surface.) The spell creates 
a random |atticework of tunnels through which 
new undead minions can be summoned or necro- 
mantic spell components harvested. 

The material components for this spell are a 
long fingernail and a pinch of dirt from a grave. 

Notes: Restricted to necromancers and undead 
spellcasters; uncommon. 


Ghoul Touch 
(Necromancy) 


Level: 2 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 2 

Duration: Maximum | rd./level 
Area of Effect: 1 person 
Saving Throw: Special 


When this spell is in effect, the caster’s touch 
causes any single human, dwarf, gnome, half-elf, 
a halfling, to become rigid for 3-8 (1d6+2) 
rounds unless the victim makes a successful sav- 
ing throw vs. paralyzation. 

The material component for this spell is a 
smal] scrap of cloth taken from the clothing of a 
ghoul or a pinch of earth from a ghoul’s lair. 

Notes: Restricted to necromancers; uncom- 
mon, 

Giant Fur 
(Alteration) i ; 
Level: 1 
Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: Instantaneous 


Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell causes the recipient’s body hair to 
grow thickly in a matter of seconds, covering him 
with a layer of matted hair that provides armor 
protection equivalent to that of padded armor 
(AC 8). Any member of a mammalian race, intel- 
ligent or not, can benefit from this spell, even if 
he keeps his hair shaved off. Thri-kreen and other 
nonmammalian beings are not affected by this 
spell. Successive castings on an individual have 
no effect as long as a previous casting is in effect. 
The armor does not hinder movement or prohibit 
spellcasting—it’s the recipient's own body hair, 
after all—and the hair shrinks back into the body 
at the spell’s end. The spell lasts until success- 
fully dispelled or until the wearer takes cumula- 
tive damage totaling greater than 8 hit points plus 
1 hit point per level of the caster. This spell’s pro- 
tection is cumulative with normal shield and 
Dexterity bonuses but not with protective spells 
like armor. 

The material component for this spell is a 
strand of giant hair. 

Notes: Available on Athas; very rare. (Updated 


from DRAGON Magazine.) 
Giant Size 

(Alteration) 

Reversible 

Level: 8 

Range: 0 


Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 turn 
Duration: 2-8 rds. 

Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell allows the wu jen to assume truly 
gigantic proportions. As soon as the spell is 
cast, the wu jen must make a system shock roll. 
If the roll is failed, the individual permanently 
loses 1 point of Constitution. The spell causes 
the wu jen to instantly grow, adding a height of 
3 feet for every level of experience. An 18th- 
level wu jen would be about 60 feet tall and a 
29th-level wu jen would stand a colossal 93 feet 
tall. The Strength of the wu jen increases pro- 
portionately— 1 point of Strength for every 
three levels of experience, to a maximum of 25. 
However, the giant form is awkward and 
clumsy, so the wu jen does not receive any hit 
bonuses for his increased Strength (although he 
does receive damage bonuses). The percentile 
scores for an 18 Strength are ignored, going 
directly from 18 to 19 in Strength. Damage 
bonuses for Strengths above 18 are equal to +6, 


a Na a eae 


~ een ed 


plus 1 point for every point of Strength greater 
than 18. The Armor Class of the wu jen is 
improved by | for every 12 feet of height 
gained. The hit points of the wu jen remain 
unchanged. The movement rate also remains 
unchanged, because of the slow and lumbering 
body of the caster. 

While in giant form, the wu jen cannot cast 
spells of any type. Items carried by the wu jen 
do not increase in size, except for normal cloth- 
ing. Obviously, because of this, the wu jen can- 
not use normal weapons. However, he can 
uproot trees to use as clubs (2410 points of dam- 
age, plus Strength) if a successful bend bars/lift 
gates roll is made. Boulders can be hurled, again 
if a successful bend bars/lift gates roll is made. 
Each boulder thrown causes 3d6 points of dam- 
age. Other acts of rampage and destruction must 
be adjudicated by the DM, using the general 
guidelines of Strength and the bend bars/lift 
gates roll. Also, since the spell causes a sudden 
spurt of growth, the caster should take care in 
picking the place the spell is used. If cast under- 
ground or in an area smaller than the full size 
attained by the caster, the caster will take dam- 
age, possibly even dying because of the squeez- 
ing and crushing that occurs. 

The material component for this spell is the 
scale of a dragon or hairs from the head of a 
giant. 

The reverse of this spell is minute form. 
When cast, the size of the caster reduces by 
three inches per level. An 18th-level caster 
reduces by 54 inches. When the caster shrinks 
to one inch in height only 4th of an inch is lost 
per level thereafter, The maximum reduction 
allowed is 1th inch tall. The Armor Class of 
the caster remains unchanged. However, the 
individual must be seen to be hit! The move- 
ment rate is reduced by 1 per foot of height lost. 
Upon reaching the last foot of height, the move- 
ment rate is reduced by | for every further 3- 
inch reduction in height. The movement rate 
cannot be less than I per round. 

Upon reaching one foot in height, the creature 
suffers only half normal damage from falls. At 
one inch or less of height, no damage is suffered 
from falls. However, the creature is highly sus- 
ceptible to winds and breezes and can be blown 
about easily by gust of wind, wind breath, and 
similar spells. Although all items shrink when 
this spell is cast, most are rendered unusable or 
negligible in their effect. The ranges and effects 
of magical items and spells are adjusted propor- 
tionately to their size. 

The material component for this spell is a flea, 


swallowed by the caster. 
Notes: Common in oriental settings; otherwise 
very rare. 


Giant Strength, Tenser’s 
See Tenser’s giant strength. 


Gift of Life — Elf 
(Elven High Magic) 


Level: 9 

Range: | yd./level 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 8 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: 1 undead creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This powerful high magic spell has an effect 
unlike any other. It restores undead creatures to 
life. Undead creatures are allowed a saving throw 
vs. death magic, but they can only make such a 
roll at a level equal to half their Hit Dice. An 
18th-level lich, for example, would make a sav- 
ing throw vs. death magic as if it were actually a 
9th-level wizard. 

If the undead creature fails its saving throw, it 
is immediately restored to life as it was just 
before its death, if it died by unnatural causes. It 
is restored to life as it was 10 years before its 
death if it died of old age or similar causes. The 
restored creature is stunned and incapable of any 
action for 1d4 turns as it slowly realizes what 


The restored creature returns to life at an 
appropriate experience and Hit Die level, and 
with its original alignment and abilities. It will, 
however, be wearing the same clothes, and carry- 
ing whatever equipment (if any) that it did as an 
undead creature. 

This spell does not necessarily change the 
alignment of a creature who was originally evil, 
but the elves recount legends of wicked liches 
or vampires who were restored through this 
spell, repented their old lives, and changed 
alignment, dedicating themselves to the defense 
of elves. 

The material component of this spell is a gold 
medallion in the form of the sun (worth at least 
500 gp). 

Notes: Restricted to elves able to cast High 
Magic, such as those of Evermeet. 


Give Wounds 
See cause light wounds. 


0 a a a 


407 


~~ Glamer, Elonia’s cr 


Glamer, Elonia’s 
See Elonia’s glamer. 


Glassee 
(Alteration) 
(Alchemy, Artifice, Earth) 


Level: 6 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: | rd. 
Duration: 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


By means of this spell, the wizard is able to 
make a section of metal, stone, or wood as trans- 
parent as glass to his gaze, or even make it into 
transparent material as explained hereafter. Nor- 
mally, the g/assee spell can make up to 4 inches 
of metal, 6 inches of stone, and 20 inches of 
wood transparent. The spell will not work on 
lead, gold, or platinum. The wizard can opt to 
make the glassee work only for himself for the 
duration of the spell, or he can actually make a 
transparent area, a one-way window, in the mater- 
ial affected. Either case gives a viewing area 3 
feet wide by 2 feet high. If a window is created, it 
has the strength of the original material. 

The material component of the spell is a small 
piece of crystal or glass. 

Notes; Common spell (PHB). 


Glassteel 
(Alteration) 
(Alchemy, Artiface, Earth) 


Level: 8 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 8 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: Object touched 
Saving Throw: None 


The glassteel spell turns normal, nonmagical 
crystal or glass into a transparent substance that 
has the tensile strength and unbreakability of 
actual steel. Only a relatively small volume of 
material can be affected (a maximum weight of 
10 pounds per level of experience of the spell- 
caster), and it must form one whole object. The 
Armor Class of the substance is 1. 

The material components of this spell are a 
small piece of glass and a small piece of steel. 

Notes: Common spel] (PHB). 


Glassremove, Duhlark’s 
Glasstrike, Duhlark’s 
See Duhlark’s glasstrike. 


Glitterdust 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 
(Alchemy) 

Level: 2 


Range: 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 2 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 20-ft. cube 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell creates a cloud of glittering golden 
particles within the area of effect, Those in the 
area must roll a successful saving throw vs. spell 
or be blinded (—4 penalties to attack rolls, saving 
throws, and Armor Class) for 1d4+1 rounds. In 
addition, all within the area are covered by the 
dust, which cannot be removed and continues to 
sparkle until it fades. Note that this reveals invis- 
ible creatures. The dust fades in [d4 rounds plus 
one round per caster level. Thus, glitterdust cast 
by a 3rd-level wizard lasts for four to seven 
rounds, 

The materia] component is ground mica. 

Notes; Common spell (PHB). 


408 


~ Glorious Transmutation i 


Globe of Invulnerability 
(Abjuration) 
(Geometry) 


Level: 6 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: | rd./level 

Area of Effect: 5-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell creates an immobile, faintly shim- 
mering, magical sphere around the caster that 
prevents any Ist-, 2nd-, 3rd-, or 4th-level spell 
effects from penetrating. Thus, the area of effect 
of any such spell does not include the area of the 
globe of invulnerability. This includes innate 
spell-like abilities and effects from devices. How- 
ever, any type of spell can be cast out of the mag- 
ical sphere; spells pass from the caster of the 
globe to the subject without effect on the globe. 
Fifth and higher level spells are not affected by 
the globe. The globe can be brought down by a 
successful dispel magic spell. 

The material component of the spell is a glass 
or crystal bead that shatters at the expiration of 


the spell. 
Notes: Common spell (PHB). 
Gloom 
(Alteration) 
(Shadow) 
Level: 4 


Range: 60 yds. + 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: 1 turn/leve) 

Area of Effect: 120-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell weakens light sources of any kind in 
the area of effect. Light equal to daylight in 
brightness or intensity (including continual light) 
is reduced to a deep twilight gloom. Torches and 
magical weapons illuminate only a 5-foot radius, 
and lamps, lanterns, and other magical light 
sources illuminate only a 10-foot radius. The 
spell covers a 120-foot radius, and can be made 
mobile if cast on an object. 

Light-based combat penalties for creatures of 
darkness are negated within the area of effect, 
and monsters that cannot abide the touch of day- 
light (vampires, for instance) are fully capable of 
acting under the veil of gloom. Light-based spells 


are halved in effect; for example, a sunburst from 
a wand of illumination is reduced from 6d6 to 
3d6 damage against undead. 
The material component is a special incense 
by the caster. 
Notes: Rare spell. (Updated from POLYHEDRON 
Newszine.) 


Glorious Transmutation 
(Alteration) 
(Alchemy) 


Level: 9 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: | turn 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: 50-500 Ibs. iron or 
0-100 Ibs. lead 

Saving Throw: None 


This spell turns iron into silver or lead into 
gold at the caster’s option. The prime ingredient 
for this spell is a magical item called the 
philosopher's stone, which must be touched by 
the wizard and alchemically combined with the 
metal during casting. The formula for mixing 
the stone and the metal must be known by the 
caster; the spell is useless without it. (The exact 
ingredients and formula are decided by the DM 
and must be discovered by the wizard in the 
course of adventuring.) 

Philosopher’s stones vary in quality so much 
that each is capable of transmuting either [d10 x 
50 pounds of iron into an equal quantity of silver 
or 1d10 x 10 pounds of lead into the same amount 
of gold. It is not possible to know how much 
metal can be transmuted until the process is com- 
plete. If the caster has more iron or lead prepared 
than the spell is capable of changing, any excess 
is unchanged. 

The entire transmutation must be made at one 
time. Only one stone can be used per casting of 
the spell. The entire philosopher’s stone is con- 
sumed in the process. 

Notes: Uncommon spell (7044). 


Da aa aa aS aa aa aaa a 


~ Glowing Globe, Nchaser’s 


eug | 


Nc de a 


Glowing Globe, Nchaser’s 
See Nchaser’s glowing globe. 


Gnostic Chain, Galathar’s 
See Galathar's gnostic chain 


Golden Revelation, Nystul’s 
See Nystul’s golden revelation. 


Gong of Isolation, Otto’s 
See Otto’s gong of isolation. 


Graft 


(Alteration, Necromancy) 


Level: 6 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 turn 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Special 


A spellcaster invoking a graft spell can attach 
an appendage of another creature to the recipi- 
ent’s body in place of a missing limb. The 


appendage must take the place of a lost limb— 
that is, the caster cannot place the arm of another 
creature onto a body that had no such limb 
before, nor add an extra arm in the middle of its 
chest. Additionally, the limb to be grafted must 
also perform roughly the same function as the 
old one; consequently, a wizard cannot attach a 
foot to an arm stump. 

The appendage can be of any size, but the 
recipient must be able to manipulate it with his 
current Strength. If the limb is overly cumber- 
some or exceptionally different from the original, 
it may inhibit movement or limit spellcasting 
ability. The appendage to be replaced can be any- 
where on the body: arms, legs, feet, hands, or 
parts thereof; but it cannot be the head. The 
replacement can be of any form, so a gargoyle’s 
claw, a bear’s forepaw, or a human hand could 
take the place of a lost hand, claw, or paw. 

The appendage to be grafted must have been 
alive within the hour before the spell is cast or 
the graft will not take. The member to be grafted 
can be successfully joined provided that the 
recipient of the limb makes a successful system 
shock roll upon completion of the casting. A 
failed roll indicates that the graft does not take, 
and the limb withers and dies in one day. If the 
graft does take, then the new member will 
remain in place and function normally, 

The recipient might receive Strength or Dex- 
terity bonuses or penalties based on the grafted 
limb. The grafted appendage has its original 
immunities and weaknesses, including Armor 
Class and damage ability, so long as such 
bonuses and penalties were physical in nature 
and did not result from special characteristics of 
the limb’s original body. (Thus, innate spellcast- 
ing abilities, psionic ability, magic resistance, 
and Strength bonuses other than for grasping do 
not apply.) For example, if a wizard grafted on 
the hand of an arcanaloth, his new hand would 
be AC —2, would take only half damage from 
cold, and would inflict 1d4 points of clawing 
damage. The hand would no longer be magic 
resistant (as is an arcanaloth’s hand). A wizard 
grafting on the forefoot of a lizard might have 
an improved Armor Class for that hand, but 
probably would not be able to cast spells due to 
the low potential dexterity of a lizard’s claw. The 
hand of an ogre (the largest-size humanoid 
whose limbs can be so used) would allow for a 
grasping Strength of 18; however, the wizard 
could not lift weights as an ogre. 

The spell requires the appendage to be grafted 
and a prepared mixture made up of the blood of 
the being to which the member originally 


410 


E Graft Flesh — Lich’s cr 


belonged, a potion of polymorphing (self or 
other), a potion of extra-healing, and at least 
10,000 gp worth of powdered moonstone. The 
prepared mixture is consumed when the spell is 
cast. 

Notes: Very rare spell. Known to be in Laeyn- 
dar’s Book of Metamorphoses. (Updated from 
DRAGON Magazine.) 


Graft Flesh 
(Alteration, Necromancy) 
Level: 5 
Range: 0 


Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 5 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: | person 
Saving Throw: None 


With this spell, a wizard can graft any freshly 
taken flesh to the body of the recipient, either 
replacing a lost limb or serving as a disguise. 
The spell only functions on living human, 
demihuman, or humanoid subjects of up to ogre 
size. Grafted tissue must be of the same species 
as the host. The graft flesh spell cannot be com- 
bined with other enchantments (such as embalm 
or spirit bind) that are used to preserve a 
corpse. 

The duration is limited only by the compati- 
bility of the grafted flesh to the host’s body. 
Flesh taken from the recipient (such as a sev- 
ered limb) can be permanently reattached with 
this spell. If the grafted limb was taken from a 
fresh corpse, however, the maximum duration 
of the spell is 1 day/level of the caster. Only 
musculo-skeletal tissues are affected by this 
spell; it cannot be used to graft organs or attach 
additional appendages (such as an extra arm) to 
the recipient. 

The graft flesh spell can also disguise the 
subject (who may be the caster) with flesh from 
a cadaver. While the subject gains the facial and 
bodily appearance of the deceased individual, 
the transformation is only “skin deep.” The 
recipient retains his normal voice, knowledge, 
spells, and other abilities. Furthermore, the 
subject does not gain any physical or sensory 
abilities associated with his new appearance 
(for example, the spell cannot replace lost eye- 
sight). This application lasts 1 day/level of the 
caster, 

For the duration of the spell, grafted flesh lit- 
erally becomes an extension of the host’s own 
body (affected tissue radiates a faint aura of 


necromancy, however). The recipient has com- 
plete control over the flesh as if it were natural. 
At the conclusion of the spell, however, the 
grafted flesh slowly deadens and ultimately 
drops away. A successful dispel magic ends the 
spell prematurely. 

The material component is the host’s own 
severed limb or else a suitable replacement 
from a fresh corpse (dead for no longer than 1 
day per level of the caster), By the conclusion 
of the spell, all grafted flesh has decayed past 
all utility and cannot be used in a subsequent 
casting. 

Notes: Restricted to necromancers; common. 


Graft Flesh — Lich’s 
See graft limb. 


Oo ae 


411 


= Graft Item d 


Graft Item 
(Necromancy) 
(Artifice) m 4 
Level: 8 
Range: 0 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: | rd. 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell is similar to the graft limb spell, 
but allows the caster to graft any item, magical 
or otherwise, to its flesh in order to replace a 
lost limb. The attachment is instantaneous and 
permanent, and the item functions normally. 
There is no way to remove the object short of 
cutting it off. 

At the DM’s discretion, the caster might be 
able to graft additional items to its body and use 
them—obviously, its abilities will have to be 
specifically adjudicated. In the RAVENLOFT set- 
ting, the sight of such a modified creature will 
certainly evoke a horror check. 

Notes: Restricted to undead spellcasters; rare. 


Graft Limb 


(Necromancy) r 


Level: 8 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


Should an undead spellcaster, such as a lich, 
fall victim to a vorpal weapon or otherwise lose a 
limb, it can cast this spell and graft parts from 
dead bodies on to its own; the grafted limb will 
function normally. At the DM’s discretion, a lich 
can even graft additional appendages to its body 
and use them—obviously, its abilities will have to 
be specifically adjudicated. In the RAVENLOFT 
setting, the sight of such a creature will certainly 
evoke a horror check. 

Notes: Restricted to undead spellcasters; 
uncommon. 


Grappling Hand, Halaster’s 
See Halaster’s grappling hand. 


Grappling Grasp, Geirdorn’s 
See Geirdorn’s grappling grasp. 


Grasp the Magic Since Used 
A MYSTARA Setting spell, aka reverse teleport. 


Grasping Hand, Bigby’s 
See Bigby’s grasping hand, 


Graymantle, Grimwald’s 
See Grimwald’s graymantle. 


Grease 
(Conjuration) 
(Alchemy) 


Level: | 

Range: 10 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: | 

Duration: 3 rds. + | rd./level 
Area of Effect: 10 x 10 ft. 
Saving Throw; Special 


A grease spell covers a material surface with 
a slippery layer of a fatty, greasy nature. Any 
creature entering the area or caught in it when 
the spell is cast must save vs. spell or slip, skid, 
and fall. Those who successfully save can reach 
the nearest nongreased surface by the end of the 
round, Those who remain in the area are allowed 
a saving throw each round until they escape the 
area. The DM should adjust saving throws by 
circumstance; for example, a creature charging 
down an incline that is suddenly greased has 
little chance to avoid the effect, but its ability to 
exit the affected area is almost assured! The 
spell can also be used to create a greasy coating 
on an item—a rope, ladder rung, weapon han- 
dle, etc. Material objects not in use are always 
affected by this spell, while creatures wielding 
or employing items receive a saving throw vs. 
spell to avoid the effect. If the initial saving 
throw is failed, the creature immediately drops 
the item. A saving throw must be made each 
round the creature attempts to use the greased 
item. The caster can end the effect with a single 
utterance; otherwise, it lasts for three rounds 
plus one round per level. 

The material component of the spell is a bit of 
pork rind or butter, 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Sg ee eS 


412 


N Great Shout 4 


YN AS Ps ca 
N AA Ş 
: NY WX 


Grease Slick 
(Alteration) 
(Alchemy) 


Level: 3 

Range: 10 yds. 

Components: S, M 

Casting Time: 3 

Duration: 2 rds./level 

Area of Effect: 15 x 15 ft. area 
Saving Throw: Special 


This variation of the grease spell allows a wiz- 
ard to create a spray of grease that erupts from 
his fingertips and can extend up to 10 yards away 
from his body. The grease coats all objects within 
a 15-foot by 15-foot area. 

Objects coated by the grease become slippery, 
slimy, and subject to the effects of a grease spell 
(save vs. spell or fall). Further, individuals in the 
area of effect who are carrying weapons and 
other objects must, for each object, make a suc- 
cessful saving throw vs. spell at a —2 penalty. 
Failure means the object slips from the individ- 
ual’s grasp. Individuals attempting to pick up 


greased items must make a successful saving 
throw vs. spell at a —3 penalty to grasp any one 
object. Once a saving throw is made for an 
object, it can be handled normally. 

The material component of this spell is a pinch 
of lard. 


Notes: Very rare spell. 
Great Shout 
(Evocation) 
(Song) 
Level: 8 
Range: 0 


Components: V, M 

Casting Time: 1 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: Cone, 90 ft. long x 20 ft. wide 
Saving Throw: Special 


Upon uttering the great shout, the caster 
releases a stunning force, akin to a horn of blast- 
ing, from his mouth in a 90-foot by 20-foot cone, 
with additional damage inflicted along a narrow 
path in the center of the cone, 1 foot wide by 8 
feet long. 

All creatures within the general area of effect 
must save vs. spell. Those which do not save are 
stunned for two rounds, deafened for four rounds, 
and suffer 1d10 points of damage. Those who do 
save are stunned for only a single round and deaf- 
ened for two rounds. 

Damage is much greater along the narrow path 
at the heart of the great shout. Boulders can be 
split, cottages leveled, and powerful gates 
breached by this part of the shout. It inflicts 
structural damage as if the great shout were a 
missile flung by a large catapult (see “Siege 
Damage” in the DMG) with a —2 modifier to the 
saving throw. All items, magical and nonmagical, 
within the narrow path of the shout must make a 
saving throw vs. crushing blow or be destroyed. 
Creatures within the narrow path take 2420 
points of damage if they fail their saving throw 
and 1d10 points of damage if they make their 
saving throw. Deafness and stunning effects 
apply as described above. 

The great shout is extremely taxing and danger- 
ous to the user. The shout drains 2d4 hit points 
from the caster, and in addition the caster must 
make a system shock roll or die from the exertion. 

The material component of this spell is any 
item that radiates a magical aura, including those 
temporarily invested with Nystul 5 magic aura as 
well as magical items. Powerful items such as 
artifacts and unique weapons cannot be used to 


413 


Great Thump—Geisya 


power the great shout. The item is destroyed in 
the process. 

Notes: Rare spell from the FORGOTTEN REALMS 
setting; known to be in The Spell Book of Daimos. 


Great Thump — Geisya 
(Evocation) 


Level: 4 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 

Duration: 1 turn/level 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


When a great thump is cast, the wu jen thumps 
the attacker with an ornamental fan and berates 
the offender. Unless a saving throw is successful, 
the attacker suddenly loses all interest in attack- 
ing anything. If the creature is attacked, the spell 
is broken. This spel] affects only those creatures 
that can be affected by thump. 

Notes: Common to individuals with geisya 
training; otherwise rare in oriental settings; virtu- 
ally unknown elsewhere. (Updated from DRAGON 
Magazine.) 


Greater Detect Undead 


(Divination, Necromancy) d 


Level: 2 

Range: 0 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: 3 turns 
Area of Effect: | mi./point of Intelligence 
Saving Throw: None 


With this spell, the caster can detect all undead 
within range. Range is equal to the caster’s Intelli- 
gence score in miles. The detection is omnidirec- 
tional. The caster need not remain stationary. The 
spell indicates direction but not specific location, 
distance, or the type of undead—for instance, the 
caster might sense a small number of undead 
about ten miles north, a single undead creature 
about 100 feet to his left, and so on. The undead 
receive no saving throw against this detection, nor 
is the spell hindered by obstacles of any kind, save 
magical warding like nondetection. 

The material component for this spell is a bit 
of earth from a grave. 

Notes: Restricted to undead spellcasters of 
[Ith level or higher; uncommon. This spell can 
be researched only in the RAVENLOFT setting. 


Greater Distraction — Ninja 
(Illusion) 


Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


With this spell, the ninja causes the victim to 
become distracted by a sensation. The caster 
decides what the sensation will be before he casts 
the spell. Typical sensations include itching, the 
feeling that one’s hands are grubby, or the need to 
answer nature’s call. 

If the victim fails a saving throw vs. spell, 
the sensation will not stop distracting him until 
he deals with it (by scratching the itch, washing 
his hands, etc.) or until the spell duration ends. 
Once either of these conditions is met, the dis- 
tracting sensation ends. A victim who makes 
the save feels the sensation momentarily, but it 
goes away almost immediately. The victim is 
never aware that a spell was cast, whether he 
saves or not. 

This is another spell used by intruding ninja to 
maneuver guards or intended targets out of posi- 
tion. 

Notes: Restricted to ninja spellcasters and 
those trained by them; common. 


Greater Malison 
(Enchantment/Charm) 


Level: 4 

Range: 60 ft. 

Components: V 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: 2 rds./level 

Area of Effect: 30-ft. radius sphere 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell operates exactly like the 3rd-level 
minor malison spell; it allows a wizard to 
adversely affect all the saving throws of his ene- 
mies. The wizard places a —2 penalty on the sav- 
ing throws of all hostile creatures within the area 
of effect. Optionally, the wizard can impose a -3 
penalty to saving throws against spells from one 
school of magic. This penalty is not cumulative 
with the specialist wizard saving throw penalty; 
the penalty is not increased to —4. 

Notes: Uncommon spell (70M). 


a ae eR Ee a O 


414 


~ Greater Spelldream a 


Greater Sign of Sealing 
(Abjuration) 
(Geometry) 


Level: 6 

Range: 0 
Components: S, M 
Casting Time: 1 turn 
Duration: Permanent 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: Special 


A more potent form of the /esser sign of seal- 
ing, this spell allows the caster to guard an item 
or portal and prevent all other creatures from 
opening or passing through the sealed item or 
surface. The greater sign has several effects. 

First, it affects a doorway or item that opens (a 
chest, for instance) as a wizard lock spell. If 
placed in an open corridor or archway to prevent 
passage, the greater sign creates a magical bar- 
rier that repels all who try to pass. 

Second, the greater sign greatly strengthens 
the physical structure of any door or item it is 
placed upon, granting a +6 bonus to any item 
saving throws and allowing the item or door to 
ignore | point of damage per caster level from 
any attack. For example, a greater sign cast by a 
12th-level wizard would reduce the damage of 
any blow or spell by 12 points, so a fighter armed 
with a broad sword (maximum damage of 8 
points) could never hack through a door pro- 
tected by the sign. 

Third, if the protected doorway or item is 
forced open or destroyed by any means, the sign 
itself is not only destroyed, but also releases a 
spell upon the offending creature. The spell held 
by the sign is cast into the ward when the greater 
sign is created, and any spell the caster has mem- 
orized can be used in this way, from a fireball or 
shocking grasp to a very nasty wish or poly- 
morph. The range of the sign’s retributive spell is 
10 yards per caster level, so it is possible to 
destroy the warding from a safe distance. 

The sign is displayed in plain sight, and most 
wizards will recognize it for what it is. The caster 
cannot specify particular creatures or conditions 
for the signs operation; it functions against any 
creature that attempts to pass it, although the wiz- 
ard can freely pass through his own sign without 
activating it. The greater sign can be removed by 
the caster, thus ending the spell, or it can be 
defeated by a limited wish or wish spell cast by a 
wizard of equal or higher level than the original 
caster; it cannot be dispelled. 

The material component for a greater sign is a 


powdered diamond worth at least 1,000 gold 
pieces. 
Notes: Uncommon spell (PO:SM). 


Greater Spelldream 
(Invocation, Illusion/Phantasm) 


Level: 6 

Range: 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 6 
Duration: | turn/level 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Special 


Like the 4th-level /esser spelldream, but more 
powerful, the greater spelldream spell allows the 
caster to remove spells of 6th level or less from a 
slumbering creature, who must be visible to the 
caster or specifically named during spellcasting. 

When the spell is cast, the recipient is allowed 
a save vs. spells with a —5 penalty. If the save suc- 
ceeds, the spell is lost, and the intended recipient 
instantly awakens. 

This occurs during an enforced slumber, which 
can be broken by any physical attack on the 
recipient (such an event will jolt the recipient into 
instant alertness). The enforced slumber is 
accompanied by dreams, and the caster of this 
spell can choose one image per level to feature in 
these dreams (typically, the caster shapes a 
sequence of images showing the recipient how he 
came to be enspelled, or why the caster has cho- 
sen to remove those spells). 

The spell effects are unraveled slowly, without 
doing harm to the caster of the spel/dream or the 
recipient, and without triggering any spell traps 
or defensive effects. Note that spells that have 
been made permanent cannot be unraveled in this 
way. Spells not subject to dispel magic cannot be 
unraveled unless the caster makes at saving throw 
vs. spell at a -5 penalty. Failure means the spell is 
transferred to the caster. 

While a spelldream is unfolding, the recipi- 
ent’s mind cannot be contacted or influenced by 
any other being. Thus, a wizard can pass infor- 
mation to a creature who is under magical thought 
surveillance without risk of the information 
being detected. 

Notes: Common for Dream mages; otherwise 
rare. 


LO ee ee 


415 


~ Grimwald’s Graymantle = 


Grimwald’s Graymantle 
(Necromancy) 


Level: 5 

Range: 5 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 5 
Duration: | rd./level 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


On the round of casting, a small skull or bone 
is imbued with a silvery-gray radiance. The skull 
or bone can then (in the next round) be touched to 
an opponent or thrown to the limit of the spel]’s 
range against a target. In cases of touching the 
skull to an opponent, the attack is +2 to hit. Oth- 
erwise the chances of hitting are normal, accord- 
ing to the mage’s normal THACO. 

If the skull or bone hits the target, the gray 
radiance is transferred from the skull to the 
creature, covering it entirely. For the duration of 
the spell, the creature cannot regain hit points by 
any means, Natura] regeneration (such as that of 
trolls) is stopped as are the effects of a ring of 
regeneration, potion of healing, or staff of cur- 


ing. Spells that return lost hit points (cure light 
wounds, heal) will not work on that individual, 
Other necromantic spells will function nor- 
mally, including those that cure other afflictions 
(disease, blindness). Those that remove hit 
points (cause light wounds) are unaffected by 
the spell. 

Should the gray-wrapped skull or bone miss 
the target, or should the target make a saving 
throw vs. spell (at -2 for those administered by 
touch), the graymantle fades and the spell has no 
effect. 

Upon the expiration of the spell, automatic 
healing abilities and items such as the ring of 
regeneration or the troll’s regenerative ability are 
restored and regenerate hit points normally. Any 
healing attempted during the spell’s duration is 
lost. 

The material component of this spell is the 
skull or bone used. 

Notes: Uncommon or rare spell. Known to be 
in The Tome of the Covenant. 


Ground Flame 
Lost spell, referenced in the novel, Prism Pentad. 


~ uation ON ag 


Ground Fog 
(Invocation) 
(Air, Water) a d 
Level: 3 
Range: 0 
Components: V, S 


Casting Time: 10 rds. 

Duration: 1 hr./level 

Area of Effect: One 50 x 50-ft. square/level 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell creates a ground fog or mist that 
rises only knee high on a normal human (about 
two feet). The mist fills an area defined by the 
spellcaster, laid out as 50-foot x 50-foot squares. 
The first square must be centered on the caster. 
The others can be laid out in any pattern so long 
as every square shares a complete border with 
another square. Indoors, the fog fills only the 
level or floor where the caster stands. It cascades 
down stairs and into pits but evaporates after a 
few feet. 

The fog is full of moving swirls and eddies. 
An invisible individual moving through the 
fog does not create enough of a stir to reveal 
his presence more readily than normal, The 
ground is generally not visible beneath the 
fog. It is quite possible for a corpse to be lying 
on the floor and be completely covered by the 
fog. A detect magic spell will reveal an aura of 
invocation. 

This spell may seem innocuous, but to a vam- 
pire spellcaster it is a deviously simple trap. The 
gaseous form of the vampire is easily concealed 
by the fog. In effect, he can rise up out of the fog 
anywhere and attack with surprise. Alternatively, 
the spellcaster or undead minions can lie down 
under the fog cover, then leap up to attack or 
strike at passing legs. 

The material component of the spell is a pinch 
of lamb’s fleece. 

Notes: Common for undead spellcasters; 
uncommon for mages of Air, Water, Frost, and 
Weather; very rare for others. 


Grue Conjuration, Nystul’s 


See Nystul’s grue conjuration. 


Guardian — Pluma 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 


Level: 2 
Range: 0 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 turn 


Duration: 3 hrs./level 
Area of Effect: Up to 30-ft./level radius 
Saving Throw: None 


A guardian spell will alert the caster if a living 
creature above a certain size (specified at the 
time of the casting) approaches within a certain 
distance of the caster. The spell will awake the 
individual from a sound sleep. 

Any size creature can be indicated—including 
the tiniest—but the caster will be constantly 
alerted to the approach of insects, mice, etc. 
Since the spell gives no indication of the size of 
the approaching being, this may be somewhat 
unsettling. 

The material component of the spell is the ear 
of a bat. 

Notes: Restricted to practitioners of pluma 
magic (the Maztica setting); common, 


Guardian, Serrel’s 


The 3rd-level guardian spell, see Serrel’s 


guardian. 


Guardian Mantle 
(Abjuration, Invocation) 


Level: 7 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 7 

Duration: 1 turn + 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


The guardian mantle spell creates a blanket of 
translucent bluish energy that encases the caster’s 
body as protection from melee and missile attacks. 
Those attempting to attack the caster must roll a 
successful saving throw vs. spell at a—4 penalty or 
find the attack foiled by the mantle. Attackers 
using magical weapons can add the weapon 
bonuses to the saving throw. Maintaining this 
defensive enchantment requires no concentration 
on the part of the caster, who can cast spells or 
choose to ignore attackers. The mantle does not 
protect against spells or spell-like powers and can- 
not be made permanent. While the mantle is in 
effect, it suppresses all of the caster’s other protec- 
tive magics for its duration. For example, neither a 
globe of invulnerability nor an amulet of life pro- 
tection, neither a ring of regeneration nor bracers 
of defense, will operate while this spell is in effect. 

The materia) components are a piece of blue 
velvet and a gem of at least 500 gp value. 

Notes: Very rare spell. 


417 


~ Guards and Wards A 


Guards and Wards 
(Alteration, Enchantment/Charm, Evocation) 
(Geometry) 


Level: 6 

Range: 0 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 3 turns 
Duration: 1 hr./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This special and powerful spell is primarily 
used to defend the wizard's stronghold. The ward 
protects a one-story stronghold, with a base 
dimension of 400 feet x 400 feet. The wizard can 
ward a multistory area by reducing the base area 
proportionately. The following take place in the 
warded area upon casting the spell: 

1. All corridors become misty; visibility is 
reduced to 10 feet. 

All doors are wizard locked. 

Stairs are filled with webs from top to bot- 
tom, These act as the 2nd-level wed spell, 
except that they regrow within one turn if 
destroyed. 

Where there are choices in direction—such 
as a cross or side passage—a minor confu- 
sion-type spell functions so as to make it 
50% probable that intruders believe they are 
going in the exact opposite direction. 

The whole area radiates magic. The normal 
use of the detect magic spell becomes impos- 
sible for those of less than the caster’s level 
and difficult for others. 

One door per level of experience of the wiz- 
ard is covered by an illusion to appear as if it 
were a plain wall. 

The wizard can place one of the following 
additional magical effects: 

A. Dancing lights in four corridors. 

B. A magic mouth in two places. 

C. A stinking cloud in two places. 

D. A gust of wind in one corridor or room. 

E. A suggestion in one place. 


3 
3 


Note that items 6 and 7 function only when the 
wizard is totally familiar with the area of the 
spell’s effect. Dispel magic can remove one 
effect, at random, per casting. A remove curse 
spell will not work. 

The materia] components of the spell are burn- 
ing incense, a small measure of sulphur and oil, a 
knotted string, a smal) amount of umber hulk 
blood, and a small silver rod. 


Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Guess, Hornung’s 
See Hornung’s guess. 


Guise of the Yak-Man 


d 


(Ilusion) 


Level: 5 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: | rd. 
Duration: | turn/level 
Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell makes the target look, feel, smell, 
and sound like one of the hideous yak-men. It is 
an extremely powerful illusion that cannot be 
detected through normal or magical means, short 
of true seeing, and cannot be dispelled save 
through the use of a wish. Even creatures that are 
normally unaffected by illusions or phantasms 
are affected by this spell. 

The guise of the yak-man spell has two pos- 
sible uses. The first is beneficial. Because of an 
ancient pact between yak-men and geniekind, dao 
will never harm or interfere with a yak-man. The 
target of this spell will not be harassed or harmed 
by dao, though that individual has no other spe- 
cial powers over the genie races. 

The second use comprises a means for the 
caster to do away with someone without dirtying 
his own hands. Everyone hates yak-men, and 
most denizens of civilized areas will attack 
these creatures on sight. By casting this spell 
upon someone, the wizard virtually guarantees 
that his victim will avoid cities or be killed upon 
entering one. 

The material component of this spell is hair 
from a yak-man, which is not at all easy to 
obtain. A successful saving throw vs. spell 
negates this spell’s effect. 

Notes: Uncommon in arabian lands; unknown 
elswhere. 


ee Og EE EE ET ag co a 


418 


5 Gust of Wind 4 


Gullship — Elf 
(Alteration) 


Level: 7 

Range: 10 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: | turn 
Duration: 1 hr/level 
Area of Effect: 1 vessel 
Saving Throw: None 


When cast, this spell allows a single normally 
water-borne vessel to fly. The vessel can be no 
longer than 10 feet per level of the caster, and it 
must still rely on the winds to move (MC E). The 
caster can control the vessel’s altitude up to 100 
feet per level. A vessel raised with this spell will 
lower itself gently to sea level as the spell ends; it 
will not come crashing down. The caster need not 
maintain concentration, except when changing 
altitude. 

The material components of this spel] are a 
small model boat and the feather of a seagull. 

Notes: Common for elves, who jealously 
guard it; otherwise very rare. 


Gunther’s Kaleidoscopic Strike 
(Invocation/Evocation) 
(Geometry) 


Level: 8 

Range: 5 yds./level 
Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 8 

Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: | spellcaster 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


When this spell is cast, a thin beam of shim- 

mering, kaleidoscopic light shoots from the wiz- 
ard’s fingertips toward a target spellcaster. That 
individual is allowed a saving throw to resist the 
beam. 
This spell has no effect on non-spellcasters, 
causing them no harm whatsoever. Creatures 
with innate spell-like abilities are also unaf- 
fected. Against those using memorized spells, 
this dweomer can be devastating. It “short-cir- 
cuits” the arcane energy stored in a spellcaster’s 
mind, wiping away memorized spells. Lost 
spells are dissipated without effect and must be 
rememorized. 

The number of spells drained is equal to the 
caster’s level minus 1d20. Thus, a 16th-level wiz- 
ard drains a maximum of 15 spells but might 
drain no spells, depending on the die roll. After 


subtracting the die roll from the caster’s level, any 
result of zero or a negative number indicates that 
the victim loses no spells. 

Spells are drained from the wizard’s memo- 
rized spells, beginning with Ist-level spells and 
working up to higher level spells, Spells drained 
from a given level are determined randomly. 

Notes: Uncommon or rare spell (ToM). 


Gust of Wind 
(Alteration) 
(Air) 


Area of Effect: 10 ft. wide x 10 yds/level long 
Saving Throw: None 


When this spell is cast, a strong puff of air 
originates from the wizard and moves in the 
direction he is facing, The force of this gust of 
wind (about 30 m.p.h.) is sufficient to extinguish 
candles, torches, and similar unprotected flames. 
It causes protected flames—such as those of 
lanterns—to dance wildly and has a 5% chance 
per level of experience of the spellcaster to extin- 
guish even such lights. It also fans large fires out- 
ward 1d6 feet in the direction of the wind’s 
movement. It forces back small flying creatures 
1d6 x 10 yards and causes man-sized beings to 
be held motionless if attempting to move against 
its force. It slows larger-than-man-sized flying 
creatures by 50% for one round. It blows over 
light objects, disperses most vapors, and forces 
away gascous or unsecured levitating creatures. 
Its path is a constant 10 feet wide, by 10 yards 
long per level of experience of the caster (for 
example, an 8th-level wizard causes a gust of 
wind that travels 80 yards). 

The material component of the spell is a 
legume seed. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


ee ee 


419 


Haelyn’s Bow 
(Enchantment) 
Reversible oe ee 
(Artifice) 
Level: 3 
Range: 10 yds. 


Components: V, S, M 
Duration: Special (1 rd./level) 
Casting Time: 3 

Area of Effect: 1 bow/level 
Saving Throw: None 


When a wizard casts this spell upon a short 
bow, long bow, or crossbow, the bow gains a +1 
bonus to attack and damage rolls for a number 
of rounds equal to the wizard’s level. The 
bonus conferred by this spell adds to any magi- 
cal bonus the bow already carries. 

The spell takes effect when the first shot is 
fired and then lasts for the full duration, which 
is one round per caster level. The first shot 
must be fired within 8 hours of the casting or 
the enchantment is lost. Multiple spells can be 
cast upon the bow, with cumulative bonuses. 

The reverse of this spell, cursed bow, confers 
a -1 penalty to attack and damage rolls for a 
number of rounds equal to the caster’s level. 

The material component is a stone arrow- 
head. 

Notes: Common in the BIRTHRIGHT setting; 
very rare elsewhere. 


Hail of Stone 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 
(Earth) 


Level: 1 

Range: 120 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: 5-ft. sq./level 
Saving Throw: None 


Upon casting this spell, the wu jen summons 
a rain of stones in the area of effect, causing 
damage to creatures and objects within this 
area. An attack roll is made against every crea- 
ture in the area of effect, at the caster’s chance 
to hit. A hit means the creature has been hit by 
one or more stones falling from the sky. The 
damage caused is 1d3 points per level of the 
caster (10d3 maximum). Any number of crea- 
tures can be struck by these stones if within the 


area of effect. 

The material component for this 
spell is a piece of jade worth at least 1 ch’ien 
(5 gp), which is thrown at the desired target. 

Notes: Common in oriental settings; other- 
wise very rare. 


Hailcone 
(Evocation) 
(Air) 


Level: 4 

Range: 10 yds./level 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: 1 rd. 

Arca of Effect: 30-ft. diameter cone 
Saving Throw; None 


The spellcaster causes large hailstones (2 
inches across and greater) to rain down in a con- 
ical area, from a point 30 feet above a surface or 
target downward in a cone that opens to a 30- 
foot base diameter. Creatures within this area of 
effect suffer 3d10 points of damage, and any 
exposed items must make a successful saving 
throw vs. crushing blow to avoid damage. 

If the spell is cast in midair, there is a danger 
zone up to 30 feet below the broad base of the 
cone; creatures in this area take 1d10 points of 
damage and items that are fragile and exposed 
must save vs. crushing blow. Creatures beneath 
the danger zone might be struck by odd hail- 
stones and thus become aware of the spell’s 
effect, but these hailstones will have no appre- 
ciable force and will inflict no damage. 

The material components of the hailcone are 
a pinch of dust and a few drops of water 

Notes: Very rare spell from the FORGOTTEN 
REALMS setting. Known to be in Aubayreer's 
Workbook. 


Hair 
(Alteration, Invocation/Evocation) 
Level: 1 
Range: Touch 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: I 


Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This useful spell allows the caster to perform 
one or more of the listed functions on his own 


Bo a ee ee 


421 


N Halaster’s Grappling Hand A 


or another person’s hair (the artistic ability or 
barbering nonweapon proficiencies are a plus). 
The functions are: 

è Trim or cut the hair 

è Style the hair 

ə Wash, cleanse, and dry the hair 

è Lightly dye or bleach the hair 

The change lasts until the person's hair 
grows out naturally or becomes dirty again. An 
unwilling subject receives a saving throw vs. 
spell to avoid the caster’s attentions. 

Notes: Rare spell. Known to be in Prismal 5 
Pocket Library, Vol. I. 


Halaster’s Grappling Hand 
(Evocation) 
(Force) 


Level: 5 

Range: 10 ft. 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: 4 rds. + 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: Creates 1 hand 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell creates a translucent, 5-foot tall 
magical left hand of force. Silent and noncorpo- 
real, the hand appears within ten feet of the spell- 
caster and moves with him. It can pass through 
nonmagical, unliving matter easily; door frames, 
missiles, and so on do it no harm. It lasts without 
concentration while the caster engages in other 
activities, including spellcasting. 

The hand acts only when a magical attack, 
such as a magic missile or lightning bolt, is 
directed at the caster, or when a hostile crea- 
ture armed with magic attempts to attack the 
caster. The spell intercepts any magic targeted 
directly on the caster. The hand does not stop 
wide area effects that incidently include the 
caster, such as a fireball. 

The hand moves to block any creatures 
armed with magic that try to approach the 
caster, stopping them as if it were a solid bar- 
rier. Innately magical creatures (such as most 
constructs) are generally blocked, though their 
natural attacks inflict full damage. Special 
creatures with virtual immunity to most spells 
are unaffected (for example, a true golem 
would walk right through the hand unless it 
was actually carrying a magical weapon). 

The hand is lightning-quick, and can defend 
against several magical attacks or one creature 
in a round, It tries to intercept all such attacks, 
taking their damage itself. The hand is AC 0, 


has the same hit points as the caster in full 
health, and has the caster’s saving throw against 
special attack forms. Magical weapons can 
damage the hand, inflicting one point of dam- 
age for every combat bonus of the weapon. For 
example, a dagger +2 inflicts two points of 
damage upon the hand. Individuals or monsters 
without magical weapons, items, or armor pass 
freely through the hand. 

The caster should make a Dexterity check to 
see if the hand successfully intercepts a magic- 
based attack. If it does, all damage is suffered 
by the hand (if the hand is destroyed, any dam- 
age it did not stop affects the caster), Dispel 
magic, negation, or cancellation effects and 
spells destroy the hand instantly. Once a grap- 
pling hand has been created, it cannot be ended 
by will of the caster or anyone else before its 
duration runs out; to remove it, a dispel magic 
must be used. 

The grappling hand does not stop and is not 
affected by normal missiles or any nonmagical 
thrown item. Most creatures cannot harm a 
hand by attacking it, unless using enchanted 
weapons (which inflict only their magical 
bonuses as damage to the hand). 

Notes; Known to Halaster, archmage of the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Hallucinatory Terrain 
(Illusion/Phantasm) 


Level: 4 

Range: 20 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: | turn 

Duration: | hr./level 

Area of Effect: 10 yds./level cube 
Saving Throw: None 


By means of this spell, the wizard causes an 
illusion that hides the actual terrain within the 
area of effect. Thus, open fields or a road can 
be made to look like a swamp, hill, crevasse, or 
some other difficult or impassable terrain. A 
pond can be made to look like a grassy 
meadow, a precipice like a gentle slope, or a 
rock-strewn gully like a wide and smooth road. 
The hallucinatory terrain persists until a dispel 
magic spell is cast upon the area or until the 
duration expires. Individual creatures may see 
through the illusion, but the illusion persists, 
affecting others who observe the scene. 

If the illusion involves only a subtle change, 
such as causing an open wood to appear thick 
and dark, or increasing the slope of a hill, the 


Se a ee ee 


422 


N Hand — Dragon f 


effect may be unnoticed even by those in the 
midst of it. If the change is extreme (for exam- 
ple, a grassy plain covering a seething field of 
volcanic mudpots), the illusion will no doubt 
be noticed the instant one person falls prey to 
it. Each level of experience expands the dimen- 
sions of the cubic area affected by 10 yards; for 
example, a 12th-level caster affects an area 120 
yards x 120 yards x 120 yards, 

The material components of this spell are a 
stone, a twig, and a bit of green plant—a leaf 
or grass blade. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Halo of Eyes 
(Conjuration) 


Level; 4 

Range: 0 
Components: V, M 
Casting Time: 4 
Duration: | turn/level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


Halo of eyes creates a halo of functional eye- 
balls that sits atop the caster’s head, enabling the 
caster to see in all directions at the same time. 
Additionally, these magical eyes all have infravi- 
sion to a distance of 60 feet. The caster can see 


423 


opponents on all sides of him, providing they are 
not invisible; and therefore cannot be struck from 
behind or suffer a penalty for a back attack. 
Under normal conditions, the caster cannot be 
surprised. Attacks cannot be directed against the 
magical eyes, but their vision is obscured by 
blindness and other magical and natural effects 
that would hinder the wizard’s normal sight. 

The material components for this spell are 
the feather of an eagle and an eyelash from the 
corpse of any creature. 

Notes: Uncommon spell. 


Hand — Dragon 
(Invocation/Evocation) 


Level: 2 

Range: 5 yds./level 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 2 
Duration: 2 rds./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


The spell brings into being a faintly glowing 
area of force similar in size and shape to a 
human hand. It has four fingers and an oppos- 
able thumb. The fingers of the hand are much 
more precise in their movements than, for 
example, an unseen servant. The Dexterity 
ability score of the fingers is equal to the cast- 
ing dragon's Intelligence, plus 1d3-1. 

The hand is very weak when compared to 
typical dragon strength. It can lift objects 
weighing up to 60 pounds and can apply an 
equivalent amount of force. Thus it can crush 
only the most fragile of objects. The hand can- 
not wield a weapon or throw an object. 

The hand can deliver a single slapping attack 
per round; its THACO is the same as the 
dragon’s. The slap causes no damage, but a 
successful hit will break a spellcaster’s concen- 
tration and ruin a spell. 

The dragon must have a direct line of sight 
to the hand. As soon as the dragon’s view of the 
hand is blocked, the spell ends. 

Hand is one of the few draconic spells that 
might possibly be learned by a nondragon, 

For dragons unable to polymorph or 
shapechange into human or demihuman form, 
the lack of small manipulating digits is a real 
problem. They can’t write, they can’t open 
small jewelry boxes, and so on. The hand spell 
solves this problem. 

Notes: Common for dragons; otherwise very 
rare, Known to be in the Draconomicon. 


N Hand of Darkness — Drow A 


Hand of Darkness — Drow 
(Alteration) 


Level: 3 

Range: 10 yds./level 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 3 

Duration: 1 turn + 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: 30-ft. radius sphere 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell cloaks light sources quickly and 
with great precision. On the round after cast- 
ing, the radiances caused by glowing magical 
items, light and continual light spells, torches, 
fires, and other sources within the 30-foot- 
radius area of effect are negated. The sources 
themselves are not extinguished (an unseen 
fire still burns fuel and beings coming into 
contact with it), they simply give off no light 
while in the affected area. Those in the area 
cannot see light from outside, and light sources 
brought into the area are negated. Creatures 
requiring light for vision suffer standard penal- 
ties for operating in total darkness. The spell 
has no effect on infravision. 

The spell area of effect is targeted as if the 
caster were attacking (an attack roll using the 
caster’s THACO is required). A missed attack 
causes the spell center to be other than where it 
was intended; use the grenade-like missile 
scatter diagram from the DMG. 

The hand of darkness cannot be dispelled by 
subsequent casting of light or continual light 
spells, The effect continues until the hand of 
darkness spell itself expires or is dispelled. 

The material components of this spell are a 
piece of coal or handful of ash, a small sphere 
of black glass or stone, and a scrap of black 
cloth, fur, or hide. 

Notes: Restricted to drow; common. 


Handfangs 
(Alteration, Necromancy) 
Level: 4 
Range: 0 


Components: S, M 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: Caster’s hands 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell conjures bony fangs or hooked 
teeth that protrude from the back and/or knuck- 
les of one or both of the caster’s hands, or a 


single other extremity, though the fangs appear 
only on bare flesh, not beneath footwear or 
clothing. 

The fangs are sharp enough to saw through 
bindings, tear cloth, or slash opponents (for 
1d2 points damage), but they have a more 
potent attack: the first time handfangs touch 
another’s living flesh, they inject a virulent poi- 
son that slows a victim for 1d4 rounds (no sav- 
ing throw) and instantly inflicts 1 point of 
damage per level of the caster. The poison’s 
effects can be removed by a neutralize poison 
spell, but s/ow poison is ineffective. This 
nerve-numbing attack functions only once per 
casting, not once for each fanged hand. 

The material component is a flake or chip of 
bone from any source, and the somatic compo- 
nent is a subtle, almost unnoticeable gesture. 

Notes: Known by Shaaan (Shay-an) the Ser- 
pent Queen, of the FoRGOTTEN REALMS setting. 
(Updated from DraGon Magazine.) 


Harm 
(Necromancy) 


Level: 7 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 7 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


The harm spell corrupts the victim’s life 
energies, causing the loss of all but 1d4 hit 
points, Noncorporeal, nonliving, and extrapla- 
nar creatures are not affected by the spell. A 
successful touch attack is required, and the 
caster has a +4 bonus to the attack roll. The 
damage must be healed naturally or cured with 
magic. Unlike the 6th-level priest spell, heal, 
this spell is not reversible. Casting harm is an 
evil act. 

Notes: Restricted to evil necromancers, evil 
witches, and those trained by them; uncommon. 


Oe ee ee 


424 


‘ Hatch the Stone foes ao Boag 


Handy Mirror, Prismal’s 
See Prismal’s handy mirror. 


Handy Timepiece, Drawmij’s 
See Drawmmij’s handy timepiece. 


Harp, Melisander’s 
See Melisander’s harp. 


Haste 
(Alteration) 


Level: 3 

Range: 60 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 3 

Duration: 3 rds. + 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: 40-ft. cube, 1 creature/level 
Saving Throw: None 


When this spell is cast, each affected crea- 
ture functions at double its normal movement 
and attack rates. A hasted creature gains a —2 
initiative bonus. Thus, a creature moving at 6 
and attacking once per round would move at 12 
and attack twice per round. Spelicasting and 
spell effects are not sped up. The number of 
creatures that can be affected is equal to the 
caster’s experience level; those creatures clos- 
est to the center of effect are affected first. All 
affected by haste must be in the designated 
area of effect. Note that this spell negates the 
effects of a slow spell. Additionally, this spell 
ages the recipient by one year, because of sped- 
up metabolic processes (like all magical aging, 
this requires a system shock roll). The spell is 
not cumulative with itself or with similar 
magic (including boots of speed and potion of 
speed). 

Its material component is a shaving of 
licorice root. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Hasten Growth 
(Alteration) 


Level: 5 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 2 hrs. 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: Animal touched 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This can be cast once per week upon any 
animal, including a giant variety. If a saving 


throw vs. spell is failed, the creature ages by 
one month instead of one week, undergoing 
any physical changes associated with the nor- 
mal passage of time. Casting this spell more 
than once per week on the same animal may 
afflict it with magic-induced changes, a degen- 
erative disease, system shock, genetic damage, 
or other penalties at the DM’s option. The spell 
is most often used to accelerate maturation 
during breeding experiments. 

The material components are: a pinch of 
spinach and a spoonful of cod liver oil. 

Notes: Very rare spell. (Updated from 


Imagine Magazine.) 


Hatch the Stone from the Egg 
(Alteration, Enchantment, Evocation) 
(Alchemy, Earth) 


Level: 7 

Range: Touch 

Casting Time: 1d4 + 4 hrs. 
Components: V, S, M 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: One alchemical mixture 
Saving Throw: None 


When a wizard wishes to create the magical 
item known as the philosopher's stone, he must 
first discover its alchemical formula, which 
tells him the necessary ingredients and the 
method of preparing them. This information is 
not provided by this spell, and this spell is use- 
less without the formula. (The exact ingredi- 
ents and formula are decided by the Dungeon 
Master and must be discovered by the wizard 
though adventuring.) 

When the formula has been discovered and 
the ingredients prepared, the wizard enchants 
the alchemical mixture with the enchant an 
item spell. Hatch the stone from the egg is then 
cast upon the mixture. This spell slowly trans- 
mutes the mixture into its final form as the 
philosopher's stone. The process is completed 
with a permanency spell. 

The spell requires the magical item known 
as the philosopher's egg. This is an enchanted 
retort (a long-necked piece of glassware) used 
to distill an alchemical mixture. The egg is not 
destroyed upon completion of the spell and can 
be used again (XP value: 1,000; the other prop- 
erty of the egg is to reduce by half the time 
required to produce any fluid by means of 
alchemy.) 

Notes: Uncommon spell ( 704‘). 


ne Rt a 


425 


N Haunted Sleep, Tasirin’s A 


Haunted Sleep, Tasirin’s 
See Tasirin’s haunted sleep. 


Heal Self — Phaerimm 


(Necromancy) 


Level: 6 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 6 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: Special 


This healing spell is usable only by the 
phaerimm. When it is cast, a saving throw vs. 
spell is required. If the throw fails, the casting 
phaerimm is healed of only 4d8 points of dam- 
age (to the limit of damage previously taken). 
Blindness, poison, weakness, or nausea, how- 
ever caused, are banished from the phaerimm’s 
body. 

If the throw succeeds, al? damage is healed, 
including the restoration of full use to broken 
limbs and damaged organs. All afflictions 
(including rot grub and other parasitic infesta- 
tions, diseases such as mummy rot, and even 
lycanthropy) are ended. 


In addition, the phaerimm temporarily gains 
| point of Strength, with the applicable bonuses 
(a phaerimm possessing 18 Strength attains 19 
Strength, regardless of any percentile normally 
possessed). This augmentation lasts for | turn, 
plus | round per level. The healing effects of 
the spell cannot be dispelled, although new 
damage can be taken. 

This healing spell requires as its material 
components two drops of water, a drop of 
blood, and a gemstone of not less than 100 gp 
value. The phaerimm holds these in one tenta- 
cle, claps that tentacle to its body, and intones 
the spell. 

Notes: Restricted to phaerimm; common. 


Healing Dream 
(Enchantment/Charm) 


Level: 3 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 3 

Duration: 8 hrs. + 2 hrs./level 
Area of Effect: 1 sleeping creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


Casting this spell induces a deep, unbreak- 
able sleep in which the subject dreams peace- 
fully of the most comforting images or events 
his mind imagines. During the dream, the 
sleeper cannot be awakened normally, not even 
by wounding. However, during each hour after 
the first eight, the dreamer heals wounds at an 
astonishing rate, recovering 2 hit points per 
hour. 

If this enchantment is magically countered, 
or if the sleeper is affected by a true nightmare 
or sleepwalking spell, the healing effect is 
stopped. Likewise, a successful dispel magic 
spell not only wakes the sleeper, but also stops 
the healing. 

The material components for this spell are a 
bear’s claw, a strip of dreamwillow bark, and 
the dried, crushed petal of a blue lotus flower. 

Notes: Restricted to Dreammaster mages, 
non-evil witches, and those of gypsy blood. 
(Updated from DraGoN Magazine.) 


426 


~ Heart of Stone A 


Healing Touch 
(Alteration, Necromancy) 


Level: 3 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time; 3 

Duration: One touch 

Area of Effect: 1 living being 
Saving Throw: None 


When the caster touches a living being, life 
energy is transferred from the caster to the sub- 
ject being. If the being is unwilling, a success- 
ful attack roll is required. 

The caster rolls 1d6, and this is the number 
of temporary hit points bestowed upon the sub- 
ject and subtracted from the caster’s total. The 
caster must then make a successful saving 
throw vs. spell or be paralyzed for 1d4 rounds. 
Any transferred hit points over the target’s nor- 
mal total are lost. The temporary hit points are 
the first lost to any subsequent damage, and 
any remaining after one hour per caster level 
are lost. 

When cast upon an undead creature, this 
spell inflicts damage equal to the number of hit 
points lost by the caster. 

This spell was developed by Stayros of the 
Skulls to fulfill an order of the Lords of Water- 
deep. It is essentially a reversed version of the 
vampiric touch spell. 

Notes: Known by the mage Stavros; uncom- 
mon for the Watch-Wizards’ Guild of Water- 
deep; virtually unknown outside the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Heart of Stone 
(Necromancy) 


Level: 8 

Range: 0 

Components; V, S, M 
Casting Time: | day 
Duration: 1 year 

Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


This potent spell exchanges the wizard’s 
own living heart for a finely crafted heart of 
perfect, unblemished stone that alters the very 
nature of the wizard’s body. As long as the 
heart of stone remains in effect, the caster need 
not fear attacks that pierce, slash, or cut him; 
he does not bleed and can ignore the most hor- 
rible injuries of this kind. 


From any slashing or piercing attack (type S 
or P), the wizard suffers only 1 point of dam- 
age, plus any magical adjustment for the 
weapon. For example, a wizard struck by a 
long sword +1 suffers only 2 points of damage. 
Strength and specialization bonuses are 
ignored. Note that while the caster may not feel 
a sword in his rib cage, any damage sustained 
interrupts spellcasting. A wizard who is dis- 
membered suffers no additional damage other 
than the inconvenience of having his limbs 
removed, and a severed limb reattaches if held 
in place for one full turn. 

The heart of stone is also partially effective 
against bludgeoning attacks (type B) since it 
prevents bruising, swelling, and crushed blood 
vessels. Against bludgeoning weapons, the 
wizard only suffers half normal damage. Cause 
wound spells always inflict minimum damage 
against a wizard protected by this spell. 

In addition to resisting injury, the heart of 
stone also renders the character immune to 
fatigue and exhaustion, whether normal or 
magical. The caster also gains a +4 bonus to 
saving throws vs. petrification attacks, 

While the heart of stone is quite powerful, it 
has limitations. First, determined physical 
attacks can eventually destroy the wizard 
despite his unnatural resistance to injury—a 
mob of angry peasants with hatchets and spears 
can finish off the wizard one point at a time if 
that’s what it takes. Second, the heart confers 
no protection against other attack forms, such 
as fire, electricity, cold, acid, and so on. Most 
importantly, the caster loses the ability to natu- 
rally recover from injury and no longer regains 
lost hit points with the passage of time. Heal- 
ing spells, potions and items are reduced to 
their minimum effect, so a cure serious wounds 
(2d8+1 hit points restored) would only return 3 
hit points to a wizard protected by keart of 
stone. However, limited wish or wish can be 
used to restore | hit point per level of caster or 
all but 1d4 hit points, respectively. 

In addition to these disadvantages, heart of 
stone also renders the wizard vulnerable in one 
other way: his own real heart can be destroyed, 
instantly slaying him. Naturally, the wizard 
will take steps to hide and protect his true heart 
to prevent this from happening. The living 
heart continues to beat for the duration of the 
spell but requires no special receptacle or facil- 
ities to protect it—the caster could leave it 
lying on the floor, if he wished. 

The heart of stone cannot be dispelled, 
although a more powerful negation magic such 


a 


427 


Heartcall 


as Mordenkainen’s disjunction can bring the 
spell to an end. Stone to flesh also undoes the 
magic of the heart of stone. No matter how the 
spell is ended, the wizard’s own living heart 
instantly returns to its proper place, and the 
stone heart appears wherever the living heart 
was kept. At this time, any injuries the wizard 
currently has are multiplied by 1d6 as the 
wounds begin to bleed again. For example, a 
wizard who currently has 6 points of damage 
suffers 6d6 points of damage when the spell 
ends. 

The material component for this spell is the 
stone heart itself. This must be a carved stone 
of quality (jade, obsidian, or gold-veined mar- 
ble would be appropriate) worth not less than 
5,000 gp. It must be prepared by use of the 
enchant an item spell. The stone is not con- 
sumed at the spell’s end and can be used again 
if it is undamaged. 

Notes: Uncommon (PO:SM) 


Heartcall 
(Divination) 


Level: 3 

Range: Special 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 3 turns 
Duration: 1 turn 

Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell indicates approximate direction 
and distance of the subject's true love, if such a 
one exists. Sometimes the spell gives no result, 
indicating that either the subject has no true 
love or that the time is not right for them to 
meet. If this true love is on a different plane of 
existence, some indication of the plane is all 
the information that can be garnered by this 
method (Outer plane, Astral plane, demiplane, 
etc.), 

The material components are a spool of red 
thread and a glass disk. 

While adventuring in far-off Kozakura, the 
hedge-sorceress Majinhime discovered the 
belief that an invisible thread of Fate connected 
those destined to marry. The theory led to the 
creation of this spell. 

Notes: Uncommon for diviners, good 
witches, and gypsies; otherwise very rare. 
(Updated from DraGoN Magazine.) 


Heartsense — Hishna 
(Divination) 


Level: 2 

Range: 0 

Components: V 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: | turn/level 

Area of Effect: 30 yds,/level 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell allows the caster to sense the beat- 
ing of any warm-blooded hearts within range— 
that is, mammals and birds, including humans 
and humanoid creatures. The area moves with 
the caster for the duration of the spell. In addi- 
tion to the location of the target, the caster can 
make an estimate as to the being’s approximate 
size. 

Notes: Restricted to practitioners of hishna 
magic (the Maztica setting); common. 


Heat Mirage 


od 


(Illusion) 


Level: 5 

Range: 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 1 
Duration: | rd./level 
Area of Effect: Cube, 5 ft./level per side 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


The heat mirage is a simple illusion spell 
that is used to augment the desert’s natural illu- 
sory properties. When cast upon an area that is 
already affected by a natural mirage, it 
enhances that image and produces auditory and 
olfactory illusions as well. Anyone who fails a 
saving throw vs. spell will believe that the illu- 
sion is an actual oasis. 

This spell is often used to lure unwary trav- 
elers to an area so that they may be ambushed. 
Because the illusion isn’t dispelled until some- 
one tries to drink from the “oasis,” bandits can 
hide within the affected area and spring upon 
their unwitting victims. 

Good wizards use this spell to lure foolish 
travelers away from dangerous areas or crea- 
tures. While not exactly the most polite method, 
those wizards valuing their privacy find that 
the heat mirage works much better than an 
open meeting. 

Notes: Uncommon in arabian settings; oth- 


erwise very rare. 


Le — a 


428 


~ Heroism — Elf i 


Hedge Enchantment 
(Enchantment, Invocation) 


Level: 5 

Range: Special 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 day + 1—6 days 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: | item 

Saving Throw: Neg. 


Similar in many respects to the 6th-level 
spell enchant an item, this spell is much more 
limited. It is used, typically, to make a minor 
magical effect, such as cantrip, a part of an 
object. Such enchantments have little or no 
combat use and are usually restricted to com- 
fort or everyday use items such as skillets and 
blankets. The more pronounced the effect, the 
more days the wizard must spend working over 
the item, to a maximum of one week (at the 
DM's discretion). 

Notes: Restricted to hedge wizards; com- 
mon. These are minor NPC wizards of 9th level 
or less (and optionally the kit in The Complete 
Book of Humanoids). The second, plant-affect- 
ing version of the original spell has been 
renamed enhance plant. (Updated from 
DRAGON Magazine.) 


Hellfire 


See Avissar’s bane. 


Helm, Dolent’s 
See Dolent’s helm. 


Heroism — Elf 
(Alteration) 


Level: 4 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 4 
Duration: | rd./level 
Area of Effect: 1 warrior 
Saving Throw: None 


Developed by grey elf mages, this spell con- 
fers a temporary increase in life energy level 
upon any warrior character of 9th level or 
lower, including 0-level men-at-arms or 
hirelings. The amount of the increase varies 
with the subject's base level, as shown below: 


Warrior's Levels Dice for 
Level Bestowed Bonus hp 
0 4 4d10 
Ist to 3rd 3 3d10+1 
4th to 6th 2 2d10+2 
7th to 9th 1 1d10+3 


The warrior gains the THACO, number of 
attacks per round, and saving throws of the 
new, temporary level. In addition, a number of 
bonus Hit Dice (shown above) are added to the 
warrior’s current hit point score. Any damage 
the warrior sustains while under the influence 
of the heroism spell is taken from these bonus 
hit points first. The bonus hit points vanish at 
the end of the spell, and the warrior returns to 
his own true level. If the warrior is struck by an 
energy draining attack while the spell is in 
effect, bestowed levels and their bonus hit 
points are negated first. Only classes from the 
warrior group can be affected, although a 
multi-class or dual-class character who is a 
warrior can benefit from this spell. 

The material component is a leaf from an 
oak tree. 

Notes: Very rare spell. While not restricted 
to elves alone, the spell is jealously guarded by 
its creators. (Updated from POLYHEDRON 
Newszine.) 


So ee el 


429 


N Hidden Lodge, Leomund's a 


Hidden Lodge, Leomund’s 


See Leomund’s hidden lodge. 


Hide Heart 
(Necromancy) 


Level: 8 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 turn 
Duration: | month 

Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


This macabre spell allows the wizard to pull 
his beating heart from his chest and place it in 
some better protected place, While this causes 
no physical damage to the caster, it has several 
other effects. 

First, the spell protects the caster from dam- 
age. The caster suffers only half damage from 
any normal physical attack; magical weapons 
inflict half damage plus any magical bonuses. 
Magical attacks are treated normally. In addi- 
tion, any shot specifically aimed to pierce the 
caster’s chest (and presumably his heart, if it 
were still there), causes no damage. 


430 


The material components for the spell are a 
silken pillow, on which the heart is laid, and a 
glass or crystal cover for it. 

When a wizard uses this spell, the heart is 
usually placed in some unusual place, not eas- 
ily found, and very well-protected. The wise 
wizard chooses non-carnivorous creatures to 
guard the heart. 

If the heart is discovered and damaged, the 
caster feels it immediately (though other magi- 
cal warnings may have already caused an 
alert). While separated from the body, the heart 
can suffer | point of damage per level of the 
caster before the caster dies. 

Notes: Uncommon in arabian lands; virtu- 
ally unknown elsewhere. 


Hide Normal Metal 


Reversed form, see smelting. 


Hiding Place 
(Abjuration) 


Level: 4 

Range: 0 

Components: V, M 

Casting Time: 1 hr. 

Duration: | day/level 

Area of Effect: 1 room, 5-ft, cube/level 
Saving Throw: None 


The small room on which this spell is to be 
cast must first be completely sealed; doors 
locked and windows boarded over, all cracks 
filled with rags, and so on. The spell is then 
cast. For one day per level of the caster there- 
after, the room is completely undetectable save 
by divinations of at least 5th level cast by 
diviner specialists (including sages, seers, and 
certain mystic priests). Those within are pro- 
tected against detection and location just as if 
wearing the amulet of that power. Also, anyone 
outside the room will forget its location, if 
known, for the spell’s duration. The area 
affected is not large; even a 12th-level caster 
can hide a room of only 10 feet by 15 feet. 

The spell requires previously prepared magi- 
cal scrolls (worth a minimum of 1,000 gp) with 
pictograms of eyes, ears, and brains, These are 
burned as words of command are spoken to 
magically seal the room. 

Notes: Very rare spell; most likely known to 
multi-class mage/thieves. (Updated from 
Imagine Magazine.) 


~ pen na 


Hissing Sand 
(Evocation) 
(Province: Sand) 
Level: 3 


Range: 10 yds./level 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 3 

Duration: 3 rds. 

Area of Effect: Surface area 10 ft. x 10 ft./level 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell causes sand or loose earth to flow 
10 feet per round in a general direction chosen 
by the caster. This spell moves only natural 
sand or loose soil (the latter includes mud, 
dust, gravel, or topsoil with virtually no plant 
cover). Cultivated soil cannot be affected. 

The sand hisses softly as it drifts. It can’t 
bury large objects or creatures, nor creatures 
that can move to evade it. The sand can cover 
small objects and corpses of man-size or less, 
and can obliterate tracks or markings. 

If used on slopes or dune slipfaces, the spell 
can start sandslides. In this case, a creature at 
the bottom may be buried, just as it would by a 
normal sandslide. Sand running down a cliff 
face forces creatures clinging or climbing there 
to make a successful Strength check each 
round. Failure means they lose their holds and 
fall (the moving sand provides no cushion 
against normal falling damage). 

When casting hissing sand, the wizard must 
pour out roughly a cup of any liquid, which 
disappears. 

Notes: Common in arabian settings; other- 
wise very rare, 


Hoardguard — Dragon 
(Abjuration, Evocation) 


Level: 4 

Range: 0 

Components: V 

Casting Time: | rd. 

Duration: 1 hr./level 

Area of Effect: As breath weapon 
Saving Throw: None 


By means of this spell, a dragon can protect 
its hoard in such a way as to make theft virtu- 
ally impossible, 

When the spell is cast, the dragon’s breath 
weapon temporarily changes. Instead of the 
usual fire, lightning, acid, and so on, the breath 
weapon becomes pure magical energy, which 


must be released by the dragon within 1 round 
following the spell’s casting, or the magic is 
wasted, The dragon breathes this energy (which 
conforms to the dimensions of the dragon’s 
usual breath weapon) over its hoard, attempting 
to encompass as much of the hoard as possible 
within the area of effect. 

This energy bonds whatever parts of the 
hoard it touches into a solid mass. The spell 
does not harm the hoard in any way, nor does it 
alter its appearance or position; the items 
within the hoard remain loose and separate. 
Instead, the hoardguard magic fills in the 
spaces between the individual coins, gems, 
weapons, chests, ingots, and so forth, and 
holds them together as a solid mound of wealth. 
This invisible bond prevents the hoard from 
being sorted, separated for transport, scattered, 
or otherwise moved or manipulated as separate 
items. Because it has essentially become one 
single mass, lifting the hoard as a whole is 
impossible by any see creature, except 
through powerful magi 

The hoard so enik cannot be harmed by 
physical or magical attacks without first 
removing the hoardguard spell. It is thus 
impossible for intruders to break off pieces or 
sections of the hoard and carry them away. 

Dispel magic has no effect on a hoard pro- 
tected by the spell, and an antimagic shell frees 
only as much treasure as fits within its area of 
effect. (If freed treasure is not removed from 
the hoard, the hoardguard magic reasserts 
itself as soon as the shell expires or moves 
away.) A limited wish negates a hoardguard for 
one hour (and if the treasure is not separated in 
that time, the Aoardguard will return as above). 
A full wish destroys the spell permanently. 

Treasure added to a hoard already protected 
by this spel] does not gain the spell’s benefits. 
New treasure requires a hoardguard of its own, 
though the dragon may include the new trea- 
sure after the first hoardguard’s duration 
expires and a new spell is cast. 

This spell only affects the dragon’s hoard. It 
does not function upon creatures or the items 
they possess, unless the dragon acquires the 
items and adds them to its hoard. This spell 
typically protects the dragon’s treasure while it 
is out hunting for food or seeking treasure. 
Some dragons arrange their hoards so that the 
entire amount can be warded with a single 
spell. Others make several smaller piles, to use 
up an invader’s magical powers in repeatedly 
negating the spell, and thus minimizing the 
overall treasure loss. 


A A ESAE A E 


431 


> Hold Giant r 


Many dragons cannot use this spell due to its 
level, but all dragons who know of it seek mag- 
ical items that can duplicate its effects. Non- 
dragons who somehow cast hoardguard (or a 
derivative thereof) instantly contract a form of 
insanity that combines paranoia with intense 
greed, for which there is no known cure, short 
of exceptionally powerful magic. 

Notes: Rare for dragons; otherwise very 
rare. Known to be in the Draconomicon. 


Hold Giant 
(Enchantment/Charm) 


Level: 4 

Range: 120 yds. 

Components: V 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: 2 rds./level 

Area of Effect: 1 to 4 giants in a 40-ft. cube 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell immobilizes from one to four true 
giants or giant-kin within spell range and in 
sight of the spellcaster. The caster can opt to 
hold one, two, three, or four giants. If three or 
four are attacked, each saving throw is normal; 
if two are attacked, each saving throw suffers a 
~1 penalty; if only one is attacked, the saving 
throw suffers a -3 penalty. 

Notes: This spell is known by the wizard 
Delsenora. (Updated from POLYHEDRON 
Newszine.) 


Hold Golem 
(Abjuration, Enchantment/Charm) 
(Artifice) 


Level: 7 

Range: 10 ft./level 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 3 
Duration: 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: 1 golem 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell allows the caster to halt a single 
golem of any type within spell range. The loca- 
tions of all golems in range and not magically 
warded are revealed to the caster—even if they 
are disguised, hidden behind cover, or inac- 
tive—and the caster chooses which golem to 
affect. 

The chosen golem becomes immobile even 
if it is under the direct control of another being. 
Moreover, a hold golem freezes any existing 


golem attack (even magic or a breath weapon) 
in midair, so only creatures venturing into the 
attack’s area are affected. A held golem cannot 
use any special attack form it possesses until it 
is released, 

The golem can be touched, climbed, 
attacked, and even dismantled without break- 
ing the spell. The only way to free the golem 
before the spell expires is to slay the caster. A 
dispel magic cast on the caster or the golem 
does not affect the hold golem spell. Once the 
spell takes effect, even the caster cannot end it 
before its duration runs out. 

Notes: Rare for artificers; otherwise very 
rare in the FoRGOTTEN REALMS setting and vir- 
tually unknown elsewhere. 


Hold Monster 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
(Song) 


Level: 5 

Range: 5 yds./level 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: | rd./level i 

Area of Effect: 1 to 4 creatures in a 40-ft. cube 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell immobilizes from one to four 
creatures of any type within spell range and in 
sight of the spellcaster. He can opt to hold one, 
two, three, or four creatures. If three or four are 
attacked, cach saving throw is normal; if two 
are attacked, each saving throw suffers a —1 
penalty; if only one is attacked, the saving 
throw suffers a —3 penalty. 

The material component for this spell is one 
hard metal bar or rod for each monster to be 
held. The bar or rod can be as small as a three- 
penny nail. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


ee ee 


432 


Hold Portal Open ‘A 


Hold Person 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
(Song) 


Level: 3 

Range: 120 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 3 

Duration: 2 rds./level 

Area of Effect: 1 to 4 persons, 20-ft. cube 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell holds from one to four humans, 
demihumans, or humanoid creatures rigidly 
immobile for five or more rounds. 

The hold person spell affects any bipedal 
human, demihuman or humanoid of man-size 
or smaller, including brownies, dryads, 
dwarves, elves, gnolls, gnomes, goblins, half- 
elves, halflings, half-orcs, hobgoblins, humans, 
kobolds, lizard men, nixies, ores, pixies, 
sprites, troglodytes, and others. 

The spell is centered on a point selected by 
the caster; it affects persons selected by the 
caster within the area of effect. If the spell is 
cast at three or four people, each gets an 
unmodified saving throw. If only two people 
are being enspelled, each makes his saving 
throw with a —1 penalty. If the spell is cast at 
only one person, the saving throw suffers a -3 
penalty. Saving throws are adjusted for Wis- 
dom. Those succeeding on their saving throws 
are unaffected by the spell. Undead creatures 
cannot be held. 

Held beings cannot move or speak, but they 
remain aware of events around them and can 
use abilities not requiring motion or speech. 
Being held does not prevent the worsening of 
the subjects’ condition due to wounds, disease, 
or poison. The caster can end the spell with a 
single utterance at any time; otherwise, the 
duration is 10 rounds at Sth level, 12 rounds at 
6th level, 14 rounds at 7th level, etc. 

The spellcaster needs a small, straight piece 
of iron as the material component of this spell. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Hold Portal 
(Alteration) 
(Universal) 


Level: 1 

Range: 20 yds./level 
Components: V 
Casting Time: 1 
Duration: | rd./level 


Area of Effect: 20 sq. ft./level 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell magically bars a door, gate, or 
valve of wood, metal, or stone. The magical 
closure holds the portal fast, just as if it were 
securely closed and locked. Any extraplanar 
creature (djinn, elemental, etc.) with 4 or more 
Hit Dice can shatter the spell and burst open 
the portal, A wizard of 4 or more experience 
levels higher than the spellcaster can open the 
held portal at will. A knock spell or a success- 
ful dispel magic spell can negate the hold por- 
tal. Held portals can be broken or physically 
battered down. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Hold Portal Open 
(Alteration) 
Reversible 


Level: 2 

Range: 10 ft-/level 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 2 

Duration: Maximum 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: 1 open door, gate, or valve 
Saving Throw: None 

The purpose of this spell is to keep a door, 
gate, or valve of wood, metal, or stone from 
being shut. The spell only works on a portal 
that is already open and in range. 

When the spell is cast, the door freezes in its 
open position. The spell can be shattered, and 
the door shut, by an extraplanar creature of 4 
Hit Dice or more. Creatures of huge size (size 
H) or larger can force the door closed if they 
have strength and bulk comparable with their 
size (giants, dragons), though this is likely to 
break the door from its hinges unless it is spe- 
cially reinforced. 

The reverse of this spell, slam portal, imme- 
diately shuts an open door, gate, or valve in 
range. The slammed door can be opened nor- 
mally. A slam portal spell cast directly against 
a hold portal open spell will negate it, and will 
close the portal if the caster is of higher level 
than wizard who cast the hold portal open 
spell. 

Notes: Very rare spell. (Updated from 
DRAGON ine.) 


"Mba NG alae aa a 


433 


N Hold Undead r 


Hold Undead 


(Necromancy) 


Level: 3 

Range: 60 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: 1d4 rds. + | rd./level 
Area of Effect: 1d3 undead 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


When cast, this spell renders immobile 1d3 
undead creatures whose total Hit Dice are 
equal to or less than the caster’s level. No more 
than three undead can be affected by a single 
spell, To cast, the wizard aims the spell at a 
point within range and the three undead closest 
to this are considered to be in the area of effect, 
provided all are within the field of vision and 
spell range of the caster. Undead of less than 
three Hit Dice are automatically affected. 
Other undead are allowed a saving throw vs. 
spell to negate the effect. If the spell is success- 
ful, it renders the undead immobile for the 
duration of the spell. 

The material component for this spell is a 
pinch of sulphur and powdered garlic. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Hold Undead 
An early Sth-level version of this spell was 
incorporated into the 2nd Ed, rules at 3rd 
level. 


Hold Vapor 
(Abjuration) 
(Air, Alchemy) 


Level: 3 

Range: 10 yds./level 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 3 

Duration: Special (maximum | hr.) 

Area of Effect: 20 ft. + 10 ft./level radius 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell allows a wizard to halt and pre- 
vent the further movement of any visible cloud 
or vapor within the spell’s range and area of 
effect. Such clouds include gaseous breath 
weapons, fog cloud, cloudkill, and incendiary 
cloud as well as the smoky effects of pyrotech- 
nics. Other objects and creatures can pass 
freely through this barrier, moving into and out 
of the gas-filled area. A volatile gas could be 
contained by the spell and safely incinerated by 
tossing a torch through the barrier. 

The hold vapor spell will restrain gas clouds 
even against magical and natural winds. A 
creature in gaseous or airlike form (air elemen- 
tal djinns, and vampires, for example) can be 
contained by this spell. In these cases, the crea- 
ture being contained is permitted a saving 
throw vs. spell each round to break through the 
barrier. Gaseous creatures cannot transform 
from their gaseous state when being contained 
by this spell. 

The spell lasts for as long as the wizard con- 
tinues chanting, to a maximum of one hour, at 
which time the spell fades and the cloud (if it is 
still there) settles or drifts naturally. The wizard 
can move normally during this period, though 
if silenced or interrupted from chanting for a 
full round, the spell will fade and the held 
vapors will be freed. 

This spell does not control a cloud of gas, it 
only contains it and halts its movement. 

The material component of the spell is a 
small balloon or bladder. 

Notes: Uncommon spell from the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. Known to be in 
The Book of Bats. 


434 


N Hornung y Pann Defetioigp- 


Hold Vapor 
An early Sth-level version of this spell has been 
incorporated into the 3rd-level version. 


Homunculus Shield 
(Necromancy) 


Level: 8 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 3 

Duration: | rd./level 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


By creating a homunculus shield, the wizard 
separates a portion of his life force in the form 
of a magical homunculus. This creature is 
invisible to all but the caster and appears as a 
miniature version of the caster perched atop 
the wizard’s head. 

The wizard can move and act normally 
while this spell is in effect. The magical 
homunculus operates as an independent spell- 
caster. It can cast only teleport, contingency, 
and protective spells of 4th level and lower. It 
casts spells only from the wizard’s memorized 
store of spells, but any spell cast by the 
homunculus has a casting time of 1. The wiz- 
ard selects which spells are cast by the 
homunculus; after they are cast, they are 
wiped from the caster’s memory. 

The homunculus has | hit point per two lev- 
els of the caster. These points are “borrowed” 
from the caster; while the homunculus is pre- 
sent, the wizard’s hit points are reduced by this 
amount. 

The homunculus cannot be struck by melee 
or missile weapons separately from the wizard. 
It can be damaged separately from the wizard 
(for example, by a magic missile targeted at the 
homunculus or by area effect spells), The 
homunculus has the attributes and saving 
throws of the wizard. 

At the end of the spell’s duration, the 
homunculus disappears and any hit points it 
had are restored to the wizard. Hit points lost 
by the homunculus can be regained only by 
magical healing. 

If the wizard’s hit points are reduced to zero 
at any time during the spell, the wizard is dead 
(or dying) even if the homunculus has hit 
points remaining. 

A wizard with an active homunculus shield 
suffers a —4 saving throw penalty against magic 
jar spells cast upon him due to the division of 


his mental energy. 

The material component is a miniature 
sculpted bust of the spellcaster. 

Notes: Uncommon spell (ToM). 


Honor Mark 
(Alteration) 


Level: 1 

Range: 10 ft./level 
Components: V 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: Permanent (special) 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: None (special) 


This spell is used to mark those whom the 
wizard has seen performing a dishonorable 
action. The honor mark is generally a striking 
black line that cuts across the eyes or slashes 
down the face along the nose. The mark is 
instantly recognizable to all who see it, and 
they will treat the character so marked as if his 
station were two full levels lower than it actu- 
ally is. 

The only way to remove the mark is to atone 
for the misdeed. Once this has been done, the 
mark disappears and the character cannot be 
marked for that action again. 

While there is no a saving throw allowed for 
those subjected to this spell, the wizard must 
have actually seen the individual performing a 
dishonorable act. A wizard attempting to mark 
a character whom he hasn't witnessed perform- 
ing a misdeed receives the mark instead. The 
mark remains until the wizard apologizes to the 
character for attempting to malign his name. 
The wizard must also perform a task of atone- 
ment named by the offended party. 

Notes: Uncommon in arabian settings; oth- 
erwise very rare. 


Hornung’s Baneful Deflector* 
(Evocation) 
(Wild) 


Level: 2 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 2 

Duration: 2 rds./level 

Area of Effect; Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell creates a shimmering, hemispheri- 
cal field of force. The field is transparent and 


ne ee Se ie eee ee E 


435 


N Hornung’s Guess f 


moves with the recipient, forming about one 
foot away from his body. The force serves as a 
shield spell against all forms of individually 
targeted missile attacks (including magic mis- 
siles and other spells). The caster designates 
the position of the shell (protecting the front, 
rear, left side, right side, or top of the recipi- 
ent). The spell does not protect against area 
effect spells or other attacks that strike several 
creatures at once. 

Whenever an individual missile attack is 
directed at a protected creature, the baneful 
deflector activates. Instead of striking the tar- 
get creature, the missile’s target is determined 
randomly among all creatures within a 15-foot 
radius of the protected creature, including the 
protected creature. The missile then changes 
course toward its new target with normal 
chances to hit. If the new target is beyond the 
range of the missile, no target is hit. If the pro- 
tected creature is struck, the spell immediately 
fails. If several people in a group are each pro- 
tected by baneful deflector, a missile may 
change course several times before reaching its 
target. 

The material component is a small prism 
that shatters when the spell is cast. 


436 


A reversed form of this spell was developed 
much later, called Strahd 's baneful attractor. 
This spell has its own listing. 

Notes: Restricted to wild mages; uncommon 


(ToM). 


Hornung’s Guess* 
(Divination) 
(Wild) 


Level: 1 

Range: 300 yds. 
Components: V 
Casting Time: 2 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


The spell provides a wizard with an instant 
and highly accurate estimate of the number of 
persons or objects in a group. 

The spell’s area of effect is one group of a 
general class of objects. All objects of the 
group must be within spell range and the group 
as a whole must be visible to the caster. The 
wizard need not see every individual in the 
group, merely the general limits of the group’s 
size and area. For example, a wizard on a hill 
could look down on a forest and estimate the 
number of trees in all or part of it. He could not 
get an estimate of the number of goblins within 
the forest, however, since the group as a whole 
(the goblins) is concealed from sight. 

The estimate generated is accurate to the 
largest factor of ten (rounded up). For example, 
if Hornung s guess were cast on a group of 439 
horsemen, the estimate would be 400. If there 
were 2,670 horsemen, the spell would estimate 
3,000. If there were 37 horsemen, the answer 
would be 40. Clearly, using the spell on small 
groups (especially those with fewer than 10 
members) is pointless. 

Hornung s guess can be used to quickly esti- 
mate the size of treasure hoards and army 
units. It is particularly popular with moneylen- 
ders and generals. Hornung, one of the leading 
wizards in the field of wild magic (before his 
untimely disappearance while experimenting 
with wildwind), developed this spell to improve 
the accuracy of his estimates. 

Notes: Restricted to wild mages; common 


(ToM). 


~ Hornung’s Surge Selector ‘A 


Hornung’s Random Dispatcher* 
(Abjuration) 
(Wild) 


Level: 8 

Range: 30 yds. 
Components; V 

Casting Time: 2 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


With the utterance of a few words, this spell 
can hurl a creature to a random plane of exis- 
tence and leave him there. The creature, if 
unwilling, is allowed a saving throw. If success- 
ful, the spell fails. If unsuccessful, the creature 
and all items it carries are sent to a random 
plane. To determine the plane, roll on the table. 

The caster has no control over the destina- 
tion of the target creature. The conditions at the 
destination might kill the creature (for exam- 
ple, arriving in the Elemental Plane of Fire) or 
merely make life difficult. This determination 
is left to the DM. 

Notes: Restricted to wild mages; common 
(ToM). The original table provided with this 
spell has been updated to incorporate the 
PLANESCAPE setting. 


Hornung’s Surge Selector* 
(Alteration) 
(Wild) 


Level: 7 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: [ rd. 

Duration: Special (maximum 12 hrs.) 
Area of Effect: The caster 

Saving Throw: None 


By casting this spell, the wild mage gains 
greater control over wild surges. When the 
caster’s spell creates a wild surge, two separate 
results are determined from Table 2. The caster 
can then choose which of the two results will 
take effect. This spell can be used in conjunc- 
tion with Nakal s reckless dweomer. 

The spell’s duration is a fixed number of surges 
or 12 hours, whichever comes first. The wild 
mage is able to shape one wild surge per five lev- 
els of his experience; thus, a 1 5th-level caster 
could shape three wild surges within a [2-hour 
period. At the end of 12 hours, the spell expires, 
regardless of the number of surges remaining. 


The great Hornung, having been blasted more 
than once by his own wild surges, devised this 
method of improving the results of wild magic 
and, not incidentally, his own chances of sur- 
vival. The result was Hornung 5 surge selector. 

The spell requires a brass spinner, which is 
reusable. 

Notes: Restricted to wild mages; common 


(ToM). 


r a a aaam -T 


437 


qy Horrid Wilting, Abi-Dalzim's a 


Horrid Wilting, Abi-Dalzim’s 
See Abi-Dalzim’s horrid wilting. 


Hover 
(Conjuration) 
(Air) 


Level: 3 

Range: 10 yds,/level 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 3 

Duration: Special (4 rds. maximum) 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 

Saving Throw: Special 


By means of this spell, a mage can instantly 
arrest the movement of a falling, jumping, or 
flying creature within spell range (including 
the caster), stopping its aerial movement and 
fixing its position for a short, variable time. 

The creature chosen by the caster is affected 
for one round. An aerial creature of Huge size 
or larger is affected for that one round only, 
any other creature is affected for one round and 
receives a saving throw vs. spell each round 
thereafter. An aerial creature that succeeds can 
fly at half normal speed in the following (sec- 
ond) round; a jumping or falling creature 
descends at feather fall rate (2 feet per second, 
120 feet per round). In the next (third) round 
all movement is normal. 

If the saving throw fails, creature might 
hover for up to four rounds. The creature 
makes a saving throw at the beginning of each 
round to see if the effect ends—whether this is 
desirable not—with a success as described 
above. If the spell hasn’t ended by the fourth 
round, it does so at the beginning of the fifth. 

This spell cannot be dispelled, nor can the 
hovering creature move aerially. A creature 
able to plane shift or become astral or ethereal 
can escape the spell in this way. A ring of free 
action provides complete immunity. 

A hovering creature can launch missile 
weapons, cast spells, read scrolls, open locks, 
shout instructions, catch ropes or thrown items, 
turn around, and the like as if standing on firm 
and solid earth. 

Notes: Very rare spell from the FORGOTTEN 
REALMS setting. Known to be in The Libram of 
Lathintel. 


Hovering Skull 
(Necromancy) 


Level: 3 

Range: Special 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 4 
Duration: 2 rds./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell creates a glowing human skull 
with sharp fangs. The skull hovers about a foot 
above the caster’s shoulder; as the caster 
moves, the skull hovers along with him. A 
caster who stops moving and concentrates can 
mentally command the hovering skull to move 
in any direction within a 30-foot radius. 

The caster can see through the skull’s eyes as 
if they were his own; for instance, the hovering 
skull could be ordered to investigate a dark 
cave or peek over a high wall. Additionally, the 
caster can order the hovering skull to attack 
other creatures with its razor-sharp teeth. If the 
caster’s concentration is interrupted while con- 
trolling the skull, the skull immediately drops 
to the ground. It takes no damage, and a caster 
who resumes concentration, can continue to 
command the skull. 

The hovering skull has the same attack rolls 
and saving throws as the caster; the skull has 3 
hit points and inflicts 1d6 points of damage 
with its bite. Most attacks directed at the skull 
do not harm the caster, nor does damage taken 
by the caster affect the skull. Gaze attacks 
against the skull do affect the caster. 

The material component for this spell is the 
tooth from a human skull. 

Notes: Uncommon for necromancers; other- 
wise very rare. 


Le ee 


438 


How! of Pandemonium 


Howl of Pandemonium 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 
(Dimension) 


Level: 6 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 6 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 30-ft. radius or 
60 x 20-ft. cone 

Saving Throw: Special 


This spell channels the screaming winds of 
Pandemonium through the caster’s body, emit- 
ting a numbing how! that incapacitates anyone 
nearby. The spell can last as long as one round 
per level of the caster, but ceases if the howl is 
not maintained for that length of time—the howl 
must be maintained for at least one full round to 
be effective at all. The effects linger after the 
spell ends, lasting as long as the how! was main- 
tained. The wizard can take no other action than 
standing still and howling to maintain the spell. 

A wizard casting howl of Pandemonium can 
either affect all creatures within 30 feet or chan- 
nel the spell into a cone-shaped area, 60 feet long 
and 20 in diameter at the far end. Those native to 
Pandemonium are unaffected by this spell. 


The spell negates all sound-based attacks, 
even drowning out a banshee’s wail or an 
androsphinx’s roar. All creatures in the area of 
effect are deafened and disoriented by the 
spell. Communication of any kind is impossi- 
ble, and those affected suffer a -2 penalty to 
attack rolls and saving throws. Any creature 
trying to approach the caster must save vs. 
spell to be able to get closer. Nonmagical mis- 
sile fire is deflected by the force of the howl. 
Creatures of 2 Hit Dice or less who fail a sav- 
ing throw vs. spell are driven into a catatonic 
state that lasts for 2d6 hours. 

In addition to the above effects, creatures 
whose Hit Dice or levels are greater than 2 but 
less than the caster’s must save vs. spell or 
become confused. Roll a d10 for those who fail 
their save and refer to the results given. 


1d10 
Roll Result 

l Wander away for duration of effect. 
2—6 Stand confused for one round, then 


roll again. 

7-9 Attack nearest creature for one round, 
then roll again. 

10 Act normally for one round, then roll 
again. 


N Howling Chain d 


The material component is a pebble from 
Pandemonium, which must be consumed by 
the caster. 

Notes: Common for members of the Bleak 
Cabal in the PLANESCAPE setting; otherwise 
very rare. 


Howling Chain 
(Evocation) 


Level: 6 

Range: 10 yds./2 levels 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 6 
Duration: | rd./level 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell brings into being a shimmering, 
blood-red chain of force (akin to that created 
by the 5th-level spell, sighing chain) that coils 
snakelike around a single chosen target crea- 
ture. This spell is named for the howling chant 
emitted by the chain as it loops and writhes 
around the target creature. The chain’s move- 
ments do not require the caster’s continued 
attention; once it is cast, the caster is free to 
work other magic or even leave the scene. 

The victim within a howling chain is not held 
fast, nor prevented from moving, but the chain 
imposes a —2 penalty on all of the creature’s 
attack and damage rolls; adversely affects abil- 
ity checks, saving throws, and movement rate by 
2; and increases the casting time of a spell cast 
by the chained creature by 2. 

A howling chain flails at the chained crea- 
ture constantly, attacking twice per round with 
a THACO of 7, and dealing 3d4 points of crush- 
ing and bludgeoning damage per successful 
strike. In any round in which both chain attacks 
hit a spellcasting victim, the spell is ruined; 
otherwise, an enchained spellcasting creature 
can successfully cast spells with a casting time 
of 5 or less. If an enchained creature devotes its 
attention exclusively to blocking and avoiding 
chain attacks, and does not otherwise move or 
attempt any other actions not directly related to 
defense (readying a shield is permissible), one 
chain attack per round automatically misses, 
and the other is made at THACO 12. 

Creatures trying to pull at the chain suffer 
2d4 points of bludgeoning damage per tug, and 
such attempts are always futile. Foes of the 
chained creature trying to strike at it past or 
through the chain suffer a —2 penalty on attack 
rolls, but are otherwise unaffected by the chain. 


Aside from waiting for its disappearance at 
the expiration of the spell, the chain can be 
gotten rid of by dispel magic, by destroying it, 
or by the death of the chained creature. If the 
first creature dies and the spell has not expired, 
the caster can direct the chain to move to 
another creature, coiling and writhing at a 
movement rate of 9. To enchain the subsequent 
creature requires a successful attack roll at the 
caster’s THACO, and directing the chain to a 
new victim consumes the spellcaster’s action 
for that round. This is the only way a howling 
chain can change victims. If the chain is not 
directed to a new victim in the round following 
the first victim’s death, it dissipates. 

To destroy a howling chain, it must be dealt 
33 points of damage. It is only AC 8, but the 
nature of the magic causes equal damage to be 
inflicted upon the enchained victim. Thus, a vic- 
tim must suffer 33 points of damage to be free 
of a howling chain that is destroyed by damage. 

The material component of this spell is a 
length of at least three joined links of chain of 
the finest steel or of any pure metal. 

Notes: Very rare in the FORGOTTEN REALMS 
setting; unknown elsewhere. 


Howling Horrortt 
(Evocation, Necromancy) 


Level: 7 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 7 

Duration: | rd./level 

Area of Effect: Attacks | creature 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell causes a wraithlike flying form to 
be emitted from the caster. Moaning eerily, it 
flies at a target being within line of sight that 
has been mentally selected by the caster. A 
howling horror cannot form underwater. 

A howling horror is a faceless, translucent 
gray, wispy being that swirls and drifts in 
response to weapon blows and moving objects. 
It is not fooled by feign death spells or similar 
conditions. The caster need not concentrate on 
the horror to maintain its existence. Once a tar- 
get creature is selected, the howling horror 
cannot be redirected against any other being. 

The howling horror is a magical force, not 
an undead creature, and thus cannot be turned. 
It lasts for 1 round per level of the caster, or 
until the target creature perishes, The horror is 
destroyed by suffering more than 22 points of 


ee a E 


Hypnosis — Hishna 


damage or if the caster wills it to vanish. 

Only physical attacks that pass through the 
volume of air the horror occupies harm it. The 
horror itself hits every time it attacks for 2d4 
points of damage. For every point of damage the 
howling horror inflicts, a hit point is gained by 
its caster. If the caster has been hurt, these 
points heal damage. When the caster is at full hit 
points, these points become bonus hit points that 
remain with the caster for | turn. Any damage 
suffered by the caster is taken from the bonus hit 
points first. 

Spells that affect an area have no effect on a 
howling horror. Spells directed specifically 
against a horror do it no harm; these spell 
effects are instead transmitted to its caster. The 
caster suffers no harm from them and can emit 
them at any chosen target (not necessarily the 
horror’s target). This retransmission occurs in 
addition to the caster’s other activities and does 
not disrupt or replace the caster’s own spellcast- 
ing. The emission is immediate and involuntary; 
if the caster does not direct the emission, then 
the distance and direction of the spell effect is 
determined randomly. 

Spells targeted on the caster while the horror 
is active are likewise transmitted through the 
magical link to the horror, to be emitted by the 
horror at targets selected by the caster. The pri- 
mary target of the horror need not be among 
them. Spells affecting an area are also immedi- 
ately altered and usurped by the caster in this 
manner if the caster is in the area of effect at all 
(any other creatures in the area escape the 
effects of the usurped spell). Again, this occurs 
in addition to any spellcasting on the part of the 
horror-caster, and it does no harm to either the 
horror or its creator. 

If the caster is unconscious, spells are emit- 
ted from the caster (or horror, respectively) in 
random directions. A retransmitted spell that 
affects an area is focused at a random distance 
and direction. 

The material component of this spell is a 
small cone made of bone that is consumed in 
the casting. 

Notes: Unique spell; known only to Semem- 
mon, one of the Zhentarim triumvirate, Casting 
this spell is an evil act. 


Hunting Hawk, Tenser’s 
See Tenser’s hunting hawk. 


Huntsman’s Call — Hishna 
(Summoning) 


Level: 1 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: | turn 

Duration: Concentration 

Area of Effect: 1,000 yds./level 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell allows the caster to call game 
from a wide area, bringing it—albeit cau- 
tiously—toward the caster as long as he retains 
his concentration. Mammals and birds are 
summoned by the spell, and will move in the 
general direction of the caster. However, their 
natural alertness remains, and they will flee at 
the first sign of a threat. 

The material component for the spell is a 
whistle made from the claw of a jaguar. 

Notes: Restricted to practitioners of hishna 
magic (the Maztica setting); common. 


Hypnosis — Hishna 
(Enchantment/Charm) 


Level: 2 

Range: 10 ft. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1—6 rds. 
Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: 1 being 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell allows the caster to beguile 
another individual, creating much the same 
effect as a charm person spell. However, the 
casting of hypnosis requires the caster and sub- 
ject to pay attention to each other for a period 
of several rounds. The casting time required is 
determined (by the DM) at the time the spell 
begins. 

The target being is allowed a saving throw 
vs. spell to avoid the effect. However, one who 
successfully resists will not be aware that the 
attempt to hypnotize him has been made unless 
possessing godlike Intelligence (21+). The 
spell can affect any creature of semi-intelli- 
gence (2) or higher. 

Notes: Restricted to practitioners of hishna 
magic (the Maztica setting); common. 


DP ik OE GE ea EE ate ae er 


441 


N$ Hypnotic Pattern A 


Hypnotic Pattern 
(Illusion/Phantasm) 
(Geometry) 


Level; 2 

Range: 30 yds. 
Components: S, M 
Casting Time: 2 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 30-ft. cube 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


When this spell is cast, the wizard creates a 
weaving, twisting pattern of subtle colors in 
the air. This pattern causes any creature look- 
ing at it to become fascinated and stand gazing 
at it as long as the spellcaster maintains the dis- 
play, plus two rounds thereafter. The spell can 
captivate a maximum of 24 levels, or Hit Dice, 
of creatures (for example, 24 creatures with 1 
Hit Die each, 12 with 2 Hit Dice, etc.). All 
creatures affected must be within the area of 
effect, and each is entitled to a saving throw vs. 
spell. A damage-inflicting attack on an affected 
creature frees it from the spell immediately. 

The wizard need not utter a sound, but he 
must gesture appropriately while holding a 
glowing stick of incense or a crystal rod filled 
with phosphorescent material. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB), 


442 


Hypnotism 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
(Mentalism) 


Level: 1 

Range: 5 yds. 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 1 

Duration: 1 rd. + 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: 30 ft. cube, 1d6 creatures 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


The gestures of the wizard, along with his 
droning incantation, cause 1d6 creatures within 
the area to become susceptible to a sugges- 
tion—a brief and reasonable-sounding request 
(see the 3rd-level wizard spell, suggestion). 
The request must be given after the hypnotism 
spell is cast. Until that time, the success of the 
spell is unknown, Note that the subsequent 
suggestion is not a spell, but simply a vocal- 
ized urging—the caster must speak a language 
the creature understands for this spell to work. 
Creatures that successfully roll their saving 
throws are not under hypnotic influence. Those 
that are exceptionally wary or hostile save with 
+1 to +3 bonuses. If the spell is cast at an indi- 
vidual creature that meets the caster’s gaze, the 
saving throw is made with a penalty of -2.A 
creature that fails its saving throw does not 
remember that the caster enspelled it. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Ice Blight l 
(Evocation, Summoning) 
Reversible 


Level: 7 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: | turn 

Duration: | day/level 

Area of Effect: 4 mi. diameter/level 
Saving Throw: None 


This powerful spell allows the wu jen to 
summon fearsome freezing winds, ice, and 
snow in the area of effect. Once cast, gray 
scudding clouds gather and rain begins to driz- 
zle down. The temperature begins to fall 
abruptly—40°F in a single day. Winds begin to 
blow, gently at first, but slowly gaining 
strength. Each day the weather conditions 
worsen. The clouds thicken, the rain falls heav- 
ier, the air gets colder, and the winds blow 
more fiercely. The temperature can drop no 
colder than —20°F. 

In arctic and winter conditions, the snowfall 
begins after 6 hours. In temperate climes, snow 
begins to fall by the end of the first 24 hour 
period. In desert lands the snow starts 36 hours 
after the casting of the spell, while tropical 
areas experience snow by the end of the second 
day. Thereafter, the snow continues to fall at 
the rate of 1 inch per hour to a maximum depth 
of 48 inches. The winds whip the snow into 
huge drifts (5 feet to 12 feet or more) and the 
wind chill is extreme. During the snowfall, vis- 
ibility is limited to 200 feet and movement 
rates are 4 normal. 

Creatures exposed to the weather without 
adequate warm clothing, fire, and shelter suffer 
1d8 points of damage each turn. Control 
weather spells cannot cancel the effects of the 
ice blight, but can be used to lessen the severity 
by raising the temperature, slowing the snow- 
fall, and breaking the cloud cover. 

Casting ice blight is an extremely difficult 
process for the wu jen, as he seeks to control 
magical energies powerful enough to affect a 
huge area. Upon uttering the final word of the 
spell, a tremendous blast of mystical energy 
leaps through the wu jen, ravaging his body 
and spirit. The wu jen instantly forgets all other 
spells memorized the moment this spell is cast. 
His Strength and stamina are broken, causing 
him to lose all but 1 hit point. All his ability 
scores are temporarily reduced to 3 and he 


oA | must have immediate bed rest (the 
“ caster is at the center of the area of 
effect). Each day the wu jen regains | point to 
each ability score. Only when all his abilities 
have returned to 50% or more of normal can 
the wu jen begin to recover his lost hit points 
(although once this occurs, curing spells can be 
cast to speed recovery). Likewise, no spells can 
be memorized until all scores are returned to 
normal. 

The material component for ice blight is a 
piece of ice. 

The reverse of the spell, drought, cancels the 
effects of ice blight. Drought has the opposite 
effect, raising the temperature and drying the 
land instead of covering it with snow. When 
cast, the sky quickly clears of clouds and 
remains so for the duration of the spell. No rain 
falls for the duration of the spell. The tempera- 
ture soars upward 20°F per day to a maximum 
of 120°F during the day and a cool of 100°F at 
night. Fields become hard and cracked after 
four days, small streams dry up after six days, 
all but the deepest wells go dry after 10 days, 
small rivers are reduced to a trickle in 14 days 
and go dry after 20 days. Large rivers drop 
noticeably in 10 days and become little more 
than streams after 20 days. On the 25th day of 
drought, only extremely deep wells still have 
water—all else having evaporated or soaked 
away. 
Plants suffer according to their size and nor- 
mal habitat. Desert plants hardly notice the 
drought while those of tropical jungles die and 
wither rapidly. Normal creatures flee the area 
of the drought, returning only when normal 
conditions have been restored and the land 
recovered, Creatures exposed to the full light 
of the sun for an entire day suffer 2d6 points of 
damage a day if without adequate shade and 
water. Characters in bulky and metallic armor 
suffer 1d3 points of damage a turn from the 
blistering heat and exhaustion. As with ice 
blight, the effects of the spell can be lessened 
by a control weather spell and can be cancelled 
by the casting of an ice blight. The caster suf- 
fers all the effects of casting the ice blight 
when casting drought. The material component 
for drought is a handful of desert sand. 

Notes: Common in oriental lands; uncom- 
mon in some savage northern lands; otherwise 
very rare. 


aaa aaa a aaa ea te, S 


443 


Ice Knife 


Ice Knife 
(Evocation) 
(Artifice, Water) 


Level: 2 

Range: Special 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: | rd. 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


The wu jen casting this spell fires a dagger 
of ice at the target. The caster makes a normal 
attack roll as if attacking with a missile 
weapon, adjusting for the range from the 
attacker to the target (the knife has a long 
range of 30 yards, a medium range of 20 yards, 
and a short range of 10 yards). A successful hit 
causes 2d4 points of damage. If the ice knife 
misses its target, consult the rules for grenade- 
like missiles in the DMG to determine where it 
lands. 

When an ice knife strikes a solid object or a 
creature, the knife shatters, releasing a wave of 
numbing cold. All creatures within a 5-foot 
radius must make a successful saving throw vs. 
paralyzation or suffer 1d4 points of cold dam- 
age and become numb for 1d3 rounds. Proxim- 
ity to a major source of heat, such as a roaring 
bonfire, improves a creature’s saving throw by 
+2. Numbed creatures have their movement 
rates reduced by half and their attack rolls suf- 
fer a —2 penalty. 

An ice knife that misses or is lost cannot be 
picked up by the caster (or anyone else) and 
thrown again. If the knife is touched, it instantly 
shatters, releasing its numbing cold. If a lost 
knife is not touched, it melts away in a pool of 
water | round after it was originally created; 
this melting occurs regardless of the environ- 
mental temperature. 

The materia! components for this spell are a 
drop of water from melted snow and a tiny sil- 
ver dagger. 

Notes: Common in oriental lands; uncom- 
mon for Frost or Water mages; otherwise rare. 


Ice Storm 
(Evocation) 
(Water) 


Level: 4 

Range: 10 yds./level 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 20 ft. radius (hail) or 40 ft. 
radius (sleet) 

Saving Throw: None 


This spell can have one of two effects, at the 
caster’s option: Either great hail stones pound 
down for one round in a 20-foot-radius area 
and inflict 3d10 points of damage to any crea- 
tures within the area of effect, or driving sleet 
falls in an 40-foot-radius area for one round 
per caster level. 

The sleet blinds creatures within its area for 
the duration of the spell and causes the ground 
in the area to be icy, slowing movement by 
50% and making it 50% probable that a crea- 
ture trying to move in the area slips and falls. 
The sleet also extinguishes torches and small 
fires. Note that this spell will negate a heat 
metal spell. 

The material components for this spell are a 
pinch of dust and a few drops of water. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Icejacket, Zala’s 
See Zala’s icejacket. 


Icelance 
(Alteration) 
(Water) 


Level: 3 

Range: 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 3 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: Creates 1 lance 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell will function only if there is suffi- 
cient ice present—usually no less than 10 lbs. 
though the remnants of an ice storm spell will 
suffice. The spell causes the shards of ice to 
reform into a long magical lance of ice that then 
spirits off in the direction dictated by the caster 
against a particular target of the caster’s choice. 

The lance strikes with the caster’s THACO 
and a +4 bonus; it inflicts 5d6 points of dam- 


Wo 


y Identify g 


age and the target creature must save vs. spell 
or be stunned for Ld4 rounds. 

The icelance travels in a straight line. It 
crumbles to its component shards if it misses 
the target creature or if it strikes some other 
target before hitting the intended one. The spell 
creates only a single lance. 

Notes: Common for Frost or Water mages, 
otherwise uncommon. Originally from the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. Known to be in 
the Tome of Rathdaen. 


Icicle, Gemidan’s 
See Gemidan’s icicle. 


Identify 
(Divination) 
(Universal) 


Level: | 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: Special 
Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: 1 item/level 
Saving Throw: None 


When an identify spell is cast, magical items 
subsequently touched by the wizard can be 


identified. The eight hours immediately pre- 
ceding the casting of the spell must be spent 
purifying the items and removing influences 
that would corrupt and blur their magical 
auras. If this period is interrupted, it must be 
begun again. When the spell is cast, each item 
must be handled in turn by the wizard. Any 
consequences of this handling fall fully upon 
the wizard and may end the spell, although the 
wizard is allowed any applicable saving throw. 

The chance of learning a piece of informa- 
tion about an item is equal to 10% per level of 
the caster, to a maximum of 90%, rolled by the 
DM. Any roll of 96-00 indicates a false read- 
ing (91-95 reveals nothing). Only one function 
of a multifunction item is discovered per han- 
dling (that is, a Sth-level wizard could attempt 
to determine the nature of five different items, 
five different functions of a single item, or any 
combination of the two). If any attempt at read- 
ing fails, the caster cannot learn any more 
about that item until he advances a level. Note 
that some items, such as special magical tomes, 
cannot be identified with this spell. 

The item never reveals its exact attack or 
damage bonuses, although the fact that it has 
few or many bonuses can be determined. If it 
has charges, only a general indication of the 
number of charges remaining is learned: pow- 
erful (81%—100% of the total possible charges), 
strong (61%-80%), moderate (41%-60%), 
weak (6% — 40%), or faint (five charges or 
less). The faint result takes precedence, so a 
fully charged ring of three wishes always 
appears to be only faintly charged. 

After casting the spell and determining what 
can be learned from it, the wizard loses 8 points 
of Constitution. He must rest for one hour to 
recover each point of Constitution. If the 8-point 
loss drops the spellcaster below a Constitution 
of 1, he falls unconscious. Consciousness is not 
regained until full Constitution is restored, 
which takes 24 hours (one point per three hours 
for an unconscious character). 

The material components of this spell are a 
pearl (of at least 100 gp value) and an owl 
feather steeped in wine; the infusion must be 
drunk prior to spellcasting. If a luckstone is 
powdered and added to the infusion, the div- 
ination becomes much more potent: Exact 
bonuses or charges can be determined, and the 
functions of a multifunctional item can be 
learned from a single reading. At the DM’s 
option, certain properties of an artifact or relic 
might also be learned. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Se ee 


445 


Ay entity Race — Neogi a 


Identify Race — Neogi 
(Divination) 


Level: 4 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This unusual spell is used by the neogi to 
identify the capabilities of a newly encountered 
race. The spell provides for the caster the name 
of the race (as it is known to the creature 
itself), its general combat abilities, a brief 
knowledge of the creature’s customs, and what 
the creature needs to survive. The spell can 
identify only one piece of information (for 
example, the usual methods of attack) per 
round. The DM must decide if the information 
being sought is available. The spell will only 
identify with that particular creature’s life, not 
the race as a whole, so various readings are 
possible. For example, the lifestyle and abili- 
ties of a human wizard of Thay from the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting will differ greatly 
from those of a human Knight of Solamnia 
from Krynn of the DRAGONLANCE setting. 

This spell is used by the neogi to determine 
the abilities and needs of a potential slave with- 
out serious risk to the slave’s life. Although this 
spell may seem somewhat trivial to other races, 
it has been witnessed that ships bearing neogi 
wizards capable of casting this spell have far 
more powerful slaves than those that do not. 

Notes: Restricted to neogi; common. 


Identify Species 
(Divination) 


Level: 3 

Range: 10 ft./level 
Components: V, M 

Casting Time: 3 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: 1 creature/round 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


By using this spell, the caster can determine 
the race and species of a creature. One creature 
can be examined per round while the spell 
remains in effect. A saving throw vs. spell is 
allowed only for creatures that realize a spell is 
being cast at them and actively resist. For the 
spell to be effective, the subject creature’s loca- 


tion must be known to the caster. If the spell 
works, the name of the creature’s species 
immediately comes to the caster’s mind. 

This spell is useful when dealing with crea- 
tures in disguise, beings deformed by the 
effects of the red curse of cinnabryl, or uniden- 
tified monsters. The spell sees through magical 
or normal disguises and deformations, includ- 
ing such spells as polymorph other. 

There is one exception. Since the aranea spi- 
derfolk created this spell, it detects the true 
race of aranea only when they are in giant spi- 
der form. If used upon an aranea in another 
form (such as one affected by polymorph self 
or shape change, or otherwise altered in form), 
the aranea is detected as a creature of the 
apparent species. Nobody else knows enough 
about the aranea to create a version of the spell 
that can successfully identify aranea in another 
form. 

The spell’s material component is two 
strands of animal hair twisted tightly together. 
The hairs are pulled apart during casting, and 
are consumed when completely separated. 

Notes: Common for aranea spider-folk or 
wizards from the RED STEEL setting; otherwise 
virtually unknown. 


Identify Tighmaevril 
(Divination) 


Level: 4 

Range: 100 yds. 
Components: S, M 
Duration: 1 rd./level 
Casting Time: 4 

Area of Effect: 1 cu. yd. 
Saving Throw: None 


Identify tighmaevril allows the caster to dis- 
tinguish the bloodline-draining “bloodsilver” 
from other metals. Because of the spell’s rela- 
tively short duration and limited area of effect, 
it is most useful for confirming whether a 
found object is indeed forged of tighmaevril. 

The spell causes all tighmaevril within the 
chosen area of effect to glow a bright burgundy 
color and to pulse in a manner visible only to 
the caster. If, for some reason, the caster can- 
not see the tighmaevril affected by the spell 
(because of magical darkness or interposing 
walls), he will sense the metal’s location, but 
not its shape or size. 

The material component, which melts during 
the casting, is a band of copper wire wrapped 
around a rod of steel. 


s Illusory Wall "i 


Notes: Common in Cerilia, the BIRTHRIGHT 
setting; otherwise rare. This spell is castable 
outside the Cerilian setting. 


Ignite Flame — Old Empire 
(Evocation) 
(Fire) 


Level: 1 

Range: 10 yds. 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 1 
Duration: 3 rds. or less 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


With this spell, a wizard can create a small 
area of hot flame, typically a three-inch-square 
area. If cast on exposed flesh, this causes 1d3 
points of damage per round. The victim can put 
out the flames by spending one round smother- 
ing them, receiving damage for that round but 
automatically putting out the flames. The 
flames go out by themselves after three rounds. 

If this spell is cast on flammable material, it 
grows into a small fire, destroying flammable 
materials such as paper, causing exposed flasks 
of oil to explode, or creating a bonfire. Affected 
materials still receive saving throws vs. normal 
fire; flame produced by the ignite flame spell is 
normal, not magical, fire. 

Notes: Common spell. As a FORGOTTEN 
REALMS Old Empire spell, initial exposure 
requires a mentor or a read Southern magic 
spell. 


Illusionary Script 
(Illusion/Phantasm) 


Level: 3 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: Special 
Duration: | day/level 

Area of Effect: Script reader 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell enables the wizard to write 
instructions or other information on parch- 
ment, paper, etc. The illusionary script appears 
to be some form of foreign or magical writing. 
Only the person (or people) who the wizard 
desires to read the writing can do so. An illu- 
sionist recognizes it for illusionary script. 

An unauthorized creature glancing at the 
script must roll a saving throw vs. spell. A suc- 


cessful save means the creature can look away 
with only a mild sense of disorientation. Fail- 
ure means the creature is subject to a sugges- 
tion implanted in the script by the caster at the 
time the illusionary script spell was cast. The 
suggestion cannot require more than three 
turns to carry out. The suggestion could be to 
close the book and leave, or to forget the exis- 
tence of the book, for example. A successful 
dispel magic spell will remove the illusionary 
script, but an unsuccessful attempt erases all of 
the writing. The hidden writings can be read by 
a combination of the true seeing spell and 
either the read magic or comprehend lan- 
guages spell, as applicable. 

The material component is a lead-based ink 
that requires special manufacture by an alche- 
mist, at a cost of not less than 300 gp per 
usage. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Illusionary Wall 
(Illusion/Phantasm) 


Level: 4 

Range: 30 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: Permanent 
Area of Effect: 1 x 10 x 10 ft. 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell creates the illusion of a wall, 
floor, ceiling, or similar surface, which is per- 
manent until dispelled, It appears absolutely 
real when viewed (even magically, as with the 
priest spell true seeing or its equivalent), but 
physical objects pass through it without diffi- 
culty. When the spell is used to hide pits, traps, 
or normal doors, normal demihuman and magi- 
cal detection abilities work normally, and touch 
or probing searches reveal the true nature of 
the surface, though they do not cause the illu- 
sion to disappear. 

The material component is a rare dust that 
costs at least 400 gp and requires four days to 


prepare. 
Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Illusory Wall 
Aka illusionary wall. 


447 


> Ilyykur's Mantle r 


Ilyykur’s Mantle 
(Abjuration) 


Level: 4 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 4 

Duration: 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


When Zlyykur's mantle is called into being, 
the caster is surrounded by a luminous aura 
that completely covers him, conforming to the 
contours of his body. This mantle does not 
affect any physical or magical abilities of the 
caster, but does affect spells that are cast 
against him. The effects are: 

* +3 on all saving throws against all enchant- 
ment/charm spells that allow a saving throw. 
The mantle does not grant a saving throw 
against spells that do not normally allow one; 

e +1 on all other saving throws vs. spell, again 
provided that one is allowed under the spell 
description; 

¢ All damage from electrical attacks, including 
shocking grasp and lightning bolt, is halved 
(saving throws can negate or halve the damage 
again). 

The mantle protects only the caster and the 
caster’s familiar, provided that the creature is 
relatively small (size S) and remains in physi- 
cal contact with the caster. 

The material component of this spell is a 
natural (not cut or finished) gem. 

Notes: Rare or very rare spell from the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. Known to be in 
the Tome of the Covenant. 


Imbue Undead with Spell Ability 


(Necromancy) 


Level: 6 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: | turn 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 undead 
Saving Throw: None 


The wizard using this spell grants an undead 
creature one use of a particular spell the wizard 
has memorized. Any sort of spell can be trans- 
ferred, and will take effect when released as if 
cast by the wizard. For example, a ghoul can be 
invested with a lightning bolt, or a skeleton 


guard with a dimension door to the location of 
its master’s throne room. 

Once this spell has been given to an undead 
creature, it remains with that creature. The wiz- 
ard who imbues the spell loses the use of one 
spell of that particular level—auntil the creature 
discharges the spell or is destroyed. For exam- 
ple, if wizard imbues a skeleton with a fireball 
spell, the wizard has one less 3rd-level spell 
available. A wizard can imbue as many differ- 
ent undead as he has imbue spells or spells to 
give away. No spell above Sth level can be 
imbued, nor can an undead creature receive 
more than one spell at a time. 

Once discharged, the imbued spell takes effect 
as if it were cast by the wizard for purposes of 
range, duration, area of effect, and damage. No 
material, verbal, or somatic materials are required 
at the time of the undead’s casting (any materials 
are expended at the time of imbuement), and the 
casting time of the released spell is 1. 

The material components of imbue undead 
with spell ability are a small scroll of paper 
upon which is written the name of the imbued 
spell in squid ink and any material components 
required by the imbued spell. 

Notes: Uncommon for necromancers; other- 
wise very rare. From the FORGOTTEN REALMS 
setting, it is known to be in the lich Kyristan’s 
tome, Studies in Death. 


Immediate Animation 
Athasian Dragon-King magic; 
psionic component renders the 
spell uncastable by wizards. 
Immunity 
See immunity to poison and disease. 
Immunity to Adherence — Drow 
(Abjuration, Alteration) 


Level: 1 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 3 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell confers upon the drow or another 
being temporary immunity to magical and nat- 
ural webs, viscid globs (such as those produced 
by a wand of viscid globs), the sticky secretions 
and natural glue-like properties of roper strands, 
mimic pseudopods, cave fisher filaments, and 


am aa aT a a aes 


448 


~ Immunity to Spider Venom — Drow A 


similar impediments. These perils do not ham- 
per or cling to the spell recipient, who can move 
and act normally. 

The material components for this spell are a 
milkweed seed or other windborne seed “key” 
or “puff” and a drop of water, alcohol, tears, or 
spittle. 

Notes: Restricted to drow; uncommon. Note 
that the material component is difficult for 
subterranean drow to acquire. 


Immunity to 
Magical/Normal Weapons 
See invulnerability to magical/normal weapons 
and protection from magical/normal weapons. 


Immunity to Poison and Disease 
(Abjuration) 


Level: 5 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: 24 hrs. 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell renders the recipient immune to dis- 
ease, parasitic infestation, poison, and natural ven- 
oms. Even magical or cursed diseases such as 
lycanthropy and mummy rot cannot take hold in 
the subject while the spell is in effect. The spell 
repels the attacks of such vermin such as rot grubs 
and ear seekers, and prevents damage from yellow 
mold spores and similar infestations. 

Immunity to poison and disease only affects 
the recipient’s subsequent exposure—it has no 
effect on diseases, parasites, or poisons already 
afflicting the recipient when the spell is cast. 

The material component is a ground bay leaf. 

Notes: Restricted to witches (common) and 
abjurers (very rare); the latter must be trained 
by a witch—part of this training implants a 
fatal curse that is triggered against the abjurer 
and student if the knowledge is passed on. 


Immunity to Spider Venom — Drow 
(Abjuration) 


Level: 2 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 2 

Duration: 2 rds. + 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell confers upon the caster or another 
touched creature (who, even if willing, receives 
a saving throw; if successful, it breaks the 
spell) absolute immunity to all effects of the 
venom, internal fluids, digestive juices or 
secretions, or spilled gore of any arachnid (that 
is, corrosive as well as poison effects are 
negated), Fresh-spun webs will not adhere to 
the protected being, and the spell recipient is 
even immune to any blinding effects that would 
normally result from being sprayed in the face 
by such fluids. 

The spell also confers upon the protected 
being a +2 saving throw bonus against all other 
acids, venoms, and poisons (ingested, contact, 
or insinuative). 

The material component of this spell is a 
whole poisonous spider of any size, alive or 
dried, which is crushed during spellcasting. 

Notes: Restricted to drow; uncommon. 


449 


N Immunity to Undeath ‘A 


Immunity to Undeath 
(Abjuration, Necromancy) 


Level: 9 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: | rd. 
Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: 40-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell creates a globe that moves with 
and is centered on the caster. The perimeter of 
this protected area glows with a very faint 
blue-white radiance, visible only in gloomy or 
dark surroundings. All creatures can freely 
pass into and out of the globe. 

Within the globe, all beings are rendered 
immune to undead energy draining attacks, 
Strength draining attacks, mental control, and 
all undead powers that cause fear, paralyzation, 
aging, or death (such as a banshee wail). The 
undead can be turned as usual. 

A creature leaving the globe becomes nor- 
mally vulnerable to undead attacks while it is 
outside the area. A being on the perimeter is 
protected as long as any part of its body is in 
contact with the globe. 

Within the globe, physical attacks by undead 
creatures inflict normal physical damage. 
Undead cannot voluntarily change form (for 
example, a vampire cannot turn from gaseous 
to solid form or vice versa), nor can undead 
creatures such as zombies be animated. Shad- 
ows and other hard-to-discern undead are 
clearly outlined at all times while within the 
globe and are vulnerable to all weapons. 

The caster cannot end the spell’s effects 
before the spell expires. A successful dispel 
magic spell destroys the globe. Spellcasting 
may be freely undertaken within the globe by 
any caster. 

The material components of this spell are a 
drop of the caster’s blood, a seed from any 
plant, and a drop of holy water. 

Notes: Very rare spell from the FORGOTTEN 
REALMS setting; virtually unknown elsewhere. 
Known to be in The Glandar s Grimoire. 


Immurk’s Distraction 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
Level: 2 
Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 turn 
Duration: Special (maximum 24 hrs.) 
Area of Effect: 50-ft. radius from item touched 
Saving Throw: Special 


When this spell is cast on a concealed item, 
it clouds the mind of anyone seeking the item 
and within 50 feet of it, so that they will not 
find the hidden item. The caster can exclude 
specific individuals from the effect (these must 
be specified at the time of casting); all other 
searchers must make a successful saving throw 
vs. spell or fail to find the item. For example, if 
the item is concealed under a blanket, it simply 
will not occur to an affected individual to look 
under that blanket. 

An individual who successfully saves does 
not necessarily find the item. The character 
only avoids the spell’s misdirection; unless the 
right place is successfully searched, the item 
remains hidden. 

An item in plain sight is not protected. Simi- 
larly, an individual who is not looking for the 
affected item is not affected by the spell, and 
may thus stumble across the item accidentally. 
Once the item is touched by someone (other 
than by one specified to be immune), the 
dweomer is canceled. 

An affected individual specifically directed 
to look in the right location (for example, by 
someone outside the area of effect) will do so, 
but will fail to find the item. Thus, if digging 
for a buried chest based on paced-off direc- 
tions, an affected individual makes just enough 
mistakes to dig in the wrong place. 

The caster chants and gestures while casting 
the spell, scattering a mixture of sand and dia- 
mond dust (from a diamond of at least 500 gp 
value) over the protected item. 

Immurk’s distraction is said to have been 
researched for Immurk by Selzen, a mage of 
Procampur. 

Notes: Rare or very rare spell from the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting; uncommon or rare 
in the Inner Sea region. 


Impenetrable Lock, Odeen’s 
See Odeen’s impenetrable lock. 


| a a a 


450 


s mes ater sae 


Impersonation 
(Illusion) 


Level: 6 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: | turn/level 

Area of Effect: Person touched 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell must be cast upon a willing sub- 
ject, who immediately assumes the appearance 
of a person of his choice. The subject becomes 
the same height, sex, and race of the target per- 
son selected, even speaking with the same 
voice, and gesturing with the same manner- 
isms—the impersonator is wae a ta 
from the original in all outward 

However, the impersonator does not acquire 
the original’s memories or abilities, and cannot 
automatically speak the original’s language. 
Furthermore, if the impersonator does anything 
that is out of character for the original, any- 
body present who knows the original is allowed 
a saving throw vs. spell. Those making a suc- 
cessful save see through the illusion and real- 
izes that an impostor has taken the original’s 
place. 

The material component is a drop of blood, 
lock of hair, or cherished possession belonging 
to the original individual. 

Notes: Uncommon for illusionists; other- 
wise rare (L&L). 


Imprisonment 
(Abjuration) 
Reversible 


Level: 9 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 9 
Duration: Permanent 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: None 


When an imprisonment spell is cast and the 
victim is touched, the recipient is entombed in 
a state of suspended animation (see the 9th- 
level wizard spell temporal stasis) in a small 
sphere far beneath the surface of the earth. The 
creature remains there unless a reverse of the 
spell, with the creature’s name and background, 
is cast. Magical search by a crystal ball, a 
locate object spell, or similar means will not 


reveal the fact that a creature is imprisoned. 
The imprisonment spell functions only if the 
subject creature’s name and background are 
known. 

The reverse spell, freedom, cast upon the 
spot at which a creature was entombed and 
sunk into the earth, causes it to reappear at that 
spot. If the caster does not perfectly intone the 
name and background of the creature to be 
freed, there is a 10% chance that | to 100 crea- 
tures will be freed from imprisonment at the 
same time. 

Note: The exact details of any creatures 
freed are up to the DM. A random method of 
determining this is to roll percentile dice twice 
(once for imprisoned creature density and once 
for a base number of creatures at maximum 
density), The rolls are multiplied and rounded 
to the nearest whole number. Each released 
creature has a 10% chance to be in the area of 
the spellcaster, If monsters are being generated 
randomly, roll 1d20 for level, with rolls of 9+ 
considered 9, and the exact monsters deter- 
mined by the random encounter tables. 

For example, if the initial rolls were 22 and 
60, the number of monsters released is .22 x 
.60 = .1320 = 13 monsters. Since only 10% of 
these will be in the immediate vicinity of the 
caster, the wizard may encounter only one or 
two of them. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Improved Armor 


(Conjuration) $ 


Level: 4 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Duration: Special 
Casting Time: 4 

Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: None 


Like the 1st-level armor spell, this enchant- 
ment creates a faintly glowing magical field of 
energy around a target individual that serves as 
if it were field plate (AC 2). 

The spell has no effect on a person already 
armored or a creature with Armor Class 2 or 
better, but it is cumulative with Dexterity 
bonuses. Improved armor does not affect a 
creature’s movement or hinder spellcasting, 
and it has no weight. 

Improved armor remains about the individ- 
ual until dispelled or until the individual suf- 
fers damage equal to 10 points plus twice the 


a a a aaa aa aaa, 


451 


Ty lmproved Blink d 


caster’s level. For example, if an 8th-level wiz- 
ard cast this spell upon himself, the armor 
would remain intact until he suffered 26 points 
of damage. The armor does not prevent the 
spell recipient from suffering the damage; 
damage both affects the protected individual 
and reduces the duration of the spell. 

The material component is a cube of pol- 
ished steel. 

Notes: Common on Cerilia, the BIRTHRIGHT 
setting; unknown elsewhere. This spell func- 
tions only in the Cerilian setting. 


Improved Blink 
(Alteration) 
(Dimension) 


Level: 5 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 1 

Duration: 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell is a variation of the 3rd-level wiz- 
ard spell blink, allowing the wizard to shift his 
body to any point within 15 feet of his current 
location. Unlike the lower-level spell, improved 
blink allows the wizard to choose the exact 
time of the blink, the exact destination, and the 
orientation or facing of his choosing. For 
example, a wizard confronted by an enemy 
fighter could blink just before the fighter 
attacked, reappearing directly behind his foe 
for a back attack. If the wizard blinks away 
from an attack, his enemy automatically 
misses—but creatures with multiple attacks 
may be able to reposition themselves for 
another swing if the wizard blinks to a location 
within reach. 

A wizard intending to take any action—such 
as attacking, casting a spell, or using a magical 
item—must decide before the round begins if 
he will do so before or after he blinks. If he 
acts before he blinks, he may be struck by an 
attack before he finishes; he can choose to pro- 
ceed with his action, hoping that he won’t be 
hit, or he can abort his action by taking his 
blink for the round. On the other hand, if the 
wizard begins his action after his blink, the ini- 
tiative modifier of his attack or spell is added 
to the time of his blink to determine when he 
attacks. For example, a blinking wizard who is 
dueling a fighter decides to blink first—when 
the fighter attacks—and then lightning bolt the 


offensive fellow. The fighter rolls a modified 6 
for initiative, so the wizard waits until 6, then 
blinks, making the fighter miss. At that time, 
he starts his lightning bolt, which has a casting 
time of 3—the spell will go off on 9. 

Because the wizard can pick the location he 
is blinking to, he must blink to an area clear of 
obstructions or obstacles. A caster blinking 
into a movable object is displaced to a random 
location (use the blink spell rules in the PHB to 
determine where he ends up). 

Notes: Uncommon spell (PO:SM). 


Improved Burning Hands 
See flame ray. 


Improved Chill Touch 


(Necromancy) a 


(Shadow) 


Level; 2 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 2 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


Resembling the 1st-level spell chill touch, 
this spell conjures a magical aura of negative, 
blue energy that surrounds the caster’s hand. 
The energy drains the life force of any creature 
touched by the wizard with a successful attack 
roll. If the creature touched fails to make a suc- 
cessful saving throw vs. spell, it suffers 1d10 
points of damage and becomes paralyzed from 
the extraordinary cold and pain. 

The paralysis lasts one hour per point of 
damage inflicted. In addition, the creature 
loses 2 points of Strength and Constitution, 
both of which return at the rate of | point per 
day. Any undead creature of less than 3 Hit 
Dice touched by the caster must save vs, spell 
or be ; 


” a in" ne aia | 


452 


Improved Haste 


Notes: Restricted to undead spellcasters; 
common. Can be researched only in the 
RAVENLOFT setting and triggers a RAVENLOFT 
powers check on completion of the attempt. 


Improved Double Wizardry, Jonstal’s 
See Jonstal’s improved double wizardry. 


Improved Featherfoot — Ninja 
(Alteration) 


Level: 4 

Range: Touch 

Components: S 

Casting Time: | rd. 

Duration: | turn/level 

Area of Effect: Person touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell improves on the 2nd-level ninja 
spell featherfoot by additionally allowing the 
ninja to walk across still or gently moving 
water surfaces (the water of a pond or a slow 
river, for example). Such travel leaves the bot- 
toms of the recipient’s feet wet, so he must take 
care to leave no trail after leaving the water. 

Otherwise, the person affected by this spell 
gains the magical ability to move quietly and 


weightlessly at a normal walking pace or 
slower. If he tries to go any faster, the spell is 
broken and lost. The person affected by this 
spell does not leave normal footprints, nor set 
off weight- or pressure-based traps. 

While the spell is in effect, the person gains 
+30% to his move silently roll. (If without this 
skill, the person has a 30% chance to move 
silently, as a thief, for the duration of the spell.) 
Unlike the featherfoot spell, this spell has no 
reversal. 

Notes: Restricted to ninja spellcasters and 
those trained by them; common. 


Improved Haste 


whi 


(Alteration) 


Level: 6 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: | rd. 
Duration: | rd./level 
Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell lets the wizard bestow tremendous 
speed on any one creature. The quickened crea- 
ture functions at double its normal movement 
and attack rates, moving and attacking twice in 
the round. The quickened creature rolls initia- 
tive for each round normally; the first basic 
action always happens at initiative “0” in the 
round, and goes again on his rolled initiative 
number. The creature also receives a +4 bonus 
to its Dexterity score (to a maximum of 25) for 
the duration of the spell, which can affect reac- 
tion adjustment, missile attack adjustment, and 
defensive adjustment. 

Casting the spell takes one entire round, dur- 
ing which both the recipient and the caster can 
do nothing else. The spell lasts for a number of 
rounds equal to the caster’s level. 

Unlike the normal haste spell, this spell has 
no effect on the recipient’s age. This spell 
negates the effects of a slow or improved slow 
spell. It is not cumulative with itself or with 
other similar magic. 

The material components for this spell are a 
lump of grease and a spark of flint and steel. 

Notes: Common in the DARK SuN setting; 
this spell requires a mentor who has been there 
or spell research in that setting. 


~ Improved Invisibility "d 


Improved Invisibility 
(Illusion/Phantasm) 


Level: 4 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: 4 rds. + 1 rd_/level 
Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell is similar to the invisibility spell, 
but the recipient is able to attack, either by mis- 
sile discharge, melee combat, or spell casting, 
and remain unseen. Note, however, that telltale 
traces (such as a shimmering effect) sometimes 
allow an observant opponent to attack the invis- 
ible spell recipient. These traces are only notice- 
able when specifically looked for (after the 
invisible character has made his presence 
known). Attacks against the invisible character 
suffer —4 penalties to the attack rolls, and the 
invisible character’s saving throws are made 
with a +4 bonus. Beings with high Hit Dice that 
might normally notice invisible opponents will 
notice a creature under this spell as if they had 2 
fewer Hit Dice (they roll saving throws vs. spell; 
success indicates they spot the character). 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


WINN \\Y 
gait 
Whitt 


sA 
ANN 
Wy Al 
K 


; AN j 
i a F i 
if My? F cy > 
a si 


Improved Magic Missile 
(Invocation/Evocation) 
(Force) 


Level: 3 

Components: V, S 

Range: 60 yds. + 10 yds./level 

Casting Time: 3 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: 1 or more creatures in 
a 10-ft. cube 

Saving Throw: None 


The improved magic missile conjures deadly 
bolts of magical force that unerringly strike 
their targets, inflicting 1d4+1 points of damage 
each. However, improved magic missile can 
generate up to 10 missiles, The caster gains one 
missile at Ist level, and then one additional 
missile for every two experience levels past Ist 
level (two at 3rd, three at 5th, and so on). Note 
that this spell is identical to the Ist level magic 
missile spell for wizards of less than 1 1th level. 
Any protective magics that stop magic missile 
also stop this spell. 

Notes: Common in the MysTARA setting; 
otherwise very rare. 


Improved Magic Mouth — Bard 
(Alteration) 


Level: 3 

Range: 10 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 3 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 object 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell works in all ways like the 2nd- 
level wizard spell magic mouth, except as fol- 
lows. When this spell is cast, the mouth is 
endowed with the bard's current knowledge, 
Intelligence, and personality, When the prede- 
termined event occurs that activates the mouth, 
it converses as if the bard were actually there. 
For example, the mouth might say, “Who goes 
there?” and wait for a reply. If the visitors 
announce their names, it could go on to say, 
“Tamak, please proceed to the music room, 
while the rest wait in the sitting room.” The 
mouth lasts until the conversation is over. 

Although the mouth can be set to activate due 
to a visual stimulus (that is, activate if anyone 
wearing a green feather approaches the castle 
gate), once triggered, it reacts only to sounds 


454 


Improved Phantasmal Force 


and speech. Also note that the mouth and the 
bard are not linked in any way. Once cast, the 
mouth’s knowledge is set and will not change. 
Thus, if a bard is extremely angry at Tamak 
when he casts an improved magic mouth, the 
mouth will remain in a state of anger, even if the 
bard and Tamak have reconciled. 
Notes: Common for bards; otherwise rare. 


Improved Mantle, Alustriel’s 
See Alustriel’s improved mantle. 


Improved Mind Mantle — Alhoon 
(Abjuration) 


Level: 3 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 3 

Duration: | turn/level 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell creates a cloaking web of random 
mental impulses that screens the mind of a sin- 
gle protected being against all mind reading 
and influencing spells of Sth level or less (wiz- 
ard school of enchantment/charm magics and 
priest spells of the charm sphere). The creature 
is also immune to magical item effects that 
duplicate the aforementioned spells, and to all 
psionic telepathic devotions. 

Psionic telepathic sciences (such as the five 
commonly-known psionic attack forms) can 
affect a being protected by an improved mind 
mantle, but their contact cost is doubled. Also, 
if the protected being is psionic and uses ejec- 
tion (a telepathic science) to force away a 
psionic attacker, no side effects are suffered. 

The mantle-wearer is also protected against 
all telepathic attack modes (ego whip, id 
insinuation, mind thrust, psionic blast, and 
psychic crush) as follows: no “power score” 
effects are possible against the mantle-wearer, 
and the initial costs of these attacks are dou- 
bled when used against the mantle-wearer. In 
other words, unless the psionic attacker knows 
of the protection and doubles the psionic 
strength points (PSPs) used in the attack, the 
initial attack fails. 

An improved mind mantle is invisible, and is 
unaffected by subsequent spellcasting on the 
part of a protected being (which also won't 
affect it). The caster can end it instantly by 
silent act of will, and a dispel magic spell will 
also destroy it. 


Notes: Restricted to alhoon (undead 
illithids); common. 


Improved Mirror Image — Ninja 
(Illusion/Phantasm) 


Level: 4 

Range: 0 

Components: S 

Casting Time: 2 rds. 
Duration: 3 rds./level 

Area of Effect: 30-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: None 


ai 


This ninja spell works much like the 2nd- 
level wizard spell mirror image, with some 
important differences. 

The mirror images appear in the vicinity of 
the caster, but can move up to 30 feet away. 
Although the images must face the same target 
or enemy (whichever one the spellcaster is fac- 
ing), they do not have to perform exactly the 
same actions. They can draw different weapons 
or appear to choose different tactics in combat. 

When struck in combat, these images collapse 
as if injured or killed, feeling solid to the person 
attacking them. Only at the start of the next com- 
bat round do “injured” images disappear. 

Like the images created by a mirror image 
spell, these visions can inflict no actual dam- 
age. If they attack an enemy in combat, all their 
attacks seem to miss until they are struck or the 
spell duration ends. 

To determine how many images appear, the 
DM rolls 1d4 and adds | for every three levels 
of the ninja’s spellcasting experience. 

Notes: Restricted to ninja spellcasters and 
those trained by them; common. At the DM’s 
discretion, this spell might be researched nor- 
mally by an illusionist. 


Improved Phantasmal Force 
(Illusion/Phantasm) 


Level: 2 

Range: 60 yds. + 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 2 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 200 sq, ft. + 50 sq. ft./level 
Saving Throw: Special 


Like the Ist-level phantasmal force spell, 
this spell creates the illusion of any object, 
creature, or force, as long as it is within the 
spell’s area of effect. The spellcaster can main- 


455 


N Improved Skull Watch r 


tain the illusion with minimal concentration; 
thus, he can move at half normal speed (but not 
cast other spells). Some minor sounds are 
included in the effects of the spell, but not 
understandable speech. Also, the improved 
phantasm continues for two rounds after the 
wizard ceases to concentrate upon it. 

The material component is a bit of fleece. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Improved Skull Watch 
(Necromancy) 


Level: 5 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: Until activated 

Area of Effect: 20-ft. wide x 90-ft. long path 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell is an improved version of skull 
watch, used by necromancers with large per- 
manent bases. Like skull watch, the improved 
spell sets an enchanted skull either on a surface 
or hanging in midair. Living intelligent crea- 
tures entering the area 20 feet wide by 90 feet 
long in front of the skull will activate it. 

The activated skull screams; this can be 
heard up to a quarter-mile away. The skull 
mentally communicates the presence of intelli- 
gent living creatures to the caster, if the caster 
is on the same plane as the skull. The skull 
communicates both its location and general 
visible data about those who activated it (race, 
appearance, visible weapons, and so forth, but 
not alignment, level, or magical abilities). 

The wizard can create as many watch skulls 
as he has levels. Each one sounds alike in its 
scream. Once activated the floating skull sinks 
slowly to the ground and can be reused later. 
Should the caster die before a skull is activated, 
it will continue to operate until triggered or 
deactivated. 

Once the skull is in place it cannot be moved. 
It is not undead and thus not subject to turning. 
A dispel magic spell will deactivate the skull, 
as will destroying the skull itself. The skull has 
AC 5 and 2 hit points for every level of the 
caster. Destroying or dispelling the skull makes 
the caster aware of its destruction, but does not 
reveal the attacker's nature. 

The spell requires the complete skull of a 
humanoid, intelligent creature. Its material 
component is a bit of earwax. 

Notes: Uncommon for necromancers; other- 


wise very rare. In the FORGOTTEN REALMS set- 
ting, it is known to be in the book Tidings of 
Improved Slow 


Conflict and Woe. 

(Alteration) à i 3 
Level: 6 

Range: 90 yds. + 10 yds./level 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 6 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: Thirty 10-ft. cubes. 

Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell causes the affected creatures to 
move and attack at 1/9 their normal rate. In 
combat, affected creatures only attack every 
ninth round, and they cannot cause damage 
from normal melee attacks. However, they do 
attack with a —8 penalty for nonstandard melee 
attacks, such as touch energy drain and paraly- 
sis—such attacks, if successful, have their 
stated effect without penalty. Creatures under 
this spell have a +8 penalty to their AC as well. 
The caster can vary the area of effect as desired, 
arranging the thirty 10-foot cubes (30,000 
cubic feet total) in any continuous shape, pro- 
vided no section extends beyond the range of 
the spell. All creatures entirely within the area 
of effect may be slowed, but each is entitled to 
a saving throw vs. spell to negate the spell. 
This spell negates the effects of a haste or 
improved haste spell. 

The material component for this spell is a 
tiny golden statue (minimum 10 gp value). 

Notes: Common in the DARK SUN setting; 
this spell requires a mentor who has been there 
or spell research in that setting. 


Improved Spider Climb — Drow 
(Alteration) 


Level: 2 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 2 

Duration: 3 rds. + 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell is an improved version of the 1st- 
level wizard spell spider climb. The recipient 
can climb on vertical surfaces and hang upside 
down from ceilings, moving at a rate of 8 (4 if 
at all encumbered); bare hands and feet are not 


a a a aaa ae a Rae 


456 


N Improved Vampiric Touch d 


required, and small objects do not stick to the 
recipient’s body: a recipient can easily cast 
spells while sticking to a wall with feet and/or 
back. The caster can end the effect with a word 
(if this causes a fall, normal damage applies). 
Sufficient force or impact can also tear the 
recipient free; the DM must assign a saving 
throw based on the circumstances. 

The material components of this spell are a 
drop of bitumen (pitch) or tree gum, and a live 
spider, both of which must be eaten by the 
recipient. Unwilling recipients must be 
touched, must eat the components, and must 
also fail a saving throw vs. spell, to be affected. 

Notes: Restricted to drow; uncommon. 


Improved Strength 
(Alteration) 


Level: 4 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


By casting this spell, the wizard can empower 
a creature with superhuman strength. Unlike the 
2nd-level strength spell, improved strength 
allows the recipient of the spell to ignore race or 
class restrictions on his maximum Strength 
score, possibly reaching scores as high as 25. 
The exact amount of strength gained varies by 


the recipient’s class group (see table). 
Class Strength Gain* 
Warrior 1d8+4 (max 25) 
Priest 1d6+4 (max 23) 
Rogue 1d6+4 (max 23) 
Wizard 1d4+4 (max 21) 


*Count each percentile bracket of exceptional strength as one 
point; the Strength gain proceeds as 18, 18/01, 18/51, 18/76, 
18/91, 18/00, 19, and so on. 


Even if the recipient is not a warrior, he 
gains all the benefits of an exceptional Strength 
category; for example, if a thief with a Strength 
of 14 gained 7 points, he would possess a 
Strength of 18/76 for the duration of the spell. 
In addition to the attack and damage bonus, 
increased chance to open doors or bend bars, 
and increased carrying capacity, the spell 
recipient may temporarily gain the ability to 
throw boulders as a giant of equivalent Strength 
(see table). 


Strength Equivalent Rock Hurling 
Score Giant Type Range Damage 
19 Hill giant 80 yds, 1d6 
20 Stone giant 100 yds. 1d8 
21 Frost giant 100 yds. 1d8 
22 Fire giant 120 yds. 1d8 
23 Cloud giant 140 yds. 1d10 
24 Storm giant 160 yds. 1d12 
25 Titan 200 yds. 1d20 


When the spell ends, the recipient is struck 
by intense exhaustion, and can do nothing 
except rest for 1d3 full turns. The material 
component is a strand of hair from a giant. 

Notes: Uncommon (PO:SM). 


Improved Vampiric Touch 
(Necromancy) 


Level: 4 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 4 

Duration: | day 

Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


A more dangerous version of the 3rd-level 
spell, vampiric touch, this spell inflicts 1d6 
points of damage per two caster levels, to a 
maximum of 9d6 at 18th level. The caster must 
touch his opponent with a successful melee 
attack; the spell lasts until discharged by a 
touch or until one turn passes. Hit points 
drained from the opponent are added to the 
caster’s own total, with any hit points above the 
caster’s normal maximum treated as temporary 
bonus hit points. Damage is subtracted from 
the bonus hit points first, and any remaining 
after one day dissipate. 

The victim of this spell can recover lost hit 
points through normal or magical healing; 
undead creatures are completely unaffected by 
the spell. 

Notes: Restricted to necromancers; uncom- 
mon, Can be researched only in the RAVENLOFT 
setting and triggers a RAVENLOFT powers check 
on completion of the attempt. Some sources 
refer to this spell as lich touch. 


I ae a ET ee EN 


457 


SI * be id 
y Zens 


et cf 
+ 

REHN 
EEA AN 
De a8 yt 


ros 


Incendiary Entrapment 


Improved Whispering Wind 


(Alteration, Phantasm) a 


(Air, Song) 


Level: 3 

Range: | mi./level 
Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 1 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 5 ft. radius 
Saving Throw: None 


This variation of the 2nd-level whispering 
wind spell functions like that spell, except that 
once the wind arrives, the caster can converse 
with the subject freely (though in a whisper) 
for as many rounds as the wizard has levels of 
experience. 

The wizard is able to either send a message 
or create some desired sound effect, excluding 
sound-based special attacks. The wind can 
travel as many miles above ground as the spell- 
caster has levels of experience, to a specific 
location within range that is familiar to the 
wizard. The wind is as gentle and unnoticed as 
a zephyr until it reaches the location. The spell 
operates regardless of whether anyone is pre- 
sent to hear it, then the wind dissipates. 

The wizard can cause the wind to move as 
slowly as a mile per hour or as quickly as a 
mile every turn. When the spell reaches its 
objective, it swirls and remains for the spell 
duration. As with the magic mouth spell, no 
spell can be cast via the whispering wind. 

The spell was developed by the wizard Sha- 
ZOgTOX. 

Notes: Uncommon for Air mages; otherwise 
rare. 


Inaccuracy 
Reversed form, see accuracy. 


Incendiary Cloud 
(Alteration, Evocation) 
(Air, Fire,Alchemy) 


Level: 8 

Range: 30 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 2 

Duration: 4 rds. + 1d6 rds. 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: 4 


An incendiary cloud spell exactly resembles 
the smoke effects of a pyrotechnics spell, 


except that its minimum dimensions are a 
cloud 10 feet tall, 20 feet wide, and 20 feet 
long. This dense vapor cloud billows forth and 
on the third round of its existence begins to 
flame, causing 1d2 points of damage per level 
of the spellcaster. On the fourth round, it 
inflicts 1d4 points of damage per level of the 
caster, and on the fifth round this drops back to 
1d2 points of damage per level as its flames 
burn out. In any successive rounds of exis- 
tence, the cloud is simply harmless smoke that 
obscures vision within its confines. Creatures 
within the cloud need to make only one saving 
throw vs. spell if it is successful, but if they fail 
the first saving throw, they roll again on the 
fourth and fifth rounds (if necessary) to attempt 
to reduce the damage sustained by one-half. 

In order to cast this spell, the wizard must 
have an available fire source (just as with a 
pyrotechnics spell), scrapings from beneath a 
dung pile, and a pinch of dust. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Incendiary Entrapment 
(Alteration) 
(Alchemy, Fire) 


Level: 7 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: | rd. 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 100 sq. ft. or more 
Saving Throw: 4 


This spell allows a wizard to create a magi- 
cal trap upon a floor, stairway, door, or other 
surface. The area affected is 100 square feet at 
14th level, with an additional 50 square feet 
per level affected thereafter (thus, a 20th-level 
wizard can affect a 20 x 20 foot area), 

When a creature touches the surface, the 
area explodes into flames after a delay of 20 to 
60 seconds, causing combustibles to ignite and 
other substances to melt, vaporize, or char, 
unless the item makes a saving throw vs. magi- 
cal fire. The caster can specify the delay when 
completing the spell, but the delay cannot be 
changed thereafter. The flames inflict 1d4 
points of damage per level of the caster upon 
all creatures within the area of effect. A suc- 
cessful saving throw vs. spell reduces the dam- 
age by half. The incendiary entrapment spell 
lasts until a creature contacts the surface and 
triggers the explosion. 

To complete this spell, the caster must sprin- 


459 


N Induce Lycanthropy / 


kle a mixture of finely powdered magnesium 
and saltpeter upon the surface to be enchanted. 

Notes: Uncommon for Fire mages; other- 
wise, very rare. (Updated from POLYHEDRON 
Newszine.) 


Induce Lycanthropy 
Reversed form, see suppress lycanthropy. 


Infallible Identification, Shayn’s 
See Shayn’s infallible identification. 


Infratorch 
(Alteration) 
(Artifice) 


Level: 2 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, M 
Casting Time: 2 
Duration: | turn/level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


A wizard casting this spell creates a special 
torch that allows all those within a 15-foot 
radius to see as if they had infravision. The 
infravision extends 60 feet from the torch. 

The torch does not give off light or heat, and 
looks like nothing more than a burnt-out torch 
or piece of wood. /nfratorch can be cast only 
on wooden objects, such as staves, torches, 
sticks, etc. 

The spell requires a piece of wood at least 
two feet long, which is not consumed. 

Notes: Rare spell, originally from the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Infravision 
(Alteration) 


Level: 3 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: | rd. 

Duration: 2 hrs. + 1 hr./level 
Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


By means of this spell, the wizard enables the 
recipient to see in normal darkness up to 60 feet 
without light. Note that strong sources of light 
(fire, lanterns, torches, etc.) tend to blind this 
vision, so infravision does not function efficiently 
in the presence of such light sources. Invisible 
creatures are not detectable by infravision. 


The material component of this spell is 
either a pinch of dried carrot or an agate. 
Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Ingenious Recollection, Sathrath’s 
See Sathrath’s ingenious recollection. 


Insatiable Thirst 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
(Water) 
Level: 2 


Range: 5 yds./level 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 2 
Duration: 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: | creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell instills in the subject an uncon- 
trollable desire to drink. The creature is allowed 
a saving throw to avoid the effect. If the roll is 
failed, the creature must consume any potable 
liquids it can find (including magical potions, 
which might result in strange effects if potions 
are mixed). Although poisons are not consid- 
ered potable, a creature might not realize that a 
liquid is poisonous. The creature will not con- 
sume a liquid known to be poisonous. 

No matter how much the creature drinks, its 
magical thirst is not quenched until the spell 
ends. During this time, the creature can do 
nothing but drink or look for liquids to drink. 
Victims of this spell believe they are dying of 
thirst and (depending upon their nature) may 
be willing to kill for drinkable fluids. 

Notes: Uncommon spell (ToM). 


Inscribe 

This is reportedly a 6th level spell from the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS Setting able to transcribe 
writings more effectively than lower level 
spells such as copy, dictate, sorcerous scribe, 
write, and so on. It is believed lost since the 
Time of Troubles, although Elminster may have 
access to it. 


ea ary an A SSC le ee AME 


460 


Instant Audience — Bard 


Insect Sight 


(Alteration) 
Reversible 


Level: 5 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 2 rds. 

Duration: 5 turns + | turn/level 
Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


With this spell, the caster confers a fantastic 
range of vision on the creature touched. The 
recipient gains the ability to see above and 
behind him, with a field of vision of nearly 360 
degrees. The creature will seldom be surprised, 
as it receives a +2 (or +20%) bonus to any roll 
that determines whether it has been surprised. 
In addition, back attacks against the creature 
are considered flank attacks, and flank attacks 
are considered frontal attacks. However, the 
spell gives a —2 penalty to any saving throw 
against a gaze attack. An unwilling creature 
receives a saving throw vs. spell to avoid 
receiving the insect sight spell. 

The spell components are sunblossom oil 
and the dried remains of ten flies. 


The reverse of this spell, tunne/ vision, 
reduces the field of vision to a mere 10 degrees. 
The subject gains a +2 bonus to saving throws 
against gaze attacks, but suffers a —2 penalty to 
surprise checks. Flank attacks against the crea- 
ture are considered rear attacks while the spell 
is in effect. The creature is allowed a saving 
throw vs. spell to avoid the effect. The material 
components are nightflower sap and an earth- 
worm. 

Notes: Very rare spell. Known to be in Pris- 
mal’s Pocket Library, Vol. IV. 


Instant Audience — Bard 
(Conjuration) 


Level: 3 

Range: 30 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 2 

Duration: Up to 4 hrs. 

Area of Effect: | room or area within range 
Saving Throw: None 


When this spell is cast, audience members 
are magically conjured, Each round 1d4 people 
enter the room or area in a normal manner. 
(They actually appear just outside the room 
when no one is looking.) This continues for a 
number of rounds equal to the caster’s level. 

The audience contains a combination of 
races, genders, and social classes appropriate 
to the occasion. /nstant audience members act 
in every way like any other members of the 
audience. They walk around during intermis- 
sion, talk, eat snacks, and so on. However, they 
always evade questions about their past, their 
history, or current events, as they have no past, 
no history, and have no idea as to what is going 
on in the world outside of the room. 

Instant audience members are strictly non- 
combative and never attack or cast spells 
(although they can be bullies or braggarts if 
that is appropriate). If one suffers even a single 
point of damage, he instantly vanishes along 
with all of his items (including items no longer 
on his body, such as clothes that he hung in the 
linen closet). Once the performance ends, 
instant audience members leave in an appro- 
priate manner and vanish as soon as they are 
out of view. 

If the audience is treated in an inappropriate 
way (as determined by the DM), the spell 
instantly ends. For example, an audience could 
be summoned to watch a combat, but if the 
audience is used as a human shield, it vanishes. 


a ae Re aed a ge et 


Instant Exit, Drawmij’s 


The material components are a small collec- 
tion of the items carried by the appropriate 
audience (a gold coin, a piece of fine fabric, a 
snuff box, etc.). These are tossed into a bag that 
contains at least one live mouse. The mouse is 
not destroyed, but vanishes during the spell to 
reappear somewhere in the room after the spell 
ends. 

Notes: Restricted to bards; common. 


Instant Exit, Drawmij’s 
See Drawmij’s instant exit. 


Instant Regeneration 
(Necromancy) 


Level: 9 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: | rd. 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


Upon its casting, this spell allows a wu jen 
to instantly restore a lost limb, causing it to 
regrow right before one’s eyes. The spell can 
only restore a lost limb. It cannot cause a new 
limb to appear where none was before. The 
spell causes no harm to the recipient and 
restores any hit points that may be missing 
because of the loss of the limb. The caster per- 
manently loses | point of Constitution when 
this spell is cast. 

The material component for the spell is a 
charm of yellow paper inked with mystical red 
characters. 

Notes: Restricted to wu jen and like oriental 
wizards; common. 


Instant Summons, Drawmij’s 
See Drawmij’s instant summons. 


Insulation 
(Abjuration, Alteration) 


Level: 1 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 

Duration: 2 rds./level 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell provides the recipient with a tem- 
porary resistance to all electrical spells or 


effects. The recipient gains a +2 bonus to sav- 
ing throws against such attack forms, and all 
damage sustained is reduced by half (to a mini- 
mum of | point). If the saving throw is success- 
ful, only one-quarter damage is sustained. 

The material component of this spell is a 1- 
inch-square piece of rubber. This must be 
placed between the recipient's foot (shod or 
unshod) and the ground. It must be touched by 
the recipient and the ground at all times or the 
spell is ineffective (in other words, this protec- 
tion effectively immobilizes the protected crea- 
ture). If conditions are wet, that is, the recipient 
is standing in water—or in a thunderstorm— 
the saving throw bonus is reduced to +1, but 
the resistance to damage is unchanged. 

Notes: Very rare in the Shining South of the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting; otherwise it is 
unknown. 


Intensify 
See intensify nature. 


Intensify Nature 
(Alteration) 


Level: 8 
Range: 0 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 9 
Duration: | turn 
Area of Effect: 1 sq. mi. 
Saving Throw: None 

This spell drastically multiplies the power of 
one currently existing natural phenomenon or 
condition. A light breeze can be transformed 
into a hurricane-strength wind, the sound of 
rustling leaves or running water becomes a 
deafening tumult, a light sprinkle of rain would 
turn into an unbearable downpour, and so on. If 
the conditions are already marginal, intensify 
can escalate them into damaging attacks 
against all creatures and structures within the 
area of effect. For example, a thunderstorm 
could be intensified into raging sheets of light- 
ning equal to a call lightning spell, or a bliz- 
zard could be enhanced to an ice storm over the 
entire area. Some possibilities are shown on 
the list. 


462 


Interruptable Light 


Condition Intensified Effect 

Light Rain Downpour 

Heavy Rain Downpour with flash 
flooding 

Thunderstorm Dangerous lightning 

Light Snow Blizzard 

Heavy Snow White-out blizzard 

Heat Wave Unbearable heat 

Cold Snap Unbearable cold 

Fog Complete obscurement 

Light Breeze Hurricane-force winds 

Strong Breeze Tornado-force winds 


The exact effects of any given condition are 
left to the DM to decide. Downpours, bliz- 
zards, and white-outs generally reduce vision 
to a few feet and seriously penalize movement 
and combat in the entire area. Dangerous 
winds or lightning can destroy structures and 
cause damage to all creatures that do not find 
cover. Intensified sounds or smells could 
deafen or gag all creatures in the area. /ntensify 
nature cannot be dispelled except by means of 
dispel enchantment or a wish spell. 

The material component is a small, curved 
horn carved with special runes, worth at least 
100 gp. 

Notes: Restricted to witches and, optionally, 
Weather mages; uncommon. 


Intensify Summoning 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 


Level: 7 

Range: Special 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 7 

Duration: Special (1 turn maximum) 
Area of Effect: Special 

Saving Throw: None 


This spell enhances the strength of creatures 
summoned by the caster via Ist- through 6th- 
level conjuration/summoning spells. Only 
spells that bring summoned creatures to the 
wizard are affected. 

The first two conjuration/summoning spells 
cast by the wizard within one turn following 
the intensify summoning spell are affected. The 
summoned creatures are more powerful, having 
an additional 2 hit points per Hit Die. 

The material components are a small leather 
pouch and a miniature silver candelabra. 

Note: Uncommon spell (ToM). A necroman- 
tic variant exists, restricted to necromancers and 
affecting only summoned undead. 


Internal Fire 
(Evocation) 


Level: 9 

Range: 60 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: 1 HD/level in 10-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell allows the wu jen to create a 
deadly raging heat within the bodies of the vic- 
tims, causing them to be consumed by flame 
from inside. Death occurs instantly. There is no 
saving throw against this spell. If more Hit 
Dice or levels of creatures are in the area of 
effect than can be affected by the caster, those 
with the fewest Hit Dice or levels die first. Par- 
tial totals are unaffected by the spell (if a 20th- 
level caster has already affected 15 Hit Dice or 
levels of creatures, a creature with 7 Hit Dice 
or levels would be unaffected since only 5 Hit 
Dice of power remain). 

Although there is no saving throw against 
this spell, a magical item that confers protec- 
tion from fire and fire-based attacks makes the 
wearer immune to the effects of this spell. 
Creatures immune to fire-based attacks are 
unaffected. 

The material component for this spell is an 
iron brazier filled with red-hot charcoal. The 
charcoal is extinguished as the spell is cast. 

Notes: Common in oriental settings; very 
rare elsewhere (known mostly by Fire mages). 


Interposing Hand, Bigby’s 
See Bigby’s interposing hand. 


Interruptable Light 
(Alteration, Enchantment) 


Level: 3 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: | rd. 

Duration: Permanent 

Area of Effect: Special (4-inch diameter spot) 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell creates a round spot that radiates a 
beam of bright light. The spell must be cast on 
a person or item. The beam created is about 
four inches in diameter and illuminates an area 
in a direct line from the place it originates, to a 
range of 60 feet. Of course, the light can be 


463 


Ty misibility jä 


seen by others for a much greater distance. 

The light is as bright as full daylight and 
lasts until negated by magical darkness or a 
dispel magic. Creatures that suffer penalties in 
bright light suffer them if the beam is directed 
at their eyes. Creatures that try to avoid looking 
at the light are allowed a saving throw vs. para- 
lyzation, with success indicating that they are 
not dazzled. 

The caster—or other person named at the 
time of casting—has mental control over the 
light, and can order it to turn off or on at will. 

Notes: Common in the RED STEEL setting; 
virtually unknown elsewhere. 


i Invisibility 
(Illusion/Phantasm) 


Level: 2 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 2 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell causes the creature touched to 
vanish from sight and be undetectable by nor- 
mal vision or even infravision. Of course, the 
invisible creature is not magically silenced, and 
certain other conditions can render the creature 
detectable. Even allies cannot see the invisible 
creature or his gear, unless these allies can nor- 
mally see invisible things or employ magic to 
do so. Items dropped or put down by the invis- 
ible creature become visible; items picked up 
disappear if tucked into the clothing or pouches 
worn by the creature. Note, however, that light 
never becomes invisible, although a source of 
light can become so (thus, the effect is that of a 
light with no visible source). 

The spell remains in effect until it is magi- 
cally broken or dispelled, until the wizard or 
recipient cancels it, until the recipient attacks 
any creature, or until 24 hours have passed. 
Thus, the invisible being can open doors, talk, 
eat, climb stairs, etc., but if he attacks, he 
immediately becomes visible, although the 
invisibility enables him to attack first. Note 
that the priest spells bless, chant, and prayer 
are not attacks for this purpose. All highly 
Intelligent (Intelligence 13 or more) creatures 
with 10 or more Hit Dice or levels of experi- 
ence have a chance to detect invisible objects 
(they roll saving throws vs. spell; success 
means they noticed the invisible object). 


If the spell is somehow made permanent, 
this effectively grants innate invisibility at will: 
the caster still becomes visible when attacking, 
but can return to a state of invisibility the next 
round if no action other than movement is 
taken. 

The material components of the invisibility 
spell are an eyelash and a bit of gum arabic, the 
former encased in the latter. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Invisibility, 10’ Radius 
(Illusion/Phantasm) 


Level: 3 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 3 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 10-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell confers invisibility upon all crea- 
tures within 10 feet of the recipient. Gear car- 
ried and light sources are included, but any 
light emitted is still visible. The center of the 
effect is mobile with the recipient. Those 
affected by this spell cannot see each other., 
Any affected creature moving out of the area 
becomes visible, but creatures moving into the 
area after the spell is cast do not become invis- 
ible. Affected creatures (other than the recipi- 
ent) that attack negate the invisibility only for 
themselves. If the spell recipient attacks, the 
invisibility, 10’ radius spell is broken for all. 

The material components are the same as for 
the invisibility spell. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


464 


N Involuntary Wizardry, Mordenkainen’s f 


Invisibility, Mind-Control 


See mind-control invisibility. 


Invisibility, Physical 
See physical invisibility. 


Invisibility to Undead 
Aka cloak from undead. See that entry for 
details. 


Invisible Blade, Laeral’s 
See Laeral’s invisible blade. 


Invisible Mail 
(Abjuration, Evocation) 
(Force) 


Level: 3 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 3 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


A variation of the armor spell, this spell 
enables the caster to cover his body with an 
invisible suit of plate mail, temporarily raising 
his Armor Class to 3. Its effects are not cumu- 
lative with other armor or magical protection (a 
character with these cannot improve his AC to 
better than 3 through use of this spell), but 
Dexterity bonuses still apply. 

For each level of the caster, the invisible mail 
absorbs | hit point of damage that would nor- 
mally hit AC 3; however, the spell offers no 
protection against magical weapons or attacks. 
When the invisible mail has absorbed as many 
points of normal damage as the wizard has lev- 
els of experience, the mail disappears. The 
invisible mail does not hinder movement, nor 
does it add weight or encumbrance. It does not 
interfere with spellcasting. 

For example, a wizard with AC 10 has 
shielded himself with the invisible mail spell. 
The first opponent attacks with a normal dag- 
ger; making the attack against AC 3. The attack 
hits, causing 2 points of damage, which is 
absorbed by the invisible mail spell, leaving the 
wizard unharmed. A second attack is made 
with a sword +/. The invisible armor offers no 
protection against this magical weapon, so the 
attack is made against the wizard’s normal AC 
of 10. The attack hits, inflicting 4 points of 
damage on the wizard (which are not counted 
against the invisible mail). 


The material component is a small fragment 
of plate mail. 
Notes: Uncommon spell. 


Invisible Stalker 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 


Level: 6 

Range: 10 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: | rd. 
Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell summons an invisible stalker from 
the Elemental Plane of Air. This 8 Hit Die 
monster obeys and serves the spellcaster in 
performing whatever tasks are set before it. It 
is a faultless tracker within one day of the 
quarry’s passing. The invisible stalker follows 
instructions even if they send it hundreds or 
thousands of miles away and, once given an 
order, follows through unceasingly until the 
task is accomplished. However, the creature is 
bound to serve; it does not do so from loyalty 
or desire. Therefore, it resents prolonged mis- 
sions or complex tasks, and it attempts to per- 
vert instructions accordingly. Invisible stalkers 
understand common speech but speak no lan- 
guage save their own. 

The material components of this spell are 
burning incense and a piece of horn carved 
into a crescent shape. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Involuntary Wizardry, 
Mordenkainen’s 
See Mordenkainen’s involuntary wizardry. 


Invulnerability to Magical Weapons 
(Abjuration) 
(Geometry) 


Level: 6 

Range: 0 

Components: V, M 
Casting Time: 3 

Duration: | rd./level 

Area of Effect: 5-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell creates an immobile, faintly shim- 
mering magical sphere around the caster that 
cannot be penetrated by magical blunt, edged, 
or missile weapons; all such weapons are 
harmlessly deflected (missile weapons strike 


ie eV a eee re 


465 


N Invulnerability to Normal Weapons A 


the sphere, then immediately fall to the 
ground). However, the sphere offers no protec- 
tion against magically created creatures (such 
as golems) or from special attacks (such as the 
gaze of a medusa). The sphere offers no protec- 
tion against spells such as magic missile, or 
spells that simulate the effects of weapons. 

The caster can use magical weapons from 
inside the sphere to attack opponents normally. 
Spelis can also be cast through the sphere. The 
sphere can be negated by dispel magic. 

Any effort to combine this spell with magics 
that grant immunity to normal weapons cause 
this spell to fail immediately. 

The material component for this spell is a 
piece of a broken magical weapon. 

Notes: Uncommon spell, typically known by 
abjurers. (Originally from The Complete Wiz- 
ard's Handbook.) 


Invulnerability to Normal Weapons 
(Abjuration) 
(Geometry) 


Level: 5 

Range: 0 

Components: V, M 
Casting Time: 2 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: 5-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell creates an immobile, faintly shim- 
mering magical sphere around the caster that 
cannot be penetrated by nonmagical blunt 
weapons, edged weapons, or missile weapons. 
The caster can use these weapons from inside 
the sphere to attack opponents normally. Spells 
can also be cast through the sphere. The sphere 
can be negated by dispel magic. 

Any effort to combine this spell with magics 
that grant immunity to magical weapons cause 
this spell to fail immediately. 

The material components for this spell are a 
piece of a broken nonmagical weapon and a 
scale from a dragon. 

Notes: Uncommon spell; typically known by 
abjurers. (Originally from The Complete 
Wizard's Handbook.) 


Iron Body 


(Alteration) 
(Earth) 


Level: 8 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 8 

Duration: | rd./level 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell transforms the caster’s body into 
living iron, which grants him several powerful 
resistances and abilities. While the spell is in 
effect, the caster can be injured only by blunt 
weapons of +3 or better value, or monsters of 
8+3 Hit Dice or more. Slashing weapons, 
falling, crushing, and constriction attacks of all 
types are completely unable to harm the caster, 
although an attack may knock him off-balance 
or pin him beneath tons of debris. Spells or 
attacks that affect the subject’s physiology or 
respiration—for example, cloudkill, poison, 
enfeeblement, contagion, or pain touch—fail 
completely, since the caster has no physiology 
or respiration while the spell is in effect. Also, 
spells that have weight limits should be applied 
to the wizard as if he weighed over 3,000 
pounds. The wizard ignores electrical attacks 
and saves at +4 against fire attacks. If he saves, 
he takes quarter damage; if not, he takes half 
damage. If hit with a rod of smiting, he takes 
2d8+6 points of damage unless the attacker 
rolls a natural 20. If this occurs, then the dam- 
age is doubled. 

In addition to the natural immunities of an 
iron body, the wizard enjoys powerful offensive 
abilities. His Strength score is raised to 20 (+3 
to attack rolls, +8 damage) for the duration of 
the spell, and he can punch or bludgeon his 
enemies twice per round for 1d4 points of 
damage per blow, plus his Strength bonus. 
Unfortunately, his movement becomes slow 
and awkward, so he is reduced to a move of 3 
and suffers a —2 penalty to his initiative rolls (a 
reduction of his base phase by one step, in 
PLAYER'S OPTION: Combat & Tactics). Most 
importantly, the wizard’s clumsiness and lack 
of breath prevent him from casting any spells 
while the iron body is in effect. 

Iron body may create additional hazards for 
the wizard as the DM deems appropriate. For 
example, rust monsters are extremely danger- 
ous to a wizard using this spell. Heat metal 
spells inflict double damage to the caster. And, 


ee nae ee re eee 


Iron Maiden 


naturally, the wizard sinks like a stone in 
water—although he could survive the crushing 
pressure and lack of air at the bottom of the 
ocean—at least until the spell expired. Some 
magical items, such as potions or winded 
instruments, may be temporarily unusable as 
well. 

The material component for this spell is a 
small piece of iron that once belonged to an 
iron golem. 

Notes: Uncommon spell (PO:SM). 


Iron Kimono 
(Alteration) 


Level: 3 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: 2 rds./level 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


This is a protective spell for geisya and other 
oriental spellcasters. By casting this spell, the 
geisya temporarily enchants her kimono, obi, 
and tabi to a higher Armor Class. Though the 
clothing appears the same, it actually protects 
the geisya as armor of AC 5, At the end of the 
spell’s duration, the Armor Class returns to its 
normal rating. Dexterity bonuses apply to the 
caster; the iron kimono does not hamper move- 
ment in any way. 

Notes: Uncommon in oriental settings; very 
rare elsewhere. 


Iron Maiden 
(Evocation) 


Level: 4 

Range: 10 ft./level 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: | rd./level 

Area of Effect: Creates | battle horror 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell temporarily brings into being a 
“helmed horror” that fights for the caster with 
absolute loyalty until destroyed. The iron 
maiden takes the form of an empty, animated 
suit of armor, armed with a long sword and a 
footman’s mace. It acts as the caster directs. 
The caster mentally chooses its foe, and it 
fights that foe until directed to perform some 
other specific action. For example, it can be 


commanded to “Block that doorway, and let 
nothing through!” or “Snatch up the wand that 
the mage in black let fall, and bring it quickly 
to me!” The caster is free to work other magic 
as the helmed horror fights. 

The iron maiden is a “battle horror,” the 
most powerful type of helmed horror. When 
destroyed, the iron maiden shatters and falls 
into dust and shards of rust. If it still exists 
when the spell expires, it meets the same fate, 
dropping on the spot and unharmed any items 
the caster has directed it to carry (in other 
words, a fragile flask would settle undamaged 
to the ground when the iron maiden carrying it 
collapsed, not fall and shatter). A battle horror 
created by means of this spell can communi- 
cate only with its caster. 

Only one iron maiden spell can be memo- 
rized by a wizard at once. Such is the stress of 
this spell that it cannot be memorized again 
until at least a full day (24 hours) has elapsed 
since it was last cast. 

The material component of this spell is a 
piece of metal plate that has been part of a suit 
of armor worn into battle at least once. 

Notes: Restricted to the Seven Sisters, their 
apprentices, and select Harpers in the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


a aaa aa acne aa aaa aa ala ama aaa, 


467 


Iron Mind 


Iron Mind 


(Abjuration) 
(Mentalism) 


Level: 3 

Range: Touch 
Components: S, M 
Casting Time: 3 
Duration: | hr. 

Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: None 


The person or creature affected by iron mind 
is immune to all charm and hold spells for a 
full hour. Additionally, the recipient automati- 
cally disbelieves all illusions cast by 3rd-level 
wizards (or their equivalent) or lower. 

The material component for this spell is a 
small chunk of iron ore or any small item made 
of solid iron, such as a nail. 

Notes: Common for abjurers and mentalists; 
otherwise uncommon. (Originally from The 
Complete Wizard's Handbook.) 


Iron Sack, Drawmij’s 
See Drawmij’s iron sack. 


Ironguard 
(Abjuration, Alteration) 


Level: 5 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 5 
Duration: 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: None 


By means of this spell, the caster confers 
upon himself or another creature immunity to 


metal, including normal metal weapons. Such 
weapons pass harmlessly through the individ- 
ual as if he were a phantasm, not solid flesh. 
The individual can pass through iron bars, 
gates, and other metallic objects. Nonmetallic 
objects still affect the individual and can harm 
him. /ronguard affects only the individual’s 
body, not anything that he is carrying or is 
attached to him. 

The ironguarded individual is still subject to 
other attacks, such as heat, cold, and poison, 
even if these are delivered by weapons that 
would normally pass through him. The individ- 
ual retains his Armor Class. Magical weapons 
can strike him, inflicting damage equal to their 
magical bonus (a /ong sword +2 inflicts 2 
points of damage per strike). Enchanted metal 
is an impassible barrier to an ironguarded indi- 
vidual. Spells using metal in their effects (such 
as blade barrier) affect the individual nor- 
mally. 

The ironguarded individual can attack 
armored opponents as if they were unarmored, 
but only with barehanded or natural weapons, 
Such opponents would be AC 10 if they were 
wearing all-metal armor, modified by any Dex- 
terity adjustments. 

An ironguarded individual who occupies the 
same place as metal when the spell duration 
elapses is immediately killed (collapsing while 
passing through an iron gate, for example). 

Notes: Rare spell from the FORGOTTEN 
REALMS setting. Known to be in The Shadow- 
tome. Previously barred to abjurers and trans- 
muters, this restriction is now removed. 


Ironwood 
(Alteration) 


Level: 5 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: | rd. 
Duration: Permanent 

Area of Effect: 1 cu. ft./level 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell allows the wu jen to change the 
tensile strength of wood to that of the finest 
steel. It only affects the hardness of the wood. 
Coloration, texture, and weight are unaffected. 
If cast on normal living plants, the spell has a 
50% chance of working. If successful, it does 
not interfere with the normal growth of the 
plant but gives all parts of the plant, including 
leaves, flowers, and fruit the hardness of steel. 


468 


N Isolate Templar A 


If cast on a plant-like monster, a saving throw 
vs. spell must be made by the creature. If suc- 
cessful, the spell has no effect. Failure means 
the creature becomes rigid and paralyzed. The 
Armor Class of the creature becomes 0 and a 
hit roll must be made when striking it, since the 
hardness is imbued throughout the body of the 
creature. 

The material component for this spell is a 
pinch of metal filings mixed with the sap of a 
willow tree. 

Notes: Common in oriental settings; very 
rare elsewhere. 


Ironwood, Nautical 
See nautical ironwood. 


Irresistible Dance, Otto’s 
See Otto’s irresistible dance. 


Irresistible Scent, Ivy’s 
See Ivy’s irresistible scent. 


Irritating Odor, Ivy’s 


Reversed form, see \vy’s irresistible scent. 


Irritation 
(Alteration) 


Level: 2 

Range: 10 yds./level 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 2 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 to 4 creatures 
in a 15-ft. radius 

Saving Throw: Neg. 


An irritation spell affects the epidermis of the 
subject creatures. Creatures with very thick or 
insensitive skins (such as buffalo, elephants, 
scaled creatures, etc.) are basically unaffected. 
There are two versions of the spell, either of 
which can be cast from the standard preparation: 

Itching. When cast, this causes cach subject 
to feel an instant itching sensation on some 
portion of its body. If one round is not immedi- 
ately spent scratching the irritated area, the 
creature is so affected that the next three 
rounds are spent squirming and twisting, effec- 
tively worsening its Armor Class by 4 and its 
attack rolls by 2 during this time. Spell prepa- 
rations are ruined in the first round this spell is 
in effect, but not in the following three rounds. 
Doing nothing but scratching the itch for a full 
round prevents the rest of the effect. If cast at 


one creature, the saving throw has a —3 penalty; 
if cast at two creatures, the saving throw has a 
—l penalty; and if cast at three or four crea- 
tures, the saving throw is normal. 

Rash. When a rash is cast, the subject notices 
nothing for 1d4 rounds, but thereafter its entire 
skin breaks out in red welts that itch. The rash 
persists until either a cure disease or dispel 
magic spell is cast upon it. It lowers Charisma 
by | point per day for each of four days (i.e., 
maximum Charisma loss is 4 points). After one 
week, Dexterity is lowered by 1 point also. 
Symptoms vanish immediately upon the 
removal of the rash, and all statistics return to 
normal, This can be cast at one creature only, 
with a saving throw penalty of —2. 

The material component for this spell is a 
leaf from poison ivy, oak, or sumac. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Isolate Templar 


whe 


(Abjuration) 


Level: 6 

Range: 100 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 
Duration: 1 turn/level 
Area of Effect: 1 templar 
Saving Throw: None 


This is a specialized, offensive version of 
antimagic shell, designed in the DARK SuN set- 
ting to affect one humanoid creature. When 
this invisible field surrounds a templar, that 
templar is automatically cut off from his sor- 
cerer-king in regard to acquiring priestly spells. 
If the templar is maintaining a spell, such as 
wall of fire, then that spell automatically ends 
as the supporting magical energies are cut off. 
The templar is thrown back on his own 
resources, including magical items, normal 
weaponry, and whatever psionic powers he has. 
The templar still retains those spells granted 
but not yet cast. 

Unless the sorcerer-king is watching the 
individual templar or a messenger tells him 
what’s happening, the sorcerer-king will not 
realize that this spell is in operation. Only a 
sorcerer-king can cast a dispel magic spell 
powerful enough to get rid of an isolate tem- 
plar spell. The spell cannot be successfully cast 
on a sorcerer-king to cut off all his templars 
from spells. 

The material component of this spell is a 
gemstone of at least 1,000 gp value. 


A eR TT ae eee eee 


469 


N Isolde’s Answer a 


Notes: Very rare for a spellcaster from the 
DARK SUN setting; virtually unknown else- 
where. 


Isolde’s Answer 
(Divination) 


Level: 3 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 3 

Duration: 2 rds./level. 
Area of Effect: 1 mi./level 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell temporarily enhances a magical 
mirror, crystal ball, or other scrying device. 
The spellcaster then asks the scrying device a 
question, and the scrying device answers that 
question by showing an appropriate scene if it 
is within the area of effect. Typical questions 
include: “Where did I put that book on magical 
apparatus?” “Who is the most beautiful in the 
land?” and “Where are the fish biting today?” 
Note that a scrying device must be in operation 
at the time the spell is cast. The spell requires a 
scrying device, which is not consumed by the 
casting. 

Notes: Rare or very rare spell. (Updated 
from DRAGON Magazine.) 


Item 
(Alteration) 
(Artifice) 


Level: 3 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 3 

Duration: 4 hrs./level 

Area of Effect: 1 object, up to 2 cu. ft./level 
Saving Throw: Special 


By means of this spell, the wizard is able to 
shrink one nonmagical item (if it is within the 
size limit) to 2 of its normal size. Optionally, 
the caster can also change its now-shrunken 
composition to a clothlike one. An object in the 
possession of another creature is allowed a sav- 
ing throw vs. spell. Objects changed by an item 
spell can be returned to normal composition 
and size merely by tossing them onto any solid 
surface or by a word of command from the 
original spellcaster. Even a burning fire and its 
fuel can be shrunk by this spell. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Item Supercharger 
(Chronomancy) 


Level: 8 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 8 
Duration: Permanent 
Area of Effect: 1 item 
Saving Throw: None 


By means of this spell, a chronomancer 
attempts to alter the salient abilities of a magi- 
cal item. This attempt can be made only once 
per item, and has a significant chance of ruin- 
ing the item forever. Use the table to figure the 
chance for success. 


Item Supercharging Success Chances 


Item Frequency Duration 
Potion - 25% 
Ring 60% 65% 
Rod 60% 80% 
Staff 90% 65% 
Wand 85% 90% 
Misc. 50% 65% 


Frequency is the number of times per day the 
item can be used, or the recharge time required 
between uses. When this ability is changed, 
uses per day are doubled or the recharge time 
halved. For example, the recharge time of a 
ring of blinking goes from six turns to three. 

Duration is how long the effect operates. 
Altering this doubles the duration. For exam- 
ple, wings of flying could be used for 16 turns 
at speed 12, instead of eight turns. 

The material component is an ounce of mer- 
cury. 

Notes: Restricted to chronomancers; com- 
mon. 


N Ivy's Irritating Odor A 


Itembane 
(Alteration) 


Level: 6 

Range: 100 ft. 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 6 

Duration: Permanent 

Area of Effect: 1 magical item and its owner 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


A much more powerful version of wandbane, 
the itembane spell affects a magical item and its 
owner, forever preventing the item from func- 
tioning for that character. The item must be in 
the owner's possession at the time of casting. If 
the owner fails a saving throw vs. spell, the item 
ceases to function for that particular user. A 
warrior could not wield a magical sword, wands 
no longer cast spells, rings become inert, In fact, 
these items are physically repelled by their own- 
ers. For example, an affected wand will fly from 
a character's grip. 

This effect can be removed by the casting of 
a separate, successful dispel magic spell on 
each of the item and the owner. Artifacts are 
not subject to this spell (and certain other cam- 
paign-specific items may not be as decided by 
the DM). 

Notes: Rare spell from the MysTARA setting. 


Ivy’s Irresistible Scent 
(Alteration) 
Reversible 


Level: 4 

Range: 10 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: 1d4 rds. 

Area of Effect: 1 creature or object 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


By means of this spell, the caster causes an 
irresistible scent to adhere to a creature or 
object, though living creatures receive a saving 
throw vs. spell to negate the effect. The scent is 
extremely appealing to all creatures of animal 
Intelligence or less within 10 yards. Those 
within 10 yards, and who are above animal 
Intelligence, will notice a pleasant smell and 
can identify where it is coming from. Any crea- 
ture with a keen sense of smell trying to track a 
creature or object with this spell cast on it does 
so automatically. 


The material components are a drop of ani- 
mal musk and a drop of rose oil. 

The reverse of this spell, /vy's irritating 
odor, causes a creature or object to emit a rank 
and noxious odor, though living creatures have 
a saving throw vs. spell to negate the effect. 
The stench drives away creatures of animal 
Intelligence or less. Those with greater than 
animal Intelligence are reluctant to approach 
the source. 

The material components are a drop of 
skunk oil and a clove of crushed garlic. 

Notes: Rare spell. (Updated from POLYHEDRON 
Newszine.) 


Ivy’s Irritating Odor 
Reversed form, see \vy’s irresistible scent. 


| aaa aT a a a eT, 


471 


REAY 
waver 


iy 
ayn Benth 
y TA ye 
AEE 
We Ke 
SS] i Wk 

Ag My 


ii fi 4 my 


i al 


ie 


Jackal Ward 
(Abjuration) 


Level: 4 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 turn 
Duration: | day (special) 
Area of Effect: Caster 
Saving Throw: None 


In areas where jackal wizards are known to 
operate, it is wise for an arabian wizard to pro- 
tect himself from spell thievery. This spell 
serves this purpose admirably. 

After the spell is cast, the wizard simply 
places a small coin (the spell’s material compo- 
nent) in his turban or other headgear. If a jackal 
wizard attempts to lift a spell from the pro- 
tected wizard, the coin grows warm, warning 
the wizard. 

The first attempt to steal a spell from a wiz- 
ard protected by the jackal ward will always 
fail. The second and subsequent attempts have 
a 50% chance of being foiled. 

Notes: Common for spellcasters from an 
arabian setting; otherwise very rare. 


Jaggar’s Strengthened Bastion 
(Abjuration, Enchantment/Charm) 
(Geometry) 


Level: 5 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: 1 hr./level 

Area of Effect: 100 cu. ft-/level 
Saving Throw; None 


Prince Jaggar designed his strengthened 
bastion spell to fortify his castle in wartime. It 
makes one or more inanimate objects resistant 
to magic, giving them a saving throw against 
spells that normally allow none. This spell also 
proves effective when cast on portions of a 
wall, a door, or similar area. For example, Jag- 
gar's strengthened bastion allows a saving 
throw vs. knock, dig, avoidance, distance dis- 
tortion, passwall, transmute rock to mud, 
glassee, move earth, stone to flesh, vanish, 
glassteel, crystalbrittle, and other spells that 
affect objects. The objects make a saving throw 
vs. spell at the level of the caster of the fortify- 
ing spell. This spell can be combined with the 
permanency spell. 


The material component is a piece 
of chalk the wizard uses to inscribe a 
small magical symbol on the affected 
object. The marking immediately dis- 
appears, visible only via true sight, a gem of 
seeing, or similar magic. 

Notes: Very rare, originally from the MysTARA 
setting. 


Jaguar Form — Hishna 
(Alteration) 


Level: 5 

Range: 0 

Components: S 

Casting Time: 3 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


The caster can polymorph his body into the 
body of a jaguar, although he retains his own 
mental capacity. He cannot speak, cast spells, 
or otherwise exceed the limitations of the 
feline body. He retains his original hit points 
and Hit Dice, however. 

The caster can move through the trees of a 
dense forest as easily as he can move along the 
ground. He gains infravision to 90 feet, and the 
ability to meld into shadows and foliage as if 
concealed by an ambush spell. 

Notes: Restricted to practitioners of hishna 
magic (the Maztica setting); common. 


473 


N Jalartan’s Miraculum d 


Jalartan’s Miraculum 
(Alteration) 


Level: 3 

Range: 0 

Components: S 

Casting Time: 1 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: | memorized spell 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell modifies one other spell that the 
caster has currently memorized. It allows the 
latter spell to be cast without one of its normal 
components (verbal, somatic, or material). 
Spells that normally have only one component 
can be cast by silent act of will alone if a Jalar- 
tan's miraculum is used first. 

A specific component of a particular spell 
must be chosen to be omitted when this spell is 
cast. There is no time limit between the casting 
of the miraculum and the unleashing of the 
modified spell. However, the caster must not 
have been slain in the intervening period or the 
modified spell does not work. 

Notes: Very rare in the FORGOTTEN REALMS 
setting; unknown elsewhere. Optionally specific 
to this setting alone. 


Janga’s Jewel 
(Divination, Conjuration) 
(Artificer) 


Level: 7 

Range: 0 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 7 
Duration: 24 hrs. 
Area of Effect: 1 gem 
Saving Throw: None 


By casting this spell upon a gem worth at 
least 400 gp, a wizard imbues the jewel with 
several properties, each usable once during a 
24-hour period. The enchanted gem can know 
alignment, operate as an arrow of direction, 
detect lie (as the 4th-level priest spell) and 
accurately make one prediction of an event that 
will happen during the next 10 minutes (one 
turn) if no action is taken on the foreknowledge 
the gem provides. The gem is destroyed when 
all of the spell-like functions are used up or 
when 24 hours pass. 

Notes: Rare or very rare spell. (Updated 
from POLYHEDRON Newszine.) 


Javelin — Old Empire 


(Evocation) 


Level: 6 

Range: 80 yds. + 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 6 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: | javelin 
Saving Throw: 4 


This spell causes a javelin to become filled 
with deadly energy. The caster may hurl this 
bolt at any creature within range of this spell. 
The javelin strikes without error and inflicts 
1d10 points of damage for every two levels of 
experience of the caster, to a maximum of 
10d10. The target creature is allowed a saving 
throw vs. spell with a —3 penalty; success indi- 
cates half damage is suffered. 

The material component of this spell is a 
javelin. 

Notes: Uncommon spell. As a FORGOTTEN 
REALMS Old Empire spell, initial exposure 
requires a mentor or a read Southern magic 


spell. 


AC Ny, 


TEA 


4 


7 


4 


Jhanifer’s Deliquescence 


Jest 
(Enchantment, Evocation) 
(Song) 


Level: 4 

Range: 0 

Components: V 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 30-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


Jest acts as the 2nd-level wizard spell, fasci- 
nate, upon all hearing it, All creatures within 
the area that fail a saving throw vs. spell stop 
their activities and listen for the time required 
to complete the casting. An attack on a creature 
during this time negates the spell’s effects on 
that creature. 

Upon completion of the spell, stopped crea- 
tures receive another saving throw vs. spell. A 
successful saving throw means the creature 
merely walks away confused for 1d10 rounds 
unless attacked (which immediately negates the 
spell effect). Failure means that the creature is 
racked with laughter and unable to do anything 
but laugh for the next 1d10 rounds; also if no 
attack is made on a creatures during the period of 
helpless laughter, it views the caster as having 
both a Charisma and Appearance/Comeliness of 
20 for the duration of one full day. 

Notes: Common in oriental settings for 
geisya (entertainers), rare for others; virtually 
unknown elsewhere, except perhaps for bards 
or jesters. 


Jester’s Jest 
(Alteration) 


Level: 2 

Range: 10 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 2 

Duration: 1 turn + 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


A target creature that does not make a suc- 
cessful saving throw vs. spell becomes instantly 
serious, and everything it says will be sorrow- 
ful and sad, depressing those around it. Reac- 
tion checks to the creature suffer a —4 penalty. 

This spell was created by Lendolin the 
Laughless, jester to King Azoun I. 

Notes: Very rare spell. (Updated from 
POLYHEDRON Newszine.) 


Jewel, Janga’s 
See Janga’s jewel. 


Jhanifer’s Deliquescence 
(Alteration) 


Level: 5 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: 10 cu. ft./level 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell enables a wizard to instantly melt 
ice, frozen liquids, and other substances that 
freeze within 10 degrees of water’s freezing 
point (32°F). Such melting does not involve 
heat, steam, or the consumption of fuel. A wall 
of ice, for instance, could be turned into water 
that falls to the ground, a frozen lock or sleigh 
runner could be freed. 

Repeated applications of this spell can turn 
solids into liquid form, and 10 deliquescence 
spells equal the effects of a transmute rock to 
mud spell. (The details of this use of the spell 
are little known and poorly understood. The 
DM should sharply limit the combat effective- 
ness of dissolving solids, although a wizard 
might use the spell repeatedly to make digging 
a tunnel easier.) 

Animated or enchanted creatures of stone 
receive a saving throw vs. spell based on their 
Hit Dice and a stone golem practically shrugs 
off the effects. Other objects have a saving 
throw equal to the saving throw (at the time) of 
the being who enchanted them. Success negates 
the spell. Living creatures, even if stony, are 
unaffected by Jhanifer s deliquescence. 

The material components of this spell are a 
tiny piece of amber and a piece of ice. 

Notes: Rare or very rare spell from the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting: Known to be in 
Laeral’s Libram. 


ee 


475 


~ Jonstal's Double Wizardry r 


Jonstal’s Double Wizardry 
(Alteration) 


Level: 5 

Range: 0 

Components: V 

Casting Time: | 
Duration: | rd./level 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: None 


This powerful spell enables a caster to 
unleash two specific spells at once, with the 
utterance of a single word. Both spells take 
effect in the same round, upon the caster (or 
both on a recipient being), and function nor- 
mally, except that their durations become 1 
round per level of the caster. The two spells 
must have been memorized beforehand by the 
caster. They are not lost from memory until the 
double wizardry is employed; if either is used 
by itself, the double wizardry vanishes with it. 

Any material components for the two spells 
are consumed when the double wizardry spell 
is uttered, and must be on the caster’s person 
(but need not be revealed or handled by the 
caster). Only the caster can unleash the double 
wizardry. 

The only two spells that can be paired by use 
of a Jonstal’s double wizardry are invisibility 
and /evitate; despite years of research, the 
archmage Jonstal has managed to master only 
one other pair of “combination” spells (see 
Jonstal’s improved double wizardry). No 
known being short of the Faerdnian lesser 
divine power Azuth can freely cast any two 
spells in the same round. 

Notes: Very rare in the FORGOTTEN REALMS 
setting (confirmed users are the Seven Sisters, 
the Chosen, and Jonstal); virtually unknown 
elsewhere, 


Jonstal’s Improved Double Wizardry 
(Alteration) 


Level: 6 

Range: 0 

Components: V 

Casting Time: | 
Duration: 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: None 


This powerful magic enables a caster to 
unleash two specific spells at once by uttering 
one word. Both spells take effect in the same 


round on the caster (or both on a recipient 
being), and function normally, except that their 
durations become | round per level of the 
caster. The caster must have memorized the 
two spells beforehand. They are not lost from 
memory until the improved double wizardry is 
employed. If either magic is cast by itself, the 
improved double wizardry vanishes with it. 

Material components for the two spells are 
consumed when this spell is uttered, and must 
be on the caster’s person (but need not be 
revealed or handled by the caster) or the 
improved double wizardry will not take effect. 
Only the caster can unleash the spell. The only 
two spells that can be paired by use of a Jon- 
Stal’s improved double wizardry are fly and 
nondetection. Despite years of research, the 
archmage Jonstal has managed to master only 
one other pair of “combination” spells (see 
Jonstal’s double wizardry). No known being 
short of the Faerdnian lesser divine power 
Azuth can freely cast any two spells in the 
same round. 

Notes: Very rare in the FORGOTTEN REALMS 
setting (confirmed users are the Seven Sisters, 
the Chosen, and Jonstal); virtually unknown 
elsewhere. 


N 7 Juggle A 


Joyful Voyage, Nybor’s 
See Nybor’s joyful voyage. 


Juggernaut 
(Evocation) 
(Artifice) 


Level: 9 

Range: 10 ft./level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 9 
Duration: | rd./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell calls into being a large, mobile 
humanoid form similar to a featureless, gen- 
derless, naked human. The form seems to rise 
up out of the ground in front of the caster, fac- 
ing away from its creator. Despite the spell 
name, it is not the same as a juggernaut golem. 

A juggernaut looks like a bald human with 
no recognizable features except a mouth. It 
stands up to 100 feet tall, with a reach of up to 
80 feet. It seems to be made of the same sub- 
stance as the ground it appears from, although 
it is in actuality purely a spell manifestation. It 
can roar out, as often as desired, a word or a 
phrase of up to six words; these are whispered 
by the caster during the spell’s casting. The 
words cannot be a spell incantation, and they 
do not issue forth if they are command words 
that trigger or activate any magic. 

A juggernaut within 60 feet of its caster 
draws into itself all magical attacks specifi- 
cally meant for the caster, such as magic mis- 
siles, feeblemind spells, and so on. The spell 
effects are then visited on the juggernaut, not 
the caster. Spells that normally rebound from 
solid forms or burst, such as fireball and light- 
ning bolt, are drawn into the juggernaut’s body 
so that they do no harm to the surroundings. 

The juggernaut attacks with its fists foes 
chosen by the silent will of the caster. It can 
strike once with each fist in a round, with a 
THACO two better than its creator (that is, if 
the caster has a THACO of 14, the juggernaut 
strikes at THACO 12). Its blows deal 8d8 points 
of damage each if successful. It can grab and 
carry items, including foes. It can inflict 6d8 
points of damage with its grab, plus constrict- 
ing damage of 5d8 points per round thereafter 
until the foe makes successful Dexterity, Con- 
stitution, and Strength ability checks all in the 
same round (check all three each round). 

A fall from a juggernaut’s hand results in 


normal falling damage of 1d6 points per 10 
feet fallen. A being thrown by a juggernaut suf- 
fers double falling damage on impact and 
receives no saving throw (unless the thrown 
being can fly or use magic to slow his flight). A 
juggernaut cannot wield magic, even devices 
or worn items such as magical rings. The caster 
cannot cast spells through its body. 

When the spell expires or the juggernaut is 
destroyed by accrued damage, it simply fades 
away. 

The material components of this spell are a 
ball of clay that fills the caster’s palm; a bit of 
string, wire, or natural fiber; and a gem of any 
type worth at least 500 gp. 

Notes: Very rare in the FORGOTTEN REALMS 
setting; virtually unknown elsewhere. 


Juggle 
(Evocation) 


Level: 4 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 5 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell requires a proficiency in juggling. 
The geisya creates harmless balls of fire that 
can be juggled safely. With further work, 
spheres of ice, water, colored light, or glowing 
white daggers can be substituted—one such 
substitution is gained with every three levels of 
experience the geisya has attained. 

The items disappear on contact with something 
besides the juggler’s hands or when the geisya 
ceases her concentration. Each item can be 
thrown, up to two per round at a target. This 
requires both an attack roll to strike the target and 
a juggling proficiency roll to keep the other items 
juggling). Each missile, regardless of form, does 
1d4 damage plus | hit point per level of the 
geisya. A water ball inflicts no damage, but 
causes the creature struck to lose its next initia- 
tive roll. 


477 


pa A 


Notes: Used by geisya (common) and wu jen 
(rare) in oriental settings; otherwise very rare. 


Jump 
(Alteration) 


Level: 1 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 

Duration: 1d3 rds. + 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


The individual touched when this spell is 
cast is empowered to leap once per round for 


the duration of the spell. Leaps can be up to 30 
feet forward or straight upward or 10 feet back- 
ward. Horizontal leaps forward or backward 
have only a slight arc—about 2 feet per 10 feet 
of distance traveled. The jump spell does not 
ensure safety in landing or grasping at the end 
of the leap. 

The material component of this spell is a 
grasshopper’s hind leg, to be broken by the 
caster when the spell is cast. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


wht. 


Just Sovereign 
Athasian Dragon-King magic; 
psionic component renders the 
spell uncastable by wizards. 


478 


Kaleidoscope, Lysander’s 
See Lysander’s kaleidoscope. 


Kaleidoscopic Strike, 
Gunther’s 
See Gunther's kaleidoscopic strike. 


Kank Shell 


whe 


(Alteration) 


Level: 5 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: | rd. 
Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This is a defensive spell developed by mages 
of the elven kank-herding tribes, enabling the 
recipient to go without armor in the terrific 
heat of Athas until he actually needs it. When 
the spell is cast, the beneficiary’s body or torso 
is transformed into the chitinous carapace of a 
kank, giving him the protection of plate mail 
(AC 3). This armor lasts until successfully dis- 
pelled or the wearer takes cumulative damage 
totalling over 8 hit points, plus | point per level 


r' 
‘ 


ii 


B 
' ili | 


X of the caster. It has no effective weight 
or encumbrance, and does not affect 
spellcasting. It cannot be added to other 
spells, such as giant fur, but is cumulative with 
shield and Dexterity bonuses. 

The material component for this spell is a 
fist-sized shard of kank shell. 

Notes: Common in the DARK SUN setting; 
otherwise unknown. 


Khazid’s Procurement 
(Divination, Summoning) 
(Geometry) 


Level: 5 

Range: Special 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 turn 
Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: Creates 1 gate 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell allows the caster to more easily 
access rare or dangerous spell components. 
The wizard casts this spell upon a silver mirror 
while concentrating on a mental image of the 
material he desires. The base chance of success 
is 50%, modified by the following factors: 

e +1% per level of the caster 

e +10% if the caster has seen the same type of 
substance or object before; this bonus is not 
cumulative with the following bonus 

* +20% if the caster has a sample of the mater- 
ial or the same type of object in his posses- 
sion; this bonus is not cumulative with the 
bonus above 

¢ +30% if the wizard knows the location of the 
desired object 

+ —50% if the caster has never seen the same 
type of material or item before. 


If the percentile roll indicates failure, the 
caster is unable to locate the desired ingredient 
and the spell ends, If the roll indicates success, 
the wizard has located the object or substance 
and the mirror becomes a magical gate through 
which the caster can see the desired compo- 
nent. The size of the gate is determined by the 
size of the mirror, to a maximum size of 3 feet 
by 2 feet. 

The gate always appears within arm’s length 
of the target component, allowing the wizard to 
reach through the mirror, grasp the object of 
his desire, and draw it back through the gate. 
The wizard must risk his own safety—the gate 
does not allow the use of probes, long-handled 
ladles, tongs, or other equipment to gather the 


479 


N Khelben’s Blackstaff A 


material. The caster cannot move completely 
through the gate. 

The gate vanishes when the spell’s duration 
expires or when the component or the wizard 
moves more than 10 feet away from it. 

The gate is visible from both sides, and other 
creatures can reach through the gate. Breath 
weapons, gaze attacks, missiles, spells, and 
similar attacks cannot pass through the gate. 
Because creatures can pass their limbs through 
the gate, physical attacks and touch spells can 
be used. 

The only limit to the range of this spell is 
that the caster and the desired component must 
be on the same plane of existence. Elemental 
forces (not creatures) will not pass through the 
gate. Thus, the wizard does not risk flooding 
his laboratory by opening a gate beneath the 
sea, for example. However, the spell does not 
provide any sort of protection against a hostile 
environment into which the caster may reach. 

The spell requires an exquisite silver mirror 
of no less than 10,000 gp value and a black 
opal worth at least 1,000 gp that must be pow- 
dered and sprinkled on the mirror. The mirror 
is not lost after casting and can be used again, 
but the powdered opal is consumed in the cast- 
ing. 

Notes: Uncommon spell (70M). 


Khelben’s Blackstafff+ 
(Alteration, Evocation) 


Level: 8 

Range: 0 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: | rd. 
Duration: | rd./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: Special 


This is the unique spell that gave its creator, 
the archmage Khelben Arunsun Waterdeep, his 
nickname, The magic causes any nonmagical 
staff, club, piece of wood, or pole arm held by 
the caster to shimmer with a black. crawling 
radiance. 

A weapon enchanted with Khelben’s black- 
staff has the following properties: 

* It can never harm the caster or any other 
beings touching the staff during the casting of 
the spell. 

s It strikes as a +4 magical weapon to hit (no 

damage bonus). 


Blackstaff Mental Damage 

1d100 Effect 

01-45 Target unaffected 

46-65 Target confused (as the 4th-level wiz- 


ard spell confusion) for 1d4 rds. 


66-75 Target stunned (as the 9th level sym- 
bol spell) for 1d3 rds. 

76-85 Target affected by fear (as the 4th 
level wizard spell) for 1d2 rds. 

86-95 Target affected by repulsion 

96-00 Target affected by feeblemind 


e Its touch drains 1 hit point automatically (the 
target gets a saving throw vs. death magic to 
avoid having this loss being permanent, unre- 
coverable except by use of a wish), plus 1d8 
points of normal damage, regardless of the 
weapon’s size and shape. 

« Its touch acts as a dispel magic spell (at the 
caster’s level) on all magical barriers, weapons, 
or effects, at all times; the wielder cannot turn 
this power on and off. 

e Its touch causes mental damage (see table). 

è Its touch causes any spelicasting being to for- 
get one memorized spell or be unable to use 
one natural spell-like power for two rounds (if 
a choice exists, determine which spell or abil- 
ity at random; save vs. paralyzation to avoid 
this effect entirely). 

Its touch causes beings possessing psionic 
skills or wild talents to be psionically “scram- 
bled” (unable to use any powers except 
defenses) for Ld4 rounds. 

+ It absorbs magic cast upon it, without conse- 
quence, and is apparently unaffected by any 
magic except a wish, which can negate it. 

» The blackstaff can be wielded by any creature 
able to use a pole arm who can withstand (or is 
immune to) its effects. A weapon enchanted 
with Khelben s blackstaff will prevent spell- 
casting by any being who is contact with it dur- 
ing a given round. It can therefore be used to 
ruin enemy spellcasting with a successful 
attack. (It cannot be easily thrown and resists 
telekinesis and similar movements as it does 
almost all other magic.) At the spell’s expira- 
tion, the material component (the staff) is 
instantly and completely consumed. 

Notes: Unique to Khelben “Blackstaff” 
Arunsun, premier wizard of the city of Water- 
deep in the ForgoTTEN REALMs setting. A vari- 
ation available to other characters is listed 
elsewhere as blackstaff- 


480 


N Khelben’s Suspended Silence oc 


Khelben’s Dweomerdoom 
(Abjuration, Evocation) 


Level: 9 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 2 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect; 40-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: None 


This powerful magic allows archmages to 
drain magic directly from other spellcasters by 
eliminating the memory of certain spells. 

When the spell is cast, a spell focus (such as 
a gem or staff) is charged with the magical 
energy; the item remains charged for up to the 
caster’s level in rounds before dissipating. The 
dweomerdoom activates when the charged 
focus item is thrown against a hard surface. 
When it strikes, a green pulse of energy flashes 
out 40 feet in all directions from the item (bar- 
riers of less than one-foot-thick solid stone or 
six inches of solid metal are pierced). One 
spellcaster within the radius of effect, chosen 
by the caster, bears the brunt of this spell. 
When the green energy pulse contacts the cho- 
sen spellcaster, multiple arcs of energy leap to 
the focus item, draining the spellcaster of as 
many memorized spell levels as the caster of 
the dweomerdoom. High level spells are elimi- 
nated first, with any remaining spell levels 
reducing the lower level spells until the spell 
levels are gone (for example, draining 18 levels 
causes the loss of two 9th-level spells or one 
8th-level, one 7th-level, and one 3rd-level). 

When the energy pulse meets any other 
spellcasters (wizard, priest, or other) within the 
area of effect, a green energy arc leaps to the 
focus item and drains the memory of one spell 
up to 9th level (DM’s choice, highest level 
spells first). There is no limit to the number of 
spellcasters the dweomerdoom affects in this 
lesser way, provided they are at least partially 
in the area of effect (the caster of the spell is 
immune to this effect). 

Lost spells can replaced by the usual means: 
memorization for wizards and meditation and 
prayer for priests. 

Example: Khelben (W27) flies over a spell 
battle within Waterdeep between Tharchion 
Buulgast of Thay (W20) and Nenex the Aged 
(W22) that has ruined two homes. He casts 
Khelben's dweomerdoom on his staff and 
throws it between the two mages, spearing it 
into the ground. Buulgast loses the memory of 


his shape change spell (drained of his most 
powerful spell automatically), Khelben’s main 
target, Nenex, loses 27 memorized spell levels 
from his most powerful remaining spells (one 
9th, two 8th, and one 2nd): time stop, monster 
summoning VI, sink, and invisibility. 

Khelben developed this spell to deal with the 
increasing number of powerful mages disrupt- 
ing Waterdeep’s peace (or so he says; Elminster 
hints it might involve the many wizards about 
the Realms and the planes who challenge Khel- 
ben to spell duels). 

The spell’s focus is a signature for the cast- 
ing mage, allowing drained foes to understand 
just who brought this down upon them; Khel- 
ben uses his staff, while Alustriel uses a moon- 
stone pendant with her symbol and Elminster’s 
focus is, of course, his pipe. Most wizards stop 
and listen to the spellcaster, which was Khel- 
ben’s alleged intent: “Do you know how diffi- 
cult it is to get the attention of a Red Wizard in 
the throes of a temper tantrum? I think this 
solves that problem...” 

This spell is cast through an object—a magi- 
cal staff, a diamond, a golden crown, etc.—that 
is made the center of the spell effect. This 
focus is not consumed or harmed in any way by 
the spell. 

Notes: Known to certain archmages of the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting, including Alus- 
triel, Elminster, Khelben, Laeral, and the Sim- 
bul. 


Khelben’s Suspended Silence 
(Alteration) 


Level: 3 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 3 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 20-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell, devised by the famous archmage 
Khelben “Blackstaff” Arunsun of Waterdeep, 
brings into being a magical field of silence on 
any nonliving object of smaller size than the 
caster (for example, a stone, weapon, or corpse 
of a being smaller than the wizard). Once cast, 
the spell is inactive until the command word is 
spoken. This spell field can be detected as a 
faint aura until the spell is triggered, and can be 
dispelled with a dispel magic spell. 

When the focal object is touched and a com- 
mand or trigger word (chosen and uttered dur- 


a eo 


481 


x Khelben's Warding Whip g 


ing casting) is spoken, the spell takes effect, 
expanding into a 20-foot radius spherical field 
centered on the midpoint of the focal object. 
Within this field, absolute magical silence 
reigns for six rounds. The field moves with the 
object (for example, a thrown stone), and its 
effects can be avoided only by creatures 
employing dispel magic (to end the spell 
effects), vocalize, or a similar spell. 

The material components for this spell are a 
feather and a handful of dust, which must be 
held in the cupped palm of the caster, while the 
caster’s other hand touches the focal object. 
The focal object is in no way harmed or altered 
by the spell. 

Notes: Known to Khelben of the FORGOTTEN 
Rearms setting and a few of his apprentices. 


Khelben’s Warding Whip 
(Abjuration) 


Level: 7 

Range: 10 yds. 

Components: S, M 

Casting Time: 7 

Duration: | rd./level 

Area of Effect: Creates | force lash 
Saving Throw: None 


This specialized and rare spell creates a 
whiplike lash of mystical force controlled by 
the caster. This magical whip is particularly 
effective against those spells that take the form 
of pushing, striking, or crushing forces, in par- 
ticular the popular spells created by Bigby. 

The wizard need not concentrate to maintain 
the warding whip, but while using it cannot cast 
other spells or wield other weapons. The whip 
strikes or parries automatically while under the 
direction of its wielder. The whip can be used 
only against those within 30 feet of the wizard. 
The effects of the whip are as follows: 


e The whip confers to the user immunity to the 
push spell. 

e The whip will immediately dissipate a shield 
spell without effect to itself. 

e The whip has a 40% chance of destroying a 
Tenser 5 floating disk per attack. The whip is 
not affected. 

e The whip affects any of the Bigby's hand 
spells as follows: 

Interposing Hand—Destroyed, with a 20% 
chance of the whip being destroyed as well. 

Forceful Hand—90% chance destroyed per 
attack, with a 30% chance of the whip being 


destroyed per attack. 

Grasping Hand—80% chance destroyed per 
attack, with a 40% chance of the whip being 
destroyed per attack. 

Clenched Fist—70% chance destroyed per 
attack, with a 50% chance of the whip being 
destroyed per attack. 

Crushing Hand—65% chance of being 
destroyed per attack, with a 60% chance of the 
whip being destroyed per attack. 

Lesser Bigby spells (strangling grip, batter- 
ing gauntlet, fantastic fencers, etc.) are 
destroyed upon contact with the whip, as would 
be a shield spell. 


* The whip has no effect on nonmoving magi- 
cal barriers such as a wall of force or a pris- 
matic sphere. 

* The whip has no effect on spells that do not 
use magical force as a solid entity—holds, 
slow, reverse gravity, and so forth. 

s The whip cannot harm living objects, and so 
cannot be used as a weapon. 

e The whip has no effect on spells that take 
effect instantaneously. 

* The whip can be used to parry physical 
attacks, including those from magical weap- 
ons and weapons of magical force (decastave, 
spiritual hammer, etc.) This parrying has a 
base 60% chance of success plus 2% per level 
of the whip’s caster. An attack parried this 
way does no damage, but the wizard using the 
whip must have initiative over his attacker in 
order to parry. 

As noted, this spell was developed by Khel- 
ben Arunsun, the Blackstaff of Waterdeep, as a 
specific counter to the various Bigby spells 
that have appeared in the Realms. Whether the 
mythical Bigby of Greyhawk visited the 
Realms or Khelben or some other Realmsmage 
visited Oerth to bring these spells from one 
world to another is not known. The Blackstaff 
has apparently met the great Bigby at some 
time in the past, though the meeting was appar- 
ently not on the best of terms. As the wizard of 
Waterdeep once noted to his apprentice Illistar, 
“The old goat comes up with one good gim- 
mick, and beats it to death with a rock.” Bigby’s 
response, if any, has never been recorded. 

The material component of this spell is a 
piece of wire and a pinch of powdered elec- 
trum. 

Notes: Known to Khelben of the FORGOTTEN 

REALMS setting. 


a a A cee ee 


483 


N Khinasi Trade Tongue fr 


Khinasi Trade Tongue 
(Divination) $ 
Level: 1 
Range: Touch 


Components: V, M 
Duration: 5 rds./level 
Casting Time: | 

Area of Effect: | individual 
Saving Throw: None 


Favored by Khinasi and Brecht wizards 
because of their countries’ reliance on trade, 
this limited form of ESP aids in dealing effi- 
ciently with merchants and peddlers. The 
recipient of this spell can sense the amount of 
money that an individual is willing to accept or 
pay for a particular item—regardless of the 
price verbally quoted by the individual—to 
within 1d6 coins appropriate to the transaction. 
The recipient of the spell can determine prices 
for multiple items (one at a time) until the spell 
expires. 

When cast by a Khinasi or Brecht wizard, 
this divination is even more precise, determin- 
ing within 1d4 appropriate coins the amount of 
money a trader will accept or pay. 

The material component of this spell is a 
vial of snake oil. 

Notes: Common on Cerilia, the BIRTHRIGHT 
setting; unknown elsewhere. 


Kiss of Night’s Guardiantt 
(Evocation) 


Level: 9 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 1 
Duration: | passage 
Area of Effect: | person 
Saving Throw: None 


The Master of the Tower of High Sorcery at 
Palanthus has the power to grant protection to 
anyone entering the Shoikan Grove. The Master 
confers this protection by means of a kiss upon 
the subject's forehead. To those of good or neu- 
tral alignment, the kiss seems to burn into their 
flesh. To those of evil alignment, the kiss will 
confer a pleasant, warm sensation. It leaves a 
scar that is visible only to the undead of the 
Shoikan Grove. The kiss alleviates fear in the 
grove (eliminating the —10 saving throw 
penalty) and also prevents all undead in the 
grove from attacking the protected person. No 


weapons or spells can be used while under the 
kiss 5 influence; to do so negates the spell. The 
kiss works only for one passage through the 
grove. 

Notes: Unique to Master of the Tower of 
High Sorcery in the DRAGONLANCE setting. 


Knock 
(Alteration) 
(Universal) 
Reversible 


Level: 2 

Range: 60 yds. 

Components: V 

Casting Time: 1 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 10 sq. ft./level 
Saving Throw: None 


The knack spell opens stuck, barred, locked, 
held, or wizard locked doors. It opens secret 
doors, as well as locked or trick-opening boxes 
or chests. It also loosens welds, shackles, or 
chains. If used to open a wizard locked door, 
the spell does not remove the former spell, but 
simply suspends its functioning for one turn. In 
all other cases, it permanently opens locks or 
welds—although the former could be closed 
and locked again later. It does not raise barred 
gates or similar impediments (such as a 
portcullis), nor does it affect ropes, vines, and 
the like. Note that the effect is limited by the 
area; a 3rd-level wizard can cast a knock spell 
on a door of 30 square feet or less (for exam- 
ple, a standard 4-foot x 7-foot door). Each 
spell can undo up to two means of preventing 
egress through a portal. Thus if a door is 
locked, barred, and held, or triple locked, open- 
ing it requires two knock spells. In all cases, the 
location of the door or item must be known— 
the spell cannot be used against a wall in hopes 
of discovering a secret door. 

The reverse spell, Jock, closes and locks a 
door or similar closure, provided there is a 
physical mechanism. It does not create a weld, 
but it locks physically operated locking mecha- 
nisms, set bars, and so on, up to two functions. 
It cannot affect a portcullis. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


ae nae Oe aay a a ae 


Know Bloodline Derivation 


A 
AT sae DLL 
lene ce i Crypt 


Level: 5 

Range: 30 yds. 
Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 8 

Duration: 1—10 days 

Area of Effect: 50-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell causes any inhabited structure to 
become sealed as a crypt. In effect, all exits are 
wizard locked. Then the interior begins to 
darken over a period of five rounds. No light, 
even magical, can function in the darkness, nor 
can infravision. When the structure is dark, a 
horrible musty smell of death permeates the 
area. If the RAVENLOFT setting rules are not 
used, a saving throw vs. paralysis can be used 
to see if the effects of a fear spell are avoided. 
Otherwise, the conditions prompt fear and hor- 
ror checks (the DM may optionally call for 
madness checks as detailed in the spell, descent 
into madness). 

Notes: Very rare; usually found in the hands 
of necromancers or undead spellcasters. It can 
be successfully researched only on the Demi- 
plane of Dread. 


Know Alignment 
(Divination) 
Reversible 


Level: 2 

Range: 10 yds. 

Components; V, S 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: | rd./level 

Area of Effect: 1 creature or object per 2 rds. 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


A know alignment spell enables the wizard 
to read the aura of a creature or an aligned 
object (unaligned objects reveal nothing). The 
caster must remain stationary and concentrate 
on the subject for two full rounds. A creature is 
allowed a saving throw vs. spell and, if success- 
ful, the caster learns nothing about that particu- 
lar creature from the casting. If the caster 
concentrates on a creature or object for only 
one round, he can learn its alignment only with 
respect to law and chaos. Certain magical 
devices negate the know alignment spell. 

The reverse, undetectable alignment, con- 
ceals the alignment of an object or creature for 
24 hours—even from a know alignment spell. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Know Bloodline Derivation 


(Divination) $ 


Level: 1 

Range: 30 yds. 
Components: S, M 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Casting Time: 2 

Area of Effect: 1 individual 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


The caster of this spell can determine the 
bloodline derivation of an individual. The tar- 
get individual is allowed a saving throw vs. 
spell with the following modifiers to the die 
roll (because stronger bloodlines are easier to 
detect): tainted, +2; minor, +0; major, —2; 
great, —4. There is a base 50% chance (minus 
5% for every level of the caster) that a tainted 
bloodline passes unnoticed, even if the individ- 
ual fails the saving throw. This spell does not 
work on inanimate objects. 

The material component of this spell is a 
collection of trinkets representing the different 
bloodlines (Basaia is represented by the hawk, 
so a hawk feather or claw would be appropri- 
ate; scions of Reynir are attuned to the wilder- 


a Ge aa EEA EL Ee TENS 


485 


N Know Bloodline Strength 4 


ness, making a pine cone or live twig suitable, 
and so on). The component that represents the 
target’s bloodline disintegrates upon comple- 
tion of the spell. If the spell is cast on an 
unblooded character, none of the totems are 
destroyed. 

Notes: Common on Cerilia, the BIRTHRIGHT 
setting; unknown elsewhere. 


Know Bloodline Strength 


(Divination) é 3 


Level: 1 

Range: 30 yds. 
Components: S, M 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Casting Time: 2 

Area of Effect: 1 being 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell affects only blooded characters. If 
the individual fails a saving throw vs. spell, the 
caster learns the relative strength of his blood- 
line—tainted, minor, major, or great. Because 
stronger bloodline strengths are easier to iden- 
tify, the being makes his saving throw with the 
following modifiers to the die roll: tainted, +2; 
minor, +0; major, —2; great, —4. 

There is a base 50% chance (minus 5% for 
every level of the caster) that a tainted blood- 
line’s strength cannot be determined, even if 
the being fails the saving throw. 

The material component is a small vase or 
jar made of malleable metal (brass, gold, tin, 
etc.). The component collapses, as if crushed in 
a strong hand, when the spell is cast. The caster 
measures the extent of the crumpling to deter- 
mine the relative bloodline strength. If the spell 
is cast on an unblooded character, the vase 
remains uncrushed. 

Notes: Common on Cerilia, the BIRTHRIGHT 
setting; unknown elsewhere. 


Know Cerilian Origin 


(Divination) 4 $ 


Level: 1 

Range: 10 yds. 

Components: V, S 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Casting Time: 1 

Area of Effect: 1 creature or object 
Saving Throw; Neg. 


When a wizard directs this spell at a crea- 
ture, individual, or object, he can determine the 


area of Cerilia from which the subject origi- 
nated (or whether the subject comes from out- 
side Cerilia). This spell can identify the origin 
ofa Cerilian item or person to within 25 miles, 
with a general or specific result—that is, a 
warrior born 20 miles outside of the City of 
Anuire might be identified as hailing from that 
city; a weapon forged in the city of Ilien might 
simply be identified as originating in the 
province of Ilien. 

The caster may specify whether he wishes to 
learn the actual origin of the subject or the 
place in which it has spent the most time. Thus, 
he may learn the birthplace of an individual or 
the place in which she has spent most of her 
life; he may learn the place where a weapon 
was forged or the site at which it lay lost for 
decades. The origins of Cerilian items predat- 
ing the Mount Deismaar cataclysm (when 
magic changed) cannot be determined. 

In the case of centuries-old items, this spell 
might be cast a number of times to determine 
the history of an object. Such castings will first 
reveal the place where the item spent the most 
time, with subsequent castings revealing pro- 
gressively shorter habitats. 

When this spell is cast on an individual, a sav- 
ing throw vs. spell is allowed; on a magical item, 
a saving throw vs. crushing blow applies. In 
either case, a successful saving throw means the 
caster cannot determine the subject's origin. 

The spell gives information (other than a 
reading of “outside”) based on the subject’s 
history in Cerilia. Even subjects from as close 
as the continents of Thaele and Aduria are 
“outside” as revealed by this spell. 

Notes: Common on Cerilia, the BIRTHRIGHT 
setting; unknown elsewhere. 


Know Faction 
(Divination) 


Level: 1 

Range: 20 yds. 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: | 
Duration: | rd./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell enables a wizard to determine the 
faction of a character or creature simply by 
looking at him. Most faction members don't 
bother to hide their affiliation, but on occasion 
factols will order covert missions or infiltra- 
tions of other groups. The spell lasts one round 


486 


Know Path of Magic 


per level of the caster, and the caster can deter- 
mine the faction of one creature within range 
every round. A creature trying to conceal its 
faction is allowed a saving throw vs. spell to 
foil the wizard’s efforts. 

On occasion, creatures with deep-rooted 
philosophical beliefs will be revealed by this 
spell. For example, a high-level priest who 
worships a power of death may be mistaken for 
a Dustman. 

Notes: Common in the PLANESCAPE setting; 
otherwise very rare. 


Know History 
(Divination) 


Level: | 

Range: 120 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: 1 creature or object 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell reveals to the wu jen the common 
name, background, lineage, and deeds of any 
item, creature, or place, should such possess 
any notable history at all. It does not reveal 
secret identities, presence of magic, magical 
abilities, character alignment, etc. If cast on a 
character, it would tell of his parents, what 
family he belongs to, and any famous deeds of 
his ancestors. When cast on an object, it reveals 
the specific name of the item (if it has one), 
any notable deeds it was used in, and the name 
of its maker. For example, a katana might be 
revealed as the “Cloud-Cutting Sword used by 
the great hero Akicha Tanokura at the Battle of 
the Fallen Bridges, having been made for him 
by the master swordsmith Lei Yung.” 

When used to reveal a creature that is dis- 
guised or polymorphed, the subject is allowed a 
saving throw vs. spell. If this is failed the spell 
operates normally. The spell has no effect on 
disguised or polymorphed items or places. 
When used on a creature, the caster must be 
able to see the creature in question. When used 
on an object, the caster must handle the item. 
When used on a place, the caster must be 
standing within the grounds of the site. 

The material component of this spell is a 
pair of carved bones. 

Notes: Common in oriental settings; other- 
wise very rare. 


Know Intent — Savant 
(Divination) 


Level: 2 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 2 

Duration: | rd. 

Area of Effect: 10 ft/level path, 10 ft. wide 
Saving Throw: None 


When this spell is cast, the savant becomes 
aware of the general intent of an encountered 
individual or group. Information revealed is 
along the lines of the following one-word 
descriptions: friendly, neutral, hostile, wary, 
and so on. 

Notes: Restricted to diviners, sages, and 
savants; common. 


Know Path of Magic 
(Divination) 


Level: 4 

Range: 5 yds./level 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: 1 rd./2 levels 
Area of Effect: 1 wizard 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


By casting this spell, the wizard might learn 
if the subject has organized his magical studies 
by the “path system” or not. The subject’s sav- 
ing throw is reduced by 1 per three levels of the 
caster (a natural “20” always succeeds). If the 
subject makes a successful saving throw vs. 
spell, the divination fails completely. 

If the saving throw is failed, for each round 
of concentration, the caster has a 5% per level 
chance to learn another piece of information, 
for example: the number of paths studied, the 
name of a specific path studied, the highest 
spell level completed on that path, the name of 
a specific spell on the path that the caster 
knows (these will be revealed in order of level, 
lowest to highest, starting with spells that the 
caster doesn’t know the subject has). 

This spell is defeated by any device or pro- 
tective item that wards against scrying. The 
spell also ends if the subject moves out of 
range or if the caster’s concentration is broken. 

Notes: Rare; known mostly by those follow- 
ing the Path of Paths (see Appendix). 


a a 7 T a ae TR 


487 


N Know School A 


Know School 
(Divination) 


Level: 1 

Range: 120 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 

Duration: 1 rd. 

Area of Effect: | specialist wizard 
Saving Throw: None 


By means of this spell the caster can deter- 
mine the school of another spellcaster. This 
spell only functions on other wizards who are 
specialist mages; it produces no results on 
priests, spellcasters without schools, or crea- 
tures without spell ability. 

The subject is not necessarily aware of this 
divination, but as with all such divination 
spells, probably would take umbrage if he 
found out. Let the caster beware. 

The material component of this spell is a 
small tube of paper or vellum. 

Notes: Uncommon spell from the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. Known to be in 
Darrson’s Notes. 


Know Value 
(Divination) 


Level: 5 

Range: 10 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: 10-ft. cube 
Saving Throw: None 


Know value enables the caster to determine 
the raw monetary value of all coins, gems, and 
jewelry within the area of effect, within the 
limits that follow. 

The items must be laid out so they are clearly 
visible. They cannot be concealed on a person, 
hidden in a chest, or buried in the ground. The 
items must also be contained within an area no 
larger than a 10-foot cube, and this area can be 
no farther than 10 yards from the caster. The 
spell appraises the basic raw material value of 
precious metals and gemstones examined, 
regardless of magical enchantment, workman- 
ship, or collectible value. Fools’ gold is 
instantly detected. 

Optionally, the DM might allow this spell to 
duplicate the appraisal nonweapon proficiency 
with respect to the raw monetary value of trea- 


sure at an effective Intelligence of 15. 

The material component of the spell is part 
of the material appraised, equal to 1% of the 
total value, rounded up to one whole item as 
necessary. This disappears from the area exam- 
ined. Thus, a pile of 20,000 sp is reduced by 
200 sp when this spell is cast upon it. 

Notes: Uncommon spell. (Updated from the 
Complete Wizard's Handbook.) 


Know Weight 
(Divination) 


Level: 1 

Range: 0 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: | 
Duration: | rd./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


When the know weight spell is cast, the wiz- 
ard use it to read weight for one individual or 
object or compare weight for two, determining 
if one is strong enough to carry or support the 
other, The caster use either spell function as he 
desires, deciding which function to use on a 
round-by-round basis. 

Read Weight: By touching the subject and 
concentrating for a round, the caster knows the 
weight of an object or creature. The reading 
gives the total weight, including the weight of 
all items carried or supported. A different indi- 
vidual or object can be examined each round. 
The maximum weight that can be read at Ist 
level is one-half ton (1,000 Ibs.) and the amount 
doubles each level thereafter, to a total of 256 
tons at 10th level. If the weight of a creature or 
object exceeds the caster’s capacity, only that 
fact can be determined. 

Compare Weight: Alternately, the wizard can 
test the weight of creatures or objects against 
each other. He grasps one with his right hand 
and another with his left and holds them for a 
round. This reading determines if the left-hand 
subject can bear the weight of the right-hand 
subject. The answer is given as a short reply 
(see table). 

For this use, success is the chance that a 
weight-stressed object will hold without break- 
ing as decided by the DM. Movement gives the 
effect of carrying a burden on the individual 
who will bear it (a “physically dangerous” bur- 
den runs the risk of a disabling a character or 
possible death by exhaustion for mounts and 
pack animals—the nature and chance of injury 


T E aaa N 


488 


~ Know Weight g 


is up to the DM). Reading is what the caster 
learns. This use of the spell does not reveal the 


actual weight of either subject. 
Success Movement Reading 
(Object) (Creature) (Caster) 
100% Normal movement Yes 
75%-99% Encumbered movement Probably yes 
40%-74% Heavy encumbrance Possibly yes 
01-39% Burden dangerous Probably no 
0% Cannot be lifted No 


For example, Redolent the wizard grasps a 
heavily armored fighter with his left hand and 
a rotted bridge with his right hand. His answer 
is no. Then he realizes the fighter obviously 
can’t lift the bridge and switches hands. He 


489 


gets a yes answer and tells the fighter it is safe 
to cross. Then he lets go of the bridge and con- 
centrates on the fighter, then on a halfling and 
on an elf who are with the party. From this he 
learns the halfling and elf have a combined 
weight of less than the fighter’s, and can thus 
safely cross together. 

Notes: Uncommon for diviners; otherwise 
rare. 


Know Weight 
A spell of Ist level that once appeared in the 
POLYHEDRON Newszine. It was ranged, affected 
many individuals in a large area, and had an 
undefined material component. It is now lost 
knowledge. 


| x a if í 
N / 
AN) . 


DJA Ras 
3 A oe o 
To NY . 
© 
Sey 


Oo 
One 


Ladder — Old Empire 
(Alteration) 
(Force) 


Level: 1 

Range: 20 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: | 

Duration: | turn 

Area of Effect: Creates | ladder 
Saving Throw: None 


By means of this spell, the caster creates a 
firmly anchored ladder of force, one foot wide, 
and ten feet long, plus ten feet per level of the 
caster, to a maximum length of 60 feet. This 
ladder is easy to climb (no Dexterity check is 
required). This ladder can be used to climb 
walls and pits, or can be laid horizontally and 
used to cross chasms. 

The material component for this spell is a 
knot of wood. 

Notes: Uncommon spell. As a FORGOTTEN 
REALMS Old Empire spell, initial exposure 
requires a mentor or a read Southern magic 
spell. 


Laeral’s Aqueous Column 
(Alteration, Evocation) 


Level: 4 

Range: 10 ft./level 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 2 rds. 

Duration: | turn/level 

Area of Effect: 10-ft.-diam. cylinder, length up 
to 10 ft./level 

Saving Throw: None 


By means of this spell, a mage can trans- 
mute the air in a particular area into water. A 
cylindrical volume of pure water 10 feet in 
diameter is created, expandable to a length of 
10 feet per level of the caster, The caster 
decides if the water is fresh or salt during cast- 
ing. The spell confines the water in a 10-foot- 
diameter cylinder, allowing it to circulate 
freely and draw oxygen into itself as necessary 
to support marine life. Multiple aqueous col- 
umn spells can be cast by the same caster or 
several wizards to create a continuous column 
longer than the powers of a single caster could 
bring into being. The column can run verti- 
cally, horizontally, at an angle, and make turns 
as desired and set during casting. Once estab- 
lished, the location of a column cannot change. 


Laeral’s Aqueous Column 


Beings and objects can pass freely into and out 
of the water without disturbing the stability of the 
column. (In other words, the passage of a creature 
or item does not cause the column to leak, spray, 
or spill.) Though items and beings become wet in 
the column, all excess moisture is gone when 
they emerge. Creatures not able to breathe in 
water are not empowered to do so by this spell. 

An aqueous column is often used to main- 
tain marine creatures in a dry environment for 
purposes of conferences, imprisonment, or 
transportation. The created cylinders are usu- 
ally vertical (hence the spell’s name) and may 
be connected with other bodies of water, such 
as sewers beneath buildings or the sea under a 
ship. When the spell expires, the water simply 
vanishes; marine creatures can easily be 
stranded. The magic equalizes varying water 
pressures so as to harm neither creatures nor 
the spell’s surroundings. (A column connected 
to the sea in a cellar does not cause the sea to 
flood the cellar.) 

The material components of this spell are a 
hair from any creature and a drop of liquid. 

Notes: Common or uncommon among the 
Seven Sisters and Harpers in the FORGOTTEN 
REALMS setting; otherwise uncommon or rare. 
Known to be in Laeral's Libram. 


aaa aaa a a a eae. 


491 


Y Laeral’s Crowning Touch va 


Laeral’s Crowning Touch*++ 
(Alteration, Conjuration) 


Level: 9 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 7 
Duration: 366 days 
Area of Effect: 1 person 
Saving Throw: None 


By casting this spell, the wizard effects a 
debilitating curse on a target being. To be 
affected, a target must be a spell-using entity 
who employs magic governed by Mystra (such 
as all priests of Azuth and Mystra). 

The spell is initially unnoticeable save to the 
subject; Mystra’s symbol appears drawn in sil- 
ver on each palm (or on chest and forehead of 
beings lacking palms) as a glowing brand. The 
brands can be seen by others employing detect 
magic or reveal magic. Even after the spell 
expires, one mark remains forever. 

For a year and a day, the subject knows he 
has been cursed. A recipient who casts a spell 
loses one full level of experience per level of 
any spell cast (reducing Hit Dice, class 
bonuses, spell abilities, etc. accordingly). For 
example, a 14th-level wizard who casts a 6th 
level spell immediately drops to 8th level, los- 
ing 6d4 hit points and all powers an abilities 
beyond those of an 8th level wizard), Memo- 
rized spells are not lost, but if their level is 
beyond the cursed wizard’s ability, they cannot 
be replaced once cast. 

Streaks of silver appear in the hair of the 
cursed spellcaster. With each spell use, more 
silver appears. When the transgressor’s hair is 
all silver, it falls out. In addition, the trans- 
gressor’s hands become gnarled, and sores 
form on the vocal cords, making it harder to 
vocalize spells as well. (These are physical 
manifestations of the changes wrought by the 
spell, not added penalties.) After the spell 
expires, these side-effects vanish, and normal 
spell use returns, However, lost levels are gone 
and must be regained through the accumula- 
tion of experience. 

If this spell is cast upon a lich, the undead 
spellcaster is allowed a saving throw vs. spell 
at a —2 penalty. If successful, the spell is 
negated. If failed, the lich loses 1d8 hit points 
per spell it casts (draining itself slowly of 
unlife), but the cast spell functions normally 
otherwise. There is no known way to avoid this 
damage, and a lich reduced to 0 hit points in 


this way is destroyed utterly, along with its 
phylactery. 

This spell was developed for use only against 
those who misuse in the worst way the sort of 
magic Mystra has dominion over. If the sub- 
jects are intelligent or knowledgeable enough, 
they realize what has occurred when the sym- 
bols of Mystra manifest and go into seclusion 
while they pray to Mystra for forgiveness. 
Effectively, this sends spellcasters into forced 
retirement for a year and a day. The goddess 
has been known to shorten the effects of the 
touch for the truly repentant. 

Only the Chosen by Mystra can wield this 
spell; an unscrupulous apprentice of the Sim- 
bul’s tried the spell on a man who spurned her, 
only to have it visited on herself! 

Notes: A unique FORGOTTEN REALMS spell, 
restricted by Mystra to Mystra’s Chosen (Alus- 
triel, Laeral, and the Simbul use it most fre- 
quently). 


Laeral’s Cutting Hand 
(Alteration) 


Level: 2 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 2 

Duration: | rd./level 

Area of Effect: The caster’s hand 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell affects one of the caster’s hands. 
The spell does not change the hand’s appear- 
ance, but its lightest touch severs nonmagical 
ropes, sacks, and the like. Its strike deals 
1d4+2 points of damage. The spell dweomer 
can be made visible as a faerie fire-like glow of 
any hue, if the caster desires. 

While the spell lasts, the caster’s hand is 
considered a +2 weapon for purposes of what it 
can hit. The caster gains a +2 bonus to attack 
rolls made both barehanded and with all non- 
missile weapons wielded by the hand (the 
caster’s base THACO is unchanged), The magic 
does not prevent the hand from moving, grasp- 
ing, and otherwise functioning normally. 

No spell involving a somatic component can 
be cast while the cutting hand is maintained. It 
can be ended in an instant at the caster’s will. 

Notes: Restricted to the Seven Sisters, their 
apprentices, and select Harpers in the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


ERR er al a I ee RE ee eS 


492 


N Laeral’s Dancing Dweomer A 


Laeral’s Dancing Dweomer 
(Illusion/Phantasm) 


Level: 3 

Range: 20 yds. + 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 3 

Duration: | turn/level 

Area of Effect: 40-ft. diam. sphere 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell is used to confuse spells and abili- 
ties that detect magic by creating a score of 
false images that flit from one item to another 
within the area of effect, alternately creating 
and masking magical auras on all items therein. 

A detect magic spell used within the area of 
the dancing dweomer consequently reveals 
nothing useful, as all items in the area flicker 
with magical radiance. The flickering is not 
visible to the naked eye, but is seen only by 
beings actively detecting for magic. 

All beings employing any such means of 
detection are allowed a saving throw vs. spell. 
If the saving throw fails, the being cannot tell 
what items—if any—truly bear a dweomer, and 


ae 


L. N re ae ae 
Fae 


cannot tell the source or nature of what is con- 
fusing the detection. If the saving throw suc- 
ceeds, the being is able to discern stronger, 
fixed auras about the truly magical items, and 
to see the movements of the dancing dweomer. 
The caster of the dancing dweomer, if still pre- 
sent at the scene, also seems to be illuminated 
by a smaller duplicate of the dancing dweomer. 

The caster of a dancing dweomer need not 
concentrate on the effect or refrain from other 
spellcasting to maintain it. The material com- 
ponent of this spell is a pinch of dust tossed 
into the air. 

Notes: Uncommon or rare spell of the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. Known to be in 
The Wizard's Workbook. 


N Laerals Dancing Whip A 


Laeral’s Dancing Whip 


(Evocation) 


Level: 1 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: | 

Duration: | rd./level 

Area of Effect: 10 ft./level 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell animates a whip or any piece of 
wood small enough to be carried one-handed 
by the caster into a weapon. The caster tosses 
the item into the air and speaks the incantation, 
and this material becomes a 5-foot-long line of 
translucent white light floating in the air. 

On the next round, the dancing whip strikes 
twice with a THACO of 10 at any target being 
chosen by the caster that is in the area of effect. 
It inflicts 1d3+1 points of damage with each 
successful strike. It continues to attack twice 
per round until the spell expires, the target 
being moves out of the area, or the being is 
slain or destroyed. It the being moves out of the 
area, the whip hangs in midair waiting for the 
being to move back into range. The spell area is 
stationary at the caster’s location when the 
whip was created; it does not move with the 
caster, 

A dancing whip cannot change its target 
being, but it can sense invisible or shape- 
changed beings, and it is not fooled by illu- 
sions (for example, it ignores mirror images to 
strike at the true body of the target). Each time 
the whip successfully strikes the being, the 
being’s effective Armor Class against the whip 
only (not other creatures or attacks) worsens by 
| point. The being is allowed a saving throw vs. 
spell against every whip attack, however. A 
successful saving throw means only 1 point of 
damage is suffered. 

A dancing whip takes no damage from phys- 
ical attacks, but is MV FI 15 (A), AC 4, and has 
22 hit points for purposes of other types of 
attacks. A dispel magic destroys a dancing 
whip instantly. The caster of the whip need not 
concentrate on it or refrain from other spell- 
casting to maintain its existence. The dancing 
whip magic consumes the original whip. 

Notes: Restricted to the Seven Sisters, their 
apprentices, and select Harpers in the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Laeral’s Disrobement 
(Alteration) 


Level: 5 

Range: 0 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 5 
Duration: | day/level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell stores a second spell for a time 
based on caster level, or until a specific event 
occurs. The dweomer is cast upon a nonmetallic 
item that is worn just before the second (stored) 
spell, which can be of any level, is cast. The 
item can be as large as a gown or as small as a 
ring or earring, but cannot be something already 
bearing an enchantment. For example, although 
a metal dagger could not be made the focus of a 
disrobement, its sheath could. 

The spell to be stored is cast in the normal 
way, but the caster—who need not be the caster 
of the disrobement—touches the item bearing 
the disrobement dweomer during casting, and 
the spell enters the item rather than taking 
effect. Teleport, death spell, and meteor swarm 
are favorite spells used in conjunction with 
Laeral’s disrobement. 


+ Laeral’s Invisible Blade r 


The stored spell takes effect when the item is 
removed from or torn away from an unwilling 
wearer, or when the item is destroyed or sub- 
stantially damaged (tearing a sleeve from a 
shirt, for example, or slashing a tunic with a 
sword). 

Item-wearers are instantly made aware of 
erupting spells. These spells are under their 
control even if they have no spellcasting ability 
or are of another class than the caster of either 
the disrobement or the spell it has stored. The 
item-wearer can decide what form the spell 
takes (if any), its duration or intensity (if 
applicable), and its destination or target. This 
control is by silent act of will. Even bound and 
gagged item-wearers can direct erupting spells. 

Even if item-wearers make foolish decisions 
about spell effects, they cannot be directly 
harmed by an unleashed spell. If the item- 
wearer made a fireball detonate with herself at 
the center, she and all worn, carried, and 
touched items and companions would be com- 
pletely protected by the disrobement, but the 
fireball’s blast would have normal effects on 
everything else it reached. 

If the disrobement duration expires before 
the item is removed or harmed, the stored spell 
is lost without taking effect. 

Syluné once used a disrobement when cap- 
tured by slavers. They tore her gown to brand 
her on one shoulder, and the resulting meteor 
swarm destroyed them and their log-built 
stronghold. As a result, Laeral 5 disrobement 
was called Syluné's displeasure for a time by 
sages who had not learned its true nature. The 
name may still be found in some old writings. 

The casting of Laeral's disrobement con- 
sumes a handful of diamond dust (crushed dia- 
monds worth 3d4+1 x 1,000 gp), but the item it 
is cast on is not harmed or consumed by this 
magic. 

Notes: Restricted to the Seven Sisters, their 
apprentices, and select Harpers in the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Laeral’s Gesture 
(Alteration) 


Level: 4 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 spell of 3rd level or less 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell allows its user to cast any cur- 
rently memorized spell of 3rd level or less in a 
casting time of | without verbal or material 
components, by means of a specific complex 
gesture. The spell to be affected is chosen, the 
gesture is cast, the caster casts the modified 
spell, and then she directs the effects of the 
chosen spell normally. 

Only one Laeral's gesture can be memorized 
by any being at a time. There is no known way 
to make this magic govern spells of greater 
than 3rd level. 

Laeral is (correctly) said to have devised this 
spell after being attacked while bathing—and 
necessarily parted from most all spell compo- 
nents—once too often. 

Notes: Known to Laeral and some other 
wizards in the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Laeral’s Invisible Blade 
(Evocation) 


Level: 8 

Range: 10 yds./level 
Components: V, 8, M 
Casting Time: 7 
Duration: | rd./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell is the result of Laeral modifying a 
spell created by one of her sisters, Alustriel’s 
sword of stars. Laeral’s spell creates an invis- 
ible, silent, long-sword-shaped construct of 
force that forms at the end of the round of cast- 
ing and attacks a chosen target creature. 

During casting, the caster decides if the 
blade will strike with her own THACO, inflict- 
ing 2d4 points of damage plus | point for each 
level the caster currently possesses, or if the 
blade will strike at THACO 7, inflicting only 
2d4 points of damage per hit. The version cho- 
sen cannot be changed after the spell is cast. 
For purposes of determining what the invisible 
blade can hit, it is considered a +5 magical 
weapon, though it does not have any attack or 
damage bonus. 

An invisible blade cannot be seen unless or 
until it is blooded or marked with some other 
substance. Onlookers see only a creature fight- 
ing apparently empty air. Contact with any 
detection spell, regardless of its normal func- 
tion, causes an invisible blade to become 
clearly visible. 

The blade’s first blow is always made at 
THACO 5, regardless of which version of the 


a aaa aaa eames Nh 


495 


N Laeral’s Raging Griffon f 


blade has been chosen. The blade strikes twice 
per round until the spell expires or the caster 
chooses a new target creature. Because a crea- 
ture concentrating on detecting (and parrying) 
the blade can see disturbances in the air as the 
edges of the force move, the creature suffers no 
Armor Class penalty for not being able to see 
the blade. Only those within 10 feet of the 
blade can see the disturbances. 

However, if the blade is fought in complete 
(or magical) darkness, the standard Armor 
Class penalties apply and the blade itself 
strikes at a THACO of 5. 

An invisible blade flies at MV 21 (A), has 
AC —2, and has 22 hit points. It vanishes if 
destroyed by physical attacks. Magical attacks 
have no effect on it at all, save that a successful 
dispel magic or a properly worded limited wish 
or wish can make it vanish. 

The magical blade fights by itself, and does 
not require the caster’s attention once created, 
except when the caster desires the sword to 
switch targets. Every time a new creature is cho- 
sen, the caster cannot cast spells on the round in 
which that choice is made. The round must be 
spent concentrating on the blade and the new 
creature, which must be within spell range of 
and visible to the caster at the time the choice is 
made. An invisible blade can follow a being any- 
where on the same plane, though long distance 
teleportation causes the magic to expire before 
the pursuing sword reaches its target. 

The material components of this spell are 
any metal-bladed weapon, which is consumed 
in the casting, and a clear rock crystal. 

Notes: Restricted to the Seven Sisters, their 
apprentices, and select Harpers in the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Laeral’s Raging Griffon 
(Evocation) 


Level: 3 

Range: 10 ft-/level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 3 
Duration: 9 rds. 

Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell calls into being a translucent, 
utterly silent, obviously magical construct that is 
an extension of the caster’s will and acts with 
precise loyalty to the caster’s desires. The caster 
can ride it if desired, see through its eyes when- 
ever desired (though not to cast spells through 


it), or command it to fight the caster’s foes. 

Beings other than the caster can ride the 
griffon—and even drop onto its back from 
above, against the caster’s wishes—but the 
caster can make the griffon vanish instantly at 
will. The griffon also disappears if destroyed 
by cumulative damage. It can fight a creature 
of the caster’s choice until it or the creature is 
destroyed, or the caster changes its target. The 
caster can change the griffon’s target in any 
round that she does not cast another spell. The 
griffon can move any distance from the caster 
without contact—or control—being lost. The 
spell range is how far away from the caster the 
griffon can be made to appear when the spell is 
cast. A real griffon does not recognize a raging 
griffon as a griffon or a living creature, nor 
views it as a threat unless attacked by it. 

The material component of this spell is a 
griffon feather or a tuft of hair from a griffon’s 
tail. 

Notes: Restricted to the Seven Sisters, their 
apprentices, and select Harpers in the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Lamentable Belaborment, 
Leomund’s 
See Leomund’s lamentable belaborment. 


Lance of Disruption 
(Invocation/Evocation) 
(Air, Force) 


Level: 3 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 3 

Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: 5 ft. x 60 ft, 
Saving Throw: 4 


This spell creates a beam of concussive, dis- 
rupting force that lashes out from the wizard’s 
hand in a path 5 feet wide and 60 feet long. Any 
creatures caught in the beam’s path suffer 5d4 
points of damage, plus 2 points of damage per 
caster level, to a maximum of 5d4+20; for 
example, a 6th-level wizard would inflict 
5d4+12 damage with the lance of disruption. 
Victims are allowed a saving throw vs. spell for 


ta Rr ae mT oc ae ne ae 


496 


E E E a 


half damage. The lance’s energy delivers a pow- 
erful blow against inanimate objects and can 
easily blast light furniture, thin wooden walls, or 
fragile stonework to flinders. Even sturdy iron- 
bound doors or heavy stonework can be seri- 
ously damaged by the lance of disruption. 

Creatures with amorphous or nonsolid bod- 
ies, such as fire or air elementals and some 
oozes and slimes, are resistant to the lance’s 
effects. These sustain only half damage, or 
one-quarter damage with a successful saving 
throw. 

Notes: Uncommon spell (PO.:SM). 


Landscape of Spell Lore 
A Mysrara setting spell, aka spell sense. 


Lapis Bonds 
(Invocation/Evocation) 
(Force) 


Level: 5 

Range: 10 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 5 

Duration: | turn + | rd./level 
Area of Effect: 10-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


With lapis bonds, a wizard conjures blue 
rings of magical energy that encircle creatures 
or objects. A caster can create one ring for 
every five experience levels. While the wizard 
dictates the size of these magical rings upon 
casting the spell, they cannot exceed a radius 
of 1 foot per caster level. Creatures the caster 
wishes to bind in the rings are allowed saving 
throws vs. spell, modified by the defensive 
adjustment from the character’s Dexterity score 
to avoid them. Target creatures must be together 
within a 10-foot radius sphere. 

Once created, these azure rings stay fixed in 
space. They remain immune to all forces, 
including gravity. Nothing short of a wish can 
cause them to change size or position, although 
they can be dispelled. A ring that tightly encir- 
cles even one leg or arm pins the character to 
the spot (though target creatures can move the 
rest of their bodies normally). The caster can 
try to place the rings so that they completely 
bind a creature’s legs or arms, but creatures 
then receive a +1 bonus to their saving throws. 
Note, however, that a wizard creating multiple 
rings can cast them all on a single creature, 
requiring that creature to make multiple saving 
throws. 


The spellcaster does not have to create /apis 
bonds around something; when a creature suc- 
cessfully avoids a ring, the bond still appears. 
Their immobility makes the bonds useful for 
anchoring ropes or aiding in climbing. 

The material component is one silver ring 
worth at least 10 gp for every ring to be created. 

Notes: Rare spell, originally from the MysTARA 
campaign setting. 


Lapse 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
(Artifice) 

Level: 4 
Range: 0 


Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: Until triggered, then 1d4+1 rds. 
Area of Effect: | creature 

Saving Throw: Special 


This insidious spell that affects memorized 
spells is not cast directly upon its subject. 
Rather, a small object receives the dweomer, 
then delivers its magical charge to the first 
creature that touches it. Typical triggers are a 
comb, a wine cup, a ring, a paving stone—any 
solid object of relatively small size. The first 
creature that touches the trigger is affected, 
with no saving throw allowed at that time. The 
subject is unaware of the effect, though subse- 
quent spells such as detect charm will discover 
something is amiss. 

Once triggered, the spell causes a lapse in 
the victim’s memorization of spells, to occur at 
some future time (an inconvenient time, the 
caster hopes, but there are no guarantees). 
Whenever the recipient attempts to cast a 
memorized spell (as opposed to a spell read 
from a scroll or cast from a magical item), the 
lapse comes into effect. Any spellcaster, 
including wizards, priests, rangers, paladins, 
bards, etc., can be affected, and even monsters 
that keep spellbooks and cast memorized spells 
(as opposed to innate spell-like abilities)—that 
is, certain dragons, liches, titans, etc.—are sub- 
ject to this spell. Natural flight abilities, breath 
weapons, and other special abilities are not 
affected. 

An affected creature preparing to cast a spell 
must make a saving throw vs. spell. Failure 
indicates a malfunction of memory lasting 2-5 
rounds, during which time the spellcaster can- 
not think of any spells at all. These are not lost, 
however. Once the /apse passes, the spellcaster 


a ye ae ee mr ane eae ee a 


497 


> Last Resort, Mycontil’s "d 


can then cast spells normally. 

A successful saving throw does not negate 
the /apse spell. The creature must try a saving 
throw each time a spell is attempted, until a 
failure occurs. A successful dispel magic or 
remove curse negates this dweomer. 

Notes: Very rare spell. Known to be in the 
Cyclopedia Phantastica Vol. II. (Updated from 
DRAGON Magazine.) 


Last Resort, Mycontil’s 
See Mycontil’s last resort. 


Lasting Breath 
(Alteration) 
(Air, Water) 


Level: 1 

Range: 5 yds./level 
Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 1 

Duration: 1d4 rds. + | rd./level 
Area of Effect: | creature/level 
Saving Throw: None 


oe 


498 


This spell increases the amount of time a 
character can hold his breath. As described in 
the Player’s Handbook, a character can hold 
his breath for a number of rounds equal to one- 
third his Constitution score. The effect of this 
spell is added to that figure. 

The duration of the spell is always unknown 
to the recipient; the DM secretly rolls 1d4 to 
determine the exact duration. At the end of this 
time, the character must make a successful 
Constitution check or be forced to take a breath 
as per the rules. 

Notes: Uncommon spell (ToM). 


Leadfoot 
Reversed form, see featherfoot. 
Legend Lore 
(Divination) 
Level: 6 
Range: 0 


Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: Special 
Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


The legend lore spell is used to determine 
legendary information regarding a known per- 
son, place, or thing. If the person or thing is at 
hand, or if the wizard is in the place in ques- 
tion, the likelihood of the spell producing 
results is far greater and the casting time is 
only 1d4 turns. If only detailed information on 
the person, place, or thing is known, casting 
time is 1d10 days. If only rumors are known, 
casting time is 2d6 weeks. 

During the casting, the wizard cannot engage 
in activities other than the routine: eating, 
sleeping, etc. When completed, the divination 
reveals if legendary material is available. It 
often reveals where this material is—by place 
name, rhyme, or riddle. It sometimes gives cer- 
tain information regarding the person, place, or 
thing (when the object of the /egend lore is at 
hand), but this data is always in some cryptic 
form (rhyme, riddle, anagram, cipher, sign, 
etc.). Naturally, a legend lore spell reveals 
information only if the person, place, or thing 
is noteworthy or legendary. 

For example, suppose Delsenora came across 
an extremely well-made sword. It radiates 
magic, but when she used an identify spell, she 
could not learn any information. Even giving it 
to a trusted fighter didn’t work, as the sword 


~ Leomund’s Lamentable Belaborment A 


did not reveal any special powers. Finally, she 
casts a legend lore spell, hoping to gain more 
information. Since the sword is at hand, she 
completes the spell in three turns. In her mind 
comes the message, “Once this was the sword 
of he who waits till Albion’s time of greatest 
peril, when unto his hand it shall fly again. Fair 
was the hand that gave me and fair was the 
hand that reclaimed me.” Clearly, Delsenora 
realizes, this must be a very powerful item, 
since her spell gave only a cryptic answer. But 
who is he who waits? And where is Albion? For 
more information, Delsenora is going to have 
to cast more spells. But now the process will 
take much longer, since she has only the 
vaguest of clues to follow. 

The legend lore spell is cast with incense 
and strips of ivory formed into a rectangle, but 
some item of value to the caster must be sacri- 
ficed in addition—a potion, magical scroll, 
magical item, etc. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Leomund’s Hidden Lodge 
(Alteration, Enchantment/Charm) 


Level: 5 

Range: 20 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: | turn 
Duration: 1 d4 hrs. + 1 hr./level 
Area of Effect: 30 sq. ft./level 
Saving Throw: None 


Similar in most regards to the 4th-level spell 
Leomund’s secure shelter, this spell offers one 
significant improvement: the shelter is perfectly 
camouflaged to blend in with whatever terrain or 
surroundings are appropriate. It may appear as a 
house-sized boulder in rocky or mountainous 
areas, a sand dune, a deadfall, a small grassy 
knoll, or even a mighty tree. The spell also con- 
ceals all telltale signs of habitation, including 
smoke, light, or sound from within the lodge. 
Creatures or characters who are exceptionally 
well-tuned to their surroundings (elves, druids, 
rangers, and various sylvan monsters) may be 
allowed a saving throw vs. spell to spot the hid- 
den lodge if they pass within 30 feet; all other 
creatures cannot find the wizard’s refuge without 
the aid of true seeing or similar magic. 

In all other respects, the hidden lodge resem- 
bles Leomund's secure shelter. The interior is 
level, clean, and dry, and the whole thing is 
sturdily constructed from timber, stone, or sod. 
It is secure against winds of up to 100 miles 


per hour, impervious to normal missiles, and 
the doors, windows, and chimney are wizard 
locked and guarded by an alarm spell. Simple 
furnishings include up to ten bunks, a small 
writing desk, a trestle table and benches, and 
an unseen servant to wait on the wizard. If any 
of the optional secondary spells are added, the 
casting time goes up by one hour. 

The material components are a square chip 
of stone, crushed lime, a few grains of sand, a 
sprinkle of water, and a splinter of wood, plus a 
crushed diamond worth at least 100 gp. If the 
secondary spells are to be included, their mate- 
rial components are required also. 

Notes: Uncommon or rare spell (PO:SM). 


Leomund’s Lamentable 
Belaborment 
(Enchantment, Evocation) 
(Song) 


Level: 5 

Range: 10 yds. 
Components: V 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 10-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: Special 


This devious spell distracts the subject crea- 
tures by drawing them into an absorbing dis- 
cussion on topics of interest to them. A chain 
of responses occurs during the next 11 rounds, 
with additional saving throws as described 
later. These responses are conversation (rounds 
1-3), possible confusion (rounds 4—6), and 
then either rage or lamentation (rounds 7-11). 
All saving throws are affected by the creatures’ 
Intelligences, as noted later. The subject crea- 
tures must be able to understand the language 
in which the spellcaster speaks. 

Upon casting the spell, the wizard begins 
discussion of some topic germane to the crea- 
ture or creatures to be affected. Those making a 
successful saving throw vs. spell are unaf- 
fected. Affected creatures immediately begin to 
converse with the spellcaster, agreeing or dis- 
agreeing, all most politely. As long as the spell- 
caster chooses, he can maintain the spell by 
conversing with the subject(s). If the caster is 
attacked or otherwise distracted, the subject 
creatures do not notice. 


aaa ea al a E 


499 


Intelligence Saving Throw Modifier 
2 or less Spell has no effect 
3-7 -=l 
8-10 0 
11-14 +1 
15+ +2 


The wizard can leave at any time after the 
casting and the subject(s) continue on as if the 
caster were still present. As long as they are not 
attacked, the creatures ignore all else going on 
around them, spending their time talking and 
arguing to the exclusion of other activities. 
However, when the caster leaves, each subject 
completes only the stage of the spell that it is 
currently in, and then the spell is broken. 

If the caster maintains the spell for more 
than three rounds, each affected creature can 
roll another saving throw vs. spell. Those fail- 
ing to save wander off in confusion for 1d10+2 
rounds, staying away from the spellcaster. 
Those who make this saving throw continue to 
talk and roll saving throws for each round that 
the caster continues the spell, up through the 
sixth round, to avoid the confusion effect. 

If the spell is maintained for more than six 
rounds, each subject must roll a successful saving 
throw vs, spell to avoid going into a rage, attack- 


ing all other subjects of the spell with intent to 
kill. This rage lasts for 1d4+1 rounds. Those who 
successfully save against the rage effect realize 
that they have been deceived and collapse to the 
ground, lamenting their foolishness, for 1d4 
rounds unless attacked or otherwise disturbed. 
Notes: Common or uncommon spell (PHB). 


Leomund’s Secret Chest 
(Alteration, Conjuration/Summoning) 
(Dimension) 

Level:.5 

Range: Special 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: | turn 

Duration: 60 days 

Area of Effect: One chest, about 2 x 2 x 3 ft. 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell enables a specially constructed 
chest to be hidden deep within the Ethereal 
Plane, to be summoned using a small model of 
the chest. The large chest must be exception- 
ally well-crafted and expensive, constructed for 
the caster by master craftsmen. If made princi- 
pally of wood, it must be ebony, rosewood, san- 
dalwood, teak, or the like, and all of its corner 
fittings, nails, and hardware must be platinum. 
If constructed of ivory, the metal fittings of the 
chest must be gold. If the chest is fashioned 
from bronze, copper, or silver, its fittings must 
be electrum or silver. The cost of such a chest 
is never less than 5,000 gp. Once it is con- 
structed, the wizard must have a tiny replica (of 
the same materials and perfect in every detail) 
made, so that the miniature of the chest appears 
to be a perfect copy. One wizard can have but 
one pair of these chests at any given time— 
even wish spells do not allow exceptions! The 
chests themselves are nonmagical, and can be 
fitted with locks, wards, and so on, just as any 
normal chest. 

While touching the chest and holding the 
tiny replica, the caster chants the spell. This 
causes the large chest to vanish into the Ethe- 
real Plane. The chest can contain | cubic foot 
of material per level of the wizard no matter 
what its apparent size. Living matter makes it 
75% likely that the spell fails, so the chest is 
typically used for securing valuable spell 
books, magical items, gems, etc. As long as the 
spellcaster has the small duplicate of the magi- 
cal chest, he can recall the large one from the 
Ethereal Plane whenever the chest is desired. If 
the miniature of the chest is lost or destroyed, 
there is no way, not even with a wish spell, that 


TI aes SRE aN 


500 


E Leomund'’'s Tiny Hut ‘A 


the large chest can return, although an expedi- 
tion might be mounted to find it. 

While the chest is in the Ethereal Plane, 
there is a cumulative 1% chance per week that 
some being finds it. This chance is reset to 1% 
whenever the chest is recalled and the spell 
recast to return it to the Ethereal Plane. If the 
chest is found, the DM must work out the 
encounter and decide how the being reacts to 
the chest (for example, it might ignore the 
chest, fully or partially empty it, or even 
exchange or add to the items present!). 

Whenever the secret chest is brought back to 
the Prime Material Plane, an ethereal window 
is opened for a variable amount of time (usu- 
ally about one turn); the window slowly dimin- 
ishes in size. When this hole opens between the 
planes, check for an ethereal encounter to see if 
a monster is drawn through. 

If the large chest is not retrieved before the 
spell duration lapses, there is a cumulative 
chance of 5% per day that the chest is lost. 

Notes: Common or uncommon spell (PHB). 


Leomund’s Secure Shelter 
(Alteration, Enchantment) 


Level: 4 

Range: 20 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 4 turns 

Duration: 1d4+1 hrs. + 1 hr./level 
Area of Effect: 30 sq. ft./level 
Saving Throw; None 


This spell enables the wizard to magically 
call into being a sturdy cottage or lodge, made 
of material that is common in the area where 
the spell is cast—stone, timber, or (at worst) 
sod. The floor area of the lodging is 30 square 
feet per level of the spellcaster, and the surface 
is level, clean, and dry. In all respects the lodg- 
ing resembles a normal cottage, with a sturdy 
door, two or more shuttered windows, and a 
small fireplace. 


"a $, 


While the lodging is secure against winds of 
up to 70 miles per hour, it has no heating or 
cooling source (other than natural insulation 
qualities). Therefore, it must be heated as a 
normal dwelling, and extreme heat adversely 
affects it and its occupants. The dwelling does, 
however, provide considerable security other- 
wise, as it is as strong as a normal stone build- 
ing, regardless of its material composition. The 
dwelling resists flames and fire as if it were 
stone, and is impervious to normal missiles 
(but not the sort cast by siege machinery or 
giants). 

The door, shutters, and even chimney are 
secure against intrusion, the former two being 
wizard locked and the latter being secured by a 
top grate of iron and a narrow flue. In addition, 
these three areas are protected by an alarm 
spell. Lastly, an unseen servant is conjured to 
provide service to the spellcaster. 

The inside of the shelter contains rude fur- 
nishings as desired by the spelicaster—up to 
eight bunks, a trestle table and benches, as 
many as four chairs or eight stools, and a writ- 
ing desk, 

The material components of this spell are a 
square chip of stone, crushed lime, a few 
grains of sand, a sprinkling of water, and sev- 
eral splinters of wood. These must be aug- 
mented by the components of the alarm and 
unseen servant spells if these benefits are to be 
included (string and silver wire and a small 
bell). 

Notes: Common or uncommon spell (PHB). 


Leomund’s Tiny Hut 
(Alteration) 


Level: 3 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 3 

Duration: 4 hrs. + 1 hr./level 

Area of Effect: 15-ft. diameter sphere 
Saving Throw: None 


When this spell is cast, the wizard creates an 
unmoving, opaque sphere of force of any 
desired color around his person. Half of the 
sphere projects above the ground, and the lower 
hemisphere passes through the ground. Up to 
seven other man-sized creatures can fit into the 
field with its creator; they can freely pass into 
and out of the hut without harming it. However, 
if the spellcaster removes himself from the hut, 
the spell dissipates. 


N Leomund’s Trap a 


The temperature inside the hut is 70° F, if the 
exterior temperature is between 0° and 100° F, 
An exterior temperature below 0° or above 
100° lowers or raises, respectively, the interior 
temperature on a 1°-for-1° basis. The tiny hut 
also provides protection against the elements, 
such as rain, dust, sandstorms, and the like. 
The hut can withstand any wind of less than 
hurricane force without being harmed, but 
wind force greater than that destroys it. 

The interior of the hut is a hemisphere; the 
spellcaster can illuminate it dimly upon com- 
mand, or extinguish the light as desired. Note 
that although the force field is opaque from the 
outside, it is transparent from within. Missiles, 
weapons, and most spell effects can pass 
through the hut without affecting it, although 
the occupants cannot be seen from outside the 
hut. The hut can be dispelled. 

The material component for this spell is a 
small crystal bead that shatters when the spell 
duration expires or the hut is dispelled. 

Notes: Common or uncommon spell (PHB). 


Leomund’s Trap 
(illusion/Phantasm) 
(Artifice) 


Level: 2 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 3 rds. 

Duration: Permanent 

Area of Effect: Object touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This false trap is designed to fool a thief or 
other character attempting to pilfer the spell- 
caster’s goods. The wizard places the spell 
upon any small mechanism or device, such as a 
lock, hinge, hasp, screw-on cap, ratchet, etc. 
Any character able to detect traps, or who uses 
any spell or device enabling trap detection, is 
100% certain a real trap exists. Of course, the 
spell is illusory and nothing happens if the trap 
is sprung; its primary purpose is to frighten 
away thieves or make them waste precious 
time. 

The material component of the spell is a 
piece of iron pyrite touched to the object to be 
trapped while the object is sprinkled with a 
special dust requiring 200 gp to prepare. If 
another Leomund'’s trap is within 50 feet when 
the spell is cast, the casting fails. 

Notes: Common or uncommon spell (PHB). 


Lessen Gravity 
(Alteration) 
(Alchemy) 


Level: 3 

Range: 0 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: | rd. 
Duration: 3 hrs,/level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


By use of this spell, the caster can reduce 
gravity to one quarter of its normal pull in a 
given area. A 3rd level caster can affect a 10 x 
10-foot area; an additional 10 x 10 square can 
be affected for each two levels of the caster 
above third (two squares at Sth level, three at 
7th level, etc.). A zone of reduced gravity 60 
feet high is created. This spell is useful primar- 
ily in arcane researches, where a reduction of 
gravity might enhance certain alchemical 
processes or reagents. 

Birds and other flying creatures may have 
trouble compensating for the effects of-the 
spell because their wings will push them higher 
than normal. Those using such spells as fly or 
levitate cannot move faster in the area, though 
they can carry more weight. Missiles fired 
through the area are unaffected; their inertia 
maintains their normal speed and height. A 
missile fired or thrown within the area, how- 
ever, can travel much higher. Lessen gravity 
does not lend itself to permanency. 

Consecutive castings of the spell are cumu- 
lative in effect. Beings unused to lower gravity 
are somewhat disoriented in the spell’s area of 
effect, suffering a penalty of +2 to initiative 
and —1 to attack rolls in combat. In an area 
under the cumulative effects of two lessen 
gravity spells, penalties are +4 to initiative and 
—1 to attack rolls. 

An area affected by three or more such 
spells is basically a weightless environment 
(1.5% normal gravity), and penalties are +6 to 
initiative and —2 to attack rolls for those unused 
to this effect. 

Note: Further optional information on 
weightlessness can be found on page 14 of the 
Concordance of Arcane Space, in the 
SPELLJAMMER campaign set. 

Notes: Very rare spell from the FORGOTTEN 
REALMS setting. Known to be in Darsson's 
Notes. 


, aaa i 


502 


Lesser Geas 


Lesser Distraction — Ninja 


(Illusion) Q 


Level: 1 

Range: 5 ft./level 
Components: S 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


With this spell, the ninja causes the subject 
to hear a faint noise or see something indistinct 
out of the corner of his eye. The caster must 
decide if the illusion will be auditory or visual 
but cannot choose to further define the distrac- 
tion. It wìll be a sound, but not a footstep or a 
low moan. Or it will be a glimpse of some- 
thing, but not of a person. 

The subject must make a successful saving 
throw vs. spell at a penalty of —4 or believe the 
sight or sound to originate from a direction of 
the spellcaster’s choice. The spellcaster cannot 
choose distance. The subject can be made to 
believe that he heard a sound behind him, but 
not that it was something moving 30 feet 
behind him. He can be made to think that he 
saw motion off to his right, but not that it was 
something moving at the top of a wall 50 feet 
from him. 

The subject is free to act as he chooses on 
the illusion. He may ignore it or may be moved 
by duty or curiosity to investigate. 

Because the illusion is quick and not 
detailed, the subject has a —4 penalty to his sav- 
ing throw. If he fails the saving throw, he 
believes the sight or sound to be real but does 
not know what made it. If he makes the saving 
throw, he assumes that he was “seeing things” 
or “hearing things” and does not act on the dis- 
traction. Even if he makes his saving throw, he 
does not know that he was the target of a spell. 

This spell is used by ninja attempting an 
escape or infiltration. It is designed to encour- 
age a guard to leave his post for a moment. 

Notes: Restricted to ninja spellcasters and 
those trained by them; common. 


503 


Lesser Geas 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
(Mentalism, Song) 


Level: 4 

Range: 10 yds. 
Components: V 

Casting Time: 4 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


By means of this spell, the wizard places a 
magical command upon a creature of 7 Hit 
Dice or less to carry out some service, under- 
take a task, or refrain from some action or 
course of activity. The caster specifies the con- 
ditions of the lesser geas when he casts the 
spell; the subject creature must be intelligent, 
conscious, able to understand the caster, and 
not under the influence of any spells or effects 
that affect or control its mind. 

The lesser geas cannot compel a creature to 
kill itself or perform acts that will result in cer- 
tain death, although the wizard can use the 
spell to coerce the subject into almost any non- 
destructive course of action. The subject is 
entitled to a saving throw vs. spell to avoid a 
lesser geas, but suffers a —2 penalty on its sav- 
ing throw if the wizard is of higher level or Hit 
Dice, or a —4 penalty if the wizard is more than 
twice the creature’s level or Hit Dice. 

The wizard must be careful in the wording 
of his lesser geas since the casting and fulfill- 
ment are tricky. The subject should be given a 
tangible, achievable goal, with clear courses of 
action available to him. “Climb that moun- 
tain!” or “Tear that mountain down rock by 
rock!” are legitimate geases, but a geas such as 
“Become a mountain!” is just not specific 
enough to work. 

Similar to the 6th-level spell geas, the lesser 
geas compels the subject to obey the wizard’s 
command. If the geased creature fails to follow 
the wizard’s instructions, it will grow sick— 
each week that passes, the creature loses one 
point from each ability score, | hit point per 
Hit Die, and suffers a cumulative —1 penalty to 
attack rolls and saving throws. These penalties 
cannot reduce an ability score to less than 3, 
reduce a creature to less than 1 hit point per Hit 
Die, or reduce its attacks and saving throws 
more than 4 points. The /esser geas can be 
countered by a remove curse spell, a limited 
wish, or a wish. 

Notes: Uncommon spell (PO:SM). 


OR ee 6 ree ee ee i ne 


N Lethal Hatchling — Neogi g- 


Lesser Sign of Sealing 
(Abjuration) 
(Geometry) 


Level: 2 

Range: 0 

Components: S, M 
Casting Time: 1 turn 
Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: 1 portal 
Saving Throw: 4 


By using this spell, the caster creates a mag- 
ical ward that has two major effects. First, it 
affects a doorway or item that opens (a chest, 
for instance) as if it were a hold portal spell, 
keeping it securely locked and closed. Second, 
if the protected doorway is forced open by any 
means, magical or physical, the sign is not only 
destroyed, but also strikes the offending crea- 
ture for 1d8 points of damage +1 point of dam- 
age per level of the caster. The duration of this 
spell is either one day per level of the caster or 
until discharged, whichever happens first. The 
exact form of energy is chosen by the caster 
upon creating the lesser sign; acid, cold, fire, 
electricity, or sonic disruption are popular 
choices. 

The sign is not hidden or concealed in any 
way and is usually quite prominent on the item 
or portal it protects. The caster cannot specify 
particular creatures or conditions for the lesser 
sign's operation; it functions against any crea- 
ture that attempts to pass it (except for extra- 
planar creatures of 6 HD or more and wizards 
of higher level than the caster—they can 
merely ignore it as if it was not there). 

The lesser sign of sealing cannot be dis- 
pelled by spells of lower spell levels such as 
knock, but the caster can remove it any time he 
chooses, thus ending the spell, or it can be 
defeated by an erase spell cast by a wizard of 
equal or higher level than the original caster. 

The material component for a /esser sign of 
sealing can be a pinch of either powdered dia- 
mond (cold), ruby (fire), emerald (acid), pearl 
(sonic disruption), or sapphire (electricity), 
depending on the type of energy the wizard 
wishes the sign to employ. The value of the 
gemstone powder must be at least 100 gold 
pieces. 

Notes: Uncommon spell (PO:SM). 


Lesser Spelldream 
(Invocation, Ilusion/Phantasm) 


Level: 4 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: | turn 
Duration: | turn/level 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell is only effective upon sleeping 
beings. It allows the caster to remove any spells 
of 4th level or less already in effect on the 
recipient (such as charm person or change 
self). The spell effects are unraveled slowly, 
without doing harm to the caster of the spell- 
dream or the recipient, and without triggering 
any spelitraps or defensive effects. This occurs 
during an enforced slumber, which can be bro- 
ken by any physical attack on the recipient 
(such an event will jolt the recipient into 
instant alertness). This enforced slumber is 
accompanied by dreams, and the caster of this 
spell can choose one image per level to feature 
in these dreams (typically, the caster shapes a 
sequence of images showing the recipient how 
they came to be enspelled, or why the caster 
has chosen to remove those spells). 

While a spelldream is unfolding in the recip- 
ient’s mind, the target creature cannot be con- 
tacted or influenced by any other being. Thus, a 
wizard can pass information to a recipient who 
is under magical thought surveillance without 
risk of the information being detected. 

When the spell is cast, the recipient is 
allowed a saving throw vs. spell with a —4 
penalty. A successful saving throw negates the 
spell, and the intended recipient instantly 
awakens. 

Notes: Common for Dream mages; otherwise 
very rare. (Updated from DraGoN Magazine.) 


Lethal Hatchling — Neogi 


(Necromancy) 


Level: 5 

Range: 10 yds. 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: | rd. 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: | creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


Upon utterance of this spell, the caster con- 
jures up a small egg, | inch in diameter, which 


fe 


505 


N Leviathan — Elf Me 


fires outward from the caster toward a target 
creature. The creature is allowed a saving 
throw vs. death magic. A successful saving 
throw negates the spell. Failure indicates a 
most gruesome fate: The egg enters the crea- 
ture’s body and begins to grow. For the next 
four rounds, the creature is allowed another 
saving throw vs. death magic each round at a 
—2 cumulative penalty (that is, —2 for the first 
save after the egg enters the body, —4 for the 
second, etc.). Each failed saving throw cause 
the loss of 25% of the creature’s original hit 
point total. If the creature makes a successful 
saving throw during this time, the spell is 
halted, the egg’s growth stops, and then it dete- 
riorates. If the creature dies, a newborn neogi 
erupts out of its body. 

Some neogi wizards have been known to 
cast this spell to replace neogi lost in earlier 
combats. This is a rare occurrence, however; 
more commonly a slave is sacrificed instead. 

Notes: Restricted to neogi; uncommon. 


Leviathan — Elf 
(Elven High Magic) 


Level: 8 

Range: 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: | turn 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell summons gigantic sea creatures to 
aid elven ships and fleets at sea. When cast, 
roll 1d10 and refer to the chart to determine the 
type and number of creatures that arrive. The 
creatures will arrive in 1-10 turns and fight for 
as long as needed, even to the death. 


Die Roll Type 
1-5 1d8 Common Whales 
6-8 1d2 Giant Whales 
9-0 1 Leviathan 


The material components of this spell are a 
small carving of a whale and a gold ring. 

Notes: Restricted to elves able to cast elven 
High Magic. Used for the defense of the elven 
homeland (for example, Evermeet Island). 


Levitate 
(Alteration) 
(Force) 


Level: 2 

Range: 20 yds./level 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 2 

Duration: | turn/level 

Area of Effect: 1 creature or object 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


When a /evitate spell is cast, the wizard can 
place it upon his person, an object, or a single 
creature, subject to a maximum weight limit of 
100 pounds per level of experience (for example, 
a 3rd-level wizard can levitate a maximum of 300 
pounds). If the spell is cast upon the wizard, he 
can move vertically up or down at a movement 
rate of 2 per round. If cast upon an object or 
another creature, the wizard can levitate it at the 
same speed, according to his command. This 
spell does not empower horizontal movement, but 
the recipient could push along the face of a cliff, 
for example, to move laterally. The spellcaster 
can cancel the spell as desired. If the subject of 
the spell is unwilling, or the object is in the pos- 
session of a creature, a saving throw vs. spell is 
allowed to determine if the evitate spell affects it. 

Once cast, the spell requires no concentra- 
tion, except when changing height. A levitating 
creature attempting to use a missile weapon 
finds himself increasingly unstable; the first 
attack has an attack roll penalty of —1, the sec- 
ond -—2, the third —3, etc., up to a maximum of 
-5. A full round spent stabilizing allows the 
creature to begin again at —1. Lack of leverage 
makes it impossible to cock a heavy crossbow. 

The material component of this spell is 
either a small leather loop or a piece of golden 
wire bent into a cup shape with a long shank on 
one end. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Lich Armor 
(Necromancy) 


Level: 4 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 4 

Duration: 2 rds./level 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


A development of the spirit armor spell, this 
spell surrounds the wizard with a portion of his 


506 


x Life Bolt A 


own life essence, which appears as a black 
shroud of shadow that mystically flows around 
his body. It guards the caster against both mag- 
ical and nonmagical weapons and attacks, 
without hindering movement or interfering 
with spellcasting. The spell protects the caster 
as well as plate armor (base AC 3), with a +3 
bonus to saving throws against magical attacks, 
and is cumulative with spells and protective 
devices that add to a base AC. 

At the end of the spell, the caster must 
attempt a saving throw vs. spell or temporarily 
lose a portion of the life energy used to create 
the lich armor. Failure inflicts 2d6 points of 
damage. Hit points lost in this fashion can be 
restored only through magical healing. 

Notes: Uncommon for necromancers and 
undead spellcasters; otherwise very rare. Origi- 
nally from the RAVENLOFT setting. 


Lich Touch 
At least six different spells have had this name 
or effect. Close versions have been combined 
into single spells; see also improved chill 
touch and improved vampiric touch, which are 
from the RAVENLOFT setting. 


Lich Touch 
(Necromancy) 


Level: 6 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 6 
Duration: | rd./Jevel 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: Special 


By means of this spell the wizard gains both 
the chilling touch attack of a lich and invulner- 
ability to several special attack forms. The 
caster is immune to all types of paralysis and 
fear for the duration of the spell. When the lich 
touch is in operation, the hands of the caster 
glow with an unearthly greenish brilliance. 

The caster can touch individuals and affect 
them as a lich would, inflicting both 1d10 
points of damage and paralyzing the individual 
unless a successful saving throw vs. paralysis 
is made. The touch damage is always taken, 
even by undead and creatures immune to paral- 
ysis. Those paralyzed by this spell remain so 
for 2d4 hours or until the paralysis is countered 
by a dispel magic, remove paralysis, or similar 
magic. The lich touch spell cannot be ended 
before its duration expires. The caster affects 


everyone touched, its effects cannot be volun- 
tarily suppressed. 

The material components of this spell are a 
scrap of rotting meat or fish. 

Notes: This standard form of the spell origi- 
nated in the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. It is 
uncommon for necromancers; otherwise very 
rare. It is known to be in the lich Kyristan’s 
tome, Studies in Death. 


Lichdom 
Lost knowledge. This achieving this state 
requires a long, involved, highly dangerous, 
and evil series of magical experiments. No one 
spell creates this state. See appendix section 
for more information. 


Life Bolt 
(Alteration, Necromancy) 


Level: 4 

Range: 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 6 

Duration: Permanent 

Area of Effect: 1 undead creature 
Saving Throw: % 


This spell uses the energy of the caster’s own 
life force offensively against undead. The spell 
has no effect on living creatures. By holding an 
open palm toward the undead creature and utter- 
ing the incantation, the caster sends a pulse of 
living energy toward the undead (color of the 
energy depends on the caster’s general align- 
ment; lawful is white, chaotic is red, and neutral 
is blue). The caster sacrifices 1d4 hit points to 
cast this spell; for each hit point lost, the caster 
causes 1d6 points of damage to the undead tar- 
get. The undead creature is allowed a saving 
throw vs. spell against this attack, with success- 
ful saving throws limiting the damage to half. 

Stavros of the Skulls created this spell years 
ago after nearly losing his life to zombies that 
broke free of his control. He gave this spell to 
the Watchful Order of Magists & Protectors as 
part of his penance for damages to Waterdeep. 
Devotees of Mystra, especially priests and 
mages affiliated with the House of Wonder, are 
eager to learn this spell, as Meleghost Starseer, 
the Magister of Mystra, holds this up as an 
example of how “Mystra grants us the power to 
protect life through our own sacrifices!” 

Notes: Known to Stavros of the Skulls and 
the Watch-Wizards and Guild of Waterdeep in 
the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


i ee 


507 


N Life Extension A 


Life Extension 
Athasian Dragon-King magic; 
psionic component renders the wie 
spell uncastable by wizards. 


Life Field 
(Alteration, Necromancy) 
Reversible 


Level: 5 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 2 

Duration: | rd./3 levels 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


Stavros of the Skulls’ final spell created for 
the Lords of Waterdeep is his most potent cre- 
ation. By marshaling their own life forces, wiz- 
ards can surround their bodies and handheld 
items or weapons with a shining blue radiance 
known as a life field. Once summoned, the 
spell remains in effect without concentration, 
allowing the mage to attack or cast further 
spells. If the caster attacks undead with a 
weapon covered in a /ife field, weapon damage 
is doubled in addition to the caster’s level in 
points of damage (that is, a 7th-level mage’s 
quarterstaff wrapped in a /ife field deals 2d6+7 
points of damage to undead). Missile weapons 
act normally since they move beyond the field’s 
range. If undead simply come into contact with 
a life field (that is, not one used jointly with an 
attack, or a hand-to-hand attack against some- 
one with an active /ife field), they must make a 
saving throw or take damage equal to the 
caster’s level due to living energy counteract- 
ing their undead state. 

While this spell does not affect living crea- 
tures (damage dealt is normal), further research 
has uncovered the reverse of this spell, death 
field, which is now in use by a number of evil 
mages including Stavros. All the effects visited 
upon undead are now usable on living targets; 
the death field is a shimmering, dark purple 
field of energy. The Watch-Wizards of Water- 
deep have been instructed to arrest anyone seen 
using this version of the spell. 

Notes: Known to Stavros of the Skulls and 
the Watch-Wizards and Guild of Waterdeep in 
the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting; uncommon. 


Life Force Exchange 
(Necromancy) 
Reversible 


Level: 9 

Range: 60 yds. 
Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 9 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 2 creatures 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell permanently switches the life 
forces of two creatures (one of which may be 
the caster). Both subjects must be within range 
at the spell is completed, or it fails automati- 
cally. When employed correctly, both creatures 
are surrounded by a radiant green aura and 
must save vs. spell at —6 to avoid the effects 
(obviously, willing subjects may forego the 
saving throw to consciously accept the effect). 

The spell functions properly only if both 
subjects fail their saving throws. If only one 
fails the save, then the one who made the sav- 
ing throw is automatically stunned (reeling and 
unable to take action) for 1 round. Meanwhile, 
the other (the one who failed the save) is 
stunned for 1d4 rounds. 

In the event of a successful transfer, both life 
forces retain all of their original mental abili- 
ties and behavioral patterns, although their 
physical abilities are limited (or possibly 
enhanced) by their new forms. For instance, a 
decrepit necromancer uses this spell to 
exchange bodies with a hale young warrior in 
the prime of his health. While the wizard gains 
a young and vigorous body (and all of the ben- 
efits that go with it), the unfortunate youth 
finds himself trapped in the withering shell of 
a dying old man. Creatures unaccustomed to 
being shifted in this way are stunned for a min- 
imum of | round after the transfer. 

The effects of this spell are permanent and 
can be reversed only by a full wish or by the 
reverse of the spell. If one of the bodies is slain 
before reversal can take place, the life force 
inhabiting that body departs. That spirit and its 
new body are dead, just as if the spirit was in 
the body that actually belonged to it in the first 
place. The life force originally belonging to the 
slain body is now irreversibly trapped in its 
new form. Short of expending two wishes (one 
to restore the slain body, and the second to 
transfer the life force), the only way to now 
restore the subject to his or her rightful body is 
by cloning the original body and casting the 


ae tae 


508 


x Life Force Transfer A 


\ Ni 


oat \ 


IN ii 


reversed form of this spell. 
The reversed form, revoke life force 
exchange, undoes the effect of the spell. 
Notes: Uncommon for necromancers; other- 
wise very rare. 


Life Force Transfer 
(Necromancy) 
(Artificer) 
Reversible 


Level: 8 

Range: 10 ft. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: Special (8 rds.) 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


Upon completion of this long and highly- 
versatile incantation, the caster permanently 
transfers a creature’s life force (even his or her 
own) into a specially fabricated item, a magical 
receptacle, or the body of another individual. 
Once the transfer has been completed, the sub- 
ject’s body falls into a cataleptic state, and 
remains in a death-like trance or coma for 2 to 


7 days. Unless the subject's life force is 
reunited with the body during that time, the 
body dies, and the life force is permanently 
trapped within the physical object or new body. 

While in the physical receptacle, the crea- 
ture can perform any action permitted by the 
new form. In an item such as a ring or a sword, 
the subject can communicate with the user 
when the receptacle is held or worn properly. 
The extent of communication depends on the 
subject’s Intelligence (see table). 


Int Communication 
3-11 None 

12-13 Semi-Empathy 
14-16 Empathy 

17+ Telepathy 


Individuals of low or average Intelligence 
cannot communicate, and those of above-aver- 
age Intelligence can communicate using a 
primitive form of empathy (usually limited to a 
throb or tingle of varying intensity). At the dis- 
cretion of the DM, the life force might animate 
a specially prepared statue or golem, perhaps 
even enabling the recipient to employ any 
memorized spells. 


en sen 


509 


> Life Force Transfer — Necromancer r 


Life force transfer is sometimes the final step 
in the manufacture of a powerful magical item 
or minor artifact (usually a sword). In this 
process, a creature’s life force is transferred into 
a magical item (an unwilling subject is allowed 
a saving throw vs. death magic at —4), which is 
finally sealed with a permanency spell. 

In such an enchantment, the subject’s body 
is frequently destroyed afterward by the caster, 
forever trapping the life force in the item 
(unless the permanency is first reversed and a 
new body prepared using a clone or wish spell, 
or by similar means), If the item is destroyed 
while the subject’s life force is in it, the crea- 
ture can regain its body by making a system 
shock roll if it lies within 1 mile per level of 
the caster; otherwise, the subject’s life force 
dissipates, and the creature dies. 

Sometimes, a wizard may employ this spell 
as a final measure to protect his or her own 
life. In this version, the entire incantation and 
receptacle are prepared and cast beforehand, 
but only the final syllable of the spell is left 
unfinished. The wizard can pronounce this 
short (casting time 1) syllable at any later time, 
casting his or her life force into the recepta- 
cle—providing that it lies within range. Obvi- 
ously, this strategy only works if the receptacle 
is kept close to the wizard at all times. Further- 
more, the wizard usually must leave behind 
clues or encrypted instructions so that allies 
may later reverse the spell and restore the wiz- 
ard to his or her normal state. While the spell is 
in its unfinished state, the wizard cannot learn 
a new 8th-level spell to replace it. Aside from 
this limitation, however, the caster remains 
unaffected by the pending spell. 

Less scrupulous wizards may use this spell to 
permanently transfer a creature’s life force 
(often their own) into the body of a younger 
individual, thereby extending their own exis- 
tence. The victim is entitled to a saving throw 
vs. death magic with a —4 penalty to resist the 
effects. If failed, the victim’s life force departs, 
and the transferred life force takes permanent 
possession of the victim’s body. If the saving 
throw is successful, the spell fails without any ill 
effects to either the victim or creature (though it 
may be recast at a later date). Thus, an ancient 
necromancer may transfer his or her life force 
into the body of a vigorous younger person, 
thereby gaining all of the victim’s physical 
attributes, manual skills, and extended life span. 

The material component is a massive, blood 
red garnet (worth 5,000 gp or more). The spell 
also requires a scroll inscribed with special 


rare inks and either an expertly-crafted item or 
a living human, demihuman, or humanoid 
(preferably young and healthy) to house the 
subject’s life force. The exact nature of any 
physical receptacle should be decided by the 
DM, but it must be of quality suitable for 
enchantment. The garnet is consumed in the 
casting. This spell cannot be dispelled nor- 
mally (even in its “pending” state). If the 
receptacle was not sealed with a permanency, 
then the subject’s life force can be driven out 
with dispel evil or similar exorcising magic (in 
the event of a permanent magical receptacle, 
the item’s permanency must be first overcome 
with dispel magic). 

In rare cases, to be adjudicated by the DM, 
the life force of the victim does not depart from 
the body, but coexists in his or her body with 
that of the intruder. Such a life force may be 
able to take control of the survivor—use the 
control rules for the magic jar spell to deter- 
mine this. As before, the intruding life force 
can be ejected only by casting dispel evil or 
similar exorcising magics (or a full wish). Oth- 
erwise, at the discretion of the DM, the life 
force of the intruder might merge with that of 
the victim, diluting the recipient’s personality, 
alignment, and possibly sanity, as well. 

The reverse of this spell, revoke life force 
transfer, requires the original scroll (the one 
used in the life force transfer spell to be 
revoked), the construct, and the body of the 
recipient. Providing that the spell is cast before 
the body physically dies (within 2-7 days of 
the original separation), the reversal process 
requires a system shock roll in order to be suc- 
cessful. If failed (or if the body has already 
perished), the newly released life force dissi- 
pates, and the subject dies. 

Notes: Uncommon for necromancers and 
artificers; otherwise very rare. 


Life Force Transfer — Necromancer 
(Necromancy) 


Level: 4 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell allows the caster to transfer some 
of his life-force to another creature. When cast, 
the spell transfers | hit point per level of the 


Po eee 


510 


- Life Tether ‘A 


caster to the target creature, plus an additional 
1d4 hit points. The hit points are added to the 
creature’s current hit point total and deducted 
from the spellcaster’s. Thus, a 7th-level necro- 
mancer can transfer 8 to 11 hit points from 
himself to another creature. 

The caster can transfer only as many hit 
points as he currently has; if he transfers more, 
his current hit point total plus 1d4 hit points 
are transferred to the target, while that amount 
is subtracted from the caster’s total (and the 
caster begins to die). The creature cannot gain 
more hit points than its full normal total; extra 
hit points are merely lost. The necromancer’s 
hit point losses can be regained by normal 
healing or magic. 

After the transfer, is complete, the necro- 
mancer loses four points of Constitution tem- 
porarily; each point can be recovered by six 
turns of rest. If the caster’s Constitution drops 
below 3, unconsciousness results and full Con- 
stitution is not regained for 24 hours. The 
material component of this spell is a glass tube 
filled with the caster’s blood, which disappears 
when the spell is cast. 

Notes: Restricted to necromancers; uncom- 
mon. 


Life Sounding 
(Chronomancy) 


Level: 2 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 2 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


When life sounding is cast, the chrono- 
mancer establishes a temporary link to the sub- 
ject’s lifeline. A magical pulse is sent along the 
line in both directions, reflecting back when- 
ever it reaches the points of the recipient’s birth 
and death. 

Using the echo principle, the chronomancer 
acquires a general idea of the length of the life- 
line in each direction. If the subject’s age is 
known or can be guessed, it is then a simple 
matter of calculating the ratios to discover with 
fair accuracy how much life the person has left. 

After 6th level, the chronomancer acquires 
an innate feeling for the spell’s mystical echo 
and can instantly know the subject’s age, as 
well as how much life it has left, without hav- 
ing to make any calculations. A saving throw is 


not permitted, but physical contact must be 
maintained throughout the casting (the subject 
has to be willing or unable to struggle away). 

The material component necessary for a life 
sounding is an unblemished silver weight on a 
1-foot length of silver chain. The weight must 
be replaced with a fresh silver weight after 
every casting. 

Notes: Restricted to chronomancers; com- 
mon. 


Life Steal — Savant 
(Necromancy) 


Level: 5 

Range: Touch 
Components: V 

Casting Time; 1 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell allows the savant to leech up to 1 
hit point per level from a living (that is, not a 
construct or undead) human or humanoid and 
bestow it upon himself or another within a time 
limit of three rounds. The leeched hit points 
can increase the recipient’s hit points beyond 
his normal maximum, and last up to one hour. 
Any damage suffered is first subtracted from 
these additional hit points. 

Notes: Restricted to savants; common. 


Life Tether 
(Chronomancy) 


Level: 3 

Range: Special 
Components: S, M 
Casting Time: 3 
Duration: 5 rds./level 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


When this spell is cast on an intelligent crea- 
ture, it fastens a magical tether to the creature's 
lifeline. The creature must be close enough for 
the chronomancer to recognize it by sight, and 
it can save vs. spell to avoid the effect. This 
sets the range at 60 yards. Items such as eves of 
the eagle would extend this range, but the 
psionic power clairvoyance or any type of scry- 
ing device would not. 

If the chronomancer slips to the Demiplane 
of Time, he appears next to the creature’s life- 
line. The tether is seen as a thin white cord 


nen et a 


511 


N$ Life Water 4 


linking the two. As with timeslip, a large 
amount of turbulence may displace the caster, 
but he remains tethered to that lifeline. 

If life tether is cast directly on a lifeline, no 
saving throw is permitted. Slipping back to 
reality places the caster within 1d100 x 10 
yards of the creature. A detect temporal anom- 
aly spell leads the chronomancer right to the 
tethered creature. This application is useful in 


discovering to whom a particular lifeline 


belongs. 

The material component is a 1-foot length of 
cord braided with strands of silver. 

Notes: Restricted to chronomancers; com- 


mon, 


Life Water 
(Alteration, Necromancy) 
(Alchemy, Province: Sea) 


Level: 9 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 9 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: Up to 1 gallon 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell transforms any liquid into a 
sweet-smelling serum that heals wounds and 
cures blindness, disease, poisoning, rotting 
(including “mummy rot”), magical feeblemind- 
edness, and fungal growth (such as the trans- 
formation of flesh into green slime). Even 
life-threatening wounds are healed; lost limbs 
and organs regenerate instantly when the 
miraculous life water is applied. A severed 
head cannot be restored, however. 

As wondrous as the serum is, it cannot bring 
a slain creature back to life, nor it can it restore 
a magically transformed creature to its original 
form. 

One gallon of the serum entirely cures one 
man-sized being of all the ailments listed 
above, restoring all lost hit points in the 
process. An typical water skin filled with /ife 
water can cure one condition, or restore 3d8 
points of physical damage. Immersing even a 
partial body in life water can restore the com- 
plete form, provided the body is not dead. (Any 
leftover body parts are worthless.) 

The serum is a topical treatment. As it is 
used, it is absorbed by the recipient and disap- 
pears. A pool created by this spell can be com- 
pletely absorbed by several healings. 

Any liquid can serve as the material compo- 


nent of this spell—even a liquid devised by 
magical means. Leftover serum reverts to its 
original condition with the next setting of the 
sun. 
Notes: Restricted to casters from arabian 
settings or those trained by them. DM might 
allow research by alchemists or (optional) 
Healer mages. DM might also allow training 
by a suitable mentor, particularly characters 
native to the Anauroch region of the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Lifeblend 


(Necromancy) 


Level: 9 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: | turn 
Duration: Permanent 

Area of Effect: 2d4 creatures 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


Using this macabre spell, a wizard can cause 
two (or more) lifeforms to join together to form 
a new one. The subjects can be of any type, 
plant or animal, but must be alive. After casting 
this spell, a wizard can cast no other spells for 
24 hours. 

The subjects are placed in cages made with 
precious metals, each cage worth no less than 
2,500 gp. To cast the spell, the caster must 
touch each subject through the casting time of 
the spell. If two creatures are involved, they 
can be touched with the hands; if a third or 
even fourth creature is involved, touching them 
with the feet is possible. No more than four 
creatures can be affected by a single applica- 
tion of this spell. During casting, the wizard 
must concentrate on the desired final form of 
the combination creature (if the caster does not 
have a specific form in mind, the spell fails). 

At the end of the casting, each subject 
involved makes a saving throw vs. spell; if any 
is successful, the spell fails. If the spell fails, 
the caster must make a successful saving throw 
vs. spell, or suffer a magical backlash, taking 
on characteristics of the subjects for the next 
2d4 days. The exact nature of the change is left 
to the DM but should not be beneficial to the 
caster. 


" OOOO Ee ee 


512 


= Lifedrain — Phaerimm ag 


Lifeblend Result 

Success: The resulting creature 
looks like the caster wants it to 
look, and has more-or-less the abil- 
ities desired. 

Bonding: The target creatures are 
not melded together, but are bonded 
at some point on their bodies (for 
example, a dog and a cat bonded 
might appear to be a dog and a cat 
that share one set of legs). 
Imperfect Melding: The creatures 
are melded together, but not in the 
desired fashion; they might be 
melded in a centaur-like fashion, or 
in any other way. 
Pseudo-Lycanthropy: The creatures 
are blended together, but only one 
is dominant at any given time. Peri- 
odically, the creature changes com- 
pletely from the form of one 
subject creature to the form of 
another. 

Dominance: One creature is clearly 
dominant in the mix, but has a few 
characteristics of the other crea- 
ture(s) involved in the spell. 

Death: The creature looks exactly 
as desired, but has something 
wrong internally and cannot live. 
Vengeful: The creature is exactly as 
desired, but has a hatred for its 
creator. 

Disaster! At the last moment, one 
of the subjects pulled away, and the 
caster is pulled into the spell 
instead, becoming a part of the 
composite creature (no saving 
throw). Roll again on this table to 
find the results. 


51-60 


61-70 


71-80 


81-90 


If all subjects fail their saving throws, the 
spell is at least partially successful. Roll per- 
centile dice and consult the table for the result. 

If the spell succeeds in any way except 
death, the DM creates a new monster, with 
input from the player of the spellcaster who 
performed the lifeblend spell. Guidelines for 
monsters are in the MONSTROUS MANUAL acces- 
sory. In general terms, the monster should have 
a mixture of characteristics of its component 
beings. Possible examples of this spell include 
owlbears, bulettes, perytons, and manticores. 
The creature created has a 25% chance of 
being infertile. 

Besides the cages needed, the material com- 


ponents for this spell include one candle for 
each component creature; these are placed 
together and lit at the beginning of the casting, 
so their waxes can blend together as they melt. 
A ruby worth at least 5,000 gp must be placed 
between the candles, so the blended wax can 
cover it; it represents the heart of the composite 
beast. The ruby, candles, and cages are all con- 
sumed during casting. 

Notes: Very rare spell. Known to be in the 
tome Kyristan'’s Mysteries. 


Lifedrain — Phaerimm 
(Alteration) 


Level: 8 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 70-ft. radius sphere 
Saving Throw: None 


Use of this mighty spell is thought to have 
created much of the lifelessness at the heart of 
the vast desert of Anauroch. This spell affects 
only water in geographical form (lakes, rivers, 
oceans), or in meteorological form (rain, 
snow). It does not affect water contained in liv- 
ing things. 

A lifedrain spell destroys water within its 
area of effect—and prevents water from exist- 
ing there as well. Water cannot fall into, form 
within, condense within, or flow into the spher- 
ical area of effect of this spell. (Daring wizards 
sometimes use this spell to lay bare the bottom 
of a lake or pond, to recover a lost item, or to 
reach a sunken chest or trapdoor.) 

Living creatures find conditions within the 
area of effect to be very, very dry uncomfort- 
ably so; for each turn that one spends perform- 
ing any sort of activity except simple rest, that 
creature loses 1 hit point due to dehydration. 
(Tales are told of Phaerimm drying off wet 
slaves and items by conveying them from a 
bath through a /ifedrain sphere.) Plants cannot 
grow within a /ifedrain field and desert-like 
conditions soon occur. 

A lifedrain spell cannot be affected by dispel 
magic or water magics: only a limited wish or 
more powerful spell can destroy it. Otherwise, it 
lasts for 1 year per level of the caster (but if the 
caster should die, even on another plane or world, 
it ends earlier, at the moment of the caster’s 
death). Casting a lifedrain permanently drains 1 
hit point from the total possessed by the caster. 


fo ee a 


513 


N Lifeforce Guardian, Zala’s A 


The material components of this spell are a 
piece of bone and a fire of any sort and size. 
The bone is placed in the flames during cast- 
ing, and both are consumed in a flash by the 
spell. The spell’s area of effect forms centered 
on the caster. 

Notes: Known to phaerimm (common) and a 
few wizards of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting 
(very rare). 


Lifeforce Guardian, Zala’s 


See Zala’s lifeforce guardian. 


Lifeproof 
(Necromancy) 
Reversible 


Level: 7 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 3 turns 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This powerful incantation enables the caster 
to safely remove an intangible but vital part of 
the recipient’s life, transporting it through solid 
objects if need be. The caster places that part— 
called the “shadow of the heart”—in a closed 
glass container or a crystal. Once inside, the 
“shadow” becomes clearly visible as a translu- 
cent image of the recipient’s heart. No apparent 
change occurs in the recipient himself, 
although detect magic reveals a strong necro- 
mantic spell in operation, centering on his 
actual, still-beating heart. 

As long as the “shadow of the heart” remains 
safely within the container, the recipient’s body 
can endure any amount of physical damage. 
When reduced to 0 or fewer hit points, the 
character doesn’t fall unconscious or die; he 
just keeps on going. Saving throws, attacks, 
and Hit Dice remain the same. “Negative” hit 
points are healed normally, as if the character 
has an endless supply. 

For every 10 points of damage below 0, the 
recipient of this spell suffers a —1 penalty to 
Charisma. With sufficient loss, the character 
looks as horrid as the undead, but is otherwise 
unaffected. Charisma returns to its normal 
value when the character is healed to a positive 
level of hit points (that is, 1 or more). 

Although the recipient is effectively immune 
to magical and natural attacks that cause dam- 
age, he’s still vulnerable to other types of 


assaults (such as the death spell). He’s also vul- 
nerable to poison. He still can be polymorphed. 
If a part of his body is severed, it still functions 
independently (as long as the spell is in effect), 
allowing the recipient to reattach it. (This is 
similar to a troll’s ability.) 

The vessel or crystal holding the “shadow of 
the heart” must be within sight of the wizard as 
he’s casting the spell. Thereafter, the vessel can 
be any distance from the recipient’s body, with- 
out harm to the recipient, The crystal or glass 
is never more than 10 hit points in Strength, 
and considered AC 10 (for it to be otherwise 
would violate the energies of the spell and 
therefore void it). Destroying the container 
kills the recipient. Only a full wish or similar 
enchantment can raise him from this grisly 
death. 

The reverse of this spell, revoke lifeproof, 
brings a body and its “shadow of the heart” 
back together again. Other than a limited wish 
or wish, this is the only way to do so. The 
recipient must make a system shock roll, and if 
this fails, he dies. If the recipient’s hit points 
total 0 or fewer when revoke lifeproof is cast, 
the recipient dies a normal death. 

Wizards often cast /ifeproof on themselves 
as protection against an attack. Some cast it on 
others, ensuring that a recipient returns from a 
quest or mission to reclaim that part of his life 
that the wizard holds. 

The spell’s material component, a glass con- 
tainer or crystal, must be transparent. It also 
must be at least 1 foot in diameter to contain 
the “shadow of the heart.” 

Notes: Common for spellcasters from an 
arabian setting; otherwise very rare. 


Lifesurge — Ghul 


(Necromancy) Q ‘ 


Level: 4 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 2 rds. 
Duration: | rd./level 
Area of Effect: Individual touched 
Saving Throw: None 


Ghul lords are more than ready to lend a 
helping hand to their comrades, but often the 
hand becomes a monkey’s paw. Ghul lord 
spells can have adverse effects on a subject 
despite their beneficial intentions. 

Lifesurge is one such spell, though a ghul 
lord can cast this spell only upon a willing 


a i 


514 


ine. 
Wa) ae 


Light 


individual. When cast, the spell creates a nega- 
tive energy field within the subject’s body. This 
field forces the life force within the individual 
to surge up in defiance, affording the individ- 
ual enhanced physical abilities for the duration 
of the spell. 

For the duration of the spell, the subject is 
treated as if two levels higher for all purposes. 
Wizards do not automatically gain new spells, 
but they cast memorized spells as if two levels 
above their own. Hit points are increased, and 
THACO, saving throws, and all other level 
related abilities and bonuses are appropriately 
improved. 

When the effects of the Jifesurge wear off, 
the individual suffers damage. A successful 
saving throw vs. death magic reduces this dam- 
age by half. The damage is equal to twice the 
maximum value of the Hit Die used for their 
class. Thus, a fighter, who uses a d10 for hit 
points, suffers 20 points of damage when the 
spell wears off, 10 points if the saving throw is 
made. 

Notes: Restricted to ghul lords (most com- 
mon in an arabian setting). 


Light 
(Alteration) 


Level: 1 

Range: 60 yds. 

Components: V, M 

Casting Time: | 

Duration: 1 turn/level 

Area of Effect: 20-ft. radius globe 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell creates a luminous glow, equal to 
torchlight, within a fixed radius of the spell’s 
center. Objects in darkness beyond this sphere 
can be seen, at best, as vague and shadowy 
shapes. The spell is centered on a point selected 
by the caster, and he must have a line of sight 
and unobstructed path for the spell when it is 
cast. Light can spring from air, rock, metal, 
wood, or almost any similar substance. 

The effect is immobile unless it is specifi- 
cally centered on a moveable object or mobile 
creature. If this spell is cast upon a creature, 
the applicable magic resistance and saving 
throw rolls must be made. Successful resis- 
tance negates the spell, while a successful sav- 
ing throw indicates that the spell is centered 
immediately behind the creature, rather than 
upon the creature itself. Light taken into an 
area of magical darkness does not function, but 


Light — Pluma 


if cast directly against magical darkness 
negates it (but only for the duration of the light 
spell, if the darkness effect is continual). 

Light centered on the visual organs of a crea- 
ture blinds it, reducing its attack rolls and saving 
throws by 4 and worsening its Armor Class by 4. 
The caster can end the spell at any time by utter- 
ing a single word. Note that, unlike the |st-level 
priest spell, this spell is not reversible. 

The material component is a firefly or a 
piece of phosphorescent moss. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Light — Pluma 
This spell is identical to the 
common light spell, except 
that it is 2nd level. 


Light Step, Drawmij’s 
See Drawmij’s light step. 


Lightburst, Nystul’s 
See Nystul’s lightburst. 


Lightning Bolt 


(Evocation) 


Level: 3 

Range: 40 yds. + 10 yds./level 
Casting Time: 3 

Components: V, S, M 
Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: 4 


Upon casting this spell, the wizard releases a 
powerful stroke of electrical energy that inflicts 
1d6 points of damage per level of the spellcaster 
(maximum damage per level of 10d6) to each 
creature within its area of effect. A successful 
saving throw vs. spell reduces this damage to 
half (round fractions down). The bolt begins at a 
range and height decided by the caster and 
streaks outward in a direct line from the casting 
wizard (for example, if a 40-foot bolt was 
started at 180 feet from the wizard, the far end 
of the bolt would reach 220 feet (180 + 40). The 
lightning bolt may set fire to combustibles, sun- 
der wooden doors, splinter up to a half-foot 
thickness of stone, and melt metals with a low 
melting point (lead, gold, copper, silver, bronze). 
Saving throws must be rolled for objects that 
withstand the full force of a stroke (see the fire- 
ball spell). If the damage caused to an interpos- 
ing barrier shatters or breaks through it (i.e., the 
saving throw fails), the bolt continues. A bolt 


can breach 1 inch of wood or half an inch of 
stone per caster level, up to a maximum of 1 
foot of wood or half a foot of stone. 

The lightning bolt’s area of effect is chosen 
by the spellcaster: either a forked bolt 10 feet 
wide and 40 feet long or a single bolt 5 feet 
wide and 80 feet long. If a bolt cannot reach its 
full length, because of an unyielding barrier 
(such as a stone wall), the lightning bolt 
rebounds from the barrier toward its caster, 
ending only when it reaches its full length. 

For example: An 80-foot-long stroke is 
begun at a range of 40 feet, but it hits a stone 
wall at 50 feet. The bolt travels 10 feet, hits the 
wall, and rebounds for 70 feet back toward its 
creator (who is only 50 feet from the wall, and 
so is caught in his own lightning bolt!). 

The DM might allow reflecting bolts. When 
this type of lightning bolt strikes a solid sur- 
face, the bolt reflects from the surface at an 
angle equal to the angle of incidence (like light 
off a mirror). A creature crossed more than 
once by the bolt must roll a saving throw for 
every time it is crossed, but it still suffers either 
full damage (if one saving throw is missed) or 
half damage (if all saving throws are made). 

The material components of the spell are a 
bit of fur and an amber, crystal, or glass rod. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Lightning Bug 
(Alteration, Evocation) 


Level: 1 

Range: 15 yds. + 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S 

Casting Time: | 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: 1 creature or target 
Saving Throw: None 


Another of Gemidan’s spell variants that 
merges magic missile with shocking grasp, this 
spell allows a spellcaster to generate a missile 
of electrical energy and cast it unerringly at a 
target. When it hits the target (or an electrical 
conductor that touches an opponent’s body), 
the lightning bug discharges 1d6 points of 
damage, plus | point per level of the wizard, to 
a maximum of 1d6 + 10 (for example, an 11th- 
level mage would generate an electrical missile 
of 1d6 + 10 points of damage). 

Notes: Known to the Watch-Wizards and 
Guild of Waterdeep and a few wizards (Gemi- 
dan, Khelben, Laeral) in the FORGOTTEN 
REALMS setting; common. 


a a 


516 


+ Lightning Lash ag 


Lightning Curtain 
(Evocation) 


Level: 5 

Range: 60 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 20 sq. ft./level 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell creates a crackling, shimmering, 
vertical plane of electrical force. The lightning 
curtain reacts to nearby metal objects; anyone 
wearing or carrying such an item will be 
“sparked” by the wall if she approaches to 
within 5 feet of the curtain. A “spark” inflicts 
1d8 points of damage. 

Those passing through the lightning curtain 
suffer 2d8 points of damage, plus | point per 
experience level of the caster. For those wear- 
ing metal armor or carrying at least 4 pounds 
of conductive objects (swords, iron spikes, 
etc.), the damage is 3d8 points, plus | point per 
level of the caster. 

No saving throw is allowed for creatures 
passing through the curtain. Touching the light- 
ning curtain with a metal object has the same 
effect as walking through it. The wizard who 
creates the lightning curtain is immune to its 
effects. 

The lightning curtain is fairly transparent, 
allowing persons on opposite sides of it to see 
each other, Its glow is sufficient to illuminate 
the area on either side of it up to a distance of 
10 feet. Spells and missiles can be cast through 
the curtain, but missiles must successfully save 
vs. electricity or be destroyed. The lightning 
curtain does not hinder any spells except for 
electrical attacks, which it absorbs. 

The lightning curtain will persist for as long 
as the wizard concentrates upon it, or for 2 
rounds plus | round per level if concentration 
is not maintained. 

The material components a piece of amber, a 
bit of fur, and a square of fine velvet. 

Notes: Very rare spell. Known to be in The 
Book of Naz. (Updated from DraGoN Magazine.) 


517 


Lightning Lash 
(Evocation) 


Level: 5 

Range: 60 yds. + 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: %4 


A wizard casting this spell unleashes a dis- 
charge of electrical energy that inflicts 1d6 
points of damage per level of the caster (to a 
maximum of 6d6). A successful saving throw 
vs. spell reduces this damage to half (round 
fractions down). The discharge appears in a 
shape or arc whose precise location and direc- 
tion is as visualized by the caster (it is instanta- 
neous, so the caster can’t move or “redirect” it 
to strike a moving or unforeseen foe). If solid 
barriers, such as stone walls, prevent the lash 
from fully forming as desired, it rebounds 
“within itself” (hence its name), affecting only 
the area in which it was directed to form (crea- 
tures in this area must save twice; to suffer only 
half damage, both throws must succeed). 

The lash can set combustible materials 
aflame, sunder wooden doors (blasting away 
one inch of thickness per level of the caster, to 
a maximum of one foot), splinter stone up to 
six inches thick (a half inch per caster level), 
and melt metals with low melting points (such 
as bronze, copper, gold, lead, and silver), Item 
saving throws must be made to determine if 
stone shatters, metal melts, or other objects 
struck by the lash are affected. If a barrier shat- 
ters (its saving throw fails), the lash can con- 
tinue into the area beyond the barrier with full 
effects—if it was cast to do so. 

This spell is often used to melt locks, ruin 
armor, or seal metal doors shut without harm- 
ing nearby valuables. Such precision in casting 
requires practice. 

Notes: Very rare spell, originally from the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. (Updated from 
POLYHEDRON Newszine.) 


N Lightning Reflection 4 


Lightning Reflection 
(Abjuration, Alteration) 


Level: 5 

Range: 0 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 5 
Duration: | turn 

Area of Effect: 1 being 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell protects the caster or a touched 
recipient, and all worn or carried material, 
against all effects of energy discharges. All 
such attacks are reflected straight back at their 
sources for full normal effect. Magical or nat- 
ural lightning and other raw energy discharges 
are protected against. Magic missiles are also 
reflected. Fire is not protected against. 

The material components of the spell are a 
drop of quicksilver and a shard of metal of any 
size. 

Notes: Known to the Seven Sisters and some 
other wizards in the FORGOTTEN REALMS set- 
ting, rare; virtually unknown elsewhere. 


Vy 


Ss S35 


Lightning Ring 


(Evocation) 


Level: 8 

Range: 10 ft./level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 8 
Duration: 8 rds. (or | rd.) 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: 4 


This spell surrounds the caster with a bright 
white, crackling, chest-high ring of lightning. 
The ring moves with the caster, who can cast 
other spells without harming the ring’s function- 
ing after the round in which the ring is estab- 
lished. While encircled by the ring, the caster is 
immune to damage from all lightning attacks. 

Twice per round, the ring can emit a lightning 
bolt that streaks straight outward in a direction 
chosen by the caster. (The bolt rebounds at an 
angle chosen by the DM if it strikes something 
solid and nonliving.) Such bolts cause 8d6 
points of damage to all creatures in their path. 
Creatures who are struck are allowed a saving 
throw vs. spell for half damage. 


~ Lightning Shield g 


Alternatively, this spell can be cast to dis- 
charge all at once. The ring forms in one round, 
spinning about the caster (who is protected 
against all lightning damage for that round), 
then rises straight up and fires eight lightning 
bolts at once at up to eight different targets 
chosen by the caster. In doing so, the spell 
exhausts itself. The bolts inflict 8d6 points of 
damage each (save for half damage). 

The material components of this spell are a 
ring of any size, fashioned of glass, and a bit of 
fur from any animal. 

Notes: Known to the Seven Sisters and a few 
other wizards in the FORGOTTEN REALMS set- 
ting, very rare; virtually unknown elsewhere. 


Lightning Rod 
(Alteration) 


Level: 3 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 7 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 metal object 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell forces magical lightning to a spe- 
cific spot determined by the caster. When cast, 
the wizard chooses a metal object to become the 
lightning rod (a sword, a lamppost, or a gold 
piece). The focal point of the spell cannot be 
alive or heavier than 100 pounds. When any 
ranged electrical attack occurs within 50 yards 
of a lightning rod, the energy is redirected and 
absorbed into it, negating the attack and destroy- 
ing the object (if someone is in contact with the 
rod, that person receives the full damage of the 
attack). If the object is not struck by a magical 
electricity within 48 hours, the spell ends. 

This spell was developed by a watch-wizard to 
minimize random property damage when the 
watch (or anyone) battled a mage in the streets. 
This spell was refined to limit lightning bolts and 
similar energies, as they are a standard attack 
spell. Many watch-wizards cast this spell on 
metal rods, tossing them clear when anticipating 
spell battles. One unscrupulous former mage was 
sentenced to Undermountain for casting this spell 
on a ring and selling the “magical lightning- 
enhancer ring” to a fellow guild member (when 
the wearer cast his lightning bolt, it centered on 
the ring, killing the mage with his own spell). 

Notes: Known to the Watch-Wizards and 
Guild of Waterdeep in the FORGOTTEN REALMS 
setting; common. 


Lightning Rod 
(Abjuration) 


Level: 6 

Range: Special 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 6 

Duration: 1 turn/level 

Area of Effect: 30-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell requires a pole at least 6 feet long, 
made entirely of metal. As the spell is com- 
pleted, the rod implants itself firmly into the 
ground or stone floor. Any bolt of lightning— 
natural, magically invoked, druidically sum- 
moned, blue or bronze dragon breath, 
etc.—coming within 30 feet of the rod is 
diverted through the rod and into the ground. 
Unless the intended targets are in the area of 
effect of the electrical attack and between the 
source and the rod, the electricity misses them. 
Short distance discharges (shocking grasp, 
will’o-wisp attack, etc.) are not affected. Once 
planted, the rod cannot be moved without break- 
ing it until the magic expires or is dispelled. The 
spell can be made permanent or be used in con- 
junction with the enchant an item spell, also. 

The material component is a piece of copper 
wire. The rod itself is not destroyed by the spell. 

Notes: Very rare spell. (Updated from 
POLYHEDRON Newszine.) 


Lightning Shield 
(Alteration, Evocation) 


Level: 4 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 4 

Duration: 2 rds. + 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell much like the 4th-level spell fire 
shield, except that it protects against electricity 
(chill) or acid (warm) attacks. The caster must 
memorize the version he wants available. The 
spell creates sparks around the caster’s body. The 
color of the sparks is determined randomly (50% 
for either)—blue or white if chill, blue or black if 
warm. The sparks produce a dim illumination 
equal to half that of a torch. They are harmless if 
touched, but will return certain attacks made 
upon the caster. The shield powers are: 

A.) Chill Shield: The sparks are cool. Light- 


Sa a iT OT a ia 


519 


N Lightning Storm A 


ning-based attacks are saved against at a +2 
bonus, with either one-half or no damage 
taken. Acid-based attacks are normal, but if 
successful inflict double damage. 

The material component for this version is a 
small rubber ball. 

B.) Warm Shield: The sparks are warm. 
Acid-based attacks are saved against at a +2 
bonus, with either one-half or no damage being 
taken. Electricity-based attacks are normal, but 
if successful inflict double damage. 

The material component is a scale from a 
black dragon or a small piece of marble. 

Any creature striking the spellcaster with its 
body or a hand-held weapon inflicts normal dam- 
age, but the attack suffers the same amount. The 
attacker’s magic resistance, if any is tested upon 
the first successful hit. Successful resistance shat- 
ters the shield; failure means the magic resistance 
does not affect that casting of the spell. 

This spell does not work with a fire shield. If 
both are placed on the same caster, they cancel 
each other in a brilliant flash, leaving the caster 
stunned for 1d3 rounds. 

Notes: Very rare. Known to be in the Blue 
Book of Du'Morde, Vol. II. (Updated from 
DRAGON Magazine.) 


Lightning Storm 


(Evocation) 


Level: 8 

Range: 40 yds. + 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 8 

Duration: | rd. 

Area of Effect: 70 ft. diameter sphere 
Saving Throw: 4 


This spell creates electrical discharges within 
a spherical area. Bolts of lightning leap repeat- 
edly about within this area, regardless of the 
presence or location of metal, water, or other 
conductors. All beings within this area take 
6d12 points of damage (unless immune to elec- 
trical damage), and all items must make a saving 
throw vs. electricity. The magic prevents light- 
ning from traveling along conductive paths out 
of spell range; a man in full armor and a bather 
in a moat, both just outside the spell’s area of 
effect, will be unharmed. The 3rd-level light- 
ning rod spell is negated by the large number of 
bolts the storm generates. The 6th-level /ight- 
ning rod spell creates a 30-foot safe zone if the 
metal pole survives an item saving throw vs. 
lightning (otherwise it is negated). 


The caster is unharmed by the spell, even if he 
stands in the center of the storm, by this or any 
other electrical attacks or effects during the spell’s 
duration. The material component include a shard 
of glass, a scrap of fur, a piece of silver, and a flint. 

Notes: Uncommon for Weather or Storm 
mages; otherwise very rare. Believed to origi- 
nate from the WORLD OF GREYHAWK setting 
(Updated from DraGon Magazine). 


Lightning Strike 


(Evocation) 


Level: 2 

Range: 10 yds. + | yd./level 
Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 2 

Duration: Instant. 

Area of Effect: 1 or 2 creatures 
Saving Throw: 4 


This spell causes a small bolt of lightning 1 
inch wide to shoot forth from the caster’s out- 
stretched fingertip, striking the indicated target 
for 1d6 points of damage for every two levels of 
the caster (2d6 at 3rd, 3d6 at Sth, etc., to a maxi- 
mum of 5d6 at 9th level), with the target crea- 
ture receiving a saving throw vs. spell for half 
damage. The bolt can be forked, striking two 
creatures within 10 feet of each other for the full 
effect. The lightning strike is not powerful 
enough to cause structural damage to a building 
or wooden craft. 

The spell is otherwise the same as the third 
level spell lightning bolt, except that the strike 
will not rebound off solid materials such as 
stone walls. 

Notes: Very rare spell. Known to be in the 
Blue Book of Du'Morde, Vol. I. (Updated from 
DRAGON Magazine.) 


Lightningcloak 
(Alteration, Evocation) 
Level: 6 
Range: 0 


Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 6 

Duration: Maximum | turn + 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: The caster 

Saving Throw: Special 


The lightningcloak spell surrounds the 
caster with a shimmering aura of lightning. Its 
crackling sound is audible at a distance of 5 
feet, and in dark areas the caster is outlined as 


i. eae re 


520 


* Liquid Earth gg 


if by a faerie fire spell. 

The cloak contains damaging electrical poten- 
tial of 1d6 per level of the caster. The caster can 
discharge bolts of lightning at the rate of one bolt 
per round, up to the potential of the lightning- 
cloak. For example, a 12th—level wizard can cast 
two 6-dice bolts, four 3-dice bolts, a 9-dice bolt 
and three |-die bolts, or any combination that 
adds to 12 dice. The bolts crackle outward to a 
distance of 40 feet, and each will strike one crea- 
ture. A saving throw vs. spell is allowed against 
each bolt for half damage. Bolts of 3d6 or more 
require saving throws for exposed items if the tar- 
get creature fails its saving throw. The maximum 
potential for the cloak is 18d6. 

Anyone who touches a lightningcloaked wiz- 
ard is shocked for 1d6 points of damage; if a 
metal object (such as a metal weapon) is the 
touching agent, a full 6 points of damage is sus- 
tained. No saving throws are allowed against 
these shocks, but each discharges 1d6 of the 
cloak’s potential. 

The lightningcloak protects the wizard from 
the effects of electrical attacks. These attacks, 
after any magic resistance and saving throws 
have been resolved, are absorbed without harm 
to the wizard, up to a maximum of 2 points per 
level (for example, 24 points for a 12th level 
mage). If the /ightningcloak absorbs more than 
its capacity of electrical damage, it discharges 
all of its remaining bolt capacity directly into 
the caster (no saving throw). The caster must 
make a successful system shock check or lose 
consciousness for 1d4 rounds. 

The spell ends when all its bolts have been 
used or if it absorbs more than its maximum 
capacity of electrical damage. Otherwise, cloak 
lasts one turn plus one round for each level of 
the wizard. 

The material components for this spell 
include powdered amber and rose quartz (100 
gp total value), and a bit of phosphorous. Also, 
a finely woven cloak of no less than 500 gp 
value must be worn; this can be re-used for 
subsequent castings of the spell. 

Notes: Very rare spell. Known to be in The 
Book of Naz. (Updated from Dracon Magazine.) 


Limited Wish 
(Conjuration/Summoning, Invocation/ 
Evocation) 


Level: 7 

Range: Unlimited 
Components: V 
Casting Time: Special 


Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: Special 


The limited wish is a very potent but difficult 
spell. It will fulfill literally, but only partially or for 
a limited duration, the utterance of the spellcaster. 
Thus, the actuality of the past, present, or future 
might be altered (but possibly only for the wizard 
unless the wording of the spell is most carefully 
stated) in some limited manner. The use of a jim- 
ited wish will not substantially change major reali- 
ties, nor will it bring wealth or experience merely 
by asking. The spell can, for example, restore some 
hit points (or all hit points for a limited duration) 
lost by the wizard. It can reduce opponent hit prob- 
abilities or damage, increase duration of some 
magical effect, cause a creature to be favorably dis- 
posed to the spellcaster, mimic a spell of 7th level 
or less, and so on (see also the 9th-level wish 
spell). Greedy desires usually end in disaster for 
the wisher. Casting time is based on the time spent 
preparing the wording for the spell (clever players 
decide what they want to say before using the 
spell). Normally, the casting time is one round 
(most of it being taken up by deciding what to say). 
Casting this spell ages the caster one year per 100 
years of regular life span (human—l1 year, half- 
ling/half-elf—2, dwarf/gnome—4, elf—S). 


Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Liquid Earth 
(Alteration) 
(Province: Sand) 


Level: 5 

Range: 0 

Components: V, M 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: 1 hr. + 1 hr./level 

Area of Effect: 15-foot radius hemisphere 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell creates a hemisphere of airy earth, 
in which normal stone is magically trans- 
formed into a thick fog. Within this bubble, 
creatures not native to the plane of elemental 
Earth can move through its earth, stone, and 
clay as if passing through water. The spell also 
enables those within its area to breathe nor- 
mally. The spell provides no light, however. 
The material component is a bent tube of 
nickel costing 100 gp. 

Notes: Common for spellcasters from an 
arabian setting; otherwise very rare. 


” a ee ee eee ae ee ee, 


521 


~y Liquid Orb "a 


Liquid Orb 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 
(Water) 

Level: 1 
Range: 0 


Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 2 

Duration: | turn + 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: | pint/level 
Saving Throw: None 


When the spell is cast, an orb of nonflamma- 
ble liquid comes into existence in the caster’s 
palm and is held by the mage through a magi- 
cal increase in the sphere’s surface tension. The 
liquid maintains its spherical shape until 
released by the caster or until the end of the 
spell’s duration. 

The temperature of the sphere is always that 
of the surrounding air (temperatures must be 
above freezing and below boiling) and cannot 
be altered except through normal means. The 
sphere can be thrown, but its accuracy is very 
poor (30-foot range, —2 to hit) and it does no 
damage to nonfiery creatures. The sphere can 
be used to put out fires covering up to four 
square feet per pint. The orb also inflicts 1d4 


522 


points damage per gallon (eight pints) to any 
fire-based creatures (fire elementals, salaman- 
ders, etc.). The caster cannot make a called 
shot (DMG, Chapter 9) with the sphere, and its 
liquids cannot be used to blind opponents. 

This spell can be used to supply the caster 
with small amounts of fresh drinking water, ink 
(nonmagical), clothing dye, fruit juice, cider, 
soup, or any other known nonflammable liquid 
that causes no damage to normal creatures 
(thus excluding acids and poisons); the DM 
and player may be fairly creative here. The 
spell has an absolute limit of four gallons—a 
sphere the size of a small beach ball. A liquid 
orb of one gallon or more must be thrown with 
both hands. 

Notes: Uncommon for Water mages; other- 
wise very rare, 


Little Bird 
(Alteration) 
(Mentalism) 


Level: 1 

Range: 10 yds. 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 1 
Duration: 1 turn + 1/level 
Area of Effect: 1 object 
Saving Throw: None 


By casting this spell, the caster can direct 
one object to fly through the air under his con- 
trol. Although slow-moving (movement rate 6), 
the object can turn and stop at will (maneuver- 
ability class A) responding instantly to the 
caster’s mental commands. The affected object 
can weigh no more than 1 Ib. per level of the 
caster. 

The /ittle bird spell is generally employed as 
a laborsaving device, because its uses in com- 
bat are limited. A caster attempting to wrest an 
object from an enemy, for example, must over- 
come the enemy’s Strength (The enemy can 
hold onto the object by making a successful 
Strength check, with a —2 bonus to the die roll). 
Alternatively, picking up a loose object and 
hurling it at an enemy requires a successful 
attack roll and inflicts no more than 1d3 points 
of damage. Some wizards, however, have been 
known to use this spell as a diversion (for 
instance, ringing a gong next to an enemy’s 
head). 

Notes: Uncommon for mentalists and appor- 
tation specialists; otherwise very rare. 


~ Locate Object d 


Living Link 
(Divination, Necromancy) 


Level: 1 

Range: 90 yds. + 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 2 

Duration: | rd./level 

Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: None 


With this spell, a necromancer establishes a 
sensory like between himself and any living 
creature within range. If the caster knows a 
specific creature or person within range, then 
the spell can take effect on that specific crea- 
ture. Otherwise, the living link will be estab- 
lished with any sapient creature within range, 
determined randomly. 

Like the Ist-level spell corpse link, the liv- 
ing link spell allows the caster to gather sen- 
sory information from the vicinity of the target 
creature (sight, sound, smell, taste, or touch). 
For every four levels of experience past the Ist, 
the necromancer can collect information from 
an additional sense (up to two senses at Sth 
level, three at 9th, four at 13th, and all five at 
17th level). 

The creature linked by this spell experiences 
nothing to indicate that its senses have teen 
tapped, and it remains in control of its own 
actions, entirely unaware of the magical con- 
nection to the necromancer. In other words, the 
caster cannot force the subject to look at some- 
thing (listen at a keyhole, taste a glass of wine, 
pick up an object, and so on). This spell merely 
enables the caster to directly experience the 
world through another creature’s perceptions. 
For instance, looking through another crea- 
ture’s eyes gives the wizard all of its visual 
capabilities, such as infravision if the creature 
has that ability. 

While the spell is in effect, the living link 
overrides the wizard’s own sensory percep- 
tions. Thus, a wizard seeing through another 
creature’s eyes is unable to see through his 
own. The spell can be ended at will with no 
risk to the caster. 

Notes: Uncommon for necromancers and 
diviners; otherwise very rare. 


Locate Creature 
(Divination) 


Level: 4 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 4 

Duration: 1 turn/level 

Area of Effect: 50 yds./level 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell is similar to the 2nd-level locate 
object spell. Instead of finding an inanimate 
object, however, it allows the wizard to find a 
creature. The wizard casts the spell, slowly turns, 
and is able to sense the direction of the person or 
creature, provided the subject is within the area. 
The wizard learns how far away the creature is 
and in what direction it is moving (if at all). 

This spell can locate a general species of 
creature (a horse or umber hulk, for instance) 
or can be used to find a specific individual. 
The wizard must have physically seen the indi- 
vidual or the type of creature at least once from 
a distance of no more than 10 yards. 

Unlike /ocate object, this spell is not blocked 
by lead. It is blocked, however, by running 
water (such as a river or stream). Objects can- 
not be found with this spell. 

The material component is a bit of a blood- 
hound’s fur. 

Notes: Uncommon spell (ToM). 


Locate Object 
(Divination) 
Reversible 


Level: 2 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 2 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: 20 yds./level 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell aids in locating a known or familiar 
object. The wizard casts the spell, slowly turns, 
and senses when he is facing in the direction of 
the object to be located, provided the object is 
within range (that is, 60 yards for 3rd-level wiz- 
ards, 80 yards for 4th, 100 yards for Sth, etc.). 
The spell can locate such objects as apparel, 
jewelry, furniture, tools, weapons, or even a lad- 
der or stairway. Note that attempting to find a 
specific item, such as jewelry or a crown, 
requires an accurate mental image; if the image 


ra er ane aAA 


523 


N$ Locate Portal A 


is not close enough to the actual, the spell does 
not work. Desired but unique objects cannot be 
located by this spell unless they are known by 
the caster. The spell is blocked by lead. Crea- 
tures cannot be found by this spell. 

The material component is a forked twig. 

The reversal, obscure object, hides an object 
from location by spell, crystal ball, or similar 
means for eight hours. Creatures cannot be 
affected by this spell. The material component 
is a chameleon skin. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Locate Portal 
(Divination) 


Level: 2 

Range: Special 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: | turn 
Duration: 1 rd. 

Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell can be cast only within 100 yards of 
the surface of a crystal shell. The caster of a locate 
portal spell can find the nearest portal through the 
crystal shell either into or out of the Flow (phlo- 
giston). The spell indicates direction and distance 
(either in miles or in travel time, should the wizard 
know the particulars of his own ship). 

In general, from any point on a crystal shell, 
a portal suitable for a normal-sized ship can be 
found within 2-20 days travel. At the DM’s 
option, there may be more portals available, 
fewer, or none at all. 

The material component of this spell is a 
conch shell. 

Notes: Common for spellcasters from a 
spelljamming culture; otherwise very rare. 


Locate Remains 
(Divination, Necromancy) 


Level: 1 
Range: 0 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: | turn + 5 rds./level 
Area of Effect: path, 10 ft. wide x 
30 ft. + 5 ft-/level long 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell attunes the caster to the physical 
remains of dead beings in the area of effect. 
Locate remains will thus easily detect the pres- 


ence of unburied corpses or corporeal undead 
(such as skeletons, zombies, or ghasts), but 
will not reveal noncorporeal undead (such as 
ghosts or spectres). The area of effect extends 
in a 10-foot wide path, facing in the caster’s 
current direction. Scanning in a direction 
requires one round, during which time the 
caster remains motionless in concentration. 

Locate remains is mostly unaffected by 
walls or obstacles, though the area of effect is 
decreased (to 10 feet plus 1 foot/level) by more 
than three feet of solid stone, ten feet of wood 
or packed earth, or one inch of metal. 

In the most general applications, the spell 
precisely locates any and all physical remains 
of individuals in the area of effect, regardless 
of sex, species, and undead status. This spell 
does not impart any knowledge regarding the 
identity (or undead nature) of the remains; only 
the current locations of corpses within the area 
of effect are learned. 

If a personal item or small fragment of the 
deceased individual is available at the time of 
casting, the spell can be used to locate the remains 
of that specific individual. In that case, the spell 
does not register the presence of any remains 
except those of the desired individual. 

Both the general and specific versions of the 
spell have no effect if cast on a living creature 
of any type. 

The material component for this spell is 
either a small piece of bone from a human 
cadaver (for the general version) or else an arti- 
cle of clothing, personal possession, or strand 
of hair (for the specific version). This spell is 
popular in regions with strict burial customs. 

Notes: Common for necromancers, witch- 
doctors, and Savage mages; otherwise very rare. 


Lock 
Reversed form, see knock. 


Long Reach, Duhlark’s 
See Duhlark’s long reach. 


Lorloveim’s Creeping Shadow 
(Illusion) 
(Shadow) 


Level: 3 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 7 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: The caster’s shadow 
Saving Throw: None 


524 


= Lose the Path A 


This spell causes the wizard’s shadow to 
elongate, stretching away from his body at a 
rate of 15 yards per round. It can elongate a 
maximum distance of 10 yards per level of the 
caster. 

The shadow moves as an ordinary shadow, 
along floors and up walls. The caster can 
maneuver in any manner feasible to place the 
shadow where he desires. For example, the 
caster might position his shadow over a high 
window in a tower in order to spy on the tower’s 
occupants. The shadow makes no sound and is 
90% undetectable in all but the most brightly 
lit surroundings. 

While the spell lasts, the illusionist can see, 
hear, and speak through his shadow. The 
shadow cannot physically touch, pick up, or 
attack creatures or objects. It can be struck 
only by spells, magical weapons of +1 or bet- 
ter, or other special attacks (such as a dragon’s 
breath). The shadow has the same Armor Class 
as the caster. Hit points lost by the shadow are 
suffered by the caster. 

To cast the spell, a light source of at least the 
brightness of a candle must be present. The 
caster must also have a small statuette of the 
caster sculpted from a piece of obsidian worth 
at least 1,000 gp. 

Notes: Uncommon or rare spell (ToM). 


Lorloveim’s Shadowy 
Transformation 
(Illusion) 
(Shadow) 


Level: 6 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 6 

Duration: 1d4 rds. + 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: Special 

Saving Throw: Neg. 


When this spell is cast, the illusionist trans- 
forms one creature or a specified volume of 
nonliving material into shadow, making it 
insubstantial. Thus, a door could be turned to 
shadow and entered. The maximum amount of 
inanimate material that can be transformed is 
one cubic foot per level of the caster. 

Unwilling creatures are allowed a saving 
throw vs. spell to resist the shadowy transfor- 
mation. Magical items and the spell effects 
(such as Bighy’s forceful hand or a wall of 
stone) cannot be affected. 

A transformed creature and all its gear 


become insubstantial. The creature can pass 
through small holes, narrow openings, and the 
smallest cracks. The creature cannot fly with- 
out additional magic. 

No form of attack is possible when in 
shadow form except against creatures that exist 
on the Ethereal plane. In this case, all attacks 
are normal; however, the shadowy creature can 
be harmed only by magical weapons of +1 or 
greater or by creatures able to affect those 
struck only by magical weapons. Spells and 
special attacks have normal effects. 

Most undead creatures will ignore a creature 
in shadow form, believing it to be a wraith or 
spectre; however, liches and powerful undead 
may save vs. spell with a —4 penalty to recog- 
nize the spell. A successful dispel magic spell 
forces the creature in shadow form back to nor- 
mal form. 

Notes: Uncommon or rare spell (ToM). 


Lose Face 
Reversed form, see face. 


Lose the Path 
Reversed form, see find the path, 


DOO ee 


525 


N Love — Witch f 


Love — Witch 
(Enchantment/Charm) 


Level: 7 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 7 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 male human, demihuman, or 
humanoid 

Saving Throw: Neg. 


With a simple touch of her hand, the caster 
can create in the creature touched an undying 
devotion and infatuation toward her. The sub- 
ject is allowed a saving throw vs. spell to 
negate the effect. 

A male subject failing the saving throw is 
affected as if he had imbibed a philter of love 
(see Appendix 3 of the DMG). He is charmed 
and regards the caster as his one true beloved, 
willingly following her least suggestion and 
defending her from all harm. 

The Zove spell is one of the most powerful 
charms known, and the recipient can never free 
himself unless the witch releases him, or a lim- 
ited wish or wish spell is used to break the 
spell. Even the caster’s most hostile and objec- 
tionable orders or actions—including direct 
attacks against the charmed character or suici- 
dal commands—will do no more than tem- 
porarily drive the subject from her presence for 
a period of 1 to 12 hours, after which the sub- 
ject cautiously returns, hoping that the love of 
his life may have forgiven him. 

Notes: Restricted to witches of good or neu- 
tral alignment; uncommon. 


Love Charm 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
(Song) 


Level: 3 

Range: 120 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 person 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell is identical to charm person in all 
respects but two. First, the caster specifies that 
the subject become enthralled with a person of 
the opposite sex. This may be herself or anyone 
else whose name the caster knows. If it is 


someone not present, the spell’s effects are felt 
only when the subject first sees that person. 
Second, to the normal effects of a charm per- 
son (trust and friendship) are coupled a strong 
desire for romance. 

The caster must have in her possession 
something belonging to both the subject and 
the spell’s object in order to cast this spell. 

Notes: Restricted to those of gypsy blood, 
witches of good or neutral alignment, or a spe- 
cialist in this type of magic. Those who have 
access to this spell do not have access to the 
charm person spell and vice versa; uncommon, 


Lower Resistance 
(Abjuration, Alteration) 


Level: 5 

Range: 60 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 5 

Duration: 1 turn + 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: None 


Using this spell, a wizard can attempt to 
reduce the magic resistance of a target crea- 
ture. The magic resistance of the subject works 
against the lower resistance spell itself, but at 
only half its normal value. No saving throw is 
permitted in addition to magic resistance. This 
spell has no effect on creatures that have no 
magic resistance. 

A target creature that does not resist the effects 
of the spell has its magic resistance reduced by a 
base 16% plus 1% per level of the caster (that is, 
a base 25% reduction at 9th level). 

The material component is a broken iron 
rod. 

Notes: Uncommon spell (7oM). Note that 
the base is substantially reduced from the orig- 
inally published form. 


Lower Water 
(Alteration) 
(Water) 
Reversible 


Level: 6 

Range: 80 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: | turn 

Duration: 5 rds./level 

Area of Effect: 10-ft/level square 
Saving Throw: None 


J —”~—”——. Ee ee 


526 


Mace, Belsham’s 


See Belsham’s mace. 


Maelstrom 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 
(Water) 


Level: 9 

Range: 120 yds. + 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 9 

Duration: 1d10 rds. 

Area of Effect: 150-yd. radius 
Saving Throw: Special 


When cast upon the sea (or large lake), the 
maelstrom spell punches a hole right through 
the Prime Material Plane into the Elemental 
Plane of Water. A huge whirlpool appears for 
1d10 rounds, sucking everything close to it 
into the Elemental Plane of Water. At the end 
of that time, the rift between the planes seals 
and the sea returns to normal. 

The whirlpool has a dark center like a bulls- 
eye, surrounded by a ring of swirling water. 
The center has a 50-yard radius. The surround- 
ing ring is another 100 yards wide (giving the 
entire whirlpool a 150-yard radius). All vessels 
within the whirlpool’s center must make a sea- 
worthiness check with a -20% modifier each 
round. Failure indicates that they are sucked 
into the Elemental Plane of Water. Success 
means they simply hold their ground; they have 
no choice but to hang on until the spell elapses 
or until they are sucked through. 

Vessels within the 100-yard border around 
the center must also make a seaworthiness 
check each round. Success indicates that they 
can sail under “adverse” conditions. Creatures 
and spells that affect water also may help them 
move from the area. Failure means they are 
dragged 20 yards toward the center. 

An individual in the border area who is not 
aboard a ship is dragged 50 yards per round 
toward the center. 

Allies who control water or use magic may 
help; mere swimming has no effect. An indi- 
vidual in the center of the maelstrom who is 
not aboard a vessel must make a saving throw 
vs. death magic each round to avoid being 
sucked through the whirlpool. Success indi- 
cates the character holds his ground. Failure 
calls for another saving throw. If a second save 
vs. death magic succeeds, the individual is 
merely cast up somewhere else in the Prime 


Mage Tunnel 


Material Plane, with flotsam from a 
wreck. Characters from the same ship 
may be cast up as a group or scattered far apart 
(DM's option). Those who fail the second sav- 
ing throw are dragged fully into the Plane of 
Elemental Water. Unless these individuals can 
somehow breathe underwater, or have friends 
among the marids near such an area, their 
prospects are grim: If they don’t drown, they'll 
probably be enslaved by the marids. 

The material component of this spell is a 
diamond worth at least 10,000 gp. The gem is 
crushed when the spell is cast. 

Notes: Common for Sea mages or those 
from an arabian setting; otherwise very rare. 


Mage Tunneltt 
(Alteration) 
(Dimension) 


Level: 9 

Range: Special 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 9 
Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: Special 


When cast, mage tunnel opens up a magical 
passageway between the caster and an area 
known to the caster no more than 1,000 miles 
away, through which the caster can freely 
travel. The only restriction on the spell is that 
the destination must be out-of-doors and in a 
location with which the caster is familiar. 

The tunnel can be used to kidnap others. In 
this case, the tunnel is cast to appear next to the 
victim. Anyone within 5 feet of either opening 
must then make a successful surprise roll or be 
immediately drawn into the tunnel, sucked 
through it, and expelled at the other end. Fur- 
thermore, the victim at the opposite end of the 
mage tunnel must roll for surprise with a -2 
penalty, since the appearance of this spell is usu- 
ally totally unexpected. The caster himself is not 
affected, need not roll to resist the suction, and 
may enter the tunnel or not at his discretion. 
Szass Tam developed this high-level transporta- 
tion spell, then discovered its use in kidnapping 
or in sending away unwanted visitors. 

The mage tunnel's material component is a 
l-inch length of copper tubing engraved with 
silvered runes. 

Notes: Unique; known to Szass Tam of Thay 
in the FoRGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


ne, "ada: © 


529 


530 


Magic Drain 


Magic Aura, Nystul’s 
See Nystul’s magic aura. 


Magic Boomerang 
Aka magic disk. 


Magic Cloud, Odeen’s 


See Odeen’s magic cloud. 


Magic Defiance Undone 
A MYSTARA setting spell, aka pierce magic 
resistance. 


Magic Disk — Witch 
(Invocation/Evocation) 
(Force) 


Level: | 

Range: 20 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: | 

Duration: | turn 

Area of Effect: 1 creature per rd. 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell conjures a glowing disk of magi- 
cal energy about a foot in diameter. The witch 
can throw the disk at opponents once per 
round. The device confers a +3 bonus to attack 
rolls and can affect creatures struck only by 
magical weapons. The disc can be hurled at an 
opponent fleeing around a corner and it will 
follow, but this reduces the attack bonus to +1. 
A hit inflicts 1 point of damage upon the target 
creature. After each throw, the disk returns to 
the witch’s hand, ready for the next round. 

Instead of throwing the disk multiple times, 
the witch may instead choose to expend all the 
disk’s energy in a single hit. In this event, the 
magic disk inflicts 1d6 points of damage, plus 
1 point per level to a maximum of 1d6 + 10. 
The witch can specify normal or subdual dam- 
age (the latter is 25% real and 75% temporary). 
If the witch misses, the disk returns and can be 
thrown each round, until a hit is scored or the 
duration runs out. 

The material component is a silver piece. 

Notes: Restricted to witches (and optionally 
force mages); common. An earlier version of 
this spell, differing only in the shape of the 
force, was magic boomerang (which might be 
allowed to Savage mages). 


Magic Ear 
(Alteration) 


Level: 2 

Range: 40 yds. + 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 2 

Duration: 4 rds. + 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: 3-ft. radius circle 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell amplifies all sound within the 
area of effect, so any normal sound can be 
heard clearly through as much as 1,000 feet of 
air, 10 feet of wood, or 1 foot of stone. The 
small circle from which sound is amplified can 
be moved within range as long as the spell 
lasts. Very loud sounds (the roar of a lion or 
dragon) and sounds that are already magically 
amplified (the roar of an androsphinx or drag- 
onne, a shout spell, etc.) overload and cancel 
the spell, leaving the recipient stunned for 1d4 
rounds unless he makes a successful saving 
throw vs. petrification. Like the 3rd-level clair- 
voyance and similar spells, an invisible magi- 
cal sensor is created at the spell’s center. 

A silence cast directly against the magic ear 
spell negates it. An amulet of proof against 
detection and location or other magical protec- 
tion against detection might defeat the spell, at 
the DM’s option. 

The material component is a feather from a 
giant owl's head. 

Notes: Very rare spell. (Updated from 


POLYHEDRON Newszine). 

Magic Drain 
(Evocation) ; $ 
Level: 8 
Range: 60 yds. 


Components: V, S, M 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Casting Time: 4 

Area of Effect: 1 weapon 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell permanently drains the enchant- 
ment from one magical weapon. The casting 
wizard must be within 60 yards of the weapon 
and have a clear view of it. 

If the caster holds the weapon, no saving 
throw is neccessary. If the weapon is in the 
possession of another individual or creature, 
the weapon is allowed a saving throw vs. disin- 
tegration modified by the level of the wielder. 


Soe ee aan. 


531 


q Mesic Fis r 


For example, a sword would normally require a 
saving throw of 17 or better to resist the effect; 
in the hands of a 6th-level fighter, it would 
need an |! or better. 

The spell’s effect is limited to one type of 
magic of no greater than a +5 bonus. Against a 
sword +1, +3 vs. lycanthropes, for example, 
this spell could negate either the +1 bonus or 
the +3 bonus. A second spell would be required 
to negate both bonuses. 

The material component is a vial that once 
held a magical potion. 

Notes: Common on Cerilia, the BIRTHRIGHT 
setting; unknown elsewhere. This spell func- 
tions only when cast in the Cerilian setting. 


Magic Fist 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 
(Mentalism) 


Level: | 

Range: 5 yds./level 
Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 1 

Duration: 3 rds. + 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: Creates | fist 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell conjures a glowing fist of noncor- 
poreal energy that can be used to telekineti- 
cally pummel the caster’s foes. 

The caster can attack any creature within the 
spell range, requiring a successful attack roll to 
hit. A hit inflicts 1d4~1 points of damage per 
caster level (minimum | point of damage per 
die) to a maximum of 10d4—10 at 10th level. 
Any creature reduced to 0 hit points is knocked 
out for 2d6 rounds, but only 25% of the dam- 
age is actual. 

The magic fist delivers a solid blow that 
might also prove useful for triggering traps, 
moving small objects, or performing other 
unsubtle manipulations within the spell’s 
range. 

The fist is an emanation of the caster’s men- 
tal power. It does not take damage, and physi- 
cal objects pass through it. While the caster is 
manipulating the fist, no action is possible 
except for movement at no more than half the 
caster’s normal movement rate. 

Notes: Very rare spell. Known to be in Pris- 
mals Pocket Library, Vol. I. 


Magic Jar 
(Necromancy) 
(Mentalism) 


Level: 5 

Range: 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Special 


The magic jar spell enables the caster to 
shift his lifeforce into a special receptacle (a 
gem or large crystal), From there the caster can 
force an exchange of lifeforces between the 
receptacle and another creature, thus enabling 
the wizard to take over and control the body of 
another creature, while the lifeforce of the host 
is confined in the receptacle. The special life- 
force receptacle must be within spell range of 
the wizard’s body at the time of spellcasting. 
The wizard’s lifeforce shifts into the receptacle 
in the round in which the casting is completed, 
allowing no other actions. 

While in the magic jar, the caster can sense 
and attack any lifeforce within a 10-foot-per- 
level radius (on the same plane); however, the 
exact creature types and relative physical posi- 
tions cannot be determined. In a group of life- 
forces, the caster can sense a difference of four 
or more levels/Hit Dice and can determine 
whether a lifeforce is positive or negative 
energy. 

For example, if two 10th-level fighters are 
attacking a hill giant and four ogres, the caster 
could determine that there are three stronger 
and four weaker lifeforces within range, all 
with positive life energy. The caster could try 
to take over either a stronger or a weaker crea- 
ture, but he has no control over exactly which 
creature is attacked. 

An attempt to take over a host body requires 
a full round. It is blocked by a protection from 
evil spell or similar ward. It is successful only 
if the subject fails a saving throw vs. spell with 
a special modifier (see following). The saving 
throw is modified by subtracting the combined 
Intelligence and Wisdom scores of the target 
creature from those of the wizard (Intelligence 
and Hit Dice in nonhuman or nonhumanoid 
creatures), This modifier is added to (or sub- 
tracted from) the die roll. 


532 


x Magic Manager A 


Difference Die Adjustment 
-9 or less +4 
-$ to -6 +3 
-5 to -3 +2 
-2 to 0 +] 
+1 to+4 0 
+5 to +8 -1 
+9 to +12 -2 
+13 or more -3 


A negative score indicates that the wizard 
has a lower total than the target creature; thus, 
the host has a saving throw bonus. Failure to 
take over the host leaves the wizard’s lifeforce 
in the magic jar. 

If successful, the caster’s lifeforce occupies 
the host body and the host’s lifeforce is con- 
fined in the magic jar receptacle. The caster 
can call upon rudimentary or instinctive knowl- 
edge of the subject creature, but not upon its 
real or acquired knowledge (i.e., the wizard 
does not automatically know the language or 
spells of the creature). The caster retains his 
own attack rolls, class knowledge and training, 
and any adjustments due to his Intelligence or 
Wisdom. If the host body is human or human- 
oid, and the necessary spell components are 
available, the wizard can even use his memo- 
rized spells. The host body retains its own hit 
points and physical abilities and properties. 
The DM decides if any additional modifica- 
tions are necessary; for example, perhaps 
clumsiness or inefficiency occurs if the caster 
must become used to the new form. The align- 
ment of the host or receptacle is that of the 
occupying lifeforce. 

The caster can shift freely from the host to 
the receptacle if within the 10-foot-per-level 
range. Each attempt to shift requires one 
round, The spell ends when the wizard shifts 
from the jar to his own body. 


Ms 


= 

= 
\% 
’ 


533 


A successful dispel magic spell cast on the 
host can drive the caster of the magic jar spell 
back into the receptacle and prevent him from 
making any attacks for 1d4 rounds plus 1 
round per level of the caster of the dispel. The 
base success chance is 50%, plus or minus 5% 
per level difference between the casters. A suc- 
cessful dispel magic cast against the receptacle 
forces the occupant back into his own body. If 
the wizard who cast the magic jar is forced 
back into his own body, the spell ends. 

If the host body is slain, the caster returns to 
the receptacle, if within range, and the lifeforce 
of the host departs (i.e., it is dead). If the host 
body is slain beyond the range of the spell, 
both the host and the caster die. 

Any lifeforce with nowhere to go is treated 
as slain unless recalled by a raise dead, resur- 
rection, or similar spell. 

If the body of the caster is slain, his lifeforce 
survives if it is in either the receptacle or the 
host. If the receptacle is destroyed while the 
caster’s lifeforce occupies it, the caster is irrev- 
ocably slain. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Magic Manager 
(Chronomancy) 
Level: 6 
Range: 0 


Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 6 
Duration: | rd./2 levels 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: Neg. ` 


This spell delays the time normally spent 
each round recovering from the effects of spell- 
casting. This allows for multiple spellcastings, 
but 2 rounds of rest are required after the 
magic manager’s duration ends, during which 
the caster can perform no casting or combat 
actions (drinking potions and moving are 
allowed). 

The round after this spell is cast, the caster 
rolls initiative and adds the casting time of 
whatever spell he wishes to cast. At that spell’s 
conclusion, the chronomancer rolls another 
1d10 (to assess the situation and choose a new 
spell) and adds the next casting time. When the 
total reaches 30 or a multiple of 30, a new 
round has begun. 

This method is used for the duration of the 
spell or until the chronomancer stops casting 
spells. If the chronomancer performs an action 


N$ Magic Mirror f 


other than casting spells at any time, the action 
takes place in the following round, and then the 
count starts over again the round after that. 

For example, assume a chronomancer casts 3 
spells in a row, with casting times of 5, 4, and 6, 
and rolls initiatives of 9, 1, and 7. Two spells are 
cast in the first round (totals of 14, then 19), and 
the third spell is cast in the second round with 
an initiative of 2 (32 total 30). The chrono- 
mancer then decides to drink a potion. The 
potion is imbibed in round 3, and the chrono- 
mancer can start casting spells again in round 4. 

Only spells of 4th level or lower can be cast 
while using the magic manager, and no spell 
can be cast more than once while the spell is 
still running. Doing so ends the magic man- 
ager’s effect. 

The material components are a humming- 
bird’s tongue and some poppy seeds. 

Notes: Restricted to chronomancers; com- 
mon. 


Magic Mirror 
(Divination, Enchantment) 
(Artifice) 


Level: 4 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: | hr. 
Duration: | rd./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


By means of this spell, the wizard changes a 
normal mirror into a scrying device similar to a 
crystal ball. The details of the use of such a 
scrying device are found in the DMG (in 
Appendix 3: Magical Item Descriptions, under 
the description for the crystal ball). 

The following spells can be cast through a 
magic mirror: comprehend languages, read 
magic, tongues, and infravision. The following 
spells have a 5% chance per level of the caster 
of operating correctly: detect magic, detect 
good or evil, and message. The base chances 
for the subject to detect any crystal ball-like 
spell are listed in the DMG (again, under the 
description for the crystal ball). 

The mirror used must be of finely wrought 
and highly polished silver and cost not less than 
1,000 gp. This mirror is not harmed by casting 
the spell, but the other material components— 
the eye of a hawk, an eagle, or even a roc, and 
nitric acid, copper, and zinc—are used up. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


eet carer} 


\\ 


Magic Missile 
(Evocation) 
(Force) 


Level; 1 

Range: 60 yds. + 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 1 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: 1—5 targets in a 10-ft. cube 
Saving Throw: None 


Use of the magic missile spell creates up to 
five missiles of magical energy that dart forth 
from the wizard’s fingertip and unerringly 
strike their target. This includes enemy crea- 
tures in a melee. The target creature must be 
seen or otherwise detected to be hit, however, 
SO near-total concealment, such as that offered 
by arrow slits, can render the spell ineffective. 
Likewise, the caster must be able to identify 
the target. He cannot direct a magic missile to 
“Strike the commander of the legion,” unless 
he can single out the commander from the rest 
of the soldiers. Specific parts of a creature can- 
not be singled out. Inanimate objects (locks, 
etc.) cannot be damaged by the spell, and any 
attempt to do so wastes the missiles to no 


ie aaa aT Ea a Pre eee 


534 


~ Magic Mouth gr 


effect. Against creatures, each missile inflicts 
1d4+1 points of damage. 

For every two extra levels of experience, the 
wizard gains an additional missile—he has two 
at 3rd level, three at 5th level, four at 7th level, 
etc., up to a total of five missiles at 9th level. If 
the wizard has multiple missile capability, he 
can have them strike a single target creature or 
several creatures within a [0-foot cube as 
desired. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Magic Missile Reflection 
(Abjuration, Alteration) 


Level: 2 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 2 

Duration: 2 rds. + 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This dweomer weaves an invisible field 
around the body of the recipient that reflects 
magic missiles entirely back at their source, so 
that the protected creature takes no harm. The 
missiles are reflected for full damage unless 
the source is protected against them. 

The spell can be transferred by the protected 
being to another creature by willing the magic 
to move and speaking the one-word initial 
incantation as the new recipient is touched. The 
incantation is made initially by the caster as 
she touches a spell recipient, who probably 
hears it well enough to repeat it. A being so 
bestowing the spell need not be a spellcaster. 
These transfers can be done as often as desired, 
but only once per round, and only one creature 
is protected at any given time. The spell dura- 
tion is not extended or shortened by transfers. 

This spell was once known as Shalantha's 
kiss because that long-ago sorceress of Myth 
Drannor bestowed its protection on compan- 
ions in the adventuring band she led by means 
of a kiss. 

The material component of the spell is a 
drop of the caster’s saliva. 

Notes: Rare or very rare in the FORGOTTEN 
REALMS setting; virtually unknown elsewhere. 


Magic Mouth 
(Alteration) 


Level: 2 

Range: 10 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 2 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 object 
Saving Throw: None 


When this spell is cast, the wizard imbues 
the chosen object with an enchanted mouth that 
suddenly appears and speaks its message when 
a specified event occurs. The message, which 
must be of 25 words or less, can be in any lan- 
guage known by the spellcaster, and can be 
delivered over a period of one turn. The mouth 
cannot speak magical spells or use command 
words. It does, however, move to the words 
articulated—if it is placed upon a statue, the 
mouth of the statue would actually move and 
appear to speak. Of course, the magic mouth 
can be placed upon a tree, rock, door, or any 
other object, excluding intelligent members of 
the animal or vegetable kingdoms. 

The spell functions when specific conditions 
are fulfilled, according to the command of the 
spellcaster. Some examples are to speak “to the 
first creature that touches you,” or “to the first 
creature that passes within 30 feet.” Com- 
mands can be as general or as detailed as 
desired, although only visual and audible trig- 
gers can be used, such as the following: “Speak 
only when a venerable female human carrying 
a sack of groat clusters sits crosslegged within 
1 foot.” Such visual triggers can react to a char- 
acter using the disguise ability. Command 
range is 5 yards per level of the wizard, so a 
6th-level wizard can command the magic 
mouth to speak at a maximum encounter range 
of 30 yards (“Speak when a winged creature 
comes within 30 yards.”). The spell lasts until 
the speak command can be fulfilled; thus, the 
spell duration is variable. A magic mouth can- 
not distinguish invisible creatures, alignments, 
level, Hit Dice, or class, except by external 
garb. If desired, the effect can be keyed to a 
specific noise or spoken word. 

The material component of this spell is a 
small bit of honeycomb. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


a a aaa 


535 


Magic Resistance — Pluma 


Magic Resistance — Pluma 
(Abjuration) 


Level: 4 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: | turn 

Area of Effect: 5 ft./level radius 
Saving Throw: None 


This potent spell combines the effects of a 
minor globe of invulnerability with some 
unique features of its own. The spell cancels 
out all magic effects within the area of effect, 
including spells directed at the caster, the use 
or effects of magical items, and abilities. 

The magic resistance spell can be broken by 
a successful dispel magic, but it is treated as 
16th level for purposes of dispelling. 

The material component for the spell is a 
small, clay image of Qotal, which is crumbled 
as the spell is cast. 

Notes: Restricted to practitioners of pluma 
magic (the Maztica setting); common. 


Magic Resistance Undone 
A MYSTARA Setting spell, aka pierce magic 
resistance. 


Magic Staff 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
(Artifice) 


Level: 5 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: Special 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: The wizard’s staff 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell allows a wizard’s staff to store one 
spell level for every three levels of the caster. 
Thus, a 9th- level wizard can store three spell 
levels (three 1st-level spells, one Ist and one 
2nd, or one 3rd-level spell). 

Spells that are to be stored in the staff must 
be memorized normally by the wizard. The 
spells are then cast as normal when charging 
the staff; casting requires the spell’s normal 
casting time plus one round. The spell is wiped 
from memory and material components are 
consumed. All spells to be stored must be cast 
into the staff within 1 turn. All stored spells 
have a casting time of 3. 


Spells remain in the staff until cast or dis- 
pelled, or up to 1 hour per level of the caster. 
After this time, all stored spells fade away. 
(Note that on low magic worlds, M4 or less, the 
staff will not function, though it will function 
normally if taken to a higher magic world 
before the duration expires.) 

Only wizards who know the magic staff spell 
can cast spells from another wizard’s magic 
staff. This applies to wizards who have never 
learned or could not normally cast the spells 
stored in the staff. It is common for the staff's 
owner to implant a command word that must 
be used by anyone wishing to employ the staff. 

The material component for this spell is a 
staff cut from an ash tree. For each spell level 
the wizard intends to imbue into the staff, it 
must be inlaid with rubies worth at least 1,000 
8p. 
Notes: Uncommon spell (ToM). 


Magic Tailor, Odeen’s 


See Odeen’s magic tailor. 


Magical Doom, Xult’s 
See Xult’s magical doom. 


Magical Minions 
Athasian Dragon-King magic; 
psionic component renders the 
spell uncastable by wizards. 
Magical Plague 


Athasian Dragon-King magic; 
psionic component renders the 


spell uncastable by wizards. wie 


Magical Susceptibility 
(Alteration) 


Level: 6 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: | 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell gives the creature a —1 penalty to 
saving throws against one type of special attack 
(paralyzation/poison/death magic, rod/wand/ 
staff, breath weapon, etc.). If the creature fails a 
saving throw vs. spell, roll percentile dice and 
consult the table to find which type of saving 
throw is affected. The caster can change the per- 
centile roll by +1% per experience level, exert- 
ing some control over the category affected. 

The penalty is permanent, although it can be 
negated by means of a limited wish or wish. A 
remove curse Cast by a spellcaster of equal or 
higher level is also effective. The creature’s ini- 
tial saving throw against this spell is not 
affected by any penalty the spell might inflict. 

Multiple castings of this spell can affect a 
single saving throw up to —1 per five levels of 
the caster (—2 at 12th level, —3 at 15th, -4 at 
20th, and so on). 

Notes: Very rare spell. Known to be in 
Prismal’s Pocket Library, Vol. IX. 


d% Category 
01-20 Paralyzation/poison/death magic 
21-40  Rod/staff/wand 
41-60 _— Petrification/polymorph 
61-70 Breath weapon 
71-00 Spell 
Magnetism 
(Alteration) 
Level: 3 
Range: 60 yds. 


Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 3 

Duration: 3 rds./level 

Area of Effect: 30-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell can be used in two ways, depend- 
ing on the desires of the wu jen at the moment 
of casting. If cast upon himself, the spell gives 
the wu jen the ability to draw iron and steel 
items to his hand upon command, 

The item must be in the area of effect. Only 
one item can be called per round. If the item is 
held by another, that character is allowed a sav- 
ing throw vs. spell to resist the effect. Repeated 
attempts can be made upon the same item, pro- 
vided each attempt is made in a different 
round. 

A wu jen could attempt to snatch weapons 
from the grasp of others or change the flight of 
arrows. If the item summoned has greater mass 
than the wu jen, the effect is opposite—the wu 
jen is drawn to the item. Attempting to magne- 
tize a man in metal armor normally results in 
the wu jen being dragged to the item, not 
always a desirable result. The spell is powerful 
enough to pull the wu jen through the air; it can 
be an effective method of crossing chasms pro- 
vided there is a sufficient mass of iron on the 
other side, 

If cast upon another, that individual is 
allowed a saving throw vs. spell to avoid the 
effect. Thereafter, all iron and steel items 
within 30 feet of the individual are drawn to 
that point. Items in the possession of creatures 
allow the creature a saving throw as explained 
above. Again, if the mass of any item is greater 
than that of the target point, the direction of 
movement is reversed. In either use, weapons 
drawn by this spell cause no damage since they 
are not wielded or controlled by a conscious 
mind. 

The material component for this spell is a 
piece of lodestone. 


a aa aa aaa, 


537 


Magnificent Mansion, Mordenkainen's 


The reverse of this spell, demagnetize, can- 
cels the effects of magnetism. The material 
component is a small wooden rod. 

Notes: Common in oriental settings; other- 
wise very rare. 


Magnificent Mansion, 
Mordenkainen’s 
See Mordenkainen’s magnificent mansion. 


Mahlorn’s Mental Exchange 
See life force exchange. 


Mahlorn’s Mental Transfer 
See life force transfer. 


Mailed Might 
(Iilusion/Phantasm) 
(Shadow) 


Level: 3 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 3 
Duration: 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: None 


By means of this spell, a wizard protects 
himself or herself or another touched creature 
with temporary, illusory armor. The armor has 
no weight, nor does it encumber its wearer or 
in any way affect movement or spellcasting. To 
the wearer, it is invisible and undetectable, 
making no metallic sounds when struck or 
moving, and so on. To others, it appears as 
translucent, ghostly armor, visible in outline 
but nonreflective and soundless. 

It protects the wearer as if it were chain mail 
(AC 5). Minor illusory displacement makes 
enemy melee attacks less effective, reducing the 
actual damage from each melee attack striking 
the caster by 3 points. The phantom armor also 
confers a +1 saving throw bonus against all 
attacks protected against by magical armor. 

Furthermore, the armored creature looks as 
if it were shadowed by far larger, more power- 
ful armored creatures who stand behind it and 
move with it. Creatures of semi- or low Intelli- 
gence (2 to 7) who observe this effect may flee 
in fear of the strange and powerful armored 
creature they face. More intelligent creatures 
are often disconcerted and may respect the 
potential powers of the protected being more 
than they otherwise would. 

While the armor itself cannot be success- 


fully disbelieved, any ability or magic that 
counters illusions (such as true seeing) allows 
its user to ignore the effects of this spell. 

The material component of this spell is a 
small fragment of real armor: plate or metal 
mail-weave. 

Notes: Rare spell in the FORGOTTEN REALMS 
setting; virtually unknown elsewhere. Known 
to be in a rare tome, Selvar's Ineffable Conjura- 
tions, Magic, and Phantasms. 


Maintain 
(Abjuration, Necromancy) 
Level: 6 
Range: Touch 


Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: | turn 
Duration: 1 day/level 
Area of Effect: | creature 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell is used on the Savage Coast in the 
Rep STEEL setting. The affected creature is 
maintained at his or her current stage of Red 
Curse effect for the duration of the spell. A 
recipient in the Time of Grace remains there 
(except for suffering the loss of a single ability 
point); a recipient in the Time of Loss or the 
Time of Change stays at exactly the same point 
as when the spell is cast. The use of a Legacy 
ability by a recipient of maintain immediately 
dispels the maintain spell. 

As mentioned, this spell does not prevent the 
loss of the initial point from the appropriate 
ability score, nor does it eliminate or heal any 
detrimental effects. It does not work on Inheri- 
tors. If the recipient affected by a successful 
deplete spell (for which the caster need make 
only a normal attack roll, without the —4 
penalty), the maintain spell is immediately 
eliminated, and the full time called for by the 
deplete spell is instantaneously applied to the 
Time of Loss and Change. 

Since cinnabryl is difficult to find in some 
places, priests developed a spell to counteract 
some of the effects of the Red Curse. After 
some work, wizards were able to duplicate the 
spell’s effects. 

This spell is used throughout the Savage 
Coast, but most commonly in Robrenn, Eus- 
dria, Renardy, Bellayne, and Herath. In several 
small towns, the village priest or wizard makes 
rounds, casting the spell on all who need it. 
This holds off detrimental effects, and also 
keeps most of the common folk in those small 


a hE pe eee ee ee S 


538 


Major Domination 


towns from using Legacies. 

The spell requires at least a week’s worth of 
undepleted cinnabryl. This must be touched to 
the recipient’s head at the end of casting, but is 
not consumed in the casting. The caster touches 
the target creature while reciting the spell’s 
verbal component to activate the spell. 

Notes: Found in the RED STEEL setting, com- 
mon; otherwise virtually unknown. 


Major Cloak 
(IHusion/Phantasm) 


Level: 9 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: | 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: | land mass, 5,000 sq. mi. 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell was used by the Irda to cloak the 
island Anaiatha. It causes a land mass that is 
surrounded by water to become invisible to all 
except the species that normally inhabit it. The 
island cannot be detected by sight or by scry- 
ing. Furthermore, the illusion affects all who 
come within one mile of its coastline, causing 
them to take a route around the island while 
making them believe that they are taking a 
direct route through the “waters” where the 
island is actually located. 

There is one drawback to this spell; it does 
not prevent the cloak from radiating intense 
magic, and those who scry the seas for magic 
may be able to detect it. Because wizards of the 
Mischta cannot reach 18th level, they have not 
been able to use this spell to hide Selasia. 

The required material components have not 
been recorded, and the Irda have not revealed 
them, but it is certain that there are one or more 
exotic components required. 

Notes: Known in the DRAGONLANCE setting; 
very rare. 


Major Creation 
(Illusion/Phantasm) 
(Shadow) 


Level: 5 

Range: 10 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 turn 
Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


Like the minor creation spell, the major cre- 
ation spell enables the wizard to pull wisps of 
materia) from the Demiplane of Shadow to cre- 
ate an item of nonliving, vegetable nature— 
soft goods, rope, wood, etc. The wizard can 
also create mineral objects—stone, crystal, 
metal, etc. The item created cannot exceed 1 
cubic foot per level of the spellcaster in vol- 
ume. The duration of the created item varies 


with its relative hardness and rarity: 
Vegetable matter 2 hrs,/level 
Stone or crystal l hr/level 
Precious metals 2 turns/level 
Gems 1 turn/level 
Mithral* 2 rds /level 
Adamantite 1 rd./level 


“includes similar rare metals. 


Attempting to use any of these as material 
components in a spell causes the spell to fail. 
The spellcaster must have at least a tiny piece 
of matter of the same type as the item he plans 
to create—a bit of twisted hemp to create rope, 
a chip of stone to create a boulder, and so on. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Major Delousing, Nimodes’ 
See Nimodes’ major delousing. 


Major Domination 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
(Mentalism) 


Level: 7 

Range: 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 7 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw; Neg. 


This spell resembles the Sth-level spell dom- 
ination, but the telepathic link between caster 
and subject is even stronger. When this spell is 
cast, the subject receives a saving throw vs. 
spell at a —2 penalty. Wisdom adjustments 
apply, but natural resistance to charm spells 
doesn’t. A creature making its saving throw is 
slowed for 1d4 rounds. 

The caster can try to dominate a different 
creature each round subject to two limitations: 
The wizard can control only one creature at a 
time, and the wizard can try to dominate a spe- 
cific creature only once in a single casting of 


a RES ees 


539 


N$ Major Enchantment, Serrel’s r 


this spell. A protection from evil effect prevents 
the caster from exercising active control over a 
creature, but it does not prevent control from 
being established. 

The wizard forges a strong telepathic link 
with the subject. Language and intelligence are 
no barrier: As long as the subject is not mind- 
less, the caster can force the creature to do as 
he wishes, While the spell must be cast initially 
on a creature within range, the wizard can 
command the creature from any distance, as 
long as both are on the same plane. 

If a creature strongly resists, the wizard may 
have to concentrate (doing nothing else that 
round) to enforce his control. Extreme acts and 
those of self-destruction allow an immediate 
gains a new saving throw with no penalty and a 
possible +1 to +4 bonus, depending on the cir- 
cumstances. In any event, the creature also 
receives periodic saving throws in order to 
break free of the spell. These vary with the 
Intelligence score, level, or Hit Dice of the 
individual, whichever is most favorable. 

Notes: Uncommon for mentalists; otherwise 
very rare. (Updated from POLYHEDRON Newszine.) 


Major Enchantment, Serrel’s 
See Serrel’s major enchantment. 


Major Missile, Snilloc’s 


See Snilloc’s major missile. 


Major Paradox 
(Chronomancy) 


Level: 9 

Range: 0 

Components; V, S 
Casting Time: 1d4 hrs. 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell changes an important event in the 
caster’s past. This is just like paradox, but the 
event can be up to one year past. Such an event 
could be changing from a Historian to a Seer, 
acquiring a proficiency in prophecy rather than 
alchemy, or deciding to research a new spell rather 
than create a new magical item. The event must be 
one the chronomancer had control of at the time, 
and something should always be given up. 

The change should always be evident but not 
necessarily work the way the caster hopes for. 
The DM should also feel free to remove any 
items or relationships he feels would not have 
been found as a result of the caster’s meddling. 
After all, the things that are changed likely 
were important to the chronomancer at one 
time. Also, the turbulence has a 50% chance of 
attracting a time dimensional or a Guardian 
from the Demiplane of Time. 

Notes: Restricted to chronomancers; common. 


Maladweomer 
(Alteration) 
Reversible 


Level: 3 

Range: 10 yds. 

Casting Time: 3 
Components: V, S, M 
Duration: 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


N Malraz’s Dramatic Death A 


By means of this spell, an wizard causes any 
and all spells and spell-like powers cast or 
wielded by a target creature, including items 
used, to be at the nadir of their effectiveness; 
that is, any damage caused by offensive magics 
will be the minimum possible, saving throws 
against such magics are enhanced by a +4 
bonus, and spells that are extant (such as magi- 
cal charms) and ongoing at the time the malad- 
weomer takes effect are reduced in efficacy. 
For instance, a charmed individual who had 
previously failed to save against the spell might 
immediately be allowed another saving throw, 
with the +4 bonus. 

The material component of this spell is a 
small, clear glass or crystal prism, which is 
smashed (with a weapon-blow, or against a 
wall, rock, or floor) in the spellcasting. 

The reverse, dweomerboost (also called 
empradweomer) permits all magic cast or 
wielded by the recipient creature to be of maxi- 
mum efficacy (maximum damage and effects) 
for one round. If the caster makes a saving 
throw vs. spell at the end of the first round, the 
dweomerboost lasts a second round. 

While the material component is the same as 
for maladweomer, the crystal need not be 
smashed; rather, it vanishes when spellcasting 
is complete. 

Both forms of the spell can be cast upon the 
wizard, so that maladweomer would enable an 
wizard to lessen his powers when compelled to 
work magic against his wishes. 

Notes: Very rare in the FORGOTTEN REALMS 
setting (mostly by a special wizard type, the 
incantatrix); otherwise virtually unknown. 
(Updated from DraGon Magazine.) 


Malec-Keth’s Flame Fist 
(Evocation) 
(Fire) 


Level: 7 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 1 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: 1 creature or object 
Saving Throw: Special 


When this spell is completed, one of the 
caster’s hands (his choice) bursts into light and 
is surrounded by an aura of flame. The caster 
suffers no damage from this effect, and the 
illumination is equal to that of a torch. 


An opponent touched by the wizard (an 
attack roll is required) must attempt a saving 
throw vs. spell. If successful, the touched crea- 
ture suffers 1d4+2 points of fire damage and 
the flame remains on the caster’s hand (he can 
make further attacks with it until the spell 
duration expires). If the saving throw is failed, 
the flame leaves the caster’s hand to surround 
the creature’s body in an aura of searing fire. 
The superheated aura burns for 1 round, inflict- 
ing 1d4 points of damage per level of the 
caster. 

Instead of attacking a creature, the caster 
may choose to touch any single object, which 
is automatically surrounded by the searing aura 
for | round and must make a successful item 
saving throw vs. magical fire or be destroyed. 
The aura can surround an object up to 5 cubic 
feet in volume per level of the caster, 

Notes: Uncommon spell (ToM). 


Malefic Meld, Strahd’s 
See Strahd’s malefic meld. 


Malraz’s Dramatic Death 
(Illusion/Phantasm) 


Level: 7 

Range: 0 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: | 
Duration: 3 rds./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell creates a programmed illusion of 
the caster dying a horrible death, while the true 
caster is cloaked by improved invisibility, as the 
4th-level wizard spell. The intent is to get the 
wizard’s enemy off his trail, giving him time to 
either escape or launch a counterattack. A 
series of different demises are available to the 
caster, depending on the command word whis- 
pered. The words are: 

Air: The wizard appears to gasp for breath, 
dying of suffocation. 

Earth: The wizard appears to turn to stone. 

Fire: The wizard appears to burst into 
flames, screaming and dying horribly. 

Water: The wizard seems to flail about in a 
pool of liquid and drown. 

Blade: Wounds appear on the wizard, as if 
from a melee weapon. 


ERE I TS ET Ma ena ee 


541 


Manor's Mind Vision 


Bow: The wizard appears to be killed from a 
missile weapon, such as an arrow through the 
heart. 

Seizure: A shocked expression appears on 
the wizard’s face, then he keels over. 

Shock: Sparks fly about as the wizard seems 
to be electrocuted. 

After the death scene ends, a convincing 
looking illusionary corpse is left behind for the 
duration of the spell. Viewers attempting to 
disbelieve must spend one round examining the 
scene to have a chance at success. The spell 
also can be cast upon a projected image (see 
the 6th level spell project image) to truly mys- 
tify opponents. 

The somatic component of the spell requires 
the caster to clutch at his chest while whisper- 
ing the command word. 

Notes: Rare or very rare spell. (Updated 
from POLYHEDRON Newszine.) 


Manor’s Mind Vision 
(Divination) 
(Mentalism) 


Level: 7 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: 2 rd./level 

Area of Effect: 90 ft. radius 
Saving Throw: None 


Manor's mind vision is essentially a more 
powerful version of Manor's mindsight. It is 
subject to the same restrictions and bonuses in 
terms of movement, combat, and concentra- 
tion, as the mindsight spell, and has the same 
area. It has three main differences: 

* The mind vision spell allows the wizard to 
view any area as if it was brightly lit. 

e Divinations of 4th level or less can be cast to 
combine with mind vision at any time. 

* Any illusions created by 4th level spells or 
less will be apparent as such, and the true 
form of any item or object polymorphed or 
altered by a 4th level spell or less (or an 
equivalent, such as a potion of polymorph 
self, or a wand of illusion) can be easily deter- 
mined. Invisible objects and creatures can be 
seen. 

* The caster’s enhanced perceptions operate in 
his normal field of vision without concentra- 
tion to a distance of 90 feet. 


The basic parameters of the spell follow: 

e Everything in the area of effect is perceived 
simultaneously; the wizard need not look up 
or down to see objects out of his normal field 
of vision while concentrating. 

e Using the ability granted by the spell in order 
to see outside the caster’s normal field of 
vision requires concentration. A caster con- 
centrating on “seeing” cannot move, cast 
spells, or engage in any strenuous activities 
while doing so. If the caster’s concentration is 
broken, the spell is not ruined and the caster 
can resume viewing after the interruption is 
resolved. 

e No actual sensory organs are needed for the 
mind vision spell—the caster being blinded or 
blindfolded does not hinder its use. The mind 
vision spell can be used in conjunction with 
darksense, infravision, ultravision, and other 
sight-enhancing spells of 4th level or less; the 
enhanced perceptions have the area of effect 
of the mind vision spell. 

e The mind vision spell can be combined with 
other divinations of 4th level or less: detect 
invisible, detect evil, detect magic, etc. The 
area of effect of the enhanced perceptions is 
the area of the mind vision spell. 


542 


N Manshoon’s Xorn Talons d 


The material component of the spell is two 
eyes from a being originating on a plane other 
than the Prime Material plane, immersed in a 
mixture of a potion of ESP and a potion of 
gaseous form. These are destroyed as the spell 
is cast. 

Notes: Uncommon for diviners; otherwise 
rare or very rare. Known to be in Manors Man- 


ual of Sight. (Updated from DraGoN Magazine.) 


Manor’s Mindsight 
(Alteration) 
(Mentalism) 


Level: 5 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 6 

Duration: 5 rds./level 

Area of Effect: 20 ft. + 5 ft./level 
Saving Throw: None 


By means of this spell, a wizard gains the 
ability to concentrate and “see” everything in 
the spell’s area of effect. This happens regard- 
less of intervening objects, but is subject to 
existing lighting. Everything in the area of 
effect is perceived simultaneously; the wizard 
need not look up or down to see objects out of 
his normal field of vision while concentrating. 

Using the ability granted by the spell 
requires concentration. A caster concentrating 
on “seeing” cannot move, cast spells, or engage 
in any strenuous activities while doing so. If 
the caster’s concentration is broken, the spell is 
not ruined and the caster can resume viewing 
after the interruption is resolved. 

No actual sensory organs are needed for the 
mindsight spell—the caster being blinded or 
blindfolded does not hinder its use. The mind- 
sight spell can be used in conjunction with 
darksense, infravision, ultravision, and other 
sight-enhancing spells of 4th level or less; the 
enhanced perceptions have the area of effect of 
the mindsight spell. 

The spell has limitations. It allows no spe- 
cial benefit with respect to illusions, nor distin- 
guishes between magical and nonmagical 
items, nor allows discovery of alignment. The 
caster cannot see traps, tricks, pits, magical 
symbols, or other invisible or magically con- 
cealed items or objects unless able to detect 
such items normally. 

However, the mindsight spell can be com- 
bined with other divinations of 4th level or 
less, provided these are cast first: detect invis- 


ible, detect evil, detect magic, etc. The area of 
effect of the enhanced perceptions is the area 
of the mindsight spell. 

The spell requires the preserved eye of a 
blink dog, which is reusable. 

Notes: Uncommon for diviners; otherwise 
rare or very rare. Known to be in Manor's Man- 
ual of Sight. (Updated from DraGon Magazine.) 


Manshoon’s Xorn Talons 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 
(Earth) 


Level: 5 

Range: 10 ft. to 70 ft. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 5 

Duration: | turn + 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell, also known as stony hands, cre- 
ates an invisible half-moon arc in front of the 
caster, set from 10 feet to 70 feet distant. The 
arc is 12 feet broad at its center, and the tips of 
its curving “horns” are 20 feet apart. To func- 
tion at all, the spell must be cast on a solid, 
level surface, such as a floor, lawn, clearing, or 
flat roof (the surface can be covered by water 
no more than a foot deep). If solid, nonliving, 
objects (such as walls, furniture, or stalag- 
mites) are in the area of casting, or if the space 
is too small to permit the half-moon to fully 
form, the spell does not take effect and is 
wasted. 


Any living being except the caster who 
enters any part of the crescent-shaped area of 
effect is instantly attacked by 2d4 stony taloned 
arms. These nonliving, unintelligent magical 
constructs resemble the upper limbs of living 
xorn. They erupt from the ground and grasp at 
any targets for 1d2 points of crushing damage 
each (THACO 6); a successful hit means the 
clawed arm holds its victim fast, inflicting no 
further damage on it. (The talons rise only 
where an intruder steps, not all across the half- 
moon, so the area of effect can be determined 
only by trial and error.) 

Once they’ve grabbed victims, the arms sim- 
ply hold on until the spell expires. Trapped 
individuals cannot move beyond the stretch of 
their limbs. They suffer —2 penalties to all 
attack, damage, and saving throw rolls, and 
lose all Dexterity-related Armor Class bonuses. 

The talons do no more damage, but a trapped 
individual can try to tear free of all of them 


el Re RE ITT eae a See ee ne 


543 


N Mantle, Alustriel’s A 


once per round. A single successful open doors 
roll is required; each failed attempt inflicts 1 
point of damage upon the victim. Once free of 
the talons, the individual can leave the area 
unhindered. 

The talons are AC 0, and each must be dealt 
55 points damage to shatter it. Spells that affect 
stone can be used against the talons (stone to 
flesh and rock to mud both affect the talons for 
1d4+2 rounds, lowering their effective AC to 7, 
and making them suffer double damage from 
all attacks), and a passwall spell destroys all 
talons in a pathway equal in extent to its usual 
area of effect (even talons that have not mani- 
fested). Spells such as move earth, which phys- 
ically affect terrain, do not work against the 
talons. Dispel magic spells shorten the duration 
of talons by one round per spell, but have no 
apparent immediate effect—they do not cause 
talons to open, pause, or fade away. A dispel 
magic cast in an area does not prevent this spell 
from functioning if no talons have yet mani- 
fested, but does shorten the spell duration as 
noted. 

The material component of this spell is a 
piece of xorn flesh, bone, talon, or hide. 

Notes: Known to Manshoon, a powerful 
wizard in the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Mantle, Alustriel’s 
See Alustriel’s mantle. 


Mantle, [lyykur’s 
See Ilyykur’s mantle. 


Manyjaws 
(Evocation) 
(Force) 


Level: 3 

Range: 10 ft./level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 3 
Duration: 6 rds. 

Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: 


This spell brings into being one pair of 
clashing jaws per level of the caster, up to a 
total of 10 jaws, floating in midair. These are 
actually strings of disembodied teeth, without 
gums, lips, or gullets. These jaws attack one 
creature per round, and fly about at a move- 
ment rate of 15 (MC: A) in accordance with the 
caster’s silent act of will. If other spelicasting 
is undertaken by the caster, the jaws either 


hang stationary or, if already attacking a crea- 
ture, continue until the caster resumes control 
over them. 

The jaws are constructs of force and can 
penetrate any nonmagical armor. The jaws 
automatically hit their target each round. Each 
jaw bites for 1d4 points of damage per round. 
Magical armor of any sort (not bracers or 
rings) provides some protection from the jaws. 
Their damage is reduced by | point per jaw for 
each magical plus of the armor worn (/eather 
armor +2 reduces the damage by 2 points per 
jaw). A target creature that makes a successful 
saving throw vs. spell takes half damage from 
each jaw, with a minimum of | point of dam- 
age being inflicted per jaw. 

The material component of this spell is at 
least two teeth. The teeth can be of any size, 
can be from any sort of creatures, and are con- 
sumed by the spell. 

Notes: Very rare in the FORGOTTEN REALMS 
setting; virtually unknown elsewhere. 


Map, Muirara’s 


See Muirara’s map. 


March 
(Alteration) 


Level: 1 

Range: Touch 

Casting Time: 1 
Components: V, S, M 
Duration: 1 hr./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


Casting this spell allows an encumbered per- 
son to walk at his normal unencumbered move- 
ment rate. Because the movement is powered 
by the spell, the person suffers no more physi- 
cal fatigue than he would sitting in a chair for 
the same length of time. This spell must be cast 
on a subject able to walk; a subject must be 
able to lift his burden in the first place. The 
spell is dissipated when the subject stops walk- 
ing for more than one round or picks up more 
than his maximum encumbrance. More than 
one person can be affected; the duration is 
divided evenly among those touched when the 
spell is cast. 

The material component of this spell is a 
pinch of pepper. 

Notes: Common for apportation specialists, 
uncommon for transmuters; otherwise rare. 
(Updated from DraGoN Magazine). 


544 


5 mee ee 


Marvelous Shield, Drawmij’s 
See Drawmij’s marvelous shield. 


Mask 


Reversed form, see aura. 


Mask of Death 


(Necromancy) 


Level: 4 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: | hr./level 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: None 


By casting this spell, a wizard can change a 
corpse’s features to make it appear to be some- 
one else. The caster must possess an accurate 
portrait of the individual to be duplicated, or 
must have a clear mental image of the person 
based on personal experience. 

If animate dead is cast on the body, it can be 
animated to become a zombie that looks 
exactly like the copied person. The double is a 
mindless automaton, however, having all the 
characteristics of a normal zombie. 

This spell can be cast on a creature that has 
already become a zombie. A wizard who does 
not control the zombie must successfully touch 
the zombie in combat (a successful attack roll 
is required). 

The material component of this spell is a 
drop of doppleganger’s blood. 

Notes: Uncommon spell (ToM). 


Mask, Ottar’s 
See Ottar’s mask. 


Mask Bloodline 


—— 


(Illusion) 


Level: 2 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S 
Duration: 2 turns/level 
Casting Time: 4 

Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell is cast on blooded characters to 
hide.the derivation and strength of their blood- 
lines from others. Bloodlines, because of their 
divine nature, are somewhat resistant to being 
hidden; the subject therefore must roll a saving 


throw vs. spell even if he wants the spell to 
work. The bloodline’s strength adds a modifier 
to the roll as follows: tainted, —2; minor, —0; 
major, +2; great, +4. 

If the subject fails the saving throw, the 
bloodline is completely masked; nothing short 
of a limited wish will reveal its derivation or 
strength for the duration of the spell. If the sub- 
ject’s saving throw succeeds, obvious charac- 
teristics of the bloodline (such as a bloodmark 
or other secondary characteristic) are masked, 
but a know bloodline derivation or know blood- 
line strength spell will succeed normally. 

The subject of the spell cancels the effect if 
he uses any blood ability during the spell’s 
duration. This means that some characters will 
be forced to operate at below their normal abil- 
ities for the duration of the spell if they want to 
keep their bloodlines secret (such as characters 
with heightened ability). 

Ershegh and awnshegh characters are diffi- 
cult to affect with this spell, since they almost 
always bear unconcealable marks of their 
bloodlines. The DM may wish to increase the 
modifier to their saving throws or disallow the 
use of the spell altogether unless it is cast in 
conjunction with another powerful illusion or 
polymorph spell. 

Notes: Common on Cerilia, the BIRTHRIGHT 
setting; unknown elsewhere. 


Masque Mask — Drow 
(Illusion/Phantasm) 


Level: 1 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 1 

Duration: 2 or 3 rds. 

Area of Effect: The caster’s face 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell is used by drow wizards who wish 
to conceal their identities for a short encounter 
or momentary sighting. It works only on living 
flesh, and only on a caster with a face (although 
all faces, if the caster has more than one, are 
affected). 

The masque mask transforms the surface 
appearance of the caster’s facial features into a 
shifting blur, studded with eyes. The caster’s 
own eyes—however many currently have 
sight—will appear in their customary locations 
and with their usual appearance (that is, a mage 
blind in one eye will only display the “good” 
eye; and one with more than two eyes will 


a aa a aaa aaa aaa lai aia. 


545 


~ Masquerade a 


show them all, even if trying to conceal the fact 
with eyepatches or shutting eyes during this 
spell). This effect cannot foil true seeing or any 
magic that penetrates illusions, and in any case 
lasts only for 2 or 3 rounds (even roll = 2 
rounds, odd = 3 rounds; the caster has no con- 
trol over duration). The spell does not conceal 
hair hue or cut, general skin coloration, ear 
shapes, and so on, and is therefore seldom able 
to conceal the race of the caster. 

The spell’s name comes from its use at rev- 
els, to conceal the caster’s identity when 
unmasked—but it is more often used when 
fleeing a crime scene, or while perpetrating a 
crime. 

Notes: Restricted to drow; uncommon. 


Masquerade 


(Alteration) 


Level: 5 
Range: 60 yds. 


Athasian Dragon-King magic; , 
psionic component renders the 
spell uncastable by wizards. 
Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 


Mass 
Duration: 5 rds. + 1 rd_/level 


Area of Effect: One item, | cubic ft./level 
within a 10 ft. cubic area 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


By means of this spell, the wu jen is able to 
control the weight of an item if it is within the 
size range of the area of effect. He can render the 
object so heavy as to be immovable or as light as 
a feather. Throughout the duration of the spell he 
can alter the weight of the item at will, increasing 
it one round and decreasing it the next. The mass 
of the item can be increased or decreased up to 
5% per level. At 10th level, the wu jen could 
change the mass of an item by 50%. The change 
in mass has no adverse effect on the properties of 
the item affected beyond the change in weight. 
Furthermore, multiple items can be affected if all 
are within the same 10-foot square area. Missiles 
can be increased up to double their mass (causing 
double the normal damage) and still fired 
although their ranges are halved. Heavy items can 
be carried with ease, although the bulk of the 
item may prevent it from being carried readily. 
Thus, a huge boulder rendered extremely light 
would still be difficult to carry because of its size. 

The material components for this spell are 


the feather of a hummingbird and a bit of the 
toenail of an elephant. 

Notes: Common in oriental settings; other- 
wise very rare. 


Mass Blindness 
(INusion/Phantasm) 
(Shadow) 


Level: 9 

Range: 5 yds./level 
Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 9 

Duration: 3 turns 

Area of Effect: 20 x 40 x 40-ft. 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell strikes blind or deaf, or both, all 
creatures up to 4 Hit Dice with no saving throw. 
Those of greater level or Hit Dice, but less than 
the caster save vs. spell at -4 to avoid the effect. 
Creatures whose levels or Hit Dice are equal to 
or greater than the caster’s are receive a normal 
saving throw. The caster can designate one spe- 
cific group to be excluded from the circle’s 
power; for example, the spell could blind all but 
humans, all but wizards, all but royal guards- 
men, and so, The circle itself remains in place 
for 3 full turns, and creatures who enter the area 
of effect during this time are also struck by the 
spell’s effects. Magical items that enhance sight 
or hearing are rendered inert. 

Affected creatures and magical items remain 
affected until the spell ends or they blunder out 
of the area of effect. The effect cannot be 
ended by a dispel magic spell, but dispel 
enchantment, limited wish, ot wish can end the 
spell, and an antimagic shell suppresses its 
effects (remember that spells cast while deaf- 
ened are 20% likely to fail). The caster can end 
the effect at will. 

Notes: Uncommon for illusionists, necro- 
mancers, and shadow mages; very rare for 
others. 


Mass Charm 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
(Song) 


Level: 8 

Range: 5 yds./level 
Components: V 

Casting Time: 8 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 30-ft. cube 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


A Eee en ee ne FORDE eRe E ee a 


Va 
ANNS NA 


Z 


N Mass Contagion 


A mass charm spell affects either persons or 
monsters just as a charm person or charm mon- 
ster spell. The mass charm spell, however, 
affects a number of creatures whose combined 
levels of experience or Hit Dice does not 
exceed twice the level of experience of the 
spellcaster. All affected creatures must be 
within the spell range and within a 30-foot 
cube. Note that the creatures’ saving throws are 
unaffected by the number of recipients (see the 
charm person and charm monster spells), but 
all target creatures are subject to a penalty of 
-2 on their saving throws because of the effi- 
ciency and power of this spell. The Wisdom 
bonus against charm spells does apply. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Mass Contagion 
(Necromancy) 


Level: 5 

Range: 30 yds. 
Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 10-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell wracks the subjects with disease 
and weakness. Up to one creature per caster 
level can be affected, but all must be within a 
10-foot radius. Creatures afflicted with mass 
contagion must make a successful saving throw 
vs. spell or be immediately stricken with 
painful symptoms, including boils, blotches, 
lesions, and shaking fits. Strength, Dexterity, 
and Charisma are reduced by 2 points, and all 
attack rolls have a —2 penalty. 

The effect persists until the afflicted creature 
receives a cure disease spell or spends 1d3 
weeks of complete bed rest to recover from the 
contagion. Those ignoring the condition for 
more than a day or two may be subject to worse 
afflictions (and possibly death) at the DM’s dis- 
cretion. 

Notes: Uncommon in the RAVENLOFT set- 
ting; otherwise very rare. 


Mass Domination 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
(Mentalism) 


Level: 9 

Range: 60 yds. 
Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 9 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 30-ft. cube 
Saving Throw: Special 


This powerful domination spell affects any 
nonmindless creature. The spell controls up to 
2 Hit Dice or levels of creature per caster level. 
The creatures are allowed a saving throw vs. 
spell, but at a —4 penalty, Language or species 
is no barrier to the caster’s control. 

The caster can, at will, exercise an empathic 
link (as the 3rd-level spell, but without empathic 
shock damage) or domination (as the Sth-level 
spell) over any creature that is in thrall to this 
spell, provided both of them are on the same 
plane. The caster cannot perform other actions 
while exercising one of these effects. 

Except when exercising an empathic link or 
the Sth-level domination, the caster retains his 
full movement, combat, and spellcasting capa- 
bilities. As with the major domination spell, 
the dominated creatures gain periodic saving 
throws based on the most favorable of Intelli- 
gence, Hit Dice, or level to shake off the spell’s 
effects. In addition, extremely distasteful or 
self-destructive orders immediately grant a 
new saving throw at a +1 to +4 bonus to break 
the caster’s control. 

Once established, the link remains in place 
no matter how far apart the caster and subject 
are, but orders cannot be transmitted to sub- 
jects on a different plane. The caster can 
release individual creatures from mass domina- 
tion with a single command. 

Dominating many creatures at once can be 
fatiguing to the caster. For every 4 Hit Dice (or 
levels) per caster level dominated through mul- 
tiple castings of this spell, the caster’s Constitu- 
tion score is temporarily reduced by 1 point. For 
example, an 18th-level caster dominating 75 Hit 
Dice of creatures suffers a 5-point reduction to 
his Constitution score (75 + 18 = 4.16; rounded 
up to 5). The spell ends when the caster is 
destroyed, the creatures free themselves, or the 
caster voluntarily releases them. 

Notes: Uncommon for mentalists; otherwise 
very rare. (Updated from POLYHEDRON 
Newszine.) 


548 z 


~ Mase Monia ay 


Time Between 
Intelligence Levels/HD Checks 
3 or less Ist/less than 2 3 months 
4to6 2nd/up to3+2 2 months 
7to9 3rd/up to 4+4 1 month 
10 to 12 4th/up to 6 3 weeks 
13 to 14 Sth/up to 7+2 2 weeks 
15 to 16 6th/up to 8+4 1 week 
17 7th/up to 10 3 days 
18 8th/up to 12 2 days 
19 or more 9th/more than 12 1 day 


Mass Fanaticism 
Athasian Dragon-King magic; 
psionic component renders the 


spell uncastable by wizards. A 


Mass Invisibility 
(Illusion/Phantasm) 


Level: 7 

Range: 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 7 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 60 x 60 yds. 
Saving Throw: None 


This is a more extensive adaptation of the 
invisibility spell for battlefield use. It can hide 
creatures in a 60-yard x 60-yard area: up to 400 
man-sized creatures, 30 to 40 giants, or six to 
eight large dragons. The effect is mobile with the 
unit and is broken when the unit attacks. Individ- 
uals leaving the unit become visible. The wizard 
can end this spell upon command. 

The material components of the mass invisi- 
bility spell are an eyelash and a bit of gum ara- 
bic, the former encased in the latter. 


Notes: Common spell (PHB). 
Mass Jump 
(Alteration) 
Level: 2 
Range: 0 


Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 2 

Duration: 1d3 rds. + 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: 10-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell confers the ability to leap once per 
round for the duration of the spell on all crea- 
tures that are within the area of effect. Leaps 
can be up to 30 feet forward or straight upward 


or 10 feet backward. Horizontal leaps forward 
or backward have only a slight arc about two 
feet per 10 feet of distance traveled. The mass 
jump spell does not ensure safety in landing or 
grasping at the end of the leap. 

The mass jump spell is used as part ofa 
boarding action. For example, it allows several 
pirates to arrive on the deck of an attacked ship 
before the two ships are fully grappled, thus 
offering some chance of surprise, On the Inner 
Sea on Toril, this tactic is common enough to 
not be totally surprising to experienced sailors. 

The material component of this spell is a 
grasshopper’s hind leg, to be broken by the 
caster when the spell is cast. 

Notes: Uncommon for the pirates of the 
Inner Sea in the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting; 
otherwise very rare. 


Mass Mounts 
(Conjuration) 


Level: 5 

Range: 10 yds./level 

Components: V, S, M 

Duration: | hr./level 

Casting Time: | turn 

Area of Effect: Creates | mount/level 
Saving Throw: None 


This enchantment, similar to the Ist-level 
wizard spell mount, allows the caster to con- 
jure a number of mounts. The mounts obey the 
wizard (or riders designated by him) willingly 
and to the best of their abilities. When the spell 
expires, however, the mounts disappear, possi- 
bly pitching any riders and equipment to the 
ground. 

One mount is conjured for each level of the 
caster’s experience; for example, a 13th-level 
wizard can call 13 horses to serve for 13 hours. 
The caster can elect to conjure fewer animals 
than his limit. All the mounts created by a sin- 
gle spell must be the same type of animal and 
will be of varying natural colors unless the 
wizard otherwise specifies a color (such as jet- 
black riding horses for night travel). The con- 
jured mounts do not come with gear. 

The wizard can specify the type of mounts 
gained by this spell (subject to regional avail- 
ability), choosing from the list below. Non- 
Cerilian mount statistics are in the MONSTROUS 
MANUAL tome. 

The material components, regardless of what 
type of mount the wizard wants to conjure, are 
a horseshoe and a tuft of fur. 


Oe Se ee ee ee ee ee ne 


549 


N Mass Polymorph ‘A 


Notes: Common on Cerilia, the BIRTHRIGHT 
setting; unknown elsewhere. 


Conjured Fall Speed 
Mount Carrying Capacity 
Worg (Wolf) 100 Ibs. 
Pony 160 Ibs. 
Light War Horse 170 Ibs. 
Riding Horse 180 Ibs. 
Hippocampus 200 Ibs. 
Medium War Horse 220 Ibs. 
Varsk (Cerilian Lizard) 240 Ibs. 
Mule 250 Ibs. 
Draft Horse 260 Ibs. 
Mass Polymorph 
(Alteration) 
Level: 8 
Range: 120 yds. 


Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 8 

Duration: Permanent 
Area of Effect: 60-ft. cube 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This mighty spell allows the caster to simul- 
taneously polymorph a large number of crea- 


> 
=T= 
4 
a Se 

— 
=.= 

= 
I= 


tures: up to 4 large individuals, 12 man-sized 
individuals, or 24 small creatures can be 
affected if they are in the area of effect. Huge 
and gargantuan creatures cannot be affected. A 
mixed group can be affected; for example, a 
caster could affect one ogre (counts as three 
men), four hobgoblins (one man each), and six 
kobolds (two counting as one man) with a sin- 
gle casting of the spell. 

Creatures that fail their saving throws are 
affected just as if struck by a polymorph other 
spell. The creatures receive a system shock roll 
in order to survive the transformation (80% 
plus 1% per HD if no Constitution score is 
available). The polymorphed creatures gain the 
form and physical abilities (physical attacks, 
Armor Class, and movement but not special 
attacks or magical abilities) of their new shape. 
The subjects must make a special Intelligence 
check to see if they retain their own minds and 
personas; see polymorph other for details. 

The caster can transform the creatures into 
one of no more than three different forms when 
the spell is cast. In other words, while the 
caster might affect creatures of a dozen differ- 
ent types, all the creatures must be transformed 
into individuals of one, two, or three species. 
In the example given above, the caster could 


x adast Se eae” 


turn the ogre into a fat piglet, most of the hob- 
goblins into rats, and one hobgoblin and the 
kobolds into chickens with a single casting of 
the spell. 

The material component is the caterpillar 
cocoon of a rare butterfly or moth. 

Notes: Uncommon for witches and trans- 
muters; otherwise rare. 


Mass Suggestion 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
(Mentalism, Song) 


Level: 6 

Range: 30 yds. 

Components: V, M 

Casting Time: 6 

Duration: 4 turns + 4 turns/level 
Area of Effect: 1 creature/level 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


The mass suggestion spell enables the wiz- 
ard to influence the actions of one or more cho- 
sen creatures in the same way as the suggestion 
spell. Up to one creature per experience level 
of the caster can be influenced, provided that 
all subject creatures are within the 30-yard 
range. Undead are not subject to this spell. The 
suggestion must be reasonably worded and 
understood by the creatures, and must be the 
same for all hearing it. Creatures successfully 
saving vs. spell are unaffected. Saving throws 
against the spell suffer a penalty of —1, and if a 
single creature is to be affected, its saving 
throw suffers a —4 penalty. Note that a very rea- 
sonable mass suggestion can cause the saving 
throw to be made with an additional penalty 
(such as —1, —2, etc.), at the discretion of your 
DM. A mass suggestion can continue in effect 
for a considerable duration, at the DM’s discre- 
tion. Conditions that will trigger a special 
action can also be specified; if the condition is 
not met before the spell expires, the action will 
not be performed. 

The material components of this spell are a 
snake’s tongue and either a bit of honeycomb 
or a drop of sweet oil. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Mass Teleport 
(Alteration) 
(Dimension) 


Level: 7 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: Up to 12 people 
Saving Throw: None 


By casting this spell, the caster instantly 
transports himself and up to 11 companions to 
another location. Distance is not a factor, but 
interplanar transport is not possible. Accuracy 
depends on the caster’s familiarity with the tar- 
get location (see table). Only one roll is made 
for the entire group being teleported, with 
“familiarity” being that of the caster. 

While casting this spell, the caster stands in 
the center of a circle formed by his compan- 
ions, who must hold hands for the entire round. 
Breaking this circle before the end of the round 
disrupts the spell. 

Notes: Uncommon for apportation special- 
ists; otherwise very rare. 


Probability of Teleporting: 
On 

Destination is: High Target Low 
Very familiar 01-02 03-99 00 
Studied carefully 01-04 05-98 99-00 
Seen casually 01-08 09-96 97-00 
Viewed once 01-16 17-92 93-00 
Never seen 01-32 33-84 85-00 

Mass Teleport Without Error 
(Alteration) 
(Dimension) 
Level: 8 
Range: Touch 


Components: V, S 

Casting Time: | turn 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: Up to 12 people 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell is similar to the mass teleport 
spell. The caster transports himself and up to 
11 companions to any known location in his 
home plane with no chance of error. 

Like teleport without error, travel to other 
planes is possible, but only to locations that the 
caster has previously studied carefully, No mat- 


551 


5 as a a a 


ter how careful this perusal was, there is a 
chance for mishap when traveling to another 
plane. Accordingly, the caster must roll for 
accuracy. Again, breaking the circle before the 
end of the turn disrupts the spell. 

Notes: Uncommon for apportation special- 
ists; otherwise very rare. 


Probability of Teleporting: 
On 

Destination is: High Target Low 
Very familiar 01-02 03-99 00 
Studied carefully 01-04 05-98 99-00 
Seen casually 01-08 09-96 97-00 
Viewed once 01-16 17-92 93-00 
Never seen 01-32 33-84 85-00 

Massmorph 
(Alteration) 
Level: 4 


Range: 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 10 ft. cube/level 
Saving Throw: None 


When this spell is cast upon willing crea- 
tures of man-size or smaller, up to 10 such 
creatures per level of the caster can be magi- 
cally altered to appear as trees of any sort. 
Thus, a company of creatures can be made to 
appear as a copse, grove, or orchard. Further- 
more, these massmorphed creatures can be 
passed through and even touched by other crea- 
tures without revealing their true nature. Note, 
however, that blows to the creature-trees cause 
damage, and blood can be seen. 

Creatures to be massmorphed must be within 
the spell’s area of effect; unwilling creatures 
are not affected. Affected creatures remain 
unmoving but aware, subject to normal sleep 
requirements, and able to see, hear, and feel for 
as long as the spell is in effect. The spell per- 
sists until the caster commands it to cease or 
until a dispel magic spell is cast upon the crea- 
tures. Creatures left in this state for extended 
periods are subject to insects, weather, disease, 
fire, and other natural hazards. 

The material component of this spell is a 
handful of bark chips from the type of tree the 
creatures are to become. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Master of Arms, Tenser’s 
See Tenser’s master of arms. 


Master Undead 
(Necromancy) 


Level: 9 

Range: 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 9 

Duration: 5 rds./level 
Area of Effect: 50-ft. cube 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This powerful spell allows the caster to con- 
trol the actions of any type of undead creatures 
as if they were intelligent creatures under the 
effect of a charm person spell. Undead so con- 
trolled can perform precise tasks for the caster. 

The caster can affect one undead within the 
area of effect per level. In cases of mixed 
undead, the weakest are affected first, then 
those with more Hit Dice. All undead affected 
must be within a cubic area 50 feet on a side. 
Undead with more than 3 Hit Dice are permit- 
ted a saving throw vs. spell to avoid the spell. 
Liches and undead with 10 or more Hit Dice 
have a bonus of +4 to this saving throw., 

Undead creatures controlled by this spell 
are mastered for the spell duration, then are 
restored to their own (often nominal) control. 
The caster does not need to know any common 
language with the undead to effect the control. 
The undead beings can be ordered to perform 
self-destructive actions—and the caster can 
even attack them—without the spell being 
broken. 

The material component of this spell is a 
crushed diamond worth at least 500 gp, which 
is consumed in casting. 

Notes: Very rare spell, originating in the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. Known to be in 
the Book of Daimos. 


ei aT a a eee Te A 


552 


~ Maw of Chaos A 


Material 
(Conjuration) 


Level: 3 

Range: 10 yds. 
Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: 1 cu. ft./level 
Saving Throw: None 


A material spell allows the wizard to actu- 
ally bring into being certain common sub- 
stances. Raw, unworked materials such as 
stone, earth (soil), or wood of average quality 
are easily gained by means of this spell. Simi- 
larly, other inorganic or nonliving materials 
such as water, air, dung, straw, etc., can be con- 
jured. 

Living matter cannot be created by means of 
this spell. In no event can worked, refined, or 
fabricated items be brought into being by a 
material spell, nor can rough gems or precious 

. metals. Basic materials of higher than average 
quality can be attempted; the wizard has a 1% 
chance per level to bring such materials into 
existence. The spell essentially enables the 
wizard to create common substances of a basic 
nature. 

Notes: Uncommon spell. (Updated from 

Unearthed Arcana.) 


- Maw of Chaos 


(Evocation) 


Level: 9 

Range: 30 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 9 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: Beam 10-ft. diam, 90-ft. long 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell instantly calls into being a spec- 
tral mouth, 6 feet across and many-toothed. 
The mouth has no tangible existence and floats 
in the air, moving under the caster’s. mental 
direction, at MV Fl 6 (MC: A). 

The mouth does nothing except move into 
position to aim where the caster desires until 
the end of the round after the spell is cast. If it 
is struck by a weapon directly wielded by a 
being during this time, it is destroyed. The 
being who destroyed the mouth suffers 9d12 
points of damage (no saving throw). A spell- 
caster destroying the mouth is automatically 


feebleminded as by the S5th-level wizard spell. 
Missile weapons and all magical and psionic 
attacks have no effect on a maw of chaos. 

At the end of the round after casting, the 
mouth opens and emits a ray of roiling, purple- 
red radiance. This ray is a cylinder 10 feet in 
diameter and 90 feet long. This stationary shaft 
of chaos remains in existence for two rounds 
before it suddenly vanishes. All items and crea- 
tures touching any part of the ray during its 
existence are subject to the following effects: 
¢ All magical items are surrounded by a 
crawling web of raw spell energy that pre- 
vents their functioning while they are in the 
ray and for 1d4+1 rounds after the shaft 
vanishes. No known means short of a wish 
spell banishes this effect before it fades. 

All spelicasters are prevented from spell- 
casting and all psionic beings cannot use 
psionics while in contact with the ray 
because of the concentration-destroying 
chaos. Thereafter, such beings must make a 
successful saving throw vs. spell in order to 
regain their wits enough to work magic or 
use psionics. Such saving throws are made 
at a —6 penalty on the first round after 
escaping the shaft, a -5 penalty on the sec- 
ond, —4 on the third, and so on, up to +1 on 
the eighth round. The first successful saving 
throw means the spellcaster or psionic indi- 
vidual is free of this effect. 

All magical barriers and continuing magical 
effects (from simple wizard locks and stone- 
skin spells to illusions and even prismatic 
spheres) are instantly destroyed. 

All beings except the caster and undead 
creatures suffer 1 point of damage per level 
of the caster. A successful saving throw vs. 
spell reduces damage taken by half. The 
caster never suffers any damage from his or 
her own maw of chaos. Undead creatures 
suffer double damage and receive no saving 
throw. 
The material component of a maw of chaos 
is a jawbone from any creature, with at least 
two teeth attached. 

Notes: Known to the Simbul and a few other 

wizards of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


ee 


553 


N Maximilian’s Earthen Grasp A 


Maximilian’s Earthen Grasp 
(Alteration) 
(Earth) 


Level: 2 l 
Range: 10 yds. + 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 2 

Duration: 3 rds. + 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell causes an arm made of compacted 
soil to rise from the ground. The spell must be 
cast on open turf, such as a grassy field or a 
dirt floor. 

The earthen arm and hand (which are about 
the same size as a normal human limb) arise 
from the ground beneath one creature targeted 
by the caster. The hand attempts to grasp the 
creature’s leg. The creature must attempt a sav- 
ing throw vs. spell; if successful, the hand 
sinks into the ground. Each round thereafter 
(until the spell ends or the creature moves out 
of spell range), the hand has a 5% chance per 
level of the caster of reappearing beneath the 
target creature, at which time another saving 
throw is required. 

If a saving throw is missed, the earthen limb 
firmly grasps and holds the creature in place. A 
creature held by the hand suffers a movement 
rate of 0, Armor Class penalty of —2, and attack 
penalty of -2. All Dexterity combat bonuses 
are negated. The hand causes no physical dam- 
age to the victim. Creatures of great size and 
strength may be able to pull free at the discre- 
tion of the DM. 

The arm can be attacked by any creature, 
including the one seized by the arm. The arm 
has AC 5 and hit points equal to double the 
caster’s maximum hit points. For example, a 
caster who normally has 15 hit points can cre- 
ate an earthen hand with 30 hit points. The 
maximum number of hit points that an earthen 
hand can have is 40. When the arm’s hit points 
are reduced to zero or when the spell duration 
ends, the hand crumbles. 

The material component is a miniature hand 
sculpted from clay, which crumbles to dust 
when the spell is cast. 

Notes: Uncommon spell (ToM). 


Maximillian’s Stony Grasp 
(Alteration) 
(Earth) 


Level: 3 

Range: 20 yds. + 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 3 

Duration: 5 rds. + 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell must be cast on stony ground, 
such as a manmade stone floor, a natural cav- 
ern floor, or a boulder-strewn field. It is not 
possible to cast the spell on a stone wall or 
ceiling. The spell causes an arm made of stone 
(about the same size as a normal human limb) 
to rise from the ground beneath any creature 
targeted by the caster. The stony hand attempts 
to grasp the leg of the target creature, which is 
allowed a saving throw to avoid the effect; if 
the save is successful, the hand disappears. 
Each round thereafter, the hand has a 5% 
chance per level of the caster of reappearing 
and attacking. 

Creatures grasped by the hand suffer a 
movement rate of 0, AC penalty of —2, and 
attack penalty of —-2. Grasped characters lose 
any Dexterity bonuses. The hand causes no 
damage to the creature grasped. 

The stony limb has AC 2 and hit points equal 
to triple the caster’s maximum hit points. The 
maximum number of hit points a stony hand 
can have is 60. 

The material component is a miniature hand 
sculpted from stone, which crumbles to dust 
when the conjured hand is destroyed or the 
spell expires. i 

Notes: Uncommon spell (ToM). 


Maximum Damage — Elf 
(Enchantment/Charm) 


Level: 5 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 3 
Duration: 1 rd. 

Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell causes nonmagical weapons to 
inflict maximum damage for one round after it 


_ is cast. The caster can enchant a number of 


weapons equal to his level. Weapons so 


554 


N l Melf’s Acid Arrow a 


enchanted inflict maximum damage on their 
`- next round of use only. Magical weapons are 
unaffected by this spell. 

The spell requires a silver rod worth at least 
100 gp, which must be touched to the weapons 
in order for the spell to be effective. 

Notes: Restricted to elves; uncommon. 


Maze 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 
(Dimension, Geometry, Shadow) 


Level: 8 

Range: 5 yds./level 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 3 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: None 


An extradimensional space is brought into 
being upon the utterance of a maze spell. The 
subject vanishes into the shifting labyrinth of 
force planes for a period of time that is depen- 
dent upon its Intelligence. (Note: Minotaurs 
are not affected by this spell.) 


Intelligence of Time Trapped 

Mazed Creature in Maze 
under 3 2d4 turns 
3-5 1d4 turns 

6-8 - §d4 rounds 

9-11 4d4 rounds 

12-14 3d4 rounds 

15-17 2d4 rounds 

18+ 1d4 rounds 


Note that teleport and dimension door spells 
will not help a character escape a maze spell, 
although a plane shift spell will. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Measure Cinnabryl 
(Divination) 


Level: 2 

Range: 10 ft. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 2 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: 1 item of cinnabryl 
Saving Throw: None 


With this spell, the caster can measure the 
amount of time for which a single, visible item of 
cinnabryl will remain useful in holding off afflic- 


tion of the Red Curse. The amount of time comes 
to the caster’s mind as if suddenly remembered. 

Notes: Common in the RED STEEL setting; 
virtually unknown elsewhere. 


Mechanical Disruption 


(Alteration) Q i 


(Artifice) 


Level: 4 

Range: 5 yds./level 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: 1 rd./level above 5th + 1d4 rds. 
Area of Effect: 1 mechanical 

Saving Throw: Neg. 


When this spell is cast upon a mechanical 
creation, the creation will be unable to perform 
any action and will remain immobile for the 
duration of the spell (at 7th level, 3 to 6 
rounds). There is no known way to reduce the 
duration of this spell, and clockwork mages 
aren’t at all amused to discover someone who 
knows how to cast it. Mechanicians have been 
known to pay handsomely for any knowledge 
of this spell in order to unravel its secrets. 

In no case should this spell be installed into 
a mechanical. When placed in the vessel of a 
mechanical, this spell will always cause the 
mechanical to cease working, and 20% of the 
time it will also cause the mechanical to col- 
lapse into a useless pile of broken parts. 

Mechanical or clockwork monsters receive a 
saving throw vs. death magic to avoid the 
effects of this spell. 

Notes: Uncommon for spellcasters from an 
arabian setting; otherwise very rare. 


Melee Manager, Articus’s 
See Articus’s melee manager. 


555 


~ Melf’s Acid Arrow r 


Melf’s Acid Arrow 
(Conjuration) 
(Alchemy) 


Level: 2 

Range: 180 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 2 
Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: 1 target 
Saving Throw: Special 


By means of this spell, the wizard creates a 
magical arrow that speeds to its target as if fired 
from the bow of a fighter of the same level as 
the wizard. No modifiers for range, nonprofi- 
ciency, or specialization are used. The arrow has 
no attack or damage bonus, but it inflicts 2d4 
points of acid damage (with saving throws for 
items on the target); there is no splash damage. 
For every three levels that the caster has 
achieved, the acid, unless somehow neutralized, 
lasts for another round, inflicting another 244 
points of damage each round. So at 3rd—5th 
level, the acid lasts two rounds; at 6th—8th level, 
the acid lasts for three rounds, etc. 

The material components of the spell are a 
dart, powdered rhubarb leaf, and an adder’s 
stomach. 

Notes: Common or uncommon spell (PHB). 


Melf’s Minute Meteors 
(Alteration, Evocation) 
(Alchemy, Artifice, Fire) 


Level: 3 

Range: 70 yds. + 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 3 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 target/meteor 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell enables the wizard to cast small 
globes of fire (one for each experience level 
he has attained), each of which bursts into a 
1-foot-diameter sphere upon impact, inflict- 
ing 1d4 points of damage on the creature 
struck. It can also ignite combustible materi- 
als (even solid planks). The meteors are 

- treated as missiles hurled by the wizard with a 
+2 bonus to the attack rolls and with no 
penalty for range. Misses are treated as 
grenadelike missiles that inflict 1 point of 
damage to creatures within 3 feet. 

The spell can be cast in either of two ways: 


A) The wizard discharges five meteors every 
round (see the “Multiple Attacks and Initia- 
tive” section in Chapter 9: Combat). Note that 
this carries over into at least the following 
round. 

B) The wizard discharges only one meteor 
per round. In addition to releasing the missile, 
the caster can perform other actions in the 
round, including spellcasting, melee, or device 
use. Spells requiring concentration force the 
wizard to forgo the rest of the missiles to main- 
tain concentration. Also, if the wizard fails to 
maintain an exact mental count of the number 
of missiles he has remaining, he has involun- 
tarily lost the remaining portion of the spell. 

The spell ends when the caster has fired off 
as many meteors as he has experience levels, 
when he forgoes casting any still remaining, or 
when a successful dispel magic spell is thrown 
upon the caster. 

The components necessary for the casting of 
this spell are nitre and sulphur formed into a 
bead by the addition of pine tar. The caster 
must also have a small hollow tube of minute 
proportion, fashioned from gold. The tube 
costs no less than 1,000 gp to construct, so fine 
is its workmanship and magical engraving, and 
it can be reused. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Melisander’s Harp 
(Alteration) 
(Song) 
Level: 5 


Range: 10 ft./level 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: Special (60 ft. maximum) 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell brings into being the spectral, 
shadowy illusion of a harp that plays by itself, 
floating in midair. The caster has near total 
control over the initial position, movement, and 
playing of the harp. However, the powers of the 


harp cannot pass through magical barriers 


(such as a wall of force), and the spellcaster 
cannot cause the harp to come into being 
beyond or to move through such a barrier. 

This aside, the harp can appear anywhere the 
caster desires, up to 10 feet per level distant. If 
the caster is within 10 feet per level of the 
harp, he can move it up to 10 feet per round as 
he wills. The harp’s playing can be turned on 


556 


N Melt A 


and off instantly and repeatedly by the silent 
will of the caster, and this does not affect spell 
duration. While the harp is playing, it has the 
following effects: 


¢ All normal sound is hushed (but not negated) 
and available light, even magical light, dims. 

+ All creatures and objects within 60 feet of the 
harp are affected as if by a feather fall spell 
with no saving throw (rendering most mis- 
siles useless). 

* All creatures of 4+4 HD or less within 40 feet 
must make a saving throw vs. spell or be 
affected as if by a sleep spell. 

e All creatures within 20 feet of the harp are 
slowed (no saving throw). 

Melisander’s harp is unaffected by dispel 
magic or silence spells, nor can it be damaged 
by physical or magical attacks. A limited wish 
or stronger spell is required to dispel it. 

The material components of this spell are a 
silver harpstring and at least three tears. The 
spell is named for its creator, the elven mage 
and Harper hero known to Realmslore as “The 
Last Lonely Harpist.” 

Notes: Known to the Seven Sisters, their 
apprentices, and some senior harpers in the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting; rare or very rare. 
Known to be in The Glandar’s Grimoire. 


Mellix’s Fire Mouth 
(Alteration, Evocation) 
(Fire) 
Level: 3 


Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 3 

Duration: Permanent until triggered 

Area of Effect: Cone, 10 ft. dia. x 15 ft. long 
Saving Throw: None 


Wher this spell is cast, an object is empowered 
with an enchanted mouth that suddenly appears 
and breathes fire when a specific condition is 
met. The spell is activated when a specific type of 
creature (named beforehand by the caster) passes 
directly in front of the enchanted object, which 
could be a statue, chest, wall, door, or whatever. 
Alternately, if no specific creature is named 
beforehand, the spell activates the first time any 
creature steps in front of it. 

The cone of fire emitted by a fire mouth is 
15 feet long, and measures 1 foot at the source 
and 10 feet at the far end. The cone is always 
emitted perpendicular to the surface upon 


which the spell is cast, so a creature must be 
standing directly in front of it to be affected. 
The victim struck by the cone of fire emitted 
by a fire mouth takes 3d6 points of damage, 
plus 1 point per level of the caster, to a maxi- 
mum of 3d6 + 10 points of damage. 

This spell normally functions but once, then 
expires, but it can be used in conjunction with 
the 8th-level spell permanency. 

The fire mage Mellix Kabiryn devised this 


- variation on the 2nd-level wizard spell magic 


mouth. 

The material components are a drop of oil, a 
pinch of sulphur, and one tooth or scale from a 
red dragon. 

Notes: Uncommon for Fire mages; other- 
wise very rare. Known to be in the Fire-Eye 
Scrolls. (Updated from DraGoN Magazine.) 


Melt 
(Alteration) 


Level: 1 

Range: 30 yds. 

Casting Time: 1 

Components: V, S, M 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: 1 cu. yd. of ice or 2 cu. yds. of 
snow/level 

Saving Throw: Special 


When a melt spell is cast, the wizard effec- 
tively raises the temperature in the area of 
effect. This sudden increase in warmth will 
melt ice in 1 round, so that a 1st level wizard 
can melt a cube of solid ice, 7 yard on a side, in 
1 round after the spell is cast, so that the ice 
becomes water. Twice this volume of snow can 
be affected, so that the spell will melt 1 cubic 
yard of snow in one-half round, or will turn 2 
cubic yards (1 yd. x 1 yd. x 2 yds.) of snow to 
water in 1 round. Against such monsters as 
white dragons, winter wolves, yeti, woolly rhi- 
nos, those composed of para-elemental ice, and 
the like, a melt spell will inflict 2 points of 
damage per level the spellcaster, or 1 point per 
level if the subject creature makes its saving 
throw vs. spell. The melt spell is generally inef- 
fective against types of creatures other than 
those listed above. 

The material components for a melt spell are 
a few crystals or rock salt and a pinch of soot. 

Notes: Common in oriental and arctic set- 
tings; otherwise very rare. 


a Oe Ee 


557 


Melt Metal 


Melt Metal 
(Evocation) 
(Fire) 


Level: 4 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: 1 cubic inch/level 
Saving Throw: None 


Using this spell, the wu jen can gently touch 
a normal metal item, causing a charge of fiery 
magical energy to pass from his fingertip to the 
metal. This creates such heat that the metal 
begins to melt and flow at the rate of one cubic 
inch per round. Bars and locks can be easily 


cut free with this spell. During the spell, the wu 


jen must concentrate on focusing the energy 
and can take no other action. The spell affects 
only normal metallic items. 

The material component for this spell is a 
gem worth at least 20 ch’ien (100 gp). 

Notes: Common in oriental settings; other- 
wise very rare. 


Memory 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
(Mentalism) 

Reversible 
Level: 3 
Range: 10 yds. 


Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: Special 
Duration: Permanent 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell allows the wu jen to plant a ficti- 
tious memory in the mind of another. The spell 
can be cast on any intelligent creature able to 
understand the speech of the wu jen. The crea- 
ture is allowed a saving throw vs. spell to avoid 
the effect. However, if the subject is uncon- 
scious or asleep, the saving throw is made at a 
-2 penalty. Upon casting the spell (which takes 
only a few moments), the wu jen continues the 
casting by describing the memory implanted. 


_- Memories of events up to 1 turn in length 
per level of the caster can be implanted. Thus a 


12th-level wu jen could construct the memo- 
ries of an event that lasted two hours. The exact 
casting time of the spell is the time required by 
the wu jen to describe the memory. The spell 


558 


gives the wu jen limited knowledge of memo- 
ries already possessed by the subject, but only 
for the purpose of fitting the new memory into 
the flow of events so that it seems to fit logi- 
cally in the subject’s mind. The new memory 
can be used to supplant a memory already in 
the mind of the subject (changing the outcome 
of an encounter or the orders the subject may 
have received) or can be wedged into “blank 
space” (describing an encounter during a jour- 
ney that was otherwise forgettable). 

The memory has no magical properties (it is 
not a suggestion spell), but can be used to pro- 
mote friendliness, hostility, or change the sub- 
ject’s mission. Obviously, the wu jen must take 
pains to create logical memories—occurrences 
must mesh with the personality of the subject 
or be logically explained. Telling an intelligent 
evil monster he likes a traditional foe of his 
race simply because the foe was nice is not suf- 
ficient. Telling him he likes the character 
because the character spared his life is much 
more acceptable. If the DM rules the implanted 
memory is out of character, the subject is 
allowed a second saving throw at the end of the 
spell, with a +4 bonus to the die roll. 

The reverse of this spell, erasement, allows 
the wu jen to remove any memory from the 
mind of the subject. The limitations on the 
amount of memory removed are identical to 
that given above. The time of the erased mem- 
ory is a blank to the subject; he has no idea of 
what transpired. Dispel magic, remember, or a 
similar spell removes an implanted memory or 
restores a memory that has been erased. 

The material components for this spell are a 
sheet of white paper, a brush, and a pot of ink. 

Notes: Common in oriental settings; other- 
wise very rare. 


Memory Alteration, Rary’s 
See Rary’s memory alteration. 


A O ia nn. 


N Mental Transfer, Mahlorn’s A 


Mempter’s Barriertt 
(Evocation) 
(Force) 


Level: 6 

Range: 60 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 6 

Duration: 2 turns + 2 rds./level 

Area of Effect: up to 10 ft. square/level 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell is similar to the 5th-level spell, wall 
of force, except a barrier is one-way, preventing 
things from coming in, but not from going out. 
It allows those protected behind or inside the 
barrier to attack those beyond, yet still prevents 
the outsiders’ attacks from coming in. The bar- 
rier is invisible, immobile, and totally unaffected 
by most spells, including dispel magic. Blows, 
missiles, cold, heat, electricity, spells, breath 
weapons, etc. cannot affect or pass in through it, 
although dimension door, teleport, and similar 
effects can bypass it. A disintegrate spell, a rod 
of cancellation or a sphere of annihilation will 
immediately destroy the barrier. 

The wizard can, if desired, form the barrier 
into a spherical shape with a radius up to one 
foot per level or to an open hemispherical shape 
of 1.5-foot radius per level. The barrier must be 
continuous and unbroken when formed; other- 
wise, the spell fails. The caster can end the spell 
on command. 

The material component is 5,000 gp worth 
of powdered diamond and a mirrored lens. 

Notes: Unique to Mempter, so far as is 
known. (Updated from POLYHEDRON Newszine.) 


Mending 
(Alteration) 
(Artifice) 


Level: 1 

Range: 30 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 
Duration: Permanent 
Area of Effect: 1 object 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell repairs small breaks or tears in 
objects. It will weld a broken ring, chain link, 
medallion, or slender dagger, providing but one 
break exists. Ceramic or wooden objects with 
multiple breaks can be invisibly rejoined to be 
as strong as new. A hole in a leather sack or 


wineskin is completely healed over by a mend- 
ing spell. This spell does not, by itself, repair 
magical items of any type. One turn after the 
spell is cast, the magic of the joining fades, and 
the effect cannot be magically dispelled. The 
maximum volume of material the caster can 
mend is 1 cubic foot per level. 

The material components of this spell are 
two small magnets of any type (lodestone in all 
likelihood) or two burrs. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Mental Block 
(Enchantment\Charm) 
(Mentalism) 

Level: 3 


Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 3 turns 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell can be cast only on a willing and 
living creature. The mental block affects a par- 
ticular message, causing it to be blocked from 
recall or mental examination until such time as 
a predetermined trigger is met. The trigger can 
be as simple as “when you are in the presence 
of King Azoun of Cormyr” to “three days 
hence, when the cock crows” or any reasonable 
similar condition. Torture, spells that probe the 
mind, dispel magic, or other attempts to learn 
the message cause the permanent loss of the 
message instead. This spell is commonly used 
by kings wishing to send secret information by 
courier; the information is stored in the 
courier’s mind until the preset conditions are 
met. 

The material component is a chip of granite. 

Notes: Rare spell. (Updated from DRAGON 
Magazine.) 


Mental Exchange, Mahlorn’s 
Aka life force exchange). 


Mental Transfer, Mahlorn’s 
Aka life force transfer). 


Me ee ae ee ee eee meee 


559 


N Mental Transport f 


Mental Transport 
(Alteration) 
(Mentalism) 


Level: 3 

Range: 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 3 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: 1 or more objects 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell imparts a limited form of tele- 
kinesis. By focusing his mental energies, the 
caster can levitate and move one or several 
small objects within the area of effect. The 
total weight of the objects cannot exceed more 
than 5 pounds plus 1 pound per level (a 5th- 
level caster can move 10 pounds of material). 

The caster can move the objects up to 20 feet 
per round; too slowly to inflict damage. All 
items transported together must remain within 
5 feet of each other. If the caster’ concentration 
is broken, the items fall, but the spell itself 
lasts for the given duration. 

The mental transport spell is too weak to wrest 
an item from an actively resisting creature. 

Notes: Uncommon for mentalists; otherwise 
rare. (Updated from POLYHEDRON Newszine.) 


Merald’s Murderous Mist 
(Evocation) 
(Alchemy) 


Level: 4 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 4 

Duration: 2 rds. 

Area of Effect: 20-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


A billowing cloud of misty vapors is created 
by the use of this spell. It radiates outward 
from the caster to fill a 20-foot radius spherical 
area above and below the caster’s ground level, 
penetrating all obstructions that are not air- 
tight. At the end of the round of casting, the 
magic takes effect, and the mist changes in hue 
from blue-gray to green, becoming poisonous. 
All breathing creatures within the area of effect 
not possessing a (magical) separate air sup- 
ply—except the caster, who is immune to the 
effects of his or her own murderous mist— 
must immediately save vs. spell. Those who 
successfully save are unharmed. Those who do 
not suffer 2d4 points of damage from the 
vapor, which is corrosive to flesh but does not 
affect clothing or items. Creatures that can’t 
move out of the area of effect within the round 
take a further 1d4 points of damage on the fol- 
lowing round as the vapors begin to combine 
with the air and disappear. Tiny creatures, such 
as those making up an insect swarm or creep- 
ing doom are killed by the mist on contact. 

The globe of murderous mist is a magically 
bound, stationary, precise area unaffected by 
natural or magical winds. Dispel magic or part 
water will cause it to disappear before expira- ` 
tion of the spell, and various magic or items 
(such as rope trick or a portable hole) will pro- 
tect an individual by providing escape from the 
mist, but it is otherwise unaffected by natural 
or magical forces. 

Notes: Uncommon or rare spell from the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. Known to be in 
Sabirine s Specular. 


Merciful Metamorphosis, Drawmij’s 
See Drawmij’s merciful metamorphosis. 


Metal to Rust 


Message 
(Alteration) 
Level: 1 
Range: 0 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 
Duration: 5 rds./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


When this spell is cast, the wizard can whis- 
per messages and receive replies with little 
chance of being overheard. When the spell is 
cast, the wizard secretly or openly points his 
finger at each creature to be included in the 
spell effect. Up to one creature per level can be 
included. When the wizard whispers, the whis- 
pered message travels in a straight line and is 
audible to all of the involved creatures within 
30 feet, plus 10 feet per level of the caster. The 
creatures who receive the message can whisper 
a reply that is heard by the spellcaster. Note 
that there must be an unobstructed path 
between the spellcaster and the recipients of 
the spell. The message must be in a language 
the caster speaks; this spell does not by itself 
confer understanding upon the recipients. This 
spell is most often used to conduct quick and 
private conferences when the caster does not 
wish to be overheard. 

The material component of the spell is a 
short piece of copper wire. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Metal Skin 
(Alteration) 
(Alchemy) 


Level: 5 i 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: 2d4 rds. 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell transforms the skin of any creature 
touched into a gleaming steel-hard surface. The 
spell recipient’s Armor Class becomes 2 for the 
duration of the spell, but the character becomes 
slow and stiff. The character moves at half his 
normal movement rate and always acts last in 
combat. The character’s skin is considered fer- 
rous metal for the purpose of spells with mag- 
netic effects. Rusting attacks reduce the Armor 
Class of the affected area to 10. 


The material component for this spell is a 
small piece of rhinoceros hide swallowed by 
the caster. 

Notes: Common in oriental settings or for 
alchemists; otherwise very rare. 


Metal to Rust 
(Alteration) 
(Alchemy) 
Reversible 


Level: 6 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: 4 cubic ft./level 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell allows the wu jen to reduce fer- 
rous metal to a crumbled pile of rust with a sin- 
gle touch. Upon casting the spell, the wu jen 
touches the item (rolling a hit if necessary), 
causing it to fall away in large flakes of rust. 
Normal metallic items do not receive a saving 
throw—the effect is automatic. Magical metals 
make a saving throw vs. disintegration (17 for 
hard metal, 19 for soft metal and jewelry), 
receiving the appropriate bonus to the saving 
throw for the strength of the magic. Magical 
items of ferrous content that do not have a spe- 
cific plus value (an iron amulet of ESP for 
example) should be assigned a bonus by the 
DM based on their magic (usually +0 to +5). 
Ferrous creatures must be touched with an 
attack roll. If no other result is specified, the 
creature takes 1d6 points of damage per caster 
level with no saving throw. 

The material component for this spell is a 
fiask of seawater. 

The reverse of this spell, rust to metal, 
restores a rusted item to its original condition 
if at least 90% of the original material is pre- 
sent. 

Notes: Common in oriental settings; other- 
wise very rare. 


D E 


561 


a ae ENEE 
“ig: cee 


st 

= r, 

Zez 
Saaie 


í 
| 


BHMN 
miall 


= čiti 


562 


~N Mimic Blood Ability dA 


Metamorphose Liquids 
(Alteration) 
(Alchemy, Water) 


Level: 1 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: cube/level 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell transmutes one type of liquid into 
an equal amount of a different, nonmagical 
fluid (water, wine, blood, oil, apple cider, etc.). 
The caster must touch the fluid itself (not sim- 
ply its container) for the spell to take effect. 

Magical liquids (such as potions) receive a 
saving throw vs. disintegration with a +3 bonus 
to avoid the spell’s effect. Fluids can be trans- 
muted only into nonmagical liquids; it is not 
possible to change a magical liquid into another 
type of magical liquid. Poisons can be rendered 
harmless through use of this spell, but the spell 
has no effect on poisons already consumed. 

Living creatures are unaffected by the spell, 
excluding those from the Elemental Plane of 
Water. Such creatures are allowed a saving 
throw vs. spell. Failure results in 1d4 points of 
damage per level of the caster, while success 
indicates half damage. Only one creature can 


be affected by a single casting of this spell, © 


regardless of the creature’s size. 

The material component is a drop of the liq- 
uid that the caster intends to create, which must 
be placed on the wizard’s tongue and con- 
sumed. Creating poisons through use of this 
spell is especially dangerous. 

Notes: Uncommon spell (ToM). 


Meteor Swarm 
(Evocation) 
(Fire) 


Level: 9 

Range: 40 yds. + 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 9 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: % 


A meteor swarm is a very powerful and 
spectacular spell that is similar to the fireball 
spell in many aspects. When it is cast, either 
four spheres of 2-foot diameter or eight spheres 


of 1-foot diameter spring from the outstretched 
hand of the wizard and streak in a straight line 
to the distance demanded by the spellcaster, up 
to the maximum range. Any creature in the 
straight-line path of these missiles receives the 
full effect, without benefit of a saving throw. 
The meteor missiles leave a fiery trail of 
sparks, and each bursts as a fireball. 

The large spheres (2-foot diameter) inflict 
10d4 points of damage, bursting in a diamond 
or box pattern. Each has a 30-foot diameter 
area of effect, and each sphere is 20 feet apart 
along the sides of the pattern, creating overlap- 
ping areas of effect and exposing the center to 
all four blasts. 

The smaller spheres (1-foot diameter) each 
have a 15-foot diameter area of effect, and each 
inflicts 5d4 points of damage. They burst in a 
pattern of a box within a diamond or vice 
versa, with each of the outer sides 20 feet long. 
Note that the center has four areas of overlap- 
ping effect, and there are numerous peripheral 
areas that have two overlapping areas of effect. 
A saving throw for each area of effect will indi- 
cate whether full damage or half damage is 
sustained by creatures within each area, except 
as already stated with regard to the missiles 
impacting. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Mien, Sidhelien 


See Sidhelien mien. 


Mild Admonishment, Nybor’s 
See Nybor’s mild admonishment. 


Mimic Blood Ability 
(Enchantment) , £ 
Level: 4 
Range: 20 yds. 


Components: V, S 
Duration: 1 rd./level 
Casting Time: 6 

Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: None 


This powerful spell allows the caster or other 
blooded character to mimic a scion’s blood 
ability. The caster must have witnessed the use 
of the chosen blood ability within one day per 
level of experience or have personal knowledge 
of the blood ability (for example, has seen it 
used several times in recent months, has a per- 
sonal friend or colleague with the ability, etc.). 

The recipient of the spell must be a blooded 


563 


N Mimic Mortal d 


scion in order to imitate the ability (it does not 
affect unblooded individuals) but the deriva- 
tion and bloodline strength need not match that 
required for the mimicked ability. Thus, a char- 
acter with a bloodline other than Azrai’s could 
mimic the fear ability; a character with a 
bloodline strength of only 8 could imitate an 
ability of a great bloodline. 

Both the recipient of the spell and a posses- 
sor of the blood ability to be imitated must be 
within 20 yards of the wizard at the time of 
casting. As part of the spell, the caster states 
the name and power (minor, major, or great) of 
the blood ability in a loud, clear voice. 

The recipient gains the use of the blood abil- 
ity for the duration of the spell. The character 
whose ability was mimicked retains full use of 
the ability; the character is unaffected by the 
spell. 

When the spell ends, the recipient com- 
pletely loses the blood ability, but any effects 
caused by the character’s use of the ability 
remain. For example, if the recipient mimicked 
the regeneration ability and healed several 
points of damage, those points would remain 
healed. However, if a character mimicked 
divine aura to influence an unblooded charac- 
ter, the influence on that character would end 
when the spell duration expired. Note that 
spells such as enhance blood ability and blood 
drain can affect the mimicked ability for the 
duration of this spell. 

Notes: Common on Cerilia, the BIRTHRIGHT 
setting; unknown elsewhere. 


Mimic Mortal 
(Necromancy) 
Level: 4 
Range: Touch 


Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 2 

Duration: 1 turn + 4 rds./level 
Area of Effect: 1 undead creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This is a powerful spell in the hands of a 
vampire wizard. The caster can cause an 
undead creature to lose some of its vulnerabili- 
ties in exchange for losing some of its powers. 
In effect, the creature simulates a mortal for a 
short time. 

The caster chooses how many vulnerabilities 
and powers to cancel, but not which ones. He 
can choose a maximum of one vulnerability 
per two levels of experience. 

The vulnerabilities and powers are taken 
from the given list, in order. If a particular type 
of undead creature does not have the listed vul- 
nerability or power, skip to the next entry. In all 
cases, one vulnerability is sacrificed for one 
power. The least valuable vulnerabilities are 
sacrificed first, but the most valuable powers 
go with them. In general, and undead creature 
desiring to masquerade as human will try to 
exchange as many vulnerabilities and powers 
as possible. 

Notes: Restricted to undead spellcasters; 
uncommon. Originally from the RAVENLOFT 
setting. 


~ Mind Fog A 


Mimicry 
(Illusion/Phantasm) _ 
(Song) S 
Level: 2 


Range: 60 yds. + 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 2 

Duration: 2 rds./level 

Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: Special 


When a wizard casts this spell, he gains the 
ability to perfectly mimic the sounds made by 
any animal or monster he knows, or the spe- 
cific vocal inflection and accent of any person 
known to him. He cannot duplicate special 
sound-based attacks such as an androsphinx’s 
roar or a harpy’s song, but almost any other 
kind of call, roar, or sound can be duplicated. 

The area of effect includes all characters 
within hearing range. Characters who actively 
disbelieve in the sound are allowed a saving 
throw vs. spell; if successful, they hear the wiz- 
ard’s own, unaltered voice. 

Notes: Uncommon for illusionists; other- 
wise very rare. (Updated from POLYHEDRON 
Newszine.) l 


Mind Blank 
(Abjuration) 
(Mentalism) 


Level: 8 

Range: 30 yds. 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 1 
Duration: 1 day 

Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: None 


When the very powerful mind blank spell is 
cast, the creature is totally protected from all 
devices and spells that detect, influence, or 
read emotions or thoughts. This protects 
against augury, charm, command, confusion, 
divination, empathy (all forms), ESP fear, fee- 
blemind, mass suggestion, phantasmal killer, 
possession, rulership, soul trapping, sugges- 
tion, and telepathy. Cloaking protection also 
extends to the prevention of discovery or infor- 
mation gathering by crystal balls or other scry- 
ing devices, clairaudience, clairvoyance, 
communing, contacting other planes, or wish- 
related methods (wish or limited wish). Of 
course, exceedingly powerful deities can pene- 


trate the spell’s barrier. 
Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Mind-Control Invisibility 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
(Mentalism) 


Level: 5 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: 2 rds./level 

Area of Effect: 40-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell affects the minds of one character 
or creature per level of the caster (all of which 
are chosen by the caster) within a 40-foot 
radius of his location. It causes the caster (and 
only him) to become visually undetectable by 
the affected creatures. No matter what means - 
are used to locate him, the minds of the crea- 
tures will not believe the caster is there. Note 
that only creatures within 40 feet of the caster 
are so affected; the mind control is broken if 
movement takes the caster and viewer more 
than 40 feet away from each other. The caster 


- can attack a character or creature affected by 


the spell, and the defender can only attempt a 
futile defense; shield and Dexterity adjust- 
ments are not counted on any blow. Affected 
creatures may believe some arcane spirit or 
other aberration is attacking them. 

All whom the caster intends to affect by the 
spell are allowed a saving throw vs. spell at —2 
(plus any Wisdom bonus or penalty) to escape 
the mind control attempt. A successful dispel 
magic will end the spell, while detect charm 
will reveal individuals under this spell’s effects. 

Notes: Rare spell. (Updated from DRAGON 
Magazine.) 


Mind Fog 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
Level: 5 
Range: 80 yds. 


Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 3 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 20-ft. cube 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


Mind fog is a physical block of fog that 
enables the wizard to weaken the mental resis- 
tance of his victims, who are allowed a saving 


AE ie 


565 


N Mind Mantle — Alhoon A 


throw at a —2 penalty to avoid the effects. 

A creature who fails the saving throw suffers 
a —2 penalty to any saving throw vs. spell for 
these categories of magic: spells of 1st through 
Sth level that affect the mind directly, and all 
spells of the illusion/phantasm and enchant- 
ment/charm schools that affect the mind 
directly. For example, phantasmal force is a 
mind-affecting spell; phantom steed is not. 

The saving throw penalty is cumulative with 
penalties of other types. Affected creatures suf- 
fer the penalty as long as they remain in the fog 
and for 2d6 rounds thereafter. The fog itself 
remains for 3 full turns after it has been cast. 

If optional schools or specialties are used, 
this spell affects the school of mentalism and 
any other specialties as decided by the DM. 

Notes: Uncommon spell (ToM). 


Mind Mantle — Alhoon 


(Abjuration) han ae 
Wp We 
Level: 2 MY Wer sg SC) 


Range: Touch 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 2 

Duration: 1 turn/level 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell creates a cloaking web of random 
mental impulses that screens the mind of a sin- 
gle protected being against all mind reading 
and influencing spells of 5th level or less (both 
wizardly enchantment/charm school magics 
and all priests’ spells of the charm sphere). The 
being is also immune to the effects of magical 
items that duplicate the aforementioned spells, 
and to all psionic telepathic devotions. 

Psionic telepathic sciences (such as the five 
commonly-known psionic attack forms) can 
affect a being protected by a mind mantle, but 
their contact cost is increased by half (e.g. 
from “1” to “1.5”), rounding upwards. Also, if 
the protected being is psionic and uses ejection 
to force away a psionic attacker, no side effects 
are suffered. 

A mind mantle is invisible and unaffected by 
subsequent spellcasting on the part of a pro- 
tected being. The caster can end it instantly by 
silent act of will, and a successful dispel magic 
will also destroy it. 

Notes: Restricted to Alhoon (undead 
illithids); common. 


Mind Scan, Rary’s 


See Rary’s mind scan. 


Mind Shield, Rary’s 
See Rary’s mind shield. 


Mind Vision, Manor’s 
See Manor’s mind vision. 


Mindsight, Manor’s 


See Manor’s mindsight. 


Mindspin 
(Illusion/Phantasm) 


Level: 7 

Range: Special 
Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 3 hrs. 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 individual 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


The mindspin spell isolates the innermost 
nightmares, fears, and anxieties of the subject 
and from them creates startlingly vivid illu- 
sions. The spell requires both the caster and the 
subject to remain undisturbed for three hours 
while the caster sifts through the subject’s mind 
to create the illusions. Any disturbance negates 
the process. If the subject makes a successful 
saving throw vs. spell, the spell is broken (but a 
charmed subject receives no saving throw). For 
the purposes of dispelling, the mindspin spell 
is treated as if cast by a 21st-level wizard. 

The individual within the dream experiences it 
as three separate levels of reality. Parts of the 


Mindspin 


dream are experienced as the dreamer moves over 
physical terrain. The terrain moves along at a rate 
of one mile per hour, with a maximum range that 
depends on the level of the dream and the subject’s 
Intelligence. The first level maximum is 20 miles 
times the character’s Intelligence. The second level 
maximum is one mile times the subject’s Intelli- 
gence. The third level extends to a maximum of 20 
feet times the subject’s Intelligence. The dreamer is 
always a central figure of the dream; all of the 
effects of each level of the dream disappear if the 
dreamer is awakened. Dreamwraiths and 
dreamshadows are common in all levels of the 
dream; the subject is constantly faced with deter- 
mining what is reality and what is illusion. 

First Level: The first level of the dream 
alters a character’s perceptions of space, time, 
and the reality of the immediate area. What is 
seen as a lush forest may in reality be a barren 
field. A character may actually travel many 
miles, yet only perceive himself as having 
moved a short distance. Time is equally dis- 
torted. Travel seeming to last only for a few 
minutes may actually have taken several days. 

Second Level: The second level of the dream 
distorts a character’s perception of reality even 
further, for he can no longer distinguish which of 
his companions are real and which are illusions. 

Third Level: The third level is the core of the 
dream, as a character’s perceptions of himself 
become distorted. In addition to the effects of 
the previous two levels, a character uses the 
attack and saving throw tables of another class: 
* Priests use rogue tables 
e Warriors use wizard tables 
e Wizards use warrior tables 
e Rogues use priest tables. 


567 


` Minor Creation r 


Additionally, because of the disorienting 
effects of the dream area, certain classes make 
the following adjustments: 

Priest: Subtract Wisdom from 20 use the 
result as the priest’s Wisdom for determining 
spell failure. Use the special Turning Undead 
table given here. 

Rogue: For thieving skill rolls, all successes 
fail and all failures succeed. Otherwise, adjust 
the rolls normally. 

Wizard: Wizards cast spells at one level 
higher than normal. If this enables a wizard to 
cast a spell higher than those he currently 
knows, he can choose any one spell from the 
higher level. The mindspin spell automatically 
gives the wizard the illusion that he knows this 
new spell; unlike other spells the wizard casts 
during the dream, this new spell has only illu- 
sionary effects. 

Notes: Uncommon spell found in the 
DRAGONLANCE setting or known by Dream 
mages; otherwise very rare. 


Minor Creation | 
(ilusion/Phantasm) 
(Shadow) 


Level: 4 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 turn 

Duration: 1 hr./level 

Area of Effect: 1 cubic ft./level 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell enables the wizard to create an item 
of nonliving, vegetable nature—soft goods, 
rope, wood, etc. The caster actually pulls wisps 
of material of the plane of Shadow from the air 
and weaves them into the desired item. The vol- 
ume of the item created cannot exceed 1 cubic 
foot per level of the spellcaster. The item 
remains in existence for only as long as the 
spell’s duration. 

The spellcaster must have at least a tiny piece 
of matter of the same type of item he plans to 
create by means of the minor creation spell—a 
bit of twisted hemp to create rope, a splinter of 
wood to create a door, and so forth. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Minor Enchantment, Serrel’s 
See Serrel’s minor enchantment. 


Minor Glassteel 
Lost spell. Reputed to be a lower level version of 
the glassteel spell developed by an ancient race 
of wizards. 


Minor Globe of Invulnerability 
(Abjuration) 
(Geometry) 


Level: 4 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S M - 
Casting Time: 4 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: 5-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell creates an immobile, faintly shim- 
mering magical sphere around the caster that pre- 
vents any Ist-, 2nd-, or 3rd-level spell effects 
from penetrating (i.e., the area of effect of any 
such spells does not include the area of the minor 
globe of invulnerability). This includes innate 
abilities and effects from devices. However, any 
type of spell can be cast out of the magical globe, 
and these pass from the caster of the globe to 
their subject without affecting the globe. Fourth 
and higher level spells are not affected by the 
globe. The globe can be brought down by a suc- 
cessful dispel magic spell. The caster can leave 
and return to the globe without penalty. Note that 
spell effects are not actually disrupted by the 
globe unless cast directly through or into it: The 
caster would still see a mirror image created by a 
wizard outside the globe. If that wizard then 
entered the globe, the images would wink out, to 
reappear when the wizard exited the globe. Like- 
wise, a wizard standing in the area of a light spell 
would still receive sufficient light for vision, even ` 
though that part of the Jight spell volume in the 
globe would not be luminous. l 

The material component of the spell is a glass 
or crystal bead that shatters at the expiration of 
the spell. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Minor Malison 
(Enchantment/Charm) 


Level: 3 


- Range: 60 ft. 


Components: V 

Casting Time: 3 

Duration: 2 rds./level 

Area of Effect: 30-ft. radius sphere 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


568 


~ Minor Spell Turning A 


This spell allows a wizard to adversely affect 
all the saving throws of his enemies. Opponents 
under the influence of this spell (the caster’s 
known enemies in the area of effect at the 
instant the spell is cast) make all subsequent 
saving throws at a penalty of —1. 

Alternatively, the wizard can select any one 
school of magic and cause his enemies to make 
all saving throws against magic from that school 
at —2. This penalty is not cumulative with a sav- 
ing throw penalty for specialists; that is, the 
penalty is not increased to —3. 

Notes: Uncommon spell (ToM). A specialist 
wizard barred from enchantment/charm spells 
can research a version of this spell that affects 
his own school, according to the general rules 
for spell research. 


Minor Paradox 
(Chronomancy) 


Level: 3 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


When this spell is cast, the chronomancer. can 
take back an action performed within the last five 
rounds or insert an additional action if timing 
permits. The caster could take back something 
said or decide not to kiss the king’s daughter. He 
could not insert another attack into a combat 
round, but could insert one into the round before 
combat. The number of rounds back that the 
caster can affect is equal to twice his level. If an 
action is taken back that would have prevented 
combat (insulting the goblin king) or another 
major event, the caster and Dungeon Master must 
work out a reasonable course of events that would 
make up for the lost time. . 

Notes: Restricted to chronomancers; com- 
mon. 


Minor Quest — Witch 
(Enchantment/Charm) 


Level: 1 

Range: 20 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 

Duration: Maximum 6 hrs. 
Area of Effect: 50-ft. sphere 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell compels up to 12 levels or Hit Dice 
of demihuman or humanoid creatures (or up to 6 
levels or Hit Dice of monstrous creatures) 
within the area of effect to embark on some 
errand or mission specified by the caster. The 
lowest-level creatures in the area of effect are 
affected first. The caster must be able to ver- 
bally communicate with the creatures for the 
spell to work. 

This spell cannot compel creatures to under- 
take nonsensical or foolhardy missions on the 
caster’s behalf, so the caster must be careful to 
phrase the minor quest in such a way that the 
subjects believe they are acting in their own 
behalf. For example, she might suggest that they 
return to town for supplies, break out their 
rations and enjoy a long, leisurely lunch, or head 
off on the trail of an enemy who “just passed 
this way.” The intended subjects receive a saving 
throw vs. spell to resist the spell; this is automat- 
ically successful if the caster’s mission poses a 
direct threat to their safety or well-being. 

The minor quest spell lasts 6 hours or until the 
affected creatures complete their task. There is a 
20% chance, plus 1% per level of caster, that the 
quested being or beings forget their encounter 
with the caster after the spell has ended. 

The material component is a small tin cup. 

Notes: Restricted to witches; common. 


Minor Shadow Summoning 
Lost spell, reputed equivalent to summon 
shadow but cast at a lower level. 


Minor Spell Turning 
(Abjuration) 


Level: 4 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 4 

Duration: 3 rds./level 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell is similar to the 7th-level spell turn- 
ing, which causes spells cast against the wizard to 
rebound upon the original caster. This includes 
spells cast from scrolls and innate spell-like abili- 
ties, but excludes the following: area effects that 
are not centered directly upon the protected wiz- 
ard, spell effects delivered by touch, and spell 
effects from devices such as wands, staves, and so 
forth. Thus, a ight spell cast to blind the protected 
wizard could be turned back upon and possibly 
blind the caster, while the same spell would be 


"a 


569 


~ Minute Form A 


unaffected if cast to light an area in which the pro- 
tected wizard were standing. 

One to four (1d4) spell levels can be turned. 
The exact number is secretly rolled by the DM 
the player never knows how effective the spell 
is. Unlike the 7th-level version of this spell, 
minor spell turning is not capable of partially 
turning a spell. For example, if a wizard has 
three levels of spell turning, he can turn three 
1st-level spells, one 1st and one 2nd, or one 3rd- 
level spell. He can in no way turn spells of 4th 
_ level or above. If the caster is the target of a 
higher level spell than he is capable of turning, 
the minor spell turning is negated and the caster 
receives the full brunt of the attack. 

If the protected wizard and a spellcasting 
attacker both have spell turning effects operat- 
ing, a resonating field is created. 


Resonating Field Table 

d100 

Roll Effect 

01-70 Spell drains away without effect 

71-80 Spell affects both equally at full 
damage 

81-97 Both turning effects are rendered 
nonfunctional for 1d4 turns 

98-00 Both casters are sucked through a 


rift into the Positive Material plane 


The material component of this spell is a 
smoothly polished silver coin. 
Notes: Uncommon spell (ToM). 


Minute Form 
Reversed form, see giant size. 


Minute Meteors, Melf’s 
See Melf’s minute meteors. 


Miraculum, Jalartan’s 
See Jalartan’s miraculum. 


Mirage Arcana 
(illusion/Phantasm, Alteration) 


Level: 6 

Components: V, S (M optional) 
Range: 10 yds./level 

Casting Time: Special 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 10 ft./level radius 
Saving Throw: None 


The magic of this spell is similar to that of the 
vacancy spell, only more powerful and elaborate. 


The spell enables the caster to make an area 
appear to be something other than it is—a setting 
he has personally seen. The spell remains as long 
as the caster maintains a minimal concentration 
upon it. Even after this, the spell persists for a total 
of one hour plus one additional turn for each 
experience level of the caster. (Note: Minimal 
concentration can be maintained during normal 
conversation but not while spellcasting, in melee, 
or if harmed by an attack.) If the caster actually 
uses a small bit of anything connected with the 
place to create this spell, it takes on a quasi reality. 

In its basic form, forceful contact is necessary 
to have any hope of discovering the magic, short 
of a detection device or spell. In its more com- 
plex form, where a material component is used, 
detection is possible only by some magical 
means, whether device, item, or spell. Either 
form of mirage arcana is subject to the dispel 
magic spell. 

As with all powerful illusions, the mind of the 
believer urges appropriate effects upon the 
viewer’s body. Under the influence of the spell, 
the viewer could possibly walk across a bed of 
hot coals thinking it was a shallow stream of 
water that was cooling his feet (and thus suffer 
no damage), dine upon imaginary food and 
actually be satisfied, or rest comfortably upon a 
bed of sharp stones, thinking it a featherbed. 
Gravity is not affected by the spell, however, so 
an envisioned bridge spanning a deep chasm 
does not support the believer. Those who wit- 
ness the event see it as a sudden disappearance 
of the individual. They do not connect it with an 
illusion unless they are otherwise aware of some 
magic at work. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Mirage Arcane 
Aka mirage arcana. 


Mirage Wall 
(Mlusion/Phantasm) 
(Province: Wind) Cy 
Level: 4 
Range: 20 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 4 
Duration: 1 turn/level 
Area of Effect: 2-ft. thick wall, 10 ft. x 10 
: ft./level 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell creates a stationary illusion much 
like a backdrop or scenery curtain for a theatri- 


a a as. © 


570 


N Misdirection A 


cal play. The mirage wall need not be vertical or 
even regular in its confines. It blankets the true 
scene and conceals it with another. For example, 
a cavern entrance might look like the adjacent 
cliff face, or a lush oasis might appear to be 
sandy dunes. Or a party of warriors lying in 
ambush might appear not to “be” at all. 

The wizard must see the location that he intends 
to disguise before casting this spell. When the 
mirage is in place, the caster does not have to con- 
centrate to maintain it. The mirage disappears if 
the caster wills it, or when the duration of the spell 
has ended. Dispel illusion and dispel mirage also 
can destroy the mirage wall (see those spells for 
details). In addition, the mirage ends if a living 
creature or spell passes through it. (Poking a hand 
through it is enough.) Physical objects, such as 
missile weapons, don’t destroy it, although they 
may provide a visual clue when sailing through it. 
A mirage wall does not block odors and sounds, 
either. (Hence, an ambush party must remain 
silent and, preferably, downwind.) 

The material components of-this spell are an 
eyelash, a pinch of sand, and some sweat from 
any source. 

Notes: Common for spellcasters from an ara- 
bian setting; otherwise very rare. 


Mirror Image 

(Iltusion/Phantasm) 

t 
Level: 2 
Range: 0 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 2 
Duration: 3 rds./level 
Area of Effect: 6-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: None 


When a mirror image spell is invoked, the 
spellcaster causes from two to eight exact dupli- 
cates of himself to come into being around him. 
These images do exactly what the wizard does. 
Since the spell causes a blurring and slight dis- 
tortion when it is cast, it is impossible for oppo- 
nents to be certain which are the illusions and 
which is the actual wizard. When an image is 
struck by a melee or missile attack, magical or 
otherwise, it disappears, but any other existing 
images remain intact until struck. The images 
seem to shift from round to round, so that if the 
actual wizard is struck during one round, he can- 
not be picked out from among his images the 
next. To determine the number of images that 
appear, roll 1d4 and add 1 for every three levels 
of experience the wizard has achieved, to a max- 


; N : 
imum of eight images. At the end of the spell 


duration, all surviving images wink out. 
Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Misdirection 
(ilusion/Phantasm) 


Level: 2 

Range: 30 yds. 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 2 

Duration: 8 hrs. 

Area of Effect: 1 creature or object 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


By means of this spell, the wizard misdirects 
the information from a detection spell (detect 
charm, detect evil, detect invisibility, detect lie, 
detect magic, detect snares and pits, etc.). While 
the detection spell functions, it indicates the 
wrong area, creature, or the opposite of the truth 
with respect to detect evil or detect lie. The wiz- 
ard directs the spell effect upon the object of the 
detection spell. If the caster of the detection 
spell fails his saving throw vs. spell, the misdi- 
rection takes place. Note that this spell does not 
affect other types of divination (know align- 
ment, augury, ESP clairvoyance, etc.). 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


, i a a 


571 


D Misfortune r 


Misfortune 
(Alteration) 3 $ 
Level: 2 
Range: 10 yds. 


Components: V, S 
Duration: 1 wk./level 
Casting Time: 2 

Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Special 


f 
ah 


When a wizard successfully casts a misfor- 
tune spell upon another individual or creature, 
the subject’s proficiency checks suffer a 1-point 
penalty for the spell’s duration. Multiple misfor- 
tune spells can be cast upon a subject, with 
cumulative results. 

The subject of a misfortune enchantment is 
allowed a saving throw vs. spell with a —1 
penalty to the die roll for every three full levels 
of the caster. Thus, if a 10th-level wizard cast 
misfortune, the subject suffers a —3 penalty to 
his saving throw. 

The misfortune spell(s) can be negated by a 
single remove curse or similar spell. 

An elderly Rjurik wizard is said to have cre- 
ated this spell to bring ill luck to his enemies. 
He intended his foes to suffer misfortune when 
hunting, fishing, or trapping—activities essen- 
tial to the livelihood of the Rjurik people. The 
spell has since been used to bring ill-luck to 
people of all races. 

Notes: Common on Cerilia, the BIRTHRIGHT 
setting, uncommon for Savage mages; unknown 
elsewhere. 


Mislead 
(Illusion/Phantasm) 
Level: 6 
Range: 10 yds. 


Components: S 
Casting Time: 1 
Duration: 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


When a mislead spell is cast by the wizard, he 
actually creates an illusory double at the same 
time that he is cloaked by improved invisibility 
magic (see the 4th-level spell). The wizard is 
then free to go elsewhere while his double seem- 
ingly moves away. The spell enables the illusion 
of the wizard to speak and gesture as if it were 
real, and there are full olfactory and touch com- 
ponents as well. A true seeing spell or a gem of 


572 


seeing will reveal the illusion for what it is. A 
detect invisibility or true seeing spell or items 
such as a gem of seeing or robe of eyes can 
detect the invisible wizard (see the 5th-level 
wizard spell shadow door). 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Missile Mastery 
(Alteration) 


Level: 4 

Range: 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 4 
Duration: 4 rds. 

Area of Effect: 1 missile 
Saving Throw: Special 


While this spell is in effect, the wizard can 
alter the flight of a single missile that passes 
within the range of the spell, stopping it or caus- 
ing it to be hurled back toward its original sender. 
Missiles returned to sender strike with the 
sender’s THACO with a +4 to hit and inflict nor- 
mal damage. The wizard can affect only a single 
missile per round. The missile can weigh no more 
than the wizard’s experience level in pounds. 
Enchanted items (such as an arrow +1) receive a 
saving throw vs. spell to overcome the missile 
mastery. The saving throw for these items is the 
same as the individual who launched them, plus 
any bonuses of the weapon (+1, +2, etc.). 

Magic missiles and similar spells of 3rd level 
or less are negated entirely (magic disk, Melf’s 
acid arrow and minute meteors, Snilloc’s snow- 
bail and snowball swarm, etc.). Regardless of 
how the missiles of a spread are targetted, the 
entire spell effect is considered a single missile 
for purposes of negation. l 

The wizard does not need to concentrate to 
maintain the spell, being able to move and fight 
while it is in operation. Casting any spell negates all 
remaining duration left on a missile mastery spell. 

Notes: Rare in the FORGOTTEN REALMS set- 
ting. Known to be in The Shadowtome. 


Misspell Mantle. — Phaerimm 
(Alteration) 


Level: 5 

Range: 30-yds. 
Components: V 

Casting Time: 5 
Duration: 12 hrs. 

Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


A O a a ais 


~ Mnemonic Enhancer, Rary’s A 


This spell enables the caster to create an 
invisible aura around any single creature. The 
creature will not feel anything, and the spell will 
not take effect until the being uses a magical 
item or casts a spell. 

At that time, instead of the intended effect, a 
random, “wild” magical effect, similar to the 
discharges of a wand of wonder (and possibly 
harmful to the target creature) will occur instead. 
The wild magic Wild Surge Results table in the 
Tome of Magic can be used if the DM desires. 
The magical item charge (if any) or spell is 
expended, regardless of the result. 

A successful dispel magic will remove this 
unseen mantle. An affected creature will radiate 
magic strongly. 

Notes: Restricted to phaerimm; common. 
Duration is changed from the original. 


Mist Magic 
(Evocation) 
(Water, Air) 


Level: 2 

Range: 70 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 2 

Duration: 1d4 turns + 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: 20 ft. + 10 ft./level radius 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell creates concealing mists, akin to 
the Ist-level wizard spell wall of fog. Unlike that 
simpler spell, mist magic can, as chosen by the 
caster, either move at a maximum rate of 20 feet 
per round, stay motionless despite winds for 1 
round per level of the caster, or move with the 
caster (being left behind at the caster’s last loca- 
tion if the caster uses such spells as blink, 
dimension door, or teleport). The movement 
cannot be changed once chosen. The duration of 
the mists is halved by strong winds. 

The mist created is thick and concealing, 
obscuring even infravision beyond a 2-foot dis- 
tance. The mist is also extremely wet, dousing 
normal campfires or smaller flames and extin- 
guishing larger normal fires in 2—5 rounds (this 
also destroys the mist). Many wizards use this 
spell to put out house and forest fires. 

All fire-based attacks entering, passing 
through, or cast within the mists lose 2 points 
from each die of damage. Items in the mist 
requiring saving throws against fire-based 
attacks receive a +3 saving throw bonus. The 
mists can be affected by hold vapor and 
destroyed by dispel magic. 


Notes: Uncommon for Water, Air, and 
Weather mages; otherwise rare. Originally from 
the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Misty Summons 


(Alteration, Invocation) a 


Level: 7 

Range: 1 mi./level 
Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 7 rds. 
Duration: 10 rds./level 
Area of Effect: 30-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell requires a special portal to be built 
prior to the casting—a doorway or archway of 
stone. It must be at least three feet wide, but no 
more than thirty. The materials to build it cost 
3,000 gp and the labor takes six months. All the 
labor must be performed by the caster. Once 
built, it looks like any normal doorway or arch, 
although it may be as plain or ornate as the 
caster desires. 

When casting the spell, the wizard visualizes 
a place he knows well, which must be within the 
range of the spell and in the same domain as the 
caster. The wizard must also be within 30 feet of 
the portal. Over the next 7 rounds, a misty fog 
coalesces at that distant place and within the 
portal. Once the fog has been created, the caster 
no longer needs to concentrate on it. He can dis- 
pel it at any time, but cannot change its position. 
The fog is magical, with an aura of alteration 
and invocation, but is otherwise indistinguish- 
able from normal fog. 

Any creature stepping into the mist walks out 
of it through the portal; anyone seeing the mist 
forming can choose to not step into it. If the mist 
is created over characters, they have 7 rounds to 
escape. If they are sleeping or otherwise immo- 
bile, the characters are transported through the 
misty portal. 

Count Von Zarovich has built a misty portal 
somewhere in his castle, but its exact location is 
unknown. Those whom he summons to his 
castle rarely return. . . . 

Notes: Common spell in the RAVENLOFT set- 
ting; otherwise very rare. Can be researched 
only on the Demiplane of Dread. 


Mnemonic Enhancer, Rary’s 
See Rary’s mnemonic enhancer. 


573 


~~ Widely Known Spells A 


Most Widely Known Spells 
Common, Uncommon, and Rare Spells Found in this Volume 


While more complete lists are given in the final volume of this series, this list can be used as a quick guide 
to the most common spells in this volume, suitable for nonspecialized PCs. Humanoid, monster, chrono- 
mancer, and Maztican spells are not listed here. Common/uncommon spells are in bold. Spells in italic 
are very rare or otherwise restricted; see individual spell entries for details. Drow, necromancer, ninja, and 
Athasian specialty lists are given separately. 


Level 1 locate remains insatiable thirst 
elemental burst magic disk invisibility 

empathic seizure magic fist invisibility to undead 
empathy magic missile irritation 

enlarge march jester’s jest 

erase melt knock 

farseer mending know alignment 
feather fall message Laeral’s cutting hand 
feather float metamorphose liquids Leomund’s trap 
fiery eyes minor quest lesser sign of sealing 
filth’s bane levitate 

find familiar life sounding 

fire burst Level 2 lightning strike 

fire quill echoes locate object 
fire truth elemental guide locate portal 
firewater Elonia’s glamer magic ear 

fist of stone empathic control magic missile reflection 
flamespin enchanted blade magic mouth 

flare enhanced olfaction mask bloodline 
flashlight enlarge desert creature mass jump 
float enter dream Maximilian’s earthen grasp 
friends ESP measure cinnabryl 
frost fingers everwatching skull Melf’s acid arrow 
frost shroud falling wall mimicry 

gauntlet familiar enhancer I mirror image 

gaze reflection fascinate misdirection 
Gemidan 5 icicle filter misfortune 

ghost light Flann’s finery mist magic 
ghostharp fire arrows 

grease fire shuriken 

hail of stone fireproof Level 3 

hair firestaff eagle vision 

hold portal first strike Elminster s multiple mouths 
honor mark fist of the adder empathic link 
Hornung s guess flaming sphere enchanted torch 
hypnotism flash enhance blood ability 
identify flashpuff entomb 

ignite flame ` flying fist Erik’s quills 
insulation flying jambiya explosive runes 
jump fog cloud face 

Khinasi trade tongue fools’ gold familiar enhancer II ~ 
know bloodline derivation forcewave far reaching I 

know bloodline strength forget farspeaker 

know Cerilian origin frostfire Searfire 

know faction gate ward feign death 

know history Gemidan’s paralytic missile fiery fists 

know school ghost blade find treasure 

know weight ghost pipes find water 

ladder glitterdust fire phantom 
Laeral’s dancing whip Hornung s baneful deflector fire rain 

lasting breath hold portal open fire wings 

light hypnotic pattern fireball 

lightning bug ice knife fireflow 

liquid orb Immurk’s distraction flame arrow 

little bird improved phantasmal force fly 

living link infratorch fool’s speech 


574 


„~ Widely Known Spells d 


foothold 

Gamalon's fiery backlash 
gate seal 

ghost armor 

grease slick 

ground fog 

gust of wind 

Haelyn’s bow 

haste 

healing dream 

hissing sand 

hold person 

hold undead 

hold vapor 

hover 

hovering skull 

icelance 

illusionary script 
improved magic missile 
improved magic mouth 
improved whispering wind 
infravision 

instant audience 
interruptable light 
invisibility, 10° radius 
invisible mail 

iron kimono 

iron mind 

Isolde’s answer 

item 

Khelben'’s suspended silence 
Laeral’s dancing dweomer 
lance of disruption 
Leomund’s tiny hut 
lessen gravity 

lightning bolt 

lightning rod 
Lorloveim’s creeping shadow 
lubricity 

Lysander 5 kaleidoscope 
magnetism 

mailed might 
maladweomer 

manyjaws 

material 

Maximilian’s stony grasp 
Melf’s minute meteors 
Mellix’s fire mouth 
memory 

mental block 

mental transport 

minor malison 


Level 4 

electrical wards 
elemental form 
elemental turning 
elude blow 

emotion 

enchanted weapon 
encrypt 

enervation 

enhance fire creature 
Evard’s black tentacles 
everlasting fire 
everpresent record 
extension I 

familiar enhancer III 


far reaching II 
fatigue 

fear 

feign destruction 
find person 
find treasure 
fire aura 

fire charm 
fire enchantment 

fire shield 

fire trap 
fire wake 
firebrand 

Flamsterd’s flamestrike 
fumble 

Galather’s gnostic chain 
Galkyn 5 bolt 

gaseous form 
Geirdorn’s grappling grasp 
genie contract 

Ghelkyn 5 wounding 
ghost rigging 

gloom 

great thump 

greater malison 
hailcone 

hallucinatory terrain 
halo of eyes 

heroism 

hiding place 

ice storm 

identify tighmaevril 
illusionary wall 
Ilyykur’s mantle 
improved armor 
improved invisibility 
improved strength 

iron maiden 

Ivy’s irresistible scent 
jackal ward 

jest 

juggle 

know path of magic 
Laeral’s aqueous column 
Laeral's gesture 

lapse 

Leomund’s secure shelter 
lesser spelldream 

lesser geas 

life bolt 

lifesurge 

lightning shield 

locate creature 

magic mirror 

mask of death 
massmorph 
mechanical disruption 
melt metal 

Merald’s murderous mist 
mimic blood ability 
minor creation 

minor globe of invulnerability 
minor spell turning 
mirage wall 

missile mastery 


Level 5 

elemental control 
enhance maneuverability 
ethereal banishment 
extension II 

eyefire 

fabricate 


575 


Widely Known Spells 


>, Ci 


facet 

Fallion’s fabulous fireball 
false vision 

familiar enhancer IV 
far reaching IT 

farscry : 

fear aura 

feeblemind 

feign undead 

fiendform 

fire breath 

fire track 

flesh mirage 

Jleshshiver 

flyfield ` 

force shapechange 
Grimwald’s graymantle 
guise of the yak-man 
hasten growth 

heat mirage 

hold monster 

immunity to poison and disease 
improved blink 
improved skull watch 
insect sight 
invulnerability to normal weapons 
ironguard 

ironwood 

Jaggar s strengthened bastion 
Jhanifer s deliquescence 
Jonstal’s double wizardry 
Khazid’s procurement 
Knoslira’s crypt 

know value 

Laeral’s disrobement 
lapis bonds 

Leomund’s hidden lodge 
Leomund’s lamentable belaborment 
Leomund’s secret chest 
life field 

lightning curtain 
lightning lash 

liquid earth 

lower resistance 

magic jar 

magic staff 

major creation 

Manor’s mindsight 
mass 

mass contagion 

mass mounts 

maximum damage 
Melisander’s harp 

metal skin 

mind-control invisibility 
mind fog 

mind-control invisibility 


Level 6 

enchant an item 
energy transformation 
enfeeble 
ensnarement 
etherealness 
evaporate fluids 
extension III 

eyebite 

familiar enhancer V 
fire eyes 

flame of justice 
flameproof 

Forest’s fiery constrictor 
gamblers luck 


"aa 


gauntlet of teeth 

geas 

ghostgrail 

glassee l 

globe of invulnerability 

grafi 

greater sign of sealing 

greater spelldream 

guards and wards 

howl of Pandemonium 
impersonation 

invisible stalker 

invulnerability to magical weapons 
itembane 

javelin 

Jonstal’s improved double wizardry 
legend lore 

lightning rod 

lightningcloak 

Lorloveim’s shadowy transforma- 
tion 

lower water 

magical susceptibility 

maintain 

mass suggestion 

metal to rust 

mirage arcana 

mislead 


Level 7 

electric bow 

elemental servant 
enhanced empathy 
exalted eye 

faerie sword 

find the path 

familiar enhancer VI 
finger of death 

flame chase 

forcecage 

gemjump 

guardian mantle 
gullship 

hatch the stone from the egg 
hold golem 

Hornung 5 surge selector 
ice blight 

incendiary entrapment 
intensify summoning 
Janga’s jewel 

lifeproof 

limited wish 

love 

lullaby 

Lysander s bladestorm 
major domination 
Malec-Keth’s flame fist 
Malraz’s dramatic death 
Manor’s mind vision 
mass invisibility 

mass teleport 

mindspin 

misty summons 


576 


Level 8 l 

elemental transmogrification 
endless slumber 

enhance 

evolve 

familiar enhancer VIE 

Sear ward 

finding the center 

gateway 

giant size 

glassteel 

great shout 

Gunther’s kaleidoscopic strike 
hide heart 

heart of stone 

homunculus shield 
Hornung s random dispatcher 
incendiary cloud 

intensify nature 

iron body 

Laeral s invisible blade 

life force transfer 

lightning ring 


. lightning storm 


magic drain 


- mass charm 


mass polymorph : 
mass teleport without error 
maze 

mind blank 


Level 9 

elemental aura : 
Elminster’s effulgent epuration 
Elminster’s evasion 
energy drain 

estate transference 

eye of Mystra 

eye of power 

familiar enhancer VII 
foresight 

gate 

glorious transmutation 
immunity to undeath 
imprisonment 

instant regeneration 
internal fire 

Juggernaut 

Khelben s dweomerdoom 
life force exchange 

life water 

lifeblend 

maelstrom 

major cloak 

mass blindness 

mass domination 
master undead 

maw of chaos 

meteor swarm 


