” Accessory 


Tome of Magic 


by Cook, Findley, Heming, Kubasigsaeenrand swan 


i d und 15 
s Me i 7 . . ; F and priest 
A and scores of new 
magical items. 
~ j Tome of Magic brings to 
hight spectacular magical 


iay = fi ‘ ” > i effects for players and 
("F ` Dungeon Masters alike! 


Advanced 
ngeons Ð ragons 


2" Edition 


Official Game Accessory 


New spells and magical items for priest and wizard classes! 


TSR, Inc. TSR Ltd. 
POB 756 i 120 Church End, Cherry Hinton 
Lake Geneva Cambridge CB1 3LB 
WI 53147 U.S.A. ack o United Kingdom 


ADVANCED DUNGEONS & DRAGONS, AD&D, and FORGOTTEN REALMS are registered trademarks owned by TSR, Inc. 
PRODUCTS OF YOUR IMAGINATION, BATTLESYSTEM, and the TSR logo are trademarks owned by TSR, Inc. 
©1991 TSR, Inc. All rights reserved. Printed in the U.S.A 


Distributed to the book trade by Random House, Inc., and in Canada by Random House of Canada, Ltd. 
Distributed to the toy and hobby trade by regional distributors. 
Distributed to the book and hobby trade in the United Kingdom by TSR Ltd 
1-56076-107-5 


This work is protected under the copyright laws of the United States of America. Any reproduction or unauthorized use of the material or artwork presented herein is prohibited without the express written 
consent of TSR, Inc 


Forward 


Whew, another big project behind me! Never did I 
realize when I started work on the Tome of Magic that 
it would become such an undertaking. After all, it 
seemed so simple. At that point, I should have known 
better. 

It all started with a seemingly innocent comment, 
something like, “There are a lot of gaps in the spell lists 
for wizards and priests. Maybe we should do some- 
thing about it.” I don’t know if I said that, or if it was 
someone else's idea, but whoever said it was right. I 
knew they were right because I could see them clearly 
by the time the AD&D® 2nd Edition Player's Hand- 
book was finished. 

These gaps were not yawning chasms in the game 
system. They were little things, like, “Gee, it would be 
nice to have a spell that did X—or Y, or Z, or what- 
ever.’ Sometimes they were things to help explain the 
weirdness people were always putting in adventures or 
little touches that would smooth things out for players 
and DMs alike. The Tome of Magic could be just the 
place to get some of these ideas into the AD&D® game 
system. Months later (because months always pass be- 
tween the idea and actually doing the work), it was 
time to make all this real. 

That’s when I discovered the warts on the great 
idea—two in particular. First, filling a book with a mis- 
matched collection of spells was not enough. How 
many variations on fireball, lightning bolt, and confu- 
sion did you really need? Second, a book of odds and 


Table of Contents 


Chapter 1: How to Use Tome of Magic ............ 3 
Chapter: 2; Wizard Spells sx issuias caesaviawcases 16 
First-Leve) Spells: ccsa rantaan i Oo. wasn 17 
Second- Level Spell sis. cc's ea n R 21 
PhirdaLevel Spell sis oscecsie:seieisieiein Srreetrare einai ee 24 
Pth- Level Spei enas osme erneer 28 
PEA L EVEL BONS renas aena aaa 34 
Sixth Level Spel Si aros scaverscsrsis suyercirarevesrocers. 596 37 
Seventh-Level Spells rri sonses caweres aoa es 40 
Eishth-Level Spells: essorer saan acer eed 43 
Ninth-Level Spells: sssr canes oran nanei E 45 
Chapter 3: Priest Spellcsces pasam na A 49 
First- Level Spells ro escatievsssd ain Aa 51 
SECONG LEVEL SPEIS saas id aaea RE 56 
"Third Level Spells. sauniaina nea ranan #5 63 
Pourth=Level Spells «:.cicscrsie icnrmira stneinsesie alewmnniwye 74 
Fifth-Level Spells sirinin sesssirerns conoi 87 
Sixth-Level Spells. asce amsema 98 
Seventh-Level Spells:e..csciccvvancawaaws sanak 105 
Guest SPAMS: swiss sa sonam seer gs sis eacowin Brees 112 
Chapter4: Magical EMS inre eceran oie cacaies 123 
Appendix 1: Wizard Spells by School ........... 149 
Appendix 2: Priest Spells by Sphere............. 152 


Appendix 3: Alphabetical Index of Spells ........ 155 


ends didn’t sound exciting for either a game designer or 
for the players. The Tome of Magic needed 
something—a hook—to make it interesting. 

As a result, the Tome of Magic is much more than 
just a collection of spells. There are many new ideas 
about the types and uses of magic in these pages—wild 
magic, cooperative magic, focuses, elementalists, and 
more. In the end, the Tome of Magic offers more than 
just spells—it gives breadth and range to wizards and 
priests. In many ways, it is a peek inside the Pandora's 
box of magic. 

On top of these concerns was a problem of mental 
health. If I alone had to fill all these pages with spells 
and magical items, I'd be writing from the nut-house 
by now. There was no way I could create all these new 
spells are remain sane. That's why there is a host of 
designers listed in the credits. Taking often the barest 
of my ideas and suggestions, these creative conspira- 
tors produced a wide variety of spells and items. After 
weeding out spells too similar in form and function, I 
can offer you the cleverness and diversity of six differ- 
ent designers, not just one! 

For myself and the other designers, we hope you find 
the Tome of Magic both entertaining and useful. Let it 
be your guide to just how much further wizards and 
priests can go in the AD&D game. 


David Cook 
February, 1991 


Credits 


Design: David Cook (Wild Magic, Faith Magic) 
Nigel Findley (Numbers, Thought, War) 
Anthony Herring (Elementalists, additional 

spells) 
Christopher Kubasik (Chaos, Law) 
Carl Sargent (Quest Spells, Metamagic) 
Rick Swan (Time, Travel, Wards) 

Supervision and Development: David Cook 

Editing and Additional Development: Anne Brown 

Proofreading: Anne Brown, Rob King, Dori Watry 

Cover Art: Jeff Easley 

Black and White Art: Stephen Fabian 

Color Art: Brom, Clyde Caldwell, Carol Heyer, John 

& Laura Lakey, Roger Loveless 

Icons: Stephen Sullivan 

Graphic Design: Stephanie Tabat 

Typesetting: Gaye O'Keefe, Angelika Lokotz 

Production: Sarah Feggestad 


An apprentice stands in the laboratory of his 
ancient wizard master. The youth's eyes stray 
across tables cluttered with alembics, retorts, 
beakers, bat wings, and phials, and beyond to 
shelves of scrolls and books. A musty old vol- 
ume, bound in cracked green leather with glitter- 
ing silver hinges, catches his attention. His 
master is elsewhere, so the curious student pulls 
the heavy volume from the shelf and, with a puff 
of breath, blows away a thick layer of dust. 
“Tome of Magic” it reads, spelled out in silver leaf 
on the brittle cover. 

The apprentice can't believe his discovery. He's 
never seen this book before. What secrets has his 
master been keeping from him? What secrets will 
he discover inside? With trembling fingers, the 
apprentice opens the creaking cover. 

“Ahem, O callow youth! Perhaps you are dis- 
satisfied with my training and would like to seek 
another master!” booms the master’s voice from 
behind the apprentice. The youth startles and 
guiltily slams the cover shut. Turning, he smiles 
sheepishly at his master. 

The old wizard, bald and portly, takes the 
book from his apprentice’s hands. “Before you 
can learn secrets like these, you must first master 
the basics, which I sometimes doubt you ever 
will. Now tell me, what are the three Greater 
Gesticulations used. in casting a light spell?” The 
wizard deftly slides the tome back into place on 
the shelf as he speaks. 

Flustered, the apprentice stammers out what 
feels like an elementary reply. But in his heart, he 
knows that someday he will read the secrets of 
that tome. 


Someday is now! 


How to Use This Book 


With over two hundred new spells for wizards 
and priests and a host of new magical items, the 
question of how to use this book may seem fairly 
obvious to most players. It appears to be a simple 
matter of opening the pages, selecting spells and 
magical items, and tossing these into a campaign. 

Of course, it can be done that way, but players 
and DMs who take this route will miss many of 
the new possibilities and expansions the Tome of 
Magic has to offer. On the surface, the Tome of 
Magic may appear to be just a collection of spells 
and magical items. But it contains new game rules 
and information that goes much deeper. 

This volume introduces a new type of wizard 
magic, expanded specializations, new priest 


Chapter 1: How to Use Tome of Magic 


spheres, and new variations on priest magic. 
These rules have the potential to impact a cam- 
paign in a way greater than a first glance might 
suggest. To benefit the most from these expan- 
sions, the DM should carefully consider how to 
introduce and use the new rules. 


Who Is It For? 


The Tome of Magic is written with both the 
DM and player in mind. Dungeon Masters who 
keep this book out the hands of their players are 
doing their game a disservice. Likewise, players 
who want this book only to learn about the new 
magical items are missing the point. Both player 
and DM can use this book to improve and ex- 
pand the game. 


Wizards 


In the game world of wizards, there are two 
significant additions—wild magic and elementa- 
lists. Wild magic is a strange, new type of magical 
power, just being explored and discovered for the 
first time. Wild mages are rare and exotic. Long 
before encountering such a wizard, characters 
may hear tell of a new type of magic in reports 
from travelers to distant lands. Of course, every 
adventurer knows that these reports tend to be 
exaggerated—more fiction than fact. 

The first appearance of a wild mage is best pre- 
sented by the DM as a mysterious NPC. The wild 
mage may join the party briefly or may be the 
springboard for an adventure. He should not be a 
henchman or hireling, but someone who is the 
characters’ equal or superior. This gives players 
the opportunity to experience the wonders (and 
terrors) of wild magic before immersing them- 
selves in this new art. After the characters have 
learned something of this strange magic, wild 
mage player characters may be introduced, per- 
haps as apprentices of the same NPC. Gradually, 
these new mages will become accepted members 
of the campaign world. 

Elementalists can be introduced in a similar 
fashion, although their arrival is likely to be less 
mysterious. The first appearance of the speciali- 
zation could be a small school or guild in a near- 
by town, established by an elementalist from 
distant lands (where such magic is common). The 
newly established wizard is likely.to be looking 
for an apprentice; new characters are eligible to 
join the school. Of course, established mages 
may take an interest (both positive and negative) 
in his activities. 


How to Use Tome of Magic 


Priests 


The introduction of new priest spheres can 
pose a logical problem in some campaigns—if an 
existing Power has influence in a certain sphere, 
why did his priests never have these spells before? 
Why do they wake up one morning and suddenly 
have access to spells never before seen? 

The DM can use several solutions to this ques- 
tion. The first is most effective for such esoteric 
spheres as Thought and Numbers. In this case, 
few (if any) existing Powers have access to these 
spheres. Instead, priests arrive (as did wild 
mages) from distant lands, spreading the word 
of their god. These NPC priests have strange 
powers never before seen. In some locations, 
they may be accepted, while in others, they may 
be driven out with vengeance. As new player 
characters are created, this “new” faith with all 
its advantages and disadvantages becomes an 
option. 

Another explanation, particularly useful for 
the spheres of War and Wards, is that the Power 
always had access to these spells, but never had 
the need to grant them. A deity of war could rea- 
sonably withhold spells of the War sphere until 
the threat of war exists. To introduce the War 
sphere into the campaign, the DM need only cre- 
ate a little border tension and massing of 
troops—the perfect background for many ad- 
ventures. 

Certain deities may be too aloof or remote to 
become involved in the affairs of men until the 
need arises. This is particularly appropriate for 
the spheres of Law and Chaos. A shift in the “har- 
mony of the universe” might warrant the atten- 
tion of these Powers to “set things right.” 

The introduction of subdivisions in the elemen- 
tal sphere can be effected in a similar manner. 
Foreign priests may enter the campaign region 
and introduce the concept, or existing priests 
might discover their own deities suddenly taking 
a more active interest in their spells. Conflict or 
rivalry on the elemental planes can be used to jus- 
tify rigid adherence to a particular element. A fire 
god, feeling the rising power of a sea god, may 
enforce strict elemental selection to bolster the 
devotion of his priests. 

Of all the new priest material, quest spells are 
the easiest to introduce. These are given by the 
DM only when special conditions warrant. It is 
easy to justify that conditions have never yet 
warranted the need for quest spells. 


Magical Items 


Of all the new material in this book, magical 
items require the least effort to introduce. Many 
are simply treasures that can be discovered in a 
newly-won hoard. In this case, DMs are encour- 
aged not to reveal all the powers of a newly- 
found item. Rather, the player should be forced 
to puzzle out an item's powers. For example, the 
characters find a magical quill. What does it do? 
How is it used? Answering these questions is a 
goal that players can set for their characters. Af- 
ter spending time, spells, and money on research 
and possibly more adventures, the characters 
may discover that they own a quill of law. 

Another effective and logical method for intro- 
ducing never-before-seen magical items is for 
NPCs to possess these fascinating new devices. 
Thus, a wild mage might own a rod of disruption 
or an elementalist a wand of corridors. 


Patience, Patience, Patience 


An important thing for both the DM and play- 
ers to remember is that the existence of Tome of 
Magic does not mean that everything in it needs 
to be rushed into play. If the need for a particular 
spell does not exist right away, don’t worry. 
Sooner or later, a player or DM will discover that 
it suits his needs perfectly. Properly used, the 
Tome of Magic will become a source of surprises 
and inspiration for many adventures to come. 


New Rules for Wizards 


Mages and magic, great and small, are a key 
element of a fantasy campaign. While endowed 
with considerable powers, there are still vast ho- 
rizons for mages to explore. Just a small portion 
of these possibilities is explored in the Tome of 
Magic—wild magic, elemental specialists, and 
metamagic. 


Wild Magic 


One of the newest discoveries from the great 
lands of the Forgotten Realms is wild magic. 
Originally considered little more than the unfor- 
tunate by-product of an epic struggle among the 
gods of that world, the.strange effects of the wild 
lands (as those areas affected by wild magic are 
known) have attracted the attention of many a 
curious or scholarly wizard. 

In general, two types of wizards are drawn to 
these strange areas. The first are the researchers: 


wizards devoted to the study of the theoretical 
underpinnings of magic. For them, the wild areas 
expose long-hidden secrets of the magical uni- 
verse and give new insights into how magical en- 
ergy functions. From their work have evolved the 
beginnings of a theory of random magic—one 
that defies the traditional schools. 

The second type of wizard drawn to the wild 
lands is far less rigorous and methodical. These 
spellcasters are attracted by the sheer random- 
ness and uncertainty of the wild lands. Such 
mages seek to incorporate wild magic into their 
spells by combining traditional magic with the 
new theories of random magic, throwing in a 
dose of their own chaotic natures as an extra 
measure. These wizards are the true wild mages 
who have been seen recently in various lands. 

Although initially discovered and researched 
on Toril, the FORGOTTEN REALMS® campaign 
world, the art of wild magic has quickly spread to 
other places. Wild mages, through teleporting, 
spelljamming, planar hopping, and even walk- 
ing, have carried the precepts of wild magic to 
lands and worlds far removed from Toril. 


Wild Mages 


With the discovery of wild magic has come the 
appearance of wizards devoted to its study. Like 
their traditional specialist brethren, wild mages 
have thrown themselves into the intense study of 
a single aspect of magic. This has given them 
unique benefits and restrictions on their powers. 
Wild magic is so different from traditional magic 
that only those devoted to its study may cast wild 
magic; no wizard other than a wild mage may at- 
tempt to use the spells of wild magic. 

Wild mages are by no means specialist 
wizards—at least not in the traditional sense. Wild 
mages do not study within the confines of schools. 
Instead, their research into new theories of wild 
magic carries them into all different fields. Wild 
magic has strengths in some areas (particularly 
divination and evocation), but it is not confined to 
any single school of magic. The proponents of 
wild magic proudly trumpet their art's broad base 
and flexibility as its great advantages. 

Of course, these same advocates are quick to 
downplay wild magic's drawbacks. First and 
foremost, it is wild magic. On rare occasions, any 
spell can have dangerously unpredictable results, 
including backfiring or creating an entirely differ- 
ent effect from what was desired. More common- 
ly, the magnitude of a spell—range, duration, 
area of effect, or even damage—may fluctuate 


How to Use Tome of Magic 


from casting to casting. Spells cast by wild mages 
are inherently unpredictable. 

Only characters with Intelligence of 16 or 
greater are qualified to become wild mages. The 
theories of wild magic are breaking new ground, 
and only characters of high intelligence are able 
to decipher the arcane convolutions of its meta- 
mathematical theory. Although wild magic is 
chaotic on the surface, study in this field requires 
diligence and discipline. 

There are no restrictions to the alignment of a 
wild mage. The race of a wild mage is limited to 
those races with competency at magic; thus, only 
humans, elves, and half-elves can be wild mages. 
Gnomes have some magical talent, but lack the 
broad base of skills and knowledge necessary to 
master this new field. 

Wild mages must abide by the normal restric- 
tions for all wizards concerning weapons and ar- 
mor. They use the same THACO and saving 
throw values of traditional wizards. They pro- 
gress in level according to the Wizard Experience 
Levels and Wizard Spell Progression tables 
(Tables 20 and 21 in the Player's Handbook). 

Wild mages have several abilities and restric- 
tions. Like specialists, wild mages are able to 
memorize one extra spell per spell level. This spell 
must be a wild magic spell, although it can be 
from any school; wild mages have no opposition 
schools as do specialists. 

Wild mages receive a bonus of +10% when 
learning new wild magic spells and a —5% penal- 
ty when learning other spells. Because wild magic 
is somewhat “fast and loose,’ wild mages can re- 
search new spells as if they were one level less dif- 
ficult, decreasing the amount of time and money 
needed to create new spells. 

Certain magical items behave differently in the 
hands of a wild mage. This is due to his understand- 
ing of the random processes that power them. Most 
notable of these is the wand of wonder. The wild 
mage has a 50% chance of controlling the wand, 
allowing him to use charges from the wand to cast 
any spell he already knows (but does not need to 
have memorized). The number of charges used by 
the wand is equal to the number of levels of the spell 
desired. If the attempt fails, only one charge is used 
and a random effect is generated. 

The wild mage can control the following items 
50% of the time, thereby allowing him to select 
the result or item instead of relying on chance: 
amulet of the planes, bag of beans, bag of tricks, 
deck of illusions, deck of many things, and the 
well of many worlds. 


How to Use Tome of Magic 


Level Variations 


The most broad-reaching aspect of the wild 
mage’s powers is his approach to spells. The wild 
mage’s work with the principles of uncertainty af- 
fects all spells that have a level variable for range, 
duration, area of effect, or damage. Each time a 
wild mage uses a spell with a level variable, he 
randomly determines the resulting casting level 
of the spell. The spell may function at lesser, 
equal, or greater effect than normal. The degree 
of variation depends on the true level of the cast- 
er, as shown in Table 1: Level Variation. 

To determine the level at which the spell is cast, 
the player must roll 1d20 at the moment the spell 
is cast. The variation from the caster’s actual level 
is found at the point where the character's true 
level and the die roll intersect. (True level refers 
to the current experience level of the wild mage.) 
If the result is a positive number, that many levels 
are added to the caster's true level for purposes of 
casting the spell. If the result is a negative num- 
ber, that many levels are subtracted from the 
caster’s true level. If the result is 0, the spell is cast 
normally. The variation of a spell’s power has no 
permanent effect on the mage’s experience level 
or casting ability. 

For example, Theos, a 7th-level wild mage, 
casts a fireball. He wishes it to take effect 70 
yards away at the site of a band of advancing 
orcs. Fireball has level variables for range (10 
yds. +10 yds./level) and damage (1d6/level). A 
die roll is made on the Level Variation Table with 
a result of 19, indicating a level variation of +3. 
The fireball functions as if cast by a 10th-level 


wizard (7 +3) and easily reaches its target, caus- 
ing 10d6 points of damage. If the level variation 
had been —3 (die roll of 2), the spell would have 
operated as if it were 4th level. In this case, the 
fireball would have fallen short since its maxi- 
mum range would have been 50 yards (10 
yds +10 yds X 4). 

One additional effect can occur when casting 
level-variable spells. If the result from Table 1 is 
boldfaced, the caster has inadvertently created a 
wild surge in the spell in addition to the spell’s ef- 
fects. A wild surge briefly opens a doorway 
through which raw magical energy pours. The 
energy is incompletely controlled by the actions 
of the spellcaster. The result, often spectacular, is 
seldom what the caster intended and is sometimes 
a smaller or greater version of the desired spell. 
At other times, wildly improbable results occur. 
Songs may fill the air, people might appear out of 
nowhere, or the floor may become a pool of 
grease. Whatever happens, it is the essence of 
wildness. 

When a wild surge occurs, the DM must roll on 
Table 2. Unlike many other instances in the 
AD&D® game in which the DM is encouraged to 
choose a suitable result, wild surges are best re- 
solved by random chance. Actively choosing a 
result biases the nature of wild magic. DMs are 
encouraged to be random and have fun. 


Table 1: LEVEL VARIATION 

True Die Roll (D20) 

Level 1 2 3 4 S 6 7 & 9 10 Tl 2 Id 4 15 16 17 18: 19 20 
1 =1 -1 =I “1-21 0060006 0 O 0 0 0 O HLA 41 +1 41 
2 -1 -1 -1 -1 -1 -1 O0 00000 0 0 +1 +1 +1 +1 +1 +i 
3 -23 -1 -1 -1 -i -1 -1 0 0 0 0 © O +1 +1 +1 -+1 41 +1 42 
4 -2 -2 -1 -1 -1 -1 -1 -1 O O 0 O +1 +1 +1 +1 +1 +1 +2 +2 
5 -3 -2 -2 -1 -1 -1 -1—1 -1 O O +1 +1 +1 +1 +1 +1 +2 +2 +3 
6 -3 -3 e2 -3 -f -3 -1 -1 -1 0 Ü +1 EL +1. t1 t1. +2 £2 +3 $3 
7d -4 -3 -3 -2 -2 -1 -1 -1 -1. 0 O +1 FT 41 FI F2 +2 +3 +3 44 
8 -4 -4 -3 -3 -2 -2 -1 -1 -1 O O +1 +1 +1 +2 +2 +3 +3 +4 +4 
9+ -5 -4 -4 -3 -3 -2 -2 -1 -1 0 O +1 +1 +2 +2 +43 +3 +4 +4 +5 


Boldface results indicate a wild surge; consult Table 2: Wild Surge Results. 


Table 2: WILD SURGE RESULTS 


D100 
Roll 
01 
02 
03 
04 


05 
06 


t4 


12 
13 


14 
15 


16 
17 


18 
19 
20 
21 
22 
23 
24 
25 


26 
27 


Result 

Wall of force appears in front of caster 
Caster smells like a skunk for spell 
duration 

Caster shoots forth eight non- 
poisonous snakes from fingertips. 
Snakes do not attack. 

Caster’s clothes itch (+2 to initiative) 
Caster glows as per a light spell 

Spell effect has 60’ radius centered on 
caster 

Next phrase spoken by caster becomes 
true, lasting for 1 turn 

Caster's hair grows one foot in length 
Caster pivots 180 degrees 

Caster’s face is blackened by small ex- 
plosion 

Caster develops allergy to his magical 
items. Character cannot control sneez- 
ing until all magical items are re- 
moved. Allergy lasts 1d6 turns. 
Caster’s head enlarges for 1d3 turns 
Caster reduces (reversed enlarge) for 
1d3 turns 

Caster falls madly in love with target 
until a remove curse is cast 

Spell cannot be canceled at will by 
caster 

Caster polymorphs randomly 
Colorful bubbles come out of caster’s 
mouth instead of words. Words are re- 
leased when bubbles pop. Spells with 
verbal components cannot be cast for 1 
turn. 

Reversed tongues affects all within 60 
feet of caster 

Wall of fire encircles caster 

Caster’s feet enlarge, reducing move- 
ment to half normal and adding +4 to 
initiative rolls for 1d3 turns 

Caster suffers same spell effect as 
target 

Caster levitates 20’ for 1d4 turns 
Cause fear with 60' radius centered on 
caster. All within radius except the 
caster must make a saving throw. 
Caster speaks in a squeaky voice for 
1d6 days 

Caster gains X-ray vision for 1d6 
rounds 

Caster ages 10 years 

Silence, 15' radius centers on caster 


52 


53 


How to Use Tome of Magic 


10'X10' pit appears immediately in 
front of caster, 5’ deep per level of the 
caster 

Reverse gravity beneath caster’s feet 
for 1 round 

Colored streamers pour from caster’s 
fingertips 

Spell effect rebounds on caster 

Caster becomes invisible 

Color spray from caster’s fingertips 
Stream of butterflies pours from cast- 
er's mouth 

Caster leaves monster-shaped foot- 
prints instead of his own until a dispel 
magic is cast 

3-30 gems shoot from caster’s finger- 
tips. Each gem is worth 1d6 X 10 gp. 
Music fills the air 

Create food and water 

All normal fires within 60’ of caster are 
extinguished 

One magical item within 30’ of caster 
(randomly chosen) is permanently 
drained 

One normal item within 30’ of caster 
(randomly chosen) becomes perma- 
nently magical 

All magical weapons within 30’ of cast- 
er are increased by +2 for 1 turn 
Smoke trickles from the ears of all 
creatures within 60’ of caster for 1 turn 
Dancing lights 

All creatures within 30’ of caster begin 
to hiccup (+1 to casting times, —1 to 
THACO) 

All normal doors, secret doors, port- 
cullises, etc. (including those locked or 
barred) within 60’ of caster swing open 
Caster and target exchange places 
Spell affects random target within 60' 
of the caster 

Spell fails but is not wiped from cast- 
er's mind 

Monster summoning II 

Sudden change in weather (tempera- 
ture rise, snow, rain, etc.) lasting 1d6 
turns 

Deafening bang affects everyone with- 
in 60'. All those who can hear must 
save vs. spell or be stunned for 1d3 
rounds. 

Caster and target exchange voices until 
a remove curse is cast 


57 
58 


Result 

Gate opens to randomly chosen outer 
plane; 50% chance for extra-planar 
creature to appear. 

Spell functions but shrieks like a 
shrieker 

Spell effectiveness (range, duration, 
area of effect, damage, etc.) decreases 
50% 

Spell reversed, if reverse is possible 
Spell takes physical form of free- 
willed elemental and cannot be con- 
trolled by caster. Elemental remains 
for duration of spell. Touch of the ele- 
mental causes spell effect (THACO 
equal to caster’s). 

All weapons within 60’ of caster glow 
for 1d4 rounds 

Spell functions; any applicable sav- 
ing throw is not allowed 

Spell appears to fail when cast, but 
occurs 1-4 rounds later 

All magical items within 60’ of caster 
glow for 2d8 days 

Caster and target switch personalities 
for 2d10 rounds 

Slow spell centered on target 

Target deluded 

Lightning bolt shoots toward target 
Target enlarged 

Darkness centered on target 

Plant growth centered on target 
1,000 lbs. of non-living matter within 
10’ of target vanishes 

Fireball centers on target 

Target turns to stone 

Spell is cast; material components 
and memory of spell are retained 
Everyone within 10’ of caster receives 
the benefits of a heal 

Target becomes dizzy (—4 AC and 
THACO, cannot cast spells) for 2d4 
rounds 

Wall of fire encircles target 

Target levitates 20’ for 1d3 turns 
Target suffers blindness 

Target is charmed as per charm mon- 
ster 

Target forgets 

Target's feet enlarge, reducing move- 
ment to half normal and adding +4 
to all initiative rolls for 1-3 turns 
Rust monster appears in front of 
target 


83 Target polymorphs randomly 

84 Target falls madly in love with caster 
until a dispel magic is cast. 

85 Target changes sex 

86 Small, black raincloud forms over 
target 

87 Stinking cloud centers on target 

88 Heavy object (boulder, anvil, safe, 
etc.) appears over target and falls for 
2d20 points of damage 

89 Target begins sneezing. No spells can 
be cast until fit passes (1d6 rounds). 

90 Spell effect has 60' radius centered on 
target (all within radius suffer the ef- 
fect) 

91 Target's clothes itch (+2 to initiative 
for 1d10 rounds) 

92 ‘Target's race randomly changes until 
canceled by dispel magic 

93 Target turns ethereal for 2d4 rounds 

94 Target hastened 

95 All cloth on target crumbles to dust 

96 ‘Target sprouts leaves (no damage 
caused, can be pruned without harm) 

97 Target sprouts new useless appendage 
(wings, arm, ear, etc.) which remains 
until dispel magic is cast 

98 Target changes color (canceled by dis- 
pel magic) 

99 Spell has a minimum duration of 1 
turn (i.e., a fireball creates a ball of 
flame that remains for 1 turn, a light- 
ning bolt bounces and continues, pos- 
sibly rebounding, for 1 turn, etc.) 

100 Spell effectiveness (range, duration, 
area of effect, damage, etc.) increases 
200% 


Unless otherwise noted, all spells created by a 
wild surge occur at the designated target point 
and function normally (appropriate saving 
throws are allowed). The caster’s true level is 
used when calculating range, duration, area of ef- 
fect, etc. of these spells. 

The above list, while long, is only a small 
fraction of the possible results of a wild surge. 
The DM is free to create his own tables for wild 
surges. 

Tables like the one above cannot take into ac- 
count the situation at the instant of casting. It is 
not feasible to create tailored effects for every 
spell used in every possible way. Therefore, it is 
quite likely that some wild magic results will 
make no sense, be impossible, or have no visible 


effect. In these cases, the wild surge has no effect. 
For example, if a mage were casting a wizard lock 
on a door and triggered a wild surge with the re- 
sult “Target changes sex,” no effect would be visi- 
ble, since doors do not have a sex (at least as far 
as we know). Likewise, a rock might be hastened 
or a snake might have its feet enlarged. In these 
cases, nothing happens—at least nothing that af- 
fects play. When determining the result of wild 
magic, the DM must use his best judgment. 

Finally, not even the randomness of wild surges 
should be allowed to ruin the story of an adven- 
ture. As ultimate storyteller and arbiter of the 
game, the DM can overrule any wild surge he 
deems too destructive to the adventure. If this 
happens, reroll the dice to get a new result. Ina 
case such as this, do not treat a wild surge as hav- 
ing no effect. 

Clearly, wild mages are a risky proposition. 
Not every player will want to play a wild mage; 
not every party will want a wild mage. The DM 
should not add benefits to the wild mage, hoping 
to the make the class more “attractive” to his 
players. Players who like wild mages will play 
them without bribery. They will find the uncer- 
tainty and randomness of wild mages irresistible; 
these are the players for whom the wild mage was 
created. 


Elemental Wizards 


The elemental wizard is a new variety of spe- 
cialist mage beginning to appear throughout the 
lands. These wizards scorn the “accepted” theo- 
ries of magical classification (the rigid school 
structure) in favor of a holistic, natural under- 
standing of magic. The result is elementalism. 

Elementalism is not a school in itself; it is an 
area of specialization focusing on spells involving 
the four prime elements of air, earth, fire, and 
water. These spells may be from any of the nine 
schools of magic. The fireball spell, for example, 
belongs to the evocation school, but according to 
elementalists, it is also a spell of elemental fire. 

Unlike other specialists, an elementalist does 
not specialize in a single school of magic, but may 
learn and cast spells belonging to any school. Al- 
though this may seem to be a great advantage, 
elementalists suffer considerable penalties when 
learning and casting spells that do not relate di- 
rectly to the elements. The exception to this pen- 
alty is the spells of the school of lesser divination, 
which every wizard may learn. 

Each element has a diametrical opposite: air op- 
poses earth, fire opposes water, and vice versa. 


How to Use Tome of Magic 


Every elementalist must choose one element as his 
specialty. He may learn and cast any spells relating 
to his chosen element and gains advantages when 
doing so. He may also cast spells of the two ele- 
ments which do not oppose his specialty, for 
which he receives no bonuses or penalties. Conse- 
quently, he may not learn or cast any spells associ- 
ated with the element that opposes his element of 
specialty. For example, a fire elementalist may cast 
spells relating to fire, air, or earth, but may not 
cast spells of elemental water. A specialist is also 
prohibited from using magical items that duplicate 
spell effects of his oppositional element. 


Fire 
| 
Air — opposes — Earth 
l 
Water 


Although their repertoire of spells is small, ele- 
mentalists are potent wizards, for they gain the 
following advantages when involved with spells 
of their chosen element: 

è Elementalists receive a bonus of +25% 
when attempting to learn spells of their element 
and a bonus of +15% when learning other ele- 
mental spells. They suffer a penalty of —25% 
when trying to learn spells that do not relate to 
the elements. 

e An elementalist may memorize one extra 
spell per level, providing that at least one of the 
memorized spells is from his element of specialty. 

è Because elementalists have an enhanced un- 
derstanding of spells within their element, they 
receive a +2 bonus when making saving throws 
against those spells. Other creatures suffer a —2 
penalty when making saving throws against an 
elementalist casting spells from his specialty. 

e Once per day, an elementalist may choose to 
cast one memorized spell from his element of spe- 
cialty as if he were 1d4 levels higher. He must de- 
clare his decision to do this immediately prior to 
casting the spell. This affects range, duration, ar- 
ea of effect, and damage; it does not allow the 
wizard to cast a spell from a level which he nor- 
mally could not use. 

e When an elementalist attempts to create a 
new spell relating to his specialty element, the 
DM should count the new spell as one level less 
(for determining difficulty). 

è Upon reaching 15th level, an elementalist 
does not need to concentrate when controlling el- 


How to Use Tome of Magic 


ementals of his specialty element summoned by 
the 5th-level spell conjure elemental. The normal 
5% chance of the elemental turning upon its sum- 
moner remains in effect. 

e At 20th level, there is no chance of a sum- 
moned elemental turning upon an elementalist if 
the creature is of the wizard’s specialty element. 


A complete listing of elemental spells arranged 
by each element can be found in Appendix 1. 


Metamagic 


Metamagic is a special term used by erudite 
and educated wizards to describe a single class of 
spells and magical items—those powers that alter 
or affect other magical spells and items. Meta- 
magic spells do not directly affect people, ob- 
jects, or events. Instead, the powers of 
metamagic are used to alter the fabric of spells 
themselves. Through metamagic spells, such as 
far reaching or squaring the circle, the once invio- 
lable limits of a spell can be altered. Range, dura- 
tion, casting time, area of effect, and even sound 
and color can be tailored through the use of meta- 
magical spells. 

Although the concept of metamagic has existed 
since the beginning of magical study, it has gener- 
ally been ignored by most wizards, who have 
been far more interested in spectacular effects 
and immediate results. However, a few indepen- 
dent researchers have continued to explore and 
expand this esoteric field of study. 


New Rules for Priests 


Priests are hardly the unglamorous and weak 
adventurers that they are sometimes portrayed to 
be. They are an important part of any society, 
serving as more than just handy doctors. Priests 
have great responsibilities for the defense, guid- 
ance, welfare, and protection of a community. 
Because of this, their spells reflect more diversity 
and application when compared with wizard 
spells. The Tome of Magic provides priests with 
more tools to help them achieve their goals. 


Quest Spells 


Priests and clerics are the servants of Powers— 
immortal entities with abilities far beyond those 
of mere mortals. Yet these servants do not wield 
magical forces equal to those of wizards; priests 
have nothing to compare with the wish spell, for 
example. Circumstances will arise when a priest 


10 


should be able to call upon the magical energies 
controlled by his Power to achieve something ex- 
traordinary in serving a sacred duty. Quest spells 
are designed to satisfy these extremes and allow 
the priest to wield high-powered magic without 
drastically altering the scope of his magic. 

Quest spells are a category of powerful spells 
without an assigned level. They should not be 
confused with the Sth-level spell quest, which is a 
specific single spell. 

While quest spells are powerful, they are not as 
powerful as the energies used by Powers. If a god 
chose to flatten a mountain or raise an island, he 
could probably do so. Priests cannot achieve 
such huge effects; they are still mortal beings. But 
quest spells do provide a priest with magic more 
powerful than any other priestly magic; a quest 
spell could easily mean the difference between 
success or failure in a mission. Quest spells are 
capable of affecting large areas or numbers of 
creatures and allow the shaping of great energies; 
they are often difficult or impossible to resist or 
dispel. 

Quest spells are not part of a priest's normal 
repertoire. These spells are granted powers, be- 
stowed directly by one’s deity to achieve special 
goals. 


Why Quest Spells? 


Two circumstances are most likely to warrant 
the granting of a quest spell to a priest. First, a 
Power may contact the priest in a dream or 
omen, or by sending a servant or avatar. In this 
case, the Power requests that the priest perform a 
vital service on behalf of the Power (the nature of 
such a request is discussed later). The priest is ef- 
fectively commanded to go on a quest—hence, 
the generic title of quest spell. 

A second case for the granting of a quest spell 
may occur if a priest were to discover something 
of fundamental importance to the faith which the 
Power must be appraised of (not all powers are 
omniscient). A priest contacting the Power (with 
a commune spell or by prayer) might beseech the 
Power to grant him some exceptional magic to 
address the situation. The request for a quest 
spell must never be motivated by selfish consider- 
ations on the priest's part (such hubris is grossly 
offensive to any Power), and circumstances must 
be truly exceptional. The Power then considers 
the priest's request and responds accordingly. 

In game terms, the first condition translates to 
the DM using a quest spell as a plot device to 
spice up a quest for the priest and his party. The 


second condition translates to a player requesting 
exceptional aid for his priest PC followed by the 
DM's decision whether to allow this. 


Conditions for Quest Spells 


The circumstances which prompt a Power or 
priest to seek the use of a quest spell are usually 
related to a major sphere of concern of the Power. 
A god of druids is not likely to grant a quest spell 
to address a matter of warfare, commerce, poli- 
tics, knightly virtue, or other irrelevance (as this 
Power would view them). However, destruction 
of a huge swathe of forest by fire is entirely differ- 
ent. To protect or regenerate a great natural re- 
source, a druidic Power would surely consider 
dispatching his most powerful servants with awe- 
some magic. A major challenge demands a major 
response. 

A Power may choose to equip followers with a 
quest spell in preparation for a major conflict 
with servants of a hostile Power. This may be 
true for both sides in the conflict; the NPCs as 
well as the PCs might be equipped with quest 
spells. In this manner, two Powers avoid fighting 
each other directly; their servants carry out the 
warfare instead. This will be a major event in any 
campaign setting! Milder variations on this 
theme would include the razing of a major temple 
of the enemy Power or the destruction of a major 
resource belonging to the Power's servants. 

This is a situation in which a DM must exercise 
caution. This kind of conflict can easily swerve 
out of control and threaten the destruction of the 
game world; no Power wants this. Only if a 
Power has stepped out of line is the retribution by 
a rival Power tolerable among the community of 
Powers. If an evil temple has stood in the capital 
of an evil land for centuries, it is unacceptable for 
a good deity to strike at it. If an evil temple is 
hidden in nonevil lands, it is reasonable for a 
good Power to strike it down. It is important that 
game balance and the status quo are maintained. 

A Power is likely to grant a quest spell when 
there is a major threat to his followers, church, 
consecrated grounds, or territories. These situa- 
tions may become considerably extended; a 
Power of healing may extend the use of quest 
magic to help his priests cure a virulent plague af- 
fecting ordinary folk. For such a Power, the wel- 
fare of the common man is important. In cases 
such as this, game balance must be maintained by 
granting quest spells only in true catastrophes. 

Exceptional and unique circumstances will 
arise which will draw quest magic into the game. 


How to Use Tome of Magic 


This may include racial interests (for elves, 
dwarves, etc.) such as defense of the homelands 
or protection of great fortresses, or it may include 
communities of exceptional artisans wishing to 
draw quest magic from Powers. The discovery of 
an intensely magical artifact or place important 
to the Power may necessitate the use of quest 
magic to secure it. Establishing and developing a 
major sacred location may justify the use of quest 
magic (especially with spheres such as Creation, 
Guardian, Protection, and Wards). Such cases 
will be individually determined by the DM as ma- 
jor elements of a campaign story line. 


Situations Unworthy of Quest Spells 


What types of requests do not warrant a Power 
granting a quest spell? Generally, a quest spell is 
not needed for events which affect only a minor 
sphere of interest for the deity and events that are 
part of normal Prime Material conflict; a senior 
priest being killed by an agent of an evil Power 
isn’t enough to justify the use of a quest spell. 
Any problem that has limited scale or should re- 
solve itself in time through the normal efforts of 
priests does not need quest magic. 

The DM must consider whether a problem is 
out of the ordinary. Only under extraordinary 
circumstances should a quest spell be granted. If 
the DM is in doubt, a simple question may pro- 
vide the answer: Could the problem have a fair 
chance of resolution through the use of upper- 
level priest spells if wisely used? Only if the an- 
swer is “no” should quest magic be considered. 


Which Priests Receive Quest Spells? 


Only true and faithful servants of a Power who 
have successfully used powerful magic are eligi- 
ble for quest spells. This limits quest spells to 
priests; although a paladin may be true and faith- 
ful, his experience is not sufficient to command 
the magical energies of potent quest magic. 

Level limitations are important. It is very rare 
for a priest of lower than 12th level to be granted 
quest magic. Priests of 9th level and lower cannot 
use quest magic; the strain of holding and shap- 
ing such magic is too great. 

A priest must possess Wisdom of 17 or better in 
order to cast quest spells. It is quite possible that a 
priest could be granted a quest spell but not pos- 
sess the wisdom to cast 7th-level clerical spells; 
Powers sometimes work in mysterious ways. 

Under normal conditions, quest spells are 
granted to high-level priests rather than their jun- 


How to Use Tome of Magic 


ior counterparts (when such an option exists, 
such as in a large temple). If the hierarchy of a 
temple has been destroyed, then the best of the 
junior echelons may be granted quest spells. 

Some cases may not offer as many options as 
to the recipient of a quest spell. If the nearest 
priest to the site of a mission is of a lower level 
than priests at a faraway temple, the chances are 
good that this priest will be granted a quest spell 
rather than awaiting the arrival of a faraway su- 
perior. Similarly, if the senior priests of a temple 
are too old to travel or are needed to maintain 
order at the temple, a priest of a lower level may 
be granted the quest spell. 

In some situations, a Power will recognize an 
extremely devoted follower by granting him a 
quest spell, passing up older, more experienced 
colleagues. Age and experience do not indicate 
devotion or worthiness. Prodigies exist in all 
walks of life; clerics are no exception. 

Faithfulness and piety of the priest are impor- 
tant but are difficult to judge. The priest must be 
unswerving in his alignment and have an exem- 
plary record of service to the Power. It is reason- 
able to ignore an offense committed due to 
magical influence even if atonement was required 
(or voluntarily undergone) as a result. 

Obviously, these criteria depend on DM judg- 
ment. The DM must remember that priests are 
mortals—and mortals have weaknesses. While a 
priest who has not been zealous in defense of the 
faith is a noncandidate for quest spells, a priest 
who is pure of heart but who has made a few er- 
rors might still be considered for quest magic. 
However, such a priest may be asked to under- 
take a preliminary quest to prove his worthiness 
to the Power. This is especially likely if there is no 
time pressure for the greater quest or if the priest 
has asked the Power for quest magic rather than 
the Power commanding the priest. 

A preliminary quest is not a trivial affair; it 
should present a stiff challenge. In a campaign, it 
will be especially appropriate if such a quest dou- 
bles as a test of the priest's mettle and as an op- 
portunity to acquire a new resource (magical 
items, henchmen, followers, NPC co-operation, 
etc.) which might assist the greater quest to come. 


How Is the Quest Spell Granted? 


A priest must undergo specific preparations to 
receive a quest spell. Isolated prayer and medita- 
tion for 24 hours are required (double this if he 
has Wisdom of only 17 or is below 12th level). If 
this period is interrupted, the priest must begin 


12 


anew. Following this period, the priest needs one 
hour to establish and maintain a direct mental 
link with his deity and receive the spell into his 
mind. During this communion, the priest is in a 
state of exultation and is oblivious to the outside 
world. He cannot be roused from this reverie. 
The DM may rule that specific ceremonies be car- 
ried out by the priest during the time of 
meditation and the time of the granting of the 
spell. These ceremonies should be determined in 
accordance with the nature of the religion. The 
priest may be required to be in a major church or 
temple for the ceremony. The presence of junior 
priests and acolytes, perhaps united in mass 
prayer, may also be needed. However, these are 
only suggestions and should not be rigidly 
enforced—a god of travelers would not require a 
quest spell to be granted in a temple, for example. 


Introducing the Quest Spell 


Bringing a quest spell into a campaign should 
be a major event. It should create a powerful 
atmosphere that includes elements of pageantry, 
solemnity, and ceremony to make the event come 
alive in the game. Such considerations of staging 
and flavor are left to DM discretion and the de- 
mands of the campaign. 


The Cost of Quest Spells 


Quest spells are not granted without a price. A 
priest receiving a quest spell is unable to memorize 
spells of the highest level which he is allowed. He 
loses any memorized spells of that level (e.g., a 
13th-level cleric is unable to use 6th-level spells). 

Once a cleric has been granted a quest spell, he 
does not gain the ability to automatically cast it 
again. Each time a priest wishes to use a quest 
spell, he must repeat the described procedures. 


Adjudicating Quest Spells 


The rules which follow apply to all quest 
spells. The DM should avoid altering these rules 
in order to use quest spells consistently and fairly. 

Components: Material components are never 
needed for a quest spell. All quest spells use ver- 
bal and somatic components. Since this is invari- 
ant, components are therefore not included in the 
spell descriptions. 

Duration: In the spell descriptions, the term 
“day” is often used. Day means “until the next 
dawn’ if the spellcaster casts the spell during day- 
light hours and “until the next dusk” if he casts 
the spell during nighttime hours. 


Countering Quest Spells: Most quest spells 
cannot be dispelled. Because of their semidivine 
origin, mortal dispel magic spells simply do not 
affect them. In most cases, only other quest mag- 
ic will directly counter quest magic. 

This also applies to attempts to counter specific 
elements of quest spells. For example, certain 
quest spells include the effect of a prayer spell in 
the area of effect of the quest spell. Such a prayer 
effect cannot be countered by the use of a mortal 
prayer spell. The quest prayer overrides the ordi- 
nary prayer spell. 

Saving Throws: Target creatures at whom 
quest spells are cast are usually allowed no saving 
throws. Magical items which would normally 
protect them against the type of effect (e.g., a 
ring of free action against a hold/paralysis effect) 
allow a weakened saving throw of 18. Magic re- 
sistance functions, but at only one-half normal. If 
a quest spell has multiple magical effects, magic 
resistance checks must be made for each effect. 


Faith Magic 


A unique feature of clerical magic is faith mag- 
ic. Using this special category of priest spells, 
clerics can create semipermanent wards, sanctify 
ground, ensure good harvests, or even improve 
the health of followers. In short, this amplified 
magic allows certain clerical spells to be increased 
and intensified through the combined efforts of 
priests and worshipers. Range, area of effect, du- 
ration, and even damage can be altered through 
devotion and combined spellcasting. 

To gain this ability, priests and their worshipers 
form groups to create faith magic. Clerics of 
nearly all religions seek out worshipers, establish 
temples, retire to monasteries, and establish sem- 
inaries. While there are many mundane reasons 
to form such groups, priests’ attitudes are also 
shaped by this important difference between cler- 
ical and wizardly magic—the ability to combine 
magical power. Wizard spells lack this 
property—even a large number of wizards can- 
not combine their spells into a whole. Thus, wiz- 
ards gain no magical benefits from founding 
monasteries or attracting followers. 


Devotional Power 


The core of faith magic is devotional power. 
This power comes from the dedication of ardent 
followers and priests. It is not something that can 
be manipulated directly (like a spell), although it 
is the source of power for spells. Unlike magical 
energy, devotional energy is not tied to a particu- 


13 


How to Use Tome of Magic 


lar character class. Ordinary people are as much 
a source of this power as are adventurers. Only 
priests are significantly different, their lifelong 
dedication to their god being the wellspring for 
even greater power. 

Not everyone is a source of devotional energy. 
Almost every character generates a small amount 
of power, but only those persons dedicated in 
their beliefs provide the amounts needed for faith 
magic. Even at this level, the total energy provid- 
ed by each person is very small. Thus, faith mag- 
ic can be used only when large numbers of sincere 
worshipers gather, such as particularly devout 
congregations, monasteries, seminaries, and uni- 
versities operated by a religious order. Sincere be- 
lief is the most important factor. While persons 
attending a service may be numerous, casual fol- 
lowers do not contribute to the effect. 

Before its power can be harnessed, the devo- 
tional energy of a group must be gathered and 
concentrated toward a single effect. This is 
known as focusing the effect. Once focused, the 
devotional energy provides power needed to 
maintain a spell effect, increase its area of effect, 
or create a number of other different results. A 
focus is created by means of the spell focus. 

Once the devotional energy has been focused, 
the cleric or clerics can cast the spell to be amplified. 
Using the devotional energy gathered by the focus, 
the spell’s effect is increased in area of effect and du- 
ration. The exact increase depends on the level of 
the priest who casts the focus. Such amplified spells 
typically affect a building (such as a church or hos- 
pital), group of buildings, or even an estate. 

The spell remains in effect as long as the focus 
exists. This requires a minimum number of wor- 
shipers and periodic renewals of the spell. Since 
the duration of a focus is long, these renewals of- 
ten coincide with important festivals of the reli- 
gion, when numerous worshipers are present to 
provide devotional energy. 


Cooperative Magic 


Cooperative spells are unique to priests. These 
spells allow several priests to combine their abili- 
ties to create a greater effect. Combine is one type 
of cooperative spell. 

Cooperative spells do not require a focus or de- 
votional energy; all that is required are two or 
more clerics of sufficient level to cast any cooper- 
ative spell. Casting times for cooperative spells 
are not excessive and their results are spectacular, 
making cooperative magic practical and useful to 
adventuring priests. 


How to Use Tome of Magic 


All priests who attempt cooperative magic 
must know the spell to be cast and must be of the 
same ethos. Generally, only priests of the same 
religion can use cooperative magic. However, 
priests of deities known to work in close harmo- 
ny are sometimes able to use cooperative magic 
with each other. The decision lies with the DM, 
since the relations between different deities vary 
greatly from campaign to campaign. 


New Spheres 


In addition to the new types of clerical magic, a 
number of new spheres are introduced in Tome of 
Magic. These spheres help to round out and com- 
plete the priest class. 


Chaos 


Most of the spells in the Sphere of Chaos give 
the spellcaster the ability to add randomness and 
confusion to the world around him. Some of the 
spells change the probability of the outcomes of 
events, while others offer protection against Law- 
ful influences. 

Many of the spells of this sphere are tricky; 
while they usually help the spellcaster, there are 
times when the spell might harm the priest. Such 
is the way of Chaos—anyone who draws upon 
chaotic energy knows that nothing is certain, not 
even the influences of his god. 

Powers that operate in this sphere are deities of 
mischief, trickery, ill luck, and those gods de- 
voted to the power of the individual. 


Law 


The Sphere of Law is based on two principles. 
The first is that the group is more powerful than 
the sum of the individuals who make up the 
group. The second is that the individual must 
obey established rules whether or not he person- 
ally thinks they are good rules. In both cases, the 
idea of order is exploited, sometimes beneficially, 
sometimes harmfully. 

The beneficial spells of the Sphere of Law draw 
upon the first principle. Such spells coordinate 
the power of a group of characters. By using 
spells of this sphere, individuals who work 
closely together can become focused into a 
strong, united force. 

The harmful spells of the sphere draw upon the 
second principle; they take the concept of law 
one step too far and prevent the individual from 
operating with a free will. These spells limit a per- 
son's choices and obliterate spontaneity and indi- 


14 


vidual thought and action. Whereas beneficial 
spells draw a group together, harmful spells iso- 
late the individual or even subjugate him to the 
commands of another person. 

Deities of rulership, kingship, community, and 
culture are likely to act in this sphere. 


Numbers 


The Sphere of Numbers revolves around the 
concept that numbers and mathematical relation- 
ships between numbers represent the “core truths” 
of reality or the “secrets of the universe.” By study- 
ing numbers and their relationships, some scholars 
believe they can learn truths otherwise inaccessi- 
ble; by manipulating numbers, they believe they 
can actually alter the fabric of reality. 

This sphere uses spells that allow a priest to 
comprehend and use the mysteries of numbers. 
Since many of these spells are incredibly intricate 
and depend on very esoteric concepts in mathe- 
matics and hypermathematics, only priests with 
relatively high intelligence (13 or higher) are al- 
lowed access to these spells. 

Spells from this sphere are most likely to be 
granted by deities of knowledge (particularly ar- 
cane or hidden knowledge). 

Many of the philosophies central to this sphere 
sound unusual, illogical, or even insane—things 
one might expect to hear from the lips of a senile 
“prophet” who has discovered the “truth of All” 
in the pseudomathematical scratchings he makes 
in his notebooks. There are many cranks and 
charlatans claiming to predict the future who are 
often mistaken for true practitioners of this 
sphere and vice versa. A priest who is granted 
spells from the Sphere of Numbers may sound 
like a crank when he claims the birthdates of 
kings predict the date of Doomsday, but there is 
one fundamental difference between him and the 
charlatan: The priest's spells work. 


Thought 


The Sphere of Thought is rooted in the philoso- 
phy of mentation and the effects of mental acts 
and structures on reality. Priests of this sphere be- 
lieve that the common conception of the thought 
(i.e., a more-or-less objective analysis of sensory 
input which is in turn an objective perception of 
reality) is fallacious and misleading. These phi- 
losophers maintain that thought is and must be 
tied closely to reality. In effect, they believe that 
the thinker, the thought, and the subject of that 
thought somehow interact. Thus, thinking about 


an object or condition can sometimes cause a 
physical change in that object or condition. 

Philosophers of this sphere also believe that 
once a thought has been created (“once a thought 
is thought”), it exists as a “freestanding mental 
object.” This “thought object” can sometimes be 
detected and manipulated. 

This sphere uses spells related to these philo- 
sophical beliefs. Like the Sphere of Numbers, 
these spells are intricate and are based on some 
esoteric concepts of philosophy. It is suggested 
that only priests with relatively high intelligence 
(13 or higher) be allowed access to these spells. 

Spells of this sphere are most likely to be grant- 
ed by deities of thought or knowledge (especially 
arcane or hidden knowledge). This sphere might 
have as its patrons certain deities who rule and 
exist in the abstract realms of thought. Certain 
isolated philosophers discuss the existence of a 
deity of solipsism (the philosophical belief that 
only the self exists). Since such a deity would be- 
lieve that it exists alone in the universe, it would 
have no worshipers. 


Time 


The spells of the Sphere of Time explore ways 
in which time can be altered and perceived. These 
spells manipulate the effects of the passage of 
time on objects and creatures and can also affect 
the passage of time itself. Such spells are often the 
province of deities associated with nature, philos- 
ophy, divination, and trickery. 


Travelers 


Spells of this sphere provide aid and comfort to 
travelers, making their journeys safer, easier, and 
more enjoyable. Deities sympathetic to the well- 
being of explorers, nomads, and other wayfarers 
often allow access to this sphere. 


War 


The Sphere of War involves magic specifically 
for use on the battlefield—in mass combat be- 
tween large units. Usually, these spells are grant- 
ed by deities of war: those Powers who believe 
that victory and courage in battle are the ultimate 
goals for mortals. 

Priests who follow these gods are sometimes 
generals or leaders of armies. For these priests, 
tactical and strategic brilliance are as important 
as personal skill in combat. 

There are significant differences between the 
spheres of War and Combat. Combat spells are 


15 


How to Use Tome of Magic 


those the priest can use in personal altercations. 
These spells inflict physical damage on an oppo- 
nent or improve the combat abilities of the priest 
and several comrades. War spells, on the other 
hand, are concerned with aspects of large-scale 
battles other than direct infliction of damage: ob- 
servation, identification, movement, morale, 
and the like. Few spells of this sphere inflict phys- 
ical damage on the enemy. 

Unlike spells of other spheres, most War spells 
can be cast only on a single military “unit” The 
definition of a “unit” is that which is used in the 
BATTLESYSTEM™ rules; however, the DM may 
rule that any large group of troops accompanied 
by PCs may qualify as a unit. Units can be infan- 
try or cavalry (ground or airborne), human or 
non-human, of regular or irregular formation. In 
general, they must be organized as a single unit 
and must be at least five individuals in number. 
These spells are generally useless in individual 
combat. 

Spells from the Sphere of War are designed to 
be used in large-scale battles like those played us- 
ing BATTLESYSTEM™ rules; thus, these spells 
refer to concepts from this game system. Dis- 
tances are referred to in linear inches (not game 
inches) and times are referred to in 
BATTLESYSTEM turns, but the DM is free to 
modify these statistics to suit combat outside the 
BATTLESYSTEM rules. 

The deities who preside over the Sphere of War 
are careful when granting these spells to their 
priests. They will generally grant such spells only 
when a priest is about to enter battle. In the case 
of the more militant war gods, a priest who peti- 
tions for these spells inappropriately or misuses 
them may suffer dire consequences. 


Wards 


This sphere includes spells that provide protec- 
tion of clearly defined areas, ranging from small 
objects to entire villages. The magical boundaries 
established by these spells prevent entry or ne- 
gate the effects of specific creatures, energies, or 
conditions. Many of the spells take advantage of 
cooperative magic, involving the casting of a 
spell by a number of assembled priests to enchant 
exceptionally large areas (refer to specific spells 
and the sections in this book on Faith Magic, De- 
votional Power, and Cooperative Magic for more 
information). Deities of war and protection, as 
well as those associated with benevolence and 
mercy, might bestow these spells. 


ist Level 


Conjure Spell Component 
Fire Burst 

Fist of Stone 

Hornung’s Guess* 

Lasting Breath 
Metamorphose Liquids 
Murdock’s Feathery Flyer 
Nahal’s Reckless Dweomer* 
Patternweave* 


4th Level 


Dilation I 

Divination Enhancement 
Far Reaching II 

Greater Malison 

Locate Creature 

Mask of Death 

Minor Spell Turning 
Mordenkainen’s Celerity 
Summon Lycanthrope 
There/Not There* 
Thunder Staff 

Turn Pebble to Boulder 
Unluck* 


7th Level 


Acid Storm 

Bloodstone’s Frightful Joining 
Hatch the Stone From the Egg 
Hornung’s Surge Selector* 
Intensify Summoning 
Malec-Keth’s Flame Fist 
Shadowcat 

Spell Shape* 

Steal Enchantment 

Suffocate 


Italicized spell is reversible. 


Chapter 2: Wizard Spells 


Wizard Spells 


2nd Level 


Chaos Shield* 

Hornung’s Baneful Deflector* 
Insatiable Thirst 

Maximilian’s Earthen Grasp 
Nahal’s Nonsensical Nullifier* 
Past Life 

Protection From Paralysis 
Ride the Wind 

Sense Shifting 


5th Level 


Far Reaching III 
Khazid’s Procurement 
Lower Resistance 
Magic Staff 

Mind Fog 
Safeguarding 

Von Gasik’s Refusal 
Vortex* 

Waveform* 


8th Level 


Abi-Dalzim’s Horrid Wilting 
Airboat 

Gunther's Kaleidoscopic Strike 
Homunculus Shield 

Hornung’s Random Dispatcher 


Wildzone* 


* 


An asterisk (*) indicates a wild magic spell. 


3rd Level 


Alacrity 

Alamir’s Fundamental Breakdown 
Alternate Reality* 
Augmentation | 

Far Reaching | 

Fireflow* 

Fool's Speech* 

Lorloveim’s Creeping Shadow 
Maximilian’s Stony Grasp 
Minor Malison 

Spirit Armor 

Squaring the Circle 

Watery Double 

Wizard Sight 


6th Level 


Augmentation II 

Bloodstone’s Spectral Steed 

Claws of the Umber Hulk 

Dilation II 

Forest's Fiery Constrictor 

Lorloveim’s Shadowy Transformation 
Wildshield* 

Wildstrike* 


9th Level 


Chain Contingency 
Elemental Aura 

Estate Transference 
Glorious Transmutation 
Stabilize* 

Wail of the Banshee 
Wildfire* 

Wildwind* 


Wild magic spells are indicated by an asterisk (*) 
after the spell name. 


First-Level Spells 


Conjure Spell Component 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 


Range: 1 mile/level 

Components: V, S 

Duration: 1 round 

Casting Time: 1 

Area of Effect: 3 components/level 
Saving Throw: None 


When this spell is cast, the wizard teleports de- 
sired items directly to his hand. The objects must 
be naturally occurring components for spells the 
wizard knows and they must be within spell 
range. The components must be items commonly 
found in the area, such as a twig, feather, firefly, 
or bit of beeswax in a forest. 

If the components lie underground or under- 
water at a depth greater than 10 feet, they cannot 
be conjured, even if the caster is at a similar depth 
(such as in a cavern or at the bottom of a lake). 

The spell will not cause the appearance of com- 
ponents whose value exceeds 1 gp. Thus, it is im- 
possible to summon gemstones, crystals, metals, 
pearls, etc. Additionally, components cannot be 
manmade or altered from their natural state 
(coins, jewelry, cut or crushed gems, mirrors, 
etc.), nor can they be taken from someone else's 
possession. 

A single conjure spell component spell will 
summon three components per level of the caster. 
They may be three different components or mul- 
tiples of a single component. 

Attempts to conjure an animal's body parts 
(such as bat fur) produce unpredictable results. 
The DM should roll on the table below. 


D4 
Roll Result 
1 Desired component appears. 
2 Component does not appear. 
3 Creature is teleported to the caster. 
4 Caster is teleported to the creature. 


Only animals with Intelligence scores of 1-4 
can be affected by this spell. Humanoids and 
fantastic animals (dragons, bugbears, unicorns, 
etc.) cannot be affected. 

In all cases, the DM must use common sense to 
determine the likelihood of the component being 
located within spell range. 


17 


Wizard Spells (1st Level) 


Fire Burst (Alteration, Evocation) 


Range: 5 yards/level 

Components: V, S 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Casting Time: 1 

Area of Effect: One 10’-radius circle 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


When this spell is cast upon a nonmagical fire 
(such as a campfire, lantern, or candle), it causes 
the fire to flash and shoot arrows of flame. All 
creatures within 10 feet of the fire source suffer 1 
point of damage per level of the caster (maximum 
of 10 points). Victims who roll a saving throw 
successfully suffer no damage. 


Fist of Stone (Alteration) 


Range: 0 

Components: V, S 

Duration: 1 round/level 
Casting Time: 1 

Area of Effect: The caster’s hand 
Saving Throw: None 


Upon completion of this spell, one of the cast- 
er's hands (his choice) turns to stone. It is flexible 
and can be used to punch, smash, or crush ob- 
jects and opponents as if the wizard had Strength 
of 18/00. Combat bonuses for Strength do not 
apply if the caster uses any weapon other than his 
fist. 

While the spell is in effect, the wizard cannot 
cast spells requiring somatic components. 


Hornung’s Guess* (Divination) 


Range: 300 yards 
Component: V 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Casting Time: 2 

Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


Hornung, one of the leading wizards in the 
field of wild magic (before his untimely disap- 
pearance while experimenting with wildwind), 
developed this spell to improve the accuracy of 
his estimates. The spell provides a wizard with an 
instant and highly accurate estimate of the num- 
ber of persons or objects in a group. 

The spell’s area of effect is one group of a gen- 
eral class of objects. All objects of the group must 
be within spell range and the group as a whole 
must be visible to the caster. The wizard need not 
see every individual in the group, merely the gen- 
eral limits of the group's size and area. For exam- 
ple, a wizard on a hill could look down on a 


forest and estimate the number of trees in all or 
part of it. He could not get an estimate of the 
number of goblins within the forest, however, 
since the group as a whole (the goblins) is con- 
cealed from sight. 

The estimate generated is accurate to the larg- 
est factor of ten (rounded up). For example, if 
Hornung’s guess were cast on a group of 439 
horsemen, the estimate would be 400. If there 
were 2,670 horsemen, the spell would estimate 
3,000. If there were 37 horsemen, the answer 
would be 40. Clearly, using the spell on small 
groups (especially those with fewer than 10 mem- 
bers) is pointless. 

Hornung's guess can be used to quickly esti- 
mate the size of treasure hoards and army units. 
It is particularly popular with moneylenders and 
generals. 


Lasting Breath (Alteration) 


Range: 5 yards/level 

Components: V, S 

Duration: 1d4 rounds +1 round/level 
Casting Time: 1 

Area of Effect: One creature/level 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell increases the amount of time a char- 
acter can hold his breath. As described in the 
Player's Handbook, a character can hold his 
breath for a number of rounds equal to one-third 
his Constitution score. The effect of this spell is 
added to that figure. 

The duration of the spell is always unknown to 
the recipient; the DM secretly rolls 1d4 to deter- 
mine the exact duration. At the end of this time, 
the character must succeed a Constitution check 
or be forced to take a breath as per the rules. 


Metamorphose Liquids (Alteration) 


Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 
Duration: Permanent 
Casting Time: 1 round 
Area of Effect: 1'-cube/level 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell transmutes one type of liquid into an 
equal amount of a different, nonmagical fluid 
(water, wine, blood, oil, apple cider, etc.). The 
caster must touch the fluid itself (not simply its 
container) for the spell to take effect. 

Magical liquids (such as potions) receive a sav- 
ing throw vs. disintegration with a +3 bonus to 
avoid the spell’s effect. Fluids can be transmuted 


19 


Wizard Spells (1st Level) 


only into nonmagical liquids; it is not possible to 
change a magical liquid into another type of mag- 
ical liquid. Poisons may be rendered harmless 
through use of this spell, but the spell has no ef- 
fect on poisons already consumed. 

Living creatures are unaffected by the spell, ex- 
cluding those from the elemental plane of water. 
Such creatures are allowed a saving throw vs. 
spell. Failure results in 1d4 points of damage per 
level of the caster, while success indicates half 
damage. Only one creature can be affected by a 
single casting of this spell, regardless of the crea- 
ture’s size. 

The material component is a drop of the liquid 
that the caster intends to create, which must be 
placed on the wizard’s tongue and consumed. 
Creating poisons through use of this spell is espe- 
cially dangerous. 


Murdock’s Feathery Flyer (Alteration) 
Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Duration: 1 round/level 

Casting Time: 1 

Area of Effect: The caster 

Saving Throw: None 


Upon casting this spell, a feathery membrane 
grows under the wizard’s arms, extending along 
his sides all the way to his feet. The membrane 
appears to merge with the caster’s skin and 
clothing. 

If the caster spreads his arms and jumps from a 
height, he may glide through the air. For each 
foot of elevation, the wizard can glide five feet 
horizontally. Thus, a wizard jumping from a 10- 
foot wall could glide up to 50 feet. Gliding char- 
acters have a movement rate of 12 and 
Maneuverability Class E. 


So exvoMtenyS |. 
| iS FATHIS R 
| Aeris | 
CIGAR?) | 
eva LE 
WYENSES ew 


ZS ees Gi | 


Y= 


EST 


LASI O 
Pa | 


Dury LMA IATE p 4 


j 
& 


Wizard Spells (1st Level) 


A wizard attempting to carry more than his 
normal weight allowance plummets to the earth 
upon takeoff. 

When the spell expires, the feathers instantly 
disappear. If the wizard is airborne, he immedi- 
ately plummets toward the ground. 

The material component is an eagle's feather. 


Nahal’s Reckless Dweomer* 
(Invocation/Evocation) 


Range: Special 
Components: V, S 
Duration: Special 
Casting Time: 5 

Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell is the wild mage’s ultimate last-resort 
spell. When cast, the mage releases a sudden 
flood of wild magical energy in the hope of seiz- 
ing and shaping that energy into a desired spell 
effect. The attempt usually fails, but something 
almost always occurs in the process. 

Before casting the spell, the mage announces 
the spell effect he is trying to create. The mage 
must be able to cast the spell (i.e., have it in his 
spell books), but need not have it memorized. Af- 
ter announcing the spell (along with the target 
and any other conditions required by the spell), 
the wild mage casts Nahal's reckless dweomer. A 
burst of magical energy is released, which the 
wild mage tries to manipulate into the desired 
form. The actual effect of the spell is rolled ran- 
domly on Table 2: Wild Surge Results. 

Because the release of energy is planned by the 
mage, his level is added to the dice roll. If the re- 
sult indicates success, the mage has shaped the 
magical energy into the desired effect. More often 
than not, the effect is completely unexpected. 
The result may be beneficial to the mage or it may 
be completely disastrous; this is the risk the mage 
takes in casting Nahal’s reckless dweomer. 


Patternweave* (Divination) 


Range: 10 yards 
Components: V, S, M 
Duration: 1 round 

Casting Time: 3 

Area of Effect: 10-foot square 
Saving Throw: Special 


Patternweave allows the caster to make sense 
of apparent chaos. The caster can see such things 
as pottery shards reformed into a whole pot, 
shreds of paper formed into a page, scattered 


parts as a working machine, or specific trails ap- 
pearing out of overlapping footprints. 

After casting the spell, the mage studies seem- 
ingly random elements—broken bits of glass, 
shreds of paper, intermingled trails, etc. The 
items to be studied must be tangible—coded 
flashing lights, garbled speech, or thoughts of 
any kind cannot be studied. 

The wizard must study the random elements 
for one round, after which the DM secretly 
makes a saving throw vs. spell for the wizard. If 
the saving throw is failed, the spell fails. How- 
ever, if the saving throw is successful, the caster 
sees in his mind the pattern these objects form. If 
the items studied are truly random, no informa- 
tion is gained. 

After the caster has visualized the pattern, he 
can attempt to reassemble the parts into their 
original form. This requires another saving 
throw vs. spell to determine whether the mage re- 
members sufficient details to accomplish the task. 
The amount of time required and the quality of 
restoration vary according to the complexity of 
the pattern. Reassembling a shredded map may 
be easy; reassembling a broken clock is signifi- 
cantly more difficult; rebuilding a shattered mo- 
saic is extremely difficult. In any case, the wizard 
can make only a reasonable copy of the item. He 
can use this spell to restore works of art, but they 
will be worth only a small percentage of their 
original value. 

The material component is a small hand lens 
through which the caster studies the objects. The 
lens is not consumed in the casting. 


i. Worn 


Second-Level Spells 


Chaos Shield* (Abjuration) 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S 

Duration: 1d10 rounds +2 rounds/level 
Casting Time: 2 

Area of Effect: The caster 

Saving Throw: Special 


Following the discovery of wild magic came 
the discovery of wild surges and the personal 
danger such surges create. After several wild 
mages destroyed themselves by rather spectacu- 
lar means (or suffered very odd side effects), the 
chaos shield was created as protection from these 
surges. 

This spell imbues the wild mage with special 
protection against the effects of wild surges. It 
protects only against wild surges caused by the 
caster’s own spells, not from the effects of an- 
other mage’s wild surges. 

When a wild surge affects a caster protected by 
chaos shield, he is allowed a saving throw vs. 
magic. If the saving throw is successful, the effect 
of the surge on the caster is negated. If the saving 
throw is failed, the caster is affected normally by 
the surge. The spell does not protect against wild 
surges that might be caused by its own casting. 

The chaos shield protects only the caster and 
does not negate the effects of a wild surge for oth- 
er characters who might be in the area of effect. 
The caster cannot voluntarily cancel the protec- 
tion once he has learned the nature of a wild 
surge; the chaos shield protects from both good 
and harmful effects. Thus, if a wild surge resulted 
in a heal spell for all characters within 10 feet of 
the caster, the protected caster might not benefit, 
while all others in the radius would be healed. 

The spell remains in effect until it negates a 
wild surge or the spell duration expires. 


Hornung’s Baneful Deflector* (Evocation) 


Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 
Duration: 2 rounds/level 
Casting Time: 2 

Area of Effect: One creature 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell partially surrounds the recipient in a 
shimmering, hemispherical field of force. The 
field is transparent and moves with the subject, 
forming a shell about one foot away from his 
body. The shell serves as a shield against all forms 


21 


Wizard Spells (2nd Level) 


of individually targeted missile attacks (including 
magic missiles and other spells). The caster desig- 
nates the position of the shell (protecting the 
front, rear, side, or top of the recipient). The spell 
does not protect against area effect spells or other 
attacks that strike several creatures at once. 

Whenever an individual missile attack is di- 
rected at a protected creature, the baneful deflec- 
tor activates. Instead of striking the target 
creature, the missile’s target is determined ran- 
domly among all creatures within a 15-foot hemi- 
sphere of the protected creature, including the 
protected creature. The missile then changes 
course toward its new target with normal chances 
to hit. If the new target is beyond the range of the 
missile, no target is hit. If the protected creature 
is struck, the spell immediately fails. If several 
people are protected by baneful deflector, a mis- 
sile will change course several times before reach- 
ing its target. 

The material component is a small prism that 
shatters when the spell is cast. 


Insatiable Thirst (Enchantment/Charm) 


Range: 5 yards/level 
Components: V, S 
Duration: 1 round/level 
Casting Time: 2 

Area of Effect: One creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell instills in the victim an uncontrolla- 
ble desire to drink. The victim is allowed a saving 
throw to avoid the effect. If the roll is failed, the 
creature must consume any potable liquids it can 
find (including magical potions, which might re- 
sult in strange effects if potions are mixed). Al- 
though poisons are not considered potable, a 
victim may not realize that a liquid is poisonous. 
The victim will not consume a liquid he knows to 
be poisonous. 

No matter how much the creature drinks, its 
magical thirst is not quenched until the spell ends. 
During this time, the creature can do nothing but 
drink or look for liquids to drink. Victims of this 
spell believe they are dying of thirst and (depend- 
ing upon their nature) may be willing to kill for 


drinkable fluids. 


Wizard Spells (2nd Level) 


Maximilian’s Earthen Grasp (Alteration) 


Range: 10 yards +10 yards/level 
Components: V, S, M 

Duration: 3 rounds +1 round/level 
Casting Time: 2 

Area of Effect: One creature 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell causes an arm made of compacted 
soil to rise from the ground. The spell must be 
cast on open turf, such as a grassy field or a dirt 
floor. 

The earthen arm and hand (which are about 
the same size as a normal human limb) arise from 
the ground beneath one creature targeted by the 
caster. The hand attempts to grasp the creature's 
leg. The victim must attempt a saving throw; if 
successful, the hand sinks into the ground. Each 
round thereafter (until the spell ends or the target 
moves out of spell range), the hand has a 5% 
chance per level of the caster of reappearing be- 
neath the targeted creature, at which time an- 
other saving throw is required. 

If a saving throw is missed, the earthen limb 
firmly grasps and holds the creature in place. An 
individual held by the hand suffers a movement 
rate of 0, Armor Class penalty of —2, and attack 
penalty of —2. All Dexterity combat bonuses are 
negated. The hand causes no physical damage to 
the victim. 

The arm may be attacked by any creature, in- 
cluding the arm's victim. The arm has AC 5 and 
hit points equal to double the caster’s maximum 
hit points. For example, a caster who normally 
has 15 hit points can create an earthen hand with 
30 hit points. The maximum number of hit points 
that an earthen hand may have is 40. When the 
arm’s hit points are reduced to zero or when the 
spell duration ends, the hand crumbles. 

The material component is a miniature hand 
sculpted from clay, which crumbles to dust when 
the spell is cast. 


Nahal’s Nonsensical Nullifier* (Abjuration) 
Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Duration: 1d6 rounds +1 round/level 
Casting Time: 2 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 

Saving Throw: None 


This spell scrambles the aura of the affected 
creature, giving random results to know align- 
ment, detect evil, and detect lie spells cast on that 
creature. 


22 


When a protected creature is the focus of one 
of these divinations, the information gained is 
randomly determined. Thus, if know alignment 
is used against a chaotic evil creature protected 
by the nonsensical nullifier, the response could be 
any alignment combination. If two characters 
both use the same divination on the same target, 
two random results are generated. 

A new random result is generated each round; 
thus, continued observation of a protected crea- 
ture usually results in different answers. The ta- 
ble below should be used to determine the 
random alignment. 


D10 

Roll Alignment 
1 Lawful Good 
2 Lawful Neutral 
3 Lawful Evil 
4 Neutral Good 
5 Neutral 
6 Neutral Evil 
7 Chaotic Good 
8 Chaotic Evil 
9 Chaotic Neutral 
10 No alignment 


The material component is a small amount of 
egg yolk smeared into the hair of the recipient. 


Past Life (Divination) 


Range: Touch 

Components: V, S 
Duration: Special 

Casting Time: 1 round 
Area of Effect: One creature 
Saving Throw: None 


By touching the remains of a dead creature, 
this spell allows a caster to gain a mental image of 
the deceased's former appearance. The remains 
can be of any age and only a tiny fragment is re- 
quired, such as a bone splinter or a strand of hair. 

When cast by a wizard of at least 7th level, he 
is able to view the final minute of the subject's life 
from the subject's point of view. 

When cast by a wizard of at least 9th level, a 
personal possession (a ring, a favorite walking 
stick, etc.) may be substituted for bodily re- 
mains. 


Protection From Paralysis (Abjuration) 


Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 
Duration: 1 turn/level 
Casting Time: 2 

Area of Effect: One creature 
Saving Throw: None 


The recipient of this spell receives total immu- 
nity to magical paralysis. Spells such as hold per- 
son and slow have no effect on the individual. 
This spell also provides protection against the pa- 
ralysis attacks of monsters (a ghoul’s touch, for 
example). This spell offers no protection against 
physical damage. 

The material component is a bit of cloth taken 
from a priest's robes. 


Ride the Wind (Alteration) 


Range: 5 yards/level 
Components: V, S, M 

Duration: 1 turn/level 

Casting Time: 2 

Area of Effect: One creature/level 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell allows creatures targeted by the cast- 
er to become virtually weightless and be lifted 
upon the wind. Affected creatures can control 
their altitude by rising or descending at a move- 
ment rate of 12, but are at the mercy of the wind 
for speed and direction. Recipients can stop for- 
ward movement only by grasping something to 
anchor them in place. If no wind is present, this 
spell has no effect. 

Unwilling targets are allowed a saving throw 
to resist the effect. 

Each subject and his equipment must weigh 
less than 100 pounds per level of the caster. Thus, 
a 6th-level wizard could affect six creatures each 
weighing 600 Ibs. or less. This spell may be cast 
only on living creatures. 

The material components are a small handful 
of straw and a dry leaf. 


Wizard Spells (2nd Level) 


Sense Shifting (Alteration) 
Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Duration: 3 turns 

Casting Time: 2 

Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


Sense shifting allows the wizard to affect all 
spells of levels 1 through 3 that he casts within the 
duration of the spell. For each spell, he can modi- 
fy one of three sensory features pertaining to the 
spell: color, sound, or patterned visual appear- 
ance of the spell effect. The changes produced by 
this spell do not affect the functions of the affect- 
ed spell nor any saving throws that apply against 
their effects. 

Sense shifting might be used to produce green 
fireballs, magic missiles that streak through the 
air with a scream, colored continual light globes, 
customized designs for a hypnotic pattern, or a 
spectral hand that makes scrabbling sounds as it 
attempts to grasp a target. 

Sense shifting cannot create any form of invisi- 
bility. It cannot completely silence a spell effect 
(thus, a fireball’s blast might be muted, but not 
wholly eliminated). 

The material component is a twist of multi- 
colored ribbon with a small silver bell fastened to 
its end. 


LO" 


Wizard Spells (3rd Level) 


Third-Level Spells 


Alacrity (Alteration) 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Duration: 1 turn +1 round/level 
Casting Time: 1 

Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


The use of an alacrity spell allows the wizard to 
speed up the casting of spells of 5th level and 
lower. Only spells that are cast within the alacrity 
spell’s duration are affected. 

Casting times of 2-5 are reduced by 1; casting 
times of 6-9 are reduced by 2; and a casting time 
of one round is reduced to a casting time of 8. 
Casting times for spells which require more than 
1 round are reduced by 20% (e.g., an animate 
dead spell affected by alacrity could be cast in on- 
ly 4 rounds). Spells which have a casting time of 1 
are not affected by this spell. 

The material component is a miniature hour- 
glass which is destroyed when the spell is cast. 


Alamir’s Fundamental Breakdown (Divination) 


Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Duration: Special 
Casting Time: 1 round 
Area of Effect: One item 
Saving Throw: Special 


By casting this spell, the wizard learns what in- 
gredients and formulas were used to create a 
chemical mixture or magical item. 

The information instantly appears in the cast- 
er's mind but may be lost if the wizard cannot 
comprehend it. The caster must roll an Intelli- 
gence check; if successful, the wizard under- 
stands the formula and retains it in his memory. If 
the roll is missed, the caster cannot comprehend 
what he has learned and the information is imme- 
diately forgotten. If the spell is cast a second time 
on the same substance, the spell automatically 
fails unless the wizard has advanced to the next 
experience level. 

The caster’s level determines the type of infor- 
mation gleaned: 

5th Level: The type and quantity of ingredients 
and the preparation process required to produce 
a non-magical mixture are learned. For example, 
the wizard could learn how to produce Greek fire 
or gunpowder, or could learn the recipe for some- 
thing simple, like chocolate cake. 

9th Level: The wizard may learn the proper in- 


24 


gredients and formula for making a magical liq- 
uid (potion, scroll ink, etc.). 

14th Level: The caster may learn the formula 
for creating any type of magical object, excluding 
unique items and objects of extreme power (arti- 
facts and relics). 

In all cases, simply knowing the proper formu- 
la does not mean the wizard can successfully cre- 
ate the item or material. The construction of 
alchemical mixtures and magical items is a time- 
consuming and expensive undertaking. 

This spell has detrimental effects on the magi- 
cal item analyzed. Single-use items (potions, oils, 
etc.) are automatically destroyed; the spell con- 
sumes the item in the process of analyzing it. Re- 
usable magical items must make a saving throw 
vs. disintegration. If the saving throw is failed, 
Alamir's fundamental breakdown releases the 
magic of the item in an explosive blast, rendering 
it permanently nonmagical. The caster suffers 
4d8 points of damage from the explosion. 

The material component is a wand cut from a 
100-year-old oak tree. The wand is used to touch 
the item in question, and vanishes in a puff of 
smoke when the spell is complete. 


Alternate Reality* (Alteration) 
Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Duration: Instantaneous 
Casting Time: 3 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


With this spell, the caster creates a small varia- 
tion in probabilities. This variation lasts only a 
moment, but creates alternate results for one re- 
cent event. When the spell is cast, any one event 
attempted by the recipient during the previous 
round is recalculated, essentially allowing (or 
forcing) the creature to make new die rolls. 

Only events that begin and end in a single 
round can be affected. Only one die roll can be 
rerolled. If the creature touched is a willing recip- 
ient, the player can choose which roll (the origi- 
nal or the new roll) affects him, more than likely 
picking the most successful. If the creature is un- 
willing, he must redo the action. The second re- 
sult, whatever its outcome, cannot be changed. 

Typical uses of this spell include allowing a 
fighter to reroll an attack, forcing an opponent to 
reroll a saving throw, or allowing a wizard to re- 
roll the damage caused by a fireball. 

The material component is a small, unmarked 


die. 


Augmentation | (Invocation/Evocation) 
Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Duration: Special 

Casting Time: 2 

Area of Effect: Special 

Saving Throw: None 


This spell augments the damage inflicted by 
any spell of levels 1-3. For each die of damage 
rolled, the caster adds one point to the damage 
total. 

The augmentation I spell affects only one spell 
cast on the round immediately following the aug- 
mentation. If an entire round or more elapses, the 
augmentation is wasted. 

Only spells which cause direct physical dam- 
age are affected by augmentation; for example, 
monsters gained through monster summoning I 
gain no bonuses to their damage. 

The material component is a pair of concentric 
circles of bronze or silver. 


Far Reaching I (Alteration) 
Range: 0 

Component: V 

Duration: Special 

Casting Time: 2 

Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell allows the wizard to extend the range 
of any one 1st- or 2nd-level spell by 50% or any 
one 3rd-level spell by 25%. The spell to be affect- 
ed must be cast on the round immediately follow- 
ing the far reaching I spell. If a complete round or 
more elapses, the far reaching I is wasted. 

Far reaching I affects only a spell cast by the 
same wizard. Far reaching I does not affect spells 
that have range of 0 or touch. 


Fireflow* (Alteration) 


Range: 30 yards 

Components: V, S, M 
Duration: 1 round/level 
Casting Time: 3 

Area of Effect: One fire source 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell allows a wizard to contro] natural 
fires by manipulating randomness and adjusting 
probabilities to cause them to spread and take 
shape in any direction he desires. Once cast, the 
wizard points at any fire within range. He can 
then cause that fire to move in any direction de- 
sired within spell range, as long as the flames con- 


25 


Wizard Spells (3rd Level) 


tact a solid surface (the fire may not be raised in 
the air). 

The caster must maintain concentration or the 
spell fails. The flames can be spread at the rate of 
50 square feet per turn. Thus, if a caster affects a 
campfire, he could create a flaming line 1 foot 
wide and 50 feet long or fill a 5' X 10’ square ina 
single round. 

The flames are not limited by a lack of burn- 
able material and can be directed to spread over 
water, snow, ice, and other nonflammable sur- 
faces. The surface is not harmed, but objects and 
creatures caught in the flames suffer damage as if 
they had stepped into the original fire source. 
Thus, a character caught in flames created from a 
candle will suffer only minor damage, while a 
character caught in a blaze that originated from a 
huge bonfire will be severely burned. 

The material components are a small paint- 
brush and a pot of pitch. 


Fool’s Speech* (Alteration) 


Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Duration: 1 hour/level 

Casting Time: 1 turn 

Area of Effect: Caster +1 creature/level 
Saving Throw: None 


With this spell, the wizard empowers himself 
and others of his choosing with the ability to 
speak a secret language incomprehensible to oth- 
ers. Creatures designated to speak the language 
must be touching each other when the spell is 
cast. 

Once cast, the characters can choose to speak 
normally or in their secret tongue. They can 
speak and understand this mysterious language 
fluently. 

Fool's speech is not recognizable as any known 
language, nor does it remotely sound like any 
language. A comprehend languages or tongues 
spell will not translate it. It can be understood by 
a character wearing a helm of comprehending 
languages and reading magic, although the nor- 
mal percentage chances apply. 

The material component is a small whistle 
made of bone. 


Wizard Spells (3rd Level) 


Lorloveim’s Creeping Shadow (Illusion) 
Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Duration: 1 round/level 

Casting Time: 7 

Area of Effect: The caster’s shadow 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell causes the wizard’s shadow to elon- 
gate, stretching away from his body at a rate of 
15 yards per round. It can elongate a maximum 
distance of 10 yards per level of the caster. 

The shadow moves as an ordinary shadow, 
along floors and up walls. The caster may ma- 
neuver in any manner feasible to place the 
shadow where he desires. A caster might position 
his shadow over a high window in a tower in or- 
der to spy on the tower's occupants. The shadow 
makes no sound and is 90% undetectable in all 
but the brightest surroundings. 

While the spell lasts, the illusionist can see, 
hear, and speak through his shadow. The shadow 
cannot physically touch, pick up, or attack crea- 
tures or objects. It can be struck only by spells, 
magical weapons of +1 or better, or other special 
attacks (such as a dragon’s breath). The shadow 
has the same Armor Class as the caster. Hit 
points lost by the shadow are suffered by the 
caster. 

To cast the spell, a light source of at least the 
brightness of a candle must be present. 

The material component is a small statuette of 
the caster sculpted from a piece of obsidian worth 
at least 1,000 gp. 


Maximilian’s Stony Grasp (Alteration) 


Range: 20 yards + 10 yards/level 
Components: V, S, M 

Duration: 5 rounds +1 round/level 
Casting Time: 3 

Area of Effect: One creature 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell must be cast on stony ground, such 
as a manmade stone floor, a natural cavern floor, 
or a boulder-strewn field. It is not possible to cast 
the spell on a stone wall or ceiling. The spell 
causes an arm made of stone (about the same size 
as a normal human limb) to rise from the ground 
beneath any creature targeted by the caster. The 
stony hand attempts to grasp the leg of the target- 
ed creature, who is allowed a saving throw to 
avoid the effect; if the save is successful, the hand 
disappears. Each round thereafter, the hand has a 
5% chance per level of the caster of reappearing 
and attacking. 


26 


Creatures grasped by the hand suffer a move- 
ment rate of 0, AC penalty of —2, and attack 
penalty of —2. Grasped characters lose any Dex- 
terity bonuses. The hand causes no damage to its 
victim. 

The stony limb has AC 2 and hit points equal 
to triple the caster’s maximum hit points. The 
maximum number of hit points a stony hand may 
have is 60. 

The material component is a miniature hand 
sculpted from stone, which crumbles to dust 
when the conjured hand is destroyed or the spell 
expires. 


Minor Malison (Enchantment/Charm) 


Range: 60 feet 

Component: V 

Duration: 2 rounds/level 

Casting Time: 2 

Area of Effect: 30-foot-radius sphere 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell allows a wizard to adversely affect 
all the saving throws of his enemies. Opponents 
under the influence of this spell make all saving 
throws at a penalty of —1. 

Alternatively, the wizard may select any one 
school of magic and cause his enemies to make all 
saving throws against magic from that school at 
—2. This penalty is not cumulative with a saving 
throw penalty derived from the wizard being a 
specialist; the penalty is not increased to —3. 


Spirit Armor (Necromancy) 
Range: 0 

Components: V, S 
Duration: 2 rounds/level 
Casting Time: 3 

Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell allows the wizard to surround him- 
self with a portion of his own life essence, which 
takes the form of a shimmering aura. The spirit 
armor offers protection equivalent to splint mail 
(AC 4) and grants the wizard a +3 bonus to sav- 
ing throws vs. magical attacks. The spirit armor's 
effects are not cumulative with other types of ar- 
mor or magical protection, but Dexterity bonuses 
apply. 

The spirit armor is effective against magical 
and nonmagical weapons and attacks. It does not 
hinder movement or add weight or encumbrance. 
It does not interfere with spellcasting. 

When the spell ends, the aura dissipates and 
the caster temporarily loses a bit of his life es- 


sence, suffering 2d3 points of damage unless he 
succeeds at a saving throw vs. spell. No damage 
is sustained if the save is successful. The hit 
points lost can be regained only through magical 
healing. 


Squaring the Circle (Alteration) 
Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Duration: 1 round/level 
Casting Time: 2 

Area of Effect: Special 

Saving Throw: None 


Squaring the circle allows a wizard to alter the 
shape of the area of effect of one spell of 1st- 
through 5th-level spells. The spell to be affected 
must be cast within the duration of the squaring 
the circle spell. 

Square or cubic areas of effect can be trans- 
formed into circular or spherical areas of effect. 
Circular or spherical areas of effect can likewise 
be transformed into square or cubic areas of ef- 
fect. In both cases, the length of a side of a square 
area is equated to the diameter of a circular or 
spherical area. 

Alternatively, a square or cubic area can be 
transformed into a rectangle. The rectangle can- 
not cover more or less square footage than the 
standard square area of the spell. 

Similarly, a circular or spherical area can be 
transformed into an oval or egg shape. The area 
covered by the oval or egg shape cannot cover 
more or less square footage than the original area 
of the spell. 

The material component is a small pendant of 
any precious metal with a circle fashioned inside 
a square. 


Watery Double 
(Conjuration/Summoning, Enchantment) 


Range: Touch 

Components: V, S 

Duration: Special 

Casting Time: 3 

Area of Effect: One body of liquid 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell may be cast on any body of liquid as 
large as an ocean or as small as a glass of wine. 
The first creature whose reflection is cast on the 
surface of the liquid releases the spell. When the 
spell is triggered, the liquid immediately forms an 
exact three-dimensional image of the reflected 
creature. If more than one creature casts a reflec- 


27 


Wizard Spells (3rd Level) 


tion simultaneously, only one watery double 
forms. Each creature has an equal chance of being 
the victim of the spell (roll randomly). 

The size of the watery double is restricted by 
the volume of fluid available. If the spell were 
cast on a full mug of ale, the double would form 
from the ale, becoming a mug-sized duplicate of 
the victim. The watery double will never exceed 
the actual size of the victim regardless of the size 
of the body of liquid. 

When the spell is cast on the liquid, its duration 
is considered permanent until the power is re- 
leased by a creature's reflection. The liquid will 
not evaporate until the spell is triggered. When 
the watery double forms, it remains animated for 
1 round per experience level of the caster. 

The watery double attempts to touch the crea- 
ture it has duplicated. It can affect only the crea- 
ture that it resembles. It has the same THACO 
and current hit points as the creature it dupli- 
cates, but cannot cast spells or use any of the 
creature's magical items or special abilities. The 
watery double is AC 6 and its movement rate is 
double that of the victim. It may seep under 
doors and through cracks. 

If the watery double succeeds in touching the 
creature, it merges with the individual, covering 
his entire body in a skin of liquid. The victim 
must attempt a saving throw. If successful, the 
creature has resisted the spell’s effect and the wa- 
tery double “dies,” becoming normal fluid (and 
soaking the creature in the process). If the saving 
throw is failed, the watery double begins forcing 
its way into the victim's bodily openings, inflict- 
ing 1d8 points of damage per round until it is de- 
stroyed. 

The watery double dissipates if reduced to zero 
hit points or when the spell’s duration expires. 
Striking the watery double while it is wrapped 
around its victim causes an equal amount of dam- 
age to the victim. Part water, lower water, and 
transmute water to dust spells instantly destroy a 
watery double. 


Wizard Spells (4th Level) 


Wizard Sight (Divination) 
Range: 0 

Components: V, S 
Duration: 1 round/level 
Casting Time: 3 

Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


Upon completion of this spell, the caster’s eyes 
glow blue and he is able to see the magical auras 
of spellcasters and enchanted objects. Only the 
auras of those things normally visible to the cast- 
er are seen; this spell does not grant the wizard 
the ability to see invisible objects, nor does it give 
him X-ray vision. This spell does not reveal the 
presence of good or evil or reveal alignment. 

While wizard sight is in effect, a wizard is able 
to see whether someone is a spellcaster and 
whether that person is a priest or a wizard (and 
what type of specialist, if any). He can sense if a 
nonspellcaster has the potential to learn and cast 
wizard spells (e.g., whether a fighter will some- 
day gain the ability to cast a spell). 

Although a spellcaster’s level cannot be dis- 
cerned, the wizard can see the intensity of a spell- 
caster’s aura and guess at the individual's magical 
power (dim, faint, moderate, strong, overwhelm- 
ing). This can be extremely ambiguous even 
when a wizard has some method of comparison; 
the DM might announce that a subject's intensity 
is roughly equivalent to that of a companion, or 
he might announce that a subject’s aura is the 
strongest the wizard has ever encountered. 

An object's magical abilities cannot be dis- 
cerned. The fact that it is magical and the type of 
magic (abjuration, alteration, etc.) are obvious. 
The wizard can see the intensity of an item's mag- 
ical aura and guess at its power, but cannot tell 
whether a magical item is cursed. 


28 


Fourth-Level Spells 


Dilation I (Alteration) 
Range: 0 

Component: V 
Duration: Special 
Casting Time: 4 

Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


Dilation I allows a wizard to increase the area 
of effect of any one spell of levels 1-3. The area of 
effect is increased by 25%; thus, a stinking cloud 
would fill a 25-foot cube, while a slow spell 
would affect creatures in a 50-foot cube. Frac- 
tions of feet or yards (as appropriate to the spell) 
are dropped. 

Dilation I must be cast immediately prior to the 
spell to be dilated; if a complete round or more 
elapses, the dilation is wasted. The dilation spell 
affects only spells which have areas of effect de- 
fined in feet or yards (numbers of creatures can- 
not be increased). The dilation affects only spells 
cast by the same wizard. 


Divination Enhancement (Evocation) 
Range: 0 

Component: V 

Duration: 2 turns +2 rounds/level 
Casting Time: 4 

Area of Effect: The caster 

Saving Throw: None 


This spell allows a wizard to extend both the 
duration and range of the wizard eye spell and 
any divination spells of levels 1-4. Duration and 
range are both increased by 50% for the length of 
the divination enhancement. 

All divination spells cast within the duration of 
the enhancement are increased. The expiration of 
the enhancement cancels all divination spells in 
effect. 


Far Reaching Il (Alteration) 
Range: 0 

Component: V 

Duration: Special 

Casting Time: 4 

Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell’s function is identical to the 3rd-level 
far reaching I spell, except that a spell of 1st or 


| 2nd level has its range doubled and a spell of 3rd 


level has its range increased by 50%. In addition, 
any spell of 4th level has its range extended by 
25%. 


Greater Malison (Enchantment/Charm) 


Range: 60 feet 

Component: V 

Duration: 2 rounds/level 

Casting Time: 4 

Area of Effect: 30-foot-radius sphere 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell operates exactly like the 3rd-level 
minor malison spell except that the wizard places 
a —2 penalty on all saving throws of all hostile 
creatures within the area of effect. Optionally, 
the wizard may create a —3 penalty to saving 
throws against spells from one school of magic. 
This penalty is not cumulative with a saving 
throw penalty which derived from the wizard be- 
ing a specialist; the penalty is not increased to 
=4, 


Locate Creature (Divination) 


Range: 50 yards/level 
Components: V, S, M 
Duration: 1 turn/level 
Casting Time: 5 

Area of Effect: One creature 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell is similar to the 2nd-level locate ob- 
ject spell. Instead of finding an inanimate object, 
however, it allows the wizard to find a creature. 
The wizard casts the spell, slowly turns, and is 
able to sense the direction of the person or crea- 
ture, provided the subject is within range. The 
wizard learns how far away the creature is and in 
what direction it is moving (if at all). 

This spell can locate a general species of crea- 
ture (a horse or umber hulk, for instance) or can 
be used to find a specific individual. The wizard 
must have physically seen the individual or the 
type of creature at least once from a distance of 
no more than 10 yards. 

Unlike locate object, this spell is not blocked 
by lead. It is blocked, however, by running water 
(such as a river or stream). Objects cannot be 
found through use of this spell. 

The material component is a bit of a blood- 
hound's fur. 


29 


Wizard Spells (4th Level) 


Mask of Death (Necromancy) 


Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 
Duration: 1 hour/level 
Casting Time: 1 round 

Area of Effect: One creature 
Saving Throw: None 


By casting this spell, a wizard can change a 
corpse’s features to make it appear to be someone 
else. The caster must possess an accurate portrait 
of the individual to be duplicated, or must have a 
clear mental image of the person based on per- 
sonal experience. 

If animate dead is cast on the body, it can be 
animated to become a zombie that looks exactly 
like the copied person. The double is a mindless 
automaton, however, having all the characteris- 
tics of a normal zombie. 

This spell may be cast on a creature that has 
already become a zombie. The wizard must suc- 
cessfully touch the zombie in combat, unless the 
zombie is controlled by the caster. 

The material component of this spell is a drop 
of doppleganger’s blood. 


Minor Spell Turning (Abjuration) 
Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Duration: 3 rounds/level 
Casting Time: 4 

Area of Effect: The caster 

Saving Throw: None 


This spell is similar to the 7th-level spell turn- 
ing, which causes spells cast against the wizard to 
rebound on the original caster. This includes 
spells cast from scrolls and innate spell-like abili- 
ties, but excludes the following: area effects that 
are not centered directly upon the protected wiz- 
ard, spell effects delivered by touch, and spell ef- 
fects from devices such as wands, staves, and so 
forth. Thus, a light spell cast to blind the protect- 
ed wizard could be turned back upon and possi- 
bly blind the caster, while the same spell would 
be unaffected if cast to light an area in which the 
protected wizard were standing. 

One to four (1d4) spell levels may be turned. 
The exact number is secretly rolled by the DM; 
the player never knows how effective the spell is. 

Unlike the 7th level version of this spell, minor 
spell turning is not capable of partially turning a 
spell. For example, if a wizard has three levels of 
spell turning, he can turn three 1st-level spells, 
one 1st and one 2nd, or one 3rd-level spell. He 


Wizard Spells (4th Level) 


can in no way turn spells of 4th level or above. If 
the caster is the target of a spell of a higher level 
than he is capable of turning, the caster receives 
the full brunt of the spell. 

If the protected wizard and a spellcasting at- 
tacker both have spell turning effects operating, a 
resonating field is created that has the following 
effects: 


D100 
Roll 
01-70 
71-80 
81-97 


Effect 

Spell drains away without effect 

Spell affects both equally at full damage 

Both turning effects are rendered non- 
functional for 1d4 turns 

Both casters are sucked through a rift into 
the Positive Material plane 


98-00 


The material component of this spell is a 
smoothly polished silver coin. 


Mordenkainen’s Celerity 
(Alteration, Invocation) 
Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Duration: 1 turn 

Casting Time: 4 

Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


Mordenkainen’s celerity affects spells of levels 
1-3 which alter the movement of the wizard such 
as feather fall, jump, spider climb, levitate, fly, 
and haste. Spells to be affected must be cast with- 
in 1 turn of the casting of the celerity. Spells do 
not expire when the celerity expires. 

Spells cast following the celerity receive a 25% 
bonus to duration. This effect may not be gained 
in conjunction with other means of magically ex- 
tending a spell’s duration. In addition, the caster’s 
movement rate is increased by 25%. Feather fall 
is an exception; the rate of descent may be re- 
duced by 25% at the caster’s option. 

The area of effect is always the caster, except in 
the case of the haste spell, for which the effects of 
the celerity will operate on 1d4 creatures in addi- 
tion to the wizard. The celerity will not affect the 
other creatures in any other manner. 

The celerity gives the wizard a +2 bonus to his 
saving throws against spells of levels 1-3 which 
directly affect his movement. This includes web, 
hold person, and slow. The wizard also gains a 
+2 bonus on all saving throws against magical 
paralysis attacks. 

The material component is a small pouch or 
vessel containing centipede or millipede legs. 


30 


Summon Lycanthrope 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 
Range: Special 
Components: V, S, M 
Duration: Special 

Casting Time: 1 turn 

Area of Effect: One creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell is effective only on the night of a full 
moon and one night immediately preceding and 
following it. 

For the spell to be effective, the caster and the 
lycanthrope must be on the same plane of exist- 
ence; there is no other range limitation. When the 
spell is cast, the nearest lycanthrope (as deter- 
mined by the DM) of the chosen species must at- 
tempt a saving throw. If successful, the creature 
is unaffected. If it fails, the lycanthrope instantly 
appears near the caster. 

Upon arrival, the creature can freely attack the 
wizard unless the caster has created a warding 
circle. If a circle is present, the lycanthrope ap- 
pears in the circle; otherwise, it appears 1d10 feet 
away from the caster in a random direction (the 
DM should use the scatter diagram for grenade- 
like missiles found in the Dungeon Master's 
Guide to determine direction). 

A warding circle is a temporary prison drawn 
with specially prepared pigments laced with sil- 
ver filings. These pigments cost 100 gp for each 
foot of diameter of the circle (thus, a circle 10 feet 
across costs 1,000 gp). A warding circle must be 
at least 5 feet in diameter; if smaller, the lycan- 
thrope is automatically freed. Preparing the circle 
takes one turn per foot of diameter. 

Even with such protection, the lycanthrope can 
break out of the circle and wreak vengeance upon 
the summoner. The creature's base chance of suc- 
cess is 20%, modified by the difference between 
its Hit Dice and the wizard’s experience level. If 
the spellcaster is of a higher level, the difference is 
subtracted from the creature's chance of escaping 
the circle. If the lycanthrope is of higher Hit Dice 
than the wizard’s level, the difference is added to 
its chance. Each creature is allowed only one at- 
tempt to escape. 

Any break in the circle spoils the power of the 
spell and enables the lycanthrope to break free. 
Even a straw dropped across the line of a magic 
circle destroys its power. Fortunately, the crea- 
ture cannot take any action against any portion 
of the ward, for the magic of the barrier abso- 
lutely prevents this. 

Once safely ensnared, the lycanthrope can be 


Wizard Spells (4th Level) 


held for as long as the summoner dares. The crea- 
ture cannot leave the circle, nor can any of its at- 
tacks or powers penetrate the magical barrier. 
When the full moon sets, the lycanthrope reverts 
to its human form. At this time, it is free of the 
spell and may leave the circle. 

The material components are a drop of blood 
from any animal, a human hair, and a moonstone 
worth at least 150 gp. If the caster elects to create 
the warding circle, the components described 
above are also required. 


There/Not There* (Evocation) 


Range: 30 yards 
Components: V, S, M 
Duration: 1-6 turns 
Casting Time: 1 round 
Area of Effect: 10’ cube 
Saving Throw: None 


This peculiar wild magic creates a random fluc- 
tuation in the probabilities of existence. The spell 
can be cast only upon nonliving objects and can 
affect only materials within a 10' X 10' X 10' cube. 

Objects in the area of effect either remain nor- 
mal and visible or they disappear (50% chance). 
The state of existence for any object is determined 
randomly and changes with each viewing and 
viewer. Thus, a single object could appear and 
disappear several times during the course of the 
spell. Furthermore, it might be “there” for one on- 
looker, but “not there” for another. 

For example, a wild mage casts this spell on a 
doorway. The DM rolls percentile dice and deter- 
mines the door is “there” for the wizard. The wiz- 
ard’s companion also looks at the door. The DM 
rolls and determines that the door is “not there” 
for the companion. The pair studies the door for 
several minutes, during which time the door does 
not change (this counts as a single viewing for 
each character). 

The wizard and his companion then close their 
eyes. When they look at the door again, new 
checks for each character reveal the door is “not 
there” for both characters. The pair steps through 
the open archway and turns around to look at the 
door once again. This time it is “not there” for the 
wizard, but “there” for his companion. This ran- 
dom changing continues throughout the duration 
of the spell. 

Objects that are “there” are normal in all re- 
spects. Doors can be opened, chests can be picked 
up and carried, and rocks can be used as barri- 
cades. Objects that are “not there” are gone, al- 
though their absence does not cause ceilings to 
collapse or other damage. A wizard could walk 


32 


through a “not there” wall without difficulty. 

When two parties perceive a there/not there ob- 
ject differently, the object functions for each party 
according to its own perceptions. For example, a 
wizard hides behind a rock that he sees as “there.” 
Her enemy, a fighter, perceives the rock as “not 
there” and fires arrows at the wizard. The wizard 
would perceive the arrows as bouncing off the 
rock, while the fighter would perceive the arrows 
as missing their target or falling short. The fighter 
would be subject to a check before firing each ar- 
row to determine whether his perception changes 
(assume that the fighter must look away from the 
rock every time he nocks an arrow; each time he 
takes aim, this counts as a new viewing). 

After the spell is cast, any objects removed 
from the area of effect retain their uncertain exist- 
ence for the duration of the spell. Thus, a pair of 
heroes could pick up a treasure chest, carry it 
down the hall, set it down, and discover it had 
vanished while their backs were turned. Worse 
still, one might see the chest and the other not! 

The material component is a small piece of cat 
fur sealed inside a small box. 


Thunder Staff (Invocation/Evocation) 
Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Casting Time: 4 

Area of Effect: 20’ X 40’ cone 

Saving Throw: 1/2 


Upon completion of this spell, the wizard raps 
his staff on the ground and produces a thundering 
cone of force 5’ wide at the apex, 20’ wide at the 
base, and 40’ long. All creatures wholly or partial- 
ly within this cone must roll a successful saving 
throw or be stunned for 1d3 rounds. Stunned crea- 
tures are unable to think coherently or act during 
this time and are deafened for 1d3 +1 rounds. Ad- 
ditionally, those who fail the save are hurled 
4d4 +4 feet by the wave of force, suffering 1 point 
of damage per two feet thrown. Intervening sur- 
faces (walls, doors, etc.) may restrict this distance, 
but damage remains the same (4d4 +4). 

If the save is successful, the victim is not 
stunned, but is deafened for 1d3 +1 rounds and is 
hurled only half the distance. 

Giant-sized or larger creatures who succeed at 
their saving throws are deafened but are not 
thrown, suffer no loss of hit points, and are not 
stunned. If the saving throw is failed, such crea- 
tures are hurled 2d4 +2 feet, suffer one point of 
damage per two feet thrown, and are deafened 
and stunned. 


The cone of force is considered to have a 
Strength of 19 for purposes of opening locked, 
barred, or magically held doors. This spell can 
move objects weighing up to 640 pounds a maxi- 
mum distance of 4d4 +4 feet. Fragile items must 
make a saving throw vs. crushing blow or be de- 
stroyed. 

The material components are a vial of rain 
gathered during a thunderstorm and the wizard’s 
staff, which must be made of oak. The staff is not 
destroyed during casting. 


Turn Pebble to Boulder (Alteration) Reversible 


Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Duration: Special 
Casting Time: 4 

Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


At the culmination of this spell, the caster hurls 
a pebble which grows and increases in speed, be- 
coming a deadly boulder that inflicts 3d6+8 
points of damage if it strikes the target. (The rules 
for boulders as missile weapons apply as de- 
scribed in the Dungeon Masters Guide.) The 
caster’s THACO is used to determine success, and 
the caster is considered to be proficient with the 
thrown pebble and receives no penalty for range. 
The maximum range of attack is equal to 50 feet 
plus 10 feet per level of the caster. Only the caster 
may throw the pebble. 

The wizard can enchant one stone at 7th level 
and gains one stone per three levels of experience 
thereafter (two stones at 10th level, three at 13th 
level, etc.). Only one pebble may be thrown per 
round, and pebbles must be hurled in consecutive 
rounds. The spell has a duration in rounds equal 
to the number of pebbles enchanted. Each pebble 
requires a separate attack roll. Pebbles may be 
thrown at different targets within range. 

The material components are pebbles, which 
revert to normal size when the spell expires. 

The reverse of this spell, turn boulder to peb- 
ble, shrinks a boulder to the size of a pebble. It 
affects only naturally occurring rocks and can 
not be used to shrink a statue or a cut gemstone. 

The number of rocks that may be affected is 
equal to the number of experience levels of the 
caster. Boulders must not exceed one cubic foot 
per level of the caster. Thus, a 10th-level wizard 
could shrink 10 rocks, each of which is equal to 
or less than 10 cubic feet in size. All rocks are af- 


fected in the same round the spell is cast. Though | 


they need not be touched, the boulders must be 


33 


Wizard Spells (4th Level) 


within 50 feet of the caster. Boulders that have 
been shrunk remain so until dispelled. 


Unluck* (Evocation) 
Range: 10 yards 
Components: V, S, M 
Duration: 2d10 rounds 
Casting Time: 4 

Area of Effect: One creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


With this spell, the wild mage creates a nega- 
tive pattern in the random forces surrounding 
one creature. The creature is allowed a saving 
throw; if successful, the spell fails. If the saving 
throw is failed, random chance falls into an un- 
lucky pattern. Any action involving random 
chance (i.e., any time a die roll affects the charac- 
ter) performed by the victim during the next 2-20 
rounds requires two separate attempts; the worse 
result is always applied. (The victim rolls twice 
for attacks, damages, saving throws, etc., always 
using the worse die roll.) 

A luckstone or similar magical device will ne- 
gate unluck. Doing so, however, prevents the 
magical item from functioning for 2d10 rounds. 

The material component is a piece of a broken 
mirror. 


Wizard Spells (5th Level) 


Fifth-Level Spells 


Far Reaching III (Alteration) 
Range: 0 

Component: V 

Duration: Special 

Casting Time: 5 

Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell operates exactly like the 3rd-level far 
reaching I spell except that the range of any spell 
of levels 1-3 is increased by 150% and the range 
of any 4th- or 5th-level spell is increased by 50%. 


Khazid’s Procurement 
(Divination, Summoning) 
Range: Special 
Components: V, S, M 
Duration: 1 round/level 
Casting Time: 1 turn 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell allows the caster to more easily ac- 
cess rare or dangerous spell components. The 
wizard casts this spell upon a silver mirror while 
concentrating on a mental image of the material 
he desires. The base chance of success is 50%, 
modified by the following factors: 

e +1% per level of the caster 

e +10% if the caster has seen the same type of 
substance or object before; this bonus is not 
cumulative with the following bonus 
+20% if the caster has a sample of the mate- 
rial or the same type of object in his posses- 
sion; this bonus is not cumulative with the 
bonus above 
+30% if the wizard knows the location of 
the desired object 
—50% if the caster has never seen the same 
type of material or item before 


If the percentile roll indicates failure, the caster 
is unable to locate the desired ingredient and the 
spell ends. If the roll indicates success, the wizard 
has located the object or substance and the mirror 
becomes a magical gate through which the caster 
can see the target. The size of the gate is deter- 
mined by the size of the mirror, to a maximum 
size of 3 feet by 2 feet. 

The gate always appears within arm’s length of 
the target, allowing the wizard to reach through 
the mirror, grasp the object of his desire, and 
draw it back through the gate. The wizard must 
risk his own safety—the gate does not allow the 


34 


use of probes, long-handled ladles, tongs, or oth- 
er equipment to gather the material. The caster 
cannot move completely through the gate. 

The gate vanishes when the spell’s duration ex- 
pires or when the target or the wizard moves 
more than 10’ away from it. 

The gate is visible from both sides, and other 
creatures can reach through the gate. Breath 
weapons, gaze attacks, missiles, spells, and simi- 
lar attacks cannot be cast through the gate. Be- 
cause creatures can pass their limbs through the 
gate, physical attacks and touch spells can be 
used. 

The only limit to the range of this spell is that 
the caster and the target must be on the same 
plane of existence. Elemental forces (not crea- 
tures) will not pass through the gate. Thus, the 
wizard does not run the risk of flooding his labo- 
ratory by opening a gate beneath the sea, for ex- 
ample. However, the spell does not provide any 
sort of protection against a hostile environment. 

The material components are an exquisite sil- 
ver mirror of no less than 10,000 gp value and a 
black opal worth at least 1,000 gp which must be 
powdered and sprinkled on the mirror. The mir- 
ror is not lost after casting and may be used 
again, but the powdered opal is consumed in the 
casting. 


Lower Resistance (Abjuration, Alteration) 


Range: 60 yards 

Components: V, S, M 
Duration: 1 turn+1 round/level 
Casting Time: 5 

Area of Effect: One creature 
Saving Throw: None 


Using this spell, a wizard may attempt to re- 
duce the magic resistance of a target creature. 
The magic resistance of the victim works against 
the lower resistance spell itself, but at only half its 
normal value. No saving throw is permitted in 
addition to magic resistance. 

If the victim does not resist the effects of this 
spell, his magic resistance is reduced by a base 
30% plus 1% per experience level of the wizard 
casting the spell. 

This spell has no effect on creatures that have 
no magic resistance. 

The material component is a broken iron rod. 


Magic Staff (Enchantment/Charm) 


Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Duration: Special 

Casting Time: Special 

Area of Effect: The wizard’s staff 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell allows a wizard’s staff to store one 
spell level for every three levels of the caster. 
Thus, a 9th-level wizard can store three spell 
levels (three 1st-level spells, one 1st and one 2nd, 
or one 3rd-level spell). 

Spells that are to be stored in the staff must be 
memorized normally by the wizard. The spells 
are then cast as normal when charging the staff; 
casting requires the spell’s normal casting time 
plus one round. The spell is wiped from memory 
and material components are consumed. All 
spells to be stored must be cast into the staff with- 
in 1 turn. 

All stored spells have a casting time of 1. 

Spells remain in the staff until cast or dispelled, 
or up to 1 hour per level of the caster. After this 
time, all stored spells fade away. 

Only wizards who know the magic staff spell 
can cast spells from another wizard’s staff. This 
applies to wizards who have never learned or 
could not normally cast the spells stored in a 
staff. It is common, however, for the staff's own- 
er to implement a command word which must be 
known by anyone wishing to use the staff. 

The material component for this spell is a staff 
cut from an ash tree. For each spell level the wiz- 
ard intends to imbue into the staff, it must be in- 
laid with rubies worth at least 1,000 gp. 


Mind Fog (Enchantment/Charm) 


Range: 80 yards 
Components: V, S 
Duration: 3 turns 

Casting Time: 3 

Area of Effect: 20-foot cube 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


A mind fog is a physical block of fog that en- 
ables the wizard to weaken the mental resistance 
of his victims. Victims are allowed a saving 
throw at a —2 penalty to avoid the effects. 

A creature who falls victim to the mind fog suf- 
fers —2 penalties to all saving throws against two 
categories of magic: all spells of the illusion/ 
phantasm and enchantment/charm schools that 
affect the mind directly; and spells of 1st through 
5th level which affect the mind directly. For ex- 


35 


Wizard Spells (5th Level) 


ample, phantasmal force is a mind-affecting 
spell; phantom steed is not. 

The penalty to saving throws operates cumula- 
tively with any penalties that operate for other 
reasons. Affected creatures suffer the penalty as 
long as they remain in the fog and for 2d6 rounds 
thereafter. 


Safeguarding (Abjuration) 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Duration: 1 turn +1 turn/level 
Casting Time: 5 

Area of Effect: 15-foot-radius sphere 
Saving Throw: None 


Use of this spell protects the wizard and any- 
one in the area of effect from damage caused by 
the rebounding of the wizard’s spells. This in- 
cludes damage from a fireball cast in an area too 
small for its effects, a reflected lightning bolt, or 
any other offensive area spell that overlaps the 
safeguarding’s area of effect. The protection is ef- 
fective against spells of 7th level and lower. The 
protection does not apply to damage from spells 
rebounded by any form of magical spell turning. 
This spell does not protect the wizard against 
damage from spells or attacks cast by enemies or 
other party members. 

A wizard who has cast safeguarding is free to 
move and act normally. The spell’s effect is al- 
ways centered on him, regardless of his actions. 
Other creatures are free to enter and exit the area 
of effect. 

An area spell cast by the wizard will take effect 
normally, but its effects will be negated within the 
area of the safeguarding spell. This applies only 
to area spells centered outside the radius of the 
safeguarding spell. If the wizard casts an offen- 
sive area spell within the area of the safeguard- 
ing, the safeguarding is immediately negated and 
those within the area suffer full damage from the 
spell. The wizard is free to cast non-offensive ar- 
ea spells and individually targeted spells within 
the area of the safeguarding. 

The material component is a piece of preserved 
skin from any creature that possesses natural 
magic resistance. 


Wizard Spells (5th Level) 


Von Gasik’s Refusal (Abjuration) 


Range: 10 yards/level 
Components: V, S, M 

Duration: 1 hour/level 

Casting Time: 5 

Area of Effect: 20-foot-square/level 
Saving Throw: None 


This powerful spell is designed to prevent un- 
authorized spellcasters from entering a hallway, 
doorway, window, or other point of entry. 

The spell creates an invisible barrier that 
blocks the targeted area. Any nonspellcasters and 
those spellcasters specifically named by the caster 
may pass freely. All other spellcasters collide with 
the invisible barrier. Members of classes with 
lesser spellcasting abilities (paladins, rangers, and 
bards) are blocked only if the character is of suffi- 
cient level to cast spells. 

The wizard is able to ward one area up to 20'- 
square for each level of his experience. Thus, a 
12th-level wizard may protect a square area 240 
feet on a side. The area of effect may be divided 
among several smaller portals as long as the total 
area does not exceed the caster’s limit. Each por- 
tal must be in range and sight of the caster at the 
time the spell is cast. 

The barriers exist for one hour per level of the 
caster unless they are dismissed by the caster or 
dispelled by a dispel magic spell. A disintegrate 
spell immediately destroys a barrier, as does a 
rod of cancellation or a sphere of annihilation. 

The invisible walls are not affected by physical 
blows, cold, heat, or electricity. Thrown and pro- 
jected weapons (both magical and mundane) are 
not repelled by the barrier and may pass through 
the area normally. Spells can be cast through the 
barrier. Dimension door, teleport, and similar ef- 
fects can bypass the barriers. 

The material component is a pinch of dust 
from any wizard’s tomb. 


Vortex* (Evocation) 


Range: 30 yards 

Components: V, S, M 

Duration: 1d4 rounds +1 round/level 
Casting Time: 5 

Area of effect: 5-foot-diameter circle 
Saving Throw: 1/2 


A vortex is a swirling mass of magical energy, 
barely controllable by the caster. On the round of 
casting, a small sparkle of lights fills the air at the 
desired position. On the second round, a 7’-tall, 
multicolored tornado appears. From this moment 


36 


on, the caster must maintain concentration in or- 
der for the vortex to remain. 

Each round, the caster can move the vortex 60 
feet. However, control of direction is not perfect. 
The caster has complete control over distance, 
but can only suggest the desired direction. The 
caster has a 50% chance of moving the vortex in 
the direction he desires; if the die roll indicates 
failure, the vortex moves according to the scatter 
diagram for grenade-like missiles. Thus, the vor- 
tex usually moves in the general direction de- 
sired, but on occasion, it may move to either side 
or directly toward the caster. 

The vortex cannot pass through objects larger 
than its area of effect (it could move through a 
sapling but not an ancient oak tree) and will be 
redirected by these, rebounding along the general 
line of movement. For example, if cast in a nar- 
row hallway, the vortex might ricochet down the 
hall, bouncing from side to side. 

The vortex is composed of raw magical energy. 
Nonmagical creatures struck by the vortex suffer 
1d4 points of damage per level of the caster. Mag- 
ical creatures and spellcasters suffer 1d6 points of 
damage per level of the caster. Creatures struck 
are allowed a saving throw vs. magic to suffer 
only half damage. 

Each time a creature is struck, there is a 5% 
chance that the vortex will explode in a wild 
surge. Use Table 2 to determine the results of any 
wild surge. If the vortex causes a wild surge, the 
spell ends immediately. 

The material components are a silk streamer 
and a handful of straw. 


Waveform* (Alteration) 


Range: 40 yards 

Components: S, M 

Duration: 1d10 rounds 

Casting Time: 5 

Area of Effect: 10-foot-cube/level 
Saving Throw: 1/2 


By means of this spell, the wild mage is able to 
shape and direct the patterns of water currents, 
allowing him to mold liquids into a variety of 
forms. The spell affects a quantity of liquid no 
larger than the area of effect. If cast onto a larger 
body, such as an ocean or large lake, the spell af- 
fects only the water within the area of effect. 

After casting waveform, the mage can form the 
water into any desired shape. The spell does not 
bind the liquid together in any fashion; it is still 
limited by its fluid properties and gravity. Thus, a 
mage could not use waveform to create a human- 
oid creature with arms and legs and direct it to 


walk across land. He could, however, create a 
roughly human shape with flowing arms that ris- 
es out of the water, crashes forward in a huge 
splash, then rises and repeats the process. Other 
possible shapes include gigantic waves, geysers, 
whirlpools, and troughs. 

The shape takes one round to form, after 
which it can be maintained by concentration. 
The shape can be directed to move in any direc- 
tion at the rate of 90 feet per round. If the wave- 
form moves into or through a body of water, the 
form loses no intensity. However, if the wave is 
moved over dry ground, it loses one die of dam- 
age for every 10 feet crossed. 

If propelled against a target, the waveform 
causes 1d4 points of damage per level of the cast- 
er to creatures in its path. The waveform can be 
directed against creatures on the surface or 
underwater. Those struck are allowed a saving 
throw; success indicates half damage. 

If the victims are in or on a body of water, the 
shape will sweep them along. Creatures of small 
size are carried with the form, moving at its 
speed. Medium and large size creatures are swept 
along at half the water’s speed. Creatures larger 
than this resist the movement. Those caught in 
the current can make a Strength check each 
round to swim free of the current. 

Boats and ships are particularly vulnerable to 
the waveform. If the waveform is twice the size of 
the vessel or more, the ship must make a seawor- 
thiness check (as described in Table 77 of the 
DMG). Vessels passing the check suffer damage 
as described above, reducing seaworthiness rat- 
ings for future checks by 2d6 points until repairs 
are made. 

Alternatively, this spell can be cast directly at a 
single water-based creature—a water weird, wa- 
ter elemental, or other creature from the elemen- 
tal plane of water. In this case, the spell causes 
1d6 points of damage per level of the caster. The 
effect is instantaneous and the spell ends immedi- 
ately after the attack is made. 

The material component is a small, carved oar 
decorated with aquamarines worth at least 500 
gp. The oar disintegrates when the spell is cast. 


37 


Wizard Spells (6th Level) 


Sixth-Level Spells 


Augmentation Il (Evocation) 
Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Duration: 3 turns 

Casting Time: 6 

Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell functions exactly like the 3rd-level 
augmentation I spell except that five spells of 
levels 1-3 may be affected. For each die of dam- 
age caused by augmented spells, one hit point is 
added to the damage total. 

Augmentation II affects the first five spells 
which cause direct damage that are cast within 
the duration of the augmentation II spell. Only 
spells that cause direct physical damage are af- 
fected by this spell. 

The material component is a pair of concentric 
circles of gold or platinum. 


Bloodstone’s Spectral Steed (Necromancy) 


Range: 10 yards 
Components: V, S, M 
Duration: 1 hour/level 
Casting Time: 1 round 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell allows a wizard to create a quasi- 
real, vulturelike creature. The flying steed can 
carry the caster and one other person per three 
levels of the wizard’s experience (four at 12th 
level, five at 15th, etc.). All passengers must be 
specifically named during the casting. 

The spectral steed looks like a huge, skeletal 
vulture with tattered wings. As it flies, it utters 
hideous screeches that echo through the sky. The 
spectral steed flies at a movement rate of 4 per 
level of the caster, to a maximum movement rate 
of 48. It appears with a bit and bridle, plus one 
saddle per passenger. 

All normal animals shun the spectral steed and 
only monsters will attack it. The mount has AC 2 
and 10 hit points plus 1 hit point per level of the 
caster. If it loses all of its hit points, the spectral 
steed disappears. It has no attack mode. 

The material component is a hollow bone from 
a vulture’s wing, which must be carved into a 
whistle and blown when the spell is cast. 


Wizard Spells (6th Level) 


Claws of the Umber Hulk (Alteration) 


Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 
Duration: 1 turn/level 
Casting Time: 1 round 
Area of Effect: One creature 
Saving Throw: None 


When this spell is cast, the subject's hands wid- 
en and his fingernails thicken and grow, becom- 
ing equivalent in size and power to the iron-like 
claws of an umber hulk. The transformation 
takes one full round and is excruciatingly painful, 
requiring a system shock roll. A failed roll causes 
the subject to suffer 3d4 points of damage. 

The subject can burrow as an umber hulk, cut- 
ting through 10 feet of solid stone or 60 feet of soil 
per turn. The only limitation to this is the sub- 
ject’s stamina; at the end of each turn of burrow- 
ing, the subject must succeed a Constitution 
check or be forced to rest for one turn. 

Burrowing through soil does not necessarily 
create a passable tunnel. If the subject wishes to 
make a passage in which others can travel or that 
he can exit when the spell ends, he must dig at a 
rate of 30 feet per turn. Cutting a tunnel through 
solid rock does not require extra care or time. 

The recipient of this spell can make two claw 
attacks per round, each inflicting 2d6 points of 
damage plus any Strength bonuses. Each attack is 
made with a —2 penalty to hit. This penalty ap- 
plies until the subject has made two successful 
consecutive attacks (not necessarily in the same 
round), at which time he is accustomed to using 
the claws. The penalty is dropped for the remain- 
der of the spell. 

The material component is an umber hulk’s 
claw. 


Dilation II (Alteration) 
Range: 0 

Component: V 
Duration: Special 
Casting Time: 5 

Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell functions exactly like the 4th-level 
dilation I spell, except that the area of effect of a 
1st-, 2nd-, or 3rd- level spell is extended by 50%. 
Alternatively, the wizard may extend the area of 
effect of one 4th- or Sth-level spell by 25%. 


38 


Forest’s Fiery Constrictor 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 


Range: 10 yards/level 
Components: V, S, M 

Duration: 1 round/level 

Casting Time: 6 

Area of Effect: One source of fire 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell causes a tentacle of magical flame to 
snake forth from any existing source of natural or 
magical fire. The flaming tendril is 10 feet long, 
has AC 7, can be hit only by magical weapons of 
+2 or better, and has hit points equal to double 
the caster’s level. 

Any creature within 20 feet of the tentacle is 
subject to attack as directed by the caster. The 
victim must attempt a saving throw; if successful, 
the subject has avoided entanglement, but suffers 
1d6 points of fire damage from contact with the 
tendril. If the saving throw is failed, the victim is 
entangled by the flaming serpent and suffers 3d6 
points of fire damage each round until the tendril 
is destroyed or the spell expires. 

If the fire source from which the tentacle ema- 
nates is extinguished, the remaining time that the 
fiery constrictor may exist is cut in half. 

The material component is a red dragon's 
scale. 


Lorloveim’s Shadowy Transformation 
(Illusion) 


Range: Touch 

Components: V, S 

Duration: 1d4 rounds +1 round/level 
Casting Time: 6 

Area of Effect: Special 

Saving Throw: Neg. 


When this spell is cast, the illusionist trans- 
forms one creature or a specified amount of non- 
living material into shadow, making it 
insubstantial. Thus, a door could be turned to 
shadow and entered. The maximum amount of 
inanimate material that may be transformed is 
one cubic foot per level of the caster. 

Unwilling creatures are allowed a saving throw 
to resist the shadowy transformation. Magical 
items and the magical effects of spells (such as 
Bigby’s forceful hand or a wall of stone) cannot 
be affected. 

A transformed creature and all its gear become 
insubstantial. The creature can pass through 
small holes, narrow openings, and the smallest 
cracks. The creature cannot fly without addition- 
al magic. 


No form of attack is possible when in shadow 
form except against creatures that exist on the 
Ethereal plane. In this case, all attacks are nor- 
mal; however, the shadowy creature may be 
harmed only by magical weapons of +1 or 
greater or by creatures able to affect those struck 
only by magical weapons. Spells and special at- 
tacks have normal effects. 

Most undead creatures will ignore a creature in 
shadow form, believing it to be a wraith or spec- 
tre; however, liches and powerful undead may 
save vs. spell with a —4 penalty to recognize the 
spell. A successful dispel magic spell forces the 
creature in shadow form back to normal form. 


Wildshield* (Alteration) 
Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Duration: Special 
Casting Time: 1 round 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell cloaks the caster in a whirling band 
of scintillating colors, completely concealing 
him. The caster is able to see normally within and 
outside the shield. 

The wildshield protects the caster from the ef- 
fects of spells and magical items. The shield can 
completely absorb 2d6 spell levels (i.e., if the roll 
of 2d6 results in 10, the shield could absorb ten 
1st-level spells, two 5th-level spells, or any simi- 
lar combination), thereby negating their effects 
on the caster. Both area effect spells and those in- 
dividually targeted at the wild mage can be ab- 
sorbed. In the case of area spells, the wildshield 
protects only the mage. All others in the area of 
effect suffer normal effects from the spell. 

Wildshield also protects against wild surges, 
whether caused by the caster’s magic or by an 
outside source. Each wild surge is considered 
equal to 1d6 spell levels. 

The spell remains in effect until it is either can- 
celed by the caster or it reaches its spell level ca- 
pacity. If the capacity is met exactly, the 
wildshield simply ceases to function. However, if 
the wildshield is struck by more spell levels than 
it can absorb, it explodes in a wild surge. The 
spell that triggered the surge is completely ne- 
gated, its energy instead transformed into a wild 
surge (see Table 2). Since the shield no longer 
functions, the formerly protected wizard is sub- 
ject to full effects of this wild surge. 

The material component is a small sponge. 


Wizard Spells (6th Level) 


Wildstrike* (Conjuration/Summoning) 


Range: 30 yards 
Components: V, S, M 
Duration: 2d4 rounds 
Casting Time: 6 

Area of Effect: One creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell is used primarily against hostile 
spellcasters. It distorts all attempts at spellcast- 
ing, converting spell energy into wild surges. 

The victim of a wildstrike is allowed a saving 
throw; if successful, the spell has no effect. If the 
saving throw is failed, the target is enclosed with- 
in a field of wild magic. If the victim casts spells 
or uses a charge from a magical item, a wild surge 
is automatically created (refer to Table 2). When 
determining the effects of this surge, the true level 
of the wild mage who cast the wildstrike is sub- 
tracted from the die roll, making the effects of the 
wild surge more likely to affect the victim. 

The material component is a small glass tube 
that is shattered in the casting. 


39 


Wizard Spells (7th Level) 


Seventh-Level Spells 


Acid Storm (Evocation) 


Range: 10 yards/level 

Components: V, S, M 

Duration: 1 round/level 

Casting Time: 7 

Area of Effect: 40-foot-diameter circle 
Saving Throw: 1/2 


This deadly spell unleashes a downpour of 
magical, gelatinous acid droplets. All creatures 
within the area of effect are coated by globs of 
gooey acid. The acid can be washed off only with 
wine, vinegar, or by a successful dispel magic or 
similar spell. The acid remains present for 1 
round per level of the caster, then vanishes. 

Creatures coated by the acid suffer 1d4 hit 
points of damage each round during rounds 1-3, 
1d6 points in each of rounds 4-6, and 1d8 points 
on each round thereafter. Characters who suc- 
cessfully save vs. spells during the first round suf- 
fer only half damage from the acid for the 
remaining rounds. When the spell expires, no fur- 
ther damage is inflicted. 

Acid damage can be healed through any means 
except regeneration. The material component is a 
drop of acid. 


Bloodstone’s Frightful Joining (Necromancy) 


Range: Touch 

Components: V, S 

Duration: 1 turn/level 

Casting Time: 7 

Area of Effect: One undead creature 
Saving Throw: Special 


When this powerful spell is employed, the wiz- 
ard transfers his spirit to the body of an undead 
creature, totally dominating it. If the undead 
creature has intelligence, it is allowed a saving 
throw vs. spell to resist the joining. If the save is 
successful, the caster’s spirit is forced back into 
his own body. The wizard must make a system 
shock roll; if the roll fails, the wizard suffers 5d6 
points of damage. If the roll succeeds, the wizard 
suffers half this damage. 

If the creature’s save fails, the necromancer 
joins his life essence with that of the undead. 
While in the creature's body, the caster can use all 
of its special attacks and innate abilities, exclud- 
ing spells memorized by the creature. 

The wizard’s body remains comatose, is sub- 
ject to all regular attacks, and suffers damage 
normally. The wizard’s spirit can travel an unlim- 


40 


ited distance from his physical body as long as 
they remain on the same plane of existence. 

If intelligent, the possessed undead continually 
tries to purge the caster with mental threats that 
can be heard only by the wizard. The thoughts of 
the undead are ghastly. During the first minute of 
each hour of possession, the caster must succeed 
an Intelligence check in order to retain his sanity. 
The roll is modified by the difference between the 
creature's Intelligence and that of the spellcaster. 
If the undead has a higher score, the difference is 
added to the die roll. If the necromancer has a 
higher Intelligence, the difference is subtracted 
from the roll. 

If the roll is successful, nothing happens and 
the caster may continue to possess the undead. If 
the Intelligence roll fails, the wizard’s intellect de- 
generates, making him a raving, homicidal mani- 
ac. His spirit is immediately forced to return to 
his body, and he must attempt a system shock roll 
with damage occurring as outlined above. The 
caster remains dangerously insane until a heal or 
wish spell is used to restore his intellect. 

This spell can be very useful when combined 
with the mask of death spell. 

When the spell’s duration expires, the necro- 
mancer’s spirit immediately returns to his body. 


Hatch the Stone from the Egg 
(Alteration, Enchantment, Evocation) 


Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Duration: Special 

Casting Time: 1d4+4 hours 

Area of Effect: One alchemical mixture 
Saving Throw: None 


When a wizard wishes to create the magical 
item known as the philosopher's stone, he must 
first discover its alchemical formula, which tells 
him the necessary ingredients and the method of 
preparing them. This information is not provided 
by this spell, and this spell is useless without the 
formula. (The exact ingredients and formula are 
decided by the Dungeon Master and must be dis- 
covered by the wizard by adventuring.) 

When the formula has been discovered and the 
ingredients prepared, the wizard enchants the al- 
chemical mixture with the enchant an item spell. 
Hatch the stone from the egg is then cast upon the 
mixture. This spell slowly transmutes the mixture 
into its final form as the philosopher's stone. The 
process is completed with a permanency spell. 

The material component for this spell is a mag- 
ical item known as the philosopher's egg, which is 


an enchanted retort used to hold the alchemical 
mixture. The egg is not destroyed upon comple- 
tion of the spell and may be used again. (Further 


details about the philosopher's egg are found in 
Chapter 4 of this book.) 


Hornung’s Surge Selector* (Alteration) 
Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Duration: Special 

Casting Time: 1 round 

Area of Effect: The caster 

Saving Throw: None 


The great Hornung, having been blasted more 
than once by his own wild surges, devised a 
method of improving the results of wild magic 
and, not incidentally, his own chances of surviv- 
al. The result was Hornung's surge selector. By 
casting this spell, the wild mage gains greater 
control over wild surges. When the caster’s spell 
creates a wild surge, two separate results are de- 
termined from Table 2. The caster can then 
choose which of the two results will take effect. 
This spell can be used in conjunction with Nahal’s 
reckless dweomer. 

The spell’s duration is a fixed number of surges 
or 12 hours, whichever comes first. The wild 
mage is able to shape one wild surge per five 
levels of his experience; thus, a 15th-level caster 
could shape three wild surges within a 12-hour 
period. At the end of 12 hours, the spell expires, 
regardless of the number of surges remaining. 

The material component is a brass spinner. 


Intensify Summoning 
(Conjuration/Summoning, Necromancy) 


Range: Special 
Components: V, S, M 
Duration: 1 turn 
Casting Time: 6 

Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell enhances the strength of creatures 
summoned by the caster via 1st through 6th level 
conjuration/summoning spells. Only spells 
which bring summoned creatures to the wizard 
are affected. 

The first two conjuration/summoning spells 
cast by the wizard within one turn following the 
intensify summoning spell are affected. Summon- 
ed creatures gain 2 hit points per hit die. The af- 
fected creatures retain their bonus hit points until 


41 


Wizard Spells (7th Level) 


the normal expiration of the spell that summoned 
them. 

The material components are a small leather 
pouch and a miniature silver candelabra. 


Malec-Keth’s Flame Fist (Evocation) 
Range: 0 

Components: V, S 

Duration: 1 round/level 

Casting Time: 1 

Area of Effect: One creature or object 
Saving Throw: Special 


When this spell is completed, one of the caster’s 
hands (his choice) bursts into light and is sur- 
rounded by an aura of flame. The caster suffers 
no damage from this effect. Illumination is equal 
to that of a torch. 

If the wizard successfully touches an opponent, 
the subject must attempt a saving throw. If the 
roll is successful, the flame remains on the caster’s 
hand (and he may use it to make further attacks 
until the spell’s duration expires) and the touched 
creature suffers 1d4 +2 points of fire damage. If 
the save is failed, the flame leaves the caster’s 
hand to surround the victim's body in an aura of 
searing fire. The superheated aura burns for 1 
round, inflicting 1d4 points of damage per level 
of the caster. 

Instead of attacking a creature, the caster may 
choose to touch any single object, which is auto- 
matically surrounded by the searing aura for 1 
round and must succeed at an item saving throw 
vs. magical fire or be destroyed. The aura can 
surround an object up to 5 cubic feet in volume 
per level of the caster. 


Shadowcat (Illusion) 


Range: 10 yards/level 
Components: V, S, M 
Duration: 1 turn/level 
Casting Time: 3 

Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


When this spell is cast, the wizard brings into 
being a cat made of shadow. The shadowcat is 
the size of a normal cat and may be either grey or 
black at the caster’s option. The caster has com- 
plete telepathic control of the feline; he can see, 
hear, and even speak through it as long as it re- 
mains within range. At the moment it moves out 
of range, the shadowcat vanishes. The caster 
does not need to concentrate on the shadowcat. 

The shadowy feline is insubstantial, making it 


Wizard Spells (7th Level) 


subject only to magical or special attacks, includ- 
ing those by weapons of +1 or better. It has AC 
5, a movement rate of 18, and saving throws 
equal to those of the caster. The cat dissipates if it 
loses hit points equal to one-half the caster’s total 
hit points. The shadowcat has no attacks of its 
own and cannot touch or carry objects. A suc- 
cessful dispel magic spell causes the cat to vanish. 

A shadowcat makes no sound as it moves. It is 
90% undetectable in all but the brightest condi- 
tions. It can pass through small holes or narrow 
openings. 

The material components of this spell are a 
black pearl of at least 100 gp value and a claw 
from a grey or black cat. 


Spell Shape* (Alteration) 
Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Duration: 1d4 +1 rounds 
Casting Time: 1 round 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell gives the wild mage the ability to 
seize magical energy directed at him and reshape 
it as he desires. While it is in effect, the spell gives 
no visible sign of its existence. It offers no protec- 
tion against area effect spells. 

If a wild mage is the target of a spell or magical 
item, this spell automatically allows him a saving 
throw. If the saving throw is failed, the oppo- 
nent'’s spell has normal effects. If the saving throw 
is successful, the spell shape absorbs the magical 
energy of the opponent's spell. The wild mage can 
then choose to let the energy dissipate or he can 
instantly use it to cast a spell back at the opposing 
mage. The return spell must be of an equal or 
lesser spell level than the original one and must be 
currently memorized by the mage. The act of re- 
turning the spell does not cost the wild mage any 
of his memorized spells. Spell energy cannot be 
saved; if not used immediately, it dissipates. 

For example, Hamos, a wild mage, is protected 
by a spell shape and is struck by a finger of death 
(a 7th-level spell). He succeeds at his saving 
throw and is now able to cast a spell of 7th level 
or lower. Hamos currently has feeblemind mem- 
orized. Since it is only a 5Sth-level spell, he 
chooses to cast it back at his enemy. He makes his 
level variation check (and doesn’t get a wild 
surge) and the feeblemind is sent hurtling back at 
his foe. Hamos still has his original feeblemind 
memorized. The remaining two spell levels are 
lost, since they were not used in the same round. 


42 


If a wild mage is struck by two spells at once, 
he may choose which spell to shape. He suffers all 
effects of the remaining spell. 

The material component is a diamond worth 
no less than 2,000 gp. When the spell is cast, the 
diamond is transformed into a lump of coal. 


Steal Enchantment (Enchantment) 


Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Duration: Permanent 
Casting Time: 1 hour 
Area of Effect: One item 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell “steals” the enchantment from a 
magical item and places it within another, non- 
magical item (the material component). Both ob- 
jects must be touched by the wizard during 
casting. The two items must be of the same cate- 
gory (blunt weapon, edged weapon, ring, amu- 
let, shield, armor, wand, etc.). 

The enchantment can be transferred only to a 
nonmagical item. Only the energy of one item 
can be transferred; it is not possible to combine 
two magical items into one item. The new item 
has all the properties of the original magical item 
(including the same number of charges, if any). 

At the culmination of the spell, the original 
magical object is allowed an item saving throw 
vs. disintegration with all modifiers it is allowed 
as a magical item. Exceptionally powerful objects 
(such as artifacts) may be considered to automat- 
ically succeed the saving throw at the DM's dis- 
cretion. 

If the saving throw is successful, the magical 
object resists the effect and the spell ends in fail- 
ure. If the roll is failed, the magical item loses all 
of its powers, which are transferred to the previ- 
ously nonmagical object. 

Even if the magical item fails its saving throw, 
the spell’s success is not guaranteed. There is a 
chance that the enchantment might be lost. The 
base chance of this occurring is 100%, modified 
by —5% per level of the caster. Thus, a 20th-level 
wizard has no chance of losing the magic. If the 
enchantment is lost, both items become non- 
magical. 

The material component is the nonmagical 
item which is to receive the enchantment. It must 
be of equal or greater value than the object to be 
drained. 


Suffocate (Alteration, Necromancy) 


Range: 30 yards 

Components: V, S, M 

Duration: 1 round/level 

Casting Time: 7 

Area of Effect: 10-foot-radius circle 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell draws the breath out of all creatures 
within the area of effect who fail a saving throw. 
Their breath is placed within a small silk bag held 
by the caster. 

Each round, a victim of this spell must attempt 
a Constitution check. If failed, the creature suf- 
fers 2d4 points of damage. If successful, the sub- 
ject has taken in enough air to reduce the damage 
to 1d4. 

As they struggle and gasp for air, affected crea- 
tures move and attack at half their normal rates, 
have a —4 Armor Class penalty, an attack penal- 
ty of —4, and lose all Dexterity combat bonuses. 

Effects of this spell continue each round re- 
gardless of whether the victims remain in the 
original area of effect. The damage accumulates 
until the spell expires, the silk bag is opened, or a 
successful dispel magic spell is cast upon the bag. 
The penalties to combat remain in effect for 1d3 
rounds after the spell ends. 

The material component is a small silk bag 
studded with black opals worth a total of no less 
than 5,000 gp. The bag is not destroyed during 
casting, but becomes useless for future castings if 
a successful dispel magic spell is used on it. 


43 


Wizard Spells (8th Level) 


Eighth-Level Spells 


Abi-Dalzim’s Horrid Wilting 
(Alteration, Necromancy) 


Range: 20 yards/level 
Components: V, S, M 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Casting Time: 8 

Area of Effect: 30-foot cube 
Saving Throw: 1/2 


This spell evaporates moisture from the bodies 
of every living creature within the area of effect, 
inflicting 1d8 points of damage per level of the 
caster. Affected creatures are allowed a saving 
throw, with success indicating half damage. 

This spell is especially devastating to water ele- 
mentals and plant creatures, who receive a penal- 
ty of —2 to their saving throws. 

The material component is a bit of sponge. 


Airboat (Alteration, Enchantment) 


Range: 1 mile 
Components: V, S 
Duration: 1 hour/level 
Casting Time: 1 round 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell must be cast under a cloudy sky. The 
caster points at a cloud, which immediately de- 
scends toward him. As it comes closer, the cloud 
changes shape, becoming any sort of vessel imag- 
ined by the wizard (a dragon-shaped galley, a 
one-man dinghy, etc.). 

Although the airboat is made of cloud, it feels 
solid and can support the weight of the caster 
plus one passenger per level of the wizard. It can 
fly at any speed up to 5 miles per hour per level of 
the caster (to a maximum of 90 miles per hour). 

The caster maintains total telepathic control 
over the airboat's speed and direction. While con- 
trolling the vessel, the wizard is able to perform 
other actions but may not cast other spells. 


Gunther’s Kaleidoscopic Strike 
(Invocation/Evocation) 

Range: 5 yards/level 
Components: V, S 

Duration: Instantaneous 
Casting Time: 8 

Area of Effect: One creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


When this spell is cast, a thin beam of shim- 
mering, kaleidoscopic light shoots from the wiz- 


Wizard Spells (8th Level) 


ard's fingertips toward his target. The victim is 
allowed a saving throw to resist the beam. 

This spell has no effect on nonspellcasters, caus- 
ing them no harm whatsoever. Creatures with in- 
nate spell-like abilities are also unaffected. Against 
wizards and priests, this spell can be devastating. It 
“short-circuits” the arcane energy stored in a spell- 
caster’s mind, wiping away a number of memorized 
spells. Lost spells must be rememorized. 

The number of spells drained is equal to the 
caster’s level minus 1d20. Thus, a 16th-level wiz- 
ard drains a maximum of 15 spells, but could 
drain no spells depending on the die roll. After 
subtracting the die roll from the caster’s level, any 
result of zero or a negative number indicates that 
the victim loses no spells. 

Spells are drained from the wizard’s memo- 
rized spells beginning with 1st-level spells and 
working up to higher level spells. Any decision 
regarding which spell should be drained from a 
specific level should be determined randomly. 


Homunculus Shield (Evocation, Necromancy) 
Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Duration: 1 round/level 

Casting Time: 3 

Area of Effect: The caster 

Saving Throw: None 


By creating a homunculus shield, the wizard 
separates a portion of his mind in the form of an 
exteriorized magical homunculus. This creature 
is invisible to all but the caster and appears as a 
miniature version of the caster perched atop the 
wizard's head. 

The wizard may move and act normally while 
this spell is in effect. The magical homunculus op- 
erates as an independent spellcaster. It may cast 
only teleport, contingency, and protective spells 
of 4th level and lower. It casts only spells from 
the wizard’s memorized store of spells, but any 
spells cast by the homunculus are done so with a 
casting time of 1. The wizard selects which spells 
are cast by his homunculus; after they are cast, 
they are wiped from the caster’s memory. 

The homunculus has 1 hit point per two levels 
of the caster. These points are “borrowed” from 
the caster; while the homunculus is present, the 
wizard’s hit points are reduced by this amount. 

The homunculus cannot be struck by melee or 
missile weapons separately from the wizard. It 
can be damaged separately from the wizard (e.g., 
by a magic missile targeted at the homunculus or 
by area effect spells). The homunculus has the at- 


44 


tributes and saving throws of the wizard. 

At the end of the spell’s duration, the homuncu- 
lus disappears and any hit points it had are restored 
to the wizard. Hit points lost by the homunculus 
can be regained only by magical healing. 

If the wizard’s hit points are reduced to zero at 
any time during the spell, the wizard is dead even 
if the homunculus had hit points remaining. 

A wizard with an active homunculus shield 
suffers a —4 saving throw penalty against magic 
jar spells cast upon him due to the division of his 
mental energy. 

The material component is a miniature sculpt- 
ed bust of the spellcaster. 


Hornung’s Random Dispatcher* (Abjuration) 


Range: 30 yards 
Component: V 

Duration: Instantaneous 
Casting Time: 2 

Area of Effect: One creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


With the utterance of a few words, this spell 
can hurl a creature to a random plane and leave 
him there. The target, if unwilling, is allowed a 
saving throw. If successful, the spell fails. If un- 
successful, the victim and all items carried by him 
are sent to a random plane. To determine the 
plane, roll on the table below. 


D100 
Roll 
01-03 
04-06 
07-12 
13-17 
18-23 
24-27 
28-30 
31-35 


Plane 

Abyss 

Acheron 

Alternate Prime Material Plane 
Arcadia 

Astral Plane 

Beastlands (Happy Hunting Grounds) 
Concordant Opposition 

Elemental Plane (Air, Fire, Earth, or 
Water) 

Elysium 

Ethereal Plane 

Gehenna 

Gladsheim 

Hades 

Limbo 

Negative Material Plane 

Negative Quasi-Plane (Vacuum, Ash, 
Dust, or Salt) 

Nine Hells 

Nirvana 

Olympus 

Pandemonium 


36-38 
39-44 
45-47 
48-50 
51-53 
54-58 
59-61 
62-64 


65-67 
68-70 
71-73 
74-76 


D100 
Roll 
77-79 


Plane 

Para-Elemental Plane (Smoke, Magma, 
Ooze, or Ice) 

Positive Material Plane 

Positive Quasi-Plane (Lightning, Radi- 
ance, Minerals, or Steam) 

Prime Material Plane* 

92-94 Seven Heavens 

95-97 Tarterus 

98-100 Twin Paradises 


80-82 
83-85 


86-91 


* Characters sent to the Prime Material plane 
are teleported elsewhere in the same world. 


The caster has no control over the destination 
of the target. The conditions at the destination 
may kill the target (for example, arriving in the 
elemental plane of fire) or merely make life diffi- 
cult. This determination is left to the DM. 


Wildzone* (Conjuration/Summoning) 
Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Duration: 2d6 turns 

Casting Time: 1d6 rounds 

Area of Effect: 300’ X 300’ square 
Saving Throw: None 


This powerful spell creates a disruption in 
magical forces similar to the conditions found in 
wild magic regions (areas where the effects of 
magic have been permanently altered). This spell 
has only a temporary effect, although the effects 
of wildzone could possibly be rendered perma- 
nent. 

The spell creates a wild magic region centered 
on the caster. The area of effect cannot be shaped 
in any way; it is always a square 300 feet long on 
each side (90,000 square feet). 

Within the wildzone, wild magic reigns. Any 
spell cast in the area of effect is automatically 
treated as a wild surge (see Table 2). Effects from 
magical items that expend charges are also treat- 
ed as wild surges when used in the area. Other 
magical items function normally. 

Spells cast into the wildzone from outside the 
area of effect function normally, but spells cannot 
be cast out of the area of effect without triggering 
a wild surge. 

The material components are several pots of 
paint which must be spilled across a sheet of ham- 
mered silver worth no less than 2,000 gp. 


45 


Wizard Spells (9th Level) 


Ninth-Level Spells 


Chain Contingency (Evocation) 


Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Duration: 1 day/level 
Casting Time: 2 turns 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


This powerful spell is similar to the 6th-level 
contingency spell. 

Chain contingency allows the caster to desig- 
nate either two or three spells that will take effect 
automatically under a specific set of conditions. 
In other words, when a set of conditions is met, 
the designated spells are “cast” immediately with- 
out the caster’s intervention. 

Chain contingency must be cast together with 
the spells it is to trigger. The caster may choose 
either two spells to occur simultaneously or three 
spells to occur consecutively, one per round. 
Spells must be of 8th level or lower. Only the 6th- 
level contingency spell may not be included. The 
casting time of 2 turns includes the casting of the 
spells to be triggered. 

Unlike the contingency spell, spells “stored” in 
chain contingency can affect creatures other than 
the caster. These instructions must be carefully 
worded; the spell obeys the letter of its instruc- 
tions and not the caster’s intentions. 

In casting chain contingency, the wizard de- 
fines the conditions that will trigger the “stored” 
spells. This definition must be carefully worded, 
but may be as limiting or general as the caster de- 
sires. The caster also states the exact order, tar- 
get, range, and manner in which the stored spells 
are to be cast. 

The spell has several limitations in triggering 
its spells. It does not have any powers of discern- 
ment; thus, an instruction to “target the highest- 
level enemy” is not possible. Furthermore, the 
conditions cannot involve a delay; a spell cannot 
be ordered to trigger “three turns after I sneeze.” 

When the named conditions are met, the chain 
contingency is automatically triggered. If all spe- 
cifics of casting a spell are not specified (e.g., tar- 
get or area of effect), the effect is automatically 
centered on the caster. 

Possible triggers might include a fall from a dis- 
tance greater than the caster’s height, the appear- 
ance of the first beholder within 30 feet of the 
caster, or the wizard pointing his finger and pro- 
nouncing a specified word. 


Wizard Spells (9th Level) 


Only one chain contingency can be placed on 
the spellcaster at any one time. If a second is cast, 
the first chain contingency is cancelled. It is possi- 
ble to have both a contingency and a chain con- 
tingency operating at the same time, provided 
that there is no overlap in the conditions specified 
for triggering the two spells. 

Spells triggered by the chain contingency have 
a casting time of 1. If the spell is triggered under 
conditions that are impossible to fulfill, it fails. If 
one of the spells in a series cannot be fulfilled, the 
remaining spells in the series are lost. Normal 
conditions, including line of sight to the target, 
must be fulfilled. All spells originate from the 
caster; thus, it is not possible for a caster to tele- 
port and leave behind a series of fireballs to blast 
his enemies. In this case, the fireballs would ei- 
ther fail or destroy something at the caster’s desti- 
nation. 

The material components are (in addition to 
those of the companion spells) 500 gp worth of 
quicksilver; a gem of at least 1,000 gp value; an 
eyelash from an ogre mage, ki-rin, or similar 
spell-using creature; and an ivory statuette of the 
wizard (which is not destroyed in the casting of 
the spell) which must be carried by the spellcaster 
in order for the chain contingency to perform its 
function when triggered. 


Elemental Aura (Abjuration, Evocation) 
Range: 0 

Component: V 

Duration: 1 hour/level 

Casting Time: 1 round 

Area of Effect: The caster 

Saving Throw: None 


This spell has four very different effects de- 
pending on the type (air, earth, fire, water) of ele- 
mental aura cast. Only the caster may receive an 
elemental aura, and it is not possible to benefit 
from more than one aura at one time. 

Each aura is three inches thick and covers the 
caster’s entire body. An aura of air is hazy white 
in color, an aura of earth is dull grey, an aura of 
fire is flickering red, and an aura of water is shim- 
mering blue. The auras have these effects: 

Air 

e immunity to gas and air-based attacks 

è total protection from physical attacks by 

creatures of the elemental plane of Air 

e ability to cast fly and protection from nor- 

mal missiles once each 


46 


Earth 

e immunity to attacks from nonmagical weap- 
ons made of stone or metal 

e immunity to physical attacks by creatures of 
the elemental plane of Earth 

è ability to breathe and move at full move- 
ment rate within the element of earth 

e ability to cast wall of stone once 


© immunity to normal and magical fire 

è total protection from physical attacks by 
creatures of the elemental plane of Fire 

è ability to breathe and move at full move- 
ment rate within the element of fire 

è total protection from hostile environmental 
effects while traveling plane of Fire 

e ability to cast wall of fire once 

Water 

e immunity to water- and cold-based attacks 

è total protection from physical attacks by 
creatures of the plane of Water 

è ability to breathe and move at full move- 
ment rate within the element of water 

e ability to cast wall of ice once 


The auras do not restrict the caster in any way. 
He is free to move and act normally while under 
the influence of an aura. 


Estate Transference (Alteration) 
Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Duration: Permanent 

Casting Time: 10 turns 

Area of Effect: 1,000 square feet/level 
Saving Throw: None 


This powerful spell allows a caster to transfer a 
large area of land in the Prime Material plane to 
any of the elemental planes. All buildings, peo- 
ple, and wildlife within the area of effect are also 
transported. The land forms a pocket of the 
Prime Material plane within the elemental plane. 
The pocket is a sphere with a diameter equal to 
the diameter of the land. The surface of the pock- 
et allows creatures to enter or exit the pocket, but 
prevents the elements from entering the pocket. 

Inside the pocket, the land is surrounded by air 
of a temperature matching that of the Prime Ma- 
terial plane at the moment the land was moved. 
In addition, a source of water is created within 
the pocket. 

Before the spell is cast, the area to be moved 
must be surrounded by solid markers of material 
from the destination plane. Thus, if a wizard 


wants to move his castle to the Elemental Plane of 
Fire, he must first surround the area with solid 
blocks of matter from the Elemental Plane of Fire, 
such as hardened magma or magically- 
crystallized fire. The blocks must be spaced no 
more than five feet apart and may be placed 
above ground or under the surface (at a depth of 
no more than three feet). 

The wizard must be within the area to be 
moved when he casts the spell. When the land 
moves, a hemispherical crater is left behind in the 
Prime Material plane. Inside its pocket on the de- 
sired plane, the land continues its existence as if 
nothing changed, with the exception of occasion- 
al visits from planar creatures. 

Any land that is moved in this manner can nev- 
er again be moved with this spell. 

The material component (in addition to the 
markers) is the appropriate magical device to 
control elementals of the desired plane (bowl 
commanding water elementals, brazier com- 
manding fire elementals, censer controlling air el- 
ementals, or stone controlling earth elementals). 
The item must be permanently placed at the heart 
of the area of effect and cannot be used for any 
other purpose. If the device is disturbed in any 
way, the spell immediately fails, allowing the en- 
ergies of the elemental plane to flood into the pro- 
tected area. 


Glorious Transmutation (Alteration) 


Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Duration: Permanent 
Casting Time: 1 turn 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell turns iron into silver or lead into 
gold at the caster’s option. The prime ingredient 
for this spell is a magical item called the philoso- 
pher's stone, which must be touched by the wiz- 
ard and alchemically combined with the metal 
during casting. The formula for mixing the stone 
and the metal must be known by the caster; this 
information is not provided by this spell and the 
spell is useless without it. (The exact ingredients 
and formula are decided by the Dungeon Master 
and must be discovered by the wizard in the 
course of adventuring.) 

Philosopher's stones vary in quality so much 
that each is capable of transmuting either 
1d10 X 50 pounds of iron into an equal quantity 
of silver or 1d10 X10 pounds of lead into the 
same amount of gold. It is not possible to know 


47 


Wizard Spells (9th Level) 


how much metal can be transmuted until the 
process is complete. If the caster has more iron or 
lead prepared than the spell is capable of chang- 
ing, any excess is unchanged. 

The entire transmutation must be made at one 
time. Only one stone may be used per casting of 
the spell. The entire philosopher's stone is con- 
sumed in the process. 


Stabilize* (Abjuration) 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S 

Duration: 1d4+1 turns 

Casting Time: 1 turn 

Area of Effect: 30-foot-radius circle 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell requires immense magical effort to 
cast, relegating it to the highest spell level. Stabi- 
lize negates the effects of wild magic regions, al- 
lowing the caster and all creatures in a 30-foot 
radius to cast spells and use magical items nor- 
mally. The spell is centered on the caster and fol- 
lows his movements. 

The caster’s own spells never cause wild surges 
when cast within the duration of a stabilize spell, 
nor do the effects of wild surges extend into the 
protected area. Furthermore, the wild mage’s 
spells function at his true level; Table 2 is not used 
to determine level variation. The spell affects 
wildstrike, wildzone, and wildwind. 


Wail of the Banshee (Necromancy) 
Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Casting Time: 9 

Area of Effect: 30-foot-radius sphere 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


At the culmination of this dreadful spell, the 
wizard screams like a banshee (a groaning spirit). 
For each level of the caster, one listener within 30 
feet hears the wail. Those who fail a saving throw 
vs. death magic die instantly. 

The wizard cannot be the victim of his own 
spell, nor can he choose who will be affected. If 
there are more potential victims than the level of 
the caster, the DM must randomly determine 
which creatures are affected. Creatures who can- 
not hear (due to ear plugs, deafness, etc.) can be 
targets, but cannot be affected and are considered 
to automatically make their saving throws. 

The material component is a lock of hair from 
an evil female elf. 


Wizard Spells (9th Level) 


Wildfire* (Invocation/Evocation) 
Range: 0 

Component: V 

Duration: Variable 

Casting Time: 1 

Area of Effect: Variable 

Saving Throw: Variable 


By means of this spell, the wild mage is able to 
channel raw magical energy through himself, 
shaping it into any form or effect he desires. The 
energy is similar in many ways to a wish spell, 
but has unique differences. 

Wildfire allows the caster to create the effect of 
any wizard spell of 8th level or lower. He need 
only have general knowledge of the spell and its 
effects; the spell does not need to be in his own 
spellbooks. 

Any normal saving throws vs. the spell effects 
are made at a —2 penalty. 

Wildfire can also be used in the creation of 
magical items. The energy created by the spell 
may be used to generate effects that are not cre- 
ated by known spells. 

Wildfire can also be used to create items out of 
nothing. The magical energy can be shaped and 
hardened to form solid objects. These objects 
have a greenish, glowing tinge and radiate magic. 
These objects are stronger than steel yet possess 
almost no weight. They are immune to fire, cold, 
electricity, and all forms of magical attack except 
dispel magic and wish spells. Even if they are sub- 
jected to these spells, a saving throw is allowed 
(equal to the creator's saving throw vs. spell). 

When creating objects, the caster is limited on- 
ly by his own skill and the dimensions of the ob- 
ject. Items larger than a 10-foot-radius sphere 
cannot be fashioned. Creating the object requires 
only one round, regardless of size. Thus, a wiz- 
ard could make an impenetrable dome or a small 
boat with this spell. 

Objects made of wildfire are neither stable nor 
permanent. Since the object is made of magic sep- 
arated from the magical continuum, the material 
gradually deteriorates until the magical bonds be- 
come too weak to hold the wildfire in the chosen 
form. This decay takes 1d6 +4 hours. 


Wildwind* (Conjuration/Summoning) 


Range: 100 yards 
Components: V, S 
Duration: 1d3 turns 
Casting Time: 8 

Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


48 


This spell is similar in effect to wildstrike and 
wildzone. When cast, a wall of faint, multi- 
colored lights springs into existence at the point 
indicated by the caster. These lights form a line 
150 feet long. After the first round of the spell, 
the wizard can move the wall of lights. Each 
round, the caster can move the wall in the same 
direction or as much as 45 degrees to either side. 
Once the wall is set in motion, it cannot be 
stopped unless the spell is cancelled or dispelled. 
The lights can move 60 feet per round. 

The wildwind has two significant effects. First, 
all creatures struck by the magical lights suffer 
2d6 points of damage. Second, any spellcaster 
struck while attempting to cast a spell automati- 
cally triggers a wild surge (use Table 2). Magical 
items that expend charges that touch the wall of 
lights automatically release one charge, also re- 
sulting in a wild surge. 


ist Level 


Analyze Balance 
Anti-Vermin Barrier 
Call Upon Faith 
Courage 

Emotion Read 
Know Age 

Know Direction 
Know Time 

Log of Everburning 
Mistaken Missives 
Morale 

Personal Reading 
Ring of Hands* 
Sacred Guardian 
Speak With Astral Traveler 
Thought Capture 
Weighty Chest 


5th Level 


Age Object 
Barrier of Retention 
Blessed Abundance 
Champion's Strength 
Chaotic Commands 
Clear Path 
Cloud of Purification 
Consequence 
Disguise 
Easy March 
Elemental Forbiddance 
Extradimensional 
Manipulation 
Extradimensional Pocket 
Grounding 
Illusory Artillery 
Impeding Permission 
Meld* 
Memory Wrack 
Mindshatter 
Repeat Action 
Shrieking Walls 
Thoughtwave* 
Time Pool 
Unceasing Vigilance of 
the Holy 
Sentinel 
Undead Ward 


Italicized spells are reversible. 


Chapter 3: Priest Spells 


Priest Spells 


2nd Level 


Aura of Comfort 
Calm Chaos 

Create Holy Symbol 
Dissension’s Feast 
Draw Upon Holy Might 
Emotion Perception 
Frisky Chest 
Hesitation 

Idea 

Lighten Load 

Mind Read 

Moment 

Music of the Spheres 
Mystic Transfer* 
Nap 

Rally 

Sanctify* 

Zone of Truth 


6th Level 


Age Creature 
Crushing Walls 
Disbelief 
Dragonbane 
Gravity Variation 
The Great Circle* 
Group Mind 
Land of Stability 
Legal Thoughts 
Monster Mount 
Physical Mirror 
Reverse Time 
Seclusion 

Skip Day 

Sol's Searing Orb 
Spiritual Wrath* 


An asterisk (*) indicates a cooperative magic spell. 


3rd Level 


Accelerate Healing 
Adaptation 

Astral Window 
Caltrops 

Choose Future 
Create Campsite 
Efficacious Monster Ward 
Emotion Control 
Extradimensional Detection 
Helping Hand 
Invisibility Purge 
Know Customs 
Line of Protection* 
Memory Read 
Miscast Magic 
Moment Reading 
Random Causality 
Rigid Thinking 
Slow Rot 
Squeaking Floors 
Strength of One 
Telepathy 
Telethaumaturgy 
Thief's Lament 
Unearthly Choir* 
Zone of Sweet Air 


7th Level 


Age Dragon 

Breath of Life 

Divine Inspiration 
Hovering Road 
Illusory Fortifications 
Mindkiller 

Shadow Engines 
Spacewarp 

Spirit of Power* 
Tentacle Walls 
Timelessness 
Uncontrolled Weather 


4th Level 


Addition 

Age Plant 

Blessed Warmth 
Body Clock 
Chaotic Combat 
Chaotic Sleep 
Circle of Privacy 
Compulsive Order 
Defensive Harmony 
Dimensional Folding 
Fire Purge 

Focus* 

Fortify* 

Genius 

Inverted Ethics 

Join With Astral Traveler 
Leadership 

Mental Domination 
Modify Memory 
Probability Control 
Rapport 

Solipsism 
Tanglefoot 

Thought Broadcast 
Tree Steed 

Uplift* 

Weather Stasis 


Quest Spells 


Abundance 

Animal Horde 
Circle of Sunmotes 
Conformance 
Elemental Swarm 
Etherwalk 

Fear Contagion 
Health Blessing 
Highway 

Imago Interrogation 
Implosion/Inversion 
Interdiction 
Mindnet 

Planar Quest 
Preservation 
Revelation 
Reversion 

Robe of Healing 
Siege Wall 

Shooting Stars 
Sphere of Security 
Spiral of Degeneration 
Stalker 

Storm of Vengeance 
Transformation 
Undead Plague 
Warband Quest 
Ward Matrix 

Wolf Spirits 


First-Level Spells 


Analyze Balance (Divination) 


Sphere: Numbers, Divination 

Range: 80 yards 

Components: V, S, M 

Duration: 5 rounds +1 round/level 

Casting Time: 1 round 

Area of Effect: One creature, object, or 10’ square 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell allows a priest to sense how far a 
character, creature, object, or area is from a con- 
dition of balance—in other words, the degree to 
which its alignment is removed from true Neu- 
tral. The spell gives no indication of the “direc- 
tion” in which the alignment is removed from 
true Neutral except under certain conditions 
which follow. The spell does, however, indicate 
along which axis or axes of alignment the varia- 
tion lies. 

For example, a priest uses this spell to analyze 
the balance of a Chaotic Neutral creature. The 
spell indicates that the creature is removed from 
Neutral by one grade, and the variation is along 
the Law/Chaos axis; thus, the creature must be 
either Chaotic Neutral or Lawful Neutral. If the 
creature were Chaotic Evil, the spell would indi- 
cate that it is removed from balance by two 
grades, one along each axis; thus, the creature 
must be Chaotic Evil, Chaotic Good, Lawful 
Evil, or Lawful Good. 

A priest has a 5% chance per level of correctly 
determining the direction of variation along one 
randomly chosen axis. This means that a 10th- 
level priest evaluating the balance of a Chaotic 
Neutral creature would have a 50% chance of 
learning that the creature is Chaotic (and hence 
Chaotic Neutral, since it is only one step away 
from balance). 

Similar to spells such as detect evil, this spell 
will not yield a result on a hidden trap. If cast on 
a creature with an intelligence level of “animal” 
or “non-,” it will always read true Neutral (i.e., 
zero steps removed from balance). 

The material components are four iron coins 
which the priest tosses in his hand while concen- 
trating on the spell. The coins are not consumed 
in the casting. 


51 


Priest Spells (1st Level) 


Anti-Vermin Barrier (Abjuration) 


Sphere: Wards 

Range: 30 yards 

Components: V, S, M 

Duration: 1 hour/level 

Casting Time: 1 

Area of Effect: 10-foot cube/level 
Saving Throw: None 


With this spell, the caster creates an invisible 
force field that repels nonmagical insects, ro- 
dents, spiders, snakes, worms, and similar ver- 
min of less than 1 Hit Die. The spell has no effect 
on giant-sized versions of these creatures unless 
they are less than 1 Hit Die. The barrier affects 
summoned creatures, such as those called by a 
summon insects spell. 

Any vermin within the area of effect when the 
spell is cast are not affected; however, when these 
creatures exit the area, they cannot return. 

The spell affects a cubic area whose sides are 10 
feet times the caster’s level (for instance, a 2nd- 
level priest could affect a 20’ X 20’ X 20’ cube. 

The material components are the caster’s holy 
symbol and a rodent's whisker. 


Call Upon Faith (Invocation) 


Sphere: Summoning 
Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Duration: 1 round 
Casting Time: 1 

Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


Before attempting a difficult task, the priest 
may cast call upon faith to aid his performance. If 
the priest has been true to his faith (as determined 
by the DM), the priest gains a +3 (or +15%) bo- 
nus to one die roll (his choice) needed to complete 
the task. The bonus may be used to affect a sav- 
ing throw, attack roll, ability check, etc. For ex- 
ample, if a priest were about to cross a narrow 
log high above a chasm, he could cast this spell 
and gain a +3 bonus to his Dexterity ability 
check. 

The material component is the priest's holy 
symbol. 


Priest Spells (1st Level) 


Courage (Enchantment/Charm) 


Sphere: War 

Range: 240 yards 

Components: V, S, M 

Duration: Special 

Casting Time: 1 turn 

Area of Effect: One unit up to 200 individuals 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell imbues the target unit with a tempo- 
rary burst of courage. To cast this spell, the priest 
must have an uninterrupted line of sight to the 
target unit. 

A courage spell enables a unit to automatically 
pass its first morale check following the casting of 
this spell. When circumstances arise that would 
necessitate a morale check, no die roll is made 
and the unit is assumed to have passed the check. 
After this occurs, the spell ends and the unit must 
make all future morale checks normally. 

If a unit under the influence of a courage spell is 
not forced to make any morale checks, the spell 
expires at the first sunset. 

When several different events simultaneously 
trigger morale checks, the BATTLESYSTEM™ 
rules apply penalties to a single morale check. If 
this occurs to a unit under the influence of a cour- 
age spell, the player commanding the unit selects 
one such event and its modifier is ignored. 

No more than one courage spell can affect a 
unit at one time. Once the spell has expired, a 
priest can cast the spell again on the same unit. 

The material component is a cube of cast iron. 


Emotion Read (Divination) 


Sphere: Thought 

Range: 5 yards/level 
Components: V, S, M 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Casting Time: 3 

Area of Effect: One creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell allows the priest to perform an in- 
stantaneous reading of a single subject’s emotion- 
al state. It can be used on any subject possessing 
Intelligence of 3 or better. This reading is neither 
deep nor specific and cannot pick out mixed emo- 
tions or intricate details. For example, it might 
tell the priest that the subject is fearful, but the 
spell cannot reveal what the subject is afraid of or 
why he is afraid. 

Emotion read does not reveal individual 
thoughts or the subject’s motivation. Thus, the 


52 


spell might reveal that the subject is coldly un- 
emotional at the moment, but not the fact that 
the subject is contemplating the cold-blooded 
murder of the priest. 

Note that this reading is instantaneous. It re- 
veals only the emotion that is strongest at the in- 
stant the spell is used. While this will usually be 
related to the subject's overall emotional state, it 
is always possible that the subject might be dis- 
tracted for a moment or remember and respond 
to past events. 

The subject is allowed a normal saving throw 
vs. spells to resist this spell. If the saving throw is 
successful, the priest receives no reading at all. If 
the subject's roll exceeds the necessary number by 
six or more, the priest perceives an emotion dia- 
metrically opposite to the subject’s true emotion. 

The material component is a square of un- 
marked white wax. 


Know Age (Divination) 


Sphere: Time 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Casting Time: 1 

Area of Effect: One object or creature 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell enables the caster to instantly know 
the age of any single person, creature, or object 
on which he concentrates. The age is accurate to 
the nearest year. 

The material component is a calendar page. 


Know Direction (Divination) 


Sphere: Travelers 
Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Casting Time: 1 

Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


Know direction allows the caster to instantly 
know the direction of north. The spell is effective 
in any environment, whether underwater, under- 
ground, or in darkness (including magical dark- 
ness). 

The material component is a small scrap of a 
parchment map that is at least 100 years old. 


Know Time (Divination) 


Sphere: Time 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Casting Time: 1 

Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


Know time is particularly useful when the cast- 
er has been unconscious. This spell enables the 
caster to know the precise time of day to the near- 
est minute, including the current hour, day, 
month, and year. 


Log of Everburning (Enchantment) 


Sphere: Elemental Fire, Plant 
Range: Touch 

Components: V, S 

Duration: 1 hour/level 
Casting Time: 1 

Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell increases the amount of time that a 
wooden object will burn before being consumed. 
Wood that is enchanted in this manner burns 
brightly without being consumed for the dura- 
tion of the spell. When the spell ends, the wooden 
object crumbles to ash. 

This spell does not cause the wood to catch 
fire; it must be ignited normally. While it burns, 
the wood gives off twice the normal amount of 
heat; thus, a single log can make a cozy fire. 

The affected wood radiates magic. The priest 
may enchant up to 1 cubic foot of wood per level 
of experience. The spell is effective on torches. 


Mistaken Missive (Alteration) 


Sphere: Chaos 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 
Duration: Permanent 

Casting Time: 1 

Area of Effect: One page/level 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell alters the appearance of words writ- 
ten in ink. When the spell is cast upon a written 
page, the ink imperceptibly begins to move. Over 
the next few days, the message becomes progres- 
sively more illegible. If the page is left undis- 
turbed for six days, an entirely new message 
forms on the page. The new message is com- 


53 


Priest Spells (1st Level) 


pletely legible and is recognizable as the hand- 
writing of the original author, but is contrary in 
content to the original message. 

After the spell is cast, the message will appear 
different every day. The DM decides the message 
that the page will carry after the sixth day has 
passed. Following is a sample of the changes that 
could take place in a message. 

Day One: The words of the letter appear faint, 
as if the author of the letter was running out of 
ink as he wrote. 

Day Two: The words have moved slightly 
from their original positions, as if the person 
writing the letter were shaking or in a moving 
carriage when the letter was written. 

Days Three and Four: The message is gibber- 
ish. Although the ink forms groups of letters ar- 
ranged in lines with punctuation, nearly all the 
words are meaningless. This may appear to be 
some sort of code, but it means nothing. 

Day Five: The ink has formed real words. 
However, the sentence construction is still mean- 
ingless (e.g., Egg west worse green!). 

Day Six (and beyond): The message is coher- 
ent, but the opposite intent of the original mes- 
sage has been created. If the original letter read, 
“Send troops quickly,” the new letter reads, “All is 
fine. Keep your men in reserve.” 


If mistaken missive is cast on the pages of a 
spellbook or a scroll, the ink on the page reforms 
into a new spell of the same level as the original 
spell. Thus, a darkness spell might become a 
maze spell. However, the spell formula will be 
wrong. Although it will look like a proper spell, 
it will not function when cast. 

A coded message that is subjected to mistaken 
missive will appear as a coded message on the 
sixth day but will hold a different meaning than 
the original message. 

A glass of preserved words will allow the origi- 
nal message to be read correctly. Dispel magic 
will restore the message to its original form. 

The material component is three drops of ink. 


Morale (Enchantment/Charm) 


Sphere: War 

Range: Special 

Components: V, S, M 

Duration: Special 

Casting Time: Special 

Area of Effect: One unit up to 200 individuals 
Saving Throw: None 


Priest Spells (1st Level) 


This spell can be used in two distinct ways. The 
first is appropriate for battlefield use. The priest 
can cast this spell on any unit within 240 yards in 
an uninterrupted line of sight. The casting time 
for this use is one turn and the material compo- 
nent is a gem of at least 100 gp value which is con- 
sumed during the casting. 

At the conclusion of this use of the spell, the 
target unit's morale is modified by 1, either posi- 
tively or negatively, as the caster desires. This 
modification remains in effect for 1d4+2 turns. 

The second and more powerful use of the spell 
requires lengthy preparations. Casting must take 
place inside or within 100 yards of a place of wor- 
ship dedicated to the casting priest's deity. Both the 
priest and the unit to be affected must be present. 
The casting time for this use is 5 turns. The materi- 
al component is the priest’s holy symbol. 

At the conclusion of this use of the spell, the 
unit's morale is raised by 3 (maximum of 19). 
This morale increase lasts until the next sunset. 
Only priests of 10th level or higher can cast this 
version of the spell. 


Personal Reading (Divination) 


Sphere: Numbers 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Duration: Special 

Casting Time: 2 turns 

Area of Effect: One creature 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell allows the priest to mathematically 
analyze personal information about one human 
or demihuman character and learn valuable 
facts about that character. To cast this spell, the 
priest must know the subject's real name (the 
name the subject was given as a child) or the 
date and place of the character's birth. The 
priest analyzes this information and is able to 
build a rough picture of the character's life his- 
tory and personal specifics. 

The “historical” information discovered 
through this spell is generally vague. For exam- 
ple, the priest might learn that the subject was 
born in the woods and moved to the city only af- 
ter hardship made his life untenable. Specific in- 
formation is up to the DM. The DM might 
provide some or all of the following information. 


è The subject's character class or career 

e The subject's approximate level (stated in 
terms such as “novice,” “highly skilled,” 
“moderately competent,” etc.) 


54 


e The subject's standing in the community 
(“highly respected,” “mistrusted,” “consid- 
ered an enigma,’ etc.) 

e The subject's success or failure in his profes- 
sion 

e The subject's prevailing character traits or 
mannerisms 


If the priest casts the spell based on an alias or 
incorrect birth information, the reading will be 
inaccurate. The DM should develop a history 
and personality at odds with the truth. This 
might allow the priest to determine whether the 
name of the subject is correct—a reading giving 
information that conflicts with what the priest al- 
ready knows should be a clue that the name is in- 
correct. 

The subject need not be present during the cast- 
ing. The priest can cast the spell without ever 
having met the subject. 

The material component is a small book of nu- 
merological formulae and notes (different from 
the book used in telethaumaturgy). The book is 
not consumed in the casting. 

A DM may rule that this spell can be cast on 
humanoids or monstrous creatures. The informa- 
tion available will be similar (considering that 
words like “profession” will mean something dif- 
ferent when applied to an ogre). This spell will 
categorically fail on creatures that have no con- 
cept of a personal name. 


Ring of Hands (Abjuration) 
Reversible 


Sphere: Protection 
Range: 0 
Components: V, S 
Duration: 2d10 rounds 
Casting Time: 5 

Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This is a cooperative magic spell. It requires a 
minimum of two priests and can accommodate 
a maximum of ten. Each priest must cast ring of 
hands on the same round. At the end of the 
casting, the priests involved join hands, thus 
completing the spell. If any priest breaks the 
circle, the spell immediately ceases. The priests 
may not move from their locations but are free 
to speak. They may not cast spells requiring a 
somatic or material component while the ring is 
formed. 

The ring of hands forms a protective barrier 
around the priests and everything within their 


circle. For each priest, assume a five-foot circum- 
ference of the circle; thus, three priests would cre- 
ate a circle of 15-foot circumference. For easy 
calculation, assume that for each priest, the circle 
can accommodate four persons. 

The barrier functions as a protection from evil 
spell. Attacks by evil creatures suffer a —1 penal- 
ty for every priest forming the circle. Saving 
throws made by the priests or anyone in the circle 
against attacks from such creatures receive a +1 
bonus for every priest in the circle. 

Attempts at mental control over protected 
creatures are blocked. Extraplanar and conjured 
creatures are unable to touch the priests and 
those within the circle, although melee attacks 
against such creatures by those within the ring 
break the barrier. 

Because the priests casting the spell cannot 
move and must hold hands, they do not receive 
any Dexterity bonuses to Armor Class. Further- 
more, opponents gain a +2 bonus on attack rolls 
against the priests, since there is little they can do 
to avoid a blow. Creatures within the ring are 
free to act as they wish. Melee attacks by those 
within the ring are limited to piercing weapons 
and suffer a —1 penalty to attack rolls since the 
priests intervene. 

The reverse of this spell, ring of woe, functions 
as detailed above except the effect applies to good 
creatures as would a protection from good spell. 


Sacred Guardian (Enchantment/Charm) 


Sphere: Guardian 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Duration: 1 day/level 

Casting Time: 1 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


By use of this spell, a priest becomes instantly 
aware when the recipient of the spell is in danger, 
regardless of the distance between the the priest 
and the recipient. The recipient may be on a dif- 
ferent plane of existence than the priest. 

When this spell is cast by a priest of at least 3rd 
level, he receives a mental image of the endan- 
gered person's situation. At no time, however, 
does the priest know the person's location 
through the use of this spell. 

The material component is a rose petal that has 
been kissed by the spell recipient. 


55 


Priest Spells (1st Level) 


Speak With Astral Traveler (Alteration) 


Sphere: Astral 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S 
Duration: 1 round/level 
Casting Time: 1 round 

Area of Effect: One creature 
Saving Throw: None 


When a priest casts the 7th-level astral spell, he 
leaves his physical body in suspended animation 
while his astral body travels. By touching the 
comatose body and casting speak with astral 
traveler, a priest can mentally communicate with 
the projected individual. Although communica- 
tion is mental, it takes the same amount of time as 
anormal, verbal dialogue. The spell ends abrupt- 
ly when its duration expires. 


Thought Capture (Divination) 


Sphere: Thought 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Casting Time: 3 

Area of Effect: 10 yards 
Saving Throw: None 


One of the more bizarre contentions held by 
priests of the School of Thought is generally 
scoffed at by outsiders. The theory states that 
once a thought has occurred in someone’s brain, 
it exists as a “freestanding mental object.” This 
“thought object” usually remains inside the brain 
of the creature that created it, but sometimes it 
escapes (this supposedly explains why people for- 
get things). When this happens, the thought ob- 
ject stays in the geographical area where it was 
lost. Any receptive brain (usually the brain of the 
creature that initially created the thought) can 
pick it up again simply by bumping into the invis- 
ible, free-floating thought. According to the the- 
ory, this is the reason that people can regain a lost 
thought by going back to the location where the 
thought was lost. This supposedly works because 
the free-floating thought is recaptured, not be- 
cause the locale reminds them of of the thought. 
Unfortunately for philosophers who disagree 
with this, thought capture seems to be extremely 
strong evidence for this theory. 

This spell makes the priest's brain something of 
a magnet that attracts thought objects in close 
proximity. The priest can sense strong thoughts 
and emotions and can sometimes even see mo- 


Priest Spells (2nd Level) 


mentary visions of creatures who died or suffered 
some powerful emotion in the immediate vicini- 
ty. Thought objects are always attracted to the 
priest in the order of the strongest (those attached 
to powerful emotions or significant events) to the 
weakest. Thus, if several thought objects share 
the same vicinity, the priest will perceive infor- 
mation about the most interesting or significant 
event. The priest might pick up images of a battle 
from the point of view of a warrior who died 
there, or he might gain information about the vic- 
tor of the battle. 

The DM dictates the information provided to 
the priest, and thus can use this spell to provide 
players with important background information 
or can add texture to a campaign world. The infor- 
mation provided might be highly cryptic or sym- 
bolic, perhaps in the form of a rhyme or riddle. 

The priest gains one thought object per casting 
of the spell. The spell may be cast a number of 
times in the same locale, with the priest gaining a 
different thought object with each casting. A lo- 
cale contains a finite number of thoughts, how- 
ever, and once the priest has gained all of them 
(per the DM), the spell will fail in that locale. 


Weighty Chest (Alteration) 


Sphere: Wards 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Duration: 1 day/level 
Casting Time: 1 

Area of Effect: 5-foot cube 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell enables the caster to enchant a chest, 
book, package, or any other nonliving object no 
larger than a 5’ X 5' X 5’ cube. When the enchant- 
ed object is touched by anyone other than the 
caster, the apparent weight of the object in- 
creases, becoming 2-5 (1d4 +1) times the weight 
of the person or persons touching it. This condi- 
tion makes the object extremely difficult to move 
for anyone but the caster. The caster can move 
the object normally throughout the duration of 
the spell. 

The material component is a lead ball. 


56 


Second-Level Spells 


Aura of Comfort (Evocation) 


Sphere: Travelers 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S 

Duration: 1 hour/level 

Casting Time: 2 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


When this spell is cast, a faintly shimmering 
aura surrounds the recipient. The aura insulates 
the recipient from the effects of nonmagical heat 
and cold in a range of —20° F. to 140° F. Any time 
a traveler encounters temperatures in this range, 
he maintains a comfortable temperature of 70° F., 
regardless of prevailing weather conditions. Ad- 
ditionally, the spell acts as a shield against rain, 
snow, and hail, which are blocked by the aura. 

If a recipient encounters a temperature above 
or below the stated range, the temperature within 
the aura is altered by an equal number of degrees. 
For example, a recipient who encounters a tem- 
perature of 150° will actually experience a tem- 
perature of 80°F. 

All physical objects other than rain, snow, and 
hail can pass through the aura. The recipient can 
cast spells normally while the aura of comfort is 
in effect. The spell offers no protection against 
magically generated weather, such as that caused 
by weather summoning and ice storm. It does not 
protect against fire, nor does it shield against fire- 
or cold-based attacks. 


Calm Chaos (Enchantment/Charm) 


Sphere: Law 

Range: 20 yards 

Components: V, S 

Duration: Special 

Casting Time: 1 

Area of Effect: 1d6 creatures/level 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell temporarily calms a chaotic situation 
involving a group of people. The situation may 
involve any range of emotions from violence (as 
in a barroom brawl) to joy and merrymaking (as 
in a festival or carnival). 

Unlike the emotion spell, calm chaos does not 
cause a change in the emotions of affected 
creatures—anger, fear, or intense joy remain in 
each individual. The emotion is simply restrained 
rather than released. Thus, an angry character in- 


tent on attacking someone will still feel the desire 
to do so, but he will withhold his action as long as 
the spell remains in effect. 

Creatures to be affected are allowed a saving 
throw vs. spell at a —4 penalty to avoid the ef- 
fects. If more creatures are present than can be 
affected, creatures nearest the caster are affected 
first. 

After casting the spell, the priest makes a Cha- 
risma check. If successful, all characters affected 
by the spell are compelled to stop what they are 
doing. They are filled with the sensation that 
something important is about to occur. At this 
time, the priest or a character of his choosing 
must gain the attention of the affected creatures 
by giving a speech, performing for the crowd, or 
casting spells with intriguing visual effects (such 
as dancing lights). The attention of the crowd is 
then held for as long as the distraction continues. 
A character could filibuster and maintain control 
over the affected characters for hours or days. 

Two conditions will cause the group to resume 
its original actions. In the first, the method of en- 
tertaining the crowd ceases for one round—the 
speech ends or the spell expires. If this action is 
not replaced with another distraction within one 
round, the crowd is freed of the spell. 

In the second condition, if an event occurs that 
is more immediate than the distraction, the 
crowd will divert its attention to that event. 
Thus, if the spell were used to stop a barroom 
brawl and the building caught fire or was at- 
tacked, the crowd's attention would be diverted 
and the individuals could act freely. 

Creatures whose attention is held by the spell 
cannot be instructed to attack or perform any 
action. Such creatures will ignore suggestions of 
this nature. Depending on the nature of the re- 
quest, the DM may deem that the suggestion 
causes a distraction that ends the spell. 


Create Holy Symbol (Conjuration) 


Sphere: Creation 

Range: 0 

Component: V 

Duration: Permanent 
Casting Time: 2 

Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


When the words of this spell are uttered, a holy 
symbol appropriate to the priest's deity appears 
out of thin air. The item appears in the priest's 
hands. It may be used as a component for spells 


57 


Priest Spells (2nd Level) 


or for any other purpose for which the priest 
would normally use his holy symbol (such as 
turning undead). He may also opt to give it to a 
lower level priest of the same deity. The holy 
symbol is a permanent object. 


Dissension’s Feast 
(Enchantment/Charm, Alteration) 


Sphere: Chaos 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S 

Duration: 5 turns +2 turns/level 
Casting Time: 2 turns 

Area of Effect: Special 

Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell must be cast by a priest during the 
preparation of food for a meal. The spell is cast 
on any one quantity of food; thus, the priest 
could cast the spell on the batter of a wedding 
cake, or he could cast the spell on a quantity of 
onions as they are diced for both a salad and a 
stew. The spell affects 10 pounds of food per level 
of the caster. Anyone who eats the affected food 
(even a character who eats the salad but not the 
stew) is subject to the effects of the spell. 

The effects of the spell begin five rounds after 
the food has been eaten. At that time, creatures 
who have eaten the affected food are allowed a 
saving throw; success indicates that a creature is 
not affected. 

Affected creatures quickly become agitated. 
Petty events ranging from poor table manners to 
loud talking bother everyone. After five minutes, 
tempers flare, characters feel compelled to shout 
at and insult one another, and threats are hurled. 
Even normally calm characters will feel com- 
pelled to vent their frustrations violently. 

Creatures maintain no alliances while under 
the effect of dissension’s feast. A king and his wife 
who are normally madly in love will find them- 
selves bickering with each other in a matter of 
minutes. Members of a diplomatic delegation 
might come to blows with each other within min- 
utes of eating the food. 

At the end of the spell duration, characters un- 
dergo the sensation of waking up. All are free to 
behave as they wish. Characters at the meal will 
still be angry, although they will have no idea 
why they became angry. 


Priest Spells (2nd Level) 


Draw Upon Holy Might (Invocation) 


Sphere: Summoning 
Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Duration: 1 round/level 
Casting Time: 2 

Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


When this spell is cast, the priest's body shud- 
ders and glows with a shimmering aura as it be- 
comes a vessel for the power of his god. As a 
result, the caster may choose to increase one abili- 
ty score (only Strength, Dexterity, Constitution, 
and Charisma are eligible) by +1 per three levels 
of his experience (+1 at 3rd level, +2 at 6th, etc.). 

Only one attribute may be increased. The ef- 
fect lasts for the duration of the spell. Attributes 
may be increased above the normal restrictions 
due to race and class, to a maximum of +6. All 
benefits for exceptional attributes listed in the 
Player's Handbook apply; however, the divine 
abilities found in the Legends & Lore book cannot 
be gained by use of this spell. 

For example, an 18th-level priest with Strength 
15 could increase his Strength to 21 for 18 
rounds, granting him a +4 attack bonus, a +9 
damage adjustment, etc. 

When the spell ends, the energy abruptly 
leaves the priest's body, leaving him physically 
and mentally drained. He is nearly comatose and 
can do nothing but rest for the next 4d6 turns. A 
successful Constitution check (at the priest's nor- 
mal attribute score) reduces this time by 50%. 

The material components are the priest's holy 
symbol and a vial of holy water that has been 
blessed by the high priest of the character's faith. 


Emotion Perception (Divination) 


Sphere: War 

Range: 300 yards 

Components: V, S, M 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Casting Time: 1 turn 

Area of Effect: One unit/five levels 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell allows the caster to sense the emo- 
tional state and the level of determination of one 
or more military units. The priest must have an 
uninterrupted line of sight to the entire target 
unit. When this spell is cast, the priest instantly 
learns the current morale rating and morale sta- 
tus of the target unit. The DM describes morale 


58 


using the appropriate term; for example, steady, 
elite, etc. 

The material component is the priest’s holy 
symbol. 


Frisky Chest (Enchantment/Charm) 


Sphere: Wards 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Duration: Permanent 
Casting Time: 2 

Area of Effect: 10-foot cube 
Saving Throw: None 


With this spell, the caster can enchant a chest, 
book, or any other nonliving object no larger 
than a 10’ 10’X10’ cube. When any creature 
other than the caster comes within three feet of 
the enchanted object, it instantly sprouts append- 
ages and moves away from the creature as quick- 
ly as possible. The enchanted object continues to 
move until it is at least 10 feet away from the 
nearest creatures in the area. 

After the enchanted object has moved a satis- 
factory distance from the nearest creature, the 
appendages disappear. When a creature again 
comes within three feet of the enchanted object, 
the enchanted object sprouts appendages and 
flees. This process continues until the enchant- 
ment is negated (through a dispel magic or similar 
spell) or the enchanted object is subdued or de- 
stroyed. 

The enchanted object can sprout feet (MV 24), 
wings (Fl 24, maneuverability class B), or fins 
(Sw 24), whichever is most advantageous. Thus, 
a book on a shelf might sprout wings and fly 
away, while a table might gallop around a room. 
The enchanted object can freely and instantly 
trade appendages as necessary. 

The enchanted object will move only through 
open spaces. It will not crash through windows, 
shatter a closed door, or dig through the earth. It 
cannot attack or take any actions other than 
movement. If surrounded or cornered, the en- 
chanted object moves in random directions until 
it is restrained or destroyed. 

The enchantment ends if the caster voluntar- 
ily negates it, if the enchanted object is de- 
stroyed (the object has the same vulnerabilities 
as it has in its normal state), or if the enchanted 
object is restrained for 2-5 (1d4 +1) consecutive 
rounds. Restraint means that the object is pre- 
vented from fleeing; if a creature is able to grap- 
ple, lift, or sit on the object, it is considered 


restrained. A creature capable of lifting the ob- 
ject in its normal state is considered strong 
enough to restrain it (for instance, a person ca- 
pable of lifting a 50-pound box is also capable of 
restraining such a box enchanted by frisky 
chest). The object may also be restrained by 
tossing a net or heavy blanket over it or by sur- 
rounding it with several characters. 

The material components are a dried frog’s leg, 
a feather, and a fish scale. 


Hesitation (Enchantment/Charm) 


Sphere: Time 

Range: 30 yards 

Components: V, S, M 

Duration: 1 round/level 

Casting Time: 2 

Area of Effect: 20-foot-radius circle 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


Creatures affected by this spell hesitate before 
executing their intended actions. This causes 
them to modify their initiative rolls by +4. The 
initiative modifier occurs in the round following 
the round in which hesitation is cast. 

The spell affects 2-8 Hit Dice or levels of crea- 
tures, although only one creature of 4 or more 
Hit Dice can be affected regardless of the number 
rolled. All possible victims are allowed saving 
throws vs. spells; those failing their saving 
throws modify their initiative rolls by +4 for a 
number of rounds equal to the caster’s level. 

The material component is a fragment of a tur- 
tle’s shell. 


Idea (Divination) 


Sphere: Thought 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Casting Time: 4 

Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell stimulates the priest's mind to experi- 
ence a flash of insight. In game terms, the DM 
reminds the priest's player of a fact or event that 
has been forgotten, overlooked, or discounted. 
Thus, the DM might remind the player about an 
important clue that the priest discovered but the 
player did not consider significant. 

If there are no forgotten facts, the DM may, at 
his discretion, tell the player of new information 
relevant to the condition at hand. 


59 


Priest Spells (2nd Level) 


The DM must be careful in adjudicating use of 
this spell. The reminder or information should al- 
ways be relevant and useful but should not be un- 
balancing to the situation. The reminder can be 
cryptic, depending on the DM's campaign. 

The material component is a gold coin. This 
spell can be cast only once in any six hour period. 


Lighten Load (Alteration) 


Sphere: Travelers 

Range: 30 yards 
Components: V, S, M 
Duration: 1 hour/level 
Casting Time: 2 

Area of Effect: 10-foot cube 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell reduces the weight of equipment, 
supplies, and other objects by 50%. Weapons, 
supplies, and even disabled characters can all be 
made more portable by use of a lighten load spell. 

This spell affects one pile of objects whose vol- 
ume is equivalent to a 10-foot cube; after the spell 
has been cast, the affected objects can be divided 
among several characters or mounts. The spell 
has no effect on magical items. 

An object affected by lighten load can be used 
normally; the spell has no effect on an object's 
mass, texture, size, strength, or other physical 
features. 

The material components are a feather and a 
slip of paper moistened by a soap bubble. 


Mind Read (Divination) 


Sphere: Thought 
Range: 5 yards/level 
Components: V, S 
Duration: 1 round/level 
Casting Time: 2 

Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell is a sensitive version of the wizard 
spell ESP. In addition to detecting the surface 
thoughts of any creatures in range, the priest is 
able to probe deeper into the mind of a single 
creature. Mind read will always reveal the kind 
of creature being probed, although this identity 
may be couched in the creature’s own language or 
in a (possibly distorted) body image. The spell 
has a 20% chance of revealing the character class 
of an individual. 

The details and the usefulness of the creature's 
thoughts will depend on the intelligence of the 


Priest Spells (2nd Level) 


subject. While a priest could read the thoughts of 
an animal, he would probably receive only a con- 
fused jumble of emotions and instincts. Reading 
the mind of a highly intelligent wizard, however, 
would be much more illuminating; the priest 
might be amazed by the crystal clarity and deep 
insight of the wizard’s mental processes. 

If mind read is used as part of an interrogation, 
an intelligent and wary subject receives a saving 
throw at a —2 penalty. If successful, the creature 
resists the spell’s effects and the priest learns no 
information. If the saving throw is failed, the 
priest may learn additional information accord- 
ing to the DM's ruling. 


Moment (Divination) 


Sphere: Numbers 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Duration: 1 round/level 
Casting Time: 1 round 

Area of Effect: 50-foot radius 
Saving Throw: None 


Theoretically, every action has a particular 
moment at which it will have its greatest possible 
effect. Using the arcane mathematics of this spell, 
the priest can determine the “ideal moment” for 
any single action in each round that the spell is in 
effect. This action must be performed by a char- 
acter other than the priest. 

In practice, another character informs the 
priest of an action he wants to undertake in a 
round. The priest concentrates on the action, 
then informs the character when the “correct mo- 
ment” has come. The character then gains a bo- 
nus of 20% (+4 on a d20) to the success of his 
action. The spell can affect only a single action in 
a given round. When used in combat, the priest 
can advise the best moment to initiate an action 
(affecting initiative) or what moment offers the 
greatest success in striking (affecting the chance 
to hit). 

If the character seeks advice concerning initia- 
tive, he gains a —2 modifier to the initiative roll, 
but only at the cost of —2 on his chance to hit. 
Characters who seek the best attack frequently 
delay their actions. These characters suffer a +1 
on their initiative roll but gain a +4 on their 
chance to hit. The spell cannot affect the amount 
of damage caused, since the act (striking) has al- 
ready succeeded at that point. 

Characters are not obliged to wait for the mo- 
ment specified by the priest. For example, a fight- 


60 


er might decide that striking first is more 
important than gaining +4 to hit. The character 
can act normally, based on his or her unmodified 
initiative. The character gains no bonus from the 
moment spell, and the priest can affect no other 
action in that round. 

Noncombat actions can also benefit from the 
moment spell. For example, a thief planning to 
climb a wall may wait to start her climb until the 
priest informs her that the moment is right. If she 
waits, she gains a bonus of 20% to her Climb 
Walls roll (in this case, the bonus is subtracted 
from her roll). 

While concentrating on this spell, the priest 
can take no other action. A break in the priest's 
concentration—taking damage in combat, for 
example—terminates the spell instantly. 

The material component is a set of three silver 
dice, which the priest tosses in his hand while 
concentrating on the spell. The dice are not con- 
sumed in the casting. 


Music of the Spheres (Enchantment/Charm) 


Sphere: Numbers, Charm 

Range: 50 yards 

Components: V, S, M 

Duration: 1 turn +1 round/level 
Casting Time: 4 

Area of Effect: 20-foot-diameter circle 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


With this spell, the priest creates tones and har- 
monies of such unearthly beauty and complexity 
that they entrance the listener, making it difficult 
for the listener to attack or otherwise harm the 
priest. The listener receives a normal saving 
throw against this effect. Failure means that the 
listener is entranced and is unable to attack the 
priest for the duration of the spell. 

In addition, the music makes the subject gulli- 
ble and more susceptible to charm magics such as 
charm person, suggestion, and hypnotism. While 
the music spell is in effect, the subject saves 
against charm spells with a —3 penalty. 

This spell does not protect other characters in 
company with the priest; listeners who have 
fallen prey to the music are free to attack anyone 
else. The spell effect ends instantly if the priest 
takes any hostile action against a creature under 
the influence of the spell. 

Music of the spheres can affect one creature per 
three levels of the priest (one subject at 3rd level, 
two at 6th level, etc.). Subjects must be within a 
20-foot-diameter circle. 


Potential victims must have Intelligence of at 
least 1 (necessary to understand the concept of 
music) and must be able to hear the music (i.e., 
they cannot be deaf and there can be nothing ob- 
structing the victim's ears). This also means that 
the level of background noise must be low 
enough for the music to be audible. The DM 
should assume that the music is the same volume 
as an average human’s normal speaking voice. If 
the potential subject could not hear speech at the 
appropriate range under prevailing conditions, 
the spell cannot affect that subject. The spell 
would be virtually useless in the midst of a full- 
scale battle or during a hurricane. 

The material component comprises a set of 
three small bows made from fine silver, each cost- 
ing 100 gp. The lengths of the bows must be in the 
ratio of 1 to 4 to 9. The priest strokes these bows 
together in an intricate sequence while casting the 
speil. The bows are not consumed in the casting. 


Mystic Transfer (Invocation) 


Sphere: Charm 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S 
Duration: 9 rounds 
Casting Time: 1 round 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell is one of the few cooperative spells 
that requires one priest to cast the transfer spell, 
but another priest to use its effect. On one round, 
a priest (or priests) casts the mystic transfer. The 
spell is then active for the remaining nine rounds 
of the turn. 

Mystic transfer allows a priest to receive spells 
from another priest of the same ethos. Any priest 
of the same religion can cast a spell and transfer it 
to a second priest within that spell’s maximum 
range. The spell does not take effect; instead, it is 
channelled through the mystic transfer into the 
receiving priest. This priest must immediately 
cast the spell or pass it to another priest cloaked 
in a mystic transfer within the spell’s range. Any 
number of transfers can be made in the same 
round, provided each new recipient is within 
spell range of the previous recipient. If the spell is 
not transferred, the spell takes effect. 

For example, a 3rd-level priest casts a mystic 
transfer. On the following round, a 10th-level 
priest “passes” a flame strike to the 3rd-level 
priest. The two priests could be 60 yards apart 
(the maximum range of the flame strike). The 


61 


Priest Spells (2nd Level) 


3rd-level priest could then use the flame strike to 
attack any target within 60 yards, or could pass 
the spell on to another priest who has an active 
mystic transfer. 

The spell passed by the mystic transfer has the 
range, area of effect, damage, and other effects 
equal to the level of the original caster. In the ex- 
ample above, the flame strike would function as 
if cast by a 10th-level priest. 

The mystic transfer does not require concen- 
tration. However, on any round in which a priest 
is receiving and/or transferring a spell, the caster 
cannot take any other significant action. 

A priest can receive spells only from priests 
who worship the same deity and who specifically 
target spells to him. Area effect spells may be 
passed. A priest can never use mystic transfer to 
pluck an opponent's spells out of the air. 


Nap (Alteration) 


Sphere: Time 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Duration: Special 

Casting Time: 2 

Area of Effect: One creature/level 
Saving Throw: None 


Creatures affected by this spell are put to sleep 
for one hour. Upon awakening, the creature is as 
refreshed as if he had slept for eight hours. The 
affected person recovers lost hit points as if he 
rested for a full night. Wizards can memorize 
spells as if real time had passed. 

Because the rest is so complete and rejuvenat- 
ing, a character does not feel fatigued after 
waking. Attempts to use nap more than once in 
an 18-hour period are ineffective (the character 
simply is not sleepy). Only willing subjects can be 
affected by nap. 

The material components are a scrap of pillow 
ticking, a feather, and a pebble that the caster has 
kept in his pocket for seven nights. 


Priest Spells (2nd Level) 


Rally (Enchantment/Charm) 


Sphere: War 

Range: 240 yards 

Components: V, S, M 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Casting Time: 1 turn 

Area of Effect: One unit of up to 300 individuals 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell allows the subject unit to make an im- 
mediate rally check. It allows the check during the 
Magic Phase, rather than forcing the unit to wait 
for the Rally Phase in the BATTLESYSTEM™ 
rules. If the priest casting the spell is of 12th level 
or higher, the subject unit receives a +1 bonus to 
its rally check die roll. The priest must have an un- 
interrupted line of sight to the unit. 

The material component is a miniature dupli- 
cate of a pennant or standard that represents the 
cause for which the unit is fighting (such as a na- 
tional flag or the blazon of the unit's liege lord). 
The pennant is consumed in the casting. 


Sanctify (Conjuration/Summoning) 
Reversible 


Sphere: All 

Range: 10 yards 

Components: V, S, M 

Duration: Special 

Casting Time: 1 turn 

Area of Effect: 10 yard X 10 yard square/priest 
Saving Throw: None 


This cooperative spell allows the priests to cre- 
ate a beneficial atmosphere within a specified ar- 
ea. Companions of similar alignment to the 
casters will feel fortified and encouraged while in 
the sanctified area. The spell can be cast by a sin- 
gle priest or a group of priests. 

After casting sanctify, the affected area is im- 
bued with the deity’s majesty. For followers of 
that deity, the area radiates a holy aura. These 
followers gain a +2 bonus to saving throws 
against all fear- and charm-based powers (a +2 
to morale for BATTLESYSTEM™ rules units). 
Persons of the same alignment as the caster but of 
different faiths gain a +1 to saving throws (+1 in 
BATTLESYSTEM rules). The effect applies only 
as long as the characters remain in the sanctified 
area. 

Creatures intent on harming the priest or his 
followers suffer a —1 on saving throws vs. fear 
and charm (—1 to morale for BATTLESYSTEM 
rules units) when on sanctified ground. 


62 


Undead creatures within the area are easier to 
turn; any priest standing on sanctified ground 
turns undead as if he were one level higher. 

Although this spell can be cast by a single 
priest, it is most effective when cast by several 
priests at once. The duration of the spell is equal 
to one round per level of the caster. When several 
priests cast the spell, the level of the most power- 
ful priest is used, with two rounds added for eve- 
ry contributing priest. Thus, one 8th-level and 
three 6th-level priests would give the spell a dura- 
tion of 14 rounds (8 +2 +2 +2). 

Sanctify is often used in conjunction with focus 
to protect the grounds of a temple or encourage 
men defending a castle. 

The material components are the priest's holy 
symbol and a handful of dirt from the grounds of 
an existing temple of the same faith. 

The reverse of this spell, defile, functions in an 
identical manner with respect to saving throws 
for charm and fear. However, priests standing on 
defiled ground who attempt to turn undead do so 
at one level lower than their current level. 

The material components for the reverse are 
the priest's holy symbol and a handful of earth 
from a grave. 


Zone of Truth (Enchantment/Charm) 


Sphere: Wards 

Range: 30 yards 

Components: V, S, M 

Duration: 1 round/level 

Casting Time: 2 

Area of Effect: 5-foot square/level 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell prevents creatures within the area of 
effect (or those who enter it) from speaking any 
deliberate and knowing lies. Creatures are al- 
lowed a saving throw to avoid the effects; those 
who fail the save are affected fully. Affected char- 
acters are aware of this enchantment; therefore, 
they may avoid answering questions to which 
they would normally respond with a lie or they 
may be evasive as long as they remain within the 
boundaries of the truth. When a character leaves 
the area, he is free to speak as he chooses. 

The spell affects a square whose sides are five 
feet long per level of the caster; thus, a 4th-level 
priest could affect a 20 foot by 20 foot square. 

The material components are the priest's holy 
symbol and a phony emerald, ruby, or diamond. 


Third-Level Spells 


Accelerate Healing (Alteration) 


Sphere: Time 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S 
Duration: 1-4 days 

Casting Time: 1 turn 

Area of Effect: One creature 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell enables the affected creature to expe- 
rience natural healing at twice the normal rate for 
1-4 days. In other words, a person affected by ac- 
celerate healing regains 2 hit points per day of 
normal rest or 6 hit points per day spent resting in 
bed. The spell has no effect on potions of healing 
or other magical forms of healing. 


Adaptation (Enchantment/Charm, Alteration) 


Sphere: War 

Range: Special 

Components: V, S, M 

Duration: Special 

Casting Time: Special 

Area of Effect: One unit of up to 200 individuals 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell can be cast in two different ways. 
The first, appropriate for battlefield use, has a 
range of 180 yards, a casting time of one turn, 
and duration of 1d4 +2 turns. During this period, 
the affected unit can fight in one specific type of 
terrain (specified by the caster) as if it were the 
favored terrain (per BATTLESYSTEM™ rules) for 
that unit. While this spell is in effect, the unit 
gains no benefit when fighting in their actual fa- 
vored terrain; the magically-enforced favored 
terrain takes precedence. The priest can cancel 
the spell before the duration expires if desired. 

The material component is a pinch of clay 
dust. 

The second effect requires preparation in ad- 
vance. The priest and unit must be within 100 
yards of a place of worship dedicated to the cast- 
ing priest's deity. The casting time is 5 turns. 

At the conclusion of the casting, the unit gains 
the benefit described above, with two main differ- 
ences. First, the unit does not lose the benefit of 
fighting in its own actual favored terrain (the unit 
effectively has two favored terrains). Second, the 
spell endures until the next sunset. Only priests of 
12th level and higher can cast this variation. 

The material component is the priest's holy 
symbol. 


63 


Priest Spells (3rd Level) 


Astral Window (Divination) 


Sphere: Astral 

Range: 5 yards 
Components: V, S 
Duration: 2 rounds/level 
Casting Time: 3 

Area of Effect: 10’ X 10’ area 
Saving Throw: None 


When this spell is cast, a “window” appears in 
the air before the priest, through which he (and 
any others present) can see into the Astral plane. 
The astral window ranges in size from one square 
foot up to a 10’ X 10’ square, at the caster’s choos- 
ing. The window is not mobile, and if the priest 
moves more than 5 yards away from it, it imme- 
diately vanishes and the spell ends. 

By stating a subject's name, the priest may view a 
specific creature or object in the window. More 
than one subject may be viewed during the spell’s 
duration. Each time a new subject is chosen, the 
window becomes streaked with grey as the Astral 
plane flies past. This continues for 1d4 rounds, until 
the window finally focuses upon the chosen subject. 
If the person is not in the Astral plane, the window 
instead chooses a random location. 

The window operates from both sides; crea- 
tures in the Astral plane can see the priest as easi- 
ly as he can see them. Verbal communication is 
not possible, however. 

Normally, creatures cannot pass through the 
window. If an attempt is made, there is a base 5% 
chance of success. This is modified by +1% per 
level or Hit Dice of the individual. In order to 
pass through, the creature or object must be small 
enough to fit through the window; otherwise, on- 
ly a portion of the subject may reach through 
(such as a monster's arm or searching tongue). 

By casting the astral window spell, a character 
who subsequently casts the 7th-level astral spell 
may choose to arrive in the Astral plane at the 
place shown in the window. 


Caltrops (Evocation) 


Sphere: War 

Range: 20 yards/level 
Components: V, S, M 
Duration: 1 turn/level 
Casting Time: 1 turn 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell allows a priest to plant a section of 
ground with magically created caltrops. 


Priest Spells (3rd Level) 


The spell can create two kinds of caltrops: in- 
fantry and cavalry. The first are of small size and 
are designed to harm foot soldiers. The latter are 
larger and cause serious damage to cavalry or 
units composed of size L or larger creatures. Cav- 
alry caltrops are so large that size M or smaller 
creatures can easily step around them. This pre- 
vents damage to infantry units. 

Each time a unit moves into a planted area, the 
unit suffers an attack of AD = 4 (for infantry cal- 
trops) or AD=6 (for cavalry caltrops). Units 
charging through a planted area suffer double 
damage. If a unit ends its movement in a caltrop- 
sown region, it suffers another attack when it 
moves out of the area. 

This spell can create a rectangular field of in- 
fantry caltrops up to 160 square yards in area 
(e.g., 40 yards X 40 yards, 20 yards X 80 yards, 
etc.), or a field of cavalry caltrops up to 90 square 
yards in area (e.g., 30 yards*30 yards, 20 
yards X 45 yards, etc.). 

Ordinary caltrops make no distinction be- 
tween friend or foe; all creatures entering a 
caltrop-sown area suffer the same consequences. 
The same is true of magical caltrops, with one ex- 
ception: the casting priest can terminate the spell 
at any time, causing the caltrops to vanish and 
leaving the terrain clear. 

Unlike normal caltrops, a region sown with 
magical caltrops cannot be “swept” clear; the 
magical caltrops remain in place until the spell 
terminates. 

The material component is a golden caltrop. 


Choose Future (Divination) 


Sphere: Time 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 
Duration: 1 round 

Casting Time: 3 

Area of Effect: One creature 
Saving Throw: None 


In the round immediately following the casting 
of this spell, the affected creature is allowed two 
rolls for any normal attack roll, initiative roll, or 
saving throw. The affected creature can then 
choose the roll he prefers. 

For example, a priest casts choose future on a 
warrior companion. In the next round, the war- 
rior attacks an enemy with his sword. The war- 
rior makes two attack rolls instead of one, then 
chooses which roll will determine the outcome of 
his attack. 


64 


The material components are two grains of 
sand and a rose petal. 


Create Campsite 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 
Reversible 


Sphere: Travelers 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Duration: Special 

Casting Time: 3 

Area of Effect: 50-foot radius 
Saving Throw: None 


With this spell, the caster generates a squadron 
of tiny invisible servants who create a campsite 
for the caster and his companions. The caster in- 
dicates the desired area for the campsite (an area 
of 50-foot radius or less) and the number of per- 
sons the campsite is to accommodate (a number 
of persons equal to three times the level of the 
caster). 

The servants clear the area of debris, set up 
tents and bedrolls, start a campfire, fetch water, 
and prepare a bland meal. The campsite is so 
skillfully prepared that it blends with the sur- 
rounding terrain, reducing the chance that the 
camp could be noticed by 50%. Campfires, loud 
noises, and other activities can negate this. 

The entire process takes 4-16 (4d4) rounds to 
complete. 

The servants make camp with the gear and 
equipment provided for them; otherwise, the ser- 
vants will improvise with materials available in 
the immediate area (50 yards of the designated 
campsite). For instance, if the party has no tents 
or beds, the servants will construct crude but 
comfortable beds of weeds and grass and tempo- 
rary shelters of leaves and branches. If no materi- 
als are available, such as in the desert or similarly 
barren terrain, the servants will do their best to 
make the party as comfortable as possible within 
the environmental limitations. 

The servants cannot fight for the party, deliver 
messages, or take any other actions other than 
creating the campsite. 

The material components are a piece of string, 
a bit of wood, and a drop of water. 

The reverse, break camp, causes the invisible 
servants to strike a campsite (an area of 50-foot 
radius or less). The servants extinguish fires, dis- 
pose of debris, and pack gear for a number of 
people equal to three times the level of the caster. 
The entire process takes 4-16 (4d4) rounds to 


complete. When completed, all traces of the 
campsite are eliminated. The material compo- 
nents are the same as those for create campsite. 


Efficacious Monster Ward (Abjuration) 


Sphere: Wards 

Range: 30 yards 

Components: V, S, M 

Duration: 1 round/level 

Casting Time: 3 

Area of Effect: 10-foot cube/level 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell prevents monsters of 2 or fewer Hit 
Dice from entering the area of effect. Such crea- 
tures are allowed a saving throw; success indi- 
cates that they avoid the spell’s effects and are 
able to enter the area of effect. 

The spell affects a cubic area whose sides equal 
the caster’s level times 10 feet (for example, a 9th- 
level caster could affect an area equal to a 
90' X 90’ xX 90’ cube). 

Monsters within the area of effect when the 
spell is cast are not affected; however, when they 
leave the area of effect, they cannot return. Mon- 
sters outside the area of effect can hurl rocks, 
spears, and other missile weapons at targets in- 
side and can also cast spells into the warded area. 

The material components are the priest's holy 
symbol and a pinch of salt. 


Emotion Control 
(Alteration, Enchantment/Charm) 


Sphere: Thought, Charm 

Range: 10 yards 

Components: V, S, M 

Duration: 1 round/level 

Casting Time: 5 

Area of Effect: One creature/5 levels of the caster 
within a 20’ cube 

Saving Throw: Special 


This spell can be cast in one of two ways: ina 
manner that affects the priest, or in a manner that 
affects a subject other than the priest. 

The first method affects only the priest and al- 
lows him to shield his true emotions from magical 
examination. Thus, it can block wizard spells 
such as ESP or priest spells such as emotion read. 
While emotion control is in effect, anyone using 
one of these spells will sense the emotion desig- 
nated by the priest rather than his true emotions. 
When the priest casts emotion control, he desig- 
nates the false emotion he wishes to be revealed. 

This use of emotion control also gives the 


65 


Priest Spells (3rd Level) 


priest a +2 bonus to saving throws against the 
following spells: spook, taunt, irritation, know 
alignment, scare, emotion, fear, and phantasmal 
killer. When any of these spells are cast on the 
priest, he is immediately aware of the attempt, al- 
though he does not learn the source of the spell. 

If another character casts emotion read, ESP 
or a similar spell on the priest, the priest must 
make a saving throw vs. spells with a +1 bonus 
for each 5 levels of the priest. If the priest success- 
fully saves, the other spellcaster reads the false 
emotion; if the priest fails the saving throw, the 
spellcaster reads the priest's true emotion. 

The second use of this spell allows the priest to 
create a single emotional reaction in the subject(s) 
(similar to the wizard spell emotion). Some typi- 
cal emotions follow, but the DM may allow other 
similar effects. 

Courage: The subject becomes berserk, gaining 
+1 to attack rolls and +3 to damage, and tempo- 
rarily gaining 4 hit points (damage against the 
subject is deducted from these temporary points 
first). The subject need never check morale, and 
receives a +5 bonus to saving throws against the 
various forms of fear. Courage counters (and is 
countered by) fear. 

Fear: The subject flees from the priest for the 
duration of the spell, even if this takes him out of 
spell range. Fear counters (and is countered by) 
courage. 

Friendship: The subject reacts positively to any 
encounter; in game terms, any result of a roll on 
the Encounter Reactions table (Table 59 in the 
DMG) is moved one column to the left. Thus, a 
threatening PC becomes cautious, an indifferent 
PC becomes friendly, etc. Friendship counters 
(and is countered by) hate. 

Happiness: The subject experiences feelings of 
warmth, well-being, and confidence, modifying 
all reaction rolls by +3. The subject is unlikely to 
attack unless provoked. Happiness counters (and 
is countered by) sadness. 

Hate: The subject reacts negatively to any en- 
counter; in game terms, any result of a roll on the 
Encounter Reactions table is moved one column 
to the right (i.e., a friendly PC becomes indiffer- 
ent, a cautious PC becomes threatening, etc.). 
Hate counters (and is countered by) friendship. 

Hope: The subject's morale is improved by 
+2. His saving throw rolls, attack, and damage 
rolls are all improved by +1 while this emotion is 
in effect. Hope counters (and is countered by) 
hopelessness. 

Hopelessness: The subject's morale suffers a 
—10 penalty. In addition, in the round in which 


Priest Spells (3rd Level) 


the emotion is initially established, all subjects 
must immediately make a morale check. Hope- 
lessness counters (and is countered by) hope. 
Sadness: The subject feels uncontrollably glum 
and is prone to fits of morose introspection. All 
attack rolls suffer a —1 penalty and initiative 
rolls suffer a +1 penalty. The subject's chance of 
being surprised is increased by —2. Sadness 
counters (and is countered by) happiness. 


All subjects of the second version, even willing 
targets, must save vs. spell to resist the emotion. 
In addition to all other modifiers, the saving 
throw is modified by —1 for every three levels of 
the priest casting the spell. 

The material component for both versions of 
the spell is a small bunch of fleece or uncarded 
wool that is consumed in the casting. 


Extradimensional Detection (Divination) 


Sphere: Numbers, Divination 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S 

Duration: 1 round/level 

Casting Time: 3 

Area of Effect: One 10'-wide path, 60 feet long 
Saving Throw: None 


When extradimensional detection is cast, the 
priest detects the existence of any extradimen- 
sional spaces or pockets in a path 10 feet wide and 
60 feet long in the direction he is facing. The 
priest may turn, scanning a 60° arc each round, 
or may move slowly while the spell is in effect to 
change the sweep of the detection. 

Extradimensional spaces include those created 
by spells such as rope trick and those contained 
within such items as bags of holding and portable 
holes. The priest does not automatically know 
the size of the space or its source. 

This spell detects interplanar gates and the “gate” 
opened by the spell extradimensional folding. 

The spell can be blocked by a stone wall of one 
foot thickness or more, a one-inch thickness of 
solid metal, or one yard or more of solid wood. 


66 


Helping Hand (Evocation) 


Sphere: Travelers 
Range: Special 
Components: V, S, M 
Duration: 1 hour/level 
Casting Time: 1 round 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


When a priest is trapped or otherwise endan- 
gered, this spell can summon help. The spell cre- 
ates a hovering, ghostly image of a hand about 
one foot high. The caster can command it to lo- 
cate a character or creature of the caster’s choice 
based on a physical description. The caster can 
specify race, sex, and appearance, but not ambig- 
uous factors such as level, alignment, or class. 

After the hand receives its orders, it begins to 
search for the indicated creature, flying at a 
movement rate of 48. The hand can search within 
a 5-mile radius of the caster. 

If the hand is unable to locate the indicated 
creature, it returns to the caster (provided he is 
still within the area of effect). The hand displays 
an outstretched palm, indicating that no such 
character or creature could be found. The hand 
then disappears. 

If the hand locates the indicated subject, the 
hand beckons the subject to follow it. If the sub- 
ject follows, the hand points in the direction of 
the caster, leading the subject in the most direct, 
feasible route. The hand hovers 10 feet in front of 
the subject, moving before him. Once the hand 
leads the subject to the caster, it disappears. 

The subject is not compelled to follow the hand 
or help the caster. If the subject chooses not to fol- 
low the hand, the hand continues to beckon for 
the duration of the spell, then disappears. If the 
spell expires while the subject is en route to the 
caster, the hand disappears; the subject will have 
to rely on his own devices to locate the caster. 

If there is more than one subject within a 5-mile 
radius that meets the caster’s description, the 
hand locates the closest creature. If that creature 
refuses to follow the hand, the hand will not seek 
out a second subject. 

The ghostly hand has no physical form. The 
hand can be seen only by the caster and potential 
targets. It cannot engage in combat or execute 
any other task aside from locating the subject and 
leading him back to the caster. The hand will not 
pass through solid objects, but can pass through 
small cracks and slits. 

The material component is a black silk glove. 


Invisibility Purge (Abjuration) 


Sphere: Wards 

Range: 30 yards 

Components: V, S, M 

Duration: 1 turn/level 

Casting Time: 1 turn 

Area of Effect: 10-foot square/priest 
Saving Throw: None 


All invisible creatures who enter an area en- 
chanted with invisiblity purge instantly become 
visible. Invisibility-related spells do not take ef- 
fect within the boundaries of the enchanted area, 
and magical devices such as potions of invisibili- 
ty do not function. Creatures with the natural 
ability to become invisible are unable to use this 
ability within the area of effect. Invisible objects 
carried into the warded area also become visible. 

Invisible creatures or persons within the area 
of effect when invisibility purge is cast remain in- 
visible; however, if such creatures exit the area of 
effect and later re-enter, they instantly become 
visible. Such creatures also lose any natural abil- 
ity to turn invisible as long as they remain within 
the area of effect. 

A creature who consumes a potion of invisibil- 
ity outside the warded area becomes invisible 
normally, but becomes visible when he enters the 
area of effect; if the duration of the potion of in- 
visibility has not yet expired when he exits the ar- 
ea of effect, he becomes invisible again outside 
the area. 

Creatures who are invisible in their natural 
state or have no visible form (such as invisible 
stalkers) are not affected by this spell. 

The material components are the priest's holy 
symbol and a silver mirror no more than three 
inches in diameter. 

The invisibility purge can be cast as a coopera- 
tive magic spell. The potency of this spell can be 
increased if several priests cast it at the same 
time. The duration of the spell is then equal to 
one turn per level of the most powerful priest, 
plus one turn for every contributing priest. Each 
priest also increases the area of effect by one 
10' X 10’ square (these areas must be contiguous). 
Thus, a 9th-level priest and two 5Sth-level priests 
could create a 30'X10' invisibility purge area 
having a duration of 11 turns. 


67 


Priest Spells (3rd Level) 


Know Customs (Divination) 


Sphere: Travelers 

Range: Special 
Components: V, S 
Duration: Special 
Casting Time: 3 

Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell allows a caster to gain general 
knowledge of the customs, laws, and social eti- 
quette of a tribe or village. The caster must be 
within 30 yards of a member of the tribe or vil- 
lage for the spell to have effect. The selected vil- 
lager must possess the knowledge sought by the 
caster; for instance, he cannot be an infant, nor 
can he be mentally unstable or dead (although he 
can be asleep or unconscious). 

The selected villager is allowed a saving throw; 
if he succeeds, the spell fails. 

If the saving throw fails, the caster gains a gen- 
eral knowledge of the villager’s local laws and 
customs, including those that apply to relevant 
tribal or clan types (such as customs observed by 
all giants). Typical information revealed by 
know customs includes common courtesies (out- 
siders must avert their eyes when addressing local 
officials), local restrictions (no animals or unac- 
companied elves within the city limits), impor- 
tant festivals, and common passwords that are 
known by the majority of citizens (such as a 
phrase necessary to pass the guards at the main 
gate). Additionally, the spell gives the caster a +1 
reaction adjustment to encounters with members 
of the relevant tribe or village. 

Knowing the local laws and customs does not 
guarantee that the caster will conduct himself 
properly. Know customs is to be used as a guide; 
the DM is free to adjust the quality of informa- 
tion provided by a villager. 


Line of Protection (Abjuration) 
Reversible 


Sphere: Protection 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Duration: 1 round/level 
Casting Time: 1 round 
Area of Effect: 30-yard line 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This cooperative spell requires at least two 
priests to cast the spell simultaneously. During 
the casting, the priests determine whether the line 
will be stationary or portable. 


Priest Spells (3rd Level) 


If the spell is stationary, each priest must in- 
scribe a magical sigil on parallel facing surfaces, 
such as facing walls of a gatehouse or two tree 
trunks. If the spell is portable, the priests must 
stand at each end of the line, thereby anchoring it. 

After the spell is cast, a shimmering field of 
force appears between the two anchors (the sigils 
or priests). The field is 10 feet high and sparkles 
with energy. Objects on the opposite side of the 
translucent field, while recognizable, are hazy 
and indistinct. 

The field causes 1d3 points of damage to all 
creatures passing through it; evil creatures and 
undead suffer 1d8 points of damage from the 
field. Creatures that roll a successful saving 
throw suffer no damage. Creatures that can fly 
over the field, burrow under it, or teleport to the 
other side are immune to damage. 

If the spell is cast in its portable form, the 
priests can move at half their movement rates 
(limited to the rate of the slower priest). The 
priests can take no other action, since all their en- 
ergy is spent in walking and maintaining the 
field. 

Once created, the field cannot be increased or 
decreased in length and must remain straight. 
The priests could maneuver by pivoting, but 
could not walk toward each other or bend the 
field around a corner. If the line of sight between 
the two priests is blocked by any object of greater 
than 5' diameter, the spell immediately fails. 
Thus, creatures, low walls, young trees, pillars, 
and similar objects will not disrupt the spell. 

As a cooperative spell, several priests can link 
together to create a longer field. Each priest (or si- 
gil) forms the end of one field and the beginning of 
another, much like fenceposts. Each section of the 
spell must extend in a straight line, but the field 
can be bent at each junction. Four priests could 
form a long line, a square, or a Z pattern. The re- 
strictions on moving the fields apply as outlined 
above. The DM may apply movement penalties 
depending on the complexity of the pattern. 

The material components are the priests’ cro- 
ziers, staves, or religious standards, held aloft by 
each caster. 

The reverse of this spell, line of destruction, 
causes 1d3 damage to all creatures passing 
through it. It causes 1d8 damage to paladins and 
creatures of good alignment who pass through it. 
Creatures that roll a successful saving throw suf- 
fer no damage. 


68 


Memory Read (Divination) 


Sphere: Thought 

Range: 5 yards 
Components: V, S, M 
Duration: 1 round/level 
Casting Time: 1 round 

Area of Effect: One creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell allows the priest to read the memory 
of a single subject. The priest experiences the 
memory with the same intensity as the subject. 
The time required to view a memory is one- 
fiftieth of the time that the actual event lasted. 
Thus, a priest can view the memory of an event 
that lasted for one hour in a little more than one 
round. The subject experiences the memory at 
the same time the caster reads it. 

The subject must have an Intelligence score of 5 
or more and must remain within range of the 
priest throughout the time it takes to read the de- 
sired memory. Priests can cast this spell on un- 
conscious, sleeping, held, or paralyzed creatures. 

The subject receives a saving throw when the 
priest casts the spell (this saving throw is allowed 
even if the subject is asleep or otherwise unaware 
of the attempt). In addition, if the memory that 
the priest wants to view concerns something the 
subject wants to keep secret, or is something that 
the subject is trying to suppress, the subject re- 
ceives a +5 bonus to the saving throw. If the 
memory the priest wishes to view is more than six 
months old, the subject receives a second saving 
throw, with bonuses depending on the age of the 
memory as follows: 


Age of Memory Bonus 
6-12 months 0 
1 to 4 years +1 
5 years or more +3 


If the subject succeeds either of these saving 
throws, the spell fails. ' 

This spell creates a mental drain on the priest, 
causing him to temporarily lose 1-3 points of 
Constitution. These can be regained only after 
eight hours of rest. The spell cannot be cast again 
until the priest's constitution is restored. 

The material component is a small piece of lin- 
en cloth with threads of gold interspersed 
throughout its weave. This is consumed during 
the casting. 


Miscast Magic (Invocation/Evocation) 


Sphere: Chaos 

Range: 40 yards +10 yards/level 
Components: V, S 

Duration: Special 

Casting Time: 2 

Area of Effect: One creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


Miscast magic can be cast only on a wizard. It 
causes the next spell cast by the affected wizard to 
be chosen randomly from his memorized spells of 
the same or lower level. Thus, if a wizard affected 
by miscast magic had four 1st-level spells memo- 
rized (armor, feather fall, jump, and sleep) and he 
attempted to cast the sleep spell, the DM would 
determine the resulting spell randomly from the 
wizard's four memorized spells. The wizard has 
only a 25% chance of casting the sleep spell. 

Only spells currently memorized are eligible to 
be exchanged with the desired spell. If a wizard 
had only one spell memorized, the miscast magic 
would have no effect and the wizard’s spell would 
be cast normally. 

The miscast spell operates normally. If a wiz- 
ard tried to levitate a companion but a web spell 
resulted, the companion would be trapped by the 
webs and subject to all resulting effects. If the tar- 
get of the spell were in range of the levitate spell 
but not in range of the web, the spell would be 
lost in a fizzle of energy and the web spell would 
be wiped from the caster’s memory. 

The wizard who casts the spell performs the 
proper verbal and somatic components of the 
spell he wishes to cast; he does not discover the 
altered results until the wrong spell takes effect. 
The wizard will also discover that the material 
component for the resulting spell has vanished (in 
addition to the material component for the de- 
sired spell). 

Wizards who are targets of miscast magic are al- 
lowed a saving throw vs. spell to avoid the effect. 


Moment Reading (Divination) 


Sphere: Numbers 
Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Casting Time: 1 round 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell allows the priest to determine the 
“tenor of the now” —in other words, to learn the 


69 


Priest Spells (3rd Level) 


“force” that is most dominant at the time. To cast 
the spell, the priest generates a series of random 
numbers and then studies the pattern contained 
in that string of numbers. This pattern contains 
information about current conditions. 

In game terms, when this spell is cast, the DM 
communicates to the priest's player a single word 
or short phrase (no more than five words) de- 
scribing the “tone” of the situation. Examples of 
suitable “tones” are “imminent danger” (the DM 
knows a dragon is approaching the area); “peace 
and tranquility” (the woods in which the PCs 
camp may look threatening, but the area is actu- 
ally free of evil influence); or “betrayal” (one of 
the PCs’ hirelings is actually a spy of their ene- 
my). The DM can make this comment cryptic, 
but it should always be accurate and contain 
some useful information. 

This spell has no specified area of effect. The 
result of moment reading will always concern the 
priest and anyone else in his immediate vicinity, 
but the definition of “vicinity” will vary depend- 
ing on the circumstances. For example, the tenor 
of the moment might be “severe danger” if the 
priest is entering the territory of a dragon who 
attacks interlopers on sight. 

The tenor of the moment is always personally 
applicable to the priest. For example, even if the 
priest is in a nation dangerously close to war with 
its neighbor, this condition will not appear in the 
tenor of the moment unless the priest is person- 
ally involved (if he’s currently in the direct path 
of an invading army, for instance). 

One casting of this spell tends to “taint” subse- 
quent castings of the same spell unless they are sep- 
arated by a minimum length of time. If a priest casts 
this spell twice within 12 hours, the second reading 
gives the same result as the first, regardless of the 
actual situation. If a second priest casts the spell 
within 12 hours of another priest's use of the spell, 
he receives an accurate reading. 

The material component is a set of 36 small 
disks made of polished bone engraved with runes 
that represent numbers. These disks are not con- 
sumed in the casting. 


Random Causality (Alteration) 


Sphere: Chaos 

Range: 10 yards 

Components: V, S, M 

Duration: Special 

Casting Time: 3 rounds +1 round/level 
Area of Effect: One weapon 

Saving Throw: Neg. 


Priest Spells (3rd Level) 


This spell creates a rift in the nature of cause 
and effect. The spell is cast upon an opponent's 
weapon. When the weapon is used, it hits and 
causes damage normally, but the damage is not 
applied to the creature struck by the weapon. In- 
stead, the person wielding the weapon or one of 
his companions suffers the damage. If the weap- 
on misses its target on any round, no damage is 
caused in that round. 

Using a die roll, the DM randomly determines 
the victim of the damage. The DM selects a die 
with a value nearest the number of eligible crea- 
tures (the wielder of the weapon and his compan- 
ions). If the number of creatures does not equate 
to highest value of a die, the wielder of the en- 
chanted weapon takes the extra chances to be hit. 
For example, if a goblin wields a sword affected 
by this spell, he and his six companions are eligi- 
ble to receive the damage. The DM rolls 1d8. On 
a roll of 1-6, one of the goblin’s companions suf- 
fers the damage; on a roll of 7 or 8, the goblin 
with the affected weapon suffers the damage. 

The weapon is affected for 3 rounds +1 round/ 
level of the spell caster. If the wielder of the weap- 
on changes weapons while the spell is in effect, 
the discarded weapon remains enchanted. 

The material component is a bronze die. 


Rigid Thinking (Enchantment/Charm) 


Sphere: Law 

Range: 60 yards 
Components: V, S 
Duration: 1 round/level 
Casting Time: 1 turn 

Area of Effect: One creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


Rigid thinking can be cast only upon a creature 
with Intelligence of 3 or greater. The creature is 
allowed a saving throw to avoid the effects. 

The creature affected by rigid thinking is inca- 
pable of performing any action other than the ac- 
tivity he is involved in when the spell takes effect. 
The creature's mind simply cannot decide on an- 
other course of action—it becomes frozen into a 
single thought and cannot change even if new cir- 
cumstances would suggest otherwise. Thus, a 
warrior fighting a kobold will ignore the arrival 
of a beholder, and a thief picking a lock will pay 
no heed to the arrival of three guards. 

The affected creature does not mechanically re- 
peat the action; he is not an automaton. He will 
not continue to fire his bow at a dragon if he runs 
out of arrows, but will choose another means of 


70 


attacking the dragon to the exclusion of all other 
activities. 

A spellcaster in the process of casting a spell 
when rigid thinking takes effect will not attempt 
to repeat the spell (unless the spell has been mem- 
orized more than once). The spellcaster will, 
however, devote his attention to the target of that 
spell until his goal is met (e.g., if the caster were 
attacking a creature, he would continue to direct 
attacks at that creature; if the caster were trying 
to open a door, he would continue to work on the 
door until it opens). 

The spell expires when the creature accom- 
plishes his goal (i.e., the kobold is killed or the 
lock is opened) or when the duration of the spell 
has ended. 


Slow Rot (Abjuration) 


Sphere: Plant 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Duration: 1 week/level 
Casting Time: 1 round 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell increases the amount of time that 
fruits, vegetables, and grains remain wholesome 
and ripe. The spell will not take effect upon meat 
of any kind. 

The caster can affect as much as 100 cubic feet 
of plant material per level. Thus, even a low level 
priest could effectively keep a farmer's grain from 
rotting while in storage or keep the fruit on the 
trees in his orchard ripe until they are harvested. 
This spell does not prevent pests (such as rats) 
from eating the food. 

The material component is a pinch of sugar. 


Squeaking Floors (Evocation) 


Sphere: Wards 

Range: 30 yards 

Components: V, S, M 

Duration: 1 hour/level 

Casting Time: 3 

Area of Effect: 10-foot square/level 
Saving Throw: None 


A surface affected by squeaking floors squeaks 
loudly when any creature larger than a normal 
rat (larger than one-half cubic foot or weighing 
more than three pounds) steps on it or touches it. 
The spell affects a square whose sides equal the 
caster’s level times 10 feet (a 9th-level priest could 
affect a square whose sides are 90 feet long). 


The squeaks can be heard in a 100-foot radius, 
regardless of interposing barriers such as walls 
and doors. The squeaks occur regardless of the 
surface, whether wood, stone, dirt, or any other 
solid material. Listeners automatically know the 
direction of the sounds. 

Characters who successfully move silently re- 
duce the radius of the noise to 50 feet. Those able 
to fly or otherwise avoid direct contact with the 
affected surface will not activate the squeaking 
floor. 

The material component is a rusty iron hinge 
that squeaks when moved. 


Strength of One (Alteration) 


Sphere: Law 

Range: 10 yards 

Components: V, S 

Duration: 2d6 rounds 

Casting Time: 3 

Area of Effect: One creature + Icreature/2 levels 
Saving Throw: None 


By casting this spell on a group of lawful crea- 
tures, the priest imbues each creature with a 
Strength bonus equal to that of the strongest 
creature in the group. To be affected by the spell, 
all creatures must touch the hand of the priest at 
the time of casting. Only human, demihuman, 
and humanoid creatures of man-size or smaller 
may be affected. The characters can be a mixed 
group of Lawful Neutral, Lawful Good, or Law- 
ful Evil alignments. The spell will not take effect 
if any creature of Neutral or Chaotic alignment is 
included in the group. 

Prior to casting, one creature is designated the 
keystone. There may never be more than one 
keystone in a group, even if another creature has 
equal strength. 

Upon completion of the spell, all affected char- 
acters gain a bonus to damage equal to the key- 
stone's bonus to damage from Strength. Any 
magical bonuses belonging to the keystone are 
not added; only the keystone’s natural strength is 
conferred on the group. 

This bonus supersedes any bonus a character 
might normally receive. Thus, a warrior with 16 
Strength (a +1 bonus to damage) who benefits 
from this spell with a keystone who has Strength 
18/07 (a damage bonus of +3) gains a total bo- 
nus of +3 to damage (not +4 to damage). The 
keystone receives no bonus. 

Affected creatures gain no improvements to 
THACO, bend bars/lift gates, or other functions 
of Strength. 


71 


Priest Spells (3rd Level) 


The spell ends if the keystone is killed before 
the duration expires. The bonus and duration are 
not affected if a member of the group is killed 
within the duration of the spell. 


Telepathy (Divination, Alteration) 


Sphere: Thought 

Range: 30 yards 

Components: V, S 

Duration: 1 turn +2 rounds/level 
Casting Time: 5 

Area of Effect: One creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell establishes direct, two-way mental 
contact between the priest and a single subject. 
The subject must have Intelligence of at least 5 for 
the spell to take effect. While the spell is in effect, 
the two participants can communicate silently 
and rapidly, regardless of whether they share a 
common language. 

Telepathy does not give either participant ac- 
cess to the other's thoughts, memories, or emo- 
tions. Participants can only “hear” the thoughts 
that the other participant actively “sends.” 

Mind-to-mind communication is approxi- 
mately four times faster than verbal communica- 
tion. The level of complexity that can be 
communicated is only that which can be ex- 
pressed through language. Gestures, expressions, 
and body language cannot be conveyed. 

A priest can establish separate “telepathic 
channels” to multiple individuals. Each linkage is 
established through a separate casting of the 
spell. There is no network between the channels. 
For example, Balfas the priest establishes telepa- 
thy with Alra the warrior and Zymor the thief by 
casting this spell twice. Balfas can communicate a 
single thought to both Alra and Zymor, but Alra 
and Zymor cannot communicate with each other. 
Balfas, however, can “target” a thought so that 
only one of the two participants receives it. 

If the priest casts this spell on an unwilling sub- 
ject (for example, if the priest wants to silently 
threaten or taunt the subject), the subject receives 
a saving throw vs. spell to resist the effect. Will- 
ing subjects need not make a saving throw. 

Lead sheeting of more than 1/2” thickness will 
totally block telepathy. 


Priest Spells (3rd Level) 


Telethaumaturgy (Enchantment/Charm) 


Sphere: Numbers 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Duration: Special 

Casting Time: 2 rounds 
Area of Effect: One creature 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell requires the priest to perform a nu- 
merological analysis of a subject's correct name. 
The result is that the priest may cast another spell 
that affects the subject individual at a range much 
greater than normal. In other words, by gaining 
deep knowledge of the individual, the priest cre- 
ates a “channel” to that individual that makes a 
subsequent spell easier to cast on that subject. 

Only certain spells can benefit from tele- 
thaumaturgy: 


bless* 

command 

charm person or mammal 
detect charm 

hold person 

know alignment 

remove curse™ 
probability control 

quest 

confusion (one creature only) 
exaction 


For spells marked with an asterisk (*), tele- 
thaumaturgy also increases the range of the re- 
versed spell. Unless indicated, telethaumaturgy 
does not increase the range of the reversed spells. 

The increase in range depends on the level of 
the priest casting telethaumaturgy: 


Level Range Multiplier 
1-6 x2 
7-11 x3 
12-16 x4 
17+ x5 


Thus, a 12th-level priest who has cast tele- 
thaumaturgy on an individual could subsequent- 
ly cast charm person on that individual at a range 
of 320 yards, rather than the normal range of 80 
yards. 

A spell to be enhanced by telethaumaturgy 
must be cast on the round immediately following 
the completion of telethaumaturgy. Spells that 
normally affect more than one individual (such 
as confusion) will affect only the selected subject 
when cast following telethaumaturgy. 


72 


When telethaumaturgy is cast by a priest of 
11th level or higher, it has an additional effect. If 
the target is within the normal range of the subse- 
quent spell (e.g., 80 yards for charm person), the 
subject's saving throw suffers a penalty of —2. 

Like the personal reading spell, telethauma- 
turgy functions only if the priest knows the cor- 
rect name of his subject. If the priest casts the 
spell using an alias, he will not know that tele- 
thaumaturgy has not taken effect until the subse- 
quent spell fails. The priest does not 
automatically know why the subsequent spell 
failed (the subject might simply have made a suc- 
cessful saving throw). 

The material component is a small book of nu- 
merological formulae and notes. This book is dif- 
ferent from the book used in personal reading. 
The book is not consumed in the casting. 


Thief’s Lament (Alteration) 


Sphere: Wards 

Range: 10 yards/level 
Components: V, S, M 
Duration: 1 hour/level 

Casting Time: 3 

Area of Effect: 5-foot cube/level 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


A thief entering an area enchanted with thief's 
lament suffers a great reduction in his thieving 
skills. The thief is allowed a saving throw to resist 
the effects of the spell; failure indicates that he 
suffers the full effects of the lament. All attempts 
to pick pockets, open locks, find/remove traps, 
move silently, detect noise, climb walls, and hide 
in shadows are reduced by 25% (although a skill 
cannot be reduced below 5%, presuming the 
character has at least a score of 5% in any skill). 

The spell affects a cube whose sides equal the 
caster’s level times five feet (a 10th-level caster 
could affect a cube whose sides equal 50 feet). 

The material components are the priest's holy 
symbol and a silver key. 


Unearthly Choir (Invocation) 


Sphere: Combat 

Range: 0 

Component: V 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Casting Time: 5 

Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: 1/2 


This cooperative spell requires at least three 
priests casting the spell simultaneously. At the 
time of casting, the priests must be within 10 feet 
of each other. Upon completion of the spell, the 
priests sing a single, dissonant chord. The result 
of the spell depends on the number of voices in 
the choir. 

Trio. In this form, the spell projects a cone of son- 
ic force 120 feet long and 40 feet wide at the base. 
All creatures within the area of effect must save 
vs. spells or suffer 2d4 points of damage. Those 
who successfully save suffer only 1d4 points. Un- 
dead suffer a —2 penalty to their saving throws. 
Quartet. With four voices, the spell has the same 
area of effect as described above. However, all 
those who fail their saving throw suffer 2d4 
points of damage and are deafened for one 
round. Those who successfully save suffer half 
damage and are not deafened. Undead creatures 
are not allowed a saving throw. 

Quintet. Five singers produce a chord of major 
power. All within the area of effect suffer 3d4 
points of damage (saving throw for half damage). 
Undead are not allowed a saving throw. All crea- 
tures are deafened for one round. Furthermore, 
pottery, glassware, crystal, and similar breakable 
goods must save vs. fall or be shattered. 
Ensemble. An ensemble of singers consists of six 
to ten priests. In this case, the area of effect in- 
creases to a cone 180 feet long and 60 feet wide at 
the base. All creatures within this area suffer 1d4 
points of damage per priest and are deafened for 
1d4 rounds. A successful saving throw vs. spell 
reduces the damage and duration of deafness by 
half. Undead creatures of 3 hit dice or less are im- 
mediately destroyed. All other undead suffer 
normal damage, but are not allowed a saving 
throw. Glass, pottery, crystal, bone, and all 
wooden items that are the strength of a door or 
less (chests, tables, chairs, etc.) must save vs. 
crushing blow or be shattered. 

Choir. The most powerful group, a choir, re- 
quires eleven or more priests. In this case, the ar- 
ea of effect expands to a cone 300 feet long and 
100 feet wide at the base. All within the area of 


Priest Spells (3rd Level) 


effect suffer 1d6 points of damage per priest to a 
maximum of 20d6. A saving throw vs. spells re- 
duces the damage to half. Those who fail to save 
are deafened for 1d10 rounds; those who succeed 
are deafened only 1d6 rounds. Undead creatures 
of 5 hit dice or less are immediately destroyed. 
Undead with more hit dice are not allowed a sav- 
ing throw. Structures within the area of effect are 
damaged as if they suffered a direct hit from a 
catapult (one hit per four priests in the choir). 
Doors, chests, and other breakable items are in- 
stantly shattered. 


Zone of Sweet Air (Abjuration) 


Sphere: Wards 

Range: 10 yards/level 
Components: V, S, M 

Duration: 1 turn/level 

Casting Time: 3 

Area of Effect: 10-foot cube/level 
Saving Throw: None 


Zone of sweet air creates an invisible barrier 
around the area of effect that repels all noxious 
elements from poisonous vapors, including those 
created magically (such as a stinking cloud). The 
spell offers no protection against poisonous va- 
pors created by a dragon's breath weapon (such 
as the chlorine gas of a green dragon). Noxious 
gases already within the area of effect when the 
spell is cast are not affected. Fresh air passes into 
the area normally. 

If a poisonous vapor is expelled within the area 
of effect (for example, a stinking cloud is cast), 
the spell takes effect normally but dissipates in 
half the time normally required. 

The spell affects a cube whose sides equal the 
caster’s level times 10 feet (for instance, a 10th- 
level caster could affect a cube whose sides are 
100 feet long). 

The material components are the priest's holy 
symbol, a silk handkerchief, and a strand of spi- 
der web. 


Priest Spells (4th Level) 


Fourth-Level Spells 


Addition (Alteration) 


Sphere: Numbers, Creation 
Range: 30 yards 
Components: V, S, M 
Duration: Special 

Casting Time: 1 round 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


The philosophy of the Sphere of Numbers 
holds that the structure of reality—the “equation 
of the moment”—can be analyzed and modified 
by someone with sufficient knowledge and 
power. The addition spell allows a priest to adda 
new mathematical term to the equation of the 
moment. This effectively allows a new object or 
even a living creature to be brought into existence 
temporarily. 

The effect of this spell varies depending on the 
level of the caster. At 10th level or lower, addi- 
tion can create a single, inanimate object weigh- 
ing up to 10 pounds. The spell gives the priest 
only rudimentary control over the creation proc- 
ess, so the object cannot be complex. The object 
must be described in a single word or short 
phrase (e.g., “a water pitcher” or “a block of 
stone”). The caster has no control over elements 
such as shape or color; thus, the water pitcher 
might be short, squat, and blue, or tall, slender, 
and red. 

Objects created with this spell cannot be of any 
greater mechanical complexity or technological 
level than a crossbow. If the priest tries to create 
an object that breaks this prohibition, the spell 
fails and nothing is created. Thus, if the priest 
tried to create “a pistol,’ assuming he had heard 
the word somewhere, the spell would fail. 

Objects cannot contain any information in an 
abstract form such as writing or diagrams. If the 
priest tries to create an object that breaks this 
prohibition, there are two possible results: the 
spell may fail, or the object may be created with- 
out the information. Thus, if the priest were to 
attempt to create “a spellbook,” the result would 
be either a book similar to a spellbook with blank 
pages, or nothing at all. 

The object appears at whatever location the 
caster wills, as long as it is within spell range. The 
object cannot appear in the same space occupied 
by another object or creature, or within a hollow 
object (for example, the priest cannot create an 
object blocking the trachea of an enemy). 


74 


The object created by addition remains in ex- 
istence for 1 turn per level of the caster. During 
this time, it obeys all the laws of physics as if it 
were a “real” object. The object cannot be disbe- 
lieved and spells such as true seeing cannot distin- 
guish it from a naturally-occurring object. 

Priests of 11th to 15th level can create a single 
inanimate object of up to 20 pounds in mass or 
two identical objects, each of up to five pounds in 
mass. The object(s) so created remains in existence 
for two hours (12 turns) per level of the caster. 

Priests of 16th to 19th level can create a single 
inanimate object of up to 50 pounds in mass or up 
to 10 identical objects, each of up to five pounds 
in mass. The object(s) is permanent unless de- 
stroyed. Since these objects are not magical con- 
structs, but real additions to the “equation of the 
moment,” dispel magic has no effect on them. Al- 
ternatively, the caster can create a single normal 
(nonmonstrous) living creature of up to 20 
pounds in weight. The creature, once created, be- 
haves as a normal member of its species; the cast- 
er has no control over its actions. This creature 
remains in existence for 5 rounds per level of the 
caster. 

Priests of 20th level and above can create a sin- 
gle inanimate object of up to 100 pounds in mass 
or up to 10 identical objects, each of up to 10 
pounds in mass. The object(s) are permanent. Al- 
ternatively, the caster can create a single normal 
(nonmonstrous) living creature of up to 100 
pounds in weight and up to 2 hit dice. The crea- 
ture, once created, behaves as a normal member 
of its species; the caster has no control over its 
actions. This creature remains in existence for 2 
turns per level of the caster. 

The material component is a small table of nu- 
merological formulae inscribed on an ivory 
plaque, plus a length of silken cord. During the 
casting, the priest ties the cord into a complex 
knot. As the magical energy is discharged, the 
cord vanishes in a flash of light. The plaque is not 
consumed in the casting. 


Age Plant (Alteration) 


Sphere: Time 

Range: 30 yards 

Components: V, S, M 

Duration: Permanent 

Casting Time: 1 round 

Area of Effect: One plant, seed, or tree/level 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell enables the caster to affect the aging 
of any plant, seed, or tree. The process can oper- 
ate either forward or backward, causing flowers 
to blossom, seeds to sprout and grow, and trees 
to bear fruit; or fruit to turn to blossoms, trees to 
become saplings, and new shoots to turn to seeds. 

The change in age, either forward or backward, 
is chosen by the priest at the time of casting. The 
changes associated with normal or reversed growth 
occur instantaneously. Plants can be altered in age 
up to 10 years per level of the caster. The caster can 
stop the aging at any point within the limits im- 
posed by his level; he could cause a tree to grow 
from a sapling until it withers and dies from old age 
or he could stop the tree's growth at a stage at which 
it would shelter his home. 

The spell does not alter the appearance or char- 
acteristics of a plant except those that result from 
normal aging (or regression). Age plant has no ef- 
fect on magically-generated plants or plant-type 
monsters. 

The material components are the priest's holy 
symbol and the petal from an apple blossom. 


Blessed Warmth (Alteration) 


Sphere: Sun 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S 
Duration: 1 round/level 
Casting Time: 4 

Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


When this spell is cast, a narrow shaft of light 
shines down upon the priest, making him im- 
mune to the effects of natural cold (such as a bliz- 
zard) and granting him a +3 bonus to saving 
throws vs. magical cold (such as a white dragon's 
breath weapon). 

For each level of the priest above 7th, an addi- 
tional beam of light may be created to protect an- 
other creature, who must be standing within 3’ of 
the priest. Thus, a 10th-level priest could protect 
four other creatures in a 3’ radius. 


Body Clock (Alteration) 


Sphere: Time 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 
Duration: 1 hour/level 
Casting Time: 4 

Area of Effect: One creature 
Saving Throw: None 


Priest Spells (4th Level) 


Body clock affects a subject in the following 
ways. 

e The subject's need for sleep is reduced. For 
every hour that a subject sleeps, he is as refreshed 
as if he slept 10 hours. For every two hours that a 
subject sleeps during the spell (20 hours of rest), 
he regains hit points as if he spent a day of com- 
plete rest. However, wizards are not able to mem- 
orize spells; “real” time must pass for this to 
occur. 

e The subject's need to breathe is reduced. He 
breathes only 10% as often as normal for the du- 
ration of the spell, enabling him to hold his 
breath 10 times longer than normal and use less 
air in enclosed situations. 

e The subject can set an internal “alarm clock” 
to alert him when a specific amount of time has 
passed. The subject then hears a brief ringing in 
his ears, audible only to him. The ringing is loud 
enough to wake the subject. He can set as many 
internal alarm clocks as he wishes, as long as they 
all occur within the duration of the spell. 

The spell has no effect on movement, spellcast- 
ing, or any other normal activities. 

The material components are a kernel of corn, 
a drop of water, and a stoppered glass bottle. 


Chaotic Combat (Invocation/Evocation) 


Sphere: Chaos 

Range: 30 yards 
Components: V, S 
Duration: 1 round/level 
Casting Time: 3 

Area of Effect: One creature 
Saving Throw: None 


When chaotic combat is cast on a fighter, he is 
inspired beyond his years of training and is sud- 
denly struck with numerous insights for varia- 
tions on the standard moves of attack and 
defense. The spell affects only warriors. 

Unfortunately, these insights are helpful in on- 
ly two-thirds of the warrior’s attacks. In the re- 
maining attacks, the spell actually impairs the 
warrior's standard performance. At the begin- 
ning of each round, after the player has declared 
his character's actions, 1d6 is rolled for the affect- 
ed warrior. On a roll of 1, 2, 3, or 4, the warrior 
gains bonuses of +2 to attack rolls and +2 to ar- 
mor class. On a roll of 5 or 6, the warrior suffers 
a —2 penalty to attack rolls and a —2 penalty to 
armor class. This must be determined at the be- 
ginning of the round so that both the warrior and 
his opponents can apply the necessary changes. 


Priest Spells (4th Level) 


The insight imparted by this spell is lost after 
the spell expires. The insight is generated by cha- 
os, which is nearly impossible to contain. After 
the spell expires, the warrior remembers the bat- 
tle but not the specifics of his actions. He is un- 
able to duplicate the maneuvers. 


Chaotic Sleep (Alteration) 


Sphere: Chaos 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 
Duration: Permanent 
Casting Time: 1 turn 

Area of Effect: One creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


After casting this spell, the priest must success- 
fully touch his victim. The victim is then allowed 
a saving throw to avoid the spell’s effect. If the 
saving throw is failed, the spell takes effect at the 
next sunrise or sunset (whichever comes first). 

From the time the spell takes effect until the 
spell is negated, the sleeping pattern of the victim 
is randomly disrupted. At sunset and sunrise of 
every day, a check is made to determine the ef- 
fects of chaotic sleep. In the 12-hour period that 
follows the check, there is an equal chance that 
the character will be unable to sleep or unable to 
remain awake (roll 1d6; on a roll of 1-3, the char- 
acter is awake, on a roll of 4-6, he sleeps). This 
condition lasts until the next sunrise (or sunset) 
when the check is made again. 

For example, a fighter fails to save against cha- 
otic sleep. For the next few hours, the spell has no 
effect. At sundown, the first check is made, re- 
sulting in a 2. The fighter does not notice any- 
thing until he tries to sleep that night, at which 
time he is wide awake, fidgeting and restless. At 
sunrise, another die roll is made, resulting in a 6. 
The fighter is suddenly exhuasted and sleeps until 
sunset. 

Characters who sleep as a result of this spell 
can be roused only by physical stimuli—a slap or 
a wound, for example. Once awake, the charac- 
ter remains conscious only as long as there are ac- 
tive stimuli around him, such as a fight. Walking 
through caves or riding a horse will not keep the 
character awake. Unlike a sleep spell, characters 
affected by chaotic sleep doze off as soon as they 
are left relatively undisturbed. Keeping an affect- 
ed character awake is difficult at best. 

Lack of sleep will eventually take a physical 
toll on any character under the influence of the 
spell. For every 12-hour period that a character 


76 


remains awake beyond the first, he suffers a —1 
penalty to THACO. Such characters do not re- 
gain hit points as a result of normal healing. 
Spellcasters cannot memorize spells until they 
have had sufficient sleep. 

Chaotic sleep can be removed with a remove 
curse. 

The material components are a pinch of sand 
and three coffee beans. 


Circle of Privacy (Alteration) 


Sphere: Travelers 

Range: Special 

Components: V, S, M 

Duration: 1 hour/level 

Casting Time: 4 

Area of Effect: 50-foot-diameter circle 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell helps to discourage predators and 
trespassers from disturbing a campsite. The cast- 
er sprinkles salt in a circle enclosing an area up to 
50 feet in diameter. For the duration of the spell, 
all sounds and scents generated within the circle 
are muted, making the area less noticeable to 
those outside the circle. Therefore, the group's 
chance of encounter is reduced by 50% for the 
duration of the spell. The spell provides no pro- 
tection against infravision or other forms of mag- 
ical detection. 

The material components are a hair from a 
skunk, a whisker from a mouse, and enough salt 
to make a 50-foot-diameter circle. 


Compulsive Order (Enchantment/Charm) 


Sphere: Law 

Range: 10 yards 
Components: V, S, M 
Duration: Permanent 
Casting Time: 5 

Area of Effect: One creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


The victim of compulsive order is compelled to 
place everything he encounters into perfect order. 
If he discovers treasure, he divides it into tidy 
piles or containers of silver, gold, and copper. He 
is reluctant to enter a dungeon because it is a 
messy place, but once inside, he is obsessed with 
cleaning it. A character under the power of this 
spell will sweep dirt from dungeon corridors into 
neat piles, arrange the corpses of a defeated orc 
band according to size, dash forward to remove a 
bit of lint on clothing, and insist that the party 


organize themselves alphabetically, then by size, 
and then by age. While the spell does not affect a 
character's abilities, the overwhelming desire for 
order impairs the character's usefulness in most 
adventures. 

When a character afflicted by this spell at- 
tempts to undertake a new event (begin a battle, 
haggle with the merchant, etc.), the player must 
rationalize the action on the basis of his compul- 
sion for order. Thus, the character cannot simply 
attack a goblin; he must announce a condition 
such as attacking the tallest goblin and fighting 
his way down according to size. Once stated, the 
character must follow through with this plan. 

If the player cannot conceive a rationale for his 
character's behavior, the character is forced to de- 
lay his actions for 1d6 rounds, with the time 
spent in preparation for the subsequent action. 
The character spends time arranging spell com- 
ponents artistically, deciding how to hold his 
sword, cleaning his weapon, etc. 

Anyone affected by compulsive order may be- 
come violent if he is prevented from being neat. 
He will do what he must to make the world 
around him more orderly. If he is allowed to or- 
ganize his surroundings, he will quickly calm 
down again. The victim will constantly petition 
the people around him to be neat and organized. 

The victim is allowed a saving throw to avoid 
the effects of the spell. Compulsive order can be 
removed with a dispel magic spell. 

The material component is a perfect cube made 
of metal. 


Defensive Harmony (Enchantment/Charm) 


Sphere: Law 

Range: 5 yards 

Components: V, S 

Duration: 1 round +2d4 rounds 
Casting Time: 1 

Area of Effect: One creature/two levels 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell must be cast on at least two crea- 
tures. The priest may affect one creature per two 
levels of his experience, and all creatures to be af- 
fected must be within three feet of each other at 
the time of casting. After the spell is completed, 
affected characters may move about freely. 

Defensive harmony grants affected creatures a 
defensive bonus by bestowing an enhanced coor- 
dination of their attacks and defenses. The affect- 
ed creatures must be involved in a single battle so 
that their efforts harmonize to the benefit of all 


77 


Priest Spells (4th Level) 


involved. For example, the affected creatures can 
attack one dragon or a group of orcs in a single 
area. They can also attack additional enemy 
forces that arrive in the same combat. If the ene- 
my forces divide and flee, the affected creatures 
can follow, continue to attack, and benefit from 
the spell. If the affected group is split into two 
smaller groups when attacked, however, it gains 
no benefit from defensive harmony. 

While the spell is in effect, each affected crea- 
ture gains a +1 bonus to armor class for every 
other creature benefitting from the spell, to a 
maximum bonus of +5 (although more than five 
characters may be affected by the spell). Thus, if 
four creatures are affected by defensive harmony, 
each creature gains a +3 bonus to armor class. 

This bonus represents a mystical coordination 
of effort on the part of all affected creatures. A 
fighter will naturally wage his attack to distract 
the troll attacking the thief. The ranger will in- 
stinctively block the swing of an orc, thereby 
protecting the wizard. Creatures affected by the 
spell are not consciously aware of these efforts, 
and they are unable to create specific strategies 
and tactics. 


Dimensional Folding (Alteration) 


Sphere: Numbers 

Range: 5 feet 

Components: V, S, M 
Duration: 1 round 

Casting Time: 1 round 

Area of Effect: 10-foot circle 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell allows the caster to selectively warp 
the fabric of space, folding it into higher dimen- 
sions. 

This effect can be best explained through an ex- 
ample. If an ant crawling along the west edge of a 
map decided to travel to the east edge of the map, 
it would have to crawl the full width of the map. 
But if the map were folded in two so that the east 
and west edges were touching, the ant would 
travel almost no distance at all. The ant’s world 
(the map) would have been folded through the 
third dimension. The dimensional folding spell 
does something similar with the three- 
dimensional world: it folds it through a higher di- 
mension (the fourth), allowing instantaneous 
travel between two locales on the same plane of 
existence. 

Although this effect may seem similar to the 
wizard spell teleport, in practice, it is much dif- 


Priest Spells (4th Level) 


ferent. The dimensional folding spell opens a gate 
that allows instantaneous, bidirectional access to 
a distant locale on the same plane. This gate is 
circular, of any size up to 10’ in diameter, and re- 
mains in existence for up to 1 full round. The 
caster and any other creatures can pass through 
the gate in either direction while it remains open. 
Missile weapons and magic spells can also pass 
through the gate. 

The gate appears as a shimmering ring, glow- 
ing with a faint light equivalent to starshine. Vi- 
sion through the gate is clear and unobstructed in 
both directions, allowing the priest to “look be- 
fore he leaps.” However, anyone on the other side 
of the gate is able to see the priest and his point of 
origin. 

The “near side” of the gate always appears 
within 5 feet of the priest. The location of the “far 
side” of the gate always opens within 5 feet of the 
place the priest desires. Thus, there is no chance 
of arriving at the wrong destination, as with the 
wizard spell teleport. 

There is a risk involved in using dimensional 
folding, however. Many philosophers believe 
that what we know as time is simply another di- 
mension, and the behavior of this spell seems to 
support this thesis. Unless the priest is extremely 
familiar with the destination, there is a significant 
chance that any creature passing through a di- 
mensional folding gate will suffer instantaneous 
aging. Theorists believe that this is the same kind 
of “slippage” that can cause a teleporting wizard 
to land high or low, except that in this case, the 
slippage is in the time dimension. 

The chance of this instantaneous aging occur- 
ring depends on how familiar the priest is with 
the destination. The table that follows outlines 
the conditions and effects of aging. 


Chance of | Amount of 
Destination is: aging aging 
Very familiar* 2% 1 year 
Studied carefully 5% 1d2 years 
Seen casually 10% 1d3 years 
Viewed once 15% 1d6 years 
Never seen 25% 1d10 years 


* Use this row if the desired location is within 
view of the priest. 


If the die roll indicates that aging occurs, every 
creature that passes through the gate in either di- 
rection suffers the aging effect. Multiple creatures 
passing through the gate in the same direction all 
age by the same amount determined by a single 
die roll. Although the chance of aging is low and 


78 


the potential amount of aging is minimal for fa- 
miliar destinations, the effects can add up and be- 
come significant over time. 

Although the word “destination” is used to re- 
fer to the “far end” of the gate, the priest need not 
be the one doing the traveling. For example, a 
priest may open the gate near a distant ally so he 
may travel instantaneously to join the priest. 

The material component is a sheet of platinum 
“tissue” worth at least 15 gp, which the priest 
folds intricately during the casting. The tissue is 
consumed when the gate closes. 


Fire Purge (Abjuration) 


Sphere: Wards 

Range: 10 yards/level 

Components: V, S, M 

Duration: 1 turn/level 

Casting Time: 1 turn 

Area of Effect: 10-yard square/priest 
Saving Throw: None 


An area enchanted with fire purge is protected 
against all types of normal and magical fires. 
Normal fires (including camp fires, torches, and 
oil fires) cannot burn in the area of effect. Magi- 
cal fires (including fiery dragon breath, other 
creature-generated fires, and spell-related fires 
such as burning hands and fireball) cause only 
50% of their normal damage. Additionally, crea- 
tures within the area of effect receive a +4 bonus 
to saving throws made vs. fire attacks, regardless 
of whether the attacks originate inside or outside 
the warded area. 

Fire purge has no effect on fires that are within 
the area of effect when the spell is cast, (i.e., it 
does not extinguish existing fires). 

The material components are the priest's holy 
symbol and a scorched sliver of wood. 

Fire purge can be cast as cooperative magic. If 
a number of priests cast this spell simultaneously, 
its effectiveness is significantly increased. The du- 
ration of the spell is then equal to 1 turn per level 
of the most powerful priest plus 1 turn for every 
other contributing priest. The area of effect is a 
square whose sides equal the number of priests 
times 10 yards (thus, six priests could create a 60- 
yard by 60-yard square of protection). 


Focus (Invocation) 


Sphere: All 

Range: 10 feet 
Components: V, S, M 
Duration: Special 
Casting Time: 1 day 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell creates the necessary conditions for 
devotional energy to be used. For faith magic to 
work, the priest must create a focus to harness 
the necessary devotional energy. This spell cre- 
ates that focus. A focus cannot function without 
a source of devotional energy. 

The focus gathers devotional energy and re- 
shapes it in order to amplify other spells cast by 
the priest (or priests). The same energy keeps the 
focus in existence. If the spell is cast and there is 
no immediate source of devotional energy within 
100 feet, the focus immediately fails. 

Once created, most foci cannot be moved. This 
condition and the need for a constant supply of 
devotional energy tends to limit the use of foci to 
temples, churches, monasteries, shrines, and 
seminaries—permanent structures where fol- 
lowers of the religion gather on a regular basis. 
Sometimes a focus is created for a special gather- 
ing such as a holy day, conclave, grand wedding, 
or yearly festival. 

Not all foci are identical. The particular form 
of the focus depends on the power and nature of 
the spell being amplified. All foci can be seen by 
detect magic. There are three basic types of foci: 
site, item, and living. 

Site foci are connected to a place, whether a 
room, building, field, or forest. Once cast, the fo- 
ci cannot be moved. It causes no disturbance in 
the surroundings; it is invisible and intangible. 

Item foci are centered on a single object. Cus- 
tomarily, this object is large and immovable, such 
as an altar, but it is possible for the focus to be as 
small as is practical. The item can be as elaborate 
or plain as desired, but should have some signifi- 
cance to the religion. 

Living foci are the rarest of all types. In this 
case, the focus is created on a living plant, ani- 
mal, or person. Detect charm reveals the person 
is somehow enchanted, although not under the 
influence of a typical charm spell. 

The type of focus created (site, item, or living) 
depends on the religion and nature of the spell 
amplified. These choices are listed in Table 3: Fo- 
cused Spell Effects. 


79 


Priest Spells (4th Level) 


Casting the focus spell is a long and compli- 
cated process, accompanied by many ceremonies 
and rituals. During the day spent casting the 
spell, the priest will need the assistance of at least 
two other priests of the same faith. These aides 
need not memorize the spell (or even be capable 
of casting it). Their duty is to provide the extra 
hands and voices needed at specific points of the 
casting. A large number of worshipers must also 
be present since the focus requires their energy. 
Not surprisingly, the casting of this spell is often 
incorporated into important holy festivals or spe- 
cial occasions. 

The duration of the focus is one year. If the de- 
votional energy falls below a minimum level, the 
spell ends sooner. A focus requires the devotional 
energy of at least 100 devout worshipers. Lay 
monks (those dedicated to the religion but not 
priests) count as two worshipers, while priests (of 
any level) count as ten. A focus could be main- 
tained by a congregation of 100, a monastery of 
fifty, or a seminary of as few as 10 priests (or any 
combination of the above). The focus must re- 
ceive this energy for at least 10 hours out of every 
day. If these conditions are not met, the focus 
weakens. The area of effect of the amplified spell 
decreases by 20% each day until it fades away 
completely. 

Once the focus is created, the priest or priests 
have 1 turn in which to cast the desired spell upon 
the focus. A focus can amplify only one spell, 
and each item, creature, or place can receive only 
one focus. Spells that can be cast upon a focus are 
listed on Table 3. 


Table 3: FOCUSED SPELL EFFECTS 


Possible 

Focus 
Spell Type 
Anti-animal shell S/I/L 
Anti-plant shell S/I/L 
Bless S/I 
Control temperature, 10' radius 5” 
Control winds S/I 
Cure disease I/L 
Cure blindness or deafness I/L 
Detect poison S/I 
Detect lie I 
Detect magic I 
Dispel evil S/I 
Endure cold/endure heat S* 
Know alignment I/L 
Negative plane protection S/I 
Protection from evil S/I 
Protection from lightning S 


Priest Spells (4th Level) 


Protections from fire 5 
Purify food and drink I 
Remove fear S/I/L 
Remove curse I 
Repel insects S/I 
Resist fire/resist cold S 
Speak with animals S/I/L 
Tongues S/I 
True seeing S 


* The caster must state a desired range (tempera- 
ture, wind strength, etc.) within the spell’s nor- 
mal limitations at the time it is cast. 


Once the spell is cast, the normal duration and 
area of effect for that spell are ignored. The focus 
begins to increase these factors of the spell’s 
power. After one day, the amplified spell reaches 
its full area of effect. Thereafter, it remains over 
that area until the focus fails. 

The area affected by the focus (and its ampli- 
fied spell) depends on the level of the caster. The 
spell expands in a radius from the focus, 20 feet 
per level of the caster, although it can deliberately 
be created smaller. Within that area of effect, the 
amplified spell exerts its normal effect. A 13th- 
level priest could create a focus up to 260 feet in 
diameter. 

The material components are many, including 
special vestments, incense, oils, waters, and oth- 
er equipment the DM deems appropriate. The 
cost of these materials is never less than 1,000 gp 
plus 100 gp per level of spell being amplified. 
These items are given up as offerings to the deity 
(perhaps to be distributed to the poor), and new 
ones must be obtained each time the spell is cast. 


Fortify (Necromancy) 


Sphere: Healing 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Duration: Special 

Casting Time: 6 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This is a simple cooperative magic spell. Only 
one priest can cast the spell, but like mystic trans- 
fer, another priest is required for the spell to have 
any effect. Through this spell, the priest im- 
proves the quality of another priest's healing 
spells. 

For the fortify spell to work, it must be cast si- 
multaneously with a cure light wounds, cure seri- 
ous wounds, or cure critical wounds. The priest 


casting fortify must lay his hand on the priest at- 
tempting the cure. When both spells are cast, ad- 
ditional energy flows through the second priest 
and into the creature being healed. Fortify auto- 
matically causes the cure spell to function at max- 
imum effect. Thus, a cure serious wounds would 
automatically heal 17 points of damage and a 
cure critical wounds would heal 27 points of 
damage. 

The material component is the priest's holy 
symbol. 


Genius (Divination) 


Sphere: Thought 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Casting Time: 5 

Area of Effect: Caster 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell is similar to idea, except that the 
priest’s player can ask the DM one question about 
any event occurring at the moment. The question 
must be somehow related to evaluation of the 
current situation, such as “What are these mon- 
sters?” Speculation about the future, such as 
“What's on the other side of the door?” is not per- 
mitted. 

As with idea, the DM must be careful in adju- 
dicating this spell. The answer to the question 
should always be relevant and correct, although 
not necessarily complete, and should not be un- 
balancing to the situation. The answer can also 
be cryptic, in the form of a riddle or rhyme, de- 
pending on the DM's assessment of the situation. 
In general, the answer will be a single word or a 
short phrase of no more than five words. 

The material component is a gem of at least 50 
gp value. This spell can be cast only once in any 
12-hour period. Subsequent attempts to cast the 
spell result in no answer. 


Inverted Ethics (Enchantment/Charm) 


Sphere: Chaos 

Range: 120 yards 
Components: V, S, M 
Duration: 1 turn 
Casting Time: 1 

Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell reverses the ethics of a person or 
group of people. While under the influence of this 


spell, a creature behaves in a manner opposite to 
the way he normally would behave. Thus, a 
shopkeeper influenced by inverted ethics will 
think it perfectly normal for someone to pick up 
an item from his shop and walk out the door 
without paying for it. If someone tried to pay for 
an item, he would be insulted. If the spell is cast 
on a shopper in a store, he would find it natural 
to steal the item, thinking that he is behaving in a 
proper way. If the spell is cast on a professed 
thief, he will no longer steal, choosing to pay for 
his goods instead. 

Inverted ethics does not cause a creature to ac- 
tively commit evil deeds (or good deeds). Thus, 
an affected creature will not go on a shoplifting 
rampage; he will steal only as the opportuntity 
presents itself. 

The spell affects one character per level of the 
caster within a 20’ radius. Each target of the spell 
is allowed a saving throw vs. spell to avoid the 
effect. 

The material component is a miniature golden 
balance (i.e., similar to the scales of justice). 


Join With Astral Traveler (Alteration) 


Sphere: Astral 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S 
Duration: Special 
Casting Time: 1 turn 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


When a priest casts the 7th-level astral spell, he 
leaves his physical body in suspended animation 
while his astral body travels. By touching the 
comatose body and casting join with astral trav- 
eler, a priest can cause his own astral body to 
leave his physical body in suspended animation. 
His astral body then travels along the silver cord 
of the originally projected priest. The caster joins 
the projected priest as if he were part of the origi- 
nal casting of the astral spell; i.e., his own silver 
cord is connected to the priest's silver cord, and 
he is dependent upon the originally projected 
priest. 

A priest who casts the 7th-level astral spell can 
project as many as seven other creatures along 
with himself. However, priests casting join with 
astral traveler are an exception to this limit. Any 
number of priests may join another priest in the 
Astral plane by use of this spell. 


Priest Spells (4th Level) 


Leadership (Enchantment/Charm, Alteration) 
Reversible 


Sphere: War 

Range: Special 
Components: V, S, M 
Duration: Special 

Casting Time: Special 

Area of Effect: One creature 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell can be cast in one of two variations. 
The first, appropriate for battlefield use, has a 
range of 240 yards, duration of 1d4 +6 turns, and 
a casting time of 1 turn. The priest can cast the 
spell on any single individual (a commander or 
hero) within his line of sight. 

While under the influence of this spell, the sub- 
jects command radius is increased by 50% 
(round fractions up). 

The reverse of this variation, doubt, requires 
the target to make a saving throw vs. spell. If 
failed, doubt halves the command radius (round 
fractions down) of the targeted individual for 
1d3 +4 turns. 

The material component for this variation is a 
pinch of steel dust. 

The second variation must take place in or 
within 100’ of a place of worship officially dedi- 
cated to the casting priest's deity. Both the priest 
and the individual to be affected must be present. 
The casting time is 5 turns and involves an intri- 
cate ritual and many prayers. At the conclusion 
of the spell, the subject's command radius is dou- 
bled. This effect lasts 2d12 hours. 

The priest can cast either aspect (but not both at 
once) on himself. No individual can be the subject 
of more than one casting of this spell at one time, 
whether different aspects or cast by different 
priests. If more than one spell is attempted on the 
individual, only the most recent casting takes effect. 

The material component for the second varia- 
tion is the priest’s holy symbol. 


Mental Domination (Enchantment/Charm) 


Sphere: Thought 

Range: 50 yards 
Components: V, S, M 
Duration: 3 rounds/level 
Casting Time: 4 

Area of Effect: One creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell is similar to the wizard spell domina- 
tion in that it establishes a telepathic link between 


a m -e e Ppa 


the priest and the subject through which the 
priest can control the subject’s bodily move- 
ments. There are some significant differences be- 
tween the spells, however. 

Elves and half-elves have no innate resistance 
to this spell. Priest and subject need not share a 
common language. The priest can force the sub- 
ject into combat, but the subject's attack rolls suf- 
fer a —2 penalty. The priest cannot force the 
subject to cast spells or use any innate magical or 
magiclike abilities. The priest can force the sub- 
ject to speak, although the priest cannot inject a 
full range of emotions into the subject's voice 
(everything said by the subject is in a monotone). 

This spell gives the priest no access to the sub- 
ject’s thoughts, memory, or sensory apparatus. 
Thus, the priest cannot see through the subject's 
eyes. To control the subject, the priest must be 
within the range of the spell and must be able to 
see the subject. Breaking either of these condi- 
tions causes the spell to terminate immediately. 

This spell requires a moderate level of concen- 
tration by the priest. While maintaining this 
spell, he can move or enter combat, but cannot 
cast another spell. If the priest is wounded, ren- 
dered unconscious, or killed, the spell immedi- 
ately terminates. 

If the priest is 10th level or lower, he or she can- 
not force the subject to perform particularly deli- 
cate actions, such as picking a lock. At 11th level 
or higher, however, this restriction is removed. 
The priest could thus force a thief to pick a lock. 
Any such delicate actions suffer a —15% penalty 
(or —3 on 1d20) to reflect the “remote control” 
nature of the action. 

The material component is a mesh of fine 
threads that the priest loops around the fingertips 
of one hand and manipulates in the way that a 
puppeteer controls a puppet. 


Modify Memory (Enchantment/Charm) 


Sphere: Time 

Range: 30 feet 

Components: V, S 
Duration: Permanent 
Casting Time: Special 

Area of Effect: One creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell enables the caster to reach into the 
subject's mind and modify up to five minutes of 
his memory in one of the following ways: 

e Eliminate all memory of an event the subject 
actually experienced. This spell cannot negate 
charm, suggestion, geas, quest, or similar spells. 


83 


Priest Spells (4th Level) 


e Allow the subject to recall with perfect clari- 
ty an event he actually experienced. For instance, 
he could recall every word from a five-minute 
conversation or every detail from a passage in a 
book. 

e Change the details of an event the subject ac- 
tually experienced. 

e Implant a memory of an event the subject 
never experienced. 


Casting the spell takes one round. If the subject 
fails to save vs. spell, the caster proceeds with the 
spell by spending up to five minutes visualizing 
the memory he wishes to modify in the subject. If 
the caster’s concentration is disturbed before the 
visualization is complete, the spell is lost. 

Modified memory will not necessarily affect 
the subject's actions, particularly if they contra- 
dict his natural inclinations. An illogical modi- 
fied memory, such as the subject recalling how 
much he enjoyed drinking poison, will be dis- 
missed by the subject as a bad dream or a mem- 
ory muddied by too much wine. More useful 
applications of modified memory include im- 
planting memories of friendly encounters with 
the caster (inclining the subject to act favorably 
toward the caster), changing the details of orders 
given to the subject by a superior, or causing the 
subject to forget that the caster cheated him in a 
card game. The DM reserves the right to decide 
whether a modified memory is too nonsensical to 
significantly affect the subject. 


Probability Control (Alteration) 


Sphere: Numbers 

Range: 30 yards 
Components: V, S, M 
Duration: Special 

Casting Time: 4 

Area of Effect: One creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell allows the priest to increase or de- 
crease by a small margin the probability of suc- 
cess for one action. This action can be anything 
that requires a die roll—an attack, a saving 
throw, an attempt to use thieving skills, an abili- 
ty check, or even an attempt to successfully tele- 
port on target. The action must be something 
performed by a single creature. 

The basic modification is 15% (15 on 1d100 or 
3 on 1d20), plus an additional 5% per five levels 
of the caster. This modification can be either pos- 
itive or negative, as deemed by the spellcaster. 
Thus, a 10th-level priest can modify a subject's 


Priest Spells (4th Level) 


saving throw or attack roll by +5 or —5, ora 
thief's “climb walls” roll by +25% or —25%. The 
priest may cast this spell on himself. 

For a noncombat action such as an attempt to 
climb a wall, the priest simply casts the spell on 
the subject immediately before the action is at- 
tempted, informing the DM whether the modifi- 
cation is positive or negative. To use this spell in 
combat, the priest must specify the action to be 
affected (e.g., the target's next attack roll) and 
whether the modification will be positive or neg- 
ative. The spell remains in effect until the subject 
attempts the specified action or until a number of 
rounds equal to the caster’s level passes. If the lat- 
ter occurs, the spell ends without effect. 

Once the spell is cast, the priest does not need 
to maintain any level of concentration; the spell 
will function even if the casting priest is killed be- 
fore the spell takes effect. 

The subject of the spell has no way of knowing 
whether any modification made by this spell is 
positive or negative (or even whether he was the 
subject of the spell at all). Thus, a lying priest 
could claim to raise a thief’s chance of climbing 
the wall, while actually lowering it. The thief 
would be none the wiser. However, an unwilling 
subject of this spell receives a normal saving 
throw to negate its effect. 

The material components are a small cube of a 
thickened sugar-and-milk mixture and a cubic 
die of matching size. Both are consumed in the 
casting. 


Rapport (Divination, Alteration) 


Sphere: Thought 

Range: 30 yards 

Components: V, S 

Duration: 1 turn +1 round/level 
Casting Time: 1 round 

Area of Effect: One creature 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell is a deeper and more intense version 
of telepathy. It allows the priest to communicate 
silently and instantly with a single willing sub- 
ject. Participants may share deeper thoughts than 
with telepathy, including emotions and memo- 
ries. Each participant sees, hears, and otherwise 
senses everything experienced by the other, al- 
though such vicarious experiences feel diluted 
and cannot be mistaken for direct sensations. 

The participants can quickly share such per- 
sonal concepts as plans, hopes, and fears, but 
they cannot share skills or spells. Thus, it is im- 


84 


possible to communicate the procedure for cast- 
ing a particular spell or for picking a lock. 
Communication through rapport is approxi- 
mately 15 times faster than verbal communica- 
tion. As with telepathy, the priest can establish 
separate “channels” to multiple individuals; each 
such linkage costs one casting of the spell. There 
is no “crosstalk” between the channels, however. 
Rapport cannot be used on unwilling subjects. 


Solipsism (Alteration) 


Sphere: Thought 

Range: 10 yards/level 

Components: V, S, M 

Duration: Special 

Casting Time: 1 round 

Area of Effect: 100 sq. ft. +100 sq. ft./level 
Saving Throw: Special 


This unusual spell is similar to phantasmal 
force and other illusion magic, except that the 
priest who casts the spell is the only creature who 
automatically believes the results of the spell. 
The spell creates the illusion of any object, crea- 
ture, or force, as long as it is within the bounda- 
ries of the spell’s area of effect. The illusion is 
visual and tactile (that is, it can be seen and felt), 
but no other sensory stimuli are created. 

Solipsism is the opposite of normal illusions in 
that anyone other than the caster must make an 
active effort to believe (rather than disbelieve) 
the illusion. Characters trying to believe the reali- 
ty of a solipsistic illusion must make a saving 
throw vs. breath weapon, modified by the magi- 
cal defense adjustment for Wisdom. A successful 
save means that the character believes the illusion 
and it is part of reality for him. A failed save 
means that the character cannot convince himself 
of the illusion’s reality, and the illusion has no ef- 
fect on him. A character can make a single at- 
tempt to believe each round. 

Unlike true illusions, the image created by this 
spell does more than just duplicate reality. The 
image formed is real for those who believe in it. 
The illusion has all the normal properties that its 
form and function allow. Thus, a solipsistic 
bridge spanning a chasm could be crossed by the 
priest and those who believed. All others would 
see the priest apparently walking out onto 
nothingnesss. Likewise, a solipsistic giant would 
cause real damage to those who believed it. 

The illusion remains in effect for as long as the 
priest continues to concentrate on it, until the 
priest is struck in combat, or until he is rendered 


unconscious. The level of concentration required 
is not extreme; the priest can move normally and 
may engage in combat, but is unable to cast any 
spell while maintaining a solipsistic illusion. 

Solipsism can create only illusions that are ex- 
ternal to the priest. Thus, the priest cannot create 
an illusion that he is the size of a giant, is un- 
wounded, or has sprouted wings. 

The material components are a lotus blossom 
that the priest must swallow and a bit of fleece. 


Tanglefoot (Alteration, Abjuration) 
Reversible 


Sphere: War 

Range: 240 yards 

Components: V, S, M 

Duration: 2 turns/level 

Casting Time: 2 turns 

Area of Effect: 100 sq. yards/level 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell temporarily doubles the movement 
cost of one region of ground. Units allied to the 
priest are unaffected and movement is made at 
normal cost; only enemy units suffer the penalty. 

A variety of effects result from the spell de- 
pending on the terrain: grass twists hinderingly 
around troops’ ankles, swamp becomes more vis- 
cous, rocks and gravel shift underfoot, etc. 

The spell affects only units—that is, groups of 
soldiers moving in regular or irregular formation. 
The spell does not affect individuals or monsters 
moving and operating alone. (When using the 
BATTLESYSTEM™ rules, figures that represent 
individual heroes are not affected by this spell.) 

When casting this spell, the priest must have an 
uninterrupted line of sight to the terrain to be af- 
fected. The priest can choose the shape of the ar- 
ea, up to the maximum area of effect. This spell 
can create only one continuous area of tangle- 
foot. There is no way of detecting that a particu- 
lar area is under the influence of this spell simply 
by looking at the area. Detect magic will reveal 
that the area is magically affected. 

The reverse of this spell, selective passage, cuts 
the movement cost of an area in half (round frac- 
tions up) for friendly units. Again, individual he- 
roes and creatures are not affected by this spell 
(which means that advancing troops must be 
careful not to leave their leader behind)!). 

The material component is a drop of molasses 
for tanglefoot, and a pinch of powdered graphite 
for selective passage. 


85 


Priest Spells (4th Level) 


Thought Broadcast (Alteration) 


Sphere: Thought 

Range: 30 yards 

Components: V, S, M 

Duration: 1 turn +3 rounds/level 
Casting Time: 5 

Area of Effect: One creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell turns the subject into a “thought 
broadcaster.” For the duration of the spell, every- 
one within 30 yards of the subject senses the sub- 
ject's thoughts, making it impossible for him to 
lie, keep secrets, conceal motives, etc. The sub- 
ject is not automatically aware that his thoughts 
are being sensed. Everyone who senses these 
thoughts, on the other hand, knows their source. 

This spell causes the broadcast of only surface 
thoughts and motivations, not memories. There 
is no need for a common language between 
broadcaster and receivers; for this purpose, 
thoughts are considered to be symbolic, not de- 
pendent on language. The detail level of the 
thoughts is insufficient for others to learn specific 
skills from the subject. Thus, if the subject casts a 
spell, everyone within range knows what spell is 
being cast before it takes effect, but no one learns 
any knowledge about how the spell is cast. 

If the broadcaster is invisible or hiding in 
shadows, the broadcast functions normally, and 
all receivers are aware that someone is in the vi- 
cinity whom they cannot see. While receivers 
cannot pinpoint the broadcaster's location, the 
broadcaster's thoughts will inevitably reveal his 
general position (“Oh no, he’s looking right at 
me,’ etc.). A character hiding in shadows will be 
automatically detected, while attacks against an 
invisible broadcaster suffer a —2 penalty, rather 
than the normal —4. This spell totally negates the 
chance of surprise by the broadcaster. 

The subject must have an Intelligence score of 1 
or more to become a broadcaster, and must have 
a “normal” mind as understood by PCs. 
Thoughts that are broadcast can be received only 
by individuals with Intelligence scores of 3 or bet- 
ter. An unwilling subject receives a normal saving 
throw vs. spell to avoid the effects. A willing sub- 
ject can waive this saving throw. 

The material component is small balloon that 
the priest inflates upon casting. This balloon is 
consumed in the casting. 


Priest Spells (4th Level) 


Tree Steed (Alteration, Enchantment/Charm) 


Sphere: Travelers 

Range: 10 yards 

Components: V, S, M 
Duration: 1 hour/level 

Casting Time: 4 

Area of Effect: One log or plank 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell enchants a log, plank, or similar 
piece of wood to become a temporary steed. The 
log or plank must be at least one foot wide, three 
inches thick, and three to ten feet long. Any type 
of wood is suitable. 

When the spell is cast, the log sprouts four 
wooden, horselike legs. The tree steed may be 
ridden like a normal horse and may be used to 
carry equipment. The tree steed can carry up to 
600 pounds of riders and gear before breaking. If 
the tree steed breaks under the weight of the 
riders or gear, the enchantment instantly ends 
and the tree steed again becomes a normal (al- 
though broken) log or plank. 

The tree steed obeys all of the caster’s verbal 
commands to move, slow, speed up, stop, and 
turn. It has a movement rate of 12 on land. It can 
move in the water (Sw 6), floating on the surface 
and paddling with its legs. The tree steed must re- 
main within 10 yards of the caster in order to 
move; if the distance between the tree steed and 
the caster exceeds 10 yards, the tree steed stops 
until the caster is again within range. 

The tree steed will not fight for the caster and is 
incapable of any action other than movement. 
The tree steed does not become fatigued and does 
not eat. It has all the vulnerabilities of normal 
wood, including fire, and can be damaged by 
both magical and physical attacks. It has AC 8 
and 20 hit points. 

The material components are a log or plank of 
suitable size and a horseshoe. 


86 


Uplift (Alteration) 


Sphere: All 

Range: 0 

Components: V, M 
Duration: 1 turn 

Casting Time: 12 hours 
Area of Effect: One priest 
Saving Throw: None 


Uplift bestows increased spellcasting ability on 
one priest, including additional spells per level 
and use of spells beyond the caster’s normal level. 
This cooperative spell requires two priests who 
must spend the day casting this spell. During the 
casting, the priests must decide which additional 
spells (of all levels) are desired. Upon completion 
of the casting, the priests touch palms, and the 
priest of higher level receives a charge of magical 
energy. This charge temporarily boosts the level 
of the priest for spellcasting purposes. The 
amount of increase is one level per five levels of 
the lower level caster (fractions rounded up). If 
both priests are of equal level, the casters must 
decide who benefits from the spell. 

The spell grants the priest the spellcasting abili- 
ty of the new level. It does not improve hit 
points, attack rolls, or other abilities. If the in- 
crease allows more spells per level, the additional 
spells are instantly placed in the character's mem- 
ory. A priest is also enabled to cast spells normal- 
ly beyond his level. Range, duration, area of 
effect, and other variables are all based on the 
character's temporary level. 

The increased effect lasts only 1 turn. At the 
end of the turn, all additional spells are lost and 
the character reverts to his normal level. 

As an example, consider a party with a fallen 
comrade. The two priests in the party are 7th and 
8th level, both unable to cast raise dead. After a 
night's rest, each priest adds uplift to his memo- 
rized spells. After casting the spell, the 8th-level 
priest suddenly gains the casting abilities of a 
10th-level priest, including the ability to cast 
raise dead. At the end of one turn, the priest's 
abilities revert to 8th-level. 

Casting this spell is an arduous task, causing a 
severe drain on the priests. When the spell ex- 
pires, the uplifted character suffers 2d6 points of 
damage from mental exhaustion. This damage 
cannot be healed by any means until the charac- 
ter has had at least eight hours of rest. 

The material components are the priests’ holy 
symbols and an offering worth at least 500 gp 
from each priest. 


Weather Stasis (Abjuration) 


Sphere: Wards 

Range: 30 yards 

Components: V, S, M 

Duration: 1 hour/level 

Casting Time: 1 turn 

Area of Effect: 10-foot cube/level 
Saving Throw: None 


Weather stasis maintains the weather condi- 
tions prevalent in the area of effect when the spell 
is cast. The spell affects a cube whose sides equal 
the caster’s level times 10 feet (a 10th-level caster 
could affect a 100’ X 100’ x 100’ cube). 

An area protected by weather stasis is unaffect- 
ed by temperature variations in the surrounding 
environment. The spell also acts as a shield 
against rain, snow, and hail, which cannot enter 
the protected area. If conditions of precipitation 
existed in the area of effect when the spell was 
cast, the identical weather will continue for the 
duration of the spell. 

For example, weather stasis is cast in an area 
where the temperature is 75° F. and no precipita- 
tion is falling. Half an hour later, the temperature 
drops to 60 degrees and rain begins to fall. The 
protected area remains dry and the temperature 
stays at 75 degrees. If the spell had been cast 
while rain was falling in the area of effect, rain 
would continue to fall for the duration of the 
spell, even after it stopped raining in the sur- 
rounding area. 

All physical objects other than rain, snow, and 
hail can pass into the protected area. All crea- 
tures and characters can move freely into and out 
of the area. The spell does not prevent water- 
based spells or water-based creatures (such as wa- 
ter elementals) from operating in the area. 

The spell protects against both natural and 
magically generated weather. Night and day pass 
normally in the protected area, although temper- 
ature variations associated with night and day do 
not occur. 

The material components are the priest's holy 


Priest Spells (5th Level) 


Fifth-Level Spells 


Age Object (Alteration) 
Reversible 


Sphere: Time 

Range: 10 yards 

Components: V, S, M 

Duration: Permanent 

Casting Time: 1 round 

Area of Effect: 1 cubic foot/level 
Saving Throw: None 


With this spell, the caster can cause an amount 
of nonliving, nonmagical matter to age dramati- 
cally. Matter can be aged up to 20 years per level 
of the caster. The following table gives typical re- 
sults of 100 years of aging for various objects, ar- 
ranged in order of descending severity: 


Object Result of Aging 

diamond none 

silver becomes tarnished 

masonry cracks and weakens 

iron rusts and corrodes 
parchment cracks, turns brittle 

wood rots, crumbles, turns to saw- 


dust 


The caster controls the extent of the aging; 
thus, he could age a book so its pages become yel- 
lowed and brittle but stop short of causing the 
book to crumble to dust. As a guideline, each ad- 
ditional 100 years of aging causes an increasingly 
severe reaction. Thus, after 200 years, parchment 
might become little more than powder, while iron 
might begin to flake away at a touch. 

Many items (especially gems) show little reac- 
tion to age. The DM must adjudicate all effects. 

The material components are a flask of seawa- 
ter and a piece of coal. 

The reverse of this spell, youthful object, re- 
turns an object ravaged by the effects of time to 
its original condition; thus, rusty iron becomes 
strong and shiny, crumbled masonry becomes 
firm, and rotten wood becomes solid. The age of 
matter can be reduced by 20 years per level of the 
caster. 

The material components for youthful object 
are a piece of eggshell and a hair from the head of 
a human or humanoid infant. 


Priest Spells (5th Level) 


Barrier of Retention (Abjuration) 


Sphere: Wards 

Range: Special 

Components: V, S, M 
Duration: 1 turn/level 
Casting Time: 1 turn 

Area of Effect: 10’-cube/level 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell creates a one-way invisible force 
field around the area of effect. The spell creates 
one 10’ x 10’ X 10’ cube for every level of the cast- 
er. These can be arranged into any rectangular 
shape the caster desires. 

Intruders entering the protected area suffer no 
ill effects, but the barrier of retention prevents 
them from leaving. The spell affects all creatures 
who fail a saving throw vs. spell. The caster can 
pass in and out of the barrier freely. 

Intruders trapped by the barrier of retention 
can cast spells out of the barrier and can use spells 
such as teleport to escape the protected area. Ob- 
jects cannot be hurled out of the barrier but can 
be carried out by an escaping creature. Dispel 
magic and similar spells negate the barrier. 

The material component is a small cage made 
of silver wire. The caster must walk around the 
perimeter of the area of effect when casting. 


Blessed Abundance (Conjuration) 


Sphere: Creation 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Duration: Permanent 

Casting Time: 1 round 

Area of Effect: 1 cubic foot/level 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell allows a priest to duplicate a speci- 
fied amount of animal or vegetable matter. Magi- 
cal items and minerals (including rocks, metals, 
and gemstones) cannot be duplicated. Although 
organic materials (such as food or living plants) 
can be duplicated, living creatures cannot be cop- 
ied by this spell. 

The caster can create 1 cubic foot of material 
per his experience level. The material to be dupli- 
cated must be equal to or less than 1 cubic foot in 
size or volume. For example, a 9th-level priest 
can create up to 9 cubic feet of animal or vegeta- 
ble matter. Using a loaf of bread 1 cubic foot in 
size, he can produce nine such loaves; using a 
bucket of apples totaling 1 cubic foot in volume, 
he can create nine such buckets. 


The material component is the priest's holy 
symbol. 


Champion’s Strength (Alteration) 


Sphere: Law 

Range: 0 
Components: V, S, M 
Duration: Special 
Casting Time: 2 

Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


Champion's strength bestows one member of a 
group with attack and damage bonuses from the 
rest of the group. The recipient of the spell can 
then fight as the group's champion. 

The spell draws bonuses from one person for 
every two levels of the priest. All characters in- 
volved must be within a 30’-radius of the priest. 
At the time of casting, the priest designates the 
recipient of the spell and the contributors. All 
characters who contribute to the spell must do so 
willingly. 

When the spell is completed, the designated 
character (the group’s champion) gains any non- 
magical bonuses to THACO and damage pos- 
sessed by the characters who contributed to the 
spell. Characters without bonuses or with com- 
bat penalties could conceivably be included in the 
spell; such characters count against the maximum 
number of creatures that can be affected. Penal- 
ties are likewise applied to the champion; con- 
tributors to this spell must be chosen carefully. _ 

The bonuses gained through this spell are add- 
ed to the character’s own bonuses (if any). The 
champion channels the energy of others through 
himself, improving his fighting ability. 

The champion must be in the line of sight and 
within 30 feet of the characters aiding him. Char- 
acters who contribute their bonuses must concen- 
trate on the champion for the duration of the 
spell. If this concentration is broken (by moving 
more than 10 feet per round, fighting, being 
struck, or losing sight of the champion), that 
character's contribution is immediately lost. 

The spell expires when the last character con- 
tributing power to the champion ceases concen- 
tration. 

A champion may benefit from only one cham- 
pion's strength spell at one time. Contributors 
can aid only one champion at one time. 

The material component is a chain of five gold 
links worth at least 1,000 gp. 


Chaotic Commands (Enchantment/Charm) 


Sphere: Chaos 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 
Duration: 1 turn/level 
Casting Time: 3 

Area of Effect: One creature 
Saving Throw: Special 


Chaotic commands renders a creature immune 
to magical commands. Taunt, forget, suggestion, 
domination, geas, demand, succor, command, 
enthrall, quest, exaction, and other spells that 
place a direct verbal command upon a single indi- 
vidual automatically fail. 

In addition, anyone casting one of these spells 
on a creature protected by chaotic commands 
must save vs. spell. Failure means that the caster 
must obey his own magic; the spell’s effect has 
backfired on the caster. 

The material component is a piece of eelskin. 


Clear Path (Alteration) 
Reversible 


Sphere: Travelers 
Range: 0 
Components: V, S, M 
Duration: 1 hour/level 
Casting Time: 5 

Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell clears away weeds, stones, and other 
debris in a 10-foot-wide path extending 10 feet in 
front of the caster. The caster can create a contin- 
uous path for the duration of the spell, clearing a 
10-foot-square ahead of him as long as he con- 
tinues to move forward. The spell affects jungles, 
forests, rocky ground, and snow. 

The result of the cleared path is that movement 
costs are reduced by half. This is reflected in a 
reduction of the penalty against movement in 
rough terrain. (See Table 74 of the Dungeon Mas- 
ter's Guide for terrain costs for movement.) For 
example, if clear path is used in heavy jungle, the 
movement cost is reduced from 8 to 4. In no case 
can clear path reduce movement cost below 1. 

Clear path has no effect on rivers, lakes, or 
other bodies of water, nor does it affect quick- 
sand, lava, or similar natural obstacles. It also 
has no effect on magically-created terrain or 
manmade barricades. 

A priest using the clear path spell can be track- 
ed easily. Tracking proficiency is not required. 


89 


Priest Spells (5th Level) 


The material components are a knife blade and 
a straw from a broom. 

The reverse, clutter path, causes weeds, small 
stones, and similar debris to litter a 10-foot path 
extending 10 feet behind the caster. This hides a 
trail, making tracking more difficult. The caster 
can create a continuous path for the duration of 
the spell. The chance to successfully track on a 
cluttered path is reduced by 50%. 

The material components are a handful of peb- 
bles and a handful of weeds. 


Cloud of Purification (Evocation) 


Sphere: Elemental Air, Water 
Range: 30 yards 
Components: V, S 

Duration: 1 round/level 
Casting Time: 5 

Area of Effect: 20-foot cube 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell creates a billowy cloud of magical 
vapors that moves in the direction of the prevail- 
ing wind at a rate of 20 feet per round. A strong 
wind (greater than 15 miles per hour) breaks it up 
in 4 rounds, and a greater wind (25 MPH or 
more) prevents the use of the spell. Thick vegeta- 
tion disperses the cloud in 2 rounds. 

The cloud of purification transmutes organic 
filth, garbage, and vermin (mice, rats, rot grubs, 
and so on) into an equal quantity of pure water. 
For example, a nest of rot grubs caught in the 
cloud would “melt,” becoming small puddles of 
clean water. If the spell is cast over a body of wa- 
ter, the cloud merges with a portion of the water 
equal to its own size, transmuting any filth, mi- 
crobes, small fish, or other “impurities” into clean 
water. 

The cloud’s vapors are heavier than air, so they 
sink to the lowest level of the land (even down 
holes in the ground). Thus, this spell is perfect for 
cleansing a sewer or well. 

This spell in no way affects magical creatures 
or creatures larger than a normal rat. 


Consequence (Divination) 


Sphere: Numbers, Divination 
Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Casting Time: 1 round 

Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


Priest Spells (5th Level) 


This spell allows the priest to determine how 
one recent event fits into the “grand scheme.” By 
casting this spell, the priest can determine wheth- 
er the sequence or situation that gave rise to the 
specific event is complete or whether it is ongo- 
ing; whether it was a significant or insignificant 
event in the larger picture; or whether it will con- 
tinue to have repercussions for the participants. 

Using his knowledge of circumstances, the DM 
communicates these facts to the caster’s player. 
This “arcane message” is normally straightfor- 
ward and easy to understand, but in the case of 
highly complex circumstances, the message might 
be cryptic. In any case, the message will always 
be truthful. 

As an example, consider a priest and his party 
who are on a holy quest to retrieve an item of 
power. On the way to the location of this item, 
the party is ambushed by evil creatures from the 
Inner Planes but manages to defeat them. Con- 
cerned that these creatures might be outlying 
guards protecting the item of interest, the priest 
casts consequence, hoping for guidance. The DM 
knows that these creatures have nothing to do 
with the quest; the encounter was coincidental. 
However, the surviving monsters will soon be re- 
turning with reinforcements to avenge their dead. 
Therefore, the DM tells the priest's player, “To 
your goals these have no place, but still they can 
cause more woe.” 

Casting this spell “taints” subsequent castings 
of the same spell within a 24-hour span. A second 
attempt within this period always results in the 
same message as the first, regardless of the true 
situation. If a second priest casts the spell within 
24 hours of another casting, he receives an accu- 
rate reading. 

The material component is three special coins 
or dice made of platinum (total value of at least 
1,000 gp), which the priest tosses in his hand 
while concentrating on the spell. The coins or 
dice are not consumed in the casting. 


Disguise (Illusion/Phantasm) 


Sphere: War 

Range: 200 yards 

Components: V, S, M 

Duration: 1 turn/3 levels 

Casting Time: 2 turns 

Area of Effect: One unit up to 300 individuals 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell changes the appearance of a single 
unit so it resembles another unit. The disguise can 


cause the affected creatures to appear to be of an- 
other class, nationality, rank, race, alignment, or 
military affiliation (i.e., a unit from one army 
may appear wearing the armor and carrying the 
colors of another army). Disguise cannot change 
the size category of the unit’s members. Thus, a 
unit of humans may appear to be a unit of elves, 
but may not appear as a unit of giants or half- 
lings. The spell does not affect the size of the 
overall unit; a unit of 50 creatures will still appear 
to be a unit of 50 creatures. 

The disguised unit may appear to be carrying 
any melee or personal missile weapons (e.g., ax- 
es, long swords, crossbows, etc.), and may ap- 
pear to be wearing any type of armor. In combat, 
however, the unit attacks and defends with its 
real weapons and armor regardless of the gear 
they may appear to be carrying. 

Disguise is most effective at long range. If an- 
other unit moves within 20 yards of a disguised 
unit, it automatically sees through the illusion. 

The caster automatically sees through the illu- 
sion. Members of the subject unit see no change 
in their appearance. True seeing or similar magic 
is required for other individuals to see through 
the disguise (unless they move within 20 yards of 
the unit). 

The material components are a fine silk veil 
and a length of woven platinum wire. The wire is 
consumed during the casting. 


Easy March (Invocation) 


Sphere: Travelers 

Range: 50 feet 

Components: V, S, M 

Duration: 1 day/level 

Casting Time: 1 turn 

Area of Effect: One creature/level 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell enables a number of creatures equal 
to the caster’s level to force march for a number 
of days equal to the caster’s level. Creatures af- 
fected by easy march can travel 21/2 times their 
normal movement rate without any risk of fa- 
tigue; thus, they are not required to make a Con- 
stitution check at the end of the day. 

All creatures affected by this spell suffer a —1 
penalty to their attack rolls for the duration of 
the spell; this modifier is not cumulative (that is, 
a party experiencing its second day of easy march 
suffers only a ~1 penalty). The modifier cannot 
be negated by resting. 


Easy march has no effect on modifiers to move- 
ment due to terrain, fatigue, weather, or other 
normal factors. (Refer to Chapter 14 of the Play- 
er's Handbook for more about force marching.) 

The material component is a piece of shoe 
leather. 


Elemental Forbiddance (Abjuration) 


Sphere: Wards 

Range: Special 
Components: V, S, M 
Duration: 1 turn/level 
Casting Time: 1 turn 

Area of Effect: 5'-cube/level 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell prevents the entry of all elementals 
into the area of effect. Further, elementals outside 
the area of effect cannot make physical attacks 
against those inside. Spells and missile attacks 
can be cast into the area by elementals. 

The spell affects a cube whose sides equal the 
caster’s level times 5 feet (a 12th-level priest could 
affect an area equal to a 60’ X 60' X 60’ cube). 

Elemental forbiddance has no effect on elemen- 
tals that are within the area of effect when the 
spell is cast. If such elementals leave the area of 
effect, they cannot reenter. 

The material components are the priest's holy 
symbol and four glass beads, each of a different 
color (green, blue, red, and yellow). The priest 
must pace out the perimeter of the warded area at 
the time of casting. 


Extradimensional Manipulation (Alteration) 


Sphere: Numbers 

Range: 10 yards 

Components: V, S, M 

Duration: 2d12 rounds +4 rounds/level 

Casting Time: 5 

Area of Effect: One extradimensional space up to 
20 feet X 20 feet 

Saving Throw: Special 


This spell allows the priest to alter the charac- 
teristics of certain extradimensional spaces such 
as those created by rope trick and similar spells or 
those contained in items like bags of holding or 
portable holes. 

Extradimensional manipulation can increase or 
reduce the size of a single extradimensional 
space. The amount of increase or decrease de- 
pends on the level of the caster: 


91 


Priest Spells (5th Level) 


Level Multiplier 
Up to 10 x2 
11 to 16 x3 
17 or above x4 


This means that a 10th-level priest can double 
the capacity of a bag of holding or decrease it to 
half its normal size. A 15th-level priest can triple 
the capacity or reduce it to one-third capacity. 

If the size and capacity of an extradimensional 
space is decreased, any contents of the space that 
exceed the current capacity are expelled (deter- 
mined randomly). These contents are expelled 
from the space in the same way they originally 
entered it, if that path is still open. If the path is 
closed, as it would be if a bag of holding were tied 
shut or a portable hole were folded up, the “ex- 
tra” contents are expelled into the Astral plane. 
Any items in an enlarged space when the spell du- 
ration expires suffer the same fate. 

Placing an extradimensional space inside an- 
other such space, such as placing a bag of holding 
inside a portable hole (see the Dungeon Master's 
Guide), is a dangerous undertaking. Extradimen- 
sional manipulation may be cast for the purpose 
of removing this danger. When used in this man- 
ner, the size of the space cannot be affected. 
However, while this version is in effect, the af- 
fected extradimensional space can be placed 
within another such space (or another extradi- 
mensional space may be placed within the affect- 
ed space) with no adverse consequences. If one 
space is within the other when the spell expires, 
the usual consequences ensue immediately. 

If the space to be affected is being maintained 
by a spellcaster, as in the case of a rope trick, that 
spellcaster receives a saving throw to resist the 
manipulation. If the space is created by a magical 
item, however, no saving throw is allowed. 

The material component is a strip of gold tissue 
worth at least 5 gp that is twisted into a Moebius 
strip. The strip is consumed in the casting. 


Extradimensional Pocket (Alteration) 


Sphere: Numbers 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Duration: 1d12 rounds +2 turns/level 
Casting Time: 1 round 

Area of Effect: Special 

Saving Throw: None 


This spell allows the priest to create a single ex- 
tradimensional space or pocket like the one inside 


Priest Spells (5th Level) 


a bag of holding. The spell must be cast on a con- 
tainer such as a sack, bag, or backpack. Once un- 
der the influence of the spell, the container opens 
into a nondimensional space and is much larger 
inside than its outside dimensions. The container 
always weighs a fixed amount, regardless of what 
is put inside. This weight and the capacity of the 
extradimensional space depend on the level of the 
caster: 


Apparent Weight Volume 
Level Weight Cap. Cap. 
9-13 15 Ibs 250 lbs 30 cu.ft. 
14-16 25 lbs 500 lbs 70 cu.ft. 
17-19 35 lbs 750 lbs 100 cu.ft. 
20+ 60 lbs 1,000 lbs 150 cu.ft. 


If the container is overloaded or if it is pierced 
by a sharp object, the bag immediately ruptures 
and the contents are lost into the Astral plane. 
Any items within the bag when the spell duration 
ends are also lost in the Astral plane. 

The material components, in addition to the 
container, are 200 gp worth of powdered diamond 
and a sheet of platinum worth 500 gp. The plati- 
num sheet must be inscribed with a drawing of a 
Klein bottle (a paradoxical figure with only one 
surface—the three-dimensional analogue of the 
Moebius strip). The diamond dust is consumed 
during the casting—the platinum sheet is not. 


Grounding (Abjuration) 


Sphere: Wards 

Range: 30 yards 

Components: V, S, M 

Duration: 1 turn/level 

Casting Time: 1 turn 

Area of Effect: 10-yard square/priest 
Saving Throw: None 


Grounding offers protection against normal 
and magical electrical attacks within the area of 
effect. The protected area and creatures within it 
suffer no damage from normal electrical attacks 
(such as those caused by lightning bolts in a thun- 
derstorm and nonmagical creatures such as elec- 
tric eels). Magical electrical attacks (including 
lightning bolt breath weapons) cause only 50% 
of their normal damage. Additionally, creatures 
within the area of effect receive a +2 bonus to 
saving throws made against electrical attacks, re- 
gardless of whether the attacks originate inside or 
outside the warded area. 

The material components are the priest's holy 
symbol and a coil of silver wire. 


92 


Illusory Artillery (Enchantment/Charm) 


Sphere: War 

Range: 300 yards 

Components: V, S, M 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Casting Time: 1 turn 

Area of Effect: 30 yard X 30 yard square 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell creates a vivid illusion of incoming 
artillery fire (ballista bolts, catapult stones, etc.) 
at a target indicated by the caster. The illusion is 
complete, comprising both audial and visual ele- 
ments. It is impossible for victims to determine 
where the missiles were fired from; creatures un- 
der attack notice the missiles only when they are 
about to strike. 

The missiles never actually strike—they vanish 
inches above the victims’ heads and do no dam- 
age. The illusion is so terrifying, however, that 
victims must immediately make a morale check. 
The first time a group or unit is the target of this 
spell, this morale check is made with no modifier. 
The second and subsequent times that the same 
unit is attacked with this spell, the unit receives a 
+1 bonus to its morale score (for checks against 
this effect only) unless the unit has been the target 
of real artillery fire in the interim. In this case, the 
bonus does not apply. 

The material component is a small, empty cyl- 
inder made of brass. 


Impeding Permission (Enchantment/Charm) 


Sphere: Law 

Range: 150 yards 
Components: V, S 
Duration: 1 turn/level 
Casting Time: 3 

Area of Effect: One creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell may be cast only on creatures with 
Intelligence of 2 or greater and the ability to 
communicate with the caster. The spell inter- 
feres with the victim’s ability to make decisions. 
It prevents the victim from performing any 
action without first gaining the permission of 
the caster or a character designated by the cast- 
er. The victim will heed only the person desig- 
nated by the caster. 

Before the victim undertakes any action, he 
must gain permission. He will not follow through 
with an action until he gains permission. If per- 
mission is denied, the victim cannot act until he 


thinks of an alternate action and gains permission 
for that action. 

Every round, the victim must decide his action 
for that round; at the victim’s initiative, he must 
ask permission to perform his action. If permis- 
sion is denied, the victim can take no other action 
that round. 

The only actions exempt from the need for per- 
mission are involuntary actions such as breathing. 

Asking and gaining permission takes only a 
short amount of time in most cases. A simple re- 
quest, such as asking for permission to swing a 
sword in the middle of combat, can be accom- 
plished quickly. Complicated requests, such as 
getting permission to act on a complicated plan, 
will naturally take more time. The DM may con- 
sider adding a modifier to the victim’s initiative 
roll in such cases. 


Meld (Enchantment) 


Sphere: Charm 

Range: 10 yards 
Components: V, S, M 
Duration: 12 hours 
Casting Time: 1 turn 
Area of Effect: One priest 
Saving Throw: Special 


This cooperative spell requires only one priest 
to cast it, but can be cast only on another priest of 
the same faith. The recipient of the spell must 
voluntarily surrender himself to the spell. The re- 
cipient becomes a host for the caster. While the 
recipient does not lose his own persona or ability 
to act, the host can be dominated by the caster at 
any time. For the most part, this domination is 
complete. 

For the duration of the spell, the caster is essen- 
tially detached from his own body. He can nei- 
ther move nor act on his own. His mind is 
connected to the host's. He sees, hears, smells, 
tastes, and otherwise senses everything the host 
does. He can telepathically communicate with 
the host. Once the spell is completed, there is no 
limit to the range over which it can function. 
However, both the caster and host must remain 
on the same plane. Since the spell relies on tele- 
pathic communication, thin lead sheeting will ef- 
fectively block the connection. 

When desired, the caster can dominate the 
host. When this happens, the host's own mind is 
pushed to the background and the caster’s per- 
sonality dominates. The host's personality, mem- 
ories, proficiencies, and spells are temporarily 


93 


Priest Spells (5th Level) 


replaced by those of the caster. While occupying 
the host, the caster can cast any spell he himself 
has memorized, provided that the necessary com- 
ponents are on hand. These spells function exact- 
ly as if the priest had cast them from his own 
body. 

The caster can return control to the host at any 
time, restoring the character's abilities and per- 
sonality without harm. 

The spell is not without limitations and risks. 
The domination must be voluntary. If the host re- 
sists the casting of the spell, it automatically fails. 
Once the spell is in effect, the host can attempt to 
resist the domination. He is then allowed a saving 
throw. If successful, the spell immediately ends. 

Whenever the host suffers damage, the caster 
must make a saving throw vs. death to maintain 
the spell. If the save is failed, a wave of pain is 
transmitted to the priest, causing 1d6 points of 
damage and canceling the spell. If the host should 
die, the caster must make a system shock roll 
with the risk of suffering instant death. 

The material component is a chalice worth no 
less than 1,000 gp. This chalice must be given as a 
gift to the host (who cannot return it to the donor 
for any reason). 


Memory Wrack 
(Alteration, Enchantment/Charm) 


Sphere: Thought 

Range: 10 yards 
Components: V, S, M 
Duration: 2 rounds/level 
Casting Time: 1 round 
Area of Effect: One creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This nasty spell “disconnects” the subject's 
short-term and long-term memory. While the 
spell is in effect, the subject is incapable of storing 
information in long-term memory. Every mo- 
ment is virtually an independent event for the 
subject; he or she can remember recent events, 
thoughts, and sensations for no more than a few 
seconds (the amount of time they remain in short- 
term memory). 

Memories of events that happened before the 
onset of the spell are not affected at all; these are 
safely stored in long-term memory. This means 
that the subject can cast any spells memorized be- 
fore the memory wrack took effect, but he is 
likely to have difficulty casting the spell as de- 
scribed below. 

The subject of this spell has a limited ability to 


Priest Spells (5th Level) 


act. He is restricted to one action at a time and 
must concentrate mightily to keep the situation 
and any planned actions in short-term memory. 
As long as the subject is able to maintain concen- 
tration, he may act normally within these limits. 

If the subject is distracted (he is struck in com- 
bat, affected by a spell, startled, surprised, or a 
similar event occurs), he forgets everything that 
occurred from the onset of the spell to the mo- 
ment of distraction. The subject must re-evaluate 
the situation as if it had just come to pass. 

Consider the following example. The subject of 
the spell is a soldier assigned to guard the en- 
trance to a building. The priest arrives and casts 
memory wrack on the guard. The guard has no 
problem remembering his orders, since he re- 
ceived them before the onset of the spell. He also 
remembers the arrival of the priest. The priest 
now tries to convince the guard that he is autho- 
rized to enter the building. The guard refuses him 
entry. The priest now picks up a rock and throws 
it at the guard, striking him and distracting him. 
The guard forgets everything that happened be- 
tween the onset of the spell and the moment the 
rock struck. He forgets that the priest has already 
tried to con him and that he threw a rock at him. 
He must reevaluate the situation as though the 
priest had just arrived. The priest is free to make 
another attempt at entering the building. 

When the spell expires, the subject remembers 
nothing that happened while the spell was in ef- 
fect, possibly leading to amusing consequences 
(“By the gods, how did I get here?”). 

The material component is a ruby of at least 
200 gp value, which is crushed during the casting. 


Mindshatter (Enchantment/Charm) 


Sphere: Thought 

Range: 3 yards/level 
Components: V, S, M 
Duration: Special 

Casting Time: 1 round 
Area of Effect: One creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell allows the priest to create one spe- 
cific form of insanity in the subject. Five forms of 
insanity are possible through this spell. 

Schizophrenia: This form of insanity is charac- 
terized by personality loss. The subject has no 
personality of his own, so he selects a role model 
and makes every possible attempt to behave like 
that character. The chosen role model will be as 
different from the subject as possible. (Thus, an 


94 


insane wizard might begin to follow the habits of 
a warrior.) Obviously, a warrior who believes 
himself to be a wizard will be unable to cast spells 
(he might think that he's casting spells, or he 
might construct a sophisticated series of excuses 
explaining why he’s “not in the mood for magic” 
at the moment). A character who emulates a 
member of another class does not gain any of the 
skills of that class and makes all attacks and sav- 
ing throws as appropriate to his true class. Cer- 
tain consequences might arise if the character's 
emulation causes him to break restrictions of his 
class. For example, a priest emulating a warrior 
might break his deity’s prohibition against edged 
weapons, or a paladin might emulate a Neutral 
Evil thief. Both will suffer the appropriate conse- 
quences as if they had been compelled to violate 
their beliefs while charmed. Such characters will 
certainly have to atone for their actions once they 
return to normal. 

Dementia praecox: The subject is totally unin- 
terested in any undertaking. Nothing seems 
worthwhile, and the individual is lethargic and 
filled with tremendous feelings of boredom and 
dissatisfaction. No matter how important the sit- 
uation, it is 50% likely that the subject will ignore 
it as meaningless. 

Delusional insanity: The subject is convinced 
that he is a famous figure: a monarch, demi-god, 
or similar personage. Characters who fail to rec- 
ognize the subject with the honor he deserves in- 
cur great hostility or disbelief. The subject acts 
appropriately to a station that he does not hold. 
He directs orders at real and imaginary creatures 
and draws upon resources that do not exist. 

Paranoia: The subject is convinced that “they” 
(whoever they are) are spying on him and plot- 
ting against him. Everyone around the subject, 
even friends and allies, is part of the plot. If any 
other character acts in a way that the subject can 
interpret as reinforcing this delusion, the subject 
has a 20% chance of reacting with violence. 

Hallucinatory insanity: The subject sees, 
hears, and otherwise senses things that do not ex- 
ist. The more stressful the situation is to the sub- 
ject, the more likely he will hallucinate. Although 
most hallucinations are external to the subject 
(that is, he perceives creatures, objects, and con- 
ditions that do not exist), there is a 10% chance 
that any hallucination will involve the subject's 
self-perception. For example, the subject might 
suddenly believe and act as if he had sprouted 
wings, grown to giant size, etc. 


When this spell is cast by a priest of 13th level 
or lower, the DM chooses or randomly selects 
one of these forms of insanity (and should feel 
free to invent other interesting symptoms). If the 
priest is 14th level or higher, he can personally se- 
lect the form of insanity to afflict the subject. 

While under the effect of this spell, the subject 
can cast spells and use innate powers; the use of 
these abilities will be in accordance with the 
symptoms of the insanity, however. Player char- 
acters affected by this spell should be encouraged 
to role-play the appropriate effects to the limit. 

The duration of this spell depends on the sum 
of the subject's Intelligence and Wisdom scores. 
A saving throw is allowed on a periodic basis de- 
pending on this total. The spell is broken if a suc- 
cessful saving throw is rolled. Refer to the table 
that follows. 


Int + Wis Time Between Checks 
8 or less 1 month 
9 to 18 3 weeks 
19 to 24 2 weeks 
25 to 30 1 week 
31 to 35 3 days 
36 or more 1 day 


The effects of this spell can be removed by a 
limited wish, wish (or equally powerful magic), 
or by a heal spell cast for this specific purpose. 

The material component is a small bust of a hu- 
man head, about 3” in height, made from fine, 
delicate china. The priest shatters this bust during 
the casting. 


Repeat Action (Enchantment/Charm) 


Sphere: Time 

Range: 30 yards 
Components: V, S 
Duration: Special 

Casting Time: 5 

Area of Effect: One creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell compels its victim to repeat the action 
of the previous round. The result of the repetition is 
always identical to the original result. 

For example, if a character fired an arrow and 
inflicted 4 points of damage, a repeat action spell 
will cause him to fire a second arrow that will al- 
so inflict 4 points of damage. As long as the vic- 
tim of the first arrow is within range, the subject 
affected by repeat action will adjust his aim and 
fire the second arrow at him. If the victim of the 
arrow moves out of range, the subject will fire his 


95 


Priest Spells (5th Level) 


second arrow in the direction of the recipient. If 
the recipient is out of sight, the subject will fire in 
the direction of the recipient's original location. 

The subject of a repeat action spell must be capa- 
ble of performing the indicated action a second 
time. If a character has no arrows in his quiver, he 
cannot fire an arrow. If a wizard were ordered to 
repeat a spell, he would attempt the spell only if he 
had the spell memorized and had sufficient material 
components. If a subject discovered a gem during a 
given round, repeat action will only compel him to 
hunt again; he will not recover another gem unless 
a second gem is actually present. 

An unwilling subject is allowed a saving throw 
vs. spell to resist the effects of repeat action. 

The material components are two identical 
glass spheres, each an inch or less in diameter. 


Shrieking Walls (Enchantment) 


Sphere: Wards 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Duration: 1 day/level 
Casting Time: 1 turn 
Area of Effect: 20'-cube 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell enchants any single room no larger 
than the area of effect. When any creature larger 
than a normal rat (larger than one-half cubic foot 
or weighing more than three pounds) enters the 
room, shrill shrieks begin to emanate from the 
walls. The shrieks persist for 2-5 (1d4+1) 
rounds. The walls do not undergo any physical 
change. 

The shrieks can be heard only by creatures in- 
side the room. Creatures hearing the shrieks ex- 
perience no ill effects on the first round, allowing 
them time to leave the room or cover their ears. 
Silence, 15' radius protects against the effects. 

Creatures who remain in the room during the 
second or subsequent rounds of the shrieks who 
have not protected their hearing are penalized as 
follows: 

e Creatures whose levels or Hit Dice are 
greater than the level of the caster are stunned for 
2-8 (2d4) rounds. 

e Creatures whose levels or Hit Dice are less 
than or equal to the level of the caster become 
deaf for 1-4 hours, suffering a —1 penalty to sur- 
prise; deafened spellcasters have a 20% chance of 
miscasting any spell with a verbal component. 

The material components are a small golden 
bell and a bee's wing. 


Priest Spells (5th Level) 


Thoughtwave (Divination) 


Sphere: Divination 
Range: 0 

Components: V, S 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Casting Time: 1 

Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: Special 


This cooperative spell can be cast by either a 
single priest or a group of priests. Thoughtwave 
allows the priest to send a short but powerful 
message to one or more specific individuals, in- 
forming them of his situation and general loca- 
tion. The spell instantly generates a powerful 
mental impulse indicative of the caster’s general 
mental state—anger, fear, pain, despair, etc. 

The caster can designate as many as ten per- 
sons to receive this message, provided they can 
all be specifically named or grouped in a general 
category. Thus, the caster could designate a 
group of characters by name or could target “fel- 
low priests,” “superiors,” “adventuring compan- 
ions,” “knights of Lord Harcourt,” or “villagers of 
Dopp.” If more than ten individuals are in the 
group, those closest to the source will receive the 
impulse. 

There is no range limitation to the spell, al- 
though it cannot be projected outside the plane 
occupied by the caster. 

Creatures receiving the impulse automatically 
know who sent it (even if they have never met the 
priest before) and gain a clear indication of the 
mood and situation of the caster. Recipients also 
intuitively know the general source of the spell, 
although they are unable to pinpoint rooms, 
dungeon levels, or landmarks. For example, a 
fighter could suddenly be struck by an image of 
Father Rastibon, who is injured and in great pain 
somewhere along the forest road. A priest might 
suddenly sense that his patriarch is being tortured 
in the dungeons of Castle Varrack. 

The spell can also be cast by more than one 
priest, allowing them to either contact greater 
numbers of individuals or increase the intensity 
of the message. If greater numbers are desired, 
ten characters are contacted per priest involved 
in the casting. 

Increasing the intensity of the message makes it 
more compelling. Doubling the intensity (requir- 
ing at least three priests) causes the message to act 
as a suggestion. In this case, the effect is limited to 
a single target. Tripling the intensity (requiring at 
least five priests) gives the spell the force of a 


96 


quest. This effect is also limited to a single target. 
In both cases, the target is allowed a saving throw 
to avoid the effect of the suggestion or quest. 


Time Pool (Divination) 


Sphere: Time 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Duration: 1 round/level 
Casting Time: 1 round 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell allows the caster to cause a mirror, a 
pool of water, or any other reflective surface to 
reveal a specific event from the past. The image 
provides a perfectly clear picture with normal 
sounds, as if the caster were present at the scene. 
The image continues for the duration of the spell. 

Time pool will not reveal images from other 
planes of existence. 

The spell’s success is not automatic. The caster 
must know the general nature of the event he 
wishes to view (i.e., “Show me the murder of 
King Thamak”). The caster’s base chance of view- 
ing the desired scene is 50%, modified as follows, 
to a maximum of 90%: 


e Add 5% for each point of the caster’s Wis- 
dom above 15. 

e Add 20% if the caster has successfully used 
time pool to observe the same event before. 


Only one of the following may apply: 

e Add 20% if the event is one in which the 
caster participated. 

e Add 10% if the caster is well informed about 
the event. 

e Add 5% if the caster is slightly informed 
about the event. 


The caster cannot communicate or otherwise 
interact with the image. Spells cannot be cast into 
the time pool. 

The material components are a suitable reflec- 
tive surface and a pinch of powdered quartz. 


Unceasing Vigilance of the Holy Sentinel 
(Alteration) 


Sphere: Guardian 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Duration: 1 hour/level 

Casting Time: 1 turn 

Area of Effect: 5-foot-radius sphere 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell enhances a priest's ability to guard a 
person, place, or object. The spell’s effect must be 
centered on a specific area, for it creates an invisi- 
ble spherical boundary up to 10 feet in diameter. 
The effect is not mobile; it cannot move with a 
living creature. 

While within the area of effect of this spell, the 
priest (and only the priest) gains several special 
abilities: 

© His sense of sight is magically enhanced. He 
can see through normal darkness and can see in- 
visible creatures and objects. He cannot see 
through solid objects, however, and the range of 
his magical sight is limited to 60 feet. 

e The priest has no need for food, water, or 
rest. He does not feel fatigue and regenerates 1 hit 
point per hour spent within the circle. However, 
he does not actually rest and therefore cannot re- 
gain spells until he sleeps. 

e He is totally immune to the effects of magi- 
cal and natural fear, as well as sleep and charm 
spells. 


If the priest leaves the circle, the spell is bro- 
ken. When the spell ends, the priest must rest for 
1 turn per hour (or portion thereof) spent in the 
circle. If the priest is forced into action (by being 
attacked, for example), he can move at only half 
his normal movement rate, has an Armor Class 
penalty of —2, an attack penalty of —2, and loses 
all Dexterity combat bonuses. 

To cast this spell, the priest must trace a circle 
of sigils and runes 10 feet in diameter using a spe- 
cial ink containing the powder of a crushed sap- 
phire (at least 1,000 gp value) and a drop of holy 
water. This procedure takes 1 turn to complete. 


97 


Priest Spells (5th Level) 


Undead Ward (Abjuration, Necromancy) 


Sphere: Wards 

Range: Special 

Components: V, S, M 

Duration: 1 turn/level 

Casting Time: 2 turns 

Area of Effect: 5-foot cube/level 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell prevents most types of undead crea- 
tures from entering the area of effect (a cube 
whose sides equal the caster’s level times 5 feet—a 
15th-level caster could affect a cube whose sides 
equal 75 feet). 

When an undead creature attempts to enter the 
protected area, the creature is affected by the 
ward as if it were being turned by a priest two 
levels lower than the caster. The casting priest 
need not have the ability to turn undead himself. 
Thus, an undead ward created by a 10th-level 
priest would turn creatures as if by an 8th-level 
priest. 

The results of the turning attempt are calcu- 
lated normally. If a large number of undead as- 
sault the warded area, not all of them are turned 
by the spell, since the normal limitations apply. 
Undead who are unaffected by the turning at- 
tempt ignore the undead ward for its duration. 
Undead within the area of effect when the spell is 
cast are not affected. However, when such un- 
dead leave the area of effect, they are subject to 
the effects of the spell if they attempt to reenter. 

The material component is the priest's holy 
symbol, which must be carried around the perim- 
eter of the area to be warded. 


Priest Spells (6th Level) 


Sixth-Level Spells 


Age Creature (Alteration) 
Reversible 


Sphere: Time 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 
Duration: Permanent 
Casting Time: 1 round 
Area of Effect: One creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell ages the targeted creature one year 
per level of the caster. Unwilling subjects may at- 
tempt a saving throw to resist the spell. Subjects 
affected by age creature must make a successful 
system shock roll to survive the change. 

Subjects cannot be aged beyond their natural 
life spans. If the priest's level indicates that a crea- 
ture would be aged beyond this level, the creature 
is aged to one year short of his maximum age. 
The spell cannot cause a subject to die. 

Human and humanoid characters affected by 
the spell experience changes in appearance associ- 
ated with increased age, such as gray hair and 
wrinkles. More significantly, they suffer losses in 
Strength, Dexterity, and Constitution when they 
reach certain age levels. These are summarized in 
Table 12: Aging Effects in the Player's Handbook. 
The Player's Handbook also provides rules for 
determining a character's base age. 

Nonmagical monsters can be affected by age 
creature. The DM determines a monster's current 
age and natural life span based on its description 
in the Monstrous Compendium or based on his 
own judgment. To determine the effects of aging 
on a monster, assume the following: a monster is 
middle-aged when it reaches half its natural life 
span; a monster reaches old age at two-thirds of 
its natural life span; a monster reaches venerable 
age in the last one-sixth of its years. A monster 
suffers the penalties which follow when it reaches 
these age levels. The penalties are cumulative and 
permanent (unless the affected monster becomes 
younger). 


Age Penalty 
Middle Age —1 to all saving throws 
Old Age —1 to all saving throws 
—1 to all attack rolls 
Venerable —1 to all saving throws 


—1 to all attack rolls 


The material component is a pinch of pow- 
dered emerald. 


98 


The reverse of this spell, restore youth, perma- 
nently restores age that has been lost as a result of 
magic (such as an age creature spell). Restore 
youth reduces the age of the targeted creature by 
one year per level of the caster. The subject must 
make a successful system shock roll to survive the 
change. Subjects who become younger regain the 
lost ability scores described above. A subject can- 
not become younger than his actual age as a re- 
sult of this spell. 

The material component is a pinch of pow- 
dered ruby. 


Crushing Walls (Enchantment) 


Sphere: Wards 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Duration: Permanent until activated 
Casting Time: 1 turn 

Area of Effect: Special 

Saving Throw: None 


This spell enables the caster to enchant a floor, 
ceiling, or single wall of a room to crush in- 
truders. The enchanted surface can be no larger 
than a square whose sides equal the caster’s level 
times 2 feet (a 13th-level priest could affect a 
26' X 26’ surface). 

The spell activates 1d4 rounds after any crea- 
ture other than the caster enters the room. The 
intruder must be larger than a normal rat (larger 
than one-half cubic foot or weighing more than 
three pounds). When activated, the enchanted 
surface moves toward the opposite surface at a 
rate of 3 feet per round. Unless the spell is can- 
celed by the caster, the enchanted surface con- 
tinues to move until one of the following events 
occurs: 

e A creature with sufficient Strength (mini- 
mum score of 19) stops the enchanted surface 
from moving by succeeding a Strength check. 
Such a creature suffers no damage from the en- 
chanted surface. If the creature prevents the en- 
chanted surface from moving for three 
consecutive rounds, the wall returns to its origi- 
nal position and the spell is negated. If multiple 
creatures attempt to stop the wall, the highest 
strength score is used as a base score; one point is 
added to that score for every creature assisting. 
Thus, a creature with 16 Strength assisted by 
three creatures could attempt to stop the wall. 

e A strong or heavy object made of stone, 
wood, or metal is placed in the path of the wall. If 
the item survives a saving throw vs. crushing 


blow, the object successfully braces the wall. If 
the object holds for three consecutive rounds, the 
surface returns to its original position and the 
spell is negated. The DM must use discretion in 
determining the types of objects that will brace 
the wall. 

e Dispel magic or a similar spell or magical 
item is used to cancel the crushing wall. 


Creatures can avoid being crushed by using a 
potion of diminution, potion of gaseous form, or 
other devices or spells that reduce size. The 
crushing wall almost never touches the opposite 
wall, usually being stopped by debris. A gap of 
two inches or more usually remains between the 
walls. 

If the wall is not stopped, it causes crushing 
damage to everyone in the room. All creatures 
must make a saving throw vs. death. Those who 
fail are crushed to death. Those who save suc- 
cessfully suffer 5d10 points of damage. When the 
wall can move no farther, it returns to its original 
position and the spell is negated. 

The material components are a 1-inch iron 
cube and a walnut shell. 


Disbelief (Enchantment/Charm) 


Sphere: Thought 
Range: 0 

Components: V, S 
Duration: 1 round/level 
Casting Time: 5 

Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell allows the caster to temporarily con- 
vince himself that certain objects or as many as 
four creatures within the area of effect do not ac- 
tually exist. While disbelief remains in effect, 
these objects or creatures cannot harm or hinder 
the caster. He can pass through them as if they 
did not exist and takes no damage from their at- 
tacks or actions. However, since these objects or 
creatures temporarily do not exist for the priest, 
he can take no action against them. If the crea- 
tures attack, the caster receives no Dexterity bo- 
nus to armor class (since this bonus represents 
dodging, and the priest is unable to dodge a crea- 
ture that does not exist for him). 

The caster can attempt to disbelieve as many as 
four creatures within 60 feet of his position at the 
time of casting. He disbelieves the same four crea- 
tures for the duration of the spell. Alternatively, 
the priest can disbelieve any or all inanimate ob- 
jects of up to 20-cubic-yard volume (thus, he may 


99 


Priest Spells (6th Level) 


disbelieve a 12 foot by 15 foot area of 3-foot- 
thick wall). This volume must be centered on a 
point no more than 20 yards from the caster. 
These two options are mutually exclusive; the 
priest can disbelieve only creatures or objects, 
not a combination of both. 

Disbelieving a creature includes all gear, equip- 
ment, or treasure carried or worn by that crea- 
ture; it does not include other objects that come 
into contact with that creature, such as walls, 
doors, chairs, etc. 

Disbelief is not automatic; it requires an ex- 
treme effort. To successfully disbelieve, the priest 
must make a saving throw vs. paralyzation. A 
successful save means the priest has disbelieved; 
an unsuccessful check means that the spell has 
failed and the priest has not convinced himself of 
the creatures’ or objects’ non-existence. 

While this spell is in effect, the DM must record 
any damage suffered by the priest from disbe- 
lieved creatures. When the spell ends, the caster 
makes a saving throw vs. spell. If the saving 
throw is successful, the priest suffers only one- 
eighth of any damage inflicted by the creatures 
(round all fractions down); if the priest fails the 
saving throw, he suffers one-half of any damage 
inflicted (round fractions down). 


Dragonbane (Abjuration) 


Sphere: Wards 

Range: 10 yards/level 

Components: V, S, M 

Duration: 1d4 rounds +1 round/2 levels 
Casting Time: 1 round 

Area of Effect: 5'-cube/level 

Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell prevents any dragon who fails its 
saving throw from entering the area of effect. The 
spell affects a cubic area whose sides equal the 
caster’s level times 5 feet; thus, a 16th-level caster 
could affect a cube whose sides each equal 80 
feet. The dragon can cast spells, blast breath 
weapon, or hurl missiles (if possible) into the area 
of effect. 

Dragons within the area of effect when the 
spell is cast are not affected. If such dragons leave 
the area of effect, they must succeed a saving 
throw to reenter the area. 

The material components are the priest's holy 
symbol and a dragon scale. 

The spell’s effectiveness can be greatly in- 
creased with the casting of a focus spell. 


Priest Spells (6th Level) 


Gravity Variation (Alteration) 


Sphere: War 

Range: 10 yards/level 

Components: V, S, M 

Duration: 1 turn/3 levels 

Casting Time: 2 turns 

Area of Effect: 120-yard X 120-yard square 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell changes the characteristics of a 
square region of terrain. The area can be no more 
than 120 yards on a side. The priest can effective- 
ly turn a flat plain into a slope of any direction, 
or may flatten an existing slope. The spell does 
not allow the priest to alter the pull of gravity, 
however. 

This spell lets the priest create or negate a 
height differential of as much as 20 feet (a 2” 
slope in BATTLESYSTEM™ rules measurements) 
within the area of effect. This can have various 
consequences; the best way to discuss the effects 
is by example. 

Example 1: Two units face each other on a flat 
plain. The priest can alter the slope of the terrain 
so that one unit is 2” of elevation higher than the 
other. The unit that is upslope gains the combat 
benefits for higher ground, and the unit that is 
downslope must pay the movement cost for mov- 
ing uphill if it wishes to approach the other unit. 

Example 2: One unit is on flat terrain; another 
unit, 6” away, is on a hill of 2” elevation. Using 
this spell, the priest can effectively eliminate this 
difference in elevation (raising the low ground or 
lowering the high ground). All combat and 
movement involving these two units is then con- 
ducted as if there were no elevation difference 
(i.e., no movement penalty, no combat benefit 
for higher ground, etc.). Alternatively, the priest 
could increase the height differential by 2” . Com- 
bat and movement would now be conducted as if 
the total difference in elevation were 4”. 

Example 3: A unit faces a hill of 3” elevation. 
The priest casts gravity variation, decreasing the 
effective elevation of the hill to 1”. The unit pays 
a lower movement point cost to climb the hill. 
Alternatively, if the unit facing the hill were an 
enemy unit, the priest could increase the effective 
elevation to 5". 


The priest must specify the degree and direc- 
tion of change at the moment of casting. These 
parameters cannot be changed while the spell re- 
mains in effect. 

Gravity variation can have dramatic effects on 
siege engines and towers. Most siege engines can 


100 


be moved only on the most gentle of slopes. By 
raising or lowering the effective elevation of siege 
engines by 2”, the priest can totally immobilize 
them by positioning them on a slope too steep to 
negotiate. In the case of siege towers, there is a 
50% chance that the structures will topple over 
(totally destroying them). 

The material component is a tiny plumb bob; 
the plumb line must be made of platinum wire 
while the bob itself must be a gem of at least 1,000 
gp value. The device is consumed in the casting. 


The Great Circle (Abjuration) 
Reversible 


Sphere: Sun 

Range: 0 
Components: V, S 
Duration: 1 round 
Casting Time: 6 turns 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: Special 


The great circle is a powerful cooperative spell 
that can be used only by four or more priests, 
each casting the spell simultaneously. Because of 
the nature of this spell and its casting time, it is 
often used to cleanse grounds in preparation for 
the construction of a temple or sanctuary. 

When casting the great circle, the priests stand 
in a circle of no more than 20-foot diameter. Each 
faces inward; when the spell is completed, each 
priest faces outward, directing the energy of the 
spell. 

When the casting is complete, the spell takes 
the form of a radiant halo of golden light 20 feet 
above the ground. This halo quickly expands in a 
shimmering wave. It can pass through objects, 
with small arcs of the halo disappearing momen- 
tarily and reappearing on the far side. As the halo 
moves, it generates a high-pitched hum that var- 
ies in pitch, almost like a chorus. The halo moves 
slowly at first, but builds speed, reaching its max- 
imum range at the end of one round. 

The radius of the golden halo is dependent on 
the number of priests casting the spell. Each priest 
adds 60 feet to the radius. Thus, four priests 
could generate a halo that extends 240 feet in all 
directions from the circle of priests. Theoreti- 
cally, there is no limit to the number of priests 
who may contribute to this spell, but the need for 
the priests to be within a 20-foot diameter circle 
sets a practical limit of 20 casters. 

The halo is pure energy tapped from the Posi- 
tive Material plane. It causes harm to undead and 


evil beings within the area of effect. Undead crea- 
tures of 8 or fewer hit dice are instantly destroyed 
and are not allowed a saving throw to avoid the 
effect. More powerful undead suffer 1d8 points 
of damage per caster. A successful saving throw 
vs. death magic reduces this damage to half. 
Creatures of evil alignment suffer 1d6 points of 
damage per caster (a saving throw is allowed for 
half-damage). 

The reverse of this spell, the black circle, cre- 
ates a ring of shimmering black energy. Paladins 
and priests of good alignment suffer 1d10 points 
of damage per priest in the circle. All other good 
creatures suffer 1d4 points of damage per caster. 
Affected creatures are allowed a saving throw vs. 
death magic to reduce the damage to one-half. 


Group Mind (Divination, Enchantment/Charm) 


Sphere: Thought 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S 

Duration: 1 turn +1 round/level 
Casting Time: 1 round 

Area of Effect: 30-yard-diameter circle 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell is a deeper and more extensive ver- 
sion of rapport, in that it lets the priest communi- 
cate silently and instantly with several willing 
subjects. The number of subjects (in addition to 
the priest) depends on the caster’s level: 


Number of 
Level participants 
13 and below 2 
14-16 4 
17 6 
18 7 
19+ 8 


As with rapport, the spell lets the participants 
share thoughts, emotions, and memories. Each 
participant sees, hears, and otherwise senses 
everything experienced by the other, although 
such “vicarious” experiences feel weak and can- 
not be mistaken for direct sensations. Partici- 
pants can shut off these experiences at will if they 
find them confusing or distracting. 

The participants can share such personal con- 
cepts as plans, hopes, and fears, although they 
cannot communicate complex or detailed infor- 
mation. It is impossible to communicate the pro- 
cedure for casting a spell or picking a lock. 

Communication through group mind is ap- 
proximately 30 times faster than verbal commun- 


101 


RS 
Priest Spells (6th Level) N 
NAJE 


ication. The priest can maintain only one group 
mind spell at any time; thus, he cannot communi- 
cate with multiple groups. 

This spell cannot be used on unwilling sub- 
jects. 


Land of Stability (Abjuration) 


Sphere: Wards 

Range: 10 yards/level 
Components: V, S, M 

Duration: 1 day/level 

Casting Time: 6 

Area of Effect: 10-foot-cube/level 
Saving Throw: None 


Land of stability protects the area of effect and 
all creatures and objects within it from the fol- 
lowing natural disasters: 

e Earthquakes—vibrations do not affect the 
warded area and fissures will not open beneath 
the warded area; 

e Floods—the warded area remains dry, even 
if submerged; 

e Windstorms—the warded area suffers no 
damage from strong winds and objects cannot be 
blown into the warded area; 

e Lava and ash eruptions—lava and ash flow 
around the warded area; and 

e Avalanches—stones and snow will not fall 
on the warded area. 


Land of stability offers no protection against 
magically-generated disasters or spells that dupli- 
cate natural disasters. Disasters in progress in the 
area when the spell is cast are not affected. 

This spell affects a cubic area whose sides equal 
the caster’s level times 10 feet; thus, a 15th-level 
caster could affect a 150' X 150' X 150’ cube. 

The material components are the priest's holy 
symbol and a pinch of volcanic ash. 


Legal Thoughts (Enchantment/Charm) 


Sphere: Law 

Range: 10 yards 
Components: V, S 
Duration: Permanent 
Casting Time: 1 turn 

Area of Effect: One creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


A priest casting this spell forces the victim of 
the spell to follow one specific law. The priest 
may choose any law prevalent in the area in 
which the priest and the victim currently reside. 


Priest Spells (6th Level) 


Thus, if a city has no laws about murder, the 
priest cannot command the person not to kill. 

The victim of the spell is forced to obey the let- 
ter of the law to the best of his ability. Thus, if a 
victim were commanded not to commit murder, 
he would go to any length to avoid murdering 
someone. 

Since the essence of this spell is tied to legal 
(and not moral) interpretation, characters may 
find loopholes that will allow them to work 
around the law in specific cases or to ignore the 
law in light of extenuating circumstances. 

When casting the spell, the priest must speak 
the law to the recipient in such a way that he can 
hear it. The victim is allowed a saving throw vs. 
spell to avoid the effect. If the save is failed, the 
victim will never willingly violate the stated law 
as long as the spell is in effect. 

Legal thoughts can be negated by dispel magic. 
The victim of this spell never perceives anything 
wrong with adhering to the law, and therefore 
never seeks to have the spell removed. 


Monster Mount (Enchantment/Charm) 


Sphere: Travelers 

Range: 30 yards 

Components: V, S 

Duration: 1 hour/level 

Casting Time: 6 

Area of Effect: 20-foot radius circle 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell compels one or more living creatures 
to serve as mounts for the caster and his compan- 
ions. The spell affects up to 10 Hit Dice or levels 
of creatures with Intelligence of 4 or lower. Crea- 
tures used as mounts must be of suitable size to 
carry at least one rider; smaller creatures can be 
used as pack animals. 

Each intended mount receives a saving throw 
vs. spell. Creatures failing their rolls become doc- 
ile and obedient, allowing riders to mount them, 
and moving at the speed and direction indicated 
by the caster. 

To maintain the enchantment, the caster must 
remain within 10 yards of one of the affected crea- 
tures, and each affected creature must remain 
within 10 yards of another. The affected creatures 
will do nothing for the caster other than carrying 
riders and gear; they will not fight (although they 
will fight to defend themselves), nor will they in- 
tentionally endanger themselves. Any overtly hos- 
tile act by the caster or a rider against any mount 
breaks the enchantment for all the mounts. 


102 


When the enchantment ends or is broken, the 
creatures take no action for one round, then be- 
have as their natural instincts direct. 


Physical Mirror (Alteration) 


Sphere: Numbers 

Range: 30 yards 
Components: V, S, M 
Duration: 1d4 +8 rounds 
Casting Time: 6 

Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell causes a localized folding of space. 
The folded space takes the form of an invisible 
disk up to 20 feet in diameter. Any missile weap- 
on or spell that intersects this disk is instantane- 
ously reversed in direction. Melee factors such as 
speed, range, and damage are unaffected; the di- 
rection of the object or force is simply rotated 
through a 180° arc. The sender of the spell or mis- 
sile finds himself the target of his own attack. 

The physical mirror operates from only one di- 
rection; that is, only one side of the mirror re- 
flects attacks. The caster of the mirror may direct 
spells and missile attacks normally through the 
space occupied by the mirror. 

In the case of physical attacks, the attacker 
must roll to hit himself (without the armor class 
benefits of Dexterity or shield). Spells turned 
back may require the caster to make a saving 
throw vs. his own spell. In both of these cases, 
range is important. If the distance between the 
initiator of the attack and the physical mirror is 
more than twice the range of the attack, the at- 
tacker is safe; the attack has insufficient range to 
travel from the attacker to the mirror and back 
again. 

When the priest casts the spell, he must specify 
the location and orientation of the physical mir- 
ror disk. Once it is created, the disk cannot be 
moved. 

If two physical mirror disks touch or intersect, 
they destructively interact and both immediately 
vanish. The resulting “ripples” in the space-time 
continuum are exceedingly destructive and inflict 
3d10 hit points of damage on any creature within 
35 yards (a saving throw is allowed for half- 
damage). This always includes the casters of the 
physical mirror spells. 

The material component is a tiny mirror of pol- 
ished platinum, worth at least 500 gp. 


Reverse Time (Alteration) 


Sphere: Time 

Range: 30 yards 
Components: V, S, M 
Duration: 1-4 rounds 
Casting Time: 6 

Area of Effect: One creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell is similar to the 9th-level wizard spell 
time stop. When reverse time is cast, time stops 
within a 30-foot diameter of the subject. All crea- 
tures and items in the area of effect stand motion- 
less, rivers stop running, and arrows hang 
suspended in the air. Any creature, person, or ob- 
ject entering the area of effect is likewise frozen in 
time. The caster is affected if he is within the area 
of effect, unless he is the subject of the spell. 

An unwilling subject is allowed a saving throw 
vs. spell; if successful, the spell is immediately ne- 
gated. Otherwise, the victim is forced to relive all 
the actions taken in the previous 1-4 rounds in re- 
verse. Beginning with the most recent round, the 
subject moves backward, arrows fired by the 
subject return to his bow, and so on. All effects of 
these actions are negated. At the end of the spell’s 
duration, normal time resumes and all creatures 
immediately continue their activities, picking up 
right where they had stopped. 

Consider the following example. A party is 
battling a spellcasting red dragon. In the first 
round, the dragon breathes fire, roasting the par- 
ty’s wizard. The rest of the group attacks and in- 
jures the dragon. On the second round, the 
dragon bites and kills the group’s thief. More 
damage is caused to the beast, but it is still alive 
in the third round, when it uses magic missile to 
kill the ranger. At this point, the priest casts re- 
verse time on the beast. Fortunately, it fails its 
saving throw and is forced to reverse the last four 
rounds. While everyone else freezes, the dragon 
goes into reverse. The magic missiles zoom back 
to the dragon (and it regains the ability to cast 
that spell), it “unbites” the thief (removing that 
damage from the character), and then inhales its 
fiery breath (leaving the roasted wizard alive and 
uncooked). The dragon is then reversed through 
one more round—the round before it encounterd 
the party. The spell then ends and actions resume. 

The dragon must now roll for surprise since it 
is encountering the party for the first time. The 
party is immune to surprise, since it was fighting 
the beast previously. All damage suffered by the 
dragon remains, since these actions were caused 
by the group and not the beast. 


103 


Priest Spells (6th Level) 


The material component is an etched silver ar- 
row bent into a circle. The arrow must be no 
more than 3 inches long and worth no less than 
500 gp. The arrow is destroyed in the casting. 


Seclusion (Alteration) 


Sphere: Numbers 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Duration: 3d12 rounds +4 rounds/level 
Casting Time: 6 

Area of Effect: One creature 

Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell encloses one individual in an extradi- 
mensional space. Creatures to be affected must 
be of size M or smaller. The space can contain on- 
ly one creature, regardless of size. The priest may 
use the spell on himself or any creature he touch- 
es. Unwilling targets are allowed a saving throw 
vs. spell to avoid the entrapment. 

While inside the space, the enclosed character 
is invisible and totally undetectable by any form 
of scrying. Powerful magic such as contact other 
plane will indicate that the character is “else- 
where,” but will give no more information. 

The creature within the extradimensional space 
can see and hear everything that occurs around 
him. However, he cannot cast spells, and no 
action of his can affect anyone or anything in the 
“real world.” 

While occupied, the extradimensional space is 
totally immobile. If the caster chooses to occupy 
the space, he can pass in and out of the space at 
will. Other creatures can leave or reenter the 
space only if the caster allows it. To an outside 
observer, an enclosed character who exits the 
space simply appears from nowhere. 

If the space is occupied when the spell termi- 
nates, the occupant is immediately ejected back 
into the real world and suffers 1d6 hit points of 
damage in the process. 

Any time the extradimensional space is empty, 
or when the occupant is someone other than the 
priest, the space follows the priest around. Thus, 
the priest may seclude a comrade in the extradi- 
mensional space, walk past some guards into a 
building, then release the comrade. 

If any other form of extradimensional space 
(such as a bag of holding) is taken into the space 
created by seclusion, both spaces are ruptured 
and all contents are expelled onto the Astral 
plane. Extradimensional manipulation can tem- 
porarily prevent this. 


wr ween 


Priest Spells (6th Level) 


The material components are a tiny crystal box 
of the finest workmanship (worth at least 1,500 
gp) and a gem of at least 250 gp value. The gem is 
consumed in the casting; the box is not. 


Skip Day (Invocation/Evocation) 


Sphere: Time 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S 

Duration: Instantaneous 
Casting Time: 1 round 

Area of Effect: 10-foot radius 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


When this spell is cast, all persons and intelli- 
gent creatures within 10 feet of the caster are in- 
stantly transported 24 hours into the future. 
Creatures outside the area of effect will believe 
that the affected characters have disappeared. 
Unwilling creatures can attempt a saving throw 
vs. spell to resist the effect of skip day. 

No time passes for creatures affected by skip 
day; they are in the exact condition that they 
were in before the spell was cast. They are fa- 
tigued, have recovered no hit points, and carry 
the same spells. Wizards must wait for actual 
time to pass before they can memorize spells. 

The affected creatures remain in the same loca- 
tion as they were before skip day was cast. Their 
immediate environment is likely to have 
changed; for instance, fires have burned out, ene- 
mies who were attacking have departed, and 
weather has changed for better or worse. 

Although skip day is a possible substitute for 
teleporting out of a dangerous situation, it is not 
without risk; characters could reappear in a situ- 
ation more threatening than the one they left be- 
hind (for instance, a forest fire may have started 
or a pack of hungry wolves may have arrived). 


Sol’s Searing Orb (Invocation) 


Sphere: Sun 

Range: 30 yards 
Components: V, S, M 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Casting Time: 6 

Area of Effect: One gem 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell must be cast upon a topaz. When the 
spell is complete, the stone glows with an inner 
light. The gem must be immediately thrown at an 
opponent, for it quickly becomes too hot to hold. 
(The acts of casting and throwing occur in the 
same round.) It is not possible for the priest to 
give the stone to another character to throw. 

The stone can be hurled up to 30 yards. The 
priest must roll normally to hit; he gains a +3 
bonus to his attack roll and suffers no penalty for 
nonweapon proficiency. In addition, the glowing 
gem is considered a +3 weapon for determining 
whether a creature can be struck (creatures hit 
only by magical weapons, for example). There is 
no damage bonus, however. 

When it hits, the gem bursts withta brilliant, 
searing flash that causes 6d6 points of fire dam- 
age to the target and blinds him for 1d6 rounds. 
The victim is allowed a saving throw vs. spell. If 
successful, only half damage is sustained and the 
target is not blinded. Undead creatures suffer 
12d6 points of damage and are blinded for 2d6 
rounds (if applicable) if their save is failed. They 
receive 6d6 points of damage and are blinded for 
1d6 rounds if the save is successful. 

If the gem misses its target, it explodes immedi- 
ately, causing 3d6 points of damage (or 6d6 
against undead) to all creatures within a 3’ radi- 
us. It blinds them for 1d3 rounds (1d6 rounds vs. 
undead). All victims are allowed a saving throw 
vs. spell, with success indicating half damage and 
no blindness. The DM should use the rules for 
grenade-like missiles found in the Dungeon Mas- 
ter's Guide for determining where the stone hits. 

The material component is a topaz gemstone 
worth at least 500 gp. 


Spiritual Wrath (Invocation) 


Sphere: Combat 

Range: 300 yards 
Components: V, S 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Casting Time: 1 turn 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: 1/2 


This powerful cooperative spell is rarely in- 
voked since it requires the concerted effort of six 
or more high-level priests. The casting effort se- 
verely weakens the priests, discouraging casual 
use of this spell. 

To cast the spell, six or more priests must be 
within a 15-foot radius. Each priest must cast 
spiritual wrath at the same time. Before begin- 
ning the spell, the priests must decide upon the 
area of effect. The spell causes 10d6 +1d6 points 
of damage per priest casting the spell. (The mini- 
mum damage, therefore, is 16d6.) Creatures 
within the area of effect are allowed a saving 
throw vs. spell to reduce the damage to half. 

The spell strikes as a great wave of force that 
descends from the sky. Small objects must save 
vs. crushing blow. Structures suffer damage as if 
hit by a heavy catapult (2d12). The force of this 
spell often raises a great cloud of dirt and dust, 
obscuring the area for 1d4+1 rounds. 

The spell’s area of effect is determined by the 
number of casters. Each priest contributes 10 feet 
to the radius of the spell. Six casters would create 
a spell with a radius of 60 feet. No more than 
twelve casters can cooperate to cast this spell 
(maximum of 22d6 damage and a 120-foot radius 
area of effect). This converts to an 8-inch circle in 
the BATTLESYSTEM"™ rules ground scale. 

The spell is difficult to cast, physically taxing 
the spellcasters so much that each caster suffers 
3d10 points of damage from the effort. There is 
no saving throw allowed to avoid this damage. 


105 


Priest Spells (7th Level) 


Seventh-Level Spells 


Age Dragon (Alteration) 


Sphere: Time 

Range: 30 yards 
Components: V, S, M 
Duration: 1 round/level 
Casting Time: 1 round 
Area of Effect: One dragon 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell allows the caster to cause any dragon 
to temporarily gain or lose one age level per five 
levels of the caster. For instance, a 14th-level caster 
could cause a dragon to gain or lose two age levels; 
a mature adult dragon could be temporarily trans- 
formed into a young adult dragon or into a very 
old dragon. A dragon's age cannot be reduced be- 
low hatchling or increased beyond great wyrm. 

Unwilling dragons are allowed a saving throw 
vs. spells with a —4 penalty to avoid the effect. 

A dragon affected by age dragon temporarily 
acquires the armor class, hit points, spell abili- 
ties, combat modifiers, size, and other attributes 
of his new age level. The dragon retains his mem- 
ories and personality. At the end of the spell’s du- 
ration, the dragon returns to his normal age level. 

If the dragon suffered damage while experienc- 
ing his modified age, these hit points remain lost 
when he resumes his normal age. If the dragon 
loses more hit points at his modified age than he 
has at his actual age, he dies when the spell ex- 
pires. For example, a young adult bronze dragon 
with 110 hit points is aged to a mature adult with 
120 hit points. The dragon suffers 115 hit points 
in combat. Unless the dragon is healed of 6 points 
of damage before the spell expires, the dragon 
dies at the end of the spell since his damage is 
greater than his actual hit points. 

If a dragon is killed while under the effect of 
age dragon, he is dead at the end of the spell’s du- 
ration. 

The material component is a handful of dirt 
taken from a dragon’s footprint. 


Breath of Life (Necromantic) 
Reversible 


Sphere: Necromantic 
Range: 0 
Components: V, S, M 
Duration: 1 hour/level 
Casting Time: 1 turn 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


Priest Spells (7th Level) 


This powerful spell enables the caster to cure 
many persons (even an entire community) who 
are afflicted with a nonmagical disease. The 
priest need not touch or even see the diseased 
people for the spell to be effective, although re- 
cipients must be within the area of effect. 

This spell does not cure all diseases in the com- 
munity at one time; the caster must specifically 
state which disease is to be eliminated (black 
plague or yellow fever, for example) with each 
casting of the spell. 

When the spell is cast, the priest exhales a 
sweet-smelling breath. This forms into a breeze 
that radiates outward, forming a circle that ex- 
pands in a 50-yard radius per hour. During this 
time, the caster must remain at the center of the 
area of effect. For example, after 12 hours, the 
breath of life would cover a circle 1200 yards in 
diameter (600-yard radius). The breath is of a 
magical nature rather than a physical nature; 
therefore, it is unaffected by prevailing winds. 

The breeze blows through the community, in- 
stantly eliminating the specified disease from all 
afflicted citizens. The breath of life spell does not 
destroy parasitic monsters (such as green slime, 
rot grubs, and others), nor does it cure lycanthro- 
py or other magical afflictions. The spell does not 
prevent recurrence of a disease if the recipients 
are again exposed. 

The material components are the priest's holy 
symbol and a cone of incense that has been bless- 
ed by the highest priest of the character's religion. 

The breath of death, which produces a foul- 
smelling wind, is the reverse of this spell. Victims 
who fail a saving throw vs. death magic are af- 
flicted with a nonmagical, fatal disease. To deter- 
mine the results of this spell, the DM should roll 
saving throws for major NPCs in the area of ef- 
fect. The effect on the rest of the community can 
be calculated as a percentage, based on the saving 
throw. 

Infected creatures do not heal hit points until 
the disease is cured. The disease is fatal within 
1d6 weeks (the duration varies from person to 
person). 

The material components are the priest's holy 
symbol and a handful of dust taken from a mum- 
my’s corpse. 


106 


Divine Inspiration 


Sphere: Thought, Divination 
Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Casting Time: 5 

Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell is a more powerful version of the ge- 
nius spell. The priest's player may ask the DM 
one question about the current situation or about 
events that will occur within the next five rounds. 
Questions about the future must relate to exter- 
nal events, such as “Will the guards respond to 
the sentry’s yell?” Questions cannot refer to the 
outcome of combat, such as “Will we win the bat- 
tle?” The priest's player is allowed to use this spell 
to ask the DM for advice. In this case, the spell is 
the equivalent of asking the gods, “Okay, how do 
we get out of this one?” 

Like the genius spell, the DM must be careful in 
adjudicating this spell. The answer to the ques- 
tion is always relevant and correct, although not 
necessarily complete. The answer can also be 
cryptic, in the form of a riddle or rhyme, depend- 
ing on the DM's assessment of the situation and 
how potentially unbalancing the answer might 
be. In general, the answer will be a short phrase 
of no more than eight to ten words. 

The material component is a gem of at least 500 
gp value. This spell can be cast only once in any 
24-hour period. 


Hovering Road (Conjuration/Summoning) 


Sphere: Travelers 
Range: 0 
Components: V, S, M 
Duration: 1 turn/level 
Casting Time: 1 round 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell enables the caster to create a magical 
10-foot-wide road extending 10 feet in front of 
him. The caster can create an unbroken road for 
the duration of the spell, creating a 10-foot area 
ahead of him as long as he continues to move for- 
ward. 

The road is approximately one foot thick and 
hovers in the air. It has the texture and color of 
black granite. Characters and creatures can move 
on the hovering road at their normal movement 
rate, ignoring the effects of surrounding terrain. 


The hovering road must originate from a solid 
surface. Once anchored, the caster controls the 
contour of the road, causing it to rise and fall as 
he wishes. The road can thus be used to traverse 
rivers (if the road is anchored on the shore), 
swamps, and similarly hostile terrain. The caster 
can cause the hovering road to rise over a jungle 
or cross a chasm. 

The road has AC 0. It is impervious to non- 
magical weapons. If the road suffers 100 points of 
damage (from magical weapons or other magical 
forces), it dissipates in a black mist; all those on 
the road fall to the ground below. 

Unless the road is destroyed, the entire hover- 
ing road remains intact from beginning to end for 
the duration of the spell, even if the caster is 
killed or incapacitated. At the end of the spell’s 
duration, the entire road dissipates. 

The material components are a chunk of black 
marble and a loop of gold wire. 


Illusory Fortification (Illusion/Phantasm) 


Sphere: War 

Range: 240 yards 
Components: V, S, M 
Duration: Special 
Casting Time: 10 turns 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


The ritual required to cast this spell is time- 
consuming and extremely complex. As its name 
implies, illusory fortification creates an illusion 
of a wall of heavy stonework up to 30 feet tall 
and 160 yards long, topped with crenellations. 
The illusory wall can be of any color and appar- 
ent age, potentially allowing the caster to match 
the false wall with the real walls of an existing 
castle. The illusory wall must be continuous (it 
cannot form two or more shorter walls), but it 
can follow any corners or bends that the caster 
desires. 

In addition to the wall, the spell creates the illu- 
sion of constant movement among the crenella- 
tions, as if defending troops were moving atop 
the wall. The formation of the crenellations 
makes it impossible for a distant observer to de- 
termine exactly how many and what types of de- 
fenders are present on the illusory fortification. 

The illusory wall remains in existence for 2d12 
hours unless the spell is terminated earlier. 

The spell has one very significant limitation: it 
is strictly two-dimensional and is visible from on- 
ly one side (the side that the caster deems to be 
the “outside”). When viewed from the outside, 


107 


Priest Spells (7th Level) 


the wall appears real; when viewed from the end, 
from above, or from the “inside,” the wall is total- 
ly invisible except for a faint outline of the shape 
of the wall. This means that friendly troops, con- 
cealed from enemy view by the illusory wall, can 
see their opponents clearly. The wall is most ef- 
fective if friendly troops are informed of the 
wall’s presence and are careful not to walk 
through the illusion. Such an occurrence does not 
end the spell, but it will probably advise the ene- 
my of the nature of the wall. 

Spells cast at the wall and shots fired at the illu- 
sory fortification by siege engines appear to 
strike the wall and inflict normal damage. In real- 
ity, the missiles or spells pass through the illusion, 
possibly striking troops or real fortifications be- 
yond. Such “hits” do not disturb the illusion. 

As soon as an enemy unit moves within 10 
yards of the illusory fortification, the spell termi- 
nates and the wall vanishes. 

There are two ways in which the spel] can be 
terminated before it expires. First, the priest can 
terminate the spell at any time. Second, if a 
friendly unit makes an attack, whether melee or 
missile combat, through the illusory wall from 
the “inside” to the “outside,” the spell terminates 
instantly. 

Once the illusory fortification has been cre- 
ated, the priest does not need to concentrate on 
the wall. The spell remains in effect even if the 
casting priest is killed in the interim. 

The material components are the priest's holy 
symbol, a handful of stones, powdered mortar, 
and a gem worth at least 3,000 gp. All compo- 
nents except the holy symbol are consumed in the 
casting. 


Mindkiller (Enchantment/Charm, Necromancy) 


Sphere: Thought, Necromantic 
Range: 240 yards 
Components: V, S, M 
Duration: Special 

Casting Time: 1 round 

Area of Effect: One creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This powerful spell puts the personality of a 
single human or demihuman into stasis, turning 
his body into a mindless automaton. The body 
will follow any telepathic order given to it by the 
casting priest. Elves and half-elves receive no in- 
nate resistance to this spell. Priest and subject 
need not share a common language. 

The priest can force the subject into combat, 
but the subject's attack rolls suffer a —2 penalty. 


The priest can attempt to force the subject to cast 
spells or use innate magical or magiclike abilities. 
This is a difficult procedure for which the subject 
receives a normal saving throw vs. breath weap- 
on. A successful save means that the priest has 
failed to cause the subject to use a magical power; 
a failed save means that the subject casts the spell 
or uses the power as directed by the priest. The 
spell takes effect successfully only if the caster 
possesses any necessary material components. 
The priest can make only one attempt per round 
to force the use of magic. 

The priest can force the subject to speak, al- 
though the priest cannot inject a full range of 
emotions into the subject's voice. At the DM’s 
discretion, any character who is very familiar 
with the subject may make an Intelligence check 
to notice that something is wrong with the subject 
(and possibly suspect that the subject's will is not 
his own). 

This spell does not give the caster access to the 
subject's thoughts or memory. However, the cast- 
er can see through the subject's eyes. 

To control the subject, the priest must be with- 
in spell range (240 yards) of the subject. If the 
priest is 15th level or lower, he cannot force the 
subject to perform particularly delicate actions, 
such as picking a lock. At 16th level or higher, 
however, this restriction is removed. The priest 
could thus force a thief to pick a lock. Any such 
delicate actions suffer a —20% penalty (—4 on 
1d20) to reflect the “remote control” nature of the 
action. 

The subject’s personality remains in stasis until 
the priest releases it with a mental command. It 
can also be released by a limited wish, wish, or a 
heal spell cast for this express purpose. If the 
priest ceases concentration on controlling the 
body or if the subject moves out of range, the 
subject collapses into a comatose state. 

With its personality in stasis, the subject's body 
will remain alive for a number of hours equal to 
the subject's Constitution times five. When this 
time period expires, the body dies and the person- 
ality is lost. The subject can be raised or resur- 
rected, however. 

When the body dies, the priest’s control termi- 
nates. The body’s death trauma is felt by the con- 
trolling priest as a wracking agony, potentially 
strong enough to unseat the priest's reason. If the 
priest has not released the victim prior to death, 
he must make a system shock roll at —15 to the 
roll. An unsuccessful check means that the priest 
becomes insane as if by a mindshatter spell. 

Use of mindkiller is considered an evil act. 


108 


Characters using this spell are subject to any and 
all consequences involving deviation of align- 
ment. 

The material component is a gem of at least 500 
gp value, which is consumed in the casting. 


Shadow Engines (Illusion/Phantasm) 


Sphere: War 

Range: 240 yards 

Components: V, S, M 

Duration: 8 turns 

Casting Time: 3 turns 

Area of Effect: 180-yard X 180-yard square 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell creates the illusion of as many as 
four siege engines. The casting priest may choose 
from ballistae, siege towers, catapults, rams, or 
any combination thereof. Like the creatures cre- 
ated by the spell shadow monsters, these illusory 
engines have at least a tenuous reality and can in- 
flict damage on enemies. 

Shadow engines are accompanied by illusory 
crews of the appropriate number and race. The en- 
gines can move at a rate of 20 yards per turn and 
are unaffected by terrain considerations. (The 
caster can choose to slow them when passing 
through rough terrain to aid the illusion of reality.) 

Shadow engines cannot carry real troops. 
They can be fired at the same rate as real engines 
of the appropriate type, but a hit causes only one- 
half the damage normal for that type of engine 
(round fractions down). 

A shadow engine remains in existence until the 
spell duration expires, until an enemy unit ap- 
proaches within 10 yards, or until it suffers dam- 
age from an enemy missile attack. When any of 
these conditions occur, the engine vanishes. If a 
single spell has created multiple engines, only the 
engine struck vanishes; the others remain. 

The crew associated with a shadow engine 
must remain with that engine; it cannot move 
more than 5 yards away from the engine itself. 

Shadow engines can move independently of 
other engines created by the spell as long as they 
remain within the area of effect and remain with- 
in 240 yards of the caster. The caster must main- 
tain concentration to control the shadow engines. 
He cannot cast any other spells, and he is limited 
to a movement rate of 6. If the caster is struck for 
damage, the shadow engines vanish. 

The material component is a finely detailed 
miniature model of a siege engine (of any type), 
which is consumed during the casting. 


Spacewarp (Alteration) 


Sphere: Numbers 

Range: 50 yards 

Components: V, S, M 

Duration: 1 round/level 

Casting Time: 7 

Area of Effect: 50-foot-diameter sphere 
Saving Throw: None 


According to one view of the universe, what 
we perceive as gravity is actually a localized 
warping of the fabric of space-time. The space- 
warp spell creates a temporary but very intense 
warping in a limited area. 

When the priest casts this spell, he selects a spe- 
cific point to be the center of effect. This point 
may be anywhere within 50 yards of the caster, 
including in midair. 

When the spell is completed, this center of ef- 
fect gains a gravity field equal to the force felt at 
the surface of the earth. In other words, gravity is 
centered at this point; everything within 50 feet 
of this center that is not attached to something 
immovable will fall toward the selected point. 

This localized gravity affects only loose objects 
and creatures capable of movement (i.e., not 
trees, whose roots are buried in the ground). It 
does not affect the ground itself—soil, plants, 
desert sand, lake water, etc. are immune to the 
effect. 

An object falling toward the center of gravity 
gains speed exactly as it would if it were falling 
toward the ground. When the object reaches the 
center, it instantly ceases its movement. If objects 
are already at the center, newly arriving objects 
will slam into them, causing normal falling dam- 
age (1d6 per 10 feet) to the newly arriving ob- 
jects. Objects previously at the center must save 
vs. paralyzation or suffer half that amount of 
damage. 

Consider the following example. An orc is 10 
feet away from the center of effect when the spell 
is cast. He falls 10 feet to the center and stops. His 
companion, a bandit, is 30 feet from the center. It 
takes him longer to fall to the center, so the orc is 
already there when he arrives, and the two char- 
acters collide forcefully. The bandit suffers 3d6 
hit points of damage—the falling damage associ- 
ated with a 30-foot fall. The orc must save vs. 
paralyzation or suffer half that amount. 

Other things are caught in the effect as well. 
The bandit’s horse was 50 feet away from the cen- 
ter of effect, so it arrives at the center after the orc 
and the bandit. It falls 50 feet, suffering 5d6 
points of damage, and potentially inflicting half 


109 


Priest Spells (7th Level) 


that amount on both the orc and the bandit. 

The center of effect can be anywhere within 50 
yards of the priest. Possibly one of the most de- 
structive uses of this spell is to cast it directly on 
an enemy creature. Everyone and everything 
within 50 feet of that creature falls toward him 
and strikes him, inflicting damage. 

When the spell terminates, gravity returns to 
normal. If the spell has lifted any characters or 
objects off the ground, they immediately fall 
back to the ground, suffering the appropriate 
amount of falling damage. 

The material components are a lodestone and a 
sphere of obsidian, both of which are consumed 
in the casting. 


Spirit of Power (Summoning, Invocation) 


Sphere: Summoning 
Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Duration: 1 hour 

Casting Time: 3 turns 
Area of Effect: The casters 
Saving Throw: None 


This cooperative spell is rarely used or spoken 
of, since its requirements are strict and the out- 
come is uncertain. The spell must be cast by six 
priests of the same faith. All six must touch hands 
at the time of casting. At the completion of the 
spell, the priests fall into a trance. The life es- 
sences of the priests leave their bodies and merge 
at a point within 10 feet of the casters. The spirits 
of the priests meld together to form the avatar of 
the priests’ deity. 

In this manner, the six characters become a sin- 
gle being with all the powers and abilities allowed 
to that avatar. The only stipulation is that the 
priests’ deity cannot have created all avatars al- 
lowed to it at that moment. If this has happened, 
the spell fails and the priests are drained as de- 
scribed below. 

If the spell succeeds, the priests have com- 
pletely given their wills over to their deity, essen- 
tially forming the vessel into which it funnels 
power. In becoming the avatar, the priests retain 
the ability to make most of their own decisions. 
(The six must work in harmony or allow one of 
their number to decide all actions.) However, the 
deity can assume direct control of the avatar at 
any time it desires—the avatar is, after all, an 
earthly manifestation of the deity. 

Although the spell has a duration of one hour, 
the deity is not obliged to release the priests at 
that time. If the priests are not released at the end 


Priest Spells (7th Level) 


of the spell’s duration, they instantly die. A deity 
can choose to sacrifice its priests in order to main- 
tain its avatar on the Prime Material plane. Such 
a cruel and unjust action is almost never under- 
taken by good deities or those that have any re- 
spect for life, free will, or mercy. For dark and 
sinister gods, the question is much more uncer- 
tain. If a deity chooses to maintain the avatar 
longer than one hour, control of the avatar in- 
stantly and permanently passes to the DM. 
(Clearly, a DM should seldom if ever exercise this 
power.) 

While the priests are formed into the avatar, 
their bodies remain in a death like trance. The 
priests have no idea what might be happening to 
their real bodies (unless the avatar can observe 
them). Any damage to a priest's body requires an 
instant system shock roll. If successful, the dam- 
age is recorded normally, but the damage does 
not take effect until the spell ends (at which point 
the priest will almost certainly die). If the system 
shock roll is failed, the character instantly dies 
and the spell ends. Characters who die in this 
manner cannot be raised, resurrected, or reincar- 
nated. They have been taken to the ultimate re- 
ward (or punishment) for the service they have 
rendered. If the bodies are moved from their posi- 
tions, the spell ends. 

Even if the deity releases the priests, they are 
left severely drained. All spells memorized are 
lost until the priest can rest and perform his pray- 
ers once again. The physical drain leaves each 
priest with only 1 hit point upon awakening, re- 
gardless of the number of hit points the character 
had when the spell was cast. Since damage suf- 
fered during the spell takes effect instantly, any 
priest who is hurt dies immediately (although 
quick action by others might save him). 

Each priest who survives the spell will be 
bound by a quest (a duty that must be completed 
in exchange for calling upon their god). 

The material component is an offering appro- 
priate to the deity. The DM determines the exact 
nature of this offering. 


110 


Tentacle Walls (Enchantment) 


Sphere: Wards 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Duration: Special 

Casting Time: 1 round 
Area of Effect: 50-foot cube 
Saving Throw: None 


Tentacle walls enables the caster to enchant a 
single room whose volume is less than or equal to 
the area of effect. The spell activates 1d4 rounds 
after any creature other than the caster enters the 
room. The intruder must be larger than a normal 
rat; that is, it must be larger than one-half cubic 
foot or weigh more than three pounds. 

When the spell is activated, six black, leathery 
tentacles sprout inside the room; the tentacles are 
evenly divided among the room’s surfaces (for in- 
stance, if the room is a cube, one tentacle sprouts 
from the floor, one sprouts from the ceiling, and 
one sprouts from each of the four walls). 

The whip-like tentacles grow to the length of 
the room and swing wildly. Each round, a tenta- 
cle has a 30% chance of striking a random crea- 
ture in the room, inflicting 1d6 points of damage 
(save vs. spell for half damage). Each tentacle has 
AC 0 and 25 hit points. When a tentacle is re- 
duced to 0 hit points, it disappears in a puff of 
black smoke. 

If all creatures are killed or withdraw from the 
room, the surviving tentacles withdraw, disap- 
pearing into the walls. If the spell is activated 
again, six tentacles reappear; new tentacles are 
created to replace any destroyed previously. As 
long as one tentacle survives an encounter, the 
tentacles will continue to be replaced. Only when 
all six tentacles are destroyed is the spell perma- 
nently negated. 

The material component is the dried tentacle of 
an octopus. 


Timelessness (Alteration) 


Sphere: Numbers 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 
Duration: 1 day/level 
Casting Time: 7 

Area of Effect: One creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell totally stops the flow of time for a 
single individual. All signs of life stop and the 
subject is incapable of any movement or thought. 


While the spell is in effect, the subject is totally 
immovable and cannot be affected by any physi- 
cal or magical forces. Weapons simply bounce off 
the subject as they would bounce off the hardest 
stone. Spells, including dispel magic, are totally 
incapable of affecting the subject in any way. The 
subject does not age. 

Aside from the fact that the subject remains 
visible, frozen in place like a statue, he is effec- 
tively no longer part of the universe. (DMs may 
rule that the most powerful of magics, such as 
wishes, and creatures of demigod or higher status 
can affect the subject.) 

When the priest casts the spell, he or she states 
the duration for which the spell will remain in ef- 
fect (the maximum is one full day per level of the 
caster). Once the spell is cast, this duration can- 
not be changed; the priest cannot terminate the 
spell before the stated time has elapsed. 

If the subject is unwilling to be affected by the 
spell, the priest must touch the victim for the spell 
to take effect; the subject receives a normal sav- 
ing throw to resist the effects. A willing subject 
need not make a saving throw. 

The priest may cast this spell on himself if de- 
sired. This spell can provide a powerful defensive 
maneuver; while the spell is in effect, the subject 
is totally invulnerable. Timelessness is also an ef- 
fective form of long-term imprisonment, as long 
as the priest is around to cast the spell again at the 
appropriate time. 

This is an exceptionally powerful spell. Casting 
it puts a significant strain on the priest. Each time 
he casts timelessness, the priest must make a sys- 
tem shock roll. If the priest fails this throw, he or 
she permanently loses 1 point of Constitution. 

The material components are a gem worth at 
least 1,000 gp and a small cylinder of obsidian. 
Both are crushed during the casting. 


Uncontrolled Weather 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 


Sphere: Chaos 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S 

Duration: 1 turn/level 

Casting Time: 1 turn 

Area of Effect: 4d4 square miles 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell allows the caster to summon weather 
that is either appropriate or inappropriate to the 
climate and season of the region. The summoned 
effects are always dramatic—cool breezes or light 
fog will not appear. Instead, torrential floods will 


Priest Spells (7th Level) 


assault a desert, a heat wave will rage in polar 
wastelands, and tornadoes and hurricanes will 
rip across gentle landscapes. A blizzard might 
spring up in summer or a tornado might material- 
ize in the winter. 

The spellcaster has no influence over the 
weather pattern that emerges. He cannot control 
the area of effect or the duration of the weather. 

Four turns after the spell is cast, the trend of the 
weather will become apparent—a sudden chill, 
gust of wind, overcast sky, etc. The uncontrolled 
weather arrives on the fifth turn. Once the weath- 
er has arrived, it cannot be dispelled. If the spell is 
canceled by the caster before the beginning of the 
fifth turn, the weather slowly reverts to its origi- 
nal condition. 

The effects of the spell are the decision of the 
DM. The effects should be grand and impressive. 
Following are suggested effects of the weather. 

Torrential Rain/Blizzard: Visibility is reduced 
to 100 yards or less; travel is nearly impossible 
due to water or heavy snow on the ground. 

Storm/Hurricanes: All flying creatures are 
driven from the skies; trees are uprooted; roofs 
are torn off; ships are endangered. 

Heat Wave: Intense heat immediately causes 
ice bridges to melt; avalanches of snow and ice 
roll down mountains. 

The DM determines the area of effect random- 
ly. The maximum duration of the spell is one turn 
per level of the caster; however, the DM may 
cancel the effect after a shorter time. 


Priest Spells (Quest Spells) 


Quest Spells 


The quest spells that follow are designed to be 
used only in extraordinary circumstances as de- 
termined by the DM. Players and the DM should 
read the explanatory notes about quest spells in 
the introduction to this book before entering 
these spells into play. 


Abundance (Alteration) 


Sphere: Creation, Plant 
Range: 0 

Duration: Permanent 
Casting Time: 1 turn 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


By casting an abundance spell, the priest 
quickens the ripening of a harvest or the growth 
of woodland. Fields of crops in the affected area 
will grow, ripen, and be ready for harvest in a 
single day. Seed must be sown any time before 
the casting of the spell. 

An area of woodland will grow as if it had 
grown for 25 years in one day plus five years per 
day for another three days. There must be soil ca- 
pable of supporting the woodland for the growth 
to remain healthy. 

The priest must stand anywhere within the ar- 
ea to be affected. The priest designates the exact 
size and shape of the area in the casting. 

The area of effect is 10 square miles for ripen- 
ing a harvest and 25 square miles for woodland 
growth. This spell does not create effects such as 
entanglement or enlargement of the flora within 
the area of effect. 


Animal Horde (Conjuration/Summoning) 


Sphere: Animal, Summoning 
Range: 0 

Duration: 1 day 

Casting Time: 1 turn 

Area of Effect: 10-mile radius 
Saving Throw: None 


This potent spell summons a number of ani- 
mals to the priest. For each level of the priest, a 
number of animals totaling 10 hit dice appear. 

The Power who grants the spell enables the 
priest to know exactly what types and numbers 
of animals are within the area of effect. The priest 
may specify the numbers of animals he wants; for 
instance, a 16th-level priest could summon 60 
HD of wolves, 40 HD of bears, and 60 HD of 


112 


wolverines. The animals will begin arriving in 
one round and will be assembled at the priest's 
location at the end of three turns. 

The animals will not fight among each other 
even if they are natural enemies. Monsters (drag- 
ons, gorgons, hell hounds, etc.) cannot be sum- 
moned with this spell. 

The summoned animals will aid the priest in 
any means of which they are capable. They will 
enter battle, protect the priest and his compan- 
ions, or perform a specified mission until the 
priest dismisses them or the spell expires. During 
this time, the priest can automatically communi- 
cate with his animals. 

At the end of the spell, the animals instinctive- 
ly return to their Jairs. For the first three turns af- 
ter the spell expires, the animals will not attack 
the caster, his companions, or other summoned 
animals. After this time, the animals will behave 
normally. 


Circle of Sunmotes 
(Alteration, Invocation/Evocation, Necromancy) 


Sphere: Sun 

Range: 200 yards 

Duration: 3 turns 

Casting Time: 1 round 

Area of Effect: 60-foot-radius hemisphere 
Saving Throw: None 


By casting circle of sunmotes, the priest creates 
a hemispherical shell filled with sparkling, glow- 
ing motes of bright sunlight. A one-foot radius 
globe of sunlight appears at the height of the cast- 
er's head in the exact center of the circle. 

Creatures within the area of effect who are 
friendly to the cleric experience the glowing 
motes as warm, invigorating, inspiring, and heal- 
ing. They are healed for 1d6 hit points, gain the 
benefit of an aid spell for 1 turn after the circle of 
sunmotes is created, gain +1 bonuses to all at- 
tack and damage rolls, and gain a +2 bonus to 
morale. 

Enemies of the priest experience the same sun- 
motes as blinding, burning, and damaging. They 
must save versus spell or be blinded for 1 turn af- 
ter the sunmotes are created. Each enemy is 
struck by a small fiery mote causing 1d4+1 
points of damage (no saving throw is allowed, 
but creatures with magical fire resistance suffer 
only half damage), and suffers a —2 penalty to 
morale. 

Companions of the cleric who step within 10 
feet of the glowing miniature sun at the center of 


the effect are healed of 1d8 +2 hit points. This af- 
fects each creature only once during the spell’s 
duration. 

Enemies of the priest who come within 10 feet 
of the minisun are burned for 1d8+2 points of 
fire damage. No saving throw is allowed, but 
creatures possessing magical resistance against 
fire suffer only half damage. 

Companions of the priest who are outside the ar- 
ea of effect view enemies within the circle as if they 
are affected by golden faerie fire. Creatures affected 
by the faerie fire suffer a —2 penalty to armor class 
from attacks by creatures outside the circle. 

Enemies of the priest outside the circle view the 
priest's allies as if obscured by a blinding light 
and suffer a —2 penalty to missile attacks against 
them. 


Conformance 
(Conjuration/Summoning, Invocation) 


Sphere: Law 

Range: 0 

Duration: 6 turns 

Casting Time: 1 round 

Area of Effect: 80-foot-diameter sphere 
Saving Throw: None 


The conformance spell has a simple principle 
with a profound effect: probable events always 
manifest. 

In game terms, this means that events with a 
probability of 51% or better always occur. Thus, 
if a saving throw of 9 is required to avoid an ef- 
fect, no roll is necessary; the save is automati- 
cally successful. If a warrior must roll 10 or better 
to hit an enemy, he automatically hits. 

Conversely, improbable actions (those with 
less than a 50% chance) always fail. If a warrior 
must roll 12 or better to hit an enemy, he auto- 
matically fails. If a thief’s chance to hide in 
shadows is 49%, he automatically fails. 

There are two conditions that affect this spell. 
First, a prayer spell is continuously operative in 
the area of effect, shifting the balance of combat 
probabilities toward the favor of the priest who 
casts this spell and his companions. Second, 
probabilities of exactly 50% always shift in favor 
of the spellcasting priest. For example, if a roll of 
11 or better is needed to save against a spell ef- 
fect, this is a 50% chance for success. In such 
cases, the priest and his friends always make the 
save and enemies always fail. 

This spell is particularly potent if bless and 
chant spells are cast in the area of effect. 


Priest Spells (Quest Spells) 


Elemental Swarm (Conjuration/Summoning) 


Sphere: Elemental, Summoning 
Range: 240 yards 

Duration: 6 turns 

Casting Time: 3 turns 

Area of Effect: Special 

Saving Throw: None 


This spell enables the caster to open a portal to 
one elemental plane of his choice (as appropriate 
for his patron Power). He can then summon ele- 
mentals from that plane. 

After the first turn of casting, 3d3 elementals of 
12HD each appear; after the second turn, 2d3 ele- 
mentals of 16HD each appear; after the third 
turn, 1d3 elementals of 20HD each appear. Each 
elemental has at least 5 hit points per hit die. The 
elementals remain for six turns from the time they 
first appear. 

These elementals will obey the priest explicitly 
and cannot be turned against the caster. The 
priest does not need to concentrate to maintain 
control over the elementals. They cannot be dis- 
missed with spells such as dismissal; the elemen- 
tals remain for the duration of the spell. 


Etherwalk (Alteration) 


Sphere: Astral, Travelers 
Range: Special 
Duration: Special 
Casting Time: 5 rounds 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


By casting this spell, the priest transports him- 
self and as many as 50 followers (who must join 
hands at the time of casting) to the Border Ethere- 
al. Unwilling creatures are allowed a saving 
throw at a —4 penalty to avoid transportation. 

The spell then allows the priest and his party to 
make as many as three round-trip journeys to 
and from the Inner Planes. It then allows them to 
return to the Prime Material plane. 

Travel rates in the Ethereal plane are at four 
times normal speed. Travel times for locating or 
searching along curtains are all at the minimum 
time possible. Encounters with monsters occur at 
one-fifth the normal frequency. The priest and his 
party are not affected by the ether cyclone. 

The spell expires when the priest and his party 
return to the Border Ethereal from an inner plane 
for the third time. They are then instantly trans- 
ported to the Prime Material plane. 


Priest Spells (Quest Spells) 


Fear Contagion (Abjuration) 


Sphere: Charm, War 
Range: 240 yards 
Duration: Special 
Casting Time: 1 round 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: Special 


A priest casting fear contagion selects a single 
creature to be the focus of the spell. The creature 
is affected by magical fear and receives no saving 
throw to avoid the effect. All creatures within 10 
yards of the target creature must make a saving 
throw versus spell with a —4 penalty; failure in- 
dicates that they are also affected by fear. 

If BATTLESYSTEM™ rules are used, the spell 
forces the affected unit to make a Morale Check 
at a —6 penalty. If this roll fails, the unit auto- 
matically routs. 

Creatures affected by fear will flee in a direc- 
tion away from the spellcaster for as long as they 
are able to run (refer to Chapter 14 of the Player's 
Handbook for rules). Such creatures will then 
spend one full turn cowering after being forced to 
rest. During this time, affected creatures suffer 
— 4 penalties to attack rolls, and all dexterity bo- 
nuses are negated. 

When using BATTLESYSTEM rules, fear- 
struck creatures are permitted rally tests with a 
—3 penalty and must engage in rout movement 
until they rally. However, a rally test is not per- 
mitted until two turns of rout movement have 
been completed. 

As creatures run in fear, their fear is conta- 
gious. Any creature that comes within 10 yards 
of a creature affected by this spell must make a 
saving throw (no penalties) or be forced to flee 
from the spellcaster. In BATTLESYSTEM”™ rules, 
creatures make a standard Morale Check with a 
—3 penalty. 

Creatures affected by fear no longer cause fear 
in others after they have passed one mile from the 
original center of the spell effect. 


Health Blessing (Necromancy) 


Sphere: Healing, Necromantic 
Range: 100 yards 

Duration: 1 day/level 
Casting Time: 1 round 

Area of Effect: 50 creatures 
Saving Throw: None 


Health blessing provides a number of human, 
demi-human, or humanoid creatures with protec- 


tion against ill health; it also enables subjects to 
heal others. 

Recipients of a health blessing are immune to 
nonmagical disease, gain a +4 bonus to saving 
throws versus poison and death magic, and can 
cast cure light wounds on themselves once per 
day for the duration of the spell. In addition, a 
recipient of health blessing can heal one other 
creature per day as a paladin does by laying 
hands. The healing conferred is 1 hit point per 
level or hit die of the healer. 


Highway (Alteration, Evocation) 


Sphere: Travelers 

Range: 0 

Duration: 1 day 

Casting Time: 1 turn 

Area of Effect: 1,000 square yards 
Saving Throw: None 


The highway spell creates a shimmering plane 
of force that acts as a magical conveyor for the 
priest. By standing at the forward edge of the 
10 x 100 yard plane, the priest and as many fol- 
lowers as can fit onto the square can travel as out- 
lined below. 

The highway travels 30 miles per hour (MV 88) 
over all terrains. The priest sets the height of the 
highway in a range from 1 foot to 100 yards 
above ground level. The highway moves as the 
priest wills; if the priest wishes to fix a destination 
in his mind, the highway will take the shortest 
route to that destination until the priest changes 
the course in his mind. 

The highway cannot be used offensively. It will 
automatically travel over or around obstacles 
such as buildings and large creatures. It protects 
creatures traveling on it from adverse effects of 
the elements (ice, rain, gales, etc.). The highway 
can hover in place, but hovering can be achieved 
only at a height of 12 inches above ground level. 

When the spell expires or the destination is 
reached, the highway gently lowers the priest and 
his party to the ground. The priest may order the 
highway to drop off creatures and collect others 
at intermediate destinations, although the priest 
who cast the spell must remain on the highway or 
it will disappear. 


Imago Interrogation 
(Divination, Enchantment/Charm) 


Sphere: Astral, Divination, Time 
Range: 0 

Duration: Special 

Casting Time: 1 turn 

Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


The imago is a mental image—a form of men- 
tal magical body. After casting this spell (requir- 
ing 1 turn), the caster falls asleep. After 1d6 turns 
of sleep, the imago of the priest begins to travel. 
The imago is not subject to any forms of attack 
and has no effective attacks. 

The imago may travel to as many as four dif- 
ferent locations separated by any distance, even 
across the planes and/or backward in time. At 
these locations, the imago may interrogate the 
imagos of as many as 10 other sentient creatures 
(other than Powers), compelling them to reply 
truthfully to its questions. A maximum of 40 
questions may be asked during the spell duration. 

Asking one question and listening to the reply 
takes 4 rounds of time in the caster’s world. Each 
planar/time jump lasts 3 turns in that world. 

Imago communications are telepathic. The 
questions must be able to be answered in a sen- 
tence of reasonable length, or the interrogated 
creature becomes confused and cannot answer. 

The imagos of interrogated creatures will have 
no recollection of their interrogations. As a re- 
sult, history cannot be changed through back- 
ward time travel using this spell. 


implosion/Inversion (Invocation) 


Sphere: Numbers, Combat 

Range: 120 yards 

Duration: Special 

Casting Time: 1 round 

Area of Effect: One or more creatures 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


By use of this spectacular spell, the priest rear- 
ranges the extradimensional and spatial geome- 
tries of the molecules of one or more creatures. 
The result is that the rearrangement of the target 
creature causes it to implode (collapse inward 
upon itself) or invert (its insides become its out- 
sides and vice versa). 

The result is usually inversion, unless the tar- 
get would not be adversely affected by this proc- 
ess (e.g., aslime, ooze, golem, elemental, etc.). In 
this case, implosion takes place. In either case, 


116 


the effect kills/destroys the target instantaneous- 
ly unless it makes a successful saving throw ver- 
sus death magic at a —4 penalty. 

The priest can affect one creature per round 
with this spell. After each round, the priest must 
make a Constitution check. If this fails, the priest 
is overwhelmed with the effort of sustaining the 
spell, at which time the spell terminates, leaving 
the priest fatigued (the equivalent of being 
stunned) for 1d4 rounds. The maximum possible 
duration of the spell is 3 turns. 


Interdiction (Abjuration) 


Sphere: Chaos, Law, Wards 
Range: 240 yards 

Duration: 1 day 

Casting Time: 2 turns 

Area of Effect: 200-foot cube/level 
Saving Throw: Special 


This powerful spell affects all enemies of the 
spellcasting priest who enter the area of effect. 
The spell inflicts a —2 penalty on saving throws, 
a —1 penalty to armor class, and a —1 penalty to 
attack and damage rolls. Creatures friendly to 
the cleric gain corresponding bonuses— +2 to 
saving throws, +1 to attack and damage rolls, 
and a bonus of 1 to AC. Additional effects are 
possible, depending on the Power granting the 
spell; effects must correspond (or at least not con- 
flict) with the spheres the priest normally uses. 
Multiple effects are possible. 

The variation for the Sphere of Wards requires 
that each hostile creature entering the area of ef- 
fect make a saving throw vs. spells with a —4 
penalty or suffer 4d6 points of damage. An af- 
fected creature must then flee the area; it is un- 
able to return. The creature must make a second 
saving throw vs. spell with a —4 penalty as it 
leaves the area or be blinded until magically 
cured. 

The variation for the sphere of Law requires 
that a hostile creature make a saving throw every 
time it wishes to change an action. Thus, if a crea- 
ture wishes to stop running and draw a weapon, 
a successful save is needed or the creature con- 
tinues to run. Actions that cannot be continued 
(e.g., firing an arrow if the archer has no more 
arrows) are repeated as empty automatisms. In 
addition, creatures hostile to the priest automati- 
cally fail saving throws against Enchantment/ 
Charm spells cast by the priest. 

The variation for the Sphere of Chaos requires 
that hostile creatures make saving throws vs. 


spells at —4 or be affected by confusion (as per 
the spell). Affected creatures have a 5% chance 
per round of suddenly being attacked by a phan- 
tasmal killer. 

All creatures who enter the area of effect are 
subject to the effects of the spell. All effects ex- 
cept blindness cease 3 rounds after an affected 
creature leaves the area. Creatures reentering the 
area of effect must make new saving throws. 


Mindnet (Divination, Enchantment/Charm) 


Sphere: Thought 
Range: 0 

Duration: 12 turns 
Casting Time: Special 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: Special 


The priest casting a mindnet spell establishes a 
telepathic link with as many as 10 other creatures 
who may be separated from each other by as 
much as 10 miles. Thus, a chain of creatures 100 
miles long could be established. 

The Power granting this spell has the final 
word on the individuals who may be included in 
the spell. Most commonly, the spell will be cast to 
include individuals familiar to the caster. How- 
ever, depending on the purpose of the spell, the 
Power may allow a stranger known to the caster 
only by name to be included in the mindnet. 
Unwilling creatures must make a saving throw at 
a ~4 penalty to avoid being included in the 
mindnet. 

Casting the spell requires one round per two 
creatures in the mindnet. The spell’s duration be- 
gins after all affected creatures have been linked. 
Characters of any class may take part in this link- 
age, benefiting from several effects. 

First, each member of the mindnet benefits 
from Intelligence, Wisdom, and Dexterity bo- 
nuses. The bonuses are equal to the bonuses held 
by the member of the mindnet with the highest 
ability score. For example, if five creatures in a 
mindnet have Wisdom scores of 15, 15, 16, 17, 
and 18, each creature would make saving throws, 
ability checks, and the like as if he had a Wisdom 
score of 18. Bonus spells are not gained due to 
enhanced Wisdom, however. 

Second, spells may be pooled among the spell- 
casters within the mindnet. Any priest may use a 
spell memorized by another priest with two con- 
ditions: the priest who has memorized the spell 
must allow its use; and a priest “borrowing” a 
spell may use only spells of levels he could nor- 


117 


mally cast. Such borrowing still causes the spell 
to be lost from the mind of the caster who memo- 
rized it. A caster may not borrow spells outside 
his normal class restrictions. Priests and wizards 
within a mindnet cannot mix their priestly and 
wizardly spells, nor can a specialist borrow a 
spell from an opposition school. 

Third, each member of the mindnet is in con- 
stant mental communication. Each member 
knows what is happening at the locations of all 
other members. 

Finally, twice per turn, the priest casting this 
spell can instantly teleport any person linked by 
the mindnet to any other person who is also a 
part of the spell. This massive effort results in a 
+4 penalty to any Constitution checks made by 
the priest. 

The priest casting the spell cannot perform any 
other actions while the mindnet exists; if he does, 
the spell is canceled. The priest must make a Con- 
stitution check at the end of each turn in order to 
sustain the spell. A failed check cancels the 
mindnet. The spell can last a maximum of 12 
turns, 


Planar Quest (Alteration) 


Sphere: Astral 

Range: Touch 
Duration: Special 
Casting Time: 5 rounds 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


By joining hands with as many as 12 compan- 
ions and casting this spell, the priest transports 
his party to any other plane of existence. The 
priest and his party may arrive at a specific loca- 
tion in a plane (if one is known) or at an un- 
known destination. Travel time to the 
destination, whether known or unknown, will al- 
ways be at the minimum possible. In an inner 
plane, a friendly guide will always be available to 
the priest. Hostile encounters occur at one-fifth 
normal frequency. 

Unwilling creatures are allowed a saving throw 
at a —4 penalty to avoid being transported. 

In the inner planes, the party is magically pro- 
tected in any means necessary for survival. The 
party does not need to eat, drink, or rest if condi- 
tions make these activities impossible. Party 
members are immune to fire in the elemental 
plane of fire, and similar immunities are granted 
by the Power in other planes as necessary. The 
party can move through any terrain (including 


the elemental plane of Earth) at its normal move- 
ment rate. 

In the outer planes, similar immunities apply. 
The priest is also granted a power compass (de- 
scribed in Manual of the Planes). Hostile en- 
counters in an outer plane occur only half as 
often as normal. 

The duration of this spell is decided by the 
Power who grants it. Normally, it is sufficient to 
allow the priest and his party to undertake the 
quest that the Power has set forth. When the 
quest has been completed successfully or has 
failed beyond recovery, the priest and his party 
are returned to the Prime Material plane. 


Preservation (Abjuration) 


Sphere: Wards 

Range: 480 yards 

Duration: Special 

Casting Time: 1 turn 

Area of Effect: One structure 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell creates a powerful set of protective 
wards that operate on a single fortified building, 
temple complex, tower, or similar structure. 
These wards protect the physical integrity of the 
structure and prevent magical access. 

A building protected by preservation suffers 
only 25% of normal structural damage from 
sources such as siege engines, earthquakes (both 
natural and magical), and powerful weather- 
affecting spells. Spells which directly affect the 
physical integrity of the structure (e.g., passwall, 
stone shape, transmute rock to mud) simply fail 
when cast on the protected building. 

Preservation creates a permanent protection 
from evil spell on the affected building. Every 
surface of the building benefits from the effects of 
the spell. 

Magical spells allowing access to the building 
fail. Thus, creatures attempting to teleport or fly 
into the building are stopped. Birds and creatures 
with natural flight may enter the building nor- 
mally. 

If the building is a temple (or other consecrated 
building) dedicated to the Power that granted the 
spell, all priests inside it gain the benefit of a sanc- 
tuary spell for the duration of the preservation. 

The preservation spell expires if the building is 
destroyed or after 60 days have passed. 


118 


Revelation (Divination) 


Sphere: Divination 
Range: Special 
Duration: 1 day 
Casting Time: 1 turn 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


The revelation spell grants the priest extraordi- 
nary divination powers. He gains the following 
abilities that are effective to a range of 240 yards. 

è The priest gains true seeing as per the Sth- 
level priest spell. 

e The priest can see and identify all priest spell 
effects in the area (assume a line of sight in a 60° 
arc). 

è The priest is instantly aware of any crea- 
ture’s attempt to lie to him. 

è The priest can communicate with animals, 
creatures, and monsters of all types. He can com- 
municate with any number of creatures, but may 
converse with only one at a time. 

è The priest can communicate telepathically 
with humanoids. 

è The priest may use a suitable item as a crys- 
tal ball once per hour, as per the magical item de- 
scribed in the DMG (including range). He gains a 
+20% bonus to all rolls to determine success. 


Reversion (Alteration, Invocation) 


Sphere: Time 

Range: 0 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Casting Time: 1 

Area of Effect: 10-foot-radius sphere 
Saving Throw: None 


By casting this spell, the priest reverses certain 
recent events in the area of effect. The spell af- 
fects only creatures friendly to the priest. The 
magic takes effect immediately after the spell is 
completed rather than at the end of the round. 

All damage suffered by the priest's allies during 
the previous turn is undone. This includes energy 
drains, poison, and all special attack forms unless 
these resulted in instantaneous death. Death from 
cumulative physical damage is undone, however. 
Any creature brought back to life by the rever- 
sion spell is not required to make a resurrection 
survival roll. 

Any spells cast by the priest's allies during the 
previous turn are restored and may be used 
again. This does not apply to magical or spell-like 
effects from magical items or scrolls. Material 


components consumed in spellcasting during this 
time are also restored. 

The reversion spell affects only creatures and 
characters. Equipment and magical items are not 
affected. 

Casting this spell ages the priest one year. 


Robe of Healing (Enchantment, Necromancy) 


Sphere: Healing 

Range: Touch 

Duration: 1 hour 
Casting Time: 1 round 
Area of Effect: One robe 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell enchants the priest's robe or cloak, 
enabling him to walk among wounded creatures 
and heal them. By touching the robe, a wounded 
creature is cured of 1d4+4 hit points. As many 
creatures as can physically touch the robe within 
the spell duration can be healed. A reasonable 
maximum is 20 creatures per round, allowing a 
total of 1,200 creatures to be healed. A creature 
can be affected only once per week by the robe of 
healing. 


Siege Wall (Alteration, Invocation) 


Sphere: Creation, Guardian 
Range: 480 yards 

Duration: Special 

Casting Time: 1 turn 

Area of Effect: One building 
Saving Throw: None 


A siege wall uses magical energy to fortify all ex- 
ternal areas of a fortified building, such as walls, 
battlements, drawbridges, and gates. External sur- 
faces to be protected must be contiguous. 

The protective effects of the siege wall are com- 
patible with BATTLESYSTEM™ rules (see Chap- 
ter 7). Creatures assaulting the protected building 
have their movement rates reduced by half when 
trying to scale the exterior surfaces (scaling lad- 
ders, etc.). Attackers suffer a — 2 penalty to dam- 
age rolls for missile fire. 

Damage or AD caused by war machines is re- 
duced by 2 die levels (if normal damage is 1d12, 
1d8 is rolled instead; if damage is 1d10, 1d6 is 
rolled; ballista has AD8). Damage caused by 
crushing engines is rolled at —2 to the damage 
roll or ADs. Hits or hit points of crushing engines 
are reduced by half. 

All enemies attacking a building protected by 
siege wall who enter an enclosed wall space are 


119 


out of command unless they are in the line of 
sight of their commander, regardless of his con- 
trol diameter. 

All exterior areas of the fortification have their 
hit points or Hits doubled (see Hits of Building 
Features in BATTLESYSTEM"™ rules). 

The siege wall expires if the building is de- 
stroyed; it lasts a maximum of 24 hours. 


Shooting Stars (Conjuration, Invocation) 


Sphere: Combat, Sun, Weather 
Range: 120 yards 

Duration: Instantaneous 
Casting Time: 1 round 

Area of Effect: 40-yard radius 
Saving Throw: 1/2 


A priest casting shooting stars creates a violent 
turbulence in the air above the area of effect, 
from which a number of fiery-orange, 
electrically-charged miniature fireballs erupt and 
shower onto the ground. Within the area of ef- 
fect, all creatures suffer 6d10 points of combined 
fire and electrical damage. A successful saving 
throw at a —4 penalty indicates half damage. 

In addition, four large shooting stars material- 
ize within the area of effect. The priest can indi- 
vidually target these at specific creatures. If 
creatures are not specified, the targets are ran- 
domly selected. Each shooting star causes 48 
points of damage on impact (no saving throw is 
allowed). Any creature within 10 feet of impact 
suffers 24 points of fire damage (half-damage if a 
saving throw at —4 is successful). 


Sphere of Security (Abjuration) 


Sphere: Protection 

Range: 0 

Duration: 6 turns 

Casting Time: Special 

Area of Effect: 10-foot-radius sphere 
Saving Throw: None 


Sphere of security protects the priest who casts 
the spell and his companions within the area of 
effect. Enemy creatures within the area are unaf- 
fected. 

The sphere grants affected creatures a +2 bo- 
nus to armor class, a +2 bonus to all saving 
throws vs. magic, and 50% magic resistance. 
Casting this portion of the spell requires 1 round. 

In addition, the priest can specify as many as 
four additional specific protection effects from 
the List of Protection Scrolls in Appendix 3 of the 


DMG. Each additional protection lengthens cast- 
ing time by 1 round. The priest may create one 
effect per 5 levels of his experience, to a maxi- 
mum of four effects. 


Spiral of Degeneration 
(Enchantment/Charm, Invocation) 


Sphere: Chaos, Thought 

Range: 0 

Duration: 6 turns 

Casting Time: 1 round 

Area of Effect: 50-foot-diameter sphere 
Saving Throw: Special 


This potent spell affects all creatures hostile to 
the priest within the area of effect. The Power 
granting the spell causes the spell’s effects to man- 
ifest in one of two ways: the Chaos variation or 
the Thought variation. 

In the Chaos variation, the fabric of reality is 
altered to change events. Magical items dysfunc- 
tion because the fabric of magical reality is 
changed. 

In the Thought variation, the thoughts of the 
victims of the spell are distorted and altered so 
that they find themselves unable to function co- 
herently and effectively. Magical items dysfunc- 
tion because the thoughts of their users are 
warped to either convince them that the items 
cannot function or block thought so that proper 
commands cannot be given. 

The effects on the victims of the spell are the 
same for both variations. Each round, there is a 
50% chance that a degeneration effect will occur 
in the area of effect. When this occurs, two events 
take place. First, spellcasters lose one spell from 
each level of spell currently memorized (e.g., a 
spellcaster who has memorized three spells each 
from levels 1 through 3 loses one spell from each 
level for a total of three). Lost spells may be re- 
gained normally through rest and memorization. 

Second, magical items are affected in the fol- 
lowing ways: 

e Weapons and armor lose one level of en- 
chantment (a sword +3 becomes a sword +2, 
etc.). 

e Magical items that carry charges (wands, 
rods, staves, etc.) are drained of 1d10 charges. 

e Magical items without pluses or charges 
must make a saving throw versus spell (using the 
saving throw of their owner) or become non- 
magical. 

e Potions lose all magic and scrolls lose one 
randomly determined spell. 


120 


è Permanent magical items (swords, boots, ar- 
mor, etc.) temporarily lose all effects until the 
spell expires or until the items leave the area of 
effect and for 1d10 rounds thereafter. 


Single-use and charged items are permanently 
affected by this spell. A potion destroyed by this 
spell remains useless even after the spell ends. 

Within the area of effect, magical communica- 
tion is impossible due to thought blocks and cha- 
otic effects. No communication magic (ESP. 
sending, etc.) will function; any spellcaster trying 
to cast such a spell will be stunned for 1 round per 
level of the spell he attempts to cast. A reverse of 
the tongues spell operates continuously in the ar- 
ea of effect. Telepathic communication (e.g., with 
a familiar) is also impossible. 

In the Chaos variation of the spell, the center 
of the area of effect moves 10’ per round. The di- 
rection is randomly determined using 1d8 roll 
and compass points (1=N, 2=NE, 3=E, 4=SE, 
5=S, 6=SW, 7=W, 8=NW). The radius of the 
spell effect will never exclude the priest who cast 
the spell; re-roll any result that leads to this oc- 
currence. 


Stalker (Conjuration/Summoning) 


Sphere: Creation, Guardian, Plant 
Range: 30 yards 

Duration: Special 

Casting Time: 1 round 

Area of Effect: Special 

Saving Throw: None 


A priest casting this spell conjures 1d4 +2 plant 
creatures which have statistics identical to sham- 
bling mounds of 11HD. These creatures will aid 
the caster in combat or battle, perform a specific 
mission, or serve as bodyguards. The creatures 
remain with the priest for seven days unless he 
dismisses them. If the stalkers are summoned on- 
ly for guard duty, however, the duration of the 
spell is seven months. In this case, the stalkers 
can only be ordered to guard a specific site or lo- 
cation. 

The stalkers gain resistance to fire as per sham- 
bling mounds only if the terrain is suitable 
(marshy, close to a body of water, etc.). 


Storm of Vengeance (Evocation) 


Sphere: Elemental, War, Weather 
Range: 400 yards 

Duration: 1 turn 

Casting Time: 1 turn 

Area of Effect: 120-yard radius circle 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell requires the priest to concentrate and 
cast the spell for the full duration of the spell. The 
casting time and duration are simultaneous; both 
activities occur in the same turn. 

In the first round of casting, the priest sum- 
mons an enormous black storm cloud over the ar- 
ea of effect. Lightning and crashing claps of 
thunder appear within the storm; creatures in the 
area of effect must make a saving throw or be 
deafened for 1d4 turns. 

On the second round, acid rains down in the 
area, inflicting 1d4 +1 points of damage. No sav- 
ing throw is allowed. 

On the third round, the caster calls six light- 
ning bolts down from the cloud. Each is directed 
at a target by the priest (all may be directed at a 
single target or they may be directed at six sepa- 
rate targets). Each lightning bolt strike causes 8d8 
points of damage (a successful saving throw indi- 
cates half damage). 

On the fourth round, hailstones rain down in 
the area, causing 3d10 points of damage (no sav- 
ing throw). 

On the fifth through tenth (and final) rounds, 
violent rain and wind gusts reduce visibility to 
five feet. Movement is reduced 75%. Missile fire 
and spellcasting from within the area of effect are 
impossible. 

The sequence of effects ceases immediately if 
the priest is disrupted from spellcasting during 
the 1 turn duration of the spell. The priest may 
opt to cancel the effects at any time. 


Transformation 
(Alteration, Enchantment, Illusion) 


Sphere: Numbers 

Range: 0 

Duration: 3 turns 

Casting Time: 1 round 

Area of Effect: 100-yard-radius sphere 
Saving Throw: None 


The transformation spell allows the priest to 
alter extradimensional and relative geometries 
within the area of effect. This enables the priest 
and his companions to use extradimensional links 


121 


Priest Spells (Quest Spells) 


to facilitate rapid movement as follows. 

All allies of the priest are able to blink (as per 
the 3rd-level wizard spell) once per round, with 
the ability to select the direction of movement. 

As many as 10 creatures (designated by the 
priest at the time of spellcasting) can use the tele- 
port without error spell. They may teleport any- 
where within the area of effect of the 
transformation spell once during the duration of 
the spell. 

As many as 10 creatures (specified by the priest 
at the time of spellcasting) gain abilities as if 
wearing boots of striding and springing for the 
spell duration. 

At any time during the spell, the priest and as 
many as 10 other creatures can be affected as per 
a shadow walk spell. Creatures to be affected 
must stand in a circle and touch hands. As soon 
as the priest who cast the transformation spell 
leaves the area of effect via the shadow walk, all 
other effects of the transformation are canceled. 


Undead Plague (Necromancy) 


Sphere: Necromantic 

Range: 1 mile 

Duration: Special 

Casting Time: 2 rounds 

Area of Effect: 100-yard square/level 
Saving Throw: None 


By means of this potent spell, the priest sum- 
mons many ranks of skeletons to do his bidding. 
The skeletons are formed from any and all hu- 
manoid bones within the area of effect. The num- 
ber of skeletons depends on the terrain in the area 
of effect; a battlesite or graveyard will yield 10 
skeletons per 100 square yards; a long-inhabited 
area will yield three skeletons per 100 square 
yards; and wilderness will yield one skeleton per 
100 square yards. 

The spell’s maximum area of effect is 10,000 
square yards. Thus, no more than 1,000 skele- 
tons can be summoned by this spell. 

The skeletons created by this spell are turned as 
zombies and remain in existence until destroyed 
or willed out of existence by the priest who cre- 
ated them. 


Priest Spells (Quest Spells) 


Warband Quest (Enchantment/Charm) 


Sphere: Charm, War 
Range: 240 yards 

Duration: Special 

Casting Time: 1 round 

Area of Effect: 200 creatures 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


A priest may cast warband quest on any group 
of 200 creatures who are capable of understand- 
ing his commands. The creatures are then affect- 
ed in a manner similar to the Sth-level priest spell, 
quest. Unwilling creatures are allowed a saving 
throw with a —4 penalty to avoid the effects. 

The specified quest must be related to the rea- 
son that the Power granted this spell (perhaps a 
quest to slay or overcome a specified enemy). 

Warband quest gives subjects of the spell a bo- 
nus of 2 hp per level of the caster (maximum 20 
hp). Subjects also gain the effects of a prayer spell 
and have Morale of 18 while on the quest. These 
benefits last for the duration of the spell; the spell 
ends when the specified task is completed. A 
creature who abandons the quest is subject to the 
wrath of his deity. 


Ward Matrix (Invocation/Evocation) 


Sphere: Wards 

Range: Special 
Duration: 60 days 
Casting Time: 6 turns 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


The ward matrix spell links as many as six lo- 
cations within the Prime Material plane. Only lo- 
cations that have a functioning Wards spell may 
be linked. Ward matrix conjoins the different 
Wards spells so that each linked site gains the pro- 
tection of all other wards in the network. 

From the place where the ward matrix is cast, 
magical connections spread to the other desig- 
nated sites. These can be seen with a true seeing 
or similar spell as tendrils of magical energy run- 
ning through the air just above ground level. The 
connections target their destinations and move 
toward them at a rate of 40 miles per turn. They 
can evade barriers such as anti-magic shells by 
moving above or around them. When the con- 
nections reach their destinations, they multiply 
and spread to connect all other locations in the 
network; this secondary linkage is established at 
a rate of 20 miles per turn. 

The conjoining of Wards lasts for 60 days un- 


122 


less a linked area is destroyed or a Wards spell is 
dispelled. Any location that is destroyed or has 
its Wards spell dispelled is removed from the ma- 
trix; other connections remain intact for the du- 
ration. 


Wolf Spirits 
(Conjuration/Summoning, Invocation) 


Sphere: Animal, Guardian, Summoning 
Range: 30 yards 

Duration: Special 

Casting Time: 2 turns 

Area of Effect: Special 

Saving Throw: None 


The priest casting this spell calls upon the “spir- 
its” of wolves (or another animal, if appropriate). 
The notion of wolf spirits is akin to the Wild 
Hunt of Celtic mythology: a pack of enormous 
magical wolves led by a human master who range 
Celtic lands seeking to destroy evil. The wolf 
spirits spell summons 2d4+2 such entities to 
serve the priest as master. 

Wolf spirits’ statistics are as follows: AC —4; 
MV 36 FI 36 (B); HD 5+5; #AT 1; Dmg 3d6; AL 
N; SZ M; ML 20; THACO 14. They are immune 
to all forms of mind control, illusions, gases, par- 
alyzation, and spells which affect only corporeal 
creatures. They cannot be harmed by weapons of 
less than +2 enchantment. 

Wolf spirits can be instructed to perform a serv- 
ice in the manner of the animal summoning spells. 
In this variation in the Animal and Summoning 
spheres, the spell does not expire until the spirits 
have performed their commanded service, to a 
maximum duration of 14 days. In the Guardian 
variation of this spell, the spirits can only be com- 
manded to keep watch over an area or creature. 
The spell lasts 100 days for this type of service. 


Table 4: POTIONS AND OILS 


D20 XP 
Roll Item Value 
1-4 Aroma of Dreams 300 
5-6 Curdled Death 750 
7-12 Murdock’s Insect Ward 200 
13 Oils of Elemental Plane 
Invulnerability 5,000 
14-15 Oil of Preservation 750 
16-17 Potion of Elemental Control 600 
18-20 Starella’s Aphrodisiac 250 


Table 5: RINGS 


D20 XP 
Roll Item Value 
1-3 Affliction = 
4-6 Armoring (W) 2,000 
7-8 Bureaucratic Wizardry (W) — 
9-11 Elemental Metamorphosis 3,000 
12-14 Fortitude 1,000 
15-17 Randomness (P) = 
18-20 Resistance (W) 1,000 
Table 6: RODS, STAVES, WANDS 
D20 XP 
Roll Item Value 
1-4 Rod of Distortion 5,000 
5-6 Staff of the Elements (W) 10,000 
7-12 Wand of Corridors 4,000 
13-14 Wand of Element 
Transmogrification 2,000 
15-17 Wand of Misplaced Objects 2,000 


18-20 Wand of Prime Material Pocket 5,000 


Table 7: MISCELLANEOUS MAGIC: Books, 
Librams, Manuals, Tomes 


D20 XP 
Roll Item Value 
1-7 Manual of Dogmatic Methods — 
8-16 Tome of Mystical Equations (P) 1,000 

17-20 Trimia’s Catalogue of Outer 

Plane Artifacts (W) 12,000 

Table 8: MISCELLANEOUS MAGIC: Jewels, 

Jewelry, Phylacteries 


D20 XP 

Roll Item Value 
1-2 Amulet of Extension (W) 1,000 
3-4 Amulet of Far Reaching (W) 1,000 
5-6 Amulet of Leadership 5,000 


7 Amulet of Magic Resistance 5,000 


8 Amulet of Metaspell Influence 


(W) 3,000 
9-10 Amulet of Perpetual Youth 2,000 
11 Brooch of Number Numbing 4,000 
12 Gem of Retaliation 2,000 

13-14 Medallion of Spell Exchange 
(W) 3,000 

15-16 Necklace of Memory 

Enhancement 1,000 
17-18 Scarab of Uncertainty 1,000 


19-20 Talisman of Memorization (W) 1,000 


Table 9: MISCELLANEOUS MAGIC: Bracers, 
Gloves, Hats, Robes 


D20 XP 
Roll Item Value 
1-4 Bracers of Brandishing 3,000 
5-8 Fur of Warmth 5,000 
9-12 Reglar’s Gloves of Freedom 3,000 
13-16 Robe of Repetition (P,W) 6,000 
17-20 School Cap (W) 2,000 


Table 10: MISCELLANEOUS MAGIC: Bags, 
Bottles, Pouches, Containers 


D20 XP 
Roll Item Value 
1-3 Bag of Bones (P) 3,000 
4-8 Flatbox 5,000 
9-13 Jar of Preserving 500 
14-15 Nefradina’s Identifier (W) 1,000 
16 Tenser’s Portmanteau of 
Frugality (W) 6,000 
17-20 Thought Bottle 1,000 


Table 11: MISCELLANEOUS MAGIC: Candles, 
Dusts, Ointments, Stones 


D20 XP 
Roll Item Value 
1-3 Candle of Propitiousness 750 
4-5 Dust of Mind Dulling 1,000 
6-7 Powder of the Black Veil 1,000 
8-9 Powder of Coagulation 500 
10-11 Powder of the Hero's Heart 750 
12-13 Powder of Magic Detection 1,000 
14-15 Puchezma's Powder of Edible 
Objects 1,000 
16-19 Salves of Far Seeing 1,000 
20 Warp Marble 5,000 


Items followed by a letter in parentheses are 
usable only by specific classes: P = Priest, W = 
Wizard, Wr = Warrior. 


Table 12: MISCELLANEOUS MAGIC; 


Magical Items (Tables) 


Household Items, Tools, Musical Instruments 


D20 
Roll 


Item 

Crucible of Melting (W) 

Everbountiful Soup Kettle 

Forge of Metal Protection 

Glass of Preserved Words 

Horn of Valor 

Hourglass of Fire and Ice (W) 

Lens of Speed Reading 

Lorloveim’s Obsidian Mortar 
and Pestle 

Mirror of Retention 

Mirror of Simple Order 

Mordom’s Cauldron of Air 

Philosopher's Egg (W) 

Pick of Earth Parting 

Skie’s Locks and Bolts 

Tapestry of Disease Warding 

Zwann’s Watering Can (P) 


XP 

Value 
1,000 
1,000 
10,000 
2,000 
5,000 
2,000 
500 


500 
1,200 


3,000 
1,000 
5,000 
1,000 
2,000 
1,000 


124 


Table 13: MISCELLANEOUS MAGIC: 


The Weird Stuff 
D20 
Roll Item 
1 Air Spores 
2 Bell's Palette of Identity 
3 Claw of Magic Stealing (W) 
4 Contracts of Nepthas 
5 Crystal Parrot 
6 Dimensional Mine 
7 Disintegration Chamber 
8 Elemental Compass 
9 Globe of Purification (P) 
10 Globe of Serenity (P) 
11 Law's Banner (Wr) 
12 Liquid Road 
13 Mist Tent 
14 Mouse Cart 
15 Portable Canoe 
16 Prism of Light Splitting 
17 Quill of Law 
18 Saddle of Flying 
19 Teleportation Chamber 
20 Time Bomb 


Aromatic Oils 


Aromatic oils are a special type of magical oil. 
Like perfumes, their power comes from the scent 
released. All aromatic oils are inert until worn by 
a living creature. Once applied, the aromatic oil 
gradually begins to react, and after 1d4 rounds 
have passed, the scent’s stated effect begins. In all 
cases, the creature wearing the aromatic oil is not 
affected, but other creatures (both friends and 
foes) within a 5-foot radius of the wearer are sub- 
ject to its effects. Note that only those creatures 
with a sense of smell can be affected by a magical 
fragrance. 

These precious perfumes are commonly found 
in tiny stoppered vials made of glass, clay, metal, 
or wood. Only a small amount is required per 
use. Each vial contains enough aromatic oil for 
1d10 +10 applications. 


Aroma of Dreams: All creatures who come with- 
in 5' of the wearer of this oil are put to sleep. Po- 
tential victims are allowed a saving throw vs. 
spell. If successful, the victim suffers no effect 
and may remain near the wearer without need of 
further saving throws. If the roll is failed, the 
creature slumps to the ground, the victim of a 
magical slumber that lasts 1d4 +4 rounds. 

When an application of the oil is worn, the 
scent is potent for 3d4 rounds. After this time, the 
perfume evaporates and another dose must be 
applied if the wearer wishes to renew the effect. 


Curdled Death: Perhaps the most powerful of all 
aromatic oils, the smell of curdled death has the 
ability to slay all living creatures of 3 or fewer Hit 
Dice or experience levels who come within 5’ of 
the wearer. Magical, undead, and extraplanar 
creatures are immune to this oil, as are all crea- 
tures of 4 or more Hit Dice or experience levels. 

Upon smelling the oil, potential victims are al- 
lowed a saving throw vs. spell. If successful, a 
creature suffers no effect and may remain near 
the wearer without need of further saving 
throws. Those who fail the save drop dead in 
their tracks. 

When a dose is worn, it remains potent enough 
to kill creatures for 1d3 rounds. After this time, 
the fragrance evaporates and another dose must 
be applied if the wearer wishes to renew the ef- 
fect. 


Murdock’s Insect Ward: This fragrance is a boon 
to travelers, since it repels insectoid creatures 
(both normal and monstrous) that come within 5 


125 


Magical Items (Oils, Potions) 


feet of the wearer of this fragrance. Insectoid 
monsters with Intelligence scores of 5 or more are 
allowed a saving throw vs. spell. If successful, 
they suffer no effects and may remain near the 
wearer without need of further saving throws. If 
the save is failed, the creature cannot approach 
within 5 feet of the wearer. (Note that this still 
may be close enough to cause harm.) One dose is 
effective for 1d3 +1 hours. 


Starella’s Aphrodisiac: Any creature of a similar 
race and opposite sex who approaches within 5 
feet of the wearer becomes thoroughly enamored 
with the wearer as if under the effect of a power- 
ful charm. Potential victims are allowed a saving 
throw vs. spell. If the roll is successful, the victim 
suffers no effects and may remain near the wearer 
without need of further saving throws. 

If the save is failed, the creature is charmed as 
long as he or she remains within 5’ of the wearer 
(as long as the aphrodisiac is still potent) plus 2d4 
turns outside that area. An affected creature re- 
gards the wearer as a trusted friend, ally, and ro- 
mantic interest to be heeded and protected. The 
charmed individual does not behave as if he were 
a mindless automaton, but any word or action of 
the wearer is viewed in the most favorable way. 
This attitude does not extend to others, and it is 
possible for the person so enamored to be over- 
come by jealousy, viewing all others (especially 
other victims) as potential rivals. 

When a dose of Starella's aphrodisiac is worn, 
it remains potent for 3d4 turns. After this time, 
the perfume evaporates and another dose must be 
applied if the wearer wishes to renew the effect. 


Potions 


Potion of Elemental Control: When this potion is 
consumed, the imbiber can influence one or two 
elementals in a manner similar to a charm mon- 
ster spell. The elementals must be within 60 feet 
of the imbiber and are allowed a saving throw vs. 
petrification to avoid the effect. If only one ele- 
mental is influenced, it is subject to a —4 penalty 
on its save. If two are influenced, their saving 
throws gain a +2 bonus because the effect of the 
potion is weakened. 

If either elemental is controlled by another wiz- 
ard, it gains a +2 bonus to its saving throw. Note 
that if the elemental was summoned by the Sth- 
level conjure elemental spell, the summoner has a 
50% chance of dispelling the creature. Control 
lasts for 5d6 rounds. 


The type of elemental subject to a particular 
potion is randomly determined. 


D4 Roll Elemental Type 
1 Air 
2 Earth 
3 Fire 
4 Water 


Oil of Elemental Plane Invulnerability: These 
precious oils provide total invulnerability against 
the elemental forces on one inner plane, as well as 
offering the same protection as the oil of elemen- 
tal invulnerability. Any character covered in the 
oil suffers no ill effects from the harsh environ- 
ments of the elemental, para-elemental, and 
quasi-elemental planes. Attacks by elemental 
creatures are effective, but with a —1 penalty per 
die of damage. 

A flask of oil contains enough oil to coat one 
man-sized creature six times or six individuals 
once. An application is effective for 24 hours. 

The protection the oil offers is determined ran- 
domly with two die rolls. First, 1d4 is rolled to 
select a table below: 1=Table A, 2=Table B, 
3= Table C, 4= Table D. Second, 1d4 is rolled on 
that table. 


Table A Table B 
D4 Roll Plane D4 Roll Plane 
1 Air 1 Smoke 
2 Water 2 Ice 
3 Earth 3 Ooze 
4 Fire 4 Magma 
Table C Table D 
D4 Roll Plane D4 Roll Plane 
1 Lightning 1 Vacuum 
2 Steam 2 Salt 
3 Radiance 3 Ash 
4 Minerals 4 Dust 


Anyone covered in the oil can see, breathe, and 
move in the respective plane without difficulty. 
Just as a character can move through flames or 
water without difficulty when covered in the 
proper oil, a character doused in the oil of earth 
can pass through the stone of the elemental plane 
of Earth as if it were air. 


Oil of Preservation: Any nonliving, non-magical 
object may be coated with a layer of oil of preser- 
vation. If every surface of the object is covered, it 
will suffer no ill effects from the passage of time. 
Thus, wood will not rot, metal will not rust, and 
masonry will not crumble. The oil provides pro- 


127 


Magical Items (Powders) 


tection from both natural and magical aging. 

One flask of oil of preservation will protect 1 
cubic foot of surface area. The effects of the oil 
wear off after one century, at which time normal 
aging resumes. 


Powders 


Magical powders are usually stored in small 
paper packets, cloth pouches, or hollow blow 
tubes made of glass, wood, metal, or bone. A 
packet or pouch can be shaken out to cover the 
area all around the user to a radius of 5 feet. This 
action lasts an entire round. Note that powders 
used in this manner can affect the user. 

Alternatively, powder in a tube can be blown 
outward in a ten-foot-long cone shape that is one 
foot wide at the apex and five feet wide at the 
end. Used in this manner, the powder has no 
chance of affecting the user (unless it rebounds on 
him due to wind or similar circumstances). 

Powders may also be blown from the user's 
hand, but can only affect a single individual with- 
in five feet of the user. 


Powder of the Black Veil: This sooty, black pow- 
der causes temporary magical blindness to all 
those in the area of effect. If a creature's saving 
throw is successful, he suffers no effects. If the 
roll fails, the creature is blinded and suffers a —4 
penalty to attack rolls, a —4 penalty to Armor 
Class, anda +2 penalty to initiative rolls. Blind- 
ness persists each round until the victim succeeds 
at a saving throw vs. spell, at which time the ef- 
fect is instantly negated. An entire packet or blow 
tube must be used for each application. 


Powder of Coagulation: When placed on an open 
wound, a pinch of this yellow powder stops all 
bleeding and heals 1d6 hit points of damage. Each 
pouch or packet contains 4d4 pinches. A blow 
tube contains one use, but stops bleeding and 
heals 1d4 hit points for all creatures in the area of 
effect. 


Powder of the Hero’s Heart: When used, this dull 
red powder instills bravery in all creatures within 
the area of effect (both friends and enemies). It 
grants such creatures a morale bonus of +2 and 
negates the effects of magical fear. The effect lasts 
for 5d4 rounds. An entire packet, pouch, or blow 
tube must be used for each application. 


Powder of Magic Detection: Under close inspec- 
tion, this ordinary-looking powder can be seen 


Magical Items (Rings) 


for what it truly is—an extremely fine powder of 
minute, crystalline granules. When this powder 
contacts a magical object, the crystals spark and 
flash with a rainbow of colors. This effect does 
not reveal the nature or intensity of the 
enchantment—only that the item is magical. 

A small pinch of powder is needed for each 
use, no matter how large or small the object. 
Each packet contains 1d10 +10 pinches. Powder 
that is placed on a nonmagical item yields no ef- 
fect and cannot be reused. 


Rings 


Ring of Affliction: When an identify spell is used 
on this cursed ring, it will appear to be a ring of 
resistance. The ring will function as such until the 
wearer makes a saving throw to any school in op- 
position to the school represented by the ring. 
The school of magic represented can be deter- 
mined by rolling 1d8 on the table below. 


D8 Roll Represented School 

1 Abjuration 
Alteration 
Conjuration/Summoning 
Enchantment/Charm 
Illusion/Phantasm 
Invocation/Evocation 
Lesser/Greater Divination 
Necromancy 


ONO rk WN 


The first time the wearer of a ring of affliction 
makes a saving throw against any school in op- 
position to the school of the ring worn, the ring of 
affliction’s true properties are revealed. The ring 
causes the wearer to suffer a —2 penalty on all 
saving throws vs. spells of the ring’s opposing 
school or schools. Once this power is activated, 
the beneficial effects of the ring no longer oper- 
ate. Once the curse has been activated, the wear- 
er can remove the ring only through a remove 
curse spell. 


Ring of Armoring: A wizard wearing this ring 
gains an additional +1 bonus to any AC bonus 
he receives from casting a spell upon himself. 
Thus, an armor spell grants the wizard AC 5 in- 
stead of AC 6, anda shield spell grants the wizard 
AC 1 versus hand-hurled missiles instead of AC 
2. Restrictions that apply to a spell (for example, 
armor does not affect a character already wear- 
ing armor) are in no way altered through use of 
this ring. 


128 


Ring of Bureaucratic Wizardry: This cursed ring 
is indistinguishable from a ring of wizardry, but 
has one important difference. When a wizard 
casts any spell while wearing the ring, a sheaf of 
papers and a quill pen suddenly appear in his 
hand. The papers are forms that must be filled 
out in triplicate explaining the effects of the spell, 
why the wizard wishes to cast it, whether it is for 
business or pleasure, and so on. The forms must 
be filled out before the effects of the spell will oc- 
cur. The higher the level of the spell cast, the 
more complicated the forms become. Filling out 
the forms requires one round per level of spell. 

As soon as the papers are filled out, the forms 
and the pen disappear and the spell effects occur 
as the spellcaster desired. 

The ring cannot be removed willingly. Remove 
curse or a similar spell must be cast upon the 
wearer in order to remove the ring. 


Ring of Elemental Metamorphosis: There are 
four types of these rings, each corresponding to 
one of the four elements. When one of these rings 
is discovered, the type is determined randomly. 


D4 Roll Element 
1 Air 
2 Earth 
3 Fire 
4 Water 


Each of these rings has the power to poly- 
morph the wearer into an elemental of the appro- 
priate type. When the transformation occurs, the 
subject's equipment is absorbed into his new 
form. The affected character retains his mental 
abilities, but cannot cast spells. 

Characters who are not accustomed to the new 
form suffer a —2 penalty on attack rolls until 
they successfully strike an opponent in two con- 
secutive combat rounds. After this occurs, it is 
assumed they have mastered their new shape. 

The polymorphed character acquires the form 
and physical abilities of the appropriate elemen- 
tal. This includes Armor Class (but the character 
is subject to attacks by weapons of less than +2 
enchantment), movement rates, and attack rou- 
tines (including special attacks). Hit points and 
saving throws are identical to those for the char- 
acter’s natural form. 

Additionally, the character is immune to dam- 
age from exposure to the element he has become, 
and may move and breathe freely within the nat- 
ural element. Thus, a character metamorphosed 
into a fire elemental could swim in a pool of non- 


magical lava without risk of injury, but the same 
character could be damaged by magical fire, such 
as that from a fireball spell. 

The ring may be used once per day for 1d4 +1 
turns, at which time the character reverts to his 
normal form. The wearer can end the metamor- 
phosis at any time. When returning to his own 
form, the wearer regains 1d12 hit points. 

If a successful dispel magic spell is cast upon 
the subject at any time while he is transformed, 
he is forced back into his normal form and must 
succeed at a system shock roll or die. The wearer 
returns to his own form when slain or when the 
effect is dispelled, but no hit points are restored in 
these cases. 


Ring of Fortitude: When worn, the ring of forti- 
tude grants the wearer a bonus of +4 to one ran- 
domly selected ability score (roll 1d12: 
1-6 = Dexterity, 7-11=Wisdom, 12 = Constitu- 
tion) for the purposes of spell resolution only. It 
does not affect ability checks or other aspects of 
ability scores, except those as a direct result of 
spells or spell-like abilities. 

For example, a character with a natural Consti- 
tution of 14 would have an enhanced score of 18 
while wearing such a ring. He does not gain any 
extra hit points from wearing it, but his system 
shock for resolving the polymorph other spell is 
increased to 99%. With the Constitution- 
enhancing ring, the bonuses even apply to the 
raise dead and resurrection spells. All effects are 
lost when the wearer removes the ring. 


Ring of Randomness: When an identify spell is 
cast on this cursed clerical ring, it radiates the au- 
ra of a beneficial ring to disguise its nature. The 
DM should roll 1d100 to determine the ring’s 
power. 


D100 Roll Power 
01-25 protection from evil 
26-40 continual light 
41-60 bless 
61-70 cure light wounds 
71-80 remove fear 
81-90 heat metal 
91-100 cure blindness or deafness 


A ring can be used three times per day at the 
12th level of ability. Each ring functions normally 
half the time, providing the indicated power. 
However, the ring’s curse causes the reverse of the 
desired effect to manifest 50% of the time. The 
DM should roll secretly each time the ring is used 


129 


Magical Items (Rings) 


to determine whether the result is the desired ef- 
fect or the reversed effect. Thus, a person casting 
continual light has a 50% chance of getting either 
light or darkness. 

If the ring is used to cure blindness or deafness, 
a reversed result yields a special curse. Since 
cause blindness has no effect on a blind character, 
the ring further distorts the spell effect by shifting 
to cause deafness. Thus, a priest attempting to 
cast cure blindness whose ring indicated a re- 
versed result would cause his victim to become 
deaf. 

In addition, the priest runs the risk of his spells 
reversing every time he uses a reversible spell 
(even those cast normally). 

The ring can be removed only with a success- 
fully cast dispel magic spell. 


Ring of Resistance: This ring grants a wizard a 
saving throw bonus identical to the bonus gained 
by a specialist in a particular school of magic. 
The magical school affected is randomly deter- 
mined on the table below by rolling 1d8. 


Ds Roll Affected School 
Abjuration 

Alteration 
Conjuration/Summoning 
Enchantment/Charm 
Illusion/Phantasm 
Invocation/Evocation 
Lesser/Greater Divination 
Necromancy 


ONOUhRWNH 


When required to save against a spell from that 
school, the wearer gains a +1 bonus to his saving 
throw. When the wearer casts a spell from that 
school, his opponent suffers a —1 modifier to all 
saving throws. This ring does not allow a wizard 
to cast spells from a school in opposition to his 
own. 

These modifiers are cumulative with all others, 
including those in effect for specialization. 


Magical Items (Rod, Staff) 


Rod 


Rod of Distortion: This unpredictable device is 
capable of affecting the operation of all rods, 
staves, and wands within a 20-foot radius for a 
single round. The wielder rolls 1d20. On a roll of 
1-15, the rod of distortion does not influence oth- 
er items. On a roll of 16-19, it acts as a wand of 
negation and rods, staves, and wands within 20 
feet simply do not function during that round 
(but are otherwise unaffected). On a roll of 20, 
the rod of distortion completely disrupts the 
functioning of rods, staves, and wands. This dis- 
tortion results in the backfiring of these devices, 
causing maximum damage to their users if the 
item is used during that round (e.g., a wand of 
lightning will fire a backward-directed bolt strik- 
ing its user, a rod of cancellation will affect one 
random magical item possessed by its owner, and 
so on). Items used by the wielder of the rod are 
unaffected. 
This rod cannot be recharged. 


Staff 


Staff of the Elements: This powerful item appears 
to be a staff +2. If it is grasped by an elemental- 
ist, however, its true powers become evident. 

A staff of the elements is charged by the life- 
force of an elemental trapped within it. The staff 
has charges equal to the number of Hit Dice of the 
elemental multiplied by 2. Thus, a staff holding a 
12 HD elemental has 24 charges. Every time two 
charges are expended, the elemental loses one Hit 
Die. When all charges are used, the elemental dies 
and the staff becomes dormant. 

If a dormant staff is used to successfully strike 
an elemental, the creature must immediately at- 
tempt a saving throw vs. rods, staves, and 
wands. If the save is failed, the elemental is ab- 
sorbed into the staff, thereby recharging the de- 
vice. If the roll is successful, the creature avoids 
the effect, but suffers normal damage from the 
strike of the magical staff (1d6 +2). 

It is possible to absorb an elemental only if the 
staff is dormant. Only one elemental may be held 
in the staff at one time. 

The staff holds the following powers that do 
not drain charges; each may be used once per day 
even if the staff does not hold an elemental: 

e affect normal fires 

e detect elementals within a 100’ radius 
fool's gold 
metamorphose liquids* 
wall of fog 


130 


An occupied staff has the following powers de- 
pending upon the type of elemental trapped with- 
in. For example, if a fire elemental is held in the 
staff, only those powers related to fire are availa- 
ble. Each requires the expenditure of one charge 


per use: 
Air: e stinking cloud 
è wind wall 
Earth: ° dig 
e Maximilian's stony grasp* 
Fire: e fireball 
è pyrotechnics 
Water: © water breathing 


© watery double* 


The following powers drain two charges per 
use: 


Air: © cloudkill 
è solid fog 
Earth: ® passwall 
e transmute rock to mud 
Fire: e fire shield 
e wall of fire 
Water: © airy water 


è wall of ice 


The most powerful abilities of the staff drain 
four charges per use: 


Air: è airboat* 

è suffocate* 
Earth: *Ħ crystalbrittle 

© stone to flesh (reversible) 
Fire: e Forest's fiery constrictor* 

© Malec-Keth's flame fist* 
Water: °& Abi-Dalzim’s horrid wilting* 


è transmute water to dust 


The powers of a staff of the elements may be 
used only by an elementalist. Note that 
elementalists are restricted against the use of 
spells and magical items of the element that di- 
rectly opposes their element of specialty. Thus, 
an elementalist specializing in water cannot use 
the staff's powers if it contains a fire elemental. 

Using a staff of the elements can be dangerous. 
Each time a power is used that requires the ex- 
penditure of one or more charges, there is a 5% 
chance that the trapped elemental bursts forth, 
destroying the staff in the process. A successful 
dispel magic spell cast on the staff automatically 
releases the creature. An escaped elemental will 
certainly seek revenge against its tormenter. 

Powers marked with an asterisk (*) are new 
spells found in this book. 


Wands 


Wand of Corridors: This wand allows its user to 
clear short corridors through the plane of elemen- 
tal Earth and the quasi-elemental plane of Miner- 
als. It does not function on any other plane, 
although it radiates magic. It is especially useful 
on the plane of minerals since travelers need not 
contact the sharp edges of the minerals. 

One charge clears a 10’ 10' X 50' path. The 
corridor is completed in 1 turn. The wand has no 
effect on animals or living creatures. Thus, if the 
wand clears a path through a space occupied by 
an earth elemental, the creature is unharmed, but 
is alerted to persons in the corridor. The wand 
can be recharged. 


Wand of Element Transmogrification: This wand 
changes a quantity of one element into an equal 
amount of another element (water into fire, earth 
into air, etc.). The element to be affected must be 
within 60 feet of the wielder, who merely points 
the wand at the element and speaks the command 
word. For every 10 cubic feet (or portion thereof) 
transformed, one charge is drained from the 
wand. 

The transmogrification is permanent unless a 
successful dispel magic is cast on the element. 

Elements created by this wand have special 
characteristics. Fire requires no fuel to burn. Wa- 
ter never evaporates. Air is absolutely pure, but 
unless contained, the air mingles with the atmos- 
phere and is lost forever. Earth can appear as soil, 
sand, clay, or stone, at the wielder’s option. It is 
not possible to create treasure such as valuable 
metals or gemstones with this wand. 

This wand has no effect upon creatures of any 
kind, except those from the Elemental planes. By 
changing such creatures into their element of op- 
position (fire into water, air into earth, etc.), the 
creature is totally obliterated. Thus, transmuting 
a water elemental into fire disintegrates it. 

A creature attacked by the wand is allowed a 
saving throw vs. rods, staves, and wands. If the 
save is failed, the elemental is destroyed. If the 
save is successful, the creature is not obliterated 
outright, but suffers 6d6 points of damage and re- 
tains its true form. 

In attacking an elemental, the number of Hit 
Dice of the elemental determines the number of 
charges used: 1 charge for an 8 HD elemental, 2 
charges for a 12 HD elemental, and 3 charges for 
a 16 HD elemental. It is not possible to use this 
wand to change an elemental into another type of 
elemental. 


131 


The wand may be used once per round. It may 
be recharged. 


Wand of Misplaced Objects: This wand emits a 
multitude of golden orbs that rush toward a tar- 
get creature. The orbs surround the victim and 
swirl around him wildly for 1 round. During this 
time the victim is confused and can take no 
action. 

At the end of the round, the orbs vanish and 
the victim is free to act. He discovers, however, 
that all objects on his person have been moved. 
Some items are inconveniently located, while 
others are nowhere to be seen. A warrior might 
find his magical ring on one of his toes, his sword 
in his pants, his gold pieces in the sheath of his 
sword, and his breastplate on his head. The more 
possessions a victim owns, the more confused the 
situation becomes. The DM is encouraged to be 
devious. 

Because of the chaotic placement of items, the 
victim suffers several penalties. Movement is re- 
duced by half. Armor class of characters wearing 
armor is reduced by 2, since pieces are not worn 
properly. Attack rolls made by the victim are 
made at a —2 penalty. These penalties are elimi- 
nated if the victim devotes 2-5 rounds (1d4 +1) to 
rearranging his gear. 

A character requiring an item carried in a back- 
pack, pouch, pocket, or other container must 
spend 2-12 (2d6) rounds searching for the item. 
This penalty is canceled if 3 turns are spent un- 
packing and repacking all gear. 

The DM must define the locations of objects 
any time a character reaches for them or if they 
impair motion or sight. When deciding locations 
of objects, the DM should state the obvious ef- 
fects of impaired sight and movement immedi- 
ately, such as boots worn on hands or a cloak 
over the face. 

Items held within a bag of holding, Heward's 
handy haversack, or other magical containers are 
unaffected. However, the containers themselves 
are subject to relocation. 

The wand uses one charge per attack. It may be 
recharged. 


Wand of Prime Material Pocket: This wand al- 
lows a spherical pocket to be created in any 
plane. The conditions within the pocket are simi- 
lar to the environment of the wielder’s Prime Ma- 
terial plane. The pocket typically contains 
ground, air, and a controlled temperature. The 
lower third of the sphere is usually occupied by 
land and water, while the upper portion of the 


sphere is usually occupied by atmosphere. 

The surface of the pocket is semipermeable, al- 
lowing creatures to exit and enter the sphere, but 
keeps the elemental conditions of the pocket 
completely separate from the elemental plane. 

One charge creates a sphere 10’ in diameter. If 
the wielder wishes, multiple charges can be used 
to create larger spheres. Thus, a 30’-diameter 
sphere could be created using three charges. 

The conditions inside the pocket are of the 
wielder’s choosing, although they must be similar 
to an area that naturally exists on the Prime Ma- 
terial plane. The pocket cannot contain buildings 
or man-made items. 

The pocket lasts 1d6+6 hours on any plane 
other than the plane of Fire, on which the pocket 
will last 1d6 hours. The wielder may choose to 
use the wand before the pocket dissipates to ex- 
tend the life of the existing pocket. The pocket 
can be destroyed through the use of a dispel mag- 
ic spell. The wand is not rechargeable. 


Miscellaneous Magic 


Air Spores: Rumors indicate that the famed wiz- 
ard Mordom created these odd, pollenlike 
spores. Only a few mages know how to make 
them today. Air spores that still exist are usually 
sequestered as specimens of study in the labs of 
powerful wizards. 

When air spores are ingested by a creature, the 
spores work their way into the creature's lungs. 
There they grow, reproduce, and die. While liv- 
ing out their lives, they create oxygen that the 
host body can use to breathe when deprived of 
oxygen from the environment. The spore colony 
can live for 2d4 days. 

In anormal environment, the spores hinder the 
character's normal respiration, causing all Con- 
stitution checks to be made with a —4 penalty. 
Fortunately, 12 hours of breathing in a normal 
environment for each day the spores were used 
will clear the lungs of the colony. 


Amulet of Extension: When desired by the cast- 
er, this amulet can be used to increase the dura- 
tion of 1st- and 2nd-level spells by 50%, and the 
duration of 3rd- and 4th-level spells by 25%. 
Fractions of one-half and above are rounded up 
(e.g., a spell with duration of 1 round extended 
to 11/2 rounds is rounded to 2 rounds). Fractions 
less than one-half are rounded down (e.g., a 
spell with 1 round duration extended to 11/4 
rounds is rounded down to 1 round and thus 
gains no benefit from the amulet). 


Magical Items (Miscellaneous Magic) 


132 


The amulet has no effect on spells with instan- 
taneous or permanent durations. A maximum of 
1d10 +4 spell levels can be affected by the amulet 
each day. Each amulet has its own individual lim- 
it, secretly determined when it is found. If this 
limit is exceeded on any given day, the amulet 
shatters and is destroyed permanently. 


Amulet of Far Reaching: When willed by the 
caster, this amulet increases the range of 1st-level 
spells by 30%, 2nd-level spells by 20%, and 3rd- 
and 4th-level spells by 10% . Fractions of one-half 
and greater are rounded up; all others are round- 
ed down. 

The amulet affects only range and does not al- 
ter a spell’s area of effect. The amulet cannot af- 
fect spells with ranges of 0 or touch. 

A maximum of 1d10+4 spell levels can be af- 
fected by the amulet each day. Each amulet has its 
own individual limit, secretly determined when it 
is found. 


Amulet of Leadership: This pendant or brooch 
bestows a character of any level the ability of a 
9th-level fighter to attract men-at-arms. The am- 
ulet does not attract additional men-at-arms to a 
fighter who has already gained his followers. 

A fighter normally gains troops at 9th level be- 
cause his name is so well known that he attracts 
the loyalty of other warriors. The amulet works 
in much the same way. When a stranger meets a 
character wearing the amulet, the stranger per- 
ceives the character to be a leader who is destined 
for greatness, regardless of the character's class. 
Just as the reputation of a 9th-level fighter 
spreads, so the reputation of the person wearing 
the amulet spreads. Roll on Table 16 of the Play- 
ers Handbook to determine the followers. 

If the amulet is lost or destroyed, the followers 
immediately lose faith in their leader. They grad- 
ually depart or desert. Once this occurs, the char- 
acter’s reputation is sullied such that he can never 
benefit from the amulet again. A fighter can, 
however, gain followers normally upon reaching 
9th level. 


Amulet of Magic Resistance: This powerful amu- 
let grants the wearer a degree of magic resistance 
ranging from 5% to 30%. The level of magic re- 
sistance is determined when the amulet is found 
by rolling 1d6 and multiplying the result by 5. 
Any time the amulet is worn and a spell is cast at 
the wearer, the wearer is allowed a percentile roll 
to avoid the full effects of the spell. 

Only 50% of all such amulets confer magic re- 


sistance against all spells. The remaining 50% ex- 
tend magic resistance only to spells of 1st through 
6th levels. Such amulets have no effect on spells 
more powerful than these. The DM should se- 
cretly determine this information when the ring is 
discovered. 

All such amulets, regardless of the degree of re- 
sistance conferred, are delicate magical struc- 
tures. If the wearer rolls for magic resistance at 
any time and the roll is 95-00, this fragile item has 
been disrupted and the amulet shatters into use- 
less scrap. 


Amulet of Metaspell Influence: This amulet does 
not appear to have any magical function (al- 
though it radiates magic if detected) until it is 
worn by someone using one of the dilation, far- 
reaching, or extension spells. When such a spell is 
cast, the amulet adds 50% to the functional effect 
of the spell. For example, if extension I is used to 
increase the duration of a 3rd-level spell by 50%, 
the wearer of this amulet can add one-half (50%) 
to that effect size, raising it to a 75% extension 
effect. 


Amulet of Perpetual Youth: This amulet glows 
continuously with a faint, blue light. The wearer 
has temporary immunity to the effects of both 
natural and magical aging; the amulet grows old- 
er instead of the wearer. As the amulet ages, it 
gradually becomes dimmer. The amulet can ab- 
sorb 5-30 (5d6) years of aging, at which time its 
light dims completely, its magic is negated, and 
the wearer resumes aging at his normal rate. 


Bag of Bones: This item, usable only by priests, 
is a small, ordinary-looking leather pouch that 
contains a number of tiny bones. When these 
bones are scattered over a 40 by 20 yard area 
and the word of command is spoken, a unit of 
skeletons immediately springs from the ground. 
This unit comprises eight BATTLESYSTEM™ 
rules figures of skeletons (80 skeletons) armed 
with swords. (The statistics for this unit are: AD 
6, AR 8, Hits 1, ML n/a, MV 12". Hits from 
piercing and slashing weapons are reduced by 
half.) 

The unit unconditionally obeys the combat or- 
ders of the priest, never checking morale. The 
unit fights until totally destroyed or until the sun 
sets (at which time the remaining skeletons crum- 
ble into dust). Two out of three (1-66 on 1d100) of 
these bags are “one-shot” magical items: once the 
bones are used, they are gone forever. One out of 
three (67-100 on 1d100) bags magically replen- 


Magical Items (Miscellaneous Magic) 


133 


ishes itself every sunset if the bones have been 
used. 

A bag of bones will work only on a battlefield 
in the full heat of battle. (For the purposes of this 
definition, a “battlefield” is a place where units 
are in conflict and where at least 100 individuals 
per side are involved.) The unit will never split 
up, and will obey no orders other than to enter 
combat. 

Certain war deities may frown upon the use of 
undead or conjured troops, believing them to be 
unworthy and cowardly. Priests worshipping 
these deities may suffer divine consequences if 
they choose to use a bag of bones. 


Bell's Palette of Identity: This device offers pro- 
tection against polymorph spells and other magi- 
cal effects that change a person's physical 
appearance. 

The item is an artist's palette covered with 
bright, mystical paints. To use the item, a person 
must paint a self-portrait. The painting does not 
need to be created with any expertise, but the 
painter must believe that the portrait is accurate. 

Any time a character carries his self-portrait on 
his person, the portrait suffers the effects of un- 
successful saving throws for him when mass- 
morph, polymorph other, polymorph any object, 
or seeming spells are cast on him. The portrait al- 
so suffers the effects if a character steps in front of 
a mirror of simple order. 

The character's saving throw is made normally. 
If successful, the spell simply fails. If the saving 
throw is unsuccessful, the portrait is altered, re- 
flecting the effect of the spell, but the character is 
unharmed. Once the portrait suffers these effects, 
it no longer can offer protection for the person it 
represents. 

A person on the plane of Hades carrying a pic- 
ture made from Bell's palette of identity is pro- 
tected from the effects of fading on this plane. It is 
the picture that slowly fades to grey while the 
person retains all of his color. After two weeks in 
Hades, a character makes a saving throw against 
being trapped in Hades. If the saving throw is un- 
successful, the portrait becomes useless to the 
person who painted it. 

There is always a risk that some denizen of 
Hades will discover a baneful use for a discarded 
painting. Travelers are wise not to leave such per- 
sonal effects behind on this plane. 

A single Bell's palette of identity can be used to 
paint 2-5 portraits. 


Bracers of Brandishing: These unpredictable and 
bewildering items appear similar to other magical 
bracers, but their magic is revealed only when the 
character wearing them uses a charged rod, staff, 
or wand. When a charge is expended from such 
an item, the bracers of brandishing alter the 
charge expenditure and the local balance of magi- 
cal forces in a chaotic manner. The drain on the 
charged rod, staff, or wand is actually in the 
range of 5 charges to —4 (i.e., the item is re- 
charged). The number of charges used is 1d10 -5 
(with negative results indicating that charges are 
restored). If an item is reduced below zero 
charges by a drain, it crumbles into dust immedi- 
ately. 

Items that are not normally rechargeable can 
be recharged through the chaotic operation of 
these items except for the rod of absorption. 


Brooch of Number Numbing: This silver or gold- 
en brooch (15% are set with jewels) is used to fas- 
ten a cloak or a cape. It magically clouds the 
mind of anyone conversing with the wearer of the 
brooch, with the confusion applying only to 
numbers. 

The brooch must be in plain sight to have any 
effect. Anyone conversing with someone wearing 
the brooch is allowed a saving throw vs. spell to 
avoid the effects. 

If the save is failed, the victim falls under the 
brooch’s special enchantment. The victim forgets 
the relative value of numbers. He cannot remem- 
ber if five is greater than three or if tens are 
smaller than hundreds. Further, the victim does 
not recognize his inability to remember the val- 
ues of numbers. While under the influence of the 
brooch, the victim thinks that all numbers are 
pretty much the same. He will accept any claim 
pertaining to numbers and accept almost any fi- 
nancial deal set before him. 

The victim remembers the relative values of 
coins (that gold pieces are worth more than silver 
pieces), but not their exact conversions. Thus, 
the victim is unable to remember whether two sil- 
ver pieces or 100 silver pieces are equal to one 
gold piece. 

The enchantment lasts only as long as the 
wearer is present and for 2d6 rounds thereafter. 
Once the effect wears off, the victim regains his 
normal understanding of numbers. Furthermore, 
he remembers exactly what he did and said while 
under the influence of the brooch, although he 
may not be aware of the cause. 


Magical Items (Miscellaneous Magic) 


134 


Candle of Propitiousness: This candle enhances 
attacks against a particular enemy within a de- 
fined area. The user lights the candle while speak- 
ing the exact name of a single foe. If the exact 
name is not known, the user must precisely iden- 
tify the foe; saying, “the evil warrior” isn’t precise 
enough, but stating, “the evil warrior who rules 
the village of Fair Meadows and carries a golden 
shield” is sufficient. 

All characters who remain within a 50-foot- 
radius of the lighted candle receive a +2 bonus to 
all attack rolls made against the stated foe, re- 
gardless of whether the foe is within 50 feet of the 
candle. Characters who venture outside the area 
of effect lose the bonus. When the stated foe is 
within the area of effect, he suffers a —1 penalty 
to all his attack rolls. 

There can be no interposing surfaces such as 
walls or doors between the candle of propitious- 
ness and characters whom it affects. The stated 
foe is not allowed a saving throw to resist the ef- 
fects of the candle. 

The candle of propitiousness burns for up to 
one hour. If it is moved after it has been lit, its 
magic is immediately and permanently negated. 
Likewise, if its flame is extinguished, its magic 
immediately ends. Any magical or natural force 
capable of extinguishing a normal flame, such as 
a gust of wind or a splash of water, can extinguish 
a candle of propitiousness. 

A candle of propitiousness can be lit and used 
only once. 


Claw of Magic Stealing: This peculiar item is usu- 
ally fashioned in the form of a miniature silver 
hand or claw. An attempt to identify it will sug- 
gest that it is an item capable of casting the 2nd- 
level wizard spell spectral hand three times per 
day. The claw can indeed do this, but this is only 
its secondary function. 

The claw’s real purpose is to steal spells from 
other spellcasters. If the victim of the spectral hand 
spell is a wizard, he must make a saving throw ver- 
sus spell. Failure to make this save means that a 
randomly selected spell is drained from his mem- 
ory and its energy is transferred to the claw’s own- 
er. The owner of the claw may then use this 
magical energy to “power” a memorized spell of 
his own, provided it is of the same or lower level. 
Such a spell may be cast without being lost from 
the mind of the wizard possessing the claw. 

The claw of magic stealing does not store magi- 
cal energy in any way; either the owner of the 
claw uses the energy to “power” a spell on the 
next round, or the energy dissipates and is lost. 


Contracts of Nepthas: These magical contracts 
are written in black ink on golden-brown vellum. 
The contracts are usually found in ivory tubes, 
each tube containing 1d6 contracts. The con- 
tracts are blank and can be filled in by the user. 
The contracts will radiate magic if detected, but 
carry no overt signs of their special nature. 

The contract of Nepthas automatically places 
an enchantment upon any persons who sign it in 
order to insure that both parties hold to the 
agreement. Anyone who has signed a contract of 
Nepthas and breaks the contract is struck deaf, 
blind, and dumb. The effects of the punishment 
last until they are removed with a remove curse. 

A person who is both deaf and blind suffers a 
—8 penalty to his attack rolls and his opponents 
gain a +8 bonus to their attack rolls. He loses all 
bonuses for Dexterity and suffers —2 penalties to 
saving throws versus spells, petrification/ 
polymorph, and rod, staff, or wand. 

A contract involves two parties agreeing on a 
set of conditions. The conditions are usually very 
specific, but if they are not, they might be pervert- 
ed in the same way that a wish spell might be mis- 
interpreted. If a group of adventurers signs a 
contract with a king stating that they will slay a 
dragon in the Northern Hills by the eve of the new 
moon, slaying any dragon will fulfill the contract, 
although the king may have had a specific dragon 
in mind. If the king agrees to pay the adventurers 
upon the completion of the task, the king had bet- 
ter have the money when the party returns. 

Contracts signed by persons under the influ- 
ence of charm and similar spells are null and 
void. A forged contract is also void. If any per- 
son who signs a contract dies before its comple- 
tion, that person's obligation is ended, Note, 
however, that if a group of adventurers signs a 
contract and one of their members dies, the survi- 
vors are still bound to the contract. 

A deadline for both parties’ responsibilities 
must be stated in the contract in order for it to be 
activated. 


Crucible of Melting: A crucible is a small bowl, 
usually made of fired clay or porcelain, used for 
heating substances to extreme temperatures. The 
bowl is usually placed on a furnace. The crucible 
of melting, however, requires no furnace. It melts 
any metals placed within it when the command 
word is spoken. It takes one turn to bring the cru- 
cible to a sufficient temperature to melt metals 
placed within it. It has no effect on substances 
other than metals. 

The average crucible of melting can hold up to 


Magical Items (Miscellaneous Magic) 


135 


one cubic foot of material. Note that magical items 
are allowed an item saving throw vs. magical fire 
to avoid destruction. Crucibles of melting are 
most often found (when found at all) in the labora- 
tories of wizards, particularly enchanters who spe- 
cialize in the construction of magical devices. 

Whenever a crucible of melting is used, there is 
a 5% chance of a mishap resulting in an explosion 
that inflicts 3d10 points of damage to all creatures 
within 10 feet. A save vs. rod, staff, or wand is 
allowed, with success indicating half damage. 
The crucible is allowed an item saving throw vs. 
disintegration. If it fails, it is destroyed; other- 
wise, it is unharmed and may be used again. 

Half of all crucibles remain hot for 3 turns. The 
rest remain hot until a command word is spoken 
to cancel the heat. 


Crystal Parrot: This is a 12-inch-high statue of a 
parrot made of clear crystal that is useful in the 
detection of trespassers. The crystal parrot is typ- 
ically placed high on a bookcase, shelf, or a simi- 
lar location that gives the parrot an unobstructed 
view of the area it is to oversee. 

To activate the parrot, the user speaks the com- 
mand word, causing a soft red glow to appear be- 
hind the parrot's eyes. Unless the crystal parrot is 
destroyed, it remains active for 30 days. The user 
may also choose to deactivate it with a second com- 
mand word, at which time the red glow in its eyes 
disappears. Once deactivated, it cannot be acti- 
vated again until 30 additional days have passed. 

The active crystal parrot “sees” everything in a 
180-degree arc in front of it, to a distance of 50 feet. 
The crystal parrot can see no better than a normal 
parrot; that is, its vision can be obscured by normal 
or magical darkness, or by physical barriers. 

The user must instruct the parrot as to what 
types of intruders it is to observe. The user may 
be specific (“Watch for a 7-foot human male with 
a bald head and a red coat”) or general (“Watch 
for all humanoid and animal intruders”). 

At the time an intruder enters the parrot’s field 
of vision, the user will hear a telepathic report 
about all intruders matching the description. The 
telepathic reports will be general in nature, sel- 
dom more than brief phrases (“Man with red coat 
enters” or “Two rats enter”). If the user was not 
specific as to what types of intruders to watch 
for, the crystal parrot will report only the number 
and type of intruders (such as “one woman en- 
ters” or “a dozen orcs enter”). The crystal parrot 
will not report the actions of intruders, merely 
their presence; it tells the user when the intruders 
enter and leave, but nothing else. 


The telepathic reports can be transmitted over 
an unlimited distance, but cannot be communi- 
cated into other planes of existence. The telepa- 
thy is one-way; the user cannot communicate 
with the crystal parrot. 

The crystal parrot has AC 3. It shatters and be- 
comes permanently useless if it suffers 12 points 
of damage. The user is instantly aware of the par- 
rot’s destruction. 


Dimensional Mine: This nasty device can take 
the form of any small item, but most often ap- 
pears as a small figure carved of jet or other black 
stone, similar to a figurine of wondrous power. 
As soon as the mine is taken into an extradimen- 
sional space, such as that created by a rope trick, 
extradimensional pocket, or a bag of holding, it 
ruptures that space. Everything in the space, in- 
cluding the mine itself, is spewed into the Astral 
plane and is lost unless someone can retrieve it. If 
the extradimensional space was created by a 
magical item, such as a bag of holding, that item 
is destroyed. 


Disintegration Chamber: These frightful devices 
range in size from a 1'X1'X1' box to a 
10'X 10’ 10' room. They are always made of 
iron, with the interior walls covered with mir- 
rored tiles. They are used to cause matter to van- 
ish, as per the 6th-level disintegrate spell. 

The amount of material to be affected is limited 
only by the size of the chamber. Each use drains 
the device of one charge. Disintegration cham- 
bers generally have 81-100 charges (1d20 +80) 
and may be recharged. 

The material to be obliterated is placed inside 
the chamber, the door is closed, and the activa- 
tion button is depressed. The interior of the 
chamber and its doomed contents then begin to 
glow with a sickly green light, and the material 
vanishes, leaving only fine dust. Creatures and 
objects that successfully save vs. spell are not af- 
fected, but must attempt another saving throw 
every time the chamber is reactivated. 

The size of any given chamber can be deter- 
mined from the table below. 


Dé Roll Size 
1’ cube 
2'X2'X3’ box 
3'X 3'X 6! box 
3'x5'X6' box 
5'X5'X10' box 
10’ x 10’ x 10’ box 


OOP WNH 


Magical Items (Miscellaneous Magic) 


136 


In the larger sizes, these devices are most often 
installed permanently and cannot be carried 
away as part of treasure, unless arrangements are 
made to transport a small room or shack. 


Dust of Mind Dulling: This harmless-looking 
dust is the bane of spellcasters. One pinch of this 
dust can be flung up to 30 feet from the user and 
will scatter to fill a 5-foot-radius sphere. 

All spellcasters within the area must make a 
saving throw versus spell or find their minds 
dulled and their wits slowed. All casting times 
less than 1 round are increased by 2 as the wiz- 
ards hesitate, trying to remember the procedures. 
Spells which normally require 1 round to cast 
now require 1 full round plus a casting time of 5 
on the following round; spells which normally 
have a casting time of 2 rounds or longer now re- 
quire 50% longer than normal to cast. The dust 
persists in the area for 1 turn unless somehow re- 
moved (e.g., a gust of wind spell). Those affected 
by the dust are impaired in their spellcasting for 
1d4 +1 turns thereafter. 


Elemental Compass: This device aids travelers 
seeking the elemental planes of Fire, Air, Water, 
or Earth. The compass, a small urn carved of 
stone and containing hollow pockets, works only 
in the Ethereal plane, an inner plane, or the Prime 
Material plane. 

To make the compass work, a representative 
sample of material from the plane sought must be 
placed in the urn and the lid sealed. Thus, to find 
the elemental plane of Fire, a small, burning fire 
must be place in the urn. Once sealed, the fire will 
burn until the lid is opened (just as water will not 
evaporate from the urn as long as the lid is 
sealed). 

When used on an inner plane or the Ethereal 
plane, the urn glows yellow when the characters 
are heading in the direction of a portal of the ele- 
mental plane they seek. On an inner plane, the 
compass leads to the para- or quasi-elemental 
planar border that exists between planes. In the 
Ethereal plane, the urn leads to the Ethereal cur- 
tain of the desired plane. There are no range re- 
strictions on the inner or Ethereal planes. 

On the Prime Material plane, the compass 
glows when the characters are headed for elemen- 
tal vortices of the correct element, provided the 
vortex is within range. The range on the Prime 
Material plane is 300 miles. 


Everbountiful Soup Kettle: When this two-gallon 
metal kettle is filled with water, the liquid is 
transformed into steaming, nutritious vegetable 
soup. One full kettle is sufficient to provide a sin- 
gle meal for up to six normal appetites. No ingre- 
dients are required for the soup, nor is heat 
necessary. Any nonmagical, nonpoisonous liquid 
can be used in place of water. The everbountiful 
soup kettle can be used once per day. 


Flatbox: A practical example of hypergeometry 
and hypermathematics, the flatbox appears to be 
a wooden box about 3’ long, 2’ wide, and two 
inches deep. It weighs eight pounds. The top of 
the box is a hinged lid. 

When the lid is opened, the interior of the box 
is filled with impenetrable darkness. This dark- 
ness cannot be dispelled by any form of magic; it 
is a characteristic of the hypergeometrical topog- 
raphy of the box. 

Although from the outside the flatbox appears 
to be only two inches deep, it actually has the in- 
ternal volume of a box six feet deep. (Thus, it has 
a volume of 36 cubic feet.) The maximum weight 
that can be loaded into a flatbox is 500 pounds. 
No matter how much of its volume is filled, the 
flatbox still weighs only eight pounds. 

Since the inside of the box is completely dark, 
the only way to retrieve a specific item is to feel 
around within the box. Finding an object this 
way takes 1d4 rounds. 

There is a significant danger associated with 
the flatbox. If it is taken into an extradimensional 
space (such as within a portable hole), if it is tele- 
ported, gated, or transported via dimensional 
folding or any analogous method, or if it ever 
suffers 15 hit points of damage, the flatbox ex- 
plodes violently. This explosion destroys all con- 
tents of the box and inflicts 4d10 hit points of 
damage on any creature within 20 feet (save vs. 
spell for half damage). 


Forge of Metal Protection: The first of these 
heavy (1,000 lb.) forges was created an unknown 
number of centuries ago. Because of the specific 
magical properties involved, it is believed that a 
wizard, assisted by a number of dwarves (all of 
whom were interested in planar research), con- 
structed the device. Although the secret of the 
construction has since spread, the forge is an ex- 
tremely rare magical item. 

The forge is a furnace made up of enchanted 
rocks held together with a network of steel rods. 
When metal armor and weapons are placed with- 
in the furnace and heated to glowing red, the ar- 


Magical Items (Miscellaneous Magic) 


137 


mor becomes immune to the effects of heat on the 
inner planes. Al] metal items tempered in this 
manner suffer no ill effects from heat on any of 
the inner planes, but suffer the effects of heat nor- 
mally on the Prime Material plane. 

The effect of the magical protection lasts 12 to 
30 days (2d10+10). Magical armor or weapons 
that are placed in the forge take on the protection 
from heat, but temporarily lose their other magi- 
cal properties. Thus, a sword +2 placed in the 
forge will not melt on the plane of Fire, but it 
ceases to functions as a sword +2 until the en- 
chantment wears off. A weapon with an ego re- 
tains its ego, but loses all of its other magical 
properties. 


Fur of Warmth: These large, white furs (5’ by 8’) 
are reportedly taken from the skins of creatures 
native to the para-elemental plane of Ice. A per- 
son wearing the fur still feels cold in a cold envi- 
ronment (such as the para-elemental plane of 
ice), but does not suffer damage from exposure. 

Anyone wrapped in the fur is immune to the 
natural effects of cold, including the environ- 
ments of the inner planes. Anyone wearing the 
fur takes half-damage from coldbased attacks. 
The wearer need not be covered completely by 
the fur to receive the enchanted protection; the 
fur must simply be draped over him like a cape. If 
the fur is cut into more than one piece, it loses its 
magical property. 

If the fur is worn in pleasant or hot weather, it 
affects the wearer as any other large fur would. 


Gem of Retaliation: The holder of this gem gains 
a special protection against Evocation spells di- 
rected at him. The owner of the gem gains a +4 
bonus to any saving throw made against such a 
spell, and also acquires a base save of 18 (but not 
the +4 bonus) against any Evocation spell which 
normally does not allow a saving throw (such as 
ice storm). All standard modifiers (ring of protec- 
tion, Dexterity, etc.) apply. 

Additionally, if the saving throw is successful, 
the incoming spell is converted into outgoing 
magic missiles. The number of missiles is equal to 
one-half the level of the spell negated, rounding 
fractions up. The magic missiles then streak back 
to strike the person or creature who cast the spell 
at the owner of the gem. Maximum range for this 
strike is 160 yards. 

Spell-like effects created from magical items 
are not affected by the gem of retaliation (thus, a 
wand of magic missiles will function normally 
against someone using this gem). 


An individual holding a gem of retaliation who 
comes under attack by an area spell (fireball, ice 
storm, etc.) gains the advantages as described 
above. Other persons in the area of effect suffer 
all effects normally. Even if the gem’s owner saves 
successfully, the area-effect Evocation is not 
transformed into magic missiles as described pre- 
viously. 


Glass of Preserved Words: This magical magnify- 
ing glass has a band of silver around the lens and 
an ivory handle. The glass has the ability to make 
illegible written words readable. Words that were 
carved into stone but worn away through time, 
inked letters blurred due to moisture, messages 
clouded by magic, and magical and normal writ- 
ings all become clear when read through the 
glass. 

The actual words remain illegible; they are not 
altered in any way. Only a character looking at 
them through the glass can read them clearly. 

The glass does not protect the reader from any 
harmful effects as a result of a cursed scroll or 
trapped writings, nor does it make cryptically 
worded or coded messages understandable. 


Globe of Purification: These enchanted glass 
spheres, 6 inches in diameter, contain the swirling 
blue-grey essence of a cloud of purification spell. 
When the globe is broken, the cloud billows 
forth, acting exactly as if the spell had been cast 
by a 12th-level priest. These devices are often 
given to a city’s sanitation crews, who descend 
upon the streets and sewers during the wee hours 
of the morning. 


Globe of Serenity: These glass orbs look very 
much like crystal balls. However, a globe of se- 
renity emits a continuous, inaudible tone that af- 
fects all living creatures within 50 feet who fail a 
saving throw vs. spell. While in the area of effect, 
affected creatures feel the utmost serenity and 
self-control. Strong emotions such as joy, love, 
and hatred are totally subdued. 

Creatures affected by the globe gain a +3 sav- 
ing throw bonus to resist spells and special at- 
tacks that affect emotions (such as charm, fear, or 
emotion). At the same time, they suffer a —2 to 
all Intelligence checks, the spark of insight also 
repressed. 

The globe also affects morale, raising the spir- 
its of some while quelling the fires of fanaticism 
in others. All affected creatures have morale of 
10, regardless of their training or skill. If a morale 
check is called for and failed, the affected crea- 


Magical Items (Miscellaneous Magic) 


138 


ture does not rout or flee, but stays in place, tak- 
ing no action until rallied. 

Globes of serenity are best suited for lawful 
communities where open displays of emotion are 
frowned upon. Although crime and violence 
would be greatly reduced in these communities, 
citizens would also lack a sense of spirit. The peo- 
ple would go about their daily routines like emo- 
tionless automatons. 


Horn of Valor: This golden horn is indistinguish- 
able from any other magical horn until it is 
sounded. When sounded, each unit hearing it 
who is allied with or loyal to the character sound- 
ing the horn gains the following benefits. First, 
the unit gains a +2 bonus to its morale for 1d4 
BATTLESYSTEM™ rules turns. Second, any 
routed friendly unit who hears it immediately 
makes a rally check with a bonus of 2 to its mo- 
rale (for that check only). (This check is made 
when the horn is sounded—during the magic 
phase—rather than in the rally phase. If this addi- 
tional check is failed, the unit is entitled to a sec- 
ond check in the rally phase, as normal.) 

Enemy units who hear the horn are also affect- 
ed: they suffer a —1 penalty to morale for 1d2 
BATTLESYSTEM rules turns. 

Under normal conditions, the sound of the 
horn can be heard at a range of 24” . Unusual con- 
ditions, such as a raging storm, can decrease this 
range, but the horn can always be heard at a 
range of 9” (unless the character blowing the 
horn is within an area of magical silence, of 
course). 

The horn of valor can be sounded only once 
per BATTLESYSTEM Rules turn, and no more 
than three times in any 12 hour period. If blowna 
fourth time within this period, it becomes totally 
nonmagical for 1d6 days, and any effects remain- 
ing from earlier soundings immediately termi- 
nate. Effects from multiple soundings are not 
cumulative. (Instantaneous effects such as the au- 
tomatic rally check for friendly units take place 
each time the horn is sounded.) 


Hourglass of Fire and Ice: This small, wooden- 
framed hourglass looks quite ordinary, but radi- 
ates invocation/evocation magic if detected. Half 
these hourglasses contain red sand and half con- 
tain blue sand. 

An hourglass containing red sand in the lower 
portion enables a spellcaster to cast fire-based 
spells with increased potency: +1 per die of dam- 
age. Further, victims suffer a —1 penalty to all 
saves against such spells, and even saving throws 


against illusions of fire are made at —1. 

When the hourglass is tilted, the red sand flows 
slowly through the aperture, turning blue as it 
does so. The hourglass takes 6 turns to fill with 
blue sand. When the hourglass has filled with 
blue sand, all cold-based spells cast by the owner 
of the houglass have +1 per die of damage. Vic- 
tims also suffer a —1 penalty to saving throws 
against cold-based spells, including saves against 
illusions of cold. 

The hourglass may be inverted to re-create the 
red sand, with a corresponding flip in the effects 
after 6 turns. 

The hourglass may be inverted up to three 
times per day. However, with every inversion of 
the hourglass there is a 1% chance that it will 
break, spilling its sands and losing its magic for- 
ever. 


Jar of Preserving: This piece of magical glassware 
is able to hold up to one cubic foot of material. 
The round jar is equipped with a glass lid that 
screws into place. 

Any animal or vegetable matter placed in a jar 
of preserving enters a form of suspended anima- 
tion. A rosebud never wilts, for example, and a 
small animal never ages and does not require 
food, water, or air. Spell components placed in 
the jar never lose potency. 


Law’s Banner: This blazing red standard has the 
magical ability to raise the morale of troops when 
held at the front of a lawful army. The banner in- 
spires any soldier in the army who is within a 
quarter-mile of the banner and can see the flag. 
Troops inspired in this manner receive a +2 modi- 
fier to their base morale as per BATTLESYSTEM™ 
rules. In order for an army to be considered lawful, 
at least 90% of the troops must be of lawful align- 
ment and no more than 1% can be chaotic. 

If the banner falls, the effects are lost immedi- 
ately. If the banner is raised within 1 turn, the ef- 
fect returns. If the banner is not raised within 1 
turn, the inspired troops become filled with 
dread, feeling that the battle has clearly gone 
against their cause. The same troops now suffer a 
—2 morale penalty for the duration of the battle. 
The standard may be raised any number of times, 
but will improve or impair morale only once per 
day. 


Lens of Speed Reading: While looking through 
this lens, the user can read any book, document, 
or other written material at three times his nor- 
mal speed with full comprehension. When used 


Magical Items (Miscellaneous Magic) 


139 


in conjunction with read magic, the lens of speed 
reading enables the user to quickly scan scrolls 
and magical tomes to learn their contents, but it 
has no effect on the time required to cast spells. 
The lens will not decipher codes, improve illegi- 
ble writing, or allow magic to be read without the 
proper spells. 


Liquid Road: When sprinkled on water, swamp- 
land, quicksand, or a similar surface, liquid road 
causes the terrain to harden to the density of 
granite, enabling easy passage. Liquid road is al- 
so effective in negating the effects of spells such as 
transmute rock to mud. The liquid road stays 
hard for one hour, after which the terrain returns 
to its original state. One flask of liquid road can 
harden a 5' X 5' surface (for example, a path 25’ 
long and 1’ wide). 


Lorloveim’s Obsidian Mortar and Pestle: This 
magical tool allows the wielder to grind even the 
hardest materials into a fine powder. Rocks, 
metals, and even gemstones of all types may be 
ground to dust in as little as 1d4 rounds. 

Magical items pounded beneath the pestle are 
allowed a saving throw vs. disintegration. If the 
save is successful, the enchanted item cannot be 
destroyed in this fashion. If the saving throw 
fails, the item is reduced to nonmagical powder. 

The obsidian mortar is commonly used by wiz- 
ards in the preparation of spell components and 
ingredients for magical items. Neither the mortar 
nor the pestle is effective without the other. 


Manual of Dogmatic Methods: This silver- 
bound book, studded with jewels, appears to be a 
tome of considerable value. The book is actually 
cursed, although this is not immediately obvious. 

The manual has the power to provide advice 
on any action that its owner might consider tak- 
ing. The owner need only open to any page in the 
book, and there before him will be a list of 
actions, most of them ritualistic in nature, to in- 
sure the success of any project he undertakes. 

The first time the book is used, the owner is 
suddenly struck with the idea that he now owns a 
source of information that can give him valuable 
advice on any matter. It becomes a guide for his 
whole life. He will not share the book or let any- 
one take it away from him. If anyone tries to re- 
move it, he will fight to keep the book. 


Following the first use of the book, the owner 
cannot do anything without first checking the 
book. The information in the manual is com- 
pletely worthless, but the owner of the book does 
not realize this. The pages in the manual change 
constantly, offering its owner an obscure (and 
usually ridiculous) ritual to perform before doing 
anything. Thus, if a character is about to go into 
battle, he might check the book and find several 
exercises he should undertake to loosen his mus- 
cles. If he is going to speak to a duke, he might 
find instructions for the color of his clothing ac- 
cording to the day of the year and the time of day 
of the meeting. If he is going to pray to his god for 
a spell, he might find six pages of cleansing rituals 
that should be performed first. 

The manual's instructions are almost never 
harmful, but they might delay the owner's 
actions at a crucial moment. 

Whenever a character is in a situation that re- 
quires hasty action (for example, he is attacked), 
the book will delay its owner by 1d8 rounds. If 
the owner is preparing for a lengthy activity (a 
long trip, for example), he will be busy for 1d4 
days getting ready for the event. The DM should 
be creative in detailing the tasks the owner must 
perform before he can comfortably commit him- 
self to his goal. 

The compulsion to follow the manual’s instruc- 
tions can be ended with a remove curse spell. Fol- 
lowing this, the next person to open the book 
becomes its new owner. If an owner should die, 
the book becomes the property of the next person 
to open its cover. 

If possible, the DM should hint that the charac- 
ter is actually gaining bonuses for using the book, 
while allowing the other characters in the group 
to figure out the effects for themselves. 


Medallion of Spell Exchange: This medallion al- 
lows the spellcaster to exchange one memorized 
spell of up to 6th level for others of lower levels, 
rather in the manner of Mordenkainen's lucubra- 
tion. The wizard loses the sacrificed spell and re- 
calls one or more spells from those he had 
memorized and cast within the past 24 hours. The 
total levels of these spells must be one less in sum 
than the spell sacrificed. For example, by sacrific- 
ing a 5th-level spell, a wizard could recall one 1st- 
and one 3rd-level spell, two 2nd-level spells, four 
1st-level spells, and so on. The medallion can 
function only once per day. The wizard must 
have available any spell components required for 
exchanged spells. 


Magical Item (Miscellaneous Magic) 


140 


Mirror of Retention: This appears to be an ordi- 
nary round silver mirror, about 12 inches in di- 
ameter. When the mirror of retention is hung ina 
50 foot X 50 foot or smaller room and the com- 
mand word is spoken, the mirror records all 
events occurring in the room for 24 hours. Dur- 
ing this time, the mirror of retention appears to 
be a normal mirror. 

When the command word is spoken again, the 
mirror replays all the events it recorded. The 
events appear as a series of silent images in the 
surface of the mirror. By rotating the mirror 
clockwise, the images can be accelerated, appear- 
ing as much as 10 times as fast as they occurred. 
Rotating the mirror counter-clockwise causes the 
images to appear in reverse. If the mirror is held 
parallel to the floor, the image freezes. Thus, by 
rotating the mirror and freezing the images, the 
user can scan for events, review previously 
viewed images, or freeze selected images for clos- 
er study. 

When the command word is spoken a third 
time, the mirror of retention is cleared of all im- 
ages and is ready to record new images for an- 
other 24 hours. 


Mirror of Simple Order: When a character steps 
in front of this mirror, he sees a strangely distort- 
ed image of himself. The reflection moves as he 
does, but the face reflected in the mirror is the im- 
age of an ordinary face. There are eyes, a mouth, 
and a nose, but all lack character. Although the 
figure moves as the character does, it is shorter or 
taller than he is, adjusted in whatever direction 
approaches the average height of the character's 
race. Any clothing worn by the character is al- 
tered as well. Bright colors will be muted, appear- 
ing to be shades of grey. Any ornamental work 
on armor, weapons, or clothing will be gone. 

If the character stands in front of the mirror for 
more than two rounds, he is instantly poly- 
morphed into the image in the mirror. The poly- 
morphed character must succeed on a system 
shock roll to survive the change. 

Like the polymorph other spell, there is a chance 
that the subject's personality and mentality change 
into that of the new form. In this case, each of his 
ability scores becomes 11 and his hit points be- 
come the average for his Hit Dice at his level. He 
retains his level and class, but is not as exceptional 
as he might have been. He is bland and boring. 
The character's alignment changes to lawful neu- 
tral, and he becomes interested in little else other 
than setting order to the world. He passionlessly 
travels to wipe out chaos wherever he finds it. 


All effects of the mirror can be removed 
through a dispel magic spell. Until the effects are 
removed, however, the character is unaware that 
any change has occured. 


Mist Tent: A mist tent is contained in a small glass 
flask. Removing the stopper causes a stream of 
white mist to pour from the flask. One round lat- 
er, the mist shapes itself into the form of a 
10' X 12’ tent with a single, open flap in the front. 
The stopper must be replaced in the flask as soon 
as the mist tent takes shape, or the tent will dissi- 
pate as described below. 

The mist tent has the density of a cloud when un- 
occupied. When one or more characters enter the 
mist tent, the flap can be closed; from the inside, the 
flap has the density of canvas. From the inside, the 
walls and ceiling of the mist tent appear as opaque 
white mist, and the floor is transparent. Despite its 
appearance, the entire mist tent has the density of 
canvas once the flap is closed. When the flap is 
closed, the following effects occur: 

© The mist tent and all occupants and items in- 
side become invisible to all creatures outside the 
tent. A detect invisibility spell cast by a creature 
outside the tent reveals the mist tent. 

e The mist tent rises 10 feet off the ground; it 
continues to hover in place as long as the flap re- 
mains closed. The transparent floor allows occu- 
pants of the tent to clearly see the surrounding 
area. The floor of the mist tent can support 1,000 
pounds without rupturing. 


If the flap is opened, the mist tent’s walls, floor, 
and ceiling instantly become visible to outsiders, 
appearing as a thin, white mist. Additionally, the 
mist tent slowly descends, landing gently on the 
ground. If the stopper is removed from the flask, 
the tent dissipates, returning to the flask in a 
stream of white mist; if the bottle is not stoppered 
immediately, the mist will pour from the flask to 
form the mist tent again. 

The mist tent is unharmed by all types of fire, 
but does not offer such protection to its occu- 
pants. The tent is susceptible to other forms of 
damage. It provides no more protection to its oc- 
cupants than a normal canvas tent. 

The mist tent has AC 10. If the mist tent sus- 
tains 10 points of damage, it dissipates in a 
shower of light and is permanently negated. If 
this occurs while the mist tent is hovering, all oc- 
cupants plummet to the ground. If the mist tent 
sustains less than 10 points of damage, it can be 
returned to its flask, then re-released; all damage 
will be repaired. 


Magical Item Descriptions (Miscellaneous Magic) 


141 


Mordom’s Cauldron of Air: Mordom’s cauldron 
of air is a round pot about two feet in diameter, 
weighing 60 pounds. There are two handles on 
either side of the pot and a compartment built 
like a small shelf under the cauldron. The com- 
partment can be filled with wood or coal to heat 
the cauldron. 

Although the device is heavy and bulky, the 
cauldron is valuable for characters planning an 
expedition to a place with little or no air. The 
cauldron functions as an air generator. To operate 
the device, the cauldron is filled with water and a 
fire is lit in the compartment. When the water 
boils, vapor is released. The air from the vapor 
creates a bubble of breathable air 10 feet in radius 
centered on the cauldron. 

The water must not be allowed to spill out of 
the cauldron and the fire must be kept burning. 
As long as these conditions are met, the cauldron 
will provide air continuously. 

The air produced is the same temperature as 
the surrounding environment. The device needs a 
minimum of one gallon of water per hour. 


Mouse Cart: A mouse cart resembles a miniature 
wooden cart with two wooden wheels and a tiny 
leather harness. When a normal mouse is secured 
in the harness, the cart expands to the size of a 
normal cart (roughly 5 square feet). The mouse 
retains its normal size, but becomes enchanted, 
acquiring the ability to pull the cart plus 250 
pounds of cargo at a movement rate of 12. 

As long as the mouse remains in the harness, it 
is compelled to obey all oral commands from the 
person who put him in the harness. The mouse 
will run forward, stop, turn, and obey all similar 
commands; it will not attack or take any action 
that a mouse is normally incapable of perform- 
ing. No other creature attached to the mouse cart 
will activate the device's magical properties. A 
character or other creature polymorphed or 
otherwise transformed into a mouse can activate 
the cart’s magic. 


Necklace of Memory Enhancement: The wearer 
of this brass necklace receives two benefits. 

è The wearer is immune to all memory loss, 
from both natural and magical causes (such as a 
forget spell). The necklace has no effect on a wiz- 
ard's spell memorization. 

è The wearer can recall with absolute clarity 
any sight or conversation he experienced or any 
book he read within the previous seven days. 
Memories prior to seven days ago are recalled 
with only normal clarity. The necklace affects 


only events that occurred while the necklace 
was worn by the user. 


Nefradina’s Identifier: This highly valued item is 
a magical test kit used to identify potions, pow- 
ders, and other alchemical substances. It consists 
of a wooden box (typically measuring 1' X 1' X 3’) 
containing an assortment of vials, flasks, and 
beakers in small, padded compartments. Also in 
the box is a copy of a text called Nefradina’s Co- 
dex. This book instructs the owner on how to use 
the test kit. 

When the owner wishes to identify a potion, 
powder, oil, perfume, or similar liquid or powdered 
magical item, he looks up the substance's character- 
istics (odor, color, consistency, and so on) in the co- 
dex and follows the directions given to create a test 
mixture by combining a number of ingredients 
found in the kit. He then adds a drop of the test 
mixture to the substance he wishes to identify. The 
resulting effects (changes in color, sparks, smoke, 
bizarre odors, small explosions, and so forth) are 
looked up in the codex and the substance is identi- 
fied through a process of elimination. 

The DM secretly rolls 1d100 to determine the 
actual results: 

01-20: The test kit is missing a vital chemical and 
can never identify that particular substance. 
21-50: The user comes to a false conclusion and 
believes the substance to be something it is not 
(DM's choice). 

51-100: The user successfully identifies the sub- 
stance. 


The DM should modify the roll by +2% per 
level of experience of the character using the test 
kit. 

The time required to perform a single test is 
1d4 +1 turns. A typical kit may be used 1d10 + 40 
times before it becomes useless. 


Philosopher's Egg: This item is an enchanted re- 
tort: a long-necked piece of glassware in which 
substances are distilled. It is a highly prized addi- 
tion to a wizard’'s laboratory, for it has two very 
important uses. 

The first use of the philosopher's egg is in the 
creation of any magical or mundane fluid. The 
time required to create such a fluid is cut in half 
through use of the philosopher's egg. 

The eggs second use is as a required compo- 
nent for creating the substance that turns lead in- 
to gold—the legendary philosopher's stone. 
Thus, it is sometimes said by wizards that “the 
stone hatches from the egg.” 


Magical Item (Miscellaneous Magic) 


142 


Pick of Earth Parting: This enchanted pick allows 
its wielder to cut through elemental earth quickly. 
The wielder of the pick must have strength of 17 
or better. By repeatedly swinging the pick at ele- 
mental earth, the wielder can carve out a 
10’ X 10’ X 60’ tunnel per round. The pick’s magi- 
cal properties create a smooth, clean surface re- 
gardless of the mining skill of the user. All rubble 
from the excavation magically disappears, leav- 
ing a clear passage. 


Portable Canoe: This ordinary, canvas-covered 
canoe is capable of comfortably holding two pas- 
sengers. The canoe includes two wooden pad- 
dles. The portable canoe can be folded into a 
6-inch-square packet, about an inch thick, weigh- 
ing just under a pound. With the exception of the 
paddles, the portable canoe must be emptied of 
all other objects before it can be folded. Folding 
the canoe requires 5 rounds; unfolding requires 2 
rounds. 


Prism of Light Splitting: This useful device re- 
fracts light into the three primary colors of 
light—red, blue, and green. The user can choose 
the color of light that is emitted by the prism. 
When creating a magical fluid or powder, the 
wizard casts the enchant an item spell. Following 
this, the wizard may use the prism of light split- 
ting to shine a blue, red, or green beam of light on 
the mixture. The light must shine on the sub- 
stance for one full day. At the end of this time, the 
material gains an additional magical property, 
depending upon the color of the beam employed. 


Red: The potion, powder, or aromatic oil is 
stronger than normal; targets of its effects 
suffer a —2 saving throw penalty. 

Blue: The duration of the magical potion, pow- 
der, or fragrance’s effect is doubled. 

Green: The amount of liquid or powder is dou- 
bled; the wizard now has enough for two 
potions, powders, or aromatic oils. 


Puchezma’s Powder of Edible Objects: An invet- 
erate traveler who was notoriously cheap, Pu- 
chezma could never bring himself to spend 
money on decent provisions or hire a quality chef 
for his long wilderness excursions. In his efforts 
to create a seasoning that would make the bland 
dishes of his second-rate cooks more palatable, 
Puchezma stumbled on a formula for the powder 
of edible objects. 

This powder, which resembles normal salt, 
causes any normally indigestible material to be- 


Magical Item Descriptions (Miscellaneous Magic) 


come edible, nutritious food. The material must 
be nonliving and nonmagical, and must be in a 
form the consumer can swallow; for instance, 
dirt and cotton cloth are acceptable (the diner 
could chew up and swallow these materials), but 
large stones and planks of hard wood are not 
(these objects would have to be broken up into 
small pieces before they could be swallowed). All 
poisonous and otherwise harmful properties 
(such as sharp edges) are negated by the powder. 
One pinch of powder of edible objects is suffi- 
cient to treat one cubic foot of material. The 
powder is normally found in small bags contain- 
ing 10 to 100 pinches. 


Quill of Law: This magical pen is used by despots 
and good rulers alike to ensure that their laws 
and proclamations are obeyed. Anyone reading a 
posted proclamation or law that was written with 
the pen must obey the law, regardless of whether 
it is a good law. 

This effect applies only to persons who actu- 
ally see the written message. If a person knows 
about the law but has not read a notice written 
with the quill, he still has the option to obey or 
break the law. Once he has read it, however, he 
must obey it. 

The magical effect is limited in that only the 
three most recent laws written with the quill 
maintain this power. Laws written prior to the 
most recent three can still be the law, but citizens 
are not compelled to obey them. 

Creatures with 15 or greater Intelligence and 12 
or more Hit Dice or levels are entitled to a saving 
throw vs. spell when viewing the proclamation. 
If the saving throw is successful, the effect is ne- 
gated and the person is left to his own moral deci- 
sions. 


Reglar’s Gloves of Freedom: These gloves appear 
to be thick, leather, combat gloves. Silvered 
pearls are sewn along the stitching. 

A character under the influence of a charm 
spell or similar enchantment can be freed of the 
enchantment by shaking hands with the wearer 
of the gloves. This item frees only characters who 
are enchanted against their will. Those who have 
willingly submitted to a charm (such as a quest) 
are not affected by the gloves. The former victim 
retains all memories of his enchantment. 

The gloves do not protect or release the wearer 
from such spells. 


Robe of Repetition: This ordinary-looking robe 
radiates strong alteration magic if magic is detect- 


143 


ed. The wearer of this robe acquires a unique and 
powerful augmentation to his magic. After cast- 
ing a spell, there is a percentage chance that a 
mnemonic/harmonic effect occurs so that the 
magical energies liberated in spellcasting are am- 
plified and retained briefly. The wizard is then 
able to cast the same spell a second time. This 
must be done on the succeeding round or the bo- 
nus spell is lost. 

Once the spell has been cast a second time, the 
energy is completely liberated. There is no possi- 
bility of a third casting. In all cases, the spell is 
lost from the wizard’s memory until the wizard 
memorizes it again. 

The chance of a spell being available for a sec- 
ond casting varies according to spell level: 


1st Level 50% 
2nd Level 40% 
3rd Level 30% 
4th Level 20% 
5th Level 10% 


Energy from spells of 6th level and above are 
not retained within the robe’s magical weave. 
Furthermore, a maximum of 24 spell levels per 
day can be reused with the benefit of this robe. If 
the wizard opts not to use a spell which is made 
available for a second use, this counts toward the 
maximum limit. 

If a wizard removes the robe, spells cast while 
the robe is off do not count toward the spell limit. 
For example, if a wizard casts 15 spell levels that 
count against the robe’s daily limit and he then 
removes the robe, subsequent spells do not count 
against the robe’s limit. If the wizard then puts on 
the robe during the same day and casts more 
spells, the robe retains the 15 spell levels that 
counted against it and all spells cast subsequently 
also count against the robe. 

Only one wizard may use the robe’s magic in a 
single day; if a second wizard puts on the robe, it 
does not function. 


Saddle of Flying: This saddle resembles a normal 
leather saddle with a small, silver buckle near the 
pommel. When the saddle is secured to a horse or 
any other nonmagical mount and the silver buck- 
le is fastened, the mount sprouts wings and ac- 
quires the ability to fly at its normal movement 
rate (Maneuverability Class D). The flying 
mount can carry its normal encumbrance. 

The saddle of flying functions for only one 
hour per day. When the silver buckle is unfas- 
tened or the duration expires, the wings disap- 


pear and all flying ability is immediately lost, re- 
gardless of whether the mount is airborne or on 
the ground. 


Salves of Far Seeing: These salves allow a char- 
acter who puts a drop of the salve into each of 
his eyes to see as well as he would on a brightly 
lit day on his Prime Material plane. The proper 
salve also serves as a protection against blind- 
ness on planes where protection is necessary. 
Several types of salves exist for the different ele- 
mental, para-elemental, and quasi-elemental 
planes. The salves have no effect on normal or 
magical blindness. 

The salves are found in small metal containers 
made of precious metals. A container contains 
4d12 drops of salve. One drop in each eye be- 
stows the magical property for one day. A drop 
must be placed in every usable eye for the magic 
to work. 

A different salve exists for each of the planes 
where such a salve is required, and each has a dis- 
tinct look and feel. The following table lists the 
planes that limit sight and the color and texture of 
each respective salve. The salves function only 
on their respective planes. 


Plane Color Texture 
Water Blue Smooth 

Earth Black Grainy, Thick 
Positive White Opaque Liquid 
Negative Clear Liquid 

Smoke Ashen Liquid 

Ice Bluish-white Thick 

Ooze Gray Rubbery 
Magma Copper Thick 

Steam Gray Liquid 

Salt White Grainy 
Radiance Golden Smooth 

Ash Gray Grainy 
Minerals Silver Grainy 

Dust Black Dry 


Scarab of Uncertainty: This scarab has a specific 
and potentially powerful effect. If the wearer is 
within range of a monster summoning or similar 
spell (invisible stalker, conjure animals, etc.) 
when cast by another creature or character, the 
summoned creatures make a saving throw versus 
spell the instant they appear. If the summoned 
creatures fail this saving throw, they mistakenly 
believe that the wearer of the scarab is the indi- 
vidual who summoned them and will then serve 
the scarab wearer as best they can, rather than 
the caster of the spell. 


Magical Item (Miscellaneous Magic) 


144 


School Cap: The wearer of this cap gains a +2 
bonus to saving throws against spells of one par- 
ticular school of magic. In addition, specialists of 
the designated school do not inflict a —1 penalty 
on a wearer's saving throws against their special- 
ist spells. The nature of the school cap is deter- 
mined using a 1d8 roll. 


D8 Roll Affected School 
Abjuration 
Conjuration/Summoning 
Greater Divination 
Enchantment/Charm 
Illusion 
Invocation/Evocation 
Necromancy 

Alteration 


ONO WNPH 


Of these caps, 10% are mixed blessings since 
they have a cursed side-effect: The wearer suffers 
a —1 penalty to saving throws against spells of 
the opposition school(s). The curse takes effect 
the first time the wearer is subjected to a spell 
from the opposition school(s). Once the curse has 
been engaged, the cap cannot be removed except 
through a remove curse spell. 


Skie’s Locks and Bolts: This device looks like a 
small, ornate lock with a tiny silver key. When 
the key is turned clockwise, all doors, windows 
and other portals within 50 feet of the item slam 
shut and become wizard locked. For purposes of 
opening them, the wizard locks are the equiva- 
lent of those cast by a 12th-level wizard. The ef- 
fect lasts until the key is twisted counterclockwise 
or the device is transported more than 50 feet 
away. 

Skie’s locks and bolts are sometimes found in 
the homes of wealthy merchants and secretive 
wizards. 


Talisman of Memorization: This talisman allows 
a wizard to memorize spells in half the normal 
time (i.e., 5 minutes per spell level). Half of these 
amulets (1-5 on 1d10) affect memorization of 
spells only of levels 1-5. The remaining half affect 
memorization of spells of levels 1-8. Spells of 9th 
level are never affected by this talisman. 


Tapestry of Disease Warding: This is a 3-foot- 
square cotton tapestry bearing the image of a 
rainbow. When hung in a house or other building 
(10,000 square feet or less), it protects the occu- 
pants from nonmagical diseases. It has no effect 
on persons already suffering from diseases, but 
protects healthy characters from contracting con- 
tagious diseases ranging from common colds to 
deadly plagues. The tapestry offers no protection 
against any disease caused by magic or of a magi- 
cal nature. 

The tapestry of disease warding is subject to 
rips, fire, and other damage that could be sus- 
tained by a normal tapestry, although it is al- 
lowed a saving throw. Its magic is permanent 
only as long as it remains intact. The tapestry 
may be moved to a new location, but has no ef- 
fect outdoors. 


Teleportation Chamber: These devices are used 
to teleport matter (as per the Sth-level teleport 
spell) and vary in size from a 1’ X 1' X 1’ box toa 
10' X10’ 10’ room. They are usually made of 
ornate wood, but can be fashioned of stone or 
metal. In any case, the interior walls are always 
covered with mirrored tiles much like disintegra- 
tion chambers. A small, green sphere is fastened 
to the outside of the chamber near the door, and 
another sphere is positioned on an inside wall. 

To activate the device, a creature must touch 
one of the spheres while concentrating on a men- 
tal image of the destination. The chance of error 
is exactly the same as that described in the Play- 
ers Handbook for casting the 5th-level teleport 
spell, with one exception. If the contents of the 
chamber are being sent to another teleportation 
chamber, the chance of a mishap is 0%. 

The number of people or objects that may be 
teleported is limited only by the size of the cham- 
ber. The size of any given chamber can be deter- 
mined from the table below. 


Dé Roll Chamber Size 
1' cube 
2' X2'X3' box 
3' x 3' x 6' box 
3’ X5'X6' box 
5'X 5’ 10' box 
10’ X 10’ X 10’ box 


On r WNe 


All travelers and materials in the chamber ar- 
rive at the same destination, which is determined 
by the activator, Distance is not a factor, but in- 
terplanar travel is not possible by means of this 
magical machine. Each use drains the device of 


Magical Item (Miscellaneous Magic) 


145 


one charge. Teleportation chambers generally 
have between 81-100 charges (1d20+80) and 
may be recharged. 


Tenser’s Portmanteau of Frugality: This moder- 
ately large, black leather traveling case contains a 
bewildering number of small instruments— 
tweezers, measuring beakers, small ceramic jars, 
and the like. It can be used to extract the greatest 
possible benefit from certain single-use magical 
items by partly diluting or admixing them. All 
potions, oils, dusts, incenses, glues, solvents, and 
Nolzur's marvelous pigments can be affected by 
Tenser's portmanteau. 

For every two potions, applications of dust, or 
similar substances that are treated by the port- 
manteau, a third active dose or use can be ex- 
tracted. Any such item may be affected only once 
by the power of the portmanteau. Single doses (a 
single potion, etc.) do not provide sufficient mag- 
ic for treatment by the portmanteau. 

The process of extracting the magic is not a 
simple task. The work takes 2d6 hours to com- 
plete. At the end of this time, the wizard must 
make an Intelligence check. If successful, the 
third dose is created. If failed, the third dose fails 
and only enough remains of the original materi- 
als for a single dose of the magical substance. 

If Alamir's fundamental breakdown is cast dur- 
ing the process, the wizard gains a +2 to his Intel- 
ligence check. In this situation, the spell does not 
consume the magical items on which it is cast. 

Each use of the portmanteau consumes some of 
the special agents required for the process. When 
discovered, the case holds enough materials to at- 
tempt 4d10 duplications. 


Thought Bottle: This item usually takes the form 
of a metal flask similar in appearance to an efreeti 
bottle. Bottle and stopper are usually engraved 
with intricate runes. The bottle can be used to 
store and protect important memories and 
thoughts, and is often used by powerful charac- 
ters as a way of managing their (potentially clut- 
tered) memories. 

To use the bottle, a character concentrates on 
the thought or memory to be stored. He then un- 
corks the bottle and speaks the word of com- 
mand. The thought or memory is then 
transferred from the character's brain into the 
bottle. All details of the thought or memory are 
held within the bottle. The caster remembers the 
general nature of the thought (“Oh, that was my 
thought on the design of an efreeti-powered 
steam engine”) but need not worry about forget- 


ting specific details, since these are trapped in the 
thought bottle. 

To retrieve a thought, a character uncorks the 
bottle and speaks another word of command. 
The thought or memory is then transferred di- 
rectly into the user's brain. 

Thought bottles are sometimes used to protect 
vital information. A messenger carrying vital 
plans through enemy territory where there is a 
significant chance of capture and subsequent in- 
terrogation might carry all sensitive plans in one 
or more bottles. The messenger does not know 
the contents or the command word and therefore 
cannot reveal the contents of the bottles. Like- 
wise, a spy could gain secret information, trans- 
fer it to a thought bottle, then use forget or 
modify memory to wipe this information from 
his mind. After this, regardless of the methods 
used, the spy is incapable of revealing the sensi- 
tive information. 

Thought bottles are sometimes used as “mem- 
ory archives," where characters can save memo- 
ries that are “cluttering up” their minds. (This 
would be more of a problem for long-lived races 
such as elves, since the sheer volume of memories 
recorded over several centuries could be over- 
whelming.) 

Thought bottles will function (in both storage 
and retrieval) for any intelligent creature. 

When discovered, 75% of all thought bottles 
can hold only a single thought or memory. The 
remaining 25% have a capacity of 2d4 separate 
thoughts or memories. There is a separate word 
of command for each “thought slot.” 


Time Bomb: A time bomb resembles a small 
hourglass without sand. To set the bomb, the user 
removes one base from the hourglass and fills one 
end with an amount of sand of the user’s choice 
(ranging from one minute’s worth of sand to one 
hour's worth). When the hourglass is set on a flat 
surface so that the sand begins to trickle from one 
end to the other, the time bomb is activated. 

When all the sand has trickled to the bottom of 
the hourglass, it explodes in a ball of flame equal 
to a fireball spell cast at Sth level, delivering 5d6 
points of damage and filling a 20-foot radius. Vic- 
tims within this area who make a successful sav- 
ing throw vs. spell suffer only half damage. 

If an activated time bomb is shattered, tipped 
over, or otherwise disturbed before it detonates, 
its magic is permanently negated; it cannot be re- 
activated. From that time on, however, it can be 
used as a normal hourglass. 


Magical Item (Miscellaneous Magic) 


146 


Tome of Mystical Equations: This book is indis- 
tinguishable from other magical tomes. It con- 
tains charts and equations relating to several of 
the spells belonging to the sphere of Numbers. It 
can be used as the material component for the 
spells personal reading, telethaumaturgy, and ad- 
dition. If it is used in this manner, the casting time 
for the spell is halved, and any saving throw that 
the subject of the spell might be entitled to suffers 
a —2 penalty. 


Trimia’s Catalogue of Outer Plane Artifacts: This 
magical device is a large book bound in heavy 
wooden covers that do not reveal the title or na- 
ture of the work. Upon opening to the first page, 
the owner finds the title of the book along with a 
table of contents listing the various outer planes. 

Upon opening the book to the desired page, the 
owner finds either a blank page (25% chance) or 
a description of a magical device (75% chance) 
that provides transportation to that particular 
plane. Along with the description of the device is 
a price ranging from 1,000 to 20,000 gp 
(1d20 X 1,000). If the appropriate sum is laid on 
the open book and a vanish spell is subsequently 
cast on the coins, the transport device shown ap- 
pears in place of the cash. The page then immedi- 
ately goes blank and the catalogue disappears, 
teleported to a random location on the Prime Ma- 
terial plane. 

The transport device can deliver characters to 
the outer planes and can return them to their 
point of departure on the Prime Material plane. 
Each transport device brings a person or persons 
to the upper layer of an outer plane. The point of 
arrival in the plane is left to the DM and usually 
changes each time the device is used. 

Each device has a command word which is al- 
ways the name of the plane associated with the 
device. Unless otherwise noted, anyone touching 
the device or touching the person who holds the 
device is transported to the upper plane of the 
outer plane named. 

Each transport device can be used once per 

day. With each use, there is a 5% chance the de- 
vice will malfunction, sending the characters to 
the desired plane, but with the device itself disap- 
pearing. 
Nirvana: The device used to transport to the 
plane of Nirvana is a small pocket watch, a de- 
vice of unspeakable rarity. The watch keeps per- 
fect time according to the yearly cycle of the sun 
and never needs winding. The watch is solid gold 
and has two long, thin gold chains that run 
through a metal loop at the top of the watch. 


Arcadia: Arcadia’'s transportation device is a 
palm-sized metal sculpture representing the out- 
lines of geometrical shapes. The largest shape is a 
six-sided cubic cage made of 12 silver rods. With- 
in this cube is a four-sided pyramid, also made of 
silver rods. Inside the pyramid is a circle of silver. 
Seven Heavens: A featureless sphere of gold is 
used to travel to the Seven Heavens. The sphere 
is three inches in diameter and would appear to 
be nothing more than a valuable bauble if not for 
the golden glow it always radiates. The glow has 
the properties of a continual light spell. 

Twin Paradises: This device appears to be a fea- 
tureless cube of silver measuring three inches on 
a side. If it is carefully examined, four small, 
nearly invisible buttons will be visible. If the 
four buttons are pressed in the correct order, the 
cube splits in half. (The correct order can be de- 
termined through the use of legend lore and sim- 
ilar spells.) The device will teleport to the Twin 
Paradises when half the cube is held in each 
hand and the command word is spoken. The 
travelers arrive in Dothion, considered the top- 
most plane. The two halves of the cube must be 
reassembled before it can once again be used to 
teleport. 

Elysium: The device used to reach this plane is a 
sturdy currach, a primitive vessel made from 
thick hide stretched over a wood-and-wicker 
frame. This device functions as a normal ship, 
with a seaworthiness rating of 95%. If anyone 
touches the ship's mast and speaks the word Ely- 
sium, the boat, its passengers and crew, and all 
cargo are transported to the Oceanus River in the 
plane of Amoria. 

Happy Hunting Grounds: A leaf sculpted of gold 
is the device used to arrive in the Happy Hunting 
Grounds. The leaf is about two inches long and is 
wrought in fine detail. 

Olympus: The device used to reach the plane of 
Olympus is a silver chariot. The chariot can com- 
fortably hold four passengers and their gear or 
eight passengers without equipment. A team of 
four horses must be attached to the chariot; when 
the chariot is in motion and the command word is 
spoken, the horses, chariot, passengers, and gear 
are transported to Olympus. The chariot arrives 
in the plane in motion. 

Gladsheim: The device used to reach Gladsheim 
is a prism approximately three inches in length. 
To operate the device, the prism must be used 
outdoors to create a rainbow on the ground. 
When the command word is spoken, the rainbow 
grows out of the ground and rises up into the sky. 
The rainbow lasts for 1 turn. Anyone who steps 


Magical Item (Miscellaneous Magic) 


147 


onto the rainbow is whisked up the colored path 
and into the plane of Asgard. 

Limbo: Limbo is reached through the use of a 
magical mirror. When a person stands before the 
mirror, he sees his own image reflected normally. 
The reflected world behind him, however, is in 
utter chaos—the bricks from the wall behind him 
float in the air, flames drift across the room, gold 
and silver pieces break apart and wander aim- 
lessly. If the command word is spoken as a char- 
acter looks into the mirror, he is transported to 
any of the planes of Limbo. The mirror does not 
travel to Limbo. Another means of returning to 
the Prime Material plane must be found. 
Pandemonium: This device is a jar perpetually 
filled with black pitch. When the pitch is spread 
ona stone wall and the command word spoken, a 
portal forms in the wall, leading to a cavern in 
Pandesmos. The pitch evaporates after 5 rounds 
and magically reappears in the jar. 

Abyss: Pazunia, the uppermost layer of the innu- 
merable layers of the Abyss, can be reached 
through the use of a circular black cloth that 
looks like a portable hole. The cloth is three feet 
in diameter and can be folded to fit inside a pock- 
et. When the cloth is spread on the ground and 
the command word is spoken, the cloth becomes 
a pit that leads to the plane. The cloth exists as a 
pit for 1 turn, then returns to its state as a piece of 
cloth. It does not follow travelers to the Abyss. 
Tarterus: This device is a necklace of dull, reddish 
pearls. A character who wears the necklace and 
speaks the command word will be transported 
(along with anyone touching him) to Othrys, the 
topmost layer of the plane. 

Hades: The device used to reach Hades is an iron 
keelboat. When any character on the boat speaks 
the command word, the keelboat and all it pas- 
sengers are transported to the river Styx in 
Oinos, the uppermost layer of Hades. 

Gehenna: Characters who wish to travel to Ge- 
henna must gather in a small, enclosed room with 
this magical urn of silver and bronze. A flame 
must be lit within the urn using materials that 
cause a great deal of smoke. When the room is so 
choked with smoke that breathing is almost im- 
possible, the command word may be spoken. 
This transports everyone and everything in the 
room, including the urn, to Khala, the uppermost 
layer of Gehenna. 

Nine Hells: The Nine Hells can be reached by us- 
ing special pieces of blood-red coal. When one of 
these coals is lit or dropped into a flame, a ball of 
fire flares out from the coal. It does no damage, 
but transports all creatures and objects within 20 


feet to Avernus. No command word is needed for 
the effect to take place. 

Acheron: The device used to reach Aceheron is a 
two-inch cube of black onyx. The cube always 
appears as a puzzle inside a black sack. The puz- 
zle is made up of 43 small pieces, which must be 
fit together to form the cube. When complete, the 
command word must be spoken. 

Solving the puzzle require an Intelligence check 
at half a creature's Intelligence score. Each at- 
tempt to solve the puzzle requires 1d6 turns. 
Once the cube has been used to teleport, it falls to 
pieces. The pieces all reappear in the sack, wher- 
ever it might be. To use the device again, the piec- 
es must be reassembled. 


Warp Marble: This item is a small (1/2-inch diam- 
eter) sphere of fine crystal, often appearing with a 
rich blue or aquamarine hue. Each marble has 
three words of command associated with it. 

The first command triggers the marble to cre- 
ate an extradimensional space large enough to 
contain a single large-sized creature. When this 
word is spoken, the closest creature to the marble 
is instantly transported to and imprisoned within 
this space. Similar to the seclusion spell, the in- 
habitant of this space can see and hear events in 
the “real world,” but can do nothing to affect any- 
thing outside the prison. Spellcasting and use of 
psionics are impossible while within the prison. If 
the prison is already occupied, this first word of 
command will have no effect. 

The second command word releases the occu- 
pant of the extradimensional space. The occu- 
pant is immediately returned to the “real world,” 
appearing within three feet of the marble (wher- 
ever it might be). Note that this word of release 
can be spoken and will be effective from within 
the prison. Thus, the possessor of the marble can 
use it as a sanctuary to escape from harm. 

The third word of command sets the marble as 
a trap. After this word is spoken, the first crea- 
ture of large size or smaller to touch the marble is 
immediately imprisoned within the extradimen- 
sional space. If the first creature to touch the mar- 
ble is larger than size L, the magic is not triggered; 
if a size L or smaller creature subsequently touch- 
es the item, the magic takes effect. 

Once one creature has been imprisoned, other 
creatures can touch the marble with no adverse 
effects. A creature trapped in this method can be 
freed only through the use of the word of release 
from outside the marble. 

A marble trapped in this manner can be 
thrown at another creature in an attempt to trap 


Magical Item (Miscellaneous Magic) 


148 


the creature. If an attack roll is successful, the tar- 
get creature is allowed a saving throw versus 
spell. Success indicates that the creature suffers 
no effect. Failure indicates that the creature is 
trapped in the warp marble. 

If a marble is taken into an extradimensional 
space (such as within a portable hole), if it is tele- 
ported, gated, or transported via dimensional 
folding or any analogous method, or if it is shift- 
ed to another plane of existence, any occupant of 
the extradimensional space is immediately ex- 
pelled into the Astral plane. 


Zwann’s Watering Can: Invented by the noted 
botanist Salerno Zwann, this otherwise ordinary 
watering can is activated when the user fills it 
with two gallons of water and lets it stand undis- 
turbed for 30 days. At the end of that period, the 
user may sprinkle the water from Zwann’s water- 
ing can over a patch of tilled soil no larger than a 
25-foot square. Seeds subsequently planted in 
this treated soil grow normally, but are perma- 
nently immune to disease, drought (the plants 
never need to be watered again), insects, bad 
weather (such as hailstorms and early frost) and 
all other forms of nonmagical trauma. The plants 
can be harvested normally by the planter. 

Water from Zwann’s watering can has no effect 
on already maturing plants. It cannot revive 
withered, diseased, or insect-infested plants. 

The patch of soil retains its effectiveness for 
one year, after which time it must be watered 
again for the effect to be renewed. 


a 
d 


Boldfaced spells are described in the 
Tome of Magic rule book. The remain- 
der are found in the AD&D® 2nd Edi- 
tion Player's Handbook. 

Italicized spells are reversible. The re- 
verse name follows the slash. 

An asterisk (*) indicates a Wild Magic 
spell. 


Abjuration 


Alarm (1st) 

Cantrip (1st) 

Protection From Evil/Protection From 
Good (1st) 

Chaos Shield* (2nd) 

Nahal’s Nonsensical Nullifier* (2nd) 
Protection From Cantrips (2nd) 
Protection From Paralysis (2nd) 
Dispel Magic (3rd) 

Non-Detection (3rd) 

Protection From Evil, 10' Radius/ 
Protection From Good, 10' Radius (3rd) 
Protection From Normal Missiles (3rd) 
Fire Trap (4th) 

Minor Globe of Invulnerability (4th) 
Minor Spell Turning (4th) 

Remove Curse/Bestow Curse (4th) 
Avoidance/ Attraction (Sth) 

Dismissal (5th) 

Lower Resistance (Sth) 

Safeguarding (Sth) 

Von Gasik’s Refusal (Sth) 

Anti-Magic Shell (6th) 

Globe of Invulnerability (6th) 
Repulsion (6th) 

Banishment (7th) 

Sequester (7th) 

Spell Turning (7th) 

Hornung’s Random Dispatcher" (8th) 
Mind Blank (8th) 

Serten’s Spell Immunity (8th) 
Elemental Aura (9th) 
Imprisonment/Freedom (9th) 
Prismatic Sphere (9th) 

Stabilize” (9th) 


Alteration 


Affect Normal Fires (1st) 
Burning Hands (1st) 

Cantrip (1st) 

Color Spray (1st) 
Comprehend Languages/Confuse Lan- 
guages (1st) 

Dancing Lights (1st) 
Enlarge/Reduce (1st) 

Erase (1st) 

Feather Fall (1st) 

Fire Burst (1st) 

Fist of Stone (1st) 

Gaze Reflection (1st) 

Hold Portal (1st) 

Jump (1st) 

Lasting Breath (1st) 

Light (1st) 

Mending (1st) 

Message (1st) 
Metamorphose Liquids (1st) 
Murdock’s Feathery Flyer (ist) 
Shocking Grasp (1st) 


Appendix 1: Wizard Spells by School 


Spider Climb (1st) 

Wizard Mark (1st) 

Alter Self (2nd) 

Continual Light (2nd) 
Darkness, 15’ Radius (2nd) 
Deeppockets (2nd) 

Fog Cloud (2nd) 

Fool's Gold (2nd) 

Irritation (2nd) 

Knock/Lock (2nd) 

Levitate (2nd) 

Magic Mouth (2nd) 
Maximilian’s Earthen Grasp (2nd) 
Pyrotechnics (2nd) 

Ride the Wind (2nd) 

Rope Trick (2nd) 

Sense Shifting (2nd) 

Shatter (2nd) 

Strength (2nd) 

Whispering Wind (2nd) 
Wizard Lock (2nd) 

Alacrity (3rd) 

Alternate Reality* (3rd) 

Blink (3rd) 

Delude (3rd) 

Explosive Runes (3rd) 

Far Reaching I (3rd) 

Fireflow* (3rd) 

Fool's Speech” (3rd) 

Fly (3rd) 

Gust of Wind (3rd) 

Haste (3rd) 

Infravision (3rd) 

Item (3rd) 

Leomund’s Tiny Hut (3rd) 
Maximilian’s Stony Grasp (3rd) 
Melf’s Minute Meteors (3rd) 
Secret Page (3rd) 

Slow (3rd) 

Squaring the Circle (3rd) 
Tongues/ Babble (3rd) 

Water Breathing/Air Breathing (3rd) 
Wind Wall (3rd) 

Wraithform (3rd) 

Dilation I (4th) 

Dimension Door (4th) 
Extension I (4th) 

Far Reaching II (4th) 

Fire Shield (4th) 

Leomund’s Secure Shelter (4th) 
Massmorph (4th) 
Mordenkainen’s Celerity (4th) 
Otiluke’s Resilient Sphere (4th) 
Plant Growth (4th) 
Polymorph Other (4th) 
Polymorph Self (4th) 

Rainbow Pattern (4th) 

Rary’s Mnemonic Enhancer (4th) 
Solid Fog (4th) 

Stoneskin (4th) 

Turn Pebble to Boulder/Turn Boulder to 
Pebble (4th) 

Vacancy (4th) 

Wizard Eye (4th) 

Airy Water (5th) 

Animal Growth/Shrink Animal (5th) 
Avoidance/ Attraction (Sth) 
Distance Distortion (5th) 
Extension II (Sth) 

Fabricate (5th) 

Far Reaching II (Sth) 


149 


Leomund’s Secret Chest (Sth) 
Lower Resistance (Sth) 

Passwall (Sth) 

Stone Shape (Sth) 

Telekinesis (Sth) 

Teleport (Sth) 

Transmute Rock to Mud/Transmute 
Mud to Rock (Sth) 

Waveform* (5th) 

Claws of the Umber Hulk (6th) 
Control Weather (6th) 

Death Fog (6th) 

Dilation II (6th) 

Disintegrate (6th) 

Extension III (6th) 

Glassee (6th) 

Guards and Wards (6th) 

Lower Water/Raise Water (6th) 
Mirage Arcana (6th) 
Mordenkainen’s Lucubration (6th) 
Move Earth (6th) 

Otiluke’s Freezing Sphere (6th) 
Part Water (6th) 

Project Image (6th) 

Stone to Flesh/Flesh to Stone (6th) 
Tenser’s Transformation (6th) 
Transmute Water to Dust/Improved 
Create Water (6th) 

Wildshield”* (6th) 

Duo-Dimension (7th) 

Hatch the Stone From the Egg (7th) 
Hornung’s Surge Selector® (7th) 
Mordenkainen’s Magnificent Mansion 
(7th) 

Phase Door (7th) 

Reverse Gravity (7th) 

Spell Shape* (7th) 

Statue (7th) 

Suffocate (7th) 

Teleport Without Error (7th) 
Vanish (7th) 

Abi-Dalzim’s Horrid Wilting (8th) 
Airboat (8th) 

Glassteel (8th) 

Incendiary Cloud (8th) 

Otiluke’s Telekinetic Sphere (8th) 
Permanency (8th) 

Polymorph Any Object (8th) 

Sink (8th) 

Crystalbrittle (9th) 

Estate Transference (9th) 

Glorious Transmutation (9th) 
Mordenkainen’s Disjunction (9th) 
Shape Change (9th) 

Succor/Call (9th) 

Temporal Stasis/Temporal Reinstate- 
ment (9th) 

Time Stop (9th) 


Conjuration/Summoning 


Armor (1st) 

Cantrip (1st) 

Conjure Spell Component (ist) 
Find Familiar (1st) 

Grease (1st) 

Mount (1st) 

Unseen Servant (1st) 
Glitterdust (2nd) 

Melf's Acid Arrow (2nd) 
Summon Swarm (2nd) 


Flame Arrow (3rd) 

Monster Summoning I (3rd) 
Phantom Steed (3rd) 

Sepia Snake Sigil (3rd) 
Watery Double (3rd) 

Evard’s Black Tentacles (4th) 
Monster Summoning II (4th) 
Summon Lycanthrope (4th) 
Conjure Elemental (Sth) 
Khazid’s Procurement (Sth) 
Leomund's Secret Chest (5th) 
Monster Summoning III (5th) 
Mordenkainen’s Faithful Hound (Sth) 
Summon Shadow (Sth) 
Conjure Animals (6th) 
Ensnarement (6th) 

Forest's Fiery Constrictor (6th) 
Invisible Stalker (6th) 
Monster Summoning IV (6th) 
Wildstrike* (6th) 

Drawmij’s Instant Summons (7th) 
Intensify Summoning (7th) 
Limited Wish (7th) 

Monster Summoning V (7th) 
Mordenkainen’s Magnificent Mansion 
(7th) 

Power Word, Stun (7th) 
Prismatic Spray (7th) 

Maze (8th) 

Monster Summoning VI (8th) 
Power Word, Blind (8th) 
Prismatic Wall (8th) 

Symbol (8th) 

Trap the Soul (8th) 
Wildzone* (8th) 

Gate (9th) 

Monster Summoning VII (9th) 
Power Word, Kill (9th) 
Prismatic Sphere (9th) 
Wildwind* (9th) 

Wish (9th) 


Enchantment/Charm 


Cantrip (1st) 

Charm Person (1st) 
Friends (1st) 

Hypnotism (1st) 

Sleep (1st) 

Taunt (1st) 

Bind (2nd) 

Deeppockets (2nd) 

Forget (2nd) 

Insatiable Thirst (2nd) 
Ray of Enfeeblement (2nd) 
Scare (2nd) 

Tasha’s Uncontrollable Hideous Laugh- 
ter (2nd) 

Hold Person (3rd) 

Minor Malison (3rd) 
Suggestion (3rd) 

Watery Double (3rd) 
Charm Monster (4th) 
Confusion (4th) 

Emotion (4th) 

Enchanted Weapon (4th) 
Fire Charm (4th) 

Fumble (4th) 

Greater Malison (4th) 
Leomund's Secure Shelter (4th) 
Magic Mirror (4th) 


Appendix 1: Wizard Spells by School 


Chaos (Sth) 

Domination (Sth) 

Fabricate (Sth) 

Feeblemind (Sth) 

Hold Monster (5th) 

Leomund’s Lamentable Belaborment 
(5th) 

Magic Staff (Sth) 

Mind Fog (5th) 

Enchant an Item (6th) 

Eyebite (6th) 

Geas (6th) 

Guards and Wards (6th) 

Mass Suggestion (6th) 

Charm Plants (7th) 

Hatch the Stone from the Egg (7th) 
Shadow Walk (7th) 

Steal Enchantment (7th) 
Antipathy-Sympathy (8th) 
Airboat (8th) 

Binding (8th) 

Demand (8th) 

Mass Charm (8th) 

Otto’s Irresistible Dance (8th) 
Sink (8th) 

Mordenkainen’s Disjunction (9th) 
Succor/Call (9th) 


Ilusion/Phantasm 


Audible Glamer (1st) 
Cantrip (1st) 

Change Self (1st) 

Nystul’s Magic Aura (1st) 
Phantasmal Force (1st) 
Spook (1st) 

Ventriloquism (1st) 
Blindness (2nd) 

Blur (2nd) 

Deafness (2nd) 

Fools’ Gold (2nd) 
Hypnotic Pattern (2nd) 
Improved Phantasmal Force (2nd) 
Invisibility (2nd) 
Leomund's Trap (2nd) 
Mirror Image (2nd) 
Misdirection (2nd) 
Whispering Wind (2nd) 
Illusionary Script (3rd) 
Invisibility, 10’ Radius (3rd) 
Lorloveim’s Creeping Shadow (3rd) 
Phantom Steed (3rd) 
Spectral Force (3rd) 
Wraithform (3rd) 

Fear (4th) 

Hallucinatory Terrain (4th) 
Illusionary Wall (4th) 
Improved Invisibility (4th) 
Minor Creation (4th) 
Phantasmal Killer (4th) 
Rainbow Pattern (4th) 
Shadow Monsters (4th) 
Vacancy (4th) 

Advanced Illusion (Sth) 
Demi-Shadow Monsters (5th) 
Dream/ Nightmare (5th) 
Major Creation (Sth) 
Seeming (5th) 

Shadow Door (Sth) 
Shadow Magic (Sth) 
Demi-Shadow Magic (6th) 


150 


Eyebite (6th) 

Lorloveim’s Shadowy Transformation 
(6th) 

Mirage Arcana (6th) 
Mislead (6th) 

Permanent Illusion (6th) 
Programmed Illusion (6th) 
Project Image (6th) 
Shades (6th) 

Veil (6th) 

Mass Invisibility (7th) 
Sequester (7th) 
Shadowcat (7th) 

Shadow Walk (7th) 
Simulacrum (7th) 

Screen (8th) 

Weird (9th) 


Invocation/Evocation 


Alarm (1st) 

Cantrip (1st) 

Fire Burst (1st) 

Magic Missile (1st) 

Nahal’s Reckless Dweomer” (1st) 
Shield (1st) 

Tenser’s Floating Disc (1st) 
Wall of Fog (1st) 

Flaming Sphere (2nd) 
Hornung’s Baneful Deflector* (2nd) 
Stinking Cloud (2nd) 

Web (2nd) 

Augmentation I (3rd) 

Fireball (3rd) 

Lightning Bolt (3rd) 

Melf's Minute Meteors (3rd) 
Dig (4th) 

Divination Enhancement (4th) 
Fire Shield (4th) 

Fire Trap (4th) 

Ice Storm (4th) 
Mordenkainen’s Celerity (4th) 
Otiluke’s Resilient Sphere (4th) 
Shout (4th) 

There/Not There* (4th) 
Thunder Staff (4th) 

Unluck* (4th) 

Wall of Fire (4th) 

Wall of Ice (4th) 

Bigby’s Interposing Hand (5th) 
Cloudkill (Sth) 

Cone of Cold (5th) 

Dream (5th) 

Leomund’s Lamentable Belaborment 
(5th) 

Sending (5th) 

Vortex* (5th) 

Wall of Force (Sth) 

Wall of Iron (5th) 

Wall of Stone (Sth) 
Augmentation II (6th) 

Bigby's Forceful Hand (6th) 
Chain Lightning (6th) 
Contingency (6th) 

Death Fog (6th) 

Enchant an Item (6th) 

Guards and Wards (6th) 
Otiluke’s Freezing Sphere (6th) 
Tenser’s Transformation (6th) 
Acid Storm (7th) 

Bigby’s Grasping Hand (7th) 


Delayed Blast Fireball (7th) 
Forcecage (7th) 

Hatch the Stone from the Egg (7th) 
Limited Wish (7th) 

Malec-Keth’s Flame Fist (7th) 
Mordenkainen’s Sword (7th) 
Bigby’s Clenched Fist (8th) 

Binding (8th) 

Demand (8th) 

Gunther's Kaleidoscopic Strike (8th) 
Homunculus Shield (8th) 
Incendiary Cloud (8th) 

Otiluke’s Telekinetic Sphere (8th) 
Astral Spell (9th) 

Bigby’s Crushing Hand (9th) 

Chain Contingency (9th) 

Elemental Aura (9th) 

Energy Drain (9th) 

Meteor Swarm (9th) 

Wildfire* (9th) 


Divination 


Cantrip (1st) 

Detect Magic (1st) 

Detect Undead (1st) 

Hornung’s Guess” (1st) 

Identify (1st) 

Patternweave” (1st) 

Read Magic (1st) 

Detect Evil/Detect Good (2nd) 
Detect Invisibility (2nd) 

ESP (2nd) 

Know Alignment/Undetectable Align- 
ment (2nd) 

Locate Object/Obscure Object (2nd) 
Past Life (2nd) 

Alamir’s Fundamental Breakdown (3rd) 
Clairaudience (3rd) 

Clairvoyance (3rd) 

Wizard Sight (3rd) 

Detect Scrying (4th) 

Locate Creature (4th) 

Magic Mirror (4th) 

Contact Other Plane (Sth) 

False Vision (5th) 

Khazid’s Procurement (Sth) 

Legend Lore (6th) 

True Seeing (6th) 

Vision (7th) 

Screen (8th) 

Foresight (9th) 


Necromancy 


Cantrip (1st) 

Chill Touch (1st) 
Detect Undead (1st) 
Spectral Hand (2nd) 
Feign Death (3rd) 

Hold Undead (3rd) 
Spirit Armor (3rd) 
Vampiric Touch (3rd) 
Contagion (4th) 
Enervation (4th) 

Mask of Death (4th) 
Animate Dead (5th) 
Magic Jar (Sth) 
Summon Shadow (5th) 
Bloodstone’s Spectral Steed (6th) 
Death Spell (6th) 


Reincarnation (6th) 

Bloodstone’s Frightful Joining (7th) 
Control Undead (7th) 

Finger of Death (7th) 

Intensify Summoning (7th) 
Suffocate (7th) 

Abi-Dalzim’s Horrid Wilting (8th) 
Clone (8th) 

Homunculus Shield (8th) 

Energy Drain (9th) 

Wail of the Banshee (9th) 


Wild Magic 


Hornung’s Guess” (1st) 

Nahal's Reckless Dweomer” (1st) 
Patternweave* (1st) 

Chaos Shield* (2nd) 

Hornung’s Baneful Deflector* (2nd) 
Nahal’s Nonsensical Nullifier* (2nd) 
Alternate Reality* (3rd) 

Fireflow* (3rd) 

Fool's Speech” (3rd) 

There/Not There* (4th) 

Unluck* (4th) 

Vortex” (Sth) 

Waveform* (Sth) 

Wildshield* (6th) 

Wildstrike* (6th) 

Hornung’s Surge Selector” (7th) 
Spell Shape* (7th) 

Hornung’s Random Dispatcher* (8th) 
Wildzone* (8th) 

Stablize* (9th) 

Wildfire* (9th) 

Wildwind* (9th) 


Elemental Air 


Feather Fall (1st) 
Lasting Breath (1st) 
Wall of Fog (1st) 

Fog Cloud (2nd) 

Ride the Wind (2nd) 
Stinking Cloud (2nd) 
Whispering Wind (2nd) 
Alamir’s Fundamental Breakdown (3rd) 
Gust of Wind (3rd) 
Water Breathing (3rd) 
Wind Wall (3rd) 

Solid Fog (4th) 

Airy Water (5th) 
Cloudkill (Sth) 
Conjure Elemental (5th) 
Control Weather (6th) 
Death Fog (6th) 
Suffocate (7th) 
Airboat (8th) 
Incendiary Cloud (8th) 
Elemental Aura (9th) 


Elemental Earth 


Fist of Stone (1st) 

Fool's Gold (2nd) 

Maximilian’s Earthen Grasp (2nd) 
Alamir’s Fundamental Breakdown (3rd) 
Maximilian’s Stony Grasp (3rd) 

Dig (4th) 

Stoneskin (4th) 


151 


Appendix 1: Wizard Spells by School 


Turn Pebble to Boulder (4th) 
Conjure Elemental (5th) 
Distance Distortion (Sth) 
Passwall (Sth) 

Stone Shape (Sth) 

Transmute Rock to Mud (Sth) 
Wall of Iron (5th) 

Wall of Stone (Sth) 

Glassee (6th) 

Move Earth (6th) 

Stone to Flesh (6th) 

Transmute Water to Dust (6th) 
Hatch the Stone From the Egg (7th) 
Statue (7th) 

Glassteel (8th) 

Sink (8th) 

Crystalbrittle (9th) 

Elemental Aura (9th) 


Elemental Fire 


Affect Normal Fires (ist) 
Burning Hands (1st) 

Dancing Lights (1st) 

Fire Burst (1st) 

Flaming Sphere (2nd) 
Pyrotechnics (2nd) 

Alamir’s Fundamental Breakdown (3rd) 
Fireball (3rd) 

Flame Arrow (3rd) 

Melf’s Minute Meteors (3rd) 
Fire Charm (4th) 

Fire Shield (4th) 

Fire Trap (4th) 

Wall of Fire (4th) 

Conjure Elemental (Sth) 
Forest's Fiery Constrictor (6th) 
Delayed Blast Fireball (7th) 
Malec-Keth’s Flame Fist (7th) 
Incendiary Cloud (8th) 
Meteor Swarm (9th) 
Elemental Aura (9th) 


Elemental Water 


Metamorphose Liquids (1st) 
Insatiable Thirst (2nd) 

Alamir’s Fundamental Breakdown (3rd) 
Water Breathing (3rd) 

Watery Double (3rd) 

Ice Storm (4th) 

Wall of Ice (4th) 

Airy Water (5th) 

Cone of Cold (5th) 

Conjure Elemental (5th) 
Transmute Rock to Mud (5th) 
Lower Water (6th) 

Otiluke’s Freezing Sphere (6th) 
Part Water (6th) 

Transmute Water to Dust (6th) 
Acid Storm (7th) 

Abi-Dalzim’s Horrid Wilting (8th) 
Elemental Aura (9th) 


Boldfaced spells are described in 
the Tome of Magic rule book. The 
remaining spells are found in the 
2nd Edition Player's Handbook. 

Italicized spells are reversible. 
The reverse name follows the slash. 

An asterisk (*) indicates a coop- 
erative magic spell. 


All 


Bless/Curse (1st) 

Combine”* (1st) 

Detect Evil/Detect Good (1st) 
Purify Food & Drink/Putrefy Food 
& Drink (1st) 

Sanctify/Defile* (2nd) 

Focus” (4th) 

Uplift* (4th) 

Atonement (Sth) 


Animal 


Animal Friendship (1st) 
Invisibility to Animals (1st) 
Locate Animals or Plants (1st) 
Charm Person or Mammal (2nd) 
Messenger (2nd) 

Snake Charm (2nd) 

Speak With Animals (2nd) 

Hold Animal (3rd) 

Summon Insects (3rd) 

Animal Summoning | (4th) 

Call Woodland Beings (4th) 
Giant Insect/Shrink Insect (4th) 
Repel Insects (4th) 

Animal Growth/Animal Reduc- 
tion (Sth) 

Animal Summoning II (5th) 
Animal Summoning III (6th) 
Anti-Animal Shell (6th) 
Creeping Doom (7th) 


Astral 


Speak With Astral Traveler (1st) 
Astral Window (3rd) 

Join With Astral Traveler (4th) 
Plane Shift (Sth) 

Astral Spell (7th) 


Chaos 


Mistaken Missive (1st) 
Dissension’s Feast (2nd) 
Miscast Magic (3rd) 
Random Causality (3rd) 
Chaotic Combat (4th) 
Chaotic Sleep (4th) 
Inverted Ethics (4th) 


Appendix 2: Priest Spells by Sphere 


Chaotic Commands (5th) 
Uncontrolled Weather (7th) 


Charm 


Command (1st) 

Remove Fear/Cause Fear (1st) 
Enthrall (2nd) 

Hold Person (2nd) 

Music of the Spheres (2nd) 
Mystic Transfer* (2nd) 
Emotion Control (3rd) 

Cloak of Bravery/Cloak of Fear 
(4th) 

Free Action (4th) 

Imbue With Spell Ability (4th) 
Meld* (5th) 

Quest (Sth) 

Confusion (7th) 

Exaction (7th) 


Combat 


Magical Stone (1st) 

Shillelagh (1st) 

Chant (2nd) 

Spiritual Hammer (2nd) 

Prayer (3rd) 

Unearthly Choir* (3rd) 

Flame Strike (5th) 

Insect Plague (5th) 

Spiritual Wrath” (6th) 

Holy Word/Unholy Word (7th) 


Creation 


Create Holy Symbol (2nd) 
Create Food & Water (3rd) 
Addition (4th) 

Blessed Abundance (5th) 
Animate Object (6th) 
Blade Barrier (6th) 

Heroes’ Feast (6th) 

Wall of Thorns (6th) 
Changestaff (7th) 

Chariot of Sustarre (7th) 


Divination 


Analyze Balance (1st) 

Detect Magic (1st) 

Detect Poison (1st) 

Detect Snares & Pits (1st) 

Locate Animals or Plants (1st) 
Augury (2nd) 

Detect Charm/Undetectable 
Charm (2nd) 

Find Traps (2nd) 

Know Alignment/Undetectable 


152 


Alignment (2nd) 

Speak With Animals (2nd) 
Extradimensional Detection (3rd) 
Locate Object/Obscure Object 
(3rd) 

Speak With Dead (3rd) 

Detect Lie/Undetectable Lie (4th) 
Divination (4th) 

Reflecting Pool (4th) 

Tongues/ Babble (4th) 

Commune (Sth) 

Commune With Nature (Sth) 
Consequence (Sth) 

Magic Font (Sth) 

Thoughtwave* (5th) 

True Seeing/False Seeing (Sth) 
Find the Path/Lose the Path (6th) 
Speak With Monsters (6th) 

Stone Tell (6th) 

Divine Inspiration (7th) 


Elemental 


Create Water/Destroy Water (1st) 
Log of Everburning (1st) 

Dust Devil (2nd) 

Fire Trap (2nd) 

Flame Blade (2nd) 

Heat Metal/Chill Metal (2nd) 
Produce Flame (2nd) 

Flame Walk (3rd) 

Meld Into Stone (3rd) 

Protection From Fire (3rd) 
Pyrotechnics (3rd) 

Stone Shape (3rd) 

Water Breathing/Air Breathing 
(3rd) 

Water Walk (3rd) 

Lower Water/Raise Water (4th) 
Produce Fire/Quench Fire (4th) 
Air Walk (5th) 

Cloud of Purification (5th) 
Elemental Forbiddance (Sth) 

Spike Stones (Sth) 

Transmute Rock to Mud/ 
Transmute Mud to Rock (Sth) 
Wall of Fire (Sth) 

Conjure Fire Elemental/Dismiss 
Fire Elemental (6th) 

Fire Seeds (6th) 

Part Water (6th) 

Stone Tell (6th) 

Transmute Water to Dust/ 
Improved Create Water (6th) 
Animate Rock (7th) 

Chariot of Sustarre (7th) 

Conjure Earth Elemental/Dismiss 
Earth Elemental (7th) 

Earthquake (7th) 

Fire Storm/Fire Quench (7th) 


Transmute Metal to Wood (7th) 
Wind Walk (7th) 


Elemental Air 


Dust Devil (2nd) 

Water Breathing/Air Breathing 
(3rd) 

Air Walk (5th) 

Cloud of Purification (5th) 

Wind Walk (7th) 


Elemental Earth 


Meld Into Stone (3rd) 

Stone Shape (3rd) 

Spike Stones (Sth) 

Transmute Rock to Mud/ 
Transmute Mud to Rock (Sth) 
Stone Tell (6th) 

Transmute Water to Dust/ 
Improved Create Water (6th) 
Animate Rock (7th) 

Conjure Earth Elemental/Dismiss 
Earth Elemental (7th) 

Earthquake (7th) 

Transmute Metal to Wood (7th) 


Elemental Fire 


Log of Everburning (1st) 

Fire Trap (2nd) 

Flame Blade (2nd) 

Heat Metal/Chill Metal (2nd) 
Produce Flame (2nd) 

Flame Walk (3rd) 

Protection From Fire (3rd) 
Pyrotechnics (3rd) 

Produce Fire/Quench Fire (4th) 
Wall of Fire (5th) 

Conjure Fire Elemental/Dismiss 
Fire Elemental (6th) 

Fire Seeds (6th) 

Chariot of Sustarre (7th) 

Fire Storm/Fire Quench (7th) 


Elemental Water 


Create Water/ Destroy Water (1st) 
Water Breathing/Air Breathing 
(3rd) 

Water Walk (3rd) 

Lower Water/Raise Water (4th) 
Transmute Rock to Mud/ 
Transmute Mud to Rock (5th) 

Part Water (6th) 

Transmute Water to Dust/ 
Improved Create Water (6th) 


Guardian 


Sacred Guardian (1st) 

Silence, 15’ Radius (2nd) 

Wyvern Watch (2nd) 

Glyph of Warding (3rd) 

Unceasing Vigilance of the Holy 
Sentinel (Sth) 

Blade Barrier (6th) 

Symbol (7th) 


Healing 


Cure Light Wounds/Cause Light 
Wounds (1st) 

Slow Poison (2nd) 

Cure Serious Wounds/Cause Seri- 
ous Wounds(4th) 

Fortify* (4th) 

Neutralize Poison/Poison (4th) 
Cure Critical Wounds/Cause Criti- 
cal Wounds (Sth) 

Heal/Harm (6th) 


Law 


Command (1st) 

Calm Chaos (2nd) 
Enthrall (2nd) 

Hold Person (2nd) 

Rigid Thinking (3rd) 
Strength of One (3rd) 
Compulsive Order (4th) 
Defensive Harmony (4th) 
Champion's Strength (Sth) 
Impeding Permission (5th) 
Legal Thoughts (6th) 
Control Weather (7th) 


Necromantic 


Invisibility to Undead (1st) 

Aid (2nd) 

Animate Dead (3rd) 

Cure Blindness or Deafness/Cause 
Blindness or Deafness (3rd) 

Cure Disease/Cause Disease (3rd) 
Feign Death (3rd) 

Negative Plane Protection (3rd) 
Raise Dead/Slay Living (Sth) 
Breath of Life/Breath of Death 
(7th) 

Mindkiller (7th) 
Regenerate/Wither (7th) 
Reincarnate (7th) 
Restoration/Energy Drain (7th) 
Resurrection/Destruction (7th) 


153 


Appendix 2: Priest Spells by Sphere 


Numbers 


Analyze Balance (1st) 

Personal Reading (1st) 

Moment (2nd) 

Music of the Spheres (2nd) 
Extradimensional Detection (3rd) 
Moment Reading (3rd) 
Telethaumaturgy (3rd) 

Addition (4th) 

Dimensional Folding (4th) 
Probability Control (4th) 
Consequence (Sth) 
Extradimensional Manipulation 
(Sth) 

Extradimensional Pocket (Sth) 
Physical Mirror (6th) 

Seclusion (6th) 

Spacewarp (7th) 

Timelessness (7th) 


Plant 


Entangle (1st) 

Locate Animals or Plants (1st) 

Log of Everburning (1st) 

Pass Without Trace (1st) 

Shillelagh (1st) 

Barkskin (2nd) 
Goodberry/Badberry (2nd) 

Trip (2nd) ‘ 
Warp Wood/Straighten Wood 
(2nd) 

Plant Growth (3rd) 

Slow Rot (3rd) 

Snare (3rd) 

Spike Growth (3rd) 

Tree (3rd) 

Hallucinatory Forest/Revealed 
Wood (4th) 

Hold Plant (4th) 

Plant Door (4th) 

Speak With Plants (4th) 

Sticks to Snakes/Snakes to Sticks 
(4th) 

Anti-Plant Shell (Sth) 

Pass Plant (Sth) 

Liveoak (6th) 

Transport Via Plants (6th) 

Turn Wood (6th) 

Wall of Thorns (6th) 

Changestaff (7th) 


Protection 


Endure Cold/Endure Heat (1st) 
Protection From Evil/Protection 
From Good (1st) 

Ring of Hands/Ring of Woe* (1st) 


Appendix 2: 


Sanctuary (1st) 

Barkskin (2nd) 

Resist Fire/Resist Cold (2nd) 
Withdraw (2nd) 

Dispel Magic (3rd) 

Line of Protection/Line of Destruc- 
tion* (3rd) 

Magical Vestment (3rd) 

Negative Plane Protection (3rd) 
Protection From Fire (3rd) 
Remove Curse/Bestow Curse (3rd) 
Remove Paralysis (3rd) 

Protection From Evil, 10' Radius/ 
Protection From Good, 10' Radius 
(4th) 

Protection From Lightning (4th) 
Repel Insects (4th) 

Spell Immunity (4th) 

Anti-Plant Shell (Sth) 

Dispel Evil/Dispel Good (Sth) 
Anti-Animal Shell (6th) 
Forbiddance (6th) 


Summoning 


Call Upon Faith (1st) 

Draw Upon Holy Might (2nd) 
Abjure (4th) 

Animal Summoning I (4th) 
Call Woodland Beings (4th) 
Animal Summoning II (5th) 
Dispel Evil/Dispel Good (Sth) 
Aerial Servant (6th) 

Animal Summoning III (6th) 
Animate Object (6th) 
Conjure Animals (6th) 

Wall of Thorns (6th) 

Weather Summoning (6th) 
Word of Recall (6th) 

Conjure Earth Elemental/Dismiss 
Earth Elemental (7th) 
Creeping Doom (7th) 
Exaction (7th) 

Gate (7th) 

Spirit of Power* (7th) 
Succor/Call (7th) 


Sun 


Light/Darkness (1st) 

Continual Light/Continual Dark- 
ness (3rd) 

Starshine (3rd) 

Blessed Warmth (4th) 

Moonbeam (5th) 

Rainbow (5th) 

The Great Circle/The Black Circle” 
(6th) 

Sol's Searing Orb (6th) 

Sunray (7th) 


Priest Spells by Sphere 


Thought 


Emotion Read (ist) 
Thought Capture (1st) 
Idea (2nd) 

Mind Read (2nd) 
Emotion Control (3rd) 
Memory Read (3rd) 
Telepathy (3rd) 

Genius (4th) 

Mental Domination (4th) 
Rapport (4th) 

Solipsism (4th) 

Thought Broadcast (4th) 
Memory Wrack (5th) 
Mindshatter (5th) 
Disbelief (6th) 

Group Mind (6th) 
Divine Inspiration (7th) 
Mindkiller (7th) 


Time 


Know Age (1st) 

Know Time (1st) 

Hesitation (2nd) 

Nap (2nd) 

Accelerate Healing (3rd) 

Choose Future (3rd) 

Age Plant (4th) 

Body Clock (4th) 

Modify Memory (4th) 

Age Object/ Youthful Object (Sth) 
Repeat Action (5th) 

Time Pool (5th) 

Age Creature/Restore Youth (6th) 
Reverse Time (6th) 

Skip Day (6th) 

Age Dragon (7th) 


Travelers 


Know Direction (1st) 

Aura of Comfort (2nd) 
Lighten Load (2nd) 

Create Campsite/Break Camp 
(3rd) 

Helping Hand (3rd) 

Know Customs (3rd) 

Circle of Privacy (4th) 

Tree Steed (4th) 

Clear Path/Clutter Path (Sth) 
Easy March (Sth) 

Monster Mount (6th) 
Hovering Road (7th) 


War 


Courage (1st) 


154 


Morale (1st) 

Emotion Perception (2nd) 
Rally (2nd) 

Adaptation (3rd) 
Caltrops (3rd) 
Leadership/Doubt (4th) 
Tanglefoot/Selective Passage (4th) 
Disguise (5th) 

Illusory Artillery (5th) 
Gravity Variation (6th) 
Illusory Fortification (7th) 
Shadow Engines (7th) 


Wards 


Anti-Vermin Barrier (1st) 
Weighty Chest (1st) 

Frisky Chest (2nd) 

Zone of Truth (2nd) 
Efficacious Monster Ward (3rd) 
Invisibility Purge (3rd) 
Squeaking Floors (3rd) 
Thief’s Lament (3rd) 

Zone of Sweet Air (3rd) 
Fire Purge (4th) 

Weather Stasis (4th) 

Barrier of Retention (5th) 
Elemental Forbiddance (5th) 
Grounding (5th) 

Shrieking Walls (5th) 
Undead Ward (Sth) 
Crushing Walls (6th) 
Dragonbane (6th) 

Land of Stability (6th) 
Tentacle Walls (7th) 


Weather 


Faerie Fire (1st) 

Obscurement (2nd) 

Call Lightning (3rd) 

Control Temperature, 10’ Radius 
(4th) 

Protection From Lightning (4th) 
Weather Stasis (4th) 

Control Winds (5th) 

Rainbow (5th) 

Weather Summoning (6th) 
Control Weather (7th) 


Boldfaced spells are described in 
the Tome of Magic rule book. The 
remainder are found in the AD&D® 
2nd Edition Player's Handbook. 
Italicized spells are reversible. 

An asterisk (*) indicates a coopera- 
tive magic spell. 

A double asterisk (**) indicates a 
Wild Magic spell. 


A 

Abi-Dalzim’s Horrid Wilting 

CVE BER) ana aaa 43 
Abjure(P 4th) sc ansann 215 
Abundance (P Q)............ 112 
Accelerate Healing (P 3rd) ..... 63 
Acid Storm (W 7th) ........... 40 
Adaptation (P 3rd)............ 63 
Addition (P 4th).............. 74 
Advanced Illusion (W Sth) ... .164 
Aerial Servant (P 6th) ........ 226 
Affect Normal Fires (W 1st) . . .131 
Age Creature (P 6th) .......... 98 
Age Dragon (P 7th) .......... 105 
Age Object\(PSth) ss seaicviown 87 
Age Plant (P:4th)) sia caryancuars ¢ 74 
AIIP 2nd): aeres cop awe 202 
Airboat (W Sth) seess nrus 43 
Air Walk (P S5th)............. 221 
Airy Water (W Sth) .......... 165 
Alacrity (W 320). csecsccspsvisrecneecwne i 24 
Alamir’s Fundamental Breakdown 
(W an aaea 25 
Alarm (Wlst)ieceaans csamncaws 131 
Alter Self (W 2nd) ........... 139 
Alternate Reality** (W 3rd)... .24 
Analyze Balance (P Ist)........ 51 
Animal Friendship (P Ist) ..... 198 
Animal Growth (P Sth)....... 221 
Animal Growth (W Sth) ...... 165 
Animal Horde (P Q) ......... 112 


Animal Summoning I (P 4th) . .216 
Animal Summoning II (P Sth) .221 
Animal Summoning III (P 6th) .226 


Animate Dead (P 3rd) ........ 208 
Animate Object (P 6th)....... 226 
Animate Rock (P 7th) ........ 230 


Anti-Animal Shell (P 6th)..... 226 
Anti-Magic Shell (W 6th) ..... 173 
Anti-Plant Shell (P Sth)....... 221 
Antipathy-Sympathy (W 8th) .188 
Anti-Vermin Barrier (P Ist)... .. 51 


Armor (Wiss). gsscscacaaea ces 131 
Astral Spell (P 7th)........... 231 
Astral Window (P 3rd) ........ 63 
Atonement (P 5th) ........... 221 
Audible Glamer (W Ist) ...... 131 
Augmentation I (W 3rd) ....... 25 
Augmentation II (W 6th) ...... 37 
Augiry (P mdh aasewrscaceew 203 


Aura of Comfort (P 2nd) ...... 56 


Avoidance (W Sth)........... 165 
B 

Banishment (W 7th).......... 182 
Barkskini (P 2G) segoa seas 203 


Barrier of Retention (P 5th) ....88 
Bigby’s Clenched Fist (W 8th). .188 
Bigby’s Crushing Hand (W 9th)194 
Bigby’s Forceful Hand (W 6th) .173 
Bigby's Grasping Hand (W 7th)182 
Bigby’s Interposing Hand 


CONE S aaa ara svarereon 165 
Bind (W 2nd).............05 139 
Binding (W 8th) ............. 188 
Blade Barrier (P 6th) ......... 227 
Bless (PASE) sees wascapernws awaa 198 
Blessed Abundance (P Sth)..... 88 
Blessed Warmth (P 4th)........ 75 
Blindness (W 2nd) ........... 140 
Bink (Ward) «neces sixes 147 
Bloodstone’s Frightful Joining (W 
TA t MEPPEN EE E ose 40 
Bloodstone’s Spectral Steed (W 
EY reson. AEN OENES 37 
Blur (41222); a mnnm 140 
Body Clock (P 4th)............ 75 
Breath of Life (P 7th)......... 105 
Burning Hands (W Ist) ....... 131 
Cc 

Call Lightning (P 3rd) ........ 209 
Call Upon Faith (P Ist) ........ 51 
Call Woodland Beings (P 4th) .216 
Calm Chaos (P’2nd) ox: ececsicen 3 56 
Caltrops(P: 3rd), ssi: csavace i 63 
Cantrip(W. Taby sees unae 131 
Chain Contingency (W 9th) ... .45 
Chain Lightning (W 6th)...... 173 
Champion’s Strength (P 5th) .. .88 
Change Self (W Ist) .......... 132 
Changestaff (P 7th) .......... 231 
Chanh (E DAO) oranana 203 
Chaos (W Sih) sass rossiore 166 
Chaos Shield** (W 2nd) ....... 21 
Chaotic Combat (P 4th) ....... 75 
Chaotic Command (P Sth) ..... 89 
Chaotic Sleep (P 4th).......... 76 
Chariot of Sustarre (P 7th) ....231 
Charm Monster (W 4th) ...... 154 
Charm Person (W Ist)........ 132 
Charm Person or Mammal 

(PBO) aoei vana B 203 
Charm Plants (W 7th) ........ 183 
Chill Touch (W Ist) .......... 132 
Choose Future (P 3rd)......... 64 
Circle of Privacy (P 4th) ....... 76 


Circle of Sunmotes (P Q)..... 112 


155 


Clairaudience (W 3rd)........ 147 
Clairvoyance (W 3rd) ........ 147 
Claws of the Umber Hulk 

(WiGEI) anaana sone’ 38 
Clear Path (P Sth)............. 89 
Cloak of Bravery (P 4th)...... 216 
Clone (Wai sasn isas esa 189 
Cloudkill (W Sth)............ 166 
Cloud of Purification (P Sth) .. .89 
Color Spray (W Ist) scans mess 132 
Combine (P Ist) -corsi ces an 198 
Command (P Ist)............ 199 
Commune (P Sth)............ 222 


Commune With Nature (P 5th) 222 
Comprehend Languages (W 1st)133 


Compulsive Order (P 4th)... ... 76 
Cone of Cold (W 5th) ........ 166 
Conformance (P Q).......... 113 
Confusion:(P 7th) .c00%8 occas 231 
Confusion (W 4th)........... 154 
Conjure Animals (P 6th)...... 227 


Conjure Animals (W 6th) ..... 174 
Conjure Earth Elemental (P 7th)232 
Conjure Elemental (W 5th)... .166 
Conjure Fire Elemental (P 6th) .227 
Conjure Spell Component 


CINGASE) saasina pannen aenea 17 
Consequence (P Sth) .......... 89 
Contact Other Plane (W Sth) . .167 
Contagion (W 4th)........... 155 
Contingency (W 6th)......... 174 
Continual Light (P 3rd)....... 209 
Continual Light (W 2nd)...... 140 
Control Temperature, 10’ Radius 

CP BED) aenea enanss 216 
Control Undead (W 7th)...... 183 
Control Weather (P 7th) ...... 232 
Control Weather (W 6th) ..... 174 
Control Winds (P Sth)........ 222 
Courage (P Ist) «500030203 iamas 92 
Create Campsite (P 3rd) ....... 64 


Create Food & Water (P 3rd) . .209 
Create Holy Symbol (P 2nd) .. .57 


Create Water (P Ist).......... 199 
Creeping Doom (P 7th)....... 232 
Crushing Walls (P 6th)......... 98 
Crystalbrittle (W 9th) ........ 194 
Cure Blindness or Deafness 

(PAren iaa con AARS 209 
Cure Critical Wounds (P 5th) . .222 
Cure Disease (P 3rd) ......... 209 


Cure Light Wounds (P Ist) ....199 
Cure Serious Wounds (P 4th) . .217 


D 

Dancing Lights (W Ist) ....... 133 
Darkness, 15’ Radius (W 2nd) .140 
Deafness (W 2nd)............ 140 
Death Fog (W 6th) ........... 175 


Death Spell (W 6th).......... 175 
Deeppockets (W 2nd) ........ 140 
Defensive Harmony (P 4th) ....77 
Delayed Blast Fireball (W 7th) .183 
Delude (W 3rd).............. 148 
Demand (W 8th)............. 189 
Demi-Shadow Magic (W 6th). .175 
Demi-Shadow Monsters 


CW Sth} since sitisisaeeawa wares 167 
Detect Charm (P 2nd) ........ 204 
Detect Boil (P 18b); scania 199 
Detect Evil (W 2nd) .......... 140 
Detect Invisibility (W 2nd) ....141 
Detect Lie (P 4th) ............ 217 
Detect Magic (P Ist).......... 199 
Detect Magic (W Ist)......... 133 
Detect Poison (P 1st) ......... 199 
Detect Scrying (W 3rd) ....... 155 
Detect Snares & Pits (P 1st) . . .200 
Detect Undead (W Ist) ....... 133 
Ds ONA enisi sxoveiann pie 155 
Dilation I (W 4th)............. 28 
Dilation II (W 6th)............ 38 
Dimension Door (W 4th) ..... 155 
Dimensional Folding (P 4th) ...77 
Disbelief (P 6th).............. 99 
Disguise (FSK) v sxises acon vox 90 
Disintegrate (W 6th).......... 175 
Dismissal (W Sth)............ 167 
Dispel Evil (P Sth) ........... 222 
Dispel Magic (P 3rd) ......... 210 
Dispel Magic (W 3rd) ........ 148 
Dissension’s Feast (P 2nd)...... 57 
Distance Distortion (W Sth) . . .167 
Divination (P 4th) ........... 217 
Divination Enhancement 4.... . 28 
Divine Inspiration (P 7th)..... 106 
Domination (W Sth).......... 168 
Dragonbane (P 6th)........... 99 


Draw Upon Holy Might (P 2nd) 58 
Drawmij’s Instant Summons 


UN PTE a E ak 183 
Drea (WSR) \sscccaveyaarernace ws 168 
Duo-Dimension (W 7th) ...... 184 
Dust Devil (P 2nd)........... 204 
E 

Earthquake (P 7th)........... 233 
Easy March (P Sth)............ 90 
Efficacious Monster Ward 

CE SPE) o goro rE 65 
Elemental Aura (W 9th)........ 46 
Elemental Forbiddance (P 5th). .91 
Elemental Swarm (P Q)....... 113 
Emotion (W 4th)............. 155 
Emotion Control (P 3rd)....... 65 
Emotion Perception (P 2nd)... .58 
Emotion Read (P Ist).......... 52 
Enchant an Item (W 6th)...... 175 


Enchanted Weapon (W 4th) . . .157 


Endure Heat (P Ist) .......... 200 


Energy Drain (W 9th) ........ 194 
Enervation (W 4th)........... 157 
Enlarge: W It rnac eassae-s 133 
Ensnarement (W 6th)......... 176 
Entangle (P 1st).............. 200 
Enthrall (P 2nd) ............. 204 
Erase (Wiets e:cseucesva wirsisvereve 134 
BSP (W211) iasecimenraw e 141 
Estate Transference (W 9th) ... .46 
Etherwalk (PQ) 6:22:93, sisisisiaia% 113 
Evard’s Black Tentacles (W 4th)157 
Exaction (P 7) o inaaianei 233 
Explosive Runes (W 3rd)...... 148 
Extension I (W 4th) .......... 157 
Extension II (W Sth).......... 168 
Extension III (W 6th)......... 177 
Extradimensional Detection 
(PSIG) x. ceases vsa aa 66 
Extradimensional Manipulation 
(P'S) onena aee 91 
Extradimensional Pocket (P 5th)91 
Eyebite (W 6th).............. 177 
F 

Fabricate (W Sth) ici. vse wce en 168 
Faerie Fire (P 1st) ............ 200 
False Vision (W Sth).......... 168 
Far Reaching I (W 3rd) ........ 25 
Far Reaching II (W 4th)........ 28 
Far Reaching III (W Sth)....... 34 
Bean (W AY: nanona nA ec 157 
Fear Contagion (P Q) ........ 115 
Feather Fall (W ist) .......... 134 
Feeblemind (W Sth) .......... 168 
Feign Death (P 3rd) .......... 210 
Feign Death (W 3rd).......... 149 
Find Familiar (W Ist)......... 134 
Find the Path (P 6th) ......... 227 
Find Traps (P 2nd) ........... 204 
Finger of Death (W 7th) ...... 184 
Fireball (W 3rd) ..........465 149 
Fire Burst (W 1st)............. 17 
Fire Charm (W 4th) .......... 158 
Fireflow** (W 3rd)......0.0066 25 
Fire Pargë (P Ath) scires acwaacc 78 
Fire Seeds (P 6th) ............ 227 
Fire Shield (W 4th)........... 158 
Fire Storm (P 7th)..........6. 234 
Fire Trap (P 2nd) ).6.6...0.05 90005 204 
Fire Trap (W 4th) ............ 158 
Fist of Stone (W Ist) .......... 17 
Flame Arrow (W 3rd) ........ 149 
Flame Blade (P 2nd).......... 205 
Flame Strike (P 5th).......... 223 
Flame Walk (P 3rd) .......... 210 
Flaming Sphere (W 2nd)...... 141 
BY: (W 3rd) sosauswaueas aaas 149 
Focus" (P-4th) = ues. ca cesses, g 79 


156 


Fog Cloud (W 2nd)........... 141 
Fool’s Gold (W 2nd).......... 141 
Fool's Speech** (W 3rd)....... 25 
Forbiddance (P 6th) .......... 228 
Forcecage (W 7th)............ 184 
Foresight (W 9th) ............ 195 
Forest's Fiery Constrictor (W 
GEE) oes eanas amanea 38 
Forget (W 20A) hones sssusa 142 
Fortfy (Path) onswcvzexaas ace 80 
Free Action (P 4th)........... 217 
Friends: (W. IED a5 css seats cine s 134 
Frisky Chest (P 2nd)........... 58 
Fumble (W 4th).............. 158 
G 

CRAP EN) eeann 234 
Gate (With) esnoenornis wans 195 
Gaze Reflection (W Ist)....... 135 
Geas (W 6th) i:ccsaneteneas iad 177 
Genius (Path) is ccincasds ross 80 
Giant Insect (P 4th) .......... 217 
Glassee (W 6th)............0. 177 
Glassteel (W 8th) ............ 189 
Glitterdust (W 2nd) .......... 142 
Globe of Invulnerability 

(W GEA) s cisessiisrimeccsa ised 177 
Glorious Transmutation (W 9th)47 
Glyph of Warding (P 3rd)..... 210 
Goodberry (P 2nd)........... 205 
Gravity Variation (P 6th)...... 100 
Grease (W Ist) .............- 135 
The Great Circle* (P 6th) ..... 100 
Greater Malison (W 4th)....... 29 
Grounding (P Sth) ............ 92 
Group Mind (P 6th).......... 101 


Guards and Wards (W 6th)... .178 
Gunther's Kaleidoscopic Strike 


(ABER): esos ons chee eee ae 43 
Gust of Wind (W 3rd)........ 149 
H 


Hallucinatory Forest (P 4th) .. .218 
Hallucinatory Terrain (W 4th) .158 


Haste (W 3rd) vc cssawrmaneasee' 149 
Hatch the Stone from the Egg 

(CW hcan aanne cea 40 
Heal (P Gt) arerin 228 
Health Blessing (P Q) ........ 115 
Heat Metal (P 2nd)........... 205 
Helping Hand (P 3rd) ......... 66 
Heroes’ Feast (P 6th) ......... 228 
Hesitation (P 2nd) ............ 59 
Highway (F O) \ecisisras«swascrece 115 
Hold Animal (P 3rd) ......... 211 
Hold Monster (W 5th)........ 169 
Hold Person (P 2nd).......... 205 
Hold Person (W 3rd) ......... 150 


Hold Plant (P 4th) ........... 218 
Hold Portal (W Ist) .......... 135 
Hold Undead (W 3rd) ........ 150 
Holy Word (P 7th) ........... 234 


Homunculus Shield (W 8th)... .44 
Hornung’s Baneful Deflector** 

(Wand) anen eee caw ees § 21 
Hornung’s Guess** (W Ist) ....17 
Hornung’s Random Dispatcher** 


MVE BETLD ina 44 
Hornung’s Surge Selector** 

CW TER) eeann 41 
Hovering Road (P 7th) ....... 106 
Hypnotic Pattern (W 2nd) ....142 
Hypnotism (W Ist)........... 135 
I 

Ice Storm (W 4th)............ 159 
JEE AN AOA aT: h isi sicessonsousee scorers rarexasace 59 
Identify (W Ist).............. 135 
Illusionary Script (W 3rd)..... 150 
Illusionary Wall (W 4th)...... 159 
Illusory Artillery (P 5th) ....... 92 


Illusory Fortification (P 7th). ..107 
Imago Interrogation (P Q)....116 
Imbue with Spell Ability (P 4th)218 
Impeding Permission (P Sth) .. .92 
Implosion/Inversion (P Q) ....116 
Imprisonment (W 9th)........ 195 
Improved Invisibility (W 4th). .159 
Improved Phantasmal Force 


CW 2) besecary. senseracersceiarnemreiacatexens 142 
Incendiary Cloud (W 8th)..... 189 
Infravision (W 3rd) .......... 150 
Insatiable Thirst (W 2nd) ...... PA 
Insect Plague (P 5th) ......... 223 
Intensify Summoning (W 7th) . .41 
Interdiction (P Q)............ 116 
Inverted Ethics (P 4th)......... 80 
Invisibility (W 2nd) .......... 142 
Invisibility, 10' Radius (W 3rd) 150 
Invisibility Purge (P 3rd)....... 67 


Invisibility to Animals (P 1st). .200 
Invisibility to Undead (P Ist) . .200 


Invisible Stalker (W 6th)...... 178 
Irritation (W 2nd)............ 142 
Teer! (WY Sd) secetei 150 


Join With Astral Traveler (P 4th)81 


Juna CW LSt) aina wares aad 135 
K 

Khazid’s Procurement (W Sth). .34 
Knock (W200) 56:5 irriken wits 143 
Know Age (P Ist)............. 52 
Know Alignment (P 2nd) ..... 206 
Know Alignment (W 2nd)..... 143 


Know Customs (P 3rd) ........ 67 


Know Direction (P Ist) ........ 52 
Know Time (P Ist)............ 53 
L 

Land of Stability (P 6th) ...... 101 
Lasting Breath (W Ist)......... 19 
Leadership (P 4th) ............ 81 
Legal Thoughts (P 6th) ....... 101 
Legend Lore (W 6th) ......... 178 
Leomund’s Lamentable Belabor- 
ment (W Sth)... eerren erasa 169 


Leomund’s Secret Chest (W 5th)169 
Leomund’s Secure Shelter 


(WA areas aana womens 159 
Leomund’s Tiny Hut (W 3rd) . .151 
Leomund'’s Trap (W 2nd)...... 143 
Levitate (W 2nd)............. 143 
Light (P Tet) neiaa eens 201 
Light (W Ast) sisi eaecasea inean 136 
Lighten Load (P 2nd).......... 59 
Lightning Bolt (W 3rd) ....... 151 
Limited Wish (W 7th) ........ 184 
Line of Protection* (P 3rd)..... 67 
Liveoale(P Oth): cascsncas exw 228 
Locate Animals or Plants (P 1st)201 
Locate Creature (W 4th)....... 29 
Locate Object (P 3rd) ........ 211 
Locate Object (W 2nd) ....... 143 
Log of Everburning (P Ist)..... 53 
Lorloveim’s Creeping Shadow 
EEko ASe eerie, 26 
Lorloveim’s Shadowy Transforma- 
tion (W 6th).............0008. 38 
Lower Resistance (W Sth)...... 34 
Lower Water (P 4th).......... 218 
Lower Water (W 6th)......... 178 
M 

Magic Font (P 5th)........... 223 
Magic Jar (W Sth)............ 169 
Magic Mirror (W 4th) ........ 159 
Magic Missile (W 1st) ........ 136 
Magic Mouth (W 2nd)........ 143 
Magic Staff (W Sth)........... 35 
Magical Stone (P Ist)......... 201 
Magical Vestment (P 3rd) ..... 211 
Major Creation (W Sth) ...... 170 
Malec-Keth’s Flame Fist (W 7th) 41 
Mask of Death (W 4th)........ 29 
Mass Charm (W 8th)......... 190 
Mass Invisibility (W 7th)...... 184 
Massmorph (W 4th).......... 160 
Mass Suggestion (W 6th)...... 179 
Maximilian’s Earthen Grasp 
(WDA) aces escmuararecans senine 22 
Maximilian’s Stony Grasp 

(Wi ardhe ossunesis cesses 26 


157 


Maze: (W 8th) ices cererea 190 
Meld (P St) cosia undor 93 
Meld Into Stone (P 3rd)....... 211 


Melf's Acid Arrow (W 2nd) ...144 
Melf’s Minute Meteors (W 3rd) 151 


Memory Read (P 3rd) ......... 68 
Memory Wrack (P Sth)........ 93 
Mending (W Ist)............. 136 
Mental Domination (P 4th) ... .81 
Message (W Ist) ............. 136 
Messenger (P 2nd) ........... 206 
Metamorphose Liquids (W Ist) .19 
Meteor Swarm (W 9th)....... 195 
Mind Blank (W 8th).......... 190 
Mind Pog SY sce ccsecemsnassis aaas 35 
Mindkiller (P 7th) ........... 107 
Mindnet (P O) repi essen sera 117 
Mind Read (P 2nd) ........... 59 
Mindshatter (P 5th) ........... 94 
Minor Creation (W 4th) ...... 160 
Minor Globe of Invulnerability 

(Wath). o eeseeeense eaea essione 160 
Minor Malison (W 3rd)........ 26 
Minor Spell Turning (W 4th) . . .29 
Mirage Arcana (W 6th)....... 179 
Mirror Image (W 2nd)........ 144 
Miscast Magic (P 3rd)......... 69 
Misdirection (W 2nd)......... 144 
Mislead (W 6th) ............. 179 
Mistaken Missive (P 1st)....... 53 
Modify Memory (P 4th)....... 83 
Moment (P 2nd).............. 60 
Moment Reading (P 3rd) ...... 69 
Monster Mount (P 6th)....... 102 


Monster Summoning I (W 3rd) 151 
Monster Summoning II (W 4th)160 
Monster Summoning III 


(WES) ies: avons comemncers asasi 170 
Monster Summoning IV 
Wotsi: seas cenaeetn a 179 


Monster Summoning V (W 7th)185 
Monster Summoning VI 


(W 8th).............. EA 190 
Monster Summoning VI 

UN AE scr EARS 195 
Moonbeam (P 5th)........... 223 
Mrale (P Th geni cxrsienstcwe § 53 
Mordenkainen’s Celerity 

(WERE corse wenn wee IE E 30 
Mordenkainen’s Disjunction 
CONQUER) a pinche ES 196 
Mordenkainen’s Faithful Hound 
CW SER) oeenn emanes eene 170 
Mordenkainen’s Lucubration 
CONFER oa riaa EE 179 
Mordenkainen's Magnificent Man- 
Stoa ONTEN) scone anasa 185 
Mordenkainen’s Sword (W 7th)185 
Mount (WISH  ov:cawasevcens 136 
Move Earth (W 6th).......... 179 


Appendix 3: 


Murdock’s Feathery Flyer 


ON TED anann yAn DAUER 19 
Music of the Spheres (P 2nd) . . .60 
Mystic Transfer* (P 2nd)....... 61 
N 

Nahal’s Nonsensical Nullifier* * 
ND a aa 22 
Nahal’s Reckless Dweomer** 
ONIAN ranes aean tanes 20 
Nap (P 2nd): crisa woexcieaenxcis 61 
Negative Plane Protection 

(Pard) osise reads ances eed 212 
Neutralize Poison (P 4th) ..... 219 
Non-Detection (W 3rd) ....... 152 
Nystul’s Magic Aura (W Ist) ..136 
Oo 

Obscurement (P 2nd)......... 206 
Otiluke’s Freezing Sphere 

(WY GED) cc'astisivie ReiNG Siow Aiwa 180 
Otiluke’s Resilient Sphere 

RY TIE) 2, oid A E 160 
Otiluke’s Telekinetic Sphere 

OO BEY eener compares neanvorseinaincs 190 
Otto’s Irresistible Dance 

(N SER) ccrsiavemcarnceserats) mean wea 190 
P 

Part Water (P 6th) ........... 229 
Part Water (W 6th)........... 180 
Pass Plant (P SE) raen ensnee 223 
Passwall (W Sth)............. 171 
Pass Without Trace (P 1st) ....201 
Past Life (W 2nd) riius eiaa 22 
Patternweave** (W Ist) ....... 20 
Permanency (W 8th) ......... 190 
Permanent Illusion (W 6th)... .180 
Personal Reading (P Ist)....... 54 


Phantasmal Force (W Ist)..... 137 
Phantasmal Killer (W 4th) ....160 


Phantom Steed (W 3rd)....... 152 
Phase Door (W 7th).......... 185 
Physical Mirror (P 6th) ....... 102 
Planar Quest (PQ) .......... 117 
Plane Shift (P 5th) ........... 224 
Plant Door (P 4th) ........... 219 
Plant Growth (P 3rd)......... 212 
Plant Growth (W 4th)........ 161 


Polymorph Any Object (W 8th)191 
Polymorph Other (W 4th) ....161 
Polymorph Self (W 4th) ...... 161 
Power Word, Blind (W 8th) .. .191 
Power Word, Kill (W 9th)..... 196 
Power Word, Stun (W 7th)... .185 


Prayer (P B90) escccvecawarws. awed 212 
Preservation (P Q)........... 118 
Prismatic Sphere (W 9th) ..... 196 


Alphabetical Spell Index 


Prismatic Spray (W 7th) ...... 186 
Prismatic Wall (W 8th) ....... 191 
Probability Control] (P 4th)..... 83 
Produce Fire (P 4th).......... 219 
Produce Flame (P 2nd) ....... 206 
Programmed Illusion (W 6th). .180 
Project Image (W 6th) ........ 180 
Protection From Cantrips 

(W 2nd) sanaaa sa ares ame 144 


Protection From Evil (P 1st) .. .201 
Protection From Evil (W 1st) . .137 
Protection From Evil, 10' Radius 


CB AUR) ersan cremeoronmainsiemanre 219 
Protection From Evil, 10' Radius 
(W dherna nannaa 152 


Protection From Fire (P 3rd). . .212 
Protection From Lightning (P 


BI EPA T E A A E 219 
Protection From Normal Missiles 
UN BE) oeann ma # 152 
Protection From Paralysis 

CN DHE) unrar i 23 
Purify Food & Drink (P 1st) . . .202 
Pyrotechnics (P 3rd).......... 212 
Pyrotechnics (W 2nd) ........ 144 
Q 

Quest (P 5th)...........00006 224 
R 

Rainbow (P Sth): isa cwcenwen d 224 
Rainbow Pattern (W 4th) ..... 162 
Raise Dead (P 5th) ........... 224 
Rally (P20) scnavan sense tina 62 
Random Causality (P 3rd)...... 69 
Rapport (Pai). asea wen 84 
Rary’s Mnemonic Enhancer 

ON eenaa 162 
Ray of Enfeeblement (W 2nd). .145 
Read Magic (W Ist).......... 137 
Reflecting Pool (P 4th)........ 219 
Regenerate (P 7th) ........... 234 
Reincarnate (P 7th)........... 234 
Reincarnation (W 6th)........ 181 
Remove Curse (P 3rd) ........ 213 
Remove Curse (W 4th) ....... 162 
Remove Fear (P Ist).......... 202 
Remove Paralysis (P 3rd) ..... 213 
Repeat Action (P Sth) ......... 95 
Repel Insects (P 4th).......... 220 
Repulsion (W 6th) ........... 181 
Resist Fire (P 2nd)............ 206 
Restoration (P 7th)........... 235 
Resurrection (P 7th).......... 235 
Revelation (P Q)............. 118 
Reverse Gravity (W 7th)...... 186 
Reverse Time (P 6th)......... 103 
Reversion (PQ) ............. 118 


158 


Ride the Wind (W 2nd)........ 23 
Rigid Thinking (P 3rd) ........ 70 
Ring of Hands* (P 1st) ........ 54 
Robe of Healing (P Q) ....... 119 
Rope Trick (W 2nd) .......... 145 
S 

Sacred Guardian (P Ist) ....... 55 
Safeguarding (W Sth) ......... 35 
Sanctify™ (P 2nd) sirr o:aedseeed 62 
Sanctuary (P 1st) ............ 202 
SCAT WY ZI) neas enonsa 145 
Seren AWB score. sanana weed 192 
Seclusion (P 6th)............. 103 
Secret Page (W 3rd).......... 152 
Seeming (W Sth)............. 171 
Sending (W Sih) cc ieecsesice ons 171 
Sense Shifting (W 2nd) ........ 23 
Sepia Snake Sigil (W 3rd) ..... 152 
Sequester (W 7th)............ 186 
Serten’s Spell Immunity (W 8th)192 
Shades (W 6th).............. 181 
Shadowcat (W 7th) ........... 41 
Shadow Door (W Sth)........ 171 
Shadow Engines (P 7th) ...... 108 
Shadow Magic (W 5th) ....... 171 
Shadow Monsters (W 4th) ... .162 
Shadow Walk (W 7th)........ 186 
Shape Change (W 9th)........ 196 
Shatter (W 2nd) as cceversinerans ares 145 
Shield (W'1st):« sss acanwenwnd 137: 
Shillelagh (P 1st)............. 202 
Shocking Grasp (W Ist) ...... 137 
Shooting Stars (PQ)......... 119 
Shout (W Ath) ccsisccssasenas 163 
Shrieking Walls (P 5th) ........ 95 
Siege Wall (P Q). see esee nia 119 
Silence, 15’ Radius (P 2nd) ....206 
Simulacrum (W 7th).......... 186 
Sa CV BER) saruana desas 192 
Skip Day (P 6th) roses sows sone 104 
Sleep: (W Tif) 5s cawicanusiowas ead 138 
Slow (W 3fd) xs aoine cas sare 153 
Slow Poison (P 2nd).......... 207 
Slow Rot (P 3rd) «5 sasis esac 70 
Snake Charm (P 2nd) ........ 207 
onare (PST) eaan 213 
Sol’s Searing Orb (P 6th) ..... 104 
Solid Fog (W 4th)............ 163 
Solipsism (P 4th).............. 84 
Spacewarp (P 7th) ........... 109 


Speak with Animals (P 2nd). . .207 
Speak With Astral Traveler 

(P T esasi sca aaae EEREN 55 
Speak With Dead (P 3rd) ..... 214 
Speak With Monsters (P 6th) . .229 


Speak With Plants (P 4th)..... 220 
Spectral Force (W 3rd)........ 153 
Spectral Hand (W 2nd) ....... 145 


Spell Immunity (P 4th) ....... 220 
Spell Shape** (W 7th)......... 42 
Spell Turning (W 7th) ........ 187 
Sphere of Security (P Q)...... 119 
Spider Climb (W Ist)......... 138 
Spike Growth (P 3rd) ........ 214 
Spike Stones (P 5th).......... 225 


Spiral of Degeneration (P Q). 7 
Spirit Armor (W 3rd) 


Spirit of Power” (P 7th) ...... i09 
Spiritual Hammer (P 2nd)..... 207 
Spiritual Wrath* (P 6th) ...... 105 
Spook (W Est) aise precei ox 138 
Squaring the Circle (W 3rd) . . . .27 
Squeaking Floors (P 3rd) ...... 70 
Stabilize** (W 9th) ........... 47 
RTIA i DIEA EA E 120 
Starshine (P 3rd)............. 214 
Statue (W 7th)............04% 187 
Steal Enchantment (W 7th)..... 42 
Sticks to Snakes (P 4th)....... 220 
Stinking Cloud (W 2nd) ...... 145 
Stone Shape (P 3rd).......... 214 
Stone Shape (W Sth) ......... 171 
Stoneskin (W 4th)............ 163 
Stone Tell(P 6th) sca izes cs 229 
Stone to Flesh (W 6th)........ 181 
Storm of Vengeance (P Q) ....121 
Strength (W 2nd) ............ 146 
Strength of One (P 3rd) ....... 71 
SHCCOP IPN) | acsscressreaaowie os 235 
Succor (WiGth) | wscuccwwcan ie 197 
Suffocate (W 7th)............. 43 
Suggestion (W 3rd)........... 153 
Summon Insects (P 3rd) ...... 214 


Summon Lycanthrope (W 4th). .30 
Summon Shadow (W Sth)..... 171 
Summon Swarm (W 2nd)..... 146 


Sunray (P Zaaien 235 
Symbol (P 7E) sorsia assonans 236 
Symbol (W BEB) i iarann asisas 193 
T 

Tanglefoot (P 4th) ............ 85 
Tasha’s Uncontrollable Hideous 
Laughter (W 2nd)............ 146 
Tant OV ISE ooto reseos w 138 
Telekinesis (W Sth)........... 171 
Telepathy (P 3rd) ............. 71 
Teleport (W Sth)............. 172 
Teleport Without Error (W 7th)187 
Telethaumaturgy (P 3rd)....... 72 
Temporal Stasis (W 9th) ...... 197 


Tenser’s Floating Disc (W Ist). .138 
Tenser’s Transformation 


GUNG GHED A E 181 
Tentacle Walls (P 7th) ........ 110 
There/Not There** (W 4th) ....32 
Thief’s Lament (P 3rd)......... 72 


Thought Broadcast (P 4th)..... 85 


Thought Capture (P 1st)....... 55 
Thoughtwave* (P Sth)......... 96 
Thunder Staff (W 4th)......... 32 
Timelessness (P 7th).......... 110 
Time Pool (P Sth)............. 96 
Time Stop (W 9th)........... 197 
Tongues (Path) wiesccs sevsem os 220 
Tonnes (W 31d). o6:5. scsaewsves se 153 
Transformation (P Q) ........ 121 
Transmute Metal to Wood 

OZER) EEEE TA IET E A 236 


Transmute Rock to Mud (P 5th)225 
Transmute Rock to Mud 


ON BERD unan aaa 172 
Transmute Water to Dust 

(POIR) suena rasanan 229 
Transmute Water to Dust 

(WiGE incase anean 182 
Transport Via Plants (P 6th). . .229 
Trap the Soul (W 8th) ........ 193 
Tree (P 3rd) .............0005 215 
Tree Steed (P 4th)............. 86 
TEDCP BN ore sczatsecacemarcrecanese 207 
True Seeing (P Sth)........... 225 
True Seeing (W 6th).......... 182 
Turn Wood (P 6th) ........... 229 
Turn Pebble to Boulder (W 4th) 33 
u 

Unceasing Vigilance of the Holy 
Senfine (P Seras enneren aa 97 
Uncontrolled Weather (P 7th) .111 
Undead Plague (P Q) ........ 121 
Undead Ward (P Sth).......... 97 
Unearthly Choir* (P 3rd) ...... 73 
Unluck (Witharen sneza 33 
Unseen Servant (W 1st)....... 138 
VUP (PAN h erie vepoaience 86 
v 

Vacancy (V Ah) nonea 163 
Vampiric Touch (W 3rd) ...... 153 
Vanish (WER), ccasseces sneezes 187 
Veil (Wi6th) enaena na 182 
Ventriloquism (W 1st) ........ 139 
Vision (WV ZEA)! sanas Ladia 187 
Von Gasik’s Refusal (W Sth)... .36 
Vortex** (W Sth) ............. 36 
W 

Wail of the Banshee (W 9th) . . .47 
Wall of Fire (P 5th)........... 225 
Wall of Fire (W 4th).......... 163 
Wall of Fog (W Ist) .......... 139 
Wall of Force (W Sth) ........ 172 
Wall of Ice (W 4th)........... 164 
Wall of Iron (W Sth) ......... 172 


159 


Appendix 3: Alphabetical Spell Index 


Wall of Stone (W Sth) ........ 173 
Wall of Thorns (P 6th)........ 230 
Warband Quest (PQ)........ 122 
Ward Matrix (P Q)........... 122 
Warp Wood (P 2nd).......... 208 
Water Breathing (P 3rd)....... 215 
Water Breathing (W 3rd)...... 153 
Water Walk (P 3rd) .......... 215 
Watery Double (W 3rd) ....... 27 
Waveform** (W Sth).......... 36 
Weather Stasis (P 4th)......... 87 
Weather Summoning (P 6th) . TA 
Web W- 2ni naa a 146 
Weighty Chest (P Ist) ......... 56 
Weird (W 9th)............005 197 
Whispering Wind (W 2nd) ....147 
Wildfire** (W 9th)............ 48 
Wildshield** (W 6th).......... 39 
Wildstrike** (W 6th).......... 39 
Wildwind** (W 9th) .......... 48 
Wildzone** (W 8th)........... 45 
Wind Walk (P 7th)........... 236 
Wind Wall (W 3rd)........... 154 
Wish (W QUi) ocscscsccareesecaven, ave 197 
Withdraw (P 2nd)............ 208 
Wizard Eye (W 4th).......... 164 
Wizard Lock (W 2nd) ........ 147 
Wizard Mark (W Ist)......... 139 
Wizard Sight (W 3rd) ......... 28 
Wolf Spirits (P Q) ........... 122 
Word of Recall (P 6th)........ 230 
Wraithform (W 3rd).......... 154 
Wyvern Watch (P 2nd) ....... 208 
Z 

Zone of Sweet Air (P 3rd)...... 73 
Zone of Truth (P 2nd)......... 62 


Accessory 


| Take your spellcasters to limits they have 

| never reached before! With over two 

| hundred new spells and magical items, the 
Tome of Magic stretches the horizons of 
every wizard and priest in the AD&D® 2nd 


Edition game. 


In these pages are new forms of wizard 
| magic including elementalists, metamagic, 
and wild magic, plus expansions of existing 
schools. For priests, whole new spheres have been discovered— 
spheres of chaos, law, numbers, thought, time, war, and wards— 
and powerful new quest spells lie waiting to be tapped. 

All characters will experience the thrill of discovering new 
magical items such as the claw of magic stealing, dimensional 
mine, crystal parrot, ring of randomness, and staff of the 
elements. Tome of Magic is an invaluable expansion for all the 


spellcasting classes! 


TSR, Inc. Lath Tn ti TSR Ltd. 
POB 756 | q 120 Church End, Cherry Hinton 
Lake Geneva iroi Cambridge CB1 3LB 
WI 53147 U.S.A. PRODUCTS OF YOUR IMAGINATION United Kingdom 


©1991 TSR, Inc. All rights reserved. Printed in the U.S.A. 
ADVANCED DUNGEONS & DRAGONS and AD&D are registered trademarks owned by TSR, Inc. 
PRODUCTS OF YOUR IMAGINATION and the TSR logo are trademarks owned by TSR, Inc. 


2121 $20.00 U.S. £11.99 U.K. 


ISBN 1-56076-107-5 


