Ddngédons8& Dragons’ 


Volume Two 


snes A 


onpa 


Priest’s Spell Compendium 
Accessory 
Credits 


Design: It is impossible to list all the creators of the spells cataloged in these volumes, but credit goes to everyone who 
created a spell in a module, boxed set, accessory, hardbound book or magazine article published in the last 20 years. 
Compilation: Mark Middleton 
Development and Editing: Jon Pickens 
Additional Proofing: Kij Johnson, Jennifer Clarke Wilkes, Andy Collins, Julia Martin 

Coordination: Ted Stark 


Acknowledgments: L. Richard Baker III, Brad Bolas, Ed Greenwood, Miranda Horner, Julia Martin, Mark 
Middleton, Roger E. Moore, John Rateliff, Cindi Rice, Thomas M. Reid, Steven E. Schend, and Skip Williams. 


Based on the original DUNGEONS & Dracons* rules created by E. Gary Gygax and Dave Ameson. 
Volume Two 
Garments of Elvenkind to Spiderform 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Spell Frequency . . . . 
A Guide to Spell Icons 


ZrrRerroa 


OROVOZ 


ADD, ADVANCED DUNGBONS & DRAGONS: 
DUNGEON MASTER, DUNGEONS & DRAGONS, FIEND FOLIO, FORGOTTEN REALMS, MONSTROUS 
PLANESCAPE, POLYHEDRON, RAVENLOFT, RED STEEL. RPGA. the RPGA logo, and SPELLIAMMER and the TSR logo are registred trademarks owned by 


TSR, Inc. 
DEITIES & DEMIGODS, MONSTROUS MANUAL, asd ROLE PLAYING GAME ASSOCIATION are trademarks owned by TSR. Inc 


A1 TSR characters, character names, speil names, magical fem names, monster names, unique piace locations, and the distinc: likenesses thereof are trademarks 
‘owned by TSR, Ine. 


‘Distributed to the hobby, toy. and comic trade in the United States and Canada by regional distributors, 
Distributed worldwide by Wizards of the Coes, lnc. and regional distributors. This materal i protecied ander the copyright laws of the United States of America. 
‘Any reproduction or unauthorized use of the material or artwork contained herein is prohibited without the express writen permission of TSR, Inc. 


11421620 0-7469-1421-1 
(©1999 TSR. Inc All Rights Reserved. Made in the U S.A. 
TSR. Inc. is a subsidiary of Wizards of the Coast, Inc. 


N 


Introduction 


The Priest's Spell Compendium continues the 
work of the Wizard's Spell Compendium series. 
This, the second volume, creates an alphabetical 
reference to priest spells of the AD&D* game 
system, covering the letters G through Sp. The full 
series covers priest spells created for the game 
from 1975 to 1995. 

For the uninitiated, this is not a book of “real” 
magical spells. In a fantasy game world, characters 
like Merlin the Magician create marvelous magical 
effects with a wave of the hand, This is a book of 
marvelous effects that can be used by the good 
guys (and the bad guys) in the course of a game 
session. The key to the game is, as always, the deci- 
sions made by the players (heroic or otherwise), 
and the impact those decisions have on the ongoing 
plot of the game. New spells are fun, but it’s even 
more fun figuring out unusual ways to use them, 

Up to this time, lists of spell effects have been 
keyed to spell level; that is, relative spell power. In 
other words, if all a gamer or Dungeon Master 
knew was a spell name, each level's list of spells 
had to be checked. While the last volume of the 
series will include level lists (as well as lists by 
race and specialty), the most important principle 
of organization used in the series as a whole is 
alphabetical. 

The material in these books is presented in the 
most current game format: that of the 2nd Edition 
rules. Some descriptions have been updated or 
combined with similar spell effects to eliminate 
duplication; some have been modified for better 
play, and a very few have been dropped entirely 

Generally, “granted powers” of specialty priests 
are beyond the scope of this series, although a few 
have been configured as spells. Variant magical 
systems, such as the kingdom-level magic of the 
BixtHRiGHT setting are also beyond the scope of 
this book. However, the optional Sphere of War, 
introduced in the Tome oF MaGic book (essentially 
a BArTLesysreMe rules variant) and the psionics- 
based spells of the Dragon-Kings of the Dark SUN 
setting are close enough to standard spells to be 
included in a special section in the final volume, 
Clerical cantrips, or orisons, will be included in the 
final volume as well. 


About This Book 


The spells listed in this book are given alpha- 
betically. Spell names that include a name are given 
a primary listing under that name. For example, for 
Abbathor's greed, the primary entry is under “A.” 


Another reference to the main entry will be found 
at the second word of the spell name; in this case, 
the entry would read: “Greed, Abbathor’s.” 

Be aware that many spell names are irregular 
compound words, and that standard alphabetical 
order follows complete words, Thus, dark road 
will appear before darkbolt. If you can’t find a 
spell, try looking for it as a compound form. 

Some spells may have the same name; or the 
name of a spell might have been changed. Where 
two spells have the same name but come from dif- 
ferent cultures, the spell from the culture most simi- 
lar to Medieval Europe is given first. Renamed spells 
have a short reference under the original name, 

Spells associated with specific campaign 
worlds (other than the FORGOTTEN REALMS" and 
GREYHAwK* settings) are marked with a special 
symbol so they can be easily recognized. See page 
7 for a summary of these symbols. Spells associ- 
ated with a specific monster or nonhuman race 
(dragons, elves, and so on) are noted; the race 
name is separated from the spell name by a dash. 
Specialized priests with unique spell lists, such as 
the NPC savant-cleric, are also specially noted, 

Generally, spell names and secondary game 
effects are italicized. For example, the symbol 
spell has a secondary effect called discord. 


How to Use This Book 


Each spell in this book is organized along the 
same general lines. Each is listed by its name, 
school, sphere, and a number of statistics that 
govern its use such as level (of power), range, cast- 
ing time, and so on. The game powers of each spell 
are described, along with any special rules that 
govern its use, how the spell target can avoid or 
counter its effects, any limitations on how the spell 
can be used, and any special preparations or mate- 
rials that needed for a successful casting. Next, the 
details of any reversed form the spell might have 
are given. Finally, a section called Notes has been 
appended to each spell; this deals with patron 
power, the spell's rarity, and any special restric- 
tions on who (or what) can use it. 

Having covered the field briefly, a more 
detailed look is in order: 


Name: This is the name by which the spell is gen- 
erally known. Although we have tried to ensure 
unique names, this has not always been possible. 
For example, dark fire, a minor spell that gives 
heat without light, is very different from darkfire, 
an evil and powerful black flame commanded by 
the drow elves. Where two spells have the same 
name, the most general version is given first, while 


I ae Ne Sa EE PEATE OE a ee EN 


N 


variants cast by other races or found in specialized 
campaign settings are given later. A name marked 
with an asterisk (*) is a cooperative magic spell in 
which a circle of priests combines their efforts 
(cooperative magic is discussed in the final book). 


School: Each school governs a type of magic, 
according to the type of energy its spells employ 
and the special practices and methods used in cast- 
ing them. The basic schools are: 


SCHOOLS OF MAGIC (PHILOSOPHY) 

Abjuration: Protective, warding, or banishing 
magics. 

Alteration: Magic that changes physical prop- 
erties of an object, creature, or condition. 

Conjuration Summoning: Magic that calls or 
brings objects or creatures from elsewhere. 

Divination: Magic that uncovers what is lost or 
hidden in the past, present, or future. 

Enchantment/Charm: Magic that bestows mag- 
ical properties on objects or influences creatures 
magically. 

Ilusion/Phantasm: illusions create and alter 
appearances; phantasms affect the mind. 

Invocation/Evocation: Magic that channels and 
shapes magical energy to create an effect or object. 

Necromancy: Magic that works on life energy, 
including the negative energy of the undead. 


Sphere: Priest spells are grouped into a number of 
spheres of influence, or spheres. These spheres are 
the building blocks of a divine power’s portfolio, 
and determine which spells are made available to 
priests of that faith. For the most part, the sphere 
assignments from the Players Handbook are given 
(the PLAYER’s OPTION: Spells & Magic assignments 
are optional.) For the purpose of this series, spheres 
are grouped into three categories: Clerical Spheres, 
Druidical Spheres, and Specialty Spheres. In addi- 
tion, there is an All sphere, to which all priests have 
access, 

Clerical Spheres are those governed by the 
powers of the Outer Planes. These are spheres to 
which the cleric class has access. In the DARK SUN 
setting, these are collectively grouped as the 
Sphere of Cosmos. 

Druidical spheres are primarily those con- 
cerned with the Prime Material Plane and Elemen- 
tal Planes. They are drawn upon by religions of the 
natural world: animism, shamanism, and druidism. 

Specialty spheres include spheres created for 
specialty priesthoods, concemed with specialized 
knowledge, and are generally closed to the clerical 
class. Most of are introduced in the TOME oF 
Maaic book. 


291 


Priests have either major or minor sphere 
access. 
Major access to a sphere allows the priest to 
cast all spells in the sphere. 

Minor access to a sphere allows the priest to 
cast spells of Ist to 3rd level in the sphere. 

Complete lists of spells by sphere appear in the 
final volume of this set. 


(CLERICAL SPHERES 

Astral spells are those that allow access to the 
Astral Plane, for purposes of movement and com- 
munication. 

Charm spells affect attitudes and actions of 
people. Powers of love, trickery, or art, often grant 
access to this sphere. Expansive faiths deal with 
this sphere as well. 

Combat spells are often granted by powers of 
war or strife. Many faiths that defend themselves 
by force have access to this sphere. 

Creation spells can produce something from 
nothing, often to benefit the followers. Prime cre- 
ator powers often grant access to this sphere. 

Divination spells recover long-lost information 
or provide guidance. Most specialty priests should 
have at least minor access to this sphere. 

Guardian spells summon an actual guardian of 
some sort. 

Healing spells remove afflictions or heal 
wounds. They cannot restore life or lost limbs. 
Reversal of these spells is restricted to evil 
priests. 

Necromantic spells restore destroyed life force 
such as life, limbs, and experience levels. Reversal 
of these spells is restricted to evil priests. 

Protection spells that provide personal protec- 
tion to the caster or creatures aided. 

Summoning spells call creatures from other 
places or dimensions to serve the caster. This is 
usually risky, as the service is often against the 
will of such creatures. 

Sun spells deal in the basic powers of the solar 
universe—the purity of light and its counterpart 
darkness. 

If the PLAYER'S OPTION: Spells & Magic rules 
are being used, the Sun sphere shifts to the 
group of Druidic Spheres, 


Clerics have major access all Clerical Spheres, 
and minor access to the Elemental Spheres of 
Earth and Water. 


DRUIDIC SPHERES 
Animal spells affect or alter creatures. This 
sphere does not include spells that affect people. 


EEE A 


Powers of nature or husbandry often grant access 
to this sphere. 

Elemental spells affect the four basic elements 
of air, earth, fire, and water. Powers of nature or 
powers with elemental interests typically grant 
access to at least part of this sphere. Few priests 
have access to all four elements. 

Plant spells affect plants, ranging from simple 
agriculture (improving crop yields) to communi- 
cating with plantlike creatures. Powers of nature or 
agriculture often grant access to this sphere. 

Weather spells enable the priest to manipulate 
forces of weather. Powers of nature and tempests 
often grant access to this sphere. 


If the PLAYER'S OPTION: Spells & Magic rules 
are being used, the Sun sphere shifts to the 
group of Prime Spheres. 


Druids have access to the Druidic Spheres and 
to the Sphere of Healing. 


SPECIALTY SPHERES 

In general, specialty spheres include those 
spheres introduced either in the Tome or MAGIC or 
in other sources. 

Chaos spells add randomness and confusion to 
the world around the caster. The results are unpre- 
dictable and uncertain. Powers of mischief and ill 
luck often grant access to this sphere. 

Law spells increase order in the world around 
the caster. This may enhance cooperation or limit 
individual thought or action. Powers of commu- 
nity and rulership often grant access to this sphere. 

Numbers spells are based on the theory that 
numbers and mathematical relationships provide 
insight into the nature of the universe. Powers of 
arcane lore sometimes grant access to this 
sphere. 

Thought spells concem such abstract topics as 
thought, time, and boundaries. Powers concemed 
with the mind or knowledge often grant access to 
this sphere. 

Time spells manipulate the effects of time on 
objects and creatures, as well as the passage of 
time itself. 

Travelers spells aid and comfort the traveler, 
making such endeavors safer, easier, and more 
enjoyable. Powers that protect wayfarers often 
grant access to this sphere, 

War spells are battlefield spells granted when 
large-scale battles are imminent. 

Wards spells seal and area against intrusion, 
either by creating a barrier or forbidden zone, or 
by inflicting a magical effect. 


Specialty priests might have access to one or 
more specialty spheres, in addition to certain Cler- 
ical or Druidical spheres. The DM decides the 
exact number and type of spheres available to a 
power or deity. 


‘THE “ALL” SPHERE 

This special list of spells is common to all 
priests. This group includes spells a priest needs to 
perform basic functions. 


Reversed Form: An entry of “Reversible” means 
the spell can be cast with the opposite effect. For 
example, the cure light wounds spell which restores 
lost hit points, can be reversed as cause light 
wounds, which inflicts damage. Often, a reversed 
form of a clerical spell will be favored by evil cler- 
ics. Usually, a priest must memorize the exact form 
of the reversible spell he wants available, 


Level: This is the relative power level of the spell, 
ranging from 1st level (weakest) to 9th level (most 
powerful). A high priest in a major city generally 
has access to a 6th-level spell, a few Sth-level 
spells, and a number of 4th- through Ist-level spells 
each day. 


Range: The distance from the caster at which the 
magical effect occurs. A range of “O" means the 
effect is centered on the caster’s person or loca- 
tion; in the latter case the effect is usually immo- 
bile. “Touch” means the effect can be used on 
another creature or object, and generally on the 
caster as well. Unless otherwise specified, ranged 
spells are centered on a point visible to the caster 
and within the spell’s range; this can be a specific 
creature or object if desired. Most ranges are 
measured in yards; some are measured in feet. 


Components: These are the types of components 
that the spell requires; if the components are not 
present, the casting fails. “V" is verbal; that is, a 
spoken incantation the priest is assumed to deliver 
while casting. “S” is somatic; that is, measured and 
precise gestures with the hands, which the priest is 
assumed to make while casting. “M” is for material; 
that is, physical substances or objects that are annihi- 
lated by the spell energies in the casting process. This 
abbreviation sometimes signifies a focus, or device 
that is reusable; sometimes this is a temporary focus 
whose premature destruction ends the spell. 

Often the components are merely suggestive or 
colorful, at other times they will be a significant 
restriction on how often a spell can be cast. Unless 
a cost for a component is given in the description 
(which means the component is intended as a limit), 


ee Ae ae ae 


N 


the cost is negligible and can be assumed as part of 
the priest’s daily or monthly general expenses. 


Casting Time: This is relative time required to 
cast a spell. Unless rounds, turns, or a longer cast- 
ing time is specified, the casting will be completed 
in the same round it is started. A casting time less 
than one round is a modifier to the initiative roll, 
and is essentially the same as a weapon speed 
factor, A spell that takes a full round to cast comes 
into effect at the end of that round. 


Duration: This is how long the magical energy of 
the spell lasts. An instantaneous duration means 
the spell energy comes and goes the instant the 
spell is cast, though the spell effect might be long 
lasting. A duration of permanent means the spell 
energy remains as long as the effect does; this 
means that the spell is vulnerable to a dispel magic 
spell. This is an altered usage. Many spells listed 
in earlier sources as having a “permanent” dura- 
tion (such as cure light wounds) are altered in this 
series and in future listings to “instantaneous,” 

Spells with a set duration (such as 1 round per 
level) must be kept track of by the player; those with 
a variable duration are secretly rolled by the DM. 

Some spells can be ended by the caster at will; 
the caster must be in range of the center of the 
spell’s effect and must usually (though not always) 
speak words of dismissal, 


Area of Effect: This entry lists the creatures, 
dimensions, volume, weight, and so on, that the 
spell can affect. Some spells have areas that can be 
shaped by the caster; of these, no dimension can be 
less than 10 feet unless the spell specifically 
allows it. Many areas are given as cubes to make it 
easy to figure out areas of effect when using maps 
gridded into 10-foot or 5-foot squares. Three- 
dimensional volumes are most often needed to 
resolve aerial or underwater effects. 

Unless specifically stated otherwise in the 
description, areas of effect conform to their physi- 
cal surroundings; for example, a light spell with a 
60-foot radius centered in a closed room that is a 
20-foot cube will light the room. It will not pene- 
trate a solid wall to light a room beyond. 

Many areas are given as geometric shapes. 

Radius: This might yield a circle, hemisphere, 
or sphere, depending on the situation. 

Cloud: Usually given as a block of cubes for 
convenience, although it's actually amorphous and 
billowy. 

Cone: This projects outward from the caster, 
with the smallest end toward the caster and the 
largest diameter farthest from the caster. 


Path: This is usually a 10-foot wide line start- 
ing at the caster projecting away in a straight line 
to a specified length. 

Spells that affect the caster’s friends or enemies 
are based on the current perceptions of the caster, 


Saving Throw: This entry lists whether a spell 
allows a saving throw and, often, the effect of a 
successful saving throw: “Neg.” means the spell is 
negated and has no effect; "3⁄4" means that the spell 
inflicts damage and that a successful saving throw 
halves the damage taken; “None” means no saving 
throw is allowed to an unwilling subject. The 
result of a saving throw for a reversed spell is 
given in the paragraph that details the reversed 
form, 

The saving throw itself is a roll on a 20-sided 
die; high numbers are generally good. 

Wisdom allows adjustments to saving throws 
against Enchantment/Charm spells. Dexterity may 
provide adjustments against spells that affect a 
large area, 

Solid physical barriers may give saving throw 
modifiers and reduce damage. Cover and con- 
cealment may also affect saving throws, The 
DUNGEON MASTER® Guide (DMG) has more 
information. 

A creature that successfully saves against a 
spell without obvious physical effects often feels a 
hostile force or tingle, but the exact nature of the 
attack cannot be deduced. 

Unless the spell specifies otherwise, if a char- 
acter makes a saving throw, all items carried and 
worn are assumed to survive the attack. If the char- 
acter fails the saving throw, exposed items must 
make saving throws against the attack form. An 
item exposed by the destruction of a covering (a 
parchment scroll protected by a bone scroll case, 
for example) must also save against the attack. 

Unless specifically forbidden, a character can 
voluntarily forego a saving throw and willingly 
accept the spell result, Even a character with a 
special resistance to magic (for example, an elf’s 
resistance to a charm spell) can voluntarily sup- 
press this if he or she wants. 


Spell Description: This contains the details of 
what the spell does and how it works. Spells with 
multiple functions usually allow the caster to 
pick the desired function at the time of casting 
(for example, the emotion spell can create fear, 
courage, hope, despair, joy, and several other 
effects). 

Spells that give bonuses or penalties to attack 
rolls, damage rolls, saving throws, and so on, are 
usually not cumulative; only the strongest magic is 


So TE | Se 


NI 


effective. However, duration may be a factor, and 
spell effects might overlap in different ways at dif- 
ferent times. 


Notes: This new section deals with the spell’s rec- 
ommended rarity on the following scale: common, 
uncommon, rare, very rare, and unique. These are 
discussed in detail in the Spell Frequency section (see 
below). Spells of any rarity also may be restricted to 
certain races or specialty casters. Any notes on a 
spell's source or origin, such as a game world or a 
magazine, are given here, 


Monster Details: Some of the spells summon 
of create monsters. The standard abbreviations 
used for monster details given later. Not all mon- 
sters will use all abbreviations. 

AC: Armor Class 

MV: Movement— Fl: fly 

(MC) = Maneuverability Class (A to E) 

AD: Hit Dice 

#AT: Number of Attacks 

THACO: To Hit Armor Class 0 

Dmg: Damage 

SA: Special Attacks 

SD: Special Defenses 

SW: Special Weaknesses 

MR: Magic Resistance 

SZ: Size 


Spell Frequency 


Forcorren REALMS players and DMs should 
‘note that the definitions used here are different 
from those used in FORGOTTEN REALMS products. 
‘These guidelines are intended for general world 
settings. The DM, as always, is free to alter them 
‘as needed for local campaign conditions. 


Common Spell: The details and effects of a 
common spell are generally known, even by priests 
who may not have access to the spell. All spells in 
the Player's Handbook are common spells. Spells 
listed for the basic priest class in world-specific 
material (such as the Dark SUN® campaign set) are 
common for priests of that world, but might be 
rarer or even unknown elsewhere. 

Player character priest of 1st level can choose 
Ist-level spells given in the Player's Handbook 
from allowed spheres. Any limitation on spell 
selection—such as those for specialty priesthood 
or kit—apply even to common spells. Note also 


that DMs may have their own campaign guide- 
lines. For example, the DM might have special 
spell lists for each divine patron, restricting any 
spells not included in the specific list. A DM might 
rule that named spells (such as Henley's disrupting 
digit) are uncommon or restricted spells, as well. 

Players and DMs should be aware that while the 
standard rule is that priests have free access to all 
spells on their respective lists, a more useful ruling 
is to use all common spells in allowed spheres. This 
gives the maximum ability to the DM to reward 
players occasionally with new spells and to encour- 
age magical research as a campaign activity. We 
highly recommend that additions to priest spell 
lists be allowed only through research or through 
the recovery of certain lost tomes. 


‘The DM always decides whether a priest- 
hood is allowed a spell if there is any question, 


Uncommon Spell: Priest spells found in the Tome 
of Magic and PO: Spells & Magic fall into this cat- 
egory. These spells are less well known, but not 
restricted to a race or special group like, for exam- 
ple, druids, dragons, or the Emerald Enclave. A 
kit, school, or other specialty might allow some 
uncommon spells to be treated as common spells. 
Clerics can research uncommon spells using the 
normal research rules, 

Generally, a player character will not start with 
an uncommon spell or leam it in the course of 
normal level advancement (unless a divine patron 
allows it). Such spells enter play when found on a 
magical scroll or in a special book, or when devel- 
oped as a result of spell research. In the average 
AD&D campaign, finding a new common or 
uncommon spell is a little more common that a 
fighter class character finding a longsword +1. 
Some uncommon spells may be restricted (see 
Restricted Spells). 


Rare Spell: Rare spells are specialized or hidden 
magic, such as those introduced in modules or 
accessories, Besides spells that are just less well 
known, two special types of rare spells exist: 1) 
Spells known by a specific nonhuman race (like 
elven spells from the Complete Book of Elves); 
and 2) Spells of a specialty or campaign-specific 
group that is not given in the Player's Handbook 
(like the spells of the Thornwater Circle, the spells 
from the Complete Necromancer's Handbook, or 
spells of a defiler priest who specializes in Ele- 
mental Fire magic). Rare spells are likely to be 
restricted (see Restricted Spells). 


Fe ee RE Fe Oe eS 


NÝ 


A specialty priest treats the spells allowed by 
the specialty as common. 

Player characters have access to rare magics 
only as a result of campaign-specific conditions. 
Priest research of rare magics has a base -15% 
penalty to the research success rolls, unless the 
character has access to some sort of knowledge or 
resource that would offset this. Of course, a spell 
not pleasing to the divine patron will not be 
granted at all. 

Certain campaign-specific or storyline condi- 
tions might allow rare spell research at common 
spell chances. For example, if a human priest's 
reward for an adventure on behalf of the elves is 
elven lore (a race-specific spell), the DM may 
choose to waive some or all of the research cost, 
and/or the research success roll (time requirements 
should not be waived under any circumstances). 


Very Rare Spell: Spells that appear only in mag- 
azine articles, or are otherwise variant, should be 
classified as very rare. Spells newly introduced in 
Prayers From the Faithful fall into this category as 
well (this makes those special tomes a treat to 
find). The DM should closely control very rare 
spells. For example, they might be available only 
in a single special book or tome in which they 
were recorded. Many very rare spells are also 
restricted (see Restricted Spells). 

A DM who allows the spell to be researched at 
all rolls for the success of the research secretly and 
announces the result to the player. At the DM's 
option, the standard research success chances may 
be halved, or even quartered. 

Classifying a spell as very rare is one way for a 
DM to handle an experimental spell that is too 
powerful or one that encroaches too much on the 
class abilities of nonpriests. It is also possible, over 
time, for a spell devised by a player character to 
become rare, uncommon, or even common, either 
within a specific sect or generally. 


Unique Spell: This spell is known only to its orig- 
inal creator and is intrinsic to the creator's cam- 
paign function. Some spells of this type might be 
available only to a character holding a certain posi- 
tion or office, Most unique spells are of the 6th 


spell level or higher; the creator is nearly always of 
12th level or higher. Such spells are marked with a 
double dagger (tt). 

There are fewer priest than wizard spells of this 
type, since a patron deity is more likely to grant or 
withhold spells of this type directly. 

The acquisition of a unique spell, or the cre- 
ation of one by a player character, is a major cam- 
paign event, similar in campaign impact to the 
completion of an epic high-level quest, the open- 
ing of a fixed interplanar gate, the founding of a 
barony, the destruction of an artifact, and so on. 


Other Definitions 


Lost Spell: Rarely, a spell is mentioned for which 
no 2nd Edition detail exists (including a few spells 
deliberately withdrawn from the system). No 
details are given for these other than the spell 
name. They are “lost knowledge,” included only to 
confirm their one-time existence for the curious. 


Restricted Spell: A restricted spell is barred to 
generalists (that is, the cleric class), and to all 
other priests except those specifically allowed in 
the spell description or by the DM. Optionally, an 
independently researched spell that matches the 
effects of a restricted spell might be possible, but 
at no less than two levels above the listed level. 


Optional Priest Magic: In addition to normal 
priest spells, three other types of priest magic are 
optional. 

Quest spells are special campaign-affecting 
spells occasionally made available to priests of at 
least 10th level and possessing a Wisdom ability 
score of at least 17. Quest spells are located in a 
special appendix in the final book. 

Faith Magic involves the harnessing of the 
devotional power of priests and worshipers to 
amplify the effect of certain spells. A discussion of 
faith magic is found in the final book. 

Cooperative Magic involves the linking of two 
or more priests who are of the same ethos (the 
Law-Neutral-Chaos axis) in order to increase the 
effectiveness of a joint spelicasting. A more com- 
plete discussion appears in the final book. 


a RE we 


A Guide to Spell Icons 
AL-QaDIM® Dark SUN 
BIRTHRIGHT* ear ‘ 
: r w 
Arabian Setting Setting of Kings Psionic World Setting 
DRAGONLANCE* Kara-Tur/The Horde Maztica PLANESCAPE* 
Epic Romance Oriental Setting Aztec/New Other Planes’ 
Setting World Setting Setting 
. n RED STEEL* £ 
RAVENLOFT® Swashbuckling ‘SPELLIAMMER® 
Gothic Fantasy Setting Fantasy Setting Savage Lands' Setting Fantasy Space Setting 
' Although there is no specific setting for savage spellcasters, many worlds have areas from which these might 
come. This icon marks spells particularly suited to an outland “savage” wizard or witch-doctor, 


Magic in the Worlds 
Elemental magic in the traditional FORGOTTEN REALMS, GREYHAWK, DRAGONLANCE, and MYSTARA 


along alignment lines. 


Abbreviations Referring to Source Material 

PHB = ADVANCED DUNGEONS & DRAGONS Player's Handbook 
DMG = ADVANCED DUNGEONS & DRAGONS DUNGEON Master Guide 
PO:SM = PLAYER’ s Orion: Spells & Magic 

ToM = Tome of Magic 


Se 


Gaer, Cloak of 
See cloak of Gaer. 


Gargauth, Call Upon 
See call upon Gargauth. 


Gargauth, Mask of 
See mask of Gargauth. 


Garments of Elvenkind — Elf 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
Sphere: All 


Level: 6 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, $, M 
Casting Time: 3 rds. 
Duration: | tum/level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell enables the caster temporarily to enchant 
a cloak, a pair of boots, and a pair of bracers so that 
they function as certain magical items. The cloak func- 
tions as a cloak of elvenkind for the duration of the 
spell. Similarly the boots act as boots of elvenkind and 
the bracers act as bracers of archery for the duration. 

Once enchanted, these items can be used by 
anyone; however, all three must be used by the 
same creature. If the items are distributed among 
several individuals, the magic fails and is wasted. 
A successful dispel magic ends the spell. 

The material components for this spell are the 
caster’s holy symbol, three drops from a potion of 
invisibility (for the cloak), three small objects (a 
stone, a twig, a coin, and so on) that once carried a 
silence dweomer (for the boots), and three arrows 
bearing any form of magical enchantment (includ- 
ing an enchantment as simple as a faith arrow or 
Nystul's magic aura). With the exception of the 
holy symbol, these components are expended in the 
casting. 

Notes: Granted by elven deities. 


Gaseous Form 
(Alteration, Necromancy) 
Sphere: Necromantic, Elemental Air 


Level: 5 

Range: 0 

Components: S, M 
Casting Time: 8 
Duration: | turn/level 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell enables the caster to 
assume gaseous form, as the potion of 
the same name. In this state, the 
caster's body and anything carried or 
worn becomes a cloud of elemental vapor and 
essentially invisible. While in this form, the 
caster can escape from almost any confinement. 
Any small crack or hole that allows air to pene- 
trate allows passage in gaseous form. 

No form of attack or spell casting is possible 
while in a gaseous state, but the priest can fly near 
the ground at a movement rate equal to his Intelli- 
gence (Maneuverability Class B). A gust of wind 
spell or even normal strong air currents blow the 
caster at air speed in the direction of the gust. 

In this form, the caster is all but immune to 
attack. Magical fire or lightning inflict normal 
damage, and a whirlwind inflicts double damage. 
‘The caster can return to his original form at will, 
but this ends the spell immediately. Otherwise, 
normal form is regained upon the expiration of the 
spell duration. 

The material component is a pinch of vampire 
dust or a vial of air from the Elemental Plane of 
Air. 

Notes: Granted by the god Velsharoon the Lich 
Lord of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Gate 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 
Sphere: All 


Level: 7 
Range: 30 yds. 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 5 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


Casting a gate spell has two effects: it causes 
an interdimensional connection between the plane 
of existence the priest is in and the plane in which 
dwells a specific being of great power. The result 
of this connection is that the sought-after being 
can step through the gate or portal from its plane 
to that of the priest. Uttering the spell attracts the 
attention of the dweller on the other plane. When 
casting the spell, the priest must name the entity 
he or she desires to make use of the gate and pro- 
vide aid. 

There is a 100% chance that something steps 
through the gate, The actions of the being that 
comes through depend on many factors, including 
the alignment of the caster, the nature of those in 
his or her company, and who or what opposes or 


J eS Se 


Gate of Doom 


threatens the priest. The DM decides the exact 
result of the spell, based on the being called, the 
desires of the caster, and the needs of the moment. 
The being gated in either retums immediately or 
remains to take action. Casting this spell ages the 
priest five years. 

Notes: Common for clerics (PHB). 


The being in question might come person- 
ally (for example, a deity might appear as an 
avatar) or might send a lesser minion, instead. 


Gate of Doom 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 
Sphere: Summoning 


Level: 7 

Range: 10 yds, 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: 1 rd /level 

Area of Effect: 10 sq. ft /level 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell creates a wall of energy from the 
Negative Energy Plane that is actually a portal to 
that fell place. A gare of doom appears as a shim- 
mering curtain of lightless black. Any mortal crea- 
ture who touches a gate of doom suffers 2d6 points 
of damage and permanently loses one level of 
experience or Hit Dice per round of contact. Those 
foolish enough to pass through this curtain are 
instantly transported to the Negative Energy Plane, 
almost certainly causing their deaths, as this spell 
creates no portal on that side by which to return. 

The spellcaster can cast this spell in any 
loosely rectangular configuration that does not 
exceed the area of effect. Once cast, the location of 
the gate of doom is fixed and cannot be moved by 
the priest or anyone else until the effect fades. This 
spell cannot be cast on any living creature. 
Attempting to do so causes the gate of doom to 
appear nearby in a random location. 

The spell negative plane protection provides 
complete immunity to this spell while it is in 
effect, including preventing an individual from 
passing into the Negative Energy Plane. All 
undead creatures except mummies (or any other 
type of undead tied to the Positive Energy Plane) 
ignore this spell’s effects as well. 

Level-draining undead, energy drain spells, 
and enervation spells and similar effects and abil- 
ities cast or used within 100 yards of a gate of 


doom always operate at twice their maximum 
effect. 

‘The material components of this spell are a 
small stick of black charcoal, a solid black gem- 
stone of at least 50 gp value, and the priest's holy 
symbol. 

Notes: Granted by the demipower Jergal, 
Scribe of the Doomed, of the FORGOTTEN REALMS 
setting. 


Gaunadaur, Mists of 


See mists of Gaunadaur. 


Gauntlet of Winds 
(Alteration, Invocation/Evocation) 
Sphere: Elemental Air, Weather 


Level: 4 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 7 
Duration: 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: 1 gauntlet 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell enchants a gauntlet (the Shaundakun 
priest's holy symbol) into a magical gauntlet of 
winds, The caster can use the gauntlet to create one 
of the following spell effects per round: feather 
fall (as the Ist-level wizard spell), gust of wind (as 
the 3rd-level wizard spell), wind wall (as the 3rd- 
level wizard spell), or calm winds (as the 4th-level 
priest spell). Each effect lasts one round. Each 
effect can be renewed or repeated the following 
round, or a different effect can be selected. If 
during any round the caster's concentration is 
interrupted, the spell lapses. 

The material component is the priest's holy 
symbol, which is not consumed in the casting. 

Notes: Granted by the lesser god Shaundakul 
of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Gembomb — Gnome 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
Sphere: Combat 


Level: 3 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 6 

Duration: 1 tum 

Area of Effect: 1 gem per 5 levels 
Saving Throw: v 


This spell converts up to one gem per five 
caster levels into a grenade-like missile that can be 


298 


Ghost Knight 


N 


lobbed by the caster at an enemy target. The caster 
must hold the gems in his or her hand when the 
spell is cast. Gems enchanted by gembomb can be 
thrown only by hand (range 10/20/30). Misses use 
the grenade-like missile table in the DMG to deter- 
mine the point of impact. 

A gembomb explodes in a rainbow-colored 
shower of magical energy when it is thrown to 
impact a hard surface. It will not explode if 
dropped or if held temporarily in a pouch. On a 
direct hit a gembomb inflicts 1d6 points of damage 
per 50 gp value of the gem, to a maximum of 3d6 
points of damage. Creatures not struck directly, 
but within 10 feet of the impact, take 1d3 points of 
damage per 50 gp value of the gem, to a maximum 
of 3d3 points of damage. Those who suffer 
damage from the gembomb are allowed a saving 
throw vs. spell for half damage. 

Only one enchanted gem can be thrown per 
round. The caster cannot have more than one gem- 
bomb spell active at a time. Gems that have not 
been thrown when the spell expires disappear; all 
gems that explode are destroyed. The spell does 
not function upon artifacts. 

The material components of this spell are one 
or more gems worth at least 50 gp. 

Notes: Granted by the gnome god Garl Glitter- 
gold. 


Genius 
(Divination) 
Sphere: Thought 


Level: 4 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 5 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: Caster 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell is similar to the 2nd-level idea spell, 
except that the priest's player can ask the DM one 
question about any event occurring at the moment. 
‘The question must be somehow related to evalua- 
tion of the current situation, such as “What are 
these monsters?” Speculation about the future 
such as “What’s on the other side of the door?” 
will fail. This spell can be cast only once in any 
12-hour period. Subsequent attempts to cast the 
spell result in no answer, 

Usually. the answer is a single word or a short 
phrase of no more than five words. The answer is 
relevant and correct, although not necessarily 
complete, and should not be unbalancing to the sit- 
uation. The answer might be cryptic or in the form 


of a riddle or rhyme, depending on the DM's 
assessment of the situation. 
The material component is a gem of at least 50 


gp value. 
Notes: Common for priests with major access 
to the sphere of Thought (ToM). 
Geyser 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Elemental Water 
Level: 5 
Range: 120 yds. 


Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 tum 
Duration: | rd. 
Area of Effect 
Saving Throw: 


0X20 ft. to 45X90 ft. 


h 


This spell causes a geyser to erupt from the 
ground, shooting scalding steam and water high 
into the air. The geyser shoots up to a height of 20 
to 90 feet instantaneously (1d8+1 x 10 feet), and 
continues to spout for 1 round. The area of effect 
is a function of the geyser’s height; the scalding 
water falls in a circular pattern around the point of 
eruption, with a diameter equal to one-half the 
geyser’s height. A creature hit by the geyser itself 
takes 3d12 points of damage from the scalding 
water, while creatures within the area of spray take 
1d12 points of damage (save vs. breath weapon for 
half). The geyser itself is 1 to 4 feet in diameter 
when it erupts. 

Notes: Very rare for druids. (Updated from 
Dracon? Magazine.) 


Ghost Knight 
(Conjuration/Summoning, IIlusion/Phantasm) 
Sphere: Summoning 


Level: 4 

Range: 30 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 7 
Duration: 2 rds./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell brings into being the silent, floating 
apparition of a fully armored human. The features 
of this knight are completely concealed by its 
closed helm. Its body armor is an omate coat-of- 
plates. A ghost knight can't speak or unleash magic, 
but it can move about and gesture as its caster wills 
it, and it can carry a single nonliving item (such as 
a sword, a scroll, a rope, or the like). The carried 


EP ANS 


Ghost Pipes 


item can bear an enchantment and can be something 
harmful that can be dropped on foes from above or 
activated from afar by the caster or another being. 

A ghost knight always walks about (at MV 12), 
but it can walk on empty air at any visible altitude 
or in the ground or in walls so that only a part of it 
appears above or outside the surface. A carried 
item can’t pass into or through such things, and is 
left behind if the caster directs the knight to enter 
or pass through solid objects. 

The caster must be able to see the ghost knight 
in order to direct it at least once during each round 
of its existence or it simply stops until visual con- 
tact is reacquired. A ghost knight has no corporeal 
existence. It carries things by means of magical 
force. It cannot snatch things, stop someone from 
taking what it is carrying, or be struck or harmed 
in any way. Contact with a dispel magic spell and 
certain magical barriers, instantly destroys a ghost 
knight, causing it to wink out.) 

‘A ghost knight can launch apparent attacks 
(with illusory weapons). These cause a momen- 
tary chilling sensation in any living creatures 
struck by the knight—such attacks inflict no 
damage. The ghost knight can carry a real 
weapon just as it might any other object, but can 
wield it in battle only by dropping it from above 


(attempts to do this use the caster's THACO with 
a -3 penalty). 

The priest casting this spell can elect to make 
more than one ghost knight appear. One for each level 
of the caster above Sth can be created, to a maximum 
of 20 knights. Each ghost knight can carry one item, 
and their movement can be coordinated: one knight 
can pass its item to another (who is empty-handed), 
and separate items can be held so as to work together 
(shields overlapping to form a wall, for example). 

A ghost knight can counterfeit the gestures of 
spelicasting or aim a real magical item, but it 
cannot cast spells, pass on magical effects by its 
touch, or otherwise interact with unleashed magic. 

The material component is a piece of metal 
armor of any size. This can be fragmentary, rusted, 
or damaged, but must have been worm into a battle 
in which at least one being died. 

Notes: Granted by the god Kelemvor, Judge of 
the Damned, of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Ghost Pipes 
(Alteration, Musion/Phantasm) 
Sphere: Charm 


Level: 2 
Range: Touch 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: Permanent 

Area of Effect: 10-ft./level radius 
Saving Throw: None 


When this spell is cast, the caster can cause any 
one nonmagical musical instrument to play itself. 
The instrument must be whole and in playing con- 
dition. It need not be an instrument that the caster 
can play, but he or she must be able to softly whis- 
tle or hum the desired tune. This tune can be no 
more than one minute long. 

Upon releasing the instrument, it glows as if 
limned with faerie fire and levitates at the level it 
was released. The various parts of the instrument 
(keys, valves, strings, and so on) move under the 
control of the magic. Upon reaching the end of the 
song, the instrument repeats the tune over and over 
until stopped. 

The ghost pipes stop playing when any living 
creature touches the instrument. The radiance 
fades and the instrument slowly settles to the 
ground. 

Notes: Granted by Finder Wyvernspur of the 
FORGOTTEN REALMs setting. (Some sources list 
this as a 3rd-level spell—it is 2nd level.) 


Giant Spider — Drow 


N 


Giant Insect 
(Alteration) 


Range: 20 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 7 

Duration: 2 rds./level 

Area of Effect: 1 to 6 insects 
Saving Throw: None 


By means of this spell, the priest can tum one or 
more normal-sized insects into larger forms resem- 
bling the giant insects described in the Monstrous 
Manvat™ tome. Only one type of insect can be 
altered at one time (that is, a single casting cannot 
affect both an ant and a fly), and all insects affected 
must be grown to the same size. The number of 
insects and the size to which they can be grown 
depend upon the priest’s level (see table). 


Priest’s Insect Maximum 
Level Hit Dice Total HD 
7-9 3 9 

10-12 4 12 

13+ 6 15 


For example, an 8th-level priest can grow three 
insects to 3 Hit Dice, four insects to 2 Hit Dice, or 
nine insects to | Hit Die. Insects of 3 Hit Dice or 
more can carry a rider of human size (assume that 
such can carry 80 pounds per Hit Die). 


If the casting is interrupted for any reason, or 
if the insects are currently subject to any other 
magical effect (including this one), the insects 
die and the spell is ruined. The DM decides how 
many normal insects of what type are available; 
this is often a greater limitation on the spell than 
the limits above. 

If the insect created by this spell matches an 
existing monster description, use the description. 
Otherwise, unless the DM creates a special 
description, the giant form has an Armor Class of 
between 8 and 4, one attack, and inflicts 1d4 
points of damage per Hit Die. 

For example, a 14th-level priest uses the 
giant insect spell to enlarge one beetle (all that is 
available) to 6 HD size. The DM decides the 
beetle has AC 5 and bites once per round for 6d4 
points of damage. 

The spell works only on actual insects. Arach- 
nids, crustaceans, and other types of small crea- 
tures are not affected. Any giant insects created 
by this spell do not attempt to harm the priest, but 
the priest’s control of such creatures is limited to 
simple commands (“attack, “defend,” “guard,” 
and so forth). Orders to attack a certain creature 
when it appears or to guard against a particular 
occurrence are too complex. Unless commanded 
to do otherwise, the giant insects attempt to 
attack whoever or whatever is near them. 

The reverse of the spell, shrink insect, reduces 
any giant insect to normal insect size. The 
number of Hit Dice affected by the priest is sub- 
tracted from the number of Hit Dice of the 
insects, and any insect reduced to 0 Hit Dice has 
been shrunk. Partial shrinking is ignored; an 
insect is either shrunk or unaffected. Thus, a 9th- 
level priest attacked by giant ants could shrink 
three warrior ants or four worker ants to normal 
insect size with no saving throw. This spell has no 
effect on intelligent insectlike creatures. 

The material component for both versions of 
the spell is the priest’s holy symbol. 

Notes: Common for druids (PHB). 


Giant Spider — Drow 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Animal 


Level: 3 

Range: 20 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 2 per arachnid 
Duration: 3 rds. + 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: 1 arachnid/level 
Saving Throw: None 


Je a a A + Ss N 


Giantsize — Halfling r 


This spell enables a priest to turn one or more 
normal-sized arachnids into giant spiders (see 
the “Spider” entry in the MONSTROUS MANUAL 
tome). Only arachnids are changed; insects, 
crustaceans, and other similar small creatures are 
unaffected, 

Unlike normal giant spiders, the bite of the 
spiders created by this spell is not a fatal poison; 
instead, those failing the poison save are stunned 
(no attacks or deliberate activities) for one round, 
and slowed for the rest of the spell duration. 

Even if a spider is normally poisonous, or the 
arachnid is a non-spider of some sort, the spell 
transforms it into a giant spider as described 
above. The giant spiders are unable to spin webs, 
but can readily navigate in existing webs (even 
the sticky strands of web or spellweb spells). 

If spellcasting is interrupted for any reason, 
or the spiders used already bear a magical 
dweomer (for example, they are other creatures 
polymorphed into spiders), the spell is ruined. 
They are freed from arachnid form by the 
attempt to use them in a giant spider spell, and 
the would-be caster is stunned (unable to think 
or act coherently) for 1 round. 

The material components are the priest's holy 
symbol and the arachnids to be transformed. 
‘They must be alive and relatively unharmed, and 
their numbers limit the number of giant spiders 
a high-level priest can create. 

Notes: Granted by the gods of the drow. 


Giantsize — Halfling 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Combat 


Level: 5 
Range: Touch 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 
Duration: 9 rds, + 1 rds./level above 9th 
Area of Effect: 1 halfling 

Saving Throw: None 


This spell makes a halfing grow to the size of 
hill giant and appear exactly like a hill giant; 
however, the halfling's Armor Class does not 
change. Everything the halfling wears and car- 
ries (equipment) grows proportionately, A short 
sword, for example, grows to the size of a bas- 
tard sword (which a giant can wield for full 
effect in one hand). The halfling is not disori- 
ented by the change and can function as if the 
body was of normal size. The halfling’s Strength 
becomes 19 for the duration of the spell. Only 
true seeing reveals the true race of the affected 


halfling. A caster using the spell personally can 
end it and return to normal size and form at will; 
otherwise, the spell lasts for the full duration. 
Notes: Granted by the halfling god Arvoreen 
the Defender. (Updated from DraGoN Magazine.) 


Gift of Speech 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
Sphere: Animal 


Level: 2 

Range: 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 5 
Duration; | turn/level 
Area of Effect: 1 animal 
Saving Throw: None 


The gift of speech spell grants a normal 
animal (or a giant version of a normal animal) the 
ability to speak any one of the languages the 
caster knows, whichever the caster chooses, 
along with the ability to understand words and 
simple concepts expressed in that language. The 
affected animal's reactions do not change, nor 
does its Intelligence increase. The spell has no 
effect if cast on a creature with an Intelligence 
score of less than 1. 

‘The material component is the priest's holy 
symbol. 

Notes: Common for druids; otherwise, rare. 


Glass Storm 
(Evocation, Summoning) 
Sphere: Elemental Earth or Silt 
Range: 0 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: | turn 
Duration: | rd./level 
Area of Effect: 30 ft. radius 
Saving Throw: None 


This powerful version of the glass spray spell 
not only lifts and separates tiny crystal shards 
from sand or silt, it creates a terrible wind to 
propel them. The particles whip about the 
storm's area leaving a circular 5-foot “eye” 
where the caster and companions can stand 
unharmed. 

Missile combat is impossible in the spell’s 
area of effect. Everyone inside the area is blinded 
and distracted. The storm is very rough on leather 
armor, flesh, and other soft targets. Any equip- 
ment composed of such material must make a 


302 


Glow 


N 


saving throw vs. normal fire or become useless. 
Living and undead creatures take 2d8 points of 
damage per round until they leave the path of the 
storm. A character escaping from the area is 
likely to be facing a randomly determined direc- 
tion upon emerging from the storm (the DM 
determines this). 

Notes: Uncommon for priests from the DARK 
Sun setting; otherwise, very rare. 


Gloom — Sahuagin 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Combat 


Level: 2 
Range: Touch 


Duration: 2 rds. +1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: 20-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: Special 


Gloom is essentially an underwater version of 
the obscurement spell, adapted for sahuagin 
preferences. The spell clouds the water in a 40- 
foot-diameter globe centered on the spell’s 
it, which can be a creature, object, or 
point in space. Unwilling creatures receive a 
saving throw vs. spell to negate the effect, Plac- 
ing the spell on a mobile creature or object cre- 
ates a mobile effect. 

Within the globe of cloudy water, visibility 
falls to 2d4 feet for most creatures. Sahuagin, 
however, can see twice as far (4d4 feet), All light 
sources—including magical sources such as con- 
tinual light—dim within the area of effect. A light 
source’s radius remains unaffected, but the light 
becomes highly diffused, equaling the brightness 
of a half moon. (A light or continual light spell 
cast on a creature's eyes, however, still blinds the 
creature if it fails its saving throw). Within the 
globe, all saving throws vs. light-based attacks 
receive a +2 bonus (this negates the sahuagin’s 
racial penalty against light attacks). If the attack 
does not allow a saving throw, creatures within 
the globe still resist the effect on a roll of 18 or 
higher on 1420; any magical saving throw adjust- 
ments still apply to the roll. Above water, this 
spell creates a cloud of acrid smoke. The spell’s 
duration halves above the surface (round frac- 
tions down), and even a slight breeze disperses it 
in a single round. 

Notes: Restricted to sahuagin; uncommon, 


Gloomcloud 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 
Sphere: Charm 


Level: 4 
Range: 10 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 
Duration: 2 rds. + 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: | creature 
Saving Throw: None 


Usually reserved as punishment for transgres- 
sions, this spell causes a drizzling gray cloud to 
form over the head of a single creature. The cloud 
appears 4 feet above the creature’s head and moves 
with it. The cloud is unaffected by wind or fire. The 
creature feels despair as if affected by the 4th-level 
wizard spell emotion unless it makes a successful 
saving throw vs. spell at a —2 penalty. No benefit 
can be gained from the gloomcloud’s drizzle; thirst 
is not quenched and fire is not put out by it. 

The enchantment can be canceled by dispel 
magic. However, the creature is too dispirited to 
cast dispel magic on itself. 

Those viewing the affected creature might also 
be affected by the dismal sight—causing them to 
laugh, take pity, or simply distrust the wet individ- 
ual (causing a -3 penalty to reaction rolls). 

‘The material component is a drop of dirty water. 

Notes: Very rare spell. (Updated from the 
POLYHEDRON" Newszine.) 


Glow 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Sun 


Level: 3 

Range: 30 yds. 
Components: V, M 
Casting Time: 5 
Duration: 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: | creature 
Saving Throw: Special 


‘The priest can cast this spell on any one crea- 
ture. If used personally by the priest, his or her 
eyes project cones of light up to 15 yards with a 4- 
foot diameter at the base, and a +2 bonus to 
Charisma is gained, 

Any other creature affected is caused to glow 
brightly, shedding radiance as a light spell in a 
100-foot radius for the duration of the spell (an 
unwilling creature is allowed a saving throw vs. 
spell to avoid the effect). 

The material component is a holy symbol. 


Fa ie eae eS ee ee eS 


Glowglory — Dwarf 


y 4 


Notes: Granted by the Pholtus of the Blinding 
Light of the GREYHAWK setting. 


Glowglory — Dwarf 
(Alteration, Invocation/Evocation) 
Sphere: Combat, Creation 


Level: 3 
Range: Touch 


Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: 1 glowstone or 1 sq. fi/level of 
normal stone 

Saving Throw: None 


‘This spell allows priests to unleash a beam of 
power from a glowstone or make normal stone 
(in a surface area of up to 1 square foot per level 
of the caster) radiate a continual light radiance, 
for 1 turn per level. If the priest desires, the radi- 
ance of normal stone can be accompanied by a 
gentle release of heat; that is, enough to warm 
chilled beings to prevent frostbite, death from 
exposure, and to ensure comfortable sleeping 
and activity in exposed or icy-cold conditions. 

When used on a glowstone touched by the 
caster, this magic unleashes a beam of power. A 
beam of power is a cutting beam of radiant force 
that rends stone, wood, and flesh alike. It is typ- 
ically used as a weapon or as a tool to quarry 
stone or open passages in solid rock. 

A beam of power inflicts as much damage to 
wood or stone objects as a heavy catapult hit. It 
deals 6d6 points of damage per contact to living 
things. In either case, a beam of power is men- 
tally aimed with the same THACO as if the 
priest were attacking directly. It lashes out to its 
furthest extent (30 feet) in a single round, and 
can be directed as a continuous stream or pulsed 
(interrupted and resumed). In either case, other 
spelicasting, death, or unconsciousness on the 
part of the caster ends the beam of power and 
the spell instantly. Beams of power can be 
tracked in any direction while cutting or to 
follow a moving target (at MV 15). A beam of 
power lasts for as long as the caster concen- 
trates, to a maximum duration of | round per 
level of the caster. 

The material component is a pinch of gold- 
or gem-dust, which is sprinkled on the glow- 
stone or surface to be affected. 

Notes: Granted by the dwarven god Martham- 
mor Duin. 


Glowstone 
A glowstone is a magical power source used 


clear, faceted, oval, as long as a man’s hand, and 
radiates light equal to a continual light spell. 

‘The stone can recharge magical items at the 
rate of one charge per tum. It can give an item 
with limited charges in a set time period (for 
‘example, a device usable twice per day) an addi- 
tional use after it has been exhausted, at the cost 
of 7 charges and five rounds of contact with the 
glowstone. Unleashing a beam of power uses 20 
charges per round. A fully drained glowstone 
fades silently and the stone crumbles to dust. 

A glowstone can be destroyed by disintegra- 
tion or by receiving a total of 66 or more points 
of damage in a single round. The latter method 
causes the stone to explode for 1d10 points of 
damage per charge remaining to all creatures 
witta 90 feet (ave va spell fer balers) 

A glowstone attaches itself to magical items. 
‘The effect is similar to magnetism, but it can be 
pulled free with some effort. While attached to a 
charged item, the stone will not only recharge it, 
but any charges used are drawn from the glow- 
stone instead of the item. 


“It is reputed that a creature holding two glowstones 
together and transferring their energy through its body 
will be purified of all poisons, diseases, parasitic infes- 
tations, and foreign materials embedded in its body. 


Glyph of Revealing 
(Alteration, Evocation) 
Sphere: Divination 


Level: 2 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: 1 hr./level 

Area of Effect: 120-ft.-diameter sphere 
Saving Throw: None 


To enact this magic, the priest draws a special 
glyph on any relatively horizontal surface (includ- 
ing a shield heid out horizontally or the instep of a 
boot) with a special ink. When the glyph of reveal- 
ing is complete, it glows and then vanishes, but it 
subsequently causes all dweomers within a 120- 
foot-diameter sphere of itself to glow with a clear 
white radiance the same brightness as faerie fire. 


LE Be a a ee NY 


The outlines of magically hidden inscriptions, 
invisible wizard marks, magically concealed secret 
pages, runes, glyphs, symbols, and the like within 
its area of effect are clearly shown so that they can 
be read or identified without being triggered. The 
glyph of revealing can be moved without damag- 
ing it once it is complete. 

The material component is an ink made of the 
juice of crushed eyebright, white chalk, and 
crushed quartz. 

Notes: Granted by the god Deneir, Lord of 
Glyphs, of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Glyph of Warding 
(Abjuration, Evocation) 
Sphere: Guardian 


Level: 3 

Range: Touch 
‘Components: V, $, M 
Casting Time: Special 
Duration: Until discharged 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: Special 


A glyph of warding is a powerful inscription 
magically drawn to prevent unauthorized or hostile 
creatures from passing, entering, or opening. It can 
be used to guard a small bridge, to ward an entry, 
or as a trap on a chest or box. 

The priest must set the conditions of the ward; 
typically any creature violating the warded area 
without speaking the name of the glyph is subject 
to the magic it stores. A successful saving throw 
vs. spell enables the creature to escape the effects 
of the glyph. Glyphs can be set according to 
physical characteristics, such as creature type. 
size, and weight. Glyphs can also be set with 
respect to good or evil, or to pass those of the 
caster’s religion. They cannot be set according to 
class, Hit Dice, or level. Multiple glyphs cannot 
be cast on the same area; although if a cabinet has 
three drawers, each can be separately warded. 

When the spell is cast, the priest weaves a trac- 
ery of faintly glowing lines around the warding 
sigil. For every five square feet of area to be pro- 
tected, one round is required to trace the warding 
lines of the glyph. The caster can affect an area 
equal to a square the sides of which are the same as 
his level, in feet. The glyph can be placed to con- 
form to any shape up to the limitations of the 
caster’s total square footage. Thus a 6th level caster 
could place a glyph on a 6-foot X 6-foot square, a 4- 
foot x 9-foot rectangle, a 2-foot X 18-foot band, or 
|-foot x 36-foot strip. When the spell is completed, 
the glyph and tracery become invisible. 


Glyph of Warding: Telaltha 


The priest traces the glyph with incense, which, 
if the area exceeds 50 square feet, must be sprinkled 
with powdered diamond (at least 2,000 gp worth). 

Typical glyphs shock for 1d4 points of electrical 
damage per level of the spellcaster, explode for a like 
amount of fire damage, paralyze, blind, deafen, and 
so forth. The DM may allow any harmful priest spell 
effect to be used as a glyph, provided the caster is of 
sufficient level to cast the spell. Successful saving 
throws either reduce effects by one-half or negate 
them, according to the glyph employed. Glyphs 
cannot be affected or bypassed by such means as 
physical or magical probing, though they can be dis- 
pelled by magic and foiled by high-level thieves 
using their find/remove traps skill, 

The DM might decide that the exact glyphs 
available to priests depend on their religion, and 
might make new glyphs available according to the 
research rules for spells. 

Notes: Common for clerics (PHB). 


Glyph of Warding: Telatha 
(Abjuration, Evocation) 
Sphere: Guardian 


Level: 3 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, $, M 

Casting Time: Special 

Duration: Permanent until discharged 
Area of Effect: Special 

Saving Throw: Special 


A glyph of warding is a powerful inscription 
magically drawn to prevent unauthorized or hostile 
creatures from passing, entering, or opening. The 
glyph of warding: Telatha, also known as “Mom- 
inglow,” is favored by priests and affiliated orders of 
the church of Lathander, who claim that the Mom- 
inglord taught it to them ages ago. Members of other 
faiths worshiping good-aligned deities can use it, 
however. The conditions, limitations, and material 
components for casting a glyph of warding: Telatha 
are the same as for a normal glyph of warding. 

When triggered, Telatha explodes with the 
intense brightness of the rising sun, automatically 
stunning the creature that triggered it for one round. 
‘The triggering creature is also permanently blinded 
unless it makes a successful saving throw vs. spell. If 
the saving throw is successful, the blindness lasts 
only 1d6 tums. (Creatures employing magical dark- 
ness at the time they trigger this glyph suffer only 1d4 
rounds of blindness, as darkness and the glyph negate 
each other—but the darkness must already be operat- 
ing. No known magic can trigger and unleash dark- 
ness quickly enough to withstand Telatha’s effects.) 


DS ae Se a a aN 


Goad of Misfortune 


lotes: Common for priests of Lathander; oth- 
', uncommon in the FORGOTTEN REALMS set- 
ae Barred to non-good priests. 


Goad of Misfortune 
(Invocation/Evocation) 
Sphere: Combat 


Level: 6 

Range: 0 or 5 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: 15 rds. 

Area of Effect: Creature struck or the first being to 
enter a 10-ft. x 10-ft. X 20-ft. area 

Saving Throw: ¥ or None 


This spell creates a hooked metal rod 4 feet in 
length, similar in appearance to an elephant goad, 
although it has no blade or sharp point. A goad of 
misfortune functions in all respects as an iron foot- 
man’s mace, except that it inflicts 4d4 points of 
damage per blow (save for half). 

It can be set aside to free the caster’s hands for 
doing other things (such as unrelated spellcasting), 
but vanishes instantly but if touched by a being other 
than the cater, it vanishes instantly unless the caster 
is also in direct contact with it. 


" ne ee ee 


When a goad of misfortune is specifically used to 
strike against any armor, weapon, or item (that is, if its 
wielder tries to harm the item and not its wearer or 
carrier, or if the item is successfully used to parry a 
goad attack), the item must make a successful item 
saving throw vs. crushing blow or be destroyed. 
Whenever the goad deals damage to a creature, its 
wielder is healed of 2 points of damage (but cannot 
gain extra hit points in this fashion, even temporarily). 

‘An attack that deals damage to a being also 
empowers the goad to dimension door itself and its 
wielder (as the wizard spell, but with a 90-yard max- 
imum distance and no recovery time necessary). 
This power vanishes if not used within 1 tum of the 
attack that enabled it. Successful multiple attacks 
can build up multiple dimension door trips to a max- 
imum of three, which the caster can use later or even 
in succession, so long as a full tum does not elapse 
between the strike and teleportation. 

When created, a goad of misfortune normally 
coalesces in the hand of its caster. The spell range 
refers to an alternative version of this spell in which 
the goad is rendered invisible and set above a spe- 
cific spot (typically a doorway or over a chair). It 
hangs in midair, waiting to strike any being except 
the caster who enters its 10-foot by 10-foot by 20- 
foot high area of activation. It attacks only once, 
striking with the caster’s THACO and dealing 4d4 
points of damage (no saving throw). This form of 
the goad has none of the additional powers pos- 
sessed by the caster-wielded form. 

‘The material component is an iron rod of at least 
the length of the caster’s arm and the thickness of a 
thumb. This rod must have been forged, shattered, 
and reformed. It is consumed in the casting. 

Notes: Granted by the evil goddess Beshaba, 
Maid of Misfortune, of the FORGOTTEN REALMS set- 
ting. This spell is found only in a few exceptionally 
rare tomes. 


Golem 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
Sphere: Guardian 


Level: 5 

Range: 10 ft. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 8 

Duration: Special (by type) 

Area of Effect: Activates 1 golem 
Saving Throw: None 


The golem activated by this spell must be man- 
shaped and approximately man-sized, although it 
can be as short as 3 feet or as tall as 7 feet. The 
priest must first personally construct the golem’s 


Good Weather 


N 


body, then place a prayer spell upon the construc- 
tion to prepare it. 

These magical constructs are collectively 
known as least golems. They have no minds, so 
spells such as charm, fear, hold, sleep, and the like 
have no effect on them. The construct has the 
saving throws of a priest of the creator's level. A 
least golem cannot speak, but can comprehend and 
carry out simple instructions involving no more 
than a dozen words. The material used and the 
level of the creator determines the type of golem. 

The golem can be destroyed in combat. A suc- 
cessful dispel magic spell cast directly against one 
will deactivate it. A damaged golem can be 
repaired by any spell that repairs or restores 
objects, at the rate of 1 hit point per spell level. 

At 9th or higher level, the priest can create a 
straw golem. 

At Lith or higher level, the priest can create a 
rope golem. 

At 13th or higher level, the priest can create a 
leather golem. 

At 15th or higher level, the priest can create a 
wood golem. 

A permanency spell used in the creation 
process makes the golem immune to dispel magic. 
The golem remains active until it is destroyed. 

Notes: Very rare spell. 


Straw Golem: AC 10; MV 12; HD 2+4; hp 
20; #AT 2; Dmg 142/1d2; SD immune to pierc- 
ing weapons, half damage from blunt weapons; 
Ibs. Construction time 1 hour; Duration 1 hour 
per caster level. 


Rope Golem AC 8; MV 9; HD 346; hp 30; #AT 
1; Dmg 146 + strangulation (6 points per round 
after a hit until destroyed or caused to release its 
grip); SD immune to blunt weapons, half damage 
from piercing weapons. Carries 40 Ibs. Construc- 
tion time 3 hours; Duration 3 hours per caster level. 


Leather Golem: AC 6, MV 6; HD 4+8; hp 40; 
#AT 2; D 1d6/Id6; SD +1 or better magical 
‘weapons to hit, half damage from blunt weapons. 
Carries 50 Ibs. Construction time 9 hours; Dura- 
tion 6 hours per caster level. 


Wood Golem: AC 4; MV 3; HD 5+10; hp 50; 
#AT 1; D 3d4; SD +1 or better magical weapon 
to hit, immune to blunt and piercing weapons. 
Carries 60 Ibs. Construction time 27 hours; 
Duration 12 hours per caster level. 


Gond, Fist of 
See fist of Gond. 


Good Medicine 
Reversed form, see bad medicine. 


Good Weather 
(Alteration) 
Reversible 


Level: 5 
Range: Touch 


Sphere: Elemental Air, Elemental Water 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 8 


Duration: 1 hr./level 


Area of Effect: 10 ft/level radius around creature 
touched 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


With this spell, a priest can create an area of 
moderate weather. The area affected is a sphere 
centered on and mobile with the subject. It has a 
radius equal to 10 feet per level of the caster—the 
sphere does not extend beneath the ground. The 
temperature and level of wind are moderated 
toward a more comfortable level for the subject. 
‘Temperature is adjusted by as much as 20 degrees, 
and wind speed by as much as 10 miles per hour. 
Note that “comfort” is subjective, varying from 
race to race. For instance, what a thri-kreen finds 
tolerable is sweltering for a halfling. 


Preferred Preferred 
Race Temp (F) Wind (mph) 
Human 80 o 
Dwarf 85 0 
Ef 100 20 
Half-elf 90 20 
Half-giant 70 30 
Halfling 70 0 
Mul 85 0 
Thri-kreen 120 20 


For example, if the spell was cast on a human 
while the temperature outside the radius is 100 
degrees and the wind speed is 5 miles per hour, the 
good weather spell would adjust the temperature 
to 80 degrees and the wind speed to 0 within the 
area of effect. If the spell was cast on a thri-kreen, 
the temperature would be raised to 120 degrees 
and the wind speed to 15 miles per hour. 

Every creature within the sphere that is made 
more comfortable by the spell receives a +2 bonus 
to all morale rolls. They can extend their marching 
time by up to half the spell’s duration in hours 


307 


Goodberry 
Ne 


every day (provided the spell’s duration covers the 
entire length of the march). 

The material component is a piece of cloth 
from a casual garment. 

The reverse of this spell, bad weather, has 
exactly the opposite effect, moving the outside 
temperature and wind speed away from the com- 
fortable range. In the above example, the human's 
sphere has a 120-degree temperature and a 15 mph 
wind speed. Wind speeds above 20 miles per hour 
cut visibility by half. Creatures made less com- 
fortable receive a -2 penalty to all morale checks 
and have their marching speed cut to half for the 
duration of the spell. A successful saving throw vs. 
spell negates this effect. 

‘The material component is a bleached bone. 

Notes: Uncommon for priests from the DARK 
Sun setting. 


Goodberry 
(Alteration, Evocation) 
Reversible 
Sphere: Plant 


Level: 2 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: 1 day + 1 day/evel 
Area of Effect: 2d4 fresh berries 
Saving Throw: None 


Casting a goodberry spell upon a handful of 
freshly picked berries makes 2d4 of them magical. The 
caster (as well as any other caster of the same faith and 
of 3rd or higher level) can immediately discem which 
berries are affected. A detect magic spell discovers this 
also, Berries with the magic either enable a hungry 
creature of approximately man-size to eat one and be 
as well nourished as if a full normal meal were eaten, 
or else cure 1 point of physical damage from wounds 
or other similar causes, subject to a maximum of 8 
points of such curing in any 24-hour period. 

The reverse, badberry, causes 2d4 rotten berries 
to appear wholesome, but each actually delivers 1 
point of poison damage (no saving throw) if 
ingested. 

The material is the caster’s holy symbol passed 
over the freshly picked, edible berries to be 
enspelled (blueberries, blackberries, raspberries, 
currants, gooseberries, and so on). 

Notes: Common for druids (PHB). 


Gorm, Fire Eyes of 
See fire eyes of Gorm. 


Gorm, Sentry of 
See sentry of Gorm. 


Grace, Kelemvor’s 
See Kelemyor's grace. 


Grassdart 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Plant 


Level: 2 
Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: 1 tum 

Area of Effect: 1d6+1 blades of grass within 10 ft. 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell causes 1d6+1 blades of grass to become 
stiff and sharp. Taller varieties of grass, such as those 
found on savannahs, can be hurled as javelins for 1d6 
points of damage. Smaller grasses, such as those 
found in the forest, can be thrown as darts for 1d3 
points of damage. The grassdarts cannot be fired as 
arrows unless fletchings are added. If the blades are 
not plucked and hurled before the spell ends, they can 
damage (according to their size) any creature that falls 
on them. The grassdarts remain stiff for one tum. 

The spell requires suitable blades of grass. 

Notes: Very rare spell for druids. (Updated 
from POLYHEDRON Newszine.) 


Gravity Variation 
A 6th-level spell of the sphere of War. See appen- 
dix in Vol. 3. 


Great Circle* 
(Abjuration) 
Reversible 
Sphere: Creation 


Level: 6 

Range: 0 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 6 turns 
Duration: 1 rd. 

Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: Special 


The great circle is a powerful cooperative spell 
that can be used only by four or more priests, each 
casting the spell simultaneously. Because of the 
nature of this spell and its casting time, it is often 
used to cleanse grounds in preparation for the con- 
struction of a temple or sanctuary, 


ee ee a a ae a Ee NG 


Greater Creature of Darkness 


NÝ 


When casting the great circle, the priests stand in 
a circle of no more than 20-foot diameter. Each faces 
inward; when the spell is completed, each priest 
faces outward, directing the energy of the spell. 

When the casting is complete, the spell takes 
the form of a radiant halo of golden light 20 feet 
above the ground. This halo quickly expands in a 
shimmering wave. It can pass through objects, 
with small arcs of the halo disappearing momen- 
tarily and reappearing on the far side. As the halo 
moves, it generates a high-pitched hum that varies 
in pitch, almost like a chorus. The halo moves 
slowly at first, but builds speed, reaching its max- 
imum range at the end of one round. 

The halo is pure energy tapped from the Posi- 
tive Material plane. It causes harm to undead and 
evil beings within the area of effect. Undead crea- 
tures of 8 or fewer Hit Dice are instantly destroyed 
and are not allowed a saving throw to avoid the 
effect. More powerful undead suffer 1d8 points of 
damage per caster. A successful saving throw vs. 
death magic reduces this damage to half. Creatures 
of evil alignment suffer 146 points of damage per 
caster (a saving throw is allowed for half-damage). 

The radius of the golden halo is dependent on the 
number of priests casting the spell. Each priest adds 
60 feet to the radius, Thus, four priests could gener- 
ate a halo that extends 240 feet in all directions from 
the circle of priests. Theoretically, there is no limit to 
the number of priests who can contribute to this spell, 
but the need for the priests to be within a 20-foot 
diameter circle sets a practical limit of 20 casters, 

The reverse of this spell, the black circle, cre- 
ates a ring of shimmering black energy. Paladins 
and priests of good alignment suffer 1d10 points 
of damage per priest in the circle. All other good 
creatures suffer 1d4 points of damage per caster. 
Affected creatures are allowed a saving throw vs. 
death magic to reduce the damage to one-half. 

Notes: Uncommon spell for clerics (ToM). 


Greater Creature of Darkness 
(Alteration, Ilusion/Phantasm) 
Sphere: Sun 


Level: 6 

Range: 10 yds//level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 9 
Duration: | rd./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell creates a mobile, bipedal, upright 
“shadow person” that resembles a human in form. 
It floats, “walking” about at MV 12 without actu- 


ally touching surfaces, and can be controlled by 
the caster from afar (to the limits of the spell's 
range), going where the caster cannot or dare not 
go. Observers cannot see through the smokelike 
body of this construct, and it quenches magical 
fight and continual light on contact without being 
itself affected. 

A greater creature of darkness can achieve 
semi-solidity and can carry items of not more than 
20 pounds weight. Thus, it can deliver items, wield 
magical items or regular weapons in combat, and 
even deliver the touch-discharged spells cast by its 
caster as if its hands were the caster’s own. (All 
these activities are at the caster’s THACO, but with 
a —3 penalty to attack rolls.) The construct is not 
sentient, but is controlled by the will of the caster, 
who can dimly see through illusory eyes that the 
shadow person does not, in fact, possess. (The 
caster cannot hear, smell, taste, or feel textures 
through the shadow person.) 

Gaze attacks (such as the petrifying glare of a 
basilisk) cannot harm the caster through the 
shadow eyes, but the caster in tum cannot see 
through the construct well enough to read, see 
expressions, or even to recognize friends by their 
features—although gestures can be discerned. The 
shadow person can open doors (so long as doing so 
does not require pushing more than 20 pounds of 
dead weight), unlock things, point at objects or 
give directions, and conceal the identity of beings 
by enveloping them. 

If the caster wishes to harm a living being that 
physically moves into a greater creature of dark- 
ness, the caster can make the “shadow person” hit 
once per round with any one weapon or magical 
item it carries, or launch a touch-delivered spell 
attack through the construct for full possible 
damage. A creature can freely enter or leave a 
greater creature of darkness effect, though the 
effect moves with them if its caster desires. The 
“shadow person” is not dispelled by the entry and 
exit of other beings. Those entering the shadow 
can see through it as if its gloom did not exist. Fur- 
ther, they are cloaked by it—to a limit of four 
small-sized (or smaller) creatures, two man-sized 
creatures, or one larger than man-sized creature. 
The darkness expands to cover their bodies and 
conceal their identities (even several beings at 
once, although if they move more than 20 feet 
apart, the construct stays with only one of them). 

A caster wearing his or her own greater crea- 
ture of darkness receives the following benefits: 
concealment of identity, immunity to blinding or 
hypnotic lights (including magical effects) and all 
illusions (including attacks such as shadow mon- 
sters). It has two additional powers, but the caster 


Greater Guardian Seal = 


exhausts the spell by calling on either of them. It 
can act as a feather fall or it can allow the caster to 
levitate for up to four consecutive rounds, 

The material components are a strand of spi- 
derweb, a pinch of soot or pitch, a piece of shell, 
beak, or bone that has been dyed black or black- 
ened in a fire, and a black feather, scale, clump of 
fur, or piece of skin from any flying creature. 

Rumors persist that those who know a secret 
variant of this spell can use one additional power 
of a greater creature of darkness. If it touches a 
foe they wish to harm, they can sacrifice some of 
their own hit points, and instantly deal their oppo- 
nent double that number of points of damage as a 
flesh-eating, corrosive attack (no saving throw). 

Notes: Granted by the Shar, Mistress of the 
Night, evil goddess of the FORGOTTEN REALMS set- 
ting. This spell is found only in a few exception- 
ally rare tomes. 


Greater Guardian Seal 
(Invocation/Evocation) 
Sphere: Guardian 


Level: 6 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, M 
Casting Time: 9 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 closure 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell allows the caster to magically seal a 
door, window, box, or similar closure against a 
broad class of creature (lycanthropes, undead, 
faeries, giants, and so on), Affected creatures 
cannot pass the seal, nor are their physical or mag- 
ical abilities, immunities, or resistances effective 
against it or the material of the closure. A creature 
of the affected type whose level or Hit Dice 


exceeds the caster’s by four or more can shatter the 
seal. 
Nonaffected creatures can eliminate the seal by 
physically destroying the door, box lid, and so on. 
The warding magic inflicts one-quarter damage 
(round down) caused to the closure back upon the 
creature trying to break through. A successful 
dispel magic spell removes the seal. 

‘The seal lasts until the portal is opened, unless 
made permanent by the permanency spell. 

Notes: Very rare spell. (Updated from DRAGON 
Magazine.) 


Greater Mantle of Mystra 
(Abjuration) 
Sphere: Protection 


Level: 6 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 9 

Duration: | tumn/level 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell creates an invisible magical aura 
around its recipient (who must be willing or at 
least unaware; the spell fails instantly if cast on 
hostile, unwilling creatures). When a specific spell 
or magical item discharge (such as fireball, but not 
all fiery spells) impinges on any part of this aura, 
the mantle instantly absorbs it, negating all of its 
effects, and presents the mantle-wearer with a 
threefold choice: use the spell energy for healing 
(on the caster or another touched being), convert it 
to another predetermined specific spell and hurl it 
back at the source of the first magic, or transform 
it to a predetermined specific spell and cast it at 
another target. If the mantie-wearer is not the 
caster, the caster can elect when bestowing the 
spell to force the magic to always make one of 
those choices or to leave each decision up to the 
mantle-wearer. (The free choice cannot be 
restricted to two of the three options, nor can the 
predetermined spell be left unselected.) 

If an incoming spell is used for healing, only 
Jost hit points can be replaced. The mantle heals 2 
hit points per level of spell absorbed. Furthermore, 
the hit points gained cannot be split between the 
mantle-wearer and another touched recipient— 
one or the other gains the full benefit. 

A given being can enjoy the protection of only 
one greater mantle of Mystra at a time, and cannot 
be protected by both a mantle and a greater mantle 
at once, Neither sort of mantle will survive contact 
with a dispel magic effect. 


310 


Greater Vision — Savant 


A 


The spell sent forth behaves as if it was launched 
by acaster of the same level, alignment, and abilities 
as the caster of the first magic. Its launching, how- 
ever, depends on the vision and abilities of the 
mantle-wearer, not the source of the original attack- 
ing magic (for instance, if an incoming chain light- 
ning attack is converted to a flame strike and hurled 
at a third party, the mantle-wearer must be able to 
see the chosen target for the flame strike). 

Both the specific spell to be defended against 
and the spell it is to be converted to must be 
chosen by the caster of the greater mantle of 
Mystra during its casting and cannot be altered 
thereafter. The magic defended against must be 
one the mantle-caster has cast, felt the effects of, 
or observed, and the specific name known, The 
mantle-caster must have at some prior time per- 
sonally cast the magic sent forth. The spell level of 
the magic sent forth cannot exceed the spell level 
of magic defended against (for instance, poly- 
morph other cannot be converted to flame strike). 

A greater mantle of Mystra defends against 
multiple attacks of the same sort of spell; it is not 
exhausted by one incoming spell. 

A variant of this spell, Azuth's alteration 
mantle (see that spell), can be selected by varying 
the wording of the casting. It protects against two 
specific spells, converting them into healing 
energy or both into one specific outbound spell. 
The restrictions on caster knowledge of the magics 
involved (noted above) remain unchanged, but the 
duration of the spell is only four rounds per level 
of the caster. 

Notes: Restricted to priests of Mystra, from the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. This spell is found 
only in a few exceptionally rare tomes. 


Greater Shield of Lathander 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 
Sphere: Guardian 


Level: 7 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: | rd. 

Area of Effect: 1 being 
Saving Throw: None 


The greater shield of Lathander protects a 
single creature from all damage—whether magical, 
physical, or psionic—the round after it is touched. 
The greater shield also suspends the functioning of 
any magical geas, quest, or other compulsions on 
the touched being including psionic controls and 
attacks. However, protected beings in or placed in 


311 


damage-taking situations during the round of pro- 
tection (pinned under water, leaping off cliffs, 
buried under rockslides or collapsing buildings, 
and so on) are not rendered immune to damage. 
‘The round after the spell expires, the creature suf- 
fers the full normal damage that the situation dic- 
tates. A being can use the round of grace provided 
by this spell to activate healing or escape magics. 

If the recipient is unwitting or unwilling and 
engaged in combat, a successful attack roll is 
required to touch that being. The creature must be 
touched within three rounds of the spell’s casting, 
or the spell is wasted and lost. 

Notes: Granted by Lathander the Morning 
Lord of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Greater Touchsickle 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Combat, Plant 


Level: 5 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 8 

Duration: 2 rds./level 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


By means of this spell, one of the caster’s 
hands temporarily becomes a wooden magical 
weapon. The extremity is able to strike any crea- 
ture that can be hit only by magical weapons. The 
extremity has a +2 attack bonus, and its slightest 
touch does slashing (type S) damage as a sickle 
+2: that is, 1d4+3 points of damage against man- 
sized or smaller creatures, 144+2 points of damage 
against larger than man-sized creatures. 

A druid can use the enchanted hand to harvest 
mistletoe as though it was a gold or silver sickle. 

Notes: Granted by Eldath, the Green Goddess 
of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Greater Vision — Savant 
(Divination) 
Sphere: Divination 


Level: 4 

Range: 0 

Components: V 

Casting Time: 1 turn 
Duration: 1 rd. 

Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


A savant-cleric presently striving against a threat 
to his or her church can attempt the casting of this 


Greed, Abbathor’s - 


spell once. If the individual behind the threat fails a 
saving throw vs. spell, the savant glimpses a momen- 
tary vision of the enemy—lich, demon, necromancer, 
paladin, and so on. An enemy who makes a success- 
ful saving throw vs. spell also glimpses a vision of 
the savant. At the DM’s discretion, this spell might be 
used on behalf of another individual not directly con- 
nected with the savant’s religion. 

Notes: Restricted to savant-clerics, common. 
(Updated from DraGoN Magazine.) 


Greed, Abbathor’s 
See Abbathor’s greed. 


Greenwood 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Plant 


Level: 3 
Range: 10 yds./level 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 6 

Duration: | turn/level 

Area of Effect: 9 cu. ft.+1 cu. ft/level 
Saving Throw: None 


By means of this spell, the caster can tem- 
porarily make dead and withered trees appear 
living, green, and healthy. The caster can affect 
one plant (or object made from one), or a mass of 
plant material up to 9 cubic feet plus 1 cubic foot 
per level of the caster. Dead or bare trees, shrubs, 
or vines can be cloaked in leaves. Sufficient 
foliage appears to afford concealment for the 
caster, but not enough for an entangle spell. 

Dry firewood becomes green enough that it 
does not light. If wood is already alight, the flames 
die down to a thick, choking smoke in a cloud that 
lasts for one round per experience level of the 
caster. This cloud, which totally obscures vision 
beyond 2 feet, fills a volume 100 times that of the 
fire source, and covers a roughly spherical volume 
from ground level (it conforms to the shape of a 
confined area). A creature in the cloud must roll 
successful a saving throw vs. spell or suffer a -2 
penalty to its attack rolls and Armor Class. 

Dry, seasoned wood, such as a ship’s mast, can 
be made to bend and snap under a strain like green 
wood. Rotten wood, such as an old bridge or ruin, 
usually collapses or becomes unsafe to carry any 
future load. 

Damage to plants or wood suffered by being 
made “green” is permanent, but the wood other- 
wise reverts to its former state after the spell ends. 
In other words, if the greenwood spell is used to 
collapse an old bridge, the wood returns to its pre- 


vious condition when the spell ends, but the 
bridge is still collapsed. 
The material component is a leaf of holly. 
Notes: Granted by Eldath, the Green Goddess 
of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Ground Trace 
(Divination) 
Sphere: Divination 


Level: 4 

Range: 10 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 7 
Duration: 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell allows its caster to follow the direction 
and discem the extent of unseen buried roots, water- 
courses, tunnels, drains, pipes, passages, and even 
underground rooms—so long as some part of the fea- 
ture (or something connected to it, such as a swill-pit 
joined to a drain or a tree coupled to its roots) is vis- 
ible above the surface and can be seen directly by the 
caster before or during the casting of the ground trace 
spell. The trace ends when the feature passes below a 
mile underground or the spell expires. 

Only the uppermost layer of multilevel 
underground features is revealed by the magic. 
However, the caster is made aware of branching 
and side passages and can often guess at more 
than the spell reveals. (For instance, if a tunnel 
splits and one passage descends and then 
crosses under the other, that deeper passage 
could not be followed as it went under the 
uppermost passage, but it would be apparent 
again the moment it emerged on the other side.) 
Although general depth, direction, and size are 
apparent to a caster looking ahead, full knowl- 
edge can be gained only by someone standing 
directly on the earth above the feature (that is, 
the presence of water blocks the sight afforded 
by this spell). The extent of features that can be 
learned is therefore determined by the caster’s 
movement rate, freedom to move, the terrain, 
and the availability of marker stakes or some- 
thing similar—although this spell is most com- 
monly used to decide where to dig a shaft or 
intercepting passage. 

The material components are a hair from the 
caster’s body and a piece of string, cord, or 
thread. 

Notes: Granted by the nature deities Mielikki 
and Gwaeron Windstrom of the FORGOTTEN 
REALMS setting 


312 


Guardian Hammer — Dwarf 


NÝ 


Grounding* 
(Abjuration) 
Sphere: Wards 


Level: 5 

Range: 30 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: | turn 

Duration: | turn/level 

Area of Effect: 10-yd. square/priest 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell creates an area in which normal and 
magical electrical attacks may not function. Crea- 
tures and objects within this stationary area suffer 
no damage from normal electrical attacks (such as 
those caused by lightning bolts in a thunderstorm 
and nonmagical creatures such as electric eels). 
Magical electrical attacks (including lightning- 
bolt breath weapons) cause only half normal 
damage (save for one-quarter damage). Creatures 
and objects in the warded area also receive a +2 
bonus to saving throws against electrical attacks. 

‘The material components are the priest’s holy 
symbol and a coil of silver wire. 

Notes: Uncommon spell (ToM). 


Group Mind 
(Divination, Enchantment/Charm) 
Sphere: Thought 


Level: 6 
Range: 0 

Components: V, $ 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: | tum + 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: 30-yd.-diameter circle 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell is a deeper and more extensive ver- 
sion of rapport, in that it lets the priest communi- 
cate silently and instantly with several willing 
subjects. The number of subjects (in addition to 
the priest) depends on the caster’s level. 


Number of 

Level Participants 
12-13 2 
14-16 4 
17 6 
18 7 
19+ 8 


As with rapport, the spell lets the participants 
share thoughts, emotions, and memories. Each 
participant sees, hears, and otherwise senses 


everything experienced by the other, although such 
vicarious experiences feel weak and cannot be 
mistaken for direct sensations. Participants can 
shut off these experiences at will if they find them 
confusing or distracting. 

The participants can share such personal con- 
cepts as plans, hopes, and fears, although they 
cannot communicate complex or detailed informa- 
tion. It is impossible to communicate the proce- 
dure for casting a spell or picking a lock. 

Communication through group mind is approx- 
imately 30 times faster than verbal communica- 
tion. The priest can maintain only one group mind 
spell at any time; thus, he cannot communicate 
with multiple groups. 

This spell cannot be used on unwilling sub- 
jects. 

Notes: Common for priests with major access 
to the sphere of Thought. 


Guardian Hammer — Dwarf 
(Invocation) 
Sphere: Guardian 


Level: 4 
Range: Touch (area to be guarded) 
Components: V, S, M 


This spell creates a guardian hammer: an invis- 
ible, hammer-shaped field of force activated when 
a guarded door or other area is disturbed. 

When activated, it charges through the air to 
strike the nearest living thing to the disturbed area or 
any being in the area (if there is more than one, 
determine the target randomly). A guardian hammer 
strikes only once, but does not miss. When it hits, it 
appears momentarily as a glowing, translucent 
hammer and then fades away into nothingness. Its 
strike does 4d12 damage, and stuns the struck crea- 
ture for 1d4+1 rounds (no voluntary actions possi- 
ble). Struck beings must make a successful Strength 
check to avoid being knocked down, forcing possi- 
ble item saving throws vs. crushing blow for fragile 
carried items. 

A guardian hammer spell can be destroyed 


area without entering it (for example, by disintegra- 
tion). The latter method destroys all guardian 
hammer spells attached to an area; the former 
method destroys only one guardian hammer per 
dispel magic, if multiple spells exist. Once activated, 


313 


Guardian Mantle — Dwarf 


a guardian hammer can dodge all magical and phys- 
ical barriers, by way of the Ethereal Plane (phasing 
in and out) if necessary. It cannot be destroyed or 
diverted to another target by such means. 

The material components for this spell are a 
drop of sweat or spittle or a tear from the caster, a 
hair from a dwarven stone mason, and a pebble or 
lump of ice. 

Notes: Granted by the dwarven god Berronar 
‘Truesilver. 


Guardian Mantle — Dwarf 
(Abjuration, Invocation) 
Sphere: Protection 


Level: 7 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: 1 tum + 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


The guardian mantle spell creates a blanket of 
translucent bluish energy that encases the priest's 
body and provides protection from melee and mis- 
sile attacks. Those attempting to so attack the 
priest must make a successful saving throw vs. 
spell at a —4 penalty or the mantle foils the attack. 
The bonus of a magical weapon used against the 
caster is added to the saving throw. 

The caster need not concentrate to maintain the 
protection, and can cast spells or choose to ignore 
attackers. The mantle does not protect against 
spells or spell-like powers, and cannot be made 
permanent. While the mantle is in effect it sup- 
presses all the priest's protective magics for its 
duration except armor (including armor, shields, 
and helms). For example, neither bracers of 
defense nor an amulet of life protection will oper- 
ate while this spell is in effect, but leather armor 
+2 is not affected. 

The material components are the priest's holy 
symbol, a piece of blue velvet, and a gem of at 
least 500 gp value. 

Notes: Granted by the dwarven god Dugmaren 
Brightmantle 


Guidance 

Lost spell. Reputed to be a 2nd-level spell usable 
once per day that answered a general question 
concerning the future fortunes of an individual or 
small group. Believed castable once per day, with 
a prognostication range of about 24 hours, it was 
supposedly used only by divination specialists 
such as savants and oracles. 


314 


Gull — Gnome 


N 


Gull — Gnome 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
Sphere: Charm 


Level: 2 

Range: 30 yds. 
Components: V, M 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: | rd. + 1 rd/level 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


When this spell is cast, the priest's words 
become very persuasive to the subject, and that 
creature becomes very gullible. If the creature 
makes a successful saving throw vs. spell, this spell 
dissipates without effect. A creature failing the 
saving throw must make an Intelligence check each 
time the priest attempts to convince it of something 
somewhat plausible with no obvious facts counter- 
ing the priest's argument. A successful check 
means the creature is not convinced; a failed check 
means the creature gives credence to the priest's 
words if no obvious facts contradict them. 

For example, a priest who attempts to gull a 
guard outside a private club might be able to con- 
vince the guard that he is a member of the club, but 
has forgotten the password (assuming he is dressed 
appropriately), or convince the guard that his home 
was just burgled and that it would be okay for him 
to run home while the priest stands guard in his 
stead (assuming that the priest is wearing the outfit 
of a city watchman). However, the priest would 
have no luck convincing the guard that he is a par- 
ticular member of the club if the guard has already 
seen that member enter the club just moments 
before, nor would he have any luck convincing the 
guard that he was a member if only humans are 
permitted to join the club and the priest is obvi- 
ously a gnome. 

The material components of this spell are the 
priest's holy symbol and a pinch of sugar. 

Notes: Granted by the gnome god Baravar 
Cloakshadow. 


315 


Haela’s Battle Blessing — Dwarf 


Haela’s Battle Blessing — 
Dwarf a 

(Alteration) 

Sphere: Combat 


Level: 2 
Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 2 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: Special 


Haela's battle blessing increases the odds of 
the recipient striking when in battle with signifi- 
cantly more powerful foes. When used against 
foes of commensurate skill and similar defenses, 
this spell has little effect. 

Normally a roll of a 1 on an attack roll is a miss 
and a roll of a 20 on an attack roll is a hit. When 
used by the priestess on herself or an ally, the 
chances of an automatic hit are improved. When 
cast on an opponent, the chances of an automatic 
miss are increased. If cast by a priestess of 6th level 
or less, either a 19 or a 20 is always a hit or a 1 or 
a 2 is always a miss. If cast by a priestess of 7th 
level or greater, an 18 is also always a hit or a 3 is 
also always a miss. Only attack rolls are affected. 

An unwilling subject of this spell is allowed a 
saving throw vs. spell to avoid its effects. 

The spell requires the use of the priest’s holy 
symbol. 

Notes: Granted by the dwarven goddess Haela 
Brightaxe. 


Addition: If optional “critical hit” or “fumble” 
rules are used, this spell does not alter the chance 
of those results. 


Haelyn’s Wisdom 
Quest spell, see appendix in Vol. 3. 


Hailstone 
(Evocation) 
Sphere: Elemental Water 


Level: 2 

Range: 3 yds. + 1 yd./level 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: 1 creature or a 10 ft. cube 
Saving Throw: None 


ROA 
FE 


When a druid casts this spell, one large 
fe failstone or a swarm of smaller stones 
burst from his or her finger, traveling in a 
SAstraight line to the target creatures. The 
caster chooses which form the spell takes at the 
time of casting, 

A) Large Hailstone. The caster creates one 
hailstone. This automatically hits one creature in a 
straight line from the caster for 1d4+1 points of 
damage. The large hailstone fractures on impact 
with a hard object (shield, helmet, metallic armor, 
a wall), inflicting 1 point of damage on any crea- 
ture within 3 feet of the point of impact. The hail- 
stone does not fracture on impact with soft 
surfaces. For every two experience levels the 
caster achieves above 2nd, one additional hail- 
‘stone can be created (two at 4th, three at 6th, to a 
maximum of five at 10th level). These can be 
directed against different foes, provided all are at 
least partially within a 10-foot cube. 

B) Hailstorm. The caster creates a swarm of 
smaller hail stones. These strike all creatures in a 10- 
foot cube for 1 point of damage. Each affected crea- 
ture must also make a successful saving throw vs. 
spell or be temporarily stunned, losing its next action. 
At 6th level, the caster can affect a 20-foot cube, and 
at 10th level the area increases to a 30-foot cube. 

This spell is ineffective underwater and when 
exposed to high heat (for example, a wall of fire 
provides complete protection). Since most of the 
hailstone effect is impact, it affects creatures 
immune to cold, Fire-based creatures with special 
vulnerability to cold-based attacks suffer from 
their normal penalty. 

Notes: Very rare druid spell. (Updated from 
DraGoN Magazine.) 


Hallucinatory Forest 
(Illusion/Phantasm) 
Reversible 
Sphere: Plant 


Level: 4 

Range: 80 yds. 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 7 

Duration: Permanent 

Area of Effect: 40-ft. square/level 
Saving Throw: None 


When this spell is cast, a hallucinatory forest 
comes into existence. The illusionary forest appears 
to be perfectly natural and is indistinguishable from 
a real forest. Priests attuned to the woodlands—as 
well as such creatures as centaurs, dryads, green 
dragons, nymphs, satyrs, and treants—recognize 


316 


the forest for what it is. All other creatures believe it 
is there, and movement and order of march are 
affected accordingly. Touching the illusory growth 
neither affects the magic nor reveals its nature. The 
hallucinatory forest remains until it is magically 
dispelled by a reverse of the spell or by a dispel 
magic spell. The area shape is either roughly rec- 
tangular or square, in general, and at least 40 feet 
deep, in whatever location the caster desires. The 
forest can be of less than maximum area if the caster 
wishes. One of its edges can appear up to 80 yards 
away from the caster. 
Notes: Common for druids (PHB). 


Hamatree — Elf 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Plant 


Level: 5 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 24 hrs. 
Duration: Permanent 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell creates a permanent link between the 
caster and a very old oak tree (at least 100 years of 
age), much like the bond between a dryad (or 
hamadryad) and her tree. The casting of the spell 
invests a portion of the caster’s spirit within the 
tree and permanently bonds her life force with that 
of the tree. The link created by a hamatree spell 
can be severed only by a limited wish or wish. 

Once cast, the caster can literally step through 
any living, healthy tree and dimension door to the 
oak tree with which she is bound. Likewise, she 
can communicate with the tree (as if by speak with 
plants) whenever in physical contact with it. 

‘The caster can choose to transfer any damage 
she suffers to the great oak, up to the maximum of 
the number of hit points the caster had when she 
cast the spell. However, transferred fire damage 
inflicts double damage on the tree. The tree regen- 
erates damage at the rate of one week per point of 
damage, and this process can be hastened only by 
means of a plant growth or heal spell, cither of 
which speeds the recovery process to one day per 
point of damage. Depending upon the age and size 
of the oak, the tree might have between 7 and 12 
Hit Dice, as determined by the DM. 

The great drawback of this spell is that any 
damage inflicted on the oak with which the caster 
is bound is suffered equally by the caster, no 
matter where she may be. Upon the death of the 
caster, the tree dies immediately. Upon the death 


~ Hammer of Justice va 


of the oak, the caster must immediately make a 
successful system shock roll or die. 

The verbal and somatic components of this 
spell require the caster to spend the entire casting 
time in contact with the tree, while singing to 
awaken its slumbering spirit. This spell can be cast 
only once in the lifetime of the caster. 

Notes: Granted by the elven goddess Hanali 
Celanil. 


Hammer of Justice 
(Divination, Musion/Phantasm) 
Sphere: Divination 


Level: 5 

Range: 5 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 8 
Duration: 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This variation of the detect lie spell creates a 
glowing illusion of an upright war hammer. This is 
normally steel-gray in hue, but it blazes white 
when truth is spoken, black when a lie is told, and 
blood-red when true but deceiving phrases are 
uttered. It cannot be made to lie by any known 
means. By the power of Tyr, this spell indicates 
absolute truth, If a questioned being knows noth- 
ing of a matter, the hammer remains steel-gray. 

‘The illusory hammer appears wherever in range 
the caster desires, and thereafter moves to maintain 
the same distance from and orientation to the 
caster. The spell range indicates both how distant 
the hammer can be from the priest initially and how 
far from the hammer any questioned being can be 
for its truth-indicating ability to function. If some- 
one questioned is out of range, the hammer grows 
dim, but the spell does not end. The caster can ask 
questions of any number of beings one at a time, 
and the telltale hammer is bright and visible to all. 

The hammer cannot be made to disappear before 
the spell expires, even by its caster. The illusory 
hammer cannot be contacted or disturbed by any 
known magical or physical attack. Though magical 
barriers of 6th or greater level can ward it away from 
a given area, there is no known means of destroying 
it. Dispel magic has no effect on a hammer of justice. 
When the spell does end, the hammer goes dark and 
seems to fall before it fades away entirely. 

The material component is a miniature war 
hammer fashioned from diamond, obsidian, ivory, 
glass, or another pure, single-hued, black, white, 
or red, nonliving substance (cost varies with mate- 
rials, but average is 25 gp). 


Notes: Granted by Tyr the Just God of the 
ForGOTTEN REALMs setting. (Recent errata is 
incorporated.) 


Hand Fire 
See handfire. 


Hand of Borogar — Dwarf 
(Alteration, Conjuration/Summoning) 
Sphere: Elemental Earth 


Level: 6 
Range: 5 yds /level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 
Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: Creates 1 hand 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell causes a great hand of earth and 
stone to emerge from any earthen surface—floor, 
wall, or ceiling. Once created, the hand performs 
the bidding of the caster for the duration of the 
spell. The base of the hand is rooted to the spot 
chosen by the caster, and cannot move from that 
spot. The hand does, however, have a reach of 10 
feet in any direction. The hand possesses a 
Strength of 20, equal to that of a stone giant. The 
hand can be used to uproot a small tree, lift a 
boulder, or help support a structure threatening 
to collapse. 

In melee, the hand always attacks last because 
it is so slow. It can punch an opponent chosen by 
the caster, attacking once per round as a priest of 
the caster's level. The punch inflicts 2d8 points of 
damage. The hand is too slow and awkward to 
grab any object that has a faster movement rate 
than 3, but a hand grasping a living creature 
inflicts 2d6 points of constriction damage per 
round if the spellcaster so commands. 

The hand can hurl stones as a stone giant if 
boulders are within its reach. These can be hurled 
to a maximum range of 300 yards for 310 points 
of damage. 

‘The hand of Borogar has an Armor Class of 0 
and can sustain 50 points of damage before being 
destroyed. Edged weapons inflict only one-half 
damage upon it. Casting stone to flesh on it con- 
verts it to flesh, reducing its Armor Class to 5 and 
allowing edged weapons to inflict full damage. 
The hand of Borogar can be destroyed by casting 
a transmute rock to mud spell at its earthen base, 
by the attack of a water elemental, by precipitation 
equal in strength to a tropical storm, or by any 
other means that can turn the hand’s earthen base 
into muck and mire. 


318 


Hand of the Sorcerer-King 


N 


The material components for this spell are a 
pinch of earth and a finely crafted, miniature stone 
fist worth no less than 1,000 gp. 

Notes: Very rare spell, granted by gods of the 
dwarves. (Updated from DraGoN Magazine.) 


Hand of Fate 


(Conjuration/Summoning) 
Sphere: Protection 


Level: 4 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 1 

Duration: | hr. + 1 hr./level 
Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell is a special blessing from the 
priest's deity upon an individual or creature the 
priest believes threatened. When the creature 
would otherwise die, a translucent hand appears 
to save him. A blow that would strike down the 
recipient misses, an object falls to block a gout of 
dragon’s breath, and so on. The hand of fate inter- 
venes only after all attack rolls and saving throws 
are resolved, and death (not just incapacitation) 
must have been the outcome or the spell is not 
released. A creature can be affected by only one 
hand of fate at any given time. The maximum 
duration of the spell is one hour, plus one hour 
per level of the casting priest. 

Notes: Very rare spell. (Updated from POLYHE- 
DRON Newszine.) 


Castings of this spell are best granted only as 


Foes may have access to this spell, as well. 


Hand of Hoar 
(Abjuration) 
Sphere: Law 


Level: 4 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 7 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: Intelligent creature touched 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell (also known as divine justice) inflicts 
a fitting punishment for an act of cruelty upon a 
single living and intelligent subject of the spell. 
This cannot be ended by dispe! magic or other 
magical effects. It lasts until the hand of Hoar has 
struck or the subject is dead. 

Upon casting the spell, the priest of Hoar must 
touch the subject and then verbally accuse the crea- 
ture of some particular injustice committed that 
caused harm (DM's discretion) to some other crea- 
ture or to the spelicaster. If the subject fails a saving 
throw vs. spell, is actually guilty of committing the 
named injustice, and can understand the priest's 
accusation, then the spell takes effect. The priest 
has no way of knowing if the spell has actually 
taken effect (except to hypothesize if a fitting 
response occurs following the casting of the spell). 

‘The vengeance of the hand of Hoar is swift and 
harsh. For example, if an assassin kills the wrong 
target and is then subject to the effects of Hoar’s 
divine justice, it is likely the assassin will die 
while unintentionally foiling a rival assassin's 
attack on the original target. If a mage imprisons 
an innocent rival and is then subjected to the 
effects of the hand of Hoar, it is likely that mage’s 
next spellcasting attempt will take effect within the 
radius of a spontaneously appearing wild magic 
region. The resulting miscast spell might result in 
the mage being imprisoned. The effects of the 
hand of Hoar vary on a case-by-case basis. They 
are adjudicated by the DM, but should be suitably 
ironic—a punishment to fit the crime. 

The spell requires a small token once possessed 
by the subject and the priest's holy symbol. Nei- 
ther is consumed in the casting. 

Notes: Granted by Hoar the Doombringer of 
the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Hand of the Sorcerer-King 


(Summoning) 


Sphere: Cosmos 


Casting Time: 4 
Duration: 1 turn + 1 rd,/level 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


A templar who casts this spell is immediately 
protected from magical spells, The shimmering 
field diffuses magical energy, giving the templar a 
+2 bonus against all spells cast against him or her, 
be the caster defiler or preserver. Only templars 
can use this spell. 


319 


~ Hand of Torm 


Notes: Restricted to templars from the DARK 
SUN setting, for whom it is common. 


Hand of Torm 
(Evocation) 
Sphere: Protection 


Level: 4 
Range: 40 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 7 

Duration: 1 hr./level 

Area of Effect: 12-ft.-radius sphere 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell is an improved form of the wyvern 
watch magic. It was developed long ago by priests 
of Torm and is often used to defend sacred areas, 
such as the treasure chambers in the temple in 
Tantras. 

A hand of Torm creates a shimmering, translu- 
cent image of a gigantic gauntleted human hand 
that is cupped to define a spherical area. It is typi- 
cally used to guard that area against intrusion. Any 
sighted creature approaching the image readily 
sees it. Any creature bearing a symbol sacred to 
Torm can pass through the hand without effect. 
Any other creature that approaches the guarded 
area feels a warning prickling in the air, an almost 
electric tension. 

If the guarded area is entered, an intruder feels 
a solid force resisting its forward movement. The 
creature must make a successful saving throw vs. 
paralyzation at a -3 penalty to continue forward 
into the protected area, and a second successful 
saving throw vs. paralyzation at a -3 penalty to 
pass out of the guarded area at any other point 
except at the one entered, Failure of this check 
causes the creature to be paralyzed for one turn per 
level of the caster or until freed by the caster, 
whichever occurs first. 

Any creature without a holy symbol of Torm 
that attempts to pass an area guarded by a hand of 
Torm is also slowed, requiring 2 rounds to enter or 
exit. Regardless of the results of the saving throw 
vs. paralyzation, the intruder must also make a 
saving throw vs. spell for each of these rounds, 
Failure inflicts a crushing, constricting force that 
squeezes the intruder for 1d6 points of damage in 
that round. Observers see the image of the hand 
closing about the intruder, but this is a visual effect 
only; a hand of Torm can constrict and hamper the 
progress of more than one creature within its con- 
fines at any one time. 

‘Any number of creatures can be affected by a 
hand of Torm without dissipating or exhausting it 


until its duration expires normally. A successful 
dispel magic destroys it instantly. 

‘The material component is the priest's holy 
symbol. 

Notes: Granted by the war god Torm in the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Handcandle 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Elemental Fire 
Level: 3 
Range: 0 


Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 6 

Duration: 1 rd level 

Area of Effect: The caster’s hand 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell causes a flame to spring from the 
caster’s palm, The flame can be either a reddish 
tongue that burns and heats, or a whitish light that 
cannot ignite or harm anything. The caster can 
cause the flame to be one form or the other as often 
as desired, switching at the end of a round. Once 
created, the flame cannot move from the caster’s 
palm. 

As a burning flame, a handcandle can ignite 
flammable materials, cook food, or scorch beings 
touched by the caster for 1d4+1 points of damage 
(unlike the fire of a produce flame spell, it cannot 
be hurled). 

As a white light, handcandle can touch any- 
thing without igniting it. The intensity of its light 
can be controlled by the caster. (It isn't blinding or 
as bright as a lantern, but it can be made so dim as 
to be visible only from a few inches away.) The 
effect is ideal for reading in poor light, stealthily 
finding keyholes and the like in darkness, and so 
on. Many priests use it to impress the gullible by 
“swallowing fire” or giving their faces an eerie 
appearance by night, playing with the effects made 
possible by this light. 

A handcandle can be extinguished (ending 
the spell) instantly whenever its caster desires. 
In either form, it can withstand even gale force 
winds (including magical winds) without being 
extinguished. It does no harm to the caster; 
many priests who conjure one as a tent light fall 
asleep with it still shedding light for their com- 
panions. 

Notes: Granted by Oghma, Lord of Knowl- 
edge, in the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


320 


Handfire 


——— Se 4 


Handfang 
(Alteration, Necromancy) 
Sphere: Combat, Necromantic 


Level: 2 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: The caster’s palm 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell creates a fanged, biting mouth in the 
palm of the caster’s hand. It can be concealed read- 
ily by curling the hand into a fist or by placing the 
palm of the hand against something. Its bite is 
under the control of the caster; it does not auto- 
matically snap at anything it touches. The caster 
can only deliver the hand’s attack by slapping his 
or her palm against a subject, requiring a success- 
ful normal attack roll; it can bite once per round. 

The bite of a handfang inflicis 1 point of 
damage and forces the subject to make two saving 
throws, one vs. paralyzation and the next vs. spell. 
If the saving throw vs. paralyzation fails, the sub- 
ject is paralyzed for 1d3 rounds; if it succeeds, this 
effect is negated. If the saving throw vs. spell fails, 
the mouth’s saliva corrodes the subject, doing 3d4 
points of additional damage. If this saving throw 
succeeds, this damage is reduced to 1d6 points. 
These twin saving throws are made against every 
bite of a handfang; saving successfully against one 
attack does not mean that the subject is immune to 
these effects. Paralyzed creatures not actively pro- 
tected by compatriots or somehow moved beyond 
the reach of the spelicaster can be struck automat- 
ically if the spellcaster attacks them. 

Notes: Granted by Moander the Darkbringer of 
the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting, 


321 


Handfire 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Combat 


Level: 1 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: The caster's hand 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell causes one of the caster’s hands (or 
the end of a chosen limb) to be surrounded by tiny 
winking motes of light that resemble a cluster of 
constantly renewed sparks. These motes of magic 
are neither hot nor flammable and do not harm 
nonliving material. Their light is bright enough to 
read by if the writing is very near (within the 
length of the caster’s longest finger). 

Any living creature struck by the motes (success- 
ful attack roll required) takes 1d4+3 points of 
damage (no saving throw). Undead creatures touched 
by handfire suffer 2d4+4 points of damage. 

The handfire spell lasts for two attacks (regard- 
Jess of how long after casting they are delivered) or 
until willed to dissipate by the caster. The handfire 
can strike twice in the same round if the caster 
comes into contact with two different creatures 
(for example, when the foes punch or run into the 
priest, rather than the caster trying to strike them). 
The handfire effect cannot be conducted along 
weapons or tools; direct contact with some part of 
a creature's body is required. No known Faerdinian 
armor can stop handfire, although certain magical 
barriers do. 

The presence of active handfire does not pre- 
vent the casting of other spells or alter their 
effects. Discharge is automatic on contact with any 
living or undead being who is not the caster, so 
handfire can accidentally harm friendly creatures, 
or harm a thief or an attacker even when the caster 
is asleep, if the active limb is disturbed. (Some 
priests clutch a magical item with a handfire-active 
hand as they fall asleep to prevent theft.) 

Handfire that is willed out of existence sputters 
and fades in seconds, becoming harmless in an 
instant. If it has struck another being once, the 
caster can will it into his or her body, healing 1d4 
points of any current damage. A caster can men- 
tally choose the color of the handfire sparks (as a 
signal, for example), but cannot change this once 
the spell takes effect. 

Notes: Granted by Sune, Lady of Love, of the 
ForGorreN REALMS setting. This spell is found 
only in a few exceptionally rare tomes. 


~ Hard Water r 


Hard Water 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Elemental Water 


Level: 5 
Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: 1 tum + 1 rdlevel 
Area of Effect: 10 cu. ft./level 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell turns a body of water (or part of one) 
into a rock-hard substance. Magical, enchanted, 
holy, and unholy waters are not affected by this 
spell. The hard water retains its color and content; 
however, it is solid for the duration of the spell. 
The amount of water affected cannot exceed 10 
cubic feet (approximately 75 gallons) per level of 
the priest. 

Creatures embedded or partially embedded in 
the hard water, such as fish, insects, and humans, 
are not injured or killed, and they do not suffocate 
or drown. They are simply held until the spell has 
run its course, as are water weirds, water clemen- 
tals, or similar creatures composed of animate 
water. The spell can be negated before its duration 
expires by a successful dispel magic spell. The 
caster can also cancel the spell at will. 

The caster can reduce the depth to which the 
water becomes hard, to a minimum of 6 inches. 
For example, a priest casting hard water on a river 
can specify that only the surface of the water 
become hard, thereby making it possible to walk 
across. 

The material components of this spell are a 
flask of water and a stone. 

Notes: Uncommon for priests with major 
access to the sphere of Elemental Water in the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Harm 
Reversed form, heal. This form is used by evil 
priests. 


Harm Plants 
Reversed form, heal plants. 


Harm Trees 


Reversed form, heal trees. 


Harp of War 
(Alteration, Evocation) 
Sphere: Combat 


Level: 7 
Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: | turn or less 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell creates a five-stringed silver harp of 
glowing force in the caster’s hands. This weight- 
less instrument can hang in midair, allowing the 
caster to cast other spells or engage in other activ- 
ities. It can be banished a successful dispel magic 
spell, but only the caster can actually touch it, 
move it, or evoke its powers, which are awakened 
by plucking the harp strings. One string can be 
plucked per round, and each string holds only one 
power and works only once, vanishing when 
called upon. When the last string fades away. so 
too does the spectral harp. The caster is always 
aware of which string calls forth what power. The 
normal selection of powers includes those listed. 
© Shatter all nonmagical metal items within 20 
feet of the harp. 

Teleport all magical items within 40 feet of the 
harp to random locations in Faerûn (not accom- 
panied by anyone holding, carrying, or wield- 
ing them). 

Unleash a lightning bolt from the harp at a 
single chosen creature (9d6 points of damage, 
‘save vs. spell for half damage). 

Teleport without error any beings specifically 
chosen by the caster who are within 20 feet of 
the harp to a locale somewhere in Faertin 
chosen by the caster. (In other words, out of a 
group of struggling combatants, the caster 
could choose just his or her friends.) 

Call down a flame strike (a 5-foot-radius, 30-foot- 
high vertical column of roaring flame) on a single 
target creature within 70 feet of the harp (6d8 
points of damage, save vs. spell for half damage). 


There are ways of varying the incantation of 
harp of war to give a harp slightly different powers 
from the norm. Each temple has its own variations. 
(Player-created custom variants must be approved 
by the DM.) 

The most common variant of this spell is a harp 
that calls forth repulsion, wall of stone, wall of fire, 
and blade barrier spells, and instead of teleport 
summons three angry pegasi that fight for the 


322 


caster or provide transport for up to 7 turns. This 
version of the spell is used almost exclusively by 
faithful trained in Waterdeep and Athkatla. 

The material component is a thin strand of 
silver wire. 

Notes: Granted by Milil, Lord of Song, of the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Hasten Crops 
Athasian Dragon King magic, 8th level; psionic 
component renders the spell uncastable by priests. 


Hathor, Horns of 
See homs of Hathor. 


Haunted Visions 
(Divination, Enchantment/Charm) 
Sphere: Divination 


Level: 3 

Range: 30 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 6 
Duration: 2d4 + 2 rds. 
Area of Effect: 1 being 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell afflicts the recipient with the ability 
to see every possible consequence of every deci- 
sion it can make. The multitude of overlapping 
visions perceived by the subject are nearly inca- 
pacitating, since every possible action might result 
in disaster somewhere down the line. 

When this spell is first cast, the subject must 
succeed at a saving throw vs. spell to completely 
avoid its effects. If the saving throw is failed, then 
the haunted visions lasts for the complete duration 
and cannot be ended except with the use of a dispel 
magic incantation or similar magics. 

While experiencing overlapping haunted visions, 
the subject cannot move faster than one-quarter its 
normal walking movement rate, always loses initia- 
tive, and is always surprised in situations where a 
surprise roll is warranted. Spellcasting is impossible, 
and the subject can make a physical attack only if it 
makes a successful saving throw vs. spell. All such 
attacks have a —2 penalty. In addition, the affected 
subject has an Armor Class and saving throw penalty 
of -2 for the duration of the haunted visions. 

The material components for this spell are the 
priest's holy symbol and a puff of smoke. The latter is 
usually generated by a match or torch and is blown in 
the general direction of the subject during the casting. 

Notes: Granted by the divinational deity Savrath 
in the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


323 


Haunting Notes — Shaman 


Haunting Notes — Shaman 
(Divination) 
Sphere: Divination 


Level: 3 
Range: Special 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: | rd. 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


The spell conjures up a small, mindless spirit 
(% Hit Die) with no awareness of its own, which 
enters the body of the target creature and allows 
the shaman to locate it later. 

To cast this spell, the shaman must play a brief 
melody on a musical instrument (and must be pro- 
ficient in the use of such an instrument) while star- 
ing at and concentrating upon a single living 
creature within 15 yards. The creature receives a 
saving throw vs. paralyzation. If this is successful, 
the spirit returns to the spirit world and the crea- 
ture never knows anything was attempted. If the 
spirit successfully enters the creature, the creature 
suffers no ill effects, nor does it have any reason to 
suspect that it has been invaded. 

The caster can thereafter locate the subject any 
number of times. By playing the same tune again, 
the shaman gains an intuitive notion of where the 
creature is and what condition it is in. However, 
whenever the caster plays the melody to get a fix 
on the spirit, the notes of the tune can be heard as 
a ghostly echo by the creature, 

Devices and spells that prevent magical detec- 
tion and scrying do not prevent the shaman from 
locating the creature, due to the nature of the link. 
The spell does not extend beyond the Prime Mate- 
rial Plane, so creatures that have gone elsewhere 
cannot be located. 

Each shaman can keep track of only one crea- 
ture at a time with this spell. Recasting haunting 
notes on another creature severs contact with the 
previous subject. 

‘The spell requires an instrument upon which 
the tune is initially played (which is not destroyed 
by the casting). The other components are the 
sound made by the instrument and the movements 
required to play it. 

Notes: Restricted to shamans, uncommon. 


Heal 


Heal 
(Necromancy) 
Reversible 
Sphere: Healing 


Level: 6 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


The very potent heal spell enables the priest to 

wipe away disease and injury in the creature that 
receives the benefits of the spell. It completely 
cures all diseases, blindness, and deafness of the 
recipient and heals all points of damage suffered 
due to wounds or injury. It dispels a feeblemind 
spell. It cures those mental disorders caused by 
spells or injury to the brain. Naturally, the effects 
can be negated by later wounds, injuries, and dis- 
eases. 
‘The reverse, harm, infects the subject with a 
disease and causes loss of all but 1d4 hit points if 
a successful touch is inflicted. For creatures that 
are not affected by the heal (or harm) spell, see the 
cure light wounds spell. 

Notes: Common for clerics and druids (PHB). 


Heal Plants 
(Alteration) 
Reversible 
Sphere: Plant 


Level: 1 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: 10-ft./level square or 1 creature 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell heals natural, nonmonstrous living 
plants of up to man-size within the area of 
effect. All damage from fire, frost, cutting, tram- 
pling, parasites, mold, fungus, or disease is 
cured. The spell purges all parasites and disease 
so that they cause no further damage. The spell 
does not heal large trees, it does not restore 
growth that has actually been destroyed, nor 
does it counteract the effects of poor soil or lack 
of water. The spell affects plants growing in a 
square area of 10 feet per side per level of the 
caster (10X 10 feet at Ist level, 20X 20 feet at 
2nd level, and so on), 


3: 


A 


K 

h 

PM Ni ki 
PN ANY 


GMs: 


Alternatively, the druid can cast the spell and 
touch a single plantlike monster to heal it of 244 
points of damage. Touching such a creature—even 
green slime or yellow mold—to discharge the spell 
does the caster no harm. 

The material component for both forms is 
mistletoe. 

The reversed spell, harm plants, leaves affected 
vegetation wilted and unproductive for the remain- 
der of the growing season or causes 2d4 points of 
damage to a plantlike monster. 

Notes: Very rare spell for druids. (Updated 
from DRAGON Magazine.) 


Heal Spirit — Shaman 
(Necromancy) 
Sphere: Necromantic 


Level: 2 

Range: 10 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration; Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: 1 spirit 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell can be used to heal a spirit of any 
damage it has taken. It does not heal damage taken 


24 


Hear Heartbeat 


SS. 4 


by objects or people inhabited by the spirit. For 
each casting of the spell the spirit regains 2d6 hit 
points, up to its normal maximum. 

‘The material component is a small gourd of 
blood, or a poultice of healing herbs, which is 
poured out on the ground or scattered in the wind 
(as appropriate) when the spell is cast. 

Notes: Restricted to shamans, uncommon. 


Heal Trees 
(Alteration) 
Reversible 
Sphere: Plant 


Level: 4 

Range: Touch 

‘Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 7 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: 10 ft/level square or 1 creature 
Saving Throw: None 


‘This spell affects either one tree or other plant per 
level of the caster, or a single plantlike monster. It heals 
normal plants of all damage and disease, and functions 
as a combination cure disease and cure critical 
wounds (restoring 348+3 points of damage) for plant- 
like monsters. All plants to be affected must alive and, 
in the case of trees, standing, and all must be in an area 
up to 10 feet per caster level on a side. The spell does 
not counteract the effects of poor soil or lack of water. 

‘The material component is a few drops of sap 
from an oak or ash tree, 

The reversed spell, harm trees, infects normal 
trees with a deadly blight that kills in one week, or 
causes 3d8+3 points of damage to a single plant- 
like monster. The caster is not harmed by touching 
a plant to discharge this spell. 

Notes: Very rare spell for druids. (Updated 
from DRAGON Magazine.) 


Healing Hand 
(Necromancy) 
Sphere: Healing 


Level: 4 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 7 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell increases the benefit of one previously 
cast curative spell, adding an additional 3d4 points 
of benefit to any healing magic that heals damage 


cast within the preceding 24 hours. The caster of a 
healing hand can deliver it by touch to the previ- 
ously healed creature (who may be the caster). If 
that creature is elsewhere or unreachable, the caster 
can touch whoever cast the original healing magic, 
while that individual concentrates on visualizing the 
healed creature. If the caster is working through the 
original healer, that healer can override the caster’s 
choice and redirect the healing elsewhere. A healing 
hand can be cast to directly benefit its caster. Mul- 
tiple healing hand spells can only benefit the same 
being if a full 48 hours passes between spell appli- 
cations. This spell cannot revive a dead being. 

The material components of a healing hand 
spell are a scrap of skin and a sliver of bone. (Both 
components can be of any size and freshness, and 
from any type of creature.) 

Notes: Granted by Ilmater, the One Who 
Endures, of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Healing Rays 
(Necromancy) 
Reversible 
Sphere: Elemental, Sun 


Level: 4 

Range: 30 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: None 


A 


This spell causes a beam of healing sunlight to 
caress a creature, healing 1d8+2 points of damage. 

The material component is sunlight. 

The reverse, radiation, fires a beam of sunlight 
that inflicts Ld10 points of damage (save vs. spell 
for no damage). 

Notes: Common for Elemental Fire priests 
from the DARK SUN setting. 


Health Blessing 
Quest spell, see appendix in Vol. 3. 


Hear Heartbeat 
(Divination, Necromancy) 
Sphere: Divination, Necromantic 


Level: 2 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: | turn + 2 rds./level 
Area of Effect: 10 ft./level radius 
Saving Throw: None 


Pi ER ee nN, 


~ Heart Blight 


For the duration of this spell, a priest becomes 
completely deaf to all normal sounds and can 
hear only the noise of other creatures’ beating 
hearts. The heartbeat of each person, animal, or 
monster in the area of effect is clearly distinct 
and can convey information about the being’s 
proximity, direction, size, emotional distress, 
general health, and race or species. For instance, 
the heartbeat of a frail old wizard is much softer 
and weaker than that of an invisible ogre body- 
guard standing behind him. This spell can pro- 
vide quite confusing results if cast in the presence 
of numerous individuals (such as on a crowded 
city street) and is most effective when cast by a 
priest in relative seclusion. A priest never hears 
his or her own heartbeat with this spell. It is 
effectively masked out by the power of the hear 
heartbeats spell. 

Obviously, this spell is of little use in locating 
creatures without functioning hearts (such as 
plants or undead). The spell’s range is diminished 
if more than a 1-inch thickness of wood, stone, or 
metal lies between the caster and a subject. Each 
inch of a barrier’s thickness is treated as 10 feet 
of open space. 

The material component is beeswax mixed 
with a tiny drop of the priest's own blood (to 
block the sound of his or her own heartbeat). 
While casting the spell, the priest places the wax 
in his ears to blot out normal sound and trigger 
the magical effect. The priest remains completely 
oblivious to normal sounds (such as talking or 
music) while the spell is in effect. 

Notes: Common for necromancer-priests. 


Heart Blight 
(Necromancy) 
Sphere: Necromantic 


Level: 4 

Range: 10 ft./level 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 
Duration: Special (3 rds. maximum) 
Area of Effect: | living creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


With this spell, an evil necromancer-priest can 
exert his or her dark will on the still-beating heart 
of any living subject, provided the creature remains 
in clear view (line of sight) and within the spell’s 
range. After casting the spell, the priest must focus 
his or her entire concentration on the subject's heart 
for three rounds, during which time the caster 
cannot cast other spells or engage in melee. The 
priest can, however, walk, talk, and take ordinary 


defensive precautions while the spell runs its 
course through the subject. 

During the first round of the spell, thé subject 
must make a saving throw vs. death magic with a 
—2 penalty. This saving throw is modified by the 
subject's hit point adjustment due to Constitution 
(+1 bonus for 15 Con, +2 for 16 Con, and so on). 

If the subject makes this first saving throw, the 
spell fails to take hold of his or her heart and has 
no further effect. A subject who fails the save, 
however, suffers a massive spasm of pain (similar 
to a heart attack). This causes 18 points of damage 
and completely incapacitates the subject for one 
excruciating round. 

During the second round, the subject must 
make another saving throw, this time with a —1 
penalty (modified for Constitution). As before, a 
successful saving throw ends the spell with no fur- 
ther effect. Failure, however, intensifies the chest 
pains, as if a searing band of iron was being slowly 
tightened around the heart. The subject experi- 
ences severe dizziness, disorientation, and terrible 
shooting pains in the arms, jaw, and left shoulder. 

Meanwhile, the subject loses 25% of any 
remaining hit points, is paralyzed with pain for 
2-5 rounds, and immediately loses 2-5 points of 
Strength, Constitution, and Dexterity. Providing 
the subject survives the final stage of the spell (see 
below), these lost points are regained at a rate of 1 
point in each ability score per day. 

On the third round of the spell, the subject must 
make a (third, unmodified) saving throw vs. death 
magic or suffer a massive heart attack, resulting in 
immediate death (onset time is 1 round, during 
which the subject is completely incapacitated). 
Alternatively, a kind DM might decide that the 
final phase of the spell merely plunges the subject 
into a deep, deathlike coma, lasting 1—4 days and 
resulting in the permanent loss of 1 point of Con- 
stitution, 

This deadly spell can be thwarted in a number 
of ways, Successfully casting dispel magic on 
either the subject or the priest disrupts the heart 
blight, as does casting a simple protection from 
evil spell on the subject or wearing a scarab of pro- 
tection (from which it drains a charge). Further- 
more, the subject may be allowed to repeat a 
saving throw with a +2 bonus if treated by another 
character with the healing nonweapon proficiency. 
Finally, the spell is immediately broken if the sub- 
ject is transported out of range or removed from 
the priest's line of sight. Because of its murderous 
effect, this spell is only granted to wicked priests 
by the gods of Death, Disease, and Evil. 

Notes: Common for evil necromancer-priests. 


326 


Heat Exhaustion 


N 


Heart Call 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Necromantic 


oe de 
Range: 30 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: 1 individual of man-size or smaller 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell was developed by the sorcerer-king 
of Draj, and so far as is known only his templars 
make use of it. When this spell is cast, the tem- 
plar points a hand at the targeted individual, who 
must then save vs. death magic. Failure means 
the subject's heart is literally torn from his or her 
breast, ripping through any covering clothing or 
armor in the process. It flies toward the caster’s 
hand, where it can be grasped, and the subject 
dies instantly. A victim who makes a successful 
saving throw only takes damage equal to that of 
a cause serious wounds spell (2d8+1). Creatures 
larger than man-size are not affected by this 
spell. 

The material component is a dried-out chunk 
from the heart of a humanoid being. 

Notes: Very rare spell from the DARK SUN set- 
ting. (Updated from DraGoN Magazine.) 


Heart of Ice 
(Alteration, Necromancy) 
Sphere: Combat, Necromantic 


Level: 7 

Range: Touch 
‘Components: S 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: Permanent 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell requires intense concentration (hence 
the long casting time) and can be delivered only by 
touch, requiring a successful attack roll to deliver 
on any but totally immobilized opponents. Subjects 
tum black, are covered by a thin sheen of white 
frost, and instantly begin to shiver uncontrollably, 
making spelicasting, attacks, or any other activity 
except falling in a certain direction or shouting 
impossible. Subjects must make a successful 
saving throw vs. death magic or die, as their hearts 
freeze and shatter. Those who successfully save 
suffer 5d8 points of internal damage instead, but as 
a side-effect are also rendered immune to all cold 


damage for 1 tum per level of the caster of the 
heart of ice, Creatures normally able to exist in 
frigid conditions (including priests of Auril, white 
dragons, remorhaz, winter wolves, and creatures 
from the Para-Elemental Plane of Ice) are immune 
to this spell or suffer only 1d4+1 points damage 
from internal bruising. 

Notes: Granted by Auril, called Frostmaiden, 
of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Heartseeker 
(Enchantment) 
Sphere: Elemental Earth or Water 
= AA 
Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 15 minutes 
Duration: 6 hrs. 
Area of Effect: 1 item 
Saving Throw: Special 


This terrible spell is cast on a piercing weapon, 
a spear, or an arrow. When the point of the weapon 
penetrates flesh (causes damage), the wooden tip 
begins to sprout as if growing. The roots and 
branches seek out vital organs as a source of nutri- 
ents. If a saving throw vs. death magic isn’t made, 
the vines burst through the subject's vital organs, 
killing him or her instantly. If the saving throw is 
successful, the subject manages to pull the weapon 
out, but takes an additional 148 points of damage. 
This spell does not work on undead or creatures 
without internal organs. 

Notes: Common for Elemental Earth or Water 
priests from the DARK SUN setting. 


Heat Exhaustion 


(Summoning) 


Sphere: Elemental Fire, Sun 


Level: 3 

Range: 50 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 4 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: None 


A beam of light streaks from the caster’s finger 
and slams into the target creature’s forehead, 
instantly causing the brain to overheat. This causes 
momentary confusion and delirium, and until the 
creature is healed by any cure spell, all attack rolls, 
saving throws, and proficiency or ability checks 
are made at ~2 penalty. 


327 


~ Heat Metal = 


Cooling the subject dispels heat exhaustion; 
pouring a canteen of water or cool liquid over the 
creature’s head is also effective. Dispel magic 
removes the effect, and cure light wounds and sim- 
ilar healing spells relieve this condition. 

Notes: Common for Elemental Fire priests 
from the DARK SUN setting. 


Heat Metal 
(Alteration) 
Reversible 
Sphere: Elemental Fire 
Level: 2 
Range: 40 yds. 


Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 5 
Duration: 7 rds. 

Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: Special 


By means of the heat metal spell, the caster is 
able to make ferrous metal (iron, iron alloys, steel) 
extremely hot. Elven chain mail is not affected, 
and magical metal armor receives an item saving 
throw vs. magical fire to avoid being heated. 

On the first round of the spell, the metal merely 
becomes very warm and uncomfortable to touch 
(this is also the effect on the last melee round of 
the spell’s duration). During the second and sixth 
(next to the last) rounds, heat causes blisters and 
damage; in the third, fourth, and fifth rounds, the 
metal becomes searing hot, causing damage to 
exposed flesh, as shown on the table. 


Metal Damage 
Temperature per Round 
Very warm None 

Hot 1d4 points 
Searing* 2d4 points 


*On the final round of searing, the afflicted creature must 
roll a successful saving throw vs. spell or suffer one of 
the following disabilities: hand or foot—becomes unus- 
able for 2d4 days, body—becomes disabled for 1d4 
days, head—fall unconscious for 1d4 tums. This effect 
can be completely removed by the 6th-level priest spell 
heal or by normal rest. 


Materials such as wood, leather, or flammable 
cloth smolder and burn if exposed to searing hot 
metal. Such materials cause searing damage to 
exposed flesh on the next round. Fire resistance 
(spell, potion, or ring) or a protection from fire 
spell totally negates the effects of a heat metal 
spell, as does immersion in water or snow, or 


exposure to a cold or ice storm spell. This version 
of the spell does not function underwater. For 
every two experience levels of the caster, the metal 
of one man-sized creature can be affected (for 
example, arms and armor, or a single mass of 
metal equal to 50 pounds weight). Thus, a 3rd- 
level caster would affect one such creature, a 4th- 
or Sth-level caster two, and so on. 

‘The reverse of the spell, chill metal, counters a 
heat metal spell or else causes metal to act as given 
on the table. 


Metal Damage 
Temperature per Round 
cold none 

icy 142 hit points 
freezing* 1d4 hit points 


*On the final round of freezing, the afflicted creature 
must roll a successful saving throw vs. spell or suffer 
from the numbing effects of the cold. This causes the loss 
of all feeling in a hand (or hands, if the DM rules the 
saving throw was failed badly) for 1d4 days. During this 
time, the character's grip is extremely weak and he 
cannot use that hand for fighting or any other activity 
requiring a firm grasp, 


The chill metal spell is countered by a resist 
cold spell, or by any great heat—proximity to a 
blazing fire (not a mere torch), a magical flaming 
sword, a wall of fire spell, and so on. Under water, 
this version of the spell inflicts no damage, but ice 
immediately forms around the affected metal, 
exerting an upward buoyancy. 

Notes: Common for druids (PHB). 


Helm, Sentry of 
See sentry of Helm. 


Helping Hand 
(Evocation) 
Sphere: Travelers 


Level: 3 
Range: Special 
Components: V, $, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: 1 hr/level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


When a priest is trapped or otherwise endan- 
gered, this spell can summon help. The spell cre- 
ates a hovering, ghostly image of a hand about one 
foot high. The caster can command it to locate an 
individual or creature of the caster’s choice based 


328 


Heroes’ Feast 


N 


on a physical description. The caster can specify 
race, sex, and appearance, but not ambiguous fac- 
tors such as level, alignment, or class. 

After the hand receives its orders, it begins to 
search for the indicated creature, flying at a move- 
ment rate of 48. The hand can search within a 5- 
mile radius of the caster. 

If the hand is unable to locate the indicated 
creature, it returns to the caster (if the caster is still 
in the area of effect). The hand displays an out- 
stretched palm, indicating that no such creature 
could be found. The hand then disappears. 

If the hand locates the indicated creature, the 
hand beckons the creature to follow it. If the crea- 
ture follows, the hand points in the direction of the 
caster, leading the creature in the most direct, fea- 
sible route. The hand hovers 10 feet in front of the 
creature, moving before it. Once the hand leads the 
creature to the caster, it disappears. 

‘The subject is not compelled to follow the hand 
or help the caster. If the creature chooses not to 
follow the hand, the hand continues to beckon for 
the duration of the spell, then disappears. If the 
spell expires while the creature is en route to the 
caster, the hand disappears; the creature has to rely 
on its own devices to locate the caster. 

If there is more than one creature within a 5- 
mile radius that meets the caster’s description, the 
hand locates the closest creature. If that creature 
refuses to follow the hand, the hand will not seek 
out a second creature. 

The helping hand has no physical form. The 
hand can be seen only by the caster and potential 
target creatures. It cannot engage in combat or exe- 
cute any other task aside from locating the target 
creature and leading it back to the caster. The hand 
won't pass through solid objects, but can pass 
through small cracks and slits. 

The material component is a black silk glove. 

Notes: Common for priests with access to the 
sphere of Travelers. 


Henley’s Digit of Disruption 
(Evocation) 
Sphere: Creation 


Area of Effect: 1 undead or lower planar creature 
Saving Throw: Special 


This powerful spell is used against undead and 
Negative Material Plane creatures. When the spell 


is cast, the priest draws upon energy from the Pos- 
itive Material Plane, creating a bolt of blazing 
energy from the priest's fingertip to smite the 
target creature. 

An undead creature must make a successful 
saving throw vs. spell or be instantly disrupted and 
completely destroyed. An undead creature that 
saves takes 2d8 points of damage. 

A creature from the Lower Planes takes 6d8 
points of damage (save vs. spell for half damage). 
The spell has no effect on creatures of demipower 
status or greater. 

The material components are the priest's holy 
symbol and a powdered sunstone of not less than 
500 gp value. 

Notes: Very rare spell. Known to be in the 
Demonomicon of Iggwilv (WoG). 


Heroes’ Feast 


This spell enables the priest to bring forth a 
great feast that serves as many creatures as the 
priest has levels of experience. The spell creates a 
magnificent table, chairs, service, and all the nec- 
essary food and drink. The feast takes one full 
hour to consume, and the beneficial effects do not 
set in until after this hour is over. Those partaking 
of the feast are cured of all diseases, are immune 
to poison for 12 hours, and are healed of 1d4+4 
points of damage after imbibing the nectar-like 
beverage that is part of the feast. The ambrosia- 
like food that is consumed is equal to a bless spell 
that lasts for 12 hours. Also, during this same 
period, the people who consumed the feast are 
immune to fear, hopelessness, and panic. If the 
feast is interrupted for any reason, the spell is 
ruined and all effects of the spell are negated. 

The material components of the spell are the 
priest’s holy symbol and specially fermented 
honey taken from the cells of bee larvae destined 
for royal status. 

Notes: Common for clerics (PHB). 


i S 


330 


Hidden Hatred 


SE 4 


Heroism 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Combat 


Level: 4 

Range: Touch 

Components: V. S, M 

Casting Time: 6 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: Person touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell affects warriors and O-level individuals 
only. It confers a temporary increase in life energy 
levels upon any such individual with fewer than 10 
experience levels. The exact number of levels (and 
associated Hit Dice gained) is given on the table. 

The recipient fights as though at the experience 
level bestowed by the magic. Any damage sus- 
tained is taken first from the magically gained hit 
points and Hit Dice. The magic lasts for one round 
per caster level, after which any remaining bonus 
energy levels or hit points are lost. 


Ist—3rd 
4th-6th 
Tth-Mh 


The material component is the priest’s holy 
symbol. 

Notes: Very rare spell. (Updated from PoLYHE- 
DRON Newszine.) 


Hesitation 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
Sphere: Time 
Level: 2 
Range: 30 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 2 


Duration: I rd./level 
Area of Effect: 20-ft.-radius circle 
Saving Throw: None 


Creatures affected by this spell hesitate before 
executing their intended actions. This causes them 
to modify their initiative rolls by a +4 penalty. The 
initiative modifier occurs in the round following 
the round in which hesitation is cast. 

The spell affects 2d4 Hit Dice or levels of crea- 
tures, although only one creature of 4 or more Hit 


331 


Dice can be affected regardless of the number 
rolled. All possible subjects are allowed saving 
throws vs. spells; those failing their saving throws 
receive a +4 penalty to their initiative rolls for a 
number of rounds equal to the caster’s level. 

The material component is a fragment of a 
turtle’s shell. 

Notes: Common for priests with access to the 
sphere of Time (ToM). 


Hibernate 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
Sphere: Charm 


Level: 1 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: 1 wk./level maximum 
Area of Effect: 1 to 3 creatures 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


A creature sent into hibemation by a druid 
sleeps in a torpid state for as many weeks as the 
caster desires (up to one week per caster). A suc- 
cessful saving throw vs. spell negates the spell. If 
affected, the creature’s need for oxygen, food, 
water, and such are all but negligible for the dura- 
tion. The creature can be awakened, but will go 
back to sleep when it is no longer interrupted 
unless it makes another saving throw vs. spell. 
When the spell expires, the creature will awaken 
with a very intense hunger. 

The caster can affect | large creature the size of 
a bear, 2 man-sized creatures, or 3 smaller crea- 
tures. Humans and humanoids are as vulnerable to 
the spell’s effects as any other creature. Sentient or 
quasi-sentient plants and plant beings will go dor- 
mant if subjected to a hibernate spell, just as they 
would in winter. 

The material component is some fur from a 
mammal that hibernates. 

Notes: Very rare druid spell. (Updated from 
DraGoN Magazine.) 


Hidden Hatred 


Reversed form, foesight. 


~ Hide — Oracle r 


Hide — Oracle 
(Abjuration, Divination) 
Sphere: Divination 


Level: 5 
Range: Touch 
Components: 
Casting Time: 8 

Duration: 2 tums/level 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


For the duration of this spell, the subject is pro- 
tected against all divination and magical location 
and detection, The creature cannot be detected 
through clairaudience, ESP, crystal balls, or any 
other scrying devices. Spells such as seek and sym- 
pathetic magic fail as well. The creature will not 
appear in any divination made concerning the time 
during which the spell is in effect, whether made 
in the past, present, or future. The subject radiates 
no aura of any sort, and predictions cannot be 
made concerning the subject unless a powerful 
being (of at least 20th-level ability) is consulted. A 
being of 20th-level ability has a 50% chance to 
penetrate this veil, with a 5% bonus per level over 
20 and a maximum chance of 95%. 

The focus for the spell is any gem of at least 
5,000 gp value that the subject must keep on his or 
her person; if the gem is lost or destroyed, the spell 
ends immediately. The gem is not destroyed by the 
spell and can be reused. 

Notes: Common for oracles. Rare for savants 
and divination specialists; otherwise, very rare. 
(Updated from Dragon Magazine.) 


High Silt Tide 
Reversed form, silt tide. 


Higher Consecration 
(Alteration, Evocation) 
Sphere: All 


Level: 6 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 2 rds. 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: 1 item 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell dedicates an item to the service of 
the caster’s deity, cleansing it of all other influ- 
ences (especially those of other deities). The caster 
performs the prayer, touches the item, and an item 
saving throw is made. 


The item's saving throw is the same as the 
caster’s own saving throw vs. spell, modified by a 
number of cumulative factors. 

+1 The item has been specially crafted by 
the caster or others dedicated to the serv- 
ice of the deity. 

The higher consecration spell is cast on 
an altar consecrated to the deity or 
ground sacred to the deity. 

The item is being prepared at the com- 
mand of the deity (either expressly or 
through dream visions). 

The material components have either 
been made or gathered personally by the 
caster. 

Holy water is omitted (good priests only). 
Unholy water is omitted (evil priests only). 
Plain water is used. 

The caster knows the item is physically 
flawed or incomplete. 


+1 
+1 


+1 


An item that fails this saving throw crumbles to 
dust or is consumed by fire. Success cleanses the 
item and dedicates it to the deity. Typically, the 
success of the spell is demonstrated by the item 
briefly levitating and exuding a blue-white glow, 
but a deity may choose a different color of radiant 
glow, may wreath the item in unending flame, or 
may even make it vanish. (This latter if the casting 
priest is deemed unworthy or unready to possess 
the item or its continued possession by the faithful 
is imperiled by events—such as an impending 
attack on the temple in which the spell is cast.) 

The material components are the priest's holy 
symbol and a spark struck from flint by a piece of 
cold iron; a pinch of earth from a dung heap on 
which plants have grown; a drop of holy water; a 
drop of unholy water; and a vial of air from a 
cavern, room, or passage in which a dragon used 
its breath weapon within 1 tum of the sealing of 
the vial. Spark, flint, and iron are all consumed in 
the casting. 

Notes: Rare spell from the FoRGOTTEN REALMS 
setting, recorded by Volo. 


Highway 
Quest spell, see appendix in Vol. 3. 


332 


Hold Animal 


Ne 


Histachii Brew — Yuan-Ti 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Animal, Creation 


Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: 1 specially prepared brew 
Saving Throw: Special 


‘This incantation enchants a brew of yuan-ti 
venom mixed with certain herbs and roots. The 
resulting broth transforms any human who ingests 
it into a histachii in 1d6+6 days if the imbiber fails 
a saving throw vs. poison with a —4 penalty. If the 
saving throw is successful, the subject immedi- 
ately lapses into a coma; death follows in one hour 
unless the subject is revived with a slow poison or 
neutralize poison spell. The transformation can be 
prevented following a failed saving throw by the 
application of the spells neutralize poison, dispel 
magic, remove curse, and heal, in that order. The 
subject permanently loses 1 point of Intelligence; 
however, a limited wish or wish spell reverses the 
transformation with no loss of Intelligence. Once 
the transformation is complete, only a wish spell 
can restore the subject. 

A nonhuman who drinks histachii brew must 
make a saving throw vs. poison with a —4 penalty. 
If successful, the nonhuman becomes violently ill 
and is unable to take any action for 1d4 tums. If 
the saving throw fails, the nonhuman becomes 
comatose and dies in 1d4+1 rounds. 

The distillation maintains its potency for one 
hour, plus three tums per level of the priest who 
created it, before losing its enchantment. The 
unenchanted histachii brew makes those who con- 
sume it ill for 1d3 rounds if a saving throw vs. 
poison is failed, but otherwise has no effect. 

The material component is a liquid mixture of 
distilled herbs, roots, and yuan-ti venom in a small 
flask. The distillate is not consumed in the casting. 

Notes: Granted by the yuan-ti god Sseth. 


Hoar, Hand of 
See hand of Hoar. 


Hoar’s Revenance 


(Necromancy) 
Sphere: Necromantic 


Level: 6 
Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: | rd. 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: | corpse 
Saving Throw: None 


When cast on the corpse of any sentient being 
killed by another sentient being, whether the death 
was accidental or deliberate, this spell causes the 
corpse to rise as a revenant, as detailed in the Mon- 
STROUS MANUAL tome, and to immediately seek out 
its killer. If the corpse’s killer is already dead, this 
spell is has no effect and is wasted. There are no 
ability score requirements for the dead character as 
there are for naturally occurring revenants, but a 
salvageable corpse (at least in good enough shape 
to transform into a skeleton or zombie if an ani- 
mate dead spell were used) must be used. The 
priest has no control over the revenant and may 
even be attacked by the undead creature if he or 
she interferes in its quest for revenge. The revenant 
tracks its killer until it destroys the killer or until 
3-6 months pass, at which time its body disinte- 
grates and its spirit rests in peace. 

‘The material components are the priest's holy 
symbol and some token that was important to the 
deceased being (such as a favored scarf, locket, 
and so on), 

Notes: Granted by Hoar the Doombringer of 
the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Hold Animal 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
Sphere: Animal 


Level: 3 

Range: 80 yds. 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 6 

Duration: 2 rds./level 

Area of Effect: 1 to 4 animals in a 40-ft. cube 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


By means of this spell, the caster holds one to 
four animals rigid. Animals affected are normal or 
giant-sized mammals, birds, or reptiles, but not 
monsters such as centaurs, gorgons, harpies, naga, 
etc. Apes, bears, crocodiles, dogs, eagles, foxes, 
giant beavers, and similar animals are subject to 
this spell. The hold lasts for two rounds per caster 


333 


~ Hold Metal = 


level. The caster decides how many animals are 
affected, but the greater the number, the better 
chance each has to successfully save against the 
spell. Each animal gets a saving throw; if only one 
is the subject of the spell, it has a penalty of -4 to 
its roll; if two are subject, each receives a penalty 
of -2 to its roll; if three are subject, each receives 
a penalty of —1 to its roll; if four are subject, each 
gets an unmodified saving throw. 

A maximum body weight of 400 pounds (100 
pounds for nonmammals) per animal per caster 
level can be affected—for example, an 8th-level 
caster can affect up to four 3,200 pound mammals 
or a like number of 800 pound nonmammals, such 
as birds or reptiles. 

Notes: Common for druids (PHB). 


Hold Metal 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
Sphere: Charm 


Level: 4 

Range: 30 yds. 
Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 6 

Duration: | rd./level 

Area of Effect: 5 sq. ft./level 
Saving Throw: None 


By casting this spell, the priest causes all fer- 
rous metal (iron, iron alloys, and steel) within the 
spell’s area of effect to be held fast, just as a person 
would be by a hold person spell. Swords being 
swung, pendulum blades arcing, and other metal- 
lic objects stop in midstrike. Although these metal 
objects can be touched, they cannot be moved for 
the duration of the spell, as if the metal weighed 
tons or was held fast by sovereign glue. 

This spell is often used to prevent individuals 
from drawing weapons or from removing metallic 
or partially metallic objects from the affected area. 
The spell is especially useful against individuals 
clad in chain or plate mail. Beings wearing any 
ferrous armor find that while under the effects of 
this spell they cannot move. Furthermore, anyone 
wearing metal or carrying metal items who enters 
the area of effect of an already operating hold 
metal spell finds that such metal is instantly ren- 
dered immobile—from weapons to metal buttons, 
from buckles to cloak clasps. 

Nonferrous metals are unaffected by hold 
metal, so an individual wearing bronze plate mail 
or picking up a silver candelabrum is able to pro- 
ceed normally if the item in question does not have 
iron or another ferrous metal hidden within it 
(such as a plating of nonferrous metal over steel or 


iron). Note that most nonferrous metals are not 
sturdy enough for use in heavy tools without some 
ferrous metal alloyed with them. 

Notes: Rare spell from the FORGOTTEN REALMS 
setting. Very early sources list this spell as 3rd 
level 


Hold Person 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
Sphere: Charm, Law 


Level: 2 

Range: 120 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: $ 

Duration: 2 rds./level 

Area of Effect: 1 to 4 persons in a 20-ft. cube 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell holds 1 to 4 humans, demihumans, 
or humanoid creatures rigidly immobile and in 
place for five or more rounds. The spell lasts two 
rounds per caster level, and the priest must be of at 
Jeast 3rd level to cast the spell. 

The hold person spell affects any bipedal 
human, demihuman, or humanoid of man size or 
smaller, including brownies, dryads, dwarves, elves, 
gnolls, gnomes, goblins, half-elves, halflings, half- 
orcs, hobgoblins, humans, kobolds, lizard men, 
nixies, orcs, pixies, sprites, troglodytes, and others. 
Thus, a 10th-level fighter could be held, while an 
ogre could not. Undead creatures cannot be held. 

‘The effect is centered on a point selected by the 
caster, and it affects persons selected by the caster 
within the area of effect. If the spell is cast at three 
or four persons, each gets a normal saving throw; 
if only two persons are being enspelled, each rolls 
the saving throw with a — penalty; if the spell is 
cast at but one person, the saving throw die roll 
suffers -2 penalty. Saving throws are adjusted for 
Wisdom. Those who succeed on their saving 
throws are totally unaffected by the spell. 

Held creatures cannot move or speak, but they 
remain aware of events around them and can use 
abilities not requiring motion or speech. Being 
held does not prevent the worsening of the sub- 
ject’s condition due to wounds, disease, or poison. 
‘The priest casting the hold person spell can end 
the spell with a single utterance at any time; other- 
wise the duration is five rounds at lst level, six 
rounds at 2nd level, seven rounds at 3rd level, and 
soon 

The material component is a small, straight 
piece of iron. 

Notes: Common for clerics (PHB). 


Sa ee eee a 


Hold Undead — Savant 


NÝ 


Hold Plant 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
Sphere: Plant 
Level: 4 
Range: 80 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 7 


Duration: 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


The hold plant spell affects vegetable matter as 
follows: 1) it causes ambulatory vegetation to 
cease moving; 2) it prevents vegetable matter from 
entwining, grasping, closing, or growing: 3) it pre- 
vents vegetable matter from making any sound or 
movement that is not caused by wind. The spell 
effects apply to all forms of vegetation, including 
parasitic and fungoid types, and those magically 
animated or otherwise magically empowered. It 
affects such monsters as green slime, molds of any 
sort, shambling mounds, shriekers, treants, and so 
on 


The duration of a hold plant spell is one round 
per level of experience of the caster. It affects 1 to 
4 plants in a 40-foot x 40-foot area—or a square 4 
to 16 yards on a side of small ground growth such 
as grass or mold. If but one plant (or 4 yards 
square) is chosen as the target for the spell by the 
caster, the saving throw of the plant (or area of 
plant growth) is made with a —4 penalty to the die 
roll; if two plants (or 8 yards square) are the target, 
saving throws suffer a —2 penalty; if three plants 
(or 12 yards square) are the target, saving throws 
suffer a —1 penalty; and if the maximum of four 
plants (or 16 yards square) are the target, saving 
throws are unmodified. 

Notes: Common for druids (PHB). 


Hold Poison 


(Necromancy) 
Sphere: Healing 


Level: 3 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 

Duration: | day/level 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell is an improved version of slow 
poison, with a duration measured in days rather 
than hours. When cast upon a subject who has 
been poisoned by any means, hold poison arrests 


the venom and prevents it from doing any addi- 
tional damage. (In most cases, the spell must be 
cast during the poison’s onset time in order to be 
effective.) Damage that has already been inflicted 
is not restored, but as long as the hold poison is in 
effect, the subject can be cured or healed of 
damage caused by poison by any normal means. 

This spell can be used to indefinitely postpone 
the onset of a poison if the caster chooses to con- 
tinue to cast it on the poisoned individual before a 
previous hold poison wears off. However, each 
time a new hold poison is used to stop the 
venom’s advance for another few days, there is a 
2% cumulative chance that the spell fails and the 
poison runs its course. Evil priests have been 
known to deliberately poison a person and then 
use this spell to grant the subject a stay of death 
for a few days. This can be an extremely effective 
threat if the subject doesn’t have access to a nen- 
tralize poison spell. 

The material component is the priest’s holy 
symbol and a bud of garlic, crushed and smeared 
on the injury (or eaten if the poison was ingested). 

Notes: Uncommon spell (PO:SM). 


Hold Undead — Savant 
(Abjuration) 
Sphere: Protection 


Level: 3 

Range: 10 yds./level 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 3 

Duration: 1 rd./level. 

Area of Effect: Up to 4 undead creatures in a 20- 
ft. cube 

Saving Throw: Neg. 


With this spell, the clerical savant is able to 
hold 1 to 4 corporeal undead creatures—even 
those not normally affected by hold spells. The 
creatures are held rigidly immobile and in place 
for five or more rounds. If a held creature is 
attacked while under the influence of the spell, the 
hold is broken. 

The effect is centered on a point selected by 
the savant, and it affects corporeal undead 
selected by the caster within the area of effect. If 
the spell is cast at three or four undead, each gets 
a normal saving throw vs. spell; if only two are 
selected, each rolls the saving throw with a —1 
penalty; if the spell is cast at but one creature, 
the saving throw suffers a —2 penalty. Saving 
throws are adjusted for Wisdom. The spell has no 
effect upon undead creatures that make their 
saving throws. 


335 


~ Hold Wave A 


Held undead cannot move or speak, but they 
remain aware of events around them and can use 
abilities not requiring motion or speech. Being 
held does not prevent the worsening of the crea- 
ture’s condition due to, for example, exposure to 
daylight. The savant casting the hold undead spell 
can end the spell with a single utterance at any 
time; otherwise the duration is five rounds at Sth 
level, six rounds at 6th level, seven rounds at 7th 
level, and so on. 

The material component is the priest’s holy 
symbol. 

Notes: Restricted to cleric-savants. Optionally 
available to necromancer-priests. (Updated from 
DRAGON Magazine.) 


Hold Wave 
(Evocation) 
Sphere: Elemental Water 
Level: 4 
Range: 10 yds. 


Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 6 

Duration: | turn + 1 tumn/level 
Area of Effect: 20 ft. X 20 ft. area 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell immobilizes normal wave motion in 
a 20-foot by 20-foot area. It stills the waters, per- 
mitting drowning sailors, lost cargo, or other items 
to be fished out of heavy seas. When cast during 
heavy chop, the ocean within the area of effect 
becomes as still as pond water; if seas are heavier 
than this (as during a violent storm), the wave 
action is reduced to heavy chop. 

If the sea is agitated by an elemental or hostile 
magic, hold wave fails unless the spellcaster 
makes a saving throw vs. spell. If the seas are 
already affected by hold wave, the hostile spell- 
caster or elemental must make a saving throw to 
disrupt the magically calmed waves. 

Notes: Granted by gods of the sea. (Updated 


from DRAGON Magazine.) 
Holly Dart 

(Alteration, Evocation) 

Sphere: Plant 

Level: 7 

Range: 60 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 8 


Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: | creature 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell transforms a sprig of holly into a 
deadly missile, which must be hurled immediately 
at a living creature. A creature not warded by a 
protective magical item (ring, bracers, armor, and 
so on) is automatically struck; otherwise, the 
caster must make an attack roll at a +6 bonus, The 
creature struck must save vs. death at a—6 penalty 
or be killed instantly. If the saving throw is suc- 
cessful, the subject takes 2d8+1 points of damage 
instead. 

‘The material component is a sprig of holly. 

Notes: Very rare druid spell. (Updated from 
POLYHEDRON Newszine.) 


Holy Flail 
(Alteration, Invocation) 
Sphere: Combat, Creation 


Level: 3 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 6 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: 1 nonbladed weapon or the caster’s 
holy symbol 

‘Saving Throw: None 


This spell allows the caster to transform his or 
her holy symbol or any nonbladed weapon wielded 
by another being that the priest touches into a mag- 
ical holy flail. The holy symbol or transformed 
weapon becomes a snakelike, flexible field of force 
attached to a rigid handhold. This invisible, crack- 
ling spectral flail has a +2 attack bonus when 
wielded in battle and is considered a magical 
weapon for attack purposes. The spell also conveys 
proficiency in its use upon the wielder if this does 
not violate class restrictions. The holy flail is con- 
sidered a footman’s flail for general purposes. 

A strike from a holy flail inflicts 1d6+1 points 
of damage. If a holy flail is wielded by a priest of 
the same religion as the caster, a hit inflicts an 
additional 1 point of damage per experience level 
of the caster to all undead creatures. If the wield- 
ing caster is good or evil, a hit inflicts an addi- 
tional 1 point of damage per experience level on a 
creature of opposite morality (that is, good vs. 
evil—lawful vs. chaotic does not matter). If the 
caster is neutral, the alignment-oriented damage 
does not apply. 

A holy flail created from a holy symbol can be 
wielded only by a priest of the same deity as the 
symbol, or the flail vanishes. If holy flail is cast 
upon a weapon held by a creature of opposite 


336 


Holy Symbol 


N 


moral stance to the casting priest (see above), the 
flail does not form. A holy flail vanishes if it is 
transferred from one wielder to another unless the 
recipient is the caster or another priest of the same 
deity. A holy flail does not require concentration to 
maintain and can be dropped to enable spellcasting 
or thrown as a weapon without vanishing. 

The spell requires the caster’s holy symbol or a 
nonbladed weapon (which is not consumed by the 
spell) and a pinch of powdered gemstone. 

Notes: Granted by Tempus, war god of the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Holy Might 


Area of Effect: 1 item no larger in volume than 
twice the caster’s body volume 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell strengthens inorganic substances so 
they do not rot or age. The caster touches one item, 
which can be crafted of any number of inorganic 
substances joined together but must not be larger 
in total volume than twice the caster’s body, and 
holy might takes effect. Organic substances, such 
as glues, can be present in the object, but if they 
make up more than a tenth of its total volume, the 
speli fails. Any fractures or weaknesses existing in 
the item are purged, so that it is whole, looks like 
new and is free of blemishes. In addition, fragile 
substances are hardened, and hard substances 
made more resilient; an item treated with holy 
might gains a bonus of +6 on all item saving 
throws vs. acid, crushing blow, disintegration, fall, 
normal fire, and cold. 

The material components of this spell are a 
whole and unflawed ruby, emerald, or sapphire of 
not less than 3,000 gp value, a sliver or chunk of 
duskwood of the same size or larger than the dia- 
mond, a piece of chitin of about the same size from 
a beholder, ankheg, or bulette, a piece of obsidian 
of any size, and a black dragon acid. 

Notes: Rare spell from the FORGOTTEN REALMS 
setting, recorded by Volo. 


This spell brings into being a twinkling blue- 
white mote of light that hangs beside one shoulder 
of its caster and moves with him or her. It is not 
blinding in its brightness and is quite beautiful. It 
has three functions that the caster can decide 
between at the beginning of each round of its exis- 
tence (once set, the choice cannot be changed until 
the next round). 

@ Reflect any one spell 100% back at its source. 
@ Block any one attack, magical or physical, 
absorbing all of its effects harmlessly. 

Emit a stabbing bolt of force at a single crea- 
ture within 90 feet at THACO 10. A hit burns 
the creature internally for 4d6 points of damage 
(no saving throw). 

A holy star can emit a maximum of two such 
beams, but the firing of the second one causes the 
magic to expire immediately. 

Notes: Restricted to priests of Mystra, from the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. This spell is found 
only in a few exceptionally rare tomes. 


Holy Symbol 
moning) 


This spell is used to prepare a priest's holy 
symbol or to create a new symbol to replace a lost 
or damaged one. The new symbol-to-be must be 
crafted of appropriate material, depending on the 
religion/deity in question, and must be of the 
proper shape and design—a priest cannot pick up 
just any item and make it into a holy symbol. A 
Priest can possess two holy symbols at one time, 
and this spell can be used to create a second one as 
a spare. No priest can create a holy symbol related 


337 


Holy Vesting ns 


to a religion or deity other than the one that he or 
she worships. The holy symbol of a good or evil 
priest will radiate a faint aura of good or evil, but 
is not a magical object per se. The holy symbol of 
a priest who is of neutral morals (with respect to 
good and evil) will have no such aura. 

The spell requires the symbol-to-be as a focus 
for the spell energy. 

Notes: Uncommon spell. 


The casting of this spell might be restricted to 
‘once per day or once per week at the DM's option. 


Holy Vesting 
(Alteration, Evocation) 
Sphere: All, Creation 


Level: 6 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 3 rds. 

Duration: 1 tum + 1 rd./3 levels 
Area of Effect: Special 

Saving Throw: Special 


This spell is used to imbue readied items with 
magical powers. The caster touches first the destina- 


tion item and then any other items that hold magic 
that is to be drained into the destination item. The 
items to be drained may be potions, spell scrolls, 
parchments with magical command words or inscrip- 
tions, focal stones, or existing magical items. 

A holy vesting creates a shimmering distur- 
bance in the air between the readied recipient item 
and any items being drained. This shimmering 
remains visible until the spell ends, whereupon it 
fades. One power or control property is trans- 
ferred per round to the destination item. Often, the 
absorption of powers can be seen by observers 
due to the sequential disappearance of focal 
stones, spell scrolls, and the like. Powers and 
magical controls drained by a wondrous web are 
transferred intact to the destination item and there 
combined harmoniously, being held within the 
item in stable magical stasis until the item is 
awakened by use of an awakening spell. (Control 
conditions are attached to the magics they are 
intended for, powers that are to work in sequence 
are arranged that way, and so on.) 

Only existing magical items are allowed a 
saving throw against this spell. Any item having 
less than three effects or functions has a base 
saving throw of 9; any item with four or more 
effects or functions has a base saving throw of 11 
and adds one point per function beyond four. If the 
item successfully saves against the effect of holy 
vesting, it is unaffected. If it fails, the holy vesting 
draws a random function out of it. If any of its 
effects or functions drain charges to function, they 
are affected first, and 1d4 charges are transferred 
per round, not the ability to perform the function. 
For items lacking charges, the ability to perform 
the effect is permanently taken from the item, pos- 
sibly destroying it or rendering it nonmagical. The 
holy vesting spell provides no mitigation or pro- 
tection against any explosive effects that might be 
built into the destruction of an item. 

Holy vesting can be ended prematurely if the 
caster so wills. Whichever magic is in transit (if any 
remain untransferred when the spell is ended) is 
ruined and lost, but those that have already entered 
the destination item are unaffected, as are the 
powers or properties not yet taken from their origi- 
nal holding places. A dispel magic disrupts a holy 
vesting spell if the spell is not performed on an altar 
dedicated to the caster’s deity (which provides the 
spell immunity from dispel magic). Other magical 
attacks (short of a properly worded limited wish or 
wish spell) do not affect the vesting. Missiles or 
thrown weapons that strike the caster while the 
spell is being cast have the normal likelihood of 
ruining the casting, but once the holy vesting spell 
is cast, they have no effect on its progress unless 


338 


Horn of Plenty — Halfling, 


N 


the caster loses consciousness or perishes, which 
ends the holy vesting prematurely as described 
above. 
‘The material components are one drop of holy 
water consecrated to the caster's deity for the item to 
be imbued, one for each source of magic to be con- 
nected to it, and a stick or block of bumed incense. 
Notes: Very rare spell from the FORGOTTEN 
REALMS setting, recorded by Volo. 


Holy Word 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 
Reversible 
Sphere: Combat 


Casting Time: 1 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 30-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: None 


Uttering a holy word spell creates magic of 
tremendous power. It drives off evil creatures from 
other planes, forcing them to retum to their own 
planes of existence, provided the speaker is in his 
home plane. Creatures so banished cannot retum 
for at least a day. The spell further affects creatures 
of differing alignment as shown on the table. 

Affected creatures are those within the 30-foot- 
radius area of effect, which is centered on the 
priest casting the spell. The side effects are 
negated for deafened or silenced creatures, but 
such are still driven off if other-planar. 

The reverse, unholy word, operates exactly the 
same way but affects creatures of good alignment. 

Notes: Common for clerics (PHB). 


Effects of Holy Word 
Creature’s 
Hit Dice or Attack 
Level General Move Dice Spelis 
Less than4 Kills — a = 
4107+ Paralyzes 
144 tums — — — 
8toll+ Slows 
Qddrds. -50% 4 — 
1I2or more Deafens 1d4 
rounds -25% -2 50% 
chance of 
failure 


*Slowed creatures attack only on even-numbered rounds 
until the effect wears off. 


Home Port 
(invocation/Evocation) 
Sphere: All 
Level: 3 
Range: Touch 


Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: | turn 

Duration: 1 week/level 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


‘This spell bestows an unerring sense on a 
person so that the individual knows how to take a 
vessel that he or she is steering or navigating back 
to its home port, regardless of how far off course 
the ship may have been blown by storm or hap- 
penstance. The home port is defined as where the 
ship was launched or the place it returns to berth 
most often. This spell cannot be modified to home 
in on an intervening port of call. 

‘The spell requires a pebble from the vessel's 
native port, held by the spell recipient. The rock is 
not destroyed in the spellcasting. 

Notes: Granted by Valkur, Captain of the 
Waves, of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Horn of Plenty — Halfling 
(Conjuration) 
Sphere: Creation 


Level: 4 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 2 rds. 

Duration: 1 tum 

Area of Effect: 1 hollow horn of a ram 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell transforms a hollowed hom of a ram 
or giant ram into a magical cornucopia. In the first 
5 rounds after the spell is cast, fresh vegetables, 
fruits, and grains tumble forth from the horn of 
plenty, in quantities sufficient to feed up to six 
human-sized creatures or two horse-sized crea- 
tures for one day. In the second 5 rounds, wine, 
water, or ale gushes forth from the horn of plenty 
sufficient to quench the thirsts of up to six human- 
sized creatures or two horse-sized creature per 
level of the caster for one day. 

During the casting, the caster must specify the 
type or types of fruits and vegetables and the type 
of liquid to be dispensed. It is up to the caster to 
determine how, if at all, the food or beverage is 
contained so that it does not spill all over the 
ground; casters often arrange to have containers 


339 


~ Horns of Hathor — Old Empire 


placed on the ground to catch the bounty. The 
enchantment of the horn of plenty fades once the 
spell is cast, but any food or drink created by 
means of this spell is permanent and nonmagical 
in nature and spoils and decays normally. 

The material component is the priest’s holy 
symbol. 

Notes: Granted by the halfling deity Yondalla. 


Horns of Hathor — Old Empire 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Combat, Animal 


Level: 2 
Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 6 
Duration: 1 rd/level 

Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell embodies the wrath of Hathor when 
her charges are threatened. When she casts horns 
of Hathor, the priestess grows a set of homs from 
her head and can use them to gore opponents, 
much like a minotaur. 

‘The priestess can attack with the homs once 
per round; attacks with the horns are with the 
THACO of a fighter of the same level as the caster. 
Damage inflicted is 2d4 per successful attack. If 
the priestess is 30 feet or more from an opponent, 
she can lower her head and charge against any 
creature that is at least 5 feet tall, She receives the 
normal +2 attack bonus for charging and inflicts 
4d4 points of damage if she hits. 

The material component is a small piece of the 
hom of a cow, bull, or minotaur. 

Notes: Granted by the Mulhorandi goddess 
Hathor of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Hovering Road 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 
Sphere: Travelers 


Level: 7 

Range: 0 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: 1 turn/level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell creates a magical 10-foot-wide road 
extending 10 feet in front of the caster. The road 
lasts for the duration of the spell, creating a 10- 
foot area ahead of the caster as long as he or she 


continues to move forward. The road ìs approxi- 
mately one foot thick and hovers in the air. It has 
the texture and color of black granite. Creatures 
move on the hovering road at their normal move- 
ment rate, ignoring the effects of surrounding ter- 
rain. 

The hovering road must originate from a solid 
surface. Once anchored, the caster controls the 
contour of the road, causing it to rise and fall as 
desired. The road can thus be used to traverse 
rivers (if the road is anchored on the shore), 
swamps, and similarly hostile terrain. The caster 
can cause the road to rise over a jungle or cross a 
chasm. 

‘The road has AC 0 and is impervious to non- 
magical weapons. If it suffers 100 points of 
damage (from magical weapons or other magical 
forces), it dissipates in a black mist; all those on 
the road fall to the ground below. 

Unless destroyed, the entire road remains intact 
from beginning to end for the duration of the spell, 
even if the caster is killed or incapacitated. At the 
end of the spell’s duration, the entire road dissi- 
pates, 

The material components are a chunk of black 
marble and a loop of gold wire. 

Notes: Common for priests with major access 
to the sphere of Travelers (ToM). 


Humansize — Halfling 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Combat 


Level: 3 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 6 

Duration: 6 rds. + 1 rd./level above Sth 
Area of Effect: 1 halfling 

Saving Throw: None 


This spell makes a halfling grow to the size of 
a human and appear exactly human in all ways. 
Everything the halfling is wearing and carrying 
(equipment) also grows proportionately. A short 
sword, for example, grows to the size of a long 
sword. The spell does not cause the halfling to be 
disoriented or clumsy; the recipient is adjusted to 
and in control of the larger body as if it were 
normal-sized. The larger halfling also gains 2 
additional points of Strength. If the halfling’s 
Strength goes above 18, it goes to the first per- 
centile rank (18/01). The true race of humansized 
halflings cannot be discovered even by magical 
means. A priest using the spell personally can 
return to normal at will, ending the spell; other- 


De ae age aa ge IA a ay eS 


Hurl Rock — Dwarf 


wise, the halfling remains humansized until the 
duration ends. 

Notes: Granted by the halfling god Arvoreen 
the Defender, 


Hunger 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Animal, Plant 
Level: 4 
Range: 10 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Tim 


Duration: 1 day/level 
Area of Effect: 1 individual 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


An individual affected by hunger no longer 
gains sustenance from food. No matter how much 
the individual eats, that individual still feels 
hungry. If the spell does not end, the individual 
eventually may starve, visibly wasting away. 

After one day under the spell’s effect, the indi- 
vidual’s concentration suffers (due to a preoccupa- 
tion with a constant hungry feeling). This causes a 
-2 penalty to all ability and proficiency checks. On 
the eighth day without food, an individual who has 
been maintaining normal activity levels loses 1 
Strength point; on the ninth day, 1 Constitution 
point. This alternating pattern continues until one 
of the individual's ability scores falls to 3; at this 
point, the individual becomes comatose. If a score 
reaches 0 before the hunger spell ends, the indi- 
vidual dies. When the spell ends, lost points are 
regained at a rate of 1 Strength and 1 Constitution 
point per day, 

When casting the spell, the spellcaster secretly 
whispers a particular type of food; by eating the 
specified food, the individual breaks the spell. It 
must be a single, natural food (such as lamb, 
honey, or an apple) but can be exotic (dragon 
meat) as long as the caster has tasted it personally 
at some point. 

The hunger spell cannot be dispelled but can be 
broken by the remove curse spell. Failing all else, 
a sufferer must wait until the spell ends. 

The material component is a pinch of the food 
that can end the spell. 

Notes: Uncommon for druids. 


Hunt Nemesis — Barbarian 
(Conjuration/Summoning, Alteration) 
Sphere: Combat 


Level: 1 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1-4 days 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


‘The hunt nemesis spell is cast during the ritual 
in which a barbarian cleric rises a level. This spell 
forces the nemesis spirit to go to the area where 
the cleric must battle it. When the spell is cast, the 
cleric lies down and is encircled by the equivalent 
of a sanctuary spell; then the caster passes into a 
trance (treat as a feign death spell). From the view- 
point of the cleric, the apparition of the nemesis 
and the subsequent battle are very real,; the fight is 
played out as if a battle was really taking place 
between two face-to-face foes who begin 100 feet 
apart on a flat plain. The spell lasts until the battle 
ends in the “death” of a participant. Any onlookers 
merely see the entranced cleric (if the sanctuary 
effect allows). Failure to win means the cleric must 
complete a special quest before undergoing the 
ritual again. 

Notes: Restricted to those barbarian clerics 
whose tribes follow this ritual. (Updated from 
DRAGON Magazine.) 


Hurl Rock — Dwarf 
(Alteration) 
Reversible 
Sphere: Combat 


Level: 2 
Range: 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 

Duration: 1 rd. 

Area of Effect: 1 rock (see below) 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell allows a dwarf to suddenly and vio- 
lently use telekinesis on a loose rock, hurling it as 
a missile. Only stone can be used (either natural 
stone or petrified objects). The stone must be 
loose; it cannot be part of a wall, rock face, or 
ceiling. The projectile strikes with the caster’s 
THACO. The range of this spell refers to the dis- 
tance between the priest and the potential stone 
missile. The projectile can leap up to 30 feet ver- 
tically and up to 30 feet horizontally. Misses use 


ee SN ert 


~ Hurl Thunderbolt r 


the grenade-like missile table in the DMG to 
determine the point of impact. 

The caster can move up to 2 cubic feet of rock 
per level. Rocks that are too large are felt as such; 
the priest can choose another rock in the same 
round. If the second rock it is also too large, the 
spell is wasted. 

At times it may be important to know what 
damage the missile itself sustains after being 
hurled; for instance, if it is a fragile, valuable object, 
or, say, a petrified companion. The missile suffers 
2d4 points of damage from its use in this spell and 
double that damage if it falls more than 50 feet in 
the process. This shatters the missile if it is brought 
to O hit points. Assume rocky missiles to have an 
average total of 6 hit points per 2 cubic feet, so that 
a rock of the maximum size that a 3rd level priest 
can move (6 cubic feet) has 18 hit points. 

Rocky missiles that shatter spray shrapnel; all 
creatures within 10 feet of the landing site of a 
missile must successfully save vs. spell or suffer 
1d4+1 points of damage. 

Any item struck by the missile or its shrapnel 
(see above) must make an item saving throw vs. 
crushing blow. A being struck by the missile suf- 
fers damage as shown on the table. 

‘The material component is a tiny pebble, held in 
the priest's hand and not consumed during casting. 


Rock Volume 

(in cubic feet) Damage 
12 2d4 
34 2d8 
56 2d10 
738 348 
9-10 3d10 

More than 10 4d12 


The reverse of this spell, rock shield, allows the 
caster to deflect rocky missiles of all types and 
from all sources, The shield remains in effect for 1 
round per level, and is infallible against all mis- 
siles whose edges contain or are made of stone. 
Once cast, it does not require continued concen- 
tration or further action. The deflections are in 


directions uncontrollable by the user of the shield. 
Use the grenade-like missile table from the DMG, 
noting that deflections can hit companions of the 
shield-user or his or her enemies. Rock shield is 
incompatible with protection from normal mis- 
siles. 

‘The reverse of the spell requires two small peb- 
bles (which are not consumed) and a translucent 
piece of glass, mica, ice, crystal, or a gem. 

Notes: Granted by the dwarven goddess Haela 
Brightaxe. 


Hurl Thunderbolt 
(Evocation) 
Sphere: Combat, Weather 


Level: 4 

Range: 30 yds. + 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 7 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: | creature 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell enables a priest of Gilgeam to hurl a 
bolt of lightning from his or her upraised holy 
symbol to strike a single creature. The bolt causes 
1d4 points of electrical damage per level of the 
priest to a maximum of 10d4. If the creature suc- 
ceeds at a saving throw vs. spell, the damage is 
halved. 

In addition, the bolt unleashes a clap of thun- 
der upon striking its target (or reaching the end 
of the spell range) that affects anyone within 30 
feet of the thunderous noise. Everyone within 
range, including the target creature, must make a 
separate saving throw vs. spell. Success indi- 
cates the creature is deafened for 1d4 rounds. 
Failure indicates that the creature is deafened for 
1d6 rounds and stunned (reeling and unable to 
act) for 1 round. 

The material component is the priest's holy 
symbol. 

Notes: Granted to priests of Gilgeam in the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Ice Blade 
(Alteration, Evocation) 
Sphere: Combat, Weather 


Level: 4 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: 4-ft.-long, 4-inch-wide field of 
force 

Saving Throw: None 


This spell creates a sword-shaped formation 
of jagged, fast-swirling ice shards extending 
from the caster’s hand. Weightless and non- 
metallic, it is considered a +2 enchanted weapon 
for purposes of determining what it can hit and 
strikes at THACO 6, regardless of the caster's 
normal combat abilities. An ice blade can pass 
through (be swept across) parrying weapons and 
obstacles such as trees without being stopped by 
them. Its touch lacerates for 3d4 points of 
damage and chills for an additional 1d6 points of 
damage. 

The material component is a shard of ice, 
glass, or crystal. 

Notes: Granted by Auril, called Frostmaiden, 
of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Ice Spikes 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Combat, Elemental Water 


Duration: 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: The caster’s fist 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell brings into being a ball of rock- 
hard ice around one of the caster’s fists, a ball 
that bristles with spikes, resembling an exagger- 
ated replica of the head of a mace. The magic of 
the spell protects the fist from all damage while 
the spell lasts (it can be ended at any time by the 
silent will of the caster). It improves the caster’s 
THACO (for smiting blows with the fist only) by 
2 points. A blow from an ice spikes fist does 
1d4+4 points of damage, and the fist is consid- 
ered a +2 magical weapon for purposes of deter- 
mining what it can hit. Note that the spell effect 
precludes most spellcasting and the performance 
of many other activities (such as climbing at the 


usual rate, casting additional spells, 
tying knots, and so on). 

If the caster willingly sacri- 
fices some of his or her own hit points, 
the damage done by a single attack with the ice 
spikes fist can be augmented by a like amount. For 
example, if 4 hit points are sacrificed by the caster, 
the blow they empower inflicts 1d4+8 points of 
damage. Hit points sacrificed are not lost if the 
attack misses, and are restored by normal rest or 
healing magic. (A sacrifice is not automatically 
assumed for the next blow of the fist after a miss; 
the caster decides separately for each fist attack.) 

Whenever an augmented fist attack strikes a 
natural or magical mass or wall of ice (regard- 
less of how many points have been sacrificed), 
the caster of the ice spikes spell must make two 
saving throws vs. spell. If both succeed, the 
mass of ice shatters and collapses. If only one 
roll is successful, the struck ice is marred 
enough to form a handhold, but takes no addi- 
tional damage. If both throws fail, the target ice 
is entirely unaffected. 

‘The material component is an icicle or sliver of 
ice of any size and origin. 

Notes: Granted by Auril, called Frostmaiden, 
of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. This spell is 
found only in a few exceptionally rare tomes. 


Ice Walk 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Elemental Water 
Level: 1 
Range: Touch 


Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 4 

Duration: | turn + | turn/level 
Area of Effect: Creatures touched 
Saving Throw: None 


By means of this spell, the caster is able to 
empower one or more creatures to tread upon any 
snow or ice as if it were firm ground. This does not 
include free-flowing water, but does include even the 
thinnest frozen surface or very powdery snow. The 
recipient's feet do not touch the surface of the ice or 
snow, and no trace is left by their passage. The recip- 
ient’s rate of movement remains normal, For every 
level of the caster above Ist, he or she can affect 
another creature. If ice walk is cast under water or 
while buried in snow, this spell has no effect until the 
recipient gets on top of some ice or snow, although 
the spell duration is expended normally. 

‘The material components for this spell are a piece 
of ice or some snow and the priest's holy symbol. 


J 343 t 


Idea 


N 


Notes: Granted by Ulutiu, the Lord in the Ice, 
of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Idea 
(Divination) 
Sphere: Thought 


Level: 2 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 4 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell stimulates the priest’s mind to expe- 
rience a flash of insight, In game terms, the DM 
reminds the priest's player of a fact or event that 
has been forgotten, overlooked, or discounted. 
Thus, the DM might remind the player about an 
important clue that the priest discovered but the 
player did not consider significant. This spell can 
be cast only once in any 6-hour period. 

If there are no forgotten facts, the DM can, if 
desired, reveal new information relevant to the 
condition at hand. The DM should adjudicate this 
spell carefully. The reminder or information is rel- 
evant and useful but shouldn't unbalance the situ- 


ation. The information might be cryptic, depend- 
ing on the DM’s campaign. 

The material component is a gold coin 

Notes: Common for priests with access to the 
sphere of Thought (ToM). 


Illumination 
(Alteration, Divination) 
Sphere: Sun, Thought 


Level: 5 

Range: 0 

Components: V, M 
Casting Time: 8 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


By means of an illumination spell, the priest in 
effect alters the flow of time with regard to himself 
or herself. While the spell is in effect, the caster is 
enveloped in a golden radiance and is immune to all 
attacks except those caused by cold-, darkness-, or 
shadow-based spells, spell-like abilities, magical 
items, or breath weapons. While but one round of 
time passes for those not affected by the spell, the 
priest is able to spend two rounds, plus one round 
per level (to a maximum 1 tum total), in contact with 
his or her deity. Thus, a Sth-level priest can seek 
illumination for seven rounds while one round 
passes for all others. The priest can request informa- 
tion in the form of questions that can be answered by 
a simple “yes” or “no.” The priest is allowed one 
such question per phantom round. Optionally, the 
DM can give a single short answer of five words or 
less rather than answering “yes” or “no.” The 
answers given are correct within the limits of the 
entity's knowledge. (“I don't know” 
answer.) The spell will, at best, pro 
to aid character decisions, and the deity contacted 
structures its answers to further its own purposes. 

While affected by the illumination spell, rather 
than ask a question during a round, the caster can 
request that the power contacted bestow a cure 
light wounds, cure blindness or deafness, cure dis- 
ease, prayer, or free action spell upon him or her. 
‘The casting of any of these spells other than cure 
light wounds, which can be granted up to four 
times, ends the spell, and no further questions are 
answered by the deity contacted, The caster cannot 
cast spells on others while affected by an illumi- 
nation spell, nor can he or she move, become 
invisible, or engage in any other action other than 
those described above. 

The material components of this spell are the 
priest’s holy symbol and holy water. 


Imbue Purpose 


N 


Notes: Granted by the sun god Amaunator of 
the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Illusory Artillery 
A Sth-level spell of the sphere of War. See appen- 
dix in Vol. 3. 


Illusory Fortifications 
A 7th-level spell of the sphere of War. See appen- 
dix in Vol. 3. 


Ilmater, Endurance of 


See endurance of Ilmater. 


Ilmater, Favor of 
See favor of Ilmater. 


Ilmater’s Fist 
(Invocation/Evocation) 
Sphere: Combat 


Level: 4 

Range: 90 yds. 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 7 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell brings into being a spectral flying 
fist. This flashes through the air to unerringly hit a 
single chosen target creature. The fist deals 
damage to the creature equal in hit points to all 
damage suffered by the caster (from all sources 
and ignoring healing magic that may have been 
applied) in the preceding hour. Having delivered 
its lone attack, it vanishes. 

The flying fist fades away harmlessly if the 
target creature passes beyond spell range or if it 
comes into contact with a dispel magic effect or a 
continuous magical barrier. (It can find its way 
around barriers that do not seal against solid walls 
or surroundings.) Once the casting is completed, 
the caster of Ilmater’s fist cannot change the 
chosen target. 

Notes: Granted by Ilmater, the One Who 
Endures, of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Image of the Sorcerer-Kings 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Cosmos 
Level: 4 
Range: | yd. whe. 


Components: S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: 1 tum 

Area of Effect: 1 templar’s sigil 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell can be used only by templars. When a 
templar’s sigil is presented and this spell is invoked, 
the priest is affected as if the hand of the sorcerer- 
kings spell had been cast. The shimmering field cre- 
ated diffuses magical energy, giving the templar a 
+2 bonus against all spells cast against him or her. 

The sigil is also empowered with the ability to 
cause fear by touch for the duration of the spell. 

Notes: Restricted to templars from the DARK 
Sun setting, for whom it is common. 


Imago Interrogation 
Quest spell, see appendix in Vol. 3. 


Imbue Purpose 
(Enchantment) 
Sphere: Guardian 


Level: 6 
Range: Touch 


Saving Throw: Special 


This spell allows the priest to give a weapon 
the purpose to slay a particular type of creature 
(ghouls, bears, elves, and so on) for a period of 24 
hours. If the priest is good, the creature type must 
be evil. The weapon is treated as a +3 weapon for 
attack and damage. A magical weapon with 
greater bonuses uses those instead. A priest cannot 
imbue purpose to more than one weapon at a time. 

Any subject creature hit by the weapon must 
make a saving throw vs. death or be slain instantly. 
If a creature with 8 or more Hit Dice is slain by the 
weapon, the spell ends immediately. Any creature 
subject to the slaying effect that is hit by the 
weapon and survives must make an immediate 
saying throw vs. spell or flee as if affected by a 
fear spell. 

The material component is powdered diamond 
dust worth 1,000 gp. 


r a aE 


Imbue Undead Spell Ability 


N 


Notes: Very rare spell. (Updated from DRAGON 
Magazine.) 


Imbue Undead With Spell Ability 


Level: 5 
Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 undead creature 
Saving Throw: None 


This is a priest's version of the Sth-level 
wizard spell of the same name. The caster can 
affect one undead creature (which can be con- 
trolled without hampering this spell). The creature 
becomes a spell focus for the caster—who can 
cast any currently memorized spell through the 
creature, While the spell is emitted from the 
undead creature, all casting activity (including 
component use) is performed by the priest. Dis- 
tance does not matter, provided the priest and 
undead remain on the same plane. However, 
unless other spells are used to see the undead 
creature's surroundings, or it is in a known loca- 
tion, such spells are hurled blindly. 

The priest can cast one spell per round through 
the undead creature, up to a maximum of one spell 
per level of experience. This ability lasts until the 
creature is destroyed, the maximum number of 
spells is used, or the spell runs out (it can last up to 
day per level of the caster). 

With this spell, a hidden priest can avoid direct 
combat. It can be cast on an undead affected by 
revenance and/or undead battlemight, and the 
spells will function simultaneously. 

The material component is a drop of the 
caster's own blood, 

Notes: Rare spell from the FORGOTTEN REALMS 
setting. 


Imbue With Blood Ability 


(Enchantment) 


Sphere: Charm 


Level: 3 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: | tum 
Duration: 1 day/level 
Area of Effect: | individual 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell allows a priest to grant a blooded or 
unblooded individual the use of one blood ability 
for a limited time. The priest casts the spell and 
invokes the name of his or her god while holding 
the individual with one hand and his or her holy 
symbol with the other. 

The priest has no control over the blood ability 
conferred on the individual. The recipient rolls for 
a blood ability as if rolling up a new blooded char- 
acter, using Tables 12 and 13 in the BIRTHRIGHT 
Rulebook. The bloodline derivation of this tempo- 
rary ability depends on the caster's faith, not the 
subject's nature. 


Priest’s Faith Derivation Granted 
Haelyn, Cuiraécen Anduiras 

Erik Reynir 

Nesirie Masela 

Ruomil Vorynn 

Sera, Eloéle Brenna 

Avani, Laerme Basaiûa 

Kriesha, Belinik Azrai 


Nonhuman priests roll on Table 11: Bloodline 
Derivation when they cast this spell to determine 
the bloodline derivation of the ability they confer. 

The strength of the blood ability is determined 
by the priest's level. If the priest is 5th-8th level, 
the blood ability granted is a minor one. A priest of 
9th-1 1th level confers a major ability, and a priest 
who is 12th level or higher grants a great ability, 

The individual instantly knows the blood abil- 
ity gained and how to use it. An individual who 
receives a blood ability already possessed has the 
ability improved by one level, if applicable. Other- 
wise, the spell is wasted. 

The material components are the priest’s holy 
symbol and a few strands of hair pulled (not cut) 
from the subject’s head. 

Notes: Uncommon for priests from Cerilia, the 
BIRTHRIGHT setting; virtually unknown elsewhere. 


Imbue With Spell Ability 


Area of Effect: Person touched 
Saving Throw: None 


By the use of this spell, the priest can transfer 
a limited number and selection of his currently 


eg a eT a ee eS 


Impart Knowledge 


memorized spells, and the ability to cast them, to 
another person. Only nonspellcasters (including 
rangers under 8th level and paladins under 9th 
level) can receive this bestowal; the imbue with 
spell ability enchantment does not function for 
those belonging to spellcasting classes, for unin- 
telligent monsters, nor for any individual with 
less than 1 full Hit Die. In addition, the being 
thus imbued must have a Wisdom score of 9 or 
higher. Only priest spells of an informational or 
defensive nature or a cure light wound spell can 
be transferred. Transferring any other spell type 
negates the entire attempt, including any allow- 
able spells that were chosen. Higher level persons 
can receive more than one spell at the priest's 
option: 


Level of Spells 
Recipient Imbued 

1 One Ist-level spell 

3 Two Ist-level spells 

S+ Two Ist- and one 2nd-level spells 


The transferred spell’s variable characteristics 
(range, duration, area of effect, and so on) function 
according to the level of the priest originally imbu- 
ing the spell. 

A priest who casts imbue with spell ability 
upon another person loses the number of 1st- and 
2nd-level spells he has imbued, until the recipient 
uses the transferred spells or is slain. For example, 
a 7th-level priest with five 1st- and four 2nd-level 
spells imbues a 10th-level fighter with a cure light 
wound spell and a slow poison spell. The priest 
now can have only four Ist-level spells memo- 
rized until the cure is cast and only three 2nd-level 
spells until the slow poison is cast, or until the 
fighter is killed. In the meantime, the priest 
remains responsible to his ethos for the use to 
which the spell is put. 

The material components for this spell are the 
priest's holy symbol, plus some minor item. from 
the recipient that is symbolic of his profession (a 
lockpick for a thief, and so on). This item, and 
any material component for the imbued spell, is 
consumed when the imbue with spell ability spell 
is cast. 

Notes: Common for clerics (PHB). 


Immobility, Azuth’s 
See Azuth’s immobility. 


Immunity To Weapons 
(Alteration) 
Reversible 
Sphere: Protection 


Level: 6 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 1 

Duration: 1 rd./3 levels 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell makes the recipient immune to all non- 
magical and some magical weapons. For shukenja of 
Lith level or below, the spell makes the recipient 
immune to normal weapons of all types, Thereafter, 
for every 6 additional levels the shukenja possesses, 
one additional plus of immunity is gained. Thus a 
12th-level shukenja renders the recipient immune to 
normal and +1 weapons, 18th level, +2 weapons or 
less, and so on. The subject can be struck by these 
weapons, but suffers no damage. The protection 
applies only against attacks made by weapons and 
weapon-like objects, not attacks made by natural 
abilities. In addition, creatures wielding weapons or 
weapon-like objects that can inflict high damage can 
hit creatures normally immune to normal weapons: 
eighteen or more points of damage hit as if they had 
a +1 item, 20 or more points equals a +2 item, 24 or 
more equals a +3 item, 28 or more points equals a +4, 
and 30 points or greater is equal to a +5 item. This is 
solely for calculating whether the subject can be hit, 
not the chance of hitting. 

The reverse of this spell, vulnerability, lowers 
the plus required to hit creatures that can only be 
hit by magical weapons. A shukenja under 12th 
level lowers the plus required by —1, 13th to 18th 
—2, and so on. No saving throw is allowed. 

The material component of both forms is a 
dagger worth at least 1 ch’ien (5 gp), which must 
be shattered when the spell is cast. 

Notes: Common for oriental priests; otherwise, 
very rare. 


Impart Knowledge 
(Divination) 
Sphere: Thought 


Level: 2 
Range: Touch 
‘Components: S 

Casting Time: 1 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: 1 being 
Saving Throw: None 


FE aan 


~ Impending Permission = 


‘This spell allows the caster to communicate com- 
plex thoughts (including magical symbols, dia- 
grams, maps, explanatory images—which can move 
in sequence to show a procedure—and the like) 
silently to the mind of the recipient by touch. This 
spell is often used to show an individual the like- 
nesses of other beings as an aid to recognizing them, 
to show a clear route or directions to an unfamiliar 
place, or to quickly transfer lists of names, heraldic 
devices, or other symbols. The information is trans- 
ferred instantaneously, leaving the recipient to mull 
its implications over later. The spell is of use to 
dying priests who have little time left or in the frenzy 
of battle when only moments of contact are possible. 

Notes: Granted by Oghma, Lord of Knowl- 
edge, in the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Impeding Permission 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
Sphere: Law 


Level: 5 

Range: 150 yds, 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 3 
Duration: 1 turn/level 
Area of Effect: | creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


‘This spell can be cast only on creatures with an 
Intelligence of 2 or greater and the ability to com- 
municate with the caster. The spell interferes with 
the subject’s ability to make decisions: no action 
can be performed by the subject without first gain- 
ing the permission of the caster or an individual 
designated by the caster. The subject heeds only 
the individual designated by the caster. 

Before undertaking any action, the subject 
must gain permission. The subject cannot follow 
through with an action started before the casting 
until permission is received. If permission is 
denied, the subject cannot act until he or she thinks 
of an alternate action and gains permission to per- 
form it. 

Each round, the subject must decide an action 
for that round; at the subject's initiative, permis- 
sion must be asked and received to perform the 
action. If permission is denied, the subject can take 
no action that round. The only actions exempt 
from the need for permission are involuntary 
actions such as breathing. 

Asking and gaining permission takes only a 
short amount of time in most cases. A simple 
request, such as asking permission to swing a 
sword in the middle of combat, can be accom- 
plished quickly. Complicated requests, such as 
getting permission to act on a complicated plan, 
take more time. The DM may consider adding a 
modifier to the subject's initiative roll in such 
cases. 

Notes: Common for priests with major access 
to the sphere of Law (ToM). 


Impenetrable Falsehood 
(Abjuration) 
Sphere: Divination 


Level: 2 

Range: Touch 

‘Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: 12 hrs. 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell makes any untruth spoken by the 
caster or a touched spell recipient sound convinc- 
ing and hides all untruths from a detect lie spell, 
similar magics, related spell-like abilities, and 
even the discernment of specialty priests of Tyr. It 
also foils ESP and other mind-reading magics or 
psionic abilities that could reveal a lie. True 
thoughts are hidden behind random ruminations 
‘on two or three topics mentally chosen by the 
caster as the spell is cast. For example, the possi- 


I IE ES I ie a 


Inanimate Servant 


NÝ 


ble whereabouts of a stream that must have been 
somewhere hereabouts; how soon the next apple 
crop might be ready; and the name of a particular 
merchant met years ago in a tavern and seen from 
afar down a crowded street just a tenday ago). 

Notes: Granted by Leira, Lady of Mists, of the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Impervious Sanctity of Mind 
(Abjuration) 
Sphere: Protection, Thought 


Level: 7 
Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: 1 turn/level 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


When using this spell, the priest becomes com- 
pletely immune to any mind-affecting spell, power, 
or psionic effect. This includes amnesia, awe, 
beguiling, charm, command, confusion, domina- 
tion, emotion, empathy, ESP, fascination, fear, fee- 
blemind, hold, hypnotism, insanity, magic jar, mind 
blast, phantasmal killer, possession, rulership, 
sleep, soul trapping, suggestion, telepathy, and any 
psionic attack or power of the telepathic discipline. 
In short, if the spell or effect coerces the priest into 
taking an action or forming an impression that he 
or she doesn’t wish to, it fails while impervious 
sanctity of mind is in effect. The only mind-affect- 
ing spells or powers that can affect the protected 
priest are those of exceedingly powerful creatures 
or artifacts and relics. 

Unlike the wizard spell mind blank, the imper- 
vious sanctity of mind offers no protection against 
detection or scrying. However, it is effective 
against some attacks and powers that mind blank is 
powerless against. 

The spell requires a small ring of lead that was 
once breathed upon by a red dragon. 

Notes: Uncommon for clerics (PO:SM). 


Implore 
Reversed form, abjure. 


Implosion/Inversion 
Quest spell, see appendix in Vol. 3. 


Impregnable Mind 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
Sphere: Protection, Thought 


Level: 5 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 1 

Duration: 1 turn + 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell guards the spell recipient against 
magical or psionic attacks that affect the mind. 
This includes beguiling, charm, domination, fee- 
blemind, hold, and similar effects, as well as most 
telepathic psionic powers and attacks. Against 
magical influences, impregnable mind grants a +4 
bonus to saving throws; if the attack normally 
allows no saving throw, the spell recipient can 
attempt one at no modifier. Against telepathic 
psionics, the spell inflicts a —6 penalty to the 
attacking psionicist’s power checks, making it 
more likely that a psionic attack or telepathic con- 
tact will fail. Impregnable mind offers no protec- 
tion against nontelepathic psionics, such as a 
telekinetic thrashing or other psionics that affect 
the body. 

Notes: Uncommon for clerics (PO:SM). 


Improved Entangle 
See Sheela’s entangle. 


Inanimate Servant 
(Conjuration) 
Sphere: Creation 


Level: 6 

Range: 60 yds. 

‘Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: 1 hr./level 

Area of Effect: 1 object/level 
Saving Throw: None 


By means of this spell, the shukenja can trans- 
form nonliving objects into helpers and servants, 
who are able to follow his commands and move 
about. The affected objects have a movement rate 
of 6, moving by whatever form of locomotion is 
most appropriate. These servants cannot fight for 
the caster, but can be used to perform tasks requir- 
ing great strength, proficiency, and skill. They are 
imbued with full intelligence to perform the task at 
hand and need no more direction than would a 
common worker. The objects can perform any task 


349 


~~ Incarnation of Evil — Old Empire F 


in which the shukenja, or a designated foreman, 
has proficiency (except for tasks requiring artistic 
skill or judgment). They could assist a master car- 
penter in raising a building, help a farmer harvest 
a crop, be recruited to repair the walls of a castle, 
and so on Their proficiency in the task is equal to 
that of the shukenja or foreman, 

‘The material component is a miniature dummy 
of straw for each servant animated. 

Notes: Common for oriental priests; otherwise, 
very rare. 


Incarnation of Evil — Old Empire 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Animal, Combat 


Level: 5 

Range: 0 

‘Components: V, $, M 
Casting Time: 8 

Duration: 1 turn/level 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell is a limited form of the 9th-level 
wizard spell shape change. With this spell, the 
priest is able to assume the form of a crocodile, 
jackal, giant scorpion, or poisonous snake (an 
adder or asp) with most of the corresponding abil- 
ities and vulnerabilities thereof. If the snake form 
is assumed, roll 1d10 to determine the details of 


the snake's poison (see table). 
Onset Poison Save 
Time (rds.) Damage Adj. 
26 2d4 +1 
1d4+1 death +2 
1 death -3 


Each form has the original hit points, THACO, 
and Intelligence of the priest, but any damage suf- 
fered in one form transfers between forms, includ- 
ing a return to the priest's normal form. One 
alteration in form can be made per round, and no 
system shock survival roll is required, The alter- 
ation in form is extremely quick and is always 
assumed to take place before any other actions are 
taken by anyone in a round; altering form does not 
preclude the caster from taking other action in a 
round at his or her normal initiative. 

‘There is a 1% cumulative chance per use of this 
spell that Set permanently transforms the caster 
into a divine minion of Set (no saving throw, char- 
acter becomes an NPC controlled by the DM). 

‘The material components for this spell are the 
tooth of a jackal, the stinger of a scorpion, the 


tooth of a crocodile, the jawbone of a snake, and 
the priest’s holy symbol. If any of the first four 
components are not available, the spell can still be 
cast, but that form is not available to the caster. 

Notes: Granted by the Mulhorandi deity Set of 
the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Infestation 
(Summoning) 
Sphere: Elemental Earth 


Level: 4 

Range: 20 ft. 
Components: $, M 
Casting Time: 6 rds. 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: None 


A 


This spell is similar to insect swarm except that 
it summons thousands of tiny parasites from the 
surrounding area to take root in the clothes, hair, 
and sometimes even the skin of the subject. The 
creature is rarely aware of the casting, so the hor- 
rible effects of whatever parasites take hold are the 
first sign of the spell's success. This spell does not 
work against undead, cthereals, and other crea- 
tures unaffected by parasitic infestation. It takes 
about | day before infestation effects set in. 

The spellcaster has no control over the type of 
parasites summoned. Roll on the table to deter- 
mine parasitical type. The exact effects of this 
spell depends on the type of parasite that appears. 

Cure spells greater than cure light wounds, 
remove curse, and heal destroy the parasites 
instantly. If the infestation is not countered before 
destructive effects begin to affect the subject, the 
creature must be treated for those as well. 

The material component can be any item that 
belongs to the creature. It is buried just beneath the 
earth as the spell is cast, and can be dug up and 
reused anytime thereafter. 

Notes: Common for Elemental Earth priests 
from the DARK SUN setting. 


350 


Infravision, Shevarash’s 


Ne 


PARASITE TYPE 


2 Eye Mites: Eye mites cause permanent 
blindness in 7-12 days (d6+6). 

3 Desert Lice: Desert lice cause the host to 
feel generally unhealthy. Any saving throw 
made against. disease or poisons are at a -2 
penalty. The lice can be removed by smoth- 
ering affected areas in oil or nonporous 
salves, or by magic. 

4 Skin-Worms: These are the most dreaded 
parasites in all the wastes of Athas. They 
live in flesh and secrete a toxic waste that 
slowly poisons the host. Each day after the 
third day of infection, a saving throw vs. 
poison is required. Failure brings death in 
no more than 24 hours. A slow poison spell 
allows another saving throw for the day the 
‘spell was cast. A neutralize poison kill the 
parasites. A person always knows that he 
has skin-worms, the tell-tale sores mark his 
flesh and cause constant itching and pain. 

5 Sand Fleas: These tiny creatures are a 
‘source of constant itching and discomfort. A 
creature infected by sand fleas ceases to 
heal at the normal 1 hit point per day rate, 


-3 penalty to all reaction rolls. Sand fleas 
leap from host to host, almost like a conta- 
gious disease. Anyone traveling with the 
infested host rolls a saving throw vs. breath 


one of the strangest insect creatures on any 
world. These tiny vermin infest a creature's 
hair and scalp, secreting a drug that causes 
hallucinations, delirium, and hysteria. The 
host creature becomes confused, as if by a 
feeblemind spell, and often feels unseen 
things crawling over its body, or sees terri- 
fying creatures lurking just beyond the next 
sand dune. The worms’ effect grows in time, 


altering ailment is at work. The usual spells 
kill the bugs, as does shaving the head and 
scrubbing the scalp. 


Inflict Labor 


Reversed form, ease labor. 


Inflict Scurvy 
Aka cause scurvy. 


Infrainvisible 


Casting Time: 2 
Duration: 24 hrs. maximum 
Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell masks the heat signature of the creature 
touched, causing it to be undetectable to infravision, 
although still visible to normal sight. Of course, the 
infrainvisible creature is not magically silenced, and 
certain other conditions (including detect invisibility 
spells and similar magics) may render the creature 
detectable. Even allies cannot see the infrainvisible 
creature or its gear with infravision, unless these 
allies can normally see invisible things, employ 
magic to do so, or employ normal sight. 

Items dropped or put down by the infrainvisible 
creature become visible to infravision; items 
picked up disappear if tucked into the clothing or 
pouches worn by the creature. However, light and 
very hot heat sources (such as fire) never become 
infrainvisible, although a source of light or heat 
can become so (thus, in effect, creating a light or 
heat signature with no visible source). 

‘The spell remains in effect until it is magically 
broken or dispelled, until the priest or recipient 
cancels it, until the recipient attacks any creature, 
or until 24 hours have passed. 

The infrainvisible being can open doors, talk, 
eat, climb stairs, and so on, but a being who 
attacks immediately becomes visible to infravi- 
sion, although the infrainvisibility allows a first 
attack against a creature relying solely on infravi- 
sion. Highly intelligent creatures (Intelligence of 
13 or more) with 10 or more Hit Dice or levels of 
experience have a chance to detect infrainvisible 
objects (a successful saving throw vs. spell means 
they noticed the infrainvisible object). 

The material components of this spell are the 
priest’s holy symbol and a drop of fire beetle ichor. 

Notes: Granted by the elven god Shevarash. 


Infravision, Shevarash’s 
See Shevarash’s infravision. 


351 


~ Inheritance Assurance * = 


Inheritance Assurance 


(Enchantment) 


Sphere: Protection 


Level: 4 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 tum 
Duration: 1 month 
Area of Effect: Two creatures 
Saving Throw: Special 


Valued highly by regents across Cerilia, inher- 
itance assurance guarantees that if a regent dies 
prematurely or far from home, his or her regency 
and bloodline pass to the chosen heir. 

Both the regent and heir must be present for the 
casting of the spell. As long as the spell is in effect, 
the heir receives the scion’s bloodline, abilities, 
and regency upon the instant of the scion’s death. 
Even bloodtheft is impossible while this spell is in 
effect. The spell ends immediately, however, if the 
designated heir dies before the scion. 

If bloodtheft is attempted with a tighmaevril 
Weapon, the scion must roll a saving throw to pre- 
vent losing his or her bloodline and regency. The 
scion gains a +1 bonus to the roll for every 10 
points of regency possessed. 


This spell cannot be cast on an unwilling 
regent, but the heir can be unwilling. In such a 
case, the unwilling heir must be restrained during 
the casting in order for the spell to work. 

‘The material components are a lock of hair 
from the scion and heir and a small silver paten on 
which the hair is placed. The paten is not con- 
sumed in the casting. 

Notes: Uncommon in Cerilia, the BIRTHRIGHT 
setting; otherwise, virtually unknown. 


Initiation 
(Invocation) P 
Sphere: Elemental (All) 


Level: 7 

Range: Special 
Components: V 

Casting Time: 12 hrs. 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: None 


hie 


This spell is used to protect a student from the 
element allied with the caster, It also opens a link 
between the initiate and the beings to be served. 
Each elemental initiation has its own require- 


wi 
rn 
nu 


Rumors abound that if an initiate’s mentor dies 
while the initiate is protected by this spell, the stu- 
dent becomes a terrible undead creature. No one 
has ever proven this, but if true, the creature would 
be a ghastly fusion of the ruined remnants of the 
student and the element. 

Notes: Universal for Elemental priests from 
the DARK SUN setting. 


Initiation: A successful initiation marks a 
student’s achievement of status as an Elemental 
cleric. The rites all involve a long joumey to a 
desolate place and long sessions with the initi- 
ate’s mentor. Thereafter initiations differ: 

Air; Fall from a mountain peak. 

Earth: Burial without food, water, or air. 

Fire: A night spent in a blazing bonfire 

Water: A night under natural, murky water, 


Inkjet 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Protection 


Level: 3 

Range: 0 

‘Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 

Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


When cast, the spell gives the priest the ability to 
jet away for one round at a movement rate of 18 in the 
direction he or she is facing, like a giant squid. The 
spelicaster must be careful about the direction chosen 
and not accidentally jet into an obstruction. Jetting 
into a solid object, such as a coral reef, the bottom of 
a ship, or into the sea floor causes 3d6 points of crush- 
ing damage. Jetting through plants, such as seaweed 
or kelp, causes 2d4 points of damage from being 
whipped by the fronds, If within 10 feet of the surface 
of the water, a spellcaster can jet straight upward and 
actually leap out of the water like a dolphin to a height 
of 1d8 feet. Ixitxachitl priests and sahuagin priestesses 
sometimes use this leap technique to attack anyone 
who leans too far over the side of a ship or dock. 

When jetting away, the priest leaves behind a 
great cloud of inky darkness that reduces visibility 
to zero within its confines. The cloud is a large 
oval shape, 60 feet high, 60 feet wide, and 80 feet 
long. The cloud lasts for five rounds, suddenly dis- 
sipating at the end of the fifth round. It cannot be 
negated by a light or continual light spell. 

The material components are a small (not nec- 
essarily living) squid and a black pearl. 


353 


Inscribe Speech — Old Empire 


Notes: Uncommon for sea priests; otherwise, 
very rare. (Updated from Dragon Magazine.) 


Inner Sanctum 
(Enchantment) 
Sphere: Wards 


Level: 7 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, M 
Casting Time: 1 tum 
Duration: 1+ hr/level 


Saving Throw: Special 


This spell seals a 20-foot sphere or a single 
room of like size against scrying, psionics, and 
magical entry (teleport, dimension door, and so 
on). It allows no access to or from other planes 
or dimensions. If not cast in an enclosed area, the 
sanctum area not only blends into the surround- 
ings, but subtly affects the senses of creatures 
around it so that not only is it not detected, but 
creatures subconsciously avoid entering the 
warded area. The caster can, at will, allow others 
to see and enter the sanctum. The caster can see 
his or her own sanctum. The spell boundaries are 
not solid and do not prevent the entry of physical 
material, such as rain. 

Notes: Very rare spell. (Updated from Dracon 
Magazine.) 


Inscribe 
Aka inscribe speech. 


Inscribe Speech — Old Empire 
(Alteration, Conjuration) 
Sphere: All 


Level: 2 

Range: 3 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 5 
Duration: 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell (more commonly known in Mulho- 
rand as inscribe) enables the words of the caster to 
be directly etched on a piece of paper, vellum, or 
papyrus. All the caster need do is speak the words, 
and they are inscribed in the language he or she is 
speaking on any appropriate writing surface within 
3 yards. If the caster subsequently speaks a spell 
during the spell’s duration, the sounds of the verbal 
component are transcribed phonetically, but other 


~ Insect Host r 


components of the spell are not transcribed, and the 
magical effect originally generated by the sounds is 
not called forth by anyone repeating the sounds. 
The material components for this spell are 
squid ink, a hawk’s feather, and papyrus. 
Notes: Granted by the Mulhorandi deity Thoth 
of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Insect Host 
Athasian Dragon King magic, 10th level; psionic 
component renders the spell uncastable by priests. 


Insect Plague 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 
Sphere: Animal 


Level: 5 

Range: 120 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: | tum 

Duration: 2 rds./level 

Area of Effect: 180-ft. diameter X 60 ft. high cloud 
Saving Throw: None 


When this spell is cast by the priest, a horde of 
creeping, hopping, and flying insects gather and 
swarm in a thick cloud. In an environment free of 
normal insects, the spell fails. The insects obscure 
vision, limiting it to 10 feet. Spellcasting within 
the cloud is impossible. Creatures in the insect 
plague, regardless of Armor Class, sustain | point 
of damage for each round they remain within, due 
to the bites and stings of the insects. Invisibility is 
no protection. All creatures with 2 or fewer Hit 
Dice automatically move at their fastest possible 
speed in a random direction until they are more 
than 240 yards away from the insects. Creatures 
with fewer than 5 Hit Dice must check morale; 
failure means they run as described above. 
Heavy smoke drives off insects within its 
bounds. Fire also drives insects away; a wall of fire 
in a ring shape keeps a subsequently cast insect 
plague outside its confines, but a fireball simply 
clears insects from its blast area for one round. A 
single torch is ineffective against this vast horde of 
insects, Lightning, cold, or ice are likewise ineffec- 
tive, while a strong wind that covers the entire 
plague area disperses the insects and ends the spell. 
‘The insect plague lasts two rounds for each level of 
The insects swarm in an area that centers 
around a summoning point determined by the 
spellcaster; the point can be up to 120 yards away 
from the priest. The insect plague does not move 
thereafter for as long as it lasts. The spell can be 
countered by a dispel magic spell. 


‘The material components of this spell are a few 
grains of sugar, some kernels of grain, and a smear 
of fat. 

Notes: Common for clerics (PHB). 


Insect Ward 


The druid casts insect ward on special focii of 
the spell, a pair of rune-carved wooden stakes. The 
druid then plants one stake in the ground, walks up 
to 100 feet per level away, and plants the other 
stake. The spell forms an invisible, 30-foot-high 
barrier extending between the stakes along the path 
the druid walked. The barrier is 99% likely to cause 
a normal insect encountering it to turn and go in the 
opposite direction. If one or several barriers join to 
completely enclose an area, affected insects depart 
the area as well. Those insects trapped in the area 
become lethargic and slowly die off. While the spell 
remains, the warded area has only 1% of its normal 
insect population, which will affect the area’s 
ecosystem as insects form a large portion of many 
creatures’ diets. Details of this are left to the DM. 

By means of the runes carved into the stakes, 
the druid determines what types of insects the spell 
excludes. This can be specific (for example, only 
mosquitoes and aphids) or general (for example, 
all plant-eaters, or all blood-drinkers). Giant 
insects are unaffected, as are magically summoned 
or controlled insects. The stakes radiate magic 
until the spell ends. If either stake is removed from 
the ground, even for a moment, the spell is broken. 

Notes: Very rare druid spell. (Updated from 
DraGoN Magazine.) 


Saving Throw: Neg. 


3: 


54 


Intensify Sensation 


Ne 


This spell filis the shukenja with great oratory 
ability, allowing the priest to explain the wonders 
of his or her religion to others. When cast, the 
shukenja sermonizes about the precepts of his or 
her ethos, attempting to sway or convert his listen- 
ers. For the duration of the spell casting, the 
shukenja is considered to have an 18 Charisma. 
Furthermore, the caster’s words are inspired, pro- 
viding hope and faith to all who listen. Everyone in 
the area of effect must make a saving throw versus 
death, Those who successfully make the saving 
throw are unaffected by the spell; those who fail are 
affected. They understand the true meaning of the 
shukenja’s words and become followers of his or 
her way. Their fervor is not violent or particularly 
strong (that is, they do not become warriors in the 
cause of the belief). Rather, they decide to gain 
more understanding and to make prayers and offer- 
ings to the shukenja’s deity without disrupting their 
normal lives. However, those who roll a | on the 
saving throw are particularly moved by the sermon 
and offer special services or aid if needed. Such 
converts can become priests (if possible), provide 
land for a shrine, help construct a temple, and so on 
Those converted remain followers unless they 
suffer great misfortune or mistreatment or the ethos 
(and its priests) abandon the area. 

When using this spell before a large crowd, 
rolling individual saving throws can become quite 
tedious. Therefore, the saving throw can be used as 
a percentage of the listeners affected. First, deter- 
mine the average saving throw of the crowd based 
on the levels or Hit Dice of those listening. This 
saving throw is then calculated as a percentage, 
with 1 point of saving throw equal to 5 percentage 
points. Thus, a saving throw of 16 would indicate 
that 25% of the crowd is unmoved by the spell, 
while the remaining 75% decide to adopt the 
shukenja's beliefs. In addition, 5% of those listen- 
ing are particularly moved as noted above. To give 
an example, say that the shukenja instructs a crowd 
of 87 humans, all 0 level. The average saving throw 
is 16. Of those in the crowd, 65 are moved by the 
speech (round all fractions down) and 4 of the 65 
are fervent in their belief. The DM may wish to 
keep track of the number of converted NPCs com- 
pared to the total population of the village (or what- 
ever), especially if the characters are remaining in 
the same area for an extended period of time. 

Once an individual has made a saving throw 
against this spell. that individual is immune to the 
effects of the spell if used by the same shukenja. 
The creature has heard the shukenja and is 
unmoved by the words. 

Notes: Common for oriental priests; otherwise, 
very rare. 


Intensification of Weather 
Aka intensify weather. 


Intensify Sensation 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
Reversible 
Sphere: Charm 


Level: 3 
Range: Touch 


living creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell enables a Sharessin to intensify sensa- 
tions in herself or a single recipient. Unwilling crea- 
tures receive a saving throw vs. spell to negate this 
effect. Any physical or emotional sensation can be 
heightened to unbelievable heights through the 
application of this spell, often disconnecting the 
recipient from reality, creating an extremely height- 
ened interest or emotion, and proving to be an 
immense distraction from dealing with fast-paced 
and changing circumstances (such as in a combat 
situation). While this spell is in effect, all ability 
checks, attack rolls, damage rolls (minimum 1 point 
of damage), and saving throws are made with a -2 
penalty, and all wizard and priest spells are cast with 
a 1d4+1 casting time initiative penalty. 

Although normally employed in pleasurable sit- 
uations, this spell can be used heighten pain as well 
to a potentially incapacitating level. Damage suf- 
fered during the effects of this spell is perceived as 
25% (round up) worse than it actually is, although 
the spell has no effect on the actual damage 
inflicted. (Basically, add 25% to damage (rounding 
down) as phantom damage that goes away when the 
spell ends and that cannot kill the subject, though it 
can induce unconsciousness.) As a result, the sub- 
ject might collapse into unconsciousness wracked 
by unbearable pain even if he or she could normally 
continue to fight on. Likewise spells such as whip of 
pain (both wizard and priest versions), symbol of 
pain, or pain touch have twice their normal effect 
(or if inapplicable, twice the duration), 

‘This reverse of this spell, deaden sensation, can 
be employed to suppress physical pain or other 
harmful feelings. While this spell is in effect, the 
recipient is immune to the effects of whip of pain, 
symbol of pain, pain touch, suggestion, other 
charm-type magics (and it terminates an existing 
charm), emotion, stunning, or nausea. All damage 
received while the reversed form of this spell is in 
effect is perceived as 25% less than actual, although 


355 


~ Intensify Weather r 


the full effects are felt when the spell ends. (Reduce 
the damage by 25% (rounding up) but keep a total 
of the amount of points of damage held in abeyance. 
When the spell ends, all unapplied damage is 
applied at once.) This dulling of pain can enable a 
Sharessin to fight on beyond normal unconscious- 
ness (or death) for the duration of the spell, 
although the Sharessin collapses into immediate 
unconsciousness upon the spell’s expiration if the 
damage would normally cause this effect and can 
die instantly if seriously enough injured. 

Notes: Granted by Sharess, the Tawny 
Temptress, of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Intensify Weather 


Reversed form, protection from weather. 


Interdiction 
Quest spell, see appendix in Vol. 3. 


Interruptible Light 
(Alteration, Enchantment) 
Sphere: Sun 


Level: 4 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: Permanent 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


xis 


Created by the ee'aar, this spell creates a round 
spot that radiates a beam of bright light. The spell 
must be cast on a person or item, The beam created 
is about four inches in diameter and illuminates an 
area in a direct line from the place it originates, to 
a range of 60 feet. (Of course, the light can be seen 
by others for a much greater distance.) The light is 
as bright as full daylight and lasts until negated by 
magical darkness or dispel magic. In addition, the 
caster. or another person named at the time of cast- 
ing. has mental control over the light, and can 
order it to turn off or come back on, at will. 

In a somber ceremony, the spell is cast by 
elders on young ce’aar when they reach maturity. 
It is placed on the chest of the recipient, who is 
named by the caster as the controller of the light. 
‘The ee'aar use the spell to light their way or to 
confuse or frighten enemies. Creatures who suffer 
penalties in bright light suffer them if the beam is 
directed at their eyes. A creatures that tries to avoid 
looking at the light is allowed a saving throw vs. 
paralyzation; success indicates the beam missed. 

Notes: Common in the RED STEEL setting; oth- 
erwise, virtually unknown. 


Intuition, Marthammor’s 
See Marthammor's intuition. 


Inverted Ethics 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
Sphere: Chaos 


Level: 4 

Range: 120 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 
Duration: 1 tum 

Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell reverses the ethics of a person or 
group of people. While under the influence of this 
spell, a creature behaves in a manner opposite to 
the way it normally would behave. Thus, a shop- 
keeper influenced by inverted ethics will think it 
perfectly normal for someone to pick up an item 
from her shop and walk out the door without 
paying for it. If someone tried to pay for an item, 
she would be insulted. If the spell was cast on a 
shopper in a store, that individual would find it 
natural to steal the item, thinking that he is behav- 
ing in a proper way. If the spell is cast on a pro- 
fessed thief, she will no longer steal, choosing to 
pay for her goods instead. 

Inverted ethics does not cause a creature to 
actively commit evil deeds (or good deeds). Thus, 
an affected creature won't go on a shoplifting 
rampage; it will steal only as the opportunity pres- 
ents itself. 

The spell affects one creature per level of the 
caster and within a 20-foot radius. Each subject is 
allowed a saving throw vs. spell to avoid the effect. 

The material component is a miniature golden 
balance, 

Notes: Common for priests with major access 
to the sphere of Chaos. 


Invisibility Purge* 
(Abjuration) 
Sphere: Wards 


Level: 3 

Range: 30 yds, 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 tum 

Duration: | turn/level 

Area of Effect: One 10-ft. cube/priest 
Saving Throw: None 


All invisible creatures who enter an area 
enchanted with invisibility purge instantly become 


356 


Invisibility to Enemies 


N 


visible. Invisibility-related spells do not take effect 
within the boundaries of the enchanted area, and 
magical devices such as potions of invisibility do 
not function. Creatures with the natural ability to 
become invisible are unable to use this ability 
within the area of effect. Invisible objects carried 
into the warded area also become visible. 

Invisible creatures or persons within the area of 
effect when invisibility purge ìs cast remain invis- 
ible; however, if such creatures exit the area of 
effect and later re-enter, they instantly become vis- 
ible. Such creatures also lose any natural ability to 
tum invisible as long as they remain within the 
area of effect. 

A creature who consumes a potion of invisibil- 
ity outside the warded area becomes invisible nor- 
mally, but becomes visible when entering the area 
of effect. If the potion has not expired by the time 
the creature leaves the area of effect, the creature 
becomes invisible again outside the area. 

Creatures invisible in their natural state or that 
have no visible form (such as invisible stalkers) are 
not affected by this spell. 

‘The material components are the priest's holy 
symbol and a silver mirror no more than three 
inches in diameter. 

The invisibility purge can be cast as a coopera- 
tive magic spell. The potency of this spell can be 
increased if several priests cast it at the same time. 
The duration of the combined spell is one turn per 
level of the most powerful priest, plus one tum for 
every contributing priest. Each priest also increases 
the area of effect by one 10-foot cube (these areas 
must be contiguous), Thus, a 9th-level priest and 
two 5Sth-level priests could create a 30-foot x 10- 
foot X 10-foot invisibility purge area having a dura- 
tion of 11 turns. 

Notes: Uncommon for clerics. common for 
priests with access to the sphere of Wards (ToM). 


Invisibility to Animals 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Animal 


Level: 1 

Range: Touch 

Components: S, M 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: | tum + 1 rd//level 

Area of Effect: 1 creature touched/level 
Saving Throw: None 


When an invisibility to animals spell is cast, the 
creature touched becomes totally undetectable by a 
normal animal with an Intelligence under 6. Normal 
animal includes giant-sized varieties, but excludes 


those with magical abilities or powers. The enchanted 
individual is able to walk among such animals or pass 
through them as if he or she did not exist. For exam- 
ple, the individual could stand before the hungriest of 
lions or a tyrannosaurus rex and not be molested or 
even noticed. However, a nightmare, hell hound, or 
winter wolf would be aware of the individual. For 
every level the caster has achieved, one creature can 
be rendered invisible. Any recipient attacking while 
this spell is in effect ends the spell immediately (for 
himself or herself only). 

The material component is holly, rubbed over 
the recipient. 

Notes: Common for druids (PHB). 


Invisibility to Animals, 10' radius 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Animal 


Level: 3 

Range: Touch 

Components: $, M 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: 1 turn +1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: None 

Saving Throw: 20-ft. diameter sphere 


This spell renders all creatures within the area 
of effect at the instant of casting totally unde- 
tectable with respect to normal animals (Intelli- 
gence under 6). This includes giant-sized animals, 
but it excludes any with magical abilities or 
powers. The affected creatures are able to walk 
amongst animals or pass through them as if they 
did not exist. The effect is broken for a recipient 
when that individual attacks, 

The material component is holly. 

Notes: Very rare for druids. (Updated from 
POLYHEDRON Newszine). 


Invisibility to Enemies 
(Ilusion/Phantasm) 
Sphere: Protection 


Level: 6 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: 3 rds./level 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell renders the shukenja or any he or she 
touches invisible to all creatures and characters who 
may have hostile intentions toward the caster or 
those things he or she represents. The subject can 


357 


Invisibility to Spirits 


NÝ 


move freely through such creatures without being 
noticed, but is perfectly visible to all other types of 
creatures. If the subject attacks hostile creatures 
while invisible, the creatures affected by the attack 
are instantly able to see the invisible individual. Fur- 
thermore, items picked up after the spell is in effect 
and visible magical effects are not invisible. 

Nonthinking creatures are not affected by this 
spell, since they are incapable of forming hostile 
intentions. Likewise, animals are not affected by 
this spell, since their motivations are based upon 
survival, not hostility or hatred. 

The material component is a white silk robe 
covered with handwritten sutras. 

Notes: Common for priests from an oriental 


setting; otherwise, very rare. 


Invisibility to Spirits 
(Mlusion/Phantasm) 
Sphere: Protection 


Level: 3 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 tum 

Duration: | turn/level 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


‘This spell renders the shukenja or any he or she 
touches invisible to spirits of all types. The subject 
can move freely through them without being noticed, 
although he or she perfectly visible to all other types 
of creatures. If the character attacks while invisible, 
those spirits affected by the attack are instantly able 
to see the invisible character. Furthermore, items 
picked up after the spell is in effect and visible mag- 

The material components are a writing brush 
and a jar of red ink. With these, the shukenja must 
write sutras on every part of the character being 
rendered invisible. 

Notes: Common for oriental priests; otherwise, 
very rare. 


Invisibility to Undead 
(Abjuration) 
Sphere: Necromantic 


Level: 1 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: 6 rds. 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell causes affected undead to lose track 
of and ignore the warded creature for the duration 
of the spell. Undead of 4 or fewer Hit Dice are 
automatically affected, but those with more Hit 
Dice receive a saving throw vs. spell to avoid the 
effect. A priest protected by this spell cannot turn 
affected undead. The spell ends immediately if the 
protected creature makes any attack, although 
casting spells such as cure light wounds, augury, 
or chant does not end the ward. 

The material component is the priest's holy 
symbol. 

Notes: Common for clerics (PHB). 


Iron Vigil 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Guardian 


Level: 2 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 1 tum 
Duration: 1 week + 1 day/level 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell allows the priest to ignore hunger, 
thirst, and extremes of climate for an extended 


358 


Istishia, Rites of 


EE 


period of time. While the spell is in effect, the priest 
requires no food or drink. The caster is effectively 
immune to exposure, dehydration, and heat or cold 
injury, since no naturally occurring climatic condi- 
tion harms him or her. (Lightning, floods, tornadoes, 
earthquakes, and other such hazardous phenomena 
may still cause physical injury, of course.) 

During the iron vigil, the priest is able to ignore 
the need to sleep by choosing to meditate instead. 
While meditating, the priest can keep watch on his 
surroundings, but he suffers a +1 penalty to any 
surprise checks. A priest who wishes to memorize 
spells must sleep normally. 

At the vigil's end, the priest must eat and drink; 
if no food or water is available, the priest must 
make a Constitution check once every four hours 
at a cumulative —1 penalty or fall into a coma and 
perish within 1d3 days if not aided. 

The priest also requires at least four hours of 
rest for each day without food, drink, or sleep 
during the vigil. 

Notes: Uncommon for clerics (PO:SM). 


Ironskin 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Elemental Earth 


1 
Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell is similar to the 4th-level wizard spell 
stoneskin in that the affected creature gains virtual 
immunity to any attack by cut, blow, or projectile. 
Physical attacks by weapons (even enchanted 
ones), natural animal weapons (such as fangs and 
claws), and hurled projectiles (giant boulders) 
cannot penetrate ironskin. Magical attacks from 
such spells as fireball, magic missile, lighting 
bolt, and so forth have normal effects. The spell 
blocks 1d6 attacks, plus one for every two levels of 
the caster. For example, an ironskin cast by a 13th- 
level priest protects against 7 to 12 attacks. How- 
ever, unlike the stoneskin spell, only physical 
attacks that would otherwise have scored a hit on 
the creature count against that total. For example, a 
fighter can attack with a sword and fail the attack 
roll without bringing down the total, while three 
magic missiles would hit, cause damage, and 
reduce the protection by three. 

‘The material component is a small iron statue 
worth at least 5 gp. 


Notes: Uncommon spell for Elemental Earth 
priests from the DARK SUN setting. 


Isis, Charm of 
See charm of Isis. 


Isolate Templar 


whe 


(Abjuration) 
Sphere: All 


Level: 6 

Range: 100 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 
Duration: 1 turn/level 
Area of Effect: 1 templar 
Saving Throw: None 


This is a specialized, offensive version of 
antimagic shell, designed to affect one humanoid 
creature. When this invisible field surrounds a 
templar, that templar is cut off from his or her sor- 
cerer-king with regard to acquiring priest spells. If 
the templar is maintaining a spell, such as wall of 
fire, then that spell automatically ends as the sup- 
porting magical energies are cut off. The templar is 
thrown back on his or her own resources, includ- 
ing magical items, normal weaponry, and any 
psionic powers possessed. The templar retains 
spells granted but not yet cast. 

Unless the sorcerer-king is watching the indi- 
vidual templar or a messenger reveals what's hap- 
pening, the sorcerer-king won't realize that this 
spell is in operation. Only a sorcerer-king can cast 
a dispel magic spell powerful enough to get rid of 
an isolate templar spell. The spell cannot be cast 
directly on a sorcerer-king to cut off all his tem- 
plars from spells. 

The material component is a gemstone of at 
least 1,000 gp value. 

Druids can use isolate templar, though in their 
version the magical field is visible and composed 
of either violet mist, flame, blown sand, or steam, 
depending on the druid’s elemental sphere. 

Notes: Very rare spell in the DARK SUN setting. 
(Updated from DRAGON Magazine.) 


Istishia, Rites of 
See rites of Istishia. 


359 


~ ishti: Port 


Istishia’s Port 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Elemental Water 


Level: 7 

Range: 0 

Components: V 

Casting Time: 4 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


Many priests of Istishia have felt the need to 
leave the Prime Material Plane and travel the mul- 
tiverse to discover how the Water Lord is viewed 
and respected on other planes. When Istishia is 
ready for them to leave the Prime Material Plane, 
he grants his priests this spell. 

‘The caster must be standing in a body of water, 
When /stishia’s port is cast, the priest's body and 
all his or her belongings turn into water, merging 
with the surrounding water. The priest can then 
transport himself or herself to any plane of exis- 
tence where another body of water exists. 

‘The spell normally only affects the priest, but 
Istishia has on a few occasions altered the spell to 
allow an entire company of priests (or the com- 
panions of one priest) to travel to the planes to do 
work in his service. 

Notes: Granted by Istishia the Water Lord of 
the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Istishia’s Tsunami 
(Invocation/Evocation) 
Sphere: Elemental Water 


Level: 7 

Range: 240 yds. 
Components: V, M 
Casting Time: 1 turn 
Duration: 1d4 rds. 
Area of Effect: Variable 
Saving Throw: Special 


‘This spell creates a huge, racing wall of water 
that destroys structures of less than the sturdiest 
stone construction. The size and destructive power 
of the wave depends on the amount of water pres- 
sure. The wave can be up to 10 feet high per level 
of the caster, An average river can wash away a 
farmstead, and an ocean can inundate an entire 
town. The tsunami washes away and scatters 
unprotected creatures with up to 3 Hit Dice, who 
must make a successful saving throw vs. death 
magic or be killed. Unprotected creatures with 4 or 
more Hit Dice take 3d6 points of damage per 


a a ER 6 ee Ee ae ae ae 


round of exposure. The tsunami has the same 
effect as an earthquake (see the 7th-level priest 
spell of that name) on all structures except those 
made of solidly constructed stone. 

The material components are the priest's holy 
symbol and a small stone, which is thrown into the 
water, 

Notes: Granted by Istishia the Water Lord of 
the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Ivy Siege 
(Enchantment) 
Sphere: Plant 


Level: 6 

Range: 90 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 9 

Duration: 6 tums 

Area of Effect: | building or similar structure 
Saving Throw: Special 


The ivy siege spell must be cast upon a stone or 
brick building constructed upon the earth; flying 
castles and the like remain unaffected, Immediately 
after casting, ivy begins to grow at a fantastic rate, 
climbing from the ground up the building’s walls, 
At the end of one turn, the ivy has climbed the 
walls. At the end of the second turn, green creepers 
have covered the structure. On the third tum, the 
ivy has deepened to a black-green and begins to 
squeeze the building. 

‘Starting on the third turn and every turn there- 
after, the building must make a saving throw 
against siege damage, as if attacked by a small cat- 
apult (see the DMG). Two cubic feet of the build- 
ing crumbles away for each point by which the 
saving throw misses each turn. This cycle contin- 
ues until the spell ends or the building is destroyed. 
‘The ivy rots away instantly when the spell ends. 

‘A druid can cast only one ivy siege per building 
at a time. After the ivy has rotted away, the druid 
can cast the spell on the same building again. 
However, multiple druids can cast several ivy siege 
spells on the same building. In the case of a large, 
interconnected series of buildings (like a castle), 
each casting affects only a single tower, keep, or 
wall segment, to a maximum of 1,000 cubic feet 
per level of the caster. 

‘The DM can choose to prohibit arctic and 
desert druids from using this spell if they are not 
familiar with ivy. 

‘The material component is an ivy leaf. 

Notes: Restricted to druids, uncommon. 


Join with Astral Traveler 


Jaws of the Wolf effect. Any sentient being touched by 
(Invocation/Evocation) the priest following the casting of this 
Sphere: Combat spell (except himself or herself) is sub- 

jected to its effects, even if the priest did 
Level: 2 not intend to probe that being. 
Range: 30 yds. When the priest touches a sentient 
Components: V, S, M being, the creature must make a successful saving 
Casting Time: 5 throw vs. spell to avoid the spell’s effects. Success 
Duration: Instantaneous ends the spell immediately with no effect. Failure 
Area of Effect: 1 creature paralyzes the creature for 2d4 rounds. Creatures 
Saving Throw: 1⁄2 that are immune to paralysis, undead creatures, 


and unliving creatures (such as golems) are not 
This spell creates a spectral set of gaping, affected by the spell. Nonintelligent creatures are 
many-fanged jaws that are about as large across as similarly immune. 
a human head. They rush toward a chosen target While a being is paralyzed by the effects of this 
creature at lightning speed, chasing if the creature spell, the priest can probe every comer of its mind. 
dodges, and strike unerringly if the creature is This aspect of the spell is blocked by magical or 
within range at the end of the round. After deliver- psionic defenses against ESP, mind-reading magic, 
ing an energy-draining bite, the jaws vanish. This or similar protections. The only type of information 
attack arrives at the very end of the round (thus, its the priest can determine is the professed faith of the 
damage does not disrupt spellcasting that takes subject of this spell, how true the subject has been 
less than a full round), The jaws inflict 2d8+2 to its professed faith, how well the subject has used 
points of damage. The creature must be visible to its natural strengths over the course of its life, how 
the caster during the entire casting time to bea well the subject has dealt with its weaknesses over 
valid target. A jaws of the wolf spell that fails to the course of its life, the failures of which the sub- 
reach its chosen target fades away and is lost. The ject is most ashamed, and the accomplishments of 
attack cannot strike the wrong creature, even if which the subject is most proud. One such nugget 
that creature switches positions precisely with the of information, in order, is learned each round that 
intended target. The target creature is allowed a the paralysis is in effect. 


saving throw vs. spell for half damage. ‘The spell is ended immediately if the priest 
‘The material components for this spell are four casts another spell or ceases to concentrate on 
wolf teeth. probing the mind of the subject. The casting of this 
Notes: Granted by the god Silvanus, the Forest spell is such a violation of a being’s sense of self 
Father, of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. that most subjects targeted by this spell build up a 
strong hatred for the casting priest during the 
Jergal’s Mind Probe spell’s effects. 
(Divination, Necromancy) The material component is the priest's holy 
Sphere: Divination, Necromantic symbol. 
Notes: Granted by the demipower Jergal, 
Level: 5 Scribe of the Doomed, of the FORGOTTEN REALMS 
Range: Touch setting. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 8 Join with Astral Traveler 
Duration: Special (Alteration) 
Area of Effect: 1 creature Sphere: Astral 


Saving Throw: Neg. 
Level: 4 

This spell combines the effect of the 3rd-level Range: 0 
wizard spell paralyze with the 2nd-level wizard Components: V, S 
spell ESP. Upon casting this spell, the priest gains Casting Time: 1 tum 
the ability to paralyze and mentally probe a single Duration: Special 
sentient being. The priest must roll a successful Area of Effect: The caster 
attack roll to deliver the spell effects. While the Saving Throw: None 
mind probe can be carried until it is delivered, a 
priest who tries to cast any other spell immediately An individual casting the astral spell leaves his 
dissipates the undelivered mind probe without or her physical body in suspended animation while 


361 


Journey's Malison 


the astral body travels. By touching the comatose 
body and casting join with astral traveler, a priest 
can cause his or her own astral body to leave the 
priest's physical body in suspended animation. 
The priest’s astral body then travels along the 
silver cord of the originally projected individual. 
The priest joins the projected individual as if part 
of the original casting of the astral spell; that is, 
the priest's own silver cord is connected to the pre- 
vious traveler's silver cord, and the priest becomes 
dependent upon the original caster. 

A priest who casts the 7th-level astral spell can 
project as many as seven creatures along with him- 
self or herself. However, priests casting join with 
astral traveler are an exception to this limit. Any 
number of priests can join another priest in the 
astral plane by use of this spell. 

Notes: Uncommon for clerics (ToM). 


Journey’s Malison 
Reversed form, journey’s orison. 


Journey’s Orison 
(Conjuration/Summoning, Abjuration) 
Reversible 
Sphere: Travelers 


Level: 1 

Range: Touch 

Components: V. S, M 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: 1 week/level 

Area of Effect: 1 individual or object 
Saving Throw: None 


Using this spell, the caster can bless an indi- 
vidual about to embark upon a long trip, or can 
bless an object that is being transported a long dis- 
tance, The caster lays hands on the individual or 
object, intones the spell, and states the destination 
of the journey. For the duration of the trip to a spe- 
cific site—which must be reachable in a number of 
weeks’ travel equal to the level of the caster—the 
blessed person receives a +2 bonus to all saving 
throws caused by natural mishaps, and a +1 bonus 
the to reaction rolls of any fellow wanderer. A 
blessed object gains a +2 bonus to all saving 
throws as well. 

The reverse of the spell, journey's malison, is 
rarely cast by good and neutral casters, though 
they might use it to punish brigands or unscrupu- 
lous merchants. Evil casters might employ the 
spell and then demand that the only way for the 
affected individual or object to survive is to have 
the caster accompany the expedition as a well- 


Notes: Common for specialty priests known as 
“stridesmen.” Very rare for priests with access to 
the sphere of Travelers. (Updated from DRAGON 
Magazine.) 


Jungle Avatar 
(Alteration) 


Sphere: Animal 


Level: 6 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 6 
Duration: | turn/level 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell transforms the caster into a towering 
reptilian monster with the head and tail of a giant 
crocodile (a greater segarran), The priest retains the 
use of his or her intellect, magical items, and 1st- to 
Sth-level spells. Hit points and base THACO are 
retained, Armor Class improves by 2, and 20% 
magic resistance, great physical strength, and dan- 
gerous physical attacks are gained. The greater 
segarran can strike once per round with a weapon 
(+6 bonus on damage from Strength bonus) or 
attack with a bite (3d6) and tail slap (2d10); the tail 
attack can affect up to three people simultaneously. 

This spell is physically demanding; the caster 
must make a successful system shock roll to sur- 
vive the transformation. The caster is compelled by 
the spell to devour fallen enemies in combat, a 
process usually taking 1-3 rounds depending upon 
the size of the slain foe. During this time, the priest 
cannot attack or cast spells. The caster can return to 
normal form at will, but this also requires a system 
shock roll. If the caster has not slain and devoured 
at least one creature, the chances of surviving the 
transformation back to normal form are decreased 
by 50% as a sign of Ragarra's displeasure. 

The material components are the powdered 
scales of a giant crocodile, mixed with a potion of 
sanctified water, blood, and bitter herbs. The caster 
imbibes the foul brew upon completing the spell. 

Notes: Granted by the jungle god Ragarra of 
the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


362 


Kami Absorption 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 
Sphere: Summoning 


Level: 5 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: | rd./level 
Duration: | rd./level 

Area of Effect: Being touched 
Saving Throw: None 


Kami absorption allows the priest to invest a 
willing individual with the kami (see below) of 
another object or being. Kami can be absorbed 
only from something that has it, such as a super- 
natural beast, an awe-inspiring mountain, an 
ancient tree, a magical weapon, or a large, 
strangely shaped rock. Normal objects such as 
small trees, common boulders, and nonmagical 
monsters do not have kamis. This spell does not 
absorb kami from any avatar or god. If the recipi- 
ent is unwilling, the spell fails. 

An individual invested with the kami of another 
object or being absorbs the essential nature of the 
object. This absorption manifests itself outwardly in 
a temporary +6 modifier to one (and only one) of 
these statistics: Str, Int, Wis, Dex, Con, Cha, 
THACO, AC, or MV. The statistic modified corre- 
sponds to the nature of the kami absorbed. Here are 
a few examples: mountain—Str; dragon—Int; ki- 
rin—Wis; stream—Dex; tree—Con; flower—Cha; 
snake—THACO; rock—AC; wind—MV. The effect 
of this spell lasts only for its duration; the absorption 
of a kami lasts for but one round per level of the 
caster. 

‘The object from which the kami is absorbed is 
not harmed by the spell. 

Notes: Restricted to priests from an oriental 
setting. 


DM Note: The correlation of “kami” to abil- 
ity score is extremely subjective. The DM's 


363 


“Kami” is a supernatural force of lesser or 
greater power, somewhere between a spirit and 
a god, venerated for its extraordinary magical 
power, For the purposes of the kami absorption 
spell, creatures of a magical nature or origin 
have a kami that can be tapped. Thus, dragons, 
unicorns, and lycanthropes would, while bears, 
griffons, and kobolds would not. If in doubt, a 
creature with magical abilities or magic resist- 
ance generally has a kami, while others don't. 


Karma Curse 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
Sphere: Charm 


Level: 7 

Range: | yd./level 
Components: V, S 

Casting Time: | 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 being/level 
Saving Throw: None 


A karma curse gives the caster a tangible guar- 
antee that the affected being won't commit a 
breach of ethics against him or her. It has no effect 
on creatures of animal Intelligence or less, or on 
other entities devoid of ethical awareness. 

The caster must decide, when casting the spell, 
which of these areas of ethics it will secure: truth, 
theft, murder, or the breaking of a promise. A being 
affected by a karma curse ensuring truth cannot lie 
to the caster without activating the penalty, If 
ensured against theft, the being likewise cannot 
steal from the caster. If ensured against murder, the 
being cannot murder the caster. If placed on a 
being who has made a promise to the caster, the 
being cannot break that promise without activating 
the penalty, 

A being who violates the curse conditions suf- 
fers an experience point loss of 100 points per 
round until stopping. If the action committed 
cannot be reversed, enough points to drop one 
experience level are lost. The curse still exists, 
however, and future losses of experience points are 
possible, While losing experience points, the being 
is aware of what is happening but perhaps not why, 
unless aware of the curse. Experience points can 


~ Karma Mask r 


be regained only by performing an act of contri- 
tion equivalent—in the DM’s judgment—to the 
act that resulted in the activation of the curse. 

The caster is not required to tell the being about 
the enchantment, but must inform the being that he 
or she is expected to behave in a manner that will 
not activate the spell (example: “I expect you to 
keep your word, my friend”). 

A karma curse cannot be removed by a remove 
curse spells. Due to the personal nature of the 
spell, a karma curse cannot be cast for anyone but 
the caster. 

A karma curse can be cast only by non-evil 
priests. On Toril, only followers of the Padhran 
faith use this spell, though other deities may grant 
it to followers demonstrating a genuine need for its 
peculiar properties. 

Notes: Very rare spell, known only to a few 
eastern religions. (The DM might consider adding 
it to the Vedic list.) 


Karma Mask 


Reversed form, see karma sight. 


Karma Sight — Vedic 
(Divination) 
Reversible 
Sphere: Divination 


Level: 2 

Range: 10 yds. 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 2 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: 1 creature/level 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell determines the number of karma 
points that a target creature has, (For rules on 
karma, see the special notes to the reincarnation 
sight spell.) In creatures from societies not based 
on India, it determines level or Hit Dice. An 
unwilling creature is allowed a saving throw vs. 
spell to avoid the revelation of its karma. This spell 
does not directly affect the mind of the creature, so 
Wisdom bonuses and mind shielding do not help 
avoid the effect. The priest can examine multiple 
creatures, but one that saves against the effect 
cannot be examined again during that casting of 
the spell. 

The reverse of the spell, karma mask, hides a 
subject's karma for 24 hours, though any divine 
being can see through the mask. 

Notes: Common for priests from a vedic 
(Indian) culture; otherwise very rare. (Updated 
from DraGoN Magazine.) 


Karsus’s Avatar 

Lost spell. Reputed to be the only 12th-level spell 
known in the Realms, this incantation enabled 
Karsus to temporarily steal part of the power of a 
deity. All notes and information developed by Karsus 
regarding the casting of this spell were destroyed by 
Mystra, successor of Mystryl. Even if these were 
recovered, this spell cannot be cast again, since 
Mystra has since changed the way magic works. 
This spell required many unique material compo- 
nents that are now impossible to acquire. For exam- 
ple, Karsus had to dip a gold dragon's gizzard in a 
brew of tarrasque blood and bile from a 12-headed 
hydra just to enchant one of the many material com- 
ponents required to cast the spell. 


Keen Eye — Elf 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Combat 


Level: 2 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: 1 rd./level (3 shots maximum) 
Area of Effect: The caster 

Saving Throw: None 


Also known as bull’s-eye, this spell assists the 
recipient in making called shots with a missile 
weapon. While gifted with a keen eye, all called 
shots are made without the normal —4 penalty to hit 
and the recipient does not suffer the normal +1 
penalty to initiative. This spell provides no bonuses 
to missile attacks that are not called shots or to 
attacks of any sort made with melee weapons. It 
provides no bonus of any sort if the normal penal- 
ties assessed for attempting a called shot are miti- 
gated by other factors. 

‘The material components are the priest's holy 
symbol and a hawk feather. 

Notes: Granted by the elven deity, Solonor 
Thelandira. 


Kelemvor’s Grace 
(Abjuration) 
Sphere: Protection 


Level: 5 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 8 

Duration: 3 rds. 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


"n a a ea 


| Kiss of Torment 


Ne 


This spell confers immunity to all undead abil- 
ities and attacks that go beyond purely physical 
damage (that is, all level- or ability-draining 
attacks, mummy rot and other diseases, a ban- 
shee’s wail, and the aging effect of a ghost, but not 
the chill of certain touches). This includes spells 
cast or passed on by undead creatures. 

Noncorporeal undead cannot pass through a 
being guarded by Kelemvor's grace and the magic 
prevents the transfer of lycanthropy, plague, and 
other diseases or conditions from the undead and 
corpses to those protected by this spell. Rot grubs 
emerging from an undead creature or parasites that 
burrow into living creatures make physical attacks 
and are not blocked by the spell. 

‘The material component is the caster’s holy 
symbol. If Kelemvor’s grace is conferred on a 
being other than the caster, the holy symbol must 
directly touch the recipient during casting. 

In desperation, certain priests have cast the 
grace directly on undead beings (by touch, suc- 
cessful attack roll required) during battle and 
report that it lasts only to the end of the round fol- 
lowing the touch in such situations. During this 
time, the undead are prevented from changing 
from corporeal to solid (or vice versa) and from 
using level draining or any other magical abili- 
ties, Undead capable of spellcasting (such as 
liches) can cast spells while under a grace, but 
such spells won't take effect until the grace 
expires. 

Notes: Granted by the god Kelemvor, Judge of 
the Damned, of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Kiaransalee’s Song of Lament 
Aka threnody. 


Kiss of Sharess 
(Alteration, Enchantment/Charm) 
Sphere: Charm 


Level: $ 

Range: Touch 

‘Components: S 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: Living creature touched 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell enables a Sharessin to grant any 
being’s fondest and most pleasurable wish, similar 
to the effects of a limited wish spell (as the 7th- 
level wizard spell of the same name). Neither the 
spellcaster nor the recipient has any control over 
this spell’s effects as they come from the depths of 
the recipient's unconscious. (The DM must adju- 


dicate the effects.) An unwilling recipient is 
allowed a saving throw vs. spell to avoid the effect. 

Unfortunately, this spell’s effects only last until 
the following dawn, never seem so wonderful in 
retrospect, and seem to have little lasting impact 
on the recipient's life. For example, a serving maid 
might masquerade as an exotic princess for one 
night at the annual ball, but in the morning the 
prince turns out to be a lout, all her fabulous gar- 
ments have been misplaced, she still has to go 
back to her old job, and her debut is quickly for- 
gotten among the city’s social circles and her 
common friends, 

Notes: Granted by Sharess, the Tawny Temptress, 
of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Kiss of Torment 
(Necromancy) 
Sphere: Combat, Necromantic 


Area of Effect: Creature touched (size L or less) 
Saving Throw: Special 


To enact kiss of torment, the caster must suc- 
cessfully touch the bare flesh of the subject with 
his or her bare flesh; this touch can be of any 
type from a light brush with the fingertips to an 
actual kiss. The spell attacks the nervous system 
of the body, overwhelming it with phantom pain 
that causes the subject to writhe uncontrollably 
and suffer 446 points of damage. Typically, vic- 
tims of this spell can retain their footing and 
their grasp on wielded or carried items, but can 
do little else; attacking or uttering incantations is 
impossible. 

‘The subject is allowed a saving throw vs, spell 
at the end of the first round, and if it succeeds, the 
spell ends. If it fails, the writhing continues for a 
second round and another saving throw is neces- 
sary. If this second saving throw succeeds, no 
damage is taken in the second round and the spell 
ends, but if it fails, an additional 246 points of 
damage is inflicted upon the subject, the writhing 
continues for a third round, and another saving 
throw is necessary. If this third saving throw suc- 
ceeds, no damage is taken in the third round and 
the spell ends, but if it fails, an additional 146 
points of damage is inflicted. 

Notes: Granted by the evil goddess Loviatar of 
the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


365 


~ Knight's Move 


Knight’s Move 


Casting Time: 6 
Duration: 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell is similar to the 3rd-level wizard 
spell blink. In a fashion reminiscent of the chess 
piece of the same name, the spellcaster employing 
a knight's move can cause his or her material form 
to blink directly from one point to another. 

Unlike the wizard spell, the spellcaster can 
control the timing, direction, and distance of a 
knight's move within certain constraints. The 
priest can blink at any time during a round instead 
of taking any other action. Alternatively, the caster 
can perform some other action at his or her normal 
initiative and then blink at the very end of the 
round after all other actions of other individuals 
have been taken. 

The direction and distance of the blink are 
under the control of the priest, who can blink from 
his or her current location to any location in sight 
within 5 feet times his or her level to a maximum 
of 120 feet. 

The material component is the priest’s holy 
symbol. 

Notes: Granted to priests of The Red Knight, a 
war god of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Know Age 
(Divination) 
Sphere: Time 


Level: 1 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: Object or creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell enables the caster to instantly know 
the age of any single person, creature, or object on 
which he or she concentrates. The age is accurate 
to the nearest year. 

The material component is a calendar page. 

Notes: Common for priests with access to the 
sphere of Time (ToM). 


De a a EG RS aa ee eae 


Know Alignment 


Sphere: Divination 


Level: 2 
Range: 10 yds. 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: 1 tum 

Area of Effect: 1 creature or object 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


A know alignment spell enables the priest to 
exactly read the aura of a creature or an aligned 
object (unaligned objects reveal nothing). The 
caster must remain stationary and concentrate on 
the subject for a full round. If the creature rolls a 
successful saving throw vs. spell, the caster learns 
nothing about that particular creature from the 
casting. Certain magical devices negate the power 
of the know alignment spell. 

The reverse, undetectable alignment, conceals 
the alignment of an object or creature for 24 hours. 

Notes: Common for clerics and druids (PHB). 


Know Bloodline 


a 


(Divination) 
Sphere: Divination 


Level: 1 

Range: 30 yds. 
Components: V, $, M 
Casting Time: 2 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: 1 individual 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell combines the effects of the Ist-level 
wizard spells know bloodline derivation and know 
bloodline strength. The creature is allowed a 
saving throw with the following modifiers to the 
die roll, based on the strength of the bloodline: 
tainted, +2; minor, +0; major, —2; great, 4. (The 
more powerful bloodlines are easier to detect.) 

The caster simply points at the creature and 
concentrates on the creature's bloodline derivation 
and strength. If the creature has a bloodline and 
fails its saving throw, the caster mentally learns the 
bloodline derivation and strength (tainted, minor, 
major, or great). If the creature has no bloodline, 
the priest is subjected to a blinding white flash of 
light, visible only to him or her. The flash is not 
harmful, but will distract the priest momentarily. 

‘The material components are the priest's holy 
symbol, an iron rod that bends with the casting (the 


Know Faction 


Ne 


degree of bend is related to the bloodline strength), 
and a handful of gems each worth at least 5 gp. The 
gem that corresponds to the creature’s bloodline is 
shattered when the spell is complete. The assort- 
ment of gems must comprise the following: 
Anduiras, garnet; Basaiûa, amethyst; Brenna, topaz; 
Masela, pearl; Reynir, jade; Vorynn, opal; Azrai, 
black onyx. 

Notes: Common for priests of Cerilia, the 
BIRTHRIGHT setting. 


Know Customs 
(Divination) 
Sphere: Travelers 


Level: 3 

Range: Special 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 3 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell allows a caster to gain general 
knowledge of the customs, laws, and social eti- 
quette of a tribe or village. The caster must be 
within 30 yards of a member of the tribe or village 
for the spell to have effect. The selected villager 
must possess the knowledge sought by the caster; 
for instance, the villager cannot be an infant, men- 
tally unstable, or dead (although he or she may be 
asleep or unconscious). 

The selected villager is allowed a saving throw 
vs. spell; success means the spell has no effect. 
Failure means, the caster gains a general knowl- 
edge of the villager’s local laws and customs, 
including those that apply to relevant tribal or clan 
types (such as customs observed by all giants). 
‘Typical information revealed by know customs 
includes common courtesies (outsiders must avert 
their eyes when addressing local officials), local 
restrictions (no animals or unaccompanied elves 
within the city limits), important festivals, and 
common passwords that are known by the major- 
ity of citizens (such as a phrase necessary to pass 
the guards at the main gate). Additionally, the spell 
gives the caster a +1 reaction adjustment in 
encounters with members of the relevant tribe or 
village. 

Knowing the local laws and customs does not 
guarantee that the caster will act properly. Know 
customs is to be used as a guide; the DM is free to 
adjust the quality of information provided by a vil- 
lager. 

Notes: Common for priests with access to the 
sphere of Travelers (ToM). 


Know Direction 
(Divination) 
Sphere: Travelers 


Level: 1 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


Know direction allows the caster to instantly 
know the direction of north. The spell is effective 
in any environment, whether underwater, under- 
ground, or in darkness (including magical dark- 
ness), 

‘The material component is a small scrap of 
parchment map that is at least 100 years old, 

Notes: Common for priests with access to the 
sphere of Travelers (ToM). 


Know Faction 
(Divination) 
Sphere: Divination 


Level: 1 

Range: 20 yds. 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 1 


Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell enables a priest to determine a crea- 
ture’s faction (if any) simply by looking at it. The 
spell lasts one round per level of the caster; each 
round, the caster can determine the faction of one 
creature within range. 

Most faction members don't bother to hide 
their affiliation, but on occasion factols order 
covert missions or infiltration of other groups. If a 
creature is trying to conceal its faction, the DM 
secretly rolls a saving throw vs. spell for the crea- 
ture. Success means that the creature has foiled 
the priest’s efforts to reveal its true faction affilia- 
tion. (For roleplaying purposes, the DM makes 
the roll so that the creature doesn’t know if its true 
faction’s been detected or not.) Note that Anar- 
chists posing as members of other factions aren't 
detected by this spell, as they take their assumed 
roles to heart. 

This spell is virtually unknown outside of Sigil. 
It obviously has no effect on creatures without fac- 
tion affiliation. It doesn’t work on those belonging 
to factions or sects of which the caster has no 


367 


Know History 


knowledge. On occasion, however, creatures with 
deep-rooted philosophical beliefs may be incor- 
rectly identified as faction members this spell. For 
example, a high-level priest who worships a power 
of death may be mistaken for a Dustman. 

Notes: Rare for planar priests. Unlikely to be 
learned except by visiting the Outer Planes. 


Know History 
(Divination) 
Sphere: Divination 


Level: 1 

Range: Special 

‘Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: 1 creature or object 
Saving Throw: Special 


The know history spell reveals to the shukenja 
the common name, background, lineage, and 
deeds of any item, creature, or place, should such 
possess any notable history at all. When used on a 
creature, the caster must be able to see the creature 
in question and must be within 15 feet. When used 
on an object, the caster must be able to handle the 
item. When used on a place, the caster must be 
standing within the grounds of the site. 

The spell does not reveal secret identities, pres- 
ence of magic, magical abilities, character align- 
ment, and so on. If cast on a character, it would tell 
of the individual's parents, identify the family or 
clan, and reveal any famous deeds of the creature’s 
ancestors. When cast on an object, it reveals the 
specific name of the item (if it has one), any 
notable deeds it was used in, and the name of its 
maker. A katana could be revealed as the “Cloud- 
Cutting Sword used by the great hero Akicha 
Tanokura at the Battle of the Fallen Bridges, 
having been made for him by the master sword- 
smith Lei Yung.” 

When used to reveal a creature or item that is 
disguised or polymorphed, the creature is allowed 
a saving throw vs. spell. If this is failed, the spell 
operates normally. The spell has no effect on dis- 
guised or polymorphed items or places. 

The material component is a pair of carved 
bones. 

Notes: Common for oriental priests; otherwise, 
very rare. 


Know Intent — Savant 
(Divination) 
Sphere: Thought 


Level: 2 

Range: 50 yds. 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 1 
Duration: 1 rd. 

Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


When this spell is cast, the savant becomes 
aware of the general intentions of an encountered 
individual or group. Information revealed is along 
the lines of the following one-word descriptions: 
friendly, neutral, hostile, and so on 

Notes: Restricted to savant-clerics. (Updated 
from DraGon Magazine.) 


Know Language 
(Divination) 
Sphere: Divination 


Level: 2 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S 
Casting Time: | rd. 
Duration: 3 rds./level 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell confers the ability to read a language 
chosen by the caster and generally understand the 
meaning of a text. It does not translate magical 
scripts used to record wizard spelibooks and 
wizard spell scrolls, nor does it decipher codes. It 
does not allow the caster to write the language 
itself. It does not necessarily allow complete 
understanding of magical or highly specialized 
technical works, although the subject matter and 
gist of the material might be gleaned. 
Notes: Very rare spell. 


Know Motivation — Shukenja 


Except for being 2nd level and for its 
component, this spell is identical to 

empathy. The material component is a 

prayer written on a strip of cloth tied 

about the caster's forehead. It is common in ori- 
ental settings. 


368 


Know Time 


(Divination) 
Sphere: Time 


Level: 1 
Range: 0 

Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 1 

Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


Know time is particularly useful when the caster 
has been unconscious. This spell enables the caster 
to know the precise time of day to the nearest 
minute, including the current hour, day, month, and 
year. This knowledge is in terms the caster can 
most easily understand. If the caster has just arrived 
on a new world and is unfamiliar with the names of 
the hours, days months, and so on, the spell reveals 
a generic result (such as the 10th hour of the 23rd 
day of the 7th month of the 2,345th year) that may 
not be as useful until the caster learns more. 

If time in the area actually flows at a different 
rate from that of the caster’s origin (see Chronologi- 
cal Ratings table), then the caster has a 2% per level 
chance to leam if the rate is faster or slower and the 
general degree of difference: minor, moderate, or 
great. For example, at the midpoint of the table (11), 
a minor difference is less than one degree (10, 12) 
moderate is exactly one degree (9, 13), and great is 
more than one degree (8 or less, 14 or more). 

Notes: Common for priests with access to the 
sphere of Time (ToM). 


CHRONOLOGICAL RATINGS 
World Local Base Campaign 
Rating Time Time 

2 1 week = 1 second 
3 1 week = 15 seconds 
4 1 week = 1 minute 
5 1 week = 10 minutes 
6 1week = 30 minutes 
7 1 week = 1 hour 

8 1 week = 6 hours 
9 1week =1 day 
10-12* 1 week = 1 week 
13 1 week = 1 month 
14 1 week = 3 months 
15 1 week = 6 months 
16 1week = 1 year 

17 1 week = 5 years 
18 1 week = 10 years 
19 1 week = 30 years 
20 1 week = 100 years 


*Most campaign worlds have a rating in this range 


(Alteration) 
Sphere: Plant 


Level: 4 

Range: 5 yds./level 
‘Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 7 
Duration: 1 turn/level 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


Casting a knurl spell transforms a creature's 
arm into a tree branch of the same thickness, cov- 
ered with bark and twigs. The new limb possesses 
neither elbow nor wrist joints—not even a hand. 
The “arm” remains attached to the shoulder. The 
spell's recipient can use it as a club but not to 
manipulate tools, weapons, or spell components, 

The caster chooses which of the recipient’s 
arms to affect. A character could use multiple 
knurl spells to transform both arms of a humanoid. 
‘The arm is treated for all purposes as a tree branch, 
becoming subject to fire, wood-altering spells, and 
tree diseases. A successful dispel magic spell ends 
the effect. 

The material component is a small twig. 

Notes: Uncommon for druids; optionally avail- 
able to other nature priests. 


Kriesha’s Cursed Quest 
Quest spell, see appendix in Vol. 3. 


369 


Laerme'’s Emissary 


Laerme’s Emissary 
Quest spell, see appendix in Vol. 3. 


Lair Divination 
(Divination) 
Sphere: Divination 


Level: 4 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 tum 
Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


The /air divination spell is used to gather infor- 
mation regarding an area whose location is known. 
Information gathered includes relative strength of 
creatures, amount and value of treasure, and 
whether the area is under the eye of supernatural 
beings. The chance of successful divination 60% 
plus 1% per level of the caster, modified further by 
the DM as needed. If the /air divination is not cor- 
rect, inaccurate information is provided. 

The material components are a handful of 
coins, incense, and the caster’s holy symbol. For 
powerful divinations, jewelry or magical items 
may be required. 

Notes: Uncommon for clerics and priests with 
major access to the sphere of Divination. (Origi- 
nally, the Ist-Edition spell divination.) 


Optional Modifiers: The DM might reduce 
the chance of a successful /air divination by 2% 
for each level that the caster’s level is exceeded 
by the Hit Dice or level of the most powerful 
spellcaster in the lair, 

Also, the chance might be reduced by a fur- 
ther 1% for every 5% magic resistance of the 
most powerful creature in the lair. 

These reductions might be offset by using 
jewelry (at 1% per 300 gp value) or magical 
items (at 1% per 100 XP value), 

‘The DM may also allow an increase in the 
caster’s chance above what the caster’s level 
allows (to 95%) at the rate of 10% per each 
5,000 gp or 1,000 XP value of magical items 
sacrificed. 


Land Legs 


Reversed form, see sea legs. 


Level: 6 


Range: 10 yds,/level 
Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 6 

Duration: 1 day/level 

Area of Effect: 10-ft. cube/level 
Saving Throw: None 


The land of stability spell protects the area of 
effect and all creatures and objects within it from 
the certain natural disasters. 
© Earthquake: Vibrations do not affect the area, 
nor do fissures open beneath it. 

Flood: The area remains dry, even if submerged. 
Windstorm: No damage from strong winds, 
objects cannot be blown into the warded area. 
Lava and ash eruption: These flow around the area. 
Avalanches: Stones and snow do not fall on the 
area. 


The spell offers no protection against magical- 
ly generated disasters or spells that duplicate natu- 
ral disasters. Disasters in progress in the area when 
the spell is cast are not affected. 

This spell affects a cubic area whose sides equal 
the caster’s level times 10 feet; thus, a 15th-level 
caster could affect a 150X 150 x 150-foot cube. 

The material components are the priest's holy 
symbol and a pinch of volcanic ash. 

Notes: Common for priests with major access 
to the sphere of Wards. 


Lathander, Boon of 
See boon of Lathander. 


Lathander, Greater Shield of 
See greater shield of Lathander, 


Lathander, Shield of 
See shield of Lathander. 


Laughing Water 


Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


370 


Leaf into Dagger 


This spell transforms any liquid that is prima- 
rily water (even fouled water) into sparkling, 
gently glowing laughing water that is sweet to the 
taste and very satisfying. The amount transformed 
can be any volume of water no larger than the 
caster’s head. 

Imbibing even a single drop of laughing water 
banishes all weariness for a day, and exhausted 
creatures that drink it become alert and energetic. 
Swallowing a mouthful cures insanity, blindness, 
and disease and instantly destroys monster and 
animal internal parasites and their eggs. Moreover, 
the drinker is rendered immune to all of these 
perils for 24 hours from the moment of swallow- 
ing. A double amount of laughing water can be 
substituted for holy water in all uses and rituals of 
the Eldathyn and other good human faiths. 

This water is named for another benefit. If 
laughing water is splashed on any being that is 
under or about to face Tasha’s uncontrollable 
hideous laughter (2nd-level wizard spell), it 
negates all effects of the spell instantly. A subject 
of such a spell who is carrying or comes into con- 
tact with laughing water (even just a few drops in 
a locket vial) before, as, or just after the spell is 
cast, is immune to the magic (it is consumed ren- 
dering this protection). 

If hurled in a breakable container, a vial of 
laughing water inflicts 446 points of damage on 
any undead creature it strikes, 

The material components are a pinch of dia- 
mond dust, a seed from any green plant that is less 
than a year old, and the water to be altered, 

Notes: Granted by Eldath the Green Goddess 
of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. This spell is 
found only in a few exceptionally rare tomes, 


Leadership 
A 4th-level spell of the sphere of War. See appen- 


dix in Vol. 3. 


Leaf into Dagger 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Combat, Plant 


Level: 1 
Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 4 

Duration: 3 rds. 

Area of Effect: Leaf touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell causes a single plant leaf (of any vari- 
ety, size, and condition) to shape itself into a non- 
metallic, nonreflective, silent dagger in the caster’s 


371 


hand. The dagger acts as a razor-sharp, unbreakable 
dagger +2 that is considered magical for purposes of 
determining which creatures can be hit. The blade 
can be used without any nonproficiency penalty by 
the caster. It is weightless and vanishes if deliber- 
ately dropped by the caster; otherwise, it cannot be 
made to leave the caster's hand. The caster cannot be 
cut with this blade (and can thus use it on bindings 
constricting him or her with energetic impunity). 
The caster can elect, but only at the end of the 
first round of the dagger’s existence (that is, after 
using it only once as a handheld weapon), to 
employ it as a hurled weapon. It must be thrown in 
the second round and is then able to reach creatures 
up to 90 feet away with no range penalties. It strikes 
at a +4 bonus to attack, but loses its damage bonus 
and vanishes upon landing or striking something. 
Notes: Granted by Chauntea, the Great Mother, 
of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. This spell is 
found only in a few exceptionally rare tomes. 


~ Legal Thoughts = 


Legal Thoughts 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
Sphere: Law 


Level: 6 

Range: 10 yds. 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 1 tum 
Duration: Permanent 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


A priest casting this spell forces the subject of 
the spell to follow one specific law. The priest can 
choose any law prevalent in the area in which the 
priest and the subject currently reside. Thus, if a 
city has no laws about murder, the priest cannot 
command the person not to kill. 

The subject of the spell is forced to obey the 
letter of the law to the best of his or her ability. 
‘Thus, a subject commanded not to commit murder 
would go to any length to avoid murdering some- 
one. 


Since the essence of this spell is tied to legal 
(and not moral) interpretation, individuals may 
find loopholes that will allow them to work around 
the law in specific cases or to ignore the law in 
light of extenuating circumstances. 

When casting the spell, the priest must speak 
the law to the recipient in such a way that he or she 
can hear it. The subject is allowed a saving throw 
vs. spell to avoid the effect. If the save is failed, the 
subject won't willingly violate the stated law as 
long as the spell is in effect. 

Legal thoughts can be negated by dispel magic. 
The subject never perceives anything wrong with 
adhering to the law, and therefore never seeks to 
have the spell removed. 

Notes: Common for priests with major access 
to the sphere of Law (ToM). 


Lesser Guardian Hammer — Dwarf 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Guardian 


Level: 3 

Range: Touch (area to be guarded) 
Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 turn 

Duration: Instantaneous when triggered 
Area of Effect: Special 

Saving Throw: None 


A lesser guardian hammer is an invisible, 
hammer-shaped field of force that appears when a 
guarded door, lock, threshold, or area is disturbed 


372 


(even years after the spell was cast). When acti- 
vated, it flies through the air to strike the nearest 
living creature (if more than one is closest, deter- 
mine the one struck randomly), A guardian 
hammer strikes only once, but does not miss. 
When striking, it appears momentarily as a glow- 
ing, translucent hammer and then fades away into 
nothingness. Its unavoidable strike inflicts 2d12 
points of damage. The being struck must make a 
saving throw vs. petrification to avoid being 
knocked down. 

A lesser guardian hammer can be destroyed 
before activation a successful dispel magic cast on 
the guarded area, or by totally destroying the 
guarded area without entering it (for example, by 
disintegration). The presence of an antimagic shell 
or its equivalent can suppresses the ward, prevent- 
ing activation. Once activated, a lesser guardian 
hammer bypasses all magical and physical barri- 
ers. It cannot be destroyed, reflected, or diverted 
by any means, although magic resistance functions 
normally, 

‘The material components for this spell are a 
drop of sweat or spittle or a tear from the caster, a 
hair (from any creature), and a pebble. 

Notes: Granted by the dwarven god Thard 
Harr. 


Lesser Guardian Seal 
(nvocation/Evocation) 
Sphere: Guardian 


Level: 4 

Range: Touch 

Components; V, M 

Casting Time: 7 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: Portal touched 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell allows the caster to magically seal a 
door, window, box, and so on against one type of 
creature (ghouls, bears, elves, etc). Affected crea- 
tures cannot the seal, nor are their physical or 
magical abilities, immunities, or resistances effec- 
tive against it or the material of the closure, A crea- 
ture of the affected type whose level or Hit Dice 
exceeds the caster’s by 4 or more can shatter the seal. 

Other creatures can try to physically destroy 
the sealed door, box lid, and so on. The warding 
magic inflicts one-quarter damage (round down) 
caused to the closure back upon the creature trying 
to break through. A successful dispel magic spell 
removes the seal. 

The seal lasts until the portal is opened, unless 
made permanent by means of the permanency spell. 


Life Drain 


N 


Notes: Very rare spell. (Updated from DRAGON 
Magazine.) 


Lesser Spellsong — Drow 
(Alteration, Evocation) 
Sphere: Creation 


Level: 3 
Range: As spell created 


created 


Duration: As spell 
Area of Effect: As spell created 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell enables the caster, by song and sup- 
plication to Eilistraee, to cause an effect equivalent 
to any desired priest spell of 3rd level or less to 
occur. In effect, the priest casts the spell with 
normal effects, range, duration, saving throws, and 
so on, but without the usual gestures or material 
components. 

The caster must be able to move (hands and 
shoulders at least) and sing, free of magical silenc- 
ing. If any such silencing occurs before spellcast- 
ing ends, the DM may allow partial spell effects to 
occur, or the spell may be wasted. Priestesses of 
Eilistraee are trained to sing when in pain and can 
sing while dodging about in combat. 

While material components are not required of 
the caster, those that require material components 
in excess of 100 gp in value require an additional 
round of singing added to the casting time for each 
100 gp value (or fraction thereof) of the original 
spell. Spells that specify that the material compo- 
nent cannot be eliminated or substituted for cannot 
be created with the lesser spellsong spell. 

Notes: Granted by the drow goddess Eilistraee. 


Levitate — Shukenja 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Elemental Air 


Level: 3 

Range: 20 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 6 
Duration: 1 turn/level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


The shukenja can levitate one creature, up to a 
limit of 100 pounds per level of the caster. If cast 
upon the shukenja, the shukenja can move 20 feet 
vertically per round, if cast upon another creature, 
that creature can be levitated 10 feet per round (an 
unwilling creature gets a saving throw vs. spell to 
avoid being affected). No horizontal movement is 
allowed. The caster can cancel the spell as desired. 

The material component is a small kite and 
string. 

Notes: Common for oriental priests; otherwise, 
very rare. 


Life Drain 


Casting Time: 6 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: / 


By casting this spell and touching another indi- 
vidual, a priest can fortify another’s life force at 
the expense of another living creature. This spell 
allows the priest to drain 1d8 hit points, plus 1 
additional hit point per level of the caster. The 
priest can immediately benefit from the hit points, 
or transfer them to another individual within four 
rounds of the casting. The stolen hit points can 
increase those of the recipient beyond the normal 
maximum, though these extra hit points only last 
for up to one tum per the caster’s level. Any 
damage suffered by the subject is first subtracted 
from these additional hit points. 

‘Though predominantly employed by evil priests 
at the expense of innocents, the spell can be used 
by those of noble intent, but only if all participants 
act of their own accord. However, if the subject (the 
provider of the life force) is unwilling, a successful 
saving throw vs. spell means the spell was partially 


373 


~ Life Steal — Savant 


resisted and only half the hit points were drained 
(round up). Undead can neither benefit nor be 
harmed by life draining. It is possible, however, for 
an undead priest to drain hit points from a subject 
and bestow them on a living ally. 

Notes: Uncommon for necromancer-priests. 


Life Steal — Savant 
(Necromantic) 
Sphere: Necromantic 


Level: 5 

Range: Touch 

Components: V 

Casting Time: 1 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell allows the savant to leech up to I hit 
point per level of the caster from a living (that is, 
not undead) human or humanoid. The creature 
touched must make a successful saving throw vs. 
spell or suffer the leeched hit points as damage. 
Hit points lost in this way can be restored by any 
means that normally restores hit points. 

The savant can bestow the life energy upon any 
living creature by touch. Any transfer must take 
place within three rounds or the spell is wasted. The 
leeched hit points can increase the recipient's hit 
points beyond the normal maximum. Those over the 
recipient's maximum last up to one hour before 
fading away. Damage suffered by the recipient is 
first subtracted from these additional hit points. 

‘The savant can also leech or transfer life energy 
to or from magical constructs that have hit points; 
even golems are affected by this ability. 

The verbal component is a secret word of 
power. Once the savant touches the creature, 
merely speaking the word triggers the effect. 
Depending on the circumstances, the DM may dis- 
allow the saving throw. 

Notes: Restricted to cleric-savants. (Updated 
from DRAGON Magazine.) 


Lifebane 
(Evocation, Necromancy) 
Sphere: Necromantic 


Level: 5 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 8 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell allows the priest to drain the vital 
force of a humanoid creature and use the energy 
personally. The priest must make an attack roll to 
touch the target creature. If successful, the creature 
loses 1d6 points of Constitution temporarily. The 
priest gains Id4 hit points per point of Constitution 
drained, but cannot exceed his or her normal max- 
imum hit point total. A creature reduced to a Con- 
stitution of zero or below by this spell becomes a 
ju-ju zombie under the control of the priest who 
slew it. Constitution points lost from a lifebane 
spell are otherwise regained at a rate of 1 point per 
day after an initial delay of 1 day. However, there 
is a 1% chance per level of the priest that a 
lifebane spell permanently drains 1 point of Con- 
stitution from the subject. This chance is reduced 
by -2% per point of Constitution the subject has 
above 14 prior to the lifebane attack. 

Notes: Granted by luz the Evil of the 
GREYHAWK setting. 


Lift Doom 

Reversed form, doom curse. 

Light 
(Alteration) 
Reversible 
‘Sphere: Creation, Guardian 
Level: 1 
Range: 120 yds. 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 4 


Duration: 1 hr. + 1 turn/level 
Area of Effect: 20-ft.-radius globe 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell causes a luminous glow within 20 
feet of the spell’s center. The area of light thus 
caused is equal in brightness to torchlight. Objects 
in darkness beyond the sphere can be seen, at best, 
as vague and shadowy shapes. The spell is cen- 
tered on a point selected by the caster, who must 
have a line of sight or unobstructed path to that 
point when the spell is cast. Light can spring from 
air, rock, metal, wood, or almost any similar sub- 
stance. The effect is immobile unless it is specifi- 
cally centered on a movable object or mobile 
creature. 

If this spell is cast upon a creature, any appli- 
cable magic resistance and saving throws must be 
rolled. Successful resistance negates the spell, 
while a successful saving throw indicates that the 
spell is centered immediately behind the creature, 
rather than upon the creature itself. A light spell 
centered on the visual organs of a creature blinds 


374 


Lightning Lance 


it, reducing its attack and saving throw rolls by 4 
and worsening its Armor Class by 4. The caster 
can extinguish the light at any time by uttering a 
single word. Light spells are not cumulative—mul- 
tiple castings do not provide a brighter light. 

The spell is reversible, causing darkness in the 
same area and under the same conditions as the 
light spell, but with half the duration. Magical 
darkness is equal to that of an unlit interior 
room—pitch darkness. Any normal light source or 
magical light source of lesser intensity than full 
daylight does not function in magical darkness. A 
darkness spell cast directly against a light spell 
cancels both, and vice versa. 

Notes: Common for clerics (PHB). 


Lighten Load 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Travelers 


Level: 2 
Range: 30 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 2 

Duration: 1 hr/level 

Area of Effect: 10-ft. cube 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell reduces the weight of equipment, 
supplies, and other objects by 50%. Weapons, sup- 
plies, and even disabled characters can be made 
more portable by use of a lighten load spell, 

This spell affects one pile of objects whose 
volume is equivalent to a 10-foot cube; after the 
spell has been cast, the affected objects can be 
divided among several characters or mounts. The 
spell has no effect on magical items. 

An object affected by lighten load can be used 
normally; the spell has no effect on an object's 
mass, texture, size, strength, or physical features. 

The material components are a feather and a 
slip of paper moistened by a soap bubble. 

Notes: Common for priests with access to the 
sphere of Travelers. 


Lightning Lance 
(Invocation/Evocation) 
Sphere: Combat 


Level: 4 
Range: 0 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 7 

Duration: 4 rds. 

Area of Effect: Creature struck 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell creates a silvery shimmering weight- 
less rod about as thick about as a sword hilt and 
about 4 feet long. This bolt of “frozen” lightning 
forms with its midpoint in the caster’s empty hand 
and can be used in three ways: as a handheld 
weapon, as an electrical discharge, or as a hurled 
bolt. 

If wielded as a handheld weapon, it lasts for the 
full spell duration, strikes with the caster’s THACO, 
can be used in conjunction with another single- 
handed weapon or item (such as a dagger or wand 
in the caster’s other hand), and deals 3d6 points of 
electrical damage per strike. In any of its first three 
rounds of existence, even if it has been used as a 
handheld weapon already, a lightning lance can be 
used in one of the two additional ways described 
below. If used as a handheld weapon for all four 
rounds, in the last round the lighting lance strikes 
at +1 and for double damage (6d6). 

If touched to a solid object and willed by the 
caster to discharge, the lance vanishes in a flash, 
forcing two item saving throws vs. lightning on the 
object; failure of either means the item shatters. 

If hurled by the caster (at the caster’s THACO 
with a +1 attack bonus), the lance streaks away in a 
straight line and deals 6d6 points of damage to any 
single creature that it strikes. It fades away harm- 
lessly if it does not strike anyone after traveling 30 


375 


~~ Lightning Water F 


yards. If the creature struck is in direct, physical 
contact with another being or beings, the damage is 
shared evenly. 

Notes: Granted by Talos the Destroyer of the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. This spell is found 
only in a few exceptionally rare tomes. 


Lightning Water 
(Alteration, Conjuration/ Summoning) 
Sphere: Elemental Water (Lightning) 


Level: 3 

Range: 10 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 5 rds. 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 2 cu. ft/level 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell is used by dwarven priests in the 
process of enchanting magical items, and thus is 
seldom encountered. By means of this spell, a 
dwarven priest causes a quantity of water to 
become infused with the magical spirit of the 
lightning. The water is then used in the forging or 
creation of certain items to improve the quality of 
the goods. The lightning water removes imperfec- 
tions, strengthens metal, and generally makes 
treated items superior in quality. 

Metal jewelry crafted with lightning water 
becomes one category more valuable (see the jew- 
eiry table in the DMG). All metal items, weapons, 
and armor crafted with lightning water have a +1 
bonus to their item saving throws. 

To prepare the water, a special trough or con- 
tainer made of fine wood inlaid with silver dec- 
orations must be constructed. The container 
must be made from materials worth no less than 
5,000 gp. The container is then blessed by a 
dwarven priest. Thereafter, the container can be 
used any number of times to collect lightning 
water. 

The water-filled container is first placed out- 
doors. The lightning water spell is then cast over 
the water, which is left out overnight to capture the 
spirit of the lightning from a nighttime thunder- 
storm (either natural or summoned). If no storm 
occurs, the spell is wasted. Once the lightning 
spirit is captured within the water, the water itself 
is not electrified, nor is it dangerous to touch; 
instead, the water is simply infused with the mag- 
ical potential and spiritual strength of the light- 
ning. 

When the water is retrieved the next morning, 
it holds its lightning-spirit charge for 12 hours or 
until the water is used up in the smithy, The light- 


ning water is used in the forging of weapons, 
armor, or metal goods, either to improve the qual- 
ity of the items or to prepare them for magical 
enchantment. To treat items, 2 cubic feet of water 
is necessary for each piece of metal jewelry or 
other small item crafted, 6 cubic feet of water for 
each weapon, and 12 cubic feet of water for each 
suit of armor. 

The material components for this spell are a 
miniature silver lightning rod worth at least 500 gp 
and a vial of holy water sprinkled into the trough 
of water to be ensorcelled. 

Notes: Very rare spell, restricted to dwarves. 
(Updated from DraGoN Magazine.) 


table is Table 86: Objects of Art, in the DMG. 


Line of Destruction 
Reversed form, line of protection. 


Line of Protection* 
(Abjuration) 
Reversible 
Sphere: Protection 


Level: 3 
Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: Line, 90 ft. long 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This cooperative spell requires at least two 
priests to cast the spell simultaneously. During the 
casting, the priests determine whether the line will 
be stationary or portable. 

If the spell is stationary, each priest must 
inscribe a magical sigil on parallel facing surfaces, 
such as facing walls of a gatehouse or two tree 
trunks, If the spell is portable, the priests must 
stand at each end of the line, thereby anchoring it. 

After the spell is cast, a shimmering field of 
force appears between the two anchors (the sigils 
or priests). The field is 10 feet high and sparkles 
with energy. Objects on the opposite side of the 
translucent field, while recognizable, are hazy and 
indistinct. 

The field causes 1d3 points of damage to all 
creatures passing through it; evil creatures and 
undead suffer 1d8 points of damage from the field. 
Creatures that roll a successful saving throw vs. 
spell suffer no damage. Creatures that fly over the 


An ae GM ca ae ee ots a 


Listening Shadow 


N 


field, burrow under it, or teleport to the other side 
take no damage. 

If the spell is cast in its portable form, the 
priests can move at half their movement rates (lim- 
ited to the rate of the slower priest). The priests can 
take no other action, since all their energy is spent 
in walking and maintaining the field. 

Once created, the field cannot be increased or 
decreased in length and must remain straight. The 
priests can maneuver by pivoting, but cannot walk 
toward each other or bend the field around a 
comer. If the line of sight between the two priests 
is blocked by any object of greater than 5 feet in 
diameter, the spell immediately fails. Thus, crea- 
tures, low walls, young trees, pillars, and similar 
objects will not disrupt the spell. 

As a cooperative spell, several priests can link 
together to create a longer field. Each priest (or 
sigil) forms the end of one field and the beginning 
of another, much like fence posts. Each section of 
the spell must extend in a straight line, but the field 
can be bent at each junction, Four priests could 
form a long line, a square, or a “Z” pattern. The 
restrictions on moving the fields apply as outlined 
above. The DM may apply movement penalties 
depending on the complexity of the pattern. 

The material components are the priests’ 
crosiers, staves, or religious standards, held aloft 
by each caster, 

The reverse of this spell, line of destruction, 
causes 1d3 damage to all creatures passing through 
it. It causes 1d8 damage to paladins and creatures 
of good alignment that pass through it. Creatures 
making a successful saving throw vs. spell suffer 
no damage. 

Notes: Uncommon for clerics and druids with 
access to the sphere of Protection. 


Lion’s Claws 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Animal 


Level: 3 

Range: 0 

‘Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


The casting of this spell causes the priest’s 
hands to temporarily develop short, thick claws, 
like those of a catlike carnivore. This allows the 
Priest to make two attacks per round, inflicting 
1d4+1 points of damage per set of claws, and 
allowing attacks against monsters struck only by 


magical weapons. The priest is still able to manip- 
ulate objects while this spell is in effect and can 
cast spells as well. 

Scrapings from the claws of a carnivore, 
preferably a feline one, are required. 

Notes: Common for shamans from areas where 
great cats range. Very rare for druids. (Updated 
from DraGoN Magazine.) 


Lionheart 
(Abjuration, Iusion/Phantasm) 
Sphere: Charm 


Level: 2 
Range: 10 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 creature/3 levels 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell is a more powerful version of the Ist- 
level priest spell remove fear but, unlike that spell, 
is not reversible. The priest casting this spell 
instills the courage of a lion in each spell recipient. 
Every creature affected by this spell is immune to 
magical fear attacks for one tum and need never 
check morale while under its effects. In addition, if 
the recipient has recently failed a saving throw 
against a fear effect during the current day, the 
spell immediately ends the effect if it is still ongo- 
ing. For every three levels of the caster, one crea- 
ture can be affected by the spell (one creature at 
levels 1-3, two creatures at levels 4-6, and so on). 
This spell has no effect on undead. 

The material component is a tuft of hair from a 
lion or related creature (including wemics, were- 
lions, lammasu, and so on). 

Notes: Granted by Nobanion, the Lion King, of 
the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Listening Shadow 
(Alteration, Divination) 
Sphere: Divination 


Level: 3 

Range: 1 mi./level 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 6 

Duration: | rd./level 

Area of Effect: 60-ft.-radius sphere 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell creates a mobile shadow that trans- 


mits sounds within 60 feet of its location to its 
caster (somewhat like the 3rd-level wizard spell 


377 


~ Liveoak r 


clairaudience). The locale being listened to need 
not be known. The shadow need not be man-shaped, 
but it is always of approximately the same cubic 
volume as the caster. It can squeeze through any 
hole that one of the caster’s hands could pass 
through up to the wrist, and the caster can change its 
shape at will. The shadow glides along the ground 
or floor at MV 15, feather failing gently to earth if 
it moves over a sudden drop-off. It cannot fly or rise 
except by moving up a stair or climbing a wall, rock 
face, or incline that the caster could traverse. 

The caster can simply send the shadow a cer- 
tain distance in such-and-such a direction and 
listen at that spot or even let the shadow move for 
the spell duration and listen as it travels. If those 
listened to move beyond 60 feet from the shadow, 
the priest can move the shadow to pick them up 
again (but the direction and distance moved is 
guesswork unless the priest can see the shadow). 
The shadow is visible, and will no doubt attract 
attention if it moves, stops, moves again, and 
appears to follow beings—especially when no 
shadow should be present. 

The range of this spell denotes how distant the 
shadow can be from the caster before it dissipates. 
Although the shadow must initially appear within 
300 feet of the caster, both it and the caster can 
move during the duration of the spell, and the 
caster can employ other magics without ending the 
listening shadow, (The caster could teleport away 
from where the shadow was cast and maintain con- 
tact with it so long as his or her new location is still 
within spell range.) 

Some senior priests of Mask have access to 
powerful magics that allow a listening shadow to 
teleport to another or even a succession of locales, 
listening in to each one for a time; certain Maskar- 
ran clergy are quite practiced at skipping from one 
end of a long-range conversation that is being con- 
ducted by magical means to another to try to hear 
most of what is said by all speakers involved. 
Those who know how can cast a modified tongues 
spell on the shadow (which must be touched 
directly by the caster at the time) so that although 
the shadow transmits actual speech and sounds, a 
simultaneous translation is heard as well in the 
caster's head alone. 

The presence of lead or gorgon’s blood in walls 
(or their mortar) serves as a barrier against the lis- 
tening linkage of shadow to caster, but the caster 
retains control of the spell effect. If the shadow can 
then be moved to a spot where there is no effective 
intervening barrier, the sound link is restored. 
Only sounds that are normally detectable by the 
caster can be heard by this spell, and it only func- 
tions on its caster’s current plane of existence. 


Notes: Granted by the Mask, god of thieves in 


the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 
Liveoak 

(Enchantment) 

Sphere: Plant 

Level: 6 

Range: Touch 

‘Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 turn 


Duration: 1 day/level 
Area of Effect: 1 oak tree 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell enables the caster to charm a healthy 
oak tree (or other type if the DM allows) to cause 
it to serve as a protector. The spell can be cast on 
a single tree at a time; the priest cannot cast 
liveoak again while any previous casting is in 
effect. The tree upon which the spell is cast must 
be within 10 feet of the caster’s dwelling place, 
within a place sacred to the caster, or within 100 
yards of something that the caster wishes to guard 
or protect. 

The liveoak spell can be cast upon a healthy 
tree of small, medium, or large size, according to 
desire and availability. A triggering phrase of up to 
a maximum of one word per level of the spell- 
caster is then placed upon the targeted oak; for 
instance, “Attack any persons who near 
without first saying “sacred mistletoe” is an 11 
word trigger phrase that could be placed by a 
caster of 11th level or higher. The liveoak spell 
triggers the tree into animating as a treant of equiv- 
alent size, with an Armor Class of 0 and with two 
seat ES and Rees only a 30-foot-per- 


Damage per 
Tree Size Height Hit Dice Attack 
Small 12-14 7-8 248 
Medium 16'-19' 910 346 
Large 20-23 11-1246 


A tree enchanted by this spell radiates a magi- 
cal aura (if checked for). It can be returned to 
normal by a successful casting of a dispel magic 
spell or upon the desire of the caster who enchanted 
it. If dispelled, the tree takes root immediately. If 
released by the caster, it tries to return to its origi- 
nal location before taking root. Damage to the tree 
can be healed with a plant growth spell, which 
restores 3d4 points of damage. A plant growth spell 
used in this fashion does not increase the size or hit 
points of the tree beyond the original value. 


378 


Locate Animal Follower — Ranger 


—————————————— 


The material component is the priest's holy 
symbol. 
Notes: Common for druids (PHB). 


Living Ward 
(Abjuration, Necromancy) 
Reversible 
Sphere: Wards 


Level: 5 

Range: Special 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 2 turns 
Duration: 1 turn/level 

Area of Effect: 5-ft/level cube 
Saving Throw: None 


‘This reverse of the undead ward spell prevents 
any living person from entering the area of effect. 
Animals and monsters are not affected by the 
ward. The caster can protect a cube-shaped area 
with sides that are 5 feet long per level of the 
caster. For example, a 15th-level caster can create 
a cube that is 75 feet on a side. 

Any living individual attempting to enter the 
area of the spell is “turned” as if an undead mon- 
ster, Use the character's level and the Turning 
Undead table to determine the chances the indi- 
vidual is affected. 

In any given round, the spell can affect only 
1d6 creatures. Even if the die roll indicates 
destruction, the creatures are merely forced out of 
the warded area. An individual can make only one 
attempt to enter the ward. Living creatures within 
the area of effect when the spell is cast are unaf- 
fected. Still, should they ever leave, they may not 
be able to get back in. 

This spell can be cast by a living priest, but is 
particularly effective when used by undead crea- 
tures. Strahd von Zarovich has a high-level minion 
who is able to cast this spell for him, should he 
ever need it. 

Notes: Common on the Demiplane of Dread; 
used mostly by evil priests. 


Lizard Limbs 
(Alteration, Necromancy) 
Sphere: Animal 


Level: 4 

Range: 0 

Components: V 

Casting Time: 1 

Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


Under the influence of this spell, the caster can 
shed one or two limbs at will, without suffering 
damage. Thus, the caster can escape the grasp of a 
fallen tree or large creature by shedding an arm or 
leg to allow escape. The caster suffers any ill 
effects that accompany losing a limb, according to 
the chart. The head is not a limb for this purpose, 


Limb Lost Effect 

One Leg Walking movement rate halved 

Two Legs Crawl only 

One Am Lack of coordination; -2 penalty 
to Dexterity checks 

Two Arms No use of arms 

Tail Lack of balance, —2 to attack rolls 


and to any proficiency check 
affected by balance 
Wing or wings Loss of flight 


Lost limbs begin to grow again an hour after 
they are lost, taking 24 hours to regrow com- 
pletely; they are not usable during this period. If a 
lost limb is recovered within two rounds, it can be 
reattached in one round. 

Notes: Very rare spell. Most likely to be found 
in the hand of tribal spellcasters. 


Lizard to Log 
Reversed form, see log to lizard. 


Locate Animal Follower — Ranger 
(Divination) 
Reversible 
Sphere: Animal 


Level: 2 

Range: 60 yds. + 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: 8 hrs. 

Area of Effect: 1 animal follower 
Saving Throw: None 


Occasionally, a ranger’s animal follower may 
wander away in search of food or a mate. An 
animal follower may also be abducted or trapped. 
The locate animal follower spell helps the ranger 
find such lost creatures. The spell takes affect once 
the ranger fixes his or her mind upon the follower 
being sought. The spell locates only that specific 
follower. 

Once the spell is cast, the ranger slowly tums in 
a circle. If the follower is within range, the ranger 
senses when the direction of the sought follower. If 
the follower isn’t within range, the spell doesn't 


379 


~ Locate Animals or Plants r 


work. If the follower moves out of the area of 
effect, the spell is immediately negated. As soon as 
the ranger sees the lost follower, the spell ends. 
The spell is blocked by lead. 

The spell works only on a natural animal fol- 
lower (including giant animals), not a supernatural 
creature, human, demihuman, humanoid, or other. 
If the follower is dead, the spell still seeks it out, 
providing other conditions of casting are met. 

‘The material component is a hair, feather, scale 
or other physical remnant of the lost follower. 

The reverse of this spell, obscure follower, 
hides an animal follower from detection by spells, 
crystal balls, and similar means for 8 hours. 

Notes: Uncommon for rangers, rare for druids 
and other nature priests. 


Locate Animals or Plants 
(Divination) 
Sphere: Animal, Plant 


Level: 1 

Range: 100 yds, + 20 yd. level 

Components: V, $, M 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: | rd./level 

Area of Effect: 20-ft.-wide path 20 yds /level long 


Saving Throw: None 


The caster can find the direction and distance 
of any one desired type of animal or plant. The 
caster, facing in a direction, thinks of the animal or 
plant, and then knows if any such animal or plant 
is within range. If so, the exact distance and 
approximate number present is learned. During 
each round of the spell’s duration, the caster can 
face in only one direction (that is, only a 20-foot- 
wide path can be known). The spell lasts one 
round per level of experience of the caster, while 
the length of the path is 20 yards per level of expe- 
rience. (At the DM's option, some casters may be 
able to locate only those animals or plants associ- 
ated closely with their own mythos.) 

While the exact chance of locating a specific type 
of animal or plant depends on the details and cir- 
‘cumstances of the locale, the general frequency of the 
subject can be used as a guideline: common=50%, 
uncommon=30%, rare=15%, and very rare=5%. 
Most herbs grow in temperate regions, while most 
spices grow in tropical regions. Most plants sought as 
spell components or for magical research are rare or 
very rare, The results of this spell are always deter- 
mined by the DM. 

The material component is the caster’s holy 
symbol. 

Notes: Common for druids (PHB). 


Locate Object 
(Divination) 
Reversible 
Sphere: Divination 
Level: 3 


Range: 60 yds. + 10 yds.level 
Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 tum 
Duration: 1 rd/level 

Area of Effect: 1 object 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell helps locate a known or familiar 
object. The priest casts the spell, slowly turns, and 
senses when he or she is facing in the direction of 
the object to be located, provided the object is 
within range—for example, 90 yards for 3rd-level 
priests, 100 yards for 4th, 110 yards for Sth, and so 
on. The spell locates such objects as apparel, jew- 
elry, furniture, tools, weapons, or even a ladder or 
stairway. Once the caster has fixed in his or her 
mind the item sought, the spell locates only that 
item. Attempting to find a specific item, such as a 
kingdom's crown, requires an accurate mental 
image. If the image is not close enough to the 
actual item, the spell does not work; in short, 
desired but unique objects cannot be located by 
this spell unless they are known by the caster. The 
spell is blocked by lead. 

The casting requires the use of a piece of lode- 
stone. 

The reverse, obscure object, hides an object 
from location by spell, crystal ball, or similar 
means for eight hours. The caster must touch the 
object being concealed. Neither application of the 
spell affects living creatures. 

Notes: Common for clerics (PHB). Errata for 
the duration is incorporated here. 


Locate Spirit Animal 
(Divination) 
Sphere: Divination 


Level: 4 

Range: Special 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: | tum 
Duration: | day 

Area of Effect: 1 person 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


A priest using a /ocate spirit animal spell learns 
the location of an animal that is the spiritual coun- 
tespart of an individual. For a full day afterward, 
the priest knows the current location of the animal. 


2 a a SET a ae ae anaes 


This spell is often used to capture an individ- 
ual’s spiritual counterpart, for both good and ill 
effects, A caster who wishes to inflict harm on the 
individual can often do so by injuring, or even 
killing, the animal counterpart. The subject of such 
an attack suffers symptoms identical to those of 
the animal (save that the person does not necessar- 
ily die if the animal dies), taking the same number 
of hit points damage as the animal counterpart. If 
the animal dies and the person does not, the hit 
point loss is permanent unless countered by at 
least a full wish. Each individual has only one spir- 
itual counterpart and can be subjected to the spell 
only once, 

This spell is often used for beneficial purposes 
when an individual suffers from a mysterious ail- 
ment. Often, the cause of the ailment is an injury 
or sickness affecting the spiritual counterpart. If 
the animal can be found and cured, the individual 
will recover from the mysterious ailment. 

Just because a priest knows the location of a 
spiritual counterpart that does not mean the animal 
can be reached. The animal may be anywhere 
within an area of 14100 X 10 miles of the subject. 
Often, the priest must undertake a long journey in 
order to track down the animal. 

An individual aware of the casting of this spell 
and unwilling to have the spiritual counterpart 
located is allowed a saving throw vs. spell. A suc- 
cessful saving throw means that the priest cannot 
find the animal counterpart, and the spell fails. 

Once the animal is located, it usually regards 
any attempt to capture or injure it as hostile, even 
if performed for the benefit of its counterpart. It 
can fight as a normal member of its species in all 
ways. It is important to remember, however, that 
all magic and damage affecting the animal also 
affects the subject. In the case of spells, the human 
counterpart is allowed to make a separate saving 
throw, just as if the spell had been thrown directly 
against him or her, but with a—2 modifier. 

Notes: Common for priests from an Aztec cul- 
ture. Optionally, available to other shamans and 
priests of primitive cultures. 


‘The DM may rule that characters from other cul- 
tures do not have such counterparts. On the other 
hand, individuals who have personally adopted 
such an animal type as a totem or talisman, or 
have one as a family patron, may be vulnerable 
to this spell even if most other individuals of the 
culture are not. 


381 


Area of Effect: Wooden object touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell increases the amount of time that a 
wooden object will burn before being consumed, 
Wood that is enchanted in this manner burns 
brightly without being consumed for the duration 
of the spell. This spell does not cause wood to 
catch fire; it must be ignited normally. While it 
burns, the wood gives off twice the normal amount 
of heat—a single log can make a cozy fire, The 
priest can enchant up to | cubic foot of wood or 
‘one torch per level of experience. When the spell 
ends, the wooden object crumbles to ash, provided 
the object has burned for at least one tum. 

Notes: Uncommon spell for druids (ToM). 


Log to Lizard 


Level: 4 

Range: 30 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 7 

Duration: 2 rds/level 
Area of Effect: 10-ft. cube 
Saving Throw: None 


This is a special derivation of the 4th-level 
priest spell, sticks fo snakes. It is known only to 
certain members of lizard deity cults and certain 
primitive shamans and witch-doctors. Except as 
noted here, it is virtually the same as that spell. 
The spell must be cast on a sizable log. For the 
duration of the spell, the log is replaced by a giant 
lizard with a number of Hit Dice equal to the level 
of the caster. Each Hit Die has a full 8 hit points. 
Thus, a 7th-level caster turns a log into a 7 Hit Die 
giant lizard with 72 hit points. The lizard brought 
forth is a typical giant one, but its bite is poison- 
ous; it inflicts 1d8 points of damage, and the crea- 
ture bitten must also save vs. poison or die (onset 
time 248 rounds). 

The reverse of this spell, lizard to log, besides 
reversing the effect of this spell, can change any 


Lolth, Meld of 


nonmagical lizardlike reptile into a log for the 
spell’s duration, if a saving throw vs. spell is 
failed. If the Hit Dice of the lizard exceeds the 
level of the caster, the spell fails. 

Notes: Very rare spell 


Lolth, Meld of 
See meld of Lolth. 


Longevity 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Time 


Level: 6 
Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: } day 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: Special 


By means of this spell, the caster can increase his 
or her lifespan beyond its normal limit. When the 
spell is cast, the shukenja must make a successful 
system shock roll for the spell to have effect. If the 
roll is failed, the shukenja dies. If successful, the 
spell increases the lifespan of the shukenja by 2410 
years. Physical aging is slowed proportionately to 


the increase in lifespan. For example, a shukenja 
who through this spell increased his age to 120 years 
would have the appearance of a spry man of 80 at the 
end of his life. This spell can be cast multiple times; 
there is no limit to the number of years the shukenja 
can add to his or her life. However, the system shock 
roll must be made each time the spell is cast. 

The material components for this spell are a 
bow! of fresh peaches and an offering to the 
shukenja’s deity worth at least 100 ch’ien (500 gp). 

Notes: Common for oriental priests; otherwise, 
very rare. 


Lose the Path 
Reversed form, see find the path. 


Love Bite 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Combat 


Level: 2 
Range: 10 yds/level 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 5 
Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


382 


Lower Water 


SE 4 


This spell delivers a kiss made by the caster on 
the empty air unerringly to a chosen creature that 
is visible and within range. The kiss can be a 
simple signal (the brush of phantom lips). It can 
also be an actual bite that causes 1 point of damage 
(but cannot target a specific location). It can 
deliver a single touch-based spell, harmful or ben- 
eficial, that has been cast within the three rounds 
immediately preceding the casting of the /ove bite 
spell. 

Notes: Granted by Sune, Lady of Love, of the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Loviatar’s Caress 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Combat 


Level: 2 

Range: 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 5 
Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell provides the means of unerringly 
delivering, at a range of 10 yards per caster level, 
a single harmful or beneficial spell of 4th level or 
less that normally requires a touch to deliver. The 
affected spell must be cast within the round imme- 
diately preceding the casting of Loviatar’s caress. 
Also, the caress can be combined with the pain 
touch ability of a specialty priest of Loviatar. 

Notes: Granted by the evil goddess Loviatar of 
the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Loving Pain 
(Alteration, Necromancy) 
Sphere: Healing 


Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell is often employed by Loviatan clergy 
to recover from wounds caused in holy rituals. it 
heals, but causes intense pain while doing so, forcing 
a system shock roll on the recipient, and preventing 
that being from doing anything but convulsing, 
crying out, and writhing about uncontrollably for 143 
rounds (Armor Class is reduced by 3 points and no 
coherent actions are possible). 


The healing is instantaneous, restoring 1d8 
points of damage, plus 1 point per level of the 
caster. If the system shock roll succeeds, the spell 
recipient (who may be the caster) takes no damage 
from the intense pain. If the roll fails, the recipient 
falls into unconsciousness and is reduced to 1 hit 
point. In theory, days of healing could bring the 
stricken being back to full health, but unless aid is 
nearby, or this “Loviatar’s bane” occurs within a 
Loviatan religious community (whose members 
are swom to care for the infirm, and heal them if at 
all possible), death is the likely result, 

This spell has no effect on undead or creatures 
without nervous systems (such as plant beings, 
fungi, slimes, jellies, molds, and so on). 

The material components are the caster’s holy 
symbol and a drop of unholy water, 

Notes: Granted by the evil goddess Loviatar of 


the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 
Lower Water 

(Alteration) 

Reversible 


Sphere: Elemental Water 


Level: 4 

Range: 120 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 tum 
Duration; 1 tum/level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


The lower water spell causes water or similar 
fluid in the area of effect to sink away to a mini- 
mum depth of one inch. The depth can be lowered 
by up to two feet for every experience level of the 
priest. The water is lowered within a square area 
whose sides are 10 feet long per caster level. Thus, 
an 8th-level priest affects a volume up to 16 
feet X 80 feet X 80 feet, a 9th-level caster affects a 
volume up to 18 feet X 90 feet X 90 feet, and so on. 
In extremely large and deep bodies of water, such 
as deep ocean, the spell creates a whirlpool that 
sweeps ships and similar craft downward, putting 
them at risk and rendering them unable to leave by 
normal movement for the duration of the spell. 
When cast on water elementals and other water- 
based creatures, this spell acts as a slow spell: the 
creature moves at half speed and makes half its 
usual number of attacks each round. The spell has 
no effect on other creatures. 

Its reverse, raise water, causes water or similar 
fluids to return to their highest natural level: spring 
flood, high tide, and so on This can make fords 
impassable, float grounded ships, and may even 


383 


~~ Loyal Vassal 


sweep away bridges at the DM’s option. It negates 
lower water and vice versa. 
The material components of this spell are the 
priest’s holy (or unholy) symbol and a pinch of dust. 
Notes: Common for druids (PHB). 


Loyal Vassal 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
Sphere: Charm 


Level: 3 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, $, M 

Casting Time: 6 

Duration: 1 day/level 

Area of Effect: Person touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell affects any single person who is a 
bipedal human, demihuman, or humanoid of man- 
size or smaller, such as brownies, dryads, dwarves, 
elves, gnolls, gnomes, goblins, half-elves, halflings, 
half-orcs, nixies, orcs, pixies, sprites, troglodytes, 
and others. This spell can only be cast upon a person 
who voluntarily enters the service of another being 
(who is not necessarily the spelicaster) as a servant or 
bodyguard. No saving throw is necessary, as it only 
affects beings that voluntarily submit to its effects, 
Creatures under any form of magical or psionic con- 
trol or those that are not in their right minds cannot 
be affected by a loyal vassal spell. During the casting 
of the spell, the spell recipient's liege-to-be must be 
named in sufficient detail to specify exactly which 
person shall serve in that role, More than one loyal 
vassal spell cannot be cast on a single recipient at the 
same time; subsequent spells automatically fail. 

While under the effects of this spell, a recipient 
is absolutely loyal to the master named during the 
casting of the spell, and cannot even contemplate 
any form of betrayal or treachery. The spell does 
not allow the master to control enspelled vassals as 
automatons, but the vassals serve to the best of 
their ability, even giving their lives in service if 
appropriate, A vassal is loyal to a person, not the 
office, so deposing the reigning monarch and pro- 
claiming oneself king does not result in a transfer 
of loyalty by any vassals loyal to the former king. 

If the spellcaster or the master harms or 
attempts to harm the vassal by some overt action, 
or if a dispel magic spell is successfully cast on the 
vassal, the spell is broken (although it is unlikely 
that vassals will immediately betray a master in 
‘the latter case). 

The material component is the priest’s holy 
symbol, which is touched to the brow of the recip- 
ient during the casting. 


Notes: Granted by Siamorphe the Noble of the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Luckbolt 
(Conjuration/Summoning, Evocation) 
Sphere: Combat, Protection 


Level: 6 

Range: 10 yds,/level 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 9 
Duration: 4 rds. 

Area of Effect: 1 being 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell can be used by the caster directly or 
fired at a chosen creature as a silvery-blue bolt that 
cannot miss and can follow around comers, 
through teleports and the like, and so on to any 
location on the same plane. If the recipient being is 
not the caster, the recipient must be viewed by the 
caster, either directly or through some means of 
scrying, as the /uckbolt is cast. If a priest casts 
luckbolt on himself or herself, it surrounds the 
priest with a silvery-blue aura for | round. In addi- 
tion, luckbolt affects the spell recipient as follows: 

On the round after contact, the affected being, 
on any successful attack, inflicts maximum damage 
plus an additional 1410 points. The being is also 
successful in all ability checks, proficiency checks 
that can be completed in a round, and saving 
throws. 

On the second round, the affected being receives 
a +6 bonus to all attack rolls and deals maximum 
damage plus 1d8 points. The being receives a +4 
bonus to all saving throws, proficiency checks that 
can be completed in a round, and ability checks, 

On the third round, the affected being receives 
a +3 bonus to all attack rolls, a 146 bonus on all 
damage done, and receives a +2 bonus to all saving 
throws, proficiency checks that can be completed 
in a round, and ability checks. 

On the fourth round, the affected being receives 
a +2 bonus to attack rolls, a 1d4 bonus to damage, 
and a +1 bonus to all saving throws, proficiency 
checks that can be completed in a round, and abil- 
ity checks. 

It is considered a sin for a priest of Tymora to 
use a luckbolt as a personal aid when compan- 
ions—particularly other worshipers of Tymora— 
are in greater danger. 

Notes: Granted by Tymora, goddess of luck in 
the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


a a a a a A 


Lure 


_———————— SS 4 


Lungs of Water 
(Conjuration) 
Sphere: Elemental Water 


This spell causes a single feature or matching 
pair of features (such as eyes) of the caster’s body 
to alter to exactly match in shape and hue the 
equivalent features of another living being whom 


Level: 4 wie the caster has personally seen at some time in the 
Range: 20 yds. past. The change is actual, and the altered fea- 
Components: V, S, M tures are instantly usable, performing as if the 
Casting Time: 7 caster was entirely used to them. The spell does 


Duration: Concentration 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


not alter Strength, Dexterity, or the like, but can 
temporarily increase or decrease Charisma (if the 
Dungeon Master permits). For example, if the 
caster alters his eyes to resemble those of an 
eagle or a creature whose eyes are on stalks, or 
modifies his feet to web his toes, others would 


This curse magically creates water inside a sub- 


ject’s lungs, drowning the creature in a few rounds. 
Nonbreathing creatures and undead are not affected 
by this spell. Any other creature that fails a saving 
throw vs. spell immediately begins to drown. See the 
rules for drowning in Chapter 14 of the Player's 
Handbook. Once the spell begins affecting a creature, 
leaving the initial casting range provides no remedy. 

The spell can be stopped with remove curse or 
by disrupting the caster. A dehydrate spell will 
also cancel lungs of water, and the subject suffers 
no other ill effects. 

The material component is the caster’s saliva, 
spat at the intended subject. 

Notes: Uncommon for priests from the DARK 
SUN setting. 


Lure 
(Necromancy) 
Sphere: Charm, Necromantic 


Level: 3 

Range: 0 
‘Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 
Duration: 1 hr./level (maximum 1 day) 
Area of Effect: The caster 

Saving Throw: Special 


385 


obviously react to him differently than before the 
transformation. 

Multiple lure spells can affect a single creature 
at the same time. Lure spells end upon the death of 
the affected creature or when the magic expires. A 
lure spell can be removed sooner by a successful 
dispel magic spell. 

Some adventuring priests use this spell to tem- 
porarily gain beast powers or to change a single 
hand or limb for purposes of disguise, but most 
Sunites employ it to lure members of the opposite 
gender by increasing their personal comeliness 
(hence the name of the spell). When the caster 
employs this spell personally, no saving throw is 
necessary, but when it is cast to affect another 
creature, both the caster and the recipient must 
successfully save vs. spell or the spell fails and is 
wasted. If the recipient is unwilling, failure is 
automatic. 

The material components are a drop of holy 
water and a scrap (of any size) of the caster’s 
skin. 

Notes: Granted by Sune, Lady of Love, of the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. This spell is found 
only in a few exceptionally rare tomes. 


Mace of Odo 
(Evocation) 
Sphere: Combat 


Level: 3 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: One hit (4 rds. maximum) 
Area of Effect: Creates 1 mace 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell enables a priest to create a magical 
mace in his or her hand. A mace of Odo is actually 
a mace-shaped construct of force. It is translucent, 
but glows bright white. Its radiance is equal in 
effect to a light spell, though it cannot be extin- 
guished by darkness spells. The mace of Odo can 
be wielded immediately when casting is complete, 
or it can be held for up to three rounds. All spells 
cast directly at the bearer of a mace of Odo are 
absorbed harmlessly by the mace; area-of-effect 
spells are not affected by the mace. 

A mace of Odo strikes at a +5 bonus to attack 
rolls and inflicts 346 points of damage upon most 
creatures; it inflicts 4d6 points of damage to 
undead creatures. A creature of 2 HD or less suf- 
fers only 1 point of damage when struck by a 
mace of Odo but must make a successful saving 
throw vs. paralyzation or be paralyzed for 1d4+1 
turns. Whenever a mace of Odo successfully 
strikes or four rounds after the round of its cast- 
ing (whichever comes first), the mace vanishes 
instantly in a burst of white radiance equal in 
intensity to a continual light spell. 

The material components for this spell are a 
stone, a piece of wood, and two drops of holy 
water. 

Notes: Granted by Helm the Vigilant of the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Mace of Xvim 
(Evocation) 
Sphere: Combat 


Level: 2 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: 5 rds. 

Area of Effect: Creates 1 mace 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell conjures up a short-lived glowing 
mace in the caster’s hand that strikes with a +3 
attack bonus, deals 1d12+2 points damage at a 


TW] 
Q A 
K P ; 

E<ge©) strike, and forces all struck items to suc- 
'B, fa] _ ceed at an item saving throw vs. crush- 
ABBE ing blow or shatter. The mace vanishes 


if it leaves the possession of the caster 
and cannot be wielded by any other being. All 
magical items and enchanted substances or sur- 
faces bearing a dweomer get a +4 bonus to their 
saving throws against the shattering power of the 
mace. Any item that succeeds at its saving throw 
once against a particular mace of Xvim need not 
do so again, even if struck repeatedly. 

The mace has a reach of 5 feet but is almost 
weightless; casters of any size and strength can 
casily wield it. It appears as a black, spiked, knob- 
headed, one-piece rod surrounded by a dim, flick- 
ering, blue radiance, 

‘The material component is an iron or steel nail, 
sliver, or fragment. 

Notes: Granted by the evil lesser power Iyachtu 
Xvim, son of Bane, of the FORGOTTEN REALMS set- 
ting. 


Maelstrom 
(Alteration, Evocation) 
Sphere: Elemental Water 


Level: 7 

Range: 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: 1 tum 

Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell causes a large body of water (a pond 
having a 60-foot-deep area that is itself 120 feet 
across or larger, a lake, or the sea) to sink and 
whirl into a sucking, drowning cone. The mael- 
strom created by this spell is a destructive, 
descending vortex of water that sucks in creatures 
and objects, whirls them around and down, and 
thrusts them out of its bottom deep underwater. 
Waterbome items and creatures within 50 feet of 
the maelstrom’s edge are drawn into it at a rate of 
10 feet per round until they enter the cone— 
whereupon they are whirled around and around, 
descending for four rounds before being expelled 
at the bottom on the fifth. The maelstrom is 60 feet 
deep and 120 feet in diameter, 

Creatures able to swim and boats being rowed 
or under sail can fight against the pull of the mael- 
strom, making Strength ability checks each round 
that if successful slow their progress into the cone 
to 5 feet. Vessels receive a Strength check based on 
a Strength score equal to that of their strongest 
rower plus 1. 


eee ae a NO a ee 


Magic Creeper 


N 


Once drawn into the maelstrom and descend- 
ing, creatures take 2d6 points of buffeting damage 
per round but travel in a fairly stable path. No 
spells requiring a material component can be cast, 
and only items already in hand can be used. On 
each round, descending creatures must make a 
successful saving throw vs. death magic or drown, 
unless able to breathe water or hold their breath (a 
successful Strength and Constitution ability check 
at a —1 penalty each round or a successful Swim- 
ming proficiency check at a —I penalty each 
round), 

On the fifth round (that of expulsion), the 
damage is doubled to 446 points, and the saving 
throw vs. death magic is made at a —2 penalty (-2 
to holding one’s breath). From the 60-foot depth at 
the center of the cone, the creature is expelled 40 
feet downward and to one side. If a rocky bottom 
or any solid object is struck during this forcible 
journey, an additional 2d4 points of damage is 
taken. Thereafter, the being is free of the mael- 
strom’s effects but is 100 feet below the surface of 
the water and will drown unless means of breath- 
ing in water are available or an immediate ascent 
is made, An ascending creature must succeed at 
three swimming checks or three sets of Strength 
and Constitution checks. If any of these rolls fail, 
1d4 points of damage are taken per failed roll. 

Items drawn into a maelstrom are buffeted and 
then expelled just as creatures are. They must 
make successful item saving throws vs. acid for 
each of the four rounds of descent plus the round 
of expulsion or be destroyed. If they strike 
bottom when they are expelled, an additional 
item saving throw vs. crushing blow is required. 
If it is failed, the item is destroyed. Buoyant 
items that survive all this slowly ascend to the 
surface. All others settle to the bottom wherever 
the maelstrom hurls them. 

When the spell expires, the maelstrom slows 
and becomes more shallow. Its central waters rise 
to the surface, carrying all items and creatures 
caught in them upward in an ascending, undamag- 
ing spiral. From the moment the spell expires, no 
damage is caused by the maelstrom; things not yet 
expelled from its bottom are borne back to the sur- 
face in the described manner. 

The material component is a drop of water 
blessed by Umberlee or by a senior Umberlant in 
the name of the goddess. 

Notes: Granted by the evil sea goddess Umber- 
lee of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Magefire* 
(Abjuration, Necromancy) 
Sphere: Healing, Necromantic, Protection 


Level: 4 

Range: 10 yds. 

‘Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 2 turs + 1 turn/additional effect 
Duration: Permanent 

Area of Effect: 1 worshiper of Mystra 

Saving Throw: None 


This cooperative spell requires at least two 
Mystran priests casting the spell simultaneously. 
For every additional Mystran clergy member (of 
any class) who participates in the ceremony, 
another restorative benefit can be empowered. 
Other participating clergy must either cast mage- 
fire or donate four spell levels of magical energy to 
the spell. Clergy who donate energy lose four spell 
levels of spells from memory as if they had been 
cast. Portions of a spell donated result in the loss 
of the whole spell as if it were cast. 

With only two casters, this spell works as a 
neutralize poison, cure disease, and remove curse. 
For each additional clergy participating, another 
benefit is added and the ceremony takes another 
tum to complete. Benefits always take effect at the 
combined level of all the spell’s participants. The 
additional benefits are, in order: cure blindness or 
deafness, heal, regenerate, and dispel magic. 
Additional participants past this point enable any 
effect to be repeated (if a dispel magic failed, for 
instance) or allow a special fell condition to be 
healed or dispelled at the DM's discretion. 

Notes: Restricted to priests of Mystra of the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Magic Creeper 
(Alteration) 
‘Sphere: Plant 


Level: 1 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: 2 rds. + 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: Vine up to 20-ft. long 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell allows the druid to temporarily ani- 
mate up to 20 feet of a single natural vegetable 
vine or creeper. The caster can then command the 
affected vine to knot or unknot itself, move along 
most normal surfaces (including up walls and 
along ceilings) at a movement rate of 2, or attack 


387 


~ Magic Font 2 


enemies. The vine can be left attached to its parent 
growth, or a suitable length can be cut before the 
spell is cast. To make the vine perform any of these 
actions, the druid must concentrate for an entire 
round. Any knots or wrappings remain in place 
after the druid stops concentrating. 

The vine attacks as the druid and has an Armor 
Class of 5. The round after it wraps around a sub- 
ject and each round thereafter, as willed by the 
druid, the vine inflicts 1d4 points of constriction 
damage. Further, the subject must save vs, paraly- 
sis or be tangled. The first missed save gives the 
subject a —2 penalty on attacks and Armor Class; 
the second missed save immobilizes the subject 
completely. A successful bend bars attempt snaps 
the vine outright; a single blow of an edged 
weapon inflicting 5 or more points of damage 
severs it. Otherwise, it can withstand of 15 points 
of damage from edged weapons or damage-pro- 
ducing magic. The spell ends when the duration 
expires or when the vine is severed or destroyed. 
Higher-level druids can animate an additional 20- 
foot length per 4 levels of experience. This addi- 
tional length can be the same vine or several 
different vines within a 10-foot radius. 

Notes: Very rare druid spell. (Updated from 
POLYHEDRON Newszine.) 


Magic Font 
(Divination) 
Sphere: Divination 
Level: 5 
Range: Touch 


Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 hr. 
Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


The spell causes a holy water font to serve as a 
scrying device. The spell does not function unless 
the priest is in good standing with his deity. The 
basin of holy water becomes similar to a crystal 
ball. For each vial of capacity of the basin, the 
priest can scry for one round, up to a maximum of 
one hour; thus, the duration of the magic font spell 
is directly related to the capacity of the holy water 
receptacle. The DM will know the chances that the 
subject observed is able to detect the scrying. 

‘The priest's holy symbol and the font and its 
trappings are not consumed by the spell. 

Notes: Common for clerics (PHB). 


388 


crystal—either Special 
An empty vial is worth 2-5 gp. Fonts and basins 
are constructed and designed by special order, 
the process taking 4-10 weeks (2d4 + 2). 

Variations on the standard fonts, with differ- 
ing may be allowed by the DM, 
using the table values as a guide. For example, a 
copper basin chased with silver and set with 
silver rim and handles would hold 8 vials and 
cost 50% of the copper basin cost, plus 50% of 
the silver basin cost. 

Capacities are design for game purposes to 
limit supplies of holy water. It is thought thar 
deities find fonts constructed of more costly 
materials more pleasing, and favor them accord- 


Receptacles: 
Min-Max 

a Capacity Basin Cost Font 
Copper 6vials 130-180 gp 200 gp 
Silver 10 vials 1900-2400 gp 500 gp. 
Electum 18 vials 8,000-12,000 gp 1,000 gp 
Gold 32 vials 19,000-22,000 gp 1,500 gp 
Platinum 50 vials 110,000-200,000 2,000 gp 


Magma Blade 


N 


Magical Stone 
(Enchantment) 
Sphere: Combat 


Level: 1 
Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 4 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 3 pebbles 
Saving Throw: None 


By using this spell, the priest can temporarily 
enchant up to three small pebbles, no larger than 
sling bullets. The magical stones can then be hurled 
or slung at an opponent. If hurled, they can be thrown 
up to 30 yards, and all three can be thrown in one 
round. The individual using them must roll normally 
to hit, although the magic of the stones enables 
anyone to be proficient with them. The stones are 
considered +1 weapons for determining if a creature 
can be struck, although they do not have an attack or 
damage bonus. Each stone that hits inflicts 1d4 points 
of damage, 2d4 points against undead. The magic in 
each stone lasts for but one-half hour, or until used. 

The material components are the priest's holy 
symbol and three small pebbles, unworked by 
tools or magic of any type. 

Notes: Common for clerics (PHB). 


Magical Tether 
(Invocation/Evocation) 
Sphere: Combat 


Level: 1 

Range: 5 yds/level 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: 3 rds. + 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: 1 object or living being 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell can be cast upon any nonliving object 
or living being within range. Upon casting, the spell 
creates an unbreakable magical tether graspable 
only by the spellcaster that stretches from the target 
object or being to the caster’s hand (or hands). 
Living creatures must voluntarily submit to the 
effects of this spell or the incantation has no effect. 
By means of the nonphysical tether, the priest can 
pull on the subject of the spell as if it were attached 
to a long, incredibly strong rope. The magical tether 
can be dropped if the caster wants to drop it, but 
otherwise it does not fall from the caster’s grip. The 
magical tether cannot be positioned so as to cause 
damage to a living being, such as to strangle it. 


This spell may be cast upon harpoons or other 
thrown weapons before hurling them in combat. If 
such a weapon lodges in its target, the priest may 
be able to drag the target closer, and if the weapon 
misses, the priest can easily retrieve it. If the 
weapon is not firmly embedded, however, it is 
likely to break free. The most typical use of this 
spell upon living creatures is on people who have 
fallen into the water and need to be pulled to safety. 

Notes: Granted by Ulutiu, the Lord in the Ice, 
of the FoRGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Magical Vestment 
(Enchantment) 
Sphere: Protection 


Level: 3 

Range: 0 

‘Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: 5 rds./level 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell enchants the caster’s vestment, provid- 
ing protection at least the equivalent of chain mail 
(AC 5). The vestment gains a +1 enchantment for 
each three levels of the priest beyond Sth level, to a 
maximum of AC 1 at 17th level. The magic lasts for 
five rounds per level of the caster, or until the caster 
loses consciousness. If the vestment is worn with 
other armors, only the best Armor Class (either the 
armor or the vestment) is used; this protection is not 
cumulative with any other Armor Class protection. 

The material components are the vestment to 
be enchanted and the priest’s holy symbol, which 
are not expended. 

Notes: Common for clerics and druids (PHB). 


ical Vestment — Shukenja 
This spell is identical to the 3rd-level priest spell, 
except for the protection, which is +] per four 
levels. This spell functions only within the shrine 
or temple of the shukenja. 


Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: 1 obsidian sword 
Saving Throw: None 


389 


~ Magma Jet es 


When used on a specially prepared obsidian 
sword, this spell sharpens the blade to a razor edge 
and stores a burst of magical energy within. The 
sword inflicts 3 additional points of damage to 
anything it hits, and the impact releases a store of 
magical heat that turns the sword to molten stone. 
The blade bursts upon an opponent, showering the 
foe with burning magma and causing an additional 
2d6 points of heat damage. The magma can 
destroy equipment (save vs. magical fire), and 
continues to bum for 1d6 points of damage per 
round, up to 10 rounds. A sizable body of water 
cools the magma in 2 rounds. A full canteen only 
halts damage for 1 round. Ice spells or resist fire 
are the most effective forms of protection. Also, 
the subject can drop and roll, extinguishing the 
magma in 1d4 rounds (rolling in loose sand or wet 
earth expunges the magma in 1d2 rounds), 

To create such a weapon, a priest must first find 
or craft an obsidian blade. The blade must be taken 
to a source of magma and, to a chant in an ancient 
language, plunged into the lava. When it emerges, 
the weapon is a magma blade. Since the creation of 
such a weapon is governed by pacts with elemental 
forces, a priest who has prepared a magma blade 
cannot make another until the first has been used. 

Notes: Uncommon for priests from the DARK 


> 


Magma Jet 
(Invocation, Conjuration) 
Sphere: Elemental Magma 


Level: 3 

Range: 2 yds /level 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 5 
Duration: Instant 

Area of Effect: | creature 
Saving Throw: None 


whe 


A priest casts this spell by simply pointing his 
finger at a creature and screaming the praises of 
the magma lords. A gout of sticky, molten rock 
gushes forth and covers the target creature in fiery 
goo. This causes 2d6 points of damage the first 
round and 1d6 points every round thereafter until 
the magma is either cooled or removed, up to a 
period of 10 additional rounds. Immersion in a 
body of water cools magma in 2 rounds; the con- 
tents of a waterskin halt damage for one round. 
Cold-based spells and resist fire are the most effec- 
tive forms of protection. 

A creature can drop and roll, extinguishing the 
magical flame in 1d4 rounds. If the creature rolls 
in loose sand or wet earth, the magma is expunged 
in 1d2 rounds. 


Notes: Uncommon for priests from the DARK 
‘SUN setting. 


Magma Shield 


(Conjuration, Invocation) 


Sphere: Elemental Magma 


Level: 4 

Range: 0 

Components: V, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell forms a mystical, swirling mass of 
magma around a common shield. The priest must 
be able to use a shield to cast this spell, and the 
shield is destroyed when the spell ends. 

‘Anyone in melee with the priest takes 1d4 points 
of heat damage if a successful saving throw vs. spell 
is not made each round. Any attack that misses the 
caster by exactly 1 point on the attack roll has hit the 
shield; a weapon that hits the shield must make a suc- 
cessful item saving throw vs. acid or be destroyed. 

‘The caster is protected from the intense heat the 
shield generates, but not from any other heat source. 

Notes: Uncommon for priests from the DARK 
Sun setting. 


Magma Tunnel 


(Alteration) 
Sphere: Elemental Magma 

Casting Time: 1 tum + 1 turnflevel 

Duration: 1 turn /level 


Area of Effect: 30-ft. X 10-ft. cylinder 
Saving Throw: None 


By using this spell, a priest can tunnel through 
solid earth or rock (but not sand or silt) by tuming 
it into flowing magma. A lit torch is applied to the 
spot of earth the priest wishes to melt. The rock 
then liquifies and moves out of the way to allow 
the caster to pass, at a movement rate of 3. The 
molten rock hardens in its new position, creating a 
permanent tunnel. Although the caster is protected 
from the molten rock for the duration of the spell, 
it takes about 24 hours for the heat to dissipate 
enough for unprotected creatures to enter. A suc- 
cessful dispel magic spell extinguishes the torch 
and halts further progress, but has no effect on a 
tunnel once it has formed. 


391 


The material component is a burning torch, 
which lasts for the duration of the spell. 

Notes: Uncommon for priests from the DARK 
Sun setting. 


Magnetism 
(Alteration) 
Reversible 
Sphere: Elemental Earth 


Level: 4 
Range: Touch 

Components: V 

Casting Time: 7 

Duration: 1 rd//level 

Area of Effect: 1 object (6 cu. ft,/ level) 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


The magnetism spell imbues an object made of 
iron or steel with magnetic properties. The object 
attracts iron and steel items approaching within 30 
feet. The caster can affect an object of up to six 
cubic feet per level of experience; thus, a 7th-level 
priest can affect an object 2X37 feet, about the 
size of a sarcophagus. 

Missiles subject to magnetic forces are attracted 
to the magnetized object and deflected from their 
intended course. A creature holding an affected item 
must make a successful saving throw vs. spell each 
round while in the area of effect, or the item is tom 
loose and pulled to the magnetized object. An indi- 
vidual wearing affected armor or similar accou- 
trements must make a saving throw vs. spell each 
round or be drawn to the object. The force exerted 
by the magnetic force at the source is 25 pounds per 
caster level—this can be used to determine if mag- 
netically attracted objects can be separated by main 
strength (see “Maximum Press” on the Strength 
table in the PHB). 

‘The foregoing assumes the magnetized object is 
either solidly fixed or more massive than the attracted 
object. If the object is lighter and not anchored, then 
it instead moves toward the largest mass of magneti- 
cally active material in the area and adheres to it. 
While the exact effect of this depends on the size of 
the object, a magnetized object adhering to a weapon 
may make it difficult or impossible to use, while one 
adhering to armor may hinder movement or other 
actions. Typical penalties range from —1 to —4. 

‘The reverse of this spell, demagnetize, can tem- 
porarily deactivate a source of magnetism up to 6 
cubic feet in volume per caster level. Alternately, it 
can render one iron or steel object of similar size 
nonmagnetic for the spell’s duration. 

Notes: Very rare spell for priests with major 
access to the sphere of Elemental Earth. 


Maintai 


Maintain 
(Necromancy, Abjuration) 
Sphere: Protection 


Level: 3 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, $, M 

Casting Time: | turn 

Duration: 1 day/level 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


ws 


This spell is used on the Savage Coast in the 
RED STEEL setting. The affected creature is main- 
tained at his or her current stage of Red Curse 
effect for the duration of the spell. A recipient in 
the Time of Grace remains there (except for suf- 
fering the loss of a single ability point); a recipient 
in the Time of Loss or the Time of Change stays at 
exactly the same point as when the spell was cast. 
The use of a Legacy ability by a protected creature 
immediately dispels the maintain spell. 

The spell does not prevent the loss of the initial 
point from the appropriate ability score, nor does 
it eliminate or heal any detrimental effects. It does 
not work on Inheritors. If the recipient is affected 
by a successful deplere spell (for which the caster 
need make only a normal attack roll, without the 
-4 penalty) the maintain spell immediately ends, 
and the full time called for by the deplete spell is 
instantaneously applied to the Time of Loss and 


Since cinnabry! is difficult to find in some 
places, priests developed a spell to counteract 
some of the effects of the Red Curse. After some 
work, wizards were able to duplicate the spell’s 
effects, 

This spell is used throughout the Savage Coast, 
but most commonly in Robrenn, Eusdria, Renardy, 
Bellayne, and Herath. In several small towns, the 
village priest or wizard makes rounds, casting the 
spell on all who need it. This holds off detrimental 
effects and keeps most of the common folk in 
those small towns from using Legacies. 

The spell requires at least a week's worth of 
undepleted cinnabryl. This must be touched to the 
recipient's head at the end of casting, but is not 
consumed in the casting. The caster touches the 
target creature while reciting the verbal compo- 
nent to activate the spell. 

Notes: Common for priests from the RED 
STEEL setting; otherwise, virtually unknown. 


Major Curse 
See bestow major curse. 


Major Curse — Old Empire 
(Abjuration) 


Area of Effect: Creature (or object) touched 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell is similar to the reversed form of the 
3rd-level spell remove curse, except the spell 
effect can be permanent. The curse can have one of 
several effects on a creature (see table). 


d% roll Result 

01-50 One ability score is reduced to 3. The 
DM determines which randomly. 

51-75 The creature suffers a —4 penalty to all 
attack and saving throw rolls. 

76-00 The creature is 50% likely to drop any 


held item (or do nothing in the case of 
creatures that don’t use tools); roll each 
round, 


If a saving throw vs. spell is failed, the curse is 
permanent. If the saving throw is successful, the 
curse lasts only one turn per level of the caster. A 
major curse cannot be dispelled or removed by a 
remove curse spell, but a remove major curse 
spell, a limited wish, or a wish spell removes it. 

‘This spell can be cast on an item, typically in a 
tomb where the item is not to be disturbed. In this 
case, those who touch the item fall subject to the 
major curse (and to the permanent major curse if 
a saving throw vs. spell is failed). 

The reverse of this spell, remove major curse, 
removes the effects of a major curse or bestow 
curse spell. 

Notes: Granted by the Mulhorandi god Neph- 
thys of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Major Ward 
(Abjuration) 
Sphere: Wards 


Level: 5 

Range: 0 

‘Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 3 rds. 

Duration: Until broken 

Area of Effect: 10-ft.-radius hemisphere 
Saving Throw: Special 


aS aLL 


Mantle of Mystra 


N 


This is a stronger variation of the minor ward 
spell. It creates a stronger barrier of force that cannot 
be broken through by a physical attack of any sort, 
including the use of such powerful weapons as a 
vorpal blade. The protection cannot be dispelled, but 
can be brought down by several spells: disintegrate, 
limited wish, or wish. Further, it can be destroyed by 
any casting of the following spells that causes at least 
50 points of damage: fireball, lightning bolt, cone of 
cold, flame strike, Otiluke's freezing sphere, or meteor 
swarm. Creatures and objects in the area of effect 
when the ward is breached are not damaged by the 
breaching effect. The ward cannot be entered or left 
by traveling astrally, or by dimension door, passwall, 
or teleportation of any sort (including word of recall). 
Those in the hemisphere cannot cast spells out, 
though spells can be cast to affect those inside the 
area—cures, neutralize poison, commune, and so on. 

‘The ward remains in effect as long as the caster 
is conscious; in the round after the caster falls 
asleep or is loses consciousness, the ward col- 
lapses, The caster can will the ward away at any 
time, but this act takes a full round. 

The material components are seven gems of 
any sort (at least 250 gp value each). They are 
spaced evenly on the ground, around a 30-foot- 
diameter circle, though a smaller area can be 
warded if desired. The gems are consumed in the 
casting. 

Notes: Very rare spell. (Updated from DRAGON 
Magazine.) 


Make Real 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: All 


Area of Effect: Plant or object touched 
Saving Throw: None 


‘This powerful spell can only be used against 
nonliving materials or plants (not undead) currently 
under the effects of other magic (for instance, a 
stone glowing because a faerie fire spell has been 
cast upon it). Make real alters the nature of the 
recipient to make a magical effect a permanent part 
of the object or plant. (A glowing stone would 
shine forever, and dispel magic would only tem- 
porarily negate its radiance.) This spell cannot be 
cast on intelligent plants or plant-based monsters. 

If multiple forms of magic are affecting an item, 
make real makes all of them permanent, so this spell 


can create simple magical items—or rather, items 
that can pass on contact-related magical effects. 
Frivolous or alignment-endangering uses of make 
real are not well regarded by Tyr. This spell is 
intended for use in creating temple items with 
useful minor magic (for example, a baton that 
speaks a magic mouth warming when passed by 
someone bearing magical items who is not wearing 
a holy symbol of Tyr). It is also used for visiting 
“fitting justice” on beings by altering their property. 

Notes: Granted by the Tyr the Just God of the 
ForGOTTEN REALMS setting. This spell is found 
only in a few exceptionally rare tomes. 


Mantle of Baravar — Gnome 


(Abjuration) 
Sphere: Protection 


Level: 5 
Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: 1 tum + 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: Creatures touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell confers a special magic resistance 
against Ilusion/Phantasm spells. This magic resist- 
ance functions as standard magic resistance, but only 
against Illusion/Phantasm spells. Those protected 
each receive 2% magic resistance per caster level, in 
addition to saving throws normally allowed. The 
caster can divide the duration evenly among several 
creatures, to a minimum duration of one-half hour 
each. Thus, a 10th-level priest can protect one creature 
for 10 hours, two creatures for 5 hours, three creatures 
for 3 hours and 20 minutes, and so on. A successful 
dispel magic spell ends the effect immediately. 

‘The material component is the caster’s holy symbol. 

Notes: Granted by the gnome god Baravar 
Cloakshadow. 


Duration: Until used or up to | year 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 

This spell creates an invisible magical aura 
around the caster. When a specific spell or magical 


393 


N 


item discharge (such as fireball, but not all fiery 
spells) impinges on any part of this aura, the mantle 
instantly absorbs it, negating all of its effects, and 
converts it to another specific type of spell, hurling 
that spell back at the source of the original magic. 

‘This action exhausts the mantle, ending its pro- 
tection, (It otherwise lasts for up to 1 year, even if 
its caster later memorizes other spells, but it 
cannot survive contact with a dispel magic spell. A 
given being can enjoy the protection of only one 
mantle of Mystra at a time.) 

The returned spell behaves as if it were 
launched by a caster of the same level, alignment, 
and abilities as the caster of the first magic. Both 
the specific spell to be defended against and the 
spell it is to be converted to and sent back as must 
be chosen by the caster of the mantle of Mystra 
during its casting and cannot be altered thereafter. 
The magic defended against must be one the 
manile-caster has cast, felt the effects of, or 
observed the effects of, and the specific name of 
the spell must be known. The return spell must be 
one the mantle-caster has personally cast at some 
prior time. 

Notes: Restricted to priests of Mystra of the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. This spell is found 
only in a few exceptionally rare tomes. 


Manythorns 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Combat, Protection 


Level: 2 

Range: 0 

Components: 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: 3 rds. 

Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell covers the caster in thousands of 
bristling thorns. To the caster, these are weightless, 
spectral, and harmless (the thorns on a caster’s arm 
can apparently retract into the caster’s face; using 
that arm to scratch her nose causes no damage). To 
others they form an armor that improves the 
caster’s Armor Class by 2, and slashes any creature 
that comes into bodily contact with the priest for 
1d4 points of damage. If the caster can crush a foe 
against a wall or deliver a blow with a thom-stud- 
ded limb (both actions require a successful attack 
roll), damage is increased to 1d4+2 points. Crea- 
tures clad in splint mail or better armor (such as 
plate mail) are immune to such damage; creatures 
clad in ring or chain mail are allowed a saving 
throw vs. spell for half damage. 


The thoms fade instantly into nothingness at 
the end of the spell and are not considered true 
plant material for the purposes of determining 
whether they are affected by either friendly or hos- 
tile magic. 

‘The material components of this spell are six or 
more plant thorns. 

Notes: Granted by the god Silvanus, the Forest 
Father, of the ForGorren REALMs setting. This 
spell is found only in a few exceptionally rare 
tomes. 


Mark of Brotherhood — Dwarf 


Available to all dwarven priests, this spell 
places a magical glyph on each of the recipient's 
hands. The symbol varies according to the priest's 
religion and clan, marking one of the recipient's 
hands with the priest's clan insignia and the other 
hand with the symbol of the priest's deity. Once in 
place, the mark of brotherhood becomes invisible. 
Thereafter, only those who possess an identical 
mark of brotherhood are able to see it, magical 

A mark of brotherhood is a permanent fixture 
unless the recipient commits some offense against 
the clan or religion associated with the spell, be it 
physical harm, political sabotage, or the like. If such 
an act is committed, the mark of brotherhood flares 
with the light of molten steel, searing the recipient's 
hands for 2 points of damage per level of the casting 
priest (at the time the spell was cast) and leaving 
behind visible scars from the ordeal. This damage is 
derived from pure divine energy; immunity to fire or 
heat provides no protection. Furthermore, while the 
inflicted damage can be healed, the scars are perma- 
nent, resisting spells like heal, regeneration, even a 
shapeshifting powers and illusions. Only after the 
subject has made amends for the offense (usually 
involving a quest on behalf of the offended party) 
can the scars be removed. In any case, the mark of 
brotherhood is negated if so triggered. 

The purpose of this spell is to allow recipients 
to recognize one another and know who their 
friends are. It also serves to vindicate recipients 


a ae” a aR > aA SRO aR) 


Marthammor’s Thunderbollts — Dwarf 


a 4 


who are falsely accused of some transgression 
against the clan or religion. If the charges are accu- 
rate, the defendant bears the scars as proof. 

The material component is a special steel coin 
bearing the priest's clan insignia on one side and 
the symbol of the deity on the other. Still hot from 
the forge, this symbol is clasped between the 
palms of the recipient (inflicting 144 points of 
damage) as the spell is cast. While the coin 
appears to be absorbed into the recipient's flesh, it 
is actually consumed when the priest touches the 
subject. 

While this spell is typically reserved for 
dwarves, there is precedent for its bestowal upon 
other races who have performed some great serv- 
ice on behalf of the dwarves. 

Notes: Very rare spell, granted by dwarven 
gods. (Updated from Dracon Magazine.) 


Mark of the Hunted 


A 


(Summoning) 
Sphere: Elemental Air 


Level: 6 

Range: 30 yds. 
Components: S, M 
Casting Time: 2 rds. 
Duration: | day/level 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: None 


This curse summons a dreadful beast from the 
surrounding vicinity and marks the target creature 
for its prey. Whenever this spell is cast, the DM 
should pick a suitably foul creature, the most pow- 
erful beast found in that area, to be the hunter. This 
cannot be an ethereal or undead creature, or a crea- 
ture that does not eat meat. Nightmare beasts, 
megapedes, and will beasts are the most com- 
monly attracted creatures. 

Whatever the hunter, it believes the prey to be 
the sweetest meat it has ever smelled, and begins 
to follow 1d4 hours after the spell is cast. From 
that point until the expiration of the spell, the beast 
pursues the subject and cannot rest until it feeds or 
it is slain. 

When the spell has expired, the beast returns to 
its lair, unless it detects its prey. In this case, the 
beast continues to pursue the subject until it is 
evaded, slain, or has eaten its prey. 

Notes: Uncommon for priests from the DARK 
‘SUN setting. 


Marthammor’s Intuition — Dwarf 


Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: 1-mi. radius 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell enables the caster to divine the 
approximate location—up to one mile away in any 
direction, including up and down—of the nearest 
dwarf or dwarves in immediate or imminent need 
of aid. Such emergencies might include a battle 
with more powerful foes, a life-threatening med- 
ical emergency, a broken wagon wheel, or the like, 
but in no case is the priest made aware of more 
than the general nature of the emergency. There is 
no guarantee that the situation revealed is one that 
the caster is capable of addressing, or that the 
caster can reach the location revealed by the spell 
in time to be of assistance. 

If no dwarf in need of assistance is within one 
mile of the caster, the spell ends and the priest is 
aware of the result. If multiple groups are in need of 
aid, Marthammor's intuition reveals only the near- 
est emergency, not necessarily the most pressing. 

If the priest heads toward the dwarf or dwarves 
in need within one tum of the casting, moving as 
fast as safely possible, Marthammor’s intuition 
guides him or her along the most efficient route to 
the scene. 

On rare occasions, at Marthammor’s discre- 
tion, this spell foreshadows an imminent event 
rather than revealing an ongoing situation. In such 
circumstances, the caster can usually reach the 
scene in time to prevent the imminent disaster. 

The material components are the priest's holy 
symbol and a strand of the priest's beard hair. 

Notes: Granted by the dwarven god Martham- 
mor Duin. 


Marthammor’s Thunderbolts — Dwarf 
(Invocation/Evocation) 
Sphere: Combat 


Level: 3 

Range: 40 yds. + 10 yds./level 
Components: V, M 

Casting Time: 6 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: Special 


395 


Mask Emotion 


Uy 


This spell enables the caster to simultaneously 
unleash twin thunderbolts either from both hands 
or both eyes. Each thunderbolt can be directed at a 
different target within range, and can either be 
directed to cure 1d8 points of damage or cause 346 
points of damage (a creature taking damage is 
allowed a saving throw vs. spell for half damage). 

The twin thunderbolts begin at the caster and 
streak outward to the target creature. Unlike the 
3rd-level wizard spell lightning bolt, the thunder- 
bolts have no effect on objects and are blocked by 
interposing barriers. The thunderbolts do not 
reflect or rebound and cannot be forked. 

The material component is the priest’s holy 
symbol. 

Notes: Granted by the dwarven god Martham- 
mor Duin. 


Mask Emotion 
Reversed form, see empathy. 


Mask of Gargauth 
(Alteration, Enchantment/Charm) 
Sphere: Charm 


Level: 3 
Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 6 
Duration: 1 day/level 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell is much like the 2nd-level wizard 
spell alter self, but with a significantly longer dura- 
tion, When this spell is cast, caster can alter both 
appearance and form—including clothing and 
equipment—to appear taller or shorter; thin, fat, or 
in between; human, humanoid, or any other gener- 
ally man-shaped bipedal creature. The caster's 
body can undergo limited physical alteration: size 
can be changed up to 50%. If the form selected has 
wings, the priest can actually fly, but only at one- 
third the speed of true creatures of that type and 
with the loss of two maneuverability classes (to a 
minimum of E). If the form has gills, the casters 
can breathe underwater as long as the spell lasts. 
However, a caster does not gain any multiple attack 
routines or additional damage allowed to the 
assumed form. 

The priest's attack rolls, Armor Class, and 
saving throws do not change. The spell does not 
confer special abilities, attack forms, or defenses. 
Once a new form is chosen, it remains for the 
duration of the spell, A caster can change back to 
his or her own forms at will; this ends the spell 
immediately. A slain caster returns to his or her 
normal form. 

This spell has a peculiar curse associated with 
it as well. For every day this spell is employed 
without recasting it, the spellcaster’s true appear- 
ance becomes more and more diabolical in appear- 
ance. Although this transformation provides no 
new abilities or defenses, for every three days this 
spell is in effect without being recast, the spell- 
caster’s Charisma permanently drops by 1 (except 
with respect to other worshipers of Gargauth) to a 
minimum of 3. This drop in Charisma is not 
noticeable until the spell expires. Further applica- 
tions of the mask of Gargauth spell cloak any drop 
in Charisma attributable to this spell but do not 
stop further decreases from occurring. 

The material components of this spell are an 
unblessed broken hom manifested by Gargauth 
and the priest’s holy symbol. 

Notes: Granted by the evil demigod Gargauth 
of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


DN IS oe pe eee ee aR 


Master Rune 


N 


Horn of Gargauth 

Sometimes Gargauth manifests as an unnatu- 
ral hom—a solitary hom growing from a animal's 
head. This gives the animal a goring attack of 146. 
The animal is tainted with Gargauth’s evil, 
becoming increasingly and mali- 
cious. About 10 days later, the hom falls off, split- 
ting into two pieces, and the animal sickens and 
dies, If an opposing priest performs a ceremony 
involving blessing both pieces, then Gargauth and 
his minions are barred from the area (about a 10- 
mile radius) for a year. 


Maskstone — Dwarf 
(Illusion/Phantasm) 
Reversible 


22 
Duration: 1 year/level 
Area of Effect: Square, 1 ft/level 
‘Saving Throw: None 


This spell alters the appearance of stone to hide 
seams, openings, traps, runes, doors, and so on. 
‘The priest touches the central point of the area to be 
masked, and visualizes what appearance is desired 
(hue, fissures, shape, and general appearance). The 
spell cloaks the stone with the visualized, long- 
term illusion. A caster of at least 6th level can cloak 
a second section of similar dimension, and a caster 
of at least 9th level, a third section. 

Features of the stone under the maskstone spell 
remain physically unchanged. A known door can 
be felt for and located in 1d3 rounds. Unless it has 
been used by the searcher before, determining its 
inethod and direction of opening and the location 
of any locks or catches is extremely difficult with- 
out a dispel magic spell to end the cloaking effect. 
Only characters with thieving skills have the nec- 
essary expertise. These can find catches, locks, 
and traps on such doors at a —15% penalty to their 
find trap rolls; unlock locks at a -10% penalty to 
their open lock rolls; and remove found traps at a 
—10% penalty to their remove trap rolls. 

A dwarf, duergar, gnome, xorn, or other sub- 
terranean dweller can tell by examination that the 
stone’s surface has been magically masked, but not 
the nature of the true surface, Features affixed to 
the stone's surface (such as maps or inscriptions) 


are hidden by this magic. True seeing penetrates 
the spell. 

‘The material components are an eyelash (from 
any creature) and a pinch of dust or sand. 

The reverse of this spell, reveal stone, negates 
maskstone. If not used for this purpose, it clearly 
indicates secret or hidden doors, panels, cavities, 
storage niches, catches, locks, and other deliber- 
ately hidden features by momentarily illuminating 
them with a glowing outline. These features are 
revealed if the stone has a maskstone spell on it or 
if it is simply in poorly-lit or confusing natural 
conditions. 

The reverse of the spell requires a scrap of 
gauze and a piece of phosphorous or a handful of 
iron filings. 

Notes: Granted by the evil dwarven deity 
Abbathor. 


Master Rune 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Combat, Protection 


Level: 7 

Range: 30 yds. 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: 4 rds. 

Area of Effect: 1 magical symbol or inscription 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell enables the priest to control the 
effects of a glyph, symbol, or magical rune written 
by someone else. 

The most common use of a master rune spell is 
as follows: The priest casts the spell, then touches 
the location of a known or suspected magical 
symbol or inscription. He or she instantly becomes 
aware of the effects of any such magic present. 
The master rune spell prevents the glyph or 
symbol from discharging—even if the touch of the 
priest was its specific trigger. The priest can 
reduce the amount or extent of its damage or 
effects, but cannot increase the effect or change its 
nature. The priest can also alter the conditions 
under which the symbol will discharge, in effect 
tuming the symbol to obey his or her intentions 
rather than those of its creator. 

A less common use of the master rune spell is 
to cast it as a protection. Thereafter, when any 
symbol, rune, or glyph within the spell’s range is 
activated, the caster becomes instantly aware of its 
effects and can divert them, even if the inscription’s 
presence or location was previously unknown. 

Magical effects that change the state of crea- 
tures (such as petrification and polymorph magic, 


397 


~ Measure bryl r 


and enchantments causing an affliction) can be 
diverted to strike a nonliving target; for example, a 
wall, shield, or door. Magical attacks that directly 
harm (such as magic missiles, lightning bolts, and 
fire magic) must be diverted to a living target; for 
example, a hostile creature, or one better able to 
withstand the effect. The wielder of the master 
rune can reduce the effect of damage-causing 
dweomers to one-half normal (save for one-quar- 
ter). The diversion must occur within four rounds 
of the casting of the master rune, or it is lost. A 
master rune spell works only against the first 
symbol encountered; this expends its power. 

A Deneirrath priest's alignment precludes the 
diversion of glyph, rune, or symbol magic to an 
unwilling or unwitting creature that is not in some 
way threatening the caster. Magics diverted in con- 
travention of alignment, or that cannot be properly 
diverted, are entirely channeled into the master 
rune wielder for their normal effect. 

Notes: Granted by the god Deneir, Lord of 
Glyphs, of the ForGoTTEN REALMs setting. 


sis 


With this spell, the caster can measure the 
amount of time for which a single, visible item of 
cinnabryl will remain useful in holding off afflic- 
tion of the Red Curse. The amount of time comes 
to the caster’s mind as if suddenly remembered. 

The material component is the priest’s holy 
symbol. 

Notes: Common for priests from the RED 
STEEL setting; otherwise virtually unknown. 


Measure Cinnabryl 
(Divination) 
Sphere: Divination, Elemental 


Level: 1 

Range: 10 ft. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 2 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: 1 item of cinnabryl 
Saving Throw: None 


Mebhaighl’s Touch 
Quest spell, see appendix in Vol. 3. 


Meld 
(Enchantment) 
Sphere: Charm 


Level: 5 

Range: 10 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 tum 
Duration: 12 hrs. 

Area of Effect: 1 priest 
Saving Throw: Special 


This cooperative spell requires only one priest to 
cast it, but can be cast only on another priest of the 
same faith. The second priest must voluntarily sur- 
render to the spell, becoming a host for the caster. 
‘The host retains his or her own persona and ability 
to act, but can be dominated by the caster at any 
time. For the most part, this domination is complete. 

For the duration of the spell, the caster is essen- 
tially detached from his or her own body, which 
can neither move nor act on its own. The caster’s 
mind is connected to the host's—the caster can 
see, hear, smell, taste, and otherwise sense every- 
thing the host does. The caster can communicate 
telepathically with the host. Once the spell is com- 
pleted, the meld has no limit to the range over 
which it can function, However, both the caster 
and host must remain on the same plane, or the 
meld is broken. 

When desired, the caster can dominate the host. 
When this happens, the host's own mind is pushed to 
the background and the caster’s personality domi- 
nates. The host's personality, memories, proficien- 
cies, and spells are temporarily replaced by those of 
the caster. While occupying the host, the caster can 
cast any of his or her own memorized spells from the 
host, provided that the host has the necessary com- 
ponents. These spells otherwise function exactly as 
if the caster had used them normally. 

‘The caster can return control to the host at any 
time, restoring the host's abilities and personality 
without harm. 

The spell is not without limitations and risks. 
The domination must be voluntary. If the host 
resists the casting of the spell, it automatically 
fails. Once the spell is in effect, the host can 
attempt to resist the domination by making a 
saving throw vs. spell. If successful, the spell 
immediately ends. Whenever the host suffers 
damage, the caster must make a saving throw vs. 
death magic to maintain the spell. If the saving 
throw is failed, a wave of pain is transmitted to the 
caster, causing 1d6 points of damage and cancel- 
ing the spell. If the host dies, the caster must make 
a successful system shock check or die as well. 


398 


The material component is a miniature crystal 
chalice worth no less than 1,000 gp, which is 
smashed as the casting is completed. 

Notes: Common for priests with major access 
to the sphere of Thought (ToM). 


Meld Into Stone 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Elemental Earth 


Level: 3 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 6 

Duration: 8 rds. + 1d8 rds. 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell enables the priest to meld into a 
single block of stone. The stone must be large 
enough to accommodate the priest's body in all 
three dimensions. When casting is complete, the 
caster and not more than 100 pounds of nonliving 
gear merge with the stone. If the size or weight 
condition is violated, the spell fails and is wasted. 

While in the stone, the priest must remain in 
contact, however tenuous, with the face of the 
stone through which he or she melded. The priest 
remains aware of the passage of time; however, 
nothing that goes on outside the stone can be seen 
or heard. Minor physical damage to the stone does 
not harm the priest, but its partial destruction, if 
enough so that the caster no longer fits, expels the 
priest with 4d8 points of damage. The stone’s 
destruction expels the priest, who is instantly slain 
unless a successful saving throw vs. spell is made. 

The magic lasts for 8+1d8 rounds, the variable 
part of the duration rolled secretly by the DM. At 
any time before the duration expires, the priest can 
step out of the stone through the stone surface 
entered. If the duration runs out, or the effect is 
dispelled before the priest exits the stone, the 
caster is violently expelled and suffers 4d8 points 
of damage. 

The following spells harm the priest if cast upon 
the melded stone: stone to flesh expels the priest and 
inflicts 448 points of damage; stone shape causes 
4d4 points of damage, but does not expel the priest; 
transmute rock to mud expels and slays the priest 
instantly unless a successful saving throw vs. spell 
is made; passwail expels the priest without damage. 

The material component is the priest's holy 
symbol. 

Notes: Common for druids (PHB). 


Meld of Lolth — Drow 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
Sphere: Charm 


Level: 6 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 1 tum 
Duration: 1 hr/level 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: Special 


Often used by priestesses to link themselves to 
a powerful drow male before a battle (to control 
him when necessary), this spell enables the caster 
to join minds with another creature. The meld 
allows the caster to see through the other being’s 
eyes and read its thoughts, and communicate tele- 
pathically with the linked being. 

‘The caster can act, speak, and cast spells nor- 
mally without ending this link, and is able (when- 
ever not casting another spell or using any psionic 
abilities) to dominate the linked being completely, 
controlling its body regardless of distance (the 
spell is broken if caster and linked being end up on 
different planes), The caster can use the linked 
being as the focus (source of emission) of a cur- 
rently memorized spell, casting it through the 
linked being—but this ends the me/d instantly. 

If the linked being’s Intelligence is less than the 
caster’s, it is allowed a saving throw vs. spells 
‘once per tum to break the meld. If the linked being 
is as intelligent as the caster (or more so), and is or 
becomes (that is when ordered into danger) 
unwilling to be in the meld, it gets a saving throw 
vs. spell once every second round to escape. 

Whenever the linked being suffers damage, the 
caster must make a successful saving throw vs. death 
magic. Failure ends the spell, and the pain-wracked 
caster suffers 1d6 points of damage. If the linked 
being dies, the caster must make a successful system 
shock roll or die instantly (the caster can willingly 
end a meld 1 round after deciding to do so). 

Notes: Granted by the drow goddess Lolth. 


Melisander’s Harp 


Area of Effect: 60-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


Ee a 


This spell creates the spectral, shadowy illusion 
floating in midair of a harp that plays by itself. The 
harp can appear anywhere the caster desires up to 
10 feet per level distant. The caster has near total 
control over the initial position, movement, and 
playing of the harp. The powers of the harp cannot 
pass through magical barriers (such as a wall of 
force), and the caster cannot cause the harp to come 
into being beyond or to move through such a barrier. 

If the caster is within 10 feet per level of the 
harp, he or she can move it up to 10 feet per round 
as willed. This movement does not require the 
caster’s constant attention, and the caster can take 
other actions while the harp plays. 

‘The tune or tunes that the harp plays are the ones 
the caster listed in mind during the spelicasting, and 
the harp plays them in order at normal tempo, 
repeating them from the beginning of the list when 
it completes all tunes selected, until the spell's dura- 
tion ends. The harp’s playing can be tumed on and 
off instantly and repeatedly by the silent will of the 
caster, and this does not affect spell duration. While 
the harp is playing, it has the following effects: 


© All normal sound is hushed (but not negated) 
and available light, even magical light, dims. 

© All creatures and objects within 60 feet of the 
harp are affected as if by a feather fall spell 


with no saving throws (rendering most missiles 
useless). 

© All creatures of 4+4 HD or less within 40 feet 
must make a successful saving throw vs. spell 
or be affected as if by a sleep spell. 

© All creatures within 20 feet of the harp except 
the caster are slowed (no saving throw). 


Melisander's harp is unaffected by dispel 
magic or silence spells, nor can it be damaged by 
physical or magical attacks. A limited wish or 
stronger spell is required to dispel it before it 
expires normally. 

The material components of the spell are a 
silver harp string and at least three tears from an 
eif, a maiden who sings, a harpist (or other musi- 
cian), or the caster. Tears from different individu- 
als can be combined in the casting. 

Notes: Granted by Finder Wyvernspur of the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Realmslore 

This spell is the priest version of the 
Melisander's harp spell presented in Pages from 
the Mages. The spell is named for its creator, the 
cif mage and Harper hero known to Realmslore 
as the Last Lonely Harpist. Finder learned it and 
teaches it to his bardic followers, as well as 
granting its use to his church. 


Memory 
(Divination) 
Sphere: Divination 


Level: 6 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 1 tum 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: 1 creature or object 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell allows the caster to absorb the 
memory of a person or thing by speaking the spell, 
then touching the subject. The spell wipes the 
memory of a living creature blank, though basic 
instincts and personality remain. Once the memo- 
ries have been absorbed, the caster can retain up to 
20% of them permanently; the rest will vanish 
after an hour has passed. 

‘The spell is dangerous, having a 20% chance to 
work in reverse, transferring to the person or thing 
the memories of the caster, thus wiping out the 
caster’s memory. In this case, the caster must make 
a successful system shock roll or go insane, as 


a MOO, Re a Be 


Memory Wrack 


Ne 


must any living creature receiving the caster’s 
memories. 

Lost memories can be fully restored with a 
restoration spell. 

Notes: Restricted to savant-clerics, for whom it 
is common. 


Memory Read — Savant 
(Divination) 
Sphere: Thought 


Level: 3 

Range: 5 yds. 
‘Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: | rd. 
Duration: | rd./level 
Area of Effect: | creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell allows the priest to read the memory of 
a single subject. The priest experiences the memory 
with the same intensity as the subject. The time 
required to view a memory is one-fiftieth of the time 
that the actual event lasted. Thus, a priest can view 
the memory of an event that lasted for one hour in a 
little more than one round. The subject experiences 
the memory at the same time the caster reads it. 

The subject must have an Intelligence score of 
5 or more and must remain within range of the 
priest throughout the time it takes to read the 
desired memory. Priests can cast this spell on 
unconscious, sleeping, held, or paralyzed creatures. 

The subject receives a saving throw when the 
spell is cast (this saving throw is allowed even if 
the subject is asleep or otherwise unaware of the 
attempt). In addition, if the memory that the priest 
wants to view concems something the subject 
wants to keep secret, or is something that the sub- 
ject is trying to suppress, the subject receives a +5 
bonus to the saving throw, If the memory the priest 
wishes to view is more than six months old, the 
subject receives a second saving throw, with 
bonuses depending on the age of the memory (as 
shown on the table). If the subject succeeds with 
either of these saving throws, then the spell fails. 


Age of Memory Bonus 
6 to 12 months 0 
1 to 4 years +1 
5 years or more +3 


This spell creates a mental drain on the priest, 
who temporarily loses 1d3 points of Constitution. 
‘These can be regained only after eight hours of 
rest, and the spell cannot be cast again until the 
priest's Constitution is restored. 


The material component is a small piece of 
linen cloth with threads of gold interspersed 
throughout its weave. This is consumed during the 
casting. 

Notes: Common for priests with access to the 
sphere of Thought (ToM). 


Memory Wrack 
(Alteration, Enchantment/Charm) 
Sphere: Thought 


Level: 5 

Range: 10 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: | rd. 
Duration: 2 rds./level 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This nasty spell disconnects the subject's short- 
term and long-term memory. While the spell is in 
effect, the subject is incapable of storing informa- 
tion in long-term memory, Every moment is virtu- 
ally an independent event for the subject; he or she 
can remember recent events, thoughts, and sensa- 
tions for no more than a few seconds (the amount 
of time they remain in short-term memory). 

Memories of events that happened before the 
onset of the spell are not affected at all; these are 
safely stored in long-term memory. This means 
that the subject can cast any spells memorized 
before the memory wrack took effect, but is likely 
to have difficulty casting the spell, as described 
below. 

A creature subjected to this spell has a limited 
ability to act, It is restricted to one action at a time 
and must concentrate mightily to keep the situation 
and any planned actions in short-term memory. A 
subject able to maintain concentration can act nor- 
mally within these limits. 

A creature that is distracted (struck in combat, 
affected by a spell, startled, surprised, or similarly 
affected) forgets everything that occurred from the 
onset of the spell to the moment of distraction. The 
creature reevaluates the situation as if it had just 
come to pass, 

Consider the following example. The subject of 
the spel soldier assigned to guard the entrance 
to a building. The priest arrives and casts memory 
wrack on the guard. The guard has no problem 
remembering his orders, since he received them 
before the onset of the spell. He also remembers 
the arrival of the priest. The priest tries to convince 
the guard that she is authorized to enter the build- 
ing. The guard refuses her entry. The priest now 
picks up a rock and throws it at the guard, striking 


ee Sa ANT ag ae ae ne 


Mend Limb 


eee 


and distracting him. The guard forgets everything 
that happened between the onset of the spell and 
the moment the rock struck. He forgets that the 
priest has already tried to con him and that she 
threw a rock at him. He reevaluates the situation as 
though the priest had just arrived. The priest is free 
to make another attempt to enter the building. 

When the spell expires, the subject remembers 
nothing that happened while the spell was in 
effect, possibly leading to amusing consequences 
(By the gods, how did I get here?). 

The material component is a ruby of at least 
200 gp value, which is crushed during the casting, 

Notes: Common for priests with major access 
10 the sphere of Thought (ToM). 


Mend Limb 
Reversed form, see break limb. 


Mending — Dwarf 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Creation 


Level; 1 

Range: 30 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 4 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: | object 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell repairs small breaks or tears in 
objects. It will weld a broken ring, chain link, 
medallion, or slender dagger, providing but one 
break exists. Ceramic or wooden objects with mul- 
tiple breaks can be invisibly rejoined to be as 
strong as new. A hole in a leather sack or wineskin 
is completely healed over by a mending spell. This 
spell does not, by itself, repair magical items of 
any type. One turn after the spell is cast, the magic 
of the joining fades, and the effect cannot be mag- 
ically dispelled. The maximum volume of material 
the caster can mend is | cubic foot per level. 

The material components are two small pieces 
of lodestone or two burrs. 

Notes: Granted by the dwarven god Dugmaren 
Brightmantle. 


Mental Domination 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
Sphere: Thought 


Level: 4 

Range: 50 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 4 
Duration: 3 rds./level 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell is similar to the wizard spell domi- 
nation in that it establishes a telepathic link 
between the priest and the subject through which 
the priest can control the subject's bodily move- 
ments. There are some significant differences 
between the spells, however. 

Elves and half-elves have no innate resistance 
to this spell. Priest and subject need not share a 
common language. The priest can force the subject 
into combat, but the subject’s attack rolls suffer a 
—2 penalty. The priest cannot force the subject to 
cast spells or use any innate magical or spell-like 
abilities. The priest can force the subject to speak, 
although the priest cannot inject a full range of 
emotions into the subject's voice (everything said 
by the subject is in a monotone). 

This spell gives the priest no access to the sub- 
ject’s thoughts, memory, or sensory apparatus, 
Thus, the priest cannot see through the subject's 
eyes. To control the subject, the priest must be 
within the range of the spell and must be able to 
see the subject. Breaking either of these conditions 
causes the spell to terminate immediately. 

This spell requires a moderate level of concen- 
tration, While maintaining this spell, the priest can 
move or enter combat, but cannot cast another 
spell. If the priest is wounded, rendered uncon- 
scious, or killed, the spell immediately ends. 

If the priest is 10th level or lower, he or she 
cannot force the subject to perform particularly del- 
icate actions, such as picking a lock. At 11th level 
or higher, however, this restriction is removed. The 
priest could thus force a thief to pick a lock. Any 
such delicate actions suffer a -15% penalty (or -3 
on 1420) to reflect the remote-control nature of the 
action. 

The material component is a mesh of fine 
threads that the priest loops around the fingertips 
of one hand and manipulates in the way that a pup- 
peteer controls a puppet. 

Notes: Common for priests with major access 
to the sphere of Thought (ToM). 


SS a a ME a meas A. 


Merciful Shadows 


a 


Mental Prowse 
(Abjuration) 
Sphere: Protection 


Level: 3 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 1 

Duration: 2 rds./level 

Area of Effect: 20 ft./level radius 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell endows all living beings within the 
spell area at the instant the spell is cast with a bonus 
of +6 to saving throws vs. all mind-affecting spells 
and spell-like abilities. This includes, but is not lim- 
ited to, the mind flayer's mental blast capabilities. 
The god Helm gives this spell only to his specialty 
priests on the Rings of Glyth, as well as to paladins 
of all other gods who currently belong to the Code 
Helm company. There is no exception to this rule, 

Notes: Restricted to paladins of the Code Helm 
company of Realmspace in the FORGOTTEN REALMS 
setting. Available to specialty priests of Helm on 
Rings of Glyth. 


Mental Strength 
(Alteration) 
Reversible 
Sphere: Healing 


Level: 5 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, 8, M 

Casting Time: 8 

Duration: | rd/level 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw; None 


This spell enables the shukenja to mentally for- 
tify himself or others. The recipient of the spell 
gains a +4 bonus to saving throws against spells 
and magical effects involving will force—illu- 
sions, enchantments, charms, hypnosis, sugges- 
tions, fear, possession, telepathic attacks, and so 
on In addition, when struck by mental attacks that 
do not normally allow a saving throw (pacify, and 
so on), the recipient is allowed a saving throw of 
17 or better to avoid the effects of the spell. 

The reverse of this spell, mental weakness, has 
the opposite effect—lowering the saving throw 
against mental attacks by —4. The subject must be 
touched, and no saving throw is allowed. 

The material component is the tail of a fox. 

Notes: Common for oriental priests; otherwise, 
very rare. 


Mental Weakness 
Reversed form, mental strength. 


Merchant’s Glamer — Dwarf 
(Ilusion/Phantasm) 
Reversible 
Sphere: Charm 


Level: 2 

Range: 10 ft, 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 5 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 cu. ft/level 
Saving Throw: None 


Material goods affected by this spell appear to 
be much finer that they actually are. Old, rusty 
weapons can be made to look new, goods of ordi- 
nary quality can be made to appear fine, and a 
common sword can be made to appear as a 
weapon of quality. For all purposes the ensorcelled 
goods appear to be genuine, unless tested with 
magics that specifically penetrate illusions, such as 
detect illusion and true seeing. 

The spell lasts up to 24 hours, or until shortly 
after the goods are sold, at which time the 
dweomer unravels. The actual quality of the goods 
is revealed after a time equal to 1 turn per level of 
the caster after the magic starts to fall apart. 

Priests of Vergadain do not generally sell goods 
affected by this spell to other dwarves. If con- 
fronted by an irate customer, their usual tactic is 
either to claim that the customer switched the 
goods after purchase (and intimate that they have 
connections with dwarven priests able to use 
detect lie) or to claim that their goods are sold “as 
is” and the inability of the customer to pick qual- 
ity goods is not their problem. 

‘The material components are the priest's holy 
symbol and a tuft of wool. 

Notes: Granted by the dwarven god Vergadain. 


Merciful Shadows 
(Abjuration) 
Reversible 
Sphere: Cosmos 


Level: 1 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: 1 day/5 levels 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


A e a s ETT | 


~ Merciful Touch — Elf r 


This spell creates a magical shade to protect an 
individual from the scorching sun. Once cast, the 
individual gains the benefits of being in the shade 
(half water consumption requirements), even when 
traveling or fighting in the full light of the sun. The 
individual so protected appears normal, except that 
he doesn’t sweat as much as expected and his col- 
oration is a bit gray. 

The reverse of this spell, blistering rays, inten- 
sifies the light and heat of the sun on the subject. 
The individual must have twice the water per day 
for duration of the spell or suffer the effects of 
dehydration. Also, in each round of combat in the 
open sun, the individual must make a constitution 
check to keep from passing out. The saving throw, 
applicable only to the reverse of the spell, negates 
its effects. This spell (and its reverse) has no effect 
on an individual who is in the shade. 

The material components of this spell are a 
piece of a palm leaf (or black fabric for the 
reverse). 

Notes: Common for priests from the DARK SUN 
setting. 


Merciful Touch — Elf 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Healing 


Level: 3 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 6 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


By means of this spell, the priestess can both 
heal and relieve suffering. Merciful touch cures 
1d12 points of damage. The dweomer also allevi- 
ates the pain of conditions not otherwise removed 
by the curative aspect of this spell. For example, 
the discomfort caused by a disease is held in 
abeyance, although the disease itself is neither 
cured nor placed in remission. Likewise, the 
excruciating pain of an injury such as a broken 
ankle is masked for the duration of the spell; how- 
ever, it is still not possible for the creature to put 
weight on the ankle. Such spells as irritation can 
be effectively negated if the duration of the merci- 
ful touch exceeds the duration of the spell that 
inflicts the suffering. Merciful touch only affects 
conditions in existence at the time it is cast. 

The material components of this spell are the 
priest's holy symbol. 

Notes: Granted by the elven goddess Sharind- 
lar. 


Merge with Nature 
(Alteration, Necromancy) 
Sphere: Charm, Necromantic, Plant 


Level: 6 

Range: 0 

‘Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: | hr. 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: Special 


‘This spell allows a female priest of Sune to avoid 
old age and death by transforming into a dryad, a 
being with a life expectancy and strength of consti- 
tution and health far beyond mortal range. This spell 
is used only by high-ranking and somewhat desper- 
ate priestesses of Sune, who use it to retain a certain 
youth and charm and to avoid the shame of being 
cast out of the clergy when they can no longer hold 
off the ravages of age. The use of this spell has fallen 
out of favor in the church, but knowledge of the 
prayer is retained in the Sunite liturgy. 

Upon casting this spell, the caster links herself 
with a tree and unites with it so that she actually 
becomes a dryad (as in the MONSTROUS MANUAL 
tome), losing her spellcasting and other class abil- 
ities in the process, but getting all a dryad’s powers 
in their stead. As this spell is not reversible, it is 
used rarely, and only by individuals willing to 
leave this world and relinquish their positions to a 
new generation. At the end of the ceremony, the 
caster must pass a system shock roll or die. 

Successful use of this spell requires a tree willing 
to accept the dryad-to-be (which can be leamed by a 
speak with plants spell), the presence of two willing 
assistants of the Sunite church (preferably clergy), 
and the caster’s holy symbol. The system shock roll 
that marks the conclusion of the spell is penalized by 
10% for every component of the spell ritual that is 
missing (for instance, -10% for not finding a willing 
tree, —10% for only one assistant, and so on). 

Notes: Granted by Sune, Lady of Love, of the 
ForGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Message Mote 
(ilusion/Phantasm) 
Sphere: All 


Saving Throw: None 


a a a GO ee aN 


Metal Shape — Dwarf 


N 


This spell does not take effect until the condi- 
tions stated during its casting are met (visual and 
audible triggers only, as detailed by the caster, like 
a wizard’s magic mouth spell). Any amount of 
time can elapse between casting and triggering this 
spell, but the trigger spot for the undischarged 
magic must be the location of the caster when the 
message mote was cast or an item or object (which 
may be portable) touched during casting. An 
undischarged message mote cannot be magically 
detected or dispelled. 

Once activated, a message mote manifests itself 
as a twinkling radiance (a single cloud of not more 
than 1 cubic foot in volume) of a hue, shape, and 
intensity chosen by the caster. It cannot be blind- 
ing or even equal to true sunlight, nor can its 
appearance change during its presentation, but it 
can mimic the features of a being or an item 
known to the caster. A message mote flies about on 
a route predetermined by the caster, at up to MV 
Fly 18 (B), within the stated spell range. If desired, 
its movements can convey meaning (for example, 
pointing out the location of a secret door, keyhole, 
or hiding place). It can also speak a message of up 
to 33 words in length. It cannot utter spells, words 
of activation, or any magical trigger phrases, but it 
does deliver messages in the voice of the caster, 
mirroring the volume at which they were delivered 
during casting. (The caster can, of course, assume 
an unnatural voice or employ mimicry, and the 
message mote will reproduce that, too.) 

Notes: Granted by the Tyr the Just God of the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. This spell is found 
only in a few exceptionally rare tomes. 


Messenger 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
Sphere: Animal, Summoning 


Level: 2 

Range: 20 yds./level 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: 1 day/level 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell enables the priest to call upon a tiny 
(size T) creature of at least Animal Intelligence to 
act as his messenger. The spell does not affect 
giant animals and it does not work on creatures of 
low (that is, 5) Intelligence or higher. If the crea- 
ture is within range, the priest, using some type of 
food desirable to the animal as a lure, can call the 
animal to come. The animal is allowed a saving 
throw vs. spell. If the saving throw is failed, the 


animal advances toward the priest and awaits his 
bidding. The priest can communicate with the 
animal in a crude fashion, telling it to go to a cer- 
tain place, but directions must be simple. The 
spellcaster can attach some small item or note to 
the animal. If so instructed, the animal will then 
wait at that location until the spell expires. (Note 
that unless the intended recipient of a message is 
expecting a messenger in the form of a small 
animal or bird, the carrier may be ignored.) When 
the spell’s duration expires, the animal or bird 
returns to its normal activities. The intended recip- 
ient of a message gains no communication ability. 
Notes: Common for druids (PHB). 


Metal and Mineral Detection 
See detect metal and minerals, 


Metal Shape — Dwarf 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Elemental Earth 


Level: 3 
Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: | rd. 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: 9 cu, ft. of metal + 1 cu. ft/level 
Saving Throw: None 


By means of this spell, the caster forms an 
existing piece of nonmagical metal into any shape 
that suits his or her purpose. For example, the 
caster can fashion a metal weapon, a special trap- 
door, or a crude idol. While metal coffers can be 
thus formed, metal doors made, and so on the fine- 
ness of detail is not great. If the shaping has 
moving parts, there is a 30% they do not work. If 
the shaping has a sharp edge, there is only a 30% 
chance it is sharp enough to cut. However, if this 
spell is employed on metal prior to it being worked 
upon by a smith, it reduces the time and expense to 
create the final product by 50% or more, as adju- 
dicated by the DM. 

‘The material component is lead, worked with a 
hammer into roughly the desired shape of the 
metal object. 

Notes: Granted by the dwarven god, Flandal 
Steelskin. 


J 405 KL 


~ Metal Skin r 


Metal Skin 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Charm 


Level: 6 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 9 

Duration: 2d4 rds. 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell transforms the skin of any creature 
touched into a gleaming steel-hard surface. The 
creature's Armor Class becomes 2 for the duration 
of the spell, but the character becomes slow and 
stiff. The creature moves at half its normal move- 
ment rate and acts last in combat. The character's 
skin is considered ferrous with respect to magnet- 
ism, and the creature must make a saving throw vs. 
death magic or perish when exposed to a rusting 
attack. A successful saving throw means the crea- 
ture still takes 1d4 points of damage per level (or 
Hit Die) of the attacker. 

‘The material component is a small iron pellet. 

Notes: Very rare spell. 


Meteors of Celestian 


Area of Effect: 1 or more creatures 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell creates 1d4+1 stone spheres, each six 
inches in diameter. They can be released at any time 
during the spell duration, but are lost if not used. 
‘The meteors shoot from the caster’s hand following 
a straight path toward the target or targets selected. 
A meteor hits unless the target creature makes a 
successful saving throw vs. spell. Dexterity and 
racial bonuses do not apply. If the range is 10 yards 
or Jess, the saving throw is at a -2 penalty. Each 
meteor inflicts 1d4+4 points of damage. The caster 
can release the meteors simultaneously or individu- 
ally (at a rate not exceeding three per round). 

The material component is a holy symbol of 
Celestian, and the priest must be under an open 
sky to cast the spell. 

Notes: Granted by Celestian of the GREYHAWK. 
setting. 


Might of Mystra 
(Alteration, Divination) 
Sphere: Divination, Charm 


Level: 5 

Range: 0 

‘Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: 1 day 

Area of Effect: Copies 1 wizard spell 
Saving Throw: Special 


If a priest casts a might of Mystra spell before 
a friendly or hostile wizard casts another spell, the 
might allows the priest to precisely duplicate the 
effects of that one spell. No material components 
are required for the priest's magic and the priest 
need not even know the name or nature (school) of 
the spell to be copied, but he must have witnessed 
either its casting or its results. The decision to 
copy a spell must be made the round after it is wit- 
nessed or the ability to use might of Mystra to copy 
that one spell is lost. Once might of Mystra is used 
to copy a spell, it ends; otherwise, it ends after one 
day has passed. 

The priest’s spell deals exactly the same points 
of damage, affects the same volume of area (if 
applicable), and lasts for exactly the same duration, 
as the spell being copied. However, the priest cast- 
ing the might of Mystra spell can select a different 
target or area of effect and both target creatures and 
items affected by the magic are allowed new saving 
throws against the priest's spell as if it was a new 
casting of the same spell the priest copies. 

Notes: Restricted to priests of Mystra, from the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. This spell is found 
only in a few exceptionally rare tomes. 


Might of the Sorcerer-Kings 


whe 


Casting Time: 5 
Duration: 5 rds. + 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: Templar touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell, developed by the sorcerer-kings, 
empowers a minion with unnatural aggressiveness. 
A templar under its influence fights with a +2 
attack bonus and a +2 damage bonus. The templar 
loses 1 hit point as the spell ends. Hit points lost in 
this way can be regained normally. 


a er re 0 ae ae nee a pee OS 


Mindkiller 


N 


Notes: Common for the sorcerer-kings of the 
DARK SUN setting. 


Mind Cloak 
(Abjuration) 
Sphere: Protection 
Level: 4 
Range: Touch 


Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: | turn/level 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell creates a psionically null area around 
an affected creature. The creature effectively dis- 
appears from the psionic world. All telepathic con- 
tacts are immediately broken and none can be 
established while the spell lasts. A cloaked crea- 
ture with psionic abilities cannot use them. An 
unwilling creature is allowed a saving throw vs. 
spell to negate the effect upon itself. 

A priest of 9th level or above can affect multi- 
ple creatures, with the duration divided evenly 
among them, to a minimum of 1 turn. 

‘The material components for this spell are the 
priest's holy symbol and a small black cloak. 

Notes: Very rare spell. (Updated from POLYHE- 
DRON Newszine.) 


Mind Probe, Jergal’s 
See Jergal’s mind probe 


Mind Read 
(Divination) 
Sphere: Thought 


Level: 2 

Range: 5 yds./level 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 2 
Duration: | rd./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell is a more sensitive version of the 
wizard spell ESP. In addition to detecting the 
surface thoughts of any creatures in range, the 
priest is able to probe deeper into the mind of a 
single creature. Mind read reveals the type of 
creature being probed, although this identity can 
be couched in the creature’s own language or in 
a (possibly distorted) body image. The spell has 
a 20% chance of revealing the character class of 
an individual. 


‘The details and the usefulness of the creature's 
thoughts depend on the intelligence of the subject. 
A priest reading the thoughts of an animal would 
probably receive only a confused jumble of emo- 
tions and instincts. Reading the mind of a highly 
intelligent wizard, however, would be much more 
illuminating; the priest might be amazed by the 
crystal clarity and deep insight of the wizard’s 
mental processes. 

If mind reading is used as part of an interroga- 
tion, an intelligent and wary subject receives a 
saving throw at a—2 penalty. If successful, the sub- 
ject resists the spell’s effects and the priest learns 
nothing. If the saving throw is failed, the priest can 
learn information according to the DM's ruling. 

Notes: Common for priests with access to the 
sphere of Thought (ToM). 


Mindkiller 
(Enchantment/Charm, Necromancy) 
Sphere: Thought, Necromantic 


Level: 7 

Range: 240 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This powerful spell puts the personality of a 
single human, demihuman, or humanoid into 
stasis, turning his or her body into a mindless 
automaton. The body follows any telepathic order 
given to it by the casting priest. Elves and half- 
elves have no innate resistance to this spell, and 
the caster and subject need not share a common 
language. 

To control the subject, the priest must be within 
240 yards. A priest of 15th level or lower cannot 
force the subject to perform particularly delicate 
actions, such as picking a lock. At 16th level or 
higher, however, this is possible; the priest could 
force a thief to pick a lock. Any such delicate 
actions suffer a -20% penalty (4 on 1420) to 
reflect the controlled nature of the action. 

The priest can force the subject to speak, 
although a full range of emotions cannot be 
injected into the subject's voice. At the DM's dis- 
cretion, anyone who is very familiar with the sub- 
ject can make an Intelligence check to notice that 
something is wrong (and possibly suspect that the 
subject’s will is not his own). This spell does not 
give the caster access to the subject's thoughts or 
memory. However, the caster can see through the 
subject’s eyes. 


a a NG 


~ Mindnet r 


‘The priest can force the subject into combat, but 
the subject's attack rolls suffer a -2 penalty. The 
priest can attempt to force the subject to cast spells 
or use innate spell-like abilities. This is a difficult 
procedure, for which the subject receives a normal 
saving throw vs. breath weapon. Failure means that 
the priest forces the use of the power. Any restric- 
tion or requirement for the usage must be fulfilled 
(such as material components). The priest can make 
‘one attempt per round to force the use of magic. 

‘The subject's personality remains in stasis until 
the priest releases it with a mental command. It 
can also be released by a limited wish or wish, or 
by a heal spell cast for this express purpose. If the 
Priest ceases concentration on controlling the body 
or if the subject moves out of range, the subject 
collapses into a comatose state. 

With its personality in stasis, the subject's body 
will remain alive for a number of hours equal to 
the subject's Constitution times five. When this 
time period expires, the body dies and the person- 
ality is lost. The subject can be raised or resur- 
rected, however. 

When the body dies, the priest's control termi- 
nates. The body's death trauma is felt by the con- 
trolling priest as a wracking agony, potentially 
strong enough to unseat the priest’s reason. A 
priest who has not released the subject prior to 
death must make a system shock roll at a -15% 
penalty. Failure means the priest becomes insane 
as if by a mindshatter spell. 

The use of mindkiller is considered an evil act, 
and those using this spell are subject to any conse- 
quences that may follow. 

The material component is a gem of at least 
500 gp value, which is consumed in the casting. 

Notes: Common for priests with major access 
to the sphere of Thought, uncommon for priests 
with major access to the Necromantic sphere 
(ToM). 


Mindnet 
Quest spell, see appendix in Vol. 3. 


Mindshatter 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
Sphere: Thought 


Level: 5 

Range: 3 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 creature 


This spell allows the priest to create one spe- 
cific form of insanity in the subject. Five forms of 
insanity are possible through this spell. 

Schizophrenia: This form of insanity is charac- 
terized by personality loss. The subject has no per- 
sonality of his own, so he selects a role model and 
makes every possible attempt to behave like that 
character. The chosen role model will be as differ- 
ent from the subject as possible. (Thus, an insane 
wizard might begin to follow the habits of a war- 
rior.) Obviously, a warrior who believes himself to 
be a wizard will be unable to cast spells. (He might 
think that he’s casting spells, or he might construct 
a sophisticated series of excuses explaining why 
he’s not in the mood for magic at the moment.) A 
character who emulates a member of another class 
does not gain any of the skills of that class and 
makes all attacks and saving throws as appropriate 
to his true class. Certain consequences might arise 
if the character's emulation causes him to break 
restrictions of his class. For example, a priest emu- 
lating a warrior might break his deity's prohibition 
against edged weapons, or a paladin might emu- 
late a Neutral Evil thief. Both will suffer the 
appropriate consequences as if they had been com- 
pelled to violate their beliefs while charmed. Such 
characters will certainly have to atone for their 
actions once they return to normal. 

Dementia Praecox: The subject is totally unin- 
terested in any undertaking. Nothing seems worth- 
while, and the individual is lethargic and filled 
with tremendous feelings of boredom and dissatis- 
faction. No matter how important the situation, it 
is 50% likely that the subject will ignore it as 
meaningless. 

Delusional Insanity: The subject is convinced 
that he or she is a famous figure: a monarch, demi- 
god, or similar personage. Those who fail to rec- 
ognize the subject with the honor he or she 
deserves incur great hostility or disbelief. The sub- 
ject acts appropriately to a station that he or she 
does not hold. The subject directs orders at real 
and imaginary creatures and draws upon resources 
that do not exist. 

Paranoia: The subject is convinced that they 
(whoever they are) are spying on him and plotting 
against him. Everyone around the subject, even 
friends and allies, is part of the plot. If anyone acts 
in a way that the subject can interpret as reinforc- 
ing this delusion, the subject has a 20% chance of 
reacting with violence. 

Hallucinatory Insanity: The subject sees, hears, 
and otherwise senses things that do not exist. The 
more stressful the situation is to the subject, the 
more likely he or she will hallucinate, Although 
most hallucinations are external to the subject (that 


ST ee a A 


Mindspin 


is, perceived creatures, objects, and conditions that 
do not exist), there is a 10% chance that any hallu- 
cination will involve the subject's self-perception. 
For example, the subject might suddenly believe 
and act as if she had sprouted wings, grown to giant 
size, and so on 

When this spell is cast by a priest of 13th level or 
lower, the DM chooses or randomly selects one of 
these forms of insanity (and should feel free to invent 
other interesting symptoms). A priest of 14th level or 
higher can select the form of insanity inflicted. 

While under the effect of this spell, the subject 
can cast spells and use innate powers; however, the 
use of these abilities is in accordance with the 
symptoms of the insanity. 

The duration of this spell depends on the sum 
of the subject's Intelligence and Wisdom scores. A 
periodic saving throw is allowed, depending on 
this total. The spell is broken if a successful saving 
throw is rolled. Refer to the table that follows. 


Int+Wis Time Between Checks 
8 or less 1 month 

9 to 18 3 weeks 

19 to 24 2 weeks 

25 to 30 1 week 

31 t035 3 days 

36 ormore 1day 


‘The effects of this spell can be removed by a 
limited wish or wish (or equally powerful magic), 
or by a heal spell cast for this specific purpose. 

The material component is a small bust of a 
human head, about 3 inches tall, made from fine, 
delicate china. The priest shatters this bust during 
the casting. 

Notes: Common for priests with major access 
to the sphere of Thought. 


Mindspin 
(Illusion/Phantasm) 
Sphere: Charm 


Level: 7 
Range: Special 


Casting Time: 3 hrs. 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 being 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


lates the innermost 
of the subject and 


The mindspin spell is 
nightmares, fears, and anxiet 


uses them as the basis of startlingly vivid illusions. 
The spell requires both the caster and the subject 
to remain undisturbed for three hours while the 
caster sifts through the subject's mind to create the 


~~» Mindspin 


illusions. Any disturbance negates the process. If 
the subject makes a successful saving throw vs. 
spell, the spell is also broken (but a charmed sub- 
ject is not allowed a saving throw), For the pur- 
poses of dispelling, the mindspin spell is treated as 
if cast by a 21st-level priest. 

The individual within the dream experiences it 
as three separate levels of reality. Parts of the dream 
are experienced as the dreamer moves over physical 
terrain. The terrain moves along at a rate of one mile 
per hour, with a maximum range that depends on 
the level of the dream and the subject's Intelligence. 
The first level maximum is 20 miles times the sub- 
jects Intelligence. The second level maximum is 1 
mile times the character's Intelligence. The third 
level maximum extends to 20 feet times the sub- 
ject’s Intelligence. The dreamer is always a central 
figure of the dream; all of the effects of each level 
of the dream disappear if the dreamer is awakened. 
Dreamwraiths and dreamshadows are common in 
all levels of the dream; the character is constantly 
faced with determining what is reality and what is 
illusion. 

First Level: The first level of the dream alters a 
character's perceptions of space, time, and reality 
of the immediate area. What is seen as a lush forest 
may in reality be a barren field. A character may 
actually travel many miles, yet only perceive him- 
self as having moved a short distance. Time is 
equally distorted. Travel seeming to last only for a 
few minutes may actually have taken several days. 

Second Level: The second level of the dream 
distorts a character's perception of reality even fur- 


ther, for he can no longer distinguish which of his 
companions are real and which are illusions. 

Third Level: The third level is the core of the 
dream, as a character’s perceptions of himself 
become distorted. In addition to the effects of the 
previous two levels, a character uses the attack and 
saving throw tables of another class: 
© Priests use rogue tables 
Warriors use wizard tables 
Wizards use warrior tables 
Rogues use priest tables. 

Additionally, because of the disorienting effects 
of the dream area, certain classes make the follow- 
ing adjustments: 

Priest: Subtract Wisdom from 20 and use the 
result as the priest’s Wisdom for determining spell 
failure. Use the special Turning Undead table 
given here. 

Rogue: For thieving skill rolls, all successes 
fail and all failures succeed. Otherwise, adjust the 
rolls normally. 

Wizard: Wizards cast spells at one level higher 
than normal. If this enables a wizard to cast a spell 
higher than those he currently knows, he can 
choose any one spell from the higher level. The 
mindspin spell automatically gives the wizard the 
illusion that he knows this new spell; unlike other 
spells the wizard casts during the dream, this new 
spell has only illusionary effects. 

Notes: Rare priest spell from the DRAG- 
ONLANCE setting (identical to the wizard spell of 
the same name), 


‘Type of Level of Priest 

Undead 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 O13 14 
Skeleton — — — o — — — — — — 

Zombie — ra a = == = =) = 20 

Ghee ma Lag ERE re ee eae 

Shadow — — — = — — — 20 19 13 

Wight — = = ae m — 20 19 16 10 

Ghast — = = E = 20 19 16 13 7 

Wraith — = — — 20 19 16 13 10 4 

Mummy — = = 20 19 16 13 10 7 T 
Spectre — — 20 19 16 B 10 7 4 T. 
Vampire — 20 19 16 13 10 7 4 T 

Ghost 20 19 16 3 10 X 4 T T D 
Lich 19 16 13 10 7 T T va D D 
Special 16 13 10 7 T T T D D D 


40 


Minor Wealthtwi 


N 


Mindtouch — Drow 
(Divination) 
Sphere: Divination 


Level: 2 

Range: 5 yds./level (90 yds. max.) 
Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: 1 turn/level 

Area of Effect: 1 creature 

Saving Throw: Neg. 


Similar to the 2nd-level wizard spell, ESP, a 
mindtouch allows the caster limited contact with the 
minds of nearby living creatures. Surface thoughts 
can be read, but no mental influencing or direct 
communication is possible, Unintelligent creatures 
will yield only emotions and instinctive thoughts. 

Undead and creatures without minds (as we 
know them) cannot be contacted by this spell. 
Contact can be broken or initially foiled by any 
thickness of lead, two or more inches of any metal 
other than lead, or two or more feet of rock. 

One creature per round can be probed; the priest 
can freely switch from one being to another, The 
priest can even engage in spellcasting or activities 
requiring intense concentration without ending the 
spell—but any round in which the priest does not 
concentrate on the thoughts of a being is a round 
wasted. While the spell continues for the entire 
duration, without the caster's concentration, noth- 
ing is read. 

‘The caster can use the spell to help determine if 
a creature lurks in ambush; even if no thoughts can 
be read, the priest can detect the presence of a 
mind, and gain some idea of its current state (agi- 
tated, active, damaged, at rest, and so on). Even a 
clear thought-reading will not always reveal what 
sort of creature is being read. 

The material component is the priest's holy symbol. 

Notes: Granted by the evil drow goddess Lolth. 


Minor Curse 
See bestow minor curse. 


Minor Ward 
(Abjuration) 
Sphere: Wards 


Level: 4 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 3 rds. 

Duration: Until broken 

Area of Effect: Up to 15-ft. radius hemisphere 
Saving Throw: Special 


The minor ward spell creates a special barrier of 
force. It cannot be broken through by a physical 
attack of any sort, including the use of such power- 
ful weapons as a vorpal blade. The protection can 
be brought down by several spells: disintegrate, 
limited wish, phase door, shadowdoor, planeshift, 
or wish. Further, it can be destroyed by any casting 
of the following spells that causes at least 20 points 
of damage: fireball, lightning bolt, cone of cold, 
flame strike, Otiluke's freezing sphere, or meteor 
swarm. Creatures and objects in the area of effect 
when the ward is breached are not damaged by the 
breaching effect. The ward cannot be entered or left 
by traveling astrally, or by dimension door, pass- 
wall, or teleportation of any sort. Those in the 
hemisphere cannot cast spells out, though spells 
can be cast to affect those inside the area—cures, 
neutralize poison, commune, and so on. 

The ward remains in effect as long as the caster 
is conscious; in the round after the caster falls 
asleep or is loses consciousness, the ward col- 
lapses. The caster can will the ward away at any 
time, but this act takes a full round. 

The material components are seven small 
pearls (at least 100 gp value each) spaced evenly 
on the ground in a 30-foot diameter circle. A 
smaller area can be warded if desired. The pearls 
are consumed in the casting. 

Notes: Very rare spell. (Updated from DRAGON 
Magazine.) 


Minor Wealthtwist 
(Alteration, Necromancy) 
Sphere: Healing, Necromantic 


Level: 5 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 8 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell transforms gems, trade bars, and/or 
coinage of a value of 250 gp per spell level into 
one of the following spells, chosen by the caster 
and enacted instantly on him or through his touch 
on another being: cure light wounds, cure blind- 
ness or deafness, cure disease, cure serious 
wounds, or neutralize poison, If insufficient 
funds exist for a chosen spell, the caster is 
instantly made aware of this, and if enough addi- 
tional funds cannot be touched within the two 
rounds of the spell’s casting, the caster will have 
to settle for a lesser spell effect or waste the 
magic altogether. 


411 


~~ Mirage — Old Empire 


This spell is often used by Waukeenar as a spe- 
cial boon to Waukeen-worshiping merchants who 
are willing to make substantial donations to the 
church in return for some extra protection. 

The material component is the wealth needed 
to cast the level of spell desired. 

Notes: Granted by Waukeen, goddess of Trade, 


of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 
Mirage — Old Empire 

(Illusion/Phantasm) 

Sphere: Sun 

Level: 4 


Range: 10 yds flevel 
Components: V, $, M 
Casting Time: 7 

Duration: 1 hr/level 

Area of Effect: 30-ft. cube 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell creates an elusive mirage in the 
minds of affected creatures that beckons convinc- 
ingly from the horizon but never seems to draw 
closer no matter how they proceed. Unlike the 
optical phenomenon of the same name, an illusion 
created by this spell is not restricted to the depic- 
tion of a pool of water. Instead, the caster can 
create nearly any desired image. 

A mirage spell is subject to several constraints. 
It must appear on the horizon, although the direc- 
tion is up to the priest. It cannot occupy more than 
a 45° arc of the horizon (vertically or horizon- 
tally). The mirage always appears fuzzy and 
appears to shimmer in the heat. 

When the spell is cast, any creature in the area 
of effect must make a saving throw vs. spell or 
perceive the image. Even a creature not facing in 
the direction of the image sees a flicker in the 
corner of its peripheral vision, requiring the 
saving throw. If conditions are not appropriate for 
rendering distant objects fuzzy and for making 
them appear to shimmer, those within the spell 
effect receive a +5 bonus to their saving throws. 
Those who successfully save throws see nothing 
unusual on the horizon at all. Those who fail see 
the illusion envisioned by the caster and cannot be 
convinced it does not exist while the spell effect 
persists. 

In addition, if the mirage depicts something 
very desirable (such as a pool of water in a desert), 
as adjudicated by the DM, anyone failing the first 
saving throw must make a second saving throw vs. 
spell without the bonus mentioned above or imme- 
diately fee] compelled to head toward the vision 
for the duration of the spell. 


A successful dispel magic spell ends this spell 
effect immediately. 

The material components of this spell are the 
priest's holy symbol and several drops of water 
flicked into the air. 

Notes: Granted by the Mulhorandi deity 
Horus-Re of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Mirage of Despair 


whe 


(Illusion) 
Reversible 
Sphere: Elemental, Sun 


Level: 4 

Range: 30 yds. 
Componenis: V, M 
Casting Time: 4 rds. 
Duration: 1 hr./level 
Area of Effect: | creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell creates visual illusions that affect a 
single creature. That creature sees everything in its 
worst possible light—friends are monsters, oases 
of beauty are deformed pools of black water. It 
functions only on a creature that has at least aver- 
age Intelligence. 

When the spell is cast, the creature receives a 
saving throw vs. spell. If successful, the mirage of 
despair fails. Once a creature is affected, a second 
saving throw vs. paralyzation is required. Failure 
means it is terrified of the things it sees and flees 
as if affected by the 4th-level wizard spell fear. A 
creature that is comered or restrained will attack; 
it doesn't matter whether the other creature is 
friend or foe—all creatures are perceived as mon- 
strous. Success means the creature suffers from 
increasing paranoia for the next turn, at which time 
another saving throw vs. paralyzation is made. 
Companions who notice strange behavior from a 
friend can try to talk him or her out of the mirage 
(one chance), and this gives the subject one addi- 
tional saving throw vs. spell to end the effect. A 
successful dispel magic spell or the reverse form 
can end the spell earlier. 

The reverse of the spell, mirage of deception, 
makes everything seem beautiful, warm, and 
friendly. Athasian sloths are harmless woodland 
creatures, and an ancient enemy is suddenly 
friendly and trustworthy. As the subject becomes 
more trusting and gullible, he or she will agree to 
any reasonable requests for the duration of the 
spell. Requests of a dangerous or suicidal nature 
grant a second saving throw to break the spell 
immediately, and even if this is failed the crea- 
ture’s actions may be unpredictable. 


412 


Misfire 


NÝ 


The material component is the priest's holy 
symbol. 

Notes: Uncommon for priests from the DARK 
SUN setting; otherwise, very rare. 


Mirror Vestments 
(Abjuration) 
Sphere: Protection 


Level: 3 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 6 

Duration: 1 tum +1 rd./3 levels (round down) 
Area of Effect: The caster 

Saving Throw: None 


This spell affects only the caster, outlining his 
or her clothes (and all worn or carried items, so 
long as they remain in physical contact) with an 
invisible aura that automatically reflects all magic 
of a specific wizard school or a specific priestly 
sphere (chosen by the caster at the time of casting) 
back at their sources. Magical item effects that 
duplicate known wizard and priest spelis are con- 
sidered to be discharges of those spells for pur- 
poses of determining how a mirror vestments spell 
acts against them. The full force of the magic is 
returned to its point of origin. 

Reflected spells are absorbed by the aura and 
then hurled back, causing no damage to the caster 
or anyone nearby. Destroying or removing any 
integral part of the clothing after this spell is cast 
on it or switching bodies so that a being other than 
the caster is wearing the mirror vestments instantly 
ends this spell. The aura created by this spell can 
handic any number of magics at once, and operates 
continuously until the spell expires, regardless of 
what is sent against it or the wishes of its caster. 

Notes: Granted by Lathander Morninglord of 
the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Miscast Magic 
(Invocation/Evocation) 
Sphere: Chaos 


Level: 3 

Range: 40 yds. + 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 2 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 wizard 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


Miscast magic can be cast only on a wizard. It 
causes the next spell cast by the affected wizard 


to be chosen randomly from his or her memo- 
rized spells of the same or lower level. Thus, if a 
wizard affected by miscast magic had four Ist- 
level spells memorized (armor, featherfall, jump. 
and sleep) and attempted to cast the sleep spell, 
the DM would determine the resulting spell ran- 
domly from the wizard’s four memorized spells. 
The wizard has only a 25% chance of casting the 
sleep spell. 

Only spells currently memorized are eligible to 
be exchanged with the desired spell, If a wizard 
had only one spell memorized, the miscast magic 
has no effect and the wizard’s spell is cast nor- 
mally. 

The miscast spell operates normally. If a 
wizard tried to levitate a companion but a web 
spell resulted, the companion would be trapped by 
the webs and subject to all resulting effects. If the 
target creature was in range of the levitate spell but 
not in range of the web, the spell would be lost in 
a fizzle of energy and the web spell would be 
wiped from the caster’s memory. 

‘The affected wizard performs the proper verbal 
and somatic components of the desired spell; the 
altered results occur when the wrong spell takes 
effect. The wizard will also discover that the mate- 
rial component for the resulting spell has vanished 
(in addi to the material component for the 
desired spell). 

Wizards who are targets of miscast magic are 
allowed a saving throw vs. spell to avoid the 
effect. 

Notes: Common for priests with access to the 
sphere of Chaos (ToM). 


Misfire 
(Enchantment/Charm, Necromancy) 
Sphere: Combat 


Level: 4 

Range: 5 yds./level 
Components: S 

Casting Time: 7 
Duration: 1 day/level 
Area of Effect: | creature 
Saving Throw: None 


‘The subject of a misfire cannot hit any chosen 
target with any thrown, fired, slung, or otherwise 
projected missile weapon for the spell duration, 
though unintended targets may well be hit by the 
subject's use of such weapons. A remove curse, 
dispel magic, or bless spell cast upon the recipient 
disrupts this magic and ends the spell. 

Notes: Granted by the deities Beshaba and 
Tyche of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


413 


~ Misfortune 


Misfortune 
(Enchantment/Charm, Necromancy) 
Sphere: Combat, Charm 


Level: 5 

Range: Touch 

Components: S 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: | rd./level 

Area of Effect: Living creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell gives the recipient a —3 penalty to all 
initiative checks, attack rolls, damage rolls, saving 
throws, ability checks, and proficiency checks, and 
a —15% penalty to all thieving skill checks for the 
spell duration. The priest must physically touch 
the recipient with a bare hand to cast this spell, 
requiring a successful attack roll if the recipient is 
in battle or not unaware or immobilized. Nonliving 
beings, such as undead, are not affected. A remove 
curse or dispel magic ends the spell prematurely, 
and the caster can banish his or her misfornine by 
a silent act of will. 

Notes: Granted by the deities Beshaba and 
Tyche of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Missing Word 
(Divination) 
Sphere: Divination 
Level: 7 
Range: 0 


Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: | tum 

Area of Effect: | incomplete writing or diagram 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell is an entreaty to Oghma himself to 
complete a missing, partial, or obscured word, 
inscription, or diagram in a writing found by the 
priest. In rare cases, the deity allows use of this 
spell to complete a fragmentary spell, but all 
priests of Oghma know that to overuse prayer and 
supplication in such matters, rather than applying 
research, contemplation, and experimentation, is 
frowned upon by the Most Wise. 

When a missing word spell is cast, the priest 
immediately suffers 2d6 points of damage (as if 
wounded; rest and healing magics can restore this 
Jost vital energy) and is surrounded by an aura of 
purplish-white light and a tension in the air. The 
spell then either succeeds (the missing writing 
silently appears) or fails (the aura fades, and the 
priest receives a momentary and sometimes cryp- 


tic vision of guidance; no writing appears) as the 
god wills. (No saving throw governs this effect; 
the DM should decide Oghma’s will in particular 
situations.) 

When the spell ends, the magically revealed 
portion fades, leaving the writing incomplete again 
unless someone has traced over the previously 
missing portions. At his discretion, Oghma can 
extend the duration of the revelation to allow the 
missing text to be copied if it would otherwise take 
longer than a turn. Using this spell to solve long- 
standing problems of knowledge, particularly to 
benefit others not of the Oghmanyte faith, usually 
succeeds, Using this spell to devise new spells or 
processes of making goods to enrich the caster 
generally fail. 

Notes: Granted by Oghma, Lord of Knowl- 
edge, in the FoRGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Mist of the Goddess 
(Alteration, Evocation, Necromancy) 
Sphere: Elemental Water, Healing 


Level: 7 

Range: 5 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 turn 
Duration: 1 rd. 

Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell creates a glowing, green, inverted 
cone of mist that acts as the priest spells cure dis- 
ease (3rd level), remove curse (3rd level), heal (6th 
level), regenerate (7th level), restoration (7th 
level), and resurrection (7th level) on any single 
being within it. The base of the cone has a maxi- 
mum radius of 10 feet per caster level; it can be as 
small as the caster wills during casting, to a mini- 
mum of 5 feet. The cone is 30 feet high; if called 
forth in an area with low clearance, its height is 
truncated by any solid, continuous roof or ceiling 
material. If more than one being or portions of 
more than one being are touched by the mist, a 
random being is aided unless the priest calling up 
the mist of the goddess specifically chooses one 
being as the spell recipient by act of will. 

No corpse is aided by this spell if a living intel- 
ligent being is in contact with the mists, but if only 
corpses are present, and no single being is chosen 
by the caster as the spell recipient, all the dead are 
allowed the saving throw vs. spell they had in life. 
All those who successfully save are reincarnated 
(as the 7th-level priest spell reincarnate, but with- 
out any time limit since death) into a random crea- 
ture form that can readily survive in the immediate 


414 


Mistaken Missive 


ee 4 


surroundings (in other words, no fish out of water 
or tropical species in glacial arctic regions). 

The material component is a drop of water 
blessed by Eldath, blessed by one of her personal 
servants (her servitor creatures) in her name, or 
consecrated to her by an Exalted of Eldath. 

Notes: Granted by Eldath the Green Goddess 
of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Mistake — Gnome 
(Illusion/Phantasm) 
Sphere: Protection 


Level: 1 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 4 

Duration: 3 rds. + 2 rds./level 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell creates a false impression in the 
minds of those interacting with the caster. A sen- 
tient being who views the priest must make a 
successful saving throw vs. spell (adjusted for 
Wisdom) to perceive the caster as he or she truly 
is. Failure means the being perceives the caster as 
someone else. The exact identity perceived is cre- 
ated by the affected being, but is one that is least 
likely to provoke an encounter or cause difficulty 
for the priest. 

Creatures of semi-Intelligence or less (Intelli- 
gence 4 or less), supra-genius or better (Intelli- 
gence 19 or more) or with a Wisdom of 18 or 
higher are not affected by the spell. Creatures rely- 
ing on senses such as scent to identify friends and 
foes and those who observe the priest casting the 
spell are not deceived by it. 

If the caster is viewed by multiple creatures at 
once, the magic might create an impression that is 
the same for all or different for some, depending 
on which is least likely to provoke an encounter. 
The spell does not alter the caster in any way or 
create any visual illusion, While it does not ensure 
the caster remains undetected, it enhances the 
chance he or she is not. Each case is unique and 
adjudicated by the DM. The effects are not perma- 
nent. If an affected creature's attention is drawn 
back to the encounter after the spell expires, it will 
realize it’s been duped, although its Intelligence 
and Wisdom determines the degree to which the 
creature can figure out what it really saw. Those 
with high ability scores will remember more or the 
truth than those with lower scores, while those 
with low scores (7 or less) may simply think that 
there was something odd. 


For example, a priest casts this spell upon him- 
self in order to infiltrate a camp of goblins and 
bugbears and rescue some prisoners. He appears 
unaffected to his companions who observed him 
casting the spell. If the priest walks past a bugbear 
guard, the bugbear might perceive him to be a 
goblin child who passes by its post several times 
every day to get water from a nearby stream. If the 
priest continues by a group of goblin warriors, 
they might perceive him as a particularly mean 
subchief who does not like to be disturbed. When 
the priest reaches the group of prisoners, they 
might perceive him as a cloaked figure resembling 
an ally who is obviously trying to free them while 
not raising an alarm. 

‘The material components of this spell are the 
priest’s holy symbol and small piece of thin, see- 
through material that is placed across the eyes. 

Notes: Granted by the gnome god Baravar 
Cloakshadow. 


Mistaken Missive 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Chaos 


Level: 1 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 

Duration: Permanent 

Area of Effect: | page/level 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell alters the appearance of words writ- 
ten in ink. When the spell is cast upon a written 
page, the ink imperceptibly begins to move. Over 
the next few days, the message becomes progres- 
sively more illegible. If the page is left undisturbed 
for six days, an entirely new message forms on the 
page. The new message is completely legible and 
is recognizable as the handwriting of the original 
author, but is contrary in content to the original 
message. 

After the spell is cast, the message will appear 
different every day. The DM decides the message 
that the page will carry after the sixth day has 
passed. Following is a sample of the changes that 
could take place in a message. 


Day One: The words of the letter appear faint, 
as if the author of the letter was running out of ink 
while writing. 

Day Two: The words have moved slightly from 
their original positions, as if the person writing the 
letter was shaking or in a moving carriage when 
the letter was written. 


415 


Mists of Ghaunadaur — Drow 


Days Three and Four: The message is gibber- 
ish. Although the ink forms groups of letters 
arranged in lines with punctuation, nearly all the 
words are meaningless. This may appear to be 
some sort of code, but it means nothing. 

Day Five: The ink has formed real words. 
However, the sentence construction is still mean- 
ingles (for example, “Egg west worse green!”) 

Day Six (and beyond): The message is coher- 
ent, but conveys the opposite intent of the original 
message. If the original letter read, “Send troops 
quickly,” the new letter reads “All is fine. Keep 
your men in reserve.” 


If mistaken missive is cast on the pages of a 
spellbook or a scroll, the ink on the page reforms 
into a new spell of the same level as the original 
spell. Thus, a web spell might become an invisibil- 
ity spell. However, the spell formula will be 
wrong. Although it will look like a proper spell, it 
will not function when cast. 

A coded message subjected to mistaken missive 
appears as a coded message on the sixth day but 
has a different meaning than the original message. 

A glass of preserved words allows the original 
message to be read correctly. Dispel magic restores 
the message to its original form. 

‘The material component is three drops of ink. 


Notes: Common for priests with access to the 
sphere of Chaos (ToM). 


For the purpose of mistaken missive, “ink” is 
any substance that is artificially compounded or 
altered to render it suitable for writing. Thus, a 
message written with chalk or in blood cannot 
be altered by this spell. 


Mists of Ghaunadaur — Drow 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 
Sphere: Elemental Air 


Level: 3 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 5 

Duration: 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


By means of this spell, the caster can cloak 
himself or herself in mauve or violet mists that 
eddy and flow, foiling attacks for which one must 
see the target (including magic missile), and 
thwarting infravision and heat-based detection 
abilities. The caster receives a +2 Armor Class 
bonus. The mists of Ghaunadaur can be pierced by 
true seeing. The caster’s vision is unhindered by 
the enveloping mists. 

Notes: Granted by the drow god Ghaunadaur. 


Moander, Seed of 
See seed of Moander. 


Modify Memory 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
Sphere: Thought 


Level: 4 

Range: 30 ft. 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: Special 
Duration: Permanent 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell enables the caster to reach into the 
subject’s mind and modify up to five minutes of the 
creature's memory in one of the following ways: 


è Eliminate all memory of an event the subject 
actually experienced. This spell cannot negate 


416 


Moment 


N 


charm, suggestion, geas, quest, or similar 
spells. 

Allow the subject to recall with perfect clarity 
an event actually experienced. For instance, the 
subject could recall every word from a five- 
minute conversation or every detail from a pas- 
sage in a book. 

Change the details of an event the subject actu- 
ally experienced. 

Implant a memory of an event the subject never 
experienced. 


Casting the spell takes one round. If the subject 
fails a saving throw vs. spell, the caster proceeds 
by spending up to five minutes visualizing the 
memory he or she wishes to modify in the subject. 
If the caster’s concentration is disturbed before the 
visualization is complete, the spell is lost. 

Modified memories won't necessarily affect 
the subject’s actions, particularly if they contra- 
dict natural inclinations. An illogical modified 
memory, such as the subject recalling how much 
the subject enjoyed drinking poison, will be dis- 
missed as a bad dream or a memory muddied by 
too much wine. More useful applications of 
modify memory include implanting memories of 
friendly encounters with the caster (inclining the 
subject to act favorably toward the caster), chang- 
ing the details of orders given to the subject by a 
superior, or causing the subject to forget that the 
caster cheated him or her in a card game. The DM 
reserves the right to decide whether a modified 
memory is too nonsensical to significantly affect 
the subject. 

Notes: Common for priests with major access 
to the sphere of Thought (ToM). 


Mold Touch 


(Alteration) 
Sphere: Plant 


Level: 3 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 6 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell empowers the casting priest to trans- 
mute its material components into brown mold 
spores without suffering personal harm. The first 
creature touched by the caster within six rounds of 
the casting is infected by brown mold. A success- 
ful attack roll is required to touch an opponent in 
combat or one who is not unaware or immobilized. 


If the caster cannot touch any creature, the mold 
spores vanish at the end of six rounds. 

The mold spores created by this spell cannot 
live on plant or inorganic material. All the spores 
are transferred to the first creature touched by the 
caster. Thus, the caster can infect only one creature 
per spell. In the event of an accident, this could 
well be a friend or ally. A mold touch spell inflicts 
4d6 points of damage upon the target creature, or 
half that if the subject makes a successful saving 
throw vs, spell. 

Brown mold spreads from the contact point 
rapidly, growing by absorbing body heat. In the 
process, it chills the subject. In the second round 
after the attack, the mold inflicts 2d6 points of 
damage and half that if the subject makes a suc- 
cessful saving throw vs. spell. On every round 
thereafter, the subject receives a saving throw vs. 
spell. If the saving throw is successful, no damage 
is taken, and the spell ends. If the saving throw is 
failed, the subject takes 146 points of damage in 
that round. 

Brown mold created by this spell is of limited 
duration, and a subject cannot infect other crea- 
tures even if intending to do so. Magical cold 
harms mold created by this spell in the usual 
manner, but also affects the creature on which the 
mold is growing. 

The material components of this spell are 
mistletoe, holly, or oak leaves. 

Notes: Granted by Eldath the Green Goddess 
of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Moment 
(Divination) 
Sphere: Numbers 


Level: 2 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: 50-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: None 


Theoretically, every action has a particular 
moment at which it will have its greatest possible 
effect. Using the arcane mathematics of this spell, 
the priest can determine the ideal moment for any 
single action in each round that the spell is in 
effect. This action must be performed by a being 
other than the priest. 

In practice, another being informs the priest of 
an action it wants to undertake in a round. The 
priest concentrates on the action, then informs the 
being when the correct moment has come. The 


417 


~ Moment Reading r 


being then gains a bonus of 20% (+4 on a d20) to 
the success of the action. The spell can affect only 
a single action in a given round. When used in 
combat, the priest can advise the best moment to 
initiate an action (affecting initiative) or what 
moment offers the greatest success in striking 
(affecting the chance to hit). 

A being seeking advice conceming initiative 
gains a—2 modifier to the initiative roll, but only at 
the cost of —2 on its chance to hit. A being that 
seeks the best attack frequently delays its actions. 
This causes a +1 penalty to its initiative roll but 
gives a +4 bonus to the attack roll. The spell 
cannot affect the amount of damage caused, since 
the act (striking) has already succeeded at that 
point. 

‘The being is not obliged to wait for the moment 
specified by the priest. For example, a fighter 
might decide that striking first is more important 
than gaining +4 to hit. The fighter can act nor- 
mally, based on his or her unmodified initiative. 
The fighter gains no bonus from the moment spell, 
and the priest can affect no other action in that 
round. 

Noncombat actions can also benefit from the 
moment spell. For example, a thief planning to 
climb a wall can wait to start her climb until the 
priest informs her that the moment is right. If she 
waits, she gains a bonus of 20% to her Climb 
Walls chance. 

While concentrating on this spell, the priest can 
take no other action. A break in the priest's con- 
centration—taking damage in combat, for exam- 
ple—terminates the spell instantly. 

The spell focus is a set of three silver dice, 
which the priest tosses in his or her hand while 
concentrating on the spell. The dice can be reused. 

Notes: Common for priests with access to the 
sphere of Numbers (ToM). 


Moment Reading 
(Divination) 
Sphere: Numbers 


Level: 3 

Range: 0 

‘Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell allows the priest to determine the 
“tenor of the now”—in other words, to leam the 
force that is most dominant at the time. To cast the 
spell, the priest generates a series of random num- 


bers and then studies the pattem contained in that 
string of numbers. This pattern contains informa- 

In game terms, when this spell is cast, the DM 
communicates to the priest's player a single word 
or short phrase (no more than five words) describ- 
ing the tone of the situation. Examples of suitable 
tones are imminent danger (the DM knows a 
dragon is approaching the area); peace and tran- 
quillity (the woods in which the PCs camp may 
look threatening, but the area is actually free of 
evil influence); or betrayal (one of the PCs’ 
hirelings is actually a spy of their enemy). While 
the DM can make this comment cryptic, it should 
be accurate and contain some useful information. 

This spell has no specified area of effect. The 
result of moment reading always concems the 
priest and anyone else in the immediate vicinity, 
but the definition of vicinity will vary depending 
on the circumstances. For example, the tenor of the 
moment might be severe danger if the priest is 
entering the territory of a dragon who attacks 
interlopers on sight. 

‘The tenor of the moment is always personally 
applicable to the priest. For example, even if the 
priest is in a nation dangerously close to war with 
its neighbor, this condition will not appear in the 
tenor of the moment unless the priest is personally 
involved (in the direct path of an invading army, 
for instance). 

One casting of this spell tends to taint subse- 
quent castings of the same spell unless they are 
separated by a minimum length of time. If a priest 
casts this spell twice within 12 hours, the second 
reading gives the same result as the first, regard- 
less of the actual situation. A second priest casting 
the spell within 12 hours of the first receives an 
accurate reading. 

The spell requires is a set of 36 small disks 
made of polished bone engraved with runes that 
represent numbers. These disks are not consumed 
in the casting. 

Notes: Common for priests with access to the 
sphere of Numbers (ToM). 


Monster Mount 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
Sphere: Travelers 


Level: 6 

Range: 30 yds. 
Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 6 

Duration: | hr./level 
Area of Effect: 20-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


418 


Moon Blade 


Eee a 


This spell compels one or more living creatures 
to serve as mounts for the caster and any compan- 
ions. The spell affects up to 10 Hit Dice or levels 
of creatures with Intelligence of 4 or lower. Crea- 
tures used as mounts must be large enough to carry 
at least one rider; smaller creatures can be used as 
pack animals. 

Each intended mount receives a saving throw 
vs. spell. Creatures failing their rolls become 
docile and obedient, allowing riders to mount 
them, and moving at the speed and direction indi- 
cated by the caster. 

To maintain the enchantment, the caster must 
remain within 10 yards of one of the affected crea- 
tures, and each affected creature must remain 
within 10 yards of another. The affected creatures 
will do nothing for the caster other than carrying 
riders and gear; they will not fight (although they 
will fight to defend themselves), nor will they 
intentionally endanger themselves. Any overtly 
hostile act by the caster or a rider against any 
mount breaks the enchantment for all the mounts. 

When the enchantment ends or is broken, the 
creatures take no action for one round, then behave 
as their natural instincts direct. 

Notes: Common for priests with major access 
to the sphere of Travelers (ToM). 


Sphere: Combat, Necromantic 


Level: 4 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 7 
Duration: | rd./level 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell transforms the air around the caster 
into the shape of any wholly physical Faerûnian 
creature. It cannot create the shapes of creatures 
having a dual-planar existence or a fundamental 
connection to another plane of existence, such as 
most undead creatures. The monster form chosen 
must be of a creature that the caster has seen 
directly on some earlier occasion while it was alive 
and awake, and cannot be a unique being such as 
the tarrasque or a particular ruler. The form must 
also be large enough to encompass the caster. 

The caster controls the monstrous illusion from 
within and can use all the normal powers and abil- 
ities of the creature except—if applicable—flying. 
The illusory monster’s attacks cause only half the 
damage the real monster would, but the illusion 


also cloaks and shields the caster, who suffers only 
half the normal damage from attacks made on him 
or her while within the monstrous illusion. This 
spell can be ended at any time at will. 

Notes: Granted by Leira, Lady of Mists, of the 
ForGoTTEN REALMS setting (or maybe not). 


Moon Blade 
(Alteration, Evocation) 
Sphere: Combat, Sun 


Level: 3 

Range: 0 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 6 
Duration: 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell brings into being a silent, weight- 
less, swordlike construct made of moonlight that 
extends 4 feet straight out from the caster’s hand. 
It cannot be dropped, transferred to the grasp of 
another being, or broken. To strike, it must be 
wielded as a weapon. The caster’s normal THACO 
applies, but a moon blade is considered a +4 mag- 
ical weapon for the purpose of what kinds of 
beings it is able to hit. Its strike drains vitality or 
life force, causing no visible wounds, but inflict- 
ing 1d12+4 points of damage. Undead are visibly 
wounded by a moon blade; their substance boils 
away from its touch, and they suffer 2d12+4 
points of damage per blow. 

A successful moon blade strike temporarily 
scrambles magic. On the round after being hit, the 
creature struck cannot cast spells or call on any 
spell-like abilities. The functioning of existing 
spell conditions is suspended for that round, and 
magical items wielded by the subject do not func- 
tion for that round. 

A moon blade vanishes if its caster is slain or 
casts any other spell except those that have only 
verbal components. 
items known as moonblades borne and made by 
some elves. 

Notes: Granted by the goddess Selfine of the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting, and the elven goddess 
Sehanine Moonbow. 


419 


Moon Path 
(Alteration, Evocation) 
Sphere: Sun, Travelers 


Level: 5 

Range: 5 yds,/level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 8 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 15 ft/level 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell enables its caster to create a stair or 
bridge from one known, visualized spot to another. 
The effect is a railless ribbon of glowing white 
translucent force like a glass strip that is from 3 to 
20 feet wide as the caster decides (and able to vary 
in width over its length if the caster desires). It is a 
maximum of 15 feet long per level of the caster, 
though the caster can make it shorter if space is 
constricted. It can climb or descend and sticks to its 
endpoints unshakably, even if these endpoints are 
actually empty air above known ground features. 

Beings walking on a moon path are protected 
as follows: They cannot be drained of abilities or 
experience levels (life force), they cannot be 
harmed by normal missiles, they are immune to 
all enchantment/charm spells (although they can 
sense enough of a spell effect to identify it for 
what it does), and they cannot fall over or off the 
moon path, no matter what force strikes it or 
them. 

A moon path needs no supports, cannot be 
shattered or moved by any known force, and is 
stable enough to cast spells from. It vanishes if 
struck by a successful dispel magic, if the caster 
wills it to, or if it has been completely traversed by 
as many beings as the caster has levels, 
Otherwise, it persists for 1 tum per level of the 
caster. Beings on a moon path that expires or van- 
ishes are subject to normal falling damage when 
they strike whatever hard surface is below. A mag- 
ical barrier of the 6th or greater spell level stops a 
forming moon path or truncates an existing one 
where the two meet, but the caster cannot choose 
to banish only a part of his or her moon path in a 
similar manner. Loss of one part of a moon path 
has no effect on remaining parts, even if the loss 
cuts the path in two. 

The material component is a handful of pow- 
dered moonstone. 

Notes: Granted by Selûne the Moonmaiden of 
the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


“T SAS a a eR a 


This spell creates a glowing aura (akin to 
moonlight in intensity and tone, but it can manifest 
in full sunlight and so be rendered nigh invisible) 
in a sphere of air that typically appears as a hemi- 
sphere while its caster positions it to cover the 
maximum ground area. It is stationary once cast 
and has two effects: 

All priest spells cast within it (even if cast at 
areas or targets outside of the moon rising area) 
have the maximum possible effect: They hit auto- 
matically, inflict full damage, last for full duration, 
all saving throws against them fail, and so on. This 
applies to hostile priest magic also, not merely to 
the spells worked by the caster and friends. 

The second effect must be deliberately exer- 
cised by the caster or it is lost: One attack or activ- 
ity (such as a bend bars/lift gates attempt, or a feat 
requiring an ability check) in each of the two 
rounds of the moon rising can be augmented by 
the spell. The caster must choose one attack roll or 
activity attempt to aid (if no choice is made in a 
round, the benefit is missed and cannot be saved 
for later). The enchantment gives a +4 bonus to 
attack rolls, a 4-point boost to ability checks, and 
a 20% bonus to percentile rolls. 

Notes: Granted by Selûne the Moonmaiden of 
the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Moon Shield 
(Abjuration, Invocation/Evocation) 


Casting Time: 5 
Duration: 1 rd /level (maximum 2 tums) 
Area of Effect: The caster 

Saving Throw: None 


This spell creates an intangible shield of moon- 
light that floats along with the caster. It provides 
enough light to read by, cannot be made brighter or 
darker by the caster, and operates automatically. A 


Moonbeam 


Ne 


moon shield gives its caster a saving throw vs. 
death magic against all undead aging, fear, level- 
and ability-draining attacks. If successful, the 
attacks fail (though any purely physical damage 
they cause is unaltered). 

A moon shield also provides its caster with a 
+2 bonus to all saving throws against priest spells 
of the Sun sphere (where such spells allow saving 
throws) and provides a saving throw vs. spell 
against all attacks made on the caster by lycan- 
thropes and by silver weapons. If these saves suc- 
ceed, all damage done to the caster by such forces 
is reduced to 1 point per successful attack. 

The material components of a moon shield spell 
are a piece of silver and a moonstone (both can be 
of any size, so long as they present at least one sur- 
face as large as the caster’s smallest fingernail). 

Notes: Granted by the goddess Selûne of the 
ForGorTeN REALMS setting, and the elven goddess 
Sehanine Moonbow. 


421 


Moonbeam 
(Alteration, Evocation) 
Sphere: Sun 
Level: 5 $ 


Range: 60 yds. + 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 7 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: 5-ft.-radius + special 
Saving Throw: None 


By means of this spell, the caster is able to 
cause a beam of soft, pale light to strike downward 
from overhead and illuminate whatever area he or 
she is pointing at. The light is exactly the same as 
moonlight, so that colors other than shades of 
black, gray, or white are vague. The caster can 
easily move the moonbeam to any area that he or 
she can see and point to. This makes the spell an 
effective way to spotlight something, an opponent, 
for example. While the moonbeam spell does not 
eliminate all shadows, a creature centered in a 
moonbeam is most certainly visible. The reflected 


light from this spell enables dim visual perception 
10 yards beyond the area of effect, but it does not 
shed a telltale glow that would negate surprise. 
The light does not adversely affect infravision. The 


Moonbeam — Cerilia r 


caster can dim the beam to near darkness if 
desired. The beam has, in addition, all the proper- 
ties of true moonlight and can induce a lycan- 
thropic change (while in the beam), unless the DM 
tules otherwise. 

The material components are several seeds of 
any moonseed plant and a piece of opalescent 
feldspar (moonstone). 

Notes: Common for druids (PHB). 


Moonbeam — Cerilia 
(Evocation) 
Sphere: Sun 


Level: 1 

Range: 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 2 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: 1 creature/3 levels 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


The moonbeam spell uses the power of Cerilia’s 
sun and moon to paralyze undead. When a priest 
points a talisman at an undead creature and casts this 
spell, a beam of silver or golden light streaks toward 
the creature. If the creature fails a saving throw vs. 
spell, it remains completely paralyzed for the dura- 
tion of the spell. Otherwise, there is no effect. 

Originally granted to Ruornil's followers during 
the Battle of Mount Deismaar, the moonbeam spell 
has become a weapon against undead for many 
priests across Cerilia. 

The material component is a reflective moon- 
or sun-shaped talisman (usually depending on the 
interests of the priest's patron deity). It can be 
made of glass, mirrored glass, highly polished 
metal, or polished stone such as hematite. 

Notes: Restricted to the world of Cerilia, the 
BIRTHRIGHT setting; common for priests from that 
setting. 


Moonbow — Elf 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Sun 


Level: 4 


Range: 0 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 7 
Duration: 1 rd./2 levels 
Area of Effect: Creates 1 bow 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell creates a crystalline bow only the 
caster can use. The bow is the size and strength of 


a short bow or long bow, as chosen by the caster 
during the casting. A thin beam of silvery ligbt 
serves as the bowstring and, when it is drawn back, 
causes a shimmering, silver arrow to appear in the 
proper position. 

If the caster releases the bow for any reason, it 
fades into a cloud of luminescence that dances for 
1d4+1 rounds, then vanishes into nothingness. The 
bow can fire, at most, two arrows per round at any 
target within range. Each shaft trails a stream of 
motes of moonlight (as the Lst-level spell, but last- 
ing only 1d4+1 rounds) delineating the path of 
flight. A successful attack roll is required to hit the 
target. After any attack, whether it hits or misses, 
the arrow fired vanishes in a manner similar to the 
crystalline bow, as described above. 

The effects of a successful hit vary according to 
the type of target. If shot into an area of magical 
darkness, the arrow negates the effect, but other- 
wise does nothing but trail the motes of moonlight. 
Against a living creature, a moonbow shaft acts as 
a bolt of energy from the Positive Material Plane, 
inflicting 744 points of damage. Against an undead 
creature that draws its power from the Negative 
Material Plane, the shaft inflicts 1444 points of 
damage and bathes the target in silvery faerie fire 
for 1d4+1 rounds. (Multiple successful attacks 
against one undead creature do not increase the 
faerie fire effect, but simply extend the duration if 
a later hit would outlast an earlier one.) 

Against an undead creature that draws its 
power from the Positive Material Plane (such as a 
mummy), a moonbow shaft restores 7d4 points of 
damage, but has no other effect. 

‘The material components are the priest's holy 
symbol and the silken thread of a cobweb coated 
in dew gathered beneath the light of a full moon. 

Notes: Granted by the elven goddess Sehanine 
Moonbow. Some sources refer to this spell as 
moonshaft. 


Moonbridge — Elf 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Sun 


Level: 4 
Range: 120 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 7 
Duration: 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 
This spell transforms a shaft of moonlight, 


whether it be naturally occurring or magically 
created (such as by a motes of moonlight spell), 


"n a a a aaa 


Moonveil 


N 


into a translucent bridge capable of supporting 
beings of good alignment. Beings of neutral align- 
ment can also walk atop a moonbridge as long as 
they stay in direct physical contact with the caster 
(or form part of a chain, of which at least one 
member must be in physical contact with the 
priest). Evil beings find moonbridges as insub- 
stantial as moonlight. In areas bathed in moon- 
light with no distinctive shafts of light, the caster 
can create a moonbridge from his or her location 
in any direction as long as the entire length of the 
moonbridge is bathed in moonlight without inter- 
ruption. 

A moonbridge is at most 3 feet wide and at 
least 20 feet long, although it can extend as far as 
120 yards, according to the caster’s desire. It can 
last as long as one round per level, and the caster 
can order it out of existence instantly. The angle of 
inclination and direction of the moonbridge varies 
as noted above. 

The material components of this spell are the 
priest's holy symbol and a vial of holy water that 
has been bathed in the light of the last full moon 
for at least six consecutive hours. 

Notes: Granted by the elven goddess Sehanine 
Moonbow. 


Moondance* —Drow 


(Conjuration/Summoning) 
Sphere: All 


Level: 2 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 8 hrs. 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effeċt: Participating priestesses of Eilis- 
trace 

Saving Throw: None 


A moondance is a cooperative magic spell that 
blesses cach participating priestess of Eilistraee 
who contributes to the casting of the spell. At least 
three priestesses of the Dark Maiden are required 
for this spell to be effective. 

The bless effect of a moondance lasts for a 
number of days equal to the total number of levels 
of all the priestesses participating in the dance, but 
not exceeding a maximum of 99 days. Like the 
recipient of the 1st level priest spell bless, a par- 
ticipant in a moondance spell receives a +1 bonus 
to all attack dice rolls, morale checks, and saving 
throw rolls made against fear attacks. 

Notes: Granted by the drow goddess Eilistraee. 


Moonfire 
(Alteration, Necromancy) 
Sphere: Necromantic 


Level: 5 

Range: 30 yds. 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: 10 ft. wide X 30 ft. long path 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell unleashes a flash of “cold white fire” 
akin to bright moonlight in appearance that begins 
at any point within range chosen by the caster and 
flows out from that spot in a straight line away 
from the caster for 30 feet in a 10-foot-wide strip. 
All undead creatures within this area suffer 2 
points of damage per level of the caster (no saving 
throw) to a maximum of 20 points. 

Moonfire also chills living creatures, doing 244 
points of damage to those who come into contact 
with it. It also has the property of revealing all 
magical auras (including such things as not-yet- 
triggered fire traps, glyphs, and symbols) that it 
touches, outlining them with a brilliant greenish 
radiance. The area where a moonfire spell has 
taken effect repels electricity for 1d4+2 rounds 
thereafter, and can deflect lightning bolts and sim- 
ilar magical effects, harmlessly diverting them 
elsewhere, 

Notes: Granted by the goddess Selûne of the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting, and the elven goddess 
Sehanine Moonbow. 


Moonfire, Eilistraee’s 
See Eilistraee’s moonfire. 


Moonshaft 
Aka moonbow. 


Moonveil 
(Abjuration, Alteration) 
Sphere: Elemental Water 


Level: 7 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 9 rds. 

Duration: Permanent 

Area of Effect: Moonwell touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This complicated evil ritual to magically veil 
moonwells was recently rediscovered and devel- 
oped by certain priests of Bane. Moonwells are 


DA TN 


~ Moonweb r 


precious pools of clear water found in the Moon- 
shae Isles sacred to the goddess Chauntea, known 
as the Goddess (or Earthmother) in the Moon- 
shaes. Some sages and priests believe that this 
ritual could be modified to seal other existing 
gates, color pools, and other means of passing 
between planes or contacting deities. 

A moonveil spell is a long ritual involving 
chanting, dancing about the entire circumference 
or shore of a moonwell, and the sacrifice of one 
living creature per round. The caster can have up 
to seven assistants active in carrying out the ritual. 
If successful, the spell causes a moonwell to lose 
its properties. In addition, any holy water or sweet 
water potions that are within 90 feet of the caster 
at any time during the ritual are fouled and useless. 
The moonwell can be magically purified again, but 
the other magical waters are ruined forever. 

A veiled moonwell is covered by an opaque 
black carpet of curling mist, even in full sunlight. 
This veil blocks all beneficial effects of the moon- 
well. It also lessens the local influences of the 
Goddess (Chauntea), preventing her from awaken- 
ing or, if already active, from accurately directing 
her land-dwelling children, Kamerynn the unicorn 
and the Pack, against evil. 

Contact with the black mist forces items to 
make saving throws vs. acid with a -2 penalty or 
be destroyed. Living beings must make a success- 
ful saving throw throws vs. poison with a -2 
penalty or suffer 3d4 points of corrosive damage 
per round of contact. If a being dives, falls, or is 
otherwise immersed in the pool, 6d4 points of 
damage automatically are inflicted for each round 
of contact, and the subject must make a successful 
saving throw vs. poison each round or be blinded. 
Such blindness lasts for 1d4 turns after the being 
was last in contact with the mist or water. 

All spells of 6th level or less directed against 
the black mist of the well are reflected back on the 
caster for full effect. The black mist cannot be sep- 
arated into smaller portions, nor can any of it be 
taken away from the well; the magic of the spell 
generates it continuously from the pool itself. 

A moonveil can be destroyed by a specially cast 
variant of the sunray spell, sanctify sacred site (a 
Tth-level priest spell of the church of Chauntea). 
No other means of destroying a moonveil has yet 
been found. It cannot be reversed or negated by the 
will of the caster. 

The material components of this spell are a 
piece of burned bone from any creature native to 
the Moonshaes, the blood of one living creature per 
round of the ritual (each creature must be slain 
during the ritual), a pinch of dung, a pinch of ashes, 
a dried snakeskin, and a small vial of liquid poison. 


Notes: Granted by the evil god Bane of the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Moonweb 
(Abjuration, Alteration) 
Sphere: Guardian, Sun 


Level: 5 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 8 

Duration: 2 turns/level 

Area of Effect: Creature touched or opening with 
a surface area up to 1 ft-/level square 

Saving Throw: None 


This spell creates a blocking web or a protec- 
tive cocoon of glowing, shimmering strands of sil- 
very light. The priest chooses the form the spell 
takes at the time of casting. 

A) Web. As a blocking spell, it affects an open- 
ing such as doorway or window, up to a square sur- 
face area of 1 foot per level of the caster (thus, a 
9th-level caster can seal an opening measuring 
9X9 feet or smaller). 

B) Cocoon. As a spell of personal protection, a 
moonweb affects a single creature touched by the 
caster. The creature to be protected must be com- 
pletely encompassed (wrapped) by the area of 
effect, or the spell fails, Otherwise, both castings 
have certain elements in common: 
© A moonweb blocks the sight of all but priests of 

Selûne and the goddess herself (in the cocoon 

form, the individual can see through it). The 

moonweb does not foil magical means of 
detecting or locating beings and objects. 

@ Creatures and objects cannot pass the barrier, 
nor do magics such as dimension door and 
teleportation work (these are drained and 
ruined). 


e LT TR: 


Moss Skull 


Ne 


e Any being, weapon, or spell striking a moon- 
web is forced, violently and immediately, back 
to its source. Weapon attacks directed at or 
through a moonweb rebound for full damage on 
the wielder. This includes weapons and spells 
used by a protected creature, 

Magical weapons damage a moonweb before 
rebounding—these inflict 1 point of damage on 
the moonweb for each point of attack bonus (for 
example, a sword +3 inflicts 3 points of 
damage). The moonweb has 1 hit point per level 
of its caster, and dissipates when reduced to 0. 
A moonweb repels a globe of invulnerability and 
other magical barriers, but any contact between 
a moonweb and an antimagic shell or any pris- 
matic magic instantly destroys both spell effects 
in a spectacular burst of harmless blue sparks 
and crawling purple lightning bolts. It can also 
be destroyed by a successful dispel magic spell. 
A caster of a moonweb, if on the same plane as 
the effect, gains a clear, vivid mental image of 
any being or object that tries to pass or destroy 
the barrier. 


The material components are a drop of holy 
water and a gray or silver hair from any source. 

Notes: Granted by Selûne the Moonmaiden of 
the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Morale 
A Ist-level spell of the sphere of War. See appendix 
in Vol. 3. 


Morningglow 
See glyph of warding: Telatha. 


Mortal Snare — Shaman 
(Necromancy) 
Sphere: Necromantic 


Level: 6 

Range: 10 yds. 
Components: V, $, M 
Casting Time: | turn 
Duration: 14100 years 
Area of Effect: | spirit 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell is used to remove an offending spirit 
from the Prime Material Plane for a time, placing 
it where the shaman can call upon it. A successful 
casting binds a supernatural spirit into a living 
human, demihuman, or humanoid body. A spirit 
that makes a successful saving throw vs. spell 
remains at liberty. If left in the body, the spirit can 
then attempt a saving throw vs. spell once each 


turn until it eventually escapes. If the body is not 
firmly tied down or otherwise incapacitated, the 
spirit can control it. 

Usually, as soon as the spirit is bound into the 
living body, the caster kills the body, flinging both 
the body's spirit and the bound spirit into the 
Astral Plane for the duration of the spell. When the 
spell ends, the spirit returns to the spirit world and 
the body’s life force departs for its final resting 
place. Until then, the spirit can be summoned from 
the Astral Plane, 

Exiled spirits are seldom amused by being 
abused in this way, and may attempt to avenge 
themselves against the caster when the spell ends. 
Similarly, other spirits may take offense at the 
shaman’s behavior. Only the most evil or desperate 
of shamans will use this spell, as its consequences 
may be far worse than the circumstances that 
prompted the shaman to take the action, 

Notes: Restricted to shamans, uncommon, 


Moss Skull 
(Invocation/Evocation) 
Sphere: Combat, Elemental Fire, Elemental 
Water 


Level: 5 
Range: 90 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 8 

Duration: Up to 2 rds. 

Area of Effect: 20-ft.-radius 
Saving Throw: 1/2 


This dramatic spell causes a construct that 
looks like a moss-covered skull to form in the 
caster's hand and fly from there to strike at a 
chosen target. The skull travels at MV Fly 21 (A), 
striking with a THACO of 9. The skull has AC 2 
and hit points equal to the caster’s level. It can be 
destroyed on the way to its target, but unless com- 
pletely destroyed, it inflicts full damage if it 
reaches its target and hits. Touching a moss skull 
with either fire-based magic (not just heat) or ice- 
based magic (not just cold) destroys it instantly 
and harmlessly—it does not explode. 

A moss skull that strikes its target vanishes in a 
flash of light, sending forth both fire damage and 
ice damage into its target. Unless magically pro- 
tected against those attack forms, a target creature 
suffers both kinds of damage, as follows: 4d4 
points of fire damage (save vs. spell for half), fol- 
lowed by 4d4 points of ice damage (save vs. spell 
for half), Any item (such as a shield, helm, or 
breastplate) worn or held by a creature directly 
struck by the moss skull must make a successful 


425 


Motes of Moonlight — Elf 


saving throw vs. spell or be destroyed (other items 
will be unharmed, the target creature’s body takes 
the damage instead). 

Tf the moss skull misses, the caster can send it 
after a different target on the next round, but then 
it inflicts only half damage, strikes at THACO 15, 
and is MV FI 15 (B), with an AC of 5. When so 
directing it, the caster cannot engage in spellcast- 
ing on that round. 

A moss skull can strike the wrong person on 
the way to its intended target, but glances off with- 
out exploding or doing damage and continues to 
chase the target creature. 

The caster of moss skull can will it out of exis- 
tence at any time (even just before it hits). Other- 
wise, it fades away by itself at the end of the first 
round if it misses and is not immediately directed 
at another target by its caster. It fades away harm- 
lessly if it misses its second attack. 

‘The material components are a piece of human 
bone, a pinch of ash from something organic that 
has been burned in a fire of natural origin (light- 
ning, for example, not caused by magic or deliber- 
ately set by a person), and a bone from a creature 
that froze to death. 

Notes: Granted by the god Silvanus, the Forest 
Father, of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. This 
spell is found only in a few exceptionally rare 
tomes. 


Motes of Moonlight — Elf 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Sun 


Level: 1 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: 1 hr. + | turn/level 
Area of Effect: 10 ft./level 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell creates a trail of shimmering, silvery 
lights in the direction pointed by the caster. The 
beam of light thus caused is equal in brightness to 
a shaft of moonlight, and any priest of Sehanine 
standing amongst the motes of moonlight is treated 
as if bathed in the light of a full moon. Objects in 
darkness beyond this beam can be seen, at best, as 
vague and shadowy shapes. The spell is targeted at 
any fixed point within range of the beam's termi- 
nus, 10 feet per level of the caster, and the caster 
must have a line of sight or unobstructed path to 
that point when the spell is cast. The beam starts at 
the caster’s holy symbol, Once cast, motes of 
moonlight will hang in place, even if the target or 
holy symbol is then moved. The caster can dismiss 
the motes on command. 

Notes: Granted by the elven goddess Sehanine 


Area of Effect: Special 


This spell is a more powerful version of the 
detect metal and minerals spell. With this spell, a 
dwarven cleric can locate a major ore deposit of 
any metal or mineral. When the spell is cast, the 
type of deposit to be located must be specified. 
Only one type of deposit can be divined per cast- 
ing of the spell. Furthermore, the material compo- 
nent employed in the spell must pertain to the type 
of deposit sought. For example, a tiny iron anvil is 
required to find the location of an iron ore deposit, 
while a diamond must be expended to locate a dia- 
mond mine. 

Once the spell is cast, there is a 100% chance 
of finding the deposit if the deposit is within the 
area of effect of the spell. The DM must decide 
whether such a deposit is present. Obviously, the 
rarer the substance, the less chance there is of the 
deposit being present. A DM who wishes to leave 
the decision to chance can use the following per- 
centages: 60% chance for finding a desired base 
metal, 30% chance for a precious metal ore or 
gemstone deposit, 5% for a very rare substance, 
and 5% for no substance whatsoever (adjust 20% 
in favor of the component type, but a 96-00 fails 
outright). The spell detects the desired deposit in a 


a a a I a i ee RE 


Multiple Message Mote 


cel 


radius of 10 miles per level of the caster and to a 
depth of one-half mile per level. 

The material components are the cleric’s holy 
symbol and a small amount of the ore to be found. 
The cost of the material component must be com- 
parable to the value of the deposit to be found. 
‘Typical material components will cost 1,000 gp for 
base metals, 5,000 gp for precious metals or gem- 
stones, or 10,000 gp for very rare metals such as 
mithral or adamantite. 

Any deposit located should be quite substan- 
tial, an amount sufficient to support the needs of a 
dwarven community for months or even years. 

Notes: Very rare spell, granted by dwarven 
deities, (Updated from Dracon Magazine.) 


Alternately, the DM can use the “Duration of a 
Mining Site” guidelines from the Dungeoneer’s 
Survival Guide. 


Mountainous Barrier 
Athasian Dragon King magic, 9th level; psionic 
component renders the spell uncastable by priests. 


Muddy Water 


Reversed form, cleanse water. 


Mulch 
(Alteration, Necromancy) 
Sphere: Plant 


Level: 5 

Range: 5 ft./level 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: 1 rd. 

Area of Effect: Cube, 10 ft./level (90 ft. cube min- 
imum) 

Saving Throw: Special 


This spell must be used with extreme care by 
priests of Silvanus, for its reckless use could undo 
much of the growth and revitalization of sylvan 
lands that their god stands for. It causes wood 
(such as a tree, shrub, door, or cottage wall) or 
once-living organic material (such as leather straps 
or rope) to rot away instantly. Carefully applied, 
this can make plate mail fall off a foe, free a bound 
captive, and so on. When used with less care, it can 
destroy clothing in a trace, cause weapons to fall 
off friendly warriors in all directions, and devas- 
tate gardens or stands of trees. The caster can 
affect an area 10 feet on a side per level of the 


caster (thus, a 9th level priest can affect an area 
measuring 90 X 90 X 90 feet). The spell must affect 
a minimum 90-ft. cube; the spell’s area of effect 
above this is increased at the caster’s discretion, 
but limited by his or her experience level. 

This spell instantly kills yellow musk creepers, 
violet fungi, and various harmful molds, but intel- 
ligent plant life receives a saving throw vs. spell at 
+5 to avoid death. Plant beings (such as shambling 
mounds and vegepygmies) successfully saving 
against a mulch spell suffer 5d4 points of damage 
instead. 

Nonvegetable intelligent beings are affected by 
this spell in a curious way: Its touch causes much 
internal moisture to retreat from the skin and fat 
layers of the body to deeper body cavities for a short 
period. This does no damage and has no adverse 
effects save to cause an affected being’s voice to 
grow rough and quavery and to cause the being’s 
skin to become very wrinkled (because it hangs 
more loosely), This effect of the spell would tem- 
porarily ruin a good singing voice, and for 1d4+1 
rounds, it tends to cause affected beings to appear 
very old. This side-effect of the spell has been used 
by priests to aid in disguise attempts, fake devastat- 
ing diseases, or simulate magical aging. 

Notes: Granted by the god Silvanus, the Forest 
Father, of the FoRGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Multiple Message Mote 
(Illusion/Phantasm) 
Sphere: All 


Level: 4 

Range: 30 yds. 

Components: V, $ 

Casting Time: 7 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 cu. ft. maximum 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell creates a more powerful sort of mes- 
sage mote. Its effects are identical to an ordinary 
message mote in all important respects save two. 

Though it also appears for only 1 round at a 
time, it can reappear whenever its triggering con- 
ditions are met for as many times as the caster has 
levels at the time of casting before the magic is 
exhausted. 

A multiple message mote is also capable of 
delivering two different messages: a general mes- 
sage of 33 words, and a special, secondary mes- 
sage of 16 additional words that are uttered only in 
the presence of a personal holy symbol of Tyr (in 
other words, when the beings triggering the mote 
include a priest of the Just God). The caster has the 


427 


~ Murk — Sahuagin r 


option of suppressing this second message when 
within spell range of beings who do not carry holy 
symbols of Tyr (such as when Tyrran priests are 
accompanied by nonpriests) or of not using this 
aspect at all. (Due to these special properties, 
many multiple message motes appear as trap wam- 
ings in the secret entry passages of numerous tem- 
ples.) 

Notes: Granted by the Tyr the Just God of the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. This spell is found 
only in a few exceptionally rare tomes. 


Murk — Sahuagin 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Combat 


Level: 4 

Range: 20 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 6 

Duration: 2 turns 

Area of Effect: 60-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: Special 


A more powerful version of the gloom spell, 
murk fills the water in a 60-foot-radius globe with 
inky silt. The globe can be centered on a creature, 
an object, or on a point in space. Unwilling crea- 
tures receive a saving throw vs. spell to negate the 
effect. Placing the spell on a mobile creature or 
object creates a mobile effect. 

Sahuagin can see 4d4 feet within the globe, 
while all other creatures can see 2d4 feet. The 
globe blankets all light sources within its area of 
effect, reducing their intensity to that of a firefly. 
Light or continual light spells cast on a creature’s 
eyes cease to affect the creature while it remains 
within the globe. Other light-based attacks have a 
50% chance to fail. If a light attack actually pene- 
trates the globe's influence, all creatures receive a 
+4 bonus on their saving throws against the 
attack—even sahuagin. If the light attack fails, it 
remains briefly visible as a dim flash, like light- 
ning flickering in the depths of a cloud. 

When cast above water, murk creates a rain of 
rancid slime mixed with thick fog that fills a 120- 
foot diameter globe. Watertight barriers block the 
effect, but the globe instantly expands to fill any 
open area. The globe extinguishes small fires— 
such as torches, candles, and cooking fires within 
its confines. Large fires and fire-based attacks 
have a 25% chance of failing. Permanent magical 
fires flare up again when the globe passes, Target 
creatures of a successful fire-based attack receive 
a +4 saving throw bonus against the attack while in 
the globe's area of effect. 


Surfaces touched by the globe remain coated 
with a film of slime and grit after the globe passes. 
A strong wind, bright sun, or desert heat reduces 
the spell’s duration by half. 

The material component is spittle. 

Notes: Restricted to sahuagin, uncommon for 
them. 


Music of the Spheres 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
Sphere: Charm, Numbers 


Level: 2 

Range: 50 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 4 

Duration: 1 turn + 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: 10-ft.-radius 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


With this spell, the priest creates tones and har- 
monies of such unearthly beauty and complexity 
that they entrance the listener, making it difficult 
for the listener to attack or otherwise harm the 
priest. The listener receives a normal saving throw 
against this effect. Failure means that the listener 
is entranced and is unable to attack the priest for 
the duration of the spell. 

In addition, the music makes the subject 
gullible and more susceptible to charm magics 
such as charm person, suggestion, and hypnotism; 
there is no saving throw against this effect. While 
the music spell is in effect, the subject saves 
against charm spells with a —3 penalty. 

This spell does not protect other characters in 
company with the priest; listeners who have fallen 
prey to the music are free to attack anyone else. 
The spell effect ends instantly if the priest takes 
any hostile action against a creature under the 
influence of the spell. 

Music of the spheres can affect one creature per 
three levels of the priest (one subject at 3rd level, 
two at 6th level, and so on). Subjects must be 
within a 10-foot-radius circle. 

Potential subjects must have Intelligence of at 
least 1 (necessary to understand the concept of 
music) and must be able to hear the music (that is, 
they cannot be deaf and there can be nothing 
obstructing their ears). This also means that the 
level of background noise must be low enough for 
the music to be audible. The DM should assume 
that the music is the same volume as an average 
human’s normal speaking voice. If the potential 
subject could not hear speech at the appropriate 
range under prevailing conditions, the spell cannot 
affect that subject. The spell would be virtually 


428 


Mystic Transfer 


N 


useless in the midst of a full-scale battle or during 
a hurricane. 

The material component comprises a set of 
three small bows made from fine silver, each cost- 
ing 100 gp. The lengths of the bows must be in the 
ratio of 1 to 4 to 9. The priest strokes these bows 
together in an intricate sequence while casting the 
spell. The bows are not consumed in the casting. 

Notes: Common for priests with major access 
to the sphere of Numbers (ToM). 


Mystic Lash 
(Evocation) 
Sphere: Combat 


Level: 5 

Range: 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 8 
Duration: 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: Special 


Casting this spell creates a long whip of 
ghostly, glowing red force that emanates from the 
priest's hand. With this lash the caster can attack 
once per round at a +3 bonus to his or her attack 
roll. When the lash strikes a being, the caster can 
release it to attack that being repeatedly, fighting 
on its own until the spell expires, using the priest's 
THACO, The caster can then engage in spellcast- 
ing or other activities. If the target creature dies, 
falls unconscious, or becomes immobilized, the 
following round the lash returns to the casting 
priest's hand. If the casting priest does not grasp it 
that round, the spell ends; otherwise, the priest can 
again attempt to hit a new creature and release the 
mystic lash to once more attack on its own. 

A mystic lash inflicts 2d8 points of electrical 
damage per strike. Target creatures hit by the lash 
are allowed a saving throw vs. spell to take half 
damage (round up). The strike of the lash also has 
a magical effect. If the lash is directly wielded by 
its caster, that priest mentally chooses the effect 
from those listed below. If the lash is fighting by 
itself, the effect is chosen at random by rolling 146 
and consulting the table. 

A mystic lash is destroyed instantly by a suc- 
cessful dispel magic, but cannot be affected or 
guarded against as though it were a purely electri- 
cal attack. 

Its material components are the priest's holy 
symbol and a piece of amber. 

Notes: Granted by the evil god Bane of the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Mystic LASH TABLE 
1d6 
Roll Effect 


1 Stunned (reeling and unable to act) for the 
rest of the current round and entire next 
round, 

2 Forgets one spell or command word from 
memory. If none, treat as a roll of “1." 

3 Wracking Pain inflicts 1d4 points addi- 
tional damage; drop all held items. 

4 Paralyzed for 2 rounds, then save vs. para- 
lyzation at the start of each round to 
recover. 

5 Electrical Arc inflicts 2d4 points additional 
damage and one metal item is vaporized. 
Magical items save vs. lightning with a +2 
bonus to survive. Artifacts and relics are 
unaffected. 

6 Entwined by helix of electrical energy and 
propelled 1d4X 10 yards for 2d6 impact 
damage (if in midair, take falling damage 
instead); no electrical damage. 


Mystic Transfer 
(Invocation) 
Sphere: All 


Level: 2 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: 9 rds. 

Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


Mystic transfer allows a priest to receive spells 
from another priest of the same ethos. This spell is 
a cooperative spell that requires one priest to cast 
and another priest to use its effect. On one round, 
a priest casts the mystic transfer. The spell is then 
active for the remaining nine rounds of the turn. 

‘The priest can cast a second spell and transfer 
it to a second priest of the same religion within 
that spell's maximum range. This spell is 
neled through the mystic transfer into the receiving 
priest. This priest must immediately cast the spell 
or pass it to another priest via his or her own 
mystic transfer. Any number of transfers can be 
made in the same round, provided each new recip- 
ient is within spell range of the previous recipient. 
If the spell is not transferred, it takes effect. 

For example, a 3rd-level priest casts a mystic 
transfer. On the following round, a 10th-level 
priest passes a flame strike to the 3rd-level priest. 


429 


~ Mystra, Greater Mantle of r 


The two priests could be 60 yards apart (the max- 
imum range of the flame strike). The 3rd-level 
priest could then use the flame strike to attack any 
creature within 60 yards, or could pass the spell on 
to another priest who has an active mystic transfer. 

The spell passed by the mystic transfer has the 
range, area of effect, damage, and other effects 
equal to the level of the original caster. In the 
example above, the flame strike would function as 
if cast by a 10th-level priest. 

The mystic transfer does not require concentra- 
tion. However, on any round in which a priest is 
receiving, transferring, or releasing a spell, the 
priest cannot take any other significant action. 

A priest can receive spells only from priests 
who worship the same deity and who specifically 
transfer spells to him or her. Area effect spells can 
be passed. A priest cannot use mystic transfer to 
pluck an opponent's spells out of the air. 

Notes: Uncommon for clerics, common for 
specialty priests (ToM). 


Mystra, Greater Mantle of 
See greater mantle of Mystra. 


Mystra, Mantle of 
See mantle of Mystra. 


Mystra, Might of 
See might of Mystra. 


430 


Nature's Eyes — Gnome 


Nap during the spell’s duration, the ranger is 
(Alteration) allowed a second chance to find the trail. 
Sphere: Time ‘The material component is a handful of 

dirt, smeared on the spelicaster’s palms. 

Level: 2 Notes: Granted by the demipower Gwaeron 
Range: Touch Windstrom, Master of Tracking, of the FORGOTTEN 
Components: V, S, M REALMS setting. 
Casting Time: 2 
Duration: Special Nature’s Charm 
Area of Effect: 1 creature touched/level (Enchantment/Charm) 
Saving Throw: None Sphere: Elemental Earth 


Creatures affected by this spell are put to sleep Level: 5 
for one hour, Upon awakening, the creature is as Range: Touch 
refreshed as if it had slept for eight hours. The Components: V, S, M 
affected creature recovers lost hit points as if rest- Casting Time: | rd. 
ing for a full night. Spells can be memorized as if Duration: 2 hrs./level 
real time had passed; however, the actual study Area of Effect: 15-ft. radius/level 


time required to memorize spells is not reduced. Saving Throw: Neg. 
Because the rest is so complete and rejuvenat- 
ing, an affected creature does not feel fatigued Nature's charm causes a particular place to exert 


after waking. Attempts to use nap more than once a special fascination beyond mere beauty to anyone 

in an 18-hour period are ineffective (the creature entering the area except the spelicaster. Creatures 

simply is not sleepy). Only willing creatures can native to the area of effect are not affected. 

be affected by nap. This spell must target a site of notable natural 
The material components are a scrap of pillow splendor that possesses both edible plants and 

ticking, a feather, and a pebble kept in the caster's fresh water. The spot cannot be larger than the 


pocket for seven nights. spell’s area of effect. For instance, a 12th-level 

Notes: Common for priests with access to the druid could cast this spell on a forest glade up to 

sphere of Time (ToM). 360 feet across, with flowers and fruit-bearing 
trees centered around a waterfall. 

Natural Attunement Anyone coming upon the enchanted region 
(Enchantment/Charm) must save vs. spell; those who fail invariably make 
Sphere: Animal, Plant up excuses to remain there long after they should 

have left. They say they want only to bathe, rest, 
Level: 2 admire the beauty a bit longer, eat the berries or 
Range: Touch fruit, paint a picture of the area, or defend the spot 
‘Components: V, S, M jealously from others. 
Casting Time: 5 Whatever the reason, those who fall subject to 
Duration: 1 rd./level the enchantment forcefully resist all attempts to 
Area of Effect: Living creature touched make them leave until the spell’s duration ends. 
Saving Throw: None The spell’s material component is the druid’s 
holy symbol. 
This spell enables the recipient to become fully Notes: Uncommon spell for druids. 
attuned to the surroundings, to notice every detail 
of the environment, and to parse which facts are Nature’s Eyes — Gnome 


important and why. This spell provides the recipi- (Divination) 
ent with a +2 bonus to surprise rolls, a +1 bonus to Sphere: Animal, Divination 
initiative, and a +1 bonus to saving throws for its 

duration. A recipient without Tracking proficiency Level: 3 

receives it for the spell’s duration. Nonrangers pro- Range: 0 

ficient in tracking can track as a ranger for the dura- Components: V, S, M 

tion of the spell (that is, without the -6 penalty). A Casting Time: 1 rd. 

ranger receives a +3 bonus when following a Duration: 1 hr. + 1 hr./3 levels 
common trail, and can even track flying or noncor- Area of Effect: 30-ft. radius/level 
poreal creatures at a -6 penalty. If a trail is lost Saving Throw: None 


431 


~ Nectar aS 


This spell attunes the priest to the natural 
world and links the caster, at will, to the senses 
of the creatures of animal Intelligence or less in 
the area of effect. If too few creatures live in the 
area (such as true deserts, underground com- 
plexes, and areas haunted by the undead), then 
this spell confers no real benefit. If, however, the 
surrounding region teems with animal life, the 
caster is instantly aware of intruders in the area 
of effect and their approximate positions, pro- 
vided that living creatures can detect them. 
Although the priest cannot be surprised while 
employing nature's eyes, no information other 
than the presence and approximate position of 
intruders can be determined by this spell. The 
spell lasts 1 hour, plus 1 hour per three levels of 
the caster (rounded down). 

The material components of this spell are the 
priest's holy symbol and a pair of acorns held in 
the caster’s fists. 

Notes: Granted by the gnome god Gaerdal 
Ironhand. 


Nectar 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 
Sphere: Plant 
Level: 1 
Range: Touch 


Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 1 

Duration: | rd. 

Area of Effect: Flower or blossom touched 
Saving Throw: None 


A druid who casts a nectar spell on a flower 
is able to grasp it in his hand and “milk” it. Up 
to one quart of nectar can be produced from a 
single flower. The plant upon which the flower 
grows must be living. The nectar is mildly alco- 
holic, and has the flavor and fragrance of the 
plant from which it is produced. 

The nectar itself is of the same quality as a 
fine wine. A receptacle held beneath the flower 
can be filled with the nectar. Otherwise, the 
caster can simply hold the flower over his or 
another's mouth. Creatures that prize fine drink 
will appreciate this druid spell. 

Notes: Very rare druid spell. (Updated from 
DRAGON Magazine.) 


Needlestorm 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Plant 


Level: 4 
Range: 60 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 7 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: | tree or plant 
Saving Throw: /4 


A favorite of cold-forest and desert druids, 
needlestorm causes the spines on any pine tree or 
similar needle-bearing plant to spray out in a 
deadly barrage. The shower of needles has a radius 
of approximately 1 foot for every 2 feet of the sub- 
ject plant's height. 

Everyone within this area suffers one attack, as 
if by the druid, which inflicts 1d12 points of 
damage for every three full levels the caster has 
achieved. Thus, a spruce tree enchanted by a 7th- 
level druid attacks with a THACO of 16 and inflicts 
2d12 points of damage. The maximum damage 
potential is 5d12 at 15th level. 

The material component is a spine from a 
needle-bearing tree or plant. 

Notes: Uncommon druid spell. 


Negative Plane Protection 
(Abjuration) 
Sphere: Necromantic, Protection 


Level: 3 
Range: Touch 

Components: V, $ 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell affords the caster or touched creature 
partial protection from undead monsters with Neg- 
ative Material Plane connections (such as shad- 
ows, wights, wraiths, spectres, or vampires) and 
certain weapons and spells that drain energy 
levels. The negative plane protection spell opens a 
channel to the Positive Material Plane, possibly 
offsetting the effect of the negative energy attack. 
A protected creature struck by a negative energy 
attack is allowed a saving throw vs. death magic. 
If successful, the energies cancel with a bright 
flash of light and a thunderclap. The protected 
creature suffers only normal (hit point) damage 
from the attack and does not suffer any drain of 
experience or Strength, regardless of the number 


432 


Nurture — Old Empire 


N 


of levels the attack would have drained. An attack- 
ing undead creature suffers 2d6 points of damage 
from the positive energy; a draining wizard or 
weapon receives no damage. 

This protection is proof against only one such 
attack, dissipating immediately whether or not the 
saving throw is successful. If the saving throw is 
failed, the spell recipient suffers double the usual 
physical damage, in addition to the loss of experi- 
ence or Strength that normally occurs. The protec- 
tion lasts for one turn per level of the priest casting 
the spell, or until the protected creature is struck 
by a negative energy attack. This spell cannot be 
cast on the Negative Material Plane. 

Notes: Common for clerics (PHB). 


Nephthys, Contract of 
See contract of Nephthys. 


Neutralize Poison 
(Necromancy) 
Reversible 
Sphere: Healing 


Level: 4 
Range: Touch 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 7 

Duration: Permanent 

Area of Effect; Creature touched or 1 cu. ft./2 
levels 

Saving Throw: None 


By means of a neutralize poison spell, the 
priest detoxifies any sort of venom in the creature 
or substance touched. Note that an opponent, such 
as a poisonous reptile or snake (or even an enven- 
omed weapon of an opponent) unwilling to be so 
touched requires the priest to roll a successful 
attack in combat. This spell can prevent death in a 
poisoned creature if cast before death occurs. The 
effects of the spell are permanent only with respect 
to poison existing in the touched creature at the 
time of the touch; thus creatures (and objects) that 
generate new poison are not permanently detoxi- 
fied. 

The reversed spell, poison, likewise requires an 
attack roll that succeeds, and the subject is allowed 
a saving throw vs. poison. If the latter is unsuc- 
cessful, the subject is incapacitated and dies in one 
turn unless the poison is magically neutralized or 
slowed, 

Notes: Common for clerics and druids (PHB). 


Nightmare 
Reversed form, dream vision. 


Nobanion, Pride of 
See pride of Nobanion. 


Nurture — Old Empire 
(Enchantment/Charm, Illusion) 
Sphere: Animal 


Level: 2 
Range: Touch 

Components: V, $, M 

Casting Time: 1 tum 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: Infant creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell enables the priestess to assume the 
role of a surrogate mother for an infant mammal, 
avian, or reptile of animal Intelligence or greater. 
For the rest of its life the subject of this spell looks 
upon the priestess as its mother, and the priestess 
looks upon the creature as her child. The depth and 
intensity of this relationship vary as is appropriate 
for the species of the infant. After the casting of 
this spell, any water mixed with milk fed to the 
infant creature by the hand of the priestess serves 
as the appropriate form of nourishment for the 
infant or child, even if the creature does not nor- 
mally drink milk. (For example, the mixture of 
water and milk has the effect of regurgitated meat 
for a fledgling falcon.) This effect ends once the 
creature achieves full growth for its species, 
whereupon its diet and the composition of its food 
must be as is normal for the adults (or adolescents) 
of its species. 

This spell has numerous indirect effects as well. 
The creature always views the priestess as if under 
the effect of an animal friendship spell. Any 
attempt to train the creature is very likely to suc- 
ceed, as adjudicated by the DM. If the creature is of 
low Intelligence or greater, the priestess can poten- 
tially make a significant impact on the creature's 
alignment. For example, an orc or a dire wolf raised 
by a priestess of Hathor might very well be consid- 
ered neutral good upon reaching adulthood. 

Hathor does not grant this spell to a priestess 
who already has enough parental responsibilities. 
If a priestess abuses the parental relationship in 
any fashion, the creature's bond is transferred to 
the nearest available priestess of the faith, and the 
original spellcaster is stripped of all her powers 
until she suitably atones for her betrayal. Regard- 
less, Hathor never grants this spell to such a priest- 
ess again. 

The material component is a baby's rattle. 

Notes: Granted by the Mulhorandi goddess 
Hathor of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


433 


a Nymph’s Beauty — Elf 


Nymph’s Beauty — Elf 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
Sphere: Charm 


Level: 7 

Range: Special 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: 2 turns 

Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell grants the caster the beauty of a 
nymph and its attendant dangers. Both male and 
female casters can employ this spell, each able to 
affect both males and females. 

Observers gazing upon the caster while this 
spell is in effect must make a successful saving 
throw vs. spell or be permanently blinded. (This 
blindness can cured by a heal spell, limited wish, 
or wish, but not by the cure blindness or deafness 
spell.) If the caster is already nude or disrobes 
during the casting, he or she can chose between 
two alternative effects: unconsciousness (446 
rounds) or death. The effect desired is chosen 
when the spell is cast, and an observer must make 
a successful saving throw vs. spell or succumb, 
This spell is effective in any lighting conditions, 
save near or total darkness. 

The material components are the priest’s holy 
symbol and the tear of a nymph that is placed on 
the tongue during the casting and vanishes upon 
completion. 

Notes: Granted by the elven goddess Hanali 
Celanil. 


See Ne ASRS ee ae Ce Aa eee 


Oakheart 
(Alteration, Necromancy) 
Sphere: Plant 


Level: 4 
Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 7 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 being and one oak tree 
Saving Throw: None 


Casting this spell creates a link between the 
caster or a touched being and an oak tree. The oak 
tree can be any distance from the spell recipient 
when the spell is cast and during its duration, so 
long as the spell recipient remains in Faerûn. 

At any time after this spell is cast, crushing the 
material component causes the spell to activate. For 
the next three rounds, any damage done to the spell 
recipient does not harm him or her, but instead affects 
the distant oak tree. The tree mystically becomes the 
target of all spells and the subject struck by all attacks. 
If the tree is dead before the spell is cast, the spell does 
not work, and the caster knows this, although the spell 
is lost. If the tree dies of the damage done to it during 
the oakheart spell, the linked being suffers a perma- 
nent loss of 3 hit points. The recipient of an oakheart 
spell does not regain hit points through rest until the 
tree is entirely healed because while it is injured, it 
receives the linked spell recipient's naturally healed 
hit points. The spell recipient can be magically healed 
during this time, though. A being can be linked 
through oakheart to only one oak tree at a time and 
can only have one oakheart in affect at a time. 

The material component is an oak leaf. The 
recipient is linked to the tree from which the leaf 
came. Note that a fireward spell cast on the leaf at 
any time before it is crushed renders the distant oak 
immune to fire damage until the leaf is crushed. 

Notes: Granted by the god Silvanus, the Forest 
Father, of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. Granted 
by the elven god Rillifane Rallathial. 


Oars to Snakes 
(Alteration) 
Reversible 
Sphere: Plant 


Level: 4 

Range: 50 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 9 

Duration: 3 rds level 

Area of Effect: 1 oar/3 levels 
Saving Throw: None 


This more powerful variant of the sticks 
to snakes spell transforms the oars aboard a 
ship into giant sea snakes. It can be cast in 
lone of two modes: defensive or offensive. 

Using the defensive mode, the caster essen- 
tially transforms the oars of his or her own vessel 
into sea serpent defenders. These serpents remain 
within the oarlocks of the vessel that bore them, 
but can attack beings outside of the ship who are 
nearby, such as boarders. Each serpent can attack 
one boarder once a round with a THACO 11, 
inflicting 3d6 points of damage for each success- 
ful strike. The serpents remain until the spell 
expires or they are slain; they are 10 HD creatures 
of AC 5. 

This spell can also be cast offensively. In this 
mode, the oars become serpents of similar Hit 
Dice and THACO to those above, but rather than 
attacking outside the ship, their poisonous heads 
are aimed within a ship within range (including the 
caster’s ship), attacking the oarsmen and destroy- 
ing the ship's ability to maneuver. The poisonous 
bite of these serpents does 1d6 points of damage, 
but anyone bitten must make a successful saving 
throw vs, poison against type C poison. Those who 
successfully save suffer only 2d4 points of addi- 
tional damage; those who fail their saving throws 
suffer an additional 25 points of damage. The 
poison has an onset time of 1d4+1 minutes. Crea- 
tures struck repeatedly must make a saving throw 
every time they are bitten. 

While the spell continues, the ship does not 
have the use of those oars turned into serpents, and 
thus its speed can be reduced, The serpents turn 
back into usable oars when the spell expires, 
although those which were slain are broken and 
useless. 

The reverse of this spell, snakes to oars, 
changes giant sea snakes to oars for the same 
duration or negates the oars to snakes spell 
according the level of the priest countering the 
spell (for example, a 12th-level priest casting 
snakes to oars can turn four sea serpents back 
into oars), 

The material components of this spell are a 
small piece of wood and the scales from a sea 
snake, 

Notes: Granted by the evil sea goddess Umber- 
lee of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


ate) 


435 


Oath 


Oath 
(Abjuration) 
Reversible 
Sphere: All 


Level: 3 

Range: 10 ft. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: Permanent 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


o 


By means of the oath spell, the shukenja can 
attempt to force some deed or behavior upon an 
unwilling creature in return for some consideration 
from the shukenja (typically sparing its life). The 
creature must be able to understand the speech of 
the shukenja for the spell to have effect. The oath 
must be limited to actions that can be accom- 
plished by the natural abilities of the creature and 
cannot directly cause harm to the creature or 
another. Thus, a shukenja could demand that a 
highwayman swear never to rob again, that an evil 
monster return to those deserted lands from which 
it came, or that a lord never overtax his peasants 
again. He could not demand that a monster commit 
suicide or force a samurai to attack an encamp- 
ment of dangerous monsters. The DM must decide 
if any given oath is beyond the restrictions given. 
The subject is allowed a saving throw vs. spell to 
avoid the effects of the spell. However, if the sub- 
ject has been subdued in combat, the saving throw 
is made with a~2 penalty. 

Once the spell is in effect, both sides have free 
will to abide by the conditions of the oath. If the 
shukenja (or any accompanying him) break the 
oath, the subject creature is instantly freed of it. 
(Whoever broke the oath suffers a loss of honor, 
too.) However, a subject who attempts to break the 
conditions of the oath is struck by wracking pains, 
causing the loss of 1 hit point per round until the 
creature relents or dies. An oath can be removed 
by the reverse of this spell, unbend, or by use of an 
atonement. A dispel magic spell cannot remove its 
effects, 

The material component for both forms is the 
shukenja’s holy symbol. 

Notes: Common for oriental priests; otherwise, 
very rare. 


Oathbinding 
See seal of Cyrrollalle. 


Obscure Alignment — Shukenja 
Reversed form, know alignment. 


Obscure Animal Follower 


Reversed form, locate animal follower. 


Obscure Object 
Reversed form, locate object. 


Obscurement 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Weather 


Level: 2 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: 4 rds./level 

Area of Effect; Cloud, 10 ft/level square, 10 ft. 
high 

Saving Throw: None 


This spell causes a misty vapor to arise around 
the caster, It persists in this locale for four rounds 
per caster level and reduces the visibility ranges of 
all types of vision (including infravision) to 2d4 
feet. The ground area affected by the spell is a 
square progression based on the caster’s level: a 
10 X 10-foot area at Ist level, a 20 x 20-foot area at 
2nd level, a 30 X 30-foot area at 3rd level, and so 
on. The height of the vapor is restricted to 10 feet, 
although the cloud will otherwise expand to fill 
confined spaces. A strong wind (such as the 3rd- 
level wizard spell, gust of wind, can cut the dura- 
tion of an obscurement spell by 75%. This spell 
does not function under water. 

Notes: Common for druids (PHB). 


Odo, Mace of 
See mace of Odo. 


Oil Spray 
(Evocation/Conjuration) 
Sphere: Elemental Earth 


Level: 3 

Range: 10 yds. 
Components: V, S 

Casting Time: | rd. 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 15-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: None 


ite. 


When a cleric casts this spell over rough earth 
or sand, fountains of flammable oil spout up from 
the ground, covering everything within a 15-foot 
radius 

The oil itself isn’t particularly dangerous, 
though it will cause the subject's attacks and saves 


436 


Omen 


to suffer by ~2. The real danger occurs if the sub- 
ject is ignited. Burning oil causes 2d6 points of 
damage in the first round, and 1d6 in the second. 
The subject should also check his equipment each 
round to make sure that it doesn’t ignite. The oil 
burns off by the third round, and attack and saving 
throw penalties are ignored. 

If the oil isn’t ignited, it will remain until 
removed by no less than 3 turns of scrubbing or 
washing. 

Notes: Uncommon for priests from the Dark 
Sun setting; otherwise, very rare. 


Om — Vedic 
(Abjuration) 
Sphere: All 


Level: 1 

Range: 0 

Components: V 

Casting Time: 1 
Duration: Concentration 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


This simple chant creates a deep clarity in the 
caster’s mind. All outside sounds and sights are 
blocked out allowing the priest to regain spells or 
hit points at a 50% faster rate; however, the priest 
cannot focus on anything outside himself. Any- 
thing that disrupts concentration such as an attack 
on the priest or a conscious action by him breaks 
the spell. Spells cast on the priest are affected by 
the om spell. The priest is immune to sleep and 
charm effects while chanting and receives a +4 on 
all saving throws that allow Wisdom bonuses; 
however the priest forfeits saving throw bonuses 
for Dexterity or anything else requiring conscious 
thought. Magical healing is not affected by the 
spell’s increased healing rate. 

Notes: Common for priests from a vedic 
(Indian) culture; otherwise very rare. (Updated 
from DraGon Magazine.) 


Omen 
(Divination) 
Sphere: Divination 


Level: 1 

Range: 0 
Components: V 
Casting Time: | turn 
Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell is used to forecast the general for- 
tunes of some major undertaking and determine 
auspicious and inauspicious events. When the 
spell is cast, the shukenja calls upon a deity to 
grant him some sign regarding the proposed 
action. Although the physical aspect of casting 
takes very little time, the shukenja must remain in 
one place and observe the natural events around 
him for the entire casting time. At the end of this 
time, he sees some omen—a flight of birds, the 
appearance of an animal, the fall of a leaf, and so 
on, that indicates the general fortunes of the under- 
taking planned. 

This spell is commonly used before starting a 
journey, engaging in a major battle, or attempting 
some notable feat. The outcome of the spell is 
determined by two factors. First, the DM should 
consider the proposed action against information 
that only he knows. For example, the characters 
are about to leave a village to punish a group of 
bandits. The omen spell is cast to determine if this 
is an auspicious time to go. The DM knows that 
the village will be snacked by bandits that night, so 
the result would be an ill omen (since the charac- 
ters would not encounter the bandits in the sur- 
rounding mountains). In situations where the DM 
has no information on which to base his judgment, 
1d10 should be rolled and the Divination Results 
table consulted. 

However, omens are infrequent events, and 
interpreting them is difficult. Due to the strain this 
spell places on the caster, it can only be used once 
per week, 

Notes: Common for oriental priests; otherwise, 
very rare. 


437 


~ Omen — Old Empire r 


DIVINATION RESULTS 


Result 

Ill omen — The characters should not 
undertake the task this day. If this 
advice is ignored, all the characters will 
suffer a —1 on attack and saving throw 
rolls for the rest of the day. Their chance 
for encounters will be doubled and a 
—10% reaction modifier is applied to all 
encounters. 

Great danger exists — The chance for 
encounters is doubled for the day and a 
-10% reaction modifier applies to all 
encounters. Adversaries have a +1 applied 
to their chance to hit. 

Neutral omen — No special modifiers 
apply. 

Favorable omen — The characters are 
able to travel half again their normal 
traveling rate that day. Opponents have a 
—1 on their chances to hit the characters 
that day. 

Auspicious omen — All the effects of a 
favorable omen apply. In addition, the 
characters have a +1 to all saving throws 
made that day. 


57 


Omen — Old Empire 
(Divination) 
Sphere: All 


Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


Priests casting this spell are asking for the 
approval of their deities regarding an action. For 
instance, a good individual may want to know if 
bribing a government official into adjudicating a 
land dispute to avoid violence meets with the 
deity’s approval. The deity disapproves of bribery, 
so the answer is “no.” 

The caster has a chance equal to 60% +2% per 
level of getting an answer. This response is always 
an obvious “yes” or “no,” though it is likely to be 
expressed in a symbolic way through a known sign 
of a power’s approval or disapproval—seven 
swans flying overhead may mean “yes,” while a 
clap of thunder in an otherwise clear sky could 
mean “no.” If the request for an answer is not suc- 
cessful, no sign is obtained. (However, inexperi- 


enced or over anxious casters may well misinter- 
pret unrelated events as divine answers.) 
The material component is a gem of at least 
100 gp value, sacrificed to the deity in the casting. 
Notes: Granted by the Mulhorandi deities of 
the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Omen I 
(Divination) 
Sphere: Divination 


Level: 2 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S 
Casting Time: | turn 
Duration: 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell enhances divinations that have per- 
centage-based success chances. Such a divination 
enhanced by this spell has a +10% bonus to its 
chance of success. The chance of a successful div- 
ination cannot be raised above 95%. 

Notes: Restricted to oracles and possibly 
savant-clerics, very rare. (Updated from DRAGON 
Magazine.) 


Omen IL 
(Divination) 
Sphere: Divination 


Level: 4 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 1 turn 
Duration: 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


An improved form of omen i, this spell 
enhances divinations that have percentage-based 
success chances. Such a divination enhanced by 
this spell has a +20% bonus to its chance of suc- 
cess. The chance of a successful divination cannot 
be raised above 95%. 

Notes: Restricted to oracles and possibly 
savant-clerics, very rare. (Updated from DRAGON 
Magazine.) 


438 


Orison 


N 


Omen IIT 
(Divination) 
Sphere: Divination 


Level: 6 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 1 tum 
Duration: | rd./level 

Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


An improved form of omen II, this spell 
enhances divinations that have percentage-based 
success chances. Such a divination enhanced by 
this spell has a +30% bonus to its chance of suc- 
cess. The chance of a successful divination cannot 
be raised above 95%. 

Notes: Restricted to oracles and possibly 
savant-clerics, very rare. (Updated from DRAGON 
Magazine.) 


Omniscient Eye 
(Divination) 
Sphere: Divination 


Lev 
Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 7 

Duration: 1 tum + 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


This divination enhances the caster’s vision by 
allowing sight through any normal or magical 
darkness, fog, or mist to a range of 60 feet. In addi- 
tion, the caster has a chance of piercing magical 
illusions, blending, and invisibility equal to 70% 
plus 1% per level of experience, less 2% per spell 
level. For example, a 7th-level priest has a 70% + 
7% — 4%, or 73% chance, to spot a wizard con- 
cealed by the 2nd-level spell invisibility. 

The omniscient eye does not grant the caster the 
ability to perceive secret doors, traps, lost or mis- 
placed objects, or creature alignments; it simply 
ensures that the caster can see the surroundings as 
they would appear without the interference of 
weather, lighting, or illusionary magic. Thus, the 
omniscient eye can be deceived by careful camou- 
flage, concealment, or other purely physical precau- 
tions. Other phenomena that may bypass this spell's 
power include psionic invisibility, true transparency, 
or extradimensional objects or creatures, 

The material component is a special ointment 
for the eyes that is composed of rare powders and 


herbs. The ointment costs at least 100 gold pieces 
for a single application. 
Notes: Uncommon spell for clerics (PO:SM). 
Orison 
(All Schools) 
Sphere: All 


Level: 1 

Range: 10 yds. 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 4 
Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: Varies 
Saving Throw: None 


‘The most humble of priestly spells is the orison, 
a brief prayer or invocation of a minor nature. Typ- 
ically, priests learn a number of orisons as acolytes 
or students in order to hone their spellcasting skills 
and emphasize concepts, ideals, or phrases of par- 
ticular importance to the faith. Because an orison is 
not even on par with other Ist-level magic, a priest 
memorizes a number of individual orisons equal to 
three, plus one more per level (up to a maximum of 
nine) by devoting a Ist-level spell slot to orison. In 
other words, a Ist-level priest can memorize four 
orisons for one \st-level spell slot, a 2nd-level 
priest can memorize five, and so on. 

Unlike cantrip, an orison must have a specific 
effect, although the priest need not decide which 
incantation to use until the spell is cast. Regardless 
of the prayer chosen, the orison's duration is never 
more than one round per level. Known orisons 
include the following: 

Alleviate: A single creature suffering from 
nausea or pain is relieved of its discomfort. 
Magically induced nausea or pain is alleviated 
only if the subject passes a saving throw vs. 
spell with a ~2 penalty. 
Calm: This soothes a single creature that has 
been startled or frightened. Subjects suffering 
from magical fear can attempt a save vs. spell 
with a -2 penalty to calm themselves. 
Clarity: For the duration of the orison, the 
priest’s speech is clear and free of impedi- 
ment—useful for readings from sacred texts 
and other such rites, Magical conditions such 
as confuse languages cannot be overcome by 
this orison. 
© Courage: The priest gains a +1 bonus to his or 
her next attack roll, as long as the attack is 
made within the spell's duration. 
e Guidance: The priest gains a +1 bonus to a 
Wisdom or Intelligence check to determine the 


439 


~ Othertime r 


right course of action in a moral dilemma or 


puzzle. 

æ Healing: By a touch, the priest can heal 1 point 
of damage. 

© Magic Sense: If there is a persistent spell effect 


or magical item within 10 yards, the priest feels 
a recognizable tingle or sensation of some 
kind. What item or spell may have caused the 
reaction is not revaled. 

e Memory: Any item the priest commits to 
memory for the orison's duration is more com- 
pletely and permanently learned; the priest has 
a +2 bonus to any checks to recall the exact 
appearance, wording, or meaning of an item, 
text, or message. 

e Resistance to Magic: The caster gains a +1 
bonus to his or her next saving throw against 
magic of any type, as long as it occurs during 
the orison's duration. 

© Resistance to Poison: The priest gains a +1 
bonus to his or her next saving throw vs. 
poison, as long as it occurs during the orison's 
duration. 


Other orisons of similar power or scope may be 
permitted by the DM. Generally, an orison should 
not affect more than one creature or die roll at a 
time, and an orison that can actually cause imme- 
diate harm to a creature should inflict no more 
than | or 2 points of damage. An offensive orison 
would be quite rare and most probably associated 
with an evil priesthood. 

Notes: Uncommon spell for clerics and druids 
(PO:SM). 


Othertime 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Time 


Level: 5 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 7 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


A priest who enters othertime steps into a dif- 
ferent reality, in which the world around is frozen 
at a moment in the future. Until time catches up, 
the caster can move about unhindered and observe 
his or her surroundings; no force known can detect 
the priest's presence or harm the caster in the alter- 
nate reality, although in tum the priest cannot 
affect any creature or object in the physical world. 
For instance, the caster could read a book at the 


page to which it was opened, but could not turn the 
page. To any companions or enemies in real time, 
the priest appears to simply vanish altogether, only 
to reappear at some later point. 

The duration of this spell is unusual. The priest 
can choose a duration of up to | round at 7th to 9th 
level, 2 rounds at 10th to 12th level, 3 rounds at 
13th to 16th, 4 rounds at 17th to 19th, up to a max- 
imum of 5 rounds at 20th level or higher. The dura- 
tion chosen by the priest governs the length of the 
othertime; for example, a priest who decides the 
spell will last 2 rounds is instantly transported for- 
ward to that point in time, surrounded by the 
frozen still-life of the world as it will appear 2 
rounds after the casting. The caster then has 2 
rounds to take any actions desired, although he or 
she cannot affect the real world by any physical, 
magical, or mental means. 

A caster in othertime is completely unaware of 
the intervening events. In the example above, if the 
caster’s friends were teleported away one round 
after the caster left and replaced by an identical 
group of dopplegangers, the caster has no chance 
to detect the switch; all the priest sees are his or 
her friends, frozen in the positions they will 
occupy when the caster emerges from the other- 
time. Also, effects like dragon breath, cloudkills, 
or psionic mind blasts that pass through any spot 
the caster happens to be have no effect on him or 
her—the caster simply does not exist in the real 
world while he or she waits for everyone else to 
catch up. 

As noted above, the caster gains an amount of 
subjective time equal to the duration of the spell. 
By leaping 3 rounds into the future, the caster 
gains 3 rounds of actions in the othertime. The 
priest could drink a potion, cast a spell, and then 
maneuver for an attack, for example, or gain a 3- 
round head start by running while no one else can 
pursue him. A priest who uses this time to study a 
battle and take position to attack gains a —4 initia- 
tive bonus when emerging from othertime, and a 
+4 attack bonus with the first strike as well. 

Leaping in and out of the time stream is dan- 
gerous. Each time the priest uses this spell, the 
caster is 1% likely to become stuck in othertime, 
doomed by thirst or starvation when his or her 
rations run out. Only the most extraordinary meas- 
ures (a wish spell, divine intervention, and so on) 
can save an individual in this predicament. Once in 
othertime, the priest cannot pray for further spells. 

The material component is an hourglass filled 
with rare salts, worth at least 100 gp. 

Notes: Common for priests with major access 
to the sphere of Time. 


a ne AO ae ge en a — hee 


Oxen Strength 


Ne 


Otherworld 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Astral 


Level: 6 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 turn 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: Being touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell places the druid or another individ- 
ual in a special dual existence with respect to the 
Positive and Negative Material Planes. The 
affected being temporarily exists in the same 
body in these planes at once, and its perception is 
extended to both. 

This allows the affected being to effectively 
combat creatures with a similar dual existence. 
Creatures with a dual existence on the Negative 
Material Plane (many undead) are the most 
common, and the affected being can see them 
clearly, converse with them if desired, and engage 
in combat with them on equal terms. A being in 
otherworld state is not affected by the energy 
draining and other special abilities of undead from 
the Negative Material Plane, but still takes physi- 
cal damage from them when struck. Likewise, the 
affected being need not have magical weapons to 
hit these creatures. Those killed in the otherworld 
state have a 75% chance of being trapped in the 
Inner Planes and unable to pass to the Outer Planes 
(and thus cannot be raised, resurrected or reincar- 


nated, but can be wished back). They often reap- 
pear as undead spirits of various sorts. 

The otherworld spell can be cast only in the 
dark. Sunlight breaks the spell immediately and 
forces the affected individual back into unitary 
existence on the Prime Material Plane. 

Notes: Very rare cleric spell. (Updated from 
Dracon Magazine.) 


Oxen Strength 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Animal 


Level: 3 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 6 

Duration: 1 hr. + 1 turn/level 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell temporarily increases the druid’s 
Strength ability score by +1 per level the druid 
possesses (to a maximum of 18/00). Every 10% 
increment on the Exceptional Strength chart is 
considered a point of Strength. The druid gains an 
innate toughness that prevents muscle strain or 
physical injury from exertion and also an unar- 
mored Armor Class of 8, the equivalent of tough- 
ened leather. 

The material component is a bit of hair from a 
strong herbivore, such as an ox or buffalo. 

Notes: Very rare druid spell. (Updated from 
DraGoN Magazine.) 


laa aS” a 


Pacify 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Charm 


Level: 4 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: 60-ft. radius, 1 creature/level 
Saving Throw: None 


When this spell is cast, the shukenja utters a 
few relevant sutras, producing a still calm over the 
area of effect. All within this area are pacified, 
unable to attack or harm others. Spells and 
weapons that would destroy or potentially harm 
others cannot be used. Those affected cannot phys- 
ically impede the movement of other creatures, 
although they can barricade exits or position their 
bodies to obstruct movement. If the area of effect 
contains more creatures than the shukenja can 
affect, those with the least Hit Dice are affected 
first. If an affected creature is attacked by someone 
unaffected by the spell, the effect is instantly can- 
celed for that creature. This results in no loss of 
initiative, since the affected creature can clearly 
see any hostile intentions of the others. 

Notes: Common for oriental priests; otherwise, 
very rare. 


Page Guardian 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 
Sphere: Guardian 


Level: 5 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: 1 day/level 

Area of Effect: 1 book, scroll, or item bearing 
words 

Saving Throw: None 


‘The page guardian is a rare and potent spell. It 
protects an entire library when cast on a single 
volume. Whenever a creature other than the caster 
approaches within 100 feet of the ensorcelled doc- 
ument, a guardian is conjured forth from the script 
to attack the intruders. The spell can lay dormant 
for years until being triggered, after which the 
page guardian lasts for a number of days equal to 
the caster’s level. 

The guardian is normally a nondescript 
humanoid figure whose lower limbs fade off to 
wispy trails. However, if this spell is cast upon a 


page that features illustration, the 
guardian’s appearance mimics that of 
the most prominent drawing. 

A page guardian adopts some of the 
dweomer from the writings from which it rises. Thus, 
it may possess special attacks and defenses depending 
upon the exact nature of the document. For example, 
a guardian that rises from a scroll of protection is 
invulnerable to the same force that the scroll would 
ward off. A guardian from a scroll of protection from 
swords suffers no damage from a long sword, no 
matter what its enchantment. A guardian from a spell- 
book can cast up to five random spells, launching each 
spell but once from the tome. The DM decides what 
abilities are received by the guardian should this spell 
be cast upon other magical books, such as those that 
increase ability scores or a manual of the golems. 

A common error among opponents of the 
guardian is that it can be damaged by the destruc- 
tion of the source writing. This is untrue, because 
when the guardian rises, it automatically absorbs 
any enchantment upon the document; it erases 
clean that from which it springs. 

A page guardian attacks until all intruders 
within sight are slain. However, it does not leave 
the chamber in which its source writings are 
located. If no foes are left, the guardian slowly 
fades back into the writings that spawned it. 

Thereafter, the magic fades away after a 
number of days equal to the caster’s level, leaving 
the books unprotected but intact. 

‘The material component is a special ink made 
from rare components that cost 500 gp. A virgin hawk 
feather must be used to draw the single sigil that the 
document bears as proof of this spell’s dweomer. 

Notes: Very rare spell. (Updated from DRAGON 
Magazine.) 


I 


vy 


Page Guardian: AC 0, MY 9; HD 5; THACO 
13; #AT 1; Dmg 1d10; SA Special; SD Special; SZ 
M: Int Average; AL N; ML Fearless (20); XP Spe- 
cial (depending on special abilities and defenses). 


Part Water 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Elemental Water 


Level: 6 

Range: 20 yds,/level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 tum 
Duration: 1 turn/level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


a ep aI I a EN 


Pass Without Notice 


N 


By employing a part water spell, the priest is 
able to cause water or similar liquid to move 
apart, thus forming a trough. The depth and 
length of the trough created by the spell depends 
on the level of the priest. A trough 3 feet deep 
per caster level, by 30 yards wide, by 20 yards 
long per level is created. Thus at 12th level, the 
priest would part water 36 feet deep by 30 yards 
wide by 240 yards long. The trough remains as 
long as the spell lasts or until the priest who cast 
it opts to end its effects. Existing currents appear 
to flow through the parted water, although swim- 
ming creatures and physical objects such as 
boats do not enter the rift without strenuous and 
deliberate effort. If cast underwater, this spell 
creates an air cylinder of appropriate length and 
diameter. If cast directly on a water elemental or 
other water-based creature, the creature takes 
4d8 points of damage and must roll a successful 
saving throw vs. spell or flee in panic for 3d4 
rounds. 

The material component is the priest's holy 
symbol. 

Notes: Common for druids (PHB). 


Pass Plant 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Plant 


Level: 5 

Range: Special 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 8 

Duration: 1 use (1 rd./level maximum) 
Area of Effect: The caster 

Saving Throw: None 


By using this spell, the caster is able to enter a 
tree and move from inside it to inside another tree 
of the same type that lies in approximately the 
direction desired by the caster and is within the 
range shown in the table. 

The tree entered and that receiving the caster 
must be of the same type, living, and of girth at 
least equal to that of the caster. If the caster enters 
an ash, for example, and wishes to pass north as 
far as possible (540 yards), but the only appropri- 
ate ash in range is to the south, the caster will 
pass to the ash in the south. The pass plant spell 
functions so that the movement takes only one 
round. The caster can step forth immediately, or 
remain in the receiving tree for a maximum of 
one round per level of experience. Should no like 
tree be in range, the caster simply remains within 
the tree, does not pass elsewhere, and must step 
forth in the appropriate number of rounds. If the 


occupied tree is chopped down or burned, a caster 
who fails to exit before the process is complete is 
slain. 
The material component is a sprig of mistletoe. 
Notes: Common for druids (PHB). 


Type Range 
of Tree of Effect 
Oak 600 yards 
Ash 540 yards 
Yew 480 yards 
Elm 420 yards 
Linden 360 yards 
deciduous 300 yards 
coniferous 240 yards 
other 180 yards 
Pass Without Notice 

(Enchantment) 

Sphere: Travelers 

Level: 2 

Range: Touch 


Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: Creature or object touched 
Saving Throw: None 


A priest makes use of this spell to avoid con- 
frontations with brigands or other hostile indi- 
viduals while traveling. The spell allows the 
caster to go unnoticed by any human, demihu- 
man, or humanoid in the immediate area (up to 
40 feet). While not rendered invisible, the caster 
can walk past such an individual without being 
perceived. 

For the spell to succeed, the priest must main- 
tain a steady slow pace and cannot make any 
sudden movements. Thus such activities as run- 
ning and engaging in melee are impossible. Also, 
the priest cannot make any sound louder than a 
whisper, so while passing without notice, the priest 
can cast no other spell. 

For every three levels of experience, the priest 
can include an additional person under the effects 
of the spell, but all those to be affected must link 
hands for the duration of the spell. Any who 
release their grip from the others are immediately 
revealed. 

The material component is the priest's holy 
symbol. The spell is also cast with the priest's eyes 
closed. 

Notes: Very rare spell. (Updated from Dracon 
Magazine.) 


a a erm, 


~ Pass Without Trace 


Pass Without Trace 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
Sphere: Plant 


Level: 1 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: | tum/level 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


When this spell is cast, the recipient can move 
through any type of terrain—mud, snow, dust, and 
so on—and leave neither footprints nor scent. The 
area that is passed over radiates magic for 146 
turns after the affected creature passes. Thus, 
tracking a person or other creature covered by this 
spell is impossible by normal means. Of course, 
intelligent tracking techniques, such as using a 
spiral search pattern, can result in the trackers 
picking up the trail at a point where the spell has 
worn off. 

‘The material component is a sprig of pine or 
evergreen, which is burned and the ashes pow- 
dered and scattered when the spell is cast. 

Notes: Common for druids (PHB) 


Pass Without Trace, 10’ Radius 
(Enchantment/Charm) 


Area of Effect: 10-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: None 


Identical in function to pass without trace, pass 
without trace, 10(FM) radius affects everyone 
within 10 feet of the caster at the instant of casting, 
conferring the effects of pass without trace on 
each individual for a duration of 1 turn per level of 
the caster. The recipients can move through any 
type of terrain—mud, snow, dust, and so on—and 
leave neither footprints nor scent. The area that is 
passed over radiates magic for 1d6 turns after the 
affected creatures pass. 

The material component is a sprig of pine 
bumed to ash. Upon casting the spell, the priest 
scatters the powder over those to be affected. 

Notes: Very rare for druids. Altered substan- 
tially from its origina) form. (Updated from Por- 
HEDRON Newszine.) 


Passage 
Lost spell, reputed similar in effect to earth walk. 


Passweb 
(Abjuration, Alteration) 
Sphere: Necromantic 


Level: 4 
Range: Touch 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: | rd/level 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: Special 


This speli enables the caster (or one creature) 
to pass through existing webs, both natural and 
magical, as though they did not exist. It also per- 
mits passage through barriers of rope or vine, pro- 
vided the area to be passed through incorporates 
only nonmagical, organic materials. The webs are 
not disturbed or altered in any way by this spell or 
the passage through them. 

A creature affected by this spell can try to free 
creatures or objects already trapped in a web. This 
requires a successful saving throw vs. petrifica- 
tion, and a success ends the spell immediately. If a 


Perfect Perception — Shaman 


Ne 


trapped being is unwilling to be freed and able to 
actively resist, failure is automatic. 
This spell does not confer immunity to the effects 
of viscid globs (created by a wand of viscid globs). 
Notes: Very rare spell granted to the priests of 
drow gods. 


Penetrate Cosmic Ignorance — Vedic 
(Divination) 
Sphere: Divination 


Level: 7 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 7 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 100 ft-/level radius 
Saving Throw: Special 


‘This dangerous spell is based on the age-old belief 
that the world is just illusion and that mortals cannot 
comprehend it. Penetrate cosmic ignorance allows a 
partial piercing of that veil. When cast the spell 
reveals the divine hands behind every creature and 
object present. The caster leams of subjects’ patron 
deities, consecrated spaces, holy relics, spell residue, 
and extraplanar creatures. It tells every individual’s 
level, every magical item's power, and every mon- 
ster’s special abilities among many other revelations, 
Wherever the hands of deities manipulate life—and 
they do so everywhere—the priest will know it. 

Using this spell requires the caster to make a 
saying throw vs. breath weapon modified only by 
Wisdom bonuses. A caster who fails is driven 
insane by the revelation; if the priest is ever cured, 
the revelation is forgotten. Using this spell wipes all 
other spells from the caster's mind, and a full 
night's rest is required before spells can be regained. 

Notes: Common for priests from a vedic 
(Indian) setting; otherwise, very rare. 


Penetrate Disguise 
Lost spell. A 1st-level spell of this name is rumored 
to have existed. 


Penetrate Disguise 
(Divination) 
Sphere: Divination 


Level: 4 
Range: 20 yds. 
Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 2 rds. 
Duration: 1 rd. 

Area of Effect: | individual 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell empowers the shukenja to see through 
a nonmagical disguise (that is, one composed solely 
of makeup or altered clothing). It can determine if an 
individual is under the effects of a friends spell. The 
penetrate disguise spell does not reveal magical dis- 
guises or illusions, nor does it reveal alignments, 
intentions, class/profession, or true appearance. It 
merely points out that the individual is posing as 
someone else. The subject is allowed a saving throw 
vs. spell, and if that saving throw is successful, the 
disguise is further enhanced in the caster's mind as 
being real. 

Notes: Common for oriental priests; otherwise, 
very rare. 


Perfect Perception — Shaman 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Divination 


Level: 4 
Range: 100 yds. 


Duration: 1 rd /level 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


Upon casting this spell, the shaman can then 
hear all sounds and see all objects within 100 
yards, The smallest insect crawling on a leaf is 
seen in perfect detail; the sound of a fox's footfall 
can be heard clearly; with close concentration, the 
shaman can even hear the trees creak as they grow, 
or see each speck of dust on the breeze. 

While many solitary shamans cast this spell 
simply to enjoy the beauty of nature, it has innumer- 
able practical benefits. Unless magically moving with 
no sound at all, no one can sneak up on the shaman (it 
counters Move Silently rolls). Tiny spy holes, minute 
clues, and traces are immediately obvious; a character 
with the Tracking proficiency, for example, can see all 
tracks with perfect clarity (though proficiency checks 
might still be required to identify them). Spotting nee- 
dies in haystacks becomes a simple task, 

The spell, however, has important limitations. 
First, it cannot be used to see through illusions. 
Second, it does not allow the caster to see through 
solid objects; walls, people, leaves, even blades of 
grass may obstruct vision. (Basically, if an object is 
within view, the caster can see it. The DM decides 
what is and is not in view.) Finally, it does not mag- 
nify sights or sounds more than 100 yards away. 

‘The material component is an eagle or vulture’s 
feather, which is not consumed when the spell is cast. 

Notes: Restricted to shamans, uncommon. 


En © ee INS 


~ Permanency Prayer = 


Permanency Prayer 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: All, Creation 


Area of Effect: Item touched 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell renders the enchantments on an item 
permanent. No known form of a permanency 
prayer renders an effect permanent upon a being. 

The caster of the permanency prayer touches 
his or her holy symbol and the item to be affected 
and calls upon his or her deity to accept the item’s 
service for eternity. A saving throw is then made. 
There is a 12 in 20 chance that the prayer is suc- 
cessful, cumulatively modified as follows: +1 if 
the caster casts the spell on an altar consecrated to 
the deity or at a spot sacred to the deity; +1 if the 
caster has performed an exceptional service for the 
deity’s causes within the season (and not cast any 
other permanency prayer spells); +3 if the caster is 
preparing the item in accordance with the com- 
mands of the deity (whether direct commands or 
those given through visions or dreams); —1 if the 
caster intends to make any use of the item for per- 
sonal gain or aggrandizement; and -2 if the item is 
flawed, damaged, or incomplete. 

Whether or not the spell succeeds—and a 
caster knows if he or she has or has not by the feel- 
ing of exaltation or chill foreboding felt upon 
touching the item after the spell is done—the 
caster loses 1 point of Constitution (unless he or 
she has employed a blood link to transfer the loss 
of vitality to another being). 

Notes: Very rare spell from the FORGOTTEN 
REALMS setting, recorded by Volo. 


Permanent Lure 
(Necromancy) 
Sphere: Charm, Necromantic 


Level: 6 

Range: Touch 

‘Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: | year/level 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: Special 


Like the 3rd-level priest spell, Jure, this 
magic changes a single feature (or matching pair 


a ET | a aE ITS | 


of features) of the caster's body to match the 
equivalent feature of another living being the 
caster has personally seen. The change is actual, 
and the altered features perform as if the caster 
was entirely used to them. A permanent lure 
does not alter ability scores except for Charisma 
(if the DM so desires), Usually it increases 
beauty, but the spell may lower Charisma 
depending on how a feature is altered. 

Only one permanent lure can affect a being 
at a given time; its presence causes any addi- 
tional, lesser lure spells applied to the same 
creature to fail. Unlike the /ure spell, a feature 
altered by a permanent lure must be natural to 
the recipient's race and gender, (That is, gills 
cannot be placed on humans, and males cannot 
be given a feminine form.) Permanent lure 
spells end if the subject dies or the magic 
expires, but they can be removed earlier by 
application of three successful dispel magic 
spells from the same source or caster or by a 
limited wish or wish spell. (These dispel magic 
spells need not be cast in swift succession; 
many powerful clergy receive two of them from 
an assistant immediately, and leave application 
of the third for emergencies, which may never 
arise, or that may occur a full year later.) 

Lure spells cast on the bearer of an active 
permanent lure fail and are lost without any 
effect; a second permanent lure cast on an 
unwilling being who is already governed by one 
lure or a permanent lure is also wasted and 
without effect—but a being who willingly 
accepts a second permanent lure atop an oper- 
ant one will discover that the two spells cancel 
each other out and cause the features they 
altered or were intended to alter to melt and 
run, twisting into unnatural shapes. The recipi- 
ent suffers 1d4+2 points of damage and loses 
1d3 points of Charisma. Time heals the lost hit 
points, but the disfigurement (and Charisma 
loss) can only be reversed by application of a 
cure light wounds spell or other magic. 

When the caster employs this spell person- 
ally, no saving throw is necessary, but when 
cast upon another, both caster and recipient 
must successfully save vs. spell or the spell 
fails and is wasted. 

The material components are a vial of holy 
water, a clear, intact gem of any size and type 
worth at least 500 gp, and any size scrap of the 
caster’s skin, 

Notes: Granted by Sune, Lady of Love, of the 
FORGOTTEN REALMs setting. This spell is found 
only in a few exceptionally rare tomes. 


Phantom Plow 


Ne 


Personal Reading 
(Divination) 
Sphere: Numbers 


Level: 1 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 2 turns 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell allows the priest to mathematically 
analyze personal information about one human or 
demihuman character and leam valuable facts 
about that subject. To cast this spell, the priest must 
know the subject’s birth name (the name the sub- 
ject was given as a child) or the date and place of 
birth. The priest analyzes this information and is 
able to build a rough picture of the subject's life 
history and personal specifics. The subject need not 
be present during the casting; the priest can cast the 
spell without ever having met the him or her. 

The historical information discovered through 
this spell is generally vague. For example, the 
priest might learn that the subject was bom in the 
woods and moved to the city only after hardship 
made life there untenable. Specific information is 
up to the DM. The DM might provide some or all 
of the following information: 


© The subject’s class or career 

@ The subject's approximate level (stated in 
terms such as novice, moderately competent, 
highly skilled, and so on) 

© The subject's standing in the community (highly 
respected, mistrusted, considered an enigma, 
and so on) 

© The subject's professional success or failure 

è The subject's prevailing character traits or 
mannerisms 


If the priest casts the spell based on an alias or 
incorrect birth information, the reading is inaccu- 
rate. The DM should develop a history and per- 
sonality at odds with the truth. This might allow 
the priest to determine whether the name of the 
subject is correct—a reading giving information 
that conflicts with what the priest already knows 
should be a clue that the name is incorrect. 

A DM can rule that this spell can be cast on 
humanoids or monstrous creatures. The informa- 
tion available will be similar (considering that 
words like “profession” mean something different 
when applied to an ogre). This spell fails if cast on 
creatures that have no concept of a personal name. 


‘The spell requires a small book of numerolog- 
ical formulae and notes (different from the book 
used in telethaumaturgy). 

Notes: Common for a priest with access to the 
sphere of Numbers (ToM). 


Petrification 


Aka petrify wood 


Petrify Wood 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Plant, Combat 


Level: 1 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 

Duration: 5 rds./level 

Area of Effect: Weapon(s) touched 
Saving Throw: None 


‘This spell petrifies nonliving wood; it cannot be 
used against living treelike monsters. If cast on a 
wooden weapon, the weapon acquires the properties 
of a weapon of stone, such as flint or obsidian, This 
effectively reduces the weapon’s attack penalty from 
-3 to -2, and its damage penalty from —2 to —1; the 
weapon is now also completely fireproof. To a native 
of impoverished Athas, this can mean the difference 
between life and death in combat. The dweomer lasts 
until the spell’s duration ends or until an enchanted 
missile strikes its target. Low-level priests often 
create their first magical weapons with this spell. One 
large or two small weapons can be affected by this 
‘spell (as per enchanted weapon). Weapons normally 
made of wood (clubs, staves, etc.) gain no additional 
benefits other than being made fireproof. 

The material component is a chip of petrified 
wood. 

Notes: Common for priests from the DARK SUN 
setting; otherwise, very rare. 


Phantom Plow 
(Invocation/Evocation) 
Sphere: Elemental Earth 


Level: 3 

Range: 10 yds./level 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 6 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: Furrow, 20-ft. length/level 
Saving Throw: Special 


LS eS 


~ Physical Mirror = 


‘This spell turns aside the earth in a deep furrow 
in a straight line as indicated by the caster that 
extends from next to the caster’s feet (or beneath 
the caster, if he or she is not touching the ground) 
to a distance of 20 feet per level. The furrow stops 
if it encounters consecrated ground, and it does not 
form at all if the intended path lies entirely within 
consecrated ground. If a furrow is directed against 
a wall, it stops, but it strikes the wall as does a ram 
(see Table 52: Structural Saving Throws in the 
DMG). 

All earth bearing an active or latent dweomer 
that is touched by the spell glows with a brilliant 
crimson faerie fire for 1d4+1 rounds. All creatures 
standing on the ground opened by the furrow 
suffer 1d4 points of damage (half if a successful 
saving throw vs. spell is made). Affected creatures 
must make successful saving throws vs. fall for all 
glass or crystal items wor or carried, or the items 
break. 

Creatures buried in, or burrowing or phasing 
through the earth suffer 4d4 points of damage 
from the phantom plow, with no saving throw. 

Notes: Granted by Chauntea, the Great Mother 
of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Physical Mirror 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Numbers 


Level: 6 

Range: 30 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 6 
Duration: 1d4 + 8 rds. 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell causes a localized folding of space. 
The folded space takes the form of an invisible 
disk up to 20 feet in diameter. Any missile weapon 
or spell that intersects this disk is instantaneously 
reversed in direction. Melee factors such as speed, 
range, and damage are unaffected; the direction of 
the object or force is simply rotated through a 180° 
arc. The sender of the spell or missile becomes the 
target of his or her own attack. 

The physical mirror operates from only one 
direction; that is, only one side of the mirror 
reflects attacks. The caster of the mirror can direct 
spells and missile attacks normally through the 
space occupied by the mirror. 

In the case of physical attacks, attackers roll to 
hit themselves (without the Armor Class benefits 
of Dexterity or shield). Spells tumed back require 
the casters to make applicable saving throws 


against their own spell. In both of these cases, 
range is important. If the distance between the ini- 
tiator of the attack and the physical mirror is more 
than half the range of the attack, the attacker is 
safe; the attack has insufficient range to travel 
from the attacker to the mirror and back again. 
The priest must specify the location and orien- 
tation of the physical mirror disk when casting the 
spell. Once it is created, the disk cannot be moved. 
If two physical mirror disks touch or intersect, 
they destructively interact and both immediately 
vanish. The resulting ripples in the space-time 
continuum are exceedingly destructive and inflict 
3d10 points of damage on any creature within 35 
yards (save vs. spell for half damage). This always 
includes the caster of the physical mirror spell. 
The material component is a tiny mirror of pol- 
ished platinum, worth at least 500 gp. 
Notes: Common for priests with major access 
to the sphere of Numbers (ToM). 


Duration: 1 rd//level. 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell, first bestowed to the ancient dwar- 
ven high priest Borogar, causes a pillar of earth to 
erupt upward from the ground. The pillar rises 
from a surface of earth, stone, sand, or clay, but not 
from any other substance. The height of the pillar 
is controlled by the caster, and can be raised or 
lowered at will (in the same manner as an elevator 
is controlled). The pillar can be controlled while 
the caster is atop the pillar or beside it, as long as 
the caster is within 30 feet of the pillar. The pillar 
can attain a height of 10 feet per level of the caster, 
and can rise or fall at the rate of 60 feet per round. 
The pillar’s width is normally 10 feet in diameter, 
but this can be doubled to 20 feet by reducing the 
height by half. Altering the pillar’s diameter in this 
way takes one round. 

The pillar rises only vertically—not horizon- 
tally or diagonally. The pillar can break through 
flooring wood or roofing slate of no greater than 1- 
inch thickness. Thus, the pillar can be used as a 

The pillar of Borogar can be used to create a 
small, temporary islet in a marsh or shallow pool 


ee ae IMS, ng a a 


Plague Curse 
NÝ 


of water, if the pillar can be raised from the ground 
below the water to reach the surface. The pillar 
begins, not from the upper level of the submerged 
ground, but from 10 feet lower, where the earth is 
more solid and not muddy. 

The pillar can be destroyed by casting a trans- 
mute rock to mud spell at its earthen base, by a 
water elemental’s attack, by precipitation equal in 
strength to a tropical storm, or by any other means 
that turns the pillar’s earthen base to muck and 
mire. 

The material component is a small cylinder 
made of earth or clay. 

Notes: Very rare spell granted by dwarven 
deities. (Updated from DraGoN Magazine.) 


Pixie Dust — Elf 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Combat 
Reversible 


Level: 5 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: 2 rds./level 

Area of Effect: 10-ft radius 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell creates a single handful of fine 
powder that can coat all creatures within a 10-foot 
radius, making them invisible. Creatures coated 
with pixie dust cannot be seen with normal sight, 
normal detection, or even magical means (such as 
detect invisibility). However, dust of appearance 
and true seeing do reveal beings and objects made 
invisible by pixie dust. 

Pixie dust must be employed immediately after 
the spell is cast, or the magic is wasted. The invis- 
ibility bestowed by pixie dust lasts for 2 rounds per 
level of the caster. 

Attack while thus invisible is possible, always 
by surprise if the opponent fails to note the invisi- 
ble creature and always by an Armor Class 4 better 
than normal (while invisibility lasts). Pixie dust 
remains effective even after an attack is made. 

The reverse of this spell, revealing dust, makes 
invisible beings and objects within a 10-foot radius 
become visible. 

The material components are the priest's holy 
symbol and a pinch of dirt from the bower of the 
Seelie Court. The latter can usually be obtained, a 
pinch at a time, only by careful negotiation with 
one of the faerie races, and payment involving par- 
ticipation in some mischievous prank of the sylvan 
being's devising is usually required. 


Notes: Granted by the elven god Erevan Ile- 


Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: Neg. (Special) 


‘This spell inflicts a virulent, infectious disease 
on any single creature (if a saving throw vs. spell 
is failed). The creature immediately suffers an 
attack of plague, becoming feverish and disori- 
ented with illness for a full hour. During this time, 
the creature loses 10% of its original hit points, 1 
point each of Strength and Constitution (if these 
are known), has -2 penalties to saving throws, 
attack, and damage rolls, and a +2 penalty to 
Armor Class. 

All creatures within 10 feet of the creature 
must make a Constitution check or contract the 
plague themselves (with the same effects). Crea- 
tures currently suffering from the plague cannot 
contract multiple cases of it, and those within 
range of more than one affected creature need only 
check once, 

When the spell effect expires, the creature is 
no longer infectious and the penalties end, except 
that lost hit points and ability scores take 1d6 days 
to retum. Before the last of the plague’s effects 
wear off, a final Constitution check must be made; 
if the creature rolls a natural 1 on a 1420 roll, it 
dies. 
The material component is a glass flask of rat 
viscera bathed in a small quantity of body fluids 
from plague victims. 

Notes: Granted by the Incabulos, god of evil 
sendings, of the GREYHAWK setting. 


Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: | creature or object touched 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


a ee ee 


Planar Quest 
a 


By means of this spell, a necromancer bestows 
a powerful curse on a person or object, which 
becomes a carrier for plague and contagion. Every 
person or animal that comes in direct physical con- 
tact with the cursed carrier must make a saving 
throw vs. death magic or contact a fatal disease, as 
described in the 3rd-level priest spell cause dis- 
ease. A creature suffers a slow, agonizing demise 
within 2-5 weeks. 

The living focus of a plague curse is immune to 
the effects of the disease carried. In many cases, 
the carrier will be oblivious to the condition— 
especially if the carrier is a frequent traveler and 
does not remain in a single location long enough 
for the plague symptoms to surface. 

The carrier of a plague curse displays no out- 
ward signs of disease and radiates only a very faint 
aura of necromancy (only a 5% chance of detect- 
ing per level). The curse can be removed by a 
remove curse cast only by a priest of higher level 
than the caster (dispel magic has no effect); alter- 
natively, a cursed object may be cleansed by 
destruction in fire, 

Normally, the curse expires only after it has 
claimed one life for each level of the original 
caster. The deadly affliction caused by a plague 
curse can be successfully treated with such spells 
as cure disease, heal, or restoration. The secrets of 
this malignant incantation are known only to the 
few priests who serve the cold gods of Pestilence 
and Decay. It is rumored that some Plague Priests 
must willingly accept this curse for their religion. 
Invoking a plague curse ages the caster by | year. 


The material component is the priest’s unholy 
symbol and a small ball of myrrh. 
Notes: Rare for evil necromancer-priests. 


Planar Quest 
Quest spell, see appendix in Vol. 3. 


Planar Vassel 
Athasian Dragon King magic, 10th level; psionic 
component renders the spell uncastable by priests. 


Plane Shift 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Astral 


Level: 5 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 8 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: Creature touched (special) 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


When the plane shift spell is cast, the priest or 
some other creature moves to another plane of 
existence. The recipient of the spell remains in the 
new plane until sent forth by some like means, If 
several persons link hands in a circle, up to eight 
can be affected by the plane shift at the same time. 

The material component is a small, forked 
metal rod—the exact size and metal type dictating 
to which plane of existence (including sub-planes 
and alternate dimensions) the spell sends the 


PLANAR TRAVEL 
RESEARCH TIME AND COSTS 
Plane Type’ Research Cost* Research Time? Rod Cost" 
Inner Plane 500/1,500 1 Week/ 6 Weeks 100 
Outer Plane 1,000/3,000 2 Weeks/3 Months. 300 
Demiplane 5,000/15,000 2 Months/1 Year 400 
Pocket Dimension +2,000 +1 month = 
Prime Material World 750/3,000 3 Weeks/9 Weeks 250 


‘The Astral and Ethereal Planes are treated as known Inner Planes for the purposes of research. 


* The numbers before the slashes are the cost and time requirements for planes that are generally known by the cam- 
Paign’s spelicasters. The numbers after the slashes are the cost and time requirements for destinations about which 
little is known in the home campaign. All prices are in gold pieces. 


* The number is the typical cost in gold pieces for constructing one rod, provided that the proper materials are avail- 
able. Rods made of extremely rare materials can cost considerably more. 


* Add these modiviers to the type of plane the Pocket Dimension is attached to. For example, researching a Pocket 
Dimension that is attached to the Ethereal Plane costs 2.500 gp and takes 5 weeks. The cost for the rod remains 100 gp. 


OP a a ND a Y 


Plant Growth 


ee 


affected creatures. (Your DM will determine 
specifics regarding how and what planes are 
reached.) 

An unwilling creature must be touched (suc- 
cessful attack roll) in order to be sent; in addition, 
the creature is also allowed a saving throw. If the 
saving throw is successful the effect of the spell is 
negated. Note that pinpoint accuracy is rarely 
achieved; arriving a random distance from an 
intended destination is common. 

The metal rod is not expended when the spell is 
cast. Forked rods keyed to certain planes may be 
difficult to come by, as decided by the DM. 

Notes: Common for clerics (PHB). 


Plane Shift — Shukenja 
This spell is identical to the standard version, 
except that the material component is a special 
coin, engraved with characters representing the 
plane, tied about the creature's neck with a leather 
thong. 


Plant Door 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Plant 


Level: 4 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 7 
Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


The plant door spell opens a magical portal or 
passageway through trees, undergrowth, thickets, 
or any similar growth—even growth of a magical 
nature. The plant door is open to the one who cast 
the spell, casters of a higher level, or dryads; 
others must be shown the location of the door. The 
door even enables the caster to enter a solid tree 
trunk and remain hidden there until the spell ends. 
The spell also enables the passage or hiding of any 
man-sized or smaller creature; hiding is subject to 
space considerations. If the tree is cut down or 
bumed, those within must leave before the tree 
falls or is consumed, or else they are killed also. 
The duration of the spell is one tum per level of 
experience of the caster. If the caster opts to stay 
within an oak, the spell lasts nine times as long, if 
in an ash tree, it lasts three times as long as normal. 
The path created by the spell is up to 4 feet wide, 
8 feet high, and 12 feet long per level of experi- 
ence of the caster. This spell does not function on 
plant-based monsters (shambling mounds, molds, 
slimes, treants, and so on). 


451 


The material components for this spell are a 
piece of charcoal and the caster’s holy symbol. 
Notes: Common for druids (PHB). 


Plant Growth 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Plant 


Level: 3 

Range: 160 yds. 
‘Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: Special 


The plant growth spell enables the caster to 
choose either of two different uses. The first 
causes normal vegetation to grow, entwine, and 
entangle to form a thicket or jungle that creatures 
must hack or force a way through at a movement 
rate of 10 feet per round (or 20 feet per round for 
larger-than-man-sized creatures). Note that the 
area must have brush and trees in it in order for 
this spell to take effect. Briars, bushes, creepers, 
lianas, roots, saplings, thistles, thorn, trees, vines, 
and weeds become so thick and overgrown in the 
area of effect as to form a barrier. The area of 
effect is a square 20 feet on a side per level of 
experience of the caster, in any square or rectan- 
gular shape that the caster decides upon at the time 
of the spelicasting. Thus an 8th-level caster can 
affect a maximum area of 160X 160 feet square, a 
320 X 80-foot rectangle, a 640 X 40-foot rectangle, 
a 1,280 X 20-foot rectangle, and so on. The spell’s 
effects persist in the area until it is cleared by 
labor, fire, or such magical means as a dispel 
magic spell. 

The second use of the spell affects a one-mile- 
square area. The DM secretly makes a saving 
throw (based on the caster’s level) to see if the 
spell takes effect. If successful, the spell renders 
Plants more vigorous, fruitful, and hardy, increas- 
ing yields by 20% to 50% ({1d4+1} X 10%), 
given a normal growing season. The spell does not 
prevent disaster in the form of floods, drought, 
fire, or insects, although even in these cases the 
plants survive better than expected. This effect 
lasts only for the life cycle of one season, the 
winter “death” marking the end of a life cycle for 
even the sturdiest of trees. In many farming com- 
munities, this spell is normally cast at planting 
time as part of the spring festivals. 

The material component is the caster's holy 
symbol. 

Notes: Common for druids (PHB). 


~ Plant Lance P 


Plant Lance 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Plant 


Level: 4 
Range: 5 yds./level 
V,S,M 


Area of Effect: 1 plant/2 levels 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell transforms one or more natural 
plants into flying spears that attack as the caster 
directs. The plants can be of any sort, from clumps 
of moss or lichen to towering trees, but they must 
be alive for the spell to work. Up to one plant per 
two levels of the caster can be affected; thus a 7th- 
level priest creates three spears. 

Each spear attacks as a spear +2 hurled by the 

caster, inflicting 3d4+2 points of damage. A plant 
lance withers and vanishes upon striking, or at 
latest when the spell duration expires; it can be 
destroyed by a successful dispel magic spell as 
well. Otherwise, the lance moves with and strikes 
at the target without any attention from the caster, 
who is free to work other magic or engage in other 
activities. 
The lances are living plants until they wither; 
thus, they can be affected by magic that works on 
plants. Because using this spell strips the local 
vegetation, druids use it with care; overusing the 
spell may result in divine censure. 

The spell works on existing living plants in 
their natural habitat. If insufficient plants grow 
within range, the caster cannot generate the maxi- 
mum number of spears the spell affords. 

Notes: Granted by Chauntea, the Great Mother, 
of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Plant Renewal 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Plant 


Level: 2 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 5 

Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: Plant touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell makes sick and withered plants 
instantly healthy once more. Molds and other 
growths are destroyed, spoiled fruit and blossoms 
are renewed, and nonbeneficial insects and their 


eggs are banished. Flowers and edible plant parts 
can thus be created out of mere memories—but 
this spell cannot bring a wholly dead plant back to 
life. The spell also has a side effect. Creatures 
using magic or special abilities to masquerade as 
plants are instantly revealed in their true forms. 
Illusory plants melt away forever and magically 
altered plants revert to their true forms and 
natures, breaking any magical animations or con- 
trols, 

The material component is a drop of rainwater 
or dew (the latter must be collected on a moonlit 
night). 

Notes: Granted by Eldath, the Green Goddess 
of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Plunge 
Reversed form, float. 


Pocket Dimension 
Athasian Dragon King magic, 9th level; psionic 
component renders the spell uncastable by priests. 


Poison 
Reversed form, neutralize poison. 


Poison Touch 
(Alteration, Necromancy) 
Sphere: Combat, Necromantic 


Level: 2 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 5 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell creates a flickering brown radiance 
around the caster’s hand or another chosen limb. 
Within 5 rounds of casting poison touch, the priest 
must touch a chosen creature, or the magic fades 
and is wasted. A successful attack roll is required 
to touch the creature. If such a touch is made to 
any part of the creature (bare flesh contact is not 
required), the brown light flashes once and is 
gone, and the creature must make a saving throw 
vs. spell. 

If the saving throw succeeds, the creature 
takes 1 point of damage and the corrosive magic 
eats a hole in any armor or garment worn, caus- 
ing a disfiguring eruption of the skin beneath the 
touched area into raw welts, and then the spell 
ends. This wound inflicts a temporary loss of 2 
points of Charisma, but the wound vanishes and 
the Charisma points are regained through normal 


452 


Polymorph Self 


healing rest or the use of curative magic (such as 
cure light wounds). 

If the saving throw fails, the creature suffers 6 
points of damage and is instantly slowed (as the 
3rd-level wizard spell) until the end of the follow- 
ing round. On this second round, the creature must 
make another saving throw. If it succeeds, the 
creature suffers | point of damage, is corroded as 
discussed above, and the spell ends, If this second 
saving throw fails, the creature suffers 346 points 
of additional damage and must make a Constitu- 
tion ability check and a Strength ability check. If 
both succeed, the spell ends without further effect, 
If one fails, the creature falls unconscious and 
takes an additional 148 points of damage but can 
be roused on the following round or later if still 
alive. If both checks fail, the creature takes an 
additional 1d10 points of damage, falls into a 
coma instantly, and cannot be roused by any 
known means for 1d12+2 rounds. 

Once a poison touch is delivered, the casting 
priest is free to take any other desired actions, 

Notes: Granted by Talona, Mistress of Disease, 
of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Polymorph Plant 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Plant 


Level: 3 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 6 

Duration; Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: Plant touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell enables a ranger to transform any 
single plant, including a fungus or mold, into any 
other type of plant of the ranger’s choice. The 
change is permanent. The changed plant has the 
physical appearance of its new form, but not all of 
the associated properties. If edible, the new form 
tastes as bland as cotton. If normally used as a 
spell component, the new form has only a 50% 
chance of actually functioning as a component. If 
normally used for medical purposes (such as for a 
healing salve or poison antidote), the new form has 
only a 50% chance of having any beneficial prop- 
erties. 

Only living plants can be polymorphed; the 
spell won't work on a fallen leaf, a nut, or a picked 
fruit. The size of the plant is not relevant; a blade 
of grass can be polymorphed into a towering oak 
tree and vice versa. The new form doesn’t have to 
be indigenous to the environment; an evergreen 


tree on a frigid mountain can be polymorphed into 
a cactus (although it may not thrive for long). 

Neither the original vegetation nor its polymor- 
phed form can be an intelligent plant or a plantlike 
creature. Nor are unnatural plant forms allowed; a 
mushroom can be transformed into a normal-sized 
cornstalk, but not a 50-foot-tall cornstalk or a stalk 
that produces apples instead of com. 

The material component is any seed. 

Notes: Uncommon for rangers; otherwise, very 
rare. 


Polymorph Self 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Creation 


Level: 4 

Range: 0 

Components: V 

Casting Time: 3 

Duration; 2 turns/level 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


When this spell is cast, the shukenja is able to 
assume the form of any creature—from a small 
bird up to a great horse. There is no system shock, 
but the polymorphed shukenja gains only the form 


453 


~ Pool of Deeds — Vedic 


and its locomotion, not any special attacks, magi- 
cal abilities, and so on The shukenja can change 
from one form to another (takes half a round) as 
often as desired during the spell’s duration, 
Damage to the polymorphed form is suffered by 
the shukenja but, upon return to human form, 1d12 
hit points are restored. 

Notes: Common for oriental priests; otherwise, 
very rare. 


Pool of Deeds — Vedic 
(Enchantment) 
Sphere: Divination, Elemental (Water) 


Level: 5 

Range: 10 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 6 turns 
Duration: 24 hrs, 
Area of Effect: 1 pool 
Saving Throw: None 


The pool of deeds spell turns any pool of water, 
from as small as a birdbath to as large as a small 
lake, into a storyteller. The enchanted pool can 
recount the publicly known deeds of any one indi- 
vidual exactly as they happened. The subject can 
be living, dead, or even not yet bor; the deeds can 
reflect the past, present, and even possible futures. 
The surface of the water reflects the images as if 
they were happening at the moment, and at the 
speed at which they occurred. The caster must 
know of the stories that he wants to reflect, but he 
need not know the details. If the caster wishes to 
reflect deeds that are not publicly known, he can 
try. The subject makes a saving throw vs. spells to 
keep secrets unrevealed; this roll is at the subject's 
level at the time of the revealed deeds. 

The caster can create a pool of deeds that 
reflects his own future, but the images may leave 
out critical details to prevent tampering with the 
future. The caster should expect whatever appears 
to come true, regardless of his efforts to change it. 
The pool is activated by tossing in a handful of 
colored powder. 

Notes: Common for priests from a vedic 
(Indian) culture; otherwise very rare. (Updated 
from DraGoN Magazine.) 


Port, Istishia’s 
See Istishia’s pon. 


Portent 
(Divination) 
Sphere: Divination, Chaos 
Level: 1 
Range: Touch 


Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 tum 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell enables the priest to tell something 
of his or another individual’s future luck during 
the next 24 hours. This “luck” takes the form of an 
adjustment to an attack roll or a saving throw at 
some point in the future unknown to the subject. 

When the spell is cast, the DM makes two die 
rolls in secret. First, 1d6 is rolled to determine the 
exact effect. The caster leams only the general 
result of poor, fair, or good. 


1d6 roll General Result Exact Result 
1 Poor 3 
2 Poor -2 
3 Fair -1 
4 Fair +1 
5 Good +2 
6 Good +3 


Second, a 1d12 roll determines when the por- 
tent result takes effect. The 1dl2 roll represents the 
number of the attack roll (either by or against the 
subject) or saving throw made by subject that is 
affected by the portent. For example, if a 12 is 
rolled, then the 12th such roll receives the exact 
result as a modifier. 

Such die rolls count only if they involve signifi- 
cant risk (that is, in combat or similar situations of 
consequence). The count is suspended if the subject 
contrives, for example, to perform saving throws 
against nonharmful effects in an effort to manipulate 
the outcome of the portent. Die rolls that do apply 
toward this count include saving throws made in 
combat or against magical effects, attack rolls made 
by the subject, and attack rolls made by an opponent 
against the subject. The DM can count other rolls, 
such as proficiency checks or ability checks, in the 
face of danger. When the die roll designated by the 
portent is made, the result is adjusted upward or 
downward as indicated by the 1d6 roll. Thus, the 
subject is either more or less likely to score a hit, 
more or less likely to be hit, or more or less likely to 
succeed on a saving throw or similar check. 

Regardless of the outcome, the effects of the 
portent do not extend beyond 24 hours after the 


ag a SAN ee ae ee ea 


Prayer 


casting, If the event has not occurred by that time, 
then it will not. 

The material component is either a numbered 
wheel or tea leaves. 

Notes: Uncommon for clerics, divination spe- 
cialists, and priests with access to the sphere of 
Chaos. (Updated from Unearthed Arcana.) 


Possess 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
Sphere: Charm 
Level: 5 
Range: 360 yds. 


Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: | tum 
Duration: 1 rd.flevel 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell is similar to the 3rd-level possess 
animal spell. Unlike that spell, however, this 
enchantment can be used to take over any type of 
natural animal or intelligent creature. When pos- 
sessing a character, the shukenja does not gain any 
of the abilities of that character class (that is, spe- 
cial abilities or spells). For every point of damage 
suffered by the host, the shukenja suffers / point 
of damage. Should the host die while under con- 
trol, the shukenja must make a successful system 
shock roll or die. 

While controlling an animal, the body of the 
shukenja falls into a catatonic state. If the body is 
disturbed or moved, the shukenja’s spirit is lost 
until reunited with its body, as per a restore spell. 
When released, the possessed creature does not 
have any memory of actions done during the pos- 
session or knowledge of who possessed it. 

The material components for this spell are a 
bowl or stick of incense and a figurine of the crea- 
ture or character to be possessed. 

Notes: Common for oriental priests; otherwise, 
very rare. 


Possess Animal 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
Sphere: Animal 


Level: 3 
Range: 10 yds. 
Components: V, $, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: 1 animal 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


By use of this spell, the shukenja is able to proj- 
ect his spirit into that of an animal, forcing the crea- 
ture to behave according to his will. The creature 
must be a normal or giant animal, not a monster 
type, and must have fewer Hit Dice than the 
shukenja. The animal is allowed a saving throw vs. 
spell and if successful the spell has no effect. Once 
the animal is possessed, the shukenja can cause it 
to do anything within its ability, regardless of the 
consequences to the animal. However, for every 
point of damage suffered by the animal, the 
shukenja suffers ⁄+ point of damage. In addition, 
should the animal die while under the control of the 
shukenja, a system shock roll must be made. If the 
roll is failed, the shukenja also dies. 

While controlling an animal, the body of the 
shukenja falls into a catatonic state. If the body is 
disturbed or moved, the shukenja’s spirit is lost 
until reunited with its body, as per a restore spell. 

The material component is a bowl of incense 
and a morsel of food appealing to the animal. 

Notes: Common for oriental priests; otherwise, 
very rare. 


Prayer 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 
Sphere: Combat 


Level: 3 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 6 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: 60-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: None 


By means of the prayer spell, the priest brings 
special favor upon himself and his party and 
causes harm to his enemies. Those in the area at 
the instant the spell is completed are affected for 
the duration of the spell. When the spell is com- 
pleted, all attack and damage rolls and saving 
throws made by those in the area of effect who are 
friendly to the priest gain +1 bonuses, while those 
of the priest’s enemies suffer -1 penalties. Once 
the prayer spell is uttered, the priest can do other 
things, unlike a chant, which he must continue to 
make the spell effective. If another priest of the 
same religious persuasion (not merely the same 
alignment) is chanting when a prayer is cast, the 
effects combine to +2 and ~2, as long as both are 
in effect at once. 

‘The material component is a silver holy symbol, 
prayer beads, or a similar device. 

Notes: Common for clerics (PHB). 


455 


~ Precipitation r 


Precipitation 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Elemental Water 


Level: 1 

Range: 10 yds./level 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: 1 rd. 

Area of Effect: 30-ft. cylinder up to 60 ft. high 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell precipitates a light rain out of the air, 
drizzling on everything in the area of effect. Small 
flames (candles) are extinguished. Small fires (torches 
and campfires) gutter and smoke for a round after the 
unaffected. Large magical fire effects (fireball, wall of 
fire, flamestrike) cast into the area during the rain are 
reduced in the damage they inflict by 2 points per die 
and create a warm fog that obscures vision in an area 
60 feet in diameter. This lasts 1d4+1 rounds, half that 
in a breeze, and but one round in a strong wind. 

The precipitation spell has doubled effect in 
humid climates, causes only slight dampness in 
arid climates, produces light sleet at temperatures 
near freezing, and creates snow if the temperature 
is below freezing. 

The material component is the priest's holy 
symbol. 

Notes: Uncommon for druids (originally pub- 
lished in Unearthed Arcana). Also granted by 
Istishia the Water Lord of the FORGOTTEN REALMS 
setting. 


Predict Weather 
(Divination) 
Sphere: Weather, Divination 


Duration: 2 hrs./level 
Area of Effect: 9 sq. mi. 
Saving Throw: None 


A druid casting a predict weather spell gains 
100% accurate knowledge of the weather (sky, 
temperature, precipitation) in a nine square mile 
area centering on the druid. For each level of expe- 
rience of the druid casting the spell, two hours of 
advance weather can be forecast. Thus, at Ist level 
the druid knows what the weather will be for two 
hours; at 2nd level the druid knows the weather for 
4 hours in advance, and so on. 


Fi a aan SG Se Pe a ea 


The material component is the druid’s holy 
symbol. 

Notes: Uncommon for druids. (Updated from 
the Ist Ed. PHB.) 


Prepare Enchantment 
(Conjuration/Evocation) 


Area of Effect: Object touched 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell is used to enchant an item by forcing 
the alteration of its true name, The caster must 
know the true name of the item to be created, 
which varies in complexity according to the com- 
plexity of the item. 

Immediately prior to casting the spell, the 
priest must ritually purify himself or herself by 
fasting and so on. The ritual takes six days to pre- 
pare and one to cast but the resultant drain on the 
caster is such that it is be impossible to cast any 
other spell for the following d100 days, In addi- 
tion, there is a chance of taking mental damage. 

After the spell has been cast there is a chance 
that the item will have had its true name altered. 
The base chance is 60% with the following modi- 
fiers: 

-1% per pound weight of natural material (wood, 
leather) 

-3% per pounds of other non-ferrous material 

-10% per 1 pound of ferrous material 

+1% per level of caster 

+1% per day of fasting prior to casting the spell. 

+1% per 10,000 gp worth of material components. 


After casting the spell, the caster must make a 
successful saving throw vs. spell (at a +3 bonus if 
the spell was successful) or be feebleminded as the 
6th-level wizard spell. Even if the saving throw is 
successful, the caster is magically drained for d100 
days and can wield no dweomers for that time. 

The material components vary according to the 
item that is to be enchanted; their existence is 
revealed to the caster as part of the true name of 
the item. However, these are of at least 5,000 gp 
value. The materials are ruined if the spell fails, 
and become a part of the item if it succeeds. 

Notes: Very rare spell. (Updated from IMAGINE 
Magazine.) 


Priest Lock 


N Sa 4 


Preservation 
Quest spell, see appendix in Vol. 3. 


Pressure Resistance 
(Abjuration) 
Sphere: Protection, Elemental Water 


Level: 1 

Range: Touch 

Components: S, M 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: 1 tum + | turn/level 
Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


‘This spell increases the recipient's resistance to 
the crushing force of water pressure, allowing him 
to function at greater depths underwater. The spell’s 
recipient can safely dive to twice his normal depth. 

For example, an unassisted human can nor- 
mally withstand the effects of pressure to a maxi- 
mum depth of 400 feet underwater. A human 
protected by this spell could safely dive to a depth 
of 800 feet. 

The material component is the caster's holy 
symbol. 

Notes: Uncommon for sea priests; otherwise, 
rare. 


Optional: If the rules from of Ships and the Sea 
are used, this spell actually doubles the recipi- 
ent’s basic depth unit (see page 76). 


Pride of Nobanion 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 
Sphere: Animal, Summoning 


Level: 4 

Range: 1 mi. 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 7 
Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell is a specialized variant of the 5th- 
level priest spell animal summoning II. By means 
of this spell, the caster calls a number of great cats 
whose combined Hit Dice total 48 or less. If more 
than one species is available, the race with greater 
Hit Dice is summoned. Common lions are always 
summoned to the exclusion of all other great cats 
if they are available. Only great cats within 1 mile 


of the spellcaster at the time of the casting 
respond, but such felines include cantobeles, cath 
shee, cheetahs, dragonnes, jaguars, leopards, lions, 
mountain lions, spotted lions, giant lynxes, tigers, 
red tigers (snow cats), smilodons, and thylacines 
among others. 

Unlike the animal summoning II spell, the 
caster can only make one call as he or she does not 
get to choose what form of great cat shows up, if 
any. The great cats summoned aid the caster by 
whatever means they possess, staying until a fight 
is over, a specific mission is finished, the caster is 
safe, they are sent away, and so on. 

Notes: Granted by Nobanion, the Lion King, of 
the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Priest Lock 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Protection 


Level: 2 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: Permanent 

Area of Effect: | portal up to 12 sq. ft/level 
Saving Throw: None 


By means of this 2nd-level priest spell, a priest 
can place a magical protection on any window, 
door or portal. The door will open for anyone who 
speaks the password that was put into place by the 
priest who priest locked the door. 

The password can be a single word or several 
sentences. The priest has complete freedom in 
choosing the password, including the language in 
which it must be spoken. The password works 
only if it is spoken in the language the priest des- 
ignates. The language does not need to be the 
native tongue of the spellcaster. 

A priest locked door or portal can be opened by 
breaking, or a successful knock or dispel magic 
spell, just as a wizard lock. The priest can negate 
the spell by speaking the password in reverse. This 
allows the priest to cast a new spell in order to 
change the password. 

The caster must set a duration that the door, 
once opened, will remain unlocked, up to the 
caster’s level in rounds. The priest can also place a 
time delay on the release of the door, which cannot 
exceed 10 rounds. 

For example, a priest casts a priest lock spell on 
the door to her room. She specifies in the spell that 
the door will be released two rounds after the pass- 
word has been spoken and the door will remain 
unlocked for five rounds after that. Her native lan- 


457 


~ Probability Control = 


guage is Common, but her password is a phrase 


spoken in the Dwarven language. 
Notes: Rare priest spell, originally from the 
GREYHAWK setting. 


Probability Control 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Numbers 


Level: 4 
Range: 30 yds. 


4 
Duration: 1 rd./level (maximum) 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell allows the priest to increase or decrease 
by a small margin the probability of success for one 
action. This action can be anything that requires a die 
roll—an attack, a saving throw, an attempt to use 
thieving skills, an ability check, or even an attempt to 
successfully teleport on target. The action must be 
something performed by a single creature. 

The basic modification is 15% (15 on 14100 or 3 
‘on 1420), plus an additional 5% per five levels of the 
caster. This modification can be either positive or neg- 
ative, as deemed by the spellcaster. Thus, a 10th-level 
priest can modify a subject’s saving throw or attack 
roll by +5 or—S, or a thief’s climb walls roll by +25% 
or -25%. The priest can cast this spell on himself. 

For a noncombat action such as an attempt to 
climb a wall, the priest simply casts the spell on 
the subject immediately before the action is 
attempted, informing the DM whether the modifi- 
cation is positive or negative. To use this spell in 
combat, the priest must specify the action to be 
affected (e.g., the subject’s next attack roll) and 
whether the modification will be positive or nega- 
tive. The spell remains in effect until the subject 
attempts the specified action or until a number of 
rounds equal to the caster’s level passes. If the 
latter occurs, the spell ends without effect. 

Once the spell is cast, the priest does not need 
to maintain any level of concentration; the spell 
will function even if the casting priest is killed 
before the spell takes effect. 

‘The subject of the spell has no way of knowing 
whether any modification made by this spell is 
positive or negative (or even whether he was the 
subject of the spell at all). Thus, a lying priest 
could claim to raise a thief’s chance of climbing 
the wall, while actually lowering it. The thief 
would be none the wiser. However, an unwilling 
subject of this spell receives a normal saving throw 
to negate its effect. 


The material components are a small cube of a 
thickened sugar-and-milk mixture and a cubic die 
of matching size, Both are consumed in the casting. 

Notes: Common for priests with major access 
to the sphere of Numbers (ToM). 


Probe Enemies — Elf 
(Divination) 
Sphere: Divination 


Level: 3 

Range: 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: 1 rd. 

Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


When probe enemies is cast, all hostile entities 
within the spell's range, and in the priest's line of 
sight, are probed by the spell’s magic. While the 
duration lasts, the caster must maintain concentra- 
tion; if the caster is distracted (i.e., suffers damage 
casts another spell, initiates melee, and so on), the 
spell fails, and no information is learned. Once the 
duration has run its course, however, the caster 
will know which opponent is the most powerful, or 
which foe poses the greatest threat to the priest, if 
no single enemy can be regarded as more powerful 
than any other. Note, however, that the spell does 
not tell the caster why or what makes a given crea- 
ture more powerful than another, only that it is 
more powerful in some way. 

While this spell offers no saving throw to those 
it inspects, magic resistance still applies, as do 
magical effects that impede the effectiveness of 
Divination magic (e.g., amulet of proof against 
detection and location). In such instances, the 
probe enemies spell will choose the most powerful 
opponent who is not so obscured. 

Notes: Very rare spell granted by the elven god 
Corellon Larethian. (Updated from DRAGON Mag- 
azine.) 


Probing Arm 
(Alteration, Evocation) 
Sphere: Creation 


Level: 5 

Range: 5 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 8 
Duration: 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


458 


Produce Flame 


Ne 


This spell creates a weightless mechanical arm 
of steel that has an upper arm 3 feet in length, a 
ball-swivel elbow joint, a forearm 3 feet long, a 
ball-swivel wrist joint, and a fully articulated hand 
with four fingers and a perfectly opposed thumb 
(that is, the thumb is centered opposite the fingers 
across the palm, not located to one side). The 
shoulder of the arm always floats in midair closest 
of any part of the arm to the caster’s head, and the 
spell range refers to how distant the shoulder can 
be from the caster before the arm either does not 
form or dissipates into nothingness. 

This arm has an effective Armor Class of 1, a 
Strength of 19, moves at MV Fly 12 (A), and can 
lengthen either or both of its arm segments from 3 
feet to 30 feet—or any length in between—in 
response to the caster’s silent will. Though it is 
most often used to reach distant objects or beings 
and grab them or pick them up, a probing arm can 
function as a weapon. 

The probing arm can punch for 244+7 points of 
damage, launch weapon attacks at distant foes at a 
THACO one point better than the caster’s own, and 
grapple with a foe at a +3 bonus to hit. A success- 
ful grapple causes 1d6 points of bruising and 
jostling damage, ruins spellcasting, cuts move- 
ment in half, causes opponent missile attacks to be 
launched at a -3 penalty to attack rolls, and forces 
item saving throws vs, crushing blow on all fragile 
items worn, carried, or wielded by the foe. 

A probing arm can also reach into a guarded 
area to spring traps or to grab, recover, or move 
objects the caster dare not touch or approach, such 
as diseased or fungus-covered corpses, burning 
items, and poison-using monsters, 

A probing arm can open locks by touch, acting 
as the 2nd-level wizard spell knock cast by a 12th- 
level mage. To use this ability, the probing arm 
must be commanded to by silent will of the caster, 
If the unlocking succeeds, the arm vanishes when 
the locked door opens, since at this point the spell 
is exhausted immediately. A probing arm could 
unlock a massive door and then drag it wide open, 
fading away only when the opening motion was 
stopped by the caster of the probing arm, but such 
an arm would vanish instantly if used to unlock a 
small door that then fell open by itself. The spell is 
not exhausted if the arm is used to unlock a door 
by turning a key or otherwise opening it by its 
usual mechanical means. 

The material components of a probing arm are 
two short sticks or small straight rods, two smooth 
wooden or glass balls (or a real socket joint from 
any dead creature), and two human hairs. 

Notes: Granted by the god Gond, Lord of All 
Smiths, of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Produce Fire 
(Alteration) 
Reversible 
Sphere: Elemental Fire 


Level: 4 

Range: 40 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 7 

Duration: 1 rd. 

Area of Effect: 12-ft. square 
Saving Throw: None 


By means of this spell, the caster causes a 
common fire of up to 12 feet per side in area. 
Though it lasts but a single round, unless it ignites 
additional flammable material, the fire produced 
by the spell inflicts 1d4 points of damage, plus 1 
point per caster level, upon creatures within its 
area. It ignites combustible materials, such as 
cloth, oil, paper, parchment, wood, and the like, so 
as to cause continued burning. 

The reverse, quench fire, extinguishes any 
normal fire (coals, oil, tallow, wax, wood, and so 
on) within the area of effect. 

The material component for both forms is a 
paste of sulfur and wax, formed into a ball and 
thrown at the target. 

Notes: Common for druids (PHB). 


Produce Flame 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Elemental Fire 


Level: 2 

Range: 0 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 5 
Duration: 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


A bright flame, equal in brightness to a torch, 
springs forth from the caster’s palm when he casts 
a produce flame spell. This magical flame lasts one 
round for each level of the caster. The flame does 
not harm the caster, but it is hot and it causes the 
combustion of flammable materials (paper, cloth, 
dry wood, oil, and so on), The caster is capable of 
hurling the magical flame as a missile, with a 
range of 40 yards (considered short range). The 
flame flashes on impact, igniting combustibles 
within a three-foot diameter of its center of impact, 
and then it goes out. A creature struck by the flame 
suffers 1d4+1 points of damage and, if combustion 
occurs, must spend a round extinguishing the fire 


459 


or suffer additional damage assigned by the DM 
until the fire is extinguished Misses use the 
grenade-like missile table in the DMG to deter- 
mine the point of impact. If any duration remains 
to the spell, another flame immediately appears in 
the caster’s hand, 

The caster can snuff out magical flame any 
time he desires, but fire caused by the flame 
cannot be so extinguished. This spell does not 
function under water. 

Notes: Common for druids (PHB). 


Produce Ice 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 
Sphere: Elemental Water 


Level: 5 
Range: 60 yds. 
Components: V, 
Casting Time: 8 

Duration: 2 rds./level 

Area of Effect: Cube, 1 ft./level on a side 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell creates supernatural cold in the area 
of effect, condensing all atmospheric and standing 
water into a thick rime of ice. If there is no source 
of water or even enough humidity to support this 


spell, then the DM can rule that the spell has no 
effect, The caster affects a cubic area of | foot per 
level to a side, so a 12th-level caster affects a 12- 
foot by 12-foot by 12-foot cube (up to a maximum 
of 25 feet to a side). This can have several effects; 
first of all, any creature caught in the area of effect 
when the temperature is lowered suffers 2d4 
damage plus | point per level of the caster (or 
2d4+12, for the 12th-level caster described above), 
or half that damage with a successful saving throw 
vs. spell. Any fires in the area are suppressed and 
may (50% chance) be extinguished. 

Creatures entering the area of effect after the 
initial creation of ice suffer no additional damage, 
although the air will be noticeably dry and cold. 
However, the ice formed by the spell coats all sur- 
faces and may cause creatures to slip and fall. Any 
creature moving into or out of the affected area 
must make a saving throw vs. spell or fall, losing 
their action for the round. The ice lasts at least 2 
rounds per caster level, and then begins to melt at 
whatever rate nature decrees. 

If cast on a body of water, this spell creates an 
iceberg of the stated dimensions. A swimmer or 
aquatic creature could be caught in the ice and 
trapped until the ice melts; most airbreathers will 
suffocate from this treatment, but a few aquatic 
creatures (fish, amphibians, and so on) may sur- 
vive being frozen, at the DM's discretion. 

The material component is a scale from a white 
dragon. 

Notes: Common for priests with major access 
to the sphere of Elemental Water (PO:SM). 


Prolific Forestation 
Athasian Dragon King magic, 10th level; psionic 
component renders the spell uncastable by priests. 


Prolific Vegetation 
Athasian Dragon King magic, 9th level; psionic 
component renders the spell uncastable by priests. 


Proof Against Undeath 
(Necromancy, Alteration) 
Sphere: Cosmos 
= sie 
Range: Touch 


Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 4 

Duration: Permanent 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell is cast on a dead creature to prevent 
it from being raised as a skeleton or zombie with 


Protection From Amorphs 


EE 4 


an animate dead spell. The creature cannot have 
been dead for a number of days greater than the 
caster’s level; otherwise it has no effect. The size, 
level, or Hit Dice of the dead creature makes no 
difference. Detect magic reveals the magical 
enchantment on the body, and it can be removed 
with a dispel magic spell. This spell has no effect 
on living creatures or those already animated as 
skeletons or zombies. Corpses being magically 
enchanted into some other, more powerful form of 
undead are granted a saving throw vs. spell (based 
on the corpse’s level and class from his previous 
life); if it makes this save even once, the corpse 
cannot be raised as any form of undead. 

The material components for this spell can 
vary; either metal coins must be placed on the 
recipient’s eyes, the petals of flowers must be 
sprinkled beneath him, or dust from his homeland 
must be sprinkled on him. 

Notes: Uncommon for priests from a DARK 
SUN setting; otherwise, very rare. 


PROTECTION SPELLS 

Introductory Note: Many protection spells 

in this section were constructed from the 
protection scrolls in the DMG when the 1st 
Edition was current, They are updated here, 
with a default rarity of rare, Some, such as 
from dragon breath (dragons being 

greatly strengthened in the current edition), 
have been withdrawn to the province of 

enchanted items. 


Protection From Acid 


See resist acid and corrosion 


Protection From Air Elementals 
See protection from elementals, 10' radius, 


Protection From Aging — Elf 
(Abjuration) 
Sphere: Protection, Time 


Level: 2 
Range: Touch 

Components: V, $, M 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: 3 rds./level 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


While protected by the effects of this spell, the 
recipient is immune to unnatural aging and aging 


attack forms, such as the sight of a ghost. The spell 
does not protect against natural aging or willingly 
accepted aging effects, such as that inflicted by a 
haste spell. 

The material components of this spell are the 
priest’s holy symbol and a powdered black sap- 
phire worth at least 50 gp. 

Notes: Granted by the elven deity Labelas 
Enoreth. 


Protection From All Elementals 


See protection from elementals, 10’ radius. 


Protection From All Lycanthropes 
See protection from lycanthropes, 10' radius. 


Protection From All Traps, 5’ Radius 
See protection from traps, 5' radius. 


Protection From All Undead, 
5' Radius 
See protection from undead, 5’ radius, 


Protection From Amorphs 
(Abjuration) 
Sphere: Protection 


Level: 3 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 6 

Duration: 5 rds./level 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This abjuration protects the recipient from the 
attacks of any of the various amorphous monsters, 
including slimes, jellies, oozes, puddings, gelatinous 
cubes, and slithering trackers. To qualify as an amor- 
phous creature, the monster must have an amorphous 
or fluid body, attack through acids or secretions of 
some kind. Most are native to the Prime Material 
Plane and are formless, primordial beings, as 
opposed to creatures such as elementals. The monster 
cannot stand the touch of the barrier surrounding the 
protected character, and its natural attacks automati- 
cally fail. Ranged attacks by these creatures also fail. 

If the protected character makes an attack 
against the monster, or if he forces the barrier 
against the monster, the spell ends and he is no 
longer protected. 

The material component is a mixture of rare 
salts sprinkled in a small circle around the creature 
to be protected. 

Notes: Very rare spell. This is a priest version 
of the spell from PO:SM. 


ES a a \ 


~ Protection From Animals = 


Some extraplanar beings are affected by the 
protection from amorphs spell, in particular cer- 
tain minions of Juiblex, the Faceless Lord. Like- 
wise, some Prime Material creatures will not be, 
such as mimics (MONSTROUS MaNuaL tome) and 
algols (FrevD FoLio tome). The former is mal- 
leable but not amorphic (like a doppleganger), 
the latter is a colony of animated algae rather 
than primordial ooze. 


Protection From Animals 
(Abjuration) 
Sphere: Animal 


Level: 2 
Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 6 

Duration: 3 rds./level 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell prevents bodily contact between the 
protected individual and small, swarming mam- 
mals. Other attacks by normal and giant-sized 
mammals suffer a —2 penalty to attack rolls, and 
any saving throw these require of the protected 
creature are at a +2 bonus. Monsters and animals 
of a magical nature are not affected by this spell. 

The material components of the spell consists 
of animal hair (any type), a chip of animal bone, 
and a drop of animal blood. 

Notes: Very rare spell. (Updated from DRAGON 
Magazine.) 


Protection From Breath Weapons 
See protection from dragon breath. As the number 
of creatures with unusual breath weapons grows, 
a scroll that affects “everything else” except 
dragon breath is harder to justify. One approach 
is to use a scroll with a specific effect (for exam- 
ple, a scroll of protection from gorgon breath). On 
the other hand, a scroll not completely decipher- 
able by a player character except in a general 
way (“It's good against—untranslatable—breath 
weapon... It's not the symbol for 'dragon'™) is 
certainly possible and may add dramatic tension. 


Protection From Chaos 
(Abjuration) 
Sphere: Law 


Resembling the spell prorection from evil, this 
abjuration wards the creature touched from the 
attacks of minions of chaos. Chaotic creatures 
suffer a —2 penalty to attack rolls against the spell 
recipient, and the subject gains a +2 bonus to 
saving throws against spells or other attacks 
employed by chaotic creatures. Attempts to pos- 
sess, dominate, or exercise other forms of mental 
control against the recipient are automatically 
blocked by this spell. 

Protection from chaos also wards the recipient 
against contact with extraplanar creatures of 
chaotic origin, including tanar'ri, slaad, and 
eladrin. Unlike protection from evil, this spell 
does not necessarily guard against summoned or 
conjured creatures unless the creatures in question 
are chaotic in alignment. However, protection 
from chaos does protect the recipient from crea- 
tures influenced by confusion and chaos spells 
and effects. The natural or bodily attacks of such 
creatures automatically fail, as long as the recipi- 
ent does not use the spell's power to trap, pin, or 
drive back the chaotic creatures in question. The 
spell ends if the recipient makes a melee attack 
against creatures that are prevented from attack- 
ing him by this spell. 

‘The material component is a small ring of gold 
or lead tempered by a chaotic smith. Note that this 
spell is not reversible. 

Notes: Common for priests with access to the 
sphere of Law (PO:SM). 


Protection From Charm 
(Abjuration) 
Sphere: Charm, Protection 


Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


"TJ Tae ae a ar ES 


Protection From Death 


N 


This spell adds a bonus of +1 per three levels of 
the caster to the recipient’s saving throws against 
charm spells and all related effects. These include 
spells such as suggestion and magic jar; items 
such as a potion of human control, and spell like 
effects, such as the gaze of a vampire or the song 
of a harpy or bard. It is not effective against charm 
attacks that allow no saving throw. A saving throw 
of 1 fails regardless of the bonuses conferred by 
this spell. The maximum benefit allowed by this 
spell is +3 at 9th level. 

The material component is holy water. 

Notes: Very rare spell. (Updated from POLYHE- 
DRON Newszine.) 


Protection From Cold 
See resist fire/resist cold for a general protective 
spell. 


Protection From Cold 
(Invocation/Evocation) 
Sphere: Elemental Air, Elemental Water 


Level: 3 

Range: Touch 

‘Components: V, $, M 

Casting Time: 6 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


The effect of a protection from cold spell dif- 
fers according to whether the recipient of the 
magic is the caster or some other creature. In either 
case, the spell lasts no longer than one tum per 
caster level. 

If the spell is cast upon the caster, it confers 
complete immunity to: freezing temperatures 
(immersion in icy water, icy blasts of wind, and so 
on); exposure to magical frosts such as freezing 
dragon breath; spells such as frost fingers, chill 
metal (reverse of heat metal), Snilloc's snowball, 
Snilloc's snowball swarm, ice storm, wall of ice, 
cone of cold, Otiluke's freezing sphere, winter 
wolf breath, ice toad and brown mold cold radia- 
tions, and so on, The invulnerability lasts until the 
spell has absorbed 12 points of ice or cold damage 
per level of the caster, at which time the spell is 
negated. 

If the spell is cast upon another creature, it 
gives invulnerability to normal freezing tempera- 
tures, gives a bonus of +4 to saving throws vs. cold 
attacks, and reduces damage sustained from magi- 
cal cold attacks by 50%. 

The material components of this spell are the 
priest's holy symbol and a small sliver of ice. 


Notes: Granted by Ulutiu, the Lord in the Ice, 
of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. This is a spell 
for a specialized priesthood. 


Protection From Corrosives 
See resist acid and corrosion. 


Protection From Death 
(Necromancy) 
Sphere: Protection 


Level: 7 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, $, M 
Casting Time: 2 rds. 


Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


Protection from death is a powerful priest spell 
that temporarily prevents an individual from 
dying. When cast upon a willing recipient, no 
saving throw is required. The individual suffers 
damage normally, save that at zero hit points, the 
individual is simply defeated and must retire from 
combat. While under the influence of a protection 
from death spell, an individual is immune to the 
effects of poison, disease, and death magic, The 


rd 463 T 


~ Protection From Earth a 


protection from death spell can be canceled by a 
dispel magic spell, leaving the individual subject 
to death normally. 

After a protection from death spell wears off, 
the individual is completely healed and retumed to 
full hit points. Lost limbs and the like are not 
regenerated, however, unless they have been 
recovered and are held in place when the spell 
fades out. A person who has suffered injuries too 
severe to permit survival after the spell ends 
(beheading, for example) simply dies. 

‘The material component is an item taken from 
the body of a dead person. 

Notes: Very rare spell, originally from the 
Arthurian section of Legends & Lore. 


Protection From Earth 
(Abjuration) 
Sphere: Elemental Earth, Protection 


Level: 3 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 6 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


‘The effect of a protection from earth spell dif- 
fers according to whether the caster or another 
creature is the recipient of the spell. In either case, 
the spell lasts no longer than one tum per caster 
level. Also, this spell does not confer the ability to 
freely move through stone or earth. 

If the spell is cast upon the caster, it grants com- 
plete invulnerability to damage and wounds inflicted 
by stone and earth (thrown stones, falling rocks, 
earth elemental attacks, crushing stone walls, ava- 
lanches, being buried alive, and so on). The invul- 
nerability lasts until the spell has absorbed 12 points 
of earth damage per level of the caster or one tum 
per caster level (whichever comes first), at which 
time the spell is negated. 

If the spell is cast upon another creature, it 
reduces damage sustained by earth attacks by 50% 
and confers a saving throw bonus of +4 to the die 
roll against such attacks. 

The material component is the priest's holy 
symbol. 

Notes: Rare for planar priests. Unlikely to be 
leamed except through visiting the Inner Planes. 


Protection From Demons 


Protection From Devils 
See protection from fiends, 10’ radius. 


Protection From Dragon Breath 

A scroll of protection effect from the DMG. This 
should not be allowed as a spell, considering the 
upgraded dragons of the current edition. Recom- 
mended prerequisites for creating the scroll are a 
sage-like knowledge of dragonkind and a mini- 
mum of 12th-level priest status. Such scrolls may 
be limited to a certain family or type of dragon 
(metallic, red, and so on). In particularly chal- 
lenging campaigns, the DM may require such 
scrolls to specifically name the target dragon. 


Protection From Earth Elementals 
See protection from elementals, 10’ radius, 


Protection From Electricity 
(Abjuration) 
Sphere: Protection 


Level: 4 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: 3 rds./level 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


The protected creature receives a +4 bonus to 
saving throws against electrical attacks, natural or 
magical. Any electrical damage received is 
reduced by 50%. If the saving throw is successful, 
then any secondary effects the electrica) attack 
may have (stunning, paralysis, and so on) are 


The material component is a thread of copper. 
Notes: Very rare for clerics. 


Protection From Electricity 
See protection from lightning for a specialty priest 
effect. 


Protection From Electricity, 10’ Radius 
(Abjuration) 
Sphere: Protection 


Level: 6 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 6 

Duration: $ rds./level 

Area of Effect: 10-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: None 


The globe of protection of this spell is identical 
in all respects to a protection from electricity spell, 
except that it lasts longer and encompasses a much 


a a. ee a a a. 


Protection From Evil 


N 


larger area. The effect is centered on and moves 
with the creature touched. 

The protected creatures receive a +4 bonus to 
saving throws against electrical attacks, natural or 
magical. Any electrical damage received is reduced 
by 50%. If the saving throw is successful, then any 
secondary effects the electrical attack may have 
(stunning, paralysis, and so on) are negated. 

The material component is a thread of copper 
for each protected creature. 

Notes: Very rare for clerics. 


Protection From Elementals, 10' Radius 
(Abjuration) 
Sphere: Elemental (All) 


Level: 4 
Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: 5 rds./level 

Area of Effect: 10-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: None 


‘This spell covers a group of related effects. The one 
desired is selected when the spell is memorized. It cre- 
ates a globe of protection, that protects all within from 
the direct attacks of one type of elemental creature. 
‘The sphere is centered on and mobile with the creature 
touched. If more elemental creatures attack than are 
barrier and attack. Forcing the protection against such 
creatures negates the protection. Otherwise, the effect 
of the spell varies with the caster's level. 

‘Two factors rule the degree of protection, First, 
the total number of Hit Dice hedged out is 2 Hit 
ice per level of the caster, to a maximum of 24 
Hit Dice at 12th level. 

Second, as the caster becomes more powerful, 
stronger elemental creatures can be hedged out. 
Thus, an 8th-level caster can keep out elemental 
creatures with a total of 16 Hit Dice or less, as long 
as the creatures have less than 8 Hit Dice each. 

At 7th level, creatures of a specific element 
with less than 8 Hit Dice can be hedged out. 

At 9th level, the protection is extended to crea- 
tures of a specific element with less than 16 Hit Dice, 

At 12th level, the protection is extended to crea- 
tures of a specific element with less than 24 Hit 
Dice. Further, the protection hedges out any type 
of elemental creature with 16 Hit Dice or less; 
thus, a 12th-level priest who memorizes the air 
elemental version gains the ability to keep out 
earth elementals of 16 Hit Dice or less as well. 

At 15th level, protection is extended to any ele- 
mental creature with 24 Hit Dice or less. 


Elemental creatures with more Hit Dice, or 
exceeding the total Hit Dice limit, can pass the 
barrier. For example, if a 9th-level priest's sphere 
is attacked by three 8 Hit Die elementals, one pen- 
trates the barrier. A sphere attacked by a single 24 
Hit Die elemental is penetrated as well. Note that 
attacks by elemental creatures based on their ele- 
ment are blocked, but other attacks might not be. 
Thus, while an efreet could not affect protected 
creatures with its wall of fire, it could shoot a bow, 
if it had one. 

The material component is a piece of a sub- 
stance that came from neither the Prime Material 
Plane nor any of the Elemental Planes. 

Notes: Uncommon for Elemental priests; other- 
wise, rare. Elemental priests are restricted to their 
own elemental form until they achieve 12th level. 


pan rk pom ll 
gested that, for a 12th-level caster, 16 Hit oe 


Protection From Energy Drain 
See negative plane protection, 


Protection From Evil 
(Abjuration) 
Reversible 
Sphere: Protection 


Level: 1 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: 3 rds./level 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


~ Protection From Evil, 10’ Radius >= 


When this spell is cast, it creates a magical bar- 
rier around the recipient at a distance of one foot. 
‘The barrier moves with the recipient and has three 
major effects: 

First, all attacks made by evil or evilly enchanted 
creatures against the protected creature receive a 
penalty of -2 to each attack roll, and any saving 
throws caused by such attacks are made by the pro- 
tected creature with a +2 bonus. 

Second, any attempt to exercise mental control 
over the protected creature (if, for example, it had 
been charmed by a vampire) or to invade and take 
over its mind (as by a ghost's magic jar attack) is 
blocked by this spell. Note that the protection does 
not prevent a vampire’s charm itself, nor end it, but 
it does prevent the vampire from exercising mental 
control through the barrier. Likewise, an outside 
life force is merely kept out, and would not be 
expelled if in place before the protection was cast. 

Third, the spell prevents bodily contact by 
creatures of an extraplanar or conjured nature 
(such as aerial servants, elementals, imps, invisible 
stalkers, salamanders, water weirds, xom, and 
others). This causes the natural (body) weapon 
attacks of such creatures to fail and the creature to 
recoil if such attacks require touching the pro- 
tected creature. Animals or monsters summoned or 
conjured by spells or similar magic are likewise 
hedged from the character. This protection ends if 
the protected character makes a melee attack 
against or tries to force the barrier against the 
blocked creature. 

To complete this spell, the priest uses holy 
water or burning incense. 

This spell can be reversed to become protection 
from good; the second and third benefits remain 
unchanged. 

‘The material components for the reverse are a 
circle of unholy water or smoldering dung. 

Notes: Common for clerics (PHB). 


This spell does not specifically hedge out 
undead creatures (except ghouls, as stated in the 
Monstrous Manval tome), unless these have 
been brought by a monster summoning spell or 
equivalent magic or are from another plane. 


Protection From Evil, 10’ Radius 
(Abjuration) 
Reversible 
Sphere: Protection 


Level: 4 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 7 

Duration: | turn/level 

Area of Effect: 10-ft.-radius sphere 
Saving Throw: None 


The globe of protection of this spell is identical 
in all respects to that of a protection from evil 
spell, except that it encompasses a much larger 
area and its duration is greater. The effect is cen- 
tered on and moves with the creature touched. Any 
protected creature within the circle will break the 
warding against enchanted/summoned monsters if 
he attacks those monsters. A creature unable to fit 
completely into the area of effect (for example, a 
21-foot-tall titan) remains partially exposed and 
subject to whatever penalties the DM decides. If 
such a creature is the recipient of the spell, the 
spell acts as a normal protection from evil spell for 
that creature only. To complete this spell, the priest 
must trace a circle 20 feet in diameter using holy 
water and incense. 

The reverse, protection from good, 10’ radius, 
wards against good creatures. To complete this 
spell, the priest must trace a circle 20 feet in diam- 
eter using unholy water and smoldering dung. 

Notes: Common for clerics (PHB). 


Protection From Fiends 
Personal protection is provided by the protection 
from evil spell. For area protection, see protection 
from fiends, 10’ radius and protection from evil, 
10’ radius, 


Protection From Fiends, 10’ Radius 
(Abjuration) 
Sphere: All 


Level: 5 
Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 5 

Duration: 1 turn/level 

Area of Effect: 10-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: None 


The spell creates a globe of absolute protection, 
centered on and mobile with the creature touched. 
The sphere protects those within from any attack 


i are a a ae a eo WKS 


Protection From Gas, 5’ Radius 


Ne 


by creatures from the Lower Planes. These include 
baatezu, tanar'ri, yugoloths, gehreleths, night hags, 
and similar creatures. Their magic resistance is not 
a factor, nor can they dispel the protection by any 
means. Unlike most other protection spells, pro- 
tected individuals can launch attacks from inside 
the sphere on creatures that are hedged out, Forcing 
the protection against a trapped fiend still ends the 
protection immediately. Otherwise, the effect of the 
spell varies with the caster’s level. 

At 9th level, the protection cannot be penetrated 
by creatures with fewer Hit Dice than the caster's 
level. 

At 12th level, the protection cannot be pene- 
trated by creatures of less than demipower status. 

The material component is a powder contain- 
ing a substance inimical to the type of fiend to be 
hedged out; for example, silver (baatezu) or iron 
(tanar'ri). The powder is scattered in a circle 
around the protected creature during the casting. 

Notes: Uncommon priests with major access to 
the sphere of numbers; otherwise, rare. 


Protection From Fire 


See resist fire/resist cold for the general protective 
spell. 


Protection From Fire 
(Abjuration) 
Sphere: Elemental Fire 


Level: 3 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 6 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


The effect of a protection from fire spell differs 
according to the recipient of the magic-either the 
caster or some other creature. In either case, the 
spell lasts no longer than one turn per caster level. 

If the spell is cast upon the caster, it confers 
complete invulnerability to normal fires (torches, 
bonfires, oil fires, and the like) and to exposure 
to magical fires such as fiery dragon breath, 
spells such as burning hands, fireball, fire seeds, 
fire storm, flame strike, meteor swarm, hell 
hound or pyrohydra breath, and so on, until the 
spell has absorbed 12 points of heat or fire 
damage per level of the caster, at which time the 
spell is negated. 

If the spell is cast upon another creature, it 
gives invulnerability to normal fire, gives a bonus 
of +4 to saving throw die rolls against fire-based 


attacks, and it reduces damage sustained from 
magical fires by 50%. 

The material component is the caster’s holy 
symbol. 

Notes: Common for druids (PHB). Optionally 
uncommon for sea priests. 


Optional: A sea priest (only) can cast this spell 
‘on inanimate objects, such as a ship's hull or 
sails, When cast on objects, its duration is one 
hour, plus one tum per level. 


Protection From Fire Elementals 
See protection from elementals, 10’ radius, 


Protection From Gas, 5' Radius 
(Abjuration) 
Sphere: Protection 


Level: 4 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 

Duration: 3 rds./level 
Area of Effect: 5-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: None 


All creatures remaining within this globe of 
protection are immune to toxic gases, poisonous 
vapors, and similar hazards, The 5-foot radius 
sphere is centered on and moves with the caster, 
Harmless vapors that only obscure vision are 
unaffected, and the sphere has no effect on 
gaseous creatures. The degree of protection 
depends on the caster’s level. 

At 7th level, this spell protects against gases of 
nonmagical origin and those created by Ist and 
2nd-level spells (such as stinking cloud). Against 
other magical gases, protected creatures receive a 
+2 bonus to any saving throw allowed. 

At 9th level, immunity is gained to magical 
gases created by spells of 4th level or magical 
creatures of less than 8 Hit Dice. 

At 12th level, the protection is extended to 
spells of 6th level and creatures of less than 16 Hit 
Dice (such as a gorgon’s breath). 

At 15th level, protection is extended to all such 
effects except those that are of demipower- or arti- 
fact-level origin. 

This spell’s unusually short casting time allows 
its rapid use when toxic gas is detected. 

Notes: Rare spell for clerics. 


A U U N 


~ Protection From Good a 


Protection From Good 
Reversed form, see protection from evil. 


Protection From Good, 10’ Radius 
Reversed form, see protection from evil 10’ radius. 


Protection From Insects 
(Abjuration) 
Sphere: Animal 


Level: 3 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 6 

Duration: 3 rds./level 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell prevents bodily contact between 
the protected creature (the caster or a willing 
recipient) and normal insects. It completely 
hedges out swarming attacks of common 
insects, such as those summoned by summon 
swarm and insect plague. Attacks by giant-sized 
insects suffer a -2 penalty to their attack rolls. 
Saving throws for the protected creature against 
their attacks receive a +2 bonus. The spell does 
not affect monsters and insects of a magic 
nature. 

The material components of the spell consist of 
ground insect bodies. 

Notes: Very rare spell. (Updated from DRAGON 
Magazine.) 


Protection From Lightning 
(Abjuration) 
Sphere: Weather 


Level: 4 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 7 

Duration: 1 tum/level maximum 
Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


The effect of a protection from lightning spell 
changes depending on who is the recipient of the 
magic—the caster or some other creature. In either 
case, the spell lasts no longer than one turn per 
caster level. 

If the spell is cast upon the caster, it confers 
complete invulnerability to electrical attack such 
as dragon breath, or magical lightning such as 
lightning bolt, shocking grasp, storm giant, will ’o 
wisp, and so on, until the spell has absorbed 10 


i ne ee 


points of electrical damage per level of the caster, 
at which time the spell is negated. 

If the spell is cast upon another creature, it 
gives a bonus of +4 to the die roll for saving 
throws made vs. electrical attacks, and it reduces 
the damage sustained from such attacks by 50%. 

The caster’s holy symbol is the material com- 


Notes: Common for druids (PHB). 


Protection From Lycanthro 
10’ Radius ssi 

(Abjuration) 
Sphere: Protection 
Level: 4 
Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 4 


Area of Effect: 10-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell covers a group of related effects. The 
one desired is selected when the spell is memo- 
rized. It creates a globe of protection that protects 
all within from the direct attacks of one type of 
lycanthrope. The sphere is centered on and mobile 
with the creature touched. The globe keeps out 49 
Hit Dice of that type of lycanthrope (round up hit 
point bonuses of +4 or more). If more lycan- 
thropes attack than are protected against, the 
remaining ones can cross the barrier and attack. 
Forcing the protection against such creatures 
negates the protection. Otherwise, the effect of the 
spell varies with the caster’s level. 

At 7th level, a specified type of lycanthrope 
with less than 4 Hit Dice is hedged out (for exam- 
ple, wererats and lesser seawolves). 

At 9th level, the lycanthrope can have Jess than 
8 Hit Dice (for example, werewolves, wereboars, 
weretigers, and werebears). 

At 12th level, all attacking lycanthropes of every 
type are hedged out, up to the limit, instead of just 
one type. Further, the protection also works against 
all other shapechangers, as well, such as doppel- 
gangers, some dragon types, druids, jackalweres, 
and those under the influence of polymorph spells. 

The material component is dried wolfsbane, 
which is crumbled and scattered in a circle around 
the protected creature during the casting of the spell. 

Notes: Rare spell for clerics. 


Protection From Magic 5' Radius 


A scroll of protection effect from the DMG. See the 
6th-level wizard spell, antimagic shell. 


Protection From Possession 


Protection From Misfortune 


(Conjuration/Summoning, Invocation) 
Sphere: Protection, Chaos 


Components: V 
Casting Time: 3 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


By casting this spell, the priest seeks to protect 
himself from misfortune, While the spell is in 
operation, the priest is able to negate certain mis- 
fortunes; in game terms, the priest is permitted to 
reroll a certain number of dice rolls that produced 
unfortunate results, The caster can reroll his or her 
own saving throws, and the attack and damage 
rolls made against him or her by enemies (unless 
these resulted in the priest’s death). The following 
cannot be rerolled: the priest's own attack rolls, 
‘own damage rolls, and the saving throws of others, 
Any particular dice roll can be rerolled only once. 

The spell lasts a maximum of 1 tum per level 
of the priest, or until 1d8-1 dice rolls have been 
rerolled; this is recorded by the DM (the player 
never knows how many rerolls the priest has, if 
any!). 

In addition, if a reroll is a natural 1, then out- 
come is the worst possible (for example, a 6 Hit 
Die fireball inflicts 36 points of damage on the 
priest). 

Notes: Granted by Ralishaz of the GREYHAWK 
setting. 


Protection From Orisons 
(Abjuration) 
Sphere: All 


Level: 2 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: 9 hrs. + 1 hr/level 

Area of Effect: Creature or object touched 
Saving Throw: None 


By casting this spell, the priest receives immu- 
nity to the effects of orisons cast by other priests, 
acolytes, or creatures that use the orison spell. The 
spell protects the caster, or one item or person that 
he touches (such as a book or a drawer). Any 
orison cast against the protected person or item 
dissipates with an audible popping sound. Any 
unwilling creature subjected to this spell must be 


touched (via an attack roll) and is allowed a saving 
throw vs. spell to escape the effect, 
Notes: Common where orisons are used. 


orisions also 
rot ti am st pin fom 


Protection From Petrification, 
10’ Radius 
(Abjuration) 
Sphere: Protection 


Level: 5 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: 2 rds./level 

Area of Effect: 10-ft, radius around creature 
touched 

Saving Throw: None 


This spell creates a circle of protection that is 
centered on and mobile with the creature touched. 
All creatures within the circle are absolutely 
immune to any attack forms or spells that cause 
flesh to turn into stone. If a protected creature 
reflects a petrifying gaze attack back outside the 
circle, the monster is not affected by its own gaze: 
The spell renders the petrification power inert. 
Protection from petrification has no effect on crea- 
tures that have already been turned to stone. 

The material component is the priest’s holy 
symbol. 

Notes: Very rare spell. (Updated from PoLYHE- 
DRON Newszine.) 


Protection From Plants 
A scroll of protection effect from the DMG. See the 
6th-level priest spell, anti-plant shell. 


Protection From Poison 
A scroll of protection effect from the DMG. See the 
priest spells slow poison (2nd) and neutralize 
poison (4th). 


Protection From Possession 
See protection from evil. 


De AG te ee eee Oe 


Protection From Prime 


Protection From Prime 
(Abjuration) 
Sphere: Protection 


Level: 1 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: 3 rds./level 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


When this spell is cast, it creates a magical bar- 
rier around the recipient at a distance of 1 foot. 
This barrier moves with the recipient. The subject 
of the spell must be a planar creature or being. 
Protection from prime does not function at all on 
the Prime Material Plane. 

In effect, this spell is a version of the protection 
from evil spell. As such, it has three major effects: 

First, all attacks made by beings from the 
Prime Material Plane against the protected crea- 
ture suffer —2 penalties to attack rolls; any saving 
throws necessitated by such attacks are made with 
+2 bonuses. 

Second, any attempt to possess (as by a magic 
jar attack) or to exercise mental control over the 
protected creature (as by a vampire’s charm abil- 
ity) is blocked by this spell. Note that the protec- 
tion does not prevent the vampire’s charm itself, 
but it does prevent the exercise of mental control 
through the barrier. Likewise, a possessing life 
force is merely kept out. It would not be expelled 
if in place before the protection is cast. 

Third, the spell prevents direct bodily contact 
by creatures from the Prime Material Plane. This 
causes the natural (body) weapon attacks of such 
beings to fail and the beings to recoil, if such 
attacks require touching the protected being. Ani- 
mals or monsters summoned from the Prime Mate- 
rial Plane are likewise hedged from the character. 

This third protection ends if the protected char- 
acter makes a melee attack against or tries to force 
the barrier against the blocked being. The penalty 
applied to attacks from Prime-Material beings pre- 
sented as the first spell effect remains active in any 
event, however. 

To complete this spell, the priest must trace a 3- 
foot-diameter circle on the floor (or ground) with 
the powdered bone of a Prime-Material creature. 

Notes: Rare for planar priests. Unlikely to be 
leamed except through visiting the Outer Planes. 


Protection From Prime, 10’ Radius 
(Abjuration) 
Sphere: Protection 


Level: 4 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 7 

Duration: 1 turn/level 

Area of Effect: 10-ft, radius 
Saving Throw: None 


The globe of protection created by this spell is 
identical in all respects to a protection from prime 
spell (a Ist-level priest spell), except that it pro- 
tects a larger area of effect and has a longer dura- 
tion and casting time. 

When this spell is cast, it creates a magical bar- 
rier centered on and mobile with the recipient. The 
subject of the spell must be a planar creature or 
being. Protection from prime does not function at 
all on the Prime Material Plane. In effect, this spell 
is a version of the protection from evil, 10° spell. 
As such, it has three major effects: 

First, all attacks made by beings from the 
Prime Material Plane against the protected crea- 
tures suffer —2 penalties to attack rolls; any saving 
throws necessitated by such attacks are made with 
+2 bonuses. 

Second, any attempt to possess (as by a magic 
Jar attack) or to exercise mental control over a pro- 
tected creature is blocked by this spell. Likewise, a 
possessing life force is merely kept out. It would 
not be expelled if in place before the protection is 
cast. 

Third, the spell prevents direct bodily contact 
by creatures from the Prime Material Plane. This 
causes the natural (body) weapon attacks of such 
beings to fail and the beings to recoil, if such 
attacks require touching the protected being. Ani- 
mals or monsters summoned from the Prime Mate- 
rial Plane are likewise hedged out. 

This third protection ends if the protected indi- 
viduals make a melee attack against a blocked 
being or the recipient tries to force the barrier 
against the blocked being. The penalty applied to 
attacks from Prime-Material beings presented as 
the first spell effect remains active in any event, 
however. 

‘To complete this spell, the priest must trace a 
10-foot-diameter circle on the floor (or ground) 
with the powdered bone of a Prime-Material crea- 
ture, 
Notes: Rare for planar priests. Unlikely to be 
learned except through visiting the Outer Planes. 


470 


Protection From Scorpions 
A variation of the spell protection from serpents, 
similar in all respects except for the creature 
affected. 


Protection From Serpents — Shaman 
(Abjuration) 
Sphere: Animal 


Level: 2 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 turn 

Duration: Special (24 hr. maximum) 
Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell protects the subject from normal ser- 
pents. Nonmagical and unintelligent snakes simply 
ore the creature’s presence. Giant, magical, or 
intelligent snakes, and snakelike beings such as 
nagas, can still attack, but at a -2 penalty. The pro- 
tected creature has a +1 saving throw bonus against 
injected poisons for the spell 

‘The material component is ash from a fire in 
which a snake has been cremated. Relatively large 
amounts of the ash are required, because, as the 


yeaa 


f 


471 


Protection From Specific Undead, 5’ Radius 


creature's body. The spell ends if the ash is washed 
off, or after 24 hours in any case. If the ash is 
removed from a part of the subject, the exposed 
portion is again vulnerable to snake bites. 

Notes: Common for shamans and other primi- 
tive priests. 


Protection From Shapechangers, 
10’ Radius ái 
See protection from lycanthropes, 10’ radius. 


Protection From Silver 
(Abjuration) 
Sphere: Protection 


Level: 1 

Range: Touch 

Components: S, M 

Casting Time: 3 

Duration: 1 hr./level 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


Most fiends are especially vulnerable to silver 
weapons. Protection from silver does away with 
that vulnerability for the duration of the spell. If a 
protected creature is attacked with a silver weapon, 
the weapon is treated as if it were just a normal 
blade (or mace, or whatever it is). 

The material component is the priest's holy (or 
unholy) symbol. 

Notes: Very rare planar spell, unlikely to be 
learned except through visiting the Outer Planes. 


Protection From Specific Elementals, 
10’ Radius 
See protection from elementals, 10’ radius. 
Protection From S ic 
Lycanthropes, 10’ Radius 
See protection from lycanthropes, 10' radius. 
Protection From Specific Undead, 
5’ Radius 


See protection from undead, 5’ radius. 


Protection From Spirits 


Protection From Spirits 
(Abjuration) 
Sphere: Protection 


Level: 2 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 


Duration: 3 rds./level 
Area of Effect: 5-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: Special 


When cast, this spell creates an invisible barrier 
around the recipient, preventing most spirits from 
entering the area of the circle. Lesser spirits cannot 
enter this circle, although they can still fire mis- 
siles and magical Veils into the area. Lesser spirits 
have a —2 on their chance to hit and the characters 
gain a +2 on saving throws from such magical 
attacks, Greater spirits can enter the area if they 
make a successful saving throw vs. death. Only 
one save is allowed per spirit and an unsuccessful 
save indicates the greater spirit cannot break the 
barrier. Greater spirits suffer a—1 on all attack rolls 
and characters inside the area of effect gain a +1 
on all saving throws from their magical attacks. 
Greater spirits that penetrate the circle also suffer 
a —1 on all saving throws. 

‘The material component is a ginkgo wand with 
paper prayer strips attached. 

Notes: Common for priests from an oriental 
setting; otherwise, very rare. 


Protection From Traps, 5' Radius 
(Abjuration) 
Sphere: Protection 


Level: 4 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: 5 rds./level 

Area of Effect: 5-ft. radius around creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


The spell creates a globe of protection that 
prevents traps (and alarms) from being triggered 
by those within the area. The sphere is centered on 
and mobile with the creature touched. The traps 
within the sphere do not function, but neither are 
they revealed. The sphere only prevents activation 
of the trap’s trigger. It provides no protection 
against traps triggered by an unprotected creature, 
nor does it provide protection against a trap with- 
out a trigger, such as an open pit. The degree of 
protection depends on the caster’s level. 


At 7th level, the sphere protects against mechan- 
ical traps and alarms. 

At 9th level, the protection is extended to mag- 
ical traps and alarms created by those of the 
caster’s own level or less. 

At 12th level, the protection is extended to 
magical traps and alarms created by those up to 4 
levels higher than the priest. 

The material component is the priest’s holy 
symbol. 

Notes: Rare spell for clerics. 


Protection From Undead, 5’ Radius 
(Abjuration, Necromancy) 
Sphere: Protection 


Level: 4 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: 5 rds./level 

Area of Effect: 5-ft. radius around creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell covers a group of related effects. The 
one desired is selected when the spell is memo- 
rized. it creates a globe of protection, that protects 
all within from the direct attacks of one type of 
undead creature. It does not protect against the 
creature’s magical spells or other attack forms. 
‘The sphere is centered on and mobile with the 
creature touched. The globe keeps out 35 Hit Dice 
of undead creatures (round up hit point bonuses of 
+4 or more). If more undead creatures attack than 
the barrier and attack. Forcing the protection 
against such creatures negates the protection. Oth- 
erwise, the effect of the spell varies with the 
caster’s level. 

At 7th level, one type of undead creature with 
less than 4 Hit Dice is hedged out (ghasts or lesser 
creatures), 

At 9th level, one type of undead creature with 
less than 8 Hit Dice is hedged out (spectres or 
lesser creatures). 

At 12th level, all attacking undead are hedged 
out, regardless of type, up to the limit, including 
“special” undead and those that cannot be turned 
at all. 

‘The material component is dust from a destroyed 
undead creature of the type to be hedged out (at least 
vampire dust if all are hedged out) scattered in a 
circle around the protected creature during the cast- 
ing of the spell. 

Notes: Rare spell for clerics. 


472 


Psionic Barrier 


Protection From Water Elementals 
See protection from elementals, 10’ radius. 


Protection From Weather 
(Abjuration) 
Reversible 
Sphere: Elemental Air, Elemental Water 
Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 7 
Duration: 1 hr/level 
Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


When this spell is cast, it creates a magical bar- 
rier around the recipient at a distance of one foot. 
The barrier moves with the recipient, who com- 
pletely ignores natural (not magical) weather effects. 
Driving rain, wind, or driven sand do not impede 
progress, Incredible heat does not affect water intake 
or dehydration, Natural lightning cannot affect him. 

Normal light and darkness are not considered 
weather effects for this spell. The after effects of 
weather—flood waters, muddy ground, or drifted 
sand, for instance—impede progress normally. 

The recipient receives a saving throw bonus of 
+6 to magically created weather effects such as 
lightning bolt, wind wall, cone of cold, chain light- 
ning, incendiary cloud, call lightning, and sunray, 
and a normal saving throw against magical weather 
spells that are normally listed as having none, such 
as wall of fog, fog cloud, gust of wind, ice storm, 
solid fog, death fog, control temperature, 10° 
radius, control weather, weather summoning, and 
control winds. The recipient can save vs. spells 
against a dust devil, success indicating it cannot 
attack him. As a side effect, spells such as whisper- 
ing wind and wind walk cannot be cast or received 
by the recipient of this spell. 

The reverse of this spell, intensify weather, sub- 
jects a creature to effects more severe than the 
actual weather would inflict. Driving wind or rain 
drastically slows the creature, Natural lightning 
inflicts double damage. A creature in the heat 
requires double the normal ration of water to avoid 
dehydration. The creature loses any possible save 
against magical weather spells, and those causing 
damage add one hit point per die inflicted. The 
creature gets a save to avoid the effects of this spell. 

The material components for this spell are a 
small paper umbrella (or, for its reverse, a minute 
lightning rod). 

Notes: Uncommon for priests from the DARK 
Sun setting. 


Protection From Winds 
(Abjuration) 
Sphere: Elemental Air, Protection 


Level: 3 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 6 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


‘The effect of a protection from winds spell dif- 
fers according to whether the caster or another crea- 
ture is the recipient of the spell. In either case, the 
spell lasts no longer than one tum per caster level. 

If the spell is cast upon the caster, it confers 
complete invulnerability to damage and ill effect 
inflicted by natural winds (no matter how strong), 
gust of wind spells, and similar threats, including 
the effects of the maddening winds of Pandemo- 
nium. The invulnerability lasts until the spell has 
absorbed 12 points of wind damage per level of the 
caster or one turn per caster level, whichever 
comes first. 

If the spell is cast upon another creature, it 
reduces damage sustained by wind attacks by 50% 
and confers a saving throw bonus of +4 to the die 
roll against such attacks, as well as full protection 
against Pandemonium’s winds. 

The material component is the priest’s holy 
symbol. 

Notes: Rare for planar priests. Unlikely to be 
learned except through visiting the Outer Planes. 


Psionic Barrier 
(Evocation) 
Sphere: Guardian 


Level: 6 
Range: 0 

Components: V, $, M 

Casting Time: 1 tum 

Duration: 1 turn/level 

Area of Effect: 30-ft. diameter sphere 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell creates a stationary, spherical barrier 
that is totally opaque to psionic activity. No 
psionic energy can pass the barrier in either direc- 
tion, (This does not prohibit activity inside the 
sphere.) The sphere is invisible to all but psionic 
creatures actively searching for it. To them it 
appears as a shimmering area akin to heat waves 
on a hot summer day. The barrier can be dismissed 
at will by the caster. 


473 


~ Psychic Immolation va 


This spell is often cast prior to major cere- 
monies to prohibit unwanted psionic intrusion, 
When cast with the aid of a combine spell, the area 
of effect is extended by 5 feet for every additional 
priest in the circle. 

The material components of the spell are holy 
water sprinkled around the area to be protected, 
the priest's holy symbol, and a specially blessed 
weapon associated with the caster's faith. 

Notes: Very rare spell. (Updated from POLYHE- 
DRON Magazine.) 


Psychic Immolation 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 
Sphere: Elemental Fire 


Level: 3 
Range: 0 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 5 
Duration: | rdflevel 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell summons a small creature from the 
Elemental Plane of Fire that devours mental 
energy. This being can be hurled as a missile at a 
psionic opponent. If a hit is scored (at a +1 bonus 
to hit) the psionic creature is immediately engulfed 
in emerald flames. A nonpsionic creature is not 
affected. A psionic creature loses 10 psionic points 
and 1 point of fire damage per round for the dura- 
tion of the spell. A successful saving throw vs. 
spell means the psionic creature has sated the sum- 
moned creature in a single round. 

‘The elemental creature can be struck by magi- 
cal weapons of +1 or better enchantment (AC 4) 
and dispersed by a total of 18 points of damage. 

Notes: Very rare spell. (Updated from 
POLYHEDRON Newszine.) 


Psychic Impressions — Savant 
(Divination) 
Sphere: Divination 


Level: 4 
Range: Touch 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: | rd. 
Duration: 1 rd. 


Saving Throw: 


A savant who handles an object while using 
this spell may to glimpse important happenings 
that befell its previous possessors. Thus, a savant 


examining a sword next to a skeleton might 
receive a vision of the fighter in his former life, 
and possibly what killed him. 

The savant receives information about the 
owner's race, class or profession, alignment, and 
possibly his fate. These can be determined with 
90% accuracy; failure results in no reading. The 
owner's fate is not revealed past the moment he 
lost possession of the item or died in its immediate 
vicinity; for example, if the previous owner 
dropped her hat while being kidnapped, the savant 
learns nothing about the owner's current location. 

‘The caster has a 5% chance per level of deter- 
mining a command word associated with a magi- 
cal object, to a maximum of 90%. If the item is an 
artifact or relic, the DM decides what information, 
if any, is learned. If the object has a particularly 
tragic or legendary history, the caster is 30% likely 
to experience a vision of the item’s past. 

The spell is 5% per level likely to reveal any 
psionic potential in a device, including powers and 
any stored PSPs, 

Notes: Restricted to savant-clerics, common. 


Puffball 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Plant 


Level: 1 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: 2 rds./level 

Area of Effect: 1 mushroom, and so on 
Saving Throw: Special 


A druid who casts puffball on a normal mush- 
room, truffle, or toadstool (up to 6 inches in diam- 
eter) transforms the fungus into a magical puffball, 
which can be dropped or thrown. The DM decides 
what type of roll, if any, is required to hit the 
target, and misses use the grenade-like missile 
table in the DMG to determine the point of impact. 

The puffball bursts upon landing, releasing a 
cloud of spores 10 feet in diameter. Those caught 
in the spore cloud must make a successful saving 
throw vs. poison or suffer an attack of coughing 
and choking. They can make no attacks and lose 
all Dexterity bonuses to Armor Class and saving 
throws. The cloud dissipates in 1d3+1 rounds; 
residual effects still afflict creatures one round 
after they escape the cloud or it fades. 

The spell’s effects do not affect undead or sim- 
ilar nonbreathing creatures. If the missile is not 
thrown (or dropped) by the time its duration 
expires, the enchantment is lost. 


474 


Pyrotechnics 


el 


The caster sprinkles the material component, a 
pinch of ground puffball, over the fungus to be 
enchanted, 

Notes: Uncommon for druids. 


Purify Food & Drink 
(Alteration) 
Reversible 
Sphere: All 


Level: 1 

Range: 30 yds. 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: 1 cu, ft./level, 10-ft.-square area 
Saving Throw: None 


When cast, this spell makes spoiled, rotten, 
poisonous, or otherwise contaminated food and 
water pure and suitable for eating and drinking. Up 
to one cubic foot of food and drink per level can be 
thus made suitable for consumption. This spell 
does not prevent subsequent natural decay or 
spoilage. Unholy water and similar food and drink 
of significance is spoiled by purify food and drink, 
but the spell has no effect on creatures of any type 
nor upon magical potions. 

The reverse of the spell is putrefy food and 
drink. This spoils even holy water. It likewise has 
no effect upon creatures or potions. 

Notes: Common for clerics (PHB). 


Purify Self 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: All 


Level: 1 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 4 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell causes all grime, dirt, and stains to be 
removed from the caster and his vestments. It 
enables priests to present themselves in immaculate 
condition. All clothing wom by the caster is 
restored to its original intended color and it even 
retains any holy marks or adomments added after 
its creation. Wounds in the body of the caster are 
cleansed and infections are purified. One point of 
damage is healed if no curative spells have been 
previously applied to a wound, and all normal 
wounds are considered bound after this spell is cast. 


Priesthoods for which the effects of this spell 
are inappropriate, such as those of the various 
deities of corruption, disease, and of the earth, 
employ variants of this spell and material compo- 
nents more appropriate for their faiths. 

The material component is a piece of soap. 

Notes: Uncommon spell from the FORGOTTEN 
REALMS setting. 


Purify Water — Druid 
(Alteration) 
Reversible 
Sphere: Elemental Water 


Level: 1 

Range: 40 yds. 
Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: | cu. ft./level 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell makes dirty, contaminated water 
clean and pure, suitable for consumption. Up to 
‘one cubic foot per level of the druid casting the 
spell can be thus purified. All affected water must 
be within a 10-foot cubic volume, 

The reverse of the spell, contaminate water, 
works in exactly the some manner, and even 
holy/unholy water can be spoiled by its effects. 

Notes: Uncommon for druids; otherwise, 
unknown (Ist Ed. PHB). Most other priests have 
purify food & drink, 


Putrefy Food & Drink 
Reversed form, purify food & drink. 


Pyrotechnics 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Elemental Fire 


Level: 3 

Range: 160 yds. 

Components; V, S, M 

Casting Time: 6 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 10 or 100 times a single fire source 
Saving Throw: Special 


A pyrotechnics spell draws on an existing fire 
source to produce either of two effects, at the 
option of the caster. 

First, it can produce a flashing and fiery burst 
of glowing, colored aerial fireworks that lasts one 
round. This effect temporarily blinds those crea- 
tures in, under, or within 120 feet of the area that 


475 


~ Pyrotechnics p 


also have an unobstructed line of sight to the 
effect, for 1d4+1 rounds unless the creatures roll 
successful saving throws vs. spell. The fireworks 
fill a volume ten times greater than the original fire 
source, 

Second, it can cause a thick, writhing stream of 
smoke to arise from the source and form a choking 
cloud that lasts for one round per experience level 
of the caster. This covers a roughly hemispherical 
volume from the ground or floor up (or conform- 
ing to the shape of a confined area) that totally 
obscures vision beyond two feet. The smoke fills a 
volume 100 times that of the fire source. 

The spell uses one fire source within the area of 
effect, which is immediately extinguished. An 
extremely large fire can be used as the source, and 
it is only partially extinguished by the casting. 
Magical fires are not extinguished, although a fire- 
based creature (such as a fire elemental) used as a 
source suffers 1d4 points of damage, plus 1 point 
of damage per caster level. This spell does not 
function under water. 

Notes: Common for druids (PHB). 


476 


Quench Fire 
Reversed form, produce fire. 


Quench The Spi 
(Necromancy) 
Sphere: Necromantic 


Level: 6 

Range: 60 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 9 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell is a priest version of the 7th-level 
wizard spell finger of death. It stuffs out the victim's 
life force. The casting priest utters the spell’s incan- 
tation, points the finger bone at the victim, and snaps 
it. The creature is allowed a saving throw vs. death 
magic. If the saving throw is successful, the creature 
does not die, but takes 2d8+1 points of damage. A 
creature killed by this damage can be revived nor- 
mally. A creature failing the saving throw dies imme- 
diately and can be neither raised nor resurrected. 

The spell initiates changes in humans who fail 
their saving throws, such that after three days the 
caster can, by means of a special ceremony, animate 


their corpses as ju-ju zombies under his or 
her control. This zombie-creation cere- 
mony requires the priest’s holy symbol 
and six vials of unholy water. These 
mystic changes can be reversed before ani- 
mation by a limited wish or a similar spell 
cast directly upon such a body, preventing the cere- 
mony from working on that victim. A full wish 
restores the subject to life. 

The material component is a fleshless human 
finger bone. 

Notes: Granted by the evil god Myrkul in the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Quest 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
Sphere: All 
Level: 5 
Range: 60 yds. 


Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 8 
Duration: Until fulfilled 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


The quest spell enables the priest to require 
the affected creature to perform a service and 


Quickgrowth 


return to the priest with proof that the deed was 
accomplished. The quest can, for example, 
require that the creature locate and return some 
important or valuable object, rescue a notable 
person, release some creature, capture a strong- 
hold, slay a person, deliver some item, and so 
forth. If the quest is not properly followed, due 
to disregard, delay, or perversion, the creature 
affected by the spell loses 1 from its saving 
throw rolls for each day of such action. This 
penalty is not removed until the quest is prop- 
erly pursued or the priest cancels it. (Certain 
circumstances temporarily suspend a quest, and 
others discharge or cancel it; your DM will give 
you appropriate information as the need to 
know arises.) 

An unwilling subject is allowed a saving 
throw vs. spell. However, if the individual 
quested agrees to a task, even if the agreement 
is gained by force or trickery, no saving throw 
is allowed, If a quest is just and deserved, a 
creature of the priest's religion cannot avoid it, 
and any creature of the priest's alignment saves 
with a —4 penalty to the saving throw, in any 
case. 

A quest cannot be dispelled, but can be 
removed by a priest of the same religion or of 
higher level than the caster. Some artifacts and 
relics might negate the spell, as can direct inter- 
vention by a deity. Likewise, an unjust or unde- 
served quest grants bonuses to its saving throws, 
or might even automatically fail. 

The material component is the priest's holy 
symbol. 

Notes: Common for clerics (PHB). 


Quickgrowth 
(Alteration) 
Reversible 


Sphere: Plant 


Level: 6 

Range: 1 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: 1 plant or tree 
Saving Throw: None 


By means of this spell, the shukenja can hasten 
the growth of any one plant (or plantlike creature), 
causing it to leaf, blossom, and bear fruit out of 
season. The spell does not alter the size or charac- 
teristics of the plant except as a function of normal 
growth. The rate of growth can be altered by up to 
one month for every two levels of the caster. Once 
cast, the plant continues to follow this cycle, 
regardless of weather or other conditions. Thus, 
cherry trees can be made to blossom in the dead of 
winter, plums can bear fruit months before they are 
normally ready, and so on. When first cast, the 
plant instantly goes through the various stages of 
growth until the desired point is reached. Thus 
leaves sprout, buds appear, blossoms open, and 
fruit ripens before the eyes of all onlookers. Once 
the desired stage of growth is reached, the plant 
proceeds with normal growth thereafter, maintain- 
ing its new seasonal cycle. 

‘The reverse of this spell, wither, causes plants 
and plantlike creatures to shrivel and die, For 
normal plants, this is automatic. However, plant- 
like creatures are allowed a saving throw vs. death 
to avoid the effect of the spell. 

‘The focus for the both forms is the shukenja’s 
staff, which is not harmed. 

Notes: Common for oriental priests; otherwise, 
very rare. 


478 


Rage 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Combat 


Level: 5 

Range: Touch 

‘Components: V 

Casting Time: 8 

Duration: 1 tum +1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


Casting this spell invokes a battle fervor that 
temporarily raises Strength, combat abilities, 
and hit points. The affected individual's Strength 
is raised to 18, regardless of racial maximums, 
and to 19 if the individual already has a Strength 
of 18. The affected creature gains an additional 
attack per round and also 10 hit points immedi- 
ately; if these hit points would exceed the crea- 
ture’s normal hit point maximum, the excess 
disappears when the spell expires. Further, the 
creature gains a +1 bonus to initiative and a +2 
bonus to saving throws while the spell is in 
effect, A 

Despite the battle fervor, the enraged creature 
can tell friend from foe with a successful Intelli- 
gence check at a -2 penalty. However, enraged 
creatures are so intent on combat that they cannot 
cast spells, 

After the spell elapses, the formerly enraged 
creature is exhausted and must rest | full turn by 
lying down and not moving before engaging in 
combat or other stressful activities again. 

Notes: Granted by the evil god Malar the 
Beastlord of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting, 


Rainbow 
An obscure 4th-level druid spell reputed to create 
a rainbow bridge. Believed to be a less powerful 
forerunner of the standard Sth-level spell. 


Rainbow 
(Evocation, Alteration) 
Sphere: Sun, Weather 


Level: 5 
Range: 120 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 7 
Duration: 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


To cast this spell, the priest must be in sight of 
a rainbow of any sort, or have a special component 


Sf Sh 
ea, 


(see below). The rainbow spell has two 
applications, and the priest can choose 
the desired one at the time of casting. 
These applications are as follows: 

Bow: The spell creates a shimmering, multi- 
layered short composite bow of rainbow hues. It 
is light and easy to pull, so that any character 
can use it without penalty for nonproficiency. It 
is magical: Each of its shimmering missiles is 
the equivalent of a +2 weapon, including attack 
and damage bonuses. Magic resistance can 
negate the effect of any missile fired from the 
bow. The bow fires seven missiles before disap- 
pearing. It can be fired up to four times per 
round, Each time a missile is fired, one hue 
leaves the bow, corresponding to the color of 
arrow that is released, Each color of arrow has 
the ability to cause double damage to certain 
creatures, as follows: 


os 


Red: Fire dwellers/users and fire 
elementals 

Orange: Creatures or constructs of clay, 
sand, earth, stone or similar materials, 
and earth elementals 

Yellow: Vegetable opponents (including 
fungus creatures, shambling mounds, 
treants, and so on) 

Green; Aquatic creatures and water ele- 
mentals 

Blue: Aerial creatures, electricity-using 
creatures, and air elementals 

Indigo: Acid-using or poison-using crea- 
tures 

Violet: Metallic or regenerating crea- 
tures 


When the bow is drawn, an arrow of the appro- 
priate color magically appears, nocked and ready. 
If no color is requested, or a color that has already 
been used is asked for, then the next arrow (in the 
order of the spectrum) appears. 


Bridge: The caster causes the rainbow to 
form a seven-hued bridge up to three 
feet wide per level of the caster. It must 
be at least 20 feet long and can be as 
long as 120 yards, according to the 
caster’s desire. It lasts as long as the 
spell duration or until ordered out of 
existence by the caster. 


The components for this spell are the priest's 
holy symbol and a vial of holy water. If no rain- 
bow is in the vicinity, the caster can substitute a 
diamond of not less than 1,000 gp value, specially 


479 


~ Rainshield 


prepared with bless and prayer spells while in 
sight of a rainbow. The holy water and diamond 
disappear when the spell is cast. 

Notes: Common for druids (PHB). 


Rainshield 
(Conjuration) 
Sphere: Protection 


Level: 1 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 1 

Duration: 2 turns/level 
Area of Effect: 2-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell causes an invisible, slightly convex 
barrier about three feet in diameter to appear five 
feet above the caster’s head. The rainshield shel- 
ters the caster from rain or other liquids falling 
from above. It can be freely penetrated by solid 
objects or magical effects that are not liquid. 

With conscious effort, the caster can move the 
rainshield from its position directly overhead to a 
better angle for stopping wind-blown rain, or even 
directly in front or to the side to impede a direct 
liquid-based attack. The limited area the rainshield 
protects may allow splashes to strike the caster even 
if the major part of an attack is diverted. Others 
standing near the caster might share the benefits at 
the DM’s discretion, but the essential protection is 
the caster’s, and the rainshield cannot be deliber- 
ately positioned give more benefit to another. 

Notes: Very rare spell (Updated from DRAGON 
Magazine.) 


Raise Dead 
(Necromancy) 
Reversible 
Sphere: Necromantic 


Level: 5 

Range: 30 yds. 
‘Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: 1 person 
Saving Throw: Special 


A priest who casts a raise dead spell can 
restore life to a dwarf, gnome, half-elf, halfling, or 
human (other creatures may be allowed, at the 
DM's option). The length of time that the person 
has been dead is of importance, as the priest can 
raise persons dead only up to a limit of one day for 


DO a a Se 


each experience level of the priest (that is, a 9th- 
level priest can raise a person who has been dead 
for up to nine days). 

The body of the person must be whole; other- 
wise, missing parts are still missing when the 
person is brought back to life. Likewise, other ills, 
such as poison and disease, are not negated. The 
raised person must roll a successful resurrection 
survival check to survive the ordeal (see Table 3: 
Constitution) and loses 1 point of Constitution. 
Furthermore, the raised person is weak and help- 
less in any event, and needs a minimum of one full 
day of rest in bed for each day or fraction dead. The 
person has but | hit point when raised and must 
regain the rest by natural healing or curative magic. 

A character's starting Constitution is an absolute 
limit to the number of times the character can be 
revived by this means. 

‘The somatic component is a pointed finger. 

The reverse of the spell, slay living, grants the 
victim a saving throw vs. death magic. If it is suc- 
cessful, the subject sustains damage equal only to 
that of a cause serious wounds spell—that is, 
2d8+1 points of damage. Failure means the crea- 
ture dies instantly, 

Notes: Common for clerics (PHB). Druids 
employ the reincarnation spell, instead. 


Raise Water 


Reversed form, lower water. 


Rally 
A 2nd-level spell of the sphere of War. See appen- 
dix in Vol. 3. 


Random Causality 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Chaos 


Casting Time: 3 rds. + 1 rd/level 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 weapon 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell creates a rift in the nature of cause 
and effect. The spell is cast upon an opponent's 
weapon. When the weapon is used, it hits and 
causes damage normally, but the damage is not 
applied to the creature struck by the weapon. 
Instead, the person wielding the weapon or one of 
his companions suffers the damage. If the weapon 
misses its target on any round, no damage is 
caused in that round. 


Rapture 


Ne 


Using a die roll, the DM randomly determines 
who takes the damage. The DM selects a die with 
a value nearest the number of eligible creatures 
(the wielder of the weapon and his companions). If 
the number of creatures does not equate to highest 
value of a die, the wielder of the affected weapon 
takes the extra chances to be hit. For example, if a 
goblin wields a sword affected by this spell, he and 
his six companions are eligible to receive the 
damage. The DM rolls 1d8. On a roll of 1-6, one 
of the goblin’s companions suffers the damage; on 
a roll of 7 or 8, the goblin with the affected 
weapon suffers the damage. 

The weapon is affected for 3 rounds, plus 1 
additional round per level of the spelicaster. If the 
wielder of the weapon changes weapons while the 
spell is in effect, the discarded weapon remains 
affected. 

The material component is a bronze die. 

Notes: Common for priests with access to the 
sphere of Chaos (ToM). 


Ranike Cloud 
Casting Time: 3 


Duration: 1 rd/level 


Area of Effect: Cloud, 40 x 20 x 20 ft. 
Saving Throw: None 


(Evocation) 
Sphere: Plant 


Level; 3 
Range: 10 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 


‘This spell creates a cloud of pungent smoke 
exactly like that produced when the sap of the 
ranike tree is burned. This smoke limits visibility 
as a blizzard or dense fog does, but its main asset 
is its ability to repel all insects and insectlike crea- 
tures, luding thri-kreen, that come in contact 
with it. Once those creatures are engulfed in the 
cloud, they immediately flee the area in the 
manner of undead tumed by a cleric. Intelligent 
insects like the thri-kreen may run before they are 
touched, once they see what's coming. 

The cloud moves away from the caster at a 
speed of 10 feet per round, rolling along the sur- 
face of the ground. A moderate breeze can alter the 
cloud’s course, but it won't move back toward its 
caster. A strong wind breaks it up within four 
rounds, and stronger winds keep the cloud from 
forming in the first place. Very thick vegetation 
disperses the cloud in two rounds, but the only 
place on Athas that qualifies as such terrain is the 
halflings’ forest. The smoke does not sink as many 
vapors do (like a cloudkill spell); it also cannot 


481 


penetrate liquids or be cast underwater—not a 
great concern on Athas. 

The material component is a chunk of wood 
from the ranike tree, 

Notes: Common for priests from the DARK SUN 
setting. 


Rapport 
(Alteration) 


Sphere: Thought 


Level: 4 

Range: 30 yds. 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: | tum + 1 rd/level 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: None 


‘This spell is a deeper and more intense version 
of telepathy. It allows the priest to communicate 
silently and instantly with a single willing subject. 
Participants may share deeper thoughts than with 
telepathy, including emotions and memories. Each 
participant sees, hears, and otherwise senses 
everything experienced by the other, although such 
vicarious experiences feel diluted and cannot be 
mistaken for direct sensations. 

The participants can quickly share such per- 
sonal concepts as plans, hopes, and fears, but they 
cannot share skills or spells. Thus, it is impossible 
to communicate the procedure for casting a partic- 
ular spell or for picking a lock. 

Communication through rapport is approxi- 
mately 15 times faster than verbal communication. 
As with telepathy, the priest can establish separate 
channels to multiple individuals; each such link- 
age requires one casting of the spell. There is no 
crosstalk between the channels, however. 

Notes: Common for priests with major access 
to the sphere of Thought. 


Rapture 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
Sphere: Charm 


Level: 3 

Range: 1 yd./level 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 6 
Duration: 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: | creature 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell confers a state of bliss upon its recip- 
ient, temporarily raising his or her morale to 20 and 


Rapture of the Deep 
Ne 


banishing all feelings of pain, nausea, or weariness, 
though it actually heals and changes nothing except 
the recipient's state of mind (and thus spell effects 
based on sudden negative sensory perceptions, 
such as the incapacitation caused by a stinking 
cloud). As far as any injuries permit, the recipient 
acts happy, refreshed, rested, high-spirited, and 
unhurt. While the recipient is enraptured, lures 
designed to prey upon his or her libido are ignored 
(such as the song of sirens). Enraptured recipients 
are not affected by hypnosis or any attempts (mag- 
ical or psionic) to control or influence their minds 
(for example, charm person spells). 

The enraptured state can be a mixed blessing. A 
being affected by a rapture spell must make a suc- 
cessful saving throw vs. paralyzation or be so 
strongly affected as to be stunned for the spell 
duration. Stunned beings tremble, drop any held 
items or weapons, and can take no voluntary or 
deliberate actions until the spell wears off. Rapture 
affects only intelligent mammals. Priests of Sune 
can cast rapture on themselves; they receive a +4 
bonus to their saving throws to avoid being 
stunned. 

Notes: Granted by Sune, Lady of Love, of the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Rapture of the Deep 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Elemental Water 


Level: 6 

Range: 60 ft. 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: 1 tum 

Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell causes nitrogen bubbles to form 
inside the bloodstream of the targeted creature. 
These bubbles slowly travel toward the victim’s 
brain, causing mood shifts, perceptual alterations, 
and ever-increasing damage to the target as the 
spell progresses. 

The following chart details the specific effects. 
The creature receives a saving throw at the begin- 
ning of each phase. A successful saving throw 
negates the current effect, but does not end the 
spell. The recipient need not attempt another 
saving throw until the spell enters its next phase. 
Marine creatures receive a bonus of +3 to their 
saving throws throughout the spell’s duration. 

A creature failing the saving throw suffers the 
listed effect for the spell's duration, or until he 
fails a saving throw against a subsequent effect, in 


which case the effect for the current phase replaces 
the previous effect. 


Round Effect 

12 ‘The subject experiences an overwhelming 
feeling of euphoria and will break off 
combat if he fails his saving throw. The 


with open arms. If the spelicaster is hidden, 
the recipient stares blankly into space. In 
either case, the victim loses all defensive 
bonuses from Dexterity, and all attacks 
directed against him gain a +4 attack roll 
bonus. 

5-6 The subject feels euphoria as noted 
above. In addition, he suffers 1d8 points 
of damage each round. 

7-8 The subject becomes completely inca- 

pacitated by extreme pain and suffers 

3d8 points of damage per round. 

The subject becomes (or remains) inca- 

pacitated, suffering intense pain and 4d8 

points of damage per round until the 
spell ends. 


9-10 


The caster must concentrate on the targeted 
creature for the duration of the spell and cannot 
attack or cast any other spells while doing so. The 
caster can end the spell at any time. 

Notes: Uncommon for sea priests; otherwise, 
rare. 


Read Baned Letters 
Lost spell. Reputed to allow the safe reading of a 
cursed scroll. Wouldn't it be nice... 


Recall Spell — Savant 


‘This spell confers the ability to read a language 
for the duration of the spell. It does not translate 
magical scripts used to record wizard spell books, 
nor allow use of wizard spell scrolls. It does not 
decipher codes, nor does it allow the caster to 
speak or write the language. 

The material component is the priest's holy 
symbol. 

Notes: Very rare spell. 


Reanimation 
(Necromancy) 
Sphere: Necromantic 


Level: 4 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: | rd. 

Duration: | day/level 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: Special 


With this spell the shukenja revives a recently 
dead character (dead for no more than 24 hours) 
into a state of half-life, neither dead nor fully 
alive, The reanimated character must make a 
successful system shock roll for the spell to have 
effect, although this does not cause a loss of 
Constitution. If successful, the reanimated char- 
acter has | hit point. The reanimated character 
cannot fight or use magical items and has no 
spells memorized (nor can it regain spells), but it 
can move and speak. The movement rate is half 
normal and the speech is slow and slurred, Fur- 
thermore, the reanimated character's memory is 
cloudy and confused and it has trouble remem- 
bering even basic details concerning its past life 
and friends, If left unmatched, the character is 
prone to wander off randomly with no concep- 
tion of where it is going or where it has been. 
The reanimated character can be slain again (and 
reanimated again if necessary). While in this 
state, the character has no need of food, sleep or 
drink. The reanimated character can be returned 
to normal function through the use of a raise 
dead, resurrection, limited wish, or wish spell. 

The material components for this spell are a 
prayer-inscribed strip of white cloth, the shukenja’s 
holy symbol, and a stick of incense. 

Notes: Common for oriental priests; otherwise, 
very rare. 


Reaving Blades 
(Evocation, Necromancy) 
Sphere: Combat 


Level: 4 
Range: 10 yds/level 
Components: V, S, M 


Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell creates two whirling black blades of 
force that spin end over end as they fly through the 
air at MV Fly 18 (B) to strike at whatever targets 
the caster wills them to—either two separate beings 
or a single foe. The blades of force vanish at the 
end of the second round and do no damage to inan- 
imate objects, but each one silently slices twice 
during a round at undead and living things. The 
reaving blades strike with the caster's THACO, but 
with +6 attack bonus, and deal 2d12 points of 
damage on a successful strike. Reaving blades does 
no damage to items worn or carried by attacked 
beings, though fragile items could be harmed if 
dropped by a struck creature. 

‘The material components of this spell are two 
raven's feathers and a fragment of or an entire 
bladed weapon. 

Notes: Granted by the evil lesser power Iyachtu 
Xvim, son of Bane, of the FORGOTTEN REALMS set- 
ting. 


Recall Spell — Savant 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Thought 


Level: 6 

Range: 0 

‘Components: V, (M) 
Casting Time: As spell +1 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell allows the savant to recast any previ- 
ously cast savant spell of Ist through Sth level. 
Material components must still be obtained if the 
desired spell requires them. The casting time is 
equal to that of the desired spell plus one. 

Notes: Restricted to savant-clerics; common. 


A 483 Y 


~ Recitation 


Recitation 
(Abjuration, Invocation/Evocation) 
Sphere: Combat 


Level: 4 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 7 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: 60-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: None 


By reciting a sacred passage or declaration, the 
priest invokes his deity’s blessing upon himself 
and his allies, while causing confusion and weak- 
ness among his enemies. All creatures within the 
area of effect at the instant of the spell's comple- 
tion are affected. Allies of the priest gain a +2 
bonus to attack rolls and saving throws, or a +3 
bonus if they are of the same faith (not just align- 
ment) as the caster. Enemies suffer a -2 penalty to 
attack rolls and saving throws. After the recitation, 
the priest is free to take further actions during the 
spell’s duration as he sees fit—he need not con- 
centrate to maintain the spell. As a result, it is pos- 
sible for the priest to cast a prayer spell, which 
increases the bonuses and penalties provided to +3 
and -3 respectively. If another priest is using chant 
at the same time, then the bonuses and penalties 
given by it are also allowed to add to the total. 

The material spell component is the priest's 
holy symbol and a copy of whatever text or scroll 
he holds sacred. Neither are consumed by the spell. 

Notes: Uncommon for priests with major 
access to the sphere of Combat (PO:SM). 


Recover Trail — Ranger 
(Divination) 
Sphere: Plant 


Level: 1 

Range: Special 
Components: V, $ 
Casting Time: 4 + Special 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


A caster who has lost a quarry’s trail while 
using the tracking proficiency can use this spell 
to proceed. The spell only works in terrain con- 
taining some type of vegetation (such as trees, 
grass, or seaweed), The quarry must have left 
some potential trail on which the spell can act 
(the spell cannot track a creature that has tele- 
ported or plane shifted, for example). The spell 


has a success chance of 60% + 2% per level of the 
caster. 

If successful, within an hour after casting the 
spell, the vegetation in a particular area begins to 
flutter, as if being blown by a gentle breeze. If the 
wind is already blowing, the vegetation moves up 
and down, or moves in another unusual way to 
attract the caster’s attention. When examining this 
area, the caster won't notice a footprint, broken 
twig, or other sign previously overlooked, indicat- 
ing to correct trail. 

This spell immediately negates a pass without 
trace spell if cast directly for that purpose, other- 
wise it stills function normally to allow tracking 
along the disguised trail. 

Any spellcaster with access to both the plant 
sphere and the tracking proficiency can use this spell. 

Notes; Restricted to spellcasters with the Track- 
ing proficiency and access to the Plant sphere. 


Reduce Animal 
Reversed form, animal growth. 


Reed Staff — Halfling 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Plant 


Level: 1 

Range: Touch 

Components; V, M 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: 3 rds. + 1 rd/level 
Area of Effect: 1 blade of grass 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell transforms a normal blade of field 
grass into a quarterstaff that can then be used as a 
weapon. Although the quarterstaff possesses no 
bonuses to attack or damage rolls, it is considered 
a magical weapon for determining what creatures 
it can successfully strike. 

Only the caster can use the reed staff; if another 
creature attempts to use it, the spell is negated, The 
caster need not remain in contact with the reed 
staff, however. The priest is free to set down the 
weapon in order to perform other actions, includ- 
ing fighting with another weapon, casting a spell, 
and so forth. The spell can be ended prematurely if 
exposed to a successful dispel magic or brought 
into contact with an antimagic shell, dead magic 
area, or similar effect. 

The material components spell are the caster's 
holy symbol, a splinter of wood, and the blade of 
grass to be affected. 

Notes: Granted by the halfling deities Sheela 
Peryroyl and Yondalla. 


a NE Re a EN 


Regenerate 


SS 4 


Reflect 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Protection, Sun 


Level: 5 
Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 
Duration: 1 rd. 

Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: Special 


Creatures using infravision or ultravision are 
struck blind for 1 round if looking at the priest (no 
saving throw allowed). Other creatures are allowed 
a saving throw vs. spell to negate this same effect 
if within 30 yards (if further away, with eyes 
closed, and so on, they are not subject to the spell 
effect). 

If light conditions are equivalent to full sun- 
light, the blindness duration is doubled and saving 
throws against the spell are made with a -2 
penalty. A reflecting priest struck by a lightning 
bolt, a chain lightning spell, or the equivalent suf- 
fers only half damage. 

By means of a mystic reference to the Blinding 
Light, while clutching his holy symbol and a string 
of crystal prayer beads, the priest causes his body 
to reflect luminance. A light source at least as 
bright as a single candle must be present. 

Notes: Granted by the Pholtus of the Blinding 
Light of the GREYHAWK setting. 


Reflecting Pool 
Originally published at 2nd-level, reflecting pool 
was officially added as a 4th-level spell, 


Reflecting Pool 
(Divination) 
Sphere: Elemental Water 


Level: 4 

Range: 10 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 2 hrs. 
Duration: 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell enables the caster to cause a pool of 
normal water found in a natural setting to act as a 
scrying device. The pool can be of no greater 
diameter than two feet per level of the caster. The 
effect is to create a scrying device similar to a 
crystal ball. The scrying can extend only to those 
planes of existence that are coexistent with or 


border on the Prime Material plane-the Inner 
planes (including the para-elemental planes, the 
Demiplane of Shadow, and so on). General notes 
on scrying, detection by the subject, and penalties 
for attempting to scry beyond the caster’s own 
plane are given in the DMG, as well as a descrip- 
tion of the crystal ball item. 

‘The following spells can be cast through a 
reflecting pool, with a 5% per level chance to 
operate correctly; detect magic, detect snares and 
pits, detect poison. Each additional detection 
attempt requires a round of concentration, regard- 
less of success. Infravision, if available, operates 
normally through the reflecting pool. 

The image is nearly always hazy enough to 
prevent the reading of script of any type. 

The material component is the oil extracted 
from such nuts as the hickory and the walnut, 
refined, and dropped in three measures upon the 
surface of the pool. (A measure need be no more 
than a single ounce of oil.). At the DM's option, the 
casting of this spell may be limited to once per day. 

Notes: Common for druids (PHB), 


Regenerate 
(Necromancy) 
Reversible 
Sphere: Healing 


Level: 7 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, $, M 

Casting Time: 3 rds. 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


When a regenerate spell is cast, body members 
(fingers, toes, hands, feet, arms, legs, tails, or even 
the heads of multi-headed creatures), bones, and 
organs grow back. The process of regeneration 
requires but one round if the severed member(s) is 
(are) present and touching the creature, 2d4 turns 
otherwise. The creature must be living to receive 
the benefits of this spell. If the severed member is 
not present, or if the injury is older than one day 
per caster level, the recipient must roll a success- 
ful system shock check to survive the spell. 

The reverse, wither, causes the member or organ 
touched to shrivel and cease functioning in one 
round, dropping off into dust in 2d4 turns. Creatures 
must be touched for the harmful effect to occur. 

‘The material components of this spell are a 
prayer device and holy water (or unholy water for 
the reverse). 

Notes: Common for clerics (PHB). 


J 485 N 


Regenerate Critical Wounds 
(Necromantic) 
Reversible 
Sphere: Healing 


Level: 5 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 8 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell is the same as the Ist-level priest 
spell regenerate light wounds, except for its dura- 
tion (72 hours per level of the caster) and magni- 
tude. This spell heals 3d4+6 points of damage at a 
rate of 1 hit point per round. If the recipient is at 
full hit points when the regenerate critical wounds 
spell is cast, the spell has no immediate effect. 
Instead, if the individual is later injured (suffers at 
least 1 point of damage), the regeneration begins at 
that time. The spell ends when the individual 
reaches maximum hit points or has regenerated the 
full 344+6 hit points. 

If the spell recipient is subject to a subsequent 
curative spell (including another regenerate wounds 
spell), drinks a potion of healing, or uses other mag- 
ical healing powers, the original regenerate critical 
wounds spell ends immediately. If the regenerative 
power is not fully used within 72 hours per caster 
level, then it ends without further effect. Healing 
gained from the spell before it ends is retained. 

The regenerate wounds spells (and their reversed 
forms) affect only those creatures affected by cure 
light wounds spells, and the healing (injury) is only 
as permanent as that provided by a cure (cause) light 
wounds spell. 

The reverse of this spell, degenerate critical 
wounds, causes the recipient to suffer 3d4+6 
points of damage at the rate of 1 hit point per 
round. This degeneration begins after the creature 
regains at least | hit point from any cause. The 
degeneration stops when the spell has run its 
course or the creature dies. 

Notes: Very rare spell. (Updated from DRAGON 
Magazine.) 


Regenerate Light Wounds 
(Necromantic) 
Reversible 
Sphere: Healing 


Level: 1 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell is much like the Ist-level clerical 
spell, cure light wounds. However, it allows the 
creature to regenerate 1 hit point per round for 
1d4+1 rounds. If the recipient is at full hit points 
when the regenerate light wounds spell is cast, the 
spell has no immediate effect. Instead, if the indi- 
vidual is later injured (suffers at least 1 point of 
damage), the regeneration begins at that time. The 
spell ends when the individual reaches maximum 
hit points or has regenerated the full 1d4+1 hit 
points. 

If the spell recipient is subject to a subsequent 
curative spell (including another regenerate wounds 
spell), drinks a potion of healing, or uses other mag- 
ical healing powers, the original regenerate light 
wounds spell ends immediately. If the regenerative 
power is not fully used within 24 hours per caster 
level, then it ends without further effect. Healing 
gained from the spell before it ends is retained. 

The regenerate wounds spells (and their reversed 
forms) affect only those creatures affected by cure 
light wounds spells, and the healing (injury) is only 
as permanent as that provided by a cure(cause) light 
wounds spell. 

The reverse of this spell, degenerate light 
wounds, causes the recipient to suffer 1d4+1 points 
of damage at the rate of 1 hit point per round. This 
degeneration begins after the creature regains at least 
1 hit point from any cause. The degeneration stops 
when the spell has run its course or the creature dies. 

Notes: Very rare spell. (Updated from DRAGON 
Magazine.) 


Regenerative Heal 


N 


Regenerate Serious Wounds 
(Necromantic) 
Reversible 
Sphere: Healing 


Level: 4 
Range: Touch 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 7 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell is the same as the Ist-level priest 
spell, regenerate light wounds, except for its dura- 
tion (48 hours per level of the caster) and magni- 
tude. This spell heals 2d4+3 points of damage at a 
rate of 1 hit point per round. If the recipient is at 
full hit points when the regenerate serious wounds 
spell is cast, the spell has no immediate effect. 
Instead, if the individual is later injured (suffers at 
least | point of damage), the regeneration begins at 
that time. The spell ends when the individual 
reaches maximum hit points or has regenerated the 
full 2d4+3 hit points. 

If the spell recipient is subject to a subsequent 
curative spell (including another regenerate wounds 
spell), drinks a potion of healing, or uses other mag- 
ical healing powers, the original regenerate light 
wounds spell ends immediately. If the regenerative 
power is not fully used within 48 hours per caster 
level, then it ends without further effect. Healing 
gained from the spell before it ends is retained. 

‘The regenerate wounds spells (and their reversed 
forms) affect only those creatures affected by cure 
light wounds spells, and the healing (injury) is only 
as permanent as that provided by a cure(cause) light 
wounds spell. 

The reverse of this spell, degenerate serious 
wounds, causes the recipient to suffer 2d4+3 
points of damage at the rate of | hit point per 
round. This degeneration begins after the creature 
regains at least 1 hit point from any cause. The 
degeneration stops when the spell has run its 
course or the creature dies. 

Notes: Very rare spell. (Updated from DRAGON 
Magazine.) 


Regenerative Heal 
(Necromantic) 
Reversible 
Sphere: Healing 


Level: 7 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell is the same as the Ist-level priest 
spell, regenerate light wounds, except for its dura- 
tion (1 week per level of the caster) and magnitude. 
This spell heals wounds at a rate of 4 hit points per 
round until the creature is 4 hit points or less from 
its maximum total. If the recipient is at full hit 
points when the regenerative heal spell is cast, the 
spell has no immediate effect. Instead, if the indi- 
vidual is later injured (suffers at least 1 point of 
damage), the regeneration begins at that time. 

Unlike less powerful forms of regenerative 
healing, other magical curing does not cause the 
spell to end (except by bringing the creature to 
within 4 points of its maximum), Otherwise, there 
is no limit on the amount of damage this spell can 
regenerate within its duration, as long as the crea- 
ture remains more than 4 hit points from its maxi- 
mum. If the regenerative power is not fully used 
within 1 week per caster level, then it ends without 
further effect. Healing gained from the spell before 
it ends is retained. 

This spell has no effect on disease, blindness, 
insanity, loss of limb, or disabling spells. 

‘The regenerate wounds spells (and their reversed 
forms) affect only those creatures affected by cure 
light wounds spells, and the healing (injury) is only 
as permanent as that provided by a cure(cause) light 
wounds spell. 

‘The reverse of this spell, degenerative harm, 
causes the recipient to suffer damage at the rate of 
4 hit points per round. This degeneration begins 
after the creature regains at least 1 hit point from 
any cause. The degeneration stops when the spell 
has run its course or the creature is reduced 4 hit 
points or less. (It can weaken but not slay the sub- 
ject.) It causes no other harm to the recipient in the 
form of disease, insanity, and so on. 

Notes: Very rare spell. (Updated from DRAGON 
Magazine.) 


487 


Reincarnate 


(Necromancy) 
Sphere: Animal 


Level: 7 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: | tum 
Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: Person touched 
Saving Throw: none 


With this spell, the priest can bring back a dead 
person in another body, if death occurred no more 
than one week before the casting of the spell. Rein- 
carnation does not require any saving throw, 
system shock, or resurrection survival roll. The 
corpse is touched, and a new incamation of the 
person appears in the area in 1d6 turns. The person 
reincarnated recalls the majority of his former life 
and form, but the character class, if any, of the new 
incarnation might be very different indeed. The 
new incarnation is determined on the following 
table or by DM choice. If a player character race is 
indicated, the character must be created. At the 
DM's option, certain special (expensive) incenses 
can be used that may increase the chance for a 
character to retur as a specific race or species. A 
wish spell can restore a reincamated character to 
the original form and status. 

If an unusual creature form is indicated, the DM 
can (at his option only) use the guidelines for new 
player character races to allow the character to earn 
experience and advance in levels, although this 
may not be in the same class as before. If the rein- 
carnated character returns as a creature eligible to 
be the same class as previously (for example, a 
human fighter returns as an elf), the reincarnated 
character has half the previous levels and hit points, 
A character returning as a new character class has 
hit points at half the previous total, but must begin 
again at Ist level. A character returning as a crea- 
ture unable to have a class has half the hit points 
and saving throws of the previous incarnation. 

Notes: Common for druids (PHB). 


Area of Effect: Person touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell allows the shukenja to instill the life 
force of a deceased individual to another form, and 
as such is used in situations where the body is long 
dead or the body is severely deteriorated or dam- 
aged. Unlike other versions of this spell, there is 
neither time limit nor body required to complete 
the spell. The spirit inhabits one of the types of 
bodies listed on the table. 

If the character is reincarnated in a form that is 
a player character race, a new character is gener- 
ated. The character has all the memories of his pre- 
vious life, and is able to communicate with his 
comrades. 

The material components of this spell are the 
shukenja’s holy symbol and some part of the 
deceased's body, or some article of clothing or 
item connected with the deceased. 


SA ee 


Reinvigorate Nature — Shaman 


REINCARNATION TABLE 
d100 roll Creature type 

01-05 Bakemono 
06-10 Bear 

11-15 Boar, wild 
16-20 Carp 

21-25 Drake 

26-30 Eagle 

31-35 Faun 

36-40 Fox 

41-45 Goblin Rat 
46-50 Hawk 

51-55 Hengeyokai 
56-60 Hsing-sing 
61-65 Human 
66-70 Korobokuru 
71-75 Ogre 

76-80 Ogre mage 
81-85 Raccoon dog 
86-90 Stag 

91-95 Tiger 

96-00 Water Buffalo 


If the character is reincarnated in a form that is a 
player character race, a new character is generated, 
‘The character has all the memories of his previous 
life, and is able to communicate with his comrades. 

The material components of this spell are the 
shukenja’s holy symbol and some part of the 
deceased's body, or some article of clothing or 
item connected with the deceased. 

Notes: Common for oriental priests; otherwise, 
very rare. 


Reincarnation Sight — Vedic 
(Divination) 
Sphere: Divination, Necromantic 


Level: 6 

Range: Special 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 6 
Duration: 1 rd. 

Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell reveals the presence of a reincar- 
nated character. Using a piece of clothing belong- 
ing to the original character, the priest can use this 
spell to discover the reincarnation of that charac- 
ter’s name appearance and approximate location. 
If found, a reincarnation has only vague memories 
of his past and is unlikely to recognize any of his 
compatriots. The spell can cross planar barriers but 
it cannot penetrate barriers like conceal lifeforce or 
amulets of life protection. 


A second use of this spell is to reveal to a person 
all of the memories of one of his reincarnations. 
The priest needs merely to touch the subject to 
knows all that his past life contained, Using the two 
uses of this spell in order can reacquaint old friends 
at least in a superficial way, (Note that these spells 
allow a slain PC to rejoin the campaign with mem- 
ories intact, and perhaps level and abilities also; see 
the Vedic reincarnation table on page 490.) 

Notes: Common for priests from a vedic 
(Indian) setting. 


Reinvigorate Nature — Shaman 
(Necromancy) 
Sphere: Plant 


Level: 6 

Range: Special 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 24 hrs. 

Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: 1 sq. mi./1,000 XP 
Saving Throw: None 


By casting this spell, the shaman revives nature 
spirits, restores tainted water sources and barren soil 
to a wholesome and life-supporting state, and 
removes any magical curses and natural blights upon 
the land within the area of effect of the spell. Any 
nature spirits within the area of effect are treated as 
though they have just been subject to a revive spirit 
spell. On the other hand, any disease spirits in the 
area of effect must make a successful save vs. death 
magic or be destroyed. Disease spirits that are not 
slain must still flee the area, although they may 
return once the shaman’s ritual is complete, 

Although the shaman must still have this spell 
granted by a spirit patron, this spell is too power- 
ful for the spirit to power by itself. In fact, the 
shaman must sacrifice some of his own life energy 
to bring the land back to life, and it is this life 
energy that composes the material component of 
the spell. 

To cast reinvigorate nature, the shaman must 
position himself at the center of the area, and cast 
perfect perception to become familiar with the 
immediate area and the blight that is effecting the 
land, Then, just as that spell is about to expire, the 
shaman launches into a 24-hour-long ritual that 
comprises the reinvigorate nature spell. During 
this time, the shaman decides how much life force 
to cede to Nature, and at the end of the period, it is 
then drained from the shaman and into the land. 
(In game terms, for every square mile of land the 
shaman wishes to reinvigorate, the shaman loses 
1,000 XPs.) Halfway through the ritual, the char- 


Do” RA 


~ Reincarnation Sight — Vedic 


Karma Points 

Indian society is founded upon the concepts of 
future incarnations of a character from that culture, They 
are gained or lost depending on how exactly a character 
fulfills his or ber dharma requirements, Each character 
receives 1 karma point per level, and up to an additional 
point per session (awarded by the DM for outstanding 
roleplaying of dharma requirements or cleverly resolv- 
ing conflicts between class and alignment dharma 
requirements). A character's dharma is determined by 
alignment and class, Both sets of tenets must be fol- 
lowed; significant violations of either cost a karma 
penalty of one point. Dual-class or multi-class charac- 
ters follow the dharma requirements of all classes. 

Class dharma requirements are summarized here for 
ments for nonstandard classes. 


Warrior: Warriors must be brave, never allowing 


‘Thief: In addition to rogue dharma, the thief avoids 
brute strength, relying on cunning, stealth, or trickery. 

Bard: A bard passes up no chance to tell others of 
things seen and tales heard, enlightens, entertains, and 
pursues knowledge in the form of tales and songs. 


Reincarnation Results 

‘Any continuing character transfers Intelligence, 
Wisdom, and Charisma to the new incarnation. Other 
abilities are rerolled unless otherwise specified. 

‘The reincarnation appears within a day's time, 
having only vague memories of the previous life, All 
karma points are lost and the reincarnated character 
starts again at 0 points, If raise dead or similar is cast on 
the previous body before the reincarnation is complete, 
the process is halted, the old character can be revived, 
and karma is halved (round down), Once the reincarna~ 
tion is complete, such spells cast on the previous body 
have no effect. 


fear to dictate their actions. They do not hide from Slug: ‘Character is removed from play. 
danger or flee while a friend or ally fights on. Kobold, Goblin, 

Ranger: In addition to warrior dharma, the ranger Ore, Gnoll: Character is reincamated as this mon- 
shows reverence to nature, never killing an animal or ‘ster type, Transferred scores are 
plant without reason. adjusted for race. See the DMG or The 

Paladin: In addition to warrior dharma, the paladin Complete Book of Humanoids for fur- 
never tolerates evil, always helps the weak or poor, and ‘ther details, 
is quick to give alms to beggars, " Human: Character begins at Ist level in the 

Wizard: Takes every obvious opportunity to leam previous class, 
about forces that shape the world or magic. Human*: ‘Character retains original class, but 

Specialist: In addition to wizard dharma, a special- begins Id4 levels lower than previous 
ist has one additional duty devised by the DM and incarnation (minimum Ist level). 
related to his or her field of study. Human**: Character retains all ability scores 

Priest: A priest is devoted to the worship of the god, and class, beginning one level lower 
never allows an insult to the faith to go unavenged, and (minimum 1st). 
tries to recruit followers whenever possible. Human***: Character retains all ability scores, 

Specialty Priest: In addition to priest dharma, a but adds 1d4 points to one score 
specialty priest has an additional duty devised by the (maximum 18). Character retains 
DM. original class and level. 

Druid: The druid acts in ways complementary to Nirvana: Character achieves unity and is 
nature, never killing an animal or plant without reason. removed from play. A new character is 

Rogue: The rogue accrues wealth, not leaving an generated, This character has a +2 
obvious victim or inviting fortune untouched. modifier to all saves, 

VEDIC REINCARNATION TABLE 
Karma 
Points 246 Roll 
2 + 6 9-11 12 
o Slug Kobold. Goblin Ore Gnoll 

+s Kobold Goblin Or Gnoll Human 
6-10 Goblin Ore Gnoll Human Human’ 
1-15 Or Gnoll Human Humant Human** 
16-20 Gnoll Human Human* Human** Human*** 
20+ Human Human* Human** ‘Human*** Nirvana 


Remember 


acter must make a Shamanic Ritual proficiency 
check. If the check is successful, the results of the 
shaman’s efforts are visible immediately after the 
experience point drain has taken place: Grass, or 
some other appropriate plants begin to grow 
around the shaman’s feet, spreading outward. Full 
recovery of the land may take weeks or months, 
but, with the boost granted by the shaman's life 
energy, the recovery takes place in a speedy fash- 
ion. If the character fails the Shamanic Ritual 
check, no XPs are lost, and the ritual has no effect. 
After a day's rest, the shaman is free to try again. 

A shaman who is interrupted at any time during 
the ritual must start over. The shaman must wait a 
day and a night before trying again, just as if the 
Shamanic Ritual check failed, 

Notes: Restricted to shamans, uncommon. 


Rejuvenate 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Elemental, Plant 


Level: 5 
Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect; 10-ft. radius/level 
Saving Throw: None 


wie 


This spell functions just as the Sth level wizard 
spell of the same name. 

Clerical text: 

This spell grants the ability to support vegetation, 
to an area of ground, In the case of ground made 
barren by defiler magic, rejuvenate counters the 
ground’s sterility, making it immediately capable 
of supporting vegetation, The spell can be cast on 
any ground short of solid rock, including sand, 
rocky sand or soil, or dust, 

In either case, the spell affects the ground in a 
circle extending away from the caster, so he must 
stand in the middle of the area he wishes to revi- 
talize. The radius of the circle is 5 feet per level of 
the caster. Once cast, the soil is enriched and mois- 
tened, and a layer of fine grass emerges instantly. 

‘The duration of the spell varies. Once cast, the 
moist soil and grass are not magical, and are sub- 
ject to all natural forces upon them. However, they 
will survive a week in even the worst of condi- 
tions. Rejuvenate otherwise lasts until another 
defiler spell destroys the vegetation. 

The material component is a seed (of any type) 
and a drop of water. 

Notes: Common for priests from the DARK SUN 
setting; otherwise, very rare. 


491 


Remember 
(Divination) 
Reversible 
Sphere: Divination 
Level: 5 
Range: Touch 


Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 tum 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell can be used for two purposes. The 
first allows the shukenja to restore memories lost 
by amnesia, possession, forget, or other events 
that might cause a loss of memory. The spell 
instantly restores all lost memories of the char- 
acter. The second form of the spell restores lim- 
ited knowledge to the character of previous lives. 
This use is more difficult and requires the recip- 
ient of the spell to make a successful saving 
throw vs. death to take effect. If successful, the 
character gains some limited memories of his 
previous life as a different person (or possibly 
even as an animal). The main use of this version 
is to gain information about events in the distant 
past. It may reveal reasons for the character’s 


es Flight of > 


current fortunes, or information about places and 
items long since forgotten. This is used most 
often when the DM has created an adventure 
where such information is hidden from the char- 
acters. Thus, if the player characters discover an 
incomplete ancient legend describing some great 
treasure or past event, the remember spell can be 
used in an attempt to learn more information. 
The DM must decide if any useful information 
can be gained from this spell. 

The spell requires a metal mirror, which is not 
destroyed. 

The reverse of this spell, forget past, causes the 
victim to lose knowledge of recent events. For 
every level of the shukenja, one day's worth of 
memories is lost, starting with the most recent. 
The victim does not forget spells memorized, how- 
ever. The victim is allowed a saving throw vs. spell 
to avoid the effects of this spell. The reverse also 
requires a metal mirror 

Notes: Common for oriental priests; otherwise, 
very rare. 


Remnis, Flight of 
See flight of Remnis. 


Remorse 
(Abjuration) 
Sphere: Charm 


Level: 4 
Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


When this spell is cast, the shukenja delivers a 
stern lecture on the evil ways of the victim, filling 
the victim with guilt and regret over his actions, 
The spell can be used only on creatures of low or 
greater Intelligence, and only if the victim under- 
stands the speech of the shukenja. The victim is 
allowed a saving throw vs. spell to avoid the effect, 
although creatures subdued in combat receive no 
saving throw. Should the spell be successful, the 
creature repents of its evil action. This is either an 
action just committed or, if no recent action 
applies, some action committed in the past. 

The remorseful creature forswears from com- 
mitting this action again (with the same conse- 
quences as an oath spell) and also seeks to expiate 
its guilt through some appropriate deed or offering. 
Thus a highwayman struck with remorse would 
forswear such banditry and would seek to return his 


ill-gotten gains to the rightful owners. Likewise, an 
evil monster terrorizing the countryside would put 
this behavior behind it and might attempt to repair 
the damage it caused. When making restitution for 
its actions, the remorseful creature is not required 
to reveal itself (since this might result in harm to 
itself), but can do so secretly, concealing its pres- 
ence and identity from those it has wronged. 
Should circumstances make restitution impossible, 
the creature can perform some service for another 
of appropriate magnitude to the evil deeds it has 
committed. No restitution can be for the gain or for 
the advantage of the shukenja or the player charac- 
ters, but instead must be a service helpful to the 
general community, The shukenja can suggest 
appropriate restitution at the time of casting the 
spell, but the DM decides what is appropriate. An 
atonement spell can cancel the effects of remorse. 

The material components for this spell are a 
pearl (which must be given freely to the creature) 
and the shukenja’s holy symbol. 

Notes: Common for oriental priests; otherwise, 
very rare. 


Remove Crypt Ward 
Reversed form, crypt ward. 


Remove Curse 
(Abjuration) 
Reversible 
Sphere: All 


Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: Special 


Upon casting this spell, the priest is usually 
able to remove a curse on an object, on a person, 
or a curse in the form of some undesired sending 
or evil presence. The remove curse spell does not 
remove the curse from a cursed shield, weapon, or 
suit of armor, for example, although the spell typ- 
ically enables the person afflicted with any such 
cursed item to get rid of it. Certain special curses 
cannot be countered by this spell, or may be coun- 
tered only by a caster of a certain level or more. A 
caster of 12th level or more can cure lycanthropy 
with this spell by casting it on the animal form. 
The were-creature receives a saving throw vs. spell 
and, if successful, the spell fails and the priest 
must gain a level before attempting the remedy on 
this creature again. 


492 


The reverse of the spell, bestow curse, is not 
permanent. This spell lasts for one turn for every 
experience level of the casting priest. The curse 
can have one of the following effects (roll per- 
centile dice); 50% of the time it reduces one 
ability of the victim to 3 (the DM randomly 
determines which ability); 25% of the time it 
lowers the victim’ s attack and saving throw 
rolls by -4; 25% of the time it makes the victim 
50% likely to drop whatever he is holding (or do 
nothing, in the case of creatures not using 
tools)—roll each round, 

It is possible for a priest to devise his own 
curse, and it should be similar in power to those 
given here. Consult your DM. The subject of a 
bestow curse spell must be touched. If the victim 
is touched, a saving throw vs. spell is still applica- 
ble; if it is successful, the effect is negated. The 
bestowed curse cannot be dispelled. 

Notes: Common for clerics and druids (PHB), 


Remove Fear 
(Abjuration) 
Reversible 
Sphere: Charm 


Level: 1 
Range: 10 yds. 
Componeni 
Casting Time: 1 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: | creature/4 levels 
Saving Throw: Special 


The priest casting this spell instills courage in 
the spell recipient, raising the creature's saving 
throw rolls against magical fear attacks by +4 for 
one turn. If the recipient has recently (that day) 
failed a saving throw against such an attack, the 
spell immediately grants another saving throw, 
with a +4 bonus to the die roll. For every four 
levels of the caster, one creature can be affected by 
the spell (one creature at levels 1 through 4, two 
creatures at levels 5 through 8, and so on). 

The reverse of the spell, cause fear, causes one 
creature to flee in panic at maximum movement 
speed away from the caster for 1d4 rounds. A suc- 
cessful saving throw against the reversed effect 
negates it, and any Wisdom adjustment also 
applies. Of course, cause fear can be automatically 
countered by remove fear and vice versa. 

Neither spell has any effect on undead of any 
sort, 

Notes: Common for clerics (PHB). 


Rending 


-Remove Major Curse 
Reversed form, bestow major curse. 


Remove Minor Curse 
Reversed form, bestow minor curse. 


Remove Paralysis 
(Abjuration) 
Sphere: Necromantic, Protection 


Level: 3 

Range: 10 yds./level 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 6 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: 1 to 4 creatures in a 20-ft cube 
Saving Throw: None 


By the use of this spell, the priest can free one 
or more creatures from the effects of any paralyza- 
tion or from related magic (such as a ghoul touch, 
or a hold or slow spell). If the spell is cast on one 
creature, the paralyzation is negated. If cast on two 
creatures, each receives another saving throw 
against the effect that afflicts it, with a +4 bonus, 
If cast on three or four creatures, each receives 
another saving throw with a +2 bonus. There must 
be no physical or magical barrier between the 
caster and the creatures to be affected, or the spell 
fails and is wasted. 

Notes: Common for clerics (PHB). 


Remove Paralysis — Shukenja 
This is the same as the standard version, except 
that it is reversible. The reverse, cause paralysis, is 
cast if the shukenja touches a single creature with 
a holy symbol. This paralyzes for 1d6 rounds plus 
one additional round per level of the caster. 


Rending 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Animal 


Level: 4 

Range: 30 yds. 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: 1 item (see below) 
Saving Throw: Special 


dr 


This spell rends or destroys personal prop- 
erty, including livestock, pets, mounts, clothing, 
weapons, armor, jewelry, doors, chests, tapes- 
tries, and slaves (including mamluks). In short, 
anything that has been purchased or manufac- 


493 


~~» Renew Deposit — Dwarf 


tured can be affected by this spell; it has no 
effect if cast on a free citizen or wild creature. 
Thus, a mount can be slain out from under its 
rider, but the same creature encountered running 
free in the wilderness is immune to the spell’s 
effects. The caster can affect a single creature or 
item (one cubic foot per level of the caster) with 
this spell, 

If the target is an object, it is completely shred- 
ded as if rended by invisible claws; magical items 
are allowed a saving throw vs. disintegration with 
a +4 bonus to resist the spell’s effects. If the target 
is a purchased creature or a slave, the being suffers 
3d8 points of damage; creatures of greater than 
animal Intelligence or more than 4 Hit Dice 
receive a saving throw vs. death magic to negate 
the spell, 

Notes: Granted by the jungle god Ragarra of 
the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Renew Deposit — Dwarf 
(Alteration, Evocation) 
Sphere: Creation 


Level: 7 
Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 2 hrs. 
Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell permits a dwarven high priest to renew 
the normally nonrenewable mineral resources upon 
which dwarven society depends. With this spell, a 
depleted mineral or metal ore deposit can slowly 
grow and renew itself. First, a mineral “seed” must 
be prepared. The type of seed must be the same as 
that of the deposit to be renewed (e.g, a gold seed is 
used to renew a gold vein, a diamond seed is used to 
restore a diamond mine). The value of the seed 
ranges from 5,000 gp for a base metal (such as iron) 
up to 25,000 gp or more for a very rare substance 
(such as mithral or adamantite). 

Next, a circle of dwarven clerics links together 
using a combine spell. The high priest casts prayer 
upon the seed, then casts the renew deposit spell 
with the circle linked again by combine. The seed 
is planted in the depleted vein at the midway point 
of the spellcasting. The clerics involved in the 
circle must then rest for 72 hours after the spell is 
completed, because the spell is so physically and 
spiritually draining. 

Once the spell is cast, the depleted deposit 
slowly grows new ore until the vein is completely 
renewed. The vein renews itself at a rate that 


depends on the substance growing in the vein, as 
given in the list. 


Type Renewal Time 
Base metal (iron or copper) 5-30 years 
Precious metal (silver or gold) 20-80 years 
Very rare metal (mithral) 70-100 years 
Semiprecious stones 5-20 years 
Fancy stones 10-60 years 
Gemstones 20-80 years 


The substance grows until the deposit is fully 
renewed, up to the total volume of the original 
deposit. If the vein is again depleted, the spell can 
be cast again. If the vein is hastily mined before 
the deposit is fully renewed, the spell is broken 
and no additional growth occurs. Furthermore, no 
additional growth can ever occur, even if the spell 
is cast again, because the vein has been spiritually 
polluted by the greed and haste of the foolish 
miners, Only a special act of forgiveness by a 
dwarven deity can overcome the spiritual pollution 
of the area. There is no guarantee that this spell 
will be fully granted, even if properly performed, 

Notes: Very rare spell granted by dwarven 
deities, (Updated from DraGon Magazine.) 


Renewed Ability 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Charm 


Level: 2 

Range: 0 

Components: V, $ 
Casting Time: 4 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: Caster 
Saving Throw: None 


Renewed ability can be cast only by creatures 
that already possess innate spell-like powers (as do 
most fiends). When cast, renewed ability lets the 
caster recharge one of his spell-like powers that 
normally has a limit on how often it can be used in 
a given time period. A power can be renewed only 
if it's identical to the effects of any wizard or priest 
spell of 3rd level or less, 

For example, a comugon priest normally can 
use its innate lightning bolt power three times per 
day. After casting renewed ability, the priest can 
use lightning bolt a fourth time that same day. 

Notes: Restricted to priests with innate spell- 
like abilities. Rare for planar priests and unlikely 
to be learned except by visiting the Outer Planes. 


I N 


Repair Injury 


Renewed Youth 
(Alteration) 

Reversible 

Sphere: Healing, Time 


—EIf 


Level: 3 
Range: 10 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 6 
Duration: 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: | creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


‘This spell temporarily restores a middle-aged 
or older recipient to the peak of physical health 
enjoyed in his or her prime. The spell temporarily 
reverses penalties to ability scores due to aging, as 
detailed in the Player's Handbook. For example, a 
250 year old elf would temporarily receive a +3 
bonus to Strength, a +2 bonus to Dexterity, and a 
+1 bonus to Constitution by this spell, but would 
not suffer a corresponding penalty to Intelligence 
or Wisdom. Willing recipients can forego the 
saving throw. The spell has no effect on dragons, 
extraplanar creatures, or conjured beings. 

While this spell does not ameliorate any 
damage suffered, it might increase the recipient's 
tolerance for pain. If a temporary boost in Consti- 


tution results in increased hit points (due to a mod- 
ified hit point adjustment), those hit points are lost 
first, as with the 2nd-level priest spell aid. 

The material components are the priest's holy 

symbol and a freshly cut (or magically preserved) 
flower. 
The reversed form, weight of years, temporar- 
ily ages the recipient. The priest must touch the 
target creature. A caster of Sth level can inflict the 
penalties of middle age if the target creature fails a 
saving throw vs, spell. A caster of 6th to 13th level 
can inflict the penalties of old age, and a 14th level 
or higher caster can inflict the penalties of venera- 
ble age. The caster can inflict the penalties of a 
lesser age if desired. The temporary aging cannot 
force a creature to die of old age, nor can it relieve 
the penalties of the creature’s current age. It has no 
effect on dragons, extraplanar creatures, or con- 
jured beings. 

The material components are the priest's holy 
symbol and a crushed, dried flower petals or a 
shriveled, dried fruit. 

Notes: Granted by the elven deity Labelas 
Enoreth. 


Renewed Youth, Resplendence of 


See resplendence of renewed youth. 
Repair 
See repair item. 
Repair Injury 
(Necromancy) 
Sphere: Healing 
Level: 3 
Range: Touch 


Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 1 turn 

Duration; Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


Repair injury is intended for use in campaigns 
featuring the critical hit or critical strike rules. This 
spell repairs one specific injury or special wound. It 
can be used to knit a broken bone, alleviate the 
swelling and pain of a sprain or a twist, or repair soft- 
tissue damage such as an injured eye, ear, or a sev- 
ered tendon. Repair injury automatically removes 
one grazed, struck, injured, or broken condition, and 
alleviates any combat, movement, or maximum hit 
point penalties associated with the injury in question. 
It has no effect on critical injuries that are instantly 
fatal. The spell restores 1d10+1 lost hit points in 
addition to its special healing effect; it can be used to 


495 


~ Repair Item va 


restore hit points even if no special injury has been 
sustained. 


Beran, a Fighter with 44 hit points, is struck by 
an ogre's club, The blow inflicts 12 points of 
damage, and breaks Beran's hip. This injury 
reduces him to 25% of his normal total, so Beran's 
current hit points drop from 32 to 11 after the 
battle ends. In addition, he is not capable of 
moving or attacking due to the effects of the injury. 

When the smoke clears, Talmos the priest 
comes to Beran''s aid. Using repair injury, he knits 
Beran's broken hip. The spell cures 6 hit points in 
the process. Beran no longer suffers the movement 
or attack penalties for a broken hip and has 17 hit 
points. With time or additional healing, he can 
regain his normal total of 44. 


Repair injury is also helpful in dealing with 
wounds that fall in the crushed, shattered, or 
destroyed category. This spell reduces the severity of 
the injury to the broken level, which means it heals 
as if it were 20d6 lost hit points. Only one repair 
injury can be used on any given wound, so a charac- 
ter with a shattered knee could still require a lot of 
time to recover after an application of this spell. 

Severed limbs, destroyed eyes or ears, and abil- 
ity score losses caused by injuries cannot be healed 
by this spell. Repair injury is the equivalent of cure 
serious wounds for slowing or stopping bleeding. 

Notes: Uncommon for clerics, provided the 
optional system is used (PO:SM). 


Repair Item 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Creation 


Level: 5 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: Item touched 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell creates and correctly places a 
replacement part for an item equal in strength, 
material, dimensions, and sturdiness to what the 
original was when new. It can be cast only on 
items or assemblies of items that the caster is 
able to touch at least some part of, and that 
require only the addition of a single missing 
piece (of any size, from a pin-sized hinge to a 
castle door or portcullis). The caster must under- 
stand what is missing or broken and concentrate 
on the desired wholeness as the spell is cast, 


"T_e N 


touching what is to be repaired and simultane- 
ously holding next to his skin a clear or translu- 
cent gemstone crystal (natural, uncut) of any sort 
or value. The crystal is consumed as the spell 
takes effect, even if the repair attempt ends in 
failure. When a repair is attempted, the caster 
must make two saving throws vs. spell. If both 
fail, the spell has no effect. If both succeed, a 
permanent, “good as new” repair is crafted and 
the caster loses 2d4 hit points—damage that can 
be regained readily by healing or magical means. 
If only one saving throw succeeds, there is no hit 
point loss, but a temporary repair comes into 
being. The item must save vs. crushing blow 1 
turn after the spell takes effect, and at the end of 
each tum thereafter—failure means the “repair” 
has broken. After 24 hours have passed all tem- 
porary repairs automatically break. Missing 
parts replaced by this spell break, but do not 
vanish. 

Notes: Granted by the god Gond, Lord of All 
Smiths, of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Repeat Action 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
Sphere: Time 


Level: 5 

Range: 30 yds. 
‘Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 5 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell compels its victim to repeat the 
action of the previous round. The result of the rep- 
etition is always identical to the original result. 

For example, if an individual fired an arrow and 
inflicted 4 points of damage, a repeat action spell 
causes her to fire a second asrow that also inflicts 4 
points of damage. As long as the target of the first 
arrow is within range, the affected subject adjusts 
her aim and fires the second arrow at it. If the target 
of the arrow moves out of range, she fires her second 
arrow in the target's direction. If the target is out of 
sight, she fires in the direction of the target's last 
location. An unwilling subject is allowed a saving 
throw vs. spell to resist the effects of the dweomer. 

The subject of a repeat action spell must be 
capable of performing the indicated action a 
second time or the spell fails. An archer with has 
no arrows can’t fire an arrow. A wizard ordered to 
repeat a spell, would attempt the spell only if he 
the spell was currently memorized and any mate- 
rial components were present. Also, if the subject 


Request 


ew 


discovered a gem during a given round, repeat 
action only compels another hunt; no gem is found 
unless one is actually present. 
The material components are two identical 
glass spheres, each an inch or less in diameter. 
Notes: Common for priests with major access 
to the sphere of Time (ToM). 


Repel Insects 
(Abjuration, Alteration) 
Sphere: Animal 


Level: 4 
Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: 1 turn/level 

Area of Effect: 10-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: None 


When this spell is cast, the priest creates an 
invisible barrier to all sorts of insects, and normal 
insects do not approach within 10 feet of the caster 
while the spell is in effect. Giant insects with Hit 
Dice less than /s the caster’s experience level are 
also repelled (e.g., 2 Hit Dice for 7th- to 9th-level 
casters, 3 Hit Dice at 10th—12th level, and so on). 
Insects with more Hit Dice can enter the protected 
area if the insect is especially aggressive and, in 
addition, rolls a successful saving throw vs. spell. 
Those that do sustain 1d6 points of damage from 
passing through the magical barrier. The spell does 
not affect arachnids, myriapods, and similar crea- 
tures—it affects only true insects. 

The material components include any one of 
the following: several crushed marigold flowers, 
a whole crushed leek, seven crushed stinging 
nettle leaves, or a small lump of resin from a 
camphor tree. 

Notes: Common for druids (PHB). 


Repulsion — Drow 
(Abjuration) 
Sphere: Guardian 


Level: 7 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 7 

Duration: 1 rå./2 levels 

Area of Effect: Creatures in a 10-ft.-wide path, 10 
ft level long 

Saving Throw: Neg. 


When this spell is cast, the priest can cause all 
creatures in the area of effect to move directly away 


from his or her person, Repulsion occurs at the 
speed of the creature attempting to move toward 
the caster. The repelled creature continues to move 
away for a complete round even if this takes it 
beyond the area of effect. The caster can designate 
a new direction each round, but use of this power 
counts as the caster’s principal action in the round. 
The caster can, of course, choose to do something 
else instead of using the repulsion attack. 

The spell is not effective against drow or crea- 
tures of chaotic evil alignment—but other crea- 
tures are affected: The priest must be able to 
confront the creatures to be affected—see them 
and be seen. As the casting ends, flickering black 
flames seem to emanate from the caster, streaming 
outward to define the pathway of effect. 

‘The material components are the priest’s holy 
symbol; a miniature sword blade, normal dagger, 
or knife; and a flame, spark, hot coal or ember. 

Notes: Granted by the drow goddess Lolth. 


Request 
(Abjuration) 
Sphere: Summoning 
Level: 2 
Range: 0 


Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 3 turns 
Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: 1 spirit 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


By means of this spell, the shukenja is able to 
ask for some service or deed from a spirit. The 
shukenja must know the identity of the spirit 
before casting the spell and must be in the area the 
spirit occupies. The request must be within the 
powers of the spirit. The lesser nature spirit of a 
stream could be asked to change its course slightly 
or bring fish within it to a certain area, while the 
Lord of the Sea could be asked to summon a great 
storm, return some item from the depths, or ensure 
the smooth sailing of a vessel. 

In all cases, the spirit is allowed a saving throw 
vs. spell. Success means the spirit need not honor 
the request. Likewise, if the request is outside the 
powers of the spirit, the spell fails. The DM can, 
under special circumstances, rule that the request 
is automatically followed, especially in cases 
where refusal would result in great harm to the 
spirit. The request must be carefully worded, for 
the spirit follows the literal wording, not the 
intent, of the statement. Asking for a great storm 
without specifying where and when won't give 
the desired results, for example. Furthermore, the 


497 


~ Resist 


spirit will try to harm to the caster (or place the 
caster under some obligation), usually by twisting 
the intent of the request, because the shukenja is 
bothering the spirit. 

Casting this spell is extremely taxing; when 
finished, the shukenja is mentally and physically 
drained. All spelis currently memorized are for- 
gotten and cannot be regained until the shukenja 
has had a complete week of rest. During this 
time, the shukenja can still travel but cannot take 
part in combat except to use magical items that 
do not require concentration or physical exertion. 
Furthermore, the shukenja’s hit point total is 
reduced to 1. Lost hit points can be regained 
thought cure spells (cast by someone else) or 
magical items. 

The material component is an offering of 
appropriate value to the spirit, anywhere from 5 
to 100 ch'ien in value (25 gp to 500 gp). In addi- 
tion, the offering must have some meaning to the 
spirit—usually a piece of art or an item of fine 
craftsmanship. Simple cash is seldom a sufficient 
offering. The DM decides the nature and value of 
the offering required. 

Notes: Common for oriental priests; otherwise, 
very rare. 


Resist 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Protection 
Level: 1 
Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 


Duration: 1 turn/level 
Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell allows the shukenja to harden 
another against the pains and discomforts of 
heat, cold, fatigue, and hunger. Upon receiving 
the spell, the recipient is unaffected by normal 
heat or cold. One less point of damage per die is 
taken from magical fires and magical cold (ice, 
cold rays, and so on). Fatigue is banished as if 
the character had slept for one hour for every 
level of the caster, although this does not allow 
spellcasters to regain spells. The effects of 
hunger and starvation are delayed until the spell 
has expired. 

The material components of this spell are a 
piece of rice cake or dumpling, a scrap of cloth, a 
drop of water, and an owl's feather. 

Notes: Common for oriental priests; otherwise, 
very rare. 


Resist Acid and Corrosion 
(Abjuration) 
Sphere: Protection 


Duration: 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell provides a subject with a better 
resistance to acid, corrosives, and caustic sub- 
stances of all kinds. Mild corrosives cannot harm 
the subject at all, although they can still damage 
his gear. More intense acids and corrosives (black 
dragon breath, Melf’s acid arrow, and the natural 
attacks of various puddings, oozes, slimes, and jel- 
lies) inflict only half the normal damage on the 
protected character, If the attack requires a saving 
throw, the subject gains a +3 bonus, sustaining half 
damage with a failed save or one-quarter damage 
with a successful saving throw. 

Notes: Uncommon for clerics (PO:SM). 


Resist Fire/Resist Cold 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Protection 


Level: 2 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


When this spell is placed upon a creature by a 
priest, the creature's body is toughened to with- 
stand heat or cold, as chosen by the caster. The 
spell grants complete immunity to mild condi- 
tions (standing naked in the snow or reaching into 
an ordinary fire to pluck out a note). The recipi- 
ent can somewhat resist intense heat or cold 
(whether natural or magical in origin), such as 
red-hot charcoal, a large amount of burning oil, 
flametongue swords, fire storms, fireballs, meteor 
swarms, red dragon's breath, frost brand swords, 
ice storms, wands of frost, or white dragon’s 
breath. In all of these cases, the temperature 
affects the creature to some extent. The recipient 
of the spell gains a bonus of +3 to saving throws 
against such attack forms and all damage sus- 
tained is reduced by 50%; therefore, if the saving 
throw is failed, the creature sustains one-half 


498 


Resplendence of Renewed Youth 


damage. If the saving throw is successful, the 
creature sustains only one-quarter damage. The 
resistance lasts for one round for each experience 
level of the casting priest. 
The material component is a drop of mercury. 
Notes: Common for clerics (PHB). 


Resist Injury 
(Abjuration, Alteration) 
Sphere: Protection 


Level: 3 

Range: 0 

Components: M 

Casting Time: | tum 
Duration: 3 rds./level 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell negates the effects of damaging, 
even fatal wounds for its duration. For example, a 
dagger can be thrust through the priest's heart, yet 
he or she can function normally. Two points of 
damage per level can be negated, as well any extra 
damage or effects from critical hits (if that option 
is used). This spell is often used in rituals; its 
exceptionally long casting time makes it less 
useful for immediate encounters. 

Only the priest’s holy symbol is required, as 
the casting is a matter of mental preparation and 
emotional state. 

Notes: Very rare spell, mostly known by 
savage priests and barbarian clerics. (Updated 
from DkAGon Magazine.) 


Resist Magic — Old Empire 
(Abjuration) 
Sphere: Guardian 


Level: 6 

Range: 0 

‘Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 9 
Duration: 2 rds./level 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell grants the priest 2% magic resistance 
per level of the priest, to a maximum of 40%, for 
the spell’s duration. This magic resistance func- 
tions identically to the magic resistance possessed 
by certain monsters and bestowed by certain pow- 
erful artifacts and relics. 

Notes: Granted by the Mulhorandi deity Thoth 
of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Resist Turning 
(Abjuration) 
Sphere: Necromantic 


Level: 2 

Range: Touch 

Components: V 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: 1 turn/level 

Area of Effect: 30-ft. diameter circle around crea- 
ture or object touched 

Saving Throw: None 


While this spell is in effect, all undead within a 
30-foot radius of the affected object or creature 
gain a resistance to being turned (or commanded) 
by the clerics and paladins of an opposing religion 
(compared to that of the caster). The spell can be 
centered on an object or creature, including the 
caster. The base resistance conferred is 20%, plus 
5% for every two levels of experience of the caster 
(60% at 4th, 65% at 6th, 70% at 8th, up to a max- 
imum of 95% at 18th level). 

This resistance roll is made secretly by the DM 
before each turning attempt is made. A priest can 
continue attempting to turn or command the resist- 
ant undead creatures each round until either the 
resistance is overcome or the turn roll indicates 
failure. 

Notes: Uncommon for necromancer-priests; 
otherwise, virtually unknown. 


instinctively 
general nature of the resistance, but not neces- 
sarily its strength. In other words, the priest will 
realize success is possible, but not how likely 
his or her own success might be. 


Resplendence of Renewed Youth 
(Alteration, Necromancy) 
Sphere: Necromantic, Healing 


Level: 7 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, $ 
Casting Time: 1 hr. 
Duration: | year 

Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell allows a creature to tap into its spir- 
itual strength in order to bring its body back to the 


RIS ee NS 


Rest, Dumathoi 


peak strength of youth for one year. In a human, 
this would mean that the affected body would 
retum to the shape it had when the recipient was 
around 25 years of age. Recipients of this spell 
lose all the negative aspects of old age, such as lost 
hit points, levels, or ability score points, and so on, 
as well as gaining immunity to all diseases for the 
duration of the spell only. 

This spell functions only on those who have 
shown exceptional wisdom and piety during their 
lives, and then only if they have an exceptional 
focus that their current condition prevents them 
from completing. Casting a quest spell is thus 
mandatory before attempting this spell. Dropping 
this quest means forfeiting all advantages of the 
resplendence spell. 

An individual can benefit from this spell only 
once in a lifetime. When the spell expires, the 
recipient's body returns to the state it would have 
normally for its years. The spell heavily drains the 
body of the recipient, and so adds an additional 
1d10+3 years to the recipient's true age when it 
expires. 

This spell is one of the secrets of the church of 
‘Tyr and is used sparingly, only when it needs the 
help of a great hero in dire circumstances. It is 
rumored that the church of Sune has many times 
tried to learn the secret of this spell. 

Notes: Granted by the Tyr the Just God of the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Rest, Dumathoin’s 
See Dumathoin’s rest. 


Restoration 
(Necromancy) 
Reversible 
Sphere: Necromantic 


Level: 7 
Range: Touch 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 3 rds. 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


When this spell is cast, the life energy level of 
the recipient creature is raised by one, reversing 
any previous life energy level drain of the creature 
by a force or monster. Thus, if a 10th-level charac- 
ter had been struck by a wight and drained to 9th 
level, the restoration spell would bring the charac- 
ter up to exactly the number of experience points 
necessary to restore him to 10th level once again, 
restoring additional Hit Dice (or hit points) and 


level functions accordingly. Restoration is effec- 
tive only if the spell is cast within one day of the 
recipient's loss of life energy per experience level 
of the priest casting it. A restoration spell restores 
the Intelligence of a creature affected by a feeble- 
mind spell. It also negates all forms of insanity. 
Casting this spell ages both the caster and the 
recipient by two years. 

The reverse, energy drain, draws away one life 
energy level (see such undead as spectre, wight, 
and vampire, in the Monsrrous MANUAL tome). 
The energy drain requires the victim to be touched. 
Casting this form of the spell does not age the 
caster. 

Notes: Common for clerics (PHB). 


Restore Bloodline 
(Alteration) 
Reversible 
Sphere: Necromantic 


Level: 6 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 4 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


-— 


500 


Restore Rune 


N 


This powerful spell allows the caster to restore 
a creature’s depleted or stolen bloodline, including 
any blood abilities lost as a result, Restore blood- 
line works on any living scion who has lost all or 
part of his bloodline through some magical means 
(such as the blood drain of a spectral scion or sim- 
ilar method). The spell has no effect on victims of 
bloodtheft who are brought back to life, or charac- 
ters who give away their bloodlines willingly (by 
bequeathing them to an heir). 

The material components are the priest's holy 
symbol and a length of red velvet ribbon, which is 
tied about the recipient's head. 

The reverse of this spell, destroy bloodline, can 
be used to blast a scion’s bloodline into nonexis- 
tence. By touching a creature, the casting priest 
uses his deity’s power to erase the creature's 
bloodline. The victim is allowed a saving throw vs. 
death magic; if he fails, his bloodline and all blood 
abilities vanish permanently. Only a restore blood- 
line or wish spell can bring the bloodline back. Use 
of destroy bloodline is frowned upon in most parts 
of Cerilia; in some areas, it is banned entirely. 
Most scions feel that the spell wastes a rare 
resource; they would rather see bloodlines trans- 
ferred or stolen than destroyed forever. 

The material component for the reverse is a 
small sewing needle made of pure gold. 

Notes: Common for priests of Cerilia, the 
BIRTHRIGHT setting, 


Restore Earth 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Elemental Earth 


Level: 4 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, $, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell, a more powerful version of the stone 
shape spell, allows a dwarven cleric to heal 
damage to an earthen structure. Once the spell is 
cast, the structure restores itself toward its original 
condition gradually over time. The spell remains 
in effect for as many rounds as the cleric has levels 
of experience. The spell heals damage to stone, 
earth, or metal at the rate of one point of structural 
damage per round. When the spell fades, it leaves 
behind a permanent repair (unless the structure is 
damaged again, of course). 

If a structure is totally destroyed or demolished, 
the spell has no effect. The spell cannot restore a 


501 


castle wall that has been battered into rubble or an 
iron gate that has been smashed to pieces. 

The material component is a piece of clay with 
iron filings mixed into it, which is then shaped to 
resemble the original appearance of the structure 
to be repaired. 

Notes: Very rare spell, granted by dwarven 
deities. (Updated from Dracon Magazine.) 


Restore Rune 
(Alteration, Abjuration) 
Sphere: Divination, Guardian 


Level: 6 
Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: Item or surface touched 
Saving Throw: Special 


‘The application of this spell to an item or a partic- 
ular surface of large constructions (such as a wall) 
immediately causes the outlines of any normal or 
magical writings that are or were present on the sur- 
face (or all surfaces of an item) to appear, All such 
markings show up at the end of the round in which the 
spell was cast as spectral, ghostly markings visible 
only to the caster. Large, simple writings and symbols 
can be readily read and understood by the caster, 
More complicated things (tiny or extensive writings, 
complicated diagrams, and all magical inscriptions or 
symbols) must be revealed by proper study, 

The spell allows only one such element to be 
revealed, either a single symbol or a continuous line 
or series of lines of writing that were made by the 
same being and at the same time. The caster chooses 
this one element and all of the other markings vanish 
as the chosen element becomes visible to all. 

If the writing or symbol was magical and 
could be discharged by touching, passage, or 
reading, the caster can choose to restore it. The 
caster must then make three saving throws vs. 
spell. If the first succeeds, the restore rune spell 
restores the image of the original symbol and tells 
the caster its precise effects. If the second suc- 
ceeds, the symbol fades from view again and 
communicates to the caster its conditions of acti- 
vation (the caster cannot alter these, he is merely 
made aware of them). At this point the symbol is 
powerless, The caster can decide to end the spell 
at this time, leaving a symbol that can alarm or 
impress creatures, but has not other effect. If the 
third saving throw succeeds, the invisible symbol 
becomes charged. It has the same magical effects 
as its predecessor (except that the passage, 


Restore Spirit 


presence, or actions of the caster of the restore 
rune spell do not activate it). 

‘The material components are a pinch of pow- 
dered gemstone, a piece of chalk, and three twigs 
or stems from any sort of plant bound together 
with string, wire, hair, or vines to form a triangle. 

Notes: Granted by the god Deneir, Lord of 
Glyphs, of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


s 


By means of this spell, the shukenja can retum 
the spirit of another from its aimless wanderings to 
its proper body. The shukenja lays his hands upon 
the body, reconnecting the tie between the body 
and the spirit. A system shock roll is made for the 
creature and, if successful, the lost spirit instantly 
returns to its body, restoring the individual to 
whatever condition he or she was in the moment 
the spirit became lost. Spirits can become lost in a 
number of ways, particularly through mishaps 
when using the astral and dream walk spells. 

The material component is a red robe. 

Notes: Common for oriental priests; otherwise, 
very rare. 


Restore Spirit 
(Necromancy) 
Sphere: Necromantic 


Level: 7 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: Special 


Restore Strength 
(Necromancy) 
Sphere: Necromantic 


Level: 2 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell removes unnatural weakness, debili- 
tation, or exhaustion from the creature touched and 
restores it to it normal strength and stamina. The 
spell is useful in countering the effects of chill 
touch, ray of enfeeblement, ray of fatigue, the 
touch of a shadow or roper, and any similar spell 
or effect. Only temporary ability score losses can 
be alleviated by this spell; an individual who suf- 


S ne ay eee Le ee ae 


fers an incapacitating physical injury receives no 
benefit. Strength or stamina reduced by purely nat- 
ural causes such as exposure, disease, or exertion 
is not restored. The subject remains at the restored 
strength and endurance only until these are drained 
or otherwise reduced again. 

Notes: Uncommon for clerics (PO:SM). 


Restore Youth 
Reversed form, age creature. 


Resurrection 
(Necromancy) 
Reversible 
Sphere: Necromantic 


Level: 7 

Range: Touch 

‘Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 tum 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


The priest is able to restore life and complete 
strength to any living creature, including elves, by 
bestowing the resurrection spell. The creature can 
have been dead up to 10 years per level of the cast- 
ing priest. Thus, a 19th-level priest can resurrect 
the bones of a creature dead up to 190 years. The 
creature, upon surviving a resurrection survival 
check, is immediately restored to full hit points 
and can perform strenuous activity. 

‘The spell cannot bring back creature that has 


causes). Casting this spell makes it impossible for 
the priest to cast further spells or engage in combat 
until he has had one day of bed rest for each expe- 
rience level or Hit Die of the creature brought back 
to life. The caster ages three years upon casting 
this spell. 

‘The material components of the spell are the 
priest’s religious symbol and holy water. The DM 
may reduce the chances of successful resurrection 
if little of the creature's remains are available. 

The reverse, destruction, causes the victim of 
the spell to be instantly dead and turned to dust, A 
wish spell or equivalent is required for recovery. 
Destruction requires a touch, either in combat or 
otherwise, and does not age the caster. In addition, 
the victim is allowed a saving throw vs. death magic 
with a —4 penalty. If the saving throw is successful, 
the creature receives 8d6 points of damage instead. 

‘The material components for the reversed spell 
are the priest’s holy symbol and unholy water. 

Notes: Common for clerics (PHB), 


Reveal 


Ne 


Resurrection — Shukenja 
Generally the same as the standard version, except 
the resurrected being must be honorable; the spell 
does not function on those of less than 50 honor. 
The components are the shukenja's holy symbol, 
holy water, and burning incense tapers. This form 
is also reversible, and affects creatures regardless 
of honor. 


Retarget 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Combat, Protection 
Level: 5 
Range: 40 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 7 


Duration: 2 rds./level 
Area of Effect: | spell 
Saving Throw: None 


Retarget allows the caster to choose any spell 
cast, during its duration and redirect it to any other 
creature within spell range. For example, if a mage 
casts magic missile at a cleric who has cast retar- 
get, the cleric can choose a different target for the 
spell—including the mage who initially cast it. 

This spell does not convey to its caster any 
knowledge of the spell that has been cast (which 
might be important if two spells have a similar 
appearance when cast). If the caster redirects the 
chosen spell to a point out of range for the initial 
caster, the retargeted spell is negated instead, and 
the rerarget spell expires. Spells that affect only 
the original caster cannot be retargeted. 

The material components for this spell are the 
caster's holy symbol and a silver mirror. 

Notes: In the ForGotren REALMS setting, 
known to the Emerald Enclave and granted by 
Eldath, Gwaeron, Mielikki, and Silvanus. 


Return to Earth 


(Necromancy) 


Sphere: Elemental Earth 


Level: 4 

Range: 0 

Components: V, M 

Casting Time: 3 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 30 ft. radius 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell turns the physical bodies of undead 
creatures within 30 feet of the caster into dust. 
The affected undead must actually have physical 


forms; for example, ghosts and spectres are not 
subject to this spell. Corpses inhabited by spirits 
(such as wights) and undead with more than 4 Hit 
Dice are allowed a saving throw vs. death magic, 
but zombies, skeletons and similar animated 
undead with 4 Hit Dice or less are not. The caster 
can affect 1 Hit Die of undead for each level of 
experience. Once cast, bits of the undead crea- 
tures begin to crumble and fall to the ground, 
completely destroying them in 3 rounds. As they 

is , affected undead creatures suffer a 
cumulative —I to attack rolls each round after the 
spell has taken affect. 

The material component is a pinch of dust. 

Notes: Uncommon for priests from the DARK 
SUN setting. 


Reveal 
(Divination) 
Reversible 
Sphere: Divination 


Level: 4 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 7 

Duration: 4 rds. 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


Reveal allows the caster or another creature 
to which the ointment spell component is applied 
to see clearly the location and outline of sym- 
bols, glyphs of warding, magically concealed 
inscriptions, and dweomers existing upon sur- 
faces up to 120 feet ay These are viewed even 
if not yet activated (including magic mouth, 
Mordenkainen's faithful hound, Leomund’s trap, 
Nystul's magic aura, hallucinatory terrain, wall 
of force). No clue as to the precise nature of the 
magic is given by the spell, but protective cir- 
cles, symbols, and glyphs all can be scrutinized 
in detail, and might well be identified by some- 
one familiar with them or recorded for later 
study. (Spellcraft proficiency checks might be 
applicable to determine that a marking is a glyph 
of warding and what its identity is, for instance.) 

Reveal shows the presence of active or inactive 
gates or other links between planes, including the 
Presence of an astral silvery cord, but does not 
reveal astral, ethereal, or invisible creatures or 
things, Unlike true seeing, the auras of creatures 
are not shown; nor are polymorphed or magically 
changed things shown for what they truly are 
(although the dweomer of an illusion, for example, 
would be seen). 


Ye a ce ae 


~ Reveal Forest 


The spell requires an ointment composed of 
four drops of wine, two drops of water, two drops 
of giant squid sepia, a pinch of powdered eye- 
bright (an herb), a large powdered blue sapphire 
worth at least 1,000 gp, and a powdered carbuncle 
(a deep-red garnet) worth at least 300 gp. The 
caster mixes these in a ceramic or stone bowl, 
speaks the words of the spell while holding his or 
her holy symbol over the paste, and then applies it 
to the eyes of the recipient, 

‘The reverse of the spell, conceal, masks all the 
above things from any creature to whom a differ- 
ent ointment is applied for one turn per level of the 
caster. (This ointment is composed of a pinch of 
powdered monkshood, six drops of onion juice, a 
pinch of dust, and seven drops of water, mixed and 
enspelled as above.) If during this time the affected 
being employs true seeing, detect magic, or equiv- 
alent magic, these spells appear to work, but the 
phenomena listed above are simply not seen by the 
affected creature. Awake, mobile creatures unwill- 
ing to have the ointment for either version of the 
spell applied to their eyes must be touched by the 
caster twice (two successful attack rolls required), 
No means short of dispel magic or a limited wish 
prevents the ointment from working. 

Notes: Granted by Tempus, war god of the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Reveal Forest 
Reversed form, hallucinatory forest. 


Reveal Stone 
Reversed form, maskstone. 


Revelation 
Quest spell, see appendix in Vol. 3. 


Revelation 
(Divination) 
Sphere: Divination 


Level: 5 

Range: Line of sight 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: 1 rd. 

Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


By casting a revelation spell, a wizard immedi- 
ately understands, in unerring detail, the complete 
meaning of an omen or portent. This spell can be 
used only when the spellcaster sees the omen, and 
must be used while the portent is remains visible, 
The revelation spell cannot predict the future, 


TR ee N 


except as indicated by the portent, nor even iden- 
tify who sent the omen. The spell only reveals the 
exact meaning of the omen, 

Should a spelicaster use the spell in an attempt 
to understand an unusual event that is not an 
omen, the spell fails, although the caster does 
learn that there is no great importance to the sup- 
posed sign. 

Notes: Very rare spell, originally from the 
Arthurian section of Legends & Lore. 


Revealing Dust 


Reversed form, pixie dust. 


Revenance — Drow 
(Necromancy) 
Sphere: Necromantic 


Level: 2 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 undead/level 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell is much like the wizard spell of the 
same name. The caster affects one touched undead 
per level, making it immune to an initial attempt to 
tum, destroy, or command it by a priest, paladin, or 
other being with power over undead. The spell ends 
as it prevents that one attempt; later attempts have 
a normal chance of success (the spell does not pro- 
tect undead from spells or magical item effects). 
Protected undead radiate a faint magical aura. 
Unlike the wizard spell, multiple priest revenances 
can be cast on a single undead; each tuming 
attempt ends only one spell, leaving the others 
operating. 

The material components of the spell are a 
pinch of dust for each undead creature to be 
affected. 

Notes: Rare spell granted by drow deities in 
the FoRGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Revenance, Hoar’s 
See Hoar’s revenance. 


Reverse Bane 
Reversed form, bane. 


Revitalize Animal — Ranger 


0 4 


Level: 3 
Range: Touch 


Reverse Fossilization 
Components; V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 


(Enchantment) 
Sphere: Combat 
Duration: 5 rds./level 
Area of Effect: Weapon(s) touched 
Saving Throw: None 
This spell causes stone weapons to become 
equivalent to their bone counterparts, cutting their 
attack penalty from -2 to —1 (damage is the same). 
‘This spell is not as potent as stoneiron, but is far more 
common on Athas. One large weapon or two small 
weapons can be enchanted by a single casting of this 
spell; missiles lose their enchantment when used. 
‘The material component is a piece of fossilized 
bone, 


Notes: Uncommon for priests from the DARK 
SUN setting. (Updated from DraGoN Magazine.) 


Reverse Time 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Time 


Level: 6 

Range: 30 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 6 
Duration: 1d4 rds. 

Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell is similar to the 9th-level wizard 
spell time stop. When reverse time is cast, time 
stops within a 30-foot diameter of the subject. All 
creatures and items in the area of effect stand 
motionless, rivers stop running, and arrows hang 
suspended in the air. Any creature, person, or 
object entering the area of effect is likewise frozen 
in time. The caster is affected if he is within the 
area of effect, unless he is the subject of the spell. 

An unwilling subject is allowed a saving throw 
vs. spell; if successful, the spell is immediately 
negated. Otherwise, the victim is forced to relive 
all the actions taken in the previous 1d4 rounds in 
reverse. Beginning with the most recent round, the 
subject moves backward, arrows fired by the sub- 
ject return to his bow, and so on, All effects of 
these actions are negated. At the end of the spell’s 
duration, normal time resumes and all creatures 
immediately continue their activities, picking up 
right where they had stopped. 


Consider the following example. A party is bat- 
tling a spellcasting red dragon. In the first round, 
the dragon breathes fire, roasting the party's 
wizard. The rest of the group attacks and injures 
the dragon. On the second round, the dragon bites 
and kills the group’s thief. More damage is caused 
to the beast, but it is still alive in the third round, 
when it uses magic missile to kill the ranger. At 
this point, the priest casts reverse time on the 
beast. Fortunately, it fails its saving throw and is 
forced to reverse the last four rounds. While every- 
one else freezes, the dragon goes into reverse. The 
magic missiles zoom back to the dragon (and it 
regains the ability to cast that spell), it unbites the 
thief (removing that damage from the character), 
and then inhales its fiery breath (leaving the 
roasted wizard alive and uncooked). The dragon is 
then reversed through one more round the round 
before it encountered the party. The spell then ends 
and actions resume. 

The dragon must now roll for surprise since it 
is encountering the party for the first time. The 
party is immune to surprise, since it was fighting 
the beast previously. All damage suffered by the 
dragon remains, since these actions were caused 
by the group and not the beast. 

The material component is an etched silver 
arrow bent into a circle, The arrow must be no 
more than 3 inches long and worth no less than 
500 gp. The arrow is destroyed in the casting. 

Notes: Common for priests with major access 
to the sphere of Time (ToM). 


Reverse Winds 
Athasian Dragon King magic, 8th level; psionic 
component renders the spell uncastable by priests. 


Reversion 
Quest spell, see appendix in Vol. 3. 


Revitalize Animal — Ranger 
(Necromancy) 
Sphere: Animal 


Level: 1 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 4 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: 1 animal 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell allows the caster to heal an animal by 
transferring life force (hit points) from himself or 
herself to the animal, If the animal is touched with 
one hand, it regains 144 hit points (otherwise just 


505 


Revive Spirit — Shaman 


as if it had received a cure light wounds spell). 
Touching the animal with both hands restores 2d4 
hit points. In either case, the caster temporarily 
loses the number of hit points that the animal 
regains. The caster recovers temporarily lost hit 
points 1d4 hours later (if 3 hit points were trans- 
ferred, the ranger recovers 3 hit points in 1d4 
hours). The casters recovery of these hit points 
has no effect on the restored animal. 

While recovering transferred hit points, the 
caster feels weak and dizzy, making all attack rolls 
with a —1 penalty. Should the caster die during this 
period, the recovery process stops immediately 
and no hit points are recovered. 

‘The animal cannot recover hit points beyond its 
normal allotment. For instance, an animal that 
normally has 10 hit points, but has been reduced to 
6 hit points due an injury, can't receive more than 
4 hit points from this spell. Also, the caster retains 
at least | hit point remaining after using this spell; 
a caster with 6 hit points won't transfer more than 
5 to a damaged animal. 

Revitalize animal works on animals (including 
giant animals) only; it has no effect on humans, 
demihumans, humanoids, magical creatures, and 
so on. The spell is not reversible; an injured caster 
can’t receive hit points from an animal. 

Notes: Common for rangers; otherwise, very 
rare. 


Revive Spirit — Shaman 
(Necromancy) 
Sphere: Healing 


Level: 3 

Range: 10 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: | tum 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: 1 spirit 
Saving Throw: None 


‘The caster arranges a circle of small fires around 
the place where the target spirit is (enclosing an area 
no more than 20 yards across), and, while chanting, 
bums on them a mixture of rare herbs and mineral. 
As the casting begins a dark green smoke curls from 
the fires, enveloping the area in a sweet, olive fog, 
which dissipates in one round after the spell is com- 
pleted or the casting aborted. 

The effect of the spell is to completely restore 
the health of any one injured spirit within the 
circle. All lost hit points are recovered by the 
spirit. 

The spell takes a great toll on the casting 
shaman, however. The caster takes 1d6 hit points 


CO a OT 


of damage from the effort. If both a Strength and 
Constitution check are failed, one point of Consti- 
tution is permanently lost. 

‘The mixture of herbs constitutes the material 
component of the spell. They cost 10 sp if bought 
in the market, or can be gathered in one day by an 
individual with the herbalism proficiency. 

Notes: Restricted to shamans, uncommon. 


Reward 
(Conjuration) 
Sphere: All 


Level: 4 

Range: 0 

‘Components: V, M 
Casting Time: 1 tum 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: | creature 
Saving Throw: None 


The spell allows the shukenja to give an appro- 
priate gift to those who have been exceptionally 
faithful or have performed some great service for the 
shukenja’s ethical cause, The spell is extremely lim- 
ited in its use and is successful only when the DM 
judges the appropriate conditions have been met. If 
the DM determines that sufficient factors apply, the 
spell succeeds. The shukenja cannot cast the spell to 
reward himself. Rewarding player characters should 
be done only for truly exceptional deeds. 

This spell causes a gift from the shukenja’s 
deity to appear—one that is appropriate to the 
service done and the station and needs of the indi- 
vidual rewarded. The reward must be given to that 
individual (if kept by the shukenja or stolen by 
another, it vanishes and the offender suffers the 
effects of an ancient curse). The exact type of 
reward is decided by the DM. Typical services and 
rewards are listed. 

‘Those who perform such services with a greedy 
heart, that is, only looking to the reward they will 
receive, get that which they deserve—exposure of 
their greed, humiliation, or misfortune. 

The spell must be cast at a temple of the 
shukenja’s religion. 

Notes: Common for oriental priests; otherwise, 
very rare, 


Rigid Thinking 


NÝ 


Typical Rewards 
PENARE ac iasi ot y 
art for the shukenja’s temple might receive mag- 
ical tools that increase his proficiency by 1 or 
more when used. 
A peasant who consistently presents offer- 
ings of food greater than he can afford might 
receive a magical rice pot that never goes empty. 
A warrior who fights valiantly for the reli- 
gion’s cause might receive a weapon of quality 
or the one-time use of one shukenja spell. 
A lord who supports the ethos and protects 
its property might receive good fortune in his 
endeavors or success in some great battle. 


Rhondang, Shades of 
See shades of Rhondang. 


Rift 
Athasian Dragon King magic, 9th level; psionic 
component renders the spell uncastable by priests. 


Right of Might — Old Empire 
(Alteration, Enchantment/Charm) 
Sphere: Charm, Combat 


Level: 5 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 8 

Duration: 1 rd./level (Special) 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell combines the effects of three spells: 
enlarge, strength, and command. It enables the 
spellcaster to become more powerful and com- 
manding. 

When cast, right of might increases the Strength 
of the spellcaster by 1d6 points (or tenths of points 
after 18 Strength is attained if the spellcaster is a 
martinet or is also a warrior). This spell cannot 
confer a Strength of 19 or more, nor is it cumula- 
tive with other magic that adds to Strength. 

This spell also causes the spellcaster and any 
equipment carried to grow by up to 10% per four 
levels of the caster (round down), increasing this 
amount in height, weight, and width. Hit points, 
Armor Class, and attack rolls do not change, but 
damage rolls increase proportionately with size. 
For example, a priest at 120% of normal size hits 
with a mace and rolls a 6 for damage. The adjusted 
damage roll is 8 (that is, 6 X 1.2=7.2, rounded up). 
Bonuses due to Strength (except as noted above), 
class, and magic are not altered. 


Finally, this spell enables the priest to com- 
mand another creature with a single word, with 
identical effects to the Ist-level priest spell com- 
mand. One such command can be issued for every 
three levels of the priest (rounding up) to a maxi- 
mum of six. Only one command can issued per 
round; however they can be issued at any time 
while the right of might spell is in effect. It is not 
necessary to employ all the available command 
effects, but on the utterance of the last available 
command, the right of might spell automatically 
ends, even if the spell duration is not yet finished. 

The material component is the priest’s holy 
symbol. 

Notes: Granted by the Mulhorandi demigod 
Gilgeam of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Righteous Wrath (of the Faithful) 
A Sth-level spell of the sphere of War. See appen- 
dix in Vol. 3. 


Rigid Thinking 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
Sphere: Law 


Level: 3 

Range: 60 yds. 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 1 turn 
Duration: 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


Rigid thinking can be cast only upon a creature 
with Intelligence of 3 or greater. The creature is 
allowed a saving throw vs. spell to avoid the 
effects, 

The creature affected by rigid thinking is inca- 
pable of performing any action other than the 
activity he is involved in when the spell takes 
effect. The creature's mind simply cannot decide 
on another course of action—it becomes frozen 
into a single thought and cannot change even if 
new circumstances would suggest otherwise. 
Thus, a warrior fighting a kobold ignores the 
arrival of a beholder, and a thief picking a lock 
pays no heed to the arrival of three guards. 

The affected creature does not mechanically 
repeat the action; it is not an automaton. An archer 
won’t continue to fire his bow at a dragon if he 
runs out of arrows, but chooses another means of 
attacking the dragon to the exclusion of all other 
activities, 

A spellcaster in the process of casting a spell 
when rigid thinking takes effect won't attempt to 
repeat the spell (unless the spell has been memo- 


ge ae ee 


~ Ring of Hands* - 


rized more than once). However, the spelleaster 
attention is devoted to the target of the spell until 
his goal is met. For example, a caster attacking a 
creature would continue to direct attacks at that 
creature; a caster trying to open a door would con- 
tinue to work on the door until it opens). 

The spell expires when the creature accom- 
plishes its goal (for example, a creature is killed or 
the lock is opened) or when the duration of the 
spell has ended. 

Notes: Common for priests with access to the 
sphere of Law (ToM). 


Ring of Hands* 
(Abjuration) 
Reversible 
Sphere: Protection 


Level: 1 

Range: 0 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 5 
Duration: 2d10 rds. 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This is a cooperative magic spell. It requires a 
minimum of two priests and can accommodate a 
maximum of ten. Each priest must cast ring of 
hands on the same round. At the end of the casting, 
the priests involved join hands, thus completing 
the spell. If any priest breaks the circle, the spell 
immediately ends. The priests cannot move from 
their locations but are free to speak. They cannot 
cast spells requiring a somatic or material compo- 
nent while the ring is formed. 

The ring of hands forms a protective barrier 
around the priests and everything within their 
circle. For each priest, assume a five-foot circum- 
ference of the circle; thus, three priests would 
create a circle of 15-foot circumference. For easy 
calculation, assume that for each priest, the circle 
can accommodate four persons. 

The barrier functions as a protection from evil 
spell. Attacks by evil creatures suffer a—1 penalty 
for every priest forming the circle. Saving throws 
made by the priests or anyone in the circle against 
attacks from such creatures receive a +1 bonus for 
every priest in the circle. 

Attempted mental control of protected creatures 
is blocked. Extraplanar and conjured creatures are 
unable to touch the priests and those within the 
circle, although melee attacks against such crea- 
tures by those within the ring break the barrier. 

The casting priests do not receive Dexterity 
bonuses to Armor Class while the ring functions. 


Furthermore, opponents gain a +2 bonus to attack 
rolls against the priests. Creatures within the ring 
are free to act as they wish. Melee attacks by those 
within the ring are limited to piercing weapons. 
These suffer a —1 penalty to attack rolls since the 
priests intervene. 

‘The reverse of this spell, ring of woe, functions 
as detailed above except the effect applies to good 
creatures as would a protection from good spell. 

Notes: Uncommon for clerics (ToM). 


Ring of Woe 
Reversed form, ring of hands. 


Ripen 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Plant 


Level: | 

Range: 5 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 4 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


Ripen affects either a single mature tree or all 
smaller plants covering a 10-foot square plot of 
ground. It causes the affected plants to immedi- 
ately produce the normal amount of fruit (nuts, 
seeds, or whatever) they bear at the height of the 
harvest season. Thus, an apple tree will be laden 
with ripe apples, a patch of grain will mature, and 
so on. A given tree or area of ground can do this 
only once per season, and the spell won't work 
outside of the plant's normal growing season. Any 
produce not picked or harvested within 24 hours 
withers and dies. 

The material component is mistletoe. 

Notes: Very rare druid spell. (Updated from 
DRAGON Magazine.) 


Ripen Plant 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Plant 


Level: 2 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, $ 
Casting Time: 5 


Area of Effect: 1 plant 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell causes a single plant to mature and 
ripen (to bloom, to produce ready fruit, or simply 


a o a a ae = en, 


Rites of Istishia* 


EEE 4 


to yield seeds, as the caster desires) within the 
spell’s duration. A plant of any size and nature 
can be affected, and it need not be a variety famil- 
iar to the caster. The bloom, seeds, or fruits grow 
toward the caster (so as to drop into his waiting 
hand) unless the priest wills them to present 
themselves to another. If the caster desires, the 
magic affects only part of a plant, leaving the rest 
to grow normally. Once the spell expires, the 
plant affected by it radiates no magic and is 
entirely normal. 

This magic won't work on plants that are being 
magically controlled by another entity. In such 
cases, a ripen plant spell identifies the control over 
the plant to the caster and acts as an unbreakable 
hold plant spell of 1 turn in duration. 

Notes: Granted by Chauntea, the Great Mother, 
of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. This spell is 
found only in a few exceptionally rare tomes. 


Rising Rot 
(Evocation, Necromancy) 
Sphere: Combat, Necromantic 


Level: 5 

Range: 10 yds./level 
‘Components: V, $, M 
Casting Time: 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell generates a glowing brown or green 
beam of light that stabs out from the caster to 
unerringly strike a chosen target creature, who 
must be visible to the caster and within range 
when spellcasting begins. The beam fades from 
existence the moment the victim has been struck, 
and the caster does not need to concentrate on the 
spell's effects past this point. The beam infects the 
victim with a mold that sucks moisture and nutri- 
ents from living flesh, causing it to shrivel and turn 
brown. The target must make a saving throw vs. 
spell. Success means only 1d8 points of damage is 
inflicted by the mold, but failure means the victim 
suffers 248+2 points of damage. On every round 
thereafter the victim must make another saving 
throw vs. spell. The same spell damage (1d8 points 
or 2d8+2 points) continues until the victim has 
successfully saved twice. The second successful 
saving throw ends the spell. Cure disease ends this 
spell instantly, as does any magic that kills molds 
or prevents damage done by them. 

Rising rot has no effect on undead creatures, 
incorporeal beings, or creatures lacking body 
tissue (such as elementals). Sages believe that the 


Darkbringer’s cult has fashioned numerous wands, 
known as wands of rotting, which can cast rising 
rot upon command. 

The material component is a handful of mold 
spores from any source and of any type. 

Notes: Granted by Moander the Darkbringer of 
the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Rites of Istishia* 
(Conjuration/Summoning, Divination) 
Sphere: Elemental Water 


Level: 3 

Range: 10 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 3 rds. 
Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell must be performed on the shore of a 
large body of water. Whenever Istishian priests 
disagree, a decision may be reached by the rites of 
Istishia. Each dissenting priest must first find a 
third party to argue his or her case to a large body 
of water. The priests then cast a combine spell fol- 
lowed by the rites of Istishia. The rites of Istishia 
summons a number of lesser water elementals 
equal to the number of clerics involved in the dis- 
pute to act as judges. At the end of the debate, the 
priests then step out onto the water's surface. The 
one who is found to be in favor with Istishia (in 
other words, whomever the DM feels was argued 
for more eloquently) is held upon the water’s sur- 
face by one of the elementals. The others are 
dragged to the bottom of the body of water by the 
remaining elementals and then released. The ele- 
mentals take no other action—they cannot be 
coerced into attacking or defending the priests or 
serving them in any other way. 

The material components for this spell is the 
priest’s holy symbol and a pinch of ground sea 
shell for each priest involved in the dispute. 

Notes: Granted by Istishia the Water Lord of 
the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


D E ES ca a an 


~ Ritual of Transference* 


Ritual of Transference* 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: All 


Level: 7 

Range: 20 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 tum 
Duration: | tum 

Area of Effect: | item 
Saving Throw: Special 


This complicated cooperative spell ritual allows 
its participants to cast spells into a prepared item or 
being; to transfer charges of magical energy from 
one item to another; or to infuse an item or being 
with powers from another magical item, altar, arti- 
fact, or other item of great power. The usual use of 
the ritual of transference is to infuse an item with 
magic. The spell is sometimes employed to 
empower devout lay worshipers with the means to 
help in a mission or defend a holy place, but it is 
only rarely used to imbue priests with spells 
beyond their capabilities. The only powers that can 
be transferred into a being are those that are spell- 
like in nature; the ability of say, a rod of lordly 
might to change into a climbing pole or a magical 
weapon could not be transferred. 

The caster must have touched the destination 
being or item (or one of its component parts) or at 
least one of the donor sources of magic at some 
time in the past, but no contact with them is nec- 
essary during casting. A droning chant is begun 
and must continue unbroken for the entire tum of 
casting, though the initial caster can cease to chant 
without ruining the spell if other participants are 
chanting. 

Once a ritual of transference is begun, other 
priests can participate by casting their own ritual 
of transference or a combine spell and touching the 
caster of the original spell with their bare flesh. 
Once the turn-long casting of a ritual is complete, 
the spell lasts for another turn, and it is during this 
time that participants can cast spells of their own 
into the item or being. If a participant casts a spell 
at the wrong item or being (in other words, not the 
spell’s designated recipient), the spell takes its 
normal effect, and the mistaken (or hostile) partic- 
ipant’s involvement with the ritual is broken. Note 
that the ritual lasts for | tum following the initial 
tum of casting; additional participants do not 
extend its length by the casting of their own ritual 
spells. 

‘Any number of spells or charges can enter the 
recipient item or person during the same round 
without causing harm or affecting each other, but 


all spelis take their normal casting times. Charge 
transference is one charge per level of the transfer- 
ring priest per round. Magical item effects take 1 
round each to transfer. 

As each spell, set of charges, or magical item 
effect enters the recipient being or item, a saving 
throw is made by the recipient being or item. If the 
recipient is a creature, a saving throw vs. spell is 
required; each success allows the spell or magical 
effect to enter the being. A failure dissipates the 
magic effect instead of transferring it. Spells and 
effects do not affect a being as if they had been 
cast at it or used on it, but become magic stored 
within the recipient under his or her mental control 
in addition to any memorized spells or natural 
spell-like powers the being possesses. 

If the recipient of the ritual of transference is 
an item, its base saving throw is a 12. Each time 
that saving throw succeeds, the transferred spell, 
magical item effect, or set of charges successfully 
enters the item. Each time the saving throw fails, 
the magic dissipates and is lost. Spells and effects 
do not affect an item as if they had been cast at it 
or used on it, but become magic stored within the 
recipient item that is used to imbue it with certain 
powers. 

Both creature and item saving throws are 
cumulatively modified as follows; +2 per priest 
other than the initial caster that participates in the 
ritual; + 1 if the recipient item or being is in or on 
an altar or other sacred spot or object; —1 for a 
spell or magical charge transferred into the recipi- 
ent by a being other than the initial caster; —1 per 
priest participating who does not serve the same 
deity as the initial caster; —2 if any hostile magic is 
cast into the recipient or so as to affect any partic- 
ipating priest during the ritual of transference; and 
-5 per participant who is slain or deliberately 
wounded during the casting. Since repeated saving 
throws are made, events that occur during the 
ritual’s duration only affect saving throws made 
after they occur. The ritual does not protect its par- 
ticipants in any way. 

Beings who have had spells or magical item 
abilities transferred into them can use these stored 
magics in one of two ways: They can unleash them 
by silent act of will as the same spells or abilities 
they absorbed or they can absorb them as healing 
energy, transforming a stored magic into a curative 
effect upon themselves. Only one spell can be 
unleashed during a round, but any number of cur- 
ative effects can be performed instantly during a 
round and can even be combined with a stored 
spell unleashing or the recipient being’s normal 
actions for a round. Unleashed spells require no 
casting time, components, or skill at wielding 


510 


Rockburst — Dwarf 


Ne 


magic, and their unleashed effects perform as if 
they were wielded by their original source caster 
or item. Curative energy gained is 1d4 points of 
healing for every spell level used up; a partially 
transformed spell cannot be cast forth, and extra 
points of healing gained above damage taken by 
the being are lost and wasted. Stored spells or 
magical item abilities remain until they are used 
by the spell recipient. 

‘The material components are two properly con- 
secrated holy symbols: the priest's own and 
another dedicated to the same deity that is con- 
sumed during the casting. 

Notes: Rare spell of the FORGOTTEN REALMS 
setting, recorded by Volo. 


Roar of the King 
(Evocation) 
Sphere: Combat 


Level: 4 

Range: 0 

Components: V, M 

Casting Time: 1 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: Cone, 10-ft. diameter X 30-ft. long 
Saving Throw: Special 


511 


This spell is a priestly version of the 4th-level 
wizard spell shout. When a roar of the king spell 
is cast, the caster acquires tremendous vocal 
powers similar to those of a male lion. The caster 
can emit an ear-splitting roar that has a principal 
effect in a cone shape radiating from his or her 
mouth to a point 40 feet away. Any creature 
within the area of effect is deafened for 2d6 
rounds and suffers 2d8 points of damage. A suc- 
cessful saving throw vs. spell negates the deafness 
and reduces the damage by half, Any exposed 
brittle or crystal substance subject to sonic vibra- 
tions is shattered by a roar of the king spell, while 
those brittle objects in the possession of a creature 
receive the creature's saving throw. Deafened 
creatures suffer a—1 penalty to surprise rolls, and 
those that cast spells with verbal components are 
20% likely to miscast them. 

A roar of the king spell cannot penetrate the 
2nd-level priest spell silence, 15‘ radius. Unlike the 
related wizard spell, there is no limit to the number 
of times this spell can be employed per day. 

Finally, a roar of the king spell can be heard a 
mile away, if not farther. No words can be com- 
municated via this spell, but it is an effective way 
of alerting distant allies. 

The material components for this spell are a 
drop of honey, a piece of cinnamon bark, a small 
piece of meat, and a small piece of amber worth at 
least 20 gp. 

Notes: Granted by Nobanion, the Lion King, of 
the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Robe of Healing 
Quest spell, see appendix in Vol. 3. 


Rock Shield 


Reversed form, hurl rock. 


Rockburst — Dwarf 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Combat 


Level: 2 

Range: 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: 1 rd. 

Area of Effect: 1 cu. ft./level 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell allows the caster to cause a boulder 
or rockpile to suddenly explode, propelling jagged 
shards in all directions. If the desired spell focus is 
larger than the volume the priest can affect, only 
part of it flies about. 


~ Roots of the Assassin 


Shrapnel endangers all beings within 20 feet of 
the spell focus. Beings within 10 feet must save vs. 
spell for half damage. Beings between 10 and 20 
feet distant who save successfully are allowed a 
second saving throw. If both rolls are successful, 
they avoid all damage (due to luck, dodging, and 
cover). If only one roll is successful, they take half 
damage. The presence of cover or armor does not 
automatically lessen damage due to the unpre- 
dictability of ricochets, bounces, and the like. 

The shrapnel does a base damage of 1d4+1 
points per level of the caster (i.e. 1d4+1 points per 
cubic foot of rock). In rare cases, the explosion 
might remove enough rock to cause an avalanche 
or cave-in, but such results cannot be caused delib- 
erately with this spell. 

Notes: Granted by the dwarven god Clanged- 
din Silverbeard. 


Roots of the Assassin 
(Conjuration) 
Sphere: Summoning, Plant 


Level: 6 

Range: 10 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 2 rds. 
Duration: | tum 

Area of Effect: 5 sq. yds./level 
Saving Throw: None 


This dark and evil spell creates long, slimy, 
black roots of foul look and manner. These plant 
things grow from any surface the spell was cast on 
with astonishing speed and attempt to strangle the 
poor person (or people) who triggered the spell; 
they wrap themselves around the neck of their 
victim. These roots attack collectively as a priest 
of the same level as the caster. 

The caster of this spell chooses exactly what 
condition triggers it. The condition can be of any 
complexity—for example “Kill only Tallfellow 
halflings wearing magical black leather armor 
with a red rose painted on their left shoulders.” 
However, the spell cannot know the name or 
alignment of a being, nor can it be set off by 
undead or plantlike creatures. The most common 
way to use this spell is to cast it at a mandatory 
passage point of the intended target (for example, 
the bed of a king). 

This spell creates 1100 tiny roots per square 
yard, any of which is sufficient to strangle a 
human-sized opponent. Each of them can project 
itself up to 5 yards in order to attack. Potential vic- 
tims thus have to fight several hundred roots orig- 
inating from several square yards of surface. When 


called forth by being activated, the roots make no 
more noise than a leaf falling from a tree, so only 
individuals with an exceptional sense of hearing 
would deny the roots a —4 bonus to surprise rolls. 

Entrapped victims can hold their breath a 
number of rounds equal to one-third of their Con- 
‘stitution score, Beyond that time they must make a 
Constitution ability check every round with a -2 
cumulative penalty or perish. Characters with the 
Swimming proficiency gain an additional round 
before they begin making Constitution ability 
checks, Characters with the Endurance proficiency 
can hold their breath a number of rounds equal to 
two-thirds their Constitution score and then make 
Constitution ability checks with no penalty the 
first round and accrue only a cumulative —I 
penalty per round after the first check. 

Victims ensnared by this spell can attempt to 
sever the roots that strangle them. The mass of 
roots is AC 6, but only slashing (Type S) weapons 
have any effect against the roots. If trapped victims 
use any weapon larger than a dagger, they suffer a 
-3 penalty to their attack rolls against the roots. 
Slashing weapons sever five times their damage 
roll in roots, and area-of-effect damaging spells 
also destroy that many roots. A total of 1d100 
roots and tendrils holds a victim. If all of them are 
destroyed and a victim succeeds at a Strength abil- 
ity check, then he or she is able to escape the 
spell's area of effect. 

Characters attacking from outside the initial area 
of effect do not suffer any penalty when attacking 
the roots. However, they are also are in danger since 
the roots can tum in response to their attacks and 
attack these characters as long as they are within a 
5-yard range of the initial area of effect. 

The material component is a rotting leaf or a 
rotting piece of wood and the holy symbol of the 
caster. 

Notes: Granted by Moander the Darkbringer of 
the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Rosemantle 
(Alteration, Necromancy) 
Sphere: Protection 


Level: 1 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: 2+1d4 rds. 

Area of Effect: 1 living creature 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell causes the affected being (who can 
be the caster) to glow with a soft, faint, rosy radi- 


512 


ance. Until the spell expires or is dispelled, the 
spell recipient moves and functions with the same 
freedom a ring of free action grants and is tem- 
porarily released from any negative modifiers or 
activity restrictions due to naturally or magically 
induced pain, nausea, fear, or venom effects. (The 
effects of venom are suspended by the spell, but 
not negated or lessened in any way.) 

Notes: Granted by Lathander, Momninglord, of 
the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Rosetouch 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Protection 


Level: 2 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: Object touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell causes the caster’s hands to glow 
with a bright rose-red radiance. At any time after 
the spell is cast until the priest casts another spell, 
loses consciousness, goes to sleep, or dies, the 
caster can choose to mend any one item. The item 
cannot be larger in volume than the caster’s body. 

The item is touched by the caster, who must 
deliberately choose to affect it. The object may have 
been once living or even be presently living, When 
used on a living being, rosetouch closes gaping 
wounds—even over a foreign object—and closes 
off veins and arteries to prevent further blood loss, 
but cannot restore lost hit points, life force, or func- 
tioning organs, nor knit together severed limbs. 

As the item is mended, the rosy glow pulses 
brightly, surrounds the item, and then fades. At the 
end of the round in which the rosetouch is 
bestowed, the item is whole. 

This spell is often used to mend broken weapons 
or tools. Although it cannot restore the dweomer of 
a broken or expended magical weapon, its physical 
repair work is permanent and cannot be dispelled. A 
weapon that has been rosetouched gains no attack 
or damage bonuses, but is a magical weapon for 
‘purposes of what it can be hit for 1 round per level 
of the caster. 


Notes: Granted by Lathander, Morninglord, of 


the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Royalberry 


Area of Effect: A body of liquid no larger in 
volume than the caster’s head 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell affects an existing body of liquid no 
greater in total volume than the caster’s head (if 
employed against larger amounts, the spell fails and 
is wasted, without effect). A rosewater spell trans- 
forms the liquid into a rose-colored, translucent sub- 
stance that serves as a healing and refreshing drink, 
but only for members of Lathander’s clergy or laity 
and his dedicated worshipers (as adjudicated by the 
DM). The drinker regains 1d2 lost Strength points 
and 14 lost hit points by quaffing the entire output 
of a single rosewater spell. It also banishes weari- 
ness for 1d4 days, making the imbiber as alert and 
refreshed as if he had just awakened from a good 
long sleep. (This does not substitute for a spell- 
caster’s need to sleep before memorizing spells.) 

If consumed by those of other good and neutral 
alignments and faiths, rosewater acts simply as 
pure water, To any evil creature, it still tastes good, 
but is a corrosive drink that inflicts 1 point of 
damage from a single drop, 1d6+1 points from a 
swig, and 3d4 points of damage if the entire 
amount is quaffed. It is not a “poison” and cannot 
be negated by neutralize poison or similar spells. 

The material components of this spell are two 
rose petals and the priest's holy symbol (only the 
rose petals are consumed in the casting). 

Notes: Granted by Lathander, Morninglord, of 
the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Royalberry 
(Alteration, Evocation) 
Sphere: Plant 


Level: 5 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: 1 day + 1 day/level 
Area of Effect: 2d4 fresh berries 
Saving Throw: None 


When cast upon a handful of freshly picked 
berries, this spell makes 2d4 of them magical. The 


513 


~~ Ruby Axe — Gnome j 


caster (as well as any other caster of the same faith 
and 9th or higher level) can immediately discern 
which berries are affected. A detect magic discov- 
ers this also. 

Royalberries (the enspelled berries) enable a 
hungry creature of approximately man-size to eat 
one and be as well-nourished as if a full normal 
meal were eaten. They also cure 2 points of phys- 
ical damage from wounds or other similar causes, 
subject to a maximum of 16 points of such curing 
in any 24-hour period. Finally, any poison that 
exists in the consumer when a royalberry is con- 
sumed is slowed (as the 2nd-level priest spell slow 
poison). Eating three or more royalberries at a time 
will neutralize a poison (as the 4th-level priest 
spell neutralize poison). Consuming six royalber- 
ries (total) at a time additionally acts as a cure dis- 
ease spell. 

Unlike the more commonly known goodberry 
spell, there is no reverse of this spell. 

The material component is the caster’s holy 
symbol, passed over the freshly picked, edible 
berries to be enspelled. 

Notes: Granted by the elven goddess Sheela 
Peryroyl. 


Ruby Axe — Gnome 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Combat 


Level; 3 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Duration: 5 rds. 1 rd./level 

Casting Time: 6 

Area of Effect: Hand axe or battle axe touched 
Saving Throw: None 


Ruby axe causes the caster’s axe to glow with a 
faint red glow along its cutting edge. The axe tem- 
porarily becomes magical (if it was not already) 
and gains a +1 bonus to attack and damage rolls. 
The attack and damage bonus increases by +1 at 
8th, and the damage bonus increases by +1 again 
at 12th level, to a maximum of +2 to attack rolls 
and +3 to damage rolls. These bonuses are cumu- 
lative with any magical bonuses the axe may 
already have. The caster must wield the axe; if it is 
given to another to wield, all bonuses the spell 
grants do not apply, though the spell does not end. 
When the spell expires, the axe reverts to its 
normal state. 

The material component is the priest's holy 
symbol, 

Notes: Granted by the gnome god Callarduran 
Smoothhands. 


Rune Chant — Dwarf 
(Abjuration, Evocation) 
Sphere: Special 


Level: 7 

Range: 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 2 rds. 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell is sometimes granted to High Old 
ones, clan leaders, or great dwarven heroes in 
times of need, by manifestation of a dwarven deity, 
It is not otherwise usable by dwarves. 

It causes a rune of power (see that spell) to 
form anywhere in range, in midair, without the 
caster inscribing it. The rune of power takes imme- 
diate effect on a target or area selected by the 
caster, A successful saving throw vs. spell by a 
target creature causes the rune of power to affect 
an area adjacent to the one intended (perhaps 
endangering another friendly or hostile creature 
that does not receive a saving throw), 

Notes: A very rare manifestation of dwarven 
deities in the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Rune of Imp: ible 
Defense* er Bwarf 
(Alteration, Evocation) 
Sphere: Wards 
Level: 7 
Range: 60 yds. 


Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 12 turns 
Duration: 1 mo. 

Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell is used to strengthen the fortifica- 
tions of a dwarven stronghold by increasing the 
resistance of a castle wall, gate, portcullis, draw- 
bridge, or other defensive structure against physi- 
cal or magical attack. The spell is cast by a circle 
of dwarven clerics linked by a combine spell. 
Next, a large rune is inscribed on the surface of the 
structure to be protected in the last tum of the 
spellcasting. The rune is created to protect a sur- 
face of up to 2,500 square feet in area (such as a 
50-foot by 50-foot section of castle wall). The rune 
is invisible after the spell is cast, but can be 
revealed by a detect magic spell. 

The protection provided by the rune is not 
permanent; it expires after one month, and the 


514 


rune fades away if the spell is not renewed. To 
renew the rune’s power, a dwarven cleric of at 
least 7th-level experience must cast a glyph of 
warding spell upon the rune before it fades; the 
rune is thus renewed and remains in effect for 
another month, The dwarves must constantly 
renew the runes protecting a stronghold every 
month on a regular schedule, or else the runes 
fade away and become useless. 

This powerful rune protects a surface from the 
attacks of battering rams, siege machines, stones 
hurled by catapults or giants, ballistae missiles, 
or other such physical attacks that inflict struc- 
tural damage. All physical attacks inflict no 
damage to the surface. A section of castle wall or 
stone tower protected by this rune cannot be 
undermined and collapsed by sappers, because 
the rune maintains the strength and integrity of 
the structure and its underlying foundation. 

This rune also provides protection from many 
magical attacks. An attack that inflicts structural 
damage, such as a lightning bolt, disintegrate 
spell, or a horn of blasting inflicts only half 
damage if a successful saving throw vs. spell is 
made. The saving throw made by the structure is 
that used by a 19th-level or greater cleric. Thus, 
if an earthquake spell strikes a structure pro- 
tected by this rune, the earthquake’s damage is 
reduced by 50% if a saving throw of 7 or better is 
rolled. Also, if a saving throw vs. spell is made 
against a passwall spell, the passwall does not 
take effect. 

This rune has one additional protective func- 
tion. If a prayer spell is cast upon the rune by a 
dwarven cleric, any structural damage suffered 
by the protected structure repairs itself at the rate 
of two points of damage per round. The repair 
continues for as long as the prayer spell is in 
effect. 

It is possible for the rune to be destroyed or 
dispelled, of course. If the surface upon which 
the rune is inscribed is utterly destroyed, the rune 
is also destroyed, and no repair can take place if 
a prayer spell is cast upon the rune. A section of 
castle wall reduced to rubble or a drawbridge 
smashed apart also loses its protective rune. A 
dispel magic spell cast by a high-level spelicaster 
might possibly dispel the rune. Again, the rune is 
treated as if cast by a 19th-level or greater cleric. 

The material components for this spell are a 
golden writing stylus with a diamond point 
(worth at least 5,000 gp), which is used to 
inscribe the rune, and the holy symbols of all the 
clerics involved in the combine circle. 

Notes: Very rare spell granted by dwarven 
deities. (Updated from Dragon Magazine.) 


This special type of magical inscription, 
more powerful than a glyph of warding but less 
powerful than most symbols, was once the heart 
of ancient dwarven magic, usable by all 
dwarves (with differing degrees of power and 
reliability—modern dwarves do not have this 
power). Adventurers who have explored some 
of the remotest northern and southern depths 
and mountain-caverns report that either there 
are dwarven monasteries (clerical communities) 
or that a few dwarven clans or bands retain the 
use of rune magic. 

Runes of power as used by dwarven clerics 
throughout the Realms are described here. They 
increase in power according to the level of the 
dwarf casting them. A successful saving throw 
vs. spell enables a creature violating a rune of 
power to escape its effects. 

The priest casting the rune sets the exemp- 
tion conditions; that is, the situations or crea- 
tures that won't cause the rune of power to 
operate. Otherwise, any being passing, enter- 
ing, or opening the surface on which the rune of 
power is inscribed suffers its harmful effects. 
Touching or attacking the rune of power itself 
also activates it. 

A rune of power can be set to avoid dis- 
charging when creatures of certain races, align- 
ments, faiths, and sizes try to pass it. It cannot 
be set to avoid specific levels, Hit Dice, or 
classes of creatures, and cannot be combined 
with other runes, glyphs, or symbols. 

Runes of power can be drawn to any size 
larger than the caster’s hand, and their trigger 
lines can be extended to encompass any size of 
protected area on a single surface. Dispel magic 
spells can remove runes of power. 

Most runes of power duplicate or resemble 
the effects of wizard spells, The most widely- 
known of these killing runes of power are: 


SIS 


~~ Rune of Power — Dwarf > 


+Alhalbrin: This rune of power melts metal on 
all metal items that contact or pass it, within 3 
rounds of its activation. The metal receives a 
saving throw vs. magical fire (with a penalty 
of —3 if not elven chain or magical in nature). 
Whether the metal melts or not, it grows hot, 
doing any being in contact with it 1d4 points 
of damage. 
+Faerindyl: This rane of power causes a flaming 
sphere to come into being out of the protected 
surface, The flaming sphere rolls directly away 
from the protected surface with a movement of 
18. It passes around all immovable objects in 
its path, bursting only when it contacts a wall 
or other surface larger than its own 10 foot 
radius. Creatures within 5 feet of the sphere 
must save vs. spell or suffer 1d4 points of heat 
damage. Beings struck by the spell must save 
or take 2d4 points of fire damage. Objects in 
contact with the sphere must save vs. magical 
fire. When the sphere bursts, all creatures 
within 10 feet must save vs. spell or take 3d6 
fire damage. The flaming sphere is quite dif- 
ferent in behavior and effects from the wizard 
spell of the same name. The only known way 
to stop a flaming sphere is with a wall of fire 
(with which it merges), a wall of force (which 
causes it to burst), or a dispel magic. Other- 
wise, it flows around and through all obstacles, 
including creatures in its path. 

*Sabras: This rune of power creates a miniature 
blade barrier effect, across (and in line with) the 
protected surface on which the rune of power 
was inscribed, It lasts for only one round, but 
does 4d6 damage to all creatures within 10 feet 
of the protected surface (a successful save vs, 
spells allows a Dexterity check; if successful, 
the being escapes with no damage; if failed, the 
creature takes only 2d6 damage). 

*Thundaril: This forceful rune of power acts as 
a polymorph other spell on creatures activat- 
ing it. Unlike the wizard spell of the same 
name, Intelligence retention and system shock 
survival are automatic. Otherwise (equipment, 
class skills, and the like) the change functions 
as the wizard spell. The priest casting the rune 


sets the form to be changed into; Elminster 
reports that dwarven priests seem to like pop- 
ulating guarded areas with snails, slugs, and 
toads. 

*Velurndyn: This rune of power acts as a 
reverse gravity spell, flinging all beings 
within 20 feet of it (when activated) upward 
for 30 feet, and then immediately back 
downward. Creatures unable to fly suffer 
3d6 failing damage, plus 346 (or less, if the 
ceiling is lower) impact damage for striking 
the ceiling, provided the ceiling is within 30 
feet of the floor. in some cases, stalactites, 
piercer monsters, or even artificial spikes 
have been set into ceilings to augment such 
a trap. 


Some runes of power are named by the caster 

as they are inscribed, and take immediate effect. 

‘The most widely-known of these fast runes are: 

*Bhelaerak: Acts as the 8th-level wizard spell 
glassteel, affecting 10 pounds of weight per 
level of the priest. 

*Corsimmyr: Acts as the Sth-level wizard spell 
passwall, 

*Delhaubrin: Acts as the 2nd-level wizard spell 
shatter. 

*Elemsyr: Acts as the 2nd-level wizard spell 
invisibility, affecting a single living or nonliv- 
ing body or object. If an invisible creature 
launches a successful attack, it immediately 
becomes visible. 


The material component to create any rune of 
power is the priest's holy symbol, which is used to 
trace the rune, 

The Lost Runes of Power: Legends persist of 
runes once known to the dwarves that were far 
more powerful than the existing ones. A single 
rune of power was used to level the ancient city of 
Dharrmaghongh in Murghom, long ago. Elminster 
wams that although such runes definitely existed, 
no dwarven clan controls such power now—or 
recent dwarven history would be far different. 

Notes: Very rare dwarven magic of the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


516 


Rune of Power — Dwarf. 


A Guide to Dwarven Runes of Power 


A P 


Alhalbrin Faerindy! Sabras 
Thundaril Velurndyn Bhelaerak 
Corsimmyr Delhaubrin Elemsyr 


517 


Sacred Guardian 


Sacred Guardian 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
Sphere: Guardian 


Level: | 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 
Duration: 1 day/level 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


By use of this spell, a priest becomes instantly 
aware when the recipient of the spell is in danger, 
regardless of the distance between the priest and 
the recipient. The recipient can be on a different 
plane of existence than the priest. 

A priest of at least 3rd level also receives a 
mental image of the endangered creature’s situa- 
tion. At no time, however, does the spell reveal the 
creature’s location. 

The material component is a rose petal that has 
been kissed by the spell recipient. 

Notes: Uncommon for priests with access to 
the Guardian sphere (ToM). 


Sacred Link 
(Alteration, Evocation) 
Sphere: Creation 


Level: 7 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 2 rds. 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 2 objects, identical or nearly so 
Saving Throw: None 


To bring about a sacred link, a priest must hold 
in his or her hands the two objects to be linked and 
then cast the spell. The two items must be fash- 
ioned of the same material(s) and be roughly the 
same size, They cannot be living creatures. Ideally, 
they should be nearly identical (matching swords, 
scrolls, statuettes, and so on). The sacred link spell 
creates an invisible magical bond between the two 
items. After the spell is cast, both items radiate a 
very faint dweomer. What befalls one item also 
mystically happens to the other simultaneously, 
even if they are separated by any distance or 
myriad planes. For instance, if a scroll joined to a 
duplicate by a sacred link is sold to an enemy and 
the match for it is retained, several days after the 
sale the retained copy could be burned and the 
enemy’s copy would also be destroyed, regardless 
of its location or situation. The /ink lasts until one 


of the items is destroyed or until a dispel 
magic spell by a caster of at least 15th 
level is cast upon one of the items, 
negating the link. 

By means of this spell, a weapon could be dam- 
aged or destroyed by affecting its twin—con- 
versely, an item could be improved by plating with 
gold, adoming with gems, or careful carving. This 
spell can be used to fink identical magical items. 
Recharging or activating one linked item would 
then identically affect the other, but there is a 1% 
cumulative chance per use of the link (which is 
involuntary and not under anyone's control once 
the spell is cast) that one of the items shatters or 
explodes (discharging all of its functions or 
charges) and ends the link. 

The material components are the caster’s holy 
symbol, and a strand of fine wire, human hair, or 
spider web. 

Notes: Granted by Tempus, war god of the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Sacred Strike 
(Necromancy) 
Sphere: Combat, Necromantic 


Level: 4 
Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 7 

Duration: 7 rds. + 1 rd./3 levels above 11th (round 
down) 

Area of Effect: The caster’s hand 

Saving Throw: Special 


This spell creates a whiplike, flexible line of 
force emanating from any of the caster’s hands 
(once a focal point is chosen, it cannot be 
changed). This crackling line of purple sparks can 
be wielded like a whip, striking with the caster’s 
THACO at opponents up to 10 feet away. Though 
it receives no attack bonuses, is considered a +2 
magical weapon when determining what it can hit. 

A sacred strike whip is always silent. Any 
living being successfully struck must save vs. spell 
and make a Constitution ability check. If both suc- 
ceed, the victim suffers only 1 point of damage, 
and enough pain to force a -1 penalty on the first 
attack roll (or ability check roll, if forced prior to 
an attack) during the next round. (If the victim 
makes neither during that round, the pain passes 
without additional effect.) 

If the saving throw fails, the victim takes 4d4 
points of damage, and the caster gains half the 
points as healing energy. (If the caster is not 
wounded at the time, no extra points are added, nor 


518 


Sanctified Marker 


can they be saved to offset damage that may occur 
in future rounds.) 

If the ability check fails, the victim is wracked 
with pain for the rest of the round and the entire 
subsequent round. During this period, the victim 
attacks at a -2 penalty, his or her Armor Class is 
reduced by a —1 penalty, and he or she is unable to 
concentrate enough to cast any spells. 

Undead creatures are unaffected the pain 
effects and take normal damage (444 points of 
damage). Also, 2d4 points of the unlife energy are 
inflicted on the wielder of the whip (causing most 
living casters damage). 

A sacred strike ends when the spell expires, 
when its caster casts another spell (magical items 
can be triggered with the caster’s free hand with- 
out affecting the sacred strike), the caster wills it, 
or the caster falls unconscious. 

The material components are two drops of 
unholy water and one of the caster’s hairs. 

Notes: Granted by the evil goddess Loviatar of 
the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Sacrosanct 
(Abjuration, Alteration) 
Sphere: Wards 


Level: 7 
Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: | day/level 

Area of Effect: Sphere, 10 ft./level radius 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell is commonly used to keep unautho- 
rized persons out of temple vaults and holy areas. 
It protects an area that is outlined by a radiant 
glow during the spell's casting, but the glow 
fades upon the spell's completion. The protected 
area is spherical, centered on the caster, and has a 
radius of 10 feet per level of the caster. Once the 
casting is complete, this designated area inter- 
cepts all intruding beings (other than the caster) 
who are employing magic or psionics that allow 
them to travel astrally, travel ethereally, or 
translocate (in other words, teleport, dimension 
door, and the like) as they enter the area, pro- 
hibiting them from seeing into or introducing 
anything into the immobile area and redirecting 
them to a random location elsewhere in Faerdn, 

The redirected being always reaches this new 
destination safely. It cannot be chosen by the 
caster of the sacrosanct, but it is viewed by every- 
one in the protected area, all of whom also receive 
a general idea of its distance and direction—as the 
redirected being reaches it. A clear, detailed, but 
translucent image of the would-be intruder—or 
rather, the outward form of that being, which can 
be a disguise—is also displayed to all beings in the 
protected area as this occurs. 

‘The material components are a small mirror or 
reflective item and the eye of an owl or other crea- 
ture able to see in dim light. 

Notes: Rare spell from the FORGOTTEN REALMS 
setting, recorded by Volo. 


Sanctified Marker 
(Invocation/Evocation) 
Sphere: Creation 


Level: 4 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 2 rds. 

Duration: Permanent 

Area of Effect: A stone pillar no more than twice 
the caster’s body size in volume 

Saving Throw: Special 


519 


~~ Sanctify* r 


This spell brings into being a stone pillar, 
plinth, or obelisk, of any shape and size the caster 
desires, so long as its maximum volume does not 
exceed twice that of the caster’s body. Although it 
will be a solid piece of the type of stone used as a 
material component, its color, apparent type of 
stone, and apparent age (from new and gleaming 
to ancient and crumbling) are as visualized by the 
caster during casting. 

A sanctified marker is a solid object and can be 
climbed. One spell can be cast atop another to 
create a larger (or longer, if placed horizontally as 
a bridge) stone “needle.” If there is no solid ground 
present where the spell is cast, the marker will 
float in midair. (The magic holds it aloft, but it 
does possess the normal weight of solid stone.) 

A sanctified marker can be blank, or it can bear 
one symbol, or it can bear one symbol and an 
inscription (whichever the caster desires at the 
time of casting). The symbol cannot be part of a 
spell, and the marker will absolutely not accept the 
later application of any glyph, symbol, or rune 
magic cast upon it. The symbol can be a direc- 
tional arrow or even a crude map, and can be a 
holy symbol (although this becomes simply a 
design, lacking the magical powers of a priest's 
consecrated holy symbol). 

The marker inscription, if one is desired, must 
be in a tongue the caster can read, and its maxi- 
mum length is one word per level of the caster. It 
may contain words of magical activation, but 
cannot be a written spell or enchanted writing that 
unleashes a magical effect when it is read. Once 
the inscription is chosen and the marker created, it 
will never accept additions or alterations to its 
inscription, though additional writings can be 
added by purely physical means (chiseled or 
painted, without benefit of magical materials or 
force). 

A sanctified marker can be instructed during 
casting to explode if any spell or magical item is 
cast or used on it after its creation. If it does so, the 
result is a spherical blast with a 40-foot radius that 
completely destroys the marker, hurls tiny frag- 
ments out with terrific force in all directions as 
they vaporize, leaves nothing but drifting smoke, 
and deals all creatures within the blast radius 444 
points of damage (save vs. spell for half damage). 

A marker must be solid, without internal cavi- 
ties or foreign materials embedded or concealed in 
it, although there are rumors of more powerful 
variants that allow keys, magical items, and the 
like to be concealed within a marker. 

‘The material components are three drops of 
holy water and a lump of any sort of stone the size 
of the caster’s palm. 


Notes: Granted by the god Deneir, Lord of 
Glyphs, of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Sanctify* 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 
Reversible 
Sphere: All 
Level: 2 
Range: 10 yds. 


‘Components; V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 tum 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: Cube, 10 yd./priest on a side 
Saving Throw: None 


This cooperative spell allows the priests to 
create a beneficial atmosphere within a specified 
area. Companions of similar alignment to the cast- 
ers will feel fortified and encouraged while in the 
sanctified area. The spell can be cast by a single 
priest or a group of priests. 

After casting sanctify, the affected area is 
imbued with the deity’s majesty. The area radiates 
a holy aura for followers of that deity, who gain a 
+2 bonus to saving throws against fear- and 
charm-based powers. Those of the same alignment 
but of different faith gain a +1 to these saving 
throws. The effect applies only as long as the crea- 
tures remain in the sanctified area. 

Creatures intent on harming the priest or his 
followers suffer a —1 to saving throws vs. fear and 
charm when on sanctified ground. 

Undead creatures within the area are easier to 
tum; any priest standing on sanctified ground turns 
undead as if he were one level higher. 

Although this spell can be cast by a single 
priest, it is most effective when cast by several 
priests at once. The duration of the spell is equal to 
one round per level of the caster. When several 
priests cast the spell, the level of the most power- 
ful priest is used, with two rounds added for every 
contributing priest. Thus, one 8th-level and three 
6th-level priests would give the spell a duration of 
14 rounds (8+2+2+2). 

Sanctify is often used in conjunction with focus 
to protect the grounds of a temple or encourage 
men defending a castle. 

The material components are the priest's holy 
symbol and a handful of dirt from the grounds of 
an existing temple of the same faith. 

The reverse of this spell, defile, functions in an 
identical manner with respect to saving throws for 
charm and fear. However, priests standing on 
defiled ground who attempt to turn undead do so at 
one level lower than their current level. 


520 


Sanctify Sacred Site 


SN 


‘The material components for the reverse are the 
priest's holy symbol and a handful of earth from a 
grave. 

Notes: Common for specialty priests, other- 
wise uncommon (ToM) 


BartieSysrem Notes: The sanctified area 
gives a +2 bonus to morale if of the same faith, 
and ue if only of the same paar Asda Oppo- 

eS sanctified ground have a 
morale of-1. 
Sanctify Crypt — Old Empire 
(Abjuration) 
Sphere: Wards 
Level: 7 
Range: 0 


Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 tum 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 burial chamber 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell is employed by the priestesses of 
Nephthys to seal a burial chamber for all time. It 
lasts until a tomb is despoiled, which involves 
removing or destroying the mummified remains 
and/or looting those items of value buried with the 
deceased. 

Anyone despoiling a sanctified crypt by per- 
forming either of the above actions invokes a pow- 
erful curse on themselves and their descendants. 
‘The effects of the 5th-level Nephthysan priest spell 
major curse are immediately applied to all tomb 
robbers present in the area of effect with no saving 
throw allowed, whether they have actually handled 
the deceased's remains or valuable grave goods or 
not. As well, each generation one descendant of 
each tomb robber suffers the effects of the major 
curse until the tomb is restored to its original state. 

A remove major curse spell only removes the 
major curse inflicted by this spell from the current 
recipient. The curse still returns to haunt the next 
generation unless the tomb is restored. However, a 
descendant of an original tomb robber may lift the 
curse upon his or her line by performing a major 
quest for the church of Nephthys in atonement. 
(This does not lift the major curse from the lines 
of others involved in despoiling a particular tomb.) 

The material component is gold dust equal in 
value to 1 gp per square foot of the burial chamber 
to be sanctified. The gold dust is scattered over the 
floor of the crypt during the casting. 


521 


Notes: Granted by the Mulhorandi god Neph- 
thys of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Sanctify Ghi — Vedic 
(Alteration) 
Reversible 
Sphere: All 


Level: 1 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 8 hrs. 
Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: 2 ounces/level 
Saving Throw: None 


This augments the holy clarification of butter 
into a liquid substance called ghi. Cow or buffalo 
milk is be chumed, boiled, and blessed to make 
holy ghi, which can be used on undead as holy 
water. When drunk the holy ghi acts as a mild cur- 
ative healing 1d3 points of damage per ounce. 

‘The reverse of this spell, desecrate ghi, is used 
by evil priests to create a liquid butter version of 
unholy water that harms paladins. Either of these 
spells can be used to counter the other. 

Notes: Common for priests from a Vedic 
(Indian) culture; otherwise very rare. (Updated 
from DRAGON Magazine.) 


Sanctify Sacred Site 
(Abjuration, Alteration) 
Sphere: All, Sun, Plant 


Level: 7 

Range: Special 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: From sunrise to sunset 
Duration: Permanent 

Area of Effect: 1 defiled holy site 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell was developed in ancient times by 
druids of the Earthmother on the Moonshae Isles 
as is a variant of the sunray spell. Long forgotten, 
it was rediscovered through the research efforts of 
the wizard Flamsterd and the druids of the Moon- 
shaes following the destruction of the Risen Cult 
of Bane by a small company of Harpers several 
years after the Time of Troubles. The druids 
employed this spell to mitigate the destruction 
inflicted by the cultists’ moonveil spell, but it has 
additional powers as well. 

A sanctify sacred site spell takes nearly a full day 
to cast; it begins at dawn and ends at sunset. It is cast 
upon on a site sacred to Chauntea such as a sacred 


~ Sanctify Spirit Host — Old Empire r 


grove, moonwell, or graveyard of her followers that 
has been defiled by the forces of evil. The ritual of 
casting the spell involves chanting, dancing solemnly 
about the entire site, and the sacrifice of tokens of the 
goddess’s bounty (the material components). 

Sanctify sacred site is a form of faith magic that 
purifies corruption and evil from the land. It must 
be preceded by the casting of focus (a 4th-level 
priest spell). The base percentage of success is 
equal to the level of the priest who casts the spell. 
For every five true worshipers of Chauntea of any 
race who participate in the ritual as long as they 
are able (all day, or until death or total exhaustion), 
whether they be human, elf, korred, or faerie 
dragon, the chances of this spell succeeding in 
purifying a defiled sacred site are increased by 1%. 
Success is checked for at the moment of sunset. 
The chance of this spell succeeding is increased by 
25% if it is performed on Midwinter or the vernal 
or autumnal equinoxes. If performed on Midsum- 
mer, the chance is increased by 40%. 

If the spell succeeds, a dazzling beam of light 
erupts from the ground or water at the center of the 
sacred site to be sanctified. This beam has all the 
effects of a sunray (the 7th-level priest spell) on 
any creatures of evil present within a I-mile radius 
of the light, whether they be on the ground, in the 
air, or beneath the earth. Any defiling magic in 
effect on the sacred site, such as the moonveil 
spell, is permanently dispelled, and any magical 
powers of the site lost to the defiling magic will 
slowly return if the faithful maintain their worship 
of Chauntea at the site. 

The material components for this spell are 
varied and difficult to procure simultaneously. The 
goddess requires a spring sapling covered with 
dew to be planted, a summer swan halfway 
between the gosling and adult stage to be released, 
a bushel of fresh fall harvest to be consumed, and 
ice crystals from the first winter frost to be placed 
at the center of the site. 

Notes: Granted by Chauntea, the Great Mother, 
of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Sanctify Spirit Host — Old Empire 


Casting Time: 1 hr. 
Duration: Permanent 

Area of Effect: | mummified corpse 
Saving Throw: None 


In a long and involved ceremony performed 
during Muthorandi burial rites, this spell sanctifies 
the corporeal body according to the tenets of the 
Mulhorandi faith, allowing eternal safe haven for 
the ba, the animate life force, and passage to the 
afterlife for the ka, the spirit twin containing the 
personality and consciousness. If a properly mum- 
mified corporeal body sanctified by this spell is 
ever disturbed or its tomb despoiled, Osiris sends 
the spirit of a divine minion to animate the 
mummy and cooperate with the resting ba to drive 
the grave robbers from the tomb. Such a mummy 
is lawful neutral in alignment, lacks the scabrous 
touch (mummy rot) of an invoked member of the 
ancient dead, exists only so long as defilers walk 
in the tomb sanctified in the name of Osiris, is only 
tumable or commandable by the clergy of Osiris, 
and cannot be resurrected. In addition, it is not 
specially vulnerable to fire, taking no damage 
from torches, 2d6 (first round) and 146 (second 
round) from a direct hit from burning oil, and no 
additional damage from magical fire. Finally, it is 
immune to damage from either holy or unholy 
water except for unholy water created by the 
church of Set, from which it takes 2d4 points of 
damage from a direct hit. 

Notes: Granted by the Mulhorandi deity Osiris 
of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Sanctuary 
(Abjuration) 
Sphere: Charm, Protection 


Level: 1 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: 2 rds. + 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


When the priest casts a sanctuary spell, any 
opponent attempting to strike or otherwise directly 
attack the protected creature must roll a saving 
throw vs. spell. If the saving throw is successful, 
the opponent can attack normally and is unaffected 
by that casting of the spell. If the saving throw is 
failed, the opponent loses track of and totally 
ignores the warded creature for the duration of the 
spell. Those not attempting to attack the subject 
remain unaffected. Note that this spell does not 
prevent the operation of area attacks (fireball, ice 
storm, and so on). While protected by this spell, 
the subject cannot take direct offensive action 
without breaking the spell, but can use non-attack 
spells or otherwise act in any way that does not 


V mea 


Sand Warriors 


N 


violate the prohibition against offensive action. 
This allows a warded priest to heal wounds, for 
example, or to bless, perform an augury, chant, 
cast a light in the area (not upon an opponent!), 
and so on. 

The components of the spell include the 
priest’s holy symbol and a small silver mirror. 

Notes: Common for clerics (PHB). 


Sand Blade 
(Enchantment) 
Sphere: Elemental Earth or Silt 


Level: 6 

Range: 0 

Components: S, M 
Casting Time: 1 day 
Duration: Permanent 
Area of Effect: 1 sword 
Saving Throw: NA 


hie 


This spell requires a sword made of a crys- 
talline stone (such as quartz) or glass, The 
weapon must be of the highest quality and crafts- 
manship, and forged without aid of magic or 
psionics, 

The enchantment of the sword takes an entire 
day, and at day's end the caster must make an 
unmodified saving throw vs. spells. Failure indi- 
cates that the blade must be enchanted for another 
day and another save vs, spells required, now at 
—1. The caster is permitted a number of attempts 
equal to 1/4 his or her level (round down). Each 
additional attempt is made at a cumulative —1 
penalty. If the save is made, the sword has been 
enchanted. If all fail, the sword is ruined and can 
never be used for this spell again. 

A successfully enchanted sand blade is razor- 
sharp, inflicting +2 damage to opponents. It has no 
attack bonus, and cannot affect creatures immune 
to ordinary weapons. It is very difficult to see, and 
is effectively invisible in dim light, from a dis- 
tance, or underwater. A sand blade is also com- 
pletely invisible to magic that detects metal and 
minerals. 

If a wielder rolls an unmodified “1” while 
using the sword against an armored target (chitin, 
metal, bone armor, or skin), it splinters into thou- 
sands of deadly shards. The damage from the blow 
is doubled due to the spray of glass, but the sword 
is shattered and now forever useless. 

Notes: Uncommon for priests of Elemental 
Earth from the DARK SuN setting; otherwise, very 
rare. 


Sand Spray 
(Evocation, Summoning) 
Sphere: Elemental Earth or Silt 


mo de 
Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: Instant 

Area of Effect: Cone 20 ft. long X 10 ft. wide 
Saving Throw: Special 


This malicious evocation causes small glassy 
particles of sand or silt to spray into an opponent's 
eyes. The spell does not create the tiny shards, so 
the caster must use existing sand or silt to create 
the effect. 

Creatures sprayed by the slivers must make a 
saving throw vs. breath weapons, Failure indicates 
that they are blinded for 1d6 rounds, and lose 1d10 
hit points. Creatures vulnerable only to magical 
weapons take no damage, but may be blinded. 

Notes: Uncommon for priests of Elemental 
Earth from the DARK SuN setting; otherwise, very 
rare, 


Sand Warriors 


(Conjuration, Enchantment) 


Sphere: Elemental Earth or Silt 


Level: 4 

Range: 30 yds. 
‘Components: S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


The priest can summon 1d4 warriors from 
beneath the sand to fight for him or her. The war- 
riors are completely loyal and cannot be controlled 
or stolen, although they can be banished by a suc- 
cessful dispel magic spell. They have an Armor 
Class of 5, 2 Hit Dice, and wield terrible swords of 
compressed, fine sand that cause 1d10 points of 
damage whenever they hit. THACO is 18, and 
movement is 150 feet. The sand warriors take 
double damage from water based attacks. 

To use this spell, a cup of water is poured onto 
the sand where the warriors are to rise. 

Notes: Uncommon for priests of Elemental 
Earth from the DARK SUN setting; otherwise, very 
rare. 


523 


~ Sands of Time cr 


Sand Warriors: AC 5; MV 15; HD 2; #AT 1; 
THACO 18; Dmg 1410; SW Take double damage 


from water-based attacks; SZ M. 
Sands of Time 
(Alteration) 
Reversible 


Level: 5 
Range: 10 yds. 


Sphere: Elemental Air, Elemental Water 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 8 


Duration: | rd. 


Area of Effect: Up to 10 cu. ft/ level 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


By means of this spell, a priest can reverse the 
effects of aging and erosion on any nonliving, 
material object. The amount of aging that can be 
so reversed depends upon the level of the caster. 
Consult the table for the average effects of time 
and the elements on various materials (items pro- 
tected from the elements might take longer to 
erode, but use these times for all restoration). 


Papyrus and wooden objects fade over time, 
making it difficult, but not impossible, to read or 
identify surface features. Fragile objects must sur- 
vive an item saving throw vs. fall every time they 
are used; brittle items must survive vs. a crushing 
blow. Crumbled items are unusable but still identi- 
fiable as papyrus or wood; dust is completely 
unidentifiable and unusable. 

Stone and metal items wear away over time, 
and their shapes smooth out until the item is com- 
pletely wom away. Paint indicates that artificial 
coloration is gone or unrecognizable; Etching 
means carved letters or pictures are worn away; 
Relief indicates that deeply carved letters or 
images are severely eroded; Form indicates that 
time has eroded away all but the basic form of the 
original stone or metal. The fractions ¥⁄+ and % tell 
when the item has lost that amount of its original 
mass. Dust means the original item is completely 
gone, eroded away to nothing. 

A 15th-level priest could, for example, turn 
even a pile of dust back into the new, clean piece 
of papyrus it once was, or tum the crumbled 
remains of a staff back to its original form, or even 
restore a painted map on the wall of a temple con- 
structed of soft stone. This spell cannot restore 
damage done to an object by anything other than 
natural aging or erosion. Use this table as a guide 
for other objects that don’t exactly fit into these 
categories. 

The reverse of this spell, accelerate erosion, 
allows the priest to speed up erosion on any non- 
living material object. In the example above, the 
15th-level priest could tum a clean piece of 
papyrus to dust, or turn a new staff of wood into 
crumbled pieces, or erase a painted map from a 
wall of soft stone. 

The material components for this spell are a 
tiny hourglass (during the spell, the sands run 
upward) or, for the reverse, a miniature sundial 
that has timed the passage of at least one year. Nei- 
ther is consumed in the casting. 

Notes: Uncommon for priests from the DARK 
SUN setting; otherwise, very rare. 


Sandstorm 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 
Sphere: Elemental Air 


Duration: 3 rds level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: ⁄+ 


a a ee OS, 


Sap — Elf 


SANDS OF TIME TABLE 
Time So ae eee eee 
Level Reversed Papyrus Wood Soft Stone Hard Stone Metal 
9 30 days Faded =E oa = = 
10 1 year Fragile 
u 2 years Brittle Faded = = = 
12 5 years Crumbled Fragile — = = 
13 10 years Dust Brittle — -> ad 
14 20 years — Crumbled Paint = = 
15 50 years za = = =p ny 
16 100 years — Dust Etching = = 
17 200 years = — Relief Paint = 
18 500 years => =, Form — Paint 
19 1,000 years — = 1⁄2 Etching = 
20 2,000 years = = 3/4 = Etching 
21 5,000 years = = Dust Relief = 
22 10,000 years — - = - Relief 
23 20,000 years = — =- Fom — 
24 50,000 years _ — =_ _- Form 
25 100,000 years - - = 1⁄2 = 
26 200,000 years = 3 = = 12 
27 500,000 years -= a iw’ 3/4 = 
28 1,000,000 years — — — ae 3/4 
29 2,000,000 years = — = Dust = 
30 5,000,000 years ai = —- = Dust 
This spell allows a priest to conjure a very large Sap — Elf 

version of dust devil; one that can engage and (Conjuration) 

attack a number of targets at once. The storm has Sphere: Plant 

AC 0, MV 12, and Hit Dice equal to the level of 

the caster, The sandstorm is a large whirlwind of Level: 1 

dust and sand twelve feet tall that covers a 10-yard Range: 10 yds. 

by 10-yard square per level of the caster. The Components: V, S, M 

storm’s shape can be determined by the caster and Casting Time: 4 

changed on any round after casting, provided no Duration: 3 rds. + 1 rd./level 

portion of the storm moves further than its move- Area of Effe 0-ft.  10-ft. area 


ment rate. Any creature within the storm is subject 
to an attack that inflicts 246 points of damage 
(save vs. spell for half). The storm is subject only 
to attacks by magical weapons. The winds of the 
storm put out normal fires. Also, items exposed to 
the storm must make saving throws each round or 
be destroyed—items must make a successful 
saving throw vs. acid with a +5 bonus, The storm 
can hold a gas cloud or a creature in gaseous form 
at bay or push it away from the caster. The cloud 
obscures vision, and creatures must make a saving 
throw vs. spell or be blinded while in the storm 
and for 1d4 rounds after emerging from it. Spell- 
casting within the storm is not possible and any 
casting interrupted by the storm is ruined. 

The material component is a small bottle of air 
collected on a windy day. 

Notes: Common for priests from the Dark Sun 
setting; otherwise, very rare. 


Saving Throw: Special 


A sap spell coats everything within the area of 
effect in tree sap. After the spell is cast, any crea- 
ture entering the area of effect is slowed to half its 
movement rate while in the affected area. Any 
creature in the area of effect when the spell is cast 
must make a successful saving throw vs. spell or 
be covered in the sticky substance. Those who suc- 
ceed can reach the nearest unaffected surface by 
the end of the round, although their movement rate 
is also reduced to half normal while within the 
area of effect. Those who fail their saving throws 
have their movement rate reduced to | and have 
their Dexterity reduced by half. Casting spells, 
employing magical items requiring any sort of 
movement, or any launching any sort of physical 
attack is impossible while under the effects of this 
spell. In addition to any loss of Dexterity bonus, 


I ee IE ee 


~ Sarcophagus of Death — Old Empire Z 


the creature incurs a +2 Armor Class penalty (to a 
maximum of AC 10). Winged creatures and those 
employing magical items such as wings of flying 
cannot fly. 

A free action spell or ring or similar effect 
negates the effects of a sap spell for the affected 
individual only. Thoroughly dousing an individual 
covered in sap with wine also ends the effect. 

The material components are the priest's holy 
symbol and a drop of tree sap. 

Notes: Granted by the elven god Rillifane Ral- 
lathil. 


Sarcophagus of Death — Old Empire 
(Evocation) 
Sphere: Necromantic 


Level: 4 

Range: 5 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 7 
Duration: 1 rd./2 levels 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell creates a coffin-shaped cube of 
force, similar to the magical item of the same 
name, around the spell’s target. This sarcophagus 
of death lasts one round per two levels of the caster 
or until dispelled. The sarcophagus is completely 
impervious to air or any other material or gas. 
Spell effects cannot pierce into or out of the sar- 
cophagus of death. Creatures who fail a saving 
throw vs. spell are trapped within the coffin, and 
unable to escape unless they can cast some form of 
teleportation magic or the sarcophagus is success- 
fully dispelled by themselves or others. 

Each round that a being remains in the sar- 
cophagus, it suffers 1d3 points of damage and 
loses 1 point of Constitution. If it reaches O hit 
points or 0 Constitution, it dies from asphyxiation. 
(Normal cure wounds spells are not sufficient to 
revive the victim; a raise dead spell or similar 
magic is required.) If the target being is freed or 
the spell expires before death occurs, Constitution 
points return at a rate of | per hour. Damage can 
be healed through normal methods. 

This material components are a fragment of a 
sarcophagus consecrated by a priest of Osiris or 
Nephthys and the priest's holy symbol. 

Notes: Granted by the Mulhorandi deity Set of 
the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Scent of Vengeance 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Animal 


Level: 2 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: 2 days/level 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell imbues the priest with the ability 10 
unerringly track any living creature who has 
directly caused insult or injury to a designated 
being (including the caster). This spell does not 
allow the tracking of undead creatures, and the 
name of the being who committed the action must 
be known for the spell to be effective. This spell 
can only be cast at the site of the offending insult 
or injury. The priest can follow the trail across any 
terrain by following the scent of his foe, even 
underwater or through the air if he or she can 
swim or fly. 

The only way for the quarry to throw the pur- 
suit from the trail is to teleport, employ a gate, 
shift to another plane or employ some other, simi- 
lar form of magical transportation. Even if the 
quarry employs such forms of magical transporta- 
tion, the tracking priest can continue to follow the 
trail until the point of magical departure, at which 
point the spell ends. 

The spell requires a small token once possessed 
by the quarry and the priest’s holy symbol. Neither 
is consumed in the casting. 

Notes: Granted by Hoar the Doombringer of 
the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Scirocco 
Aka sirocco. 


Scorching Ray 
Reversed form, healing ray. 


Scourge 
(Necromancy) 
Sphere: Necromantic 


Level: 5 
Range: 120 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 8 

Duration: Permanent 

Area of Effect: 1 creature/level 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


526 


Scouring Wind 


De 4 


This nasty spell causes a major disease and 
weakness in those who fail a saving throw vs. spell 
at a -3 penalty, Afflicted individuals are immedi- 
ately stricken with a sickening scourge that 
quickly spreads to cover their entire bodies. The 
blackened boils, magenta blotches, violet lesions, 
seeping abscesses, and malignant cysts are excru- 
ciatingly painful, and highly debilitating. 

In the short term, the Strength, Dexterity, and 
Charisma of each victim are reduced by 3, Attack 
rolls suffer a -3 penalty. The agonizing symptoms 
persist until a victim receives a cure disease, heal, 
or restoration spell bestowed by a more powerful 
priest than the original caster. Dispel magic and 
remove curse are powerless to mediate the symp- 
toms of a scourge spell, but a wish will eradicate 
the infection immediately. 

A scourge may also lead to a long-term, debil- 
itating illness. Those ignoring the malignant dis- 
ease resulting from the spell’s effects for more 
than a few days may be susceptible to much worse 
afflictions (such as gangrene, plague, or leprosy) 
that ultimately result in the victim's untimely 
death within 1d4 weeks, 

Furthermore, if a victim of the spell enters an 
area of dense population, the disease may spread 
(1% per caster level) into an epidemic of massive 
proportions. Such long-term effects are left to the 
discretion of the DM. 

The material component is a specially pre- 
pared, black whip or riding crop, which is cracked 
in the direction of the intended victims during the 
casting of the spell. Because of its horrific affect, 
the spell is typically granted only to high priests of 
a malignant and evil god who is dedicated to 
spreading death and disease. 

Notes: Restricted to necromancer-clerics and 
evil priests, common for them. 


Scouring Wind 
(Alteration, Invocation/Evocation) 
Sphere: Elemental Air 


Level: 5 

Range: 300 yds. 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 8 

Duration: 1 rd. 

Area of Effe cylinder as tall as the caster and 
300 yds. in diameter 

Saving Throw: Special 


This spell creates a roaring rush of air, drawn 
from some undefined elsewhere and emitted from 
the caster’s mouth. When active, it is in a cylindri- 
cal shape as tall as the caster and extending to the 


limits of its spell range that is of short duration and 
centered on one target, such as a specific being or 
a spot such as a doorway, window, throne, or hall- 
way. This magical force can whirl away dust, 
vapors, leaves, papers, and the like in the same 
manner as a magical gust of wind, but has no effect 
on living creatures. A scouring wind can have one 
of three effects, chosen by the caster (once made, 
the choice cannot be altered): destroy barrier, 
destroy armor, or augment missiles. 

When used against any magical barrier created 
by a Sth-level or lesser spell, a scouring wind auto- 
matically destroys the barrier. Against barriers of 
higher levels, it has an 8 in 10 chance of destroy- 
ing them, minus | point for each level they are 
above Sth. (Thus, it has a 7 in 10 chance of 
destroying an antimagic shell or a wall of thorns, 
and a 4 in 10 chance of destroying a prismatic 
sphere.) 

When a scouring wind is used against any form 
of enchanted armor (including shields) or clothing, 
the armor must make an item saving throw vs. dis- 
integration with a bonus equal to the item's 
enchantment level (its “plus”), Success means the 
item is unaffected; failure means its magic ceases 
to function for five full days. When nonmagical 
armor or clothing is scoured, it must save vs. spell 
or be entirely tom away and disintegrated. Living 
things (such as peltasts) worn as protective garb 
are entirely unaffected by a scouring wind. 

When a scouring wind is used to augment mis- 
siles, they must be launched or introduced into it. 
If of a smaller volume and mass than the caster’s 
head, they are whirled away by this spell and strike 
for triple damage at +3 above the caster’s THACO 
(not that of the launcher, if a different person). If 
larger, they fall out of the wind. Any number of 
missiles (from the traditional arrows, sling stones, 
and darts to spears or even clubs and other hand 
weapons) can be hurled in this manner, so long as 
they can be put into the path of the wind. A scour- 
ing wind directed to augment missiles that sweeps 
them into a barrier pulverizes them and does not 
shatter the barrier or permit them to fly onward. 

A scouring wind can also be commanded to 
negate a natural wind or magical gust of wind. If 
so employed, the scouring wind negates the latter 
completely and creates an area of calm 100 yards 
in diameter for 1d4+1 rounds when used against a 
natural wind (even over tornadoes, gales, or hurri- 
cane-force storms). 

Notes: Granted by Talos the Destroyer of the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. This spell is found 
only in a few exceptionally rare tomes. 


527 


~ Screaming Skull ps 


Screaming Skull 
(Alteration, Conjuration/Summoning) 
Sphere: Necromantic 


Level: 5 

Range: Special 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: 2 rds./level 
Area of Effect: 1 skull 
Saving Throw: None 


By casting this spell, the priest animates a 
single human or humanoid skull (the material 
component) to be capable of flight and attack as 
the priest wills. The skull has AC 0, MV 21 
(flying), 4+4 HD, | bite for 1d6 damage, ML 20. 
The skull’s bite causes fear as the Ist-level priest 
spell (save vs. spell to negate). 

The skull falls to the ground at the expiration of 
the spell or when it uses its scream attack (as the 
priest wishes), 

When the skull screams, all creatures within 10 
feet are affected by a fear spell (save vs. wands to 
negate). The priest and those friendly to him are 
unaffected. The scream can be employed in addi- 
tion to the normal bite attack. 

The skull cannot travel more than 30 yards 
from the priest, or the spell is automatically 
negated (thus, a repulsion or similar spell may be 
able to counter the screaming skull). 

Notes: Granted by luz the Evil of the 
GREYHAWK setting. 


Scribe 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: All 


Level: 1 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: 8 hrs. maximum 
Area of Effect: Creates 1 copy 
Saving Throw: None 


By means of this spell, the priest’s handwriting, 
if it happens to be poor, is greatly enhanced. Fur- 
thermore, the priest can write twice as rapidly as 
normal and still produce high-quality copying of a 
text or map. This spell decreases the chance of error 
by 25% in the copying of text, including maps. It 
can be used when fabricating a magical scroll. 

The scribe spell lasts as long as the priest con- 
tinues to copy or compose a text, with a limit of 
eight hours in any case. Any interruption of the 


copying ends the scribe spell. In the case of scrib- 
ing a magical spell scroll, the interrupted spell is 
spoiled and useless, and the work must be begun 
again. 
parchment (book or scroll). 

Notes: Very rare spell. (Updated from DRAGON 
Magazine.) 


Scroll 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Thought 


Level: 4 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 hr. 
Duration: Permanent 
Area of Effect: 1 scroll 
Saving Throw: Special 


This more advanced version of the scribe spell, 
the priest can compose a magical scroll of a known 
spell with a 40% smaller chance of error. The 
scroll spell cannot be used in combination with a 
scribe spell. The caster can also chose to write the 
scroll at double normal speed, but then the reduc- 
tion in the chance for an error is canceled. 

Notes: Very rare spell. (Updated from DRAGON 
Magazine.) 


Sea Form 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: All 


Level: 4 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 6 

Duration: 1 hr. + 1 turn/level 
Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


When this spell is cast, the creature touched is 
transformed into a coherent liquid form. At a 
glance, the creature looks like ordinary sea water, 
but the sea form stays together like ooze and can 
flow up walls. The sea form has a movement rate 
of 3. The spell is typically used to infiltrate an 
enemy ship, flowing up over the side like water, 
then slipping down closed hatches and beneath 
doorways. When the sea form is submerged in a 
greater body of water it has a neutral buoyancy, 
and can float or sink at will. 

Normal shape can be resumed at will. The crea- 
ture affected by this spell shifts into the sea form 


528 


Seal of Cyrrollalee — Halfling 


SS ee 4 


without clothes or weapons, and resumes normal 
shape in the same condition. 

The material component is a mouthful of sea 
water, swallowed by the recipient. 

Notes: Uncommon for sea priests; otherwise, 
very rare. 


Sea Legs 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
Reversible 
Sphere: Healing 


Level: 1 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: | hr./level 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell stops the effects of oncoming sea- 
sickness in its recipient. If unable to do so before, 
that person also gains the ability to balance and 
maneuver easily even on a violently heaving deck, 
just as the most experienced sailor can. At the 
DM's discretion, a person under the effect of this 
spell need not make Dexterity ability checks for 
shipboard actions in stormy weather that could 
easily be done in calm weather. 

The reversed version of this spell, land legs, 
causes the target of the spell to make a Dexterity 
ability check to move or attack while on board a 
ship or boat. Failure of the check means the char- 
acter falls down and a second check is required to 
stand up again. 

The material components are the priest's holy 
symbol and a tiny vial of strong-smelling chemi- 
cals. 

Notes: Granted by Valkur, Captain of the 
Waves, of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting, 


Sea Mount 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 
Sphere: Summoning 


Level: 6 

Range: Special 

‘Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 6 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 sea creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


When this spell is cast, a sea creature large 
enough to ride is summoned to the caster, if one 
is present within an hour’s swim. Therefore, the 


summons cannot be answered until an hour has 
passed and the creature has had a chance to 
arrive. Typical sea mounts include giant fish, sea 
horses, sea turtles, and nonmagical creatures like 
rays and dolphins. Even sharks may respond and, 
for the duration, their natural predatory urges 
will be kept in check. The summoned creature 
can bear one person at the surface of the waves, 
and can carry the rider a variable distance 
depending on its reaction to the summons (see 
below). 

When the spell is cast, the sea priest must pic- 
ture where he or she wants the creature to go. 
Since this spell does not bestow the ability to com- 
municate with sea creatures, only the mental pic- 
ture provides direction to the sea mount. The DM 
should make a reaction roll: if friendly, the crea- 
ture carries its rider to the nearest shore, no matter 
how distant. If unfriendly, it travels to somewhere 
near and abandons its rider as soon as possible. A 
creature that makes its saving throw can either 
ignore the summons, or deliver the rider to a des- 
tination of its own choosing. 

Notes: Common for sea priests, otherwise very 
rare. (Updated from Deacon Magazine.) 


Seal of Cyrrollalee — Halfling 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Law 


Level: 2 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: Special 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 2 creatures 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell can be cast only on two willing 
beings who wish to make a pledge or contract with 
each other, overseen by Cyrrollalee. A seal of 
Cyrrollalee requires each participant to swear an 
oath governing his or her future behavior or deeds 
(thus the variable casting time). If the oaths so 
swom are acceptable to all participating parties 
when the spell is cast, then each participant must 
uphold his or her oath or face severe conse- 
quences. This spell fails if any party is an unwill- 
ing participant, is under the effects of a charm 
spell (or similar effect), or is not in his or her right 
mind, as adjudicated by the DM. 

If any party fails to meet the terms of the suc- 
cessfully cast seal of Cyrrollalee due to factors 
beyond his or her control and despite his or her 
best efforts, the oathbreaker suffers the effects of a 
curse spell (as the reverse of the Ist-level priest 


529 


~ Seal of Destiny 7 


spell bless) until such time as he or she receives an 
atonement spell cast by a priest Cyrrollalee. 

If any party deliberately fails to meet the terms 
of the oath, Cyrrollalee’s wrath affects the oath- 
breaker by reducing one ability score to 3 (the DM 
randomly determines which ability score). The 
wrath of Cyrrollalee persists until the oathbreaker 
makes amends for the broken pledge and receives 
an atonement spell cast by a priest of Cyrrollalee. 

The material component is the priest’s holy 
symbol. 

Notes: Granted by the halfling goddess Cyrrol- 
lalee. 


Seal of Destiny 
(Abjuration) 
Sphere: Divination 


Level: 6 

Range: 30 yds. 

Components: V, M 

Casting Time: | turn 

Duration: Permanent 

Area of Effect: 1 creature or object 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell seals a creature or object against 
divinations that would reveal its destiny, fortune, 
fate, or role in epic events. This includes all cast- 
ing of augury spells with respect to the subject, 
and the general failure of any other divinations 
that would reveal such information. It prevents 
any forecasting of the subject's influence on 
greater campaign events, making general cam- 
paign-level divinations more difficult, Any caster 
whose divination is blocked by this spell will real- 
ize that blocking magic of some type is involved, 
and any priest specializing in divinations has a 5% 
chance per level of knowing the exact cause. The 
seal can be removed only by a dispel magic spell 
cast expressly for that purpose by a caster of 
higher level than the one who placed the seal. The 
caster ages one year with each casting of the seal 
of destiny. 

Notes: Uncommon for divination specialists; 
otherwise, very rare. (Updated from DRAGON Mag- 
azine.) 


Searing Orb, Sol’s 
See Sol’s searing orb. 


Searing Song 
(Alteration, Invocation/Evocation) 
Sphere: Combat 


Level: 4 

Range: 30 yds. or touch 
Components: V 

Casting Time: 7 (or 2 rds.) 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: | creature 
Saving Throw: 4 or None 


This spell can be cast in two ways. If 
unleashed as a chanted or shouted verse for one 
round, it produces an invisible beam of solid air 
that unerringly strikes a single creature. The 
physical blow inflicts 1d6+1 points of damage (a 
successful saving throw vs. spell reduces this to 
half). The attack can pass all known magical and 
physical barriers, but the target must be clearly 
visible to the caster or the magic fails and is 
wasted. 

If the caster sings the enchantment twice 
through, taking two rounds to cast the searing 
song, its attack takes the same form, but is far 
more powerful. It corrodes the flesh of a single 
creature, causing 3d4+2 points of damage (a suc- 
cessful saving throw reduces this to half), 

If the caster can touch the subject (an attack 
roll is required), no saving throw is allowed 
against either version of the spell. 

The vocalization of the spell unleashes and 
directs the magic, rather than creating the spell 
effect, so magical silence (or deafness on the part 
of a target) has no effect on the power or operation 
of a searing song. 

Notes: Granted by Milil, Lord of Song, of the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Seclusion 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Numbers 


Level: 6 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 6 

Duration: 3d12 rds. + 4 rds./level 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 

Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell encloses one individual in an extradi- 
mensional space. Creatures to be affected must be 
of size M or smaller. The space can contain only 
one creature, regardless of size. The priest can use 
the spell personally or upon any creature touched. 


530 


Seed of Moander 


N 


Unwilling creatures are allowed a saving throw vs. 
spell to avoid the entrapment. 

While inside the space, the enclosed being is 
invisible and totally undetectable by any form of 
scrying. Powerful magic, such as contact other 
plane, will indicate that the being is elsewhere, but 
will give no more information. 

The creature within the extradimensional space 
can see and hear everything that occurs around him. 
However, he cannot cast spells, and no action of his 
can affect anyone or anything in the real world. 

While occupied, the extradimensional space is 
totally immobile. If the caster chooses to occupy 
the space, he can pass in and out of the space at 
will, Other creatures can leave or reenter the space 
only if the caster allows it. To an outside observer, 
an enclosed being who exits the space simply 
appears from nowhere. 

If the space is occupied when the spell termi- 
nates, the occupant is immediately ejected back 
into the real world and suffers 1d6 points of 
damage in the process. 

Any time the extradimensional space is empty, 
or when the occupant is someone other than the 
priest, the space follows the priest around. Thus, 
the priest can seclude a comrade in the extradi- 
mensional space, walk past some guards into a 
building, then release the comrade. 

If any other form of extradimensional space 
(such as a bag of holding) is taken into the space 
created by seclusion, both spaces are ruptured and 
all contents are expelled onto the Astral plane. 
Extradimensional manipulation can temporarily 
prevent this. 

‘The material components are a tiny crystal box 
of the finest workmanship (worth at least 1,500 
gp) and a gem of at least 250 gp value. The gem is 
consumed in the casting; the box is not. 

Notes: Common for priests with major access 
to the sphere of Numbers (ToM). 


See All Faces — Vedic 
(Divination) 
Sphere: Divination 


Level: 4 
Range: 10 yds. 


Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell requires that an item belonging to the 
target be in the caster’s possession. When cast, an 
unwilling target must make saving throw vs. spells 


or have all major aspects of his personality 
revealed to the caster. Thus, if the target is a mage, 
a rajah, a lothario, or a liar, the caster knows it. 
Note that the see all faces spell reveals only truly 
major aspects; if the aforementioned target also 
liked chocolate and raga music, this would not be 
revealed. Since this spell does not affect the mind, 
mind shielding and Wisdom bonuses are not effec- 
tive defenses. 

Notes: Common for priests from a Vedic 
(indian) culture; otherwise very rare. (Updated 
from DRAGON Magazine.) 


Seed of Moander 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Plant 


This spell was developed by priests of Moander 
centuries ago as a method of enslaving sentient 
beings to the will of Moander. The spell itself 
results in the creation of a seed of Moander, which 
can then transform a victim into a servant of 
Moander. 

To create a seed of Moander, a priest wraps an 
emerald fragment in a ball of rotting plant mate- 
rial. The resulting spherical proto-seed is soaked in 
unholy water for 24 hours and then cursed (the 
reverse of the bless spell) in the name of Moander. 
The priest then casts seed of Moander while touch- 
ing the proto-seed, transforming the sphere into a 
green, spine-covered burr about the size and shape 
of a horse chestnut burr. The seed is sticky, and the 
spines end in tiny hooks. 

A seed of Moander attaches itself to the skin of 
any living, sentient creature it comes into contact 
with who is not already a minion of Moander. The 
seed bursts on the round following its attachment 
and releases a 3-foot-diameter cloud of spores. 
Seeds can be thrown (range is 10/20/30); however, 
they do not break open unless they strike living 
beings. (Misses use the grenade-like missile table 
in the DMG to determine the point of impact.) Any 
living, sentient creature within the area of effect of 
the spores (who is not already a minion of Moan- 
der) must make a saving throw vs. spell. If it fails 
the saving throw, the spores are inhaled and begin 
transforming the host. If it succeeds, the spores are 
not inhaled, and the transformational effects of the 


~ Seedstorm — Old Empire e 


seed of Moander are negated. Unburst seeds burst 
when they contact living flesh. They are destroyed 
by being drenched in holy water and blessed (as 
the spell). 

If a victim is not treated, the spores grow, 
making the creature into a puppet of Moander 
(one of Moander's mind-controlled servants) in 
4d4 days and also turning his or her entrails into 
a festering mass of rotting, mold-encrusted ten- 
drils that eventually (in 5d6+30 days, unless 
delayed by the application of slow rot spells) 
reduce their host to a dried-out husk, killing him 
or her. Externally the host appears unchanged 
until death except for the faint odor of pollen and 
a small flowered vine wrapped around one ear. A 
victim who shares body fluids with another crea- 
ture—as little as a kiss is sufficient—can transfer 
the spores of a seed of Moander to that creature, 
spreading the Darkbringer's influence. (The 
potential new host receive a saving throw vs. 
spell at a +2 bonus for each instance of exposure 
to avoid infestation.) 

Only if Moander is completely absent from the 
Realms (in other words, all of the god's avatars 
and manifestations in the Realms have been 
destroyed) is the original host able to express its 
free will after it would have normally become a 
mind-controlled being. However, without the sta- 
bilizing effect of Moander’s power, the body 
decays at an accelerated rate once the initial 4d4- 
day period is passed and becomes a rotting mass of 


If a victim infested with the spores of a seed 
of Moander drinks holy water within | hour of 
the spores affecting it, the spores dissolve and the 
victim is cured. If holy water is drunk within 2 
days of the spores’ entry, their growth is slowed 
to half rate (in other words, the possession and 
rotting take twice as long). A cure disease or heal 
spell used within 30 days of initial corruption by 
the spores stops the possession and the corruption 
process, allowing the victim to live and slowly 
heal inwardly. Cold magic that deals the infested 
body more than 20 points of damage also slays 
the spores’ growth, allowing the victim to slowly 
recover. Typically, victims cured by cure disease, 
heal, or cold damage who do not receive a 
(second) heal, a restoration, or a regenerate spell 
have their Strength and Constitution reduced to 
half for 20+1d12 days. At the end of that time, 
they slip into a coma, lose 4d4 hit points, and a 
day later, if they survived the damage, awaken 
fully cured. 

A newly created puppet of Moander retains all 
of its previous abilities and skills, but all of its 
thoughts are known to Moander, and it is under 


the complete control of the Rotting God. In addi- 
tion, the newly created minion can sprout one or 
two 10-foot-long tentacles at will from any ori- 
fice or directly through its skin. Each tendril (AC 
2; hp 12 each; 2d8 points of bludgeoning/con- 
stricting damage per successful attack) can attack 
once per round until destroyed. If a tendril is 
destroyed, the minion can sprout another tentacle 
the following round. If both tendrils hit a small or 
man-size creature in the same round, the victim is 
entangled (as the spell of that name) until he or 
she is released or escapes. 

The material components are an emerald frag- 
ment (base value 100 gp) and Moander's holy 
symbol. 

Notes: Granted by Moander the Darkbringer of 
the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Seedstorm — Old Empire 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Plant, Combat 


Level: 5 

Range: 60 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 8 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: 5-ft/level radius 
Saving Throw: 72 


This spell creates an explosion of seeds. The 
seeds shoot out forcefully from the center of the 
area of effect in all directions to the limits of the 
area of effect, The area of effect is the maximum 
able to be created by a priestess of a certain level; 
smaller areas of effect can always be evoked to a 
minimum of a 5-foot radius. 

Normally this spell is used during the planting 
season to sow the fields, but it serves very effec- 
tively as a combat spell as well. Any creatures 
caught in its area of effect suffer 2d6 points of 
damage plus an additional 1d6+2 points for each 
four levels of the casting priestess to a maximum 
of 20th level. A successful saving throw vs. spell 
halves this damage. Due to the beneficent hand of 
Isis, the casting priestess never takes damage from 
this spell. 

The material components are a handful of 
seeds of the appropriate species to be sown and the 
priestess’s holy symbol. 

Notes: Granted by the Mulhorandi goddess Isis 
of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


532 


Seek Eternal Rest 


Ne 


Seek 
(Divination) 
Sphere: Divination 


Level: 6 
Range: Special 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 1 tum 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 item, place, or creature 
Saving Throw: None 


By casting seek, the priest gains the ability to 
determine the location of any single item, place, or 
creature, and visualize all major aspects of its imme- 
diate surroundings (within 50 feet). The caster leams 
in what part of the world the thing being sought 
exists; the closer the priest is to the thing sought, the 
more definite the general idea of its location and the 
more details can be leamed (see table). 


Distance Location Viewing Time 
250 mi. Building/Site 1 tum 

2,500 mi. Town/Landform 5 rds. 

25,000 mi. Region 1 rd. 
Extraplanar Plane Glimpse 


For example, a priest who seeks an ancient 
holy book hidden in a forgotten tower 800 miles 
away might receive an impression of the nearest 
town or major landform (mountain, lake, and so 
on), and can examine the book and its surround- 
ings for up to five rounds. If the book is actually 
3,000 miles away, the priest gains only a one- 
round vision and an impression of the country or 
kingdom in which it lies. 

If the priest is not personally familiar with the 
thing sought, the results are one step worse than 
normal. Spells or items that defeat scrying or 
detection are effective against seek and may con- 
fuse or block the results. 

‘The material component is a small, precious 
crystal, worth at least 500 gp. 

Notes: Common for priests with a specialty in 
Divination; otherwise, barred. 


Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 7 

Duration: 5 rds. (maximum) 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell augments the priest’s next attempt to 
tum undead. A priest who successfully turns 
undead while the spell is in effect will destroy the 
affected undead creatures, rather than turn them. 
For example, if an 8th-level priest attempted to 
tum a ghost and rolled a 19 after casting seek eter- 
nal rest, the ghost is immediately destroyed. 

Priests empowered by this spell and who would 
automatically destroy the undead affect twice the 
normal number. For example, if an 8th-level priest 
attempted to turn a host of skeletons, she would 
automatically destroy 8d6 skeletons, 

If the priest does not attempt to turn undead 
within five rounds of casting seek eternal rest, the 
spell ends with no effect and is lost. 

‘The material component is the priest's holy 
symbol. 

Notes: Granted by the demipower Jergal, 
Scribe of the Doomed, of the FORGOTTEN REALMS 
setting. 


533 


Seeking — Elf 
————— 


Seeking — Elf 
(Enchantment, Invocation) 
Sphere: Combat 


Level: 2 

Range: 100 yds. 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 2 

Duration: | tum 

Area of Effect: 1 missile/3 levels of the caster, up 
to maximum of five 

Saving Throw: None 


The seeking spell takes the normal laws of 
momentum and gravity, and then twists them 
slightly in a way that is favorable to the caster of 
the spell. 

The caster can ensorcel a number of normal, 
nonenchanted missiles no larger than a javelin, one 
per three levels, to a maximum of five missiles. When 
use them or distribute them to his or her companions. 

When shot or hurled at a target, the missiles 
unerringly seek the target. The missiles can go 
around objects or comers if the target was visible 
when the spell was cast, but they cannot pass 
through solid obstructions. For example, if the target 
creature closes a door, the missiles slam into the 
door and cannot be removed until the spell wears off. 

While the missile must be hurled or fired within 
its normal range, it cannot be outrun, except by 
extraordinary means. If the target plane shifts, tele- 
ports, blinks, or uses some other means of instanta- 
neous transport, the missile can no longer home in 
on the target. It falls to the ground, useless. 

This spell is not an automatic guarantee of suc- 
cess. Rather, it ensures that archers and slingers, 
when firing into melee, will not accidentally hit 
those who are on their side. This spell is especially 
useful for battles or shots in narrow corridors. 
Someone firing the arrow or bullet who can see the 
target can fire for normal damage without fear of 
injuring comrades. 

Notes: Granted by elven deities. 


Seeking Mote 
(Evocation) 
Sphere: Sun 


Level: 1 

Range: 30 yds. 
‘Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 5 
Duration: 1 rd. 

Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell creates a tiny, bright speck of light in 
one of the caster’s hands (or in his mouth or 
emerging from his forehead, or one of his eyes, as 
needed). It flashes off to strike at a single chosen 
target, turning and twisting to follow them as does 
a wizard’s magic missile spell. However, a seeking 
mote can miss. It can also be destroyed by a suc- 
cessful dispel magic spell or by a magical barrier 
en route to its target, but otherwise flies to attack a 
designated target in range, striking once with the 
caster's THACO but at a +4 bonus, and inflicting 
2d44+2 points of damage. 

The material components are a pinch of dust 
and a fleck of mica, quartz, or any sort of clear 
gemstone. Both ingredients must have previously 
been exposed to full sunlight for at least one con- 
tinuous tum. 

Notes: Granted by Chauntea, the Great Mother, 
of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. This spell is 
found only in a few exceptionally rare tomes. 


Seeking Sword 
(Evocation) 
Sphere: Combat 


Level: 4 

Range: 30 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 7 

Duration: 2 rds/level 

Area of Effect: 1 magical swordlike construct 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell brings into being a shimmering blade 
of force that appears as a sword of any description 
the caster desires, typically a broad sword. The 
sword forms in midair and is animated by the will 
of the caster (who need never touch it), flashing 
about as it attacks. The blade is silent and moves at 
MV Fly 96 (A), although it cannot move beyond 
spell range from the caster. The blade can strike four 
times per round, as if wielded by the caster, inflict- 
ing 2d4 points of damage with each successful hit. 

Although it has no attack bonuses, a seeking 
sword is considered a +4 magical weapon for 
determining what sorts of beings it can strike. It 
can strike nonliving objects and can be wielded 
dexterously enough to lift latches, slide bolts open 
or shut, tum pages of books, and so on. The caster 
can freely move the sword from target to target 
unless physical or magical barriers (such as a wall 
of force) are in the way, but the caster must con- 
centrate on the blade to maintain its existence and 
direct it. Other spellcasting is impossible while 
maintaining the spell, though the caster can move 
at half the normal rate per round while doing so. 


Fe — 


Sense Nature of Spirit — Shaman 


Ne 


A seeking sword moves with Strength enough 
to parry and hold back another blade wielded by a 
strong human or humanoid. It can be used to shat- 
ter glass objects, spike open doors, puncture sacks, 
or search for unseen opponents by sweeping 
through apparently empty spaces or across win- 
dowsills and thresholds, 

The material components are a drop of mercury 
and a human hair. 

Notes: Granted by Helm the Vigilant of the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Segojan’s Armor — Gnome 
(Abjuration, Enchantment/Charm) 
Sphere: Plant 


Level: 1 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: | day 

Area of Effect: Creates | suit of armor 
Saving Throw: None 


Segojan's armor magically weaves grass and 
roots into temporary armor. Once created, the 
armor provides protection equal to scale mail 
(AC 6). Although it does not possess any magical 


535 


plusses (+1, and so on), it does radiate magic. 
Because of its composition, it is nearly weight- 
less, with an encumbrance value equal to normal 
clothing. It prevents magic missile and similar 
spells from damaging the wearer, completely 
negating them. Segojan’s armor acts as actual 
armor, so magical items like bracers of defense 
and spells like armor cannot be used with it. 

When the spell expires, the armor immediately 
unravels into its component parts. A successful dispel 
magic or similar effect ends the spell immediately. 

Before casting this spell, the priest gathers an 
armload of grass and roots, and places the material in 
a pile. Next, an ounce of powdered iron is sprinkled 
over the collected foliage, and the spell is cast. As the 
incantation is uttered, the roots and grass weave 
themselves into a suit of armor tailored specifically to 
the caster, other beings cannot wear it. The caster’s 
holy symbol is required during the casting. Only the 
iron powder is consumed in the casting. 

Notes: Granted by the gnome god Segojan 
Earthcaller. 


Selective Passage 


Reversed form, tanglefoot. 


Sense Direction 
(Divination) 
Sphere: Elemental Earth 


Level: 1 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 4 
Duration: Instantancous 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell tells the druid which cardinal direction 
he or she faces. The spell also reveals the caster’s 
depth underground or altitude above ground. 

The material component is a small lodestone 
held in the hand. 

Notes: Very rare druid spell. (Updated from 
DRAGON Magazine.) 


Sense Nature of Spirit — Shaman 
See sense spirit. 


Sense Spirit — Shaman 


Sense Spirit — Shaman 
(Divination) 
Sphere: Divination 


Level: 2 

Range: 10 yds./level 
Components: V, $, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: | entity 
Saving Throw: None 


By casting this spell upon a specific spirit (or 
object or creature inhabited by one), the shaman 
can discern what type of spirit it is. 

If cast on a spirit, however, it reveals any facts 
that the DM considers relevant—generally, infor- 
mation about spirit's nature and purpose. 

The information revealed is game detail; the 
shaman can't codify, name, or classify the spirit. 
Rather, the shaman can tell that it's a “powerful 
spirit, courageous and noble” or “a great and 
extremely ancient animal spirit.” The shaman may 
also get hints about the spirit's intentions—hostile 
spirits will be recognized as “predatory,” “angry,” 
or “belligerent,” for example. 

If cast a creature native to the Prime Plane, the 
spell can confirm that it is not a spirit; if cast on an 
extraplanar or undead being, the spell gives an 
uncertain or indeterminate response. 

The material component is a small crystal, 
worth at least 10 sp, held in the right hand during 
casting. The crystal can be reused, 

Notes: Restricted to shamans, uncommon. 


Sentry of Helm 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 
Sphere: Guardian, Travelers 


Level: 1 
Range: 0 

Components: V, $, M 

Casting Time: 1 hr. 

Duration: 8 hrs. or until triggered 
Area of Effect: 120-ft.-diameter sphere 
Saving Throw: None 


‘This spell was created by the priests of Helm to aid 
in guard duty while most members of a group of trav- 
elers in the wild are sleeping. Like the Ist-level wizard 
spell unseen servant, this spell creates an invisible, 
mindless, and shapeless force. This force cannot fight 
and, unlike an unseen servant, it cannot affect its phys- 
ical surrounding except as indicated below. 

The priest casts this spell by walking the 
perimeter of the area of effect sprinkling pinches 


of sand every few feet and then returning to the 
center of the area of effect. Once the spell casting 
is completed, the shadowy sentry stands guard in 
the center of the area of effect and the caster 
immediately falls asleep. 

If any visible object over 1 foot in length, width, 
or height that was not present during the casting of 
the spell enters the area of effect while the spell is in 
operation or if the spell is about to end, the shadowy 
force silently shakes the caster awake. When the 
caster awakes, the priest is wide awake and aware 
that something has triggered the sentry or that the 
spell has ended. The spell then immediately expires. 

A visible object must be an object that a guard 
could have perceived with normal vision if he or 
she had been awake and on guard duty. Visible 
objects cannot be invisible, Hiding in Shadows, or 
hidden behind walls, trees, or earth. 

If this spell is cast by a priest of Sth level or 
higher, the sentry of Helm also has 60-foot infrav- 
ision in addition to normal sight, and what is visi- 
ble to it includes beings seen with that faculty. 

The material components are the priest's holy 
symbol and a small bag of fine sand. 

Notes: Granted by Helm the Vigilant of the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Sentry of Gorm — Dwarf 
This spell is exactly the same as sentry of Helm, 
but is granted by the dwarven god Gorm Gulthyn. 


Sera’s Blessed Luck 
Quest spell, see appendix in Vol. 3. 


Sever the Silver Cord 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Astral, Combat 


Level: 5 

Range: 10 yds/level 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 8 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: 1 prime 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell effectively slays a creature from the 
Prime Material Plane who was brought to another 
plane by astral spell. The priest accomplishes this 
effect by magically severing the silver cord that 
ties the creature to its home plane. 

A chopping motion directed at the subject of 
the spell extends a scythe like blade of invisible 
force. A creature that fails a saving throw vs. death 
magic dies as the spell slices the cord. A caster 
able to use detect invisibility, or otherwise see 


536 


Shadowcloak 


N 


astral objects, can perceive the cord, reducing the 
creature’s saving throw by a —2 penalty. 

Notes: Rare for planar priests. Unlikely to be 
learned except through visiting the Outer Planes. 


Shades of Rhondang — Gnome 
(Evocation) 
Sphere: Elemental Fire 


Level: 4 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, M 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: Caster's hammer 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell gains its name by allowing the caster 
to temporarily duplicate certain powers of Flan- 
dal’s magical hammer, Rhondang. 

When the spell is cast, the caster’s hammer 
bursts into flames, taking on the characteristics 
of a flame tongue sword. Thus, while the spell 
lasts, the hammer is regarded as a +1 weapon, +2 
vs. regenerating creatures, +3 vs, cold-using, 
flammable, and avian creatures, and +4 vs. 
undead. Likewise, it produces light equal to a 
torch and can ignite flammable objects on con- 
tact. 

Shades of Rhondang functions only if used on 
a nonmagical hammer. If cast on a magical 
hammer or any other type of weapon, the spell 
automatically fails. Furthermore, the hammer to be 
affected must be owned and used by the caster, it 
cannot be passed to another creature. Attempting 
to cast the spell on someone else's hammer or 
seeking to pass the hammer to another creature 
immediately negates the spell. 

Shades of Rhondang ends if subjected to a suc- 
cessful dispel magic or similar effect, if the caster 
is slain, rendered unconscious, or releases his grip 
on the handle. Since the caster must retain a hold 
on the hammer to prevent the spell from ending, he 
or she cannot cast spells that require somatic com- 
ponents, nor perform any actions that require the 
use of both hands. 

The material component is the caster’s holy 
symbol. 

Notes: Granted by the gnome god Flandal 
Steelskin. 


Shadow Engines 
A 7th-level spell of the sphere of War. See appen- 
dix in Vol. 3. 


Shadow Sword 
(ilusion/Phantasm) 
Sphere: Combat, Sun 


Level: 3 

Range: 0 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 6 
Duration: 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell creates a shadow sword that must be 
physically wielded by the spellcaster. The type, 
speed, size, and weight of the shadow sword can 
be equal to any type of sword the spellcaster is 
familiar with. (For example, if the caster has seen 
and practiced with a long sword, he or she could 
create a shadow long sword. If the caster has never 
seen and worked with a khopesh, he or she could 
not create a shadow khopesh.) This spell does not 
confer proficiency in the chosen weapon. 

A shadow sword functions in all ways as a 
magical sword +1 of the selected type. In addition, 
it functions with a +2 attack and damage bonus 
against ogres, trolls, goblinkin, giantkin, and 
giants. It functions with a +3 attack and damage 
bonus against undead creatures. 

If at any time the casting priest releases the 
shadow sword (something the casting priest can 
only do voluntarily) or the shadow sword enters an 
area of absolute darkness, the spell immediately 
expires. If a light, continual light, continual dark- 
ness, or similar spell is cast directly on a shadow 
sword, both the shadow sword and the cast spell 
are immediately canceled. 

‘The somatic component involves the caster reach- 
ing a gauntleted hand into an area of deep shadow 
and drawing forth the shadow sword. The material 
component is the priest's holy symbol (a gauntlet) in 
which the shadow sword must be wielded. The 
gauntlet is not consumed in the casting. 

Notes: Granted by the lesser god Shaundakul 
of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Shadowcloak 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Sun, Protection 


Level: 3 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 6 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: 10-ft.-radius amorphous cloud 
Saving Throw: None 


537 


This spell creates a semisolid fog of amorphous 
shape that is centered on the caster or a single 
touched spell recipient being and moves with that 
being to hide him or her completely from view. In 
bright conditions, a rolling, roiling moving cloud 
of shadow can readily be seen, concealing only the 
spell recipient's precise identity, but in darkness, 
an unsuspicious observer is only 15% likely to 
think something is amiss with what he or she is 
seeing (darkness) and a successful Intelligence 
ability check must still be made to reach a decision 
that something is certainly unusual and that it is 
more of less at such-and-such a spot. 

A shadowcloak both confuses attackers with its 
swirling, smoky chaos, and slows strikes, so that all 
attacks against the user occur at a -3 attack penalty 
and a damage penalty of —1 point per die. The shad- 
awcloak also muffles all sounds made by the cloaked 
being (regardless of that being’s desires) so that even 
shouted speech seems faint and distant, and all 
sounds short of breakage or metallic ringing or clink- 
ing are very likely to be completely blanked out. 

Torches, fire, smoke, and magical radiances are 
unaffected by contact with a shadowcloak spell, 
but in turn have no effect on it and do not force it 
to part or light up its gloom. An observer outside a 
shadowcloak can detect the presence of a light 
source inside a shadowcloak because it lightens 


538 


the dark appearance of the fog around it to a light 
gray—but the observer would not be able to see 
other things within the shadowcloak itself. 

‘To the user and any others present and bearing 
consecrated holy symbols of Mask, the shadow- 
cloak borders appear as a slight hazy shimmering 
in the air, but no darkness is apparent. The spell 
does not affect the vision and combat abilities of 
such beings. 

Notes: Granted by the Mask, god of thieves of 
the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Shape Wood 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Plant 


Level: 3 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: 9 cu. ft. +1 cu. ft./level 
Saving Throw: None 


By means of shape wood, the caster can reform 
wood. For example, the priest can cast it upon any 
appropriate-sized piece of wood to fashion a 
wooden weapon, make a rough door, or even 
create a crude figurine. 

The spell also allows the caster to reshape an 
existing wooden door, perhaps to escape imprison- 
ment. Again, the volume of the wooden object 
must be appropriate to the desired result and fit in 
the area of effect. 

While a caster might form a wooden coffer from 
a tree stump or a door from a wooden wall, the 
result does not bear high quality detail. If a shaping 
has moving parts, there is a 30% chance they do not 
work. The alteration endures permanently, at least 
until the wood rots or is physically destroyed. 

The caster blows the material component, a 
pinch of fine sawdust, over the wooden object sub- 
jected to the spell. 

Notes: Uncommon for druids. 


Shar, Whip of 
See whip of Shar. 


Sharess, Kiss of 
See kiss of Sharess. 


Shark Charm — Elf 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
Sphere: Animal, Charm 


Level: 2 

Range: 30 yds. 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 5 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 30-ft. cube 
Saving Throw: None 


When this spell is cast, a hypnotic pattem is set 
up that causes one or more sharks to cease all 
activity except a side-to-side swaying movement. 
If the sharks are charmed while simply swimming 
about, the duration of the spell is 1d4+2 turns; if 
the sharks are aroused and angry or can scent 
blood in the water, the charm lasts 1d3 turns; if the 
sharks are angry or attacking or if a sahuagin is 
present within 30 yards, the spell lasts 1d4+4 
rounds. The priest casting the spell can charm 
sharks whose total hit points are less than or equal 
to his or her own. On average, a Ist-level priest 
could charm sharks with a total of 4 or 5 hit points; 
a 2nd-level priest could charm 9 hit points, and so 
on The hit points can be those of a single shark or 
those of an entire school, but the total hit points 
cannot exceed those of the priest casting the spell. 
A 23-hit-point caster charming a dozen 2-hit point 
sharks would charm 11 of them. This spell is also 
effective against any shark-related monster, such 
as a bunyip or wereshark, subject to magic resist- 
ance, hit points, and so forth. 

Notes: Granted by the elven god Deep Sashe- 
las. Shark charm is an underwater variant of the 
more common snake charm spell It. Was devel- 


oped by aquatic elven priests. 
Sharpleaf 

(Alteration) 

Sphere: Plant 

Level: 2 

Range: 5 yds. 


Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 5 

Duration: | turn/level 

Area of Effect: 3 leaves/level 
Saving Throw: None 


When cast, this spell causes leaves of any type 
to become rigid and razor sharp, effectively 
becoming knives. These sharp leaves can be 
wielded or thrown, causing 143 points of damage 
if a successful attack roll is made. 


Shatter Circle — Old Empire 


The leaves can also be crushed and crumpled 
before the casting, then serving as caltrops doing 
1d2 points of damage. Three leaves per level of the 
caster can be affected. If mistletoe is used as the 
object of the spell, 1 point of additional damage is 
added. 

The material components are leaves and sap 
from a hardwood tree, which is sprinkled on 
them. 

Notes: Very rare druid spell. (Updated from 
DraGoN Magazine.) 


Shatter Circle — Old Empire 
(Abjuration) 
Sphere: Protection 


Level: 5 
Range: 10 yds. + 10 yds level 
Components: V, S, M 


This spell was specifically designed to combat 
the circle spell developed by the Red Wizards of 
Thay, traditional enemies of the priests of Thoth. 
It is only effective while a circle spell is in 
progress. When shatter circle is cast, the Red 
Wizard who is the focus of the circle must make a 
successful saving throw vs. spell at his or her 
actual (not enhanced) level or the circle spell is 
shattered and any additional memorized spells 
gained from that circle spell are lost. This saving 
throw is penalized by —1 for every three levels 
above 9th (rounding down) of the casting priest of 
Thoth. Hence there is a —1 penalty if the priest of 
Thoth casting shatter circle is 12th to 15th level, 
a —2 penalty if the priest of Thoth is 16th to 19th 
level, and so on. 

Although it was not designed for this purpose, 
this spell is also effective against the spellmelds of 
the Witches of Rashemen. If shatter circle is cast 
during a round in which one Witch is transferring 
a spell to another witch, the receiving Witch must 
make a successful saving throw vs. spell for the 
spelimeld to operate normally. If she fails her 
saving throw, the spell is entirely lost to both 
witches. 

The material component is a crushed ruby of at 
least 500 gp value. 

Notes: Granted by the Mulhorandi deity Thoth 
of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


aa oe ae oe ae 


~ Shatter Stone and Metal 


Shatter Stone and Metal 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Elemental Earth 


Level: 5 

Range: 60 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 8 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell causes metal or stone objects, totaling 
no more than 5 pounds weight per level of the 
druid, to explode imo shards of sharp projectiles. 
Items to be affected get a saving throw vs. crushing 
blow at —1 on the die roll for every two levels of the 
druid (magical items receive bonuses as noted in 
the DMG). Creatures standing within 5 feet plus 1 
foot per 5 pounds weight of the shattered object are 
hit by the shards of the item. Shards inflict 1 point 
of damage per 5 pounds weight of the object. 
Damage taken is reduced by an amount equal to the 
target's Armor Class subtracted from 10; thus, AC 
5 reduces the damage taken by 5 hit points. 

‘The material component is a miniature stone 
hammer. 

Notes: Very rare druid spell. (Updated from 
DRAGON Magazine.) 


Shaundakul, Favor of 
See favor of Shaundakul. 


Sheela’s Entangle — Halfling 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Plant 


Level: 2 

Range: 80 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 
Duration: 1 tum 

Area of Effect: 40-ft. cube 
Saving Throw: Special 


Like the Ist-level priest spell, entangle, this spell 
enables the caster to cause plants in the area of effect 
to entangle creatures. The grasses, weeds, bushes, 
and even trees wrap, twist, and entwine about the 
creatures, holding them fast for the duration of the 
spell. Any creature entering the area is subject to this 
effect. A creature that makes a successful saving 
throw vs. spell can escape the area, moving at only 10 
feet per round until out of the area. Exceptionally 
large (gargantuan) or strong creatures may suffer 
little or no distress from this spell, at the DM’s 


I TE gi A ee A ee 


option, based on the strength of the entangling plants. 
Sheela's entangle inflicts 1d4 points of damage per 
round on all creatures trapped therein from constric- 
tion and abrasion if so commanded by the caster 
(There is no saving throw for this, and it makes no 
difference if the creatures are able to move or not.) 

Unlike the more common version of the spell, 
the effects of Sheela’s entangle are cumulative 
(although not with entangle). For each additional 
casting, saving throws to escape the area are 
reduced by an additional -2 penalty, and move- 
ment in the area is reduced by 2 feet per round (to 
a minimum of 2 feet per round). 

The material components are the caster's holy 
symbol and a small piece of vine. 

Notes: Granted by the halfling goddess Sheela 
Peryroyl. 


Shellskin 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Protection, Elemental Water 
Level: 4 
Range: Touch 
Components: V 


Casting Time: 7 
Duration: 4 rds. + 1 rd./ level 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: None 


By means of this spell, the caster fills the skin 
of an affected creature with a chitinous substance, 
which hardens to form a layer of armor. The base 
Armor Class of the protected creature becomes 4, 
plus an additional 1 to AC for every 5 levels of the 
priest: the base Armor Class 3 at 7th level, Armor 
Class 2 at 10th level, Armor Class | at 15th level, 
and so on. In addition, the affected creature makes 
all saving throws against nonmagical attacks at +1. 

Notes: Uncommon for sea priests; otherwise, 
very rare. 


Shevarash’s Infravision — Elf 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Sun 


Level: 3 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: 2 hrs. + 1 hr/level 
Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


By means of this spell, the priest allows the 
recipient to see in normal darkness up to 120 feet 


Shield of the God 


without light. Strong sources of light (fire, lanterns, 
torches, and so on) tend to blind this vision, so the 
spell’s effect does not function efficiently in the 
presence of such light sources. Invisible creatures 
are not detectable by infravision. 

The material components are the priest’s holy 
symbol and either a pinch of dried carrot or an 


agate, 
Notes: Granted by the elven god Shevarash, 


Shield of the Archons 
(Abjuration) 
Reversible 
Sphere: Protection 


Casting Time: 1 
Duration: 1 rd,/2 levels 

Area of Effect: 120-degree arc 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell creates a mystic shield of beneficent 
energies that interposes itself between the caster 
and incoming attacks by spell, spell-like ability, or 
magical device such as a rod, staff, or wand. 
Attacks on the caster within the spell's arc hit the 
shield instead, and each strike has a chance of shat- 
tering it. The player rolls 1d20 for every attack the 
shield intercepts. The shield of the archons shatters 
if the roll is less than the level of the intercepted 
magical attack. A shield that shatters still provides 
protection from the spell that destroyed it. 

If an area-effect spell would include the caster 
but is not directly targeted on him, the shield pro- 
vides a +4 saving throw bonus and reduces 
damage by -2 points per die. This protection also 
applies against breath weapon attacks that cause 
physical damage. 

If attacks are launched at the caster from dif- 
ferent directions at the same time, the shield inter- 
poses itself between the caster and the most 
dangerous threat, as determined by the DM. 

The shield provides no protection against 
attacks other than those specified. A caster can 
create a shield of the archons but once per day. 

As its name implies, this spell was developed 
by priests working with the archons of Mount 
Celestia. It is used only by priests of good align- 
ment, The spell shield of the tanar'ri is identical in 
effect, but uses baneful energies. This form of the 
spell is used by evil priests. 

Notes: A planar priest spell, uncommon for 
good priests who traffic with archons; otherwise, 
very rare. 


Shield of the God 
(Invocation/Evocation) 
Sphere: Protection 


Level: 5 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 8 

Duration: 5 rds. 

Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell creates an invisible shield of force in 
front of the caster that moves to deal with charging 
foes (one opponent per round, but the priest can 
move the shield to defend against a different foe at 
the end of each round, if desired), slowing them to 
half movement rate and hampering their attacks. 
The caster chooses one of two additional effects 
for the shield during casting (the choice cannot be 
altered thereafter): block or shield. 

A) Block, A shield set to block a foe strikes at 
THACO 6, with the choice of blocking the foe's 
attack (if it hits) or dealing damage (2d4+4 points 
of damage and item saving throws vs. crushing 
blow for frontally exposed, fragile items carried by 
the foe). If the shield misses its block or inflicts 
damage, the foe's attacks at the shield-caster are 
unaffected. 

B) Shield, A shield setting tries to block all 
attacks. It inflicts no damage on the foe, but all of 
the foe's attacks are at a —3 penalty to attack rolls 
and a —I penalty to damage. In addition, the 
shield-caster has a +2 bonus to all saving throws 
vs, attacks, including spells (for spells that nor- 
mally allow a saving throw). 

A shield of the god can be set in a doorway or 
passage to simply block opponents from getting to 
the caster, who can cast other spells of 4th level or 
less through it without affecting the shield. If a 
Sth-level (or higher) spell makes contact with the 
shield (whatever the source of the spell), the shield 
blocks the attack (if it is a physical attack mani- 
festation, rather than a charm, area of effect, or 
general effect spell), but fails at the end of that 
round. The caster can also end the shield at any 
time by silent act of will. 

‘The material components are a glove and a 
piece of rock crystal (or clear gemstone in its nat- 
ural, uncut state). 

Notes: Granted by Helm the Vigilant of the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Digi pe a AS ee ae a eT 


~ Shield of Lathander r 


Shield of Lathander 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 
Sphere: Guardian 


Level: 5 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: $ 
Duration: 1 rd. 

Area of Effect: 1 being 
Saving Throw: None 


If the recipient of this spell is unwilling or 
unwitting and engaged in combat, a successful 
attack roll is necessary to touch that being. The 
spell’s recipient must be touched within three 
rounds of the spell being cast or the spell is wasted 
and lost. 

Shield of Lathander protects a single touched 
creature from all damage due to purely physical 
means on the round after it is touched. The pro- 
tected being takes full normal damage from spells 
and magical item discharges, but the physical 
component of an enchanted weapon's attack is 
negated. For instance, a Jongsword +2 striking a 
protected recipient of this spell inflicts only 2 
poimts of damage (due to its magical bonus). 
Enchanted weapons lacking pluses cause only 1 
point of damage. 

Notes: Granted’ by Lathander Mominglord of 
the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Shield of the Tanar’ri 
Reversed form, shield of the archons. 


Shift Glyph 
(Alteration, Evocation) 
Sphere: Creation, Divination 


Level: 3 
Range: 5 yds./level 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 6 

Duration: Permanent 

Area of Effect: 1 magical glyph, rune, symbol, or 
inscription 

Saving Throw: Special 


This spell allows the casting priest to move an 
unknown or hostile magical glyph, rune, symbol, 
or magical inscription (defined as a message of 
many characters all written at the same time and 
intended to be read together) from the surface on 
which it is found to another surface of the priest’s 
choosing within spell range. If no suitable surface 
(presumably one similar to the original surface, 


or failing that, a relatively smooth horizontal or 
vertical surface large enough to hold the writing) 
exists within range, the spell does not work, but it 
is not wasted. 

When a shift glyph is cast, all magical symbols 
within range of the caster that the spell can affect 
glow with a dim white radiance. The caster has 
until the end of the round to choose which one to 
move; beings familiar with certain glyphs can 
identify them at this time. Once a glyph is chosen, 
the other magical markings cease to glow, fading 
back into their former state. Note that the chosen 
glyph may be one the caster did not know of before 
the spell illuminated it. 

The caster of a shift glyph must then make a 
saving throw vs. spell; if this saving throw fails, 
the chosen glyph takes effect (discharges) in its 
original location and does not move. If the saving 
throw succeeds, the g/yph is successfully moved to 
its new location. If the glyph or writing is moved 
successfully but remains linked to something on, 
under, behind, or beneath its former location (sug- 
gesting that its former area remains trapped or 
dangerous), the magic makes the caster aware of 
this, but reveals nothing about the nature of the 
not-yet-triggered magic. 

Notes: Granted by the god Deneir, Lord of 
Glyphs, of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Shillelagh 


This spell enables the caster to change his own 
oaken cudgel or unshod staff into a magical 
weapon that gains a +1 bonus to its attack roll and 
inflicts 2d4 points of damage on opponents up to 
man-sized, and 1d4+1 points of damage on larger 
opponents. The spell causes no damage to the staff 
or cudgel. The caster must wield the shillelagh, of 
course. 

‘The material components are a shamrock leaf 
and the caster’s holy symbol. 

Notes: Common for druids (PHB). 


Ship of Tears 
Quest spell, see appendix in Vol. 3. 


De i a a a N 


Silence, 15’ Radius. 


N 


Ship Shield 
(Invocation/Evocation) 
Sphere: Elemental Air 


Level: 5 

Range: 5 yds./level 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 2 

Duration: 1 rd. + 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: 20-ft. X 20-ft. area/level 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell manifests as a swirling, stormy 
shield of wind and moisture that blocks sharp 
gusts of wind, huge waves, driving rain, and all 
physical projectiles. Anyone sheltered behind a 
ship shield is protected from physical missiles 
that attempt to pass through the magical barrier. 
Such missiles are blocked by the ship shield, 
losing all their forward velocity and dropping 
harmlessly to the ground (or into the sea, if 
applicable). Spell effects are unimpeded by a 
Ship shield unless they physically hurl some sort 
of matter. Living creatures and self-propelled 
objects, like ships, can pass through a ship shield 
in one round, 

The material component is a miniature shield 
made of metal or carved wood. 

Notes: Granted by Valkur, Captain of the 
Waves, of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Shooting Stars 
Quest spell, see appendix in Vol. 3. 


Shrieking Walls 
(Enchantment) 
Sphere: Wards 


Level: 5 
Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 tum 
Duration: 1 day/level 
Area of Effect: 20-ft.-cube 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell enchants any single room no larger 
than the area of effect. When any creature larger 
than a normal rat (larger than one-half cubic foot or 
weighing more than three pounds) enters the room, 
shrill shrieks begin to emanate from the walls. The 
shrieks persist for 2-5 rounds (1d4+1). The walls do 
not undergo any physical change. 

The shrieks can be heard only by creatures 
inside the room. Creatures hearing the shrieks 
experience no ill effects on the first round, allowing 


them time to leave the room or cover their ears, 
Silence, 15‘ radius protects against the effects. 

Creatures who remain in the room during the 
second or subsequent rounds of the shrieks who 
have not protected their hearing are penalized 
depending on their Hit Dice or level. 

Creatures whose levels or Hit Dice are greater 
than the level of the caster are stunned for 2d4 
rounds (reeling and unable to take actions), 

Creatures whose levels or Hit Dice are less than 
or equal to the level of the caster become deaf for 
1d4 hours, suffering a —1 penalty to surprise: deaf- 
ened spellcasters have a 20% chance to miscast 
any spell with a verbal component. 

The material components are a small golden 
bell and a bee’s wing. 

Notes: Common for priests with access to the 
sphere of Wards (ToM). 


Shrink Insect 
Reversed form, giant insect. 


Siege Wall 
Quest spell, see appendix in Vol. 3. 


Silence, 15' Radius 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Guardian 


Level: 2 

Range: 120 yds, 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: 2 rds./level 

Area of Effect: 15-ft,-radius sphere 
Saving Throw: None 


Upon casting this spell, complete silence pre- 
vails in the affected area. All sound is stopped: con- 
versation is impossible, spells cannot be cast (or at 
least not those with verbal components, if the 
optional component rule is used), and no noise 
whatsoever issues from or enters the area. The spell 
can be cast into the air or upon an object, but the 
effect is stationary unless cast on a mobile object or 
creature. The spell lasts two rounds for each level of 
experience of the priest. The spell can be centered 
upon a creature, and the effect then radiates from 
the creature and moves as it moves. An unwilling 
creature receives a saving throw against the spell. If 
the saving throw is successful, the spell effect is 
centered about 1 foot behind the position of the sub- 
ject creature at the instant of casting. This spell pro- 
vides a defense against sound-based attacks, such as 
harpy singing, horn of blasting, and so on 

Notes: Common for clerics (PHB). 


Di ee 


~ Silt Bridge = 


Silt Bridge 
Athasian Dragon King magic, 10th level; psionic 
component renders the spell uncastable by priests. 


Silt Cyclone 
(Conjuration) 
Sphere: Elemental Air, Elemental Earth 
Range: 120 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: 2 rds./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


By casting this spell on the Sea of Silt, the priest 
creates a powerful whirlwind of silt. The cyclone, 
10 feet wide at its base and 20 feet wide at its top, 
rises from the silt’s surface to a height of 100 feet, 
spinning violently and picking up tons of dust. The 
caster can move the cyclone up to 30 feet per 
round, but it cannot go beyond 120 yards from him. 

The cyclone spins so quickly that its center 
becomes extremely hot, shooting off balls of sear- 
ing dust as the whirlwind spins faster and faster. 
Any creature within 90 yards of the whirlwind 
must save vs. spell every round or be hit with a 
2d12 ball of super heated dust. Any creature that 
actually touches the cyclone suffers an attack 
(THACO 5) that inflicts 10d6 points of damage. A 
creature that takes damage from this attack is also 
thrown 3d6 yards away, suffering another 146 
points of damage. f 

The cyclone can be dissipated by an air ele- 
mental or other powerful being from the Elemen- 
tal Plane of Air on command, by dispel magic, or 
by forcing its base away from the Sea of Silt. The 
cyclone can be moved by a powerful magical wind 
(gust of wind is insufficient); control weather, 
weather summoning, or wild weather spells can 
move it 10 yards for every 10 miles per hour of 
wind sustained against it for an entire round, 

The material components are silt from the Sea 
of Silt and a child’s toy top. This spell cannot be 
cast away from the Sea of Silt. 

Notes: Uncommon for priests from the DARK 
SUN setting: otherwise, very rare. 


Silt Tides 
(Alteration) 
Reversible 
Sphere: Elemental Air, Elemental Earth 
Range: C aie 
Range: 0 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 9 
Duration: 4 hrs./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


With this spell a priest can create an area of 
abnormally low tides in the Sea of Silt. The area of 
silt affected is a circle with a radius of 10 yards per 
level of the caster. Within the circle, the silt drops 
10 feet below its normal level, which is usually 
enough to expose the maze of rock walkways 
common to the coastal areas of the Sea. The spell’s 
area of effect moves with the caster, so he can 
travel the rock walkways while exposed to the air. 
Strong winds and the like affect the silt normally. 

‘The reverse of this spell, high silt tides, causes 
the silt to rise 10 feet higher within the circular 
area of effect. The silt can overwhelm vessels or 
wading creatures who are not tall enough to wade 
through ten additional feet of depth. 

If cast outside the Sea of Silt, this spell has no 
effect. The material component is a small, oval 
lump of lead that has been cast by moonlight. 

Notes: Uncommon for priests from the DARK 
Sun setting; otherwise, very rare. 


Silver Tongue and Starry Eyes 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Animal 


Level: 6 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: Permanent 

Area of Effect: | creature of Animal Intelligence 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


‘This spell, whimsically named silver tongue 
and starry eyes, enables a priestess of Lurue to add 
another potential worshiper to Lurue’s herd. This 
spell is only effective on creatures of animal Intel- 
ligence. If the creature fails its saving throw vs. 
spell (which cannot be voluntarily forgone), its 
Intelligence is permanently boosted by 2d6 points 
and it is permanently granted the capacity of 
speech intelligible to humans and demihumans, 
typically acquiring the Common tongue of humans 


i NN eS nF an 


= Singing Stone 


immediately through the magic of this spell (or 
possibly elvish, if the caster is an elf or half-elf). 

There is a 1% chance per level of the spell- 
caster that the increase in sentience and the 
acquired capacity for speech will breed true in suc- 
ceeding generations. This chance is doubled if 
both parents have been similarly augmented. 

The material components are the priestess’s 
holy symbol and a small vial of water gathered 
from the River Rauvin at Silverymoon Ford within 
the past fortnight. 

Notes: Granted by the sylvan deity Lurue the 
Unicorn Queen of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Silverbeard — Dwarf 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Combat 


Level: 1 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 4 

Duration: 1 turn + 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


By means of this spell, the priest temporarily 
transforms his beard into refined silver. In addition 


Wii 
NII 


hy NN j 
Ja, N j 


Pd 


to the stunning visual impact of this spell effect, a 
silverbeard serves as an unusual shield in combat 
situations. 

If the priest is unarmored, silverbeard confers a 
base AC of 8 (7, if a shield is also borne) for the 
duration of the spell, If armor of any sort is worn, 
this spell confers a +1 AC bonus for the duration 
of the spell. Repeated use of this spell gradually 
transforms the color of the priest's beard to silver. 

The material component is the priest's holy 
symbol. 

Notes: Granted by the dwarven god Clanged- 
din Silverbeard, 


Singing Stone 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Divination, Elemental Earth 


Level: 4 
Range: Touch 
Components: V, $, M 
Casting Time: 7 
Duration: Permanent 
Area of Effect: 1 stone 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell traps a short tune—one that the 
caster can sing with three breaths or less—in a 
stone. Whenever the stone is either tapped or 
entirely immersed in water, it emits the tune, 
repeating it at 1-tur intervals if immersion con- 
tinues. Any solid stone no larger than the caster’s 
fist will serve, and the music can consist only of 
sounds the caster can make himself (in other 
words, singing, playing an instrument, and thump- 
ing out a rhythm simultaneously as about as com- 
plex as the captured sound can be). In the past 
many gemstones have been used for this spell, 
though it is a false rumor that granite and other 
simple stones cannot carry tunes as beautifully. 

The “tune” need not involve vocal sounds; it 
may be a message spoken or chanted rather than 
‘sung. In any case, the pitch, timbre, and inflections 
of the voice and/or instrumental sounds are pre- 
cisely duplicated, and listeners could mistake the 
sounds of a singing stone for a particular person's 
actual voice. This spell has been used to prepare 
traps, leave behind wills or dying messages, and to 
Preserve the best work of the bards. Certain tem- 
ples of Milil have entire libraries of carefully 
racked stones. Long tunes are played back by tap- 
ping a row of stones, each one enchanted with this 
spell to capture a segment of the ongoing tune. 

The maker of the sound to be captured must be 
the caster. There is no known way to use this spell 
to capture the words or song of another being. The 


ee Ee N 


~ Sink into Earth r 


spell does not pick up the words of others or back- 
ground noise, even if such things were present as 
the spell was cast, but it does preserve throat-clear- 
ings, mistakes, and other noises—such as the clat- 
ter of something dropped by the caster—that the 
caster may not want preserved. The sound is pre- 
served at the volume level reaching the stone. 
Loud shouting or music is recorded as loud. 

The spell range refers to the fact that the stone 
must be touched. The caster can, if desired, move 
away from the stone to achieve an echoing effect 
or a distant sound and can even choose to move 
continuously toward, away from, or around the 
stone while recording. The recorded sound will 
reflect this. The recording time is the three breaths 
following the round of casting when the stone is 
touched, and the magic causes the stone to glow a 
faint rose-red while it is capturing sounds. 

The material component is a small hollow 
metal tube (chime). 

Notes: Granted by Milil, Lord of Song, of the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Sink into Earth 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Elemental Earth 


Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


The druid casting this spell can choose to sink 
himself or one nonliving object into the earth for a 
distance of up to 5 feet per level, measured from 
the point at which the object rests on the earth. The 
object or druid so sunk can come back to the sur- 
face at will or automatically so when one day per 
level of the druid has past. While sunk, the druid or 
object is completely safe from burrowing creatures 
or movements in the earth. In addition, the druid 
enters a state of hibernation, requiring no food or 
water for the duration of the spell. If a cave or 
other opening lies beneath the object when this 
spell is cast, the object drops through the roof of 
the cave and lands on the floor, taking no damage, 
whereupon the spell continues where it left off. 

The material components are a miniature 
shovel and a bit of earth, 

Notes: Very rare druid spell. (Updated from 
DRAGON Magazine.) 


The victim of this spell hears haunting, beauti- 
ful music and is overwhelmed by a desire to find 
the music’s source. The sound is illusory and is, 
therefore, impossible to find. The affected creature 
wanders aimlessly in the area of effect looking for 
the source of the music. The desire is so all con- 
suming that the creature ignores food and treasure, 
though not obvious dangers. (The creature can be 
caught by hidden dangers, of course, and many 
who wade or swim out into the sea risk drowning 
or attack.) The creature fights all attempts at con- 
straint by either friend or foe. In the first round of 
combat, the creature is surprised, strikes last in the 
round, and fights at -2 to attack and damage rolls; 
thereafter, it fights at—I to attack and damage rolls 
but normally otherwise. Should the creature be 
injured in combat or forced out of the area of 
effect, the spell is negated and the creature retums 
to normal immediately. 

To use this spell, a spellcaster need not be 
underwater, but must be within 60 feet of the sea 
or the spell fails to work. Also, the creature 
affected by the spell must be in the area of effect 
when the spell is cast; this area encompasses a 
globe with a radius of 60 feet plus 30 feet per level. 
Those who wander into the area of effect after the 
casting are unaffected. The creature is allowed a 
saving throw vs. spell is modified by the Intelli- 
gence of the creature. The more intelligent the 
creature, the more beautiful the music seems. 
Creatures of Intelligence 4 or less (semi-intelli- 
gent) roll with a +2 bonus on their saving throw, 
Those of Intelligence 5-7 (low) roll with a +1 
bonus, Those of Intelligence 8-12 (average to 
very) roll normally. Creatures of Intelligence 
13-14 (high) save with a1 penalty. Those of 
Intelligence 15 or greater receive a —2 penalty. The 
caster can affect one creature for every three levels 
attained (e.g., one at 3rd level, two at 6th level, 
three at 9th level, and so on 

The material component is any large, empty 
sea shell, 

Notes: Uncommon for sea priests; otherwise 


very rare. 


Skeletal Servant 


N 


Sirocco 
(Evocation) 
Sphere: Elemental Air or Silt 


Level: 7 

Range: 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: 1d6 turns 

Area of Effect: 10 ft/level 
Saving Throw: Special 


aie 


With this spell, a caster summons up a sirocco, 
the burning desert wind of legend. The caster must 
be able to see the sky to cast this spell, and must 
be in an area covered with sand or loose stone. 
Calling up a sirocco is dangerous, because the 
priest can not control it once it is summoned. 

At the end of the round in which the spell is 
cast, a blast of scorching wind emanates from the 
caster and sweeps along the ground before him, 
whipping up small objects and particulate matter, 
and carrying them along at tremendous speed. 
Creatures of size L and smaller must make a 
saving throw vs. petrification at 4 or be bowled 
over by the force of the wind, and spends both the 
current round and the next one in the sirocco 
attempting to stand. All items caught in the storm 
(including metal) are abraded by flying grit and 
must save vs. acid or be destroyed. Magical items 
save with their bonuses added to the basic roll. 
Living creatures suffer 2d10 points of damage per 
round of exposure. 

The only way to escape a sirocco is to move 
Outside its area of effect. Ground movement rates 
for all creatures inside are reduced to 10% of 
normal; all other movement (except innate telepor- 
tation or planar travel) is impossible. Killing the 
caster or rendering him unconscious will not end 
the spell, and he cannot end it prematurely even if 
he wishes. The caster is not bound to remain in 
place after the spell has been cast, but he cannot 
cast other spells until the sirocco has run its course 
or been dispelled. 

Once the sirocco has started, it drifts in a 
random direction. Each round, select a direction to 
be 12 o'clock, and roll a d12. The number indi- 
cates the direction the sirocco moves for 2d10 
yards, 

The range of the spell depends upon the 
caster’s level. The storm's center can be created at 
any point up to the limit of the range. The caster is 
not immune to the effects of the storm, 

Notes: Uncommon for Elemental priests of Air 
or Earth from the Dark Sun setting; otherwise, 
very rare. 


Sixth Sense — Elf 
(Abjuration) 
Sphere: Protection 


Level: 1 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: 1 hr. 

Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


By means of this spell, the priest is imbued 
with a sixth sense, alerting him or her to unex- 
pected danger (to the priest or an ally) within ten 
feet of the caster’s current position. Although the 
exact nature of the threat is never revealed, the 
priest does realize that something dangerous is 
about to occur a moment before the event unfolds. 
While so protected, the priest receives a +3 bonus 
to all surprise checks, and any ability check made 
to determine the success of an immediate reaction 
to a dangerous situation is made with a +3 bonus. 
For example, if the priest is working his way along 
a high mountain ledge, the magic of this spell 
might wam of a powerful gust of wind in time to 
grab onto an outcropping of rock, and the priest 
would receive a +3 bonus to her Strength check to 
hold on to the rock spur. Likewise, if an ally would 
step onto a hidden pit trap, the priest realizes his 
friend’s danger in time to make a desperate grab 
for his arm and receive a +3 bonus to his Strength 
check to hold on. In addition, sixth sense provides 
a +3 bonus to saving throws made to avoid natural 
hazards such as rockfalls, avalanches, and so on. 

The material components are the priest’s holy 
symbol and a drop of sweat. 

Notes: Granted by the elven god Corellon 
Larethian. 


Skeletal Servant 


(Necromancy) 
Sphere: Necromantic 


Level: 1 

Range: 10 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 tum 

Duration: 1 week 

Area of Effect: 1 body or skeleton 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell temporarily animates the bones of a 
dead human, demihuman, or humanoid creature of 
man-sized or less. The resultant skeleton obeys 
only simple commands until it is destroyed, 


ee a a N 


~~ Skip Day r 


turned, or dispelled, or the spell duration expires. 
As with the creations of the more powerful ani- 
mate dead spell, a skeletal servant can be com- 
manded to guard an area, follow the caster, carry 
heavy objects, and so on. The servant is not well 
suited to complex tasks (such as cooking, for 
instance) and is generally created to serve as a 
porter or temporary bodyguard. A priest can have 
only one skeletal servant per level of experience in 
service at once. 

The material component is a handful of grave- 
yard dirt. As with the more powerful animate dead 
spell, the creation of a skeletal servant is not a 
good act, and only evil priests use it frequently. 

Notes: Restricted to necromancer-priests, 
common. 


Skip Day 
(invocation/Evocation) 
Sphere: Time 


Level: 6 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: 10-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


When this spell is cast, all persons and intelli- 
gent creatures within 10 feet of the caster are 
instantly transported 24 hours into the future. 
Creatures outside the area of effect will believe 
that the affected characters have disappeared. 
Unwilling creatures can attempt a saving throw vs. 
spell to resist the effect of the skip day spell. 

No time passes for affected creatures; they are 
in the exact condition that they were in before the 
spell was cast. They remain as fatigued, have 
recovered no hit points, and carry the same spells. 
Wizards must wait for actual time to pass before 
they can memorize spells. 

The affected creatures remain in the same loca- 
tion as they were before the skip day spell was 
cast. Their immediate environment is likely to 
have changed; for instance, fires have burned out, 
enemies who were attacking have departed, and 
weather has changed for better or worse. 

Although this spell is a possible substitute for 
teleporting out of a dangerous situation, it is not 
without risk; those affected could reappear in a sit- 
uation more threatening than the one they left 
behind (for instance, a forest fire may have started 
or a pack of hungry wolves may have arrived). 

Notes: Common for priests with major access 
to the sphere of Time (ToM). 


Skulk 
(llusion/Phantasm) 
Sphere: Protection 


Level: 4 
Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 7 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell gives willing recipients the chameleon- 
like ability to move quickly and quietly (+20% chance 
to Move Silently, +2 bonus to normal movement rate) 
or to freeze into immobility and blend into the back- 
ground of their surroundings. While immobile, a 
recipient is 90% likely to be passed by unnoticed. in 
forest and subterranean settings, spell recipients can 
pass almost without trace. Anyone following the 
recipient of a skulk spell in these surrounding has one- 
fifth his or her normal chance to track successfully, 

While under the effects of a skulk spell, morale 
checks by the recipient of a skulk are made at a -2 
penalty. Saving throws vs. magical fear are made 
at a —6 penalty. 

There is a 1% noncumulative chance per use of 
this spell that the recipient is ntly trans- 


IF a a 


Slay Living 


N 


formed into a skulk. When this happens, the victim 
undergoes an immediate and permanent physical 
metamorphosis. Any shift in alignment or devel- 
opment or improvement of thieving skills as a 
result of the transformation occurs over a period of 
one to two years. 

The material component is a small piece of 
skin from a chameleon, a dead spider of any size, 
and the priest's holy symbol. 

Notes: Granted by Ibrandul, the Skulking God, 
of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Skulk: THACO 19; #AT 1; Dmg by weapon 
type, usually 1d4 (dagger) or 1d6 (short sword); 
AC 7; HD 2; MV 12; SA backstab as Sth-level 
thief (+4 bonus to back attack roll and triple 


fifth normal chance to track in forest and sub- 
terranean settings. 

SW—Skulks try to run when first wounded 
or when the odds are Jess than two to one in 
their favor. They never engage in direct combat 
unless trapped, but rather backstab and run, to 
later sneak up on opponents again. 


Skull of Secrets 
(Invocation/Evocation) 
Sphere: Guardian 


Level: 4 
Range: 5 yds,/level 
Components: V, $ 
Casting Time: 7 
Duration: Varies 

Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell creates the intangible image of a 
floating skull trailing black flames. The skull 
appears to have eyes of flame, but neither its eyes 
nor its tail of flames are real, and they cannot burn 
or harm anything. It floats within a 20-foot-diam- 
eter sphere, drifting about at MV Fly 18 (A). 
Dispel magic destroys it, but it cannot otherwise 
be touched or harmed. 


The skull delivers a verbal message of 22 
words or fewer (which cannot be an incantation 
that launches a spell) and spits a tongue of real 
flame, The message to be spoken is spoken by the 
caster when the spell is cast. The flame is a cone 
of magical fire 1 foot in diameter at its wide end 
and 10 feet in length, whose touch deals 3d4 points 
of damage to exposed flesh and readily ignites all 
flammables, 

Both the message-speaking and the fiery “breath” 
occur when complex and specific conditions set 
during the casting are fulfilled; these trigger condi- 
tions are similar to those set up by wizards in the cast- 
ing of magic mouth spells. The message and the 
flame can have the same or a quite different set of ful- 
fillment conditions. When both actions are per- 
formed, the image of the skull slowly fades away. 

This spell is usually employed to ignite funer- 
ary pyres and to set afire foes of the faith; its visi- 
ble form serves to dupe the faithful into thinking 
that Cyric is personally manifest at an event. 

Notes: Granted by the evil god Cyric of the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Slave Scent 
(Divination) 
Sphere: Elemental Air 


Level: 2 

Range: 10 yds. 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 5 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: 1 person 
Saving Throw: None 


ihe 


When this spell is cast, the priest can use scent 
to discover whether a person is a freeman, slave, 
escaped slave, or noble. Templars use this spell to 
detect escaped slaves. If an air priest finds a slave 
by using this spell, elemental air spirits demand 
that he or she free the person. 

Notes: Uncommon for priests from the DARK 
SUN setting; otherwise, very rare, 


Slay Living 
Reversed form, raise dead. 


I aaa 


~ Sleep of Drago! 


Sleep of Dragons 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
Sphere: Charm 


Level: 6 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 9 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


By means of this spell, the caster causes a 
being to fall into a deep slumber similar to the 
hibernating sleep of dragons. While in this state, 
the being does not require food, drink, or air, and 
ages only a single year per century. This magical 
slumber can be ended only if the being is killed, 
dies of old age (a process that usually takes mil- 
lennia), or is touched with a fragment of dragon 
bone, no matter how small. Dispel magic, remove 
curse, and such general remedies do not work. In 
addition, immunities and magical resistances to 
the common sleep spell do not work upon the 
sleep of dragons enchantment. 

The recipient of this spell must be touched by 
the priest. Unwilling creatures are allowed a 
saving throw vs. spell, adjusted for Wisdom, to 
avoid the effect. 

The material components are the priest's holy 
symbol and a thimbleful of dragon’s blood. 

Notes: Granted by the evil dragon god Tiamat 
to human worshipers. 


Slicing Shadow 
(Invocation/Evocation) 
Sphere: Combat 


Level: 5 

Range: 30 yds. 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 8 

Duration: 3 rds. 

Area of Effect: Up to twelve 10-ft. cubes 
Saving Throw: ⁄ 


This spell creates a smoky. immobile cloud in 
which black, whiplike whorls of deeper darkness 
appear and disappear. They have only momentary 
solidity, yet they slice as if they were unbreakable, 
razor-sharp ribbons of steel. All creatures who 
come into contact with a slicing shadow suffer 444 
points of damage per round of contact, except its 
caster, who can move and act freely within the 
cloud without suffering harm. During every round 
in which they are in contact with the cloud, crea- 


tures are allowed a saving throw vs. spell. If it is 
successful, they take only 2d4 points of damage on 
that round (additional saving throws must be made 
for each round). 

The caster can choose what volume of area to 
affect with the spell (up to the maximum) and can 
end the spell early if desired. 

Notes: Granted by the Mask, god of thieves of 
the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. This spell is found 
only in a few exceptionally rare tomes. 


Slow Boon 
(Necromancy) 
Sphere: Healing 


Level: 3 

Range: 0 

Components: V, $, M 

Casting Time: 6 

Duration: 1 tum 

Area of Effect: The caster or one touched recipient 
Saving Throw: None 


Casting this beneficial spell restores 2 hit 
points of damage to its recipient and then 1 hit 
point at the end of every round thereafter until the 
spell expires. “Extra” hit points cannot be gained 
by the recipient of a slow boon, but subjects will 
be aware the moment they reach “full” hit points 
and can (by direct flesh-to-flesh contact with 
another willing being) confer the rest of the boon 
(1 hit point per round) on another creature or crea- 
tures (one per round; a direct touch is required in 
all cases). 

The material component is a fragment of bone 
(of any size and from any creature) painted with 
the symbol of Ilmater. 

Notes: Granted by Ilmater, the One Who 
Endures, of the ForGorren REALMs setting. 


Slow Poison 
(Necromancy) 
Sphere: Healing 


Level: 2 

Range: Touch 

‘Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 

Duration: 1 hr./level 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


When this spell is placed upon a poisoned indi- 
vidual, it greatly slows the effects of venom, if it is 
cast upon the victim before the poison takes full 
effect. (This period, known as the onset time, is 


Nn A Rg a ee TT 


Smite 


NĖ 


known to the DM.) While this spell does not neu- 
tralize the venom, it does prevent it from substan- 
tially harming the individual for the duration of its 
magic in hopes that, during that period, a full cure 
can be accomplished. 

The material components of the slow poison 
spell are the priest's holy symbol and a bud of 
garlic that must be crushed and smeared on the 
wound (or eaten if poison was ingested). 

Notes: Common for clerics and druids (PHB). 


Slow Poison — Shukenja 
(Necromantic) 


Sphere: Healing 


Level: 2 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 

Duration: 1 hr./level 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


Casting this spell upon a poisoned individual 
slows the effects of that poison, restoring life to 
that individual for the duration of the spell. The 
poison is not neutralized, and 1 hit point is lost per 
turn, which can reduce the individual to a mini- 
mum of 1 hit point for the duration of the spell. A 
poisoned individual who receives no further 
remedy by the end of the spell’s duration will 


The material components are the shukenja’s 
holy symbol and a bud of garlic. 

Notes: Common for oriental priests; otherwise, 
very rare. 


551 


Slow Rot 
(Abjuration) 
Sphere: Plant 


Level: 3 
Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: | wk./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell increases the amount of time that 
fruits, vegetables, and grains remain wholesome 
and ripe. The spell won't take effect upon meat of 
any type. 

‘The caster can affect as much as 100 cubic feet 
of plant material per level. Thus, even a low-level 
priest could effectively keep a farmer's grain from 
rotting while in storage or keep the fruit on the 
trees in an orchard ripe until they are harvested, 
This spell does not prevent pests (such as rats) 
from eating the food. 

The material component is a pinch of sugar, 

Notes: Uncommon for druids and priests with 


access to the sphere of Plants (ToM). 


Smite 

This potent spell is an example of the shukenja’s 
(and his deity’s) wrath. Upon uttering a single word, 
the shukenja points his holy symbol at the target 
area. All within the area of effect must immediately 
make a saving throw vs. death magic. Those crea- 
tures that fail the save are stricken by wracking 
pains causing 2d10 points of damage. Furthermore, 
they are blinded and diseased just as if they had 
been affected by cause blindness and cause disease. 
Those creatures that make the saving throw suffer 
1d10 points of damage and are temporarily blinded 
for 1d6 rounds. 

‘The material component is the shukenja’s holy 
symbol. 

Notes: Common for oriental priests; otherwise, 
very rare. 


(Evocation) 
Sphere: Combat 


Level: 6 

Range: 5 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 

Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: 20-ft. cube 
Saving Throw: + 


Siting r 


Smiting 
(Conjuration, Evocation) 
Sphere: Combat 


Level: 4 
Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: Weapon touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell increases the striking power of a 
normal or magical blunt weapon. A normal weapon 
gains a bonus of +1 to hit and damage per four 
levels of the caster, to a maximum bonus of +5. 
Any adjusted attack roll of 20 or more inflicts triple 
damage, but shatters the weapon, ending the spell. 

‘A magical weapon gains a +1 bonus per appli- 
cation of the spell, with no special damage capa- 
bilities. The total bonus of a weapon cannot be 
raised above +5. 

‘The material component is the priest's holy 
symbol. 


Sphere: Elemental Fire 


Level: 5 
Range: 300 yds. 


Notes: Very rare spell. (Updated from POLYHE- 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 4 rds. 


DRON Newszine.) 
Smoke Bridge 
(Alteration) 
Duration: 1d4 turns 
Area of Effect: Creates bridge up to 300 yds. long 
Saving Throw: none 
To create a smoke bridge. a priest (usually a 
shaman) calls upon the elemental spirits of fire. 
From the smoke of a burning fire the priest magi- 
cally shapes a bridge of the desired shape and length 
(but no more than 300 yards long). Once the bridge 
is shaped, it becomes as solid as a comparable bridge 
of stone, and stays that way for the duration of the 
spell. This spell can also be used to create a similar 
staircase or ladder of equal length and stability. 
When the spell ends. the smoke returns to its 
original gaseous form and slowly drifts away. 


Notes: Rare for oriental priests; otherwise, vir- 
tually unknown. 


Smoke Ghost 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Elemental Fire 


Level: 4 

Range: 10 yds./level 

Components: V, $, M 

Casting Time: 7 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: Creates 1 apparition 
Saving Throw: Special 


A priest can use this spell to affect smoke, 
drawing it into a wraithlike cowled form that flies 
or glides, drifting up to 150 feet per round in the 
direction the caster wishes. The smoke ghost is not 
a living creature or sentient force. It cannot wear 
clothing, carry things, or be made to speak. It is 
merely an apparition with one attack ability: It can 
envelop a being and suffocate it with thick, chok- 
ing smoke and ash. 

A smoke ghost is a cloud of thick, billowing 
gray smoke approximately 9 feet high by 2 feet in 
diameter. It is roughly man-shaped. It cannot 
achieve a greater stable volume, and its precise 
form is variable in accordance with the caster’s 
wishes. A smoke ghost can rise into the air 10 feet 
per level of the caster or be made to sink to the 
ground, flowing along the earth like some sort of 
living blanket. It can seep and maneuver through 
cracks and crevices precisely as the caster wills. It 
can shift into a globe form or wall form in one- 
quarter of a round (15 seconds). 

The smoke ghost attacks by attempting to 
envelop a creature. A saving throw vs. breath 
weapon must be made each round against the 
smoke ghost attack until the spell expires or the 
smoke ghost is moved to another target. If the 
saving throw is successful, the affected creature's 
attacks are at a—1 penalty, and 1 point of damage 
is inflicted upon the smoke ghost's victim at the 
end of the round. Affected creatures who make 
their saving throws are able to utter item command 
words, power words, or cast other spells that 
require only a single spoken word. Doing so 
wracks the affected creature with uncontrollable 
coughing fits for the following round, making 
them unable to take offensive action that round 
(but not affecting their saving throw). 

The failure of this saving throw vs. breath 
weapon (either in the first round or a successive 
round) means the creature is enveloped. Enveloped 
victims are partially blinded; all their attacks are 
made at a -2 penalty. They also take 1 point of 
damage at the end of the round. Enveloped victims 
find spellcasting and even normal speech impossi- 


IT a a a Sa 


Snake Charm 


ble, resulting in violent retching and coughing 
when these are tried. These penalties and this rate 
of damage continue until the third round of envel- 
opment. 

Beginning with the third round of envelop- 
ment, a creature must make a successful saving 
throw vs. death magic each round or be rendered 
unconscious through suffocation. Each following 
consecutive round of envelopment adds another -2 
penalty to the roll (for a -2 penalty on the fourth 
round, —4 on the fifth, and so on). 

Assuming he or she is not killed through the 
accrual of damage (hit points reduced to below 0 
or —10, if that optional rule is in use), an uncon- 
scious character eventually recovers. One-quarter 
(25%) of the smoke damage is actual, the rest is 
temporary. 

‘The caster must be able to see the smoke ghost 
to direct it, and controlling the apparition requires 
the caster’s full attention. The caster can cast no 
other spells nor take any other offensive action 
while controlling the smoke ghost, although the 
caster can voluntarily release control of it. An 
undirected smoke ghost hangs motionless until the 
caster takes control again, it is dispelled, or the 
spell expires. A victim who was being assaulted by 
a smoke ghost that becomes undirected is consid- 
ered to automatically find himself or herself in 
fresh air (if such is available) on the round that the 
ghost becomes undirected. If subsequently reat- 
tacked by the smoke ghost, the entire attack 
sequence must be restarted from its beginning. 
Previous damage caused by the smoke ghost is 
assumed to linger until about a turn after the ghost 
finally disappears. A ghost that reaches the caster’s 
maximum range stops and remains in place until 
directed elsewhere. The caster can will the ghost to 
disappear into nothingness at any time, an action 
that takes the smoke ghost takes half a round (30 
seconds). 

It can be destroyed by a gust of wind, dispel 
magic, or strong natural winds. Any magics that 
affect vapors also affect it. It is not affected by 
weapons. 

The caster creates the smoke ghost by means of 
a pinch of dust and some mistletoe that are cast 
into an existing fire or cloud of smoke of magical 
or natural origin. 

Notes: Granted by the god Silvanus, the Forest 
Father, of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


With this spell, the shukenja creates a painful 
barrier against snakes, reptiles, and serpent-like 
creatures, including dragons. The spell creates an 
invisible wall, covering a 20-foot x 20-foot area 
per level of the caster, that can be shaped as the 
caster desires. Although the barrier is not visible, 
serpents of all types are aware of its presence. 
Those not overtly hostile avoid the area of the 
spell, leaving it alone. Serpents with hostile intent 
can try to pass through the wall. However, those 
with 4 or fewer Hit Dice must first make a suc- 
cessful saving throw vs. paralyzation or they 
cannot cross the boundary. Any serpent that does 
cross the boundary must make a saving throw vs. 
spell or suffer 1d4 points of damage for every level 
of the caster. A successful saving throw reduces 
the damage by half. 

Using this spell in the presence of intelligent 
serpent creatures usually enrages them, or at least 
reduces their chances of befriending and aiding the 
shukenja. 

‘The material component is a shed snake skin. 

Notes: Common for oriental priests; otherwise, 
very rare. 


Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: 30-ft. cube 
Saving Throw: None 


When this spell is cast, a hypnotic pattern is set 
up that causes one or more snakes to cease all 
activity except a semi-erect, swaying movement. If 
the snakes are charmed while in a torpor, the dura- 
tion of the spell is 1d4+2 turns; if the snakes are 
not torpid, but are not aroused and angry, the 
charm lasts 1d3 tums; if the snakes are angry or 


553 


~ Snake Charm (of Sseth) - 


attacking, the spell lasts 144+4 rounds. The priest 
casting the spell can charm snakes whose total hit 
points are less than or equal to those of the priest. 
On the average, a Ist-level priest could charm 
snakes with a total of 4 or 5 hit points; a 2nd-level 
priest could charm 9 hit points, and so on The hit 
points can be those of a single snake or those of 
several of the reptiles, but the total hit points 
cannot exceed those of the priest casting the spell. 
A 23-hit point caster charming a dozen 2-hit point 
snakes would charm 11 of them. This spell is also 
effective against any ophidian or ophidianoid 
monster, such as nagas, couatls, and so on, subject 
to magic resistance, hit points, and so forth. 

Variations of this spell may exist, allowing 
other creatures significant to a particular mythos to 
be affected. Your DM will inform you if such 
spells exist. 

Notes: Common for clerics and druids (PHB). 


Snake Charm (of Sseth) 


Area of Effect: | creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


By staring into a creature’s eyes and swaying 
his or her head back and forth slightly, the caster 
can hypnotize one creature, The creature is entitled 
to a saving throw vs. spell. Success means the spell 
has no effect. Failure means the creature falls 
under the effects of the snake charm. This spell has 
no effect on undead creatures of any sort. 

While entranced, the affected creature simply 
stares at the spellcaster and cannot perform any 
other action. The spell effect ends immediately if 
the caster performs any other action except moving 
at no more than half normal movement rate or if the 
creature is physically shaken or attacked in any 
manner. 

A snake charm is not a particularly deep 
enchantment, hence the subject can respond to any 
attack in the same round, although always attack- 
ing last and performing only a single action if nor- 
mally allowed multiple actions. 

Notes: Granted by the snake god Sseth of the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Snake Skin 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Animal 


Level: 4 

Range: 0 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 
Duration: 1 hr./level 

Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell enables spellcasters to shapechange 
into any species of constrictor, giant constrictor, poi- 
sonous snake, giant poisonous snake, spitting snake, 
or jaculi (as detailed in the MONSTROUS MANUAL 
tome). For the duration of the spell, casters can 
assume a new snake form once per round or revert to 
their original forms. The spell is immediately ended 
when a spelicaster retums to his or her original form. 

Upon first assuming a snake form and upon 
retuming to their original forms, the casters heal 


Sp — ee See a N 


Snare 


el 


146 10% of all damage they have suffered (round 
fractions down). (Priests are not healed every time 
they assume a new snake form, only the first time.) 

While in the form of a snake, casters of the 
snake skin spell take on all of that serpent’s char- 
acteristics: its movement rate and abilities, its 
Armor Class, number of attacks, damage per 
attack, and any special abilities. The caster's cloth- 
ing (if any) and one item held in each hand also 
become part of the new body; these reappear when 
a spellcaster resumes his or her normal shape. The 
items cannot be used while casters of snake skin 
are in serpent form. 

In the final transformation back from snake 
form casting priests shed their snake forms’ skins. 
Discarded skins do not vanish with the termination 
of the spell. A discarded skin can be used or 
treated as any other snake skin of the correspon- 
ding species. 

The material component is a small piece of 
desiccated skin shed by any serpent. 

Notes: Granted by the snake god Sseth of the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Snake Summoning 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
Sphere: Animal 


Level: 2 

Range: 120 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: 1 turn/level 

Area of Effect: 120-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell allows the shukenja to summon all 
snakes, serpents, and serpent-like creatures within 
the area of effect. Creatures with Hit Dice greater 
than the level of the shukenja and those creatures 
with a high Intelligence are allowed a saving throw 
vs. spell to avoid the effect. If the saving throw is 
failed or the creature not allowed a save, it comes 
to the shukenja and follows him about, so long as 
the shukenja maintains concentration on the spell. 
The creatures makes no attempt to harm the 
shukenja or those with him, unless they are 
attacked. Once attacked, the spell is broken. The 
shukenja can move at half his normal movement 
rate without breaking his concentration. At the end 
of the speli, the serpents revert to their normal 
state, with all the consequences this may entail. 

‘The material component is a small silver flute, 
which is played throughout the duration of the spell. 

Notes: Common for oriental priests; otherwise, 
very rare. 


Snakes To Oars 


Reversed form, oars to snakes. 


Snakes To Sticks 
Reversed form, sticks to snakes. 


Snapdragon 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Plant 


Level: 3 

Range: 80 yds, 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 6 

Duration: 3 rds./level 

Area of Effect: 20 ft. radius 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell is named after the little flower whose 
petals can be manipulated like jaws. Upon casting 
this spell, all blooming plants in the area of effect 
become animated and carnivorous. They writhe 
and stretch, biting at creatures passing through the 
area. They also shoot their pollen at creatures 
within the area of effect, in imitation of a dragon's 
use of its breath weapon. Creatures passing 
through this spell area take 2d4 points of damage 
from plant bites each round they are within the 
area of effect. Flowers shoot pollen at creatures in 
the area of effect. This causes a disabling sneezing 
and choking attack that prevents any action other 
than staggering about at half movement rate for as 
long as the creature remains in the area and 1d4+1 
rounds thereafter. A successful saving throw vs. 
spell reduces damage from bites to 1d4 points per 
round, and negates the pollen attack for five 
rounds. Creatures remaining in the area longer 
than this, or leaving and then reentering must 
make another saving throw to avoid the effects. 

‘The material component is a snapdragon blos- 
som. 
Notes: Very rare druid spell. (Updated from 
DRAGON Magazine.) 


Snare 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
Sphere: Plant 


Level: 3 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 3 rds. 

Duration: Until triggered 

Area of Effect: 2 ft. diam. + 2 in. level 
Saving Throw: None 


555 


~~ Snow Boots a 


This spell enables the caster to make a snare 
that is 90% undetectable without magical aid. The 
snare can be made from any supple vine, a thong, 
or a rope. When the snare spell is cast upon it, the 
cordlike object blends with its surroundings. One 
end of the snare is tied in a loop that contracts 
around one or more of the limbs of any creature 
stepping inside the circle (note that the head of a 
worm or snake could be thus ensnared). 

If a strong and supple tree is nearby, the snare 
can be fastened to it. The magic of the spell causes 
the tree to bend and then straighten when the loop is 
triggered, inflicting 1d6 points of damage to the 
creature trapped, and lifting it off the ground by the 
trapped member(s) (or strangling it if the head/neck 
triggered the snare). If no such sapling or tree is 
available, the cord-like object tightens upon the 
member(s), then wraps around the entire creature, 
causing no damage, but tightly binding it. Under- 
water, the cord coils back upon its anchor point. 

The snare is magical, so for one hour it is 
breakable only by cloud giant or greater Strength 
(23); each hour thereafter, the snare material loses 
magic so as to become 1 point more breakable per 
hour—22 after two hours, 21 after three, 20 after 
four until six full hours have elapsed. At that time, 
18 Strength will break the bonds. After 12 hours 
have elapsed, the materials of the snare lose all 
magical properties and the loop opens, freeing 
anything it held. The snare can be cut with any 
magical weapon, or with any edged weapon 
wielded with at Jeast a +2 attack bonus (from 
Strength, for example). 

The caster must have a snake skin and a piece 
of sinew from a strong animal to weave into the 
cord-like object from which he will make the 
snare. Only the caster's holy symbol is otherwise 
needed. 

Notes: Common for druids (PHB). 


Snow Boots 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Elemental Water 


Level: 1 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell creates heavy but amorphous fields 
of air around the lowest pair of extremities of 
either the caster or one touched creature (who 
must be willing or the spell fails). The fields do not 


hamper movement overmuch (no Dexterity penal- 
ties), but their density does slow movement rates 
by 1 point. 

The magic allows creatures who would nor- 
mally break through a crust of snow or ice to glide 
atop it by spreading out their weight. It also 
absolutely prevents their falling over due to an 
external thrusting force or attack, though they can 
deliberately launch themselves into a dive or fall. 
The prohibition on falling works only on upright 
bipeds of 9 feet or less in height and who have at 
least two walking limbs (legs). The magic does not 
permit water walking on open water, but does slow 
sinking in water from a plunge into a round-long 
settling (allowing an alert victim to hurl at least 
one item from his person, or to make one grab at 
any nearby anchor point). 

While the snow boots spell last normally lasts 
for one round per caster level, a caster using the 
spell personally can dismiss it earlier if desired. 
Once brought into being, the snow boots effect 
cannot be transferred from one being to another. 

Notes: Granted by Auril, called Frostmaiden, 
of the FORGOTTEN REALMs setting, This spell is 
found only in a few exceptionally rare tomes. 


Snow Snake 
(Alteration, Invocation/Evocation) 
Sphere: Combat, Elemental (Water) 


Level: 5 

Range: 30 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: | rd. 

Area of Effect: Hemisphere, 10-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: Special 


‘This spell can only be cast to affect an area where 
there is an amount of snow of at least twice the 
caster's body volume, It causes the snow to rise up 
in a serpentine mass and strike at targets in an area 
of the caster’s choosing. As the magic affects only 
snow, it can also be used to uncover buried items lost 
in the snow (which will be left behind by the moving 
snow) or lying on the ground beneath. A snow snake 
can also be ridden by its caster in a “wave” move- 
ment that carries the priest (only) a maximum of 20 
feet upward and 50 feet horizontally. 

Its most popular use, however, is as an attack 
spell. It smashes down in a dome-shaped area 20 
feet in diameter, extinguishing any fires present in 
that zone and crushing for 6d4 points of damage. 
If a snow snake extinguishes any fires when strik- 
ing, all creatures in the hemisphere suffer an addi- 
tional 1d4 points of harm from a flurry of scalding 


556 


Softwood 


N 


steam. Creatures in the hemisphere of effect are 
encumbered by deep snow and are slowed to half 
movement rate for as long as they remain in the 
affected area. (If they choose to leave the hemi- 
sphere directly, their movement is slowed only for 
the round after the strike of the snow snake.) 

All creatures in the area of a snow snake strike 
are allowed a saving throw vs, spell, Those who 
succeed take only half damage and are considered 
unencumbered (but any steam damage takes its 
normal effect). 

All items within the area of effect (except those 
worn or carried by a creature who successfully 
saves vs. the spell) must make item saving throws 
vs. crushing blow. 

If snow snake spell is cast into an area that has 
been affected by an ice storm or cone of cold spell 
within the previous 4 rounds, its base damage 
becomes 6d6 points (steam damage is unaltered). 

The material components are snow and a single 
tear, drop of spittle, or drop of water in the caster’s 
palm (the last can, of course, be melted snow). 

Notes: Granted by Auril, called Frostmaiden, 
of the Forcorren REALMS setting. This spell is 
found only in a few exceptionally rare tomes. 


Soften Earth and Stone — 
Gnome, Halfling 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Elemental Earth 


Level: 2 

Range: 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: Permanent 

Area of Effect: 10-ft. square/level 
Saving Throw: None 


When this spell is cast, all natural, undressed 
earth or stone in the area of effect is softened. Wet 
earth becomes thick mud; dry earth becomes loose 
sand or dirt; and stone becomes soft clay, easily 
molded or chopped. The priest affects a 10-foot 
square area to a depth of 1 to 4 feet, depending on 
the toughness or resilience of the ground at that 
spot (DM option). Magical or enchanted stone 
cannot be affected by this spell. 

Creatures attempting to move through an area 
softened into mud are reduced to a move of 10 feet 
per round. Any creatures caught within the mud 
when the spell takes effect must make a saving throw 
vs. paralyzation or lose the ability to move, attack, or 
cast spells for 1d2 rounds as they flounder about in 
the muck. Loose dirt is not as troublesome as mud, 
and creatures are only reduced to half their normal 


movement rate, with no chance of being incapaci- 
tated for a round or two. However, it is impossible to 
run, sprint, or charge over either surface. 

Stone softened into clay does not hinder move- 
ment, but it does allow characters to cut, shape, or 
excavate areas they may not have been able to 
affect before. 

Natural vertical surfaces such as cliff faces or 
cavern ceilings can be affected by soften earth and 
stone. Usually, this causes a moderate collapse or 
landslide as the loosened material peels away from 
the face or roof and falls. A moderate amount of 
structural damage can be inflicted to man-made 
structures by softening the ground beneath a wall 
or tower, causing it to settle. However, most well- 
built structures will only be damaged by this spell, 
not destroyed. 

The material component is a bit of slip (wet 
clay) from the wheel of a master potter. 

Notes: Granted by the evil gnome god Urdlen, 
and by the halfling god Urogalan, the protector of 
the dead. 


Softwood 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Plant, Protection 
Level: 4 
Range: Touch 


Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: 1 man-sized target/3 levels 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


The recipient of a softwood spell is immedi- 
ately surrounded by soft, spongy wood, similar to 
that of a rotting stump. The created softwood is a 
living entity that inhabits the air envelope of the 
individual, sustaining his or her life at a lower 
level than normal. The individual is placed in sus- 
pended animation. 

The softwood cocoon is extremely resistant to 
heat and cold. While the form within is uncon- 
scious, it cannot be harmed. A creature in a soft- 
wood cocoon could fall to earth and the heat and 
impact of the fall would be absorbed by the spell. 

The softwood cocoon dissolves in open air. If it 
enters and stays in a new envelope of fresh air for 
longer than three turns, the softwood dissolves, 
letting the individual loose. A softwood spell cast 
in the open air will be effective for three turns, 
cocooning the target for 30 minutes, then dissipat- 
ing in a single round. 

The softwood spell was created as a defensive 
measure, to preserve those cast adrift in space. For 


557 


each three levels of experience, a priest can affect 
an additional individual. An enterprising priest 
might use the spell as a handy method to contain 
enemies, and as a way to send both foes and muti- 
nous friends into wildspace (and off their ships) 
without having to slay them. 

‘The material component is any bit of bark. The 
softwood spell creates the same type of bark cover- 
ing the body. (If maple is used, then the covering 
will appear as maple, if pine, it will appear as pine.) 
If the bark of a sentient or monster-type plant is 
used, the softwood has similar physical features, 
but lacks any special abilities of the original. 

Notes: Rare spell for priests from a spelljam- 
ming culture; otherwise, virtually unknown. 


Sol’s Searing Orb 
(Invocation) 
Sphere: Sun 


Level: 6 

Range: 30 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 6 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: 1 gem 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell must be cast upon a topaz. When the 
spell is complete, the stone glows with an inner 
light. The gem must be immediately thrown at an 
opponent, for it quickly becomes too hot to hold. 
(The acts of casting and throwing occur in the 
same round.) It is not possible for the priest to give 
the stone to another character to throw. 

The stone can be hurled up to 30 yards. The 
priest must roll normally to hit, with a +3 bonus to 
the attack roll and no penalty for nonproficiency. 
In addition, the glowing gem is considered a +3 
weapon for determining whether a creature can be 
struck (creatures hit only by magical weapons, for 
example). There is no damage bonus, however. 

When it hits, the gem bursts with a brilliant 
searing flash that causes 6d6 points of fire damage 
to the target creature and blinds it for 1d6 rounds. 
The creature is allowed a saving throw vs. spell. If 
successful, only half damage is sustained and the 
creature is not blinded. Undead creatures suffer 
12d6 points of damage and are blinded for 246 
rounds (if applicable) if they fail. They receive 646 
points of damage and are blinded for 1d6 rounds if 
the saving throw is successful. 

If the gem misses its target, it explodes imme- 
diately, causing 346 points of damage (or 6d6 
against undead) to al) creatures within a 3-foot 
radius. It blinds them for 1d3 rounds (1d6 rounds 
vs. undead). All subjects are allowed a saving 
throw vs. spell, with success indicating half 
damage and no blindness. The grenade-like mis- 
sile table in the DMG is used to determine where 
the stone hits. 

The material component is a topaz gemstone 
worth at least 500 gp. 

Notes: Common for priests with major access 
to the sphere of Sun (ToM). 


Solipsism 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Thought 


Level: 4 
Range: 10 yds/level 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 100 sq. ft. + 100 sq. ft-/ievel 
Saving Throw: Special 


This unusual spell is similar to phantasmal 
force and other illusion magic, except that the 
priest who casts the spell is the only creature who 
automatically believes the results of the spell. The 
spell creates the illusion of any object, creature, or 
force, as long as it is within the boundaries of the 


558 


Song of Compulsion 


Nie 


spell’s area of effect. The illusion is visual and tac- 
tile (that is, it can be seen and felt), but no other 
sensory stimuli are created, 

The solipsism spell is the opposite of a normal 
illusion, in that anyone other than the caster must 
make an active effort to believe the illusion (rather 
than disbelieve it). Those trying to believe the real- 
ity of a solipsistic illusion must make a saving 
throw vs. breath weapon, modified by the magical 
defense adjustment for Wisdom. A successful save 
means that the character believes the illusion and it 
is part of reality for him. A failed save means that 
the character cannot convince himself of the illu- 
sion’s reality, and the illusion has no effect on him. 
A character can make a single attempt to believe 
each round, 

Unlike true illusions, the image created by this 
spell does more than just duplicate reality. The 
image formed is real for those who believe in it. 
The illusion has all the normal properties that its 
form and function allow. Thus, a solipsistic bridge 
spanning a chasm could be crossed by the priest 
and those who believed. All others would see the 
priest apparently walking out onto nothingness. 
Likewise, a solipsistic giant would cause real 
damage to those who believed it, 

The illusion remains in effect for as long as the 
priest continues to concentrate on it, until the 
priest is struck in combat, or until he is rendered 
unconscious. The level of concentration required 
is not extreme; the priest can move normally and 
can engage in combat, but is unable to cast any 
spell while maintaining a solipsistic illusion, 

Solipsism can create only illusions that are 
external to the priest. Thus, the priest cannot create 
an illusion that he is the size of a giant, is 
unwounded, or has sprouted wings. 

The material components are a lotus blossom 
that the priest must swallow and a bit of fleece. 

Notes: Common for priests with access to the 
sphere of Thought (ToM). 


Solitude — Elf 
(Enchantment) 
Sphere: Wards 


Level: 4 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S,M 

Casting Time: 1 tum 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 10-ft/level radius 
Saving Throw: None 


By means of this spell, the caster significantly 
reduces the possibility that he or she might be dis- 


turbed by other sentient beings (defined as beings 
of low Intelligence or greater). As long as the 
priest remains within a fixed radius of the point 
where the spell is cast, there is a reduced chance 
that any will intrude purely by happenstance. 
Should a chance encounter occur, the caster 
receives a saving throw vs. spell to avoid it. 

‘The radius of solitude, beyond which the priest 
cannot pass without ending the spell, is 10 feet per 
level of the caster. If the priest moves beyond the 
perimeter set when the spell is cast, the spell effect 
ends immediately and the normal probability of 
random encounters resumes (although there is no 
implication that an encounter will necessarily 
happen immediately thereafter). This spell also 
ends whenever the priest’s presence is discovered 
by a sentient being or when another sentient being 
enters the radius of the spell effect, whether they 
are aware of the presence of the caster or not. 
Obviously, this spell has no effect if cast in the 
presence of other sentient beings. 

For example, if the priest casts this spell in the 
middle of a forest, far away from any settlement or 
road, there is no chance of a random encounter dis- 
turbing his or her solitude. Still, someone specifi- 
cally following clues to the priest's location 
(whether or not the tracker is aware of exactly 
whom he or she is seeking) would be totally unaf- 
fected by this spell’s enchantment. If, however, the 
priest cast this spell within visual range of a toad 
or other location with regular traffic, while the 
spell would ensure that no one would simply stum- 
ble across the caster as they traveled through the 
woods, it would provide no isolation from discov- 
ery by those who use the thoroughfare as a matter 
of course. 

The material component is a handful of earth 
sprinkled along the perimeter of the region of 
enforced solitude. 

Notes: Granted by the elven god Fenmarel 
Mestarine. 


Song of Compulsion 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
Sphere: Charm, Law 


Level: 3 

Range: 60 yds. 

Components: V 

Casting Time: 6 

Duration: 1 turn + 1d6 rds. 

Area of Effect: 1 to six beings in a 60-ft. cube 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


To set this spell in motion, the caster sings the 
first verse of a popular and mindless traveling song 


559 


~ Song of Healing r 


having many verses (such as “Ninety-Nine Barrels 
of Ale on the Wall”). The song of compulsion pre- 
vents the affected beings from taking offensive 
actions, casting spells, using psionic abilities, using 
magical items, or leaving the area of effect until 
they finish the song (which is assumed to occur 
when the spell duration expires). Affected creatures 
can still defend themselves (that is, they receive no 
Armor Class penalties) and move about within the 
area of effect, and the effects of a song of compul- 
sion on any creature are negated if it is attacked. 

The effect is centered on a point selected by the 
caster, and it affects persons selected by the caster 
within the area of effect. If the spell is cast at three 
or more beings, each gets a normal saving throw; 
if only two creatures are being enspelled, each 
rolls its saving throw with a—1 penalty; if the spell 
is cast at but one creature, its saving throw suffers 
a -2 penalty. Saving throws are adjusted for 
Wisdom. Creatures that make successful saving 
throws are totally unaffected by the spell. Mind- 
less undead creatures and undead creatures with 
(individually) more Hit Dice than the caster has 
experience levels cannot be affected by a song of 
compulsion, and neither can beings who cannot 
hear or do not understand the language of the 
caster (although the caster can use magic to 
become understood in order to affect such crea- 
tures). 

Notes: Granted by Milil, Lord of Song, of the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Song of Healing 
(Necromancy) 
Sphere: Healing 


Level: 5 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: | rd. + | rd./creature 

Duration: Permanent 

Area of Effect: Up to 12 creatures in a 30-ft, radius 
Saving Throw: None 


The casting time of this spell is one round, plus 
one round per creature to be affected. It affects 
only beings within range that the caster chooses as 
spell recipients (unnoticed creatures or those the 
caster does not want to aid are ignored by this 
magic) to a maximum limit of 12 beings, A song 
of healing restores 148 hit points, plus 1 point per 
level of the caster, to all recipients. The caster 
cannot benefit from his own song of healing. 

The vocalization of the spell unleashes and 
directs the magic, rather than creating the spell 
effect, so magical silence (or deafness on the part 


of the target being) has no effect on the power or 
operation of a song of healing. 

Notes: Granted by Milil, Lord of Song, of the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Soothe 
(Invocation) 
Sphere: Elemental Water 


Level: 4 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 5 rds. 
Duration: 1 rd./2 levels 
Area of Effect; 10-ft, radius 
Saving Throw: None 


whe 


‘The caster claps his hands together, making the 
sound of thunder, and rain begins to fall in a 10 
foot radius, Every creature beneath the cloud 
regains | hit point per round, up to the duration of 
the spell. The rain also causes a —1 penalty to all 
melee attacks within its area of effect. 

Notes; Uncommon for priests from the DARK 
SuN setting; otherwise, very rare, 


Soul Forge — Dwarf 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
Sphere: Creation, Law 


Level: 5 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 turn 
Duration: 1 hr/level 
Area of Effect: | creature 
Saving Throw: None 


By means of this spell, the priest strengthens 
and tempers the moral fiber of a willing recipient. 
A creature that has been tempered by a soul forge 
is immune to all fear effects (including dragon 
awe) and need never check morale. Further, the 
creature cannot be taken over by an outside intelli- 
gence against its will and receives a +1 bonus to its 
Armor Class and saving throws when attacked by 
evil creatures, It is rumored that a longer ceremo- 
nial version of this spell exists that extends the 
protection to 1 day per level of the caster. 

Soul forge is effective only on lawful good 
beings. There is a 25% chance this spell will fail 
when cast on non-dwarves. 

‘The material component is the priest’s holy 
symbol. 

Notes: Granted by the dwarven god Moradin. 


” a I a E 


Soultheft — Drow 


Soultheft — Drow 
(Alteration, Necromancy) 
Sphere: Necromantic 


Level: 7 
Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 tum 
Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell enables the caster to steal the soul or 
spirit of a recently-slain being, to empower magic. 
The caster’s holy symbol must be touched to the 
corpse within 1 tum per caster level of its death. If 
target creature makes a successful saving throw vs. 
death magic, the spell fails. Otherwise, the spell 
calls the life force of the dead being into the holy 
symbol. It will escape again, by itself, if the holy 
symbol is not touched to another object within 4 
turns. (The corpse itself is not harmed by the 
soultheft.) 

The object to receive the life force is first 
touched by the holy symbol as a secret word is 
spoken. The transfer takes 6 rounds to complete. If 
the transfer is interrupted, the life force snaps back 
into the holy symbol, but the transfer can be 
attempted again. 

Once transferred, the life force empowers an 
item to function magically for 1 month or with 10 
charges per level or Hit Dice (in life) of the dead 
being. This spell uses a trapped soul for an engine 
to power a previously-enchanted magical item. It 
cannot be used to turn a plain item into a magical 
one; in other words, one cannot use soultheft to 
turn a sword into a holy avenger +5. The magical 
item must either be specially crafted to hamess a 
stolen life force (in which case the time duration is 
used) or must be a charged item that is already 
enchanted (in which case the recharging function 
applies), Once the duration is at an end, or the 
charges are used (such charges are used first), the 
spirit is released unless the spell is renewed. 

Renewing soultheft requires only the enchanted 
item; the original corpse is not needed. When the 
spell is renewed the life force must make a suc- 
cessful system shock check (based on Intelligence 
rather than Constitution) or be annihilated. 

‘The being whose life force has been stolen 
cannot be contacted, raised, wished back, or other- 
wise called back to living existence unless the 
object empowered by the stolen life force is iden- 
tified, seized, and held by the being doing the rais- 
ing. The enchanted object betrays the fact that it 
holds the essence of the particular being to any 


561 


~ Spacewarp r 


magical scrutiny—that is, a detect magic not only 
shows a magical aura, but reveals the ghostly 
image of the stolen soul trapped within the item. 
The material component is the priest's holy 
symbol. A suitable enchanted item must also be 
prepared, but need not be present at the casting of 
the soultheft (but must be present at any renewal). 
Notes: Granted by the drow god Vhaeraun. 


Spacewarp 


Area of Effect: 50-ft.~diameter sphere 
Saving Throw: None 


According to one view of the universe, what we 
perceive as gravity is actually a localized warping 
of the fabric of space-time. The spacewarp spell 
creates a temporary but very intense warping in a 

A priest who casts this spell selects a specific 
point to be the center of effect. This point can be 
anywhere within 50 yards of the caster, including 
in midair. 

When the spell is completed, this center of 
effect gains a gravity field equal to the force felt at 
the surface of the earth. In other words, gravity is 
centered at this point; everything within 50 feet of 
this center that is not attached to something 
immovable will fall toward the selected point. 

This localized gravity affects only loose objects 
„and creatures capable of movement (i.e., not trees, 
whose roots are buried in the ground). It does not 
affect the ground itself—soil, plants, desert sand, 
lake water, and so on are immune to the effect. 

An object falling toward the center of gravity 
gains speed exactly as it would if it were falling 
toward the ground, When the object reaches the 
center, it instantly ceases its movement. If objects 
are already at the center, newly arriving objects 
will slam into them, causing normal falling 
damage (1d6 per 10 feet) to the newly arriving 
objects. Objects previously at the center must save 
vs. paralyzation or suffer half that amount of 
damage. 

Consider the following example. An orc is 10 
feet away from the center of effect when the spell 
is cast. He falls 10 feet to the center and stops. His 
companion, a bandit, is 30 feet from the center. It 
takes him longer to fall to the center, so the orc is 


Sg a ca 5 ef ETS 


already there when he arrives, and the two charac- 
ters collide forcefully. The bandit suffers 3d6 hit 
points of damage—the falling damage associated 
with a 30-foot fall. The orc must save vs. para- 
lyzation or suffer half that amount. 

Other things are caught in the effect as well. 
The bandit’s horse was 50 feet away from the 
center of effect, so it arrives at the center after the 
orc and the bandit. It falls 50 feet, suffering 5d6 
points of damage, and potentially inflicting half 
that amount on both the orc and the bandit. 

The center of effect can be anywhere within 50 
yards of the priest. Possibly one of the most 
destructive uses of this spell is to cast it directly on 
an enemy creature. Everyone and everything 
within 50 feet of that creature falls toward him and 
strikes him, inflicting damage. 

When the spell terminates, gravity returns 10 
normal. If the spell has lifted any characters or 
objects off the ground, they immediately fall back 
to the ground, suffering the appropriate amount of 
falling damage. 

The material components are a lodestone and a 
sphere of obsidian, both of which are consumed in 
the casting. 

Notes: Common for priests with major access 
to the sphere of Numbers (ToM). 


Spark of Blinding 


(Conjuration) 


Sphere: Elemental Sun 


Level: 1 

Range: 15 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: 1d4 rds. 

Area of Effect: 10-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell causes a brilliant but tiny spark of 
light to flash before a creature’s eyes, blinding it 
for 1d4 rounds. During that time, the creature 
fights as if blinded, and makes all saving throws at 
a —2 penalty. A successful saving throw vs. spell 
negates this effect. The priest can cast this spell 
only above ground and in the presence of the sun. 

Notes: Uncommon for priests from the Dark 
Sun setting; otherwise, very rare. 


Spawn Song — Giant 


N 


Sparkling Sword — Halfling 
(Evocation) 
Sphere: Combat 


Level: 3 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 rd. or 1 rd./level 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: Caster’s melee weapon 
Saving Throw: None 


When this spell is cast, the caster's weapon 
(usually a sword for specialty priests of Avoreen) 
takes on a bright, sparkling silver glow. The spell 
has two forms, one of which is chosen at the 
instant of casting. 

A) Smite, For a maximum of one round and one 
attack after the casting, the caster has a +2 bonus 
to hit and +3 bonus to damage with the affected 
weapon, The spell allows the caster to strike crea- 
tures hit only by +2 or better magical weapons. If 
the attack misses, the spell is wasted. 

B) Sparkle. The caster has a +1 bonus to attack 
and damage rolls with the affected weapon. This 
effects lasts for 5 rounds, plus 1 round for each 
experience level above Sth the caster has. The spell 
allows the caster to strike creatures hit only by +1 
or better magical weapons. 

When either version of the spell expires, the 
affected weapon must make a successful saving 
vs. crushing blow or be ruined. If there is 10 gp or 
more worth of silver in the weapon, its hilt, its 
decoration, the weapon receives a +2 bonus on the 
saving throw. 

‘The material component is a pinch of sulfur, 
which is tossed upon the weapon. 

Notes: Granted by the halfling god Arvoreen 
the Defender. (Updated from DraGoN Magazine.) 


Spawn of Tiamat 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Combat 


Level: 6 

Range: 60 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 9 

Duration: 1 tum + 2 rds./level 
Area of Effect: | dragon 
Saving Throw: None 


By means of this spell, a priest can cause any 
of Tiamat’s spawn (defined as any chromatic 
dragon) to grow a second head and neck for the 
duration of the incantation. 


The second head, identical in appearance to the 
original head, can bite once per round in addition to 
the dragon's normal attacks, Dragons cannot nor- 
mally employ their breath weapon while making 
physical attacks, but by means of this spell, a 
dragon can employ its breath weapon with its 
second head while attacking physically or casting 
spells with the original head and body. Even under 
the effects of a spawn of Tiamat spell, a dragon 
cannot breathe more than once every three rounds 
total from both heads. The second head is nonintel- 
ligent and completely under the control of the 
dragon. It cannot be used to cast spells. 

The second head and neck have the same 
Armor Class as the rest of the dragon. The head 
and neck both vanish at the end of the spell dura- 
tion or if 20 or more points of damage are 
inflicted specifically on them. Damage specifi- 
cally targeted to the second head and neck does 
not count toward total damage to the dragon, but 
if a dragon under the effects of spawn of Tiamat 
dies, the head and neck disappear. A dragon can 
only benefit from a single spawn of Tiamat spell 
ata time. 

According to legend, the cult of Tiamat in 
Unther employed a 7th-level variant of this spell, 
Lernaean spawn of Tiamat, which imbued the 
second head with the properties exhibited by Ler- 
naean hydrae. Also, some dragons who themselves 
worship Tiamat are reputedly able to cast a version 
of this spell using their draconic magic. 

The material components are the priest's holy 
symbol and a pair of hydra scales. 

Notes: Granted by the evil dragon god, Tiamat, 
to human worshipers. 


Spawn Song — Giant 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 
Sphere: Animal 
Range: 0 


Casting Time: 1 tum 
Duration: 1 tum 

Area of Effect: 240-yd. radius 
Saving Throw: None 


The shaman giants of the Silt Sea know a spell 
that can summon 2d6 silt spawn. It must be used 
carefully. because it does not make the creatures 
tame or placid. In fact, the summoning convinces 
the silt spawn that the priest is himself a meal that 
will satisfy their raging appetites. 

‘The priest actually sings the spell while in con- 
tact with the silt. So long as the caster sings, the 


LS ee 


spell calls to the silt spawn. The song only lasts 10 
rounds, after which the spell is broken. 

To make effective use of this spell, the priest 
works with spawn trappers. The priest is extremely 
vulnerable. The trappers must scoop up the silt 
spawn from the silt before they get too close to the 
shaman, Fortunately for the trappers, the silt 
spawn are oblivious to everything except the 
singing shaman. 

If this spell is used to lure specific silt spawn, 
those creatures do get a saving throw vs. spell to 
ignore the spell. The 2d6 silt spawn drawn to the 
priest are assumed to be those that have failed their 
saving throw. 

Notes: Rare spell known to the shamans of the 
giants of the Silt Sea in the DARK SUN setting. 


Speak With Ancient Dead — Elf 
(Necromancy) 
Sphere: Divination 


Level: 5 
Range: 10 ft. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: | turn 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Special 


~ Speak With Ancient Dead — Elf P. 


This spell is a more potent version of the 3rd 
level priest spell speak with dead that allows the 
priest to speak with spirits who have long ago 
departed from the mortal world. Except as noted, 
this spell is otherwise identical to the more 
common version of the spell. 

The priest is able to ask several questions of a 
dead creature in a set period of time and receive 
answers according to the knowledge of that crea- 
ture. Of course, the priest must be able to converse 
in the language that the dead creature once used. 
The length of time the creature has been dead is a 
factor, since only higher level priests can converse 
with a long-dead creature. The number of ques- 
tions that can be answered and the length of time 
in which the questions can be asked depend on the 
level of experience of the priest. Even if the cast- 
ing is successful, such creatures are as evasive as 
possible when questioned. The dead tend to give 
extremely brief and limited answers, often cryptic, 
and to take questions literally. Furthermore, their 
knowledge is often limited to what they knew in 
life. 

A dead creature of different alignment or of 
higher level or Hit Dice than the caster’s level 
receives a saving throw vs, spell. A dead creature 
that successfully saves can refuse to answer ques- 
tions, ending the spell. At the DM’s option, the 
casting of this spell on a given creature might be 
restricted to once per week. 

Notes: Granted by the elven deity Labelas 
Enoreth. 


Caster’s 

Level of Max. Length Time No. of 
Experience of Time Dead Questioned Questions 
1-9 10 years 1 tum 4 

10-11 100 years  2tums $ 

12-13 1,000 years 3 turns 6 

1417 10,000 years 1 hour 7 

18+ Unlimited 1 day Unlimited 
Speak With Animals 

(Alteration) 

Sphere: Animal, Divination 

Level: 2 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 5 


Duration: 2 rds./level 
Area of Effect: 1 animal within 30 ft. 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell empowers the priest to comprehend 
and communicate with any warm- or cold-blooded 


Aaa ae a a ee 


Speak With Dead 


EEE 


normal or giant animal that is not mindless, The 
priest is able to ask questions of and receive 
answers from the creature, although friendliness 
and cooperation are by no means assured. Further- 
more, terseness and evasiveness are likely in basi- 
cally wary and cunning creatures (the more stupid 
ones will instead make inane comments). If the 
animal is friendly or of the same general alignment 
as the priest, it may do some favor or service for 
the priest (as determined by the DM). This spell 
differs from the speak with monsters spell, for this 
spell allows conversation only with normal or 
giant nonfantastic creatures such as apes, bears, 
cats, dogs, elephants, and so on. 

Notes: Common for clerics and druids (PHB), 


Speak With Astral Traveler 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Astral 


Level: | 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: | creature 
Saving Throw: None 


A spelicaster who uses the astral spell (such as 
the 7th-level priest spell) leaves his or her physical 
body in suspended animation while the astral body 
travels, By touching the comatose physical body 
and casting speak with astral traveler, a priest can 
mentally communicate with the projected individ- 
ual, Although communication is mental, it takes the 
same amount of time as a normal verbal dialogue. 
The spell ends abruptly when its duration expires. 

Notes: Common for priests with access to the 
Astral sphere (ToM). 


Speak With Avians — Elf 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Animal, Divination 


Level: 1 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: 2 rds./level 

Area of Effect: 1 avian within 30 ft. 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell empowers the priest to comprehend 
and communicate with any normal or giant avian 
that is not mindless. The priest is able to ask ques- 
tions of and receive answers from the creature, 


although friendliness and cooperation are by no 
means assured. Furthermore, terseness and eva- 
siveness are likely in basically wary and cunning 
creatures, while the more stupid ones will make 
inane comments. If the animal is friendly or of the 
same general alignment as the priest, it may do 
some favor or service for the priest (as determined 
by the DM). Note that this spell differs from both 
the speak with animals and speak with monsters 
spells in that it allows conversation only with 
normal or giant nonfantastic avians such as cardi- 
nals, doves, jays, ravens, and so on. 

Notes: Granted by the elven goddess Aerdrie 
Faenya. 


Speak With Birds — Old Empire 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Animal, Divination 


Level: 1 

Range: 0 

‘Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: 2 rds./level 

Area of Effect: 1 avian within a 30-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell empowers the priest to comprehend 
and communicate with any normal or giant avian 
that is not mindless. The priest is able to ask ques- 
tions and receive answers from the creature, 
although friendliness and cooperation are by no 
means assured. Furthermore, terseness and evasive- 
ness are likely in basically wary and cunning birds; 
the more stupid ones will instead make inane com- 
ments. If the bird is friendly and of the same gen- 
eral alignment as the priest, it may do some favor 
or service for the priest (as determined by the DM). 

Notes: Granted by the Mulhorandi deity Thoth 
of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Speak With Dead 
(Necromancy) 
Sphere: Divination, Necromantic 


Level: 3 

Range: 1 yd. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 turn 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Special 


Upon casting a speak with dead spell, the priest 
is able to ask several questions of a dead creature in 
a set period of time and receive answers according 


I a aS ee ee 


Speak With Dead — Shukenja 


to the knowledge of that creature. Of course, the 
priest must be able to converse in the language that 
the dead creature once used. The length of time the 
creature has been dead is a factor, since only higher 
level priests can converse with a long-dead crea- 
ture. The number of questions that can be answered 
and the length of time in which the questions can 
be asked depend on the level of experience of the 
priest. Even if the casting is successful, such crea- 
tures are as evasive as possible when questioned. 
‘The dead tend to give extremely brief and limited 
answers, often cryptic, and to take questions liter- 
ally. Furthermore, their knowledge is often limited 
to what they knew in life. 

A dead creature of different alignment or of 
higher level or Hit Dice than the caster’s level 
receives a saving throw vs. spell. A dead creature 
that successfully saves can refuse to answer ques- 
tions, ending the spell. At the DM’s option, the 
casting of this spell on a given creature might be 
restricted to once per week. 

The priest needs a holy symbol and burning 
incense in order to cast this spell upon the body, 
remains, or a portion thereof. The remains are not 
expended. This spell does not function under water. 

Notes: Common for clerics (PHB). 


Caster Time Time Number of 

Level Dead Questioned Questions 

to 7th 1 week 1 round 2 

Tth-Bth 1month 3 rounds 3 

9h-12h 1 year tum 4 

13th—-15th 10years = 2 tums 5 

16th-20th 100 years 3 tums 6 

2istand up 1,000 years 1 hour 7 
Speak With Dead — Shukenja 

(Necromantic) 

Sphere: Divination, Necromantic 

Level: 3 

Range: 1 yd. 


Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 tum 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: None 


The casting of this spell allows the shukenja to 
ask questions of a dead creature within a certain 
amount of time and receive answers according to 
the knowledge of that creature. The number of 
questions is dependent on level (as shown the table.) 

‘The caster must be able to speak the language of 
the deceased creature. In addition, the dead tend to 
be brief, cryptic, and hold grudges against the living. 


A dead creature of different alignment or of 
higher level or Hit Dice than the caster’s level 
receives a saving throw vs. spell. A dead creature 
that successfully saves can refuse to answer ques- 
tions, ending the spell. At the DM’s option, the 
casting of this spell on a given creature might be 
restricted to once per week. 

Notes: Common for oriental priests; otherwise, 
very rare. 


Shukenja’s 

Maximum Subject Time Number of 

Level Dead Questioned Questions 

to 7th 1 week 1 round 2 

7thto8th  Imonth = 3 rounds 3 

9th to 12th 1year 1 tum 4 

13th to 15th 10years  2tums 5 

16th to 20th 100 years 3 tums 6 

standup 1,000 years 1 hour 7 
Speak With Dragonkind 

(Alteration) 

Sphere: Divination 

Level: 6 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 7 


Duration: 1 tum/level 
Area of Effect: 30-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: None 


When this spell is cast, the shukenja projects a 
special aura that can be detected and read only by 
a dragon (or a dragonlike creature such as a 
chimera, pseudo-dragon, firedrake, dragonne, and 
so on). The aura allows the dragon to determine 
that the caster is not hostile and is interested only 
in conversation. Any number of dragons may view 
the caster, and the chance that any sufficiently 
motivated dragon may feel an urge to attack the 
caster while the spell is in effect is only 2% per Hit 
Die of the dragon. Even if this check is successful, 
most dragons will have no wish to attack the spell- 
caster if no real reason for such an attack exists. 

The dragon may decide to speak for one of two 
reasons. First, the dragon might genuinely desire 
conversation. Second, any dragon who slays a 
spelicaster while this spell is in effect becomes 
known to the deity of the priest; that deity will 
always make a point afterward of arranging for 
vengeance to be dispensed by various adventurers, 
though the success of these attempts must be 
played out or determined randomly by the DM. 
The knowledge of this vengeance is made known 
to the dragon upon sighting the priest while this 


I a I ag am ce IN 


Speak With Plants 


spell is in effect, and few dragons are willing to 
risk a god’s displeasure. The worst that a dragon 
will do to the spellcaster in most cases is merely 
ignore him or make vaguely threatening gestures. 

The shukenja, too, is bound by certain consid- 
erations. This spell fails if cast by a priest who 
secretly plans to harm the dragon. If the caster or an 
ally within the area of effect shows hostile intent 
toward a dragon, the spell ends immediately and 
the dragon to whom the priest is will, if it chooses 
to attack, gain a +2 bonus to all attack and damage 
rolls in combat with the offenders and those aiding 
them. The dragon gains initiative on its first attack 
even if the offenders make the first moves, as the 
spell invokes a curse that gives the dragon the 
upper hand for the first round of melee. The phrase 
“hostile intent” includes any action that would 
harm or immobilize the dragon, as well as any 
attempt to spy on the dragon's lair prior to an attack 
or theft. Wise spelicasters avoid entering a dragon’s 
lair, as the temptation of seeing the dragon’s treas- 
ure hoard might move the caster to contemplate a 
“hostile” action—and thus invite doom. 

Since this spell is actually cast upon the priest, 
the dragon receives no saving throw or magic 
resistance check. The dragon operates under its 
own free will and may decide to attack the caster 
once the spell’s duration expires. The dragon is not 


obliged to be truthful or helpful, nor is it com- 
pelled to reveal its secrets. However, even evil 
dragons are more inclined to bend or shade the 
truth rather than to lie, as this may prove to be far 
more effective a tactic in certain situations (for 
example, if asked for information on a nearby orc 
tribe, a red dragon might disguise the fact that the 
ores give him treasure and sacrifices, and might 
offer misleading information as to its location and 
the composition of its forces). Divination spells 
can be used in conjunction with this spell to 
strengthen one's bargaining position. 

Notes: Rare for oriental priests; otherwise, 
very rare. (Updated from DraGoN Magazine.) 


Speak With Monsters 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: All 


Level: 6 

Range: 30 yds. 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 9 
Duration: 2 rds./level 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


When cast, the speak with monsters spell 
enables the priest to converse with any type of 
creature that has any form of communicative 
ability (including empathic, tactile, pheromonic, 
and so on). That is, the monster understands, in 
its own language or equivalent, the intent of what 
is said to it by the priest and vice versa. The crea- 
ture thus spoken to is checked by your DM to 
determine a reaction. All creatures of the same 
type as that chosen by the priest can likewise 
understand if they are within range. The priest 
can speak to different types of creatures during 
the spell duration, but he must speak separately to 
each type. The spell lasts for two rounds per 
caster level. 

Notes: Common for clerics and druids (PHB). 


Speak With Plants 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Plant 


Level: 4 
Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 tum 
Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: 30-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: None 


"T eng a INS 


~ Speak With Sea Creatures 


When cast, a speak with plants spell enables 
the priest to converse, in very rudimentary terms, 
with all sorts of living vegetables (including fungi, 
molds, and plantlike monsters, such as shambling 
mounds) and to exercise limited control over 
normal plants (that is, not monsters or plantlike 
creatures). Thus, the caster can question plants as 
to whether or not creatures have passed through 
them, cause thickets to part to enable easy passage, 
require vines to entangle pursuers, and command 
similar services. The spell does not enable plants 
to uproot themselves and move about, but any 
movements within the plants’ normal capabilities 
are possible. Creatures entangled by the Ist-level 
spell of that name can be released. The power of 
the spell lasts for one round for each experience 
level of the casting priest. All vegetation within the 
area of effect is affected by the spell. 

‘The material components are a drop of water, a 
pinch of dung, and a flame. 

Notes: Common for druids (PHB). 


Speak With Sea Creatures 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Animal, Divination 


Level: 2 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: 2 rds./level 

Area of Effect: } animal within 30 ft. 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell empowers the priest to compre- 
hend and communicate with any warm- or cold- 
blooded normal or giant sea creature that is not 
mindless. The priest is able to ask questions and 
receive answers of the creature, although friend- 
liness and cooperation are by no means assured. 
Furthermore, terseness and evasiveness are 
likely in basically wary and cunning creatures 
(the more stupid ones will instead make inane 
comments). If the animal is friendly or of the 
same general alignment as the priest, there is a 
possibility that the animal will do some favor or 
service for the priest. This possibility is deter- 
mined by the DM. This spell differs from the 
speak with monsters spell in that it allows con- 
versation only with normal or giant, nonfantas- 
tic creatures such as whales, sharks, crabs, 
squid, dolphins, and so on. 

Notes: Uncommon for Sea priests; otherwise, 
very rare. (Updated from DraGon Magazine.) 


Upon casting speak with the drowned dead, the 
priest or another designated person within 3 yards of 
The priest is able to ask two questions of a creature who 
died by drowning who is called on by name. (Com- 
plete names are not necessary, although naming infor- 
mation sufficient to distinguish one individual from 
another is.) The body of the drowning victim need not 
be present. The answers are phrased in normal speech, 
not merely “yes” and “no” replies. Questioned crea- 
tures cannot lie, but they can be as misleading and eva- 
sive as possible within that constraint. 

The awareness and memories of the drowned 
one end at death, Questioned creatures cannot 
know what events befell after they drowned and 
will say so if asked, wasting an answer. 

Drowned creatures of different alignment than 
the caster or of higher level or Hit Dice than the 
caster’s level receive a saving throws vs. spell. A 
drowned creature that succeeds at this saving throw 
can refuse to answer questions, ending the spell. 

Notes: Granted by the evil sea goddess Umber- 
lee of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting, 


Speak With Water 
) 


Area of Effect: Body of water 
Saving Throw: None 


Water, or the spirit that dwells within it, can 
speak to casters of this spell. It will know such 
things as what creatures drank from it last and 
what they looked like, where a particular fish is, or 
if a specific item lies at the bottom. It has no con- 
cept of names or time, and generally only remem- 
bers events that have occurred in the past week. 

This is a good way of finding out how long a 
given water supply will last, or if it has been 


Bo a a IE a e a N 


Spectral Stag 


NÝ 


enchanted or poisoned. The caster must be able to 
see the water to speak with it. 

Notes: Uncommon for priests from the DARK 
Sun setting; otherwise, very rare. 


Spectral Manticore 
(Ilusion/Phantasm) 
Sphere: Summoning 


Level: 4 
Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 7 
Duration: 6 rds. 

Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell causes a ghostly manticore to appear 
and fight for the caster until banished (instantly, by 
the silent will of the caster), “slain,” or the spell 
expires (in all three cases, the manticore speedily 
and silently fades away). This monster first appears 
out of the caster as it materializes, bounding away 
from his breast toward an opponent of his choosing. 

‘The spectral manticore can attack only one oppo- 
nent per round, but has the usual manticore abilities: 
THACO 13, 6+3 HD, initial round attack is a volley 
of 146 tail spikes with a 180-yard range, each spike 
inflicting 1d6 points of damage at a single opponent; 
then 3 attacks/round (a bite for 1d8 points of damage 
and two claw attacks for 143 points of damage), MV 
12, Fly 18 (E). It has a leonine body with a spiky tail, 
bat wings, and a tusk-toothed human head with flow- 
ing mane and beard, but it is translucent and obvi- 
ously an unnatural creature, Unlike a real manticore, 
it is absolutely silent, has a morale of 20, and is 
absolutely loyal to the caster. It cannot be charmed or 
magically controlled in any way, except through the 
caster’s will. It has a real, tangible presence and can 
be ridden by the caster as a mount. 

‘The material component is a tail spike from a 
manticore. 

Notes: Granted by the evil god Malar the 
Beastlord of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Spectral Senses 
(Divination, Necromancy) 
Sphere: Divination, Necromantic 


Level: 1 

Range: 30 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 4 

Duration: | hr./level 

Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell establishes a sensory link between 
the priest and a skeleton or a zombie within the 
spell’s range. This link allows the caster to see 
what the undead sees as if the priest were looking 
through the creature's eyes. The link also enables 
the priest to hear any sounds that occur in the 
vicinity of the undead being. The priest can hear 
and see exactly as if he or she were standing at the 
same location as the undead creature. The spell 
also allows the priest to issue simple commands 
via this link. The spell ends abruptly if either the 
caster or the undead creature moves out of range or 
is somehow moved to another plane. 

Alternatively, the spell can be cast upon an 
(inanimate) corpse. In such a case, the spell trans- 
mits visual and auditory senses to the priest, but 
does not confer any ability to command or animate 
the body. 

‘The material components are the priest’s unholy 
symbol and a black, hooded cowl, which must be 
worn over the eyes and ears of the priest to benefit 
from the spell. 

Notes: Restricted to necromancer-priests, 
common. 


Spectral Stag 
(Illusion/Phantasm) 
Sphere: Summoning 


Level: 4 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 7 

Duration: | rd. 

Area of Effect: | or more creatures 
Saving Throw: /s 


‘This spell causes a ghostly staglike force to rush 
from the breast of the caster in a silent charge. It 
looks like a plume of smoke with two antlers and 
blazing red eyes. It appears silently and races 
toward an opponent chosen by the caster. If the 
chosen opponent cannot avoid it, the spectral stag 
races in a straight line for 30 yards (or until striking 
a wall or other solid obstacle) and then dissipates, 
doing damage to all creatures in its path. If the 
chosen target moves, the stag turns to follow it, dis- 
sipating after striking (or missing) the single foe. 

A spectral stag attacks with a THACO two 
levels higher than its caster. Its attack is a single 
goring, battering strike inflicting 4d4+4 points of 
damage (save vs. spell for half damage). The stag 
moves on a level plane regardless of chasms, 
water, or broken ground, “running” on empty air if 
need be; it cannot be diverted by known magical 
barriers or controlling spells. (Dispel magic and 


re a a a ee ee aN 


Speed Rot 
N 


antimagic shell both destroy the stag on contact.) 
The strike of a spectral stag forces all items in pos- 
session of the subject to make saving throws vs. 
crushing blow. 

The material component is a hoof, a piece of 
antler, or an intact bone from any sort of deer. 

Notes: Granted by the evil god Malar the 
Beastlord of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Speed Rot 
(Abjuration) 
Sphere: Plant 


Level: 3 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 6 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell is the opposite of the 3rd-level priest 
spell slow rot. The speed rot spell causes fruits, 
vegetables, and grains to immediately ripen and 
then rot into a putrid slime, It has no effect upon 
meat of any kind. Plants and plant-based creatures 
within the area of effect suffer 1d6 points of 
damage per level of the caster to a maximum of 
10d6 points of damage. 

‘The caster can affect as much as 100 cubic feet 
of plant material per level. Thus, even a low-level 
Minion of Moander could effectively ruin a 
farmer's stored grain or rot all the fruit on the trees 
in his orchard. 

The material component is a bit of mold. 

Notes: Granted by Moander the Darkbringer of 
the FORGOTTEN REALMs setting. 


Speeding Trident 
(Invocation/Evocation) 
Sphere: Combat 


Level: 2 

Range: 30 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 5 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: 1⁄4 


This spell brings into being a three-tined mis- 
sile of temporarily hardened water, its piercing 
points hard enough to penetrate armor. It streaks 
straight at a chosen target creature, striking with 
the casters THACO, and deals 4d4 points of 
damage (half that if a successful saving throw vs. 


spell is made by the target) to any creature it hits, 
After striking or missing, the missile dissipates in 
a swiftly-scattering mist. 

The material components are three drops of 
water and three arrowheads, dagger points, or 
metal wedges (they must be of a hard ferrous 
metal, but need not be tempered or ever been 
intended or used as weapons). 

Notes: Granted by the evil sea goddess Umber- 
lee of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. This spell is 
found only in a few exceptionally rare tomes. 


Spell Drain — Savant 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Thought 


Area of Effect: | spellcaster 
Saving Throw: None 


Through the use of this spell, the savant is able 
to drain and utilize the memory of a spell pos- 
sessed by a spell-using creature. The savant, if 
aware of the spells known by the subject, can 
declare which spell is drained; otherwise, the most 
recently memorized of the subject's highest-level 
spells is drained. The savant cannot regain the 7th- 
level spell slot until the stolen spell is cast or the 
memory is lost. 

Material components are also necessary if the 
spell normally requires them. 

Notes: Restricted to savant-clerics. (Updated 
from DraGoN Magazine.) 


Spell Immunity 


(Abjuration) 
Sphere: Protection 


Duration: 1 turn/level 
Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


By means of this spell, the priest renders a crea- 
ture touched immune to the effects of a specified 


spell of 4th level or lower. It protects against spells, 
spell-like effects of magical items, and innate spell- 
like abilities of creatures, It does not protect against 
breath weapons or gaze attacks of any type. 


570 


Spellbind 


Ne 


The spell has several additional limitations. 
First, the caster must have directly experienced the 
effect of the specified spell. For example, if the 
caster has been attacked by a fireball at some time, 
then she can use spell immunity to provide protec- 
tion from a fireball. Second, the spell cannot affect 
a creature already magically protected by a potion, 
protective spell, ring, or other device. Third, only 
a particular spell can be protected against, not a 
certain sphere of spells or a group of spells that are 
similar in effect; thus, a creature given immunity 
to the lightning bolt spell is still vulnerable to a 
shocking grasp spell. 

The material component is the same as that of 
the spell to be protected against. 

Notes: Common for clerics (PHB). 


Spell Immunity — Shukenja 
The shukenja version is identical, except for the 
material components, which are a pot of ink, a 
brush, and a white silk vest. 


Spell Shield (of Mystra) 
(Abjuration) 
Sphere: Protection 


Level: 3 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 6 

Duration: 5 rds. 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell protects a single being against all 
magic in the following ways: The recipient 
receives a +3 bonus to all saving throws vs. spell; 
the recipient is rendered immune to all Illu- 
sion/Phantasm and Enchantment/Charm spells 
for the duration of the spell shield aspen 
existing magics of this sort are 
broken by the shield), and the shield absorbs 1a 
points from each die of damage inflicted by any 
spell that does affect the shielded being. 

Notes: Restricted to priests of Mystra, from the 
ForGOTTEN REALMS setting. This spell is found 
only in a few exceptionally rare tomes. 


Spell Ward, Azuth’s 
See Azuth’s spell ward. 


This powerful magic confers upon the caster or 
a single living touched spell recipient complete 
personal immunity to one specific, named wizard 
spell of each level (for example, lightning bolt, not 
just any lightning spell), which must be deter- 
mined during casting. In addition, a spell ward 
affords protection against any one form of damage 
of both natural and magical origin (typical forms 
are cold, electricity, fire, acid, rot, heat, energy 
drain, and poison). However, a spell ward cannot 
prevent the contraction of any disease. 

Casters who use this spell on themselves 
can—at an immediate cost of 1d6 points of 
damage to themselves—transfer the protection of 
the ward to another being by touch. (Unaware or 
unwilling recipients require a successful attack on 
AC 10 to touch.) Such a transfer does not affect 
the duration of the ward; only the remaining time 
of protection is gained. No second transfer can be 
made, and a being who is not the spell’s caster 
cannot transfer a spell ward to anyone. The ward 
does not work on automatons (such as golems) or 
undead creatures. 

Notes: Restricted to priests of Mystra, from the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Spellbind 
(Alteration, Necromancy) 
Sphere: Necromantic, Protection 


Level: 7 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: | being and one book 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell enables a caster who is touching a 
book of any sort and a living creature to cause 
book and being to be bound together. Any damage 
done to the book is suffered by the being by the 
same means. (For instance, if the book is put into 
flames, the spell recipient is burned, no matter how 


a ee a a aaa 


~ Spellsong — Drow = 


distant from the book.) However, the linked being 
can vanish into the book whenever desired. 

Materialization and dematerialization both take 
1 round. While within the book, the bound being 
can see, hear, and speak normally, but cannot 
move things, including the book, nor feel or move 
its body, clothing, or any carried items. A being 
spellbound in a book cannot be seen by those 
examining it by nonmagical means, The spell- 
bound being can read the surface thoughts of 
anyone reading or flipping through the book (akin 
to the 2nd-level wizard spell ESP) if it concen- 
trates on doing so. 

A spellbound being can freely leave the book it 
is linked to at any time unless other spells are cast 
upon the book to restrict this. While within the 
tome it need not rest, sleep, eat, or drink. All body 
processes, including healing, are suspended for the 
spellbound being while it is in the book. 

A successful dispel magic cast by a spelicaster of 
at least 20th level destroys the binding between book 
and being without damaging either, Utter destruction 
of the book ends the spell and deals the being it was 
linked to 4d12 points of damage. The death of a 
spellbound being in turn forces an item saving throw 
ys. acid on the book to avoid its crumbling to dust 
forever, This disintegration takes three rounds and 
can be halted by a successful dispel magic spell, lim- 
ited wish, or wish cast within this time. 

Notes: Granted by Oghma, Lord of Knowl- 
edge, in the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Spellsong* — Drow 
(Alteration, Evocation) 
Sphere: Creation 


Level: 6 
Range: Special 

Components; V, S 

Casting Time: | rd. or special 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


‘This spell enables the caster, by song and sup- 
plication to Eilistraee, to cause one of several 
effects. If other priests of Eilistraee are present, then 
the options available to the caster increase. The 
caster and any other choral participants must be able 
to move about freely to dance and sing free of mag- 
ical silencing. Priests of Eilistraee are trained to sing 
when in pain and may sing while dodging about in 
combat. Choral work by multiple priests involves a 
circular dance around the person to be aided, around 
a fire, or around some other focal point. Failing any- 
thing else, a longsword driven point down into the 


ground or a tipod of sticks surmounted by the 
caster’s holy symbol can be used. 

The spell can perform one of the following 
functions: 


Spellsong can cause an effect equivalent to 
almost any desired priest spell of 4th level or 
less. The spell has its normal effect, range, dura- 
tion saving throws, and so on but without the 
usual gestures or (most often) material compo- 
nents. Spells that require material components 
in excess of 100 gp value require another round 
of singing added to the casting time for each 
100 gp or fraction of the material component's 
value. Spells that specify the material compo- 
nent cannot be eliminated or substituted for 
cannot be created with spellsong. 

Alternately, a spellsong can be used to recall to 
‘memory and the immediate ability to cast any one 
spell cast by the spellsong-caster earlier in the last 
48 hours, not including spells cast from scrolls. 
It can also, with different wording, bestow spell 
immunity. Any other priests of Eilistraee pres- 
ent can join in this song without using a spell 
themselves, adding their knowledge to the 
caster’s, In this case, the immunity granted can 
be to any single spell that any member of the 
group has cast or experienced. 

A differently worded spellsong can heal 1d4+1 
lost hit points to the caster or to any creature 
touched. Each additional singing priest who 
touches the injured creature while the spellsong 
continues heals 1d4 more points of damage. 
Seven or more pricsts of Eilistrace can work a 
cure blindness, slow poison, or cure disease 
instead of restoring hit points, if they will it so, 
and sing together. 

Nine or more priests can work a dispel magic, 
remove curse, or neutralize poison spell. A 
dispel magic or remove curse spell functions at 
the level of the highest participating priest. 
‘Twelve or more priests can work a regenerate or 
restore an experience level lost within the last day. 
Notes: Granted by the drow goddess Eilistraee. 


Spelltouch 
(Enchantment) 
Sphere: Charm 


Level: 4 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 7 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 object 
Saving Throw: None 


sn 


Spellweb — Drow 


ee 


This spell, cast on a nonliving item, allows any 
spell of 3rd level or less cast on it in the following 
round to remain dormant until the item touches a 
target creature. The item affected must be of less 
weight and volume than the caster. 

The caster can specify what race and sex, or 
type (undead, summoned, living, avian, and so on) 
of creature will trigger or be affected by the second 
spell. The second spell is unleashed by contact 
between the item and the triggering creature. Any 
saving throw allowed by the stored spell are 
resolved normally. For example, a gem set into a 
throne could unleash a fireball spell when trig- 
gered by the touch of a guard. (“A living human 
male” or “female” can be specified, but not “a 
wizard” or “the king.”) 

During the casting, the caster can specify a 
single type of being as immune to the spell. An 
immune being will not trigger the stored spell and, 
if in the unleashed spell’s area of effect, gains a +4 
bonus to any saving throw the unleashed spell 
allows, An item can bear only one spelltouch effect 
or equivalent. The caster need not be know or be 
able to cast the second spell; this may be done by 
another caster, 

‘The material components of this spell are a 
pinch of powdered gemstone (of 200 gp value per 
evel of the stored spell) and a pinch of the ash left 
by any fire created or augmented by a spell, com- 
bined with a drop of water and touched to the item 
during the casting. The components of the stored 
spell are also required. The item must be purified 
and magically prepared for the casting, a process 
that takes a full week per level of the stored spell. 

Notes: Very rare spell from the FORGOTTEN 
REALMS setting. (Updated from DRAGON Maga- 
zine.) 


Spellweb — Drow 
(Evocation) 
Sphere: Creation 


Level: 3 
Range: 5 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 3 
Duration: | turn/level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: Neg. or 1⁄4 


A spellweb is the drow priest equivalent of the 
2nd-level wizard spell web. The spell creates a 
many-layered mass of strong, sticky strands simi- 
lar to spider webs but far larger and tougher. The 
spellweb must be anchored to two or more solid 
and diametrically opposed points (such as floor 


573 


and ceiling or opposing walls), or the spellweb col- 
lapses on itself, and disappears. 

A spellweb glows with an eerie green lumines- 
cence when forming; it fades to white as it dwin- 
dles in intensity. At the caster’s option, the 
completed spellweb can be lightless, or can glow 
with a very faint pearly radiance, aiding creatures 
in locating it. Once this decision is made, it cannot 
be changed. 

Priests of all levels can feel when any spellweb 
they have cast is disturbed, damaged, or expires. 
This tenuous linkage does not cause the priest any 
pain, nor can it be used by any known creature as 
a way of contacting or otherwise harming the 
caster. The caster cannot cause the spellweb to 
melt away before its duration expires until 9th 
level, whereupon the caster gains the ability to 
cause his spellweb to dissipate in 1 round, by utter- 
ance of a particular command word. 

A spellweb covers a maximum area of 7,000 
cubic feet (for example seven 10X 10-foot cubes). 
Creatures caught within the area of a spellweb, or 
who subsequently touch its gluey fibers, become 
stuck fast. Anyone in the area of effect of a spellweb 
as it forms is allowed a saving throw vs. spell at a—2 
penalty. If the saving throw succeeds, they have man- 
aged to jump free of the forming spellweb (if unable 
to do so, the web in their area is at half strength), 

Engulfed creatures of less than 13 Strength are 
trapped until the spell wears off or they are freed 
by another creature, Creatures of 13 to 17 Strength 
can break through one foot of spellweb strands per 
round. Creatures of 18 or greater Strength can 
break through two feet of webs in a round. Crea- 
tures of Huge or larger size, and possessing 
strength and bulk normal for their size (for exam- 
ple, a giant slug), can brush through 10 feet of 
webs per round. 

Missile fire is generally ineffective against crea- 
tures trapped in webs. Creatures stuck on the out- 
side of a web are reduced to AC 10 (9 if they 
currently possess either Strength or Dexterity scores 
of over 15; 8 if both ability scores exceed 15). 

Spellweb strands are readily flammable. A 
magical flaming sword can slash them away as 
easily as a hand brushes away cobwebs. Any fire— 
such as a torch, flaming oil, or candle—sets a 
spellweb alight. It burns away in a single round, 
freeing trapped creatures amid much choking 
smoke (visibility is reduced enough to cause a -2 
penalty to all attack rolls the round following the 
spellweb’s ignition). All creatures within or stuck 
to a flaming spellweb take 2d4 points of damage 
from the flames, before they are freed. 

The material components are the priest's holy 
symbol, a crystal of any size and type (e.g. a 


~ Sphere of Adaptation r 


diamond or a tiny grain of sugar or salt will serve 
equally well), and a piece of spider web. 

Notes: Rare spell granted by the gods of the 
drow. 


Sphere of Adaptation 
(Divination) 
Sphere: Divination 


Level: 7 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: 24 hrs. 

Area of Effect: 20-ft. globe around creature 
touched 

Saving Throw: None 


This spell allows creatures in the area to ignore 
gases affecting respiration, to breathe underwater, 
and even to exist in airless space for the duration 
of the spell. The effect is centered on and moves 
with the creature touched. It affects all creatures 
entering the area equally, allowing respiration to 
creatures that require it. 

The material component is holy water. 

Notes: Very rare spell. (Updated from POLYHE- 
DRON Newszine). 


Sphere of Security 
Quest spell, see appendix in Vol. 3. 


Sphere of Survival 
(Abjuration) 
Sphere: Elemental (All), Protection 


Level: 7 

Range: 0 

Components: V, $, M 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: | hr/level 

Area of Effect: 10-ft. radius sphere 
Saving Throw: None 


Sphere of survival creates a sphere of protec- 
tion against one type of element, and breathable 
atmosphere for all within. It is intended to be used 
on the Inner Planes, allowing a small group of 
planewalkers to enter into and operate within a 
hostile environment safely. As such, this spell does 
not function on the Prime Material or any of the 
Outer Planes, 

At the time of casting, the priest must specify 
which element the sphere protects against. Every- 
one within the area of effect of the spell is protected 
as by the elemental protection spell. Additionally, 


the sphere provides all creatures within it with 
fresh air. The sphere passes through all elemental 
material unhindered, even if the medium is solid 
rock. 

Obviously, this spell is a great boon to inner- 
planar travel. Only its high level keeps it from 
becoming more widely used. 

The material component is the holy symbol of 
the caster. 

Notes: Rare for planar priests. Unlikely to be 
learned except through visiting the Inner Planes. 


Spider Bite — Drow 
(Evocation) 
Sphere: Combat 


Level: 6 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 4 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


Also known as venom bite, this spell confers 
the poisonous biting ability of a spider upon the 
caster. A successful attack roll is required to 
administer the poison, and the caster can bite only 
exposed or clothed flesh; armor cannot be bitten 
through. The number of times the bite has venom 
effects, and the power of those effects, depends on 
the caster’s level. 

Spider bite can be saved for hours or days after 
casting. However, a bite delivered, whether or not 
it is successful, expends one use of the magic. A 
bitten creature receives a saving throw vs. poison 
at a —3 penalty to avoid the effect, 

For the entire time this spell is in effect, the 
caster is immune to poison. No more than two 
spider bite spells can be active on the caster at one 
time. A second spell increases the number of bites 
only, the effects are not otherwise cumulative. 

Notes: Granted by the drow goddess Lolth. 


SPIDER BITE TABLE 
Onset Poison Effect 

Level Bites (Rds) Save/Fail 
11-13: lbite  2d6 20 points/1d3 points 
14-16: I bite Id4+1 25 points/2d4 points 
17-18: 1 bite 1d2 30 points/2d6 points 
19-20: 2bites 142 30 points/2d6 points 
Over 20 2bites Immediate Death 


Se a a aS an ae a ae 


Spidereyes — Drow 


EE A 


Spider Climb — Drow 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Necromantic 


Level: 1 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 1 

Duration: | rd. + 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


The version of spider climb used by drow 
priestesses is a slight improvement over the 
widely-known wizard spell. 

Bare hands and feet are required, and the 
affected creature moves at MV 9 (6 if at all encum- 
bered). Movement is silent, unless loose rock, and 
so on is dislodged. Objects that weigh less than 1 
pound will stick to the affected being’s hands and 
feet for the spell duration, making certain types of 
spellcasting virtually impossible. The effect can be 
prematurely ended by the caster, by pronunciation 
of a word (if the affected being is not the caster, 
the caster must be within a range of 10 yards per 
level for the word to have any effect). 

Sufficient force will tear a spider climbing 
being away from the surface clung to; the DM 
determines what occurs according to the situation, 

No material component is required. If the 
caster is also the recipient of the spell, its duration 
can be (by silent will) stopped and started; that is, 
a climber who reaches a ledge can suppress the 
effect and sleep, cast other spells, and engage in 
other activities, activating the spider climb later in 
order to climb down. 

This option is not available to creatures other 
than the caster. Such beings must be touched for 
the caster to transfer the magic to them. This can 
be done at any time during the life of the spell— 
that is the priest can spider climb for a time, touch 
another being and, by will, transfer the ability to 
that other being for the remaining time. A being 
unwilling to be affected is allowed a saving throw 
vs. spell to negate the effect (this ends the spell 
immediately). 

Notes: Granted by the drow goddess Lolth. 


Spider Summoning — Drow 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 
Sphere: Animal 


Duration: 1 rd + 1 rdflevel 
Area of Effect: Summons 1d4 spiders/level 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell calls 144 large spiders (detailed in 
the Monstrous MANUAL tome) per level of the 
caster, to serve the priest. Only true arachnids can 
be summoned by this spell, not similar insect crea- 
tures or beings using magic to take arachnid form 
(such as Lolth or a wizard using spider shape). 
They appear within 100 feet of the caster, on the 
round of the casting, and obey the caster’s com- 
mand on the rounds thereafter. They have maxi- 
mum hit points and poison reserves. They fight to 
the death for the caster with utter loyalty, follow- 
ing the caster’s silent mental urgings as to targets, 
direction to move, and tasks to do, The caster can 
cast other spells without ending this spell’s con- 
trol. When the spell expires, surviving spiders dis- 
appear, returning whence they came. 

The material component is a dried arachnid 
corpse. 

Notes: Granted by the drow goddess Lolth. 


Spider, Large: AC 8; MV 6, Wb 15; HD 1+1; 
#AT 1; THACO 19; Dmg 1; SA poison (save at 
+2, onset 15 min, dmg 15/0); Int Non-; AL N; 
SZ S (2' diam.); ML Fearless (19-20). 


Spidereyes — Drow 
(Alteration) 
Sphere: Animal 


Level: 1 

Range: Special 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 1 
Duration: 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell enables a priest to temporarily see 
through the eyes of any living arachnid, which 
must be touched (unlike the wizard version of this 
spell, a priest requires no other material compo- 
nents). This spell does not give the caster any 


a ca eS pen Ee 


~ Spiderform — Drow 


direct mental contact with the spider, and does not 
confer any sort of control over the arachnid, or 
ability to learn its thoughts or emotions, 

Most spiders have eight eyes (two compound, 
six simple) whose vision is not readily under- 
standable to most intelligent races. The spell 
allows the caster to comprehend what the spider 
sees (with range, focal viewpoint, and usually 
infravision) as readily as the spider does. The 
range between spider and caster is limited only by 
the spell duration and the spider's travels, but the 
spell is broken if either spider or caster move to 
another plane of existence. The interposition of 
certain magical barriers, such as the border of a 
minor globe of invulnerability or any more power- 
ful spell, between arachnid and caster will also end 
the spell. 

Usually small, harmless spiders are employed 
by casters of this spell, to serve as spies where the 
caster dare not go—but often, frustratingly, a 
spider will not go or look where the caster wants it 
to, unless controlled or influenced by additional 
spells. 

Sometimes, this spell is cast on a giant spider 
(the caster requires a successful attack roll if the 
spider is hostile and not surprised) to see through 
its eyes while battling it, so that the caster and 
companions can strike from areas that the arachnid 
cannot see. 

Notes: Granted by the drow goddess Lolth. 


Spiderform — Drow 
(Alteration, Necromancy) 
Sphere: Animal, Necromantic 


Level: 5 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 2/arget 
Duration: 4 rds. + 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: 1 creature/level 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell enables a priest to turn one or more 
small living animals or arachnids into giant spi- 
ders, 

Unlike normal giant spiders, the bite of these 
spiders requires a saving throw vs. spell, with fail- 
ure resulting in the victim being stunned for one 
round (no actions), and slowed (as the 3rd-level 
wizard spell) for the rest of the spell duration. 

Even an arachnid that is normally poisonous is 
transformed into a giant spider that bites for this 
effect. Transformed spiders do not spin webs, but 
can freely navigate existing webs, even those cre- 
ated by the web and spellweb spells. 


If spelicasting is interrupted for any reason, or 
the arachnids already bear a magical dweomer (for 
example, they are other creatures polymorphed 
into spiders), the spell is ruined and the caster is 
stunned for 1 round. 

If this spell is successfully used on any drow 
(magic resistance fails), the drow is temporarily 
transformed into a drider under the caster’s con- 
trol. The control is like a charm spell and lasts for 
1 round per level of the caster. It is broken 
instantly if the drider is commanded to do any- 
thing contrary to its nature, the known wishes of 
Lolth, its superiors, or anything clearly fatal to 
itself. Transformation to and from drider-form 
takes 1 round, during which time the drider can 
take no action, and occurs when the spell ends, or 
upon command of the caster. The affected drow 
usually (unless Lolth desires otherwise) remem- 
bers nothing of its time and actions as a drider. 

The material component is a spider of any type 
small enough to be held in the caster’s hand. 

Notes: Granted by the drow goddess Lolth. 


Giant Spider: AC 4; MV 3, Web 12; HD 4+4; 
#AT 1; THACO 15; Dmg 1d8 + special (bite); 
SA leap 6 horizontally and 12 vertically, save 
vs, spell or stunned 1 round and slowed; Int low 
(5-7); AL N; SZ S; ML fearless (19-20), 


Drider: AC 3; MV 12; THACO 13; #AT 1; 
Dmg 1d4 (bite); SA Save vs. poison at -2 or be 
paralyzed for 1d2 turns. 

Notes: The drider retains its own spells, hit 
points, and intellect. 


576 


