Volume Four 


Wizards spell 


Wizard's Spell Compendium 
Accessory 


Credits 
Design: It is impossible to list all the creators of the spells cataloged in these volumes, 
but credit goes to everyone who created a spell in a module, boxed set, accessory, hardbound 
book or magazine article published in the last 20 years. 
Compilation: Mark Middleton 
Development and Editing: Jon Pickens 
Additional Development: L. Richard Baker III 
Project Coordination: Steve Winter and Thomas M. Reid 
Interior Black and White Art: Glen Michael Angus and Arnie Swekel 
Art Director: Dawn Murin 
Graphic Design: Tanya Matson 
Typesetting: Eric Haddock 
Acknowledgments: L. Richard Baker III, Brad Bolas, Ed Greenwood, Bruce Heard, Miranda Horner, 
Julia Martin, Mark Middleton, Roger E. Moore, John Rateliff, Terry O'Neal, Steven E. Schend, slade, 
Keith Strohm, Skip Williams. And of course, James M. Ward. 


Based on the original DUNGEONS & DRAGONS rules created by E. Gary Gygax and Dave Arneson. 
Volume Four 


Squaring the Circle to Zone of Despair 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 
a vs vy AYYaeae* Orson nr REN Spr ER Ue ee reo IL 867 
bl quA to 1:5 EPTCTEREEESS sie os 0 77 0 COUIT VIRO YD YYIS s VIT ai 867 
RS NU Lt Sea EIER EET CERTO 000 IOPE CET C EEEE Doo 870 
oc A Bae Quz Oe eee, cf ck. GE BMEXEE8S8.9S9eASTOS 2 ee 871 
iie. ADS ovata tess V USE CREER ERU Duc AERIS SC ROC QEMMETINRAM 2. 158. 873 
p rco m E. cor e o EL ooo PRENNE. AA TRNY S 917 
ie Bie ie OUT AS 0 othe 0 0:9:0:0.0: see no 70 E E, So TEBRTETNM Eso sS 963 
bg 6 reo E eee a ee, EA a ed A 973 
pO ener 0 TAINS | Ee SK TS HS C1 SS RARER AC 4 985 
b TO A CEO EGO ee T A A TE ERES S A A SA 1039 
We AJ PORE TN E Eo o ovr; «cc coc UI outil 1041 
Lo ee, Gee oS Sr ee 1043 
Jtorsl o c EA EE TU TETTE TT TEES IT 0o NE oRloe ccie eOBinc 6 Oa PAS 1048 
US., CANADA, EUROPEAN 
PACIFIC, & LATIN AMERICA Wizards of the Coast, Belgium 
Wizards of the Coast, Inc PB.34 
PO. Box 707 2300 Turnhout 
Renton, WA 98037-0707 Belgium 
*32-14-44-30-44 


Visit our website at www.tsr.com 


DEITIES & DEMIGODS, MONSTROUS MANUAL, PLAYER'S OPTION, and ROLE PLAYING GAME ASSOCIATION are trademarks owned by TSR, Inc. 
All TSR characters, character names, spell names, magical item names, monster names, unique place locations, and the distinct likenesses thereof are trademarks 
owned by TSR, Inc. 
Distributed to the book trade in the United States by Random House, Inc. and in Canada by Random House of Canada Ltd. 
Distributed to the hobby, toy, and comic trade in the United States and Canada by regional distributors, Distributed worldwide by Wizards of the Coast, Inc. and 
regional distributors. This material is protected under the copyright laws of thc United States of America. Any reproduction or unauthorized use of the material or 
artwork contained herein is prohibited without the express written permission of TSR, Inc. 

1998 TSR, Inc. All Rights Reserved, Made in the U.S.A. 

TSR, Inc. is a subsidiary of Wizards of the Coast, Inc. 


0-7869-1209-X First Printing, September 1998 2177 


Ww fay = 
AW 


1 ù M - 
i IV 


zo tet mte x 


^. 


A 
" 
Vw. 
= ba 


"mmn 


Lp 


s 


f 


77, 


> 


^^—————————w/—O!"——-——— 4 


Introduction 


The fourth volume of the Wizard Spell 
Compendium continues the work of the first 
three. This volume completes the alphabetical 
reference to wizard spells of the AD&D* game 
system, covering the letters Sq through Z, with 
appendices and spell lists. The entire series of 
Wizard Compendium books covers wizard 
spells created for the game from 1975 to 1995. 

For the uninitiated, this is not a book of 
"real" magical spells. In a fantasy game world, 
characters like Merlin the Magician create mar- 
velous magical effects with a wave of the hand. 
This is a book of marvelous effects that can be 
used by the good guys (and the bad guys) in the 
course of a game session. The key to the game 
is, as always, the decisions made by the players 
(heroic or otherwise), and the impact those de- 
cisions have on the ongoing plot of the game. 
New spells are fun, but it's even more fun figur- 
ing out unusual ways to use them. 

Up to this time, lists of spell effects have 
been keyed to spell level; that is, relative spell 
power. In other words, if all a gamer or 
Dungeon Master knew was a spell name, each 
level's list of spells had to be checked. While 
this volume of the series includes level lists (as 
well as lists by race and magical specialty) the 
most important principle of organization used 
in the series as a whole is alphabetical. 

The material in these books is presented in 
the most current game format, that of the 2nd 
Edition rules. Some spell descriptions have 
been updated or combined with similar spell ef- 
fects to eliminate duplication; some have been 
modified for better play, and a very few have 
been dropped entirely. 

Variant magical systems, such as the rune 
magic system detailed in our Viking setting ref- 
erence book; the kingdom-level magic of the 
BIRTHRIGHT setting; and the very rare, pure- 
energy "spellfire" of the FORGOTTEN REALMS 
setting are beyond the scope of this book. The 
emphasis here is on those magical effects that 
any character with the ability to cast wizard 
spells might find useful in the course of an ad- 
venture. However, the psionics-based spells of 
the Dragon-Kings of the DARK SUN setting have 
been included in a special appendix. Also, the 
original cantrips (magical effects less powerful 
than Ist-level spells) that were first introduced 
in the book, Unearthed Arcana, are in this sec- 
tion, as well. 


About This Book 


The spells listed in this book are given alpha- 
betically. Spell names that include a wizard's 
name are given a primary listing under that name. 
For example, for Tenser 5 floating disk, the pri- 
mary entry is under “T.” Another reference to the 
main entry will be found at the second word of 
the spell name; in this case, the entry would read: 
"Floating Disk, Tenser's." 

Be aware that many spell names are irregular 
compound words, and that standard alphabetical 
order follows complete words. Thus, fire shield 
will appear before fireball. If you can't find a 
spell, try looking for it as a compound form. 

Some spells will have multiple names; or the 
name of a spell might have been changed, either to 
avoid confusion with a better known spell with a 
similar name or to better match the spell effect. For 
example, intensify, which makes natural phenom- 
ena such as storms and earthquakes more severe, 
was renamed intensify nature to distinguish it from 
effects that might be intensified by other spells, 
such as intensify summoning. Renamed spells have 
a short reference under the original name. 

Spells associated with specific campaign worlds 
are marked with a special symbol so they can be 
easily recognized. See page 871 for a summary of 
these symbols. Also, spells that are associated with 
a specific monster or nonhuman race (such as 
dragons, elves, and so on) are noted; the race name 
is separated from the spell name by a dash. 

Generally, spell names and secondary game 
effects are italicized. For example, the emotion 
spell has a secondary effect called hope. 


How to Use This Book 


Each spell in this book is organized along the 
same general lines, Each is listed by its name, 
school, and a number of statistics that govern its 
use such as Level (of power), Range, Casting 
Time, and so on. The game powers of each spell 
are described, along with any special rules that 
govern its use, how the spell target can avoid or 
counter its effects, any limitations on how the 
spell can be used, and any special preparations or 
materials that needed for a successful casting, 
Next, the details of any reversed form the spell 
might have are given. Finally, a section called 
Notes has been appended to each spell; this deals 
with the spell's recommended rarity in the cam- 
paign, and any special restrictions on who (or 
what) can use it. 


Alp. eee ee ee 


867 


^—-^-——— M VÜY—!OÜO—  "———á———Ü A 


Having covered the field briefly, a more de- 
tailed look is in order: 


Name: This is the name by which the spell is 
generally known. Although we have tried to 
ensure unique names, this has not always been 
possible. For example, create shade, a useful 
shelter from the sun in the arabian deserts of the 
AL-QADIM setting, is very different from create 
shade, the evil spell that turns someone into a 
dangerous shadow monster from the Plane of 
Shadows, a monster known as a shade. Where 
two spells have the same name, the most general 
version is given first, while variants cast by other 
races or found in specialized campaign settings 
are given later. 


School: Each school governs a type of magic, ac- 
cording to the type of energy its spells employ 
and the special practices and methods used by its 
wizards. The basic schools are: 


SCHOOLS OF PHILOSOPHY 

Abjuration: Protective, warding, or banishing 
magics. 

Alteration: Magic that changes physical prop- 
erties of an object, creature, or condition. 

Conjuration/Summoning: Magic that calls or 
brings objects or creatures from elsewhere. 

Divination: Magic that uncovers what is lost 
or hidden in the past, present, or future. 

Enchantment/Charm: Magic that bestows 
magical properties on objects or influences crea- 
tures magically. 

Illusion/Phantasm: Illusions create and alter 
appearances; phantasms affect the mind. 

Invocation/Evocation: Magic that channels 
and shapes magical energy to create an effect or 
object. 

Necromancy: Magic that works on life energy, 
including the negative energy of the undead. 


Optional Schools: These include two groups 
of schools beyond the original eight. 


THE SCHOOLS OF EFFECT 

Dimension: Magic that affects dimensions, or 
access to extradimensional areas. 

Elemental Magic: This is subdivided into Air, 
Earth, Fire, and Water specialists. Arabian and 
oriental cultures have similar divisions. 

Force: Magic that deals with fields of pure co- 
hesive magical energies. 

Shadow: Magic that deals with shadow and 


darkness, including the shadowstuff of the 
Demiplane of Shadow. 


ScHOOLS OF THAUMATURGY 

Alchemy: Magic that uses powders and 
strange reagents to achieve effects. 

Artifice: Magic that uses items and devices to 
focus spell energies. 

Geometry: Magic that uses diagrams, sym- 
bols, and complex patterns to channel magical 
energy. 

Wild Magic: Magic that shapes dangerously 
uncontrolled raw energies, subject to unpre- 
dictable surges. 


UNIVERSAL ScHOOL OF MAGIC 
A special list of spells to which any wizard has 
access. 


Reversed Form: An entry of “Reversible” means 
the spell can be cast with the opposite effect. For 
example, the /Tesh to stone spell, a petrifying 
attack, can be reversed as stone to flesh, provid- 
ing a way to recover a character otherwise lost to 
a petrification attack. Usually, a wizard must 
memorize the exact form of the reversible spell 
he wants available. 


Level: This is the relative power level of the 
spell, ranging from 1st level (weakest) to 9th 
level (most powerful). A king's wizard who can 
create potions, magical scrolls, and magical items 
with expendable charges will generally have 
access to a 6th-level spell, a few 5th-level spells, 
and an increasing number of 4th- through Ist- 
level spells each day. 


Range: The distance from the caster at which 
the magical effect occurs. A range of “0” means 
the effect is centered on the caster's person or 
his location; in the latter case the effect is usu- 
ally immobile. “Touch” means the effect can be 
used on another creature or object. Unless other- 
wise specified, spells are centered on a point 
visible to the caster and within the spell's range; 
this can be a specific creature or object if de- 
sired. Most ranges are measured in yards; some 
are measured in feet. 


Components: These are the types of components 
that the spell requires; if the components are not 
present, the casting fails. “V™ is verbal; that is, a 
spoken incantation the wizard is assumed to de- 
liver while casting. “S” is somatic; that is, mea- 


” PAST o —— m T m a LENA, 


868 


"^ ——————s—— á———— A 


sured and precise gestures with the hands, which 
the wizard is assumed to make while casting. 
“M” is for material; that is, physical substances 
or objects that are annihilated by the spell ener- 
gies in the casting process. This abbreviation 
sometimes signifies a focus, or device that is 
reusable; sometimes this is a temporary focus 
whose premature destruction will end the spell. 
Often the components are merely suggestive 
or colorful, at other times they will be a signifi- 
cant restriction on how often a spell can be cast. 
Unless a cost for a component is given in the de- 
scription (which means the component is in- 
tended as a limit), the cost is negligible and can 
be assumed as part of the wizard's daily or 


monthly general expenses. 


Casting Time: This is relative time required to 
cast a spell. Unless rounds, turns, or a longer cast- 
ing time is specified, the casting will be com- 
pleted in the same round it is started. A casting 
time less than one round is a modifier to the ini- 
tiative roll, and is essentially the same as a 
weapon speed factor. A spell that takes a full 
round to cast comes into effect at the end of that 
round. 


Duration: This is how long the magical energy 
of the spell lasts. An instantaneous duration 
means the spell energy comes and goes the in- 
stant the spell is cast, though the spell effect 
might be long lasting. A duration of permanent 
means the spell energy remains as long as the 
effect does; this means that the spell is vulnerable 
to a dispel magic spell. This is an altered usage. 
Many spells listed in earlier sources as having a 
“permanent” duration (such as cure light 
wounds), will be altered in this series and in 
future publications to “instantaneous.” 

Spells with a set duration (such as 1 round 
per level) must be kept track of by the player; 
those with a variable duration are secretly rolled 
by the DM. 

Some spells can be ended by the caster at will; 
the caster must be in range of the center of the 
spell's effect and must usually (though not 
always) speak words of dismissal. 


Area of Effect: This entry lists the creatures, di- 
mensions, volume, weight, and so on, that the 
spell can affect. Some spells have areas that can 
be shaped by the caster; of these, no dimension 
can be less than 10 feet unless the spell specifi- 
cally allows it. Many areas are given as cubes to 


make it easy to figure out areas of effect when 
using maps gridded into 10-foot or 5-foot squares. 
Three-dimensional volumes are most often 
needed to resolve aerial or underwater effects. 

Unless specifically otherwise in the descrip- 
tion, areas of effect conform to their physical sur- 
roundings; for example, a /ight spell with a 
60-foot radius centered in a closed room that is a 
20-foot cube will light the room. It will not pene- 
trate a solid wall to light a room beyond. 

Many areas are given as geometric shapes. 

Radius: This might yield a circle, hemisphere, 
or sphere, depending on the situation. 

Cloud: Usually given as a block of cubes for 
convenience, although it's actually amorphous 
and billowy. 

Cone: This projects outward from the caster, 
with the smallest end toward the caster and the 
largest diameter farthest from the caster. 

Path: This is usually a 10-foot wide line start- 
ing at the caster projecting away in a straight line 
to a specified length. 

Spells that affect the caster's friends or ene- 
mies are based on the current perceptions of the 
caster. 


Saving Throw: This entry lists whether a spell 
allows a saving throw, and often the effect of a 
successful saving throw: “Neg.” means the spell 
is negated and has no effect; 4 means that the 
spell inflicts damage and that a successful saving 
throw halves the damage taken; "None" means 
no saving throw is allowed to an unwilling sub- 
ject. The result of a saving throw for a reversed 
spell is given in the paragraph that details the re- 
versed form. 

The saving throw itself is a roll on a 20-sided 
die; high numbers are generally good. 

Wisdom allows adjustments to saving throws 
against enchantment/charm spells. Dexterity may 
provide adjustments against spells that affect a 
large area. 

Solid physical barriers may give saving throw 
modifiers and reduce damage. Cover and con- 
cealment may also affect saving throws. The 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide has more informa- 
tion. 

A creature that successfully saves against a 
spell without obvious physical effects often feels 
a hostile force or tingle, but the exact nature of 
the attack cannot be deduced. 

Unless the spell specifies otherwise, if a char- 
acter makes a saving throw, all items carried and 
worn are assumed to survive the attack. If the 


Wo po a E ee i a 


869 


T 


Spell Frequency 


character fails the saving throw, exposed items 
must make saving throws against the attack 
form. An item exposed by the destruction of a 
covering (a parchment scroll protected by a bone 
scroll case, for example) must also save against 
the attack. 

Unless specifically forbidden, a character can 
voluntarily forego a saving throw and willingly 
accept the spell result. A character with a special 
resistance to magic (for example, an elf’s resis- 
tance to a charm spell) can voluntarily suppress 
this if he wants. 


Spell Description: This contains the details of 
what the spell does and how it works. Spells with 
multiple functions usually allow the caster to pick 
the desired function at the time of casting (for ex- 
ample, the emotion spell can create fear, courage, 
hope, despair, joy, and several other effects). 

Spells that give bonuses or penalties to attack 
rolls, damage rolls, saving throws, and so on, are 
usually not cumulative; only the strongest magic 
is effective. However, duration may be a factor, 
and spell effects might overlap in different ways 
at different times. 


Notes: This new section deals with the spell's 
recommended rarity on the following scale: 
common, uncommon, rare, very rare, and unique. 
These are discussed in detail in the Definitions of 
Spell Frequency section. Spells of any rarity also 
may be restricted to certain races or specialty 
casters. Any notes on a spell's source or origin, 
such as a game world or a magazine, are given 
here. 


Monster Details: Some of the spells summon 
or create monsters. The standard abbreviations 
used for monster details given later. Not all mon- 
sters will use all abbreviations. 

AC: Armor Class 

MV: Movement— Fl: fly 

(MC) = Maneuverability Class (A to E) 

HD: Hit Dice 

#AT; Number of Attacks 

THACO: To Hit Armor Class 0 

Dmg: Damage 

SA: Special Attacks 

SD: Special Defenses 

SW: Special Weaknesses 

MR: Magic Resistance 

SZ: Size 

ML: Morale 

AL: Alignment 


Common Spell: The details and effects of a 
common spell are generally known, even by wiz- 
ards who may not have the spell in their books. 
All spells in the Player s Handbook are common 
spells. Spells listed for the basic wizard class in 
world-specific material (such as the DARK SUN* 
campaign set) are common for wizards of that 
world, but might be rarer or even unknown else- 
where. 

Player characters can take common first level 
spells as starting spells (see Starting Spellbooks 
in the Wizard Spell Compendium Vol. 1). Any 
limitation on spell selection—such as those for 
school, class, or kit—apply to all spells, even 
common ones. Note also that DMs may have 
their own campaign guidelines. For example, the 
DM might require every PC mage to have a 
mentor wizard, restricting any "free" spells 
(those not found or directly researched) to spells 
in the books of the mentor. A DM might rule that 
named spells (such as Tenser 5 floating disk) are 
uncommon spells, as well. 


Uncommon Spell: Wizard spells found in the 
Tome of Magic fall into this category. These 
spells are less well known, but not restricted to a 
race or special group (like, for example, witches, 
dragons, or the Red Wizards of Thay). A kit, 
school, or other specialty might allow some un- 
common spells to be treated as common spells. 
Generalist mages can research uncommon spells 
using the normal research rules. 

A player character cannot start with an uncom- 
mon spell or learn it in the course of normal level 
advancement (unless, perhaps, a wizardly mentor 
knows it). Such spells enter play when found on a 
magical scroll or in a spellbook, or when devel- 
oped as a result of research. In the average 
AD&D campaign, finding a new common or un- 
common spell is a little more common that a 
fighter class character finding a *1 magical 


C A a e XE EE ect c 


870 


^———————— ———M 


sword. Some uncommon spells may be restricted 
(see Restricted Spells). 


Rare Spell: Rare spells are specialized or hidden 
magic, such as those introduced in modules or ac- 
cessories. Besides spells that are just less well 
known, two special types of rare spells exist: 1) 
Spells known by a specific nonhuman race (like 
elven spells from the Complete Book of Elves); 
and 2) Spells of a specialty or campaign-specific 
group that is not given in the P/ayer s Handbook 
(like the spells of the Red Wizards of Thay, the 
spells from the Complete Necromancer 's 
Handbook, or spells of a wizard who specializes 
in Elemental Fire magic). Rare spells are likely to 
be restricted (see Restricted Spells). 

As noted in the P/ayer s Handbook, a special- 
ist has bonuses to the “Chance to Learn" and 
spell research rolls within that specialty. The spe- 
cialist treats the spells of the specialty as 
common, unless other factors apply (an enchant- 
ment/charm spell known only to dragons is still 
considered rare for a wizard specializing in en- 
chantment/charm magic.) 

Player characters have access to rare magics 
only as a result of campaign-specific conditions. 


er 


Al-Qadim* 
Arabian Setting 


Kara-Tur/The Horde 
Oriental Setting 


dr 


Red Steel* 
Swashbuckling 
Fantasy Setting 


Dragonlance* 
Epic Romance 
Setting 


P 


Ravenloft* 
Gothic Fantasy Setting 


p Lands! Setting 


Generalist mage research of rare magics has a 
base —15% penalty to the “Chance to Learn" and 
research success rolls, unless the character has 
access to some sort of knowledge or resource that 
would offset this. 

Certain campaign-specific or storyline condi- 
tions might allow rare spell research at common 
spell chances. For example, if a human wizard's 
reward for an adventure on behalf of the elves is 
an elven spell, the DM may choose to waive 
some or all of the “Chance to Learn" roll, the re- 
search cost, and/or the research success roll (time 
requirements should not be waived under any cir- 
cumstances). 


Very Rare Spell: Spells that appear only in mag- 
azine articles, or are otherwise variant, should be 
classified as very rare. The DM should closely 
control very rare spells. For example, they might 
be available only in a single special book or tome 
in which they were recorded. Many very rare 
spells are also restricted (see Restricted Spells). 
A DM who allows the spell to be researched at 
all rolls for the success of the research secretly 
and announces the result to the player. At the 
DM's option, the standard “Chance to Learn" 


A Guide to Spell Icons 


— 


Setting of Kings 


Dark Sun* 
Psionic World Setting 


Maztica 
Aztec/New 
World Setting 


£ 


Spelljammer* 
Fantasy Space Setting 


1 Although there is no specific setting for savage apellcasters, many worlds have arcas from which these might come. This icon marks spells particularly 


suited to an outland "savage" wizard or witch-doctor. 


^——————————SÁ——áÜÓ 4 


might be reduced by up to 50% and the research 
success chances halved, or even quartered. 
Classifying a spell as very rare is one way for 
a DM to handle an experimental spell that is too 
powerful or one that encroaches too much on the 
class abilities of nonwizards. It is also possible, 
over time, for a spell devised by a player charac- 
ter to become rare, uncommon, or even common. 


Unique Spell: This spell is known only to its 
original creator and is intrinsic to the creator's 
campaign function. Some spells of this type 
might be available only to a character holding a 
certain position or office. Most unique spells are 
of the 6th spell level or higher; the creator is 
nearly always of 12th level or higher. Such spells 
are marked with a double dagger (t1). 

If a unique spell can be learned at all, it can be 
learned only from its creator (or in very rare cir- 
cumstances, from the creator's writings). Merely 
having a spellbook or scroll is not sufficient, 
though these might count as part of the creator's 
"writings." The Simbul s spell trigger is a unique 
spell. 

The acquisition of a unique spell or the cre- 
ation of one by a player character is a major cam- 
paign cvent, similar in campaign impact to thc 
completion of an epic high-level quest, the open- 
ing of a fixed interplanar gate, the founding of a 
barony, the destruction of an artifact, and so on. 


Other Definitions 


Lost Spell: Rarely, a spell is mentioned for which 
no 2nd Edition detail exists (including a few 
spells deliberately withdrawn from the system). 
No details are given for these other than the spell 
name. They are “lost knowledge," included only 
to confirm their one-time existence for the curi- 
ous. 


Restricted Spell: A restricted spell is barred to 
generalists (that is, the mage class), and to all 
other wizards except those specifically allowed in 
the spell description or by the DM. Optionally, an 
independently researched spell that matches the 
effects of a restricted spell might be possible, but 
at no less than two levels above the listed level. 


872 


Squaring the Circle 
(Alteration) 


Level: 3 
Range: 0 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 3 
Duration: 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


Squaring the circle allows a wizard to alter the 
shape of the area of effect of one spell of Ist through 
5th level. The spell to be affected must be cast 
within the duration of the squaring the circle spell. 

Square or cubic areas of effect can be trans- 
formed into circular or spherical areas of effect. 
Circular or spherical areas of effect can likewise 
be transformed into square or cubic areas of 
effect. In both cases, the length of a side of a 
square area is equated to the diameter of a circu- 
lar or spherical area. 

Alternatively, a square or cubic area can be 
transformed into a rectangle. The rectangle 
cannot cover more or less square footage than the 
standard square area of the spell. 

Similarly, a circular or spherical area can be 
transformed into an oval or egg shape. The area cov- 
ered by the oval or egg shape cannot cover more or 
less square footage than the original area of the spell. 

The material component is a small pendant of any 
precious metal with a circle fashioned inside a square. 


Notes: Uncommon spell (ToM). 
Stabilize* 
(Abjuration) 
(Wild) 
Level: 9 
Range: 0 


Components: V, S 

Casting Time: | turn 
Duration: 1d4 + 1 turns 
Area of Effect: 30-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: None 


The stabilize spell negates the effects of wild 
magic regions, allowing the caster and all crea- 
tures within a 30-foot radius to cast spells and use 
magical items normally. The spell is centered on 
and mobile with the caster. 

Spells never cause wild surges when cast from 
within the stabilize spell, nor do the effects of 
wild surges extend into the protected area. 


Staff of Smiting, Tenser's 


Furthermore, a wild mage's spells func- 
tion at his or her true level; Table 2 is not 
used to determine level variation. The 
spell affects wildstrike, wildzone, and wildwind. 

Notes: Restricted to wild mages; common 


(ToM). 


Staff of Smiting, Tenser's 
See Tenser's staff of smiting. 


Staffspell 
(Evocation) 


Level: 3 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: | rd. 

Duration: 3 rds./level 

Area of Effect: Creates 1 staff 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell creates a stout staff of living elec- 
tricity, 6 feet long. The staff inflicts damage as a 
normal quarterstaff, but for every five levels of 
the caster, the staff gains a +1 bonus to attack and 
damage rolls, to a maximum of +3 for a 15th- 
level wizard or higher. The staff inflicts double 
damage (2d6) on water-based creatures, save 
those immune to electricity. 

The staff can be used as a light source, bright- 
ening from a dull glimmer to the equivalent of a 
light spell upon mental command by the caster. 
The staff can be used only by an individual with a 
weapon proficiency in staff; it cannot be passed 
to others for their use. If the caster releases the 
staff for any reason, including spell casting, then 
the staffspell ends instantly. 

The material component is a small wooden 
rod 18 inches long, cut by the caster from a stout 
oak, and is consumed by the spell. 

Notes: Very rare spell. Known to be in The 
Blue Book of Othyisar Du'Morde, Vol. 1. 


(Updated from Dragon Magazine.) 


Staff of Smiting, Tenser's 
See Tenser's staff of smiting. 


xt) Sta So ee 


873 


E Stairway "d 


Stairway 
(Invocation/Evocation) 
Level: 2 
Range: 10 yds. 


Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: 1 turn + 1 turn/level 
Area of Effect: Creates | stairway 
Saving Throw: None 

This spell creates a shimmering, transparent 10- 
foot-wide stairway that ascends or descends up to 
10 feet per level of the caster. The stairway can be 
narrower than 10 feet, but not wider. Additionally, 
the caster can opt to have the stairway steep or 
gradual; the stairs can be no steeper than 60 degrees 
and no more gentle than 30 degrees. 

The stairway can support 400 pounds, plus an 
additional 10 pounds per caster level. The stair- 
way vanishes if its weight limit is exceeded. 
Otherwise, the stairway lasts for one turn, plus 
one turn per level of the caster, unless dispelled. 

The material components are a quartz crystal, 
powdered silver, and powdered talc. 

Notes: Very rare spell. (Updated from 
POLYHEDRON Newszine. 


Starharp 
(Alteration, Necromancy) 
Level: 6 
Range: 0 


Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 6 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: Sphere, 2-ft./level diameter 
Saving Throw: None 


This powerful spell is customarily known 
only by Harpers, in particular, the traveling 
bards among them. It creates a blue-white, 
glowing image of a harp, floating in the air 
above the caster's head. The harp plays by itself, 
echoing and elaborating on whatever tune the 
caster sang or hummed during the casting, and 
emits little "stars" of twinkling radiance as it 
does so. 

All creatures within the harp's area of effect 
(a sphere centered on the harp, which moves 
with the caster) are instantly freed from any ex- 
isting natural or magical pain, nausea, charms, 
holds, fear, stunning, and any effects of a repul- 
sion spell. These effects will not return after the 
starharp fades away. 


In addition, the caster can concentrate on any 
one being within range during spell casting, and that 
being will be magically cured of 2d4 points of 
damage as soon as the harp appears. (If no being is 
chosen, this healing power is lost; it cannot be saved 
for later. This power only restores lost hit points.) 

Once cast, the starharp spell cannot be dis- 
rupted, though it is subject to dispelling. Magical 
darkness of any sort cannot form or persist within 
the starharp 5 area of effect. 

Also once the spell is cast, the creator is free to 
fight, sleep, cast spells, and engage in other activi- 
ties without affecting the starharp. If the caster is 
slain, the harp continues to function, but turns blood 
red, its tune becoming sad. 

The material components are a tear from the 
caster and a tiny carved harp of wood, bone, or 
ivory. 

Notes: Common for Harper bards of the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting, rare for other Harpers; 
unknown, 


Aka temporal stasis. 


Stasis Clonet+ 
(Alteration, Necromancy) 


Level; 9 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 2 turns 
Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


874 


^ Static Field "d 


This spell creates a duplicate of a human, 
demihuman, or humanoid creature from any scrap 
of bone, hair, tissue, or at least six drops of blood 
from that being. If the caster is not the being to be 
duplicated, that living creature must touch the du- 
plicate body, as it forms, to give it life. 

This clone is identical to the original being in 
memories, skills, experience level, and appear- 
ance at the time the organic tissue was obtained. 
It has one less point of Constitution than the 
original being, and it cannot form at all if the 
original being has a current Constitution of 1. 
All other ability scores are identical. 

Unlike duplicates created by the 8th-level 
wizard spell clone, the copy of the being is not 
aware of the existence of the original. It remains 
in magical stasis and is mentally unreachable 
(with a sole exception noted hereafter). It does 
not age, decay, or need air, water, food, or other 
essentials that other living things require. A stasis 
clone can be stored in a coffin or other confined 
space, and is not awakened by handling. It can be 
damaged or even destroyed by weapons, fire, 
crushing blows, and other forces that would harm 
its living counterpart. Once activated, the clone 
cannot be dispelled or disjoined; for all purposes, 
the clone is the caster's body. 

A stasis clone holds the pose it was last 
placed in by living hands. Thus, it can be 
dressed and clothed to be used as a decoy or to 
fool others into thinking they are seeing the 
original being in a state of rest or sitting ab- 
sorbed in study. 

Whenever the original being touches the 
stasis clone, the clone's memories, skills, and 
experience levels are updated to match the orig- 
inal being's. The clone does not mirror purely 
physical changes, such as aging, a wound, or an 
amputation suffered by the original being. 

The stasis is normally lifted only when the 
original being dies, though up to two contin- 
gency spells can be applied to any stasis clone to 
modify when and how it activates. (Note that a 
stasis clone confined in an airtight or flooded 
space may perish shortly after awakening.) 
Multiple stasis clones can be created by re- 
peated castings of this spell. These stasis clones 
can even be linked to each other by custom-de- 
vised transferal spells mated to contingency 
spells so that the death of the first clone awak- 
ens only the second, its death in turn activates 
just the third, and so on. 

Manshoon has used this spell both to escape 
a final death and to remain young. As he ages, 


he can update his stasis clone, get himself slain 
(usually in a reckless attack that destroys an 
enemy, such as a powerful Red Wizard), and 
return as a physically younger clone. Several 
wizards have offered him fantastic sums for a 
copy of this spell and reportedly have been re- 
fused. Others (including apprentices) have per- 
ished quite messily at Manshoon's hands when 
they attempted to steal the spell. 

Manshoon's stasis clones are obvious targets 
for those who wish him dead, permanently. 
Several times his enemies or his rivals in the 
Inner Circle of the Zhentarim have gone to a 
great deal of trouble to kill him and destroy all 
of his stasis clones, only to find that Manshoon 
had squirreled away one or two they had missed. 
One reason that Manshoon has not advanced to 
a higher level as a wizard is undoubtedly the cu- 
mulative loss of a great deal of experience be- 
cause of the lag between newly activated clones 
that had not been recently updated and previous, 
now dead Manshoon incarnations. 

Notes: Unique to the wizard Manshoon in 
the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Static Field 
(Evocation) 


Level: 6 

Range: 10 ft. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: | rd. 

Duration: | hr./level 

Area of Effect: 1 object or creature 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell creates an immobile field of elec- 
tricity around a creature or object. The field acts 
as a wall of force, trapping any living creature or 
object caught within. 

The sphere can be created to a maximum of 
two feet in diameter, plus one-half foot for every 
two levels of the caster. Thus, a 12th-level wizard 
creates a static field 8 feet in diameter, and 20th- 
level wizard can create a static field as large as 12 
feet in diameter. If the wizard tries to enclose 
something that doesn't fit within the maximum 
size, the spell fails and is lost. 

Casting the spell on an active creature requires 
a successful attack roll. The creature also receives 
a saving throw vs. spell at a +2 bonus to evade the 
static field before it is fully enclosed; failure means 
entrapment. A mobile object receives a saving 
throw of a 20, with a +2 bonus if it is a magical 


AP L ————2— Se ee DN. 


875 


q Statue " 


item, plus any magical bonuses it may have. 

Any creature touching the static field takes 
two points of electrical damage per level of the 
caster (save vs. spell for half damage). The caster 
is not harmed by the spell, but cannot pass the 
barrier as long as it is intact. 

The field can be brought down by a disinte- 
grate spell, by a successful dispel magic by a 
caster of higher level, or by a wish or alter reality 
spell. A rod of cancellation will also destroy the 
field, as will Mordenkainen 5 disjunction. 

This spell can be made permanent with the 
permanency spell. 

The material component is a perfectly formed 
glass globe, 2 to 3 inches in diameter, containing 
a chip from the tooth of a blue dragon. The globe 
is broken on the item or creature to be enclosed, 
shattering the globe and dissolving the tooth. 

Notes: Very rare spell. Known to be in The 
Blue Book of Othyisar Du'Morde, Vol. 2. 


(Updated from DraGon Magazine.) 
Statue 

(Alteration) 

(Alchemy, Earth) 

Level: 7 

Range: Touch 


Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 7 

Duration:  hr./level 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: Special 


When a statue spell is cast, the wizard or other 
creature is apparently turned to solid stone, along 
with any garments and equipment worn or carried. 
The initial transformation from flesh to stone re- 
quires one full round after the spell is cast. 

During this initial transformation, there's a base 
18% chance that the targeted creature suffers a 
system shock failure and dies. The creature must 
roll percentile dice and add its Constitution score 
to the roll. If the total is 18 or less, the creature 
dies. If the total is 19 or more, the creature sur- 
vives the transformation; the creature can with- 
stand any inspection and appear to be a stone 
statue, although a faint magic is detected from the 
stone if someone checks for it. Note that a crea- 
ture with a Constitution of 18 or more will always 
survive the transformation. 

Despite being in this condition, the petrified 
individual can see, hear, and smell normally. 
Feeling is limited to those sensations that can 


affect the granite-hard substance of the individ- 
ual's body—i.e., chipping is equal to a slight 
wound, but breaking off one of the statue's arms 
is serious damage. 

The individual under the magic of a statue spell 
can return to his normal state instantly, act, and 
then return to the statue state, if desired, as long as 
the spell duration is in effect. No other action is 
possible while in stone form, including psionics. 

The material components of this spell are 
lime, sand, and a drop of water stirred by an iron 
bar, such as a nail or spike. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Statue — Wu Jen 
(Alteration) 


Level: 3 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 3 

Duration: 1 hr./level 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell turns the wu jen or another creature 
touched into solid stone in a single round. The af- 
fected being can still see, hear, and think, and can 
at will return to normal state almost instanta- 
neously, and can similarly switch back to stone 
form, and do this repeatedly for the duration of 
the spell. The statue can be wounded by chipping 
or breaking off parts, but is as hard as granite. For 
the initial transformation, the creature rolls per- 
centile dice as a system shock roll and adds its 
Constitution score to the roll. If the total is 18 or 
less, the creature dies. 

The material components are mortar, sand, and 
lime, mixed with water and stirred with a bar of iron. 

Notes: Restricted to wu jen. Common in ori- 
ental settings; otherwise, very rare. 


Statue Form 
(Alteration) 
(Artifice) 


Level: 8 

Range: 40 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 2 

Duration: 15 rds. 

Area of Effect: 20-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: None 


" GR EIER EEGEEE- aec eae ee c 050 P 


876 


^ Steal Enchantment " 


When the spell is cast, up to six intelligent 
creatures within a 20-foot radius of a specially 
prepared statue have their bodies and life forces 
transferred into the statue (including a caster who 
is in the area and so desires). 

Thereafter, the statue responds each round to 
the commands of any of the affected creatures 
with regard to movement, attacks, etc. If two or 
more conflicting commands are given, initiative 
among those giving the commands is rolled to de- 
termine the controller for the round, with ties 
broken by rerolls. The statue has a movement rate 
of 12 and one attack per round. For purposes 
other than controlling movement and choosing 
the attack, all those within the statue are involved 
in its operation. 

When attacking with the statue, all inhabitants 
make an attack roll at their own THACO with a 
magical bonus of +4. The highest roll is used as 
the statue's attack roll. If the attack is successful, 
all inhabitants roll 1d6 for damage. The results 
are added to determine the damage inflicted by 
the statue's blow. 

After 15 rounds (sooner if the caster desires) 
those within return to their normal forms and the 
statue crumbles to lifeless gravel. 

The statue has an Armor Class of 0 and can 
take 76 points of damage before being destroyed. 
It has a magic resistance of 65%. A stone to flesh 
spell makes the statue AC 10 permanently, while 
a rock to mud spell breaching its magic resistance 
destroys it utterly. Anyone in the statue when it is 
destroyed is killed instantly. However, since 
damage short of destruction does not affect the 
inhabitants, everyone inside when the spell ends 
reforms whole and well. 

Before this spell can be used, a statue of a 6-foot 
humanoid must be carved from granite. The statue 
is sprinkled with a mixture of wormroot, wildroot, 
and beetroot. Decorative writings and drawings can 
be added to the statue as desired. A new statue must 
be created for each use of the spell. 

Notes: Very rare spell. (Updated from 
POLYHEDRON Newszine). 


Steady Aim, Tenser's 
See Tensor's steady aim. 


877 


Steal Enchantment 
(Enchantment) 
(Artifice) 


Level: 7 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 hr. 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: 1 item 
Saving Throw: Neg. 

This spell steals the enchantment from one 
magical item and places it within another, non- 
magical item. The two items must be of the same 
category (blunt weapon, edged weapon, ring, 
amulet, shield, armor, wand, etc.). The wizard 
must touch both objects during casting. 

The enchantment can be transferred only to a 
nonmagical item. Only the enchantment of one item 
can be transferred; it is not possible to combine two 
magical items into one item. The new item has all 
the properties of the original magical item (includ- 
ing the same number of charges, if any). 

At the culmination of the spell, the original 
magical object is allowed an item saving throw 
vs. disintegration with all modifiers it is allowed 
as a magical item. Exceptionally powerful ob- 
jects (such as holy swords) might automatically 
succeed at the DM's discretion. (Recommended: 
Artifact-level items have no more than a 1% 
chance to be affected, at best.) 

If the saving throw is successful, the magical 
object resists the effect and the spell fails. If the 
roll is failed, either all powers of the original 
magical item are transferred to the previously 
nonmagical object or the powers are lost. The 
base chance for loss of powers is 10095, reduced 
by —5% per level of the caster. Thus, a 20th-level 
wizard has no chance of losing the magic. If the 
enchantment is lost, both items become nonmagi- 
cal. (Recommended: The chance of losing the 
powers of an artifact-level item should be no 
more than 1%, regardless of the caster's level.) 

The spell requires a nonmagical item that is to 
receive the enchantment. It must be of equal or 
greater value than the object to be drained. 

Notes: Common for incantatrixes; otherwise, 
uncommon (ToM). 


Stealspell 


Stealspell 
(Enchantment/Charm) 


Level: 7 

Range: 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 7 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 spelicaster 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


By means of this incantation, any single spell- 
caster chosen by the caster must save vs. spell at 
—1 or suffer the theft of any one memorized spell 
or spell-like ability use from his or her mind. The 
stolen spell is determined randomly; the identity 
of the stolen spell is not revealed by its theft. If no 
spell is available, the stealspeil is wasted. 

The stolen spell is transferred at the end of the 
round in which the stea/spell is cast. A spell in the 
process of being cast cannot be stolen. The magic 
of the stealspell works in spite of all known 
shielding spells, save antimagic shell. 

A stolen spell can be cast immediately by the 
user of this spell, or held in mind up to 24 hours. 
The casting can be made without understanding 
or sufficient level to cast the stolen spell. Any 
spell cast in this fashion is cast as if by the being 
from whom the spell was stolen. 

While the spell itself has no material compo- 
nents, any material components required by the 
stolen spell and carried by the original owner are 
expended at the time the spell is stolen. 

This powerful magical spell is rarely known 
beyond the circles of the Witches of Rasheman, and 
how it came into the hands of Shoon is unknown. 

Notes: Common for Incantrixes and the 
Witches of Rasheman in the FORGOTTEN REALMS 
setting; otherwise, very rare. 


Stealth 
(Alteration) 
(Shadow) 


Level: 2 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 2 
Duration: | turn/level 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell mutes sounds made by a creature's 
equipment or movement, giving an 80% chance 


to move silently regardless of equipment carried, 
terrain, or other factors. It does not hinder normal 
communication or spellcasting in any way. It pro- 
vides no protection against alarms or noisy traps 
triggered by the affected creature. (For this pur- 
pose, a "nightingale floor" is considered a trap). 

The chance for silent movement is not cumu- 
lative with other magic, natural abilities, or spe- 
cial devices; only the highest chance applies. 
Thus, the spell is useless to a thief with a 90% 
chance for silent movement, or to an individual 
wearing boots of elvenkind. 

The material component is a small piece of 
soft leather. 

Notes: Rare spell. 
POLYHEDRON Newszine.) 


Stealweb 
(Alteration, Evocation) 


(Updated from 


Level: 5 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 5 

Duration: | activation/level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: /4 


This spell is cast on an archway, portal, door- 
frame, window, or other solidly defined open- 
ing—though this can be as crude as the space 
between two standing stones or boulders, Like a 
magic mouth spell, it waits, radiating only a faint 
dweomer until its specific trigger conditions are 
met, and then lashing out. (Its usual trigger con- 
dition is “when any nongood-aligned wizard 
passes through.") 

A bright web of glowing white force-lines ap- 
pears, washes over the affected victim (a creature 
passing through the opening), and then vanishes. 
The creature suffers 4d4 points of damage from a 


” v er OE BE ie AERE ERE 


878 


^ Steaming Sphere, Otiluke's " 


blast of raw spell energy (save vs. spell for half 
damage). However, a creature affected by a steal- 
web is forever immune to that particular steal- 
web, nor does the web activate at the being's 
repeat passage, though its conditions are other- 
wise unchanged. 

A stealweb activates whenever its conditions 
are met, and activates once per level of its caster. 
It is destroyed by destruction of its opening or by 
a successful dispel magic spell. 

The caster of a stealweb cannot be harmed by 
her own spell, even if she meets the conditions 
for its activation as stated during casting. 

The material components are a piece of phos- 
phorous, a flint, and a scrap of cobweb. 

The name of this spell comes from an earlier 
variant (now lost) from ancient Netheril that stole 
spells from the minds of those who activated it. 
The current spell is most often used to protect 
wizards' strongholds. 

Notes: Rare in the FORGOTTEN REALMS set- 
ting; virtually unknown elsewhere. 


Steam Blast 
(Evocation) 
(Water) 


Level: 3 

Range: 0 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 3 
Duration: 3 to 5 rds. 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: 4 


The steam blast spell creates a billowing 
cloud of scalding water vapor. The blast forms a 
cone 40 feet long and 10 feet wide at its termi- 
nus. The vapor surges forward from the open 
arms of the caster and fills the entire area of 
effect instantly. It remains for | round per two 
levels of the caster (round up), to a maximum of 
5 rounds. 

Creatures composed of mist or fog (crimson 
deaths, crystalmists, vampiric mists, etc.) are 
immune to the spell. Otherwise, the scalding 
vapors immediately inflict 1d6 points of 
damage per level of the caster, to a maximum of 
10d6 (save vs. spell for half damage). Elemental 
creatures based on water or air take only half 
damage (save for one-quarter). 

In addition, air-breathing creatures must save 
vs. breath weapon or pass out for 3d4 rounds 
from choking, taking one additional point of 


drowning damage per round until revived or re- 
moved from the area of effect. Those who suc- 
cessfully save are blinded for as long as they 
remain in the vapor and for 1d2+1 rounds after 
leaving it. 

The steam also causes heat and water damage 
to exposed items. Items carried by a creature 
making a successful saving throw are unaf- 
fected; otherwise, a saving throw vs. normal fire 
determines if they are ruined. 

Underwater, the steam dissipates immedi- 
ately after inflicting its first damage. 

The material components of this spell are two 
tea leaves and a pinch of wet, powdered sulphur 
or a drop of mist dragon spittle. 

Notes: Very rare spell. (Updated from 
DRAGON Magazine.) 


Steam Breath 
(Evocation) 


Level: 3 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: 30-ft. long x 20 ft. wide cone 
Saving Throw: % 


The wu jen expels a powerful breath of super- 
heated steam that billows forth from the caster's 
mouth, instantly filling a cone 30 feet long and 20 
feet wide at the far end with scalding clouds of mist. 

The steam inflicts 1d6 points of damage per 
level of the caster, to a maximum of 10d6, A 
saving throw vs. breath weapon is allowed for 
half damage. Creatures from the Elemental 
Plane of Water take half damage (save for 
none). Creatures from the Elemental Plane of 
Fire take one additional point of damage for 
every die of damage. 

Further, normal fires in the area of effect are 
extinguished and magical fires are 50% likely 
to be extinguished, although those that can be 
rekindled are not permanently affected. The 
steam clouds dissipate instantly once the spell 
is cast. 

The material component for this spell is a 
glowing piece of charcoal doused with water. 

Notes: Common in oriental settings; other- 
wise, very rare. 


Steaming Sphere, Otiluke's 
See Otiluke's steaming sphere. 


AUTE iia et Ci se ET a N 


879 


^ Steady Aim, Tenser's " 


Steady Aim, Tenser's 
See Tenser's steady aim. 


Steeldance 
(Evocation) 
(Artifice) 


Level: 3 

Range: 10 ft./level 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 3 

Duration: 2 rds. 

Area of Effect: 60-ft.-radius sphere 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell causes four whirling long swords or 
scimitars to appear out of thin air and fly about 
inside the area of effect at MV 18 (A), striking at 
foes for two rounds before vanishing again. Each 
blade strikes with a THACO of 6 and inflicts 6 
points of damage per successful attack. For deter- 
mining what they can hit, the swords are consid- 
ered +4 magical weapons, but they give no 
bonuses to THACO and damage. Each blade is 
AC —3 and has 12 hit points. If a foe hits a blade 
for more than that amount of damage in a single 
attack during its brief existence, it winks out im- 
mediately. The blades are subject to spell damage 
if magic is used against them. 

Each blade strikes at a target chosen by the 
caster, but the spell's area of effect is stationary. If 
the target or targets flee out of the spell's reach, 
the blades cannot follow. 

The steeldance spell requires four bladed 
weapons of any size, from as long as the caster's 
forearm to tiny replicas. Knives or daggers are 
commonly used. The blades are not consumed 
and can be reused. 

Notes: Rare in the FORGOTTEN REALMS set- 
ting; virtually unknown elsewhere. 


Stench of Death 
(Necromancy) 


Level: 3 

Range: 30 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: 1 hr. 

Area of Effect: 50-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell allows the wu jen to fill the area of effect 
with a smell so foul as to cause complete disorienta- 


tion among those caught within it. A successful 
saving throw vs. paralyzation allows a creature to 
remain within the stench, unaffected. Those who 
fail their rolls are overcome by the smell, double 
over, and remain unable to cast spells or fight. 
However, they can flee the area of effect. Once out- 
side of the stench, an affected creature requires a 
round of breathing fresh air before resuming normal 
activities. As the effect is strictly magical, no wind 
will blow it away, but it can be dispelled. 

The material component of this spell is a 
rotted body organ. 

Notes: Common in oriental settings; other- 
wise, very rare. 


Stern Reproof, Nybor's 
See Nybor's stern reproof. 


Still Water 
(Alteration) 
Reversible 


Level: | 

Range: 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: 5 rds./level 

Area of Effect: 100 sq. ft./level 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell allows the wu jen to calm even the 
most turbulent waters except those of tsunami 
force, rendering them placid and still for the dura- 
tion of the spell. Upon casting the spell, all water 
in the area of effect becomes calm and settled 
stormy oceans become smooth, raging rapids sub- 
side, flood waters flow calmly. 

The spell changes the rate of flow of the water 
and the force with which it moves to a gentle flow. 
Thus, the whirlpools and turbulence of rapids 
become a gentle stream easily negotiated. The 
spell does not alter the amount of water passing 
through the area, only the force it carries. 

If cast on a water elemental or other creature 
from the Elemental Plane of Water (or a creature 
of watery substance), the creature is allowed a 
saving throw vs. spell. If the save is successful, 
the spell has no effect. If the saving throw is 
failed, the creature becomes incapable of directly 
hostile actions, although it can still cause harm in- 
directly. If such a becalmed creature is attacked, 
the spell effect is instantly negated. 

The material component for this spell is a tiny 
flask of whale oil. 


880 


^ Stone Drill r 


The reverse of this spell, turbulence, increases 
the choppiness of water. Still water becomes 
white-capped and choppy, white-capped waves 
become strong waves capable of capsizing canoes 
and small boats. Stormy ocean water becomes 
huge mounting waves capable of swamping small 
ships. If it is cast on water elementals or similar 
creatures, they become hostile and belligerent. 

The material component required is a small 
ornamental fan. 

Notes: Common in oriental settings; other- 
wise, very rare. 


Sting, Morgannaver’s 
See Morgannaver's sting. 


Stinking Cloud 
(Evocation) 
(Air, Alchemy) 


Level: 2 

Range: 30 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 2 

Duration: | rd./level 

Area of Effect: 20-ft. cube 
Saving Throw: Special 


When a stinking cloud is cast, the wizard creates 
a billowing mass of nauseous vapors up to 30 
yards away from his position. Any creature 
caught within the cloud must roll a successful 
saving throw vs. poison or be reeling and unable 
to attack because of nausea for 1d4+1 rounds 
after leaving the cloud. Those who make success- 
ful saving throws can leave the cloud without suf- 
fering any ill effects, although those remaining in 
the cloud must continue to save each round. 
These poisonous effects can be slowed or neutral- 
ized by appropriate magic. The cloud duration is 
halved in a moderate breeze (8-18 m.p.h.) and is 
dispersed in one round by a stronger breeze. 

The material component of the spell is a rotten 
egg or several skunk cabbage leaves. 
Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Stone Barrier — Galeb Duhr 
(Evocation) 


Level: 6 

Range: 30 yds. 
Components: S 
Casting Time: 6 
Duration: 13 rds. 

Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: Special 


Upon casting this spell, the galeb duhr creates a 
wall of flying stones that whirls around a fixed 
point. The plane of rotation of the wall can be hori- 
zontal, vertical, or in between. Any creature at- 
tempting to pass this barrier takes 8d8 points of 
damage, plus | point for each Hit Die the galeb duhr 
possesses. Creatures in the area of the barrier when 
it is created are allowed a saving throw vs. spell; if 
successful, the stones are avoided, no damage is 
taken by the creature, and it escapes the area of the 
barrier by the shortest possible route. The wall lasts 
13 rounds. The galeb duhr can make the wall as 
small as 5 feet square to as large as 60 feet square. 

This spell is 5% likely to be known by a galeb 
duhr for each 500 years of age over a base age of 
2,000 years 

Notes: Restricted to galeb duhr; rare. (Updated 
from DRAGON Magazine.) 


Stone Drill 
(Invocation/Evocation) 
(Earth) 


Level: 5 

Range: 30 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: | rd./level 

Area of Effect: 5 ft.-diam. cylindrical tunnel 
Saving Throw: Special 


The stone drill spell is a form of the dig spell that 
allows the caster to bore tunnels through both hard 
and soft rock. It cannot move earth, sand, mud, or 
softer materials, which will collapse. The spell drills 
through stone at a rate of 1foot per round, removing 
about 20 cubic feet of material per round. The re- 
moved material is crushed into fine gravel as well. 

Tunnels: Tunneling is possible with stone drill 
as long as there is enough space available for the 
removed material to pile up (other spells or hired 
help are needed to clean up the debris). The 
chance for a tunnel to collapse is 10%, checked 


eet eS ee LLL 1L ee 


881 


^ Stone Feet e 


for each 5-foot section unless the area is sup- 
ported or braced. 

Pits: A tunnel can be drilled vertically, but a 
pit, similar to one made by the dig spell, has a 5% 
chance per 5-foot section of collapsing in on 
itself. The spell is not fast enough to dig pits in 
front of creatures moving toward the caster. 
However, creatures within 10 feet of the drilling 
area will be pelted by gravel and stones cast out 
by the stone drill, taking 2d4 points of damage. A 
saving throw vs. spell is allowed for half damage. 
Creatures of earth and rock are unaffected. 

If used in combat against creatures of earth 
and rock, the caster must attack with the spell for 
two consecutive rounds before inflicting damage, 
due to the slow speed of the drilling. The spell in- 
flicts 5d6 points of damage on creatures of earth 
and rock. A successful saving throw vs. spell re- 
duces this damage by half. 

The material components are a twisted bar of 
iron or steel and 500 gp worth of diamond chips. 
These are expended in the casting. 

Notes: Rare for Earth mages; otherwise, very 
rare. (Updated from DraGoN Magazine.) 


Stone Feet 
Reversed form, see fleet feet. 


Stone Hull 
(Alteration) 
(Province: Sea) 


Level: 3 

Range: 10 yds. + 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 3 

Duration: | turn + 1 turn/level 

Area of Effect: 1 vessel up to 150 ft. long 
Saving Throw: None 


The stone hull spell reinforces a ship's hull 
with a magical aura, helping it withstand monster 
attacks, hidden shoals and reefs, and ramming at- 
tacks by other ships. It also counters the effects of 
spells such as warp wood and turn wood, but not 
fire. The seaworthiness of the craft under these 
conditions improves by 20% (see Table 77 in 
Chapter 14 of the DMG). The ship gains no im- 
provement for situations other than those listed. 
For example, in storms or on extended voyages, 
the ship has its original seaworthiness. 

However, the moment stone hull is cast, the 
ship's base movement per hour is halved, before 
any other modifiers are applied. The same is true 


of its emergency movement. In addition, the pro- 
tected hull radiates a dweomer of alteration 
magic. The caster can dispel stone hull at will, if 
within range of the ship. 

The material component of this spell is a bit of 
pumice (a volcanic rock light enough to float on 
water). The pumice is consumed in the casting of 
the spell. 

Notes: Common for spellcasters from an ara- 
bian setting; otherwise, very rare 


Stone Shape 
(Alteration) 
(Earth) 


Level: 5 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: Permanent 

Area of Effect: 1 cu. ft./level 
Saving Throw: None 


By means of this spell, the wizard can form an 
existing piece of stone into a shape that suits his 
purposes. For example, the wizard can make a 
stone weapon, a special trapdoor, or an idol, etc. 
This spell can also enable the spellcaster to reshape 
a stone door to escape imprisonment, providing 
the volume of stone involved is within the limits of 
the area of effect. While the caster can thus create 
stone doors and coffers, the fineness of detail is not 
great. If the construction involves small moving 
parts, there is a 30% chance they do not function. 

The material component of this spell is soft 
clay that must be worked into roughly the desired 
shape of the stone object and then touched to the 
stone when the spell is uttered. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Stone Sleep 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
(Earth) 


Level: 2 

Range: 30 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 2 
Duration: 2d4 + 1 rds. 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


When this spell is cast, the wizard forces one 
creature made of earth and stone (or any from the 


Oe eT dem i. a a. 


^ Stoneflight — Pluma g- 


Elemental Plane of Earth), into a state of dormancy. 
The caster uses a tuning fork to create a deep, res- 
onating tone over which he speaks the verbal com- 
ponents. Once the spell has taken effect, the 
creature simply stops in its tracks, moving and at- 
tacking no further. The creature is still aware of 
everything around it, but has been momentarily 
soothed by the tone of the tuning fork. The caster 
can move at only half normal movement while con- 
centrating and must keep the tuning fork pointed 
toward the affected creature. Any attack against the 
creature breaks the spell instantly. 

This spell affects such creatures as earth ele- 
mentals, clay and stone golems, galeb duhr, mud 
men, sandlings, and xorn. The DM may rule that 
other creatures related to the earth or having power 
over it (such as basilisks, stone giants, medusae, 
and rust monsters) are affected as well. 

The spell requires a platinum tuning fork of at 
least 500 gp value and of the finest craftsmanship, 
and a smooth stone on which to strike it. These can 
be reused. 

Notes: Rare for Earth mages; otherwise, very 
rare. (Updated from DraGoN Magazine.) 


Stone Tell 
The Red Wizards of Thay are rumored to have a 7th- 
level version of this priest spell, in which a face is 
drawn on the stone with chalk and conversed with. 


Stone to Flesh 
(Alteration) 
(Alchemy, Earth) 
Reversible 


Level: 6 

Range: 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 6 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: | creature 
Saving Throw: Special 


The stone to flesh spell turns any sort of stone 
into flesh. If the recipient stone object was for- 
merly living, this spell restores life (and goods), 
although the survival of the creature is subject to 
the usual system shock survival roll. Any formerly 
living creature, regardless of size, can be thus re- 
turned to flesh. Ordinary stone can be turned to 
flesh in a volume of nine cubic feet per experience 
level of the spellcaster. Such flesh is inert, lacking 
a vital life force, unless a life force or magical 
energy is available (for example, this spell would 


turn a stone golem into a flesh golem, but an ordi- 
nary statue would become a body). If cast upon 
stone, the wizard can create a cylinder of fleshy 
material from one to three feet in diameter and up 
to 10 feet long, allowing a passage to be made. 

The material components are a pinch of earth 
and a drop of blood. 

The reverse, flesh to stone, turns flesh of any 
sort to stone. All possessions on the person of the 
creature likewise turn to stone. The intended sub- 
ject of the spell receives a saving throw vs. spell to 
avoid the effect. If a statue created by this spell is 
subjected to breakage or weathering, the being (if 
ever returned to his original, fleshy state) will 
have similar damage, deformities, etc. The DM 
may allow such damage to be repaired by various 
high-level clerical spells, such as regenerate. 

The material components of the spell are lime, 
water, and earth. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Stonecase 
This lost spell reputedly encased the victim in a 
large rectangular block of stone until the magic 
was dispelled or the duration expired. Its casting 
required at least five spellcasters in combination, 
and its duration even then was 50 turns. 

The spell could be made permanent if the cast- 
ers ringed the victim's stone and then use the 
spell on themselves. Myth has that this creates a 
permanent ring of stones that maintains the orig- 
inal spell until the ring is broken, at which point 
the imprisoned creature would be released. 


Stoneflight — Pluma 


(Alteration) 


This spell benefits slingers, allowing them to 
cast their missiles to double normal range, and to 
inflict an extra hit point of damage per hit. Three 
slingers per caster level, up to a maximum of 30 
slingers can be affected. 

The material component is a tiny ball of dried 
bird guano. 

Notes: Restricted to practitioners of pluma 
magic (the Maztica setting); common. 


Level: 1 

Range: 30 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1—6 rds. 
Duration: 3 turns/level 

Area of Effect: 3 slingers/level 
Saving Throw: None 


883 


Stoneiron 


Stoneiron 
(Enchantment) 


Level: 3 

Range: Touch REY 
Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 

Duration: 5 rds./level 

Area of Effect: Weapon(s) touched 

Saving Throw: None 


This weaker version of the enchanted weapon 
spell causes stone weapons (flint, obsidian, etc.) 
to attack and damage as common steel weapons, 
eliminating all penalties and chances of breakage. 
One large or two small weapons are affected by a 
single casting. Missiles affected by this spell lose 
its effect as soon as the missile strikes its target. 

The only way to make the spell permanent is 
to use enchant an item and permanency spells as 
well; repeated castings do not improve the 
weapon's abilities any further. 

The material component is a small chunk of 
stone, of the same type as the weapon to be en- 
chanted. 

Notes: Uncommon for spellcasters from the 
DARK SUN setting, rare for Savage mages; other- 
wise, very rare. (Updated from DRAGON 


Magazine.) 


Stoneskin 
(Alteration) 
(Earth) 


Level: 4 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 

Duration: Special (24 hr. maximum) 
Area of Effect: | creature 

Saving Throw: None 


When this spell is cast, the affected creature 
gains a virtual immunity to any attack by cut, 
blow, projectile, or the like. Even a sword of 
sharpness cannot affect a creature protected by 
stoneskin, nor can a rock hurled by a giant, a 
snake's strike, etc. However, magical attacks 
from such spells as fireball, magic missile, light- 
ning bolt, and so forth have their normal effects. 
The spell's effects are not cumulative with multi- 
ple castings. 

The spell blocks 1d4 attacks plus one attack 


per two levels of experience the caster has 
achieved. This limit applies regardless of attack 
rolls and regardless of whether the attack was 
physical or magical. For example, a stoneskin 
spell cast by a 9th-level wizard would protect 
against from five to eight attacks. An attacking 
griffon would reduce the protection by three each 
round; four magic missiles would count as four 
attacks in addition to inflicting their normal 
damage. If not ended by attacks, the stoneskin 
spell lasts for 24 hours. 

The material components of the spell are granite 
and diamond dust sprinkled on the recipient's skin. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Stony Grasp, Maximillian's 
See Maximillian's stony grasp. 


Stony Hands 
Aka Manshoon's xorn talons. 


Stop 
Aka hover. 


Storm 
(Alteration) 


Level: 8 

Range: 10 miles 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: | turn 
Duration: 1 hr./level 

Area of Effect: 2-mile radius 
Saving Throw: Special 


By casting this spell, the wizard causes a hor- 
rendous thunderstorm to break in any vicinity he 
so chooses. After the casting of the spell, it takes 
one turn for the clouds to gather, regardless of the 
current weather conditions. Another turn after 
this, the storm breaks, rain pounds down, and 
lightning bolts strike all over the area of effect at 
random. The caster must concentrate for the 
entire duration; any disturbance during this time 
negates the storm, causing the rain to cease and 
the clouds to disperse in one turn. 

The rains fall at the rate of 4-inch per hour. The 
wizard can direct one lightning bolt every five 
rounds, at the cost of shortening the spell's dura- 
tion by one hour each. The caster can direct only as 
many lightning bolts (directed bolts are treated as 
the 3rd-level spell, lightning bolt) as he has levels 
minus two. Thus, a 20th-level wizard can direct a 
total of eighteen bolts, shortening the spell's dura- 


eT IINE E EA Y EL ns 


884 


^ Storm's Spell Thrust "d 


tion to only two hours (at one bolt every five 
rounds, it would take a minimum of one and a half 
hours to direct all eighteen lightning bolts.) 

A bolt cannot be directed by the wizard if 
doing so would negate the hour of duration in 
which the attempt is made. For instance, if a 
16th-level wizard cast a storm spell and let it rage 
for fifteen hours without directing any bolts, he 
could not direct one in the last hour of the spell as 
that bolt would negate the hour of the spell that 
was already taking place. These bolts cause 6d6 
points of damage (save vs. spell for half damage) 
and strike in a 5-foot diameter column. 

This spell can be cast through a crystal ball. 

The material component of this spell is a 
used (previously stricken) lightning rod, which 
the caster hurls at the sky to cause the clouds to 
gather. The rod flies straight up into the clouds, 
where it is consumed in a brilliant lightning 
flash. 

Notes: Common for Storm mages, uncom- 
mon for Weather mages; otherwise, very rare. 
Believed to be in The Blue Book of Othyisar 
Du'Morde, Vol. 3. (Updated from DRAGON 


Magazine.) 


Storm's Frozen Moment 
(Alteration) 


Level: 1 

Range: 10 ft./level 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 1 
Duration: | rd. 

Area of Effect: | being 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell enables the caster to temporarily inter- 
rupt the movement of a being through the air, includ- 
ing a fall, jump—including magical jumps—and 
natural or magical flying. If the spell recipient is un- 
willing, a saving throw vs. spell applies; but if the 
caster is able to touch the being as the spell is cast, 
the saving throw is made at a —5 penalty. 

Storm's frozen moment causes the recipient to 
halt and hover in midair for one round. During 
this time, the being is held stable, so that a quick 
spell can be cast, a knot can be tied, a lock opened, 
or other complex but swift task performed. This 
spell is often used to allow falling beings to tie a 
rope around a projection. The magic temporarily 
removes the need for a winged creature to beat its 
wings, but does not affect fly spells in any way; 
the magics coexist, neither one affecting the dura- 


tion or performance of the other. 

A frozen moment cannot coexist with a feath- 
erfall spell. It negates any existing featherfall 
magics, and prevents such spells or magical item 
abilities from functioning on the same being the 
frozen moment was cast upon for one turn after 
the frozen moment ends, unless a dispel magic is 
cast on the being to remove this prohibition. In 
other words, a non-flying being who receives 
frozen moment falls after the spell ends unless re- 
strained by a rope, handhold, or other means; and 
takes normal falling damage, even if already pro- 
tected by a featherfall. 

Notes: Restricted to the Seven Sisters, their ap- 
prentices, and select Harpers; uncommon or rare. 


Storm's Spell Thrust 
(Enchantment/Charm) 


Level: 5 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 5 
Duration: 2 rds. 

Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell causes up to two hostile spell mani- 
festations (one per round of its existence) to re- 
bound back instantly at their source. Thus, a 
lightning bolt would leap back whence it came, 
the blast of an expanding fireball would be di- 
rected back at its source in a long jet of flame, 
and so on. Each spell rebounds toward its source, 
up to 10 yards per level of the spell thrust caster. 
Creatures at a rebounded spell's source are al- 
lowed whatever saving throws the returned spell 
normally allows. 

If multiple spell manifestations occur in a 
round, the spellcaster chooses which one is thrust 
back at its source. The caster of the spell thrust 
need not be able to see the source of a spell to re- 
bound it. 

Some spells, by their nature, cannot be made 
to rebound; Storm's spell thrust has no effect on 
them. A spell thrust has no visible manifestation 
to warn enemy spellcasters that it is operating. 

The material component is a small, curved 
piece of polished metal or glass. 

Notes: Restricted to the Seven Sisters, their 
apprentices, and select Harpers; rare or very rare. 


l" aas EMEN a caGmesPOmwA ee 


885 


^- Storm's Swordfire " 


Storm's Swordfire 
(Alteration, Evocation) 


Level: 3 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 3 
Duration: | rd./level 
Area of Effect: | weapon 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell causes any one metal bladed 
weapon touched by the caster during spellcasting 
to erupt in flames. These magical flames persist 
for the spell duration, racing up and down the 
blade without harming it or affecting its temper. 
A weapon exhibiting swordfire is considered a +2 
magical weapon for purposes of what beings it 
can hit, but does not gain any attack bonuses or 
damage bonuses. 

The flames inflict an additional 2d4 points of 
damage atop the physical damage normally done 
by the weapon to any creature struck. If a creature 
struck is undead, it suffers an additional 1d12 
points of damage on top of the flame damage. The 
flames also ignite all flammables (such as paper, 
cloth, and oils), and force item saving throws vs. 
magical fire on all objects touched by them. 

The caster can by act of will alone cause her 
own swordfire to instantly die, but once it is gone, 
it cannot be recalled. Another swordfire spell is 
needed to evoke the effect again. 

The material components are a lodestone or 
magnetized piece of metal and a lump of saltpeter 
as large as the caster's mouth. The weapon is not 
consumed by the magic, but the lodestone and the 
saltpeter are. 

Notes: Restricted to the Seven Sisters, their ap- 
prentices, and select Harpers; uncommon or rare. 


Strahd's Baneful Attractor 
Casting Time: 2 


(Evocation) 
Duration: 2 rds./level 


Reversible 
Area of Effect: 1 creature, 15-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


Level: 2 
Range: 60 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 


This spell is the reverse of Hornung s baneful 
deflector. Of course, the vampire Count chose to 


name it after himself rather than credit the upstart 
Hornung. It can be cast upon any creature within 
60 yards. A successful saving throw vs. spell 
negates the spell's effect. Otherwise, the spell 
forms a hemispherical shell identical in form to 
the shell of Hornung 5 baneful deflector. Instead 
of deflecting spells directed at the target, how- 
ever, it attracts them. Any spell targeted at an in- 
dividual within 15 feet of a creature afflicted by 
Strahd s baneful attractor are redirected to the af- 
flicted creature. Area-effect and touch spells are 
not affected. If the redirection causes the spell to 
exceed its range, then it travels the full distance 
and fizzles out at the edge of its range. 

The material component is a few bits of 
broken glass. 

Notes: Common in the RAVENLOFT setting; 
very rare elsewhere. This spell can be researched 
only on the Demiplane of Dread. 


Strahd's Frightful Joining 


(Necromancy) 


Reversible 


Level: 7 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 7 

Duration: 2 rds./level 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: Neg. and special 


This spell is the reverse of Bloodstone 5 fright- 
ful joining. The original spell enables the caster to 
merge his mind with the body of an undead crea- 
ture. This spell enables an undead creature, such 
as a vampire or lich, to merge its mind with the 
body of a living person. Since Strand Von 
Zarovich is a vampire, this variation is much more 
useful to him than Bloodstone's original spell. 

The target of the spell must be a living, intelli- 
gent humanoid. A target creature that is not a 
human or demihuman (such as a goblin, ogre, or 
werewolf) receives a +2 bonus to its saving 
throw. If the saving throw vs. spell succeeds, the 
undead wizard is forced back into its original 
body. No system shock roll is necessary. If the 
target creature's saving throw fails, the undead 
wizard joins its mind to the creature's body. 

While in the creature's body, the caster can 
use all of the creature's special abilities except 
memorized spells. Meanwhile, the wizard's 
undead body remains lifeless and is vulnerable to 
attack. Once in the body, the wizard can travel 


amt} ede m EIE eei s! 


886 


~ Strahd’s Malefic Meld " 


any distance, so long as the wizard remains in the 
same domain as his or her true body. 

Once in the body, the undead caster fills the 
target creature's mind with ghastly thoughts. At 
the beginning of each hour during the joining, the 
target creature must roll a madness check. Failure 
means that the undead caster's mind overcomes 
that of its victim. No further checks are necessary 
and the undead wizard can remain in control of 
its mortal victim effortlessly for the duration of 
the spell. A successful madness check means that 
the undead wizard must make a successful saving 
throw vs. death magic to remain in the body. A 
successful saving throw means the mental battle 
goes on. Failure means the undead wizard's mind 
is cast from the body and the victim regains con- 
trol. However, a creature that successfully ejects 
the undead wizard from its body must still roll a 
horror check. 

One interesting side effect of Strahd s frightful 
joining is that while in the mortal body, the caster 
can do things that he cannot do in his own undead 
body. For example, a vampiric caster can walk in 
the sunlight and see his reflection in a mirror. For 
Strahd, this spell can have very potent ramifica- 
tions. Of course, the victim is likely to be a raving 
lunatic when the darklord is through with him, 
but Strahd cares little about that. 

Notes: Common in the RAVENLOFT setting; 
very rare elsewhere. This spell can be researched 
only on the Demiplane of Dread. 


Strahd's Malefic Meld 


(Necromancy) 


Level: 5 
Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 5 
Duration: Permanent 
Area of Effect: Creatures melded 
Saving Throw: None 

This spell enables the necromancer to create 
an undead, golemlike monster composed of up to 
three dead bodies. These parts can be from any 
selection of dead animals, humanoids, or mon- 
sters, as long as they span no more than two size 
categories. For example, a dog and an elf could 
be melded since one is size S and the other size 
M. However, a house cat and an elf could not be 
melded since the cat is size T, more than one size 
category different from the elf. Similarly, a dog, 
an elf and an ogre could not be melded since they 
are sizes S, M, and L, respectively. None of the 


creatures melded together can have more than 5 
Hit Dice. 

The advantage of the meld is that the caster 
can use various attributes from whichever of the 
original creatures used them best, though the 
monster will always have animal Intelligence. 
Most attributes are associated with a particular 
piece of the creature's body, which must be used 
in the meld. At least one attribute must be taken 
from each creature in the meld. The created mon- 
ster will always loyally serve its creator. 

The created monster inherits four attributes from 
the original creatures: Hit Dice, Armor Class, 
movement rate, and attacks. The monster's Hit 
Dice determines its THACO, saving throws, and 
resistance to turning undead attempts. The caster 
cam derive the monster's movement rates from 
multiple creatures, so long as only one movement 
rate per creature per medium is selected: running, 
swimming, flying, burrowing, etc. 

The caster must choose the number of attacks 
per round from a single creature, but can give the 
creation attack forms from any or all of the crea- 
tures in the meld. The creature can have more 
attack forms that it has attacks per round. Of 
course, the appropriate body part for the attack 
form must exist in the meld. Most physical at- 
tacks can be retained, including poison, paralysis, 
web spinning, and breath weapons. 

Magical or mental powers do not survive the 
transition into undeath. This includes gaze at- 
tacks, spellcasting, magic resistance, immunity to 
nonmagical weapons, spell-like abilities, a lycan- 
thrope's cursed bite, etc. However, for each crea- 
ture in the meld that has a magical or mental 
power, the undead creation gets one special 
undead power. These powers are cumulative and 
granted in order. 


* +1 or better magical weapon needed to hit; 
* Life energy drain (1 level) by touch; and 
* 10% magic resistance. 


The caster must assign the level drain to a 
single attack form, such as the claws of a 
claw/claw/bite sequence. Notice that only a meld 
of three creatures that all had magical or mental 
powers creates a monster with magic resistance. 
Among player character classes, only spellcast- 
ers and psionicists qualify as having special 
powers for this purpose. Other classes that can 
cast spells at higher levels, such as ranger or 
bard, do not qualify. 

One of Strahd's favorite melds is a werewolf, 


wN o Aar - ani ton wx - UC REM 


887 


^ Streaking Meteors, Syluné's = 


a large spider, and a gargoyle. This foul creature 
uses the gargoyle's flying movement and the 
spider’s ground movement. (Although a were- 
wolf is faster than the spider, he can only pick the 
legs of one of them, and therefore cannot have 
web movement if he uses the lycanthrope’s legs.) 
The Hit Dice are drawn from the werewolf, 
which has 4+3 Hit Dice. The Armor Class of 5 is 
taken from the gargoyle, as is the number of at- 
tacks (4). The creature gets the werewolf’s bite 
and the spider’s poison and web-spinning ability. 

Because both the gargoyle and the werewolf 
had magical abilities, the melded creature has the 
first two undead abilities: +1 or better magical 
weapon needed to hit and a life-level-draining 
horn attack. Visually, the abomination has a 
spider’s legs, a werewolf’s body and head, and a 
gargoyle’s wings and arms. In the summary 
below, its attacks are claw/claw/bite/horn. 

The material component for this spell is a 
pinch powdered doppleganger bone. Casting this 
spell is cause for a Ravenloft powers check. 

Notes: Common in the RAVENLOFT setting; 
very rare elsewhere. This spell can be researched 
only on the Demiplane of Dread. 


Streaking Meteors, Syluné’s 
See Syluné’s streaking meteors. 


Strength 
(Alteration) 


Level: 2 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: | turn 
Duration: 1 hr./level 

Area of Effect: Person touched 
Saving Throw: None 


Application of this spell increases the Strength 
of the character by a number of points—or tenths 
of points after 18 Strength is attained (only if the 
character is a warrior). Benefits of the strength 
spell last for the duration of the magic. The 
amount of added Strength depends upon the spell 


recipient's group and is subject to all restrictions 
on Strength due to race and class. Multi-class 


characters use the best die. 
Class Strength Gain 
Priest 1d6 points 
Rogue 1d6 points 
Warrior 1d8 points 
Wizard 1d4 points 


If a warrior has an 18 Strength already, from 
10% to 80% is added to his extraordinary 
Strength roll. The spell cannot confer a Strength 
of 19 or more, nor is it cumulative with other 
magic that adds to Strength. Beings without 
Strength scores (kobolds, lizard men, etc.) re- 
ceive a +1 to attack and damage rolls. 

The material component of this spell is a few 
hairs, or a pinch of dung, from a particularly 
strong animal—ape, bear, ox, etc. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Level: 4 
Range: 10 yds./level 


Strengthen Water Creature 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 4 


(Alteration) 
Duration: 1d4 rds. + 1 rd./level 


(Province: Sea) 
Reversible 

Area of Effect: 1 creature + 1 creature/level 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell physically enhances creatures that 
live in or breathe while in water, as well as those 
from the Elemental Plane of Water. Examples in- 
clude water weirds, water elementals, sea mono- 
liths, fish, ocean-going mammals such as whales 
and dolphins, and native ocean races including 
locathah and sahuagin. 

The spell has no effect on beings that breathe 
underwater by artificial or magical means. Nor 
does it affect those who merely use water-based 
spelis, including wizards and priests. 

Because most effects of this spell are benefi- 
cial, many recipients waive their saving throw. 
All recipients gain a +1 bonus to attack and 
damage rolls. If the damage inflicted by a crea- 
ture is measured by a number of dice, then +1 is 
added to each die before any other modification 
is made. Nonoffensive statistics are boosted, too. 
Creatures from the Elemental Plane of Water im- 


JU. 46... —-— —. A -—-—- 2m RN M 


888 


Succor 


mediately gain | hit point per Hit Die. Any 
damage suffered by these creatures is subtracted 
from the bonus hit points first. 

In addition, creatures that ordinarily need 
water to survive can survive without it for the du- 
ration of this spell. When the spell ends, however, 
their need for water immediately returns. A thin, 
bluish sheen coats the bodies of all recipients, ra- 
diating strong alteration magic. Otherwise, no 
visual change occurs. 

The reverse of this spell is weaken water crea- 
ture. Instead of a +1 bonus to attack and damage 
rolls, targets suffer a —1 penalty. Creatures from 
the Elemental Plane of Water lose 1 hit point from 
each Hit Die they have, reduced immediately. The 
same bluish sheen coats the recipients, radiating a 
strong aura of alteration magic. A successful 
saving throw negates the effects of this spell. 

The material component of both spells is a 
glass of water. The caster throws it toward the 
target creatures to provide Strength, and pours it 
on the ground to cause weakness. 

Notes: Common for spellcasters from an ara- 
bian setting; otherwise, very rare. 


Strike of Doom 

Reversed form, see elude blow. 

Succor 
(Alteration, Enchantment) 
(Artifice) 
Reversible 
Level: 9 
Range: Touch 


Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 to 4 days 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 individual 
Saving Throw: None 


By casting this spell, the wizard creates a pow- 
erful magic in some specially prepared object—a 
statuette, a jeweled rod, a gem, etc. This object ra- 
diates magic, for it contains the power to instanta- 
neously transport its possessor to the abode of the 
wizard who created it. 

Once the item is enchanted, the wizard must 
give it willingly to an individual, at the same time 
informing him of a command word to be spoken 
when the item is to be used. To make use of the 
item, the recipient must speak the command word 
at the same time that he or she rends or breaks the 
item. When this is done, the individual and all 


items worn and carried are instantly transported to 
the abode of the wizard. No other creatures can be 


affected. 

The reversed application of the spell transports 
the wizard to the immediate vicinity of the posses- 
sor of the spelled item, when it is broken and the 
command word said. The wizard will have a gen- 
eral idea of the location and situation of the item 
possessor, but has no choice whether or not to go 
(making this a rare casting indeed!). 

The material components used include gem- 
stones totaling not less than 5,000 gp value; 
whether it is a faceted gem or not is immaterial. 
The components can be enchanted only once per 
month (usually on a night of a clear, full moon). 
At that time, the object is set for the type of succor 
and its final destination (either the location of the 
spellcasting or an area well known to the wizard). 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


T bru RE EO NE EIS har AT iis 


889 


^ Suffocate r 


Suffocate 
(Alteration, Necromancy) 
(Air) 
Level: 7 
Range: 30 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 7 


Duration: 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: 10-ft.-radius circle 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


The suffocate spell draws the breath out of all 
creatures within the area of effect that fail a 
saving throw vs. spell. Their breath is placed 
within a small silk bag held by the caster. 

Each round, a victim of this spell must attempt 
a Constitution check. If failed, the creature suf- 
fers 2d4 points of damage. If successful, the sub- 
ject has taken in enough air to reduce the damage 
to 1d4. (A creature without a Constitution score 
makes a saving throw vs. paralyzation instead.) 

As they struggle and gasp for air, affected crea- 
tures move and attack at half their normal rates, 
have a —4 Armor Class penalty, an attack penalty 
of —4, and lose all Dexterity combat bonuses. 

Effects of this spell continue each round re- 
gardless of whether the victims remain in the 
original area of effect. The damage accumulates 
until the spell expires, the silk bag is opened, or a 
successful dispel magic spell is cast upon the bag. 
The penalties to combat remain in effect for 1d3 
rounds after the spell ends. 

The spell requires a small silk bag studded 
with black opals worth no less than 5,000 gp 
total. The bag is not destroyed during casting, but 
becomes useless for future castings if a success- 
ful dispel magic spell is used on it. 

Notes: Uncommon spell (75M). 


Suggestion 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
(Mentalism, Song) 


Level: 3 

Range: 30 yds. 
Components: V, M 
Casting Time: 3 

Duration: 1 hr. + 1 hr./level 
Area of Effect: | creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


When this spell is cast by the wizard, he or she 
influences the actions of the chosen recipient by the 


utterance of a few words—phrases or a sentence or 
two—suggesting a course of action desirable to the 
spellcaster. The creature to be influenced must, of 
course, be able to understand the wizard's sugges- 
tion—it must be spoken in a language that the spell 

The suggestion must be worded in such a 
manner as to make the action sound reasonable; 
asking the creature to stab itself, throw itself onto a 
spear, immolate itself, or do some other obviously 
harmful act automatically negates the effect of the 
spell. However, a suggestion that a pool of acid was 
actually pure water and that a quick dip would be re- 
freshing is another matter. Urging a red dragon to 
stop attacking the wizard's party so that the dragon 
and party could jointly loot a rich treasure elsewhere 
is likewise a reasonable use of the spell's power. 

The course of action of a suggestion can continue 
in effect for a considerable duration, such as in the 
case of the red dragon mentioned above. Conditions 
that will trigger a special action can also be specified; 
if the condition is not met before the spell expires, 
then the action will not be performed. If the subject 
successfully rolls its saving throw, the spell has no 
effect. Note that a very reasonable suggestion causes 
the saving throw to be made with a penalty (such as 
—1, 2, etc.) at the discretion of the Dungeon Master. 
Undead are not subject to suggestion. 

The material components of this spell are a 
snake's tongue and either a bit of honeycomb or a 
drop of sweet oil. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Summon Cats 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 


Level: 2 

Range: Special 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 2 

Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: 30 ft. radius 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell teleports the two largest cats within 
20 miles to fight for the caster. Normal, giant- 
sized, and magical cats can be affected, but not 
feline crossbreeds (for example, an elven cat 
might appear, but a manticore would not). Only 
living cats are affected, and the caster has no con- 
trol over what cats appear. 

The cats protect or fight for the wizard for up 
to one round per caster level. They are not con- 
trolled by the wizard, but generally cooperate 


x= Ey 00 See a STE ee VARRO 


890 


Summon Darsson 


(though cooperation may not extend to the 
caster's allies). 

At the end of the duration, the cats either leave 
or cease to cooperate. If slain, they are dead. 

The material component is a cat’s whisker, 
freely given. 

Notes: Known to the wizard Delsenora, of the 
Crystalmist Mountains in the WORLD OF GREYHAWK 
setting. (Updated from POLYHEDRON Newszine.) 


Summon Cosmic Storm 


(Evocation) 


Level: 9 

Range: Special 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 9 
Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell calls into existence that strange phe- 
nomenon known as the "cosmic storm." Some 
sages theorize that the cosmic storm is actually 
one end of a ^wormhole" in space, and anything 
sucked in at one end is ejected through the other 
somewhere (or even somewhen) else. 

It can only be cast in wildspace, more than 
100 miles from the nearest planet-sized object. 
The storm appears in 1—10 turns, at a distance of 
1-20 hexes (500 ft./hex) from the spellcaster's 
current position, in a random direction. Once it 
has been summoned, the storm cannot be con- 
trolled by the caster or by anyone else. 

Each turn, the storm moves 1—6 hexes in a 
random direction. At the beginning of each turn, 
before they make their own movement, all ships 
within 20 hexes of the storm are moved 4 hexes 
directly toward it. This movement does not 
change the ships' headings. Any ship that man- 
ages to move more than 20 hexes away from the 
storm is free of its influence. Any ship that enters 
the same hex as the storm has been engulfed by it. 

The cosmic storm is a gateway to other parts of 
the space-time continuum; any ship absorbed by the 
storm can be deposited anywhere in the universe. 
The storm remains in existence until the distance 
between it and the spellcaster exceeds 20 hexes, or 
until the spellcaster is absorbed by the storm. 

The material components for the spell are a 
piece of lodestone and a piece of mithral, both of 
which are consumed in the casting. 

Notes: Common for spellcasters from a spell- 
jamming culture; otherwise, very rare. 


Summon Daemon/Demon/Devil 
See summon fiend. This knowledge is highly dan- 
gerous and typically pursued only by evil NPCs. 


Summon Darsson 
(Summoning) 


Level: 5 

Range: 10 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: Darsson (only) 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


When summon Darsson is cast, it opens a line of 
communication with that mage, waking him if need 
be (though the spell is ineffective if cast when Darsson 
is unconscious). An image of Darsson's head appears 
before the person who cast the spell; Darsson can see, 
hear, and speak through the image. 

Spells cannot be cast through the image in either 
psionic contact to work, but normal range modifiers 
still apply; Darsson is not considered to be within line- 
of-sight, even though his image is. 

If the caster is one of Darsson's friends or utters a 
code word known to Darsson and identifying the 
caster as a friend of a friend, Darsson forgoes the 
saving throw he would normally receive against the 
spell and allows himself to be summoned to the caster. 

If Darsson does not know the caster of the spell 
and no code is mentioned, the caster has a short time 
(up to 10 seconds) to explain himself or herself. If the 
caster is slow, Darsson prompts the person to explain 
the reason for casting the spell. If the explanation is 
reasonable, or if a good reward is offered, or if for 
some other reason Darsson feels he should go to the 
caster's aid, he forgoes the saving throw. In certain 
cases, he might go simply to see how the caster came 
into possession of the spell and to mete out punish- 
ment if such is deserved. 

If Darsson does not wish to be summoned for any 
reason, he receives a saving throw vs. spell. Since he 
is a 16th-level mage, he needs roll only a 6 or better 
on 1d20 to succeed (possibly altered by items in his 
possession). 

If Darsson fails his saving throw, or if he willingly 
forgoes his saving throw, he instantly arrives within 10 
yards of the caster of the spell. He has some choice 
about where he arrives and, having seen the scene 
through his image, chooses a place that appears ad- 
vantageous for him. If he is not on friendly terms with 
the caster of the spell, Darsson can choose to arrive in 


me nui CE LL 


891 


~ Summon Deadly Smog r 


a place that gives him a distinct advantage. 

Darsson arrives with whatever equipment and 
clothing he has on at the time, as well as whatever he 
can grab in the few seconds between notification and 
transportation. This has on occasion led to some em- 
barrassing situations, such as the time a friend sum- 
moned Darsson from a bath to help him against a 
mind flayer. Fortunately, Darsson is never too far from 
his magical items, and he is never without spells. 

If he is summoned into a dire situation, Darsson 
should be able to defend himself. If frivolously or ma- 
liciously summoned by someone with no right to use 
the spell, Darsson is more than capable of causing 
enough damage to inspire more politeness in the 

This rather unusual spell was created by Darsson 
to allow his friends to summon him, presumably in 
times of great need. Few wizards would do such a 
thing because it impinges upon their time, and be- 
cause it is potentially because an 
astute study of the spell will reveal the wizard's true 
name, possibly giving another great power over the 


Still, because of the many upheavals in his life, 
Darsson cares deeply for his friends and created this 
spell so that he might be able to help them in times of 
need. He has placed the spell on scrolls for a select 
few, and it is recorded in Darsson s Notes as well as a 
few of Darsson's other spellbooks and notebooks. 

Since Darsson has many friends who are not wiz- 
ards, he created the summon Darsson spell so that it 
can be placed onto a scroll that can be activated by 
non-mages. If summon Darsson is placed on a scroll 
by a wizard capable of casting it (such as Darsson 
himself, as is usually the case), it can be activated by 
any person capable of reading. 

Notes: Very rare spell from the FORGOTTEN 
REALMS setting. Known to be in Darsson 5 Notes. 


Summon Deadly Smog 
(Summoning) 


Level: 5 

Range: 10 ft./level 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 3 turns 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: Summons one creature 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell summons one creature known as à 
“deadly smog" from the Negative Material Plane. 
The caster can cause the creature to appear at any 
location within the specified spell range. The 
deadly smog then is trapped within the Prime 
Material Plane until it is killed, gated back by 
some other force, or forced back by powerful 
wizards. This spell drains the caster of one-half 
his total hit points; the spell cannot be cast again 
until rest sufficient to restore all hit points lost has 
been completed; potions and spells do not suffice 
in this case. 

Notes: Very rare spell. 


N Summon Fetish Spirit " 


Summon Equine Beings 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 


Level: 2 

Range: 100 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: Special 
Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell summons horses or horselike beings 
to the caster's location. The caster begins the in- 
cantation and continues uninterrupted until an 
equine creature appears or three turns have 
elapsed. Naturally, this spell doesn't work indoors 
or in underground settings. The caster's chance of 
success depends on the type of equine being sum- 
moned and current location. The table can be used 
if the local equine population is unknown. 

The caster can call three times, attempting to 
summon a different type of creature each time. 
Each call requires one full turn. Once a call is 
successful, no more equines can be called with- 
out another casting of the spell. The DM may 
modify the chance of success based on his assess- 
ment of the area and whether or not the creature 
in question is likely to be within the spell's range. 

A single known individual equine can be sum- 
moned at double range, but if so, it will be the 
only equine affected. 

The creatures summoned by the spell are al- 
lowed a saving throw vs. spell to avoid the sum- 
mons. Wild equines save at a —5 penalty; 
domestic horses, ponies, etc. save at a —4 penalty; 
war horses, pegasi, and other trained steeds save 
at a —1; and unicorns and paladins’ war horses 
save with no modifier. Any equine beings sum- 
moned are favorably disposed to the caster and 
give whatever aid they are capable of. However, 
if the caster or members of his party are evil, the 
summoned equines are allowed another saving 
throw vs. spell when they approach within 10 
yards, this time with a +4 bonus. The equines im- 
mediately seek to escape if they succeed in this 
second saving throw. 

Summoned mules, riding and draft horses, or 
ponies are not willing to fight for the caster, al- 
though they will carry him and his friends as re- 
quested. Other equines (including war horses) 
fight on the caster’s behalf as long as the enemy 
is evil and not overpoweringly strong. The 
caster’s influence lasts until the equines complete 
one distinct task or mission for him, but no longer 


than one day per two levels of experience in any 
event. 

The material component is a small cube of 
sugar. 

Notes: Restricted to those of gypsy blood; 
rare. (Updated from DraGoN Magazine.) 


EQUINE SUMMONING TABLE 
Creature Chance of Success in... 
Called Plains/Hills Forest Coastal 
4d4 Ponies 30%* 25% 35% 
4d4 Mules 35% 30% 25% 
4d4 Horses 40%* 20% 30% 
4d2 Centaurs 20% 30% 10% 
1d4 Pegasi 10% 30% 10% 
1d4 Hippogriffs  30%** 10% 10% 
1d4 Hippocampi  — - 3096 


1d2 Unicoms*** 30% 10% 
* In mountains, use half the plains’ chance 
** In mountains only; otherwise 5% 
*** Come to a female spellcaster only 


Summon Fetish Spirit 


(Conjuration/Summoning) 


Level: 1 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, M 
Casting Time: 5 
Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


The casting of this spell awakens a spirit of the 
caster's totem animal that which has been bound into 
a special item (called a fetish). The spirit then trans- 
forms a skeleton or model of the totem animal into a 
body it can use. The construct then tries to carry out 
one task required by the wizard, so long as it can 
finish the task before the next sunset or sunrise 
(whichever comes first). The physical construct has 
the abilities of an animal of its type, with Hit Dice 
according to the time the wizard spent constructing it 
(see below). 

After at least one round of bickering, the spirit 
tries fairly to fulfill the task's meaning (for example, 
“Rescue me from these enemies" or “Guide me 
through the forest safety"). 

After the spirit completes the task, it tries to 
escape the wizard's power. If the wizard makes a 
successful Charisma check (Charisma or less on 
1d20), the spirit is forced back into the fetish, and the 
wizard can retrieve the fetish from the construct. 


" EUIS O A Du c c Ah die 


893 


^ Summon Fiend " 


Failure means the spirit is free and may attack the 
wizard or any companions, or simply escape. The 
spirit's physical form wreaks great damage until the 
next sunset or sunrise, whichever comes first. Such 
damage works against the wizard's interests. Then 
the spirit vanishes with the fetish, never to return. 
Charisma check takes no modifier. On each subse- 
quent summoning, the wizard incurs a -3 cumula- 
tive penalty to the Charisma check. In addition, the 
spirit grows more quarrelsome, hostile to the wizard, 
and slower to fulfill its task. The DM may impose 
more often than once a year. 

A successful dispel magic or similar spell can de- 
stroy the fetish, but as long as it remains intact, the 
wizard can summon another totem spirit as early as a 
day later. 

This spell requires a fetish containing a bound 
and sleeping spirit. Also, the wizard must build a 
skeleton or model of the totem animal and incorpo- 
rate the fetish into it. This requires one turn per Hit 
Die the wizard wants the spirit fetish to have, from a 
minimum of the caster’s level plus four, to a maxi- 
mum of 10 Hit Dice. 

Notes: Common for wizards of the Veiled 
Alliance in the DARK SuN setting, optionally common 
for Savage mages; virtually unknown elsewhere. 


Summon Fiend 
(Conjuration/summoning) 


Level: 8 

Range: 60 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: | turn 
Duration: | turn/level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: Special 


This dangerous spell allows the wizard to 
summon a fiend of his choice and forces the 


creature to do his bidding for the duration of the 
spell, much like conjure elemental. Creatures 
that can be summoned through this spell include 
all varieties of baatezu, tanar'ri, yugoloth, 
gehreleth, plus fiendish creatures such as bargh- 
ests, hordlings, and vaporighu. Unique creatures 
or fiends of demipower status cannot be called. 
The summoned creature is allowed a special 
saving throw to resist the summons; this is a 
percentage chance equal to twice the sum of its 
Intelligence score and its Hit Dice. If the crea- 
ture succeeds in this check with a roll of less 
than half of its total score, it can choose to come 
if it wishes to, but is completely free of the 
caster's will and can act in any manner it pleases 
for the duration of the spell. 


Example: A wizard attempts to summon à 
red abishai baatezu (6*3 HD, Int 8-10). The 
DM sets the monster's Intelligence at 9, so the 
fiend has a 30% chance to resist the summons. 
If the roll comes up 01—15, the monster can 
either resist or answer the call, unbound by the 
caster's will. 


The conjured fiend must be always con- 
sciously controlled and directed by the wizard. 
It can employ any of its spells or powers at the 
wizard's command, with the exception of 
gating in others of its kind or granting wishes. 
If the caster's concentration is broken for some 
reason, the summoned fiend instantly returns to 
its home plane, ending the spell. While this 
spell is clearly useful in combat, the fiend can 
be commanded to perform almost any task the 
wizard desires. It is dangerous to allow the 
fiend too much latitude in interpreting its direc- 
tions when possible, the creature will usually 
attempt to twist its instructions to produce un- 
pleasant results. 

The caster can drastically increase the margin 
of safety in summoning a fiend by employing a 
protection from evil (or good) spell or by burn- 
ing a special blue candle that requires 500 gp 
worth of rare materials. Either of these measures 
reduces the chance to resist the call and rebel 
against the caster's will by one-half, so in the 
example above, the abishai would only have a 
15% chance to ignore the summons and a 7% 
chance to arrive under its own free will. 

If the summoned creature has an Intelligence 
score of Average (8—10) or better, it can claim a 
service from the caster in the future. The wizard 
must obey the creature and undertake its task, or 


FO aa eS 


894 


^ Summon Least Yugoloth a 


risk being carried off to the creature’s home 
plane as its slave. The exact nature of the task or 
the risk of retribution is left to the DM, but it’s 
highly dangerous to go back on a bargain with a 
fiend. Employing summon fiend is not a good 
act. The material component for this spell is a 
chip of stone or pinch of earth from the home 
plane of the creature to be called. 

Notes: Uncommon for evil wizards, rare for 
conjurers; otherwise, very rare. Seeking this 
knowledge is an evil act. 


Summon Fire Dragons 


(Evocation) 


(Province: Flame) 


Level: 6 

Range: 10 yds./level 
Components: V, M 
Casting Time: 6 
Duration: | rd./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: 4 


Despite its name, this spell does not summon 
any sort of creature. Instead, it enables the caster 
to create | to 10 fiery tongues of snaking flame, 
called fire dragons. These roaring, flickering 
presences are 6 feet in diameter and move ac- 
cording to the mental direction of the caster. They 
dissipate harmlessly if the caster is struck in 
combat or ceases to concentrate on them. 

Fire dragons flicker along the ground at 180 
feet per round, and can reach up to 30 feet verti- 
cally, They cannot attack airborne targets higher 
than 30 feet, or targets standing in water. They 
otherwise strike targets as directed by the caster, 
with a THACO of 9. Each flame tongue strikes 
once per round, inflicting 4d6 points of damage if 
it hits. Any creature struck is allowed a saving 
throw vs. spell for half damage. 

The material component is a strip of paper 
soaked with saltpeter, coal oil, and sulphur that 
catches fire as the spell is cast. 

Notes: Common for spellcasters from an ara- 
bian setting; otherwise, very rare. 


895 


Summon Least Yugoloth 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 


Level: 6 

Range: 5 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 2 turns 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 least yugoloth 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


Using this spell, a wizard can summon a least 
yugoloth guardian to protect something of impor- 
tance. The yugoloth is under the wizard's com- 
plete control, and will obey commands of its 
master even after the master's death. The yugoloth 
must stay within 90 yards of the charge or be sub- 
ject to fits of searing—ultimately lethal—pain. 

The most important component for the spell is 
the true name of the individual yugoloth to be 
summoned. Finding such a name is a difficult 
task, and only through exacting research or dark 
pacts with other fell creatures can a wizard obtain 
a least yugoloth’s name. 

The material component is a ruby worth at least 
500 gp, which is destroyed in the casting. 

The reverse, banish least yugoloth, will send a 
least yugoloth back to its home plane. If the crea- 
ture’s true name is used, the banishment is auto- 
matic. If the true name is not used, the creature 
receives a saving throw vs. spell at a —2 penalty 
against the banishment. 

The material component for the banishment is 
a pinch of powdered silver mixed with holy water. 

Notes: Uncommon spell for evil spellcasters; 
otherwise, very rare. Seeking this knowledge is 
an evil act. 


^ Summon Lycanthrope " 


Summon Lycanthrope 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 


Level: 4 

Range: Special 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: | turn 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell is effective only on the night of a full 
moon and one night immediately preceding and 
following it. The caster frequently inscribes a spe- 
cial warding circle before beginning the spell. 

For the spell to be effective, the caster and the 
lycanthrope must be on the same plane of exis- 
tence; there is no other range limitation. When the 
spell is cast, the nearest lycanthrope (as determined 
by the DM) of the chosen species is allowed a 
saving throw. If successful, the creature is unaf- 
fected. Failure means the lycanthrope instantly ap- 
pears near the caster. 

Upon arrival, the creature can freely attack the 
wizard unless the caster has created a warding 
circle. If a circle is present, the lycanthrope appears 
in the circle; otherwise, it appears 1d10 feet away 
from the caster in a random direction (the DM can 
use the scatter diagram for grenade-like missiles 
found in the DMG to determine direction). 

The warding circle is a temporary prison drawn 
with specially prepared pigments laced with silver 
filings. These pigments cost 100 gp for each foot of 
diameter of the circle (thus, a circle 10 feet across 
costs 1,000 gp). The circle must be at least 5 feet in 
diameter; if smaller, the lycanthrope is automati- 
cally freed. Preparing the circle takes one turn per 
foot of diameter. 

Even with such protection, the lycanthrope can 
break out of the circle and wreak vengeance upon 
the summoner. The creature’s base chance is 20%, 
modified by the difference between its Hit Dice and 
the wizard’s experience level. If the spellcaster is of 
a higher level, the difference is subtracted from the 
creature’s chance of escaping the circle. If the ly- 
canthrope is of higher Hit Dice than the wizard’s 
level, the difference is added to its chance. Each 
creature is allowed only one attempt to escape. 

Any break in the circle spoils the power of the 
spell and enables the lycanthrope to break free. 
Even a straw dropped across the line of a magic 
circle destroys its power. However, the trapped 
creature cannot act against any portion of the ward, 
for the magic of the barrier absolutely prevents this. 


Once safely ensnared, the lycanthrope can be 
held for as long as the summoner dares. The crea- 
ture cannot leave the circle, nor can any of its at- 
tacks or powers penetrate the magical barrier. 
When the full moon sets, the lycanthrope reverts to 
its human form. At this time, it is free of the spell 
and can leave the circle. 

The material components are a drop of blood 
from any animal, a human hair, and a moonstone 
worth at least 150 gp. If the caster elects to create 
the warding circle, the components described 
above are also required. 

Notes: Uncommon spell (ToM). 


Summon Modron I 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 


Level: 3 

Range: Special 
Components; V, S, M 
Casting Time: 3 

Duration: 2 rds. + 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: 30-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: None 


Within one round of casting this spell, the 
wizard magically conjures 2d4 monodrone mod- 
rons (extraplanar creatures from the Outer Plane 
called Mechanus). The modrons appear any- 
where within the spell's area of effect, as desired 
by the wizard. They attack the spell user's oppo- 
nents to the best of their ability until either he 
commands that the attacks cease, the spell dura- 
tion expires, or the monsters are slain. These 
creatures do not check morale, but they vanish 
when slain. Note that if no opponent exists to 
fight, the modrons can, if the wizard can commu- 
nicate with them and if they are physically able, 
perform other services. 

The material component of this spell is a tiny 
bag containing eight marbles. 

Notes: Known to the wizard Argramund of the 
Rock, whose current whereabouts are unknown. 
(Updated from POLYHEDRON Newszine.) 


P adoduuMESEE ni i cce. 


896 


Summon Shadow 


Summon Modron II 
A rumored work in progress by Argramund of the 
Rock; a 4th-level spell that will summon 1d6 duo- 
drone modrons. 


Summon Sha'ir — Genie 


(Conjuration/Summoning) 


Level: 7 

Range: 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 7 
Duration: 1 day/level 
Area of Effect: | sha'ir 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


When a sha'ir has abused his gen, bound 
genies, or powers to create magical items, a 
genie sorcerer can use this spell to compel ser- 
vice from the sha'ir. It cannot be used on those of 
other classes, there must have been actual 
abuses, and several warning signs must be given 
before the spell takes effect. The genie must have 
a personal item of the sha'ir to cast the spell, 
usually obtained by intimidating the sha'ir's gen 
when it comes to the elemental plane in search of 
magic on its master's behalf. The gen will be 
missing for 1 to 6 hours while the genie brow- 
beats it into compliance. If the gen makes a 
morale check at —2, it remains faithful to its 
master. Otherwise, it agrees to the genie sor- 
cerer's demands, and when the sha'ir next sends 
it off to fetch a spell, the gen takes a personal 
item of the sha'ir's with it to the genie. The item 
need not be valuable; for example, a shoe, a 
razor, or a comb is sufficient. The gen is again 
absent for 1 to 2 hours while it makes its way to 
the genie's location on the elemental planes. 

If the sorcerer genie has the required item, the 
spell can be cast successfully. The sha'ir is al- 
lowed a saving throw without bonuses, and with 
a —l penalty for each gen he has lost, a —2 for 
each bound genie he has mistreated, and a —3 for 
each magical item he has created beyond the 
first, all in the last decade. If the saving throw 
fails, the sha'ir is whisked away to the elemental 
plane of the caster and must serve as if under the 
influence of a charm person spell for a number 
of weeks equal to the sorcerer's level. 

Notes: Restricted to genie sorcerers; common. 


897 


CX, 


Summon Shadow 
(Conjuration/Summoning, Necromancy) 


Level: 5 

Range: 10 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 5 

Duration: | rd. + 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: 10-ft. cube 
Saving Throw: None 


When this spell is cast, the wizard conjures up 
one shadow (see the MONSTROUS COMPENDIUM tome) 
for every three levels of experience he has attained. 
These monsters are under the control of the spell- 
caster and attack his enemies on command. The 
shadows remain until slain, turned, or until the spell 
duration expires. 

The material component for this spell is a bit 
of smoky quartz. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


> 


Vulp; 
d l VIA 


\ 


~ Summon Spider — Drow " 


Summon Spider — Drow 
(Summoning) 


Level: 6 

Range: 60 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 6 

Duration: 6 rds. + 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell calls | Hit Die of spiders per level of the 
caster, of any type the caster desires. The spiders may 
have from 1+1 Hit Die to 5+5 Hit Dice each (the most 
common sorts of spiders are detailed in the MONSTROUS 
COMPENDIUM tome). Thus, a 12th-level caster could 
summon twelve 1--1 Hit Die spiders, six 2+2 HD spi- 
ders, four 3+3 Hit Die spiders, and so on. The spell 
brings the nearest spiders of the type closest to the 
caster's desire, so if multiple spiders are summoned, 
they may be of various types (the DM decides the type 
and number of spiders that answer the summoning). The 
indicated by the caster until the spell expires, the caster 
commands them to cease, or they are slain. 

The spiders never attack the caster, and do not 
check morale. If commanded to attack each other, 
slain in battle, or if another being attempts to 
usurp control of them by magical means, the 
summoned spiders vanish into thin air. If no op- 
ponent exists to fight, the spiders can perform 
other services. They obey only the caster. 

The material components of this spell are a 
bag (of any size), a small candle, taper, or lamp 
(not necessarily lit), and a spider leg or entire 
spider corpse. 

Notes: Known to the drow; uncommon. 


Summon Spirit 


(Necromancy) 


Level: 4 

Range: 10 yds. 

Components: V 

Casting Time: | turn 

Duration: | rd./level 

Area of Effect: 1 dead human or demihuman 
Saving Throw: Special 


The wizard can use this spell to raise up the 
spirit of a dead human or demihuman, which may 
then answer questions put to it by those present at 
the summoning. Of course, the questioners must 
speak the same language as the dead creature. 


Extensive preparations are required (see below). 

Summoning a dead spirit is far from a certain en- 
terprise. The base chance that a spirit will answer 
the summons is 50% + 1% for each experience level 
of the wizard casting the spell. The chance also de- 
pends on the authority of the caster in the spirit 
world, the length of time the subject has been dead, 
and the specific time of the casting (see table). 

Regardless of actual penalties or bonuses, the 
chance of success never drops below 5% or rises 
above 95%. If the spell fails, the summoning may 
attract the attention of some other (potentially 
hostile) spirit or undead creature, either from the 
netherworld or the general vicinity of the caster. 
The chances of summoning a malicious undead 
are 5%, cumulative with every failed attempt by 
the same caster. The DM may roll on the table for 
the priest spell, summon undead. Note that this 
spell in no way protects the wizard or those pre- 
sent at the casting from the attacks of inadver- 
tently summoned undead. 

If the summoning is successful, the desired 
spirit slowly rises from the ground before the 
caster. The spirit's willingness to answer questions 
will first determine the effectiveness of the spell. If 
the spirit is a different alignment than the caster or 
formerly had more Hit Dice than the caster's cur- 
rent level of experience, the shade is allowed a 
saving throw vs. spell to resist the interrogation. 

If the spirit is agreeable, it can answer no more 
than one question for every three levels of the 
caster. Summoned spirits tend to be evasive and 
cryptic when questioned by the living. In general, 
their knowledge is limited to what they knew 
while alive. A spirit can also be called upon to 
answer specific questions about the near future, 
regarding actions undertaken before the next 
nightfall. Questions and predictions about future 
events are subject to the same conditions and lim- 
itations as the priest spell augury. 

This spell may also attract hostile undead (if the 
summoning fails). The DM might modify this 
spell so that it always summons a host of spirits 
(numbering 1—20) who must be individually ques- 
tioned and placated before the desired shade ar- 
rives. The DM might increase the chances of 
summoning a hostile undead (even if the spell suc- 
ceeds) to reflect the caster's location and the tone 
of the campaign. Obviously, calling a beneficial 
spirit near the burial mound of a wraith may bring 
both creatures to investigate the unusual summons. 

Notes: Restricted to necromancers and 
witches; uncommon. Optionally, rare for diviners 
and very rare for others. 


Jc UÉMMMM——————— 


898 


Summon Swarm 
N 


Summon Spirit — Wu Jen 
(Conjuration/Summoning, Necromancy) 


* 


This spell allows the wu jen to summon any 
type of spirit. The caster must have a particular 
spirit in mind when the spell is cast and the spirit 
is allowed a saving throw vs. spell to avoid the 
effect. The spirit can be the ghost of a long dead 
ancestor, a spirit of nature, or any greater spirit 
that occupies the Prime Material Plane. Once 
summoned, the spirit appears before the caster, re- 
maining for one turn. It is cooperative and 
friendly, considering the caster to be a helpful or 
needy person. However, aside from appearing and 
remaining for the turn, it is not under any obliga- 
tion to the caster. It freely answers questions, pro- 
vides guidance, and assists the caster within the 
scope of its abilities at that moment. The DM may 
adjust or disallow the spirit's saving throw based 
on the material components used, the urgency 
with which the spirit might consider the matter, or 
campaign plot considerations. 


Area of Effect: Summons one spirit 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


The material components for this spell are a 
stick of incense and an offering appropriate to the 
nature and power of the spirit summoned. 

Notes: Uncommon for other necromancers. 


Summon Swarm 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 
(Song) 


Level: 2 

Range: 60 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 2 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 10-ft. cube 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


The swarm of small animals (roll on following 
table to determine type, or the DM can assign an 
appropriate creature) drawn by the summon 
swarm spell will viciously attack all creatures in 
the area chosen by the caster. Creatures actively 
defending against the swarm to the exclusion of 
other activities suffer 1 point of damage for each 
round spent in the swarm. Those taking other ac- 
tions, including leaving the swarm, receive 
damage equal to 1d4 points + | point per three 
levels of the caster, every round. Note that spell- 
casting within the swarm is impossible. 


Dice Roll Swarm Type 
01-40 Rats 
41-70 Bats 
71-80 Spiders 
81-90 Centipedes/beetles 
91-00 Flying insects 


The swarm cannot be fought effectively with 
weapons, but fire and area effects can force it to 
disperse by inflicting damage. The swarm dis- 
perses when it has taken a total of 2 points of 
damage per caster level from these attacks. A pro- 
tection from evil spell keeps the swarm at bay, 
and certain area effect spells, such as gust of wind 
and stinking cloud, disperse a swarm immedi- 
ately, if appropriate to the swarm summoned 
(e.g., only flyers are affected by a gust of wind). 
The caster must remain stationary and undis- 
turbed to control the swarm; if his concentration 
lapses or is broken, the swarm disperses in two 
rounds. The swarm is stationary once conjured. 
The material component is a square of red cloth. 
Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


I aa- 


899 


EN Summon Undead — Red Wizard " 


Summon Undead — Red Wizard 
(Conjuration, Necromancy) 


Level: 1 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: | turn 

Duration: 1—8 turns + 1 turn/level 
Area of Effect: 100 ft. radius/level 
Saving Throw: None 


The nearest 2-12 undead of Hit Dice equal to 
or less than the level of the caster, and within 100 
feet per level of the wizard, travel to the sum- 
moner at normal pace. The summoned undead are 
not hostile, nor are they under the control of the 
summoner. They may act as they wish. 

Once they have reached the summoner, the 
undead may turn around and go back where they 
came from, attack anyone in their way, talk to the 
summoner, or perform any other action that seems 
reasonable to them. Unthinking undead (such as 
zombies and skeletons) with a purpose immedi- 
ately return to their station. Wandering unthinking 
undead stay and wait for orders (for which the 
caster needs charm undead, a potion of undead 
control, or something similar) unless there are ob- 
vious foes besides the summoner to attack. 

The material component is bone dust, which is 
scattered to the wind during the casting. 

Notes: Common for necromancers of the Red 
Wizards of Thay, but not taught to conjurers. 


Summon Wind 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 
(Air, Artifice) 


Level: 7 

Range: Special 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: | turn 
Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: 1 ship 
Saving Throw: None 


With this spell, the wizard calls up a steady 
wind to fill the sails and blow a ship in the desired 
direction. The wind never blows harder than re- 
quired for a moderate rate of travel, but is com- 
pletely reliable for as long as it lasts. It is 
unaffected by prevailing winds. To cast this spell, 
the wizard must know the true name of a wind el- 
emental, whose help he calls upon to direct the 
magical winds. If the same elemental has been 


called previously, there is a 5% cumulative 
chance per summoning that the elemental refuses 
to serve. If this happens, the elemental arrives, 
but is uncontrollable. 

Once the spell is successfully cast, the dura- 
tion of the resulting wind must be determined. 
The wizard makes an Intelligence check. Failure 
means the wind blows for one hour and then dies 
out. Success means the wind lasts all day or until 
dismissed by the wizard. At the end of each day 
of sailing, another Intelligence check must be 
made, When the check fails, the wind ceases. The 
wizard can cast other spells while the wind 
blows, but once it stops it does not start again 
unless magically summoned once more. 

The material component is a flask of air cap- 
tured and sealed in a bottle on the Elemental 
Plane of Air. The spell takes effect when the 
bottle is opened and the air released. 

Notes: Common for Sea mages, uncommon 
for air mages and artificers; otherwise, very rare. 
(Updated from DraGoN Magazine.) 


Summon Wind Dragons 


(Evocation) 


(Province: Wind) 


Level: 6 

Range: 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 6 
Duration: | rd./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: 4 


Despite its name, this spell does not summon 
any sort of creature. Instead, it enables the caster 
to create 1 to 10 small whirlwinds or vortices, 
dubbed “wind dragons." These whirling, shadowy 
presences measure 6 feet in diameter, and move 
according to the mental direction of the caster. 
They dissipate harmlessly if the caster is struck in 
combat or ceases to concentrate on them. 

Wind dragons whirl through the air at 210 feet 
per round, with maneuverability class A. They 
strike targets as directed by the caster, with a 
THACO of 10. Each whirlwind can strike once 
per round, inflicting 4d4 points of damage. The 
target creature is allowed a saving throw vs. spell; 
success halves the damage. The caster can direct 
each whirlwind against a different target, but no 
more than two can attack any single creature at 
once. Although the wind dragons cannot actually 
lift or move solid objects, they can rake and shake 


I———————— 


Sun Stone 


living (and undead) bodies effectively. A spell- 
caster struck by a whirlwind cannot cast spells 
the same round, though his or her fighting ability 
is otherwise unaffected. 

The material component of this spell is a cup 
of any sort. When casting, the wizard must blow 
into the cup while twirling it. The spell fails if 
cast in a place without air (for example, it won't 
work underwater). 

Notes: Common for spellcasters from an ara- 
bian setting; otherwise, very rare. 


Summon Yugoloth (Least) 
See summon least yugoloth. 


Summoning Wind 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 


Level: 8 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S 
Casting Time: | turn 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell causes a magical wind to carry an 
urgent message to one or more creatures. When 
cast, the wu jen can phrase any message of 25 


words or less. This message can then be sent to any 
creature or creatures. The number of creatures that 
can be contacted is 10 times the level of the caster. 
The specific identity of each creature need not be 
known, but some type of common identifier must 
be provided. This must be more specific than the 
creature’s race or character class, It must be some 
identifier of the position of the creature or crea- 
tures called. The wu jen could send the message to 
the soldiers of his palace guard or to the governors 
of all the provinces of a single land. The message 
is delivered on a gentle breeze, whispering its se- 
crets into the ears of those it is intended for. The 
spell does not compel the receiver to respond or 
act. It only informs them of the message sent. This 
spell is commonly used to rally troops, send warn- 
ings, or disseminate proclamations. 

Notes: Common in oriental settings; other- 
wise, very rare. 


Summons, Alyssindra’s 


See Alyssindra’s summons. 


Sun Stone 
(Evocation) 
(Province: Flame) 
Level: 7 


Range: 5 yds./level 
Components; V, S, M 
Casting Time: 7 
Duration: 2 rds. 

Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: Special 


dr 


A small stone, held in the sunlight by the 
caster, becomes a magical incendiary missile 
when this spell is cast upon it. The sun stone be- 
comes so hot that it glows fiery red, but the caster 
can handle it safely. It must be thrown the same 
round the spell is cast or it loses its power. 

Like a magic missile, a sun stone must be aimed 
at a target that the caster can see or detect. Its range 
is 5 yards per experience level. The stone streaks 
through the air, swooping around corners as 
needed to follow a moving target. The stone strikes 
with a THACO of 9, and is considered a +3 magi- 
cal weapon for purposes of what it can hit. The 
stone burns its way into whatever it strikes, setting 
flammable items afire. The target creature suffers 
4d4 points of fire damage, with no saving throw al- 
lowed. After that, the stone returns to normal. 

If a stone that misses its target—that is, if its 
attack roll fails—it falls to the ground. Beings 


x Sunbolt — Elf " 


touching the stone in the round after casting take 
half damage. A successful saving throw vs. spell 
reduces the damage to | hit point (per stone). 
After that, the stone returns to its original state 
and becomes harmless. 

A wizard can evoke one stone for every three 
levels of experience. (Hence, a 15th-level wizard 
can cast five stones simultaneously.) Each stone 
has its own target—either the same individual or 
a different one, as desired by the caster. 

Notes: Common for spellcasters from an ara- 


bian setting; otherwise, very rare. 
Sunbolt — Elf 

(Invocation/Evocation) 

Level: 4 


Range: 10 yds. + 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: 30-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: Special 

This spell creates a blinding discharge of sun- 
light energy, which strikes living targets for 1d4 
points of damage per level of the caster. The 
target creature, and all that observe the sunbolt 
except the caster, must successfully save vs. spell 
or be blinded for 2d4 rounds. 

The sunbolt is most effective against undead 
creatures. Damage against the undead is doubled, 
with no saving throw. Self-willed undead, such as 
liches, vampires, or mummies must successfully 
save vs. death magic or be blinded for 2d4 turns. 
The blinding effect is not effective against mind- 
less undead such as skeletons and zombies. 

The material component is a small sunstone, 
worth at least 25 gp. 

Notes: Known to the elves of Evermeet in the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting; uncommon. 


Sunburst 
(Invocation/Evocation) 


Level: 4 

Range: 120 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: 40-ft. diameter sphere 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell creates a brilliant flash of greenish- 
white light with blazing golden rays. Undead 


within the area of effect suffer 6d6 damage with 
no saving throw. Other creatures in the area of 
effect, or those outside the flash but looking in 
that direction, must make a successful saving 
throw vs. spell or be blinded for one full round. 
Creatures without eyes are immune to this effect. 
The sunburst also negates any darkness spell 
within the area of effect, if the caster of the sun- 
burst is of equal or higher level than the creator of 
the darkness effect. 
The material component is a sunflower seed. 
Notes: Very rare spell. (Updated from 
POLYHEDRON Newszine.) 


Sunburst 
(Evocation) 
Level: 8 
:0 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 4 


Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: 10-ft./level radius 
Saving Throw: Special 

The sunburst spell causes a globe of radiance 
to explode silently from the caster's form, instan- 
taneously reaching its limit of 10 feet per level of 
the caster. The sunburst has the following effects 
(use the greatest effect that applies). 
* Most Creatures: Creatures looking at the 
caster and within the area of effect must suc- 
cessfully save vs. spell or be blinded for 1d3 
rounds. 
Creatures With Infravision: All creatures look- 
ing at the caster and within the area of effect 
that use infravision must successfully save vs. 
spell or be blinded for 2d4 rounds. 
Creatures To Which Sunlight Is Harmful: All 
creatures in the area to which sunlight is harm- 
ful must make a saving throw vs. spell. 
Success blinds them for 2d6 rounds; other- 
wise, they are blinded for 1d100 days. ` 
Undead Creatures: Undead within the radius, 
including vampires, suffer 8d6 points of 
damage. Those making a successful saving 
throw vs. spell take half damage. 
Fungoid Life: All fungoid life within the 
radius takes 8d6 points of damage from the 
light with no saving throw. 
The material components of this spell are a 
piece of sunstone and a naked flame. 

Notes; Rare spell, originally from the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. Known to be in the 
tome Against the Undead. 


=” Ve T 


902 


Sunflare 


Sundazzle 
(Evocation) 
(Province: Flame) 


Level: 2 

Range: 10 yds./level 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 2 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: 15-ft. radius area, | target/level 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell can be cast only in full daylight, or 
in the presence of other magics that mimic full 
daylight, such as sunray or continual light. Its 
casting causes small, multi-colored spheres to 
appear and dance about, striking at the eyes of 
targets. The effects match those of the 2nd-level 
spell blindness for 2d4 rounds. A blinded target 
suffers a —4 attack roll penalty, and opponents 
gain a +4 bonus to attack rolls against him. 

The caster can target one creature per experi- 
ence level. All target creatures must be within a 
15-foot radius area of effect. There is no bonus 
for using sundazzle to attack a single target 
rather than multiple targets. 

Sundazzle only affects creatures that see nor- 
mally. It doesn't affect blind creatures, nor does 
it harm those that rely primarily on other senses 
or forms of detection. Against undead, sundazzle 
causes the itching associated with the 2nd-level 
spell irritation. Thus, an affected undead crea- 
ture's Armor Class is worsened by 4 points and 
its attack rolls have a —2 penalty for 2d4 rounds. 

The material component of this spell is a 
small glob of sweet gum, which is destroyed in 
the process of casting. 

Notes: Common for spellcasters from an ara- 
bian setting; otherwise, very rare. 


Sunfire (At'ar's Fire) 

(Evocation) 
(Province: Flame) 
Casting Time: 4 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: Sphere with 20-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: 4 

This spell creates a deadly and explosive ball 


of flame, said to be harnessed from the sun. 
Creatures killed by the sunfire are typically 


Level: 4 
Range: 10 yds. + 10 yds evel 
Components: V, S, M 


burned to ash. Damage equals those of a fireball: 
it causes 1d6 points of damage per level of the 
caster, up to a maximum of 10d6. Creatures 
within the radius of the sphere suffer only half 
damage if they make a successful saving throw 
vs. spells. Further, sunfire consumes or melts 
flammable items in its area of effect (items are 
still allowed a saving throw vs. magical fire). 

Yet, there is one key difference between this 
spell and a fireball. The wizard who casts sunfire 
is immune to the spell effects. So are all nonliving 
items that he carries or wears. The caster can even 
center the spell on himself and still escape harm. 

The material component of this spell is a ball 
of sticky gum. 

Notes: Common for spellcasters from an ara- 
bian setting or from the Anauroch Desert in the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting; otherwise, very rare. 
Casting Time: 9 


Duration: Instantaneous 


Area of Effect: 1 spelljamming vessel 
Saving Throw: Special 


Sunflare 
(Conjuration, Evocation) 


Level: 8 
Range: 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S 


This spell envelops an opposing spelljamming 
vessel in flames that appear to erupt directly from 
Firefall. The effect is very brief, but devastating. 

The spell will damage all the ship's rigging 
and sails, reducing its Maneuver Class and SR by 
1. Non-wooden ships do not burn as readily as 
other types, and will have only rigging or sails 
burnt by a casting of this spell, not both. External 
weapons will also be damaged, with a | in 6 
chance that any such weapon is destroyed. 
Wooden ships may also burst into flame. On a 
roll of 1 or 2 on 1d6, the ship's hull and deck have 
caught fire and will suffer 1 Hull Point of damage 
per round, and will suffer the appropriate deterio- 
ration of its air quality. The spell itself causes 1d4 
points of Hull Damage. 

Creatures within the area of effect take 5d6 
points of fire damage, with a saving throw vs. 
spell allowed for half damage. No normal or 
magical effects (other than wishes) will reduce 
the amount of fire damage. Creatures are stunned 
for 1d4 rounds by the sudden combustion of the 
air and all flammable materials. 

The helmsman is allowed a saving throw for 


903 


Sungate 


the ship and its inanimate contents. If successful, 
the ship will not lose its rigging or catch fire, but 
will still suffer 2 points of Hull Damage. 

This spell cannot be cast if the wizard and the 
target ship are farther from Firefall than the orbital 
paths of the Antilan flatworlds. 

The wizard must be standing in full sunlight to 
cast this spell. 

Notes: Known to the Sun Mages of the 
Astromundi Cluster and usable only in that setting. 


Sungate 
(Alteration) 
Level: 9 
Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 


Casting Time: 1 month/9 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: | crystal portal 
Saving Throw: None 

The sungate is a powerful teleportation device 
used by the Sun Mages to achieve secret move- 
ment from one point in the Astromundi Cluster to 
another. 

The spell must be cast upon a crystal portal, 
usually in the shape of a door. The portal can be 
no more than 5 feet X 5 feet X 5 feet in size, and 
must be worth at least 5,000 gold bars. The spell 
takes one month of preparation to cast, and, once 
cast, lasts for one year for each level of the caster. 

Once a sungate has been created, its magic 
works without fail so long as it is kept in the light 
of the sun, Firefall. Sungates that are not illumi- 
nated by the rays of that sun do not function; the 
portal requires that sun's energy in conjunction 
with the magic of this spell to power it. Wizards 
can pass from one sungate to another that they 
are aware of, anywhere within the sphere. There 
is no chance for failure, the wizard always arrives 
at the desired portal, as long as that portal is func- 
tioning. If it is not functioning, the wizard will 
remain at the starting point. 

The wizard must be standing in full sunlight to 
cast this spell. 

Notes: Known to the Sun Mages of the 
Astromundi Cluster and usable only in that setting. 


Sunscorch 
(Evocation) 
(Province: Flame) 


Level: 3 

Range: 5 yds /level 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 3 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: % 


dr 


When a wizard casts this spell, an intense blast of 
heat emanates from his hand, forming a narrow 
beam that curves around obstacles and moves to 
follow its target, striking as unerringly as a magic 
missile spell. 

The beam bakes the target with 6d4 points of 
heat damage— plus an additional 2d4 if the crea- 
ture is wearing armor or physically touching any 
metal weapon or item larger than a sword, includ- 
ing a shield. 

The sunscorch spell does not require sun, heat, 
or even warm surroundings to work. However, a 
wizard cannot cast it underwater or through 
water, including rain or fog. 

The magical heat of this spell affects living 
flesh only. Undead or nonliving objects are 
immune, even if they're highly flammable or vul- 
nerable to sunlight. Thus, a warrior carrying a 
skin of goat's milk can be cooked to death while 
the milk remains cool and unspoiled. 

Notes: Common for spellcasters from an ara- 
bian setting; otherwise, very rare. 


Sunscream 
(Evocation) 
Level: 9 
Range: Special 


Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 4 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: Special (The Astromundi Cluster) 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell provides a means by which a Sun 
Mage near death can contact his or her peers. It 
creates a magical shout that can be heard by all 
Sun Mages within the Astromundi Cluster, and di- 
rects these mages to the one who cast the sun- 
scream. In casting this spell, the Sun Mage 
permanently loses 10 hit points due to its powerful 
effect on the caster. 


N Sunstrike " 


The main effect of this spell is focused on 
sending this sound throughout the Astromundi 
Cluster, and thus anyone within one mile of the 
caster's location is affected as per the deafening 
effects of a shout spell. In addition, creatures 
within a five mile radius see a radiant, fiery 
image that resembles the caster's masked features 
expanding from the spell's point of origin. This 
image is immaterial and does not radiate heat, 
and swiftly expands into nothingness. 

Sun Mages rarely ignore this call, as it is only 
used in times of direst emergency, when a Sun 
Mage is about to fall. A side effect of the spell is 
the identification of the mage in trouble. If a 
mage cries wolf, it is very likely that he or she 
will be ignored in the future, or at the very least 
response to the call will be slow. 

The mage must be standing in full sunlight to 
cast this spell. 

Notes: Known to the Sun Mages of the 
Astromundi Cluster and usable only in that setting. 


Sunshield 
(Abjuration, Evocation) 
Level: 9 
Range: Touch 


Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: | day 
Duration: Until triggered 
Area of Effect: Self, special 
Saving Throw: 4 


This is the most fearsome of the defensive 
spells used by Sun Mages. It is cast into a spe- 
cially prepared shadowstone gem of at least 
1,000 gp value. This gem is worn at all times by 
the mage casting the spell. At the time of the 
casting, the Sun Mage establishes a command 
word that will activate the gem’s power. 

The first effect of the sunshield is to enhance 
the wearer’s AC by 3 points, lowering an AC of 
9 to an AC of 6, for example. This effect is per- 
manent and always accessible, regardless of the 
status of the secondary effects; the wearer does 
not need to speak the command word to keep 
this power active. This gem’s Armor Class 
bonuses can operate with both bracers of de- 
fense and rings of protection. However, after 
the secondary effects of the spell have been ac- 
tivated, the gem shatters into useless shards. 

The second, and by far more dangerous 
effect, is the sudden explosion of flame that en- 
gulfs the Sun Mage wearing the sunshield 


stone. These flames are extremely hot, and 
seem to explode from the caster, enveloping 
everyone within a 30-foot radius. With the ex- 
ception of the Sun Mage who activated the 
spell, those caught in the expanding flames 
suffer 10d6 points of fire damage; victims can 
attempt a saving throw vs. spell for half 
damage. As with all offensive sun magic spells, 
no natural or magical resistance to fire has any 
effect against the sunshield. 

The mage must be standing in full sunlight to 
cast this spell. 

Notes: Known to the Sun Mages of the 
Astromundi Cluster and usable only in that setting. 


Sunstrike 
(Evocation) 


Level: 8 

Range: 40 ft. + 10 ft/level 
Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 9 

Duration: | rd. 

Area of Effect: 1 creature or object 
Saving Throw: 


The sunstrike spell is one of the Sun Mages' 
most deadly attacks. It causes a fiery line of mag- 
ical energy to shoot from the hand of the caster to 
a designated single target within visual range. 
This line is 1 foot wide and can go around cor- 
ners, through windows and doors, over walls, and 
under or around any obstacles between the caster 
and the target. 

This spell hits any one creature the wizard de- 
sires, inflicting 8d8 points of damage (save vs. 
spell for half). Like sunflare, normal or magical 
flame protection does not defend against this 
spell. The sunstrike causes any flammable items 


. to burst into flame on contact (only magical items 


are allowed a saving throw). 

This spell is a favorite among Antilan Warlocks, 
who channel the spell through their soulblades for 
an additional 1d8 of damage (948 total). 

The mage must be standing in full sunlight to 
cast this spell. 

Notes: Known to the Sun Mages of the 
Astromundi Cluster and usable only in that setting. 


P ct ENSEM ESENGL i HT van m coo 


905 


Sunwarp 


Sunwarp 
(Evocation, Illusion/Phantasm) 
(Province: Flame) 


Level: 4 

Range: Special 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: | rd. 

Duration: | turn/level 

Area of Effect: Sheet | ft. thick, 20 ft. wide/level 
x 20 ft. high/level 

Saving Throw: None 


This complex spell multiplies an image se- 
lected by the caster until it fills the area of effect, 
creating an impressive illusion. For example, one 
camel becomes a herd. Twelve desert riders 
become an army. The chosen image repeats itself 
across a blurred, wavering field, which appears to 
be distorted by natural heat shimmer. The illusion 
is equally convincing when viewed from the rear 
or the front. 

When casting this spell, the wizard must first 
view the image he intends to multiply through a 
small quartz crystal. Next, the wizard designates 
one object within the image—a bridle, for example, 
or a warrior's dagger—as the focal point of the illu- 
sion. The wizard must have touched that item per- 
sonally, though it's not part of the actual 
spellcasting. The focal point anchors the illusion. It 
is the foremost point, and the area immediately 
around it is the clearest image within the illusion. 
(The focal point is not destroyed by the casting.) 
When the focal point moves, the illusion follows; 
when the focal point halts, the illusion halts, too. 

For example, imagine that 10 warriors are at- 
tempting to look like a hundred (with a wizard’s 
help). One warrior’s dagger is the focal point; he 
rides slightly ahead of his companions. If he falls, 
and they keep riding, suddenly nine warriors will 
emerge in front of a shimmering image—an image 
of one man down, repeated to look like nearly a 
hundred men down. If, however, one of the other 
warriors picks up the dagger and takes the dead 
man's place, the illusion moves onward, more or 
less intact. Like a natural mirage, the sunwarp is de- 
rived from wavering heat. The spell draws warmth 
from the desert and sends it skyward, creating a 
stiff, hot breeze immediately behind the sheet. The 
sheet is hot enough to terrify a camel ridden through 
it, but it does no harm to combustibles or creatures. 

Moving through the sheet does not destroy it, 
nor does combat within it. Only dispel magic, dispel 
mirage, or the destruction of the focal point can 


bring down the illusion before it expires—unless 
the caster himself chooses to end it. He does not 
have to concentrate to maintain it. Even if he dies, 
the illusion survives him (until is destroyed or its 
duration has ended). 

The material component of this spell, a small 
quartz crystal, is consumed by the casting. 

Notes: Common for spellcasters from an ara- 
bian setting; otherwise, very rare. 


Superheroism — Elf 
(Alteration) 


Level: 5 
Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 5 
Duration: 2 rds./level 
Area of Effect: 1 warrior 
Saving Throw: None 

A superior version of heroism, this spell is a 
carefully guarded secret of the great elven wiz- 
ards. It confers a temporary increase in life 
energy level upon any warrior character of 13th 
level or lower, including 0-level men-at-arms or 
hirelings. The amount of the increase varies with 
the subject's base level: 


Levelof | Number of Energy Bonus 
Recipient Levels Bestowed Hit Points 
0 6 5d10 

Ist to 3rd 5 4d10+1 
4th to 6th 4 3d10+2 
7th to 9th 3 2d10+3 
10th to 12th 2 1d10+4 


The recipient of the spell gains the THACO, 
number of attacks per round, and saving throws 
of the new, temporary level, and a number of 
bonus Hit Dice that add to his or her current hit 
point score. Any damage the warrior takes during 
the spell is subtracted taken from these bonus hit 
points first. The bonus hit points vanish at the end 
of the spell, and the warrior returns to his or her 
own true level. If the warrior is struck by energy 
draining attacks while the spell is in effect, bonus 
levels are absorbed first. 

The material component is a leaf from a 
treant. 

Notes: Very rare spell. (Updated from 
POLYHEDRON NEWSZINE.) The spell is jealously 
protected by the elves, and a character would 
have to perform some great service or quest in 
order to gain access to it. 


am EY cM TT bene oe ae a 


^ Superior Magnetism " 


Superior Magnetism 
(Alteration) 


Level: 6 

Range: 30 yds. + 5 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 6 

Duration: | rd./level 

Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


When this spell is cast, the wizard designates 
one inanimate object of stone, earth, or metal 
within the spell's range to function as a powerful 
magnet, attracting all metal. The object affected 
can be no larger than a 10-foot cube, although a 
section of wall, floor, or ceiling about 10 square 
feet will work. Once magnetized, the object 
exerts a powerful attractive or repulsive force 
(caster's choice) against objects of ferrous metal. 
The effects vary by the proximity of the metal ob- 
jects to the center of magnetism (see table). 


Distance to Movement Rate Effective Missile Attack 


Magnetism per Round Strength Penalty 
To 10 ft. 40 f. 22 (Garg.) -40 
To 20 ft. 20 fi. 20 (Huge) -20 
To 30 fi. 10 ft. 18 (Large) -10 
To 40 ft. 5 ft. 14 (Medium) -5 
To 50 ft. 2ft 10 (Small) -2 
To 60 ft. | f. 4 (Tiny) -l 


The movement rate represents how fast ob- 
jects are drawn to or repelled from the center of 
magnetism. If the creature or object in question is 
heavier than the magnetized item, the magnetized 
item does the moving instead. The effective 
Strength is the "pull" of the magnetism at that 
range; the size equivalent refers to creature sizes, 
not weapon sizes (all human-sized weapons are 
considered small or tiny for this chart). An indi- 
vidual carrying loose metal items or objects such 
as weapons, shields, helms, buttons, and so on 
must win an opposed Strength check to keep 
these possessions from being wrenched away by 
the magnetism (both check, the highest success- 
ful roll wins). Securing a weapon in its sheath, 
holding an item with both hands, and other pre- 
cautions may give an individual a +2 to +4 bonus 
on the ability score, at the DM's discretion. 

Those wearing metal armor must attempt an 
opposed Strength check to ignore the effects of 
the magnetism. An individual failing the Strength 
check outright slips, then flies towards or away 


from the object at the full rate indicated. Full 
falling damage is suffered, based on the speed of 
impact—1d6 for every 10 feet of movement rate, 
or half that damage if the individual is repelled 
and simply thrown back onto the ground. An indi- 
vidual passing the Strength check but beaten by 
the magnetism roll is pulled or repelled one foot 
for each point of difference in the rolls. Again, 
precautions or assistance may help those wearing 
iron. For monsters, compare the creature's size to 
the effective size of magnetism. 

An armored creature stuck to a surface or 
object loses any Dexterity adjustments to AC and 
cannot make any physical attacks. The individual 
can try to wriggle out of the armor, employ a 
magical item, or use any psionic powers at his or 
her disposal. 


Lodestone the fighter is charging a wizard 
when the dastardly felon magnetizes a sizable 
boulder about 30 feet from Lodestone' present 
position. Lodestone carries a long sword, a shield, 
and wears plate mail; he has a Strength of 17. 

First, he checks to see if he holds onto his sword 
and shield, making two opposed Strength rolls. He 
loses the shield, but keeps hold of his sword. Now 
the DM checks to see if Lodestone resists the drag 
on his armor. At 30 feet, the magnetism has a 


^ Superior Spell Enhancer, Rary's » 


Strength of 18. Lodestone rolls a 6, but the magnet- 
ism roll is 12. Although both Lodestone and the 
magnetism made their Strength rolls, the magnet- 
ism roll is higher and does not go over its target 
Strength score. As a result, Lodestone is dragged 6 
feet closer to the boulder. Next round, Lodestone 
tries again and blows his roll altogether, moving a 
full 10 feet closer. Now only 14 feet from the boul- 
der, the magnetism s Strength is effectively a 20, 
which means Lodestone is in big trouble. If he 
blows his roll again the next round, he'll go flying 
into the boulder at a rate of 20 feet/round, which 
will inflict 2d6 points of damage. 


A creature winning its Strength check can 
ignore the spell's effects and move out of the 
zone of influence normally. 

Superior magnetism also affects the passage 
of iron or steel missiles, such as steel-headed 
arrows or quarrels. Any missile that passes 
through the zone of influence suffers an attack 
penalty equal to the movement at the range indi- 
cated. For example, if the path of an arrow brings 
it within 40 feet of a magnetized object, the attack 
suffers a —5 penalty. Finally, it is possible for the 
casting wizard to be affected by this spell as well. 
Thus, the wizard had better be out of the effective 
area of effect when casting. 

The material component for this spell is a 
small bar magnet, bent into a U-shape. 

Notes: Uncommon spell (PO:SP). 


Superior Spell Enhancer, Rary's 

See Rary's superior spell enhancer. 
Suppress Blood Ability 

(Alteration) 
Level: 3 e À 
Range: 10 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Duration: 1 turn/level 
Casting Time: ! rd. 


Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


Suppress blood ability removes an individ- 
ual's power to use one blood ability for the dura- 
tion of the spell. The caster must know both the 
bloodline derivation and blood ability of the 
target, as well as the power of the blood ability to 
be suppressed (minor, major, or great) or the spell 
will fail. Bloodlines are somewhat resistant to 
tampering; therefore saving throws receive the 


following modifiers based on bloodline strength: 
tainted, —2; minor, —0; major, +2; great, +4. 
Multiple castings can affect multiple abilities on 
the same target. 

The material component is a small object from 
the victim's bloodline totem (cat whisker, snake 
scale, etc.). 

Refer to sidebar for a list of totems. 

Notes: Common on Cerilia, the BIRTHRIGHT 
setting; unknown elsewhere. 


Suppress Bloodline 


(Alteration) 


Level: 6 

Range: 50 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Duration: | turn/level 
Casting Time: 5 rds. 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


Similar to the 3rd-level spell suppress blood 
ability but stronger, suppress bloodline removes 
an individual's power to use any of his blood 
abilities for the duration of the spell. 

The caster must know the bloodline derivation 
of the subject or the spell will fail. Bloodlines are 
somewhat resistant to tampering; therefore, the 
saving throw vs. spell is modified based on 
bloodline strength: tainted, —2; minor, 0; major, 
+2; great, +4. 

The material components are six small objects 
related to the bloodline’s totem. 

Notes: Common on Cerilia, the BIRTHRIGHT 
setting; unknown elsewhere. 


908 


^ Suspended Silence, Khelben's " 


Suppress Lycanthropy 


(Alteration) 


Reversible 


Level: 4 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 2 

Duration: 3 rds./level 

Area of Effect: | lycanthrope 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell can be used to give the afflicted ly- 
canthrope a temporary reprieve from its curse, or 
as a combat tactic against any type of lycan- 
thrope. Most of these shapechangers are far less 
powerful in their humanoid form, 

If successful, the spell forces the lycanthrope 
into his human form. The creature retains any 
powers or immunities that its human form nor- 
mally grants, but remains unable to change shape 
for the duration of the spell. 

The material component of this spell is a sprig 
of wolfsbane. 

Strahd Von Zarovich was as interested in the 
reverse of this spell, induce lycanthropy, as its 
original form. With it, he can force a lycanthrope 
into its animal or man-beast form for the duration 
of the spell. Afflicted lycanthropes adopt the bes- 
tial mindset that normally overcomes them in this 
form. However, casting this spell has no effect on 
non-lycanthropes. Casting induce lycanthropy is 
cause for a Ravenloft powers check. The material 
component is a sprig of wolfsbane. 

Notes: Common in the RAVENLOFT setting; 
very rare elsewhere. This spell can be researched 
only on the Demiplane of Dread. 


Sure-Footed Shuffle, Otto’s 
See Otto’s sure-footed shuffle. 


Surelife 
(Alteration) 


Level: 8 

Range: 0 

Components; V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: 2d4 rds. 

Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell allows the wu jen to protect himself 
from some sure cause of death—one that if en- 


tered or undertaken is normally guaranteed to 
cause the death of the caster, The event protected 
against can only be a natural one—not a spell or 
the action of another individual or creature. 

The wu jen could use the spell to protect him- 
self from dying in a pot of boiling oil or under the 
crushing weight of an avalanche, but could do 
nothing to prevent death from the breath of a 
dragon or the swords of a band of samurai. 

The event being protected against must be 
specific and the spell is only effective against that 
event. Should the event come to pass during the 
duration of the spell, the wu jen suffers no 
damage from it nor does he feel any discomfort, 
However, the spell does nothing to protect those 
items carried or worn by the wu jen. 

At the expiration of the spell's duration, the 
event formerly protected against has full normal 
effects on the wu jen. 

The material component for this spell is an 
ointment of peach syrup and cinnabar. 

Notes: Common in oriental settings; other- 
wise, very rare. 


Suric's Swift Perusal 


Duration: | hr./level 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


The Suric’s swift perusal spell aids in library 
research by allowing the caster to read normal, 
nonmagical books at five times normal reading 
rate. However, the spell does not help wizards 
read magical tomes or memorize spells. Further, 
the wizard won't remember where any particular 
piece of information is without immediately writ- 
ing down a reference to its location. It can be used 
in combination with comprehend language but 
not with read magic and similar spells. Suric s 
swift perusal is most often used by wizards, al- 
chemists, and sages to find exacting knowledge of 
obscure subjects. 

Notes: Common or uncommon in the 
MYSTARA setting; otherwise very rare. 


Suspended Silence, Khelben's 
See Khelben's suspended silence. 


909 


Suspension " 


Suspension 
(Alteration) 
(Force) 


Level: 5 

Range: 20 yds./level 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: 1 day/level + 1d4 days 
Area of Effect: creature or object 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This is a powerful, long lasting version of the 
levitate spell thought to have been brought south 
to Halruaa by the original Netherese. This spell is 
known to be one of the magics necessary to 
power the fabled Halruan skyships. 

It functions in all ways as does the levitate 
spell. It can be cast on the wizard's person, on an 
object, or upon a single creature. The weight 
limit, 1,000 pounds per level of the caster, is 
greater than that of the /evitate spell. Unwilling 
creatures are allowed a saving throw vs. spell to 
avoid the effects. 

Concentration is required only when changing 
height. The vertical movement rate for this spell 
is 12. Smashing someone into a rock ceiling at 
that rate causes only 1d6 points of damage, with a 
saving throw vs. paralyzation to avoid all 
damage. Once the desired height is reached, the 
levitated object or person remains at that height 
for the spell duration or until the height is 
changed again. 

The material component is a small leather 
loop suspended from a bent golden wire. 

Notes: Common in the Halruan region of the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting; otherwise, very rare. 
Known to be in Darsson s Notes. 


Sustain Fire 
(Alteration) 
(Fire) 
Level: 1 
Range: 5 yds./level 


Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 2 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 5-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: None 


When this spell is cast on a nonmagical fire, 
the fire is made to consume its fuel at only one- 
tenth its normal rate, while giving off its full 


amount of light and heat; a boon in areas where 
firewood is scarce. A fire so affected will radiate 
magic is such is detected for, but is treated like a 
normal flame for all other purposes; it can be ex- 
tinguished normally, and it does not count as a 
magical attack form when used against creatures 
that are harmed only by magical weapons. 

Sustain fire can be cast on any number of fires, 
as long as they are all entirely within the area of 
effect at the time of casting. Thus, a bundle of lit 
torches could be created and then separated for 
full effect. However, if one such torch is used to 
light another fire, the new fire has only a normal 
duration. Multiple sustain fire spells cast on a 
single object have no additional effect, and any 
extra fuel added to the fire after the casting will 
burn at the normal rate, not at the enchanted rate. 
If the enchanted fire is extinguished, the spell 
ends, no matter how much time was left to the 
fuel. If the fire is relit, the remaining fuel burns at 
its normal rate. 

Notes: Very rare spell. (Updated from DRAGON 
Magazine.) 


Swift Perusal, Suric’s 
See Suric’s swift perusal. 


Swiftly Devour the Written Word 
A MYSTARA setting spell, aka Suric's swift perusal. 


Swim 
(Alteration) 
Reversible 


Level: 1 

Range: 120 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: 3 rds./level 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell allows the wu jen to give the recipi- 
ent the ability to swim with the ease of a fish. The 
creature has a swimming rate of 12, and can carry 
a normal load of equipment with no difficulty. A 
normally outfitted character cannot drown while 
this spell is in effect. Excessive weight still 
causes the character to sink and drown normally, 
however. The spell does not impart the ability to 
breathe underwater. 

The reverse of this spell, sink, reduces the 
swimming ability of the target by one class unless 


Á——————————— 


910 


^ Sword of Deception " 


a successful saving throw vs. spell is made. Thus, 
natural swimming creatures are treated as land 
creatures trained in swimming, those with swim- 
ming proficiency are treated as without this abil- 
ity, and those without swimming proficiency sink 
like stones. 

The material component for either spell is the 
scale of a goldfish. 

Notes: Common in oriental settings; other- 
wise, very rare. 


Sword, Mordenkainen's 
See Mordenkainen's sword. 


Sword of Darkness 
(Evocation, Necromancy) 


Level: 6 

Range: 60 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 6 
Duration: | rd./level 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell creates a jet black sword that radi- 
ates a palpable aura of evil. The sword can 
appear anywhere within the range of the spell. 
When cast, the wu jen targets the spell on one 
creature. Thereafter, the sword can attack only 
that creature. The wu jen must concentrate on the 
actions of the sword, causing it to strike as if he 
held it in his own hand (nonproficiency penalties 
do not apply). 

On a successful hit, the sword temporarily 
drains the creature hit of 1—3 levels or Hit Dice. 
Appropriate hit points, fighting ability, spell 
levels, and level powers are lost. The sword itself 
causes no physical damage. A creature reduced 
below 0 level or Hit Dice is slain. In 1-3 days, 
the spirit returns as a kuei (undead). Lost levels 
are regained 1-3 turns after the sword of dark- 
ness disappears, provided the character has not 
died; however, lost spells are not regained. These 
spells must be memorized again before they can 
be cast. 

The material component for this spell is a 
katana or long sword worth at least 20 gp, which 
is shattered against a stone. 

Notes: Common in oriental settings; other- 
wise, very rare. 


Sword of Deception 
(Evocation) 


Level: 5 

Range: 60 yds. + 10 yds evel 
Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: | rd./level 

Area of Effect: | creature 


Saving Throw: None 


This spell creates a shimmering pale green blade 
anywhere the wu jen desires within the range of the 
spell. This sword hovers and dances in the air, strik- 
ing of its own accord if the wu jen concentrates on it. 
The sword strikes as if it were wielded by a samurai 
of the same level as the caster and causes 1d4 points 
of damage. Since it is magical, it can strike any crea- 
ture hit by magical weapons. In addition to the 
damage, each hit by the sword lowers the chances of 
the victim making his next saving throw by —1. This 
effect is cumulative up to —5. After this is reached, 

The sword can be moved from creature to crea- 
ture within the duration of the spell, but only one 
creature can be attacked at a time. The saving throw 
penalty remains in effect unti] the creature is forced 
to make a saving throw in a dangerous situation. 
Thus, a companion of the victim could not cast a rel- 
atively harmless spell on him to cancel the effect. 
Remove curse, limited wish, and wish can be used to 
negate the effect. 

The material components for this spell are a 
miniature replica of a sword and a set of loaded dice. 

Notes: Common in oriental settings; other- 
wise, very rare. 


Hor ———————— IT 


911 


ES Swordfire, Storm's z 


Swordfire, Storm's 
See Storm's swordfire. 


Swordshun 
(Necromancy) 


Level: 4 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 4 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


This battle spell sees little use because the 
caster must deliberately wound herself with a 
bladed weapon to cast it. The weapon inflicts its 
normal damage, plus 1 point every second round 
thereafter, so long as it remains in the wound. 

A wizard typically uses this spell when at- 
tacks cannot be avoided. The caster can cast 
other spells while a swordshun is in effect on her, 
but all such magics have their casting time in- 
creased by 1. 

While the weapon is in the wound, however, 
no other bladed or piercing weapons of any sort 
can harm the caster. Those that do strike draw no 
blood and inflict no damage, and the wounds 
they cause close by themselves almost instantly. 
The caster can walk through a b/ade barrier un- 
harmed while using swordshun, or stroll unhurt 
through a shower of arrows. 

The spell ends when the caster loses con- 
sciousness or the weapon is removed. Healing 
magic applied to the caster while the weapon 
used to cast the spell is in place are delayed in 
effect by the swordshun enchantment so that they 
do not work until the weapon is removed. When 
the weapon is removed, they take instant effect, 
no matter how much time has passed. 

The material component of this spell is the 
weapon, which dissipates in smoke when the 
spell is done. 

Notes: Restricted to the Seven Sisters and 
their apprentices; rare. 


Syluné's Absolute Immunity 
(Abjuration) 


Level: 8 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 8 

Duration: 1 day/level 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell protects the caster or a willing spell recip- 
ient touched during casting from all damaging effects of 
a particular spell. The spell must be of 7th level or less. 
Absolute immunity is gained. If a delayed blast fireball 
struck the chest of a being protected against that spell 
and then exploded, it would explode as normal, perhaps 
slaying many folk and devastating a room, but the un- 
blackened, unhurt protected being would still be stand- 
ing in the midst of the ashes afterward. 

This spell also confers a limited benefit on the pro- 
tected being of a +2 bonus on all saving throws against 
spells similar to the designated one, but does nothing 
else to lessen damage from them. In the case given 
bonus against flaming sphere, fireball, Melf $ minute 
meteors, meteor swarm, and probably some additional, 
less common, mobile-ball-of-flame spells. Syluné ab- 
solute immunity has no effect at all on other spells than 
the designated one and related spells as described above. 

A being can only be under the protection of one ab- 
solute immunity at a time. Casting a second immunity to 
the same spell on the same person overlaps the spell du- 
rations, so that the protection lasts longer. Casting a 
against to the second spell, replacing the first immunity. 

Notes: Restricted to the Seven Sisters and their ap- 
prentices; rare or very rare. 


Syluné's Displeasure 
Aka Laeral's disrobement (this name is a discon- 
tinued usage). 


Syluné's Secret 
(Abjuration, Alteration, Divination) 


Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 7 
Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


JAe—————— 


912 


N Syluné’s Streaking Meteor y 


Syluné was quite secretive about her spell cre- 
ations. This spell is one of the few she shared with 
her sisters. It is an enchantment the caster em- 
ploys on herself just before battle, which protects 
her against a single type of spell effect selected 
during casting. For example, the caster could 
choose to be protected against cold, fire, heat, 
electrical, blast, or raw energy discharge, such as 
magic missiles or spellfire. Ifany natural or magi- 
cal attack of the chosen type comes into contact 
with the caster, it is instantly drawn into the caster. 

For example, a fireball blast that would have 
harmed the protected caster appears with a flash 
and then vanishes into the caster, inflicting upon 
other beings in its blast area either 1 or 2 points of 
damage in the fleeting shadow of a moment of its 
manifestation. The caster is not harmed by the in- 
coming spell energy, and if injured at the time, is 
healed of 1 point of damage per absorbed attack. 
The spell provides no protection against other 
attack forms, but can absorb any number of at- 
tacks of the selected type in a single round. On at 
least one occasion, Syluné used the spell to escape 
several intersecting meteor swarms unscathed. 

The remainder of the spell energy can be used, 
if the caster desires, to teleport a short distance. 
This teleportation is similar to the 4th-level 
wizard spell dimension door, though the protected 
caster does not have to perform any casting to 
make the trip, or spend any time recovering after- 
wards; she can in fact proceed with other spell- 
casting or physical combat during the same round. 
The destination is selected by the will of the caster 
when the energy is received. If the spell energy is 
not used to teleport in the round it is received or 
the round directly following, the energy is lost. 

The caster cannot protect another being or em- 
power them to dimension door by means of this 
spell. Laeral is said to be working on an 8th-level 
variant of this spell that allows the caster to 
confer by touch both aspects of the spell, together 
or separately, on another being. She has not suc- 
ceeded thus far, however. 

The material components for a Sy/uné s secret 
are a cat's whisker, a shell from any marine crea- 
ture, and a stone that has at some time been 
thrown a short distance by the caster. 

Notes: Restricted to the Seven Sisters and 
their apprentices; rare or very rare. 


Syluné's Streaking Meteor 
(Alteration) 


Level: 7 

Range: 10 ft./level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 7 
Duration: 1 rd. 

Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: 4 


This spell creates a flying sphere of flame 12 
feet across. It can begin anywhere within spell 
range that the caster desires, and at any height (in- 
cluding touching the ground). It begins its journey 
by moving away from the caster in the direction 
the caster points, forming a 40 foot-long teardrop 
of flame as it goes. It may rise, descend, or fly ina 
level manner, as the caster's points, forming a 40 
foot-long teardrop of flame, at it goes. It may rise, 
descend, or fly in a level manner, as the caster's 
pointing finger directs (or as forced to by walls). 

After the streaking meteor has traveled 60 feet 
away from the caster, it turns sharply (90°) to the 
right, left, up, or down (whichever direction the 
caster has chosen during casting), runs for another 
60 feet, and then abruptly fades away. Note that 
this trajectory allows a wizard to hurl fire around 
comers, up shafts, or down behind barriers. 

A streaking meteor rebounds straight back on 
its own path if it strikes a large solid object such 
as a wall or a huge or larger-sized creature. When 
a rebound occurs, the meteor tries to continue the 
remainder of its trajectory (whatever remains of 
60 feet, right-angled turn, then 60 feet more). It 
can rebound any number of times (for example, 
from wall to wall), but loses 1d6 from the 0 
damage it inflicts with each rebound. (A creature 
struck repeatedly by it as it races back and forth 
may fail to fully appreciate this weakening.) 
Upon contact, a streaking meteor automatically 
ignites all readily flammable substances, forces 
saving throws vs. magical fire on all other items, 
and deals all creatures 1d6 points of damage per 
level of the spell's caster, to a maximum of 16d6. 
This may be lessened by rebounds, though each 
contact causes damage, if a creature is struck re- 
peatedly. This damage is halved if the creature 
successfully makes a saving throw vs. spell. 

The material components of this spell are an 
insect wing or bird feather, a pinch of ash from 
any fire, and a pinch of sulphur or saltpeter. 

Notes: Very rare in the FORGOTTEN REALMS 
setting; virtually unknown elsewhere. 


A TY he RU IE ON 


913 


S; 


yluné's Viper 


Syluné's Viper 
(Alteration) 


Level: 3 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 3 

Duration: 4 rds. 

Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell temporarily transforms one of the 
caster's arms into a retractable serpent, whose eyes 
the caster can see through (if desired), complete 
with a fanged mouth. This serpent bites once per 
round as if it were a wizard seven levels higher 
than the caster, and its bite does 1d4+1 points of 
damage and forces the victim to make a saving 
throw vs. spell. If the saving throw is failed, the 
victim is convulsed for the following round. 
During this time, the victim is helpless to attack, 
deliberately defend, or complete any other volun- 
tary task or activity, and has his or her Armor Class 
penalized by 4. The serpentine arm can extend up 
to 50 feet and is effectively weightless, It can bite 
through armor plate, shields, and the like, and is a 
magical force rather than a real snake. It is unaf- 
fected by magic governing serpentkind. 

The serpentine arm cannot constrict or en- 
twine about victims, and its bite is not poisonous. 
Each time a victim is struck a saving throw vs. 
spell must be made to avoid the convulsive effect. 
The arm can climb vertical walls and then drag 
the caster’s body after it if the caster so desires, 
but it moves at the caster’s movement rate. The 
caster cannot work any other magic while one of 
her arms is in serpent-form, but she can end the 
spell before expiration by silent act of will. 

The serpentine arm can be struck by foes. It is 
AC 4 and has 44 hit points beyond the caster’s 
own. If attacks reduce these hit points to 0, the 
serpentine arm vanishes and the spell ends. All at- 
tacks on the caster during the functioning of a 
Syluné S viper spell inflict damage against these 
extra hit points created by the viper arm first. 
Excess damage beyond the viper s 44 hit points is 
suffered by the caster directly. 

The material components of this spell are a 
scale and a tooth from any snake (not necessarily 
a fang). 

Notes: Rare or very rare in the FORGOTTEN 
REALMS setting; virtually unknown elsewhere. 


914 


^ Symbol ag 


Symbol 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 
(Geometry) 


Level: 8 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 
Duration: Special 

Casting Time: 3 or 1 turn 
Area of Effect: 60-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: None or neg. 


This spell allows the caster to scribe any of on 
the potent runes described below. A symbol can be 
quickly scribed in the air or on some surface, or 
carefully inscribed on a surface. 

A quickly scribed symbol has a casting time of 
3. The resulting rune becomes active immediately. 
It lasts one turn per caster level and glows faintly 
while it lasts. Symbols of fear, hopelessness, pain, 
or persuasion can be used in this manner. Symbols 
of death, discord, insanity, pain, sleep, stunning, 
and spell loss cannot. 

The only material components required are a 
small amount of mercury and phosphorus. 

A carefully inscribed symbol has a casting time 
of one turn. The symbol is inactive when finished 
and remains so indefinitely until triggered. Once 
triggered, it becomes active and glowing, usually 
lasting one turn per caster level. Some symbols can 
burn out more quickly. For example, a symbol of 
death ends when it has slain 80 hit points worth of 
creatures, or after one turn per level of the caster, 
whichever comes first. 

The material components for a carefully en- 
graved symbol are mercury and phosphorus, plus 
powdered diamond and opal worth at least 5,000 gp 
each. 


To be effective, a symbol must always be placed 
in plain sight and in a prominent location, covering 
or hiding the rune renders the symbol ineffective. 
As a default, a symbol is triggered whenever a crea- 
ture does one or more of the following, as selected 
by the spell caster: reads, touches, or passes over 
the rune; looks at the rune; or passes through a 
portal bearing the rune. In this case, “reading” the 
tune means any attempt to study, identify, or 
fathom its meaning. Throwing a cover over a 
symbol to render it inoperative triggers it if it reacts 
to touch. To trigger a symbol, a creature must be 
within 60 feet of the rune. 

The caster can set special triggering conditions 
of his own. These can be as simple or elaborate as 
the caster desires. Special conditions for triggering 


a symbol can be based on a creature’s name, iden- 
tity, or alignment, but otherwise must be based on 
observable actions or qualities. Intangibles such as 
level, class, hit dice, or hit points don’t qualify. For 
example, a symbol can be set to activate when a 
lawful good creature approaches, but not when a 
paladin approaches. 

A symbol’s triggering conditions are defensive. 
A touch-triggered symbol remains untriggered if an 
item bearing the symbol is used to touch a creature. 
Likewise, a symbol cannot be placed on a weapon 
and set to activate when the weapon strikes a foe. 
Once cast, a symbols triggering conditions cannot 
be changed. 

The caster ignores the effects of his own sym- 
bols, and cannot inadvertently trigger them. When 
scribing a symbol quickly, the caster can instantly 
attune any number creatures to the symbol, rending 
them immune to its effects, provided the creatures 
are within 60 feet of the rune when it is created and 
that the caster is aware of their presence. 

When creating a carefully inscribed rune, the 
caster can specify a password of phrase that pre- 
vents a creature using it from triggering the symbol. 
The caster also can attune any number or creatures 
to the symbol, but this can extend the casting time. 
Attuning one or two creatures takes negligible 
time; attuning small group (up to 10 creatures) 
takes an hour. Attuning an entire household (up to 
25 creatures) takes a day. Attuning larger groups 
takes proportionately longer, as the DM sees fit. 

When triggered, a symbol affects all creatures 
within a 60-foot radius, except for the caster and 
any individuals attuned it. If a symbol has a pass- 
phrase, anyone using it remains immune to that 
particular rune's effects so long as the individual re- 
mains within 60 feet of the rune. An individual who 
leaves the radius and returns must use the pass 
phrase again. 

Once triggered, a symbol remains active until its 
an active symbol $ triggering conditions suffer its 
effects. The symbols described below are the most 
commonly known. 


Lesser Symbols: 

Fear: This symbol can be scribed quickly or 
carefully engraved on a surface. Creatures within 
the radius are afflicted by a powerful version of 
the 4th-level wizard spell, fear. If scribed in the 
air, this symbol imposes a —4 penalty to saving 
throws against the fear effect. If the rune is care- 
fully engraved on a surface, the saving throw 
penalty rises to -8. 


P idis CE eR a. 


915 


^ Synostodweomer, Simbul's » 


Hopelessness: Al creatures within the radius 
must attempt saving throws vs. spell, at a -4 
penalty if the rune is carefully engraved on a sur- 
face. If the saving throw fails, the creature suffers 
from hopelessness for 3d4 turns. It submits to 
simple demands from foes, such as to surrender or 
get out; the effect is similar to the 3rd-level wizard 
spell, suggestion. If no foes are present to make de- 
mands, there is a 25% chance that the creature 
takes no other action than to hold its ground. If the 
creature remains free to act there is a 25% chance 
it will retreat from the rune at its normal move- 
ment speed. In either case, the creature can defend 
normally if attacked. 


Pain: Creatures within the radius suffer wrack- 
ing pains that reduce Dexterity scores by two 
points and impose a -4 attack penalty. Both effects 
last 2d10 turns. This symbol can be scribed quickly 
or carefully engraved on a surface. 


Persuasion: This symbol can be quickly scribed 
or carefully engraved on a surface. Each creature 
within the radius must attempt a saving throw vs. 
spell, at a -4 penalty if the rune is carefully in- 
scribed on a surface. If the saving throw fails, the 
creature becomes the same alignment as the caster 
for 1d20 turns. During this time, an affected crea- 
ture becomes friendly to the caster as though sub- 
jected to the Ist-level wizard spell, charm person. 


Greater Symbols: 

Death: One or more creatures within the radius, 
whose total hit points do not exceed 80, are irrevo- 
cably slain as though struck by the 6th-level wizard 
spell, death spell. This symbol must be carefully 
engraved on a surface. 


Discord: All creatures within 60 feet immedi- 
ately fall into loud bickering and arguing. 
Meaningful communication is impossible. If the af- 
fected creatures have different alignments, they are 
50% likely to attack each other. Bickering lasts 5d4 
rounds, fighting lasts 2d4 rounds. This symbol 
must be carefully engraved on a surface. 


Insanity: One or more creatures within the 
radius, whose hit points do not exceed 120, become 
insane and act as though affected by the 4th-level 
wizard spell, confusion. Insanity lasts until a heal, 
restoration, or wish spell is used to remove the af- 
fliction, This symbol must be carefully engraved on 
à surface. 


Sleep: Creatures within the radius fall into a 
catatonic slumber if they have 8+1 hit dice or less 
(characters are affected if 8th level or less). 
Sleeping creatures cannot be awakened for 
1d12+4 turns. This symbol must be carefully en- 
graved on a surface. 


Stunning: One ore more creatures within the 
radius, whose total hit points do not exceed 160, are 
stunned for 3d4 rounds, Stunned creatures drop 
what they are holding and cannot take any mean- 
ingful actions. They cannot communicate, employ 
spells, use magical items, initiate psionic abilities, 
use spell-like powers, fight, or move freely, 
Movement is limited to one-third the creature's cur- 
rent movement rate, or a rate of 3, whichever is 
less. Attacks against stunned creatures gain a +4 
bonus. This symbol must be carefully engraved on 
a surface. 


A successful dispel magic removes the effects of 
a symbol from a creature, unless the symbol's effect 
is instantaneous (death, spell loss) or the descrip- 
tion specifies another remedy (insanity). The rune 
itself can be removed with a successful erase spell 
or a successful dispel magic targeted solely on the 
rune. The destruction of a surface upon which a 
symbol is inscribed destroys the rune, but also trig- 
gers its effects. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). This spell has 
been substantially reworked from the 2nd Edition 
version. The symbol of spell loss originated in the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Synostodweomer, Simbul's 
See Simbul's synostodweomer. 


s:tCO MEM mm erc LI Le em D 


916 


Talon's Waterproof — Bard 


Talon's Skitmaster — Bard NS) ment that uses a small ivory cube. When 
(Illusion) S e DY" cast, the spell conforms closely to the Ist- 
BAZAS leve] wizard spell, audible glamer. 
Level: 3 The caster selects six sounds and places them 
Range: 0 onto the faces of the ivory cube. These sounds 
Components: V, S, M can be virtually any noise with which the caster 
Casting Time: 3 is familiar, and can be as loud as an audible 
Duration: 3 hrs. glamer. They might include a dragon's roar, a 
Area of Effect: 20 ft. x 20 ft. bird chirping, a baby crying. The sounds remain 
Saving Throw: None in place on the cube until the cube is employed 
or the spell's duration lapses. 
This is an especially effective spell for a bard, To call forth a sound, the caster presses the 


who can summon forth illusions of heroes and side of the cube he wants to hear. Each sound 
monsters, giving real life to his stories. The illu- persists for up to five rounds, and can be called 
sions can appear to do battle, while the caster nar- forth only once. This spell is especially handy 
rates the scene and adds vocal color where he with the Talon s skitmaster illusion. 


sees fit. The spell requires an ivory cube, which can be 
The caster must mark with a line of sand an reused. 

area no larger than 20 by 20 feet when the spell is Notes: Known to Talon Stringfellow. 

cast. While it is in effect, the caster must remain 

inside this boundary. To invoke the special abili- Talon's Waterproof — Bard 


ties of the spell, the caster blinks twice and then (Abjuration) 

states the name of up to six objects and creatures. 

The caster becomes invisible, and the named ob- Level: | 

jects and creatures appear in his place. For exam- Range: 0 

ple, the caster can call into being a terrifying troll. Components: V, S, M 

The troll has no substance and cannot pass Casting Time: 2 

beyond the sandy boundary. Nor can it speak. Duration: 1 hr./level 

However, it can move about at the caster's whim, Area of Effect: 1 item or creature 
dancing, jumping, and performing feats to im- Saving Throw: None 

press an audience. The caster can speak during 


this time, telling a story, singing, or casting spells Waterproof makes one item or creature, man- 
to enhance the show. sized or smaller, immune to being wetted by nat- 

The spell is broken if the caster steps out of ural water. Water is deflected one inch above the 
the boundary or if the line of sand is broken. surface of the enchanted object or individual. The 


The bard Talon Stringfellow developed this spell affects only natural water, and has no effect 
enchantment after years of research and practice, upon water-based spells or water-based creatures 
to produce more spectacular and crowd-pleasing such as water weirds or water elementals. It does 


performances. not dry creatures or items that are already wet. It 
Notes: Known to Talon Stringfellow. does not allow the recipient to breathe underwa- 
ter. Full immersion in water breaks the spell in- 
Talon's Soundmaster — Bard stantly. 
(Illusion) This spell was developed by Talon 
Stringfellow, a famed minstrel of Waterdeep. One 
Level: 3 day, he grew tired of being drenched by the 
Range: 0 spring rains, which he feared would damage his 
Components: V, S, M polished wood harp. He spent months research- 
Casting Time: 3 ing enchantments that would keep him dry. 
Duration: 24 hrs. The material component is a drop of water. 
Area of Effect: Ivory six-sided cube Notes: Known to Talon Stringfellow. 


Saving Throw: None 


Talon Stringfellow, always looking for spells 
to improve his stage shows, created this enchant- 


" IE MEME IECUR NK EL. A eA 


917 


Talonblade — Hishna 


Talonblade — Hishna 


(Enchantment) 


The talonblade spell allows the caster to en- 
chant the blade or tip of any single stone weapon. 
The weapon gains a +3 to all attack and damage 
rolls. Any damage sustained by the weapon (if it is 
a maca) is delayed until the end of the spell's du- 
ration; it does take effect then, however. 

The material component for the spell is the 
claw of a jaguar. 

Notes: Restricted to practitioners of hishna 
magic (the Maztica setting); common. 


Level: 1 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: 1 turn/level 
Area of Effect: 1 weapon 
Saving Throw: None 


Target — Old Empire 
(Alteration) 


Level: 3 

Range: 50 yds. + 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 3 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell enables the wizard to affect a single target 
creature. A creature failing a saving throw vs. spell be- 
comes marked so that all physical missile attacks, in- 
a +2 bonus to attack and damage rolls against it. 

Notes: Uncommon spell. As a FORGOTTEN 
REALMS Old Empire spell, initial exposure re- 
quires a mentor or a read Southern magic spell. 


Tasha’s Uncontrollable Hideous 
Laughter 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
(Song) 
Level: 2 
Range: 60 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 2 


Duration: 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: 1 or more creatures in a 30-ft. cube 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


The victim of this spell perceives everything 
as hilariously funny. The effect is not immediate, 
and the creature feels only a slight tingling on the 
round the spell is cast. On the round immediately 
following, the victim begins smiling, then gig- 
gling, chuckling, tittering, snickering, guffawing, 
and finally collapsing into gales of uncontrol- 
lable, hideous laughter. Although this magical 
mirth lasts only a single round, the affected crea- 
ture must spend the next round regaining its feet, 
and it loses 2 points from its Strength (or —2 to 
attack and damage rolls) for all remaining rounds 
of the spell. 

The saving throw vs. spell is modified by the 
Intelligence of the creature. Creatures with 
Intelligences of 4 or less (semi-intelligent) are to- 
tally unaffected. Those with Intelligences of 5-7 
(low) save with —6 penalties. Those with 
Intelligences of 8-12 (average to very) save with 
-4 penalties. Those with Intelligences of 13-14 
(high) save with —2 penalties. Those with 
Intelligences of 15 or greater (exceptional) have 
unmodified saving throws. 

The caster can affect one creature for every 
three levels attained—e.g., one at 3rd level, two 
at 6th level, three at 9th level, etc. All affected 
beings must be within 30 feet of each other. 

The material components are a small feather 
and minute tarts. The tarts are hurled at the sub- 
jects, while the feather is waved in one hand. 

Notes: Common or uncommon spell (PHB). 


Tasirin's Haunted Sleep 
(Enchantment/Charm) 


Level: 3 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: 1 turn/level 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


Tasirin’s haunted sleep puts a sleeping crea- 
ture into a much deeper sleep, such that early 
awakening from this state can be accomplished 
only by /imited wish, dispel magic, acute physical 
pain (wounding), or at the caster's command. The 
state of deep sleep lasts for one turn per level of 
the caster. 

This spell can be cast successfully only upon a 
sleeping creature—those unconscious, entranced, 
drugged, in a coma or similar state of mental 
injury resulting from concussion, potion, or astral 


" ER RUNS SENE CALME e e 


918 


Tasso's Shriek 


mA 


| 
ay ae 
^ 5 kS | 
msan Sa we 
(e A uem 


ele 


or psionic activity are not affected. 

The target creature is allowed a saving 
throw vs. spell, which if successful negates the 
haunted sleep, The caster is never directly 
aware of the target’s thoughts or mental state, or 
of the success of the spell. 

While in such a deep sleep, the creature is 
open to the influence of subconscious visions or 
dreams. The caster can project one specific 
scene or vision into natural mental activity, and 
this will come into the creature’s consciousness 
soon after awakening. The vision’s clarity, 
detail, and accuracy depend upon the caster’s 
concentration, for the scene must be held in 
mind during the casting. 

Such visions can masquerade as memories 
or divine communications, and can be used to 
influence decisions, goad the creature into a 
certain course of action, trouble the recipient, 
or, conversely, to calm and rest the creature at a 
time of mental anguish or troubles. A spell- 
caster skilled in the use of this spell can boost 
morale, joy, or enthusiasm—or crush it. 

During haunted sleep, the recipient is espe- 
cially susceptible to any one suggestion spell, 
which can be cast by the caster of the haunted 
sleep or another spellcaster. The sleeping crea- 
ture is allowed a saving throw vs. spell at a —3 
penalty. The suggestion will be heard as an 


inner mental voice, and must be in a language 
that the creature understands or it will fail. 

Should the creature be protected in slumber 
(as by a protection from evil spell) the haunted 
sleep may have no effect at all, depending on 
the intentions and motives of the caster—at- 
tempts to deceive or manipulate will absolutely 
fail. 

Notes: Uncommon or rare spell from the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. Known to be in 
The Wizard s Workbook. 


Tasso's Shriek 
(Hlusion/Phantasm) 


Level: 1 

Range: 10 yds./level 
Components: V 

Casting Time: 1 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: Hearing range 
Saving Throw: Special 


This specialized form of an audible glamer 
spell is released by the caster with only minimal 
utterance. Its casting is all but silent and un- 
traceable, requiring a minimum of concentra- 
tion (thus enabling it to be cast during melee or 
when the caster is in pain, constrained, or the 
like). The magic produces a shrieking crying 
shouting or other verbal utterance. Once cast 
the sounds cannot be ended before the spell ex- 
piration. 

The sounds carried by this magic are limited 
to those produced by the caster's voice (al- 
though mimicry is possible). These are typi- 
cally used to produce shouted warnings or cries 
to suggest a fight or attack offstage, or to sug- 
gest the presence of unseen intruders so as to 
distract opponents of the caster. The spellcaster 
must emit all of these sounds while memorizing 
the spell and cannot later alter them. 

Notes: Very rare spell from the FORGOTTEN 
REALMS setting. Known to be in Tasso 's 
Arcanabula. 


" x cS Dar UM uec pce le 


919 


Tattoo of Power 


Tattoo of Power 
(Alteration, Evocation) 
(Geometry) 


Level: 6 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: | hr./level of spell implanted 


Duration: Until triggered 


Saving Throw: None 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 

The tattoo of power is a method of implanting 
spells using the art of tattooing. The wizard casts 
the tattoo of power in conjunction with the spell to 
be implanted in the tattoo. The wizard then begins 
to tattoo the recipient of the spell. When finished, 
the tattoo contains the power of the spell, which 
can be released simply by touching the tattoo and 
uttering a command word. Once the spell is cast 
from the tattoo, the markings of the tattoo fade and 
disappear almost immediately. 

When the spell in the tattoo is released, it operates 
exactly as if it were cast by the wizard who originally 
implanted the spell. If a 10th-level wizard implanted 
a spell, it is released at the 10th level of ability. 

Tattoos can take a lot of space. For every level 
of the spell implanted, the tattoo will cover a 2-inch 
square of flesh. This limits the number of tattoos 
that can be drawn upon the average human body. 
Up to four levels of spells could be inscribed on the 
average human arm, 10 levels of spells on the 
chest, and six spell levels on each leg. There are 
practical limitations to this—magic becomes 
"fuzzy" when condensed into such a small area. No 
more than four tattoos of power can be placed upon 
a single individual at any one time. Finally, the 
caster of this spell must have the tattooing profi- 
ciency or the spell will not function. 

Notes: Common for spellcasters from an ara- 
bian setting; otherwise, very rare. Optionally un- 
common for Savage mages and geometers. 


Taunt 
(Enchantment) 
(Song) 


Level: 1 

Range: 60 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 

Duration: 1 rd. 

Area of Effect: 30-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


A taunt spell enables the caster to jape and jeer 
effectively at a single type of creature with an 
Intelligence of 2 or greater. The caster need not 
speak the language of the creatures. His words 
and sounds have real meaning for the subject 
creature or creatures: challenging, insulting, and 
generally irritating and angering the listeners. 

Those failing to save vs. spell rush forth in 
fury to do battle with the spellcaster. All affected 
creatures attack the spellcaster in melee if physi- 
cally capable of doing so, seeking to use body or 
hand-held weapons rather than missile weapons 
or spells. Separation of the caster from the victim 
by an impenetrable or uncrossable boundary (a 
wall of fire, a deep chasm, a formation of set 
pikemen) causes the spell to break. 

If the caster taunts a mixed group, he must 
choose the type of creature to be affected. 
Creatures commanded by a strong leader (i.e., 
with a Charisma bonus, with higher Hit Dice, 
etc.) might gain a saving throw bonus of +1 to +4, 
at the DM's discretion. If used in conjunction 
with a ventriloquism spell, the creatures may 
attack the apparent source, depending upon their 
Intelligence, a leader's presence, and so on. 

The material component is a slug, which is 
hurled at the creatures to be taunted. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Telekinesis 
(Alteration) 
(Force, Mentalism) 


Level: 5 

Range: 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 5 
Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


By means of this spell, the wizard is able to 
move objects by concentrating on moving them 
mentally. The spell can provide either a gentle, 
sustained force or a single short, violent thrust. 

A sustained force enables the wizard to move 
a weight of up to 25 pounds a distance of up to 
20 feet per round. The spell lasts two rounds, 
plus one round per caster level. The weight can 
be moved vertically, horizontally, or both. An 
object moved beyond the caster's range falls or 
stops. If the caster ceases concentration for any 
reason, the object falls or stops. The object can 
be telekinetically manipulated as if with one 


Mp T E A T AE NN 


920 


^-^ Teleport Block " 


hand. For example, a lever or rope can be pulled, 
a key can be turned, an object rotated and so on, 
if the force required is within the weight limita- 
tion. The caster might even be able to untie 
simple knots, at the discretion of the DM. 

Alternatively, the spell energy can be ex- 
pended in a single round. The caster can hurl one 
or more objects within range and within a 10-foot 
cube, directly away from himself at high speed, 
to a distance of up to ten feet per caster level. This 
is subject to a maximum weight of 25 pounds per 
caster level. Damage caused by hurled objects is 
decided by the DM, but cannot exceed 1 point of 
damage per caster level. Opponents who fall 
within the weight capacity of the spell can be 
hurled, but they are allowed a saving throw vs. 
spell to avoid the effect. Furthermore, those able 
to employ as simple a counter-measure as an en- 
large spell, for example (thus making the body 
weight go over the maximum spell limit), can 
easily counter the spell. The various Bigby s hand 
spells also counter this spell. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB) 


Telekinetic Sphere, Otiluke's 
See Otiluke's telekinetic sphere. 


Telepathic Bond, Rary's 
See Rary's telepathic bond. 


Teleport 
(Alteration) 
(Universal) 


Level: 5 

Range: Touch 

Casting Time: 2 
Components: V 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


When this spell is used, the wizard instantly 
transports himself, along with a certain amount of 
additional weight that is on or being touched by 
the spellcaster, to a well-known destination. 
Distance is not a factor, but interplanar travel is 
not possible by means of a teleport spell. The 
spellcaster is able to teleport a maximum weight 
of 250 pounds, plus an additional 150 pounds for 
each level of experience above the 10th (a 13th- 
level wizard can teleport up to 700 pounds). If the 
destination area is very familiar to the wizard (he 
has a clear mental picture through actual proxim- 


ity to and study of the area), it is unlikely that 
there is any error in arriving, although the caster 
has no control over his facing upon arrival. 
Lesser known areas (those seen only magically or 
from a distance) increase the probability of error. 
Unfamiliar areas present considerable peril (see 
table). 


Probability of Teleporting: 

On 
Destination is: High Target Low 
Very familiar 01-02 03-99 00 
Studied carefully 01-04 05-98 99-00 
Seen casually 01-08 09-96 97-00 
Viewed once 01-16 17-92 93-00 
Never seen 01-32 33-84 85-00 


Teleporting high means the wizard arrives ten 
feet above the ground for every 1% he is below the 
lowest “On Target” probability; this could be as 
high as 320 feet if the destination area was never 
seen. Any low result means the instant death of the 
wizard if the area into which he teleports is solid. A 
wizard cannot teleport to an area of empty space—a 
substantial surface must be there, whether a wooden 
floor, a stone floor, natural ground, etc. Areas of 
strong physical or magical energies may make tele- 
portation more hazardous or even impossible. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Teleport Block 
(Abjuration, Alteration) 
(Dimension) 


Level: 8 

Range: 20 ft. + 10 ft./level 
Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 1 

Duration: 8 hrs. + | hr./level 
Area of Effect: 60 ft. cube 
Saving Throw: None 


Teleport block prevents all teleport-like func- 
tions from operating in the area of effect. The fol- 
lowing spells cannot penetrate the barrier of a 
teleport block: teleport, teleport without error, 
plane shift, dimension door, blink, phase door, 
and transport via plants. The gate spell and the 
hierophant druid's plane shift ability work only if 
the spellcaster makes a successful saving throw 
vs. spell. In addition, the following spell effects 
are blocked as well: meld into stone, wraithform, 
and passwall. 

The material component for this spell is a small 


M coa o 7- — Ha - Wo: HERREN 


921 


~ Teleport Dead r 


crystal cube that is destroyed during the casting. 

Notes: Uncommon for dimensionists; other- 
wise, very rare. (Updated from POLYHEDRON 
Newszine.) 


Teleport Dead 
(Alteration, Necromancy) 


Level: 6 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: 1 undead creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


By means of this magic the caster can in- 
stantly teleport a single dead or undead creature 
to any location on the same plane. Weight is not a 
factor, but only one creature and its immediate 
belongings can be teleported. Undead with spell 
abilities and access to this spell can teleport 
themselves. Success depends on how familiar the 
destination is to the caster (see table). 


Probability of Teleporting: 

On 
Destination is: High Target Low 
Very familiar 01-02 = 03-99 00 
Studied carefully 01-04 05-98 99-00 
Seen casually 01-08 09-96 97-00 
Viewed once 01-16 17-92 93-00 
Never seen 01-32 33-84 85-00 


The caster must touch the undead to be tele- 
ported. If the teleportation is involuntary, the 
undead receives a saving throw vs. spell to resist 
the effect. Undead that can use spells (such as 
liches) gain a +3 bonus to these saving throws to 
avoid teleportation. 

Teleporting high means the undead arrives 10 
feet above the ground for every 1% it is below the 
lowest “On Target” probability. A /ow result 
means that the undead has appeared 10 feet 
below the location chosen. This is often, though 
not always, fatal to the undead involved. It is not 
possible to deliberately teleport high, the location 
chosen must be on a hard surface. 

This spell is often used to send the recently de- 
ceased back to a safe haven or friendly church 
fair care and eventual resurrection. It can also be 
used to send a particularly nasty single undead 
away, with the chance that it will not return. 
Teleporting undead into the houses and castles of 


enemies is considered to be an evil act in most of 
the Realms, and those who are affected (if they 
survive) will take steps to track down the individ- 
uals responsible. 

Notes: Rare spell from the FORGOTTEN 
REALMS setting. Known to be in the tome Against 
the Undead. 


Teleport Object 
See the 7th-level spell, vanish. 


Teleport Object 
(Alteration) 
(Dimension) 


Level: 3 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 2 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: 1 object, 2 oz./level 
Saving Throw: Special 


By casting this spell, a wizard instantly trans- 
ports a small object to another location. The 
object can weigh no more than 2 ounces per level, 
so a 5th-level wizard can transport an item 
weighing 10 ounces. Distance is not a factor, but 
interplanar transport is not possible. Like the rele- 
port spell, accuracy depends on the caster's fa- 
miliarity with the target location (see table). 


Probability of Teleporting: 

On 
Destination is: High Target Low 
Very familiar 01-02 03-99 00 
Studied carefully 01-04 05-98 99-00 
Seen casually 01-08 09-96 97-00 
Viewed once 01-16 17-92 93-00 
Never seen 01-32 33-84 85-00 


This spell cannot place an object within any 
solid, such as a wall or an enemy. The destination 
must be a surface, not empty air or inside a solid or 
liquid. If this condition is not fulfilled, the spell fails. 

Control of this spell improves with time. A 5th- 
level caster can teleport only nonmagical items, 
and then only if the item is unencumbered (not 
tied down or in someone's grasp). At 9th level, the 
caster can teleport a magical item, Only at 12th 
level can the caster affect an item in someone 
else's grasp. To teleport an object held by some- 
one else, the wizard must first make a successful 
attack roll to touch the object. This is a "called 


- ON Er a ET EE ee e 


922 


^ Teleport Without Error " 


shot"; the wizard's initiative has a —1 penalty and 
the attack roll has a —4 penalty. The owner of the 
item can avoid the spell with a successful saving 
throw vs. spell. 

Since a sheet of parchment usually weighs less 
than two ounces, wizards often use this spell to 
send written messages. 

Notes: Uncommon for dimensionists; other- 
wise, very rare. (Updated from DRAGON 


Magazine.) 


Teleport Other 
(Alteration) 
(Dimension) 


Level: 6 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 4 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: 1 person 
Saving Throw: Special 


By casting this spell, a wizard instantly trans- 
ports any one person other than himself to another 
location. Distance is not a factor, but interplanar 
transport is not possible. Like the teleport spell, 
accuracy depends on the caster's familiarity with 
the target location (see table), and the destination 


Ns 


T nd 


LM 


EU "sn 


"Ni tt^ 
en "il 


must be a surface, not inside solid or liquid matter. 
The spell poses a slight risk to the caster, because 
teleporting a person inaccurately causes a psychic 
backlash. A wizard who rolls a “High” or “Low” 
result for accuracy is immediately stunned (reel- 
ing and unable to attack) for 1d6 turns. 


Probability of Teleporting: 

On 
Destination is: High Target Low 
Very familiar 01-02 03-99 00 
Studied carefully 01-04 05-98 99-00 
Seen casually 01-08 09-96 97-00 
Viewed once 01-16 17-92 93-00 
Never seen 01-32 33-84 85-00 


Using this spell in combat requires a success- 
ful attack roll, and the target creature is allowed a 
saving throw vs. spell to negate the teleport. 
Further, if the teleportation would be fatal, at the 
DM's option the creature is allowed a saving 
throw vs. death magic. Success teleports the sub- 
ject to a random location instead of the caster's 
desired one. 

Notes: Uncommon for dimensionists; other- 
wise, very rare. (Updated from DRAGON 
Magazine.) 


Teleport Undead 
Aka teleport dead. 


Teleport Without Error 
(Alteration) 
(Universal) 


Level: 7 

Range: Touch 
Components: V 
Casting Time: 1 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect; Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell is similar to the teleport spell. The 
caster can transport himself, along with the material 
weight noted for a teleport spell, to any known lo- 
cation in his home plane with no chance for error. 

The spell also enables the caster to travel to 
other planes of existence, but any such plane is, at 
best, "studied carefully." This assumes that the 
caster has, in fact, actually been to the plane and 
carefully perused an area for an eventual teleport 
without error spell. The table for the teleport 
spell is used, with the caster's knowledge of the 


^ Tempestcone A 


destination used to determine chance for error. 
(Exception: See the 9th level wizard spell, 
succor.) The caster can do nothing else the round 
that he appears from a teleport. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Tempestcone 
(Alteration, Evocation) 


Level: 9 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 9 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell creates a shadowy, upright cone of 
force surrounding the caster or one creature 
touched by the caster. The cone comes to a point 
a few feet above the recipient's head, and extends 
to the floor (or, if the caster is flying, failing, or 
otherwise removed from a solid surface, to just 
below the lowest part of the caster's body). The 
tempestcone moves with the caster, and seems to 
be a faintly shrieking, tumultuous chaos of 
whirling winds and shadowy clouds (hence its 
name). Its only effect is to “drink” all magic 
coming into contact with it (including spells cast 
by a spellcaster it is protecting), and transforms 
them into magic missiles. 

The caster is unharmed by the whirling cone of 
winds (and is unaffected by all incoming spell ef- 
fects); the magic missiles created by a tempest- 
cone whirl around the cone until hurled unerringly 
at targets within 40 feet by the being enveloped by 
the cone. The protected creature can hurl the mis- 
siles even if not a spellcaster; a mental command 
is all that is needed. The missiles are identical in 
all respects to those from a magic missile spell. 

A tempestcone creates two magic missiles per 
spell level absorbed, each inflicting 1d4+1 points 
of damage and flying unerringly at the target 
creatures, The action of directing discharged spell 
energy replaces any other attacks the protected 
creature is allowed. Such energy is always dis- 
charged on the protected creature’s next action; if 
not directed, it shoots off harmlessly in a random 
direction. If the projectiles pass more than 40 feet 
from the cone, or are unused when the spell ex- 
pires, they fade away harmlessly. In addition, if 
the number of spell levels absorbed in one round 
equal or exceed the caster’s experience level, the 
spell shatters, releasing all its energy at once. The 


protected creature takes two points of damage for 
each level of stored energy (save vs. spell for 
half) and is stunned for 1d4 rounds. 

Notes: Known to the Cult of the Dragon in the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting; otherwise virtually 
unknown. 


Temporal Disjunction, Wesley’s 
See Wesley’s temporal disjunction. 


Temporal Eye 
(Chronomancy) 


Level: 7 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 3 turns 
Duration: 1 turn + 2 rds./level 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell allows the caster to scry people or 
places in other times. This operates through the 
chronomancer’s mind, and any innate abilities or 
permanent spell effects placed on the caster apply. 
The spells comprehend languages, read magic, and 
infravision work through temporal eye. Tongues, 
detect magic, detect good/evil, and message have a 
5% chance per level of the chronomancer of work- 
ing correctly. Locate object, domination, sugges- 
tion, and true seeing have a 5% chance per 2 levels 
of the chronomancer of working correctly. 

The chance for scrying success, as well as the 
chance for detection, is the same as those for a 
crystal ball. Scrying into a different time offers 
no further penalty. In any case, a detect serying 
detects a temporal eve. 

There are many materials required. The eye of 
a far-seeing creature (eagles or hawks do nicely) 
is held in the left hand. Blood from a temporal 
dog is mixed with a concoction of alcohol, 
sodium, and strychnine. Finally, hundreds of 
strands must be collected from Demiplane of 
Time, enchanted, and woven into a veil worn 
over the face. All items are destroyed except the 
veil, which can be reused. 


" VM EE MEE eique LLLI on 


924 


N Temporal Shell " 


Notes: Restricted to chronomancers; 


common. 


Temporal Freedom 
(Alteration) 


Level: 8 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: | rd. 

Duration: | day 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell provides protection against any 
spell creating a stasis effect that would affect the 
protected creature. Examples of such spells in- 
clude Phezult 5 sleep of ages, temporal stasis, and 
time stop. For example, a being within the con- 
fines of a time stop and protected by temporal 
freedom remains free to hear, see, and act; but 
could pretend to be frozen until the caster of the 
time stop drew near, turned away, or left himself 
open to attack. After providing its protection 
against one such a spell, however, the spell ends. 

The temporal freedom spell also confers immu- 
nity to aging attacks upon the protected creature, 
such as those of a ghost. It does not prevent aging 
side effects, such as those caused by a gare spell or 
a potion of speed. This protection lasts as long as 
the spell, to a maximum duration of one day. 

The material component is a pinch of bone 
dust. The caster ages 6 months immediately upon 
casting the spell. 

Notes: Very rare spell. (Updated from DRAGON 
Magazine.) 

Temporal Push 
(Chronomancy) 


Level; 4 

Range: 10 yds, + 5 yds./level 
Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Special 


Upon casting temporal push, the chrono- 
mancer opens a partial slipgate to Demiplane of 
Time and attempts to force a creature through it. 
This slipgate is not fully formed, so the subject 
automatically slips back to reality at a later time. 
The creature is thrown forward up to | round plus 


] round per level of the chronomancer. The 
amount must be decided before the spell is cast. 

The spell removes the creature from reality for 
a limited time, allowing the chronomancer to deal 
with other problems, or prepare a welcome for 
the returning creature. The affected creature is 
aware of no passage of time. Everything seems to 
suddenly shift about. If a physical object occu- 
pies the space to which the creature will return, 
the creature will be slightly displaced. 

At the time of the casting, both the caster and 
target creature make Wisdom checks. For every 
point by which the chronomancer succeeds, add 1 
point to the target’s roll (maximum of +4), If the 
chronomancer fails the check or the target suc- 
ceeds (after penalties), the chronomancer is 
pushed through the slipgate, instead. 

Notes: Restricted to chronomancers; 
common. 


Temporal Reinstatement 
Reversed form, see temporal stasis. 


Temporal Shell 
(Chronomancy) 


Level: 9 

Range: 0 

Components; V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: 1 turn/level 
Area of Effect: 5-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell creates a temporary bubble around 
the caster, which is not affected by Demiplane of 
Time. While inside the shell, the chronomancer is 
immune to the passage of time, except as it ap- 
plies directly to himself. The effect is that the 
world has frozen between seconds. This gives the 
caster an opportunity for actions like drinking 
healing potions or letting a harmful spell or 
potion wear off. 

Once created, the shell cannot be moved, and 
the caster cannot leave it without automatically 
dispelling the effect. Any creatures within the 5- 
foot radius are considered in the shell and can in- 
teract with the chronomancer as if normal time is 
passing. If they step outside the radius, they are 
immediately frozen until the spell expires or the 
chronomancer dispels it. The spell's duration is 
measured by the chronomancer's subjective time. 

The material components of this spell require 
preparation. A crystal sphere valued at 1,000 gp or 


" m Il AE ee E e 


925 


~ Temporal Stasis " 


better is necessary. A diamond worth at least 5,000 
gp must be enchanted with a temporal stasis spell 
and placed within the sphere. The entire device 
must then be touched by a time dimensional while 
on Demiplane of Time (the touch need not be vol- 
untary). When this spell is cast, the device is con- 
sumed by the magical energies. 

Notes: Restricted to chronomancers; 
common. 


Temporal Stasis 
(Alteration) 
Reversible 


Level: 9 

Range: 10 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 9 
Duration: Permanent 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: None 


Upon casting this spell, the wizard places the re- 
cipient creature into a state of suspended anima- 
tion. This cessation of time means that the 
creature does not grow older. Its body functions 
virtually cease. This state persists until the magic 
is removed by a dispel magic spell or the reverse 

of the spell (temporal rein- 
statement) is uttered. 


Note that the reverse requires only a single word 
and no somatic or material components. 

The material component of a temporal stasis 
spell is a powder composed of diamond, emerald, 
ruby, and sapphire dust, each crushed stone of at 
least 100 gp value. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB) 


Temporal Wall 


(Chronomancy) 


Level: 5 

Range: 30 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: | turn + 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: Up to 10 sq. ft./level 
Saving Throw: Special 


Temporal wall creates a thin barrier composed 
of the mist-smoke of Demiplane of Time. The 
wall cannot be moved once created, but it can be 
shaped in any way (circle, dome, and so on) and 
placed anywhere within the spell's range. Anyone 
trying to pass through this wall in either direction 
suffers the effects of two cumulative s/ow spells 
and Wesley s temporal disjunction. Creatures can 
save vs. spell (once each) to avoid the effects of 
the slow spells. Missiles, breath weapons, and 
spell effects are also slowed by the wall, allowing 
a Dexterity check to reduce their damage by half. 


+ Tempus Fugit "d 


Dispel magic cannot destroy this wall, but any 
type of magical item that destroys magic can 
affect this spell. Passwall, dimension door, tele- 
port, and similar spells bypass the wall. 

The material component is a strand of web- 
bing from a vortex spider’s web. 

Notes: Restricted to chronomancers; 
common. 


Temporary Death 
Reversed form, see temporary resurrection. 


Temporary Resurrection 


(Necromancy) 
Reversible 


Level; 8 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: | turn 
Duration: 2 days/level 
Area of Effect: | creature 
Saving Throw: Special 


By means of this spell, the caster can return 
the spirit of a deceased character or creature to its 
body, granting temporary life to a creature not 
more than | day per caster level dead. Life and 
health are restored, provided the creature makes 
successful resurrection survival check. Any con- 
dition that prevents a successful resurrection also 
prevents a temporary resurrection. 

The affected creature radiates necromantic 
magic, but to all other tests appears to be a 
normal living creature. All powers, abilities, 
knowledge, and memories of the subject return, 
but the temporarily revived being is a thrall of the 
caster, nor can any simple means complete the 
subject's return to life. At the end of the spell's 
duration, the affected creature literally drops dead 

The material components are a bit of flint and 
steel that are struck together and destroyed as the 
incantation is completed. 

The reverse of this spell, temporary death, 
apparently kills the subject instantly. The victim 
is allowed a saving throw vs. death magic to 
resist. While to all tests the creature is slain and 
cannot be raised, and the creature's body may 
cool and stiffen, the normal processes of decay 
do not occur. At the end of the spell (or at a prior 
time specified by the caster), the creature sud- 
denly returns to life in the exact condition as at 
the time of death. The state of temporary death 
can be countered before it runs its course only by 


a resurrection or full wish spell. 
The material components are a bit of coal and 


moss. 

Notes: Restricted to non-good spellcasters. 
Rare for necromancers; otherwise, very rare. 
(Updated from DraGon Magazine.) 


Tempus Fugit 


(Illusion/Phantasm) 
Reversible 


Level: 5 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: 5 turns/level 
Area of Effect: 10-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: None 

This powerful illusion affects the minds and 
bodies of all those within the area of effect. The 
spell causes those affected to perceive the pas- 
sage of time in a much faster manner. 

Those entering this area after the casting is 
completed are similarly affected. Every turn (10 
minutes) spent under the tempus fugit spell 
seems like a full hour to those within its 
dweomer (thus, for a 9th level caster, the appar- 
ent duration is 74 hours). Because of this distor- 
tion, all metabolic functions of affected 
individuals are speeded up accordingly. They 
eat, sleep, and so forth according to an acceler- 
ated rate. The duration of other spells within the 
tempus fugit area is also sped up accordingly. 
One hour is as six to them, four hours a full day. 
This acceleration of time allows rest, renewal of 
spells, and recovery of hit points lost. Note that 
actual weapon speed factors and casting times 
are not affected in any way; this dweomer is 
completely unlike the haste and slow spells. The 
illusionist is always affected by the spell. 

The reverse, tempus somnus, slows time for 
the individuals affected. An hour seems as only a 
turn, à day merely four hours. The reversal re- 
quires no special preparation. The illusionist is 
affected by the spell. Under the reverse, the 


ANT 9. Ve eun T PRESSE NEN 


927 


- Tempus Somnus "d 


effects will always last at least one turn after the 
caster desires its dispelling, because his reactions 
are so greatly slowed. 

Notes: Restricted to illusionists; uncommon. 


Tempus Somnus 
Reversed form, see tempus fugit. 


Tenser's Brawl 
(Alteration) 


Level: 2 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 2 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell grants the recipient greater prowess 
in weaponless combat. The creature gains a +2 
bonus to hit with all pummeling, grappling, or 
overbearing attacks. The subject receives a +2 
initiative bonus for pummeling attacks and à 
+10% bonus to stun an opponent. The fighter 
suffers no initiative penalty when performing a 
grappling attack, and any grappling hold 
achieved by the fighter is more secure, so the 
held creature attacks at —4. 

The material component for the spell is a bit of 
chest fur from a bear or gorilla. 

Notes: Uncommon or rare spell (WoG). 


Tenser's Deadly Strike 
(Alteration) 


Level: 3 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 3 

Duration: 3 rds. + 1d6 rds. 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell improves the martial prowess of the 
caster. All melee attacks made by the caster are at 
the usual chance to hit, but every successful 
attack does maximum damage to the opponent 
for the duration of the spell. The spell works in 
combination with any other magic that enhances 
fighting ability. The spell only affects weapons 
hand-held or hurled by the caster, and excludes 
device-propelled missile weapons. 


The material component is a full set of tiger 
claws. 
Notes: Uncommon or rare spell (WoG). 


Tenser's Destructive Resonance 
(Invocation/Evocation) 
(Force) 


Level: 5 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: Ray, 60 ft. + 10 ft./level 
Saving Throw: Special 


When this spell is cast, a thin ray of destructive 
blue force springs forth from the caster's fingertip, 
to strike any one nonmagical object within range. 
The ray imparts an immense amount of energy to 
the object struck, causing it to spontaneously ex- 
plode. Large, massive objects have more potential 
destructive energy than small, lightweight objects, 
but the wizard must hold the ray on the larger object 
for a longer time in order to cause detonation. 

The ray has two principal effects: First, the 
object struck is disintegrated if it fails its item 
saving throw. Secondly, any creature near the de- 
stroyed item suffers damage proportional to the 
weight of the item detonated (see chart), plus 
blast damage of 1d6 points per two caster levels. 
Creatures caught within the blast radius are al- 
lowed a saving throw vs. paralyzation for half 
damage (1 point per caster level), but the base 
damage of the explosion cannot be saved 


against. 


Weight Weight Resonance Base Explosive 
Category — (Ibs.) Time Damage Radius 
Tiny To 5 Inst. 1d8 2 ft. 
Small 6-25 Inst. 1di2 3ft 
Medium 26-100 | rd. 1d20 5f. 
Large 101-500 = 2rds. 2d12 10 ft. 
Huge 501-2,000 3 rds. 3d12 15 ft. 


Objects more massive than 2,000 pounds are 
simply too big to detonate. Living flesh and en- 
chanted objects or items are immune to the de- 
structive resonance, but a wizard could choose to 
use Tenser $ destructive resonance on an object 
worn or carried by another creature. 

If so, the creature is allowed a saving throw 
vs. spell to negate the ray entirely, preventing 
any damage at all. If this fails, the creature is 


928 


Tenser's Flaming Blade " 


allowed a saving throw for half damage against 
the blast effect. 

Most weapons fall into the first two categories. 
Shields, light furniture, and large sticks or rocks 
are considered small. Suits of armor, medium fur- 
niture, sturdy doors, and good-sized shrubs or 
small boulders are medium. Heavy furniture, rein- 
forced doors, small carts, and small trees are 
large; and finally, fortified gates, moderate vehi- 
cles or trees, or good-sized boulders are huge. 

The material component for this spell is a tiny 
orb of finely crafted gold with a small removable 
ring surrounding it that must be taken off as the 
spell is cast. 

Notes: Uncommon or rare spell (PO:SP). 


Tenser's Eye of the Eagle 
(Alteration) 


Level: 3 
Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: | rd. 
Duration: | turn/level 
Area of Effect: Warrior touched 
Saving Throw: None 
This spell endows a warrior with superior eye- 
sight that also grants expert missile weapon use. 
The range of the warrior's vision is effectively 
doubled, even in combination with infravision or 
normal vision. This advantage dramatically im- 
proves accuracy at great distances. The warrior 
gains a +2 bonus to hit at the missile weapon's 
normal ranges. 
The material components are a few feathers 
from the head of an eagle and ground carrot. 
Notes: Uncommon or rare spell (WoG). 


Tenser's Eye of the Tiger 
(Alteration) 


Level: 1 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


By casting this spell, the wizard can endow 
a creature with superior night vision, equal to 
that of a great cat. The creature will be able to 
see in dim light up to a range of 30 feet and 
notice moving objects 60 feet away. Under 


conditions of total darkness, the creature can 
note moving objects slightly better. A creature 
which does not possess the blind-fighting pro- 
ficiency is granted the proficiency while the 
spell is in effect, and a creature who already 
knows the art of blind-fighting fights in the 
dark at only —1 to hit. 

The material components are à tiger's 
whisker and ground carrot. 

Notes: Uncommon or rare spell (WoG). 


Tenser's Flaming Blade 
(Alteration) 


Level: 4 

Range: 20 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 4 

Duration: 3 rds. + | rd./level 
Area of Effect: | dagger 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell will endow a dagger with the 
power of flame or frost, as chosen by the caster. 
This spell has no effect on a weapon that al- 
ready has a flame or frost capability. Each 
power has an effect as described below. 


A) Flame: The blade ignites like a torch, 
casting light in a 30-foot radius. The flame ig- 
nites any combustibles that the blade contacts. 
The blade has no magical bonus, but inflicts +1 
point of fire damage in melee. The blade in- 
flicts +3 points of damage against cold-based 
creatures, so it inflicts 1d4+3 points of damage 
on a yeti. 

The material component for the flaming 
blade is a pinch of phosphorous. 


B) Frost: The blade glows with a cold blue 
aura that sheds light in a 10-foot radius. The 
blade has no magical bonuses, but inflicts +1 
point of cold damage in melee. The blade in- 
flicts +3 points of damage on a fire-based crea- 
ture, such as a salamander or fire grue. The 
dagger can also freeze up to one cubic foot of 
water per round when the blade is in contact 
with water. 


The material component for a frost blade is a 
quartz crystal. 
Notes: Uncommon or rare spell (WoG). 


mT) Oe ee 


929 


^ Tenser's Floating Disc r 


Tenser’s Floating Disc 
(Evocation) 
(Force) 


Level: 1 

Range: 20 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 

Duration: 3 turns + 1 turn/level 
Area of Effect: Special 

Saving Throw: None 


With this spell, the caster creates the slightly 
concave, circular plane of force known as 
Tenser s floating disc (after the famed wizard 
whose greed and ability to locate treasure are 
well known). The disc is three feet in diameter 
and holds 100 pounds of weight per level of the 
wizard casting the spell. The disc floats at ap- 
proximately three feet above the ground at all 
times and remains level. It floats along horizon- 
tally within its range of 20 yards at the command 
of the caster, and will accompany him at a move- 
ment rate of no more than 6. If unguided, it main- 
tains a constant interval of six feet between itself 
and the wizard. If the spellcaster moves beyond 
range (by moving faster, by such means as a fele- 
port spell, or by trying to take it more than three 
feet from the surface beneath it), or if the spell 
duration expires, the floating disc winks out of 
existence and whatever it was supporting crashes 
to the surface beneath it. 

The material component of the spell is a drop 
of mercury. 

Notes: Common or uncommon spell (PHB). 


Tenser's Fortunes of War 
(Abjuration) 


Level: 6 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: | turn 

Duration: 24 hr. maximum 
Area of Effect: Warrior touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell grants one warrior a bonus of special 
luck in battle. The warrior is given one chance to 
avoid any one attack that would reduce him or her 
to zero or fewer hit points, or against magic that 
would remove the warrior from battle by paraly- 
sis, petrifaction, sleep, charm, fear, disintegration, 
death, power word, or any other magical effect. 


The warrior is allowed a saving throw to avoid 
defeat, even if a prior saving throw failed. The 
warrior must make a saving throw vs. death magic 
at a 2 penalty. If this saving throw succeeds, then 
the warrior miraculously avoids defeat. 

A damaging attack that would normally 
reduce the fighter to zero hit points or less instead 
reduces the fighter's hit point total to one-half its 
current level; that is, a fighter with 17 hit points 
who takes 17 points of damage is reduced to 9 hit 
points. Any other attack that would cause instant 
defeat takes no effect if the death magic save is 
made. Regardless of the result of the save, the 
fortunes of war spell is immediately dispelled 
after the attack. 

A warrior can benefit from only one such for- 
tune spell at a time. 

The material component is a valuable sacrifice 
made to the fighter's patron deity, worth at least 
5,000 gp in goods desirable to the deity. 

Notes: Uncommon or rare spell (WoG). 


Tenser's Giant Strength 
(Alteration) 


Level: 4 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 tum 
Duration: 3 turns/level 

Area of Effect: Person touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This variation of the strength spell empowers 
the recipient with superhuman physical Strength. 
The strength gained depends on the experience 
level of the caster, as shown below. 

Those with Strength already greater than the 
spell's effect receive one more point of Strength. 
Neither permanency nor wish can make the ef- 
fects of this spell permanent. 

The material component is a bit of hair from a 
giant or a titan. 

Notes: Uncommon or rare spell (WoG). 


Wizard's Increase 
Level Strength To 
7th 16 

9th 17 

12th 18/01 

13th 18/75 

14th 18/90 

15th 18/00 

16th- 19 


oT ged ee ee ur E o NN 


930 


^ Tenser's Primal Fury "d 


Tenser's Hunting Hawk 
(Alteration) 


Level: 2 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 2 
Duration: 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: 1 arrow 
Saving Throw: None 


When this spell is cast upon an arrow, the mis- 
sile gains a special dweomer that changes the 
arrow into a hunting hawk as the arrow leaves the 
bow. 

The hawk's first strike is a swooping attack, 
striking at +2 bonus to hit with its claw attacks in- 
flicting double damage, but no beak attack is al- 
lowed. Thereafter, the hawk continues to attack 
opponents as the caster orders, for one round per 
level of experience of the caster, or until the hawk 
is destroyed. 

If a magical arrow has hunting hawk cast upon 
it, then the hawk retains whatever magical 
bonuses the arrow had, including attack or 
damage bonuses, so a hawk formed from an 
arrow +2 will have a +2 bonus to all attack and 
damage rolls. An arrow of slaying cannot be af- 
fected by the spell. When the spell's duration 
ends, the affected arrow disappears permanently. 

The material component is a wing feather 
from a hawk. 

Notes: Uncommon or rare 


Pu 


spell (WoG). 


Tenser’s Master of Arms 
(Alteration) 


Level: 4 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: | turn/level 

Area of Effect: Warrior touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell, when bestowed upon a warrior, im- 
proves the warrior’s skill with one melee weapon. 
A weapon with which the warrior is not proficient 
becomes a weapon of proficiency in the warrior’s 
hands. A weapon of proficiency is treated as a 


weapon of specialization. It grants no bonus if the 
warrior is specialized with the weapon. 

The material component for Tenser s master of 
arms is a feather from a crane. 

Notes: Uncommon or rare spell (WoG). 


Tenser's Primal Fury 
(Alteration, Enchantment) 


Level: 5 

Range: 20 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 5 
Duration: | rd./level 
Area of Effect: 1 Warrior 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell temporarily endows a warrior with a 
surge of rage and energy rivaling that of a 
berserker. Magical fear will not affect an enraged 
warrior. The warrior also receives a +2 bonus to 
attack and damage rolls, and gains an extra attack 
every other melee round, so an attack routine of 
3/2 attacks becomes 2/1. The fighter also gains a 
temporary bonus of 4d4 hit points, from which 
any damage is subtracted before the warrior's 
permanent hit point total is reduced. The spell 
does carry a risk, however, because the berserker 
rage is maintained throughout the duration of the 


~ Tenser’s Running Warrior r 


spell. If all of a warrior's opponents are defeated 
before the spell expires, then the berserk warrior 
will turn on the nearest living creature, and con- 
tinue attacking without regard for friend or foe 
until the spell expires. A dispel magic spell will 
immediately return a berserk warrior to his or her 
normal state. 

The material component is a bit of fur from a 
wolverine or a grizzly bear. 

Notes: Uncommon or rare spell (WoG). 


Tenser's Running Warrior 
(Alteration) 


Level: 4 
Range: 60 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 4 
Duration: | turn/level 
Area of Effect: 1 warrior 
Saving Throw: None 

This spell will improve a warrior’s ability in a 
running battle. First, the warrior’s movement rate 
becomes 15 yards, regardless of the encumbrance 
of armor or goods carried by the warrior (within 
the warrior’s maximum load capacity). Second, 
no matter how far the warrior moves during a 
melee round, the full normal number of melee at- 
tacks is allowed. Thus, a fighter who had 2/1 at- 
tacks per round could now move, say, a third of 
his maximum distance, attack one foe, move the 
remainder, and then attack a second creature. 

The material component is a bit of fur from a 
live wolf. 

Notes: Uncommon or rare spell (WoG). 


Tenser's Staff of Smiting 
(Alteration) 
(Artifice) 


Level: 4 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: 2 rds./level 

Area of Effect: The caster's staff 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell increases the effectiveness of the 
caster's staff when used in melee. The spell 
works only on a nonmagical staff, adding a +1 
bonus to hit and a +4 bonus to damage. The 
bonuses apply only when the caster personally 
wields the staff. 


The material component is a small iron bar. 
Notes: Uncommon or rare spell (WoG). 


Tenser's Steady Aim 
(Alteration) 


Level: 1 

Range: Special 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 
Duration: 1 turn/level 
Area of Effect: 1 warrior 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell aids a moving archer, crossbow- 
man, or arquebusier with a steady shooting hand. 
No matter how fast the warrior is moving or how 
unsteady his motion, the warrior suffers no move- 
ment-related attack penalty to shots made with 
device-propelled missiles. The spell provides no 
bonuses to slings of any sort, nor any bonus to 
stationary and steady warriors. 

The material component is a small coiled 
spring. 

Notes: Uncommon or rare spell (WoG). 

Tenser's Transformation 
(Alteration, Evocation) 


Level: 6 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 6 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


Tenser 5 transformation is a sight guaranteed 
to astound any creature not aware of its power, 
for when the wizard casts the spell, he undergoes 
a startling transformation. The size and strength 
of the wizard increase to heroic proportions, so he 
becomes a formidable fighting machine; the spell 
causes the caster to become a berserk fighter! 

The wizard's hit points double, and all damage 
he sustains comes first from the magical points 
gained; once these points are eliminated, all sub- 
sequent damage (to his true hit points) is doubled. 
The Armor Class of the wizard is 4 better than 
that he possessed prior to casing the spell (AC 10 
goes to 6, AC 9 to 5, AC 8 to 4, etc.), to a maxi- 
mum Armor Class of —10. 

All attacks are as a fighter of the same level as 
the wizard (i.e., the wizard uses the combat 


r. MEN MEE EI mL Lee oc 


932 


^ There/Not There* " 


values normally reserved for fighters). The 
wizard can use either a dagger or a staff when at- 
tacking. A dagger can be used twice per round, 
and each successful attack inflicts an additional 2 
points of damage. A staff can be used only once 
per round, but with a +2 bonus to attack and 
damage rolls. The wizard fights in melee in pref- 
erence to all other forms of attack, and continues 
attacking until all opponents are slain, he is 
killed, the magic is dispelled, or the spell duration 
expires. 

The material component for casting this spell 
is a potion of heroism (or superheroism) that the 
wizard must consume during the course of utter- 
ing the spell. 

Notes: Common or uncommon spell (WoG). 


Tentacles 
(Alteration, Conjuration) 


Level: 6 

Range: 0 

Components: V, M 
Casting Time: | rd. 
Duration: | turn/level 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


By means of this spell, the caster causes two 
10-foot-long greenish tentacles to grow from his 
body. One tentacle grows on each side of the 
caster’s body, centered between his armpit and 
his thigh. The caster can use the tentacles as 
normal appendages to grasp tools, use weapons, 
or help with climbing. 

Each tentacle can make an attack, effectively 
giving the caster two extra attacks per round; a 
tentacle can strike to inflict 1d4 points of damage, 
or it can wield a sword, dagger, or other weapon 
(at the same ability of the caster). The flexible 
tentacles can easily reach creatures on any side of 
the caster’s body. 

If an unarmed tentacle makes a successful 
attack against a creature that is man-sized or 
smaller (less than 7 feet tall), it can hold and con- 
strict, inflicting an automatic 2d4 points of 
damage in every subsequent round. The tentacle’s 
effective Strength is 18/20; creatures of equal or 
greater Strength take no constriction damage. 

Constriction continues until the tentacle is 
severed (requiring 8 points of damage, which 
does not otherwise affect the caster), until the 
caster is killed or rendered unconscious, or until 
the spell is successfully dispelled. 


A caster with two intact tentacles adds a 40% 
bonus modifier to his climbing success rate (see 
page 122 of the Player's Handbook,) and adds a 
20% modifier if he has only one intact tentacle. 

The material component for this spell is a 
dried tentacle from a small octopus. 

Notes: Rare spell. 


There/Not There* 
(Evocation) 
(Wild) 


Level: 4 

Range: 30 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: 1—6 turns 

Area of Effect: 10-ft. cube 
Saving Throw: None 


This peculiar wild magic creates a random 
fluctuation in the probabilities of existence. The 
spell can be cast only upon nonliving objects and 
can affect only materials within a 10 x 10 x 10- 
foot cube. 

Objects in the area of effect either remain 
normal and visible or they disappear (50% 
chance). The state of existence for any object is de- 
termined randomly and changes with each viewing 
and viewer. Thus, a single object could appear and 
disappear several times during the course of the 
spell. Furthermore, it might be "there" for one on- 
looker, but “not there" for another. 

For example, a wild mage casts this spell on a 
doorway. The DM rolls percentile dice and deter- 
mines the door is "there" for the wizard. The 
wizard's companion also looks at the door. The 
DM rolls and determines that the door is "not 
there" for the companion. The pair studies the 
door for several minutes, during which time the 
door does not change (this counts as a single 
viewing for each character). 

The wizard and his companion then close their 
eyes. When they look at the door again, new 
checks for each character reveal the door is "not 
there" for both characters. The pair steps through 
the open archway and turns around to look at the 
door once again. This time it is “not there" for the 
wizard, but "there" for his companion. This 
random changing continues throughout the dura- 
tion of the spell. 

Objects that are "there" are normal in all re- 
spects. Doors can be opened, chests can be 
picked up and carried, and rocks can be used as 


" SS REMO ee E eL ec A 


933 


Thiondar's Permanent Anti-Magic Field 


barricades. Objects that are "not there" are gone, 
although their absence does not cause ceilings to 
collapse or other damage. A wizard could walk 
through a “not there” wall without difficulty. 
When two parties perceive a there/not there 
object differently, the object functions for each 
party according to its own perceptions. For exam- 
ple, a wizard hides behind a rock that he sees as 
“there.” Her enemy, a fighter, perceives the rock 
as "not there" and fires arrows at the wizard. The 
wizard would perceive the arrows as bouncing 
off the rock, while the fighter would perceive the 
arrows as missing their target or falling short. The 
fighter would be subject to a check before firing 
each arrow to determine whether his perception 
changes (assume that the fighter must look away 
from the rock every time he nocks an arrow; each 
time he takes aim, this counts as a new viewing). 
After the spell is cast, any objects removed 
from the area of effect retain their uncertain exis- 
tence for the duration of the spell. Thus, a pair of 
heroes could pick up a treasure chest, carry it 
down the hall, set it down, and discover it had 
vanished while their backs were turned. Worse 
still, one might see the chest and the other not! 
The material component is a small piece of cat 
fur sealed inside a small box. 
Notes: Restricted to wild mages; common. 


Thiondar's Permanent 
Anti-Magic Field 
(Abjuration, Alteration) 


Level: 9 

Range: Object touched 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 1 turn 
Duration: Permanent 
Area of Effect: 1 object 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell creates a transparent barrier around 
any one object, causing it to become impervious 
to magic and spell effects. The anti-magic field 
prevents the entrance of spells, and hedges out 
summoned or charmed creatures, 

The spellcaster can choose to cast one 2nd- 
level or two Ist-level spells on the object before- 
hand; these are then made permanent and 
protected from being dispelled as well. For in- 
stance, a wizard could cast hold portal and alarm 
on à door or chest, then conclude by casting 
Thiondar s permanent anti-magic field. The field 
itself can be countered only by similarly powerful 


magics; a rod of cancellation or Mordenkainen s 
disjunction, for example. The anti-magic field 
can be destroyed by a wish. Casting the spell per- 
manently lowers the wizard's Constitution by one 
point. 

Notes: Very rare spell. (Updated from 
DuNGEON Magazine.) 


Thornbush Arrows 
(Alteration) 


Level: 5 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, M 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: 1 rd. 

Area of Effect: 20 ft. X 20 ft. area, 5 thorns/level 
Saving Throw: None 


Thorns are the most important component of 
this spell. When the spell is cast, the wu jen holds 
the thorns on his open palm and waves a feather of 
a phoenix over them, then directs them toward a 
target. The thorns will fly and strike as the caster, 
with a +4 bonus to the attack roll. The little barbs 
cause 1—2 points of damage (but they can be 
dipped in various poisons before being launched). 
All thorns are used in one shot, but can be spread 


^ Thultaun's Thrust r 


out an area to strike multiple targets in a 20 X 20- 
foot area adjacent to the wu jen. These magical 
thorns hit only those targets the wu jen can see 
and cannot follow a fleeing or evading individual 

The material components are whole thorns, 
sliced from a rose bush and kept with petals from 
the same plant's blossoms, and a feather from a 
phoenix. The phoenix feather is useless after the 
spell, blackened with spent energy. Wu jen who 
learn this spell constantly seek rose bushes or 
flowering thorn trees. 

Notes: Common in oriental settings; other- 
wise, very rare. 


Threestones 
(Alteration) 


Level: 2 

Range: 10 ft./level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 2 
Duration: 1 rd. 

Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: 4 


This spell transforms any three stones that the 
caster can hold simultaneously in her hand and 
throw together, into fist-sized stones hurtling 
straight at a chosen enemy. 

The stones fly at MV 27 (A) and always hit 
unless the target creature can interpose a solid 
barrier (such as a closed door) between it and the 
streaking threestones. The stones smash into the 
target at a location roughly chosen by the caster: 
head, chest or back (depending on how the crea- 
ture is facing), or legs. Fragile items in the target 
location must make successful saving throws vs. 
crushing blow or be crushed. The creature takes 
2d4 points of damage per stone; a successful 
saving throw vs. spell halves this damage. 

A target wearing field plate or better armor (by 
type), takes only 1 point of damage per stone. 

The three stones are consumed by the spell. 

Notes: Rare in the FORGOTTEN REALMS set- 
ting; virtually unknown elsewhere. 


Throbbing Bones 
(Necromancy) 


Level: 5 

Range: 10 yds. 
Components: V, M 
Casting Time: 3 
Duration: | rd./level 
Area of Effect: | creature 
Saving Throw: 4 


This spell causes the bones of the affected 
creature to throb and pulsate inside its body. The 
spell can be cast upon any single living creature 
within the caster's range, providing the creature 
has bones; for instance, throbbing bones will not 
affect insects, ghosts, or worms. 

For the duration of the spell, the affected crea- 
ture's Armor Class is worsened by 2, its move- 
ment rate is halved, and all its attacks are made 
with a —2 penalty. Additionally, it suffers 1d4 
points of damage per round; this damage is 
halved if the creature makes a successful saving 
throw. A successful saving throw has no affect on 
the movement, attack, and AC penalties. 

The material components for this spell are both 
pieces of a small bone that has been snapped in half. 

Notes: Uncommon spell. Optionally available 
to Savage mages. 


Thultaun's Thrust 
(Abjuration, Evocation) 
(Force) 
Level: 5 


Range: 5 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 
Duration: 1 rd. 

Area of Effect: | creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


Ay cn——— cor 


935 


hem "d 


By casting this spell, a wizard creates a pow- 
erful, invisible magical force emanating from his 
own body. It can be directed against one chosen 
creature, which must make a successful saving 
throw vs. spell to avoid being hurled away. 

An affected being is snatched off its feet and 
shot through the air, along a straight line away 
from the caster, up to 80 feet distant or until it 
strikes a solid barrier. Damage from the tumbling 
is 2d4 points of damage, and a saving throw vs. 
crushing blow is required for all fragile items 
worn or carried by the creature. 

If a solid barrier is struck, the hurled being 
takes 5d4 points of damage and may (at the DM's 
option) harm the barrier. If the barrier is another 
creature, this second creature takes 2d4 points of 
damage, must make a Strength check on 1d20 to 
avoid being knocked down, and all of its fragile 
worn or carried items must make saving throws 
vs. crushing blow. Neither a tumbling target 
being or any being it strikes can successfully cast 
spells while being affected by this spell. 

The target being receives a saving throw vs. 
spell at —5, adjusted cumulatively as follows: +1 
if the target is undead, +1 if the target has a 
Strength of 17 or better, +2 if the target is at least 
large-sized or weighs more than 400 Ibs., and +3 
if the target is gaseous or noncorporeal. Creatures 
that successfully save against the spell are com- 
pletely unaffected; the spell is wasted and cannot 
be directed against an alternative foe. 

The material component of this spell is a small 
carved fist or hand, which must be made from an 
organic substance such as bone, ivory, or wood. 

Notes: Very rare spell. (Updated from DRAGON 
Magazine.) 


Thump 
(Evocation) 
Level: 2 
Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: | 


Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


Using this spell, the geisya rebukes and 
thumps the attacking creature with an ornamental 
fan. If the creature fails its saving throw vs. spell, 
its aggression is turned back upon itself, and the 
creature is stunned for 1d6 rounds (reeling and 
unable to take coherent action). Only attacking, 


malicious, hungry, hostile, or angry creatures are 
affected by this spell. 

Notes: Common in oriental settings; other- 
wise, very rare. (Updated from DRAGON 


Magazine.) 


Thundaerl’s Universal Taster 
(Divination, Illusion/Phantasm) 


Level: 2 

Range: 30 ft. 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 2 

Duration: 1 rd. + 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell allows the caster (only) to look at 
foods and see any substance harmful to the caster 
outlined in luminous purple flames (in the quanti- 
ties present). The magic penetrates darkness, 
sauces, and such solid objects such as container 
lids and layers of meat. If a harmful substance is 
present, the caster can will the food to emit illu- 
sory, hissing black serpents visible to all. This can 
alert the provider of the food to the wizard's 
awareness of the threat—or give the caster an 
excuse for destroying the tainted material along 
with the dangerous snakes! 

The material components of this spell are a 
berry from any poisonous plant (for example, 
deadly nightshade) and a piece of snakeskin. 

Notes: Very rare spell. (Updated from 
DRAGON Magazine.) 


Thunder Staff 
(Invocation/Evocation) 
(Artifice, Geometry) 


Level: 4 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: 20 ft. X 40 ft. cone 
Saving Throw: 4 


Upon completion of this spell, the wizard raps 
his staff on the ground and produces a thundering 
cone of force 5 feet wide at the apex, 20 feet wide 
at the base, and 40 feet long. All creatures wholly 
or partially within this cone must roll a successful 
saving throw or be stunned for 1d3 rounds. 
Stunned creatures are unable to think coherently 


936 


^- Thunderisnce y- 


or act during this time and are deafened for 
1d3+1 rounds. Additionally, those who fail the 
saving throw are hurled 4d4 --4 feet by the wave 
of force, suffering 1 point of damage per two feet 
thrown. Intervening surfaces (walls, doors, etc.) 
may restrict this distance, but damage remains 
the same (4d4--4). 

If the save is successful, the victim is not 
stunned, but is deafened for 1d3+1 rounds and is 
hurled only half the distance. 

Giant-sized or larger creatures who success- 
fully make their saving throws are deafened but 
not thrown, suffer no loss of hit points, and are 
not stunned. Failure means such creatures are 
hurled 2d4 +2 feet, suffer one point of damage 
per two feet thrown, and are deafened and 
stunned. 

The cone of force is considered to have a 
Strength of 19 for purposes of opening locked, 
barred, or magically held doors. This spell can 
move objects weighing up to 640 pounds to a 
maximum distance of 4d4 +4 feet. Fragile items 
must make a saving throw vs. crushing blow or 
be destroyed. 

The material component is a vial of rain gath- 
ered during a thunderstorm, focused by the 
wizard's staff, which must be made of oak. The 
staff is not destroyed during casting. 

Notes: Common for Storm mages; otherwise, 
uncommon (75M). 


Thunderball — Old Empire 
(Evocation) 


Level: 2 

Range: 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 2 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 20 ft. radius 
Saving Throw: Special 


The thunderball spell is an explosive burst of 
lightning accompanied by a clap of thunder. This 
spell causes 1d6 +1 points of damage to all crea- 
tures within its area of effect (no saving throw) and 
all within its area of effect must roll successful 
saving throws vs. spell or be deafened for 1d4 
rounds. In addition, the caster can elect to target 
this spell against a single creature. This creature is 
automatically deafened, and it must roll a success- 
ful saving throw vs. spell or suffer double damage. 

The material component for this spell is an 
amber rod. 


Notes: Uncommon spell. As a FORGOTTEN 
REALMS Old Empire spell, initial exposure re- 
quires a mentor or a read Southern magic spell. 


Thunderlance 
(Evocation) 
(Force) 


Level: 4 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: | rd./level or until discharged 
Area of Effect: The caster 

Saving Throw: None 


Upon casting this spell a faint, gray, shimmer- 
ing force comes into being in the general shape of 
a staff or spear. The force can extend up to 20 feet 
from the caster's pointed finger and retract or 
grow to the desired size, but it always remains a 
straight lance of force. Any creature that touches 
or is touched by the thunderlance takes 4d6 
points of damage. 

Upon discharge, the lance vanishes with a 
loud clap of thunder. The lance can also be willed 
out of existence by the caster at any time without 
hitting anyone. The lance will disappear without 
inflicting any damage if the caster dies, loses con- 
sciousness, or casts any other spells. Full con- 
scious control is not necessary to command the 
thunderlance, allowing the wizard to move and 
fight normally while carrying the lance. 

The lance can be used as a barrier or a trap 
against attacking creatures but is most often used 
as a weapon. The lance attacks creatures at their 
lowest unarmored Armor Class (a dragon would 
still be AC 2 but a mounted knight would be AC 
10). Any non-innate armor is ignored, but 
Dexterity and magical bonuses apply to the target 
creature's Armor Class. 

The touch of a thunderlance will destroy a 
shield spell, a wall of force, a minor globe of in- 
vulnerability and similar abjuration magics of 5th 
level or less. Higher level abjuration spells are 
unaffected by the lance. In either case, the thun- 
derlance is discharged and fades upon striking 
such a magical barrier. It can pass through fire 
and water (including ice) unharmed, even if the 
fire, water, or ice is the result of magical spells. 

The lance also absorbs magic missiles di- 
rected at the wielder. For every magic missile so 
absorbed, the lance inflicts 1d4+1 more points of 
damage when discharged. The lance can absorb 


ot Ch Ke A ME M a 


937 


^ Thunguul's Preservation » 


and then discharge one magic missile for every 
three levels of the caster. Additional missiles are 
absorbed but do not increase its discharge. 
"Magic missiles" include other spells with simi- 
lar properties such as Snilloc s major missile and 
Snilloc s snowball. Each of these spells, if ab- 
sorbed by the lance, inflicts 1d4+1 points of 
damage, regardless of the typical damage of the 
spell. 

The material component of this spell is a 
small, silver spear. 

Notes: Uncommon spell from the FORGOTTEN 
REALMS setting. Known to be in Aubayreer s 
Workbook. 


Thunguul’s Preservation 
(Abjuration, Necromancy) 
(Alchemy) 


Level: 5 

Range: 0 

Components: V, M 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: 3 hrs./level + 1d6 hrs. 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


Thunguul 5 preservation drains a portion of the 
caster's life energy equal to 3d4 hit points and 
stores it in a special candle, safe from any harm that 
might befall the wizard. The number of hit points 
set aside in this fashion cannot exceed the caster's 
current hit point total at the time the spell is cast. 
For example, if the caster had only 6 hit points left, 
Thunguul’s preservation would take no more than 
5, leaving a temporary total of 1 hit point. 

The candle is lit when the spell is cast, and 
gradually burns down until the duration expires. 
If the candle is extinguished or destroyed prema- 
turely, the reserved hit points are lost, and the 
wizard must then recover them as if he had been 
injured normally. 

The reserved hit points cannot be recovered by 
the wizard until the spell ends. In the meantime, 
if his remaining hit points drop below 0, the 
wizard will appear to die. To all tests and divina- 
tions, he will seem dead. However, when the 
spell expires, the borrowed life energy returns 
and restores the caster to life. This is not a true 
resurrection, since the caster's life force was 
never completely extinguished. Of course, a 
caster who is "dead" when the candle is extin- 
guished perishes immediately. 

As the caster's life energy returns, normal 


wounds and injuries may vanish, but severed 
limbs and conditions such as poisoning, disease, 
incineration, disintegration, and other such things 
are not altered. Thus, if the wizard's body has 
been rendered incapable of supporting life, the 
spell returns the life force only for the caster to 
immediately perish again. Similarly, if the 
caster's body is in a life-threatening location (for 
instance, the bottom of a lake), the caster may 
perish before reaching safety. 

Only one Thunguul’s preservation can be in 
effect for a caster at a time. 

The material component is a special candle 
that costs 1,000 gp to prepare. 

Notes: Rare for alchemists; otherwise, very 
rare. (Updated from DraGon Magazine.) 


Tidal Wave 
(Alteration) 


Level: 9 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 3 turns 

Duration: | turn/level 

Area of Effect: 100 ft. long wave/level 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell brings up a huge wave of water 
from a sea or other large body of water. This 
wave can destroy ships and harbors in its path. 

The tidal wave is 75 feet high (regardless of 
the caster’s level), and 100 feet long per level of 
the caster, The caster can start the wave traveling 
in any direction, but it cannot be turned once 
started. It travels at 50 yards per round, devastat- 
ing all in its path. 

Any ship caught before the tidal wave must 
make a seaworthiness roll (at a penalty of —30) in 
order to avoid swamping. Rolls that succeed by 
less than 20% indicate that the ship is driven 
before the tidal wave, and must continue to make 
seaworthiness rolls each round until they are 
swamped or manage to crest the wave. A success 
by 20% or more means the ship successfully 
crests the wave, and is out of danger. 

Swimmers can ride over the wave by making a 
saving throw vs. death magic. Failure means the 
swimmer takes 9d6 points of damage; survivors 
are washed out of the wave on the other side. 

When the wave drives up on shore, it rolls 
inland, causing 10d6 damage to everyone within 
50 yards of shore along its path (ships driven on 
shore ahead of it make a seaworthiness check 


" n hie ot 


938 


x Time Stop " 


against destruction, as above). It moves inland at 
a rate of 50 yards per round, the damage dimin- 
ishes by 1d6 each round until it ceases to exist 
500 yards inland. 

This spell is so exhausting that after casting 
this spell the caster is unable to cast magical 
spells for 1d4 days. 

The material component of this spell is a 
wooden plank, struck forcibly across the surface of 
the water in the direction the tidal wave is to form. 

Notes: Uncommon in the Sea of Fallen Stars 
in the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting and for Sea 
mages; otherwise, very rare. 


Time Loop — Old Empire 
(Alteration) 


Level: 7 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 7 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: 20-ft. cube 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell creates an area within which the flow 
of time repeats itself continually, until the duration 
of the spell (as timed in the outside world) expires. 
Any creature in the area of effect at the instant the 
spell is cast is allowed a saving throw vs. spell to 
escape the area. 

A creature in the area of effect at the instant the 
spell is cast is allowed a saving trhow vs spell to 
escape the area. 

Creatures caught in the time loop see the world 
as flickering chaos, and are unable to affect it in 
any way. Characters outside the loop perceive 
those trapped as endlessly repeating one set of ac- 
tions; those outside can affect the characters within 
the time loop with ranged attacks, but if any who 
physically enter the loop are also trapped. 

The material component for this spell is a 
powder of crushed diamond, ruby, emerald, and 
sapphire dust, with each crushed stone being of at 
least 100 gp value. 

Notes: Uncommon spell. As a FORGOTTEN 
REALMS Old Empire spell, initial exposure re- 
quires a mentor or a read Southern magic spell. 


Time Snare 
(Chronomancy) 


Level: 3 

Range: 60 yds. 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 3 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: | creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


Upon casting this spell, the chronomancer creates 
a time loop in the creature’s mind that causes it to 
repeat this round’s action indefinitely. If the creature 
attacked, it attacks the same person again. If it drank a 
potion, it drinks from the same bottle again. Even if 
something happens to prevent this attempt (the oppo- 
nent is dead, or someone takes the bottle away), the 
subject still strives to repeat its last action. The crea- 
ture is allowed a saving throw vs. spell at the end of 
every round that it is affected by the spell, until the 
loop is broken. Starting with the second saving throw, 
the creature gains a cumulative +1 bonus every round. 

Notes: Restricted to chronomancers, 
common. 


Time Stop 
(Alteration) 
(Dimension) 


Level: 9 

Range: 0 

Components: V 

Casting Time: 9 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 15-ft.-radius sphere 
Saving Throw: None 


Upon casting a time stop spell, the wizard 
causes the flow of time to stop for one round in 
the area of effect. Outside this area the sphere 
simply seems to shimmer for an instant. Inside 
the sphere, the caster is free to act for 1d3 rounds 
of apparent time. The wizard can move and act 
freely within the area where time is stopped, but 
all other creatures, except for those of demigod 
and greater status or unique creatures, are frozen 
in their actions, for they are literally between 
ticks of the clock. (The spell duration is subjec- 
tive to the caster.) Nothing can enter the area of 
effect without being stopped in time also. If the 
wizard leaves the area, the spell is immediately 
negated. When the spell duration ceases, the 
wizard is again operating in normal time. 


—T ee NE NS 


939 


^ Timed Stasis " 


Note: It is recommended that the DM use a 
stop watch or silently count to time this spell. If 
the caster is unable to complete the intended 
action before the spell duration expires, he will 
probably be caught in an embarrassing situation. 
The use of a teleport spell before the expiration 
of the time stop spell is permissible. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Timed Stasis 
(Alteration) 
(Chronomancy) 


Level: 7 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 turn 

Duration: 1d3+1 months 

Area of Effect: 1 object, no more than 27 cu. ft. 
Saving Throw: None 


This potent dweomer renders a single object 
completely impervious to all physical, magical, or 
scrying effects for a preset period. For the object, 
time itself comes to a complete stop, and it ceases 
to exist in the normal universe. Although the object 
can be handled, moved, or carried, no force known 
to mortals can breach its integrity, damage it, or 
pry it open. 

The caster can choose to simply place the object 
in a continuing stasis that lasts for a specified time or 
until the spell's duration ends. He can also create a 
periodic stasis that is in effect only part of the time. 
For example, the wizard could protect a strongbox 
by creating a stasis that lasts from sunset to sunrise, 
or a fragile work of art from the rigors of a journey 
by designating a stasis of three weeks, or a trap door 
that was in stasis one minute in every three. Even the 
caster himself cannot disturb an object in timed 
stasis, although successful dispel magic spell cast 
when the stasis is not active is effective. 

The material component is a small platinum 
spring worth at least 500 gp. 

Notes: Uncommon for chronomancers; other- 
wise, very rare. 


Timeheal 
Lost spell. Rumored to be 5th level, and possibly 
the basis of the chronomancy version. Reputed to 
date from the 3rd Age of the DRAGONLANCE setting. 


Timeheal 


(Chronomancy) 
Reversible 


Level: 4 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, M 
Casting Time: 4 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: | creature 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell replaces the body of the creature on 
which it is cast. It substitutes the same body taken 
from a point in its past at which it was in better 
health. This simulates a healing ability without 
using priestly powers. Time is of the essence 
when using this spell, though, as the farther into 
the past the current body is to be pushed, the 
greater the chance of failure. 

The caster is able to push the creature's body 
back one minute in time for every level of the 
caster. For example, a 9th-level caster is guaran- 
teed to restore a person within a nine-minute 
period. For every additional minute that the 
caster attempts to push the body backward in 
time, there is a cumulative 5% chance of failure. 
A 9th-level caster using this spell to heal a war- 
rior wounded just under 20 minutes ago, is 
stretching 11 minutes further than a guaranteed 
success: the spell has a 55% chance to fail. 

Multiple timeheals cannot increase number of 
minutes that the caster pushing the body back- 
ward in time (a 9th-level wizard can't cast three 
consecutive timeheals to push the patient back 27 
minutes in time). Because the caster is actually 
bringing the patient's past body into present with 
each casting, each time the spell goes back nine 
minutes, and it brings back the same body. 

Timeheal cannot recall a spirit from death and 
therefore is only useful on a still-living creature. 
A dead body that has timeheal cast on it may be 
entirely healed, but remains dead, as the body's 
spirit has fled. If the spirit can somehow be re- 
united with the body, though (say through the 
raise dead spell), the creature will then be alive, 
and as well as the timeheal can make it. 

Timeheal can also be used to hurt an opponent 
that has just healed itself. In this case, the caster 
must successfully touch the target (with an attack 
roll), and the target gets a saving throw vs. spell. 
Any healing (or damage) of the creature since the 
moment the body was drawn from is negated, and 
any damage the body had at that point is immedi- 


- SO a ee ce e n 


~ Timereaver " 


ately reapplied. Any resources used to heal the 
target in the intervening time are entirely wasted. 
The standard chances of failure still apply. 

This spell places extreme temporal stresses on 
the caster and the timestream, as well as attract- 
ing unwanted attention. It can be safely cast no 
more than once per day. 

Notes: Restricted to chronomancers; 
common. 


Timereaver 

Lost spell from the 3rd Age of Krynn. Reputed to be 
9th level, it sends those within its area of effect back- 
ward or forward along the timestream of Krynn, into 
either the past or future. It was used by ParSalian to 
send Caramon and Tasslehoff into the past. It was 
utilized by the Scepter of Time to transport Caramon 
and Tasslehoff throughout the Legends tales. 


Timereaver 
(Chronomancy) 


Level: 8 
Range: | yd. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 3 turns 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: 10-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


v 


This spell sends those within its area of effect 
backward or forward in time, up to five years 
per caster level. In effect, it encases those af- 
fected in a null-time bubble and pushes them 
into the Demiplane of Time. The bubble then 
moves along the timestream, reenters reality at 
the desired time, and releases the travelers. To 
the travelers, no time has passed. 

This is the only way a chronomancer can 
cause others to travel extensively throughout 
time without actually accompanying them. This 
can cause a real problem for those sent to an- 
other time with no way back. Of course, if they 
happen to cause enough trouble to the natural 
order in their new time, the Guardians may 
show up and give them a free ride home. The 
chronomancer who sent them there is likely in 
for a visit, too. 

The chronomancer can cast the spell on him- 
self, as an easy way to travel through time with 
little or no risk. It is not cheap, though. 

The material component is a ruby worth 10,000 gp 
or more, which must be crushed into dust. 

Notes: Restricted to chronomancers; 
common. 


~ Timeslip " 


Timeslip 
(Chronomancy) 


Level: 2 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 3 rds. (+ 1rd./companion) 
Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: Special 

Saving Throw: Neg. 


By means of a timeslip spell, the barrier be- 
tween reality and Demiplane of Time is 
thinned, and the chronomancer instantly slips 
between the two. Any creatures intending to 
attack those who fimeslip away first lose their 
attacks for that round. Slipping into the 
Demiplane of Time places the chronomancer 
and his companions immediately downstream 
of their lifelines (add one round to the casting 
time for each companion). Lifelines trail off 
into the silver mist that surrounds them. Even if 
there is heavy turbulence in the area, the travel- 
ers are displaced slightly so that they are rela- 
tively safe from it. 

When slipping back from the Demiplane of 
Time, the caster must focus on a lifeline to 
make the connection with reality. The chrono- 
mancer emerges within 1d10 miles of the crea- 
ture that lifeline corresponds to. This feature 
also helps the chronomancer who wishes to in- 
tersect a specific lifeline. 

All the chronomancer is wearing or carrying 
slips with him, up to a maximum of 25 pounds 
per level. Also, for every two levels, the 
chronomancer can slip one additional compan- 
ion along on the trip. A reluctant companion is 
allowed a saving throw vs. spell; if successful, 
the entire spell is negated. 

The material components for this spell are a 
diaphanous square of fine silk and a small piece 
of basalt. 

Notes: Restricted to chronomancers; 
common. 


Tin Soldiers, Otto's 
See Otto's tin soldiers. 


Tiny Hut, Leomund's 
See Leomund's tiny hut. 


Tipple 
(Conjuration) 
(Alchemy) 


Level: | 

Range: 3 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 container 
Saving Throw: None 


By casting this spell on a one-gallon or smaller 
container of liquid (such as a bottle or flask) the 
caster can, simply by a moment's concentration, 
send a mouthful of the liquid flying to his mouth 
to be swallowed. The liquid moves quickly 
enough to push a loose cork out of its container 
and nimbly enough to dodge intervening obsta- 
cles. If the spell is cast on a potion vial, the potion 
is 10% likely to be transformed to water. 

The spell lasts until the container is emptied, 
until any liquid is added to the container, or until 
24 hours have passed. Resealing the container 
has no effect on the duration of the spell, but 
tightly sealing it may prevent the liquid from 
being brought forth. 

The material component is a hollow reed, 
which is destroyed in the casting. 

Notes: Rare spell. (Updated from DRAGON 
Magazine.) 


Tobian's Ultimate Circle 
(Abjuration) 
(Geometry) 


Level: 9 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 9 rds. 

Duration: | turn/level 

Area of Effect: Circle, up to 40 ft. in diameter 
Saving Throw: None 


Tobian’s ultimate circle is completely invul- 
nerable, yet cannot be used to protect a creature 
attacking another. To cast the spell, the caster 
makes a circle of gold dust. While preparing the 
circle, the caster decides if it protects against the 
inside or the outside. If the circle faces inward, 
nothing within can escape or attack through the 
barrier by any means until the spell expires or the 
circle is broken from outside. If the circle faces 
outward, anything inside the circle cannot be 


a MEI MER EE i eT M Ce 


942 


Toothed Tentacle — Phaerimm 


harmed by any attack from outside. 

In all cases, any force or attack brought to bear 
against the invulnerable side of Tobian S ultimate 
circle is reflected back against the initiator of the 
force. However, if a creature moves or attacks 
through the protected (non-invulnerable) side, the 
spell is broken. Thus, a protected creature, com- 
pletely safe inside the circle, destroys the protec- 
tion upon leaving or attacking from the sanctuary. 

The caster can, by a supreme act of will, open 
the circle for an instant to allow teleportation or 
plane shifting—just long enough to trap a crea- 
ture inside or bring someone through the barrier. 
This is the only way a creature can pass through 
the wall without being bounced back or breaking 
the spell. 

The caster can make the circle permanent with 
a permanency spell, though it can still be broken 
by someone walking through the opposite side. 

The material component is the 10,000 gp of 
gold dust used to form the initial circle. 

Notes: Known to the archmage Tobian. 
Reported to be in the Book of Zala (the 
Lakharemtolma Zalarem). Optionally, can be al- 
lowed to geometers and abjurers. (Updated from 
DRAGON Magazine.) 


Tonal Attack, Otto's 
See Otto's tonal attack. 


Tones of Forgetfulness, Otto's 
See Otto's tones of forgetfulness. 


Tongues 
(Alteration) 
Reversible 


Duration: 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: 30-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell enables the wizard to speak and un- 
derstand additional languages, whether they are 
racial tongues or regional dialects. This does not 
enable the caster to speak with animals. The spell 
enables the caster to be understood by all crea- 
tures of that type within hearing distance, usually 
60 feet. 

This spell does not predispose the subject 
toward the caster in any way. 


The wizard can speak one additional tongue 
for every three levels of experience. The reverse 
of the spell, babble, cancels the effect of the 
tongues spell or confuses verbal communication 
of any sort within the area of effect. 

The material component is a small clay model 
of a ziggurat, which shatters when the spell is 
pronounced. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Tool 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 


Level: 7 

Range: 0 

Components: V 

Casting Time: 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 3 cu. ft./level 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell allows the wu jen to instantly create 
one or more common items or tools. The wu jen 
simply casts the spell and says “Now where did I 
put that (item name)?" The item instantly appears 
nearby. More than one item can be created up to 
the limits of the area of effect. The items created 
are not magical in any way, nor are they of any 
extraordinary value. Money of any sort cannot be 
created since it has a value greater than its form. 
Common items include weapons, armor, food, 
tools, boats, wagons, and horses. Once created, 
the item is treated as a normal item. 

Notes: Common in oriental settings; other- 
wise, very rare. 


Toothed Tentacle — Phaerimm 
(Evocation) 


Level: 2 

Range: 10 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 2 
Duration: 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell creates a shadowy, insubstantial 
“tentacle” or flexible arm extending out from the 
caster to the limits of spell range. This weight- 
less, retractile limb ends in a cluster of long- 
toothed, snapping mouths, 1d4+2 in number 
(round roll up, to an even sum). 

These mouths are solid and very real, and bite, 


mT ee ne N 


943 


^ Torment " 


slash, and savage foes. They can be attacked by 
up to three enemies at once, but can only strike at 
more than one target (up to the maximum of 
three) if the targets are grouped around the cluster 
of mouths to engage them. 

The mouths are AC 5 and have 14 hit points 
each. They bite for 2d4 points of damage each, 
every round. When a mouth is "killed," it fades 
away, taking a second mouth with it; if this leaves 
no mouths, the spell is ended. 

Only the mouths and their cluster of eel like 
“necks” can be attacked; the shadowy tentacle 
cannot be hit or harmed (except by application of 
a dispel magic, which ends the spell instantly). 
The tentacle can be passed through freely, and 
even be intersected by solid barriers and objects 
(though the caster must be able to see foes, to use 
the mouths against them), without harm to the 
caster or the spell. 

The caster gains no benefit of hit points, vital- 
ity, blood-food, or the like through the tentacle. 
The caster must concentrate on directing the ten- 
tacle; if he is killed, loses consciousness, or un- 
dertakes the study or casting of another spell, the 
tentacle fades away and this spell is ended. 

The material components are a hair and three 
teeth (they need not all be from the same corpse 
or species). 

Notes: Restricted to Phaerimm; common. 


Torment 
(Alteration, Evocation) 
Level: 7 
Range: 10 ft. 


Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: Special 6 rds. 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Special 


When this spell is cast, the wizard seeks to force 
submission and obedience from a captive creature 
from another plane from whom a service is being 
demanded (also see dolor and ensnarement spells). 
The initial uttering of the spell causes a link from 
the caster to a captive creature bound in a magic 
circle. (The subject of this spell must fail a magic 
resistance check, if applicable, for the torment spell 
to have any effect.) Thereafter, the wizard contin- 
ues to read the balance of the specially prepared 
writing, and each round this continues, the captive 
feels progressively worse—discomfort and then 
pain. The first two rounds bring twinges, the third 


and fourth rounds of reading bring shooting pains, 
and the fifth and sixth rounds of reading cause 
aches and then cramps. 

The creature refusing to submit to the perfor- 
mance of a service is given a straight saving throw 
vs. spell, adjusted each round for the increasing in- 
tensity of the dweomer. The save in the first round 
is made at -l to the die roll, the second at —2, the 
third at —3, the fourth at 4, and the fifth and sixth at 
—6 and -$ respectively. Failing the saving throw in- 
dicates the creature has agreed to the wizard's de- 
mands. There is no penalty following round 8 in 
any event. 

The effects of the torment spell have an effect on 
the creature, should it break loose. The creature has 
a —1 penalty to initiative for every 2 rounds the spell 
has been in effect, up to a maximum penalty of 4 
on round 8. In addition, the creature suffers a —1 to 
hit and ^1 per die of damage after 3 rounds of the 
spell, this increasing by —l per round to —4 in round 
6, then decreasing again to -l in round 9. 

It is likely that any intelligent creature with low 
moral standards will submit once it realizes the 
nature of the spell to which it is being subjected. 
Naturally, this does not cause the creature to feel 
anything other than immense hatred for the wizard. 
The forced service will be carried out to the letter, as 
is the case with all such agreements, but the creature 
will most certainly seek whatever revenge it can. 

Preparation for the casting of a torment spell re- 
quires either the secret name for the type of creature 
or its given name to be inscribed in the text of the in- 
cantation. The caster must also identify himself or 
herself. This establishes the link and allows the 
dweomer to be efficacious. However, for every 1 
point of Intelligence of the creature above that of the 
spellcaster, there is a 1% chance that the captive 
creature will gain control, draw the caster into the 
confines of its prison, and carry him or her off to its 
own plane and whatever fate is thus decreed. If the 
wizard is interrupted or distracted during the read- 
ing, there is a 5% chance per point of Intelligence of 
the captive creature that it will gain control. 

The material component of the spell is the afore- 
mentioned "specially prepared writing" (in the form 
of a scroll). Its special inks will require an expendi- 
ture of not less than 1,000 gp per Hit Die of the crea- 
ture to be affected by the dweomer of the spell. 

Notes: Very rare spell. Known to be in the 
Demonomicon of Iggwilv (WoG). 


Torrent of Death 
A MYSTARA setting spell, aka improved magic missile. 


A 4 cc t——v« CREE 


944 


^x Transfix " 


Tower of Mental Resistance 
(Abjuration) 
(Mentalism) 
Level: 6 
Range: 0 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 1 turn 
Duration: Special 


Area of Effect: 3 ft. radius 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell wards the caster's mind against 
mental attack, creating a barrier much like the 
psionic defense mode, tower of iron will. A creature 
attacking psionically must breach the tower before 
its telepathic attacks can affect the protected 
wizard. The tower also protects anyone standing 
within three feet of the protected wizard. 

The tower of mental resistance is empowered 
with 1d4 psionic strength points (PSPs) per caster 
level, to a maximum of 20d4. These points are not 
expended until the wizard is psionically attacked. 
The tower of mental resistance remains in force 
until its strength is exhausted, to a maximum of 24 
hours. Casting another such spell restores a par- 
tially depleted tower to full strength (reroll PSPs), 
and extends the maximum duration to 24 hours 
from the time of the casting. 

When the wizard is attacked psionically, the 
tower of mental resistance instantly becomes active 
(attempting any telepathic science or devotion 
against the wizard counts as an attack). Each round 
that the wizard is attacked, the tower expends 6 
PSPs. When the tower runs out of PSPs, the protec- 
tion fails. The caster can end the spell at any time 
by an act of will. Any psionic powers the caster 
may have are rendered unusable as long as the 
tower of mental resistance remains in effect. 

Notes: Very rare spell. 


Traceless Travel 
(Alteration) 
(Province: Sand) 


Level: 1 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 6 
Duration: 1 turn/level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell allows the recipient—either an 


individual or a mount—to tread upon sandy 
ground without leaving a visible trace. On other 
terrain, the spell is worthless. The caster must 
gather a handful of sand, then shed a tear that 
falls to the ground. The teardrop leaves a visible 
stain, marking the spot where the spell effect 
begins. From that point on, the sand (or sandy ter- 
rain) will not show the recipient's footprints—or 
any other physical track that would normally be 
made. The sand creates a cushion of air above its 
surface upon which the recipient walks. The 
cushion remains for one round, allowing a pur- 
suer or companion who follows closely to be sim- 
ilarly concealed, provided exactly the same route 
is taken. 

This path, although invisible to the naked eye, 
radiates magic for 1d4 turns after casting, regard- 
less of how much the sand or air is subsequently 
disturbed. Creatures that track by scent or heat are 
not thwarted by this spell. 

The material components of this spell are a 
handful of sand and the caster's teardrop. 

Notes: Common for spellcasters from an ara- 
bian setting; otherwise, very rare. 


Tracer, Shandaril's 
See Shandaril's tracer. 


Tracer, Tulrun's 
See Tulrun's tracer. 


Tracks, Ruornil's 
Reversed form, see Ruornil's tracks. 


Trade Tongue, Khinasi 


Transference, Nemicron's 
See Nemicron's transference. 


Transfix 
(Enchantment/Charm) 


Level: 4 
Range: 120 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 

ing Time: 1 rd. 
Area of Effect: 20-ft. cube 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell is a more powerful version of the 
hold person spell. When cast, the wu jen identi- 
fies the center point of the effect. All creatures 


945 


^x Transformation, Tenser's r 


within the area of effect at that time must make a 
saving throw vs. spell. If the save is successful, 
the spell has no effect on that creature. If the 
saving throw is failed, that creature is transfixed. 
Furthermore, any creature entering the area of the 
spell after it is cast must also make a saving 
throw vs. spell (at +4 bonus to the die roll) or be 
transfixed. A saving throw must be made each 
time a creature enters the area of effect. 

Transfixed creatures cannot move, speak, cast 
spells, or take any action. Once creatures are 
transfixed, the wu jen must state some condition 
that must be met to release the victims: “Wait 
here until I return" or "Stay there for all eternity!" 
The condition can be anything, however implau- 
sible. If this condition is met, the creatures are in- 
stantly released. Creatures removed from the area 
of effect are instantly freed. Also, for every hour a 
creature remains transfixed, it is allowed another 
saving throw vs. spell to escape. 

The spell remains active in its area as long as 
at least one creature is affected by it. 

The material component for this spell is a bar- 
nacle crushed underfoot when the spell is cast, or 
a drop of pine resin. 

Notes: Common in oriental settings; other- 
wise, very rare. 


Transformation, Tenser’s 
See Tenser’s transformation. 


Transforming Tune 
(Alteration, Evocation) 


Level: 9 

Range: 30 yds. 
Components: V, S 

Casting Time: | rd. 
Duration: | rd. + 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: Special 


This powerful spell can be cast on a musical 
instrument (or, touching a being’s throat, on the 
voice of any being having vocal cords), to be re- 
leased later by singing or playing. The releaser of 
the spell can choose its targets and effects, em- 
ploying only one effect per round, but as many 
effects as desired until the spell expires (the dura- 
tion is determined by the caster ‘s level). 

The effects and targets are selected by the will 
of the releaser. If a releaser doesn’t know what 
effects are possible, the spell unleashes the effect 
closest to his desires of the moment—or, if the 
releaser maintains an open, neutral mind, a 
random effect will occur (random targets or 
target areas can also be “selected” in this way). 

All saving throws against a transforming tune 
are vs. spell, but with a —3 penalty. The maximum 
area any tune can affect is a sphere 60 feet across, 
whose center can't be more than 30 yards away 
from the source of the tune, This sphere is the 
"area" referred to below, although the releaser 
can choose to make it smaller (to exclude certain 
beings or objects). The area need not rest on the 
ground—if a midair location is chosen, the 
sphere remains stationary. Otherwise, the releaser 
can to leave the area stationary, or move it at up 
to ten feet per round; it won't move out of range 
of the tune source, but only moves in accordance 
with tune source's movements if the releaser 
wills it to. Its effects are otherwise as described 
on the table of transforming tune effects. 

Notes: Restricted to the Harpers of the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting; very rare. Most 
senior Harpers will know of an individual who 
can produce this effect. 


x Transfuse A 


Transfuse 
Lost spell, reputed to allow the transfer ofan ability 
score, class ability, or proficiency from another in- 
dividual, with the recipients gain the donor 5 loss. 


Translocation Shift 
(Abjuration, Alteration) 
(Dimension) 


De RM V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 turn 

Duration: 10 days/level 

Area of Effect: 1 ft./level diameter sphere 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell creates a stationary, invisible field of 
protection that guards against beings arriving via di- 
mension door, gate, plane shift, teleport, teleport 
without error, phase shifting (into or out of the 
Ethereal Plane), or psionics within its confines. All 
beings attempting to enter the area by such means 
(and other translocation spells, magical items, and 
psionic powers) are redirected to a different destina- 
tion on the same plane, chosen by the caster of the 
translocation shift at the time of casting. The chosen 
site must be safe, but it may imprison the traveler or 
it may be surrounded by waiting dangers. 

A translocation shift field is unaffected by dispel 
magic and all other priest and wizard spells of less 
than seventh level. The shift has no effect on the 
caster, those speaking a verbal password chosen 
during casting, or beings bearing a pass token (any 
inorganic item) chosen and touched during casting. 
A shift field need not be linked to a password or 
token, but never exclude s its caster. 

The spell’s saving throw begins with an 
Intelligence check for incoming magic- or psionic- 
using beings redirected by the shift field. If the 
check fails, the spell has its normal effect. If the 
check succeeds, the being realizes that something is 
awry. It may try to alter its destination, resulting in 
safe arrival (that is, not into a solid object) in a 
random destination on the same plane—not the one 
to which the field was set. A successful saving 
throw vs. spell results in a random destination se- 
lected by the DM; failure indicates arrival in a spot 
near where the shift field tried to send them. 

The material components are a handful of dia- 
mond dust (crushed diamonds worth 7,000 gp or 
more) and a bit of rubber or tree gum. 

Notes: Rare for dimensionists; otherwise, 
very rare. (Updated from DraGoN Magazine.) 


Transmute Bone to Steel 
(Alteration, Necromancy) 
Reversible 


Level: 6 

Range: 30 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: Permanent 

Area of Effect: 1 creature or object 
Saving Throw: Special 


A wizard casting this spell makes any object 
made of bone, including a skeleton, as strong as 
steel. The spell can be cast only upon dead, inani- 
mate bones; after they have been transmuted, the 
bones can now be animated by the usual means. 
Despite their increased strength, the bones do not 
change in appearance, and they retain their original 
weight. Bone objects make all future saving throws 
as if they were hard metal. Transmuted skeletons 
have AC 3 and take half the usual damage from 
physical attacks. However, these skeletons still take 
normal damage from holy water and magical at- 
tacks and are also subject to spells affecting metal 
(for example, transmute metal to wood or heat 
metal) and the attacks of creatures that especially 
affect metal, such as rust monsters. 

The reverse of this spell, transmute steel to 
bone, weakens any metal by making it as brittle 
as dry bone (altering all saving throws appropri- 
ately). Each non-living recipient of this spell (in- 
cluding iron golems) must make an item saving 
throw vs. disintegration. If failed, the former 
metal item makes all future saves as if it were 
fashioned from bone. Metal armor loses its effec- 
tiveness, becoming AC 7. Whenever a successful 
hit is made by or upon the item, the transmuted 
object must make a save vs. crushing blow to 
remain intact and functional. Magical items 
weakened by this spell remain magical, with any 
bonuses applied to their saying throws. Weapons 
affected by this spell inflict -2 points per die of 
damage (and must save to avoid breakage when- 
ever they hit a target). Physical attacks against 
transmuted metal creatures inflict +2 points per 
die of damage. 

The material components (for both versions of 
the spell) are steel filings and powdered bone. 

Notes: Uncommon for necromancers; other- 
wise, very rare. 


Transmute Mud to Rock 
Reversed form, see transmute rock to mud. 


SO n e 


948 


^ Transmute Snow to Stone d 


Transmute Pebble to Boulder 
Aka turn pebble to boulder. 


Transmute Rock to Mud 
(Alteration) 
(Earth, Water) 
Reversible 


Level: 5 

Range: 10 yds./level 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: One 20-ft. cube/level 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell turns natural rock of any sort into an 
equal volume of mud. The depth of the mud 
cannot exceed one-half its length or breadth. If it 
is cast upon a rock, for example, the rock affected 
collapses into mud. Creatures unable to levitate, 
fly, or otherwise free themselves from the mud 
sink at the rate of ten feet per round and suffocate, 
except for light-weight creatures that could nor- 
mally pass across such ground. Brush thrown atop 
the mud can support creatures able to climb on top 
of it, with the amount of brush required subject to 
the DM's discretion. The mud remains until a 
dispel magic spell or a reverse of this spell, mud to 
rock, restores its substance—but not necessarily 
its form. Evaporation turns the mud to normal dirt, 
at the rate of 1d6 days per ten cubic feet. 

The reverse, mud to rock, can harden normal 
mud into soft stone (sandstone or similar mineral) 
permanently unless magically changed. 

The material components for the spell are clay 
and water (or sand, lime, and water for the reverse). 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Level: 4 
Range: 10 yds./level 


Transmute Sand to Stone 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 4 


(Alteration) 
Reversible 
Duration: 2d6 days 
Area of Effect: One 10-ft. cube/level 
Saving Throw: None 
This spell turns a volume of sand into an equal 


volume of sandstone. The caster can shape the 
sandstone into any simple form as desired (no 


great definition is possible), provided no single 
portion is smaller than one cubic foot and none of 
the shape exceeds the range. 

The created sandstone occupies the same 
space as the sand it replaces occupied at the time 
of casting. Creatures standing with their feet 
buried in the sand at the time of casting are al- 
lowed a saving throw vs. paralyzation to jump 
free (if possible), those trapped will have to break 
free. The fact that an area of sand has been turned 
to sandstone cannot readily be seen after the spell 
is cast (the DM may require an Intelligence check 
to notice this, for example). The magically cre- 
ated sandstone breaks down into sand particles 
over a period of 2d6 days. 

The material component for the spell is sand 
ground between two pebbles. 

The reverse of this spell, transmute stone to 
sand, allows the caster to change any type of un- 
worked stone to sand (sandstone, granite, gems, 
etc.). Solid rock turned to sand may cause those 
standing on it to lose their balance and fall 
(Dexterity check to avoid). This spell has no 
effect on constructions made of stone or stonelike 
material, or upon composite materials such as 
clay bricks or concrete. Golems of stone or gem 
material suffer a —2 penalty to their attack rolls 
and Armor Class. 

The material component for the reverse is 
sand from an hourglass. 

Notes: Common for spellcasters from the 
DARK SUN setting; otherwise, very rare. (Updated 
from original publication.) 


Level: 5 
Range: 10 yds./level 


Transmute Snow to Stone 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 5 


(Alteration) 
Reversible 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: One 20-ft. cube/level 

Saving Throw: None 


This spell functions much like transmute mud 
to rock. Any naturally occurring snow can be 
transformed into relatively solid rock resembling 
porous white marble. The depth of the rock cannot 
exceed one-half its length or breadth. The rock can 
be chipped with a hammer or chisel, but small 
fragments revert to snow immediately. Stone cre- 
ated with this spell can be cut or quarried like 


= RRTUUT IUe € 7 109 OD NU ROSA 


949 


^ Transmute Steel to Bone a 


normal stone for purposes of construction. 
Buildings and other items created of snow can be 
transformed to stone, retaining their shape. 

Creatures standing on the stone when it reverts 
to snow sink initially to a depth of 1d6 feet, They 
do not sink farther on subsequent rounds. Stone 
created through this spell can be changed back to 
snow through a dispel magic or transmute stone to 
snow spell, The stone suffers the effects of heat as 
if it were actually marble. 

The material components are a chip of white 
marble, a pinch of salt, and a teardrop. 

The reverse of the spell, transmute stone to 
snow, transforms unworked, natural stone to snow. 

Notes: Common in the RAVENLOFT setting; 
very rare elsewhere. On the Demiplane of Dread, a 
Domain Lord can affect worked stone within his 
domain with this spell. 


Transmute Steel to Bone 
Reversed form, see transmute bone to steel. 


Transmute Stone to Sand 
Reversed form, see transmute bone to steel. 


Transmute Stone to Snow 
Reversed form, see transmute snow to stone. 


Transmute Water to Dust 
(Alteration) 
(Earth, Water) 
Reversible 


Level: 6 

Range: 60 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 6 

Duration: Permanent 

Area of Effect: One 10-ft. cube/level 
Saving Throw: None (special) 


When this spell is cast, the subject area in- 
stantly undergoes a change from liquid to pow- 
dery dust. Note that if the water is already muddy, 
the area of effect is doubled, while if wet mud is 
being transmuted, the area of effect is quadru- 
pled. If water remains in contact with the trans- 
muted dust, the former quickly soaks the latter, 
turning the dust into silty mud, if a sufficient 
quantity of water exists to do so, otherwise soak- 
ing or dampening the dust accordingly. 

Only liquid actually in the area of effect at the 
moment of spellcasting is affected. Liquids that 
are only partially water are affected only insofar 


as the actual water content is concerned, except 
that potions containing water are rendered useless. 

Living creatures are unaffected, except for 
those native to the Elemental Plane of Water. 
Such creatures are allowed saving throws vs. 
spell. Failure inflicts 1d6 points of damage per 
caster level upon the subject, while success 
means the creature receives but half damage. 
Only one such creature can be affected by any 
single casting of this spell, regardless of the crea- 
ture’s size or the size of the spell’s area of effect. 

The material components of the spell are dia- 
mond dust (at least 500 gp value) and a bit of 
seashell. 

The reverse of the spell is simply a very high- 
powered create water spell. It requires a pinch of 
norma! dust as an additional material component. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Transport 
A 4th-level spell from the Forgotten Realms setting 
before the Time of Troubles. Reputed to transport a 
target creature into a prepared cell. Aside from the 
fact it was known to a mage named Cyndre, few 
details of the spell have been confirmed. 


Transport 
(Alteration) 
(Dimension) 


Level: 8 

Range: 10 ft. 

Casting Time: 1 
Components: V, S, M 
Duration: Until triggered 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


The wizard must prepare a cell for the target 
creature ahead of time, and cast part of the spell 
then. This takes one full turn. The rest of the spell 
stays in the caster's mind (taking up the space of 
one 8th-level spell) until the spell is completed. 
The final incantation has a casting time of 1. 

When the spell is cast, multicolored streamers 
immediately burst from the caster’s hand and 
engulf the creature. The creature must make an 
immediate, successful saving throw vs. spell or 
grow blurry and be banished to the prepared cell. 
A single creature of up to Huge size can be af- 
fected by the spell. 

The target creature must be within | mile per 
caster level of the prepared cell. If not, or if there 
is not room for the target creature to fit into the 


" Due A ie te e 


950 


- Trap the Soul g 


destination cell, then the spell fails. 

The cell is often specially warded against es- 
capes by teleportation or other magics, and may 
include a confining circle if the creature to be 
confined is of extraplanar origin. 

Notes: Very rare spell. There is rumored to be 
a 9th-level version of this spell that separates the 
creature from its magical items, weapons, and 
other equipment, sending these to a second hold- 
ing area. 


Transpose 
Lost spell, reputed to allow the caster to transfer a 
quality of an object or person to another object or 
person. 


Trap, Leomund's 
See Leomund's trap. 


Trap Spellbook — Red Wizard 
(Alteration) 


Level: 3 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 3 

Duration: | day/level 
Area of Effect: 1 book 
Saving Throw: None or 4 


Trap spellbook is a special form of explosive 
runes. As its name implies, the spell is used by 
the Red Wizards primarily to protect their spell- 
books, but can be placed on a book of any sort. As 
with explosive runes, a reader has only a 5% 
chance per level of magic use detect the trap, and 
thieves have only a 5% chance. Trap detection by 
spell or magical device always detects this spell. 

This spell inflicts 1d6 points of damage per 


level of the caster (to a maximum of 5d6) on 
anyone other than the caster who opens the 
trapped book. The spell does no damage to the 
book itself and renews itself upon closing. The 
wizard can voluntarily remove the runes; other- 
wise, they can only be removed with a dispel 
magic or similar means. 

Notes: Restricted to the Red Wizards of Thay 
and those trained by them; common. 


Trap the Soul 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 


Level: 8 

Range: 10 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: Special + 1 
Duration: Permanent until broken 
Area of Effect: | creature 

Saving Throw: Special 


This spell forces the creature’s life force (and 
its material body) into a special prison gem en- 
chanted by the spellcaster. The creature must be 
seen by the caster when the final word is uttered. 

The spell can be triggered in one of two ways. 
First, the final word of the spell can be spoken when 
the creature is within spell range. This allows magic 
resistance (if any) and a saving throw vs. spell to 


K 
"- 
Ii 


Mh 


V / 


— 


a 


951 


ET Trembling Horn » 


avoid the effect. If the creature's real name is spoken 
as well, any magic resistance is ignored and the 
saving throw vs. spell suffers a penalty of —2. If the 
saving throw is successful, the prison gem shatters. 

The second method is far more insidious, for it 
tricks the victim into accepting a trigger object in- 
scribed with the final spell word, automatically 
placing the creature's soul into the trap. To use this 
method, both the creature's true name and the trig- 
ger word must be inscribed on the trigger item when 
the gem is enchanted. A sympathy spell can also be 
placed on the trigger item. As soon as the subject 
creature picks up or accepts the trigger item, its life 
force is automatically transferred to the gem, with- 
out the benefit of magic resistance or saving throw. 

The gem prison will hold the trapped entity in- 
definitely, or until the gem is broken and the life 
force is released, allowing the material body to 
reform. If the creature trapped is a powerful crea- 
ture from another plane (and this could actually 
mean a character trapped by some inhabitant of an- 
other plane of existence when the character is not 
on the Prime Material Plane), it can be required to 
perform a service immediately upon being freed. 
Otherwise the creature can go free once the gem 
imprisoning it is broken. 

Before the actual casting of the trap the soul 
spell, the wizard must prepare the prison, a gem of 
at least 1,000 gp value for every Hit Die or level of 
experience possessed by the creature to be trapped 
(e.g., it requires a gem of 10,000 gp value to trap a 
10 Hit Die or 10th-level creature). If the gem is not 
valuable enough, it shatters when the entrapment 
is attempted. (Note that while characters have no 
concept of level as such, the value of the gem 
needed to trap an individual can be researched. 
Remember that this value can change over time as 
characters advance.) 

Creating the prison gem requires an enchant an 
item spell and the placement of a maze spell into 
the gem, thereby forming the prison to contain the 
life force. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Trembling Horn 
(Evocation) 


Level: 1 

Range: 50 yds. + 5 yds./level 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 2 

Duration: 1 hr. 

Area of Effect: Up to 3 creatures in 20-ft, radius 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell, specially designed by Thyri Snome 
for the Watch, allows watch-wizards to blow their 
horns at fleeing suspects and attach magical tracers 
to them that allow the watch to easily find them in 
crowds. When cast, the wizard must blow a watch 
horn and point at the target or targets in the area of 
effect. Target individuals must be at least partially 
in sight for the spell to be effective. The magic re- 
mains inactive until triggered by a watch horn. 

When a watch member with a watch horn (not 
limited to the caster) approaches within 30 feet of 
an affected individual, the spell activates. A 
glowing, sounding horn appears | foot above the 
individual and is easily heard. This audible image 
grows brighter and louder as the watch ap- 
proaches. It fades after two rounds, but creatures 
can be caught by then. 

If affected individuals evade the watch for one 
hour after casting, the spell ends without activat- 
ing. Waterdhavians are familiar with this spell, 
often stopping people who have this cast upon 
them, should they hide in their midst. 

Notes: Restricted to the Watch-Wizards Guild 
of Waterdeep and those trained by them; common. 


Triad Gem 
(Alteration) 


Level: 9 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: ] turn 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 specially enchanted ruby 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell is used to store other spells in a spe- 
cially prepared gemstone spell matrix. The spell- 
caster casts triad gem on a ruby, and in the turn 
immediately following, personally casts any three 
other spells of his or her choosing directly into the 
gems. Normal casting times, material components, 
and the like apply; obviously the caster must possess 
these magics, be able to cast them, and have them al- 
ready memorized, and their combined casting times 
cannot exceed one turn. 

A triad gem begins to evaporate after three days, 
silently and without spell effects occurring, losing 
one (randomly selected) spell on the fourth day and 
each day thereafter, until it vanishes on the sixth day. 
Any being can call forth the magics before they fade 
away, either by breaking the gem (this can occur un- 
intentionally) or by holding it and uttering a secret 
word (set by the caster during the casting of the triad 


952 


^ Trollish Fortitude r 


gem spell). Only the caster can control the spells is- 
suing from the gem; otherwise, they erupt wildly, 
visiting their effects on random targets and areas. 

If controlled by the caster, the spell take place 
either all at once, or in a succession chosen by the 
caster, one per round for three rounds. The caster de- 
cides the order of release at the time the spells are un- 
leashed. The caster need only designate targets or 
precise effects by an instant of silent concentration 
(and thus can wield the stored spells while bound, 
fighting, feigning slumber, or otherwise mentally or 
physically preoccupied). 

The material component is a ruby of any size 
worth at least 500 gp, upon which the caster has 
cast either an enchant an item or an eternal flame 
spell. This requirement for the gem cannot by elim- 
inated by any means, including spells or items en- 
gineered to allow the casting of other spells with no 
material component. 

Notes: Known to Sammaster of the FORGOTTEN 
REALMS. Uncommon for incantatrixes and members 
of the Cult of the Dragon; otherwise very rare. (For 
the curious, the eternal flame spell is detailed in 
#9535 Volo’s Guide to All Things Magical, and 
missed the Compendiums by a matter of months.) 


Trick — Old Empire 
(Alteration, Illusion) 


Level: 7 

Range: 80 yds. + 10 yds./level 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 7 

Duration: | turn/level 

Area of Effect: The caster and one individual 
Saving Throw: None 


This powerful illusion enables the wizard to 
exchange his appearance and position with that of 
any target creature within range. The wizard and 
the target individual are teleported to each other’s 
positions. To others, the individual and the caster 
each seem to have the voice and physical appear- 
ance of the other; in effect, none knows that a 
switch occurs unless the caster has warned them 
beforehand. A true seeing spell will detect the 
switch. Note that the teleportation is not without 
error, and thus this spell entails some risk on the 
part of the caster and the target. 

At the end of the duration, or upon a successful 
dispel magic or dispel illusion spell upon either of 
the affected individuals, the switch is reversed. 

The material component for this spell is a ball 
of wax. 


Notes: Uncommon spell. As a FORGOTTEN 
REALMS Old Empire spell, initial exposure re- 
quires a mentor or a read Southern magic spell. 


Probability of Teleporting: 
On 

Destination is: High Target Low 
Very familiar 01-02 03-99 00 
Studied carefully 01-04 05-98 99-00 
Seen casually 01-08 09-96 97-00 
Viewed once 01-16 17-92 93-00 
Never seen 01-32 33-84 85-00 

Troll Repellent 
(Evocation) 
(Alchemy) 
Level: 1 


Range: 10 vds./level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 2 

Duration: | turn + 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: 20-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell creates a thin, greasy, stationary 
greenish mist that carries a potent odor. While 
this odor is unpleasant to most creatures, it is hor- 
rible to trolls. Trolls failing to make a successful 
saving throw vs. spell at a -4 bonus leave the area 
of the mist for the duration of the spell, refusing 
to enter again until it is gone. 

The mist is easily dispersed, making it useless 
in even a light breeze. The spellcaster must con- 
centrate during the duration of the spell, or the 
mist instantly disperses. 

The material components are a bit of ragweed, 
some troll dung, and an open flame. 

Notes: Common for orc witch-doctors; other- 
wise, very rare. Optionally rare for alchemists. 
Originally from the Goblin Marches in the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


Trollish Fortitude 
(Necromancy) 
Level: 6 
Range: 0 


Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 6 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


AES. nee m ETE NR BRE 


953 


^ Trollkiller a 


This powerful spell imbues the caster with the 
physical fortitude and resilience of a troll. While 
the spell is in effect, the caster regenerates 3 hit 
points per round until he reaches his normal max- 
imum. He also gains a troll’s ability to ignore dis- 
memberment, decapitation, and other horrible 
injuries that would normally incapacitate or slay 
outright (although losing a limb may prevent the 
caster from taking certain actions, such as run- 
ning, climbing, and other activities). 

Bleeding, wounding, being reduced to nega- 
tive hit points, and other effects that cause a crea- 
ture to lose hit points from round to round are 
ignored—the caster instead regains 3 hit points 
per round, up to his or her normal maximum. A 
caster reduced to less than 0 hit points is incapaci- 
tated, but only until restored to 1 hit point or more; 
the wizard can move, fight, and cast spells again 
as soon as the hit point total is positive. 

Trollish fortitude provides no defense against 
lethal poison, disease, and other effects that don’t 
cause a loss of hit points. Fire and acid damage 
cannot be regenerated. In addition, hit points from 
Hit Dice lost through level draining cannot be re- 
generated. 

While the spell is in effect, the caster can rejoin 
severed limbs simply by holding them in place, 
but if the spell ends while a limb is still separated, 
then the caster immediately suffers the full effects 
of the injury. 

The material component for this spell is a 
shred of dried flesh from a troll’s heart, pulverized 
into dust, which is then sprinkled on the caster. 

Notes: Uncommon spell (PO:SP). 


Trolikiller 

Aka shroud of flame. 

True Bearing 
(Divination) 
(Province: Sea) 
Level: 2 
Range: Special 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 2 


Duration: | turn 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: None 


The true bearing spell, used primarily by 
mariners of the Land of Fate, allows the recipient to 
pinpoint the direction in which a familiar landmark 
or geographical site lies. For one turn, he has a 


mental compass reading for a particular city, town, 
significant land feature, or the like. He must have 
visited this place before, even if it occurred by 
means of teleport or a magical gate. Further, the site 
sought by true bearing must be on the same plane of 
existence as the recipient. Its distance is irrelevant; 
the spell still reveals the proper direction, though 
not how far away it lies. If the site is hidden by 
magic (that is, concealed from magical detection), 
the spell fails. It also fails if the site no longer exists 
(for example, an oasis that has dried up or a town 
that has been completely razed). The spell will not 
guide the recipient toward a living thing. Nor can it 
locate a portable item, such as a gem or a magical 
item, even if the item is currently stationary. 

In order to cast this spell, the wizard seeking a 
true bearing must have water at least 10 feet deep 
beneath his feet. This, coupled with the “beeline” 
nature of the spell, makes it most useful to mariners 
far from land. 

Yet stories are told of one Habib Al-Anzaro, 
nicknamed “The Squishy,” who made great stilts 
out of hollow tubes and filled them with water. 
Habib was last seen galloping across the open desert 
like a crazed stork in pursuit of some ruins he had 
visited as a child. 

The material component of this spell is a pinch 
of iron filings, swallowed by the caster. 

Notes: Common for spellcasters from an arabian 


True Dream 
(Divination, Enchantment/Charm) 


Level: 4 

Range: 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: 1 hr./level 

Area of Effect: 1 sleeping creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


When this spell is cast, the recipient experi- 
ences a vivid dream relevant to whatever thoughts 
he held just before sleeping. The dream reveals, 
however obliquely, the answer to one question or 
problem, as long as the DM decides that the 
answer can come from the dreamer's own subcon- 
scious, even through a wildly illogical leap. For in- 
stance, if the dreamer wishes to divine the identity 
of the person who sent him a blackmail note, and 
the DM decides that the dreamer could intuitively 
guess that the villain is a merchant who eyed his 
heavy pouch of gold coins early last month. 


954 


^ True Name " 


The spellcaster is not privy to the results of the 
dream unless he also casts a successful enter 
dream spell to observe its effects. 

Willing recipients of this spell can attempt to 
compose their thoughts on a particular subject by 
making a successful Wisdom check. Success in- 
dicates that the dream imagery will address the 
intended question; failure means that the recipi- 
ent still experiences a dream, but that it is not rel- 
evant to the question. 

This spell can bring forth a previously 
forgotten or blocked memory, revealing through 
dream imagery an important event, conversation, 
or even a single word important to the dreamer. 
The exact nature of this recovered knowledge is at 
the discretion of the DM, who may determine that 
no such useful knowledge exists for a particular 
subject. In this case, the DM may devise some 
colorful but irrelevant vision for the affected char- 
acter. As an example, a dreamer may experience 
this spell while thinking of his brother, who died 
as a child. The true dream could reveal the previ- 
ously repressed memory of his father killing his 
brother in a sudden fit of anger. 

The material components are a pinch of 
ground dreamwillow bark and a small amount of 
silver filings (1 gp value). In addition, the caster 
requires an item valued by the dreamer as a focus 
(the monetary value is irrelevant). 

Notes: Common for Dream mages, rare for di- 
viners and enchanters; otherwise, very rare. 


True Name 
(Alteration, Enchantment) 
(Song) 


Level: 7 

Range: 30 ft. 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: Special 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


True name grants a wizard great power over 
any living thing that has a true name, generic or in- 
dividual, known to the spellcaster. Naturally, most 
true names are not known, even by the creatures 
themselves, for the common names of most things 
are not their true and secret names. True names are 
discovered through hard work, spying, extensive 
use of legend lore and sagecraft at the most exact- 
ing levels. The casting of a true name spell re- 
quires the wizard to call out the true name of the 


subject and then begin a recitation of verse that en- 
compasses the nature and/or history of the subject. 
The initial verse has a casting time of 3. Thereafter, 
in rhyming verse, the caster describes the desired 
result of the spell. The results are variable and have 
varying casting times as noted below. 


Multiple Suggestion: The verses can contain 
from 1 to 4 suggestions, just as if each were the 
3rd-level wizard spell. Each verse (suggestion) re- 
quires a casting time of | to recite. Thus, the maxi- 
mum number of 4 suggestions have a casting time 
of 7, including the time for the initial recitation. 


Weakness and Surrender: Each verse recited 
(up to seven) causes the loss of 1 point of Strength. 
Each verse has a casting time of 1. A subject re- 
duced to 0 Strength falls to the ground, helpless. In 
addition to the Strength loss, the subject must 
make a successful saving throw vs. paralyzation or 
meekly surrender, with a penalty of —1 for each 
point of Strength lost. Strength loss is recovered 
2d4 rounds after the recitation ceases, and with this 
the subject regains its will to resist. 


Polymorph: The verses change the subject into 
something else, just as if a polymorph other spell 
had been cast. No system shock roll is required. 
The number of verses (and thus the casting time) 


depends on the degree of change. 
mineral to animal = 10 verses 
mineral to vegetable = 9 verses 
vegetable to animal = 8 verses 
monster to normal = 7 verses 
monster to monster = 6 verses 
other to human = 5 verses 
animal to animal = 4 verses 
vegetable to vegetable = 3 verses 
mineral to mineral = 2 verses 


The subject returns to its natural form in time. 
The duration is 6 turns per level of the spellcaster 
minus | turn for every verse required to effect the 
change. The subject thinks and behaves exactly 
as a nonpolymorphed creature of the same type, 
but has its original hit points. 


Transport: The subject is teleported without 
error to some other place. The number of verses 
required depends on the destination. The subject 
is altered, enabling it to physically survive the 
normal conditions of the place to which it is sent. 


ne ee ee ee a 


955 


Same plane/100 mile range = 4 verses 
Same plane = 5 verses 
One plane/world removed = 6 verses 
Two planes/worlds removed = 7 verses 
Three planes/worlds removed = 8 verses 
Greater distances are not possible. 


Domination: The subject is allowed a single 
saving throw vs. spell. If unsuccessful, the subject 
must serve the caster to the best of its ability for a 
single day. If required to perform an act highly 
against its code of ethics (for example, a paladin 
being forced to slay a village of innocents), another 
saving throw may be allowed. A dominated crea- 
ture is aware of what it is doing, but is helpless to 
stop. Acts committed under the influence of domi- 
nation will not force an alignment change, provided 
they are promptly and properly atoned for. 

Willing subjects receive no saving throw or 
benefit of magic resistance. If the caster is inter- 
rupted at any time during the recitation of the 
spell, the magic fails and the spell is lost. 

Notes: Rare spell. 


Area of Effect: 1 creature or object 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell allows a savant to discover the true 
name of a creature that fails a saving throw vs. 
spell providing the savant has some personal item 
of the target creature to act as a focus. The spell 
can be used to discover the command word of a 
device (no saving throw allowed), provided the 
savant properly holds, bears, or wears the object. 
In the case of artifacts and relics, the DM decides 
what, if anything, is learned. The DM may re- 
strict the casting of this spell to once per week. 

The material component is a potion of ESP. 
which must be consumed by the caster. 

Notes: Restricted to savants (generally 
NPC5); common. 


True Nightmare 
(Enchantment/Charm) 


Level: 4 

Range: 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: | turn 

Duration: | hr./level 

Area of Effect: 1 sleeping creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


When this spell is cast, the subject suffers 
nightmares—not illusions, but genuine terrors 
from the subconscious. The subject remains 
asleep, but upon waking remains exhausted, en- 
joying no natural healing from rest. Until sleep- 
ing undisturbed by nightmares, the subject suffers 
a l-point penalty to surprise and initiative rolls, 
and a temporary reduction in all ability scores of 
1 point. These penalties are cumulative for each 
night spent in the throes of a true nightmare, but 
even one night of undisturbed sleep (at least six 
hours) cancels the ill effects. 

Spellcasters who suffer from a true nightmare 
cannot refresh their spells until they have had a 
night’s undisturbed sleep. 

The material components of this spell are a 
pinch of ground dreamwillow bark and a small 


"a i 


956 


Tsunami 


amount of iron filings (1 gp value). 
Notes: Common for Dream mages, rare for 
enchanters; otherwise, very rare, 


True Seeing 
(Divination) 


Level: 6 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: | rd./level 

Area of Effect: 60-ft. light range 
Saving Throw: None 


When the wizard employs this spell, he con- 
fers upon the recipient the ability to see all things 
as they actually are. The spell penetrates normal 
and magical darkness. Secret doors become plain. 
The exact location of displaced things is obvious. 
Invisible things become visible. Illusions and ap- 
paritions are seen through. Polymorphed, 
changed, or enchanted objects are apparent. (The 
real form appears translucently superimposed on 
the apparent form: a gold dragon polymorphed to 
human form would appear human with a ghostly 
dragon looming over the human form.) Unlike 
the clerical version of this spell, the recipient 


PA J a 


ts 


cannot determine alignment. The recipient can 
focus his vision to see into the Ethereal Plane or 
the bordering areas of adjacent planes. The range 
of vision conferred is 60 feet. True seeing does 
not penetrate solid objects; it in no way confers 
X-ray vision or its equivalent. Furthermore, the 
spell effects cannot be enhanced with magic. 

The spell requires an ointment for the eyes 
that is made from a very rare mushroom powder, 
saffron, and fat. It costs no less than 300 gp per 
use and must be aged for 1d6 months. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Tsunami 
(Evocation) 


Level: 9 

Range: | mile 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 turn 

Duration: 2 turns 

Area of Effect: Wave 5 ft. high & 10 ft. long/level 
Saving Throw: % 


This spell allows the wu jen to create a tsunami 
or tidal wave. It can only be cast on seas, oceans, 
or similar large bodies of water. Upon finishing the 


^ Tulrun's Tracer " 


building in intensity. After two turns, a tsunami 
roils up and begins moving in the direction indi- 
cated by the caster. The wave moves at a speed of 
48. Each round it travels, the height of the wave 
drops by 10 feet. Ships caught in the wave have a 
percentage chance equal to the current height of 
the wave to be capsized and crushed to splinters. 
Non-water dwelling creatures caught in the wave 
suffer damage equal to the current height of the 
wave, although a successful saving throw vs. death 
reduces the damage to half. Upon striking land, the 
wave continues to surge ashore at the same rate, 
however dropping in height 20 feet per round. 
Wooden buildings suffer the same fate as ships, 
while stone buildings have 1/4 this chance of being 
destroyed. People on land suffer the same fate as 
those at sea. 

The material component for this spell is the 
scale of a dragon turtle or tun mi lung and water 
taken from a water elemental. 

Notes: Common in oriental settings; other- 
wise, very rare. 


Tulrun's Tracer 
(Alteration, Divination) 


Level: 4 

Range: 0 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 4 
Duration: 4 rds./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


When this spell is cast, a continuous, lumines- 
cent pathway comes into being within 10 feet of the 
caster. It shows the most recent path of any single 
creature described by the caster. If the creature 
hasn't been in the initial 10-foot radius within one 
day per caster level, the spell fails. 

The tracer shoots a luminous line at a rate of 60 
feet per round along the route taken by the creature. 
Once beyond the initial 10-foot radius, the tracer 
only shows the path of the creature where the crea- 
ture remained in physical contact with the ground, 
or rode a living mount that remained in contact 
with the ground. Pass without trace and similar 
spells of 4th level or less do not confuse the tracer, 
and it will follow the creature's route though physi- 
cal barriers and across gaps of up to 15 feet. It will 
not otherwise show aerial travel, but it will trace 
into and under water. 

The tracer is intangible—it can be passed 
through or traveled within without harm. It does 


not activate magic upon contact, nor does it distort 
magical or physical phenomena passing through it. 
Portions of the revealed path can be destroyed or 
concealed by dispel magic, continual darkness, and 
the like, but the pathway cannot he physically dis- 
turbed (for example, a gust of wind won't shift it). 

The path ends when the target creature is 
reached, the spell duration expires, or at any place 
from which the target creature teleported, left the 
plane of the caster, or embarked upon a conveyance 
such as a cart, ship, or carpet of flying. In the case 
of teleportation or plane shifting, the caster, upon 
reaching the path's end, receives a clear mental pic- 
ture of the creature's destination. If the creature 
took a conveyance, the mental picture is only of 
that act and not of the eventual destination. When 
the spell expires, the path slowly fades into noth- 
ingness; if it has not reached the target creature, 
there is no mental picture of the target's destination. 

The material component is a pinch of phospho- 
rus or a glowing life form such as a fungus or glow- 
worms over which the caster verbally describes the 
creature to be traced. 

Notes: Very rare spell. Known to be in The 
Wizard s Workbook. 


Tumble — Old Empire 
(Enchantment/Charm) 


Level: 2 

Range: 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 2 

Duration: 3 rds. + 1 rd/level 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell causes a single creature to trip and 
fall to the ground unless a successful saving throw 
vs. spell is made. If not, the creature continues to 
tumble and roll about for the duration of the spell, 
making a saving throw each round until the spell 
is broken or its duration ends. The creature cannot 
attack or cast spells while under the influence of 


Pe ee 


958 


Turn Pebble to Boulder "d 


this spell, but retains any Dexterity bonuses to 
Armor Class. 
The material component for this spell is a 
pinch of grease, which is consumed in the casting. 
Notes: Uncommon spell. As a FORGOTTEN 
REALMS Old Empire spell, initial exposure re- 
quires a mentor or a read Southern magic spell. 


Tune, Transforming 
See transforming tune. 


Tunnel Vision 
(Illusion/Phantasm) 
(Shadow) 


Level: 2 

Range: 10 yds. 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 2 
Duration: 3 turns 

Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell reduces the recipient creature's field 
of vision to the area that is directly in front of it, an 
arc 60° wide. All peripheral vision is replaced with 
a gray shading. Against attacks from outside this 
arc, the creature's Armor Class is reduced by 4, and 
saving throws are reduced by 2. The tunnel vision 
spell allows back-stabbing attacks from the side, 
and may increase the affected creature's chance of 
being surprised, depending on the situation. 

Various cure spells cannot remove this effect; if 
the creature fails its initial saving throw vs. spell, 
then only a dispel magic or dispel illusion can 
remove the effect before the spell’s expiration. 

Notes: Very rare spell. (Updated from Dracon 
Magazine.) 


Tunnel Vision 
Reversed form, see insect sight. 


Turbulence 
Reversed form, see still water. 


Turn Magic — Red Wizard 
See spell turning. 


Turn Boulder to Pebble 
Reversed farm, see turn pebble to boulder. 


Turn Pebble to Boulder 


Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: | rd./pebble enchanted 
Area of Effect: | or more pebbles 
Saving Throw: None 

At the culmination of this spell, the caster hurls 
a pebble that grows and increases in speed, becom- 
ing a deadly boulder that inflicts 3d6 + 8 points of 
damage if it strikes the target. (The rules for boul- 
ders as missile weapons apply as described in the 
DMG.) The caster’s THACO is used to determine 
thrown pebble receives no penalty for range. The 
maximum range of attack is equal to 50 feet plus 
10 feet per level of the caster. Only the caster can 
throw the pebbles affected by this spell. 

The wizard can enchant one stone at 7th level 
and gains one stone per three levels of experience 
thereafter (two stones at 10th level, three at 13th 
level, etc.). Only one pebble can be thrown per 
round, and pebbles must be hurled in consecutive 
rounds. The spell lasts a number of rounds equal 
to the number of pebbles enchanted. Each pebble 
requires a separate attack roll. Pebbles can be 
thrown at different targets within range. 

The material components are pebbles, which 
revert to normal size when the spell expires. 

The reverse of this spell, turn boulder to 
pebble, shrinks a boulder to the size of a pebble. 
It affects only unworked rock and cannot be used 
to shrink a statue or a cut gemstone. 

The number of rocks that can be affected is 
equal to the number of experience levels of the 
caster, Boulders cannot exceed one cubic foot per 
level of the caster. Thus, a 10th-level wizard 
could shrink 10 rocks, each of which is equal to 
or less than 10 cubic feet in size. All rocks are af- 
fected in the same round the spell is cast. Though 
they need not be touched, the boulders must be 
within 50 feet of the caster. Boulders that have 
been shrunk remain so until the magic is dis- 
pelled. 

Notes: Uncommon spell (70M). 


" XEmGME LEMMA UNE 


959 


~ Turn Undead — Savant " 


Turn Undead — Savant 
(Abjuration) 


Level: 4 

Range: 40 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 3 

Duration: | rd./level 

Area of Effect: | undead creature/level 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell allows a mage savant to approxi- 
mate the priestly undead turning ability by means 
of a spell. If an undead creature chosen by the 
savant fails its saving throw vs. spell, then it de- 
parts from the area as though it had actually been 
turned. This magic does not bring undead into the 
service of an evil savant. 

The material component is a cleric's holy 
symbol. 

Notes: Restricted to savants, uncommon. 


Turnshadow 
(Abjuration) 
(Shadow) 


Level: 6 

Range: 60 yds. 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 1 

Duration: | rd./level 

Area of Effect: 40-ft. by 40-ft. square or one 
creature 

Saving Throw: None/Neg. 


This spell empowers the wizard to turn crea- 
tures created by the shadow monsters, demi- 
shadow monsters, or shades spells, causing them 
to flee in panic for the duration of the spell (they 
can return later if they are able). The affected 
creatures will flee at maximum possible speed. 
The spell has no effect on truly undead creatures, 
including the monstrous shadows. 

Alternately, this spell can be targeted at a 
single shadow-monster (created by one of the 
above spells) to wrest control from its original 
caster and cause it to attack the creature of the 
controller's choice. The attack will continue 
until the spell's duration has elapsed, at which 
point the shadow-monster will return to its plane 
of origin. 

The turnshadow spell was developed by spe- 
cialist abjuration wizards (abjurers) to deal with 
shadow creatures brought about by illusionist 


spells, which abjurers cannot use. 
Notes: Rare spell. Known to be in Selvar s 
Ineffable Conjurations, Magic, and Phantasms. 


Turtle Soup 
(Alteration, Evocation) 
(Alchemy) 
Level: | 
Range: 0 


Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 
Duration: 3 turns 

Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


The spell calls into being a bowl of thick, 
green, peppery turtle soup, as large in volume as 
the caster's head. Just the soup is summoned. It is 
held in a bowl shape by the spell dweomer with- 
out benefit of an actual bowl. This "bowl" ap- 
pears in one of the caster's hands when spell 
casting is complete, Soup can be sipped, drunk, 
or ladled out of its flat top, which is the only face 
soup can spill from. The soup remains in exis- 
tence after the spell duration is over; however, it 
no longer holds its “bow!” shape. 

The soup is nourishing, and it arrives at the 
temperature the caster desires, from frozen hard 
to boiling. The “bowl” does not transmit the tem- 
perature of the soup to the caster's hand. 

If hurled at a creature, the soup leaves its 
“bowl” shape in midair and strikes with the 
caster's THACO as a grenade-like missile. A 
direct hit causes 1d3 points of damage if the soup 
is warm, 1d6 if it is frozen hard, and 2d4 if it is 
scalding hot. If dumped over a creature, the soup 
inflicts 2d4 points of damage only if it is scalding 
hot. Turtles, tortoises, and related beings cannot 
be harmed by any contact with this spell. 

This was the first spell Alustriel developed on 
her own. She is still fond of it, though her sisters 
have made it known that they do not share quite 
the verve of her liking for turtle soup. Over the 
years, Alustriel and her apprentices have discov- 
ered many inventive uses for this spell. 

The material components are three drops of 
water and a piece of turtle shell or skin of any 
size. Alustriel uses a tiny fragment from a score 
or more she carries in a tiny belt pouch. 

Notes: Known to Alustriel and her ap- 
prentices in the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. 


F dul EEEEIIMC E SRL 


E Tymessull's Planar Pacifier " 


Tymessull's Cerulean Traverse 
(Alteration, Enchantment) 
(Artifice, Dimension) 


Level: 9 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 3 rds. 

Duration: | day/level 

Area of Effect: The caster + special 
Saving Throw: None 


This powerful enchantment enables a wizard 
and a few companions to journey through space 
and across planar boundaries. The caster can 
affect one companion for every six levels he pos- 
sesses, in addition to himself (rounded down). 
For example, a 23rd-level mage could cast the 
spell upon himself and three companions. The 
companions must hold hands as part of a circle 
that includes the caster. Any interruption of the 
circle during casting ruins thc spell. Although 
there is no saving throw, the spell will not work 
on an unwilling or unconscious subject; if this is 
tried, the entire spell is ruined for all. Once the 
dweomer is cast, those affected by the spell can 
separate, though they must rejoin the circle to 
cross planar boundaries. 

The prime function of the traverse is to allow 
the mage and companions to move to other 
planes, as if they had a small, personalized gate. 
Each planar boundary is crossed by all in unison; 
this requires one round of complete concentra- 
tion. Each planar boundary crossed reduces the 
duration of the spell by one day. Furthermore, 
while under this spell, no person can cross a 
planar boundary by any means other than the tra- 
verse, including wish, gate, a well of the worlds, 
or even by an artifact. 

The spell grants certain lesser powers that can 
be used by the recipients, with no need to stay in 
a circle. These include the ability to fly, at will, as 
the 3rd-level wizard spell, and the the ability to 
assume gaseous form up to thrice per day (with 
the general effects of the potion of gaseous form, 
except for duration, which is at will). 

The use of this spell in no way guarantees the 
safety of its users, either during their journey or 
once they reach their destination. 

The spell requires a circular platinum chain 
large enough to be grasped by all to be affected 
by the spell. This must cost a minimum of 10,000 
gp for each being the spellcaster will transport. 
The material component is at least 1,000 gp of 


powdered emerald for each subject, to be sprin- 
kled in a circle enclosing the subjects. The chain 
is not consumed by the spell, but the powdered 
emerald is. 

Notes: Very rare spell. Known to be in 
Tymessul s Enchiridion of Travel. (Updated from 
DRAGON Magazine.) 


Tymessull's Planar Pacifier 
(Alteration, Enchantment) 


Level: 7 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: l/item 
Duration: | day/level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


The casting of a planar pacifier by a wizard 
enables some types of magical items to operate 
normally while being used on a foreign plane. 
The magical items a planar pacifier can affect in- 
clude only those items that have “pluses”—for 
example, swords, shields, armor, /uckstones, 
rings and cloaks of protection (but not bracers of 
defense), and so on, according to the table. 


Caster Level Penalty Cancelled 

14th 1 

18th 2 

24th 3 

30th 4 

Thus, at 14th level, an item from the Prime 
Material Plane functions normally on the 
Ethereal, Inner, and Astral Planes. At 18th level, 
the item functions normally on the Outer Planes 
as well. At 30th level, an item functions at its full 
bonus anywhere in the planes. 

The spellcaster loses 1 hit point for each item 
protected with a planar pacifier, investing this hit 
point as a bit of energy from the plane on which 
the spell is cast, in order to surround the object and 
simulate those planar conditions for the object. 

The wizard can protect half as many items as 
he has Constitution points with a single casting of 
this spell (round up). This number is also the ab- 
solute upper limit on the total number of items 
the caster can protect at any one time, regardless 
of how often the pacifier is cast. 

The wizard can regain hit points lost to this spell 
simply by touching the enspelled items within one 
day of the end of the dweomer. The caster can also, 


ait i ~~.) a TUTTO PONE T BEEN 


961 


pranteyes "d 


with a word and touch, absorb his hit point from an 
item, but this ends the enchantment on that item. 
The pacifier can be dispelled only by a spellcaster 4 
or more levels above the caster. If the magic is dis- 
pelled or otherwise removed from an item (for ex- 
ample, by means of Mordenkainen 5 disjunction or 
a rod of cancellation), the caster's hit point is per- 
manently lost, and can be regained only by means 
of a wish. If the item is destroyed, the wizard can 
recover its hit point from the item's shattered re- 
mains, if any, provided this is done within one turn. 

This spell can be made permanent if a full 
wish and 5,000 gp more diamond dust are used in 
combination with this spell upon a single item. At 
this point, the hit point loss is permanent and the 
item no longer counts against the caster's 
Constitution limit. 

The material components of this spell are a 
drop of the caster's blood and 500 gp of pow- 
dered diamond for each plus of the items to be 
protected. Both substances are consumed when 
the spell is cast. 

Notes: Very rare spell. Known to be in 
Tymessul's Enchiridion of Travel. (Updated from 
Dragon Magazine.) 


Magical Bonus Loss By Plane 
Loss 


-l 
-2 


Where Forged Where Used 
Prime Ethereal or Astral 
Inner or Outer 


Prime 


Adjacent Inner 


Tymessull’s Improved Planar Pacifier 
A 9th-level version of the base spell is rumored to 
exist. It does not require a hit point invested per 
item and its effects apply at 18th, 24th, 30th, and 
36th levels, respectively. 

This effect can be made permanent only by a 


complex process, in which the item is partially 
unmade and remade, with a minimal additional 
cost of 10,000 gp. A hit point is given up in the 
process, although this can be from the item s 
owner. Failure might destroy the item (any 
chance of this is decided the DM). 


Tyranteyes 


(Alteration, Evocation, Necromancy) 


Level: 9 

Range: 0 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: | rd. 
Duration: | turn/level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell allows the caster to transform herself 
into a beholder until the spell expires or until she 
wills the magic to end. When this spell is cast, the 
caster vanishes and is transported to an extradimen- 
the spell forms a beholder body. During this round, 
she can cast any spell she has memorized, possesses 
one round. Typically, a defensive magic is wrought. 

A round after vanishing, the caster reappears as a 
beholder in the same spot she occupied when she 
disappeared. Her own body remains in the extradi- 
mensional space, unreachable by anyone. If the 
caster is slain in beholder-form, she is forever dead 
unless a contingency spell saves her. The contin- 
gency (as typically set up) causes the caster to reap- 
pear in her own body where the beholder was slain 
(this is not necessarily the same location from which 
the caster disappeared). 

As a beholder, the caster has 69 hit points. is AC 
0/2/7, moves at MV F1 3 (B), and is in all other re- 
spects a normal beholder, with all the usual eyestalk 
powers. The caster's form corresponds in all respects 
to a living eye tyrant. Beholders are described fully 
in the MONSTROUS MANUAL Tome. 

Damage suffered to the beholder body does not 
harm the caster's own body. If she ends the spell 
before it dies, she regains her own body with no 
damage at all. Once the caster decides to end the 
spell, the beholder disappears. In the following 
round, the caster reappears in the location she van- 
ished from. 

The material component of this spell is part of a 

Notes: Very rare spell from the FORGOTTEN 
REALMS setting; virtually unknown elsewhere. 


el ET ERR LIA S RR ee 


962 


Ultravision 
(Alteration) 


Level: 4 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: | rd. 

Duration: 2 hrs. + 1 hr./level 
Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


An improved version of the infravision spell, 
ultravision allows the spell recipient to see per- 
fectly in normal darkness, starlight, or moonlight 
to the full range of his unobscured daylight 
vision. In underground settings, the spell enables 
the recipient to see up to 90 feet in nonmagical 
darkness. Magical darkness, fog, or smoke is less 
effective than normal against a character using 
ultravision; the spell permits the recipient to see 
at least 30 feet in magical darkness, and at least 
10 feet in any kind of vaporous, foggy, or smoky 
atmosphere. Ultravision does not permit the re- 
cipient to spot invisible creatures, and it does not 
function in the presence of strong light sources 
(lanterns, torches, and so on). 

The material component for this spell is a 
black agate worth at least 50 gold pieces. 

Notes: Uncommon spell (PO:SP). 


Ultimate Circle, Tobian's 
See Tobian's ultimate circle. 


Unbinding 
(Abjuration) 


Level: 9 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: | rd. 

Duration: 3 rds. 

Area of Effect: 20-ft. radius sphere 
Saving Throw: None 


When an unbinding spell is cast, a sphere of 
magical force comes into being, centered on and 
mobile with the caster. The sphere magically de- 
stroys any spells that contain, constrain, or seal, 
with the exceptions noted below. 

The unbinding negates charm and hold spells 
of all types, wizard locks and similar closures, 
spells that create physical or magical barriers, 
guards and wards, temporal stasis, slow, and time 
stop spells, among others. The effects of a statue 


spell are ended, and a magic jar is shat- 
tered—forever destroyed, and the life 


oned creature beneath the caster's feet emerges as 
though a freedom spell had been cast, and so forth. 
In addition, any spell that holds magical effects, 
including other spells, immediately releases them 
at a range of 0 (including magic mouth, Rary s 
mnemonic enhancer, imbue undead with spell 
ability, contingency, and so on). 

Protective spells such as protection from evil, 
shield, minor globe of invulnerability, globe of in- 
vulnerability, and similar spells are not affected by 
an unbinding Petrified creatures are neither revealed 
nor restored. Individuals bound to service are not 
freed (including creatures such as familiars, invis- 
ible stalkers, genies, and elementals). An antimagic 
shell is not affected, nor will the effects of unbind- 
ing penetrate one. Protective circles and similar con- 
fining runic constructions are not affected unless 
they currently hold a creature imprisoned, in which 
case, they are erased, of if that is physically impossi- 
ble, become ineffective as other than decorations. 

Curses, quest, and geas spells are negated only 
if the wizard casting the unbinding spell is of a 
level equal to or greater than that of the original 
caster. The interaction of this spell with artifacts 
and relics is adjudicated by the DM. 

These effects occur regardless of the caster's 
wishes. Spell effects on the person of the caster or 
being carried or worn by him or her, remain 
undisturbed, but any others are affected, even 
those of allies. The opening of locks or other clo- 
sures triggers any alarms or traps attached to 
them; any released creature may or may not be 
friendly to the caster. The caster cannot shorten 
this spell, save by dispelling it. 

The material components are a lodestone and 
a pinch of saltpeter. 

Notes: Restricted to incantatrixes; common. 


Unburn 
(Abjuration, Alteration) 


Level: 4 

Range: 10 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 4 
Duration: Permanent 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This rather odd spell reverses the effects of a 
fire. The unburn spell calls into existence a re- 


ai Se uem mes d Ie LERNEN 


963 


^ Uncontrollable Hideous Laughter, Tasha's r 


versed form of fire, one with a black flame that 
radiates cold and shadow rather than heat or light. 
While a normal fire requires flammable material 
for fuel, the black fire created by unburn feeds on 
the ashes and charred remains of normal fire. 

The most common use for unburn is to reverse 
the flame effects on something the caster wants 
such as an important scroll, a painting, or a home. 
When casting the spell, the caster chooses a point 
for the black flame to start; the initial manifesta- 
tion is about the size of a human hand. From this 
place, the black fire spreads to other burnt materi- 
als, similar to the way normal fire spreads to 
flammables. The black fire spreads to all burned 
materials it touches and continues to restore all 
such materials for up to a full day, or until it can 
no longer reach burned materials. At that time, 
the black fire goes out, though the effects of its 
passage are permanent and cannot be reversed by 
such spells as dispel magic. 

There are some restrictions to this spell. The 
results of a recent fire are relatively easy to undo 
because all the ashes and other materials are still 
there. Unburn can also be used on older fires, but 
there is a risk that some of the raw material has 
been carried off or blown away in the wind. The 
magic of unburn does not cause most of those 
materials to return to the scene, though it will call 
back minor amounts of ash that were wafted 
away by the hot air of the normal fire. The exact 
amount of material left unrestored is up to the 
DM and should be based on the size of the origi- 
nal fire and how long ago it happened. 

Unburn is effective only on burned materials. 
It will not prevent a fire, restore hit points lost to 
a fire-based attack, or restore to life a creature 
slain by fire. (It will, however, restore a dead 
body that was consumed by flames.) 

Since rust (and other tarnish) is produced by 
oxidation, and fire is a form of rapid oxidation, 
the black fire of unburn will also undo the effects 
of rust or tarnish on metal, removing corrosion 
and stains. 

The material component for this spell is a 
smal! vial of water. 

Notes: Very rare spell. Known to be in 
Daltim s Tome of Fire. 


Uncontrollable Hideous Laughter, 
Tasha's 
See Tasha's uncontrollable hideous laughter. 


Undead Aides 
(Necromancy) 


Level: 8 

Range: 10 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 8 
Duration: Permanent 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


When a wizard casts this spell, he imbues ani- 
mated skeletons and zombies with limited 
Intelligence. The spell gives these undead the 
ability to speak, in order to answer questions, re- 
spond to certain situations, shout warnings if 
under attack, or make introductions. This spell af- 
fects a maximum of one skeleton or zombie for 
each experience level of the caster, though the 
exact number of undead affected depends upon 
the number of tasks that each servant is to per- 
form. For example, a 30th-level wizard can affect 
30 undead creatures, each able to perform one 
task—or one undead servant that could perform 
30 different tasks. 

A task can be as simple as opening a door 
when visitors arrive or as complex as cooking a 
specific dish, each task taking no more than an 
hour to perform. The tasks are short routines that 
are performed either daily, when a certain situa- 
tion arises, or when the proper commands are 
given. The undead staff have low intelligence for 
determining what they know and how they will 
react. They retain their immunities to spells such 
as charm, hold, sleep, and so on. 

It takes one turn for this spell to affect each 
creature. Once the spell is cast, the undead ser- 
vants need no monitoring except for any com- 


mands required to start specific tasks. 
The material components are human bone 
fragments and a dragon's brain. 
Notes: Restricted to necromancers, rare, 
Undead Control 
(Necromancy) 
Level: 3 
Range: 20 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 
Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: Special 


Saving Throw: Special 


” qa a wo aera L 


^ Undead Familiar " 


With this spell, the caster can control any 
undead creatures within range as if an evil priest 
four levels lower in experience (thus, a 5th-level 
wizard can affect undead as though he were a Ist- 
level evil cleric). While casting the spell, the 
wizard rolls 1d20 and consults Turning Undead 
table to determine whether or not the monsters 
are commanded (a “D” result is treated as a ^T"). 
The wizard can make only one attempt to control 
the undead; whether or not the attempt succeeds, 
the spell is used. Any encountered group (not 
type) of undead that resists the control of the 
wizard can never be commanded by his use of 
this spell. 

When confronting a variety of undead, the 
wizard affects the weakest type of creatures first. 
Multiple castings of the spell may be required to 
exert control over the more powerful members of 
an undead horde. The spell permits the wizard to 
wrest control of the monsters from another evil 
priest or from another wizard employing this 
magic. Note that anyone of good alignment must, 
of course, use the spell only after careful consid- 
eration. (See the DMG for more information re- 
garding the influence of evil priests over undead 
creatures.) 

The material component is an evil priest’s 
unholy symbol or some other properly cursed tal- 
isman forcefully presented to the affected mon- 
sters. The component is not lost in the casting and 
may be subsequently reused. 

Notes: Restricted to necromancers (uncom- 
mon) and Deathmasters (common). Known to be 
in the Cryptikronos (the Book of Horror). 
(Updated from DraGon Magazine.) 


Undead Creation 
(Necromancy, Summoning) 


Level: 9 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 turn 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 living individual 
Saving Throw: Special 


This dangerous spell is a final step required 
for a necromancer to turn a living individual into 
one of the rarer undead creatures. Typical crea- 
tures include, among others: adherers, appari- 
tions, coffer corpses, heucuva, penanggalan, 
sheet phantoms, and so on. 

Only one undead, regardless of Hit Dice, can 


be created with a single casting of this spell. The 
undead creature conforms to the statistics and 
abilities of its type in all ways, including Hit Dice 
and alignment. The individual (usually human) 
upon which the spell is cast is allowed a saving 
throw vs. spell to negate the effect. If the individ- 
ual's level is the same as the intended undead 
creature's Hit Dice, then this saving throw is 
made as if the individual was Ist level. 
Regardless of the outcome, the individual must 
survive a system shock check or perish (this ren- 
ders the body is useless for further necromantic 
manipulation). If the casting is interrupted, then 
the caster must make a successful system shock 
check or be blasted to dust. 

The dweomer does not give the caster any in- 
fluence or control over the resulting undead crea- 
ture; this must be achieved by other means. 

Once successful, the magic cannot be reversed 
by any means short of a full wish. 

The caster must place his hand on the subject’s 
forehead while casting this spell from a scroll. 

Notes: Common for Deathmasters, rare for 
other necromancers. (Updated from DRAGON 


Magazine.) 


Undead Drain 
Reversed form, see undead regeneration. 


Undead Familiar 
(Necromancy) 


Level: 5 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 turn 

Duration: Permanent 

Area of Effect: 1 corpse or skeleton 
Saving Throw: None 


Using this spell, an evil wizard animates a 
corpse to act as his familiar. The “subject” can be 
in any stage of decay to the point of being noth- 
ing more than a skeleton. Any human, demihu- 
man, or humanoid corpse can be animated. 


” MSIE a- 


965 


ES Undead Master r 


The resulting zombie or skeleton has the same 
abilities and immunities as a normal undead crea- 
ture of its type, but has 1d3 points of Intelligence. 
The wizard has an empathic link with the familiar 
and can issue mental commands at a distance of 
up to one mile. Empathic responses from the fa- 
miliar are basic and unemotional, and such a fa- 
miliar is unlikely to be distracted from its task. 

If separated from the caster, the familiar loses 
1 hit point each day, and is destroyed when re- 
duced to 0 hit points. When the familiar is in 
physical contact with the wizard, it gains the 
wizard's saving throw against special attacks; it 
suffers damage as normal, according to whether 
or not it makes its saving throw. If the familiar is 
destroyed, the caster must immediately make a 
successful system shock check or die. Even if he 
survives this check, the wizard loses 1 point from 
his Constitution when the familiar is destroyed. 

An undead familiar can be turned normally, 
but cannot be destroyed by turning. If within 
sight of its master, it is turned as a wight. 

A wizard can have only one familiar of any 
type at any time. An undead familiar accepts 
more abuse than would a normal familiar. 

The spell requires a corpse or skeleton and a 
silver ring that is placed on one of the familiar's 
fingers. 

Notes: Very rare spell. Known to be in the 
tome, Kyristan $ Mysteries. 


Undead Master 
(Necromancy) 
Level: 9 
Range: 0 


Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 2 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 10 ft./level radius 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell enables the caster to control undead 
creatures perfectly and precisely. Controlled 
undead can perform tasks such as climbing, sort- 
ing, locking and unlocking closures, binding 
wounds, and the like, but cannot cast spells or 
perform other class abilities. 

When an undead master spell is cast, the caster 
is instantly aware of all undead within the area of 
effect. At any time within the next 2 turns, the 
caster can try to bring all undead within the area 
under direct control. All must save vs. spell at a -6 
penalty to avoid being affected. Those affected 


obey the mental commands of the caster. The 
undead, unlike charmed living creatures, are not 
freed of control by being directed to do things 
harmful to them. The destruction, departure, or 
mental suppression of the caster will end the spell. 

Undead of semi-intelligence or better have a 
5% per Hit Die chance per day of escaping the 
master's control. Often these creatures will stay 
and serve by choice. 

Notes: Restricted to undead spellcasters, rare. 
Updated from Lords of Darkness. 


Undead Mastery 


See master undead. 


Undead Monster Summoning 


See undead summoning. 


^ Undead Servant " 


Undead Mount 
(Necromancy) 


Level: 2 

Range: 10 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 2 

Duration: 2 hrs. + | hr/level 
Area of Effect: 1 mount 
Saving Throw: None 


By means of this spell, a wizard can animate a 
dead horse or similar creature or assemble a mag- 
ical mount from the bones of such creatures The 
mount created by this spell is under the control of 
the caster. It can carry up to 300 Ibs. of riders and 
equipment. Exceeding the 300-Ib. limit destroys 
the spell and reduces the mount to its original 
(dead) form. 

An undead mount is usually a horse (dead 
horses are easy to come by) but also can be a grif- 
fon, camel, hippogriff, or other beast of burden. 
Flying creatures that are turned into undead 
mounts cannot fly but they can move along the 
ground. Creatures that had some special ability 
while alive do not retain that ability in their 
undead state 

The undead mount is unintelligent and cannot 
fight. It responds only to simple verbal com- 
mands, and cannot be affected by 
enchantment/charm magic. The undead mount 
has a movement rate of 18 and moves silently. It 
has 1d4 hit points plus one additional hit point 
per level of the caster. Undead mounts can be 
turned as skeletons if they are primarily bones or 
as zombies otherwise. Undead mounts ridden by 
more powerful undead cannot be turned sepa- 
rately but if the rider is turned so is the mount. 

The caster can choose, when creating the 
undead mount, to make it glow very faintly with a 
yellow green or red hue. 

The material components of this spell are a 
drop of water, a human hair, and a pinch of pow- 
dered hoof. The bones or body of the animal that 
will serve as the mount also are needed. 

Notes: Uncommon for necromancers; other- 
wise, very rare. Known to be in Tidings of 
Conflict and Woe. 


Undead Production 
Aka undead creation. 


Undead Regeneration 


(Necromancy) 
Reversible 


Level: 6 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 6 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: Undead creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell enables the caster to touch an 
undead creature and restore a number of hit 
points to it equal to the caster's level, plus 1d6. 
Even gaseous and noncorporeal undead can be 
restored by use of this spell. The spell has no 
effect on creatures other than undead. 

The reverse of this spell, undead drain, re- 
quires a successful attack roll. The touch inflicts 
damage equal to the caster's level plus 1d6 points 
of damage. This damage is not gained as extra hit 
points by the caster. Only an undead creature can 
be affected. 

Notes: Restricted to necromancers; rare. 


Undead Servant 
(Necromancy) 


Duration: | hr. + 1 turn/level 
Area of Effect: 1 body or skeleton 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell allows the wizard to temporarily an- 
imate the body or bones of a dead human, demi- 
human, or humanoid creature of man-size or 
smaller. The animated creature is treated as a 
zombie or skeleton, as appropriate; see the 
Monstrous MANUAL tome. The undead servant 
obeys simple commands until destroyed, dis- 
pelled, or the spell duration expires. 

The material component is a pinch of grave- 
yard dirt. 

Notes: Restricted to necromancers, rare. 
(Updated from POLYHEDRON Newszine.) 


" Is EE M 


~ Undead Servants A 


Undead Servants 
See undead aides. 


Undead Summoning I 
(Necromancy) 


Level: 3 

Range: 30 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 3 

Duration: 2 rds. + 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


Within one round of completing this spell, the 
necromancer conjures 2d4 skeletons or 3d4 
animal skeletons (50% chance of each) to a point 
within the spell's range. The undead attack the 
caster's enemies to the best of their ability until 
he commands the attack to cease, the spell dura- 
tion expires, or they are defeated or turned. The 
undead summoned by this spell vanish when 
slain. If no enemy is present for the undead to 
engage, they follow any other commands or un- 
dertake simple tasks as the wizard directs. 

The material component is a bit of bone taken 
from a ghoul, wight, or ghast. 


Notes: Restricted to necromancers; rare. 


Undead Summoning II 


(Necromancy) 


Level: 4 

Range: 40 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 4 

Duration: 3 rds. + 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


An improvement of the 3rd-level spell undead 
summoning I, this spell resembles its weaker rela- 
tion, except that undead summoning II conjures 


2d4 zombies (75% chance) or 2d3 heucuvas 
(25% chance). The monsters attack the caster’s 
enemies to the best of their ability until he com- 
mands the attack to cease, the spell duration ex- 
pires, or the monsters are defeated or turned. The 
undead summoned by this spell vanish when 
slain. If no enemy is present for the undead to 
engage, they follow any other commands or un- 
dertake simple tasks as the wizard directs. 

The material component is a bit of bone taken 
from a wight, ghast, or mummy. 

Notes: Restricted to necromancers; rare. 


Undead Summoning III 
(Necromancy) 


Level: 5 

Range: 50 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 5 

Duration: 4 rds. + 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


The next spell in the series of undead sum- 
monings, this spell brings 2d4 ghouls (5096 
chance) or 2d4 monster zombies (5096 chance) to 
the caster's aid. The monsters attack the caster's 
enemies to the best of their ability until he com- 
mands the attack to cease, the spell duration ex- 
pires, or the monsters are defeated or turned. The 
undead summoned by this spell vanish when 
slain. If no enemy is present for the undead to 
engage, they follow any other commands or un- 
dertake simple tasks as the wizard directs. 

The material component is a bit of bone taken 
from a wight, ghast, or mummy. 

Notes: Restricted to necromancers, rare. 


Undead Summoning IV 
(Necromancy) 


Level: 6 

Range: 60 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 6 

Duration: 5 rds. + 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


Simply a more powerful version of the earlier 
undead summonings, this spell conjures 2d4 
ghasts (40% chance), 2d4 shadows (20% 
chance), or 2d4 juju zombies (4096 chance) to the 


MER erP—————— 


968 


^ Universal Taster, Thundrael's "d 


caster's aid. The monsters attack the caster's ene- 
mies to the best of their ability until he com- 
mands the attack to cease, the spell duration 
expires, or the monsters are defeated or turned. 
The undead summoned by this spell vanish when 
slain. If no enemy is present for the undead to 
engage, they follow any other commands or un- 
dertake simple tasks as the wizard directs. 

The material component is a bit of bone taken 
from a mummy, vampire, or lich. 

Notes: Restricted to necromancers, rare. 


Undead Summoning V 
(Necromancy) 


Level: 7 

Range: 70 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 7 

Duration: 6 rds. 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell resembles monster summoning V, 
except that it conjures 3d4 ghasts (40% chance), 
243 giant skeletons (40% chance), or 1d3+1 ban- 
shees (20% chance) to the caster's aid. The mon- 
sters attack the caster's enemies to the best of 
their ability until he commands the attack to 
cease, the spell duration expires, or the monsters 
are defeated or turned. The undead summoned by 
this spell vanish when slain. If no enemy is pre- 
sent for the undead to engage, they follow any 
other commands or undertake simple tasks as the 
wizard directs. 

The material component is a bit of bone taken 
from a mummy, vampire, or lich. 

Notes: Restricted to necromancers, rare. 


Undead Summoning VI 
(Necromancy) 


Level: 8 

Range: 80 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 8 

Duration: 7 rds. + 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


The necromancer's version of monster sum- 
moning VI, this spell summons 1d3+] mummies 
(40% chance), 1d4+1 wraiths (40% chance), or 
2d4 wights (20% chance) to the caster’s aid. The 


monsters attack the caster’s enemies to the best of 
their ability until he commands the attack to 
cease, the spell duration expires, or the monsters 
are defeated or turned. The undead summoned by 
this spell vanish when slain. If no enemy is pre- 
sent for the undead to engage, they follow any 
other commands or undertake simple tasks as the 
wizard directs, 

The material component is a bit of bone taken 
from a vampire or lich. 

Notes: Restricted to necromancers, rare. 


Undead Summoning VII 
(Necromancy) 


Level: 9 

Range: 90 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 9 

Duration: 8 rds. + 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


The most powerful version of the undead sum- 
monings, this spell conjures 1d3+1 spectres (50% 
chance), 1d3 vampires (40% chance), or 1 
revenant (10% chance) to the caster's aid. The 
monsters attack the caster's enemies to the best of 
their ability until he commands the attack to 
cease, the spell duration expires, or the monsters 
are defeated or turned. If this spell happens to 
summon a revenant, the monster selects an oppo- 
nent designated by the caster as its hated nemesis 
and attacks the selected victim single-mindedly. 
The undead summoned by this spell vanish when 
slain. If no enemy is present for the undead to 
engage, they follow any other commands or un- 
dertake simple tasks as the wizard directs. 

The material component is a bit of bone taken 
from a lich. 
Notes: Restricted to necromancers, very rare. 


Undetectable Alignment 
Reversed form, see know alignment. 


Undetectable Charm 
Reversed form, see detect charm. 


Unholy Blessing, Morphail's 
See Morphail's unholy blessing. 


Universal Taster, Thundrael's 
See Thundrael's universal taster. 


OT ee KEpEEI M ae i 


969 


^ Unleash Monolith 


Unleash Monolith 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 
(Provinces: Flame, Sand, Sea ,Wind) 
Level: 8 a 
Range: 120 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 day 
Duration: | turn/level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


A form of elemental summoning, this spell 
brings a barely sentient creature made of elemen- 
tal matter to the Prime Material Plane. The crea- 
ture, called an elemental monolith, is composed 
of either elemental fire, water, air, or earth—in 
accordance with the caster's calling. It proceeds 
to destroy everything and anything that stands in 
its way. It is stronger and less intelligent than an 
ordinary elemental of its type—and is therefore 
much more dangerous. 

Ordinary elementals are detailed in the 
MONSTROUS COMPENDIUM TOME. The same statis- 
tics apply to monoliths, with the following 
changes: All monoliths have 30 Hit Dice. They 
are nonintelligent, and inflict twice as many 
damage dice as ordinary elementals. (The wind 
monolith inflicts 4d10, sand monolith, 8d8; flame 
monolith, 6d8; and the sea monolith, 10d6.) 

It is not easy to open an interplanar gate to one 
of these creatures. A wizard must spend a full day 
of careful meditation and chanting to cast the 
spell. During that time he may not rest, sleep, or 
eat, else the preparation is ruined. Any distur- 
bance during that time also disrupts his casting, 
ruining the spell. 

When the day ends, the caster must make a 
successful Constitution check to see if he has per- 
formed the spell correctly. If he has unleashed a 
monolith, he must make an immediate system 
shock roll. Bringing such creatures into this plane 
is stressful. If the system shock roll fails, the 
caster dies. 

The monolith is uncontrolled upon arrival. 
Magic that normally brings elementals to “heel” 
has no effect on elemental monoliths. The crea- 
ture sets about to destroy as much of the sur- 
rounding countryside as possible before the end 
of the spell's duration. When the spell expires, 
the monolith fades out, returning to its native land 
(provided it was not destroyed or banished ear- 
lier). 

Given the time and risk involved, wizards tend 


to reserve this spell for a special occasion. 1f he 
intends to survive, the caster should plan an 
escape route of some type—e.g., a teleport or 
other gate. [n that way, he can avoid the ven- 
geance of the monolith, as well as that of any sur- 
viving citizenry. 

The material component for this spell varies 
according to the type of monolith being sum- 
moned: 

A sand monolith requires a huge amount of 
loose sand or dust. A stretch of beach or desert is 
sufficient; the material in a dusty, abandoned 
room or on a dusty street is not. The sand mono- 
lith resembles a huge, 30 foot-tall humanoid 
made of dripping sand. Its eyes are yellow and 
glowing. Its maw is wide, open, and lipless. 

A flame monolith requires a great amount of 
fire. The flame from a burning building (or an- 
other fire this size) is sufficient. The fire does not 
have to be burning during the entire casting time, 
but it must be present for the conclusion of the 
spell. The flame monolith appears as a 30-foot- 
long serpent with jade-green eyes and ivory 
fangs, which drip hot magma. 

A wind monolith requires a huge amount of 
moving air, such as that of a storm front, hurri- 
cane, or tornado. Such conditions are not required 
throughout the entire casting time, though they 
are required at its conclusion. The storm can be 
magically created by someone other than the 
monolith's caster. The wind monolith is a 30- 
foot-tall thunderhead with a humanoid shape. Its 
eyes appear as lightning bolts all over its body. 

A sea monolith requires at the very least a 
small lake, and more likely a good-sized chunk of 
ocean. Anything less causes the spell to fail. Once 
conjured, the sea monolith appears as a 30-foot- 
tall humanoid mass of water with wide, thick 
limbs. Sea creatures may be seen swimming 
within the monolith's body. The monolith's eyes 
are a hellish red. 

Notes: Common for spellcasters from an ara- 
bian setting; otherwise, very rare. 


Unlife — Red Wizard 
(Necromancy) 


Level: 8 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 8 

Duration: Permanent 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


E a MEME LL M MM d 


970 


^ Unpickable Lock g- 


Used only by evil wizards, this spell enables 
the caster to transform a single victim into an 
undead creature under his or her control. The 
caster touches the subject, who must then save vs. 
death magic. If the save fails, the subject instantly 
dies and is transformed into an undead creature 
under the control of the caster. 

The exact type of undead depends upon the 
level of the victim. Individuals of levels 1—3 
become skeletons (5096) or zombies (5094). 
Those of levels 4—6 become ghouls, those of 
levels 7-8 become wights, and those of level 9 or 
higher become wraiths. 

Using this spell, the caster can control a 
number of undead creatures equal to his or her 
level. 

The material component of this spell is dirt 
from a freshly dug grave. 

Notes: Restricted to evil wizards. Uncommon 
for Red Wizards of Thay; otherwise, rare. 


Unluck* 
(Evocation) 
(Wild) 


Level: 4 

Range: 10 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 4 
Duration: 2d10 rds. 

Area of Effect: | creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


With this spell, the wild mage creates a nega- 
tive pattern in the random forces surrounding one 
creature. The creature is allowed a saving throw; 
if successful, the spell fails. If the saving throw is 
failed, random chance falls into an unlucky pat- 
tern. Any action involving random chance (that 
is, any time a die roll affects the creature) per- 
formed by the victim during the next 2-20 rounds 
requires two separate attempts; the worse result is 
applied. (The victim rolls twice for attacks, 
damage, saving throws, and so on, always using 
the worse die roll.) 

A luckstone or similar magical device will 
negate unluck. Doing so, however, prevents the 
magical item from functioning normally for 2d10 
rounds. 

The material component is a piece of a broken 
mirror 

Notes: Restricted to wild mages, common. 


Unmask 
(Alteration, Divination) 
(Artifice) 
Level: 3 


Range: 10 ft./level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 3 

Duration: | rd./level 

Area of Effect: 30-ft. cube 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell creates a stationary area in which the 
caster can see all creatures as they truly are. The 
spell affects all those within a 30-foot cube, except 
the caster. The spell overcomes disguises, includ- 
ing the effects of polymorph spells, change self, il- 
lusions, and appearances caused by items such as a 
hat of difference. Only the caster sees the target 
creatures' true appearances. Others see the crea- 
tures as their illusions or spells show them to be. 
(However, certain magics creating a lasting and 
permanent change are not subject to this effect.) 

The caster can center the unmask spell up to 
10 feet away for each level of experience (for ex- 
ample, a 5th-level caster can center the spell up to 
50 feet away): 

The material component of the spell is a black 
piece of cloth with two eyeholes cut in it. 

Notes: Rare spell (WoG). Believed to have 
originated in the Valley of the Mage. 


Unpickable Lock 
(Alteration) 
(Artifice) 


Level: 2 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 2 
Duration: 1d3 + 1 months 
Area of Effect: 1 lock 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell can be cast on any lock (key or com- 
bination) and lasts for 2 to 4 months. Any character 
attempting to pick the affected lock suffers a -25% 
penalty to his Open Locks score. This spell can be 
keyed to a single individual (not necessarily the 
spellcaster) who can open the ensorcelled lock 
freely, even without the proper key or combination. 

The material component of this spell is a sliver 
of bone. 

Notes: Rare spell. 


ANY OCETNE a PETERE, 


971 


NUnreadable Magic 


Unreadable Magic 
Reversed form, see read magic. 


Unseal Gate 
Reversed form, see gate seal. 


Unseen Butler, Nimodes' 
See Nimodes' unseen butler. 


Unseen Servant 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 


Level: 1 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: | 

Duration: 1 hr. + 1 turn/level 
Area of Effect: 30-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: None 


The unseen servant is a non-visible, mindless, 
and shapeless force, used to step and fetch, open 
unstuck doors, and hold chairs, as well as to clean 
and mend, It is not strong, but unfailingly obeys 
the command of the wizard. It can carry out only 
one activity at a time and can move only light- 
weight items, carry a maximum of 20 pounds, or 
push or pull 40 pounds across a smooth surface. It 


972 


can open only normal doors, drawers, lids, etc. 
The unseen servant cannot fight, nor can it be 
killed, as it is a force rather than a creature. It can 
be magically dispelled, or eliminated after receiv- 
ing 6 points of damage from area-effect spells, 
breath weapons, or similar attacks. If the caster 
attempts to send it beyond the allowed radius, the 
spell ends immediately. 

The material components of the spell are a 
piece of string and a bit of wood. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Urgent Utterance, Rary’s 
See Rary’s urgent utterance. 


Vacancy 
(Alteration, Illusion/Phantasm) 


Level: 4 

Range: 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: 1 hr/level 

Area of Effect: 10-ft. radius/level 
Saving Throw: None 


When a vacancy spell is cast, the wizard 
causes an area to appear to be vacant, neglected, 
and unused. Those who behold the area see dust 
on the floor, cobwebs, dirt, and other conditions 
typical of a long abandoned place. If they pass 
through the area of effect, they seem to leave 
tracks, tear away cobwebs, and so on. Unless they 
actually contact some object cloaked by the spell, 
the place appears empty. Merely brushing an in- 
visible object does not cause the vacancy spell to 
be disturbed: Only forceful contact grants a 
chance to note that all is not as it seems. 

If forceful contact with a cloaked object 
occurs, those creatures subject to the spell can 
penetrate the spell only if they discover several 
items that they cannot see; each being is then al- 
lowed a saving throw vs. spell. Failure means 
they believe that the objects are invisible. A 


EN Le, 


41 dispel magic spell cancels this spell so 
that the true area is seen. A true seeing 
spell, a gem of seeing, and similar effects 
can penetrate the deception, but a detect invisibil- 
ity spell cannot. 

This spell is a very powerful combination of invisi- 
bility and illusion, but it can cloak only nonliving things. 
ence otherwise disturb the spell. 

The wizard must have a square of the finest 
black silk to cast this spell. This material compo- 
nent must be worth at least 100 gp and is used up 
during spellcasting. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Valiancy 
(Alteration) 


Level: 5 

Range: 30 yds. 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 2 
Duration: | rd. 
Area of Effect: | creature 
Saving Throw: None 


This powerful spell enables the caster (or a crea- 
ture seen by the caster and within range) to gain an 
extra attack at the end of the round following the 
casting of the valiancy (that is, in addition to the 
normal attacks the being can make during that 
round). The spell recipient can elect to undertake an 
additional activity (fleeing, readying a weapon, etc.) 
rather than attacking, but the spell does not aid the 
mind or speed up magic, so the extra activity cannot 
be the casting of another spell or the triggering of a 
magical item. This spell has no aging or other harm- 
ful effect on the recipient, and has only a minor 
effect on movement speed (a bonus 2; for example, 
from MV 12 to MV 14). 

Notes: Very rare spell. (Updated from Dracon 
Magazine.) 


Vampire Dagger 
(Necromancy) 


~ Vampire Production " 


By casting this spell on a specially prepared 
nonmagical dagger, the wizard is able to drain hit 
points from other creatures and bestow those hit 
points on himself. 

The wizard must attack the creature normally 
with the dagger. If the hit is successful, the crea- 
ture takes normal damage from the dagger, and 
must make a saving throw vs. death magic. 
Failure means the creature takes one additional 
point of damage for every two levels of the caster, 
which the wizard gains as curative hit points. The 
wizard cannot gain hit points above his normal 
hit point total; extra hit points are lost. Also, the 
wizard cannot gain more hit points than the crea- 
ture struck has remaining after taking damage 
from the dagger blow itself. 

This spell is ineffective against creatures that 
can be harmed only by magical weapons and 
creatures that have no blood. Further, if the 
dagger strikes an undead creature, the wizard 
must save vs. death magic or die himself, the 
undead only takes damage from the dagger. 

The spell requires a special dagger that has a 
channel inside it running from the tip through to 
the handle. The dagger must be forged from an 
alloy of silver and steel that has been mixed with 
the crushed bone of a vampire. The minimum 
cost of such a dagger is 2,000 gp. Blood from the 
dagger's wound must travel through the channel 
and touch the bare flesh of the wizard's hand for 
the hit points to be transferred. The effects of this 
spell do not protect the caster from any unusual 
effects of the victim's blood. 

The other material component of this spell is 
the claw of a vampire, which disappears after the 
spell is cast. 

Notes: Very rare spell. (Updated from DRAGON 
magazine.) 


Vampire Production 
Lost spell, rumored to be known by a rare type of 
necromancer, the Deathmaster. 


Casting Time: 4 

Duration: | rd. /level. 

Area of Effect: 6-ft. diameter cloud 
Saving Throw: Special 


With this spell, the wizard causes a pale cloud of 
chilling vapor to form at any desired spot within a 
30-foot radius. The vapor billows, shifts, and ap- 
pears almost sentient, even though it is not truly 
alive. It moves at a rate of 30 feet per round, seeking 
out and enveloping the nearest life form within 
reach of its gaseous tendrils (possibly attacking the 
spellcaster if he does not take precautions). Once the 
spell is cast, the wizard does not need to concentrate 
upon the magic in order for its effects to persist. 

The vapor can flow over 10-foot high walls and 
can seep through even the smallest openings and 
cracks. It cannot pass through airtight barriers (such 
as a wall of force or a hermetically sealed door), nor 
can the mist move across an area of fire. The gas 
avoids open flames, so a character could conceiv- 
ably keep the vapor at bay with a torch. 

The mist drains blood from any creature caught 
within its area of effect, inflicting 1d8 points of 
damage per round. The enveloped creature must 
make a saving throw vs. death magic during the 
first round of damage or else fall down incapaci- 
tated, unable to leave the gaseous cloud without 
help. As the vampire mist feeds, it turns dull red 
and can drain up to 48 points of damage before 
being completely satiated (i.e., inactive) for the re- 
mainder of the spell duration. A creature does not 
need to breathe the vapors in order for their effects 
to work. 

The mist cannot harm an individual protected 
by an antimagic shell, and a gust of wind repels the 
vapor without dispersing it. Violent winds (such as 
those created by an air elemental) completely oblit- 
erate this gaseous horror, as do extremely hot fires 
(such as those created by a fireball or flame strike). 
Vampire mist does not harm fire-based creatures, 
undead, or monsters from a plane other than the 
Prime Material. When the duration of the spell ex- 
pires, the cloud simply thins into nothingness. 

Notes: Very rare spell. Known to be in the 
Cryptikronos (the Book of Horror). (Updated 
from DRAGON Magazine.) 


Vampiric Lash — Phaerimm 
(Evocation, Necromancy) 


Level: 6 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 6 

Duration: 6 rds. 

Area of Effect: Creates 1 lash, 80 ft. long 
Saving Throw: Special 


A. d. - vr ne ee, ee 


974 


~ Vampiric Youthfulness " 


This spell is a more powerful version of the 
forcelash. It creates a whip of shimmering force, 
projecting from the limb or protrusion of the 
phaerimm's choice to the limits of spell range. 
Controlled by the caster's will, this crackling 
band of force can strike one creature per round. It 
penetrates magical barriers of 5th level or less, 
and always hits the target creature, inflicting 6d6 
points of damage. 

A struck creature makes two saving throws vs. 
spell. The first, if successful, reduces the damage 
by half; the second governs the target's mobility. 
If successful, the creature can move and act nor- 
mally; if it fails, the creature is rooted to the spot, 
body convulsed with the energy discharge of the 
vampiric lash. This lessens Armor Class by 2 
points and denies Dexterity Armor Class adjust- 
ments; prevents the creature from moving, 
launching attacks, aiming, or readying items; and 
ruins any attempted spellcasting that round. The 
DM may require a Dexterity check to see if a con- 
vulsing creature drops items. Fragile items 
dropped on hard surfaces might require their own 
saving throws vs. crushing blow. 

The lash wielder has the option to keep a crea- 
ture immobilized with the lash instead of striking 
with it; the whip and limb wielding it cannot be 
used for other actions. An individual who tries to 
free a convulsing creature by seizing the lash im- 
mediately takes 3d6 points of damage, but the 
convulsing creature is instantly freed. This does 
not end the spell; the wielder is free to use the 
lash against any target on the next round. 

Unlike the forcelash, damage inflicted by the 
vampiric lash is transferred to the phaerimm as 
bonus hit points. A phaerimm at full normal hit 
points can acquire up to 2 bonus hit points per 
level from energy drained by the lash. These hit 
points are retained for up to 24 hours before 
fading away; any damage suffered by the phaer- 
imm is taken first from these. Additional hit 
points drained by the lash add to the bonus, up to 
the phaerimm's maximum. Hit points drained by 
the lash above the phaerimm's maximum bonus 
are lost. 

Notes: Restricted to phaerimm, common. 


Vampiric Touch 
(Necromancy) 


When the caster touches an opponent in 
melee with a successful attack roll, the opponent 
loses 1d6 hit points for every two caster levels, 
to a maximum drain of 6d6 for a 12th-level 
caster. The spell is expended when a successful 
touch is made or one turn passes. The hit points 
are added to the caster's total, with any hit 
points over the caster's normal total treated as 
temporary additional hit points. Any damage to 
the caster is subtracted from the temporary hit 
points first. After one hour, any extra hit points 
above the caster's normal total are lost. The 
creature originally losing hit points through this 
spell can regain them by magical or normal 
healing. Undead creatures are unaffected by this 
spell. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Vampiric Youthfulness 
(Necromancy, Alteration) 
Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: Caster and creature touched 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


With this spell, the caster makes himself 
younger by leeching the life energy out of an- 
other creature. The victim must have Hit Dice or 
levels at least equal to the caster's level, and must 
be at full hit points at the time the spell is cast. 
Undead, extraplanar beings (such as elementals), 
and noncorporeal creatures cannot be affected by 
this spell. A charmed creature will not willingly 
submit to this spell, though a creature under the 
effects of a domination spell will; even a willing 
victim is allowed a saving throw to negate this 
spell. The caster and the victim must be touching 
for the entire casting time of the spell; any inter- 
ruption negates it. 


AES 0. ee erts n d c ERE 


975 


~ Vanish — a 


Once cast, the subject creature ages 10 years 
immediately. A creature aging beyond its normal 
life span, dies; otherwise, it remains unconscious 
for 24 hours. The creature suffers any aging ef- 
fects upon regaining consciousness. The caster 
becomes one year younger. Present damage is not 
healed, nor are curses or diseases removed. The 
caster retains all memories and experience. 

Performing this spell on an unwilling victim is 
definitely an evil act and cannot be undertaken by a 
good character, even against an evil victim. 
However, a good character might use this spell when 
a subject creature is willing and has plenty of years 
to spare. 

Notes: Uncommon for spellcasters from the 
DARK SUN setting; virtually unknown elsewhere. 


Vanish 
(Alteration) 
(Dimension) 


Level: 7 

Range: Touch 
Components: V 
Casting Time: 2 
Duration: | object 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


When the wizard employs this spell, he causes 
an object to vanish (1.e., to be teleported as if by a 
teleport spell) if it weighs no more than 50 
pounds per caster level. Thus a 14th-level caster 
can vanish, and cause to reappear at a desired lo- 
cation, an object up to 700 pounds in weight. The 
maximum volume of material that can be affected 
is three cubic feet per level of experience. Thus, 
both weight and volume limit the spell. An object 
that exceeds either limitation is unaffected and 
the spell fails. 

If desired, a vanished object can be placed 
deep within the Ethereal Plane. In this case, the 
point from which the object vanished remains 
faintly magical until the item is retrieved. A suc- 
cessful dispel magic spell cast on the point will 
bring the vanished item back from the Ethereal 
Plane. Note that creatures and magical forces 
cannot be made to vanish. 

There is a 1% chance that a vanished item will 
be disintegrated instead. There is also a 1% 
chance that a creature from the Ethereal Plane is 
able to gain access to the Prime Material Plane 
through the vanished item's connection. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Vaporize — Witch 
(Alteration) 


Level: 9 

Range: 30 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 9 

Duration: | rd./level 

Area of Effect: 40 x 20 x 20 ft. 
Saving Throw: None 


Any rock, earth, mud, stone, metal, crystals, or 
other mineral matter in the area of effect is in- 
stantly transformed into dense, billowing fog. 
Creatures of living stone or animated metal sus- 
tain 5d10 points of damage each round they 
remain in the area of effect. Magical materials or 
items are allowed a saving throw vs. disintegra- 
tion to resist vaporization, but common items are 
turned into a wet, clinging fog that slowly dissi- 
pates at the spell’s end. Living creatures are not 
harmed by entering the area of effect, but their 
arms and equipment might be destroyed. The 
witch can vaporize the base of a cliff, the ceiling 
of a cavern, or the lower levels of a building in 
order to create a catastrophic collapse. She could 
also choose to excavate a pit by causing part of 
the ground to vaporize. The DM can assign 


ANTT trae ee es TEE 


976 


~ Venom Bite — Neogi " 


damage for collapses or excavation as desired. 
This spell ages the caster 3 years. 

The material components for this spell are a bit of 
ash and spittle. 

Notes: Restricted to witches, common 


Veil 
(Musion/Phantasm) 


Level: 6 

Range: 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 6 

Duration: | turn/level 

Area of Effect: 20-ft. cube/level 
Saving Throw: None 


The veil spell enables the wizard to instantly 
change the appearance of his surroundings and party 
or to create hallucinatory terrain so as to fool even 
the most clever creatures unless they have the true 
seeing spell, a gem of seeing, or similar magical aid. 
The veil can make a sumptuous room seem a filthy 
den and even tactile impressions conform to the 
visual illusion. Likewise, a party might be made to 
resemble a mixed band of brownies, pixies, and 
faeries led by a treant. If hallucinatory terrain is cre- 
ated, touch does not cause it to vanish. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Vengeance 
(Invocation) 


Level: 4 

Range: 0 

Components: V 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: | rd./level 

Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


This powerful spell is only used by the wu jen in 
the face of impending death. When cast, it allows the 
wu jen to take one final act of revenge even though 
he has been killed. When the caster is slain, his spirit 
remains for one round to carry out whatever final 
thought the wu jen had fixed in his mind at the 
moment of death. If a spell is to be used, the specific 
spell must be clearly stated. This final action must be 
a deed that could be accomplished by the wu jen in 
one round at the moment he died. Thus, the wu jen 
could not cast a spell he did not have memorized, 
had memorized and already cast, or which required 
more than one round to cast. If there is confusion 


conceming what the final thought of the caster was, a 
saving throw vs. death should be made. If successful, 
the player is allowed to choose the deed; otherwise, 
it must be adjudicated by the DM. The vengeance is 
directed at the thing or person that caused the 
caster's death. The vengeful spirit has no regard for 
the lives of others and carries out its final deed even 
if it imperils or harms the lives of friends or inno- 
cents. If it is possible, the deed of vengeance must be 
carried out; it cannot be retracted once announced. 

In the next round the deed is performed. The 
spirit, through the energies sustaining it, automat- 
ically gains the initiative over all other parties. If 
the body is present, the spirit reanimates it to ac- 
complish the vengeance. If the body is not avail- 
able, the spirit appears in ghostly form to perform 
its deed. This action is subject to all the normal 
rules of attack and saving throws, and thus may 
not be successful in its stated goal. However, suc- 
cess or failure is not the key issue. Only the op- 
portunity to perform the deed is granted by the 
spell. Once the deed is done the spirit vanishes 
and is at rest. 

Notes: Common in oriental settings; otherwise, 
very rare, 


Venom Bite — Neogi 
(Evocation) 


Level: 2 
Range: 5 yds. + 5 yds./level. 
Components: V, S 


Area of Effect: 10 ft. square 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell is the neogi version of a magic missile 
spell. When cast, the spell brings into being a small 
set of pointed teeth that are fired outward from the 
caster's body. One set of teeth is created for every 
two levels of experience beyond the 1st possessed by 
the caster (for example, a 3rd-level neogi would 
create two sets of teeth) to maximum of four sets of 
teeth. The teeth strike as 5 HD monsters; any crea- 
ture struck by a set of teeth must save vs. spells or be 
slowed for 1d4 rounds. The caster can divide the sets 
of teeth among as many opponents as desired so long 
as they are all within a 10-foot square selected as the 
focus for the spell. Hits from multiple sets of teeth 
require multiple saving throws. Further bites from 
this spell have no effect once the victim has already 
been slowed. 

Notes: Restricted to neogi, common. 


ai. — = ec mem T o Re 


977 


^ Venom Bolt — Drow " 


Venom Bolt — Drow 
(Evocation) 


Level: 3 

Range: 30 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 3 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: % 


This spell creates a burst of black, apparently 
blazing liquid from the caster's mouth. It gouts 
towards a target creature chosen by the caster; to 
hit the desired target with a venom bolt, the caster 
must make a successful attack roll at a +4 bonus. 
If the roll fails, the bolt fades; it cannot affect 
non-living flesh or harm an unintended being. 

A venom bolt is corrosive. It is not a flame, 
and can bypass armor or obstacles by acting as a 
gas or mist of droplets. Its touch deals any living 
(not undead) creature 4d4 points of damage. 

The material components of this spell are at 
least six drops of any type of poison, and any 
source of spark or flame (extinguished in the 
spellcasting). 

Notes: Restricted to drow, uncommon. 


Venomdust — Dragon 
(Invocation/Evocation) 


Level: 3 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: 1 month/level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: Special 


The venomdust spell enables the dragon to 
create small amounts of highly toxic poisonous 
dust. The dust can then be sprinkled onto objects, 
where it adheres. Anyone touching an object so 
treated with bare skin must roll a successful 
saving throw vs. poison or die in one round. Even 
on a successful saving throw, the victim suffers 
2d10 points of damage. The casting dragon is 
immune to the toxicity of its own dust. 

For each effective level of the dragon, the 
spell creates enough dust to cover an area of one 
square foot. Thus a red wyrm, which is a 20th- 
level spellcaster, can create enough venomdust to 
cover a 4-foot by 5-foot area. 

Venomdust can be detected by detect magic 


and rendered harmless by a successful casting of 
dispel magic or neutralize poison. The dragon 
can negate the dust, making it harmless, at will. 
Dragons frequently use venomdust to protect 
the most precious parts of their hoards. 
Notes: Restricted to dragons, uncommon. 
Known to be in the Draconomicon. 


Ventriloquism 
(Illusion/Phantasm) 


Level: 1 

Range: 10 yds./level, maximum 90 yds. 
Components: V, M 

Casting Time: 1 

Duration: 4 rds. + 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: 1 creature or object 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell enables the wizard to make his 
voice or someone else's voice or a similar sound 
seem to issue from someplace else, such as from 
another creature, a statue, from behind a door, 
down a passage, etc. The spellcaster can speak in 
any language that he knows, or make any sound 
that he can normally make. With respect to such 
voices and sounds, anyone rolling a successful 
saving throw vs. spell with a —2 penalty detects 
the ruse. If cast in conjunction with other illu- 
sions, the DM may rule greater penalties or disal- 
low an independent saving throw against this 
spell in consideration of its contribution to the 
total effect of the combined illusion. 

The material component of this spell is a 
parchment rolled up into a small cone. 


Notes: Common spell (PHB). 
Vessel 
(Conjuration) 
Level: 6 
Range: 20 yds. 


Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 turn 

Duration: 2 turns/level + 1d3turns 
Area of Effect: Special 

Saving Throw: None 


This spell allows the wu jen to create a sea- 
worthy vessel from a single sheet of paper. Use of 
the spell requires the origami proficiency. The wu 
jen takes the sheet of paper and, while casting the 
spell, folds it into the shape of a small junk. Upon 
completion, he utters the final words of the spell 


^ Vipergout " 


and blows on the paper boat. In one round, it 
grows into a full-sized sailing vessel. 

The ship is large enough to carry the wu jen 
and four passengers for every four levels of expe- 
rience the caster has. A 16th-level caster could 
create a small junk capable of carrying up to 17 
man-sized individuals, while a 24th-level caster 
could create a medium-sized junk able to hold as 
many as 25 people. For the purposes of cargo, 
one horse equals four humans, assuming a 
normal amount of clothing and gear carried by 
each person. Furthermore, the vessel has no need 
for crew, magically moving under its own power 
at a rate of 15. At the end of the spell, the ship 
shrinks to its original size. 

Notes: Common in oriental settings; other- 
wise, very rare. 


Vile Venom 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 
(Alchemy, Water) 


Level: 5 

Range: 30 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 5 
Duration: 1 hr./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: Special 


By casting this inherently evil spell, the 
wizard conjures a small amount of deadly poison 
directly onto any weapon blades or other surface 
within the area of effect. The spell creates one 
dose per caster level; a single dose is sufficient to 
coat one size S weapon such as a dagger or an ar- 
rowhead, three doses can coat a size M weapon, 
and five doses can coat a size L weapon. The 
venom remains potent for up to one hour per 
caster level, although an envenomed blade re- 
mains so for only 1d3 successful attacks before 
the poison has been worn off. The potency of the 
venom varies by the caster level (see table). 


Level  OnsetTime Strength 
9th 2-12 rounds X 20/1d3 
12th 2-5 rounds 25/2d4 
15th 1-2 rounds 30/2d6 
18th+ Immediate death/20 


If a weapon coated with vile venom success- 
fully hits a creature, the victim must make a 
saving throw vs. poison or suffer the first damage 
figure—if the caster was a 12th-level wizard, this 


would be 25 points. (Naturally, this is damage 
above and beyond any caused by the weapon that 
injects the poison.) Success means the victim still 
sustains a lesser amount of damage, as shown in 
the second figure. 

Instead of creating an insinuative poison (one 
that is introduced to the body through a cut), the 
wizard can instead conjure the venom as a con- 
tact poison. A surface of about one-half square 
foot per caster level can be affected. One square 
foot is enough to coat a doorknob, a sword hilt, 
the handle or clasp of a chest, or an object of sim- 
ilar size. 

The contact poison has the same effects as the 
insinuative venom, but the victim gains a +2 
bonus on his saving throws. The contact poison's 
toxicity fades at the end of the spell's duration. 

The material component is a small vial of ser- 
pent venom. 

Notes: Uncommon spell (PO:SP). 


Viper, Sylüné's 
See Sylüne's viper. 


Vipergout 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 


Level: 7 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 7 

Duration: 5 rds. + 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


By means of this magic, the casting of which 
involves a piece of snakeskin (or a portion of a 
dead snake) which is consumed by the magic, 
the caster instantly teleports snakes to his or her 
location. These living snakes appear in the 
caster's mouth, and are vomited forth. They do 
not choke or otherwise harm the caster, and 
never attack him. Until the spell expires, they 
serve the caster, fighting to the death. The 
snakes are of normal varieties, 2 to 10 feet long, 
and are 50% likely to be venomous. The first 
round, 4d6 snakes appear, and for the next 1-3 
rounds another 1d6 snakes appear in each 
round. While the spell is in effect, speech, spell- 
casting, or pronunciation of magical item acti- 
vation words on the caster's part is impossible. 
The caster can breathe and swallow normally, 
and can freely engage in movement and 
combat. 


atl. Ue Uc ee 


979 


Virus Charm 


Summoned snakes vary in size, coloration, 
and species, but the DM should roll secretly for 
the type of snakes that appear, or make up similar 
types (see table). 

While the spell lasts, the caster's control of the 
snakes cannot be broken by any means except 
slaying the caster or the snakes—dispel magic 
and charms do not end or overcome the caster's 
control of the reptiles. Controlled snakes attack 
or not as the caster wills, switch targets if desired, 
constrict without harming (or biting), use their 
coils and jaws to gnaw ropes or turn keys, carry 
wands to the caster or move other small objects 
about, and engage in other noncombat activities. 

However, a vipergout spell does not empower 
a snake with special powers, with increased 
Dexterity or Intelligence, and it cannot force a 
snake to attack itself. 


| Constrictors: AC 6; MV 9; HD 2+2; con- 
strict for 1d4+1. 

Constrictors: AC 7; MV 15; HD 1-1; con- 
strict for 1d4. 

Constrictors: AC 8; MV 12; HD 1+2; con- 
strict for 1d4+1. 

Poisonous: AC 9; MV 15; HD 1-1; bite 1, 
Type A, B, or C poison* 

Poisonous: AC 7; MV 9; HD 1-1; bite 
1-2, Type A, B, or C poison* 


2 


6 Poisonous Constrictors: AC 8; MV 9; HD 
1+2; bite 1d2, constrict for 1d4+1; SA 
Type A, B, or C poison* 
*Type A: onset 10-30 min., 15/0; Type B: onset 2d6 
min., 20/1d3; Type C: onset 2d6 min., 30/2d6; the 
damage is for a failed/successful saving throw. 
Notes: Very rare spell from the FORGOTTEN 
REALMS setting. Known to be in Vaerendroon s 
Ineffable Enchantments. 


Virus Charm 
(Enchantment/Charm) 


Level: 9 

Range: Touch/Special 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: | rd. 
Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


Virus charm is a particularly nasty version of 
mass charm that has a specialized means of 
spreading The initial virus charm is cast on a single 
individual who must make a saving throw vs. spell 
at —2 to avoid being charmed. The charmed indi- 
vidual, (monster or person) must have fewer hit 
points than the wizard who cast the spell for this 
spell to operate. If the charmed individual has 
greater or equal hit points, the spell functions as a 
simple charm person or charm monster. 

Once charmed, the target individual can now 
charm others (person or monster) by touch. These 
latter individuals are considered charmed by the 
original spellcaster. Each new target individual 
must make a saving throw vs. spell Those with 
more hit points than the original caster save at +2 
to their die roll. These charmed individuals can 
then in turn charm others in the same manner 

The virus charm can affect up to three times the 
original caster's experience level in individuals 
(not levels or Hit Dice). Individuals under the effect 
of the virus charm behave the same as someone 
who was charmed normally, with all of the charm 
spell's limitations and requirements. Each charac- 
ter's Intelligence determines how long the charm 
will last before a second saving throw is permitted. 
If the caster attacks an individual under a virus 
charm, all individuals under the virus charm are 
permitted saving throws. Similarly a dispel magic 
cast successfully on an individual under the charm 
affects all individuals under that virus charm. 
Creatures that are immune to enchantment/charm 
spells are unaffected by the virus charm. 


is ee ee il er 


980 


^x Vision Stone "d 


Virus charms are commonly used by wizards 
to rouse a crowd of followers quickly, or to send 
an unknown charmed agent in to meet with an 
otherwise reclusive foe. 

The material component is a thin web of finely 
spun copper wire, worth about 100 gp. The com- 
ponents are used only for the initial spell—after 
the initial charm, the spell is passed on by touch. 

Notes: Very rare spell from the FORGOTTEN 
REALMS setting. Known to be in Tidings of 
Conflict and Woe. 


Vision 
(Divination) 


Level: 7 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 7 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


When the wizard wishes to gain supernatural 
guidance, he casts a vision spell, calling upon 
whatever power he desires aid from, and asking 
the question for which a vision is to be given in 
answer. Two six-sided dice are rolled. If they total 
2 to 6, the power is annoyed and will cause the 
wizard, by an ultra-powerful geas or quest, to do 
some service, and no questions are answered. If 
the dice total 7 to 9, the power is indifferent, and 
some minor vision, possibly unrelated to the 
question, is given. A score of 10 or better indi- 
cates that the vision is granted. 

The material component of the spell is the sac- 
rifice of something valued by the spellcaster or 
by the power supplicated. The more precious the 
sacrifice, the better the chance of the spell's suc- 
cess. A very precious item grants a bonus of +1 
on the dice, one that is extremely precious adds 
+2, and a priceless item adds +3. 

Notes; Common spell (PHB). 


Vision Crystal 
(Enchantment, Divination) 


Level: 7 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: | tum 
Duration: | turn + 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: 1 object 
Saving Throw: None 


The vision crystal spell turns any transparent or 
reflective object into a crystal ball with the power of 
clairaudience, as described in the DMG. The spell 
functions on any suitable object—a small mirror, a 
gemstone, even a piece of clear glassware—with a 
minimum of preparation. Vision crystal also lasts 
one full turn plus one round per caster level. The 
caster can cast comprehend languages, read magic, 
tongues, infravision, and ultravision through the 
vision crystal, and has a 5% chance per level of suc- 
cessfully casting detect magic, detect evil or good, 
and message through the crystal if the spells are 
memorized when the crystal is activated. No other 
spells can be cast through the crystal. 

The crystal or reflective object is unharmed by 
the casting and can be used repeatedly. 

Notes: Restricted to diviners, witches, and sa- 
vants; rare. 


Vision Stone 
(Divination) 
(Artifice) 


Level: 4 

Range: Special 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 gem or item/level 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell enables the caster to enclose a tele- 
pathic message in a gem or other object. The 
caster is able to set the conditions under which 
the message will be revealed. These conditions 
may be as generic or as specific as the caster de- 
sires, following the criteria for the magic mouth 
spell. When a designated creature holds the 
object, it glows and pulses, and the message is 
delivered mentally to the creature. The message 
remains in the object until the conditions for de- 
livery are met. 

The spell enables the caster to place a 50-word 
message or a one-minute vision into the desig- 
nated object. When the conditions of the delivery 
of the message are met, the message is delivered 
mentally to the recipient—no one else can hear 
the message. The vision stone cannot deliver 
magical spells or activate devices with command 
words, 

The caster can create one vision stone per level 
of spell ability, as long as all objects are imbued 
with the same message and the same criteria for 
delivery of the message. Thus, a 10th-level caster 


ee T uere em UB. VE oV NEC 


981 


~ Vitrolic Sphere ^ 


can imbue ten objects with the same message with 
only one spell. If the 10th-level mage desires to 
imbue ten objects with ten different messages, ten 
spells are required. The object on which the vision 
stone spell is placed disintegrates immediately 
after the message is delivered. 

Wizards below 15th level of ability can en- 
chant only gems and objects worth 100 gp or 
more. Wizards of 15th level and above can en- 
chant gemstones of any value and fabricated 
items of any value. Thus, a 15th-level mage could 
not enchant a broken tree branch, but he could a 
small wreath woven out of tree branches. 

The material components are the item to be 
enchanted, and an eyelash and a tooth from any 
creature. 

Notes: Uncommon for diviners and artificers; 
otherwise, rare. 


Vitriolic Sphere 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 
(Alchemy, Water) 


Level: 4 

Range: 150 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 4 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 5-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: 4 


This spell conjures a one-foot sphere of glow- 
ing emerald acid that the caster can direct to 
strike any target within range. When it reaches its 
target, the sphere explodes and drenches the 
victim in potent acid. The victim suffers 1d4 
points of damage per caster level (to a maximum 
damage of 12d4) and may attempt a saving throw 
vs. spell for half damage. A victim failing the 
saving throw continues to suffer acid damage in 
the following rounds, sustaining two less dice of 


^ sac a 


damage each round. For example, an 8th-level 
wizard inflicts 8d4 damage with this spell on the 
first round, 6d4 on the second round, 4d4 on the 
third round, 2d4 on the fourth round, and the spell 
ends in the fifth round. Each round, the subject is 
allows to a saving throw—the spell ends when 
the creature succeeds, or when the acid damage 
runs its course. The acid can also be neutralized 
with soda, ash, lye, charcoal, or removed with a 
large quantity of water. 

The vitriolic sphere also splashes acid in a 5- 
foot radius around the primary target. Any crea- 
tures within the splash radius must make a 
successful saving throw vs. paralyzation or suffer 
a splash hit that inflicts 1d4 points of damage per 
five caster levels. Splash hits do not cause contin- 
uing damage. 

The material component for this spell is a drop 
of giant slug bile. 

Notes: Uncommon spell (PO:SP) 


Vocalize 
(Alteration) 


Level: 2 

Range: Touch 

Components: S, M 

Casting Time: 2 

Duration: 5 rds. 

Area of Effect: 1 spellcasting creature 
Saving Throw: None 


The recipient of this spell can cast spells with 
a verbal component without having to make any 
noise, so long as the casting takes place entirely 
within the duration of the vocalize spell. Only the 
verbal requirement of spells is deleted. This spell 
has no effect on other noises or speech it simply 
removes a spell’s verbal component. 

This spell is of great use when quiet is desired 
in spellcasting, or when the individual has been 
magically silenced. The vocalize spell does not 
negate the magical silence, it merely allows the 
wizard to cast spells without verbal components. 

The material component of this spell is a bell 
with no clapper. 

Notes: Uncommon spell. 


Void, Murlynd’s 
See Murlynd’s void. 


Volcanic Circle — Witch 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 


Level: 9 

Range: 5 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: 3 rds. 

Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell causes a gout of red-hot lava to well 
forth from the ground, creating a pool 10 feet 
across and about 5 feet deep in the round in which 
the spell is cast. In the next three rounds, lava con- 
tinues to pour out from the ground, causing the 
pool to expand 30 feet per round in all directions 
to a final radius of 100 feet. Any creature that 
comes into contact with the hot lava suffers 8d10 
points of damage. Once the initial casting is com- 
pleted, the flow cannot be stopped by dispel 
magic and similar means. 

Just like water, lava runs downhill, so if this 
spell is cast on a slope the pool may only grow at 
the rate of 5 feet per round on the uphill side 
while running downhill at the rate of 40 feet per 
round. Trenches or hillocks can naturally channel 
the expanding lava pool, possibly creating safe 
areas or trapping unwary creatures. The caster 
cannot be harmed by lava she summons, and she 
can easily walk over its surface or let it flow 
around her without injury. 

After three rounds, the volcanic circle reaches 
its maximum extent and begins to cool. Each 
round thereafter, the damage for coming into con- 
tact with the molten rock is lessened by 1d10. For 
example, five rounds after the volcanic circle 
ceases to grow, a creature attempting to cross the 
pool would only suffer 3d10 points of damage. 
The lava remains as a permanent area of black 
volcanic rock over the ground, averaging five feet 
in thickness. 

The material component is a shard of obsidian. 

Notes: Restricted to witches, uncommon. 


Volley 
Lost spell. See spell turning. 


" NU ESIMEEEEEEE MEE IC NE are 


983 


^ Von Gasik's Refusal -- 


Von Gasik's Refusal 
(Abjuration) 
(Geometry) 


Level: 5 

Range: 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: | hr./level 

Area of Effect: 20-ft. square/level 
Saving Throw: None 


This powerful spell is designed to prevent 
unauthorized spellcasters from entering a hall- 
way, doorway, window, or other point of entry. 

The spell creates an invisible barrier that 
blocks the targeted area. Any non-spellcasters 
and those spellcasters specifically named by the 
caster may pass freely. All other spellcasters col- 
lide with the invisible barrier. Members of 
classes with lesser spellcasting abilities (pal- 
adins, rangers, and bards) are blocked only if the 
character is of sufficient level to cast spells. 

The wizard is able to ward one area up to 20 
feet square for each level of his experience. Thus, 
a 12th-level wizard may protect a square area 
240 feet on a side. The area of effect may be di- 
vided among several smaller portals as long as 
the total area does not exceed the caster's limit. 
Each portal must be in range and sight of the 
caster at the time the spell is cast. 

The barriers exist for one hour per level of the 
caster unless they are dismissed by the caster or 
dispelled by a dispel magic spell. A disintegrate 
spell immediately destroys a barrier, as does a 
rod of cancellation or a sphere of annihilation. 

The invisible walls are not affected by physi- 
cal blows, cold, heat, or electricity. Thrown and 
projected weapons (both magical and mundane) 
are not repelled by the barrier and may pass 
through the area normally. Spells can be cast 
through the barrier. Dimension door, teleport, and 
similar effects can bypass the barriers. 

The material component is a pinch of dust 
from any wizard's tomb. 

Notes: Uncommon or rare spell (ToM). 


Vortex* 
(Evocation) 
(Wild) 


Level: 5 

Range: 30 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: | rd./level + 1d4 rds. 
Area of Effect: 5-ft.-diameter circle 
Saving Throw: % 


A vortex is a swirling mass of magical energy, 
barely controllable by the caster. On the round of 
casting, a small sparkle of lights fills the air at the 
desired position. On the second round, a 7-foot 
tall, multicolored tornado appears. From this 
moment on, the caster must maintain concentra- 
tion in order for the vortex to remain. 

Each round, the caster can move the vortex 60 
feet. However, control of direction is not perfect. 
The caster has complete control over distance, 
but can only suggest the desired direction. The 
caster has a 50% chance of moving the vortex in 
the direction he desires; if the die roll indicates 
failure, the vortex moves according to the scatter 
diagram for grenade-like missiles. Thus, the 
vortex usually moves in the general direction de- 
sired, but on occasion, it may move to either side 
or directly toward the caster. 

The vortex cannot pass through objects larger 
than its area of effect (it could move through a 
sapling but not an ancient oak tree) and will be 
redirected by these, rebounding along the general 
line of movement. For example, if cast in a 
narrow hallway, the vortex might ricochet down 
the hall, bouncing from side to side. 

The vortex is composed of raw magical 
energy. Nonmagical creatures struck by the 
vortex suffer 1d4 points of damage per level of 
the caster, Magical creatures and spellcasters 
suffer 1d6 points of damage per level of the 
caster. Creatures struck are allowed a saving 
throw vs. spell to suffer only half damage. 

Each time a creature is struck, there is a 5% 
chance that the vortex will explode in a wild 
surge. Use Table 2 to determine the results of any 
wild surge. If the vortex causes a wild surge, the 
spell ends immediately. 

The material components are a silk streamer 
and a handful of straw. 

Notes: Restricted to wild mages, common. 


Ts. ee ee ee con NN RD S AN 


984 


Wail of the Banshee 
(Necromancy) 


Level: 9 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 9 

Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: 30-ft.-radius 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


At the culmination of this dreadful spell, the 
wizard screams like a banshee (groaning spirit). 
For each level of the caster, one listener within 30 
feet hears the wail. Those who fail a saving throw 
vs. death magic die instantly. 

The caster is not affected by the spell, but 
cannot choose who will be affected. If there are 
more potential victims than the level of the caster, 
the DM randomly determines which creatures are 
affected. Creatures who cannot hear (due to ear 
plugs, deafness, etc.) may be targets, but cannot 
be affected and are considered to automatically 
make their saving throws. 

The material component is a lock of hair from 
an evil female elf. 

Notes: Uncommon spell (ToM). 


Wakefulness 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
Reversible 


Level: 2 

Range: 30 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 2 
Duration: 8 hrs. 

Area of Effect: | creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


With this spell, the recipient is able to post- 
pone sleep. For the duration of the spell, the crea- 
ture feels wide awake and energetic, but 
immediately becomes exhausted when the spell 
effects wear off. A creature cannot naturally doze 
off while under the influence of this spell. 

When the spell does wear off, the creature suf- 
fers a —2 penalty to its attack rolls and saving 
throws until it has slept for eight hours. A spell- 
caster who has not fully rested cannot recover 
spells cast. Multiple wakefulness spells extend 
both the time awake and the sleeping time re- 
quired afterward. 

The wakefulness spell can be cast to counter 


Wall Against Noise 


the effect of a sleep spell on one creature. 
| If a sleep spell is cast on a creature pro- 

75/7 tected by this spell, a saving throw vs. 
spell with a +3 bonus is allowed to negate the 
effect. 

The material component for this spell is a tiny 
glass bell. 

The reverse, drowsiness, imposes a —2 penalty 
to the target creature's attack rolls and saving 
throws for 1 turn per level of the caster. Each full 
turn rested reduces the duration by two turns, 
shorter rest periods do not. A successful saving 
throw vs. spell negates the spell, and spells such 
as dispel magic can counter it. 

The material component of the reversed spell 
is a pinch of sand. 

Notes: Uncommon for spellcasters from the 
DARK SUN setting; otherwise, very rare. 


Wall Against Noise 
(Alteration) 
(Province: Wind) 


Level: 2 

Range: 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 2 
Duration: 1 hr./level 
Area of Effect: 30 ft. X 30 ft, 1 in. thick 
Saving Throw: None 


de" 


This spell creates a thin wall of air that pre- 
vents all sound and sound-based attacks from 
passing through it. The operative word is 
through; a sound made on one side of the wall is 
still audible and effective on that side (and even 
within the wall itself). 

The wall against noise blocks any sound- 
based attack (such as a harpy's song or a power 
word); anyone on the opposite side is immune to 
the attack. Those on the same side as the attacker 
or somehow within the wall are still vulnerable. 
An attack that partially contacts the wall, or over- 
laps the end of it, only shields those who are di- 
rectly behind the wall. 

A spell such as fireball, which has a verbal 
component but isn't sound based, is not stopped 
by the wall. The caster can still summon the ener- 
gies needed by speaking on one side of the wall, 
and then send the spell through it. Magical de- 
vices activated by words are also unaffected by 
the wall against noise. The wall still blocks 
sound, however. Hence, a fireball can penetrate it 
and explode on the far side, but the explosion 


We YT o o—-— — ee ee as P a NEN NN 


985 


~ Wall of Ash " 


isn't audible on the side from which it was cast. 
A wall against noise is most commonly used 
to secure an entrance against listening ears, as 
well as to protect the sultan's chambers and 
harem from unwanted disturbances. It also 
negates errant sounds caused by the sand whisper 
spell, and blocks the spell clairaudience. In old 
tales, great cities ruled by marids used walls 
against noise to protect their citadels from the ef- 
fects of horns of blasting and drums of panic. 
The material component of this spell is a white 
feather, blown into the air. The feather disinte- 
grates as it drifts downward, activating the spell. 
Notes: Common for spellcasters from an ara- 


Wall of Ash 


bian setting; otherwise, very rare. 
Athasian Dragon King magic; 
psionic component renders the 


spell uncastable by wizards. 


Wall of Bones 
(Conjuration, Necromancy) 


Level: 5 

Range: 60 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: | rd. 

Duration: ] turn 

Area of Effect: 10-ft. square/level; 6-inch thick- 
ness/level 

Saving Throw: None 


This spell causes a wall of bones to erupt from the 
earth in whatever shape the caster desires within the 
limits of the area of effect. The wall is a random con- 
struction of bones from many types of creatures. The 
wall need not be vertical, but it must rest upon a firm 
foundation or it will collapse. Since the wall has 
many small openings and gaps, it provides only 50% 
cover. Missiles can easily be fired from behind the 
wall, and creatures of small size (less than 4 feet tall) 
can wriggle through openings in the wall at the rate 
of 10 feet per round. However, the wall has many 
sharp edges and creatures wriggling through it suffer 
1d8 points of damage per 10 feet traveled. 

If the spell is cast in an area occupied by crea- 
tures, the wall of bones appears everywhere except 
where the creatures stand. Creatures in the affected 
area suffer an immediate 2d8 points of damage when 
the wall appears. The wall can be smashed by crea- 
tures with Strengths of 18 or greater that wield blunt 


weapons. Every 10 points of damage causes a 5 by 5 
by '4-foot section of the wall to collapse. The wall of 
bones is unaffected by the animate dead spell. 
The material component for this spell is the 
branch of a withered tree taken from a cemetery. 
Notes: Common for wu jen and necromancers; 
otherwise, very rare. 


Wall of Evil 
(Evocation) 


Level: 4 

Range: 30 yds. 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: Concentration + 1d4 rds. 
Area of Effect: Special 

Saving Throw: None 


The wall of evil spell creates an invisible, immo- 
bile wall of sheer diabolical evil. This barrier is a ver- 
tical curtain—up to one 10-foot square per level of 
that pass through the wall feel distinctly unwelcome. 
A natural animal, unless unusually loyal, will shy at 
the barrier and will not cross if a saving throw vs. 
spell is failed. 

Undead creatures cannot be turned by a priest 
separated from them by this barrier. Further, any 
spell cast by a good-aligned creature passing through 
this barrier is weakened—target creatures and ob- 
jects receive a +2 bonus to their saving throws. 

If subjected to a detect evil spell or ability, the 
wall of evil bursts into sight, resembling a translucent 
wall of blue flame. 

The wall of evil lasts for as long as the wizard 
concentrates on maintaining it (movement up to half 
normal is allowed), and for one to four rounds after 
concentration has ended. 

Notes: Restricted to evil wizards, uncommon for 


Range: 60 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 4 
Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


AE 43 9 ——e P. -— ex 7 2 CER 


986 


Wall of Force "d 


The wall of fire spell brings forth an immobile, 
blazing curtain of magical fire of shimmering 
color—violet or reddish-blue. The spell creates 
either an opaque sheet of flame up to one 20-foot 
square per level of the spellcaster, or a ring with a 
radius of up to 10 feet + 5 feet per two levels of 
experience of the wizard. In either form, the wall 
of fire is 20 feet high. 

The wall of fire must be cast so that it is verti- 
cal with respect to the caster. One side of the wall, 
selected by the caster, sends forth waves of heat, 
inflicting 2d4 points of damage upon creatures 
within 10 feet and 1d4 points of damage upon 
those within 20 feet. In addition, the wall inflicts 
2d6 points of damage, plus 1 point of damage per 
level of the spellcaster, upon any creature passing 
through it. Creatures especially subject to fire 
may take additional damage, and undead always 
take twice normal damage. Note that attempting 
to catch a moving creature with a newly-created 
wall of fire is difficult; a successful saving throw 
enables the creature to avoid the wall, while its 
rate and direction of movement determine which 
side of the created wall it is on. The wall of fire 
lasts as long as the wizard concentrates on main- 
taining it, or one round per level of experience of 
the wizard, in the event he does not wish to con- 
centrate upon it. 

The material component of the spell is phos- 
phorus. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Wall of Fog 
(Evocation) 
(Air) 


Level: 1 

Range: 30 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 

Duration: 2d4 rds. + 1 rd /level 

Area of Effect: 20-ft. cube + 10-ft. cube/level 
Saving Throw: None 


By casting this spell, the wizard creates a bil- 
lowing wall of misty vapors in any area within 
the spell range. The wall of fog obscures all 
sight, normal and infravision, beyond 2 feet. 
The caster may create less vapor if he wishes. 
The wall must be a roughly cubic or rectangular 
mass, at least 10 feet across in its smallest di- 
mension. The misty vapors persist for three or 
more rounds. Their duration can be halved by a 
moderate wind, and they can be blown away by 


| 


i 


p 


a strong wind. 

The material component is a pinch of split 
dried peas. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Wall of Force 
(Evocation) 
(Force) 


Level: 5 

Range: 30 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: | turn + 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: Up to 10-ft. square/level 
Saving Throw: None 


A wall of force spell creates an invisible bar- 
rier in the locale desired by the caster, up to the 
spell's range. The wall of force cannot move and 
is totally unaffected by most spells, including 
dispel magic, but a disintegrate spell will imme- 
diately destroy it, as will a rod of cancellation or 
a sphere of annihilation. Likewise, the wall of 
force is not affected by blows, missiles, cold, 
heat, electricity, etc. Spells and breath weapons 
cannot pass through it in either direction, al- 
though dimension door, teleport, and similar ef- 
fects can bypass the barrier. 


Bo en ee Lx DE a enm o elo 


E Wall of Gloom " 


The wizard can, if desired, form the wall into a 
spherical shape with a radius up to one foot per 
level or to an open hemispherical shape of 1.5- 
foot radius per caster level. The wall of force 
must be continuous and unbroken when formed; 
if its surface is broken by any object or creature, 
the spell fails. The caster can end the spell on 
command. 

The material component for this spell is a 
pinch of powdered diamond worth 5,000 gp. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Wall of Gloom 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 
(Shadow) 
Casting Time: 2 
Duration: 2d4 rds. + | rd./level 
Area of Effect: Two 10-ft. cubes, + one 10-ft. 


cube/level (max. 8 cubes) 
Saving Throw: Special 


Level: 2 
Range: 30 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 


This spell creates a wall or barrier of ominous 
shadow in any area within the spell range. The 
wall of gloom does not obscure sight completely, 
but objects or creatures within the wall, or on its 
other side, are dim shadows that can barely be 
seen. Creatures attempting missile fire through 
the wall suffer a —2 penalty to their attack rolls. In 
addition, the supernatural cold and darkness of 
the wall of gloom may cause creatures moving 
through the wall to recoil in fear. 

Creatures of 4 Hit Dice or less that enter the 
wall must make a saving throw vs. spell or retreat 
for 1d3 rounds. Creatures of 4+1 to 7 Hit Dice 
cannot enter the wall unless they make a success- 
ful saving throw (fear-based adjustments apply); 
this can be checked each round. Undead creatures 
and those of 7+1 Hit Dice or more ignore the 
wall's fear effects. 

The wall can take any shape the caster desires, 
as long as it is at least 10 feet high and 10 feet 
thick. 

The material component is a bit of fleece from 
a black sheep. 

Notes: Uncommon for Shadow mages; other- 
wise rare (PO:SP). 


Wall of Ice 
(Evocation) 
(Water) 


Level: 4 

Range: 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 4 
Duration: 1 turn/level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell can be cast in one of three ways: as 
an anchored plane of ice, as a hemisphere, or as a 
horizontal sheet to fall upon creatures with the 
effect of an ice storm. 


A) Ice Plane. When this spell is cast, a sheet of 
strong, hard ice is created. The wall is primarily 
defensive, stopping pursuers and the like. The- 
wall is one inch thick per level of experience of 
the wizard. It covers a 10-foot-square area per 
level (a 10th-level wizard can create a wall of ice 
up to 100 feet long and 10 feet high or 50 feet 
long and 20 feet high, etc.). Any creature break- 
ing through the ice suffers 2 points of damage per 
inch of thickness of the wall. Fire-using creatures 
suffer 3 points of damage per inch, while cold- 
using creatures suffer only 1 point of damage per 
inch when breaking through. The plane can be 
oriented in any fashion as long as it is anchored 
along one or more sides. 


B) Hemisphere. This casting of the spell cre- 
ates a hemisphere whose maximum radius is 
equal to 3 feet plus one foot per caster level. 
Thus, a 7th-level caster can create a hemisphere 
10 feet in radius. The hemisphere lasts until it is 
broken, dispelled, or melted. Note that it is pos- 
sible, but difficult, to trap mobile opponents 
under the hemisphere. 


C) Ice Sheet. This casting of the spell causes a 
horizontal sheet to fall upon opponents. The sheet 
covers a 10-foot-square area per caster level. The 
sheet has the same effect as an ice storm’ hail 
stones—3d10 points of damage inflicted to crea- 
tures beneath it. 


A wall of ice cannot form in an area occupied 
by physical objects or creatures; its surface must 
be smooth and unbroken when created. Magical 
fires such as fireballs and fiery dragon breath 
melt a wail of ice in one round, though this cre- 


A ir ee m M Mn LA 


988 


Wall of Sand 


ates a great cloud of steamy fog that lasts one 
turn. Normal fires or lesser magical ones do not 
hasten the melting of a wall of ice. 

The material component of this spell is a small 
piece of quartz or similar rock crystal. 


Notes: Common spell (PHB). 
Wall of Iron 
(Evocation) 
(Earth) 
Level: 5 


Range: 5 yds./level 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: Permanent 

Area of Effect: 15 sq. ft./level or special 
Saving Throw: None 


When this spell is cast, the wizard causes a 
vertical iron wall to spring into being. This wall 
can be used to seal off a passage or close a 
breach, for the wall inserts itself into any sur- 
rounding nonliving material if its area is suffi- 
cient to do so. The wall of iron is 1/4 inch thick 
per level of experience of the spellcaster. The 
wizard is able to create an area of iron wall up to 
15 square feet for each of his experience levels, 
so at 12th level a wall of iron 180 square feet in 
area can be created. The wizard can double the 
wall's area by halving its thickness. 

If the caster desires, the wall can be created 
vertically resting on a flat surface, so that it can 
be tipped over, to fall on and crush any creature 
beneath it. The wall is 50% likely to tip in either 
direction. This chance can be modified by a force 
of not less than 30 Strength and 400 pounds mass 
each pound over 400 or Strength point over 30 
alters the chance by 1% in favor of the stronger 
side. Creatures with room to flee the falling wall 
may do so by making successful saving throws 
vs. death. Those who fail are killed. Huge and 
gargantuan creatures cannot be crushed by the 
wall. 

The wall is permanent, unless successfully 
dispelled, but it is subject to all forces a normal 
iron wall is subject to—rust, perforation, etc. 

The material component of this spell is a small 
piece of sheet iron. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Wall of Paper 
(Evocation) 


Level: 3 

Range: 5 yds./level 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 3 

Duration: Permanent 

Area of Effect: 10-ft. square/level 
Saving Throw: None 


With this spell, the wu jen creates a wall com- 
posed of paper and a thin supporting wooden 
frame, much like the interior wall of a dwelling. 
This paper screen will attach itself to designated 
connecting surfaces; the wu jen can specify either 
a sliding screen or a fixed, immovable wall. The 
wall has all the resilience and physical strength of 
a normal paper partition. The wall is permanent 
until dispelled, or until the paper is destroyed by 
any means that will destroy normal paper. Once 
the paper is ruined—burned, slashed to ribbons, 
sodden, burst through, and so on—the remnants 
will dissipate within one turn. Minor damage to 
the wall can be repaired with the mend spell. 

The wall of paper has the unusual property of 
retaining and supporting a phantasmal force or 
similar illusion cast upon it in order to alter its ap- 
pearance. The illusion lasts until the surface of 
the wall is touched by a living creature other than 
the caster. At this time, the illusion magic ends as 
if the caster had ceased concentrating. 

The material component is a small square of 
origami paper, folded to create a sliding joint. 

Notes: Uncommon in oriental settings; other- 
wise, very rare. 


Wall of Sand 
(Evocation) 
(Earth) 


Level: 4 

Range: 5 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 4 
Duration: | rd./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell creates a wall of swirling opaque 
sand | foot thick per level of the caster 12 feet 
high and 4 feet long per level of the caster. The 
wall must be cast so that it rests upon a hard sur- 
face and once cast it is immobile. 


NN a CS ea E 


989 


E Wall of Sound — Bard m" 


The sand is thick and viscous. While movement 
is possible through the sand (at half speed) all crea- 
tures that rely on normal sight or infravision to see 
are blinded while they are within the wall, and in 
addition they suffer a —3 penalty to their Armor 
Class the round after they leave the wall of sand. 
Creatures needing to breathe air suffer one point of 
damage per round spent in the wall. 

Open flames and fires are extinguished once 
thrust into the wall of sand. Speech and spellcast- 
ing are impossible while within the wall. The 
wall blocks all sight through the sand to areas 
beyond. Magic can pass through the sand nor- 
mally, though spells that require a visible target 
will not pass through the wall of sand. 

The caster can create a wall of sand of smaller 
dimensions than those listed but once cast its di- 
mensions cannot be changed. The wall maintains 
itself with no concentration but the caster can 
dispel it at will. 

Notes: Rare spell from the FORGOTTEN 
REALMS setting. Known to be in the tome, Unique 
Mageries. 


Wall of Sound — Bard 
(Evocation) 


Level: 3 

Range: 60 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 3 

Duration: Concentration + 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: Special 

Saving Throw: None 


The wall of sound spell brings forth an immo- 
bile, shimmering curtain of violently disturbed 
air. The wall is made up of a number of 10 by 10- 
foot sections equal to the caster's level. These 
sections can be arranged as desired as long as the 
resulting wall all lies in one plane (that is, it must 
be flat) that stands up vertically. 

One side of the wall, selected by the caster, 
produces a voluminous roar that completely dis- 
rupts all communication, command words, verbal 
spell components, and any other form of orga- 
nized sound within 30 feet. In addition, those 
within 10 feet are deafened for 1d4 turns if they 
fail a saving throw vs. spell. On the other side of 
the wall, a loud roar can be heard, but communi- 
cation is possible by shouting, and verbal compo- 
nents and command words function normally. 

Anyone passing through the wall must make a 
successful saving throw vs. spell or suffer 1d6 


points of damage and be permanently deafened. 
Deafened creatures suffer a —1 penalty to surprise 
rolls, a + 1 penalty to their initiative rolls, and 
they are 20% likely to miscast spells with a 
verbal component. 

A silence 15' radius spell cast by a higher 
level caster specifically for this purpose will 
dispel the wall; the wall otherwise destroys all si- 
lence spells that come into contact with it. 

The material component is a piece of slate and 
a finger nail clipping. 

Notes: Restricted to bards; uncommon. 


Wall of Stone 
(Evocation) 
(Earth) 


Level: 5 

Range: 5 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 5 
Duration: Permanent 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell creates a wall of granite rock that 
merges into adjoining rock surfaces. It is typi- 
cally employed to close passages, portals, and 
breaches against opponents. The wall of stone is 


^ Wall of Water — Witch " 


1/4 inch thick and up to 20 square feet per level 
of experience of the wizard casting the spell. 
Thus, a 12th-level wizard can create a wall of 
stone three inches thick and up to 240 square 
feet in surface area (a 12-foot-wide and 20- 
foot-high wall, for example, to completely 
close a 10-foot X 16-foot passage). The wall 
created need not be vertical nor need it rest 
upon any firm foundation (see the wall of iron 
spell); however, it must merge with and be 
solidly supported by existing stone. It can be 
used to bridge a chasm, for instance, or as a 
ramp. For this use, if the span is more than 20 
feet, the wall must be arched and buttressed. 
This requirement reduces the area of effect by 
half. Thus, a 20th-level caster can create a span 
with a surface area of 200 square feet. The wall 
can be crudely shaped to allow crenellations, 
battlements, and so forth by likewise reducing 
the area. The stone is permanent unless de- 
stroyed by a dispel magic spell or a disintegrate 
spell, or by normal means such as breaking or 
chipping. 

The material component is a small block of 
granite. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Wall of Water 
(Invocation/Evocation) 
(Water) 


Level: 3 

Range: 30 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 3 

Duration: Concentration or | rd./level 
Area of Effect: Special 

Saving Throw: None 


This spell calls into being a curtain or field of 
water, which remains intact and upright in defi- 
ance of gravity. The wall lasts as long as the 
wizard chooses to concentrate on maintaining it, 
or one round per level if the wizard chooses not 
to concentrate on holding it together. The caster 
may shape the wall in one of three ways: 


A) Water Curtain. In this form, the wizard 
conjures one plane of water, 5 feet square and 1 
foot thick per experience level. For example, a 
5th-level caster can create five 5 X 5 X 1-foot 
wall sections, which would be enough to block a 
passageway 15 feet wide and 10 feet high with a 
curtain of water | foot thick. The curtain's lower 


edge must rest upon the ground, and it remains 
cohesive and upright for the duration of the 
spell. Once raised, the wall cannot be moved. 


B) Hemisphere. In this manifestation, the 
wall of water forms a dome | foot thick over the 
caster, with an inner radius equal to 3 feet plus 1 
foot per caster level; a 7th-level caster could 
create a dome with a 10-foot radius. The wall 
must rest upon the ground. The dome is immo- 
bile. 


C) Sphere. If cast underwater, the caster may 
shape the wall of water into a sphere | foot 
thick, with an inner radius equal to 3 feet plus | 
foot per caster level. The sphere is centered on 
the caster and moves with him. 


In any form, the wall of water has two pri- 
mary effects. First, missile fire through the wall 
is difficult, suffering a —4 attack penalty as well 
asa —1 damage penalty for every 2 feet of thick- 
ness. Creatures gain a +1 bonus to saving throws 
against attack spells that must pass through the 
wall. If the spell allows no saving throw, none is 
allowed by the wall of water. Second, physical 
passage through the wall is hindered; any crea- 
ture trying to pass through must take one full 
round to do so, and becomes soaked to the skin 
in the process. 

The wall of water can be defeated or by- 
passed by a number of spells or effects. At the 
end of the spell's duration, the water loses its co- 
hesiveness and collapses, which may surprise 
those sheltering under the hemisphere or stand- 
ing next to the curtain. Note that the water itself 
may be fresh water (25?6 chance), salt water 
(50% chance), or brackish (25%), although the 
sphere will always be composed of the water 
type that surrounds it. 

The material component is a vial full of 
blessed spring water. 

Notes: Uncommon spell (PO:SM). 


Wall of Water — Witch 
This 4th-level spell has been replaced by the 3rd- 
level spell of the same name. 


a EE tm RT a MM 


991 


~ Wall with No Doors A 


Wall with No Doors 
(Abjuration) 
(Dimension, Geometry) 


Level: 6 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: Permanent 

Area of Effect: One 10-ft. cube/level 
Saving Throw: None 


Wall with no doors prevents the creation of 


magical means of transport (both entrances and ` 


exits) in the area of effect. Within this area, sum- 
moning spells such as monster summoning (I to 
VII), gate, conjure elemental, and so on will not 
function. In addition, characters find it impossible 
to transport in or out via dimension door, teleport, 
shadow walk, plane shift, or similar spells. This 
ward even prevents the use of spelldoor in or out 
of the area of effect. Spells that create or facilitate 
physical means of egress—such as passwall, 
knock, or disintegrate—function normally. 

Notes: Common in the MYSTARA setting; oth- 
erwise very rare. 


Wandbane 
(Alteration) 


Level: 1 

Range: 100 yds. 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 1 
Duration: 1d8 rds. 

Area of Effect: ] creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


A minor version of the 3rd-level wizard spell 
dispel magic, the wandbane spell temporarily 
prevents the wielder of a rod, staff, or wand from 
using the item's powers. The wizard casts the 
spell upon a character in physical contact with a 
rod, staff, or wand. (If the character has more 
than one rod, the caster specifies the one the spell 
targets.) Should the spell recipient fail a saving 
throw, the device in question will not function for 
that character for 1d8 rounds. 

Unlike dispel magic, the caster's experience 
level does not affect the spell’s chance of success. 
Wandbane has no effect on other magical items. 

Notes: Common in the MYSTARA setting; oth- 
erwise very rare. 


Wandweird 
(Abjuration) 


Level: 7 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 7 

Duration: 1 turn/level 

Area of Effect: 10-ft. radius sphere 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell creates an invisible sphere of pro- 
tection centered on the caster that moves with her. 
While the spell lasts, no wands function within 
this sphere, and no wand discharges can pass into 
or through the sphere. Even if triggered to explo- 
sive effect just beyond the sphere's boundaries, 
no part of a wand's powers penetrates the pro- 
tected area. All such effects vanish as the sphere 
absorbs them. 

Wand effects that inflict no direct points of 
damage are merely absorbed by the spell. Wand 
attacks that deal damage (such as magic missiles, 
fireballs, and lightning bolts) empower a pool of 
spell energy of which the wandweird caster is 
made aware. 

As the sphere's existence ends because of the 
spell's expiration (or earlier, by the caster's 
choice), the wandweird caster can elect to launch 
the energy the sphere has collected at any single 
target creature. A blast or ray of raw spell energy 
roars at the chosen target, striking at MV 30 and 
with a THACO 4, dealing out all the cumulative 
points of damage that the wand attacks absorbed 
by the sphere would have done. 

If any being destroys a wandweird sphere by 
means of a successful dispel magic, this attack 
automatically lashes out at the dispelling caster, 
regardless of the wandweird caster's wishes or 
lack of attention. 

This spell has no effect on magic from sources 
other than wands. 

The material component of this spell is a piece 
of wood, roughly the size and shape of a wand, 
upon which any spell has been cast within a day 
of the casting of the wandweird. The spell need 
not still be in force; most mages employ a /ight 
spell for this preparation. 

Notes: Very rare in the FORGOTTEN REALMS 
setting; virtually unknown elsewhere. 


tt: TU ~~ oa. Tem ERE 


992 


Ward Against Undead 


Ward — Old Empire 
(Enchantment) 


Level: 1 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 

Duration: 2 rds./level 
Area of Effect: 10-ft. cube 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell enables the caster to set up an area 
with an invisible magical barrier. Those who 
enter the warded area have a strong compulsion 
to turn back and not pass through again (a suc- 
cessful saving throw vs. spell is required to avoid 
retreat). Creatures of 5 Hit Dice (or levels) or 
more are unaffected. 

Anyone with magical protection from fear 
may pass through without having to roll a saving 
throw. This spell does not affect undead. 

The material components are the feathers of a 
vulture. 

Notes: Uncommon spell. As a FORGOTTEN 
REALMS Old Empire spell, initial exposure re- 
quires a mentor or a read Southern magic spell. 
Optionally, this spell can be allowed to Savage 
mages, as well. 


Ward, Wylunde's 
See Wylunde's Ward. 


Ward Against Charms 
(Abjuration, Enchantment/Charm) 


Level: 4 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S 

Casting Time: | turn 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. effects 


Ward against charms is a specialized protec- 
tive spell wizards can place upon themselves, 
their allies, or their servants. When charm, be- 
guiling, domination, command, suggestion, or 
similar mind-control magic is cast upon the sub- 
ject, this spell automatically activates. It over- 
rides the mind-control magic, forcing the subject 
to carry out a specific predetermined action, such 
as: Attack the caster of the controlling spell 
placed upon you," or “Flee with all speed." 

The caster can choose to have the ward take 


effect only if the subject creature receives a cer- 
tain command while under the influence of mind- 
controlling magic. For example, a wizard could 
cast the ward on a personal bodyguard. If the 
bodyguard is magically compelled to reveal the 
location of the master's secret lair, the ward 
against charms might dictate that the bodyguard 
instead gives directions to a dragon's lair or a 
deadly trap. In all other respects, the enchanted 
subject obeys the other spellcaster, thereby 
making the lie more believable. 

Notes: Common in the MYSTARA setting; oth- 
erwise very rare. 


Ward Against Undead 
(Abjuration) 
(Geometry) 


Duration: | - + 1 rd/level 
Area of Effect: 10-ft./level radius 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell prevents undead creatures from 
moving into its area of effect. Upon the casting of 
this spell, the affected area radiates a faint blue, 
flickering radiance, visible to all. 

Undead must successfully save vs. breath 
weapon in order to enter the warded area; those 
failing the saving throw cannot enter. Those who 
can enter the area do so without penalty. An 
undead creature can attempt to enter the warded 
area once per turn, gaining a new saving throw 
with each attempt. 

Undead already in the area of effect must 
make a successful saving throw vs. breath 
weapon or be s/owed (as the 3rd-level wizard 
spell) for the duration of the spell. 

The ward against undead is stationary and has no 
additional effect on combat or turning. Once a par- 
ticular undead creature makes a successful saving 
throw against the ward, it does not need to make that 
saving throw again. Multiple wards can be cast in 
the same area, requiring multiple saving throws to 
cross or avoid their effects, though no undead will 
suffer more than one s/ow spell at any time. A dispel 
magic spell will destroy the ward, but otherwise the 
spell will run to the end of its duration. 

Notes: Rare spell from the FORGOTTEN 
REALMS setting. Known to be in the tome, 
Against the Undead. 


"SIS dM E MEL a 


993 


^ Wardaway - 


Wardaway 
(Abjuration, Evocation) 
Level: | 
Range: 60 ft. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: | 
Duration: 2 rds. 


Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell hurls a disjointed, shimmering area 
of magical force at a single opponent. This 
forceful chaos can dodge and dart so as to reach 
its intended target, regardless of the movements 
of the foe or other beings. Once the spell is cast, 
the caster cannot change her mind about which 
being is the spell’s target. Undead and nonliving 
constructs such as golems are immune to the ef- 
fects of wardaway. 

The shimmering chaos strikes and swirls 
around the target creature, which must make a 
saving throw vs. spell. A creature making a suc- 
cessful saving throw attacks with a —] penalty 
for two rounds and strikes last (of all engaged 
creatures) in both rounds. A creature that fails its 
saving throw suffers, in addition, 1d4+4 points 
of damage as the spell force hits it. In either 
case, any charge made by the target creature is 
broken, 

The most common use of a wardaway spell is 
to stop a charge and give the caster time to pre- 
pare for subsequent attacks. 

The material component of this spell is a 
small human hand sculpted of clear rock crystal 
or moonstone. 

Notes: Rare in the FORGOTTEN REALMS set- 
ting; virtually unknown elsewhere. 


Warding Against Subtle Enchantment 
A MYSTARA setting spell, aka ward against charms. 


Warding Tones, Otto’s 
See Otto’s warding tones. 


Warding Whip Khelben’s 
See Khelben’s warding whip. 


Wardmist 
(Alteration, Enchantment/Charm, Evocation) 
(Geometry) 


Level: 7 

Range: Special 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 hr. 
Duration: Permanent 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: Special 


The spell creates a wardmist. This is a 40-foot- 
high, 60-foot-wide band of permanent mist that 
must rest on the ground, floor, or other solid surface 
(It need not be level) The area protected by the ward 
is measured from the inner edge of the mist. The 
thickness of the mist is not included. The ward ex- 
tends 40 feet beneath the surface of the ground, and 
may be narrower than 60 feet in width wherever de- 
sired. Its boundaries can twist and tum corners as 
sharply and as often as desired to protect a certain 
area, and they may exclude whatever areas the 
caster desires Once cast, a wardmist can't be moved. 

A wardmist can always be freely entered or left. 
Beings entering it are sensed by the spell, which 
reacts by flashing a radiant or audible warning (or 
both, as desired to a specific spot or being. The spot 
or being is set upon casting, and it cannot be 
changed thereafter. Such a warning would still func- 
tion in the location of a destroyed room (even in 
midair) or inside the tomb of a dead being. 

Warnings classify those who enter the wardmist 
into two categories: those who bear ward tokens and 
intruders. Wardmist warnings transmit numbers and 
general locations of all intruders. 

Sight and all known magical and psionic 
means of scrying won't work through the bound- 
aries of a wardmist. A being in the mist can see 
through the mist to a distance of about 10 feet in 
darkness, and 40 feet when light is present. One 
cannot see out of the mist though, even if one is 
only inches away from its edge. One cannot see 
out of the mist to either the area it excludes or the 
area it encloses. A wardmist can be seen over 
freely by anyone tall enough or stationed high 
enough to be able to do so. 

When visibility is reduced by darkness, intruders 
in a wardmist who don't use lamps, markers, or other 
means of proceeding in a straight path will move in à 
random direction each round of movement in which 
they fail a secret Intelligence check. It is possible to 
wander, lost, in a wardmist for quite some time. 

The caster of a wardmist spell can try to link 


rH dckspd MEN GARE A DC cL e 


994 


Et 


certain types of magically animated or undead 
monsters to the ward as it is forming to serve as 
guardian monsters. To become guardians, these 
monsters must be present and must fail a saving 
throw vs. spell. 

When an intruder reaches a certain locale in a 
wardmist or has been in the mist for a set time, 
some guardian monsters are teleported to within 
20 feet of the intruder. The types and numbers of 
guardian monsters are set by the initial wardmist 
spell but are limited by the available stable of 
guardians. Their typical orders are to attack and 
destroy all intruders, although some may be in- 
structed to subdue, disarm, and capture while deal- 
ing as little damage as possible. 


^" EN dtm Mn 


WARDMIST GUARDIAN MONSTERS 


d8 Number & Type of Monsters 
I 2d6 baneguards 

2 1d3 blazing bones 

3 2d8 bone bats 

4 4 helmed horrors 

5 3d4 skeletons or 2d4 monster 

skeletons 

6 1d2 watchghosts 

7 1d2 wraiths 

8 — 2dl2 zombies 


SQ AW 


p 
; 


DMs lacking a particular description should sub- 
stitute another monster from the list. 

Guardian monsters are kept in stasis by the 
wardmist when not active. They do not age, heal, 
or eat. They become inactive 2d4 rounds after an 
intruder is slain or leaves the warded area A 
guardian monster can be healed at any time by ap- 
plication of the proper potions or spells. A de- 
stroyed guardian is forever gone. It can't be 
resurrected or replaced by the wardmist spell. 
Monsters can be unleashed to wander in an exist- 
ing wardmist, but to be linked to and teleported 
about by the ward, they must be part of the initial 
wardmist casting. Tales exist of wards defended by 
golems and even by undead titans. 

Mages may combine their efforts when creating 
a wardmist so as to give it multiple sets of 
guardians of the same or different types. Each 
mage casts a wardmist spell at the same time, 
though only one ward is created, and it is set to a 
single sort of ward token. 

A wardmist doesn't seem to exist for a being 
that carries the proper token. Ward tokens must be 
made of a certain material, and they must bear a 
certain rune that is drawn while a secret word is ut- 
tered. The material, the rune, and the word are all 
set during the ward's casting, and they cannot be 
changed thereafter. For convenience, tokens to a 
particular ward are usually of a common shape and 


Le ESL. 


995 


E Wardmist " 


size, but the wardmist will recognize anything of 
the right material that bears the right rune. Some 
ward tokens have been inset into the pommels of 
swords, for instance, or baked into clay jugs or 
statuettes. In some large holdings, warders carry 
rings of varying tokens Just as they do rings of 
keys. Tokens can be made freely after the casting 
of a wardmist, but the requirements for a valid 
token can't be changed without using another 
wardmist spell. 

A being bearing a valid token can't see or be af- 
fected by a wardmist and isn't subject to attacks by 
any guardian monsters linked to the wardmist. An 
intruder who seizes a valid token from another 
being, even while in battle with a guardian, will be 
instantly free of such guardian monster attacks. 

Only one wardmist spell can exist in a given 
area. If a dispel magic is cast on a wardmist, it in- 
creases visibility around the caster by 20 feet, 
delays the appearance of any guardian monsters by 
a round, and sets off an immediate warning. Only a 
limited wish or wish can destroy a wardmist. Even 
repeated dispel magics will fail, and an antimagic 


shell cannot form within a wardmist. If this is at- 
tempted, the antimagic shell is wasted, and the 
wardmist is unaffected. 

The most common addition to a wardmist is a 
band of armed human guards assigned to respond 
to the magic's warnings, Spell triggers are also 
popular; these are spells that have specific preset 
conditions to set them off. They then launch the ef- 
fects of other spells, also cast earlier. 

The material components are an amount of 
silver larger in total volume than the caster's fist, 
phase spider silk, and three powdered pieces of 
amber of no less than 500 gp value each. The 
caster must stand in an area that will become part 
of the ward and visualize the route of the desired 
ward boundary. An area of 600 square feet per 
level of the caster may be enclosed. If the wizard 
tries to enclose too large an area, the spell fails and 
is wasted. Mages casting simultaneous wardmists 
may combine their 

Notes: Uncommon in the FORGOTTEN REALMS 
setting; otherwise, very rare. 


Warp Stone "d 


Wards of Defense — Witch 
(Abjuration) 


Level: 6 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 6 

Duration: 1rd./2 levels 
Area of Effect: 20-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: None 


This potent abjuration creates a stationary 
force field at a range of 20 feet from the witch, 
shielding her from any magical attack or physical 
missile that must pass through the wards. The 
witch can cast spells of 3rd level or less and fire 
or throw missiles through her own wards, but no 
other individual inside or outside the protected 
area can do so. The spell is stationary, but as long 
as the witch does not leave the area of effect, she 
can move about freely. The wards of defense spell 
does not hinder or deter the movement of crea- 
tures, so an enemy can advance through the ward 
and then attack the witch once inside. 

The spell ends when its duration runs out, 
when it is successfully dispelled, or when the 
witch leaves the protected area. 

The material component is a piece of tortoise 
shell. 

Notes: Restricted to witches, common. 


Warmth — Pluma 
(Abjuration) 


Level: 1 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: | turn 

Duration: 4 hrs./level 

Area of Effect: 1 individual/level 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell allows the caster to stave off the ef- 
fects of dangerous cold, on himself or other indi- 
vidual(s). The spell can negate the effects of 
extreme weather conditions, preventing hypother- 
mia and frostbite. It reduces the damage inflicted 
by magical cold attacks by —1 per die of damage. 

The material component for the spell is a tiny 
fragment of goose down. 

Notes: Restricted to practitioners of pluma 
magic (the Maztica setting); common. 


Warp Sense 
(Divination) 
(Dimension) 


Level: 2 

Range: Touch 

Components: 

Casting Time: 3 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: 60 ft. x 10 ft. path 
Saving Throw: Special 


The warp sense spell finds and analyzes the 
gates and portals of the planes. When cast, it allows 
the creature touched to sense any gate or portal, 
active or not, along a 60-foot path, dead ahead. 
Scanning in a single direction (out of four in a com- 
plete circle) takes one full round, so the creature 
can shift directions while scanning. However, the 
individual cannot move in any other way without 
disrupting the spell; full concentration is required. 

Once a portal is detected, the creature can try to 
deduce a) where the other end discharges, and b) 
the key required to use the portal, if any. Each piece 
of information requires a separate saving throw vs. 
spell. If either is failed, nothing further can be 
learned about that portal (the individual decides 
which question is answered first). If the individual 
has actually seen the portal in operation, a +2 bonus 
is applied to the saving throws. 

Notes: Uncommon for extraplanar spellcast- 
ers and dimensionists; otherwise, rare. 


Warp Stone 
(Alteration) 


Level: 6 

Range: 120 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: | rd. 

Duration: Permanent 

Area of Effect: 4 cubic ft./level 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell causes stone to bend as if it was soft 
plastic. Walls can be made to buckle, stone doors 
burst their fittings, pillars bend, and stone statues 
twist. The exact effect of the spell is determined 
by the DM based on the type of structure and 
amount of stone buckled. If used on magical 
items or enchanted objects, it only succeeds if the 
caster is a higher level than the spell on the door 
or object, and then only has a 20% chance of suc- 
cess per level of difference. 


997 


Warp Wood 


The material component for this spell is a 
piece of clay, twisted in the caster's hands. 

Notes: Common in oriental settings; other- 
wise, very rare. 


Warp Wood 
(Alteration) 


Level: 1 

Range: 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 4 
Duration: Permanent 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell causes wood to bend and warp. The 
area of effect is equal to 15 inches of 1 inch-di- 
ameter wood per level, which is approximately a 
hand axe handle or four crossbow bolts. The spell 
can be used against the boards of a ship or a 
bolted door. If used on magical items or en- 
chanted objects, it succeeds only if the caster is of 
higher level than the level of the spell on the door 
or object, and then only has a 2096 chance of suc- 
cess per level of difference. 

The material component of this spell is a green 
twig, which is bent as the spell is cast. 

Notes: Common in oriental settings; other- 
wise, very rare. 


Wasting 
(Necromancy) 
Level: 8 
Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 8 


Duration: ] turn maximum 
Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


With a touch of a hand, the caster causes the 
creature to age 10d10 years in the space of a 
single round. Creatures of at least semi-intelli- 
gence (2+), or those of 8 Hit Dice or more, are al- 
lowed a saving throw vs. spell; other creatures are 
affected with no saving throw. The caster must 
make a successful attack roll—any effects from 
aging take effect immediately. The wasting spell 
is active until a touch is scored or for one turn, 
whichever occurs first. 

The material component is earth from the 
grave of a ghost. 


Notes: Restricted to evil spellcasters, very 
rare. (Updated from DRAGON Magazine.) 


Watchful Eye 
(Divination, Enchantment) 
Range: Special whe 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd./object (1 hr. minimum) 
Duration: 12 hrs./level 


Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


Level: 7 


The spellcaster enchants a number of identi- 
cal, easily portable objects so that the caster(s) 
can scry through them. The objects together un- 
dergo an elaborate “curing” process that some- 
what resembles the metapsionic method of 
empowering an item. This takes the spellcaster at 
least one hour per day for one month. If the spell- 
caster skips a day, the process must start again 
from scratch. 

Each spell enchants up to 100 identical items. 
The spellcaster must touch each item during cast- 
ing. A spellcaster who wished to enchant more 
than 100 items at a time can cast watchful eye 
consecutively, so long as the curing process con- 
tinues daily. 

Any number of spellcasters may attend. When 
the caster finishes with the final item, the spell 
activates for all items at once. The items appear 
unchanged but now detect as magical for the du- 
ration of the spell. 

Thereafter, those who attended all the castings 
can select and tune in on any item enchanted with 
this spell up to 100 miles away, as described 
above. This takes 1d6 rounds. (Note: the 
clairsentience effect works normally, indepen- 
dent of circumstances: for instance, it works even 
if the item is concealed. The DM may assign neg- 
ative modifiers for extreme range, presence of in- 
terfering magic, and so on.) 

The watchful eye carriers only become aware 
of this magical sensing if they would ordinarily 
detect magic used in their presence. Detect scry- 
ing identifies the item, but nothing can trace the 
clairsentience back to its source. 

This spell requires a conventional magical 
scrying device as a focus, such as a crystal ball, 
which is not in the process. 

Alliance leaders find the watchful eye en- 
chantment expensive and time-consuming, but 
effective. They guard its secret closely, and most 


“ts: = ee cR m o 


998 


^ Watchware, 30' Radius " 


other spellcasters have never heard of it, Some 
monarchs know of the spell, but not the proce- 
dure. They would pay a fortune for it. 

Notes: Rare for Alliance spellcasters in the 
DARK SuN setting; otherwise virtually unknown. 


Watchware 
(Evocation) 
(Artifice, Mentalism) 
Level: 4 
Range: Touch 


Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: | rd. 
Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: 1 item 
Saving Throw: None 


The wizard can place a watchware on any 
single nonliving, intimate object usually a hook, 
staff, door, or item of treasure. If that item is dis- 
turbed or moved at any later time, the caster is 
alerted. This alert occurs even if the caster is 
asleep or unconscious, but not if the caster is 
turned to stone or otherwise unable to think. 

The original caster receives a mental image 
when the watchware is activated. This mental 
image is of the item and all items and creatures 
within 10 feet of it at the time of activation. The 
mental image generated by the watchware hosts 
only a single round and does not include any 
sound. The image interrupts concentration and 
disrupts spellcasting in progress, but does not dis- 
turb the caster in any other way. 

The watchware is activated when the item is 
disturbed for any reason, whether someone 
touches it, pokes it with a pole, a cat walks on it, 
or an earthquake knocks it over. The item pro- 
tected by the watchware spell radiates a faint aura 
of magic. If a dispel magic is cast upon the 
watchware, it activates. The watchware functions 
only once, then the spell is spent. A wizard can 
have as many active watchwares as he has levels, 
but in practice most wizards keep only one or two 
to avoid the hassles of accidental activation. 

The material components of this spell are a 
spider web, a small brass or silver bell, and a 
shard of glass. 

Notes: Very rare spell from the FORGOTTEN 
REALMS setting. Known to be in The Spell Book 
of Daimos. 


Watchware, 30' Radius 
(Evocation) 
(Artifice, Mentalism) 


Level: 6 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 30-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: None 


The wizard can place this improved version 
of the watchware spell on any fixed location 
chosen by the caster. If that area is entered or dis- 
turbed at a later time, the caster is alerted. This 
alert occurs even if the caster is asleep or uncon- 
scious, but not if the caster is turned to stone or 
otherwise unable to think. 

The original caster will receive a mental im- 
pression when the watchware is activated. This 
mental image gives some hint of the nature of the 
disturbance within it at the time of activation. The 
impression lasts only a single round and does not 
include any sound. It interrupts concentration and 
disrupts spellcasting in progress, but does not dis- 
turb the wizard in any other way. 

The ward is activated when the area is dis- 
turbed for any reason, whether someone enters the 
sphere, pokes into it with a pole, a cat walks on it, 
or an earthquake shakes it. The area protected by 
the watchware, 30-ft. radius radiates a faint aura 
of magic. If a dispel magic is cast upon the watch- 
ware, it will activate. The watchware functions 
only once, then the spell is spent. A wizard can 
have as many active watchwares of all types as he 
has levels, but in practice most keep only one or 
two to avoid the hassles of accidental activation. 

The material components of this spell are a 
spider web, a small brass or silver bell, and pow- 
dered glass, which is sprinkled in a circle about 
the caster. 

Notes: Very rare spell from the FORGOTTEN 
REALMS setting. 


" JH GREEN S IET. mum ee 4 7 


Water Blast 


Water Blast 
(Evocation) 
(Province: Sea) 


Level: 5 

Range: 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 5 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: | creature 
Saving Throw: Special 


dr 


A small, stoppered bottle (or vial) of water be- 
comes an impressive weapon when this spell is 
cast. The wizard simply opens the bottle and 
aims. The water jets from the mouth, seeking out 
its target (one individual) much as would a magic 
missile. 

The water blast always strikes the target's face 
if possible. Damage is 2d6. If the face is struck, 
the target also must make a saving throw vs. spell 
or be blinded (as the 2nd-level wizard spell) for 
ld6 rounds. Sightless creatures are unaffected by 
the blinding attack. 

The water in the bottle determines what kind 
of water makes up the blast—fresh, salt, muddy, 
or holy, for example. Against undead creatures, 
holy water inflicts additional damage—twice 
what a normal vial would cause (at least 4d6), in 
addition to blinding. If the bottle contains other 
liquids—for example, acid or poison—the spell 
won't work. 

Notes: Common for spellcasters from an ara- 
bian setting; otherwise, very rare. 


Water Bomb 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 
(Water) 

Level: 5 


Range: 10 yds./level 
Components: V, M 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: | rd. 

Area of Effect: 15-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell enables a wizard to call to hand a 
grapefruit-sized ball of water, which can be 
hurled a great distance. At the specified location, 
the ball explodes into a quantity of water that 
covers a 15-foot radius circle to a depth of 2 
inches. 

The wizard can hold the ball of water for no 


longer than one round before hurling it (after this 

time, the water runs through his fingers and is 

lost). The wizard can release the ball upon him- 

self, soaking himself and creating a two inches of 

water in a 15-foot radius around himself. The 

water is nonmagical and is pure and drinkable. 
The material component is a small, glass bead. 
Notes: Rare spell (WoG). 


Water Breathing 
(Alteration) 
(Air, Water) 
Reversible 


Level: 3 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 3 

Duration: 1 hr./level + 1d4 hrs. 
Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


The recipient of a water breathing spell is able 
to breathe water freely for the duration of the 
spell. The caster can touch more than one crea- 
ture with a single casting; in this case the duration 
is divided by the number of creatures touched. 
The reverse, air breathing, enables water-breath- 
ing creatures to comfortably survive in the atmos- 
phere for an equal duration. 

The material component of the spell is a short 
reed or piece of straw. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Water Elemental Guide 
See elemental guide. 


Water Form 
(Alteration) 
(Province: Sea) 


Level: 7 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 7 

Duration: 1 turn + 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell transforms the recipient into a sen- 
tient creature made of elemental water, enabling 
him to flow as a liquid. Only the creature's phys- 
ical abilities change; its mind remains the same. 
The creature no longer needs to eat or breathe. At 


x=: °° REN LIS C ETE a o," 


1000 


Water Summoning — Pluma 


will, it can seep into cracks and crevices, as well 
as uphill and around corners. The water form is 
cohesive, and the recipient can shape itself as de- 
sired—even retaining its original shape. When 
submerged in a lake or other watery environment, 
it does not dissipate, but does become invisible. 
The creature can end the effects of this spell 
whenever it wishes. 

The creature takes half damage from all slash- 
ing and piercing weapons—normal or magical. 
Blunt weapons of all types inflict full damage. 
Full sunlight inflicts 1 point of damage per round, 
due to evaporation. Poison and gas-based attacks 
do nothing; the creature is immune. 

Most magic affects the creature, although 
some spells have greater or lesser effects. All fire- 
based magics inflict —1 point per die of damage. 
Electrical attacks such as lightning bolt inflict +1 
point per die of damage. If targeted by a spell that 
affects water, the creature can make a saving 
throw vs. spell. Spells that transmute water into 
another substance (such as transmute water to 
dust) cause the water form to end prematurely. 
The creature returns to its original state—pro- 
vided there’s enough room. 

If the creature is in a tight spot when this spell 
ends—for example, in a pipe or a sealed bottle— 
then it automatically returns to normal form the 
first moment the surrounding space allows. If part 
of the water form has been lost, or somehow sepa- 
rated from the whole, then the largest remaining 
amount transforms back into the individual. 

The material component of this spell is an eye- 
dropper, which is broken during the spellcasting. 

Notes: Common for spellcasters from an ara- 
bian setting; otherwise, very rare. 


Water Move — Pluma 
(Alteration) 


Level: 4 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: | day 

Duration: Permanent 

Area of Effect: 100-ft. length of pipe 
Saving Throw: None 


The water move spell allows the caster to redi- 
rect the flowing of water, counteracting the force 
of gravity. The spell must be cast on an enclosed 
body of water (that is, a pipe, tunnel, or cave; not 
a stream or river on the surface). For the length of 
the enchanted area, the pipe will direct the water 


wherever the pipe is laid. If it has a steady source 
of water, such as a pool or spring, it will continue 
to pump the water indefinitely. Thus, flowing 
water can be brought to houses, even to the tops 
of pyramids and other lofty places. 

The material component is the foot of a duck 
or goose. 

Notes: Restricted to practitioners of pluma 
magic (the Maztica setting); common. 


Water Protection 
(Alteration) 


Level: | 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: | turn/level + 1d3 turns 
Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell protects the creature from drowning 
and its equipment from water damage. The crea- 
ture can breathe normally underwater for the du- 
ration of the spell. Furthermore, the creature and 
its equipment do not become wet. Torches held in 
hand can burn underwater and words can be 
spoken normally. 

The spell does not give the character the abil- 
ity to swim, and movement (including combat) is 
still slowed by the resistance of the water. Potions 
cannot be drunk, since the liquid mixes with water 
upon opening, unless a special container has been 
previously prepared. The spell does not affect the 
creature's ability to breathe air normally. 

The spell requires is a small golden statuette 
ofa fish, held by the recipient. If it is released, the 
spell ends immediately. 

Notes: Common in oriental settings; other- 
wise, very rare. 


Water Summoning — Pluma 
(Summoning) 


Level: 3 

Range: 0 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: | turn 


Duration: | turn/level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell can be used to draw water from ap- 
parently parched ground. It creates a small 


A oar oT > T. rus a ae 


1001 


~ Water to Poison " 


stream, spouting about 4 feet into the air before 
splashing back to the earth. It will continue for 
the duration of the spell, so that a high level 
caster can soak a portion of ground 1,000 yards 
square, or can generate enough water to quench 
the thirst of five thousand people for a day. 

Notes: Restricted to practitioners of pluma 
magic (the Maztica setting); common. 


Water to Poison 
(Alteration) 
Reversible 


Level: 5 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: 3 tums 

Area of Effect: 1 cu. in./level 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell allows the wu jen to change any 
water (or drinkable liquid) to an ingestive poison. 
This poison inflicts 1d4 points of damage per 
level of the caster. If a saving throw vs. poison is 
made, the damage taken is reduced by half. A 
single swallow is sufficient to cause this damage. 

Those smelling the liquid have a 1% chance 
per level of experience of noticing the poison. 


The poison can be diluted up to 50% its normal 
strength, the amount of damage being caused re- 
duced accordingly. If diluted greater than this, the 
poison has no effect other than to make those who 
drink it slightly ill. 

The spell requires the fang of a poisonous 
snake, which dissolves in the liquid to be poisoned. 

The reverse of this spell, poison to water, 
allows the wu jen to change poisonous líquid or 
venom into water. This spell has no effect on poi- 
sons in a creature's system, and has no effect on 
creatures that have been poisoned. 

Notes: Common in oriental settings; other- 
wise, very rare. 


Waterbane 
(Abjuration) 


Level: 1 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: | 

Duration: | day or | day/level 

Area of Effect: 1 creature or object touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell keeps a creature or an object from 
getting wet. It protects against water in liquid 
form—saltwater as well as fresh. When cast on a 
creature, it keeps the creature and its personal 
gear dry for one day. The creature can walk 
through pouring rain, dive into a pool, or stand 
beneath a waterfall, and still emerge with dry 
clothing and every hair in place. 

When cast upon an object, waterbane renders 
it completely watertight for a period of one day 
per level of the caster. For instance, a grain barrel 
protected with waterbane can be cast into the sea, 
and then wash ashore several days later with its 
contents completely dry. 

The spell does not prevent drowning. Nor 
does it enable a creature to breathe underwater or 
swim if it could not do so before. The spell pro- 
vides no protection against corrosive acids or poi- 
sons, even when these are diluted in water. The 
spell has no effect upon creatures from the 
Elemental Plane of Water. 

The material components of this spell are a bit 
of wax and some paper. 

Notes: Common for spellcasters from an ara- 
bian setting; otherwise, very rare. 


Waterproof, Talon's 
See Talon's waterproof. 


1002 


E Watery Form " 


Waterspout 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 
(Water) 

Level: 8 


Range: 100 yds. + 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 6 

Duration: | turn + Iturn/level 
Area of Effect: 10 yd. radius 
Saving Throw: None 


When this spell is cast, a tornado forms at the 
surface of the water. The resulting waterspout is 
10 feet high for every level of the caster. If the 
spellcaster wishes, the waterspout can be shorter 
than this maximum, decreasing in increments of 
10 feet. The waterspout travels wherever the 
caster directs it at a speed of 12, up to the maxi- 
mum range of the spell. It attacks as a monster 
with as many Hit Dice as the caster's level. 1f the 
waterspout engulfs objects on sea or in the air, it 
inflicts 1d6 points of damage for every 10 feet of 
its height. A waterspout is not affected by dispel 
magic, but can be countered by wind elementals 
or other winds of magical origin (like summon 
wind), blowing in a direction counter to the water- 
spout's rotation. Each level of the opposing wind 
reduces the waterspout by 10 feet; thus, a 210- 
foot waterspout could be completely countered by 
seven gust of wind or three summon wind spells. 

Notes: Common for Sea or Storm mages, un- 
common for water mages; otherwise, very rare. 
(Updated from DRAGON Magazine). 


Watery Double 
(Conjuration/Summoning, Enchantment) 
(Water) 


Level: 3 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 3 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 body of liquid 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell can be cast on any body of liquid, as 
large as an ocean or as small as a glass of wine. The 
first creature whose reflection is cast on the surface 
of the liquid releases the spell. When the spell is 
triggered, the liquid immediately forms an exact 
three-dimensional image of the reflected creature. 
If more than one creature casts a reflection simulta- 


neously, only one watery double forms. Each crea- 
ture has an equal chance of being the subject of the 
spell (roll randomly). 

The size of the watery double is restricted by the 
volume of fluid available. If the spell is cast on a 
full mug of ale, the double forms from the ale, be- 
coming a mug-sized duplicate of the subject. The 
watery double never exceeds the actual size of the 
subject regardless of the size of the body of liquid. 

When cast on the liquid, the spell's duration is 
permanent until the power is released by a crea- 
ture's reflection. The liquid will not evaporate until 
the spell is triggered. When the watery double 
forms, it remains animated for 1 round per experi- 
ence level of the caster. 

The watery double attempts to touch the crea- 
ture it has duplicated. It can affect only the creature 
that it resembles. It has the same THACO and cur- 
rent hit points as the creature it duplicates, but 
cannot cast spells or use any of the creature's magi- 
cal items or special abilities. The watery double is 
AC 6 and its movement rate is double that of the 
subject. It can seep under doors and through cracks. 

If the watery double succeeds in touching the 
creature, it merges with the individual, covering the 
creature's entire body in a skin of liquid. The sub- 
ject must attempt a saving throw vs. spell. If suc- 
cessful, the creature has resisted the spell's effect 
and the watery double dies, becoming normal fluid 
(and soaking the creature in the process). If the 
saving throw is failed, the watery double begins 
forcing its way into the subject's bodily openings, 
inflicting 1d8 points of damage per round until it is 


The watery double dissipates if reduced to zero 
hit points or when the spell's duration expires. 
Striking the watery double while it is wrapped 
around its subject causes an equal amount of 
damage to the subject. Part water; lower water, and 
transmute water to dust spells instantly destroy a 
watery double. 

Notes: Uncommon spell (ToM). 


Watery Form 
(Alteration) 
(Water) 


Level: 3 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 8 

Duration: | turn/level 
Area of Effect: Caster only 
Saving Throw: None 


V as pee MEC IE MEE S REEL 


1003 


^ Wave of Death " 


When affected by this spell, the caster and 
anything worn turns into what appears to be a 
puddle of water. This form cannot be absorbed or 
divided into smaller parts. It has the same hit 
points and strength as the caster and moves at 
half the caster's movement rate on land or in the 
water. 

While in this form, the caster blends unde- 
tectably with a body of water, wet spots on deck, 
etc. The form does not drown in water and can 
swim at any depth the caster chooses. If desired, 
the form can flow out of the ocean, up the side of 
a ship, and onto the deck. This is as exhausting to 
the spellcaster as if he had climbed that distance 
in his regular shape. 

If the form is attacked, it remains in one piece, 
but the spellcaster suffers damage. Weapons and 
spells inflict normal damage, and other objects 
injure as determined by the DM. 

Notes: Uncommon in Sea of Fallen Stars 
region of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting, rare for 
Water mages; otherwise, very rare. 


Wave of Death 
(Necromancy) 
Level: 8 
Range: 0 


Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 5 rds. 
Duration: 2 rds. 

Area of Effect: 1-mi. radius 
Saving Throw: None 


When a lich casts this dreadful spell, all veg- 
etable matter within the area of effect withers and 
dies over a two-round period. Plant-based crea- 
tures are allowed a saving throw vs. death at a —4 
penalty to avoid perishing also. The death is irre- 
versible and unpreventable, and is quite a shock- 
ing event to behold, requiring a Horror check for 
all who see it. Druids and rangers make their 
checks with a —4 penalty. 

The material components for this spell are a 
flower and a drop of poison. 

Notes: Restricted to undead spellcasters, rare. 
This spell can be researched only on the 
Demiplane of Dread. 


Waveform* 
(Alteration) 
(Wild) 


Level: 5 

Range: 40 yds. 

Components: S, M 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: 1d10 rds. 

Area of Effect: 10-ft.-cube/level 
Saving Throw: 4 


By means of this spell, the wild mage is able to 
shape and direct the patterns of water currents, al- 
lowing him to mold liquids into a variety of forms. 
The spell affects a quantity of liquid no larger than 
the area of effect. If cast onto a larger body, such as 
an ocean or large lake, the spell affects only the 
water within the area of effect. 

After casting waveform, the wizard can form the 
water into any desired shape. The spell does not 
bind the liquid together in any fashion; it is still lim- 
ited by its fluid properties and gravity. Thus, a mage 
could not use waveform to create a humanoid crea- 
ture with arms and legs and direct it to walk across 
land. He could, however, create a roughly human 
shape with flowing arms that rises out of the water, 
crashes forward in a huge splash, then rises and re- 
peats the process. Other possible shapes include gi- 
gantic waves, geysers, whirlpools, and troughs. 

The shape takes one round to form, after which it 
can be maintained by concentration. The shape can 
be directed to move in any direction at the rate of 90 
feet per round. If the waveform moves into or 
through a body of water, the form loses no intensity. 
However, if the wave is moved over dry ground, it 
loses one die of damage for every 10 feet crossed. 

If propelled against a target, the waveform 
causes 1d4 points of damage per level of the caster 
to any creature in its path. The waveform can be di- 
rected against creatures on the surface or underwa- 
ter. Those struck are allowed a saving throw vs. 
spell for half damage. 

If the victims are in or on a body of water, the 
shape will sweep them along. Creatures of small 
size are carried with the form, moving at its speed. 
Medium- and large-sized creatures are swept along 
at half the water's speed. Creatures larger than this 
resist the movement. Those caught in the current 
can make a Strength check each round to swim free 
of the current. 

Boats and ships are particularly vulnerable to the 
waveform. If the waveform is twice the size of the 
vessel or more, the ship must make à seaworthiness 


Lt. ee ^ Musis sr C EP e RN 


1004 


Weaken Webs " 


check (as described in Table 77 of the DMG). A ves- 
sels passing the check suffers damage as described 
above, reducing its seaworthiness ratings for future 
checks by 2d6 points until repairs are made. 

Alternatively, this spell can be cast directly at a 
single water-based creature—a water weird, water 
elemental, or other creature from the Elemental 
Plane of Water. In this case, the spell causes 1d6 
points of damage per level of the caster. The effect is 
instantaneous and the spell ends immediately after 
the attack is made. 

The material component is a small, carved oar 
decorated with aquamarines worth at least 500 gp. 
The oar disintegrates when the spell is cast. 

Notes: Restricted to wild mages, common 


(ToM). 
Waves of Sand 


der 


(Alteration) 
(Province: Sand) 


Level: 5 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: | turn 
Duration: 1 hr/level 


Area of Effect: 1 wagon or similar conveyance no 
more than 5 ft. wide and 10 ft. long 
Saving Throw: None 


The waves of sand spell causes the sand be- 
neath the affected vehicle to gently undulate, cre- 
ating waves that carry the vehicle along. The 
vehicle affected in this way cannot be pulled by 
horses, camels, or other beasts of burden, as the 
waves beneath the vehicle offer no solid footing. 

The craft moves along at a steady rate of three 
miles per hour and is steered by a thought from 
the caster of the spell or a designated pilot. If the 
vehicle stops for more than one round, the spell 
expires and must be recast. 

Notes: Common for spellcasters from an ara- 
bian setting; otherwise, very rare. 


Waves of Weariness 
(Enchantment/Charm) 


Level: 2 

Range: 40 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 2 
Duration: | rd. 

Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Special 


Upon casting this spell on a creature, that 
creature is suddenly overcome with dizziness and 
exhaustion. A successful saving throw vs. spell 
negates this effect. A creature of less than 12 
Intelligence and Wisdom that fails this saving 
throw immediately collapses for that round. It 
can rise next round with no further ill effects. 

A creature of 12 or greater Intelligence or 
Wisdom that fails the saving throw vs. spell is de- 
layed in its actions. It attacks last automatically 
the next round it has an action or attack. 

This spell has no effect against a creature that 
does not sleep, such as an undead. 

The material component is a small book of 
poetry, which is read aloud (a personal favorite is 
Translations from Kara-Tur Haiku by Lhaeo of 
Shadowdale). 

Notes: Rare spell from the FORGOTTEN 
REALMS setting. Known to be in Jaluster 's 
Orizon. 


Weaken Water Creature 
Reversed form, see strengthen water creature. 


Weaken Webs 
Reversed form, see spider strand. 


^ Weakness — Witch a 


Weakness — Witch 
(Necromancy) 


Level: 5 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: 1 turn/level 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell creates a temporary palsy of feeble- 
ness that reduces the creature touched to a 
Strength of 3. For human or humanoid creatures, 
this results in an attack penalty of —3 and a 
damage penalty of -1 with handheld or thrown 
weapons. Monsters instead suffer an attack 
penalty of —3 and reduce each die of damage in- 
flicted by 1 point. Regardless of this penalty, any 
successful attack inflicts at least 1 point of 
damage. Note that characters in armor of almost 
any kind will certainly become moderately or 
heavily encumbered by the effects of this spell, 
with additional movement, attack, and defense 
penalties—see “Effects of Encumbrance,” in 
Chapter Six of the Player s Handbook. 

The material component is a drop of lotus extract. 

Notes: Restricted to witches, common. 


Weapon Proficiency 
(Alteration) 


Level: 3 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 3 

Duration: 5 turns/level 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


Upon casting this spell, the wizard magically 
empowers himself or another individual to use 
one or more weapons with which he is not profi- 
cient. It does not allow the use of weapons barred 
to the individual by class or kit restrictions, or 
negate penalties due to the physical construction 
of the weapon (saurial blades, for example). 

The creature can use the weapon in combat 
without the standard nonproficiency penalty. 
Higher level casters can give proficiencies with 
multiple weapons—one extra proficiency can be 
bestowed for every five levels over Sth; that is, 
two proficiencies can be bestowed at 10th level, 
three at 15th, and so on. Proficiencies cannot be 


split among different individuals. 

Because the spell only grants a nominal 
degree of skill with a weapon, it cannot be used to 
augment the abilities of an individual who is al- 
ready proficient with a weapon. Thus, a fighter 
who can already use a long sword cannot have his 
skill with the weapon improved to specialization 
or mastery by this spell. 

The material components for the proficiency 
spell are a bit of fleece and a miniature bronze 
weapon or weapons of the type that the spell's re- 
cipient will gain proficiency in. 

Notes: Very rare spell. Known to be in The 
Book of Naz. (Updated from Dracon Magazine.) 


Weapon Return 
(Enchantment/Charm) 


Level: 6 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 6 
Duration: 2 rds./level 
Area of Effect: 1 weapon 
Saving Throw: None 


This enchantment allows a single thrown 
weapon, or any item that can be used as a thrown 
weapon, to fly through the air and return to the 
thrower's hand immediately after it strikes a 
target. If the caster is being charged, it returns 
quickly enough to allow a melee attack or parry 
in the same round. The weapon need not belong 
to or be thrown by the caster. The weapon's range 
is not altered. If the weapon misses, it continues 
on its path out to the weapon's maximum range 
before curving around and returning at the end of 
the round. The spell has no effect on missiles that 
must be fired by devices. 


Notes: Rare spell. 
Weathertell 
(Divination) 
Level: 1 
Range: 0 


Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 3 rds. 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell enables the caster (who must be 
able to see the sky and listen to the winds) to pre- 


ee ee AE 


1006 


^ Web " 


dict the general weather conditions for the up- 
coming | hour per level of the caster, These are 
the natural weather conditions at the caster's cur- 
rent location, assuming no magical manipulation 
occurs. Thus, this spell could predict the natural 
rain shower that will be coming in three hours, 
but could not predict the magically created storm 
tomorrow morning. 

Upon casting this spell, the caster discovers 
the general wind speed and prevailing direction 
of the wind that will be extant for the indicated 
time period. Specific timing of gusts and wind 
shifts is not possible, however. 

Similarly, the caster discovers whether it will 
be raining (or snowing), and approximately how 
hard any precipitation will be. Exceptional 
weather patterns (such as tornadoes) are revealed 
to the caster, but the exact path cannot be pre- 
dicted with any accuracy. 

Notes: Common for Sea, Weather, and Storm 
mages and for those from the Sea of Fallen Stars 
region of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting; other- 
wise, very rare. 


Weave Mythal 
(Alteration) 


Level: 4 

Range: 60 yds. 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: | turn 

Area of Effect: 30-ft.-radius sphere or special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell renders magic wielded by the caster, 
or another chosen being (wherever the magic 
takes effect, and regardless of the movements of 
the caster or chosen being), or all magic cast in a 
specific 30-foot-radius sphere to be free of 
mythal influence for the spell duration. In other 
words, the magic is free of mythal prohibitions, 
wild magic, power fluctuations, and augmenta- 
tions (see appendix: “The Mythal”). 

If a dispel magic is cast on the caster or af- 
fected being, or cast in the area in which the 
weaving has taken effect (even if the dispel is not 
specifically directed at this spell), the weave 
mythal effects immediately end, and a random 
wild magic effect occurs, even if no magic is cur- 
rently operating or being cast. 

Notes: Rare spell from the FORGOTTEN 
REALMS setting; virtually unknown elsewhere. 


Web 
(Evocation) 


Level: 2 

Range: 5 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 2 
Duration: 2 turns/level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: Neg. or 4 


A web spell creates a many-layered mass of 
strong, sticky strands similar to spider weds but far 
larger and tougher. These masses must be anchored 
to two or more solid and diametrically opposed 
points, floor and ceiling, opposite walls, etc., or the 
web collapses upon itself and disappears. 

The web spell covers a maximum area of eight 
10x 10 X 10-foot cubes and the webs must be at 
least 10 feet thick, so a mass 40 feet high, 20 feet 
wide, and 10 feet deep may be cast. Creatures 
caught within webs, or simply touching them, 
become stuck among the gluey fibers. 

Anyone in the area when the spell is cast must 
roll a saving throw vs. spell with a —2 penalty. If 
the saving throw is successful, two things may 
have occurred. If the creature has room to escape 
the area, then it is assumed to have jumped free. 
If there is no room to escape, then the webs are 
only half strength. Creatures with less than 13 
Strength (7 if the webs are half strength) are stuck 
until freed by another or until the spell wears off . 
Missile fire is generally ineffective against crea- 
tures trapped in webs. 

Creatures with Strengths between 13 and 17 
can break through one foot of webs per round. 
Creatures with 18 or greater Strength can break 
through two feet of webs per round. If the webs 
are at half strength, these rates are doubled. 
(Great mass equates to great strength in this case, 
and creatures of large mass hardly notice webs.) 
Strong and huge creatures can break through 10 
feet of webs per round. 

Furthermore, the strands of a web spell are 
flammable. A magical flaming sword can slash 
them away as easily as a hand brushes away cob- 
webs. Any fire—torch, flaming oil, flaming sword, 
etc.—can set them alight and burn them away in a 
single round. All creatures within flaming webs 
suffer 2d4 points of damage from the flames, but 
those free of the strands are not harmed. 

The material component of this spell is a bit of 
spider web. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). [more follows] 


" nx ee ae Ml MERE. 


1007 


Web of Lightning 


Web of Lightning 
(Alteration, Evocation) 


Level: 8 

Range: 40 yds. + 10 yds./level 
Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: :8 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: % 


This 8th-level wizard spell causes the simulta- 
neous discharge of six lightning bolts. Identical in 
properties to those bolls created by a lightning 
bolt spell, these bolts inflict 7d6 points of damage 
each and manifest in one or two ways. 

A) Starburst: This is widely used on battle- 
fields: a starburst of six bolts radiating out from a 
single point visualized or chosen directly by the 
caster, who need not see its location. Four bolts 
spring out in the cardinal directions (forming an 
equal-armed cross), and two additional bolts leap 
out in two of the diagonals, in quadrants chosen 
by the caster. 

B) Web: The other manifestation of the spell is 
a ricocheting web within a 60-foot-diameter 
sphere. The sphere can be altered to fill a 30-by 
30-foot room or smaller area, but not increased in 
volume. Compressing it does not affect damage 
or other spell properties. This effect is often fit 
into a single doorway, with the bolts leaping from 
the frame as an intruder steps through. 

In either manifestation, target beings must 
make saving throws individually against all six 
bolts. They save against fewer bolts if the path of 
a bolt leaves them out of harm's way, as in most 
uses of the starburst. 

The material components of this spell are four 
lodestones or a bit of fur, and a small, smooth rod 
of amber, crystal, or glass. 

Notes: Very rare spell from the FORGOTTEN 
REALMS setting. 


Web of Shadows — Drow 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 


Level: 9 

Range: 40 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: 1 hr./level 

Area of Effect: 4-ft. radius/level 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell fills an area with shadowy gray 
strands of force, resembling a giant spider web. 
The strands are not solid, and need not be an- 
chored to anything. Once created, they are sta- 
tionary, and can be destroyed or moved only by 
spells; gusts of wind (even magical ones) and 
physical attacks do not affect them. 

A creature in the area in which a web of shad- 
ows is forming is allowed a saving throw to get 
out. If successful, the creature takes only 1d4 
points of chill damage, and escapes the web. 
Failure means the creature suffers full contact ef- 
fects. The caster is immune to the effects of his 
own web. 

Contact with a web of shadows causes a crea- 
ture to be s/owed (as the 3rd-level wizard spell) 
while in the web, and for the rest of any round in 
which it leaves. 

In each round in which contact with the web 
occurs, a creature is chilled, taking 2d4+1 points 
of damage and losing 1 Strength point (lost 
Strength points return 2d4 rounds after leaving 
the web). A creature losing all its strength col- 
lapses helplessly, losing consciousness; if this 
occurs before it reaches zero hit points, the web 
stops draining it at that point. 

If a spark, fire spell, or open flame of any sort 
comes into contact with a web of shadows, it does 
not harm the web—but does race all over it: The 
entire web blazes for 1d4 rounds before the fire 
vanishes. During this time, all creatures in con- 
tact with the web take 2d4 points of fire damage 
per round (save throw vs. breath weapon for 
half). This damage is in addition to the web's 
usual chilling damage, which is not impaired. 

A web of shadows vanishes at the death, un- 
consciousness, or deliberate will of the caster 
(who need not concentrate, remain present or re- 
frain from spellcasting to maintain it). Its mater- 
ial component is a piece of spider web, collected 
in shadow or darkness. 

Notes: Restricted to drow, common. 


SU T ——————ÁÉ— 


1008 


^ Weirdshield — Phaerimm " 


Weight Concentration — Witch 
(Alteration) 
Reversible 


Level: 9 

Range: 120 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: 1 hr. 

Area of Effect: Up to 10 creatures or objects 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


When this spell is cast, the witch curses up to ten 
creatures or objects within the area of effect with in- 
creased weight. Flying creatures are grounded. 
Living creatures are severely encumbered: this re- 
duces their movement to 1, penalizes their attack 
rolls by 4, and penalizes their AC by 3. A successful 
saving throw vs. spell negates the effect. 

The DM decides the effect of the spell on ob- 
jects: buildings or furniture could be severely 
damaged by having very heavy items suddenly 
crushing them, wagons or war engines may 
become too heavy to move, etc. 

A dispel magic spell has no effect on this 
spell, but a remove curse can counter it. 

The reverse of this spell is weight dilution. Up 
to ten creatures or objects in the area of effect can 
be reduced to one-tenth of their normal weight. 
Strong winds and other forces can easily sweep 
away affected creatures or objects. A successful 
saving throw vs. spell negates the effect. 

The material component is a miniature set of 
scales. 

Notes: Restricted to witches, uncommon. 


Weight Dilution 
Reversed form, see weight concentration. 


Weird 
(Illusion/Phantasm) 


Level: 9 

Range: 30 yds. 
Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 9 

Duration: Concentration 
Area of Effect: 20-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell confronts those affected by it with 
phantasmal images of their most feared ene- 
mies, forcing an imaginary combat that seems 
real, but actually occurs in the blink of an eye. 


When this spell is cast, the wizard must be able 
to converse with the victims to bring the spell 
into being. During the casting, the wizard must 
call out to the creatures to be affected, informing 
one or all that their final fate, indeed their doom, 
is now upon them. 

The force of the magic is such that even if the 
creatures make their saving throws vs. spell, fear 
will paralyze them for a full round, and they will 
lose 1d4 Strength points from this fear (the lost 
Strength will return in one turn). Failure to save 
vs. spell causes the creature or creatures to face 
their nemeses, the opponents most feared and in- 
imical to them. Actual combat must then take 
place, for no magical means of escape is possible. 

The foe fought is real for all intents and pur- 
poses. Affected creatures that lose, die. If a crea- 
ture's phantasmal nemesis from the weird spell is 
slain, then the creature emerges with no damage, 
no loss of items seemingly used in the combat, 
and no loss of spells likewise seemingly ex- 
pended. Experience for defeating the weird is 
gained if applicable. Although each round of 
combat seems normal, it takes but 1/10 of a 
round. During the course of the spell, the caster 
must concentrate fully upon maintaining it. If the 
combat goes beyond ten rounds, those who saved 
against the spell can take action. If the caster is 
disturbed, the weird spell ends immediately. 
Creatures attacked while paralyzed with fear are 
free of the paralysis immediately. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Weirdshield — Phaerimm 
(Evocation) 


Level: 7 

Range: 10 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 7 
Duration: 5 rds./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell creates a shimmering, translucent 
magical barrier that appears at a location of the 
phaerimm's choosing, floating in midair. It is 
shaped like a triangular shield, point down, 
fringed with many tentacles that end in human- 
like hands. 

This ghostly shield can be moved about by the 
phaerimm's will at MV 26. 

The weirdshield irresistibly attracts any magi- 
cally-conjured bladed weapons (such as a 


ee ee 


1009 


~ Wesley's Delayed Damage " 


Mordenkainen s sword or blade of doom) within 
60 feet of it, and negates them on contact (which 
occurs one round after the shield is formed within 
range of such conjured blades, or they come 
within its range). It also irresistibly attracts any 
swords of dancing within the same range and at 
the same rate, causing them to fall lifeless to the 
ground, temporarily becoming +1 weapons under 
no being's control. 

If the weirdshield is within 20 feet of its caster, 
it automatically intercepts any magical attack of 
4th level or lower that is directed at the caster, and 
reflects it back at its source. If the distance be- 
tween the weirdshield and caster is greater, or if the 
caster tries to move the shield to protect another 
being, object, or area (blocking a doorway, for ex- 
ample), then the caster must make a successful 
saving throw vs. spell for the shield to intercept a 
magical attack and hurl it back at its source. 
Otherwise, the attack gets through unaltered. 

The shield can make an infinite number of 
such interceptions in a round—and is itself de- 
stroyed only by dispel magic, the death of the 
casting phaerimm, contact with a magical barrier 
of Sth level or less (the shield and the barrier will 
destroy each other harmlessly but usually with 
spectacular light and sound discharges), or if 
specifically put out of existence by a limited wish 
or wish spell. 

A weirdshield can also be directed to inter- 
cept any one being, even noncorporeal or semi- 
real beings such as gaseous undead or shadow 
monsters. While doing so, it cannot intercept 
spell or magical item discharge attacks, which 
automatically pass it unless it blocks a doorway 
through which they must pass (whereupon a 
caster saving throw vs. spell determines the 
shield's success, as above). 

When directed to intercept a being, the shield 
moves to block its path, and its many arms grapple 
with the being (even if noncorporeal). The being 
must make a saving throw vs. spell at a -3 penalty 
to get past the barrier. If it succeeds, that specific 
weirdshield can never again affect that specific 
being, or magical attacks launched by it; the being 
can pass through the shield as if it does not exist. 

If the saving throw fails, the being is halted at 
the spot where the shield met with it, and cannot 
move away from that spot. The being can cast 
spells, ready items, and the like, but cannot 
launch spells or items at the caster, or move hori- 
zontally, until it successfully saves against the 
shield's magic. The being is allowed another 
saving throw vs. spell at —3 every round (whether 


it struggles against the shield or not), and as soon 
as it makes a successful throw, it is free of that 
particular weirdshield 5 ' effects forever. 

A weirdshield can affect only one being in this 
way; unless it blocks a narrow passage or open- 
ing by trapping a being there, it cannot prevent 
other beings from freely passing it. Others cannot 
aid a trapped being against the weirdshield by 
purely physical means (pulling, for instance, or 
attacking the shield); attempts to do so only harm 
the trapped being. 

A weirdshield cannot be struck by physical at- 
tacks or affected by magical attacks except as 
noted above. Magical barriers of 6th level or 
greater block its passage, but do not affect it; 
magical attacks of 5th level or greater pass it as if 
it does not exist, but do not affect it. Its tentacle- 
arms cannot grasp, wield, deflect, or pluck at 
weapons or other objects, only at beings. 

If the phaerimm successfully uses a weirdshield 
to block and trap one being, and then moves it to 
block another being (for instance, stops one charg- 
ing warrior, but another slips past and closes with 
the phaerimm, who frantically switches the shield 
to deal with this new threat), the trapped being is 
freed forever from the effects of that weirdshield, 
but the newly selected target being encounters and 
must overcome the shield in the usual fashion 
(saving throw vs. spell at —3). Note that the shield's 
movement is fast enough to overtake almost any 
known creature within the same round as it looses 
the first being, in most situations. 

The material components of this spell are a 
drop of the caster's saliva or spittle, a miniature 
shield or scrap of armor plate, and an arm (either 
whittled of wood or formed of clay, or the actual 
arm of any creature, from mouse to man-size). 

Notes: Restricted to phaerimm, common. 


Wesley's Delayed Damage 
(Chronomancy) 


Level: 7 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 7 

Duration: | turn + 1d10 rds. 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell creates a field of temporal flux 
about the caster. This field intercepts physical at- 
tacks and shifts all or part of the effects into the 
future, allowing the chronomancer time to pre- 


Fe ELS P ee 


1010 


| —————————— Á Pg 


pare. The magnitude of the shift depends on the 
type of attack. 

If the attack inflicts physical damage, half the 
damage is applied immediately, and the other half 
is put off for the duration of the spell. This delays 
the need for healing, but chronomancers are cau- 
tioned not to lose track of the time since casting. 
After the first turn, the spell could expire at any 
moment, and all deferred damage is then applied 
at once. This could easily kill the caster. Healing 
potions and spells are applied first to received 
damage, then to deferred damage. 

If the attack produces a spell effect (imprison- 
ment and energy drain inflict no physical damage 
but require a touch), then the spell's effect is de- 
layed for half the remainder of the spell's dura- 
tion. Any preventative action taken (the 
chronomancer casting freedom before the impris- 
onment takes effect, for instance) negates the up- 
coming effect. 

This spell cannot be used in conjunction with 
any contingency spells. Any spell of this nature 
placed on the chronomancer dispels Wesley s de- 
layed damage automatically. 

Notes: Restricted to chronomancers, common 
or uncommon. 


Wesley's Temporal Disjunction 
(Chronomancy) 


Level: 4 

Range: 60 yds. 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: 5 days + 1d10 days 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


When this spell is cast, the affected creature 
loses any sense of time. It is perpetually late, 
unable to function under any time restraints. This 
spell is merely an annoyance unless accurate 
timing is crucial. Creatures afflicted by this spell 
automatically lose initiative and are always sur- 
prised if attacked from stealth. 

In combat, creatures with multiple attacks au- 
tomatically lose one attack, and leaders are 
unable to follow a battle plan that requires accu- 
rate timing. A saving throw vs. spell negates the 
spell. Chronomancers and Demiplane of Time 
creatures gain a +1 bonus to their saving throws. 

Against a chronomancer or creature of the 
Demiplane of Time, this spell is particularly ef- 
fective. Any chronomancer under the temporal 


disjunction who attempts to cast a time-affecting 
spell automatically fails. A native creature of 
Demiplane of Time also loses any time-related 
abilities and suffers 1d6 points of damage, plus 1 
point for every two levels of the caster. In both 
cases, any ability (natural or spell effect) to slip 
between reality and Demiplane of Time is lost. 
The time dimensional is the hardest hit by the 
temporal disjunction. In addition to the above 
penalties, it loses the ability to slip in more copies 
of itself. 

Notes: Restricted to chronomancers, common 
or uncommon. 


Whip 
(Evocation) 
Level: 2 
Components: V, S, M 
Range: 70 yds. 
Casting Time: 2 


Duration: 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell allows wu jen to conjure a whip of 
mystical force that may be used to strike at 
opponents. The crack of the whip keeps normal 
animals at bay unless they make a successful 
saving throw vs. spell. If an animal is struck, it 
takes no damage, but must make a successful 
saving throw vs. spell at ^1 to —4 or slink away. 
The whip can be used in melee combat, also. A 
successful hit has a chance (13 or better on a 20- 
sided die for edged weapons, 6 or better for non- 
edged weapons) of pulling a weapon from an 
opponent's hand (the opponent receives a saving 
throw vs. spell to avoid this). A full round is gen- 
erally required to recover a weapon after being 
disarmed. 

The material component of this spell is a small 
silken whip. 

Notes: Common in oriental settings, uncom- 
mon in the WORLD OF GREYHAWK setting; other- 
wise, very rare. 


EO ee LEM REI LLL ae a 


1011 


~ Whip of Pain = 


Whip of Pain 
(Evocation) 


Level: 3 

Components: V, S, M 
Range: 0 

Casting Time: 3 
Duration: 1 rd./level. 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell creates a whiplike, flexible line of 
force, emanating from the fingertips of the 
caster's hand. This crackling, coiling line of 
purple sparks can be wielded as a lash in battle 
and strikes opponents up to 10 feet distant. 

The whip of pain functions as a +2 magical 
weapon. If the wielder successfully strikes a 
target, there is a loud snapping sound, and the 
target must make a saving throw vs. spell and a 
Constitution check. If the saving throw fails, the 
target creature suffers 4d4 points of damage. If it 
succeeds, the creature takes only half damage. If 
the Constitution check succeeds, the creature 
feels only enough pain to suffer a —1 penalty to its 
next attack roll. Failure wracks the creature with 
pain until the end of the next round, lowering its 
Armor Class by one, imposing a —2 penalty to its 
attack rolls, and making spellcasting impossible. 

Spellcasting by the whip wielder, the success- 
ful application of dispel magic, or the uncon- 
sciousness of the wielder causes the whip of pain 
to disappear, ending the spell. (The wielder can 
trigger magical items like wands with his other 
hand without ending this spell.) 

The material components of this spell are a 
drop of the caster's blood and one of the caster's 
hairs. 

Notes: Very rare spell. (Updated from DRAGON 
Magazine.) 


Whirling Blade 
(Evocation) 
(Force) 


Level: 2 

Components: V, S 
Range: 0 

Casting Time: 2 
Duration: 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell creates a shimmering, translucent 
silver blade of force equal in dimensions and 
damage to a long sword. It orbits one of the 
caster's hands and strikes once per round as a 
magical weapon (+1 to attack and damage rolls). 

The blade is weightless, and passes through 
metallic things as though they did not exist, with- 
out affecting them. 

Metal armor is discounted when determining 
Armor Class against blade attacks; i.e. targets 
receive Dexterity and magical bonuses, but not 
metal shield and mail protection. Beings wear- 
ing leather armor have a base Armor Class of 8, 
studded leather also counting as AC8 against 
blade attacks; creatures with naturally tough 
hides or natural “armor plating” have their usual 
Armor Classes. 

A whirling blade also passes through the 
body of its caster without harm—the caster is 
never imperiled by his own weapon. The blade 
cannot break, but is destroyed instantly by con- 
tact with a wall of force, antimagic shell, or 
dispel magic spell. 

A whirling blade emits a continuous, high- 
pitched shrieking noise—vibrations of magical 
force that cannot be magically silenced—and 
therefore cannot be used with any measure of 
stealth, Note that the caster can hold or carry 
normal weapons and other inorganic objects in 
the hand wielding the whirling blade without 
hampering its functioning, unless the carried ob- 
jects are so large as to obstruct the caster’s view 
of foes, or so heavy (10 pounds or more) as to 
hamper or significantly slow arm movement. 
This magical weapon exists for the duration 
given or until the caster concentrates on casting 
another spell, whereupon it vanishes. Wielding 
and actively using a weapon also disrupts the 
spell, canceling its effects prematurely. 

Notes: Very rare spell from the FORGOTTEN 
REALMS setting; virtually unknown elsewhere. 


" MARGE MEE a ee ee 


1012 


Whirlpool 
(Alteration) 
(Water) 


Level: 7 

Components: V, S, M 

Range: 10 yds./level 

Casting Time: | turn 

Duration: 1 turn/level 

Area of Effect: 25 ft. radius/level 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell creates a swirling region of water 
that can consume ships and swimmers. The area 
has a minimum radius of 350 feet if the caster is 
14th level, plus 25 feet per additional level. Any 
swimming creature within the area of effect takes 
1d6 damage each round from the buffeting effect 
of the water, and must make a successful saving 
throw vs. spell or be drawn 30 feet toward the 
center of the whirlpool, in addition to other 
movement. Creatures reaching the center of a 
whirlpool must make a saving throw vs. death or 
be sucked beneath the waves, never to return. 

Ships are also affected by a whirlpool. Each 
ship within a whirlpool must make a successful 
seaworthiness check every turn to avoid capsiz- 
ing and sinking. Also, every ship moves 10—60 
feet toward the center of the whirlpool, and 
10—60 feet counterclockwise around the 
whirlpool, in addition to its other movement each 
round. Creatures and ships outside the area of 
effect of the whirlpool are not affected. 

The material components for this spell are a 
cup of sea water and a jeweled stick (worth at 
least 5,000 gp). The stick is swirled in the cup 
while the spell is chanted, and then broken in half 
and tossed into the sea to start the whirlpool. 

Notes: Rare spell from the Sea of Fallen Stars 
region of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting, also 
known to some Sea and Water mages. 


Whirlwind 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 


Level: 8 

Components: V, S, M 

Range: 480 yds. 

Casting Time: | turn 

Duration: 2-7 rds. 

Area of Effect: Cone 360 ft. tall, 120-ft. wide 
Saving Throw: % 


This spell allows the wu jen to summon a 


powerful tornado anywhere within the spell's 
range. A column of whirling air touches down at 
the point indicated by the caster. The tip has a 10- 
foot diameter. Thereafter, if the wu jen continues 
to concentrate on the spell, he can attempt to 
move it in any direction desired at a rate of 15. To 
do this, the wu jen must make a successful saving 
throw vs. paralysis. If the save is failed, the wu 
jen has lost control of the whirlwind for the dura- 
tion of the spell. There after, each round the 
whirlwind moves its full movement in a random 
direction. 

Wooden buildings struck by the whirlwind 
have a 75% chance of being destroyed. If not de- 
stroyed, the building, although suffering damage, 
remains standing and can be repaired. Stone 
buildings collapse only 15% of the time and 
damage suffered by those still standing is rela- 
tively minor. Trees are uprooted 80% of the time 
and those not ripped out are battered and broken. 

All creatures caught within the whirlwind 
suffer 6d10 points of damage (save vs. death for 
half damage). However, on a roll of a natural 20, 
the creature—through some freak of nature—is 
totally unscathed by the whirlwind even if all 
about him is destroyed. The whirlwind always 
fills the area of effect. If cast underground or in a 
confined area, it almost certainly affects the caster 
as well. A control weather spell can be used to 


1013 


~ Whisper Blade " 


weaken the whirlwind and two such spells cast 
with the same purpose cause it to disappear. Once 
the whirlwind has been created, it remains for the 
full duration; the caster cannot voluntarily end it. 

The material component for this spell is a 
child's top. 

Notes: Common in oriental settings; other- 
wise, very rare. 


Whisper Blade 
(Evocation) 
(Force, Shadow) 


Level: 4 

Components: V, S 

Range: 0 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: Creates 1 blade 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell creates a translucent, shadowy, 
weightless area of magical force extending from 
the fingers of one of the caster's hands. This 
silent construct is blade-shaped. Its cutting edges 
inflict damage just as those of a real long sword 
do. The caster wields the whisper blade as if pro- 
ficient in its use. 

A whisper blade counts as a +1 magical long 
sword for purposes of what it can hit (though it 
does not gain an attack or damage bonus). It 
never breaks, rusts, or grows dull. It is nonmetal- 
lic, nonmagnetic, and does not reflect light or 
conduct electrical energy. A whisper blade cannot 
be dropped or torn from the caster's grasp, but it 
vanishes instantly if the caster desires. 

The spell’s name comes from the habit many 
mages who employ it have of whispering the 
spell’s verbal component, so as to surprise enemies. 

Notes: Rare in the FORGOTTEN REALMS set- 
ting; virtually unknown elsewhere. 


Whispering Sand 


(Alteration, Phantasm) 


(Province: Sand) 


Level: 3 

Components: V, S, M 
Range: Touch 

Casting Time: 3 
Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


Whispering sand imbues a handful of sand 
with the ability to relate a message from the 
caster, aloud. At the time of casting, the caster 
must choose the sand that will "speak" (for exam- 
ple, a cupful in the bottom of a particular urn, or à 
small patch before an abandoned gate). He must 
also determine the conditions that will trigger the 
message—such as “when the one-armed barber 
appears before the gate” or “when the name of 
the sun-god is spoken before the urn. (In this way, 
the spell resembles magic mouth.) 

The triggering event must occur within 30 
yards of the talking sand. Finally, when casting 
the spell, the wizard must voice the message that 
the sand will repeat verbatim. The message may 
be up to five words for every level of the caster. 

When the conditions are met, the sand 
“speaks.” Anyone within 20 feet can hear the 
words clearly. The voice of the sand is hoarse and 
throaty, either male or female (caster’s choice). It 
resembles no one’s voice in particular, although it 
mimics the pronunciation and tone that the 
wizard used during casting. Unlike magic mouth, 
no lips (or other visual features) appear to accom- 
pany the message. 

Besides a simple spoken message, whispering 
sand can deliver a spell that has only a verbal 
component, provided the caster has that spell in 
his repertoire. For example, one of the power 
word spells can replace the message, When the 
conditions triggering the whispering sand occur, 
the power word will be cast. The effects of such 
spells are centered on the sand that speaks. 
Whispering sand in no way enables a wizard to 
cast spells that he could not otherwise use. 
Normal saving throws apply for spells released 
by the whispering sand. 

Until the whispering sand is triggered, the 
sand enchanted by the wizard radiates a dim aura 
of alteration and phantasm magic. If a spell has 
been placed within the sand, the aura is extremely 
strong. In addition, the aura matches the school of 
magic to which the implanted spell belongs. 

Moving the sand (including moving the con- 
tainer that holds it, or unduly disturbing the dust) 
destroys any spell placed within the whispering 
sand, though a normal message remains effective. 

Notes: Common for spellcasters from an ara- 
bian setting; otherwise, very rare. 


1014 


~ Oe cd 


Whispering Tide 
(Alteration, Phantasm) 
(Water) 


Level: 2 

Components: V, S 

Range: 1 mi./level 
Casting Time: 1 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 2-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: None 


A nautical variation of the spell whispering 
wind, this spell enables the wizard to send a mes- 
sage or cause some desired sound effect in a spe- 
cific location within range that is familiar to the 
wizard. The whispering tide can travel over or 
under the surface of any body of water. It is no 
more than a mere ripple or gentle current, and usu- 
ally unnoticed by anyone until it reaches the desig- 
nated location. It then delivers its message, 
regardless or whether or not anyone is there to hear 
it, and dissipates. The wizard may dictate a mes- 
sage of up to 25 words or instead cause the whis- 
pering tide to seem to be a faint ripple or splashing 
sound. The tide can move as slowly as 1 mile per 
hour, or as quickly as 1 mile per turn. No other 
spells may be cast through the whispering tide. 

Notes: Uncommon for Water and Sea mages; 
otherwise, very rare. 


Whispering Wind 
(Alteration, Phantasm) 
(Air) 


Level: 2 

Components: V, S 

Range: | mile/level 
Casting Time: | 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 2-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: None 


By means of this spell, the wizard is able to 
either send a message or cause some desired 
sound effect. The whispering wind can travel as 
many miles above ground as the spellcaster has 
levels of experience, to a specific location within 
range that is familiar to the wizard. The wind is as 
gentle and unnoticed as a zephyr until it reaches 
the location. It then delivers its whisper-quiet 
message or other sound, Note that the message is 
delivered regardless of whether anyone is present 
to hear it. The wind then dissipates. 


The wizard can prepare the spell to bear a 
message of up to 25 words, cause the spell to de- 
liver other sounds for one round, or merely have 
the whispering wind seem to be a faint stirring of 
the air that has a susurrant sound. He can likewise 
cause the whispering wind to move as slowly as a 
mile per hour or as quickly as a mile every turn. 
When the spell reaches its objective, it swirls and 
remains until the message is delivered. As with 
the magic mouth spell, no spells may be cast via 
the whispering wind. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Wight Production 
Lost spell, rumored cast by the Deathmaster, a 
rare type of necromancer. 


Wildfire* 
(Invocation/Evocation) 
(Wild) 


Level: 9 

Components: 

Range: 0 

Casting Time: 1 
Duration: Variable 
Area of Effect: Variable 
Saving Throw: Variable 


By means of this spell, the wild mage is able 
to channel raw magical energy through himself, 
shaping it into any form or effect he desires. The 
energy is similar in many ways to a wish spell, 
but has unique differences. 

Wildfire allows the caster to create the effect 
of any wizard spell of 8th level or lower. He need 
only have general knowledge of the spell and its 
effects; the spell does not need to be in his own 
spellbooks. 

Any normal saving throws vs. the spell effects 
are made at a —2 penalty. 

Wildfire can also be used in the creation of 
magical items. The energy created by the spell 
may be used to generate effects that are not cre- 
ated by known spells. 

Wildfire can also be used to create items out of 
nothing. The magical energy can be shaped and 
hardened to form solid objects. These objects 
have a greenish, glowing tinge and radiate magic. 
These objects are stronger than steel yet have 
almost no weight. They are immune to fire, cold, 
electricity, and all forms of magical attack except 
dispel magic and wish spells. Even if they are sub- 
jected to these spells, a saving throw is allowed 


" NE DES EMG a, GM ra E A 79 0700 


1015 


^- Wildmagic Tempest " 


(equal to the creator's saving throw vs. spell). 
When creating objects, the caster is limited only 
by his own skill and the dimensions of the object. 
Items larger than a 10-foot-radius sphere cannot be 
fashioned. Creating the object requires only one 
round, regardless of size. Thus, a wizard could make 
an impenetrable dome or a small boat with this spell. 
Objects made of wildfire are neither stable nor 
permanent. Since the object is made of magic 
separated from the magical continuum, the mate- 
rial gradually deteriorates until the magical bonds 
become too weak to hold the wildfire in the 
chosen form. This decay takes 1d6 + 4 hours. 
Notes: Restricted to wild mages, common 


(ToM). 


Wildmagic Tempest 
Lost spell. Mythal magic from the FORGOTTEN 
REALMS setting, taken away by the gods. 


Wildshield* 
(Alteration) 
(Wild) 


Level: 6 

Components: V, S, M 
Range: 0 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell cloaks the caster in a whirling band 
of scintillating colors, providing complete con- 
cealment. The caster is able to see normally 
within and outside the shield. 

The wildshield protects the caster from the ef- 
fects of spells and magical items. The shield can 
completely absorb 2d6 spell levels (that is, if the 
roll of 2d6 results in 10, the shield could absorb ten 
Ist-level spells, two Sth-level spells, or any similar 
combination), thereby negating their effects on the 
caster. Both area effect spells and those individu- 
ally targeted at the wild mage are absorbed. In the 
case of area-effect spells, the wildshield protects 
only the mage. All others in the area of effect 
suffer normal effects from the spell. 

Wildshield also protects against wild surges, 
whether caused by the caster's magic or by an 
outside source. Each wild surge is considered 
equal to 1d6 spell levels. 

The spell remains in effect until either the 
caster cancels it or it reaches its spell level capac- 
ity. If the capacity is met exactly, the wildshield 


simply ceases to function. However, if the wild- 
shield is struck by more spell levels than it can 
absorb, it explodes in a wild surge. The spell that 
triggered the surge is completely negated, its 
energy instead transformed into a wild surge (see 
Table 2). Since the shield no longer functions, the 
formerly protected wizard is subject to full ef- 
fects of this wild surge. 

The material component is a small sponge. 

Notes: Restricted to wild mages, common 


(ToM). 


Wildstrike* 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 
(Wild) 


Level: 6 
Components: V, S, M 


Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell is used primarily against hostile 
spellcasters. It distorts all attempts at spellcast- 
ing, converting spell energy into wild surges. 

The target of a wildstrike is allowed a saving 
throw; if successful, the spell has no effect. If the 
saving throw is failed, the creature is enclosed 
within a field of wild magic. If the creature casts 
spells or uses a charge from a magical item, a 
wild surge is automatically created (refer to Table 
2). When determining the effects of this surge, 
the true level of the wild mage who cast the wild- 
strike is subtracted from the die roll, making the 
effects of the wild surge more likely to affect the 
victim. 

The material component is a small glass tube 
that is shattered in the casting. 

Notes: Restricted to wild mages, common 


(ToM). 


Wildwind* 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 
(Wild) 


Level: 9 

Components: V, S 
Range: 100 yds. 
Casting Time: 8 
Duration: 1d3 turns 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


ao ———————— ERN. 


1016 


Wind Breath 


This spell is similar in effect to wildstrike and 
wildzone. When cast, a wall of faint, multicolored 
lights springs into existence at the point indicated 
by the caster. These lights form a line 150 feet 
long. After the first round of the spell, the wizard 
can move the wall of lights. Each round, the 
caster can move the wall in the same direction or 
as much as 45 degrees to either side. Once the 
wall is set in motion, it cannot be stopped unless 
the spell is cancelled or dispelled. The lights can 
move 60 feet per round. 

The wildwind has two significant effects. 
First, all creatures struck by the magical lights 
suffer 2d6 points of damage. Second, any spell- 
caster struck while attempting to cast a spell auto- 
matically triggers a wild surge (use Table 2). 
Magical items that expend charges that touch the 
wall of lights automatically release one charge, 
also resulting in a wild surge. 

Notes: Restricted to wild mages, common (75M). 


Wildzone* 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 
(Wild) 


Level: 8 

Components: V, S, M 

Range: 0 

Casting Time: 1d6 rds. 

Duration: 2d6 turns 

Area of Effect: 300-ft. x 300-ft. square 
Saving Throw: None 


This powerful spell creates a disruption in mag- 
ical forces similar to the conditions found in wild 
magic regions (areas where the effects of magic 
have been permanently altered). This spell has 
only a temporary effect, although the effects of 
wildzone could possibly be rendered permanent. 

The spell creates a wild magic region centered 
on the caster. The area of effect cannot be shaped 
in any way; it is always a square 300 feet long on 
each side (90,000 square feet). 

Within the wildzone, wild magic reigns. Any 
spell cast in the area of effect is automatically a 
wild surge (see Table 2). Effects from magical 
items that expend charges are also treated as wild 
surges when used in the area. Other magical 
items function normally. 
of effect function normally, but spells cannot be cast 
out of the area of effect without triggering a wild surge. 

The material components are several pots of 
paint, which must be spilled across a sheet of 


hammered silver worth no less than 2,000 gp. 
Notes: Restricted to wild mages, common 


(ToM). 


Wind Blade 
(Evocation) 
(Province: Wind) 


Level: 4 
Components: V, S 
Range: 0 

Casting Time: 4 
Duration: | rd./level 
Area of Effect: | item 
Saving Throw: None 


wd 


This spell creates an invisible sword made of 
wind, which the caster can instantly extend from 
his hand at will and retract just as easily. He does- 
n't actually grasp the blade, so he can hold some- 
thing else while the spell is in use. If he's already 
using another weapon, however, he cannot wield 
the wind blade simultaneously. 

Though the wind blade can't be seen, it can be 
heard as a roaring wind. It doesn't disturb the air 
around it, however. It batters targets instead of 
cutting, dealing 4d4 points of bludgeoning 
damage per round. It has a speed factor of 2. The 
blade strikes all visible, nonflying targets as if the 
caster was attacking a target of AC 10. Targets 
that are invisible or flying retain their normal 
Armor Class. 

The wind blade is considered a normal, 
medium-sized weapon. It won't affect creatures 
that can only be struck with magic. The blade is 
destroyed if the wizard begins spellcasting, but 
not if he simply activates a magical item. If the 
caster falls unconscious, the wind blade is also 
destroyed. 

Notes: Common for spellcasters from an ara- 
bian setting; otherwise, very rare. 


Wind Breath 
(Evocation) 
(Air) 
Level: 4 
Components: V, S, M 
Range: 0 


Casting Time: | rd. 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: Cone, 60 yds. long X 30 yds. 
wide 

Saving Throw: % 


uM i 4 ^ —3 ee 2*2. 2 EMO 


1017 


Wind Breath — Wu Jen 


A variation of gust of wind, this spell allows 
the caster to fill his lungs with air and expel a 
powerful wind. The strength of this wind is 
about 5 miles per hour for every level of the 
caster. Those outside the area of effect do not 
notice the tremendous winds, though objects 
may be blown out of the spell's area into their 
path. The DM should determine the precise ef- 
fects of the wind breath using the following pa- 
rameters as guidelines. 

If the wind breath is 30-50 miles per hour, 
there is a 10% chance that small boats capsize, a 
1% chance that ships capsize, and a 10% chance 
that a man is knocked down. There is a 20% 
chance that branches snap, light articles are 
blown away, and tents and sails tear. Creatures 
caught in the cone of the wind breath suffer 1 
point of damage from blown sand and grit. 

If the wind breath is 50—70 miles per hour, 
there is a 70?6 chance that small boats capsize, a 
20% chance that ships capsize, and a 50% 
chance that a man is knocked down. Trees bend 
and there is a 70% chance that branches snap, 
and a 20% chance that a trunk snaps. Medium- 
sized articles are blown away, and there is a 50% 
chance that tents and sails are torn, and a 40% 
chance that shacks are blown down. Creatures 
caught in the cone of the wind breath suffer 1d4 
points of damage from sand and grit. Flying 
creatures are blown back 10—40 (10d4) feet.) 

If the wind breath is 70 miles per hour or 
more, there is a 100% chance that small boats 
capsize, a 70% chance that ships capsize, and a 
70% chance that a man is knocked down and 
blown 10—40 (10d4) feet to suffer 1d6 points of 
damage per 10 feet blown. There is a 70% 
chance that tree trunks snap, and a 100% 
chance that branches are ripped from trees. 
Heavy articles are blown away, medium articles 
are ripped from fastenings, and tents and sails 
have a 70% chance of being destroyed. There is 
a 20% chance that common buildings are blown 
down and a 60% chance that shacks are flat- 
tened. Creatures caught in the cone of the wind 
breath suffer 1d8 points of damage from blown 
objects. Flying creatures are blown back 
50-100 (40 + 10d6) feet. 

The material component for this spell is a 
handmade silk fan with a value of at least 1 gp. 

Notes: Uncommon spell. 


Wind Breath — Wu Jen 


As the 4th- level spell exactly, except 
the wu jen version is 2nd-level, with a 
casting time of 2. 


Wind Carpet 
(Alteration) 
(Province: Wind) 


Level: 5 

Components: V, S, M 

Range: Touch 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: | turn/level + 1d8 turns 
Area of Effect: Being touched 
Saving Throw: None 


When this spell is cast, the recipient becomes the 
commander of a wondrous flying carpet, woven 
from a glowing magical force. The carpet measures 
I square foot per level of the caster, with rectangular 
dimensions. Though it's wafer thin, it can carry up 
to 100 pounds per level of the caster. The wind 
carpet moves at a rate of 30 (Maneuverability Class 
A). In combat, the carpet can be destroyed by a suc- 
cessful dispel magic, or by physical or magical 
damage. The carpet has 5 hit points per level of the 


AT i+, 7. goss pps © c HM 


1018 


Wind Servant 


caster, Armor Class 8, and makes saving throws as a 
leather object. 

The being touched is fully in control of the 
carpet. It flies smoothly and with stability, enabling 
the being to recline, cast spells, study, or perform in- 
tricate tasks while floating along. In fact, the being 
cannot accidentally fall from the carpet, no matter 
what movements either makes. Even if they fly 
upside down, the being remains on the carpet, level 
and stable. However, items that the being is not car- 
rying or wearing may fall (and they will if he's 
upside down). 

Wind alone can never whisk cargo off the carpet. 
The being can command the wind carpet to hover in 
one place or guide it with deft precision around ob- 
stacles and through gaps. The carpet can even tilt 
sideways or roll upside down to dump off intruders. 
The pilot remains in place, although other passen- 
gers and cargo are vulnerable to falling, as usual. 

Only the being touched by the caster can com- 
mand the carpet. While magics can destroy it, they 
can never wrest control of the carpet from this in- 
dividual. Nor can anyone hamper its flight by gusts 
of wind or even natural storms. Subject to its 
weight limits, the carpet can carry more than one 
living creature, but it is linked to only one. If the 
being is killed or knocked unconscious, the wind 
carpet fades immediately (possibly stranding its 
riders in midair). 

The wind carpet does not confer any protection 
against creature, spell, or weapon attacks, but its 
shelter against winds extends above it in an invisible 
bubble as tall as the pilot. A wizard on a wind 
carpet, for example, is vulnerable to air elemental 
attacks or arrows, but can fly right through a tornado 
and emerge unshaken, or even stay in the funnel 
cloud to study a spell. 

The material component of this spelt is a scrap 
of woven cloth, of any size. The cloth is con- 
sumed by the spell's casting. 

Notes: Common for spellcasters from an ara- 
bian setting; otherwise, very rare. 


Wind Compass 


Casting Time: | 

Duration: 1 hr./level 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 

By casting this spell, the wizard creates a tiny, 
moaning wind that sounds in his ear alone. Its 
steady tone is anchored to a single compass direc- 
tion chosen by the caster. When his ear is turned 
toward that direction, the tone is correct. When 
the caster turns aside from that direction, moving 
his ear to the right or left, the tone rises or falls 
accordingly. Returning to the proper course re- 
stores the proper hum. Loud noises may drown 
out the hum, but ordinary conversation does not. 

The wind compass spell is most useful on 
overcast nights and in blinding sandstorms, when 
visibility is greatly reduced. The spell allows the 
caster to travel unerringly in a chosen direction. It 
cannot guide him along a complex or circuitous 
route, however, nor can it help him find land- 
marks. It only reveals his heading (that is, “north- 
west"). 

The caster can choose to end this spell before 
its duration expires. Maintaining the spell does 
not require concentration, so the wizard can cast 
other spells while the wind compass operates. 

The material component of this spell is a bit of 
earth mixed with spittle, cast into the air. 

Notes: Common for spellcasters from an ara- 
bian setting; otherwise, very rare. 


Wind Servant 

(Conjuration/Summoning) 
(Province: Wind) 
Level: 3 
Components: V, S, M 
Range: 10 ft./level 
Casting Time: | turn 
Duration: | turn/level + 1d6 turns 
Area of Effect: Summons | creature 
Saving Throw: Special 

This spell conjures a weak form of air ele- 
mental. This creature is incapable of entering 


combat, as it has no effective attacks against cor- 
poreal creatures, nor can it be affected by normal 


ere ee a ee TII PU a 


1019 


Wind Shadow 


(nonmagical) weapons. 

The creature's only power is to generate a 
strong wind over a localized area. A wind servant 
can make one of the following changes: 

Change Wind Speed: The creature can in- 
crease or decrease wind speed by one category 
(for example, from light breeze to favorable 
wind, or from gale to storm). 

Change Wind Direction: The servant can 
change the wind direction by one "step" (for ex- 
ample, from north to northeast, or from northeast 
to east). 

Any such effect on the wind applies to only 
one vessel. The wind servant is too small to 
create widespread weather effects, instead chang- 
ing the weather by filling the sails of the affected 
vessel with its own essence. 

The caster can order the wind servant to do 
more than one of the above tasks, but at a cost. 
For each round that an additional task is ordered 
(that is, changing the wind direction by two 
points, or affecting wind speed and wind direc- 
tion), the number of rounds which the wind ser- 
vant stays is decreased by one. Thus, for 
example, a wizard ordering a northerly breeze 
when the current winds are southerly reduces the 
wind servant's tenure by three rounds for each 
round of such activity. 

Wind servants are lazy and disobedient, al- 
though not hostile. The caster must give the wind 
servant continual guidance or the creature allows 
normal wind conditions to resume. On the other 
hand, the caster may change his direction to the 
wind servant at any time, and the wind servant 
will respond in 1—3 rounds. (For the purposes of 
the naval game, such a shift takes effect at the 
start of the next turn.) 

Although wind servants cannot be struck by 
normal weaponry, they can be affected by magic. 
A wind servant who takes more than 30 points of 
magical damage flees back to the Elemental 
Plane of Air, abandoning the caster. 

The material component of this spell is a lit 
block of incense worth at least 50 gp. 

Notes: Common for spellcasters from an ara- 
bian setting; otherwise, very rare. 


Wind Shadow 


(Alteration) 


(Province: Wind) 


Level: 3 

Components: V, S, M 

Range: Touch 

Casting Time: 3 

Duration: 9 rds. 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


The recipient of wind shadow takes on a 
translucent and almost weightless form, gliding 
silently upon a magical breeze. All items that the 
creature carries and wears undergo the same 
change, provided they are not living. 

The breeze trails behind the creature; no scent 
or air current precedes it to betray its movement. 
Nor does any footprint, track, or magical path 
mark its passage. The magical breeze enables the 
creature to float at its normal movement rate, in 
whatever horizontal direction it wishes. 

Although the creature typically hovers just 
above the ground, it can also ascend or descend 
up to 70 feet per round by force of will. Against a 
strong natural or magical gale, the creature moves 
at half normal rate. 

The creature retains its original Armor Class. 
Its THACO remains the same with one exception: 
when making missile attacks, the creature suffers 
a —] attack roll penalty. The creature cannot 
speak aloud while in transit, nor cast spells; the 
movement is not stable enough. 

Because of these drawbacks, the creature 
often chooses to end the spell prematurely. This 
spell is most useful for those who wish to bridge 
a chasm, or to sneak across a small distance unde- 
tected (such as from cover to cover). Silent and 
translucent, the creature has a 65% chance of es- 
caping detection by those that are not expecting 
or watching for it. When the creature is passing 
humans—or passing those unable to smell more 
acutely than humans—its chance increases to 
75%. However, it is only 40% likely to escape the 
notice of alert, watchful beings. If the creature 
enters a well-guarded position such as an enclo- 
sure, bridge, or doorway, its chance to remain un- 
detected drops to 10%. 

The material component of this spell is a piece 
of silk or gossamer. 

Notes: Common for spellcasters from an ara- 
bian setting; otherwise, very rare. 


Se ee ee M e eL 


1020 


Windtomb 


Wind Wall 
(Alteration) 
(Air) 


Level: 3 

Components: V, S, M 

Range: 10 yds./level 

Casting Time: 3 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: 10-ft. wide X 5-ft. high area/level 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell brings forth an invisible vertical 
curtain of wind two feet thick and of considerable 
strength—a strong breeze sufficient to blow away 
any bird smaller than an eagle or to tear papers 
and like materials from unsuspecting hands. (if in 
doubt, a saving throw vs. spell determines 
whether a subject maintains its grasp.) Normal 
insects cannot pass such a barrier. Loose materi- 
als, even cloth garments, fly upward when caught 
in a wind wall. Arrows and bolts are deflected 
upward and miss, while sling stones and other 
missiles under two pounds in weight receive a —4 
penalty to a first shot and —2 penalties thereafter. 
Gases, most breath weapons, and creatures in 
gaseous form cannot pass this wall, although it is 
no barrier to noncorporeal creatures. 


The material components are a tiny fan and a 
feather of exotic origin. 
Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Windrider — Pluma 
(Alteration) 


Level: 3 

Components: V, S, M 
Range: 10-ft. radius/level 
Casting Time: | turn 
Duration: | hr./level 
Area of Effect: 1 craft 
Saving Throw: None 


The windrider spell allows the caster to gently 
move an object on water or air. An airborne object 
must be held aloft by some force of its own; this 
spell does not levitate. However, items floating on 
pluma cushions, such as caused by the elevate I 
and // spells, can be moved, as can canoes and 
rafts—and possibly even larger vessels. 

The caster must keep the entire object in range 
for the spell to work. Thus, a 5th-level caster, in 
the center of a ship 100 feet long, could employ 
this spell to move the vessel. It can progress at a 
movement rate of up to 120 feet per round. 
However, the spell does not cancel natural 
weather conditions, so gusty winds can override 
its effects. 

The material component of the spell is a tiny 
bit of vulture's feather. 

Notes: Restricted to practitioners of pluma 
magic (the Maztica setting); common. 


Windtomb 
(Alteration) 
(Province: Wind) 


Level: 9 

Components: V, S, M 

Range: 5 yds./level 

Casting Time: 9 

Duration: Permanent 

Area of Effect: 1 item or individual 
Saving Throw: Special 


The casting of this spell creates a virtually 
impenetrable wall of wind around a person, 
place, or object. The windy barrier encircles the 
item and arcs over the top, preventing all entry. 
It can extend itself into a sphere, thwarting all 
attempts to dig under the barrier and gain en- 
trance from below. Even if all the material 


~ Windwar " 


around it is removed, the windtomb remains 
firmly in place. 

A windtomb can entrap one target as small as a 
dog (roughly 3 feet across) or as large as a keep 
(roughly 100 yards across). If the target is a 
building, all those within it are trapped. Living 
creatures at the heart of a windtomb are placed in 
a state of suspended animation (see the 8th-level 
wizard spell, temporal stasis). The caster has 
three options when casting the windtomb. First, 
he must decide whether the swirling barrier of 
wind will howl and moan, or be silent as death. 
Second, he must decide whether the tomb will 
appear as a swirling mass of color, or whether it 
will be invisible. In the former case, the contents 
will be blurred. In the latter, the contents will be 
as invisible as the barrier itself. Lastly, the caster 
must choose whether divination magic will reveal 
the contents of the windtomb, or whether the con- 
tents will remain secret. 

If creatures try to breach the wall from with- 
out, they're picked up, battered for a round, then 
tossed outside the area of effect, suffering 4d10 
points of damage. Those who attempt to escape 
from within suffer the same fate, landing back 
inside the tomb. Even creatures in gaseous form, 
water-form, or a similar state are battered and 
tossed if they attempt to breach the tomb. 

Creatures that partially or wholly shift into an- 
other dimension will escape damage when at- 
tempting to cross the barrier, but still fail. This 
applies to creatures out of phase, as well as those 
in the Astral or Ethereal Plane. 

The windtomb scatters magic. Attempts to 
teleport or dimension door into or out of the tomb 
fail miserably; the individual attempting the act is 
randomly shunted to another location on the same 
side of the tomb. Similarly, other spells (includ- 
ing dispel magic and destroy magic) are bounced 
off in random directions. Only the power of a full 
wish or similar spell can bring down the walls of 
a windtomb. 

The windtomb serves as the ultimate prison for 
dangerous creatures, unpopular royal relatives, 
perilous artifacts, and priceless treasures. Some 
haggard old wizards, weary of heroic interlopers, 
use the tomb as bait. An adventurer should 
always try to ascertain what exists at the heart of 
the storm before breaching the windtomb. 

The material component of this spell is a small 
crystalline or glass figure of the item, person, or 
place to be entombed. This is custom work, per- 
formed by a glassmaker, and costs about 700 gp. 
The replica must be perfect (something a profi- 


ciency check can determine). If the replica is im- 
perfect, a saving throw is allowed for the target— 
or for all those within the target. Otherwise, only 
a creature with inherent magic resistance can pos- 
sibly escape entrapment in the windtomb. 

Notes: Common for spellcasters from an ara- 
bian setting; otherwise, very rare. 


Windwar 


Duration: | turn + 3 rds./level 
Area of Effect: 1-mile-radius sphere 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell brings forth a powerful tempest of 
thunder, lightning, wind, and rain that may 
damage multiple targets in aerial combat with 
the caster. The primary effect of the spell is its 
turbulent winds. 

Winds continually buffet and whip all targets 
in the area of effect, tossing them through the air 
in various random directions. In order to simulate 
the swirling of wind in the area of effect, roll 1d8 
for the compass direction (1 = N, 2 = NE, 3 = E, 
etc.) and 1d6 X 10 for the distance in yards that 
each target is flung through the air. However, the 
effects of the winds on all aerial targets are vari- 
able according to the victims’ sizes. 

Small creatures of 2 HD or less take 2d8 
points of damage per round and are hurled twice 
the usual distance; attacking, defending, and 
normal movement are impossible. 

Man-sized creatures are buffeted for 1d8 
points of damage per round, move at half-speed, 
and attack at a —4 penalty to hit. 

Large creatures have their movement reduced 
by one-third, but aren't buffeted about and take 
no damage; larger beasts are unaffected. 

Creatures composed of air (air elementals, 
aerial servants, etc.) are completely unaffected 
by the winds created by the spell. The DM may 
deem that other creatures with considerable 
power over the air are likewise unaffected. 
Spells that generate gaseous effects, such as 
cloudkill, are immediately disrupted by windwar. 

Lightning strikes at selected living targets in the 
area of effect: every 1d6 rounds, 1d4 bolts affect 
random targets as per the spell /ightning bolt. The 


" NEIGE MESE RU C Er Er. MEE i e 


1022 


^-^ Wingbind — Dragon " 


bolts inflict 3d6 points of damage to one target 
creature each, save vs. spell for half damage. 
Targets are selected randomly by the DM. 

In addition, thunderclaps sound every time 
the lightning bolts strike. All targets in the air 
must save vs. paralyzation or be stunned for one 
round by the deafening thunder. Those affected 
are stunned and unable to act for the round. 
Flying creatures with less than 8 HD also must 
make a second save vs. paralyzation to remain 
aloft, otherwise plummeting to earth. 

The heavy, swirling rains in the area reduce 
visibility to one-half but cause no damage, 
except to those creatures affected by water. (As a 
general rule, such creatures take 1d6 points of 
damage per round in the area of effect.) 

The caster must be airborne for the spell to 
work, and it will cease to function if its area of 
effect ever contacts the ground. The caster is not 
affected by the spell, save for the reduction in 
visibility, nor is the caster's mount, if any. The 
spell is centered on and moves with the caster, 
continuing to affect other creatures in the area re- 
gardless of the caster's wishes. 

Notes: Uncommon for Weather mages, rare 
for Air mages; otherwise very rare. (Updated 
from DRAGON Magazine.) 


Wingbind 


(Evocation) 


Level: 9 

Components: V 

Range: 40 ft/level 
Casting Time: 9 
Duration: 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: 1 dragon 
Saving Throw: Special 


Wingbind is a highly effective combat spell 
known to very few non-dragons. When the spell 
is cast, it creates a web or net of force that entan- 
gles the dragon. This force net has the same effect 
as a grappling attack: the dragon is unable to fly 
and plummets toward the ground. 

The target dragon receives an initial saving 
throw vs. spell to avoid the effects of the spell. At 
the end of each subsequent round, it receives an- 
other saving throw vs. spell, but with a cumulative 
—3 penalty. A successful saving throw means that 
the dragon has broken free from the net of force. 

The wingbind spell remains in effect until 
either the duration expires, the dragon success- 
fully saves, the caster is slain or rendered uncon- 


scious, the caster purposely releases the spell, or 
the dragon slams into the ground. 

The rules for grappling apply to wingbind as 
well. A wingbound dragon falls at 125 feet per 
second, or 7,500 feet per round. After the wing- 
bind spell is terminated—for whatever reason— 
the dragon continues to fall for another 2d10 
seconds (250—2,500 feet). If it strikes the ground 
during this time, it suffers 1d6 points of damage 
per 10 feet fallen, up to a maximum of 20d6. 

Notes: Very rare spell in the FORGOTTEN 
REALMS setting; virtually unknown elsewhere. 


Wingbind — Dragon 
(Evocation) 


Level: 4 

Components: V 

Range: 40 ft./level 
Casting Time: 3 
Duration: 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: 1 dragon 
Saving Throw: Special 


Wingbind is a highly effective combat spell 
known to very few dragons. It creates a web or 
net of force that entangles the target, which must 
be a dragon. This force net has the same effect as 
a grappling attack: the dragon is unable to fly and 
plummets toward the ground. 

The target dragon receives an initial saving 
throw vs. spell to avoid the effects of the spell. At 
the end of each subsequent round, it receives an- 
other saving throw vs. spell, but with a cumulative 
-3 penalty. A successful saving throw means that 
the dragon has broken free from the net of force. 

The wingbind spell remains in effect until 
either the duration expires, the dragon success- 
fully saves, the caster is slain or rendered uncon- 
scious, the caster purposely releases the spell, or 
the dragon slams into the ground. 

The rules for grappling apply to uses of wing- 
bind as well. A wingbound dragon falls at 125 
feet per second, or 7,500 feet per round. After the 
wingbind spell is terminated—for whatever 
reason—the target dragon continues to fall for 
another 2d10 seconds (250—2,500 feet). If it 
strikes the ground during this time, it suffers 1d6 
points of damage per ten feet fallen, up to a max- 
imum of 20d6. 

Notes: Restricted to dragons, very rare. 
Known to be in the Draconomicon. 


Me I-A LEE eM 


1023 


E Wingless Wonder Spell 


Wingless Wonder Spell 


See wonderform. 


Wing Gifting 
(Alteration) 
(Air) 


Level: 7 

Components: V, S 

Range: 30 yds. + 10 yds./level 
Casting Time: 3 

Duration:  hr./level 

Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell allows the caster to gift a creature 
otherwise unable to fly with a pair of usable 
wings, which sprout from the creature's back. 
The spell gives the creature full knowledge and 
proficiency with the wings. The creature must 
have a clearly definable back for the spell to take 
effect. The creature cannot have wings already. 
Only one casting of this spell is effective on a 
creature at any time, although wings from a pre- 
viously cast spell previously can be replaced by a 
new wing type. The wings are comparable to the 
size of the creature. The caster chooses the de- 
sired wing type from the following: 


Butterfly: MV 24 (MC: C); flutter 
Dragon: MV 30 (MC: C); wing buffet 
Dragonfly: MV 36 (MC: B); hover, dart 
Eagle: MV 48 (MC: D); dive 
Hummingbird: MV 36 (MC: A); hover 


Once the spell has been cast, the subject crea- 
ture must pass a system shock roll. Failure indi- 
cates that its body has rejected the wings, which 
fail to appear; however, the creature is otherwise 
unharmed. Unwilling creatures receive a saving 
throw vs. spell to avoid the wings as well. This 
spell has no effect on polymorphed creatures. 
Finally, those affected by a wing gifting spell are 
subject to all the applicable rules of aerial combat 
(see the DMG). 

The above wing types all impart advantages 
beyond flying movement. The rules for these 
abilities are as follows: 

Dart: A dragonfly-winged creature can, after 
hovering for one round, completely change direction 
and move one-and-a-half times its normal flying 
speed the next round (round fractions up). This abil- 
ity cannot be used more frequently than every three 
rounds and can be used only from hovering. 


Dive: An eagle-winged creature that dives can 
double its flying speed for the distanced dived 
(thus a dive at MV 6 can carry the creature a dis- 
tance equal to MV 12). At the end of the dive, the 
creature can attack at a +2 attack bonus for 
double normal damage. 

Flutter: A butterfly-winged creature moves in 
such an erratic fashion that opponents trying to 
strike it have a —2 penalty to their attack rolls. 
The winged creature moves and attacks normally, 
but never receives bonus movement when it loses 
altitude (it does not dive). 

Hover: A dragonfly- or hummingbird-winged 
creature can hover in place for one round and 
change direction completely in the next round. 
The creature also has some versatility in perform- 
ing tasks such as retrieving or placing stationary 
objects, attacking slow-moving aerial targets, or 
surveying the ground below. The creature can 
attack normally while hovering as well. 

Wing Buffet: A dragon-winged creature can 
use its wings to buffet opponents to its front with 
a short burst of air. The creature using this ability 
must be on the ground, not flying, and cannot 
otherwise attack. The buffeting has no effect on a 
creature larger than the winged creature. Buffets 
inflict no damage, but opponents within 5 feet 
may be are knocked prone (use a Dexterity check 
with a penalty of +2 on the 1d20 roll, or a saving 
throw vs. paralysis at —2 for creatures not rated 
for Dexterity). 

The wings vanish at the end of the spell's 


1024 


^ TP gr 


duration. However, creatures that are airborne 
when the spell ends are affected for 1d2 rounds 
by a feather fall spell. This small safeguard 
allows time to cast a new spell to maintain flight, 
select the best place for a landing, or make other 
preparations for the fall. Once the feather fall 
wears off, a non-flying creature plummets to the 
ground, taking normal falling damage. 

Notes: Very rare spell. (Updated from DRAGON 
Magazine.) 


Wings 
A 7th-level spell, aka wing gifting. 


Wings 
(Alteration, Evocation) 


Level: 2 

Components: V, S, M 
Range: 10 ft./level 
Casting Time: 2 
Duration: 3 rds. 

Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell causes the caster, or a creature visible 
during casting, to instantly acquire wings. The 
wings sprout from the shoulders of the spell recipi- 
ent, and are of any appearance desired by the caster, 
from giant feathered avian wings, to diaphanous 
insect wings, to the bat-like wings of baatezu and 
tanar'ri. The latter wing type is sometimes used to 
impress onlookers with the caster's magical power 
or fool them into thinking she is a powerful being 
from another plane. An unwilling creature receives 
a saving throw vs. spell to avoid the effect. 

The wings created by this spell last for three 
rounds, and cannot be banished earlier. If made suf- 
ficiently large they encumber a walking being not 
used to them. The maximum wingspan is thrice the 
height of the recipient. 

The wings are only under the rough control of 
the spell recipient. Only those who are normally 
winged can use them without penalty at MV 21 
(B). All other beings must make a successful 
Dexterity ability check each round to keep from 
tumbling headfirst as they lose all balance or the 
wings become entangled. Room for the wings to 
beat unencumbered must be available or all aerial 
movement attempts fail. The wings can be used to 
lift, glide, or brake. Only one of these actions can 
be performed per round, but switching between ac- 
tions from round to round is possible. 

Lift: This is accomplished by frantically beating 


the wings. A successful Strength ability check is re- 
quired. If successful, the creature can soar upward 
to a height of 10+2d8 feet. (This is useful to reach a 
balcony, ledge, or window, or grasp something 
overhead.) This action can be used to strike a single 
blow at an opponent aloft, at the winged creature's 
normal THACO. After the attack roll is made, the 
winged creature undergoes a helpless 1-round 
tumble back to the ground, taking 2d4 points of 
falling damage. The creature might also use the 
attack to grasp the opponent, inflicting no damage 
but clinging on to strike in later rounds. 

Glide: This can be a deliberate leap, or used 
after the wings spell is cast from afar on an already- 
falling being. The mere presence of the wings en- 
ables the creature to control the general direction 
(north, northeast, east, and so on) of its descent. A 
successful Intelligence ability check is required to 
aim the glide more precisely, so that all side-slip- 
ping action is avoided and the gliding being stays 
level (instead of falling into a tumble or flipping 
upside-down). A falling winged creature that suc- 
cessfully makes both a Dexterity and an 
Intelligence check can successfully aim for a 
window, archway, door, or trapdoor, and pass 
through it. If the opening is too narrow to permit 
the wings to pass through, they are smashed flat, 
and cannot be used on the following round. The 
gliding being can choose to slow descent or speed it 
into a dive, but influence over speed is very slight. 

Brake: This action can slow a fall, a glide, or a 
descent after a lift, but cannot be attempted by a 
tumbling being. It consists of a frantic flurry of 
make a Dexterity, a Strength, and an Intelligence 
check for the maneuver to work. If all three suc- 
ceed, the being lands without any damage from a 
descent of 60 feet or less, and suffers only 1d6 
points of damage for greater descents. If one or all 
of the checks fail, only 1d6 points of damage are re- 
moved from the normal falling damage suffered by 
the winged being. 

When the spell ends, the wings rapidly fade 
away. 

The material component of the spell is a frag- 
ment of a wing from any sort of insect or a feather 
of any type. 

Notes: Rare in the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting; 
virtually unknown elsewhere. 


P xui ECC OM CE LOL OE 


1025 


Wings— Dragon Knight 


Wings — Dragon Knight 
(Alteration) 


Level: 3 

Components: V, S, M 

Range: Touch 

Casting Time: 3 

Duration: | turn/level + 1d6 turns 
Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell causes the creature to sprout a set of 
wings resembling those of a dragon. The creature 
can then fly at a rate of 18 (maneuverability class 
C). The wings spring from the character's shoul- 
der blades. They do not appear if armor. clothing, 
or other restricting material is in the way. 

Notes: Known to the Dragon Knights of the 
DRAGONLANCE setting, common. 


Wish 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 
Level: 9 
Components: V 
Range: Unlimited 
Casting Time: Special 
Duration: Special 


Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: Special 


The wish spell is a more potent version of a lim- 
ited wish. If it is used to alter reality with respect to 
damage sustained by a party, to bring a dead crea- 
ture to life, or to escape from a difficult situation 
by lifting the spellcaster (and his party) from one 
place to another, it will not cause the wizard any 
disability. Other forms of wishes, however, cause 
the spellcaster to weaken (—3 on Strength) and re- 
quire 2d4 days of bed rest due to the stresses the 
wish places upon time, space, and his body. 
Regardless of what is wished for, the exact termi- 
nology of the wish spell is likely to be carried out. 
Casting a wish spell ages the caster five years. 

Discretionary power of the DM is necessary in 
order to maintain game balance. As wishing an- 
other creature dead would be grossly unfair, for 
example, your DM might well advance the spell- 
caster to a future period in which the creature is 
no longer alive, effectively putting the wishing 
character out of the campaign. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Witch's Banishment 
(Abjuration) 


Level: 9 

Range: 10 yds./level 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 2 rds. 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: | creature or 1 object of up to 
8,000 cu. ft. 

Saving Throw: Special 


One of the most potent abjurations known, 
witches’ banish instantly hurls a single creature or 
object to a randomly determined Lower Plane. 
The spell is nearly infallible; magic resistance is 
completely useless against it, and the only crea- 
tures who can resist its effects are those whose 
levels or Hit Dice equal or exceed the caster's 
own. Even these suffer a —8 penalty to the saving 
throw vs. spell. 

Instead of employing this spell against an 
enemy, the caster can choose to banish a single 
object of up to 8,000 cubic feet (for example, a 
20-foot cube) in size. To strip an item from an in- 
dividual, a lock of the individual's hair or equiva- 
lent is required. An object is worn or carried by a 
creature is allowed its owner's saving throw. For 
example, a vorpal sword carried by a 14th-level 
ranger could be banished with no saving throw, 
since its owner is of lower level than the 18th- 
level wizard required to cast this spell. 

When this spell clashes with other effects of 
equal strength or potency: powers of demigod 
level, artifacts, spells or devices providing com- 
plete and absolute protection, the results are un- 
predictable. The DM adjudicates such conflicts. 

The plane the creature or item is sent to is de- 
termined by a roll on the chart. 


Lower Planes Destination 
1d8 Plane 


OO - OS Uh dA UA P3 — 
3 


Limbo or Mechanus 
(50% chance of each) 


The creature or object is transported to a 
random location in a random layer of the plane 


" IiIEEEN ES SCELERI d Sl 


1026 


^ Witchweed — Old Empire " 


indicated; the witch has no idea where the ban- 
ished person or item may go. The spell is perma- 
nent in that the subject won't return to the Prime 
Material Plane through the action of this spell, al- 
though the plane of banishment can be left by 
whatever other means prove expedient. 

The material component is a brass key, set with 
a ruby worth at least 500 gp. The witch discards 
the key as the spell is cast—it is annihilated by the 
casting of the spell. The spell must be cast by a 
circle of witches (at least seven), and the level of 
the abjuration is the level of the circle leader. 

Notes: Restricted to witch covens, common. 
Might optionally be available to specialist abjur- 
ers, who also require a supporting circle of wiz- 
ards. (Updated from DRAGON Magazine) 


Witch’s Death Spell 
(Necromancy) 


Level: 8 

Range: 120 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 8 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 or more creatures in a 40-ft. 
cube 

Saving Throw: Special 


This spell is used by witches to slay their ene- 
mies. Undead, nonliving, and extraplanar crea- 
tures are immune to the effects of this spell. The 
victims can be raised or resurrected by any expe- 
dient means, The spell can be cast in one of two 


A) One Creature: A single creature of 7+1 or 
more Hit Dice or levels, can be struck dead. A 
creature making a successful saving throw vs. 
death at a —2 penalty takes 2d6 points of damage 
instead. 

B) Group of Creatures: A group of individuals 
of 7 Hit Dice or levels, can be slain. The creatures 
must be within a 40-foot cube and 2d8 creatures 
chosen by the caster might be affected. Those 
with 4+3 Hit Dice or less are slain instantly, those 
with more are each allowed a saving throw vs. 
death magic at a —6 penalty, taking 2d6 points of 
damage even if they survive. 

A creature fatally affected by this spell crum- 
ples to the ground immediately and perishes in 
the space of a turn. If the death spell is cancelled, 
successfully dispelled, or rendered inert through 
antimagic during this time, the creature regains 
consciousness in 1d10 rounds. 


This potent dweomer ages the caster one year 
per victim. If cast by a circle of witches, the circle 
members split the aging, with the principal caster 
unaffected. 

Notes: Restricted to witches; common. 


Witch's Glamor — Witch 
(Illusion/Phantasm) 


Level: 2 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 2 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell is usually cast by ugly, evil witches 
in combination with one of the seduction spells. 
The witch s glamor creates a ravishing beauty di- 
rectly opposite the witch's true appearance. Any 
negative Charisma-based reaction adjustment be- 
comes positive; thus, a hag with a Charisma of 4 
(adjustment —5) has an effective Charisma of 17 
while under the influence of this spell. This 
would change a +5 saving throw bonus against a 
seduction spell to a —5 penalty. 

The glamor lasts 5 rounds per level unless cast 
while a seduction spell ís operating. In this case, 
it ends with the seduction spell. This occurs even 
if the seduction spell is broken prematurely. Also, 
the glamor ends instantly as soon as the witch at- 
tacks in any manner, except with an enchant- 
ment/charm spell. 

When the spell ends, any creature charmed by 
the witch must make an immediate saving throw 
vs. spell as soon as it sees her true features, with a 
penalty equal to her Charisma reaction adjustment. 
Failure the creature stops in horror and loses 
its next initiative roll (going last in the round). 

Notes: Restricted to witches, uncommon. 


Witchweed — Old Empire 
(Evocation) 


Level: 3 

Components: V, S, M 

Range: 50 yds. + 10 yds./level 
Casting Time: 3 

Duration: | rd_/level 

Area of Effect: 40-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell creates a cloud of smoke that is ut- 


a a i 


1027 


ES Wither " 


terly inhospitable to wizards. All wizards caught 
in this cloud cannot cast spells; they also suffer 2 
points of damage per round they remain in the 
cloud. The cloud is stationary; once in place, it 
can be moved only by a gust of wind spell or 
equivalent. 

The material component for this spell is burn- 
ing tobacco (or some other noxious, fume-pro- 
ducing plant). 

Notes: Uncommon spell. As a FORGOTTEN 
REALMS Old Empire spell, initial exposure re- 
quires a mentor or a read Southern magic spell. 


Wither 


Reversed form, see regenerate. 


Withering Palm 
(Evocation) 


Level: 7 

Components: V, S 

Range: Touch 

Casting Time: 4 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: 4 


This spell acts as a staff of withering. Upon cast- 
ing the spell, the wu jen must touch the victim. If a 
successful attack roll is made, the creature suffers 3d6 
points of damage and must make a successful saving 
throw vs. spell to avoid the withering effect. If the 
saving throw is failed, one limb of the creature (either 
the limb touched or one randomly determined) be- 
comes shriveled and useless. (The head is not consid- 
ered a limb.) If the saving throw is successful, the 
creature still suffers damage but does not undergo 
withering. 

If an arm is withered, the character can still fight, 
though two-handed weapons cannot be used. Spells 
requiring somatic components can be cast 75% of the 
time. If a leg is withered, the character's movement 
rate is reduced to one-fourth normal. Armor Class de- 
creases by 3 and the character suffers a —4 penalty to 
his chance to hit. A withered limb can be restored by 
the use of the heal, limited wish, or wish spell. 

Notes: Common in oriental settings; other- 
wise, very rare. 


Wizard Eye 
(Alteration) 
Level: 4 
Components: V, S, M 
Range: 0 


Casting Time: | turn 
Duration: 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: Creates 1 eye 
Saving Throw: None 


When this spell is employed, the wizard cre- 
ates an invisible sensory organ that sends him 
visual information. The wizard eye travels at 30 
feet per round if viewing an area ahead as a 
human would (i.e., primarily looking at the 
floor), or 10 feet per round if examining the ceil- 
ing and walls as well as the floor ahead. The 
wizard eye can see with infravision up to 10 feet, 
and with normal vision up to 60 feet away in 
brightly lit areas. The wizard eye can travel in any 
direction as long as the spell lasts. It has sub- 
stance and a form that can be detected (by a 
detect invisibility spell, for instance). Solid barri- 
ers prevent the passage of a wizard eye, although 
it can pass through a space no smaller than a 
small mouse hole (one inch in diameter). 

Using the eye requires the wizard to concen- 
trate. However, if his concentration is broken the 
spell does not end—the eye merely becomes inert 
until the wizard again concentrates, subject to the 
duration of the spell. The powers of the eye 
cannot be enhanced by other spells or items. The 
caster is subject to any gaze attack met by the 
eye. A successful dispel cast on the wizard or eye 
ends the spell. With respect to blindness, magical 
darkness, and so on, the wizard eye is considered 
an independent sensory organ of the caster. 

The material component of the spell is a bit of 
bat fur. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Wizard Lock 
(Alteration) 
(Universal) 


Level: 2 

Components: V, S 

Range: Touch 

Casting Time: 2 

Duration: Permanent 

Area of Effect: 30 sq. ft./level 
Saving Throw: None 


i a aaa 


1028 


^ Wizard Seal " 


A wizard lock spell cast upon a door, chest, or 
portal magically locks it. The caster can freely pass 
his own lock without affecting it; otherwise, the 
wizard locked door or object can be opened only by 
breaking in, a successful dispel magic, or knock 
spell, or by a wizard four or more levels higher than 
the one casting the spell. Note that the last two meth- 
ods do not remove the wizard lock, they only negate 
it for a brief duration, about one turn. Creatures from 
other planes cannot burst a wizard lock as they can a 


held portal (see the hold portal spell). 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 
Wizard Mark 

(Alteration) 

(Universal) 

Level: 1 

Components: V, S, M 

Range: Touch 

Casting Time: | 


Duration: Permanent 
Area of Effect: Up to 1 square ft. 
Saving Throw: None 


When this spell is cast, the wizard is able to in- 
scribe, visibly or invisibly, his personal rune or 
mark, as well as up to six additional characters of 
smaller size. A wizard mark spell enables the 
caster to etch the rune upon stone, metal, or any 
softer substance without harm to the material upon 
which the mark is placed. If an invisible mark is 
made, a detect magic spell will cause it to glow 
and be visible (though not necessarily understand- 
able). Detect invisibility, true seeing, a gem of 
seeing, or a robe of eyes will likewise expose an in- 
visible wizard mark. A read magic spell will reveal 
the maker's words, if any. The mark cannot be dis- 
pelled, but it can be removed by the caster or by an 
erase spell. If cast on a living being, normal wear 
gradually causes the mark to fade. 

The material components for this spell are a 
pinch of diamond dust (about 100 gp worth) and 
a pigment or pigments for the coloration of the 
mark. If the mark is to be invisible, the pigments 
are still used, but the caster uses a stylus of some 
sort rather than his finger. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


Wizard Seal 
(Abjuration, Alteration) 
(Geometry) 


Level: 6 

Components: V, S, M 

Range: Touch 

Casting Time: 8 hrs. 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 scroll or book 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell enables the caster to protect magical 
writings (such as spellbooks) from perusal by 
unauthorized individuals. Common sealings 
allow safe access to designated individuals or to a 
specific class alignment, guild, or experience 
level, and so on at the caster's choice. 

Unauthorized entities attempting to read the 
material must immediately save vs. spell or be af- 
flicted with a curse (as the 4th-level spell, but 
permanent) which is specified at the time of seal- 
ing. This can be removed only by a spellcaster of 
equal or greater level than the original sealer. A 
successful saving throw means that the reader ex- 
periences a sudden headache but no further ill ef- 
fects at that time. However additional saving 
throws must be made for each spell level (or 
equivalent) read thereafter; each at a cumulative 
—2 penalty. Failure at any point afflicts the reader 
with the curse. 

The seal remains potent until removed by the 
caster or a remove curse spell. If the remover's 
experience level is lower than that of the original 
caster, then there is a 5% chance per level differ- 
ence between them that the sealed writings will 
be destroyed. If the writings are destroyed, there 
is a 10% chance per level difference that the curse 
affects the remover. Dispel magic doesn't affect a 
wizard seal. 

Sealed material detects as magical. If sealed 
by alignment, the appropriate detection spell will 
reveal it as "good" or "evil" or even reveal tile 
caster's exact alignment if a know alignment 
spell is used. It is rumored that a variation of this 
spell allowing the sealing of small containers 
exists or is being researched. 

The material component is a 1000 gp ruby, 
which is crushed at the conclusion of the spell. 

Notes: Very rare spell. (Updated from 
POLYHEDRON Newszine.) 


a. °°». = soe ..te 2s a0 


1029 


E. Wizard Sight r 


Wizard Sight 
(Divination) 


Level: 3 

Components: V, S 

Range: 0 

Casting Time: 3 

Duration: 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


Upon completion of this spell, the caster's eyes 
glow blue and he is able to see the magical auras of 
spellcasters and enchanted objects. Only the auras of 
those things normally visible to the caster are seen; 
this spell does not give the wizard the ability to see in- 
visible objects, nor does it provide X-ray vision. This 
spell does not reveal the presence of good or evil or 
reveal alignment. 

While wizard sight is in effect, a wizard is able to 
see whether someone is a spellcaster and whether that 
person is a priest or a wizard (and what type of special- 
ist, if any). He can sense if a non-spellcaster has the po- 
tential to learn and cast wizard spells (that is, whether a 
fighter might someday gain the ability to cast a spell). 

Although a spellcaster's level cannot be discerned, 
the wizard can see the intensity of a spellcaster's aura 
and guess at the individual's magical power (dim, 
faint, moderate, strong, overwhelming). This can be 
extremely ambiguous even when a wizard has some 
method of comparison; the DM might announce that a 
subject's intensity is roughly equivalent to that of a 
companion, or he might announce that a subject's aura 
is the strongest the wizard has ever encountered. 

An object's magical abilities cannot be dis- 
cemed. The fact that it is magical and the type of 
magic (abjuration, alteration, etc.) are obvious. The 
wizard can see the intensity of an item's magical 
aura and guess at its power, but cannot tell whether 
a magical item is cursed. 

Notes: Uncommon spell (ToM). 


Wizard's Oracle 
(Divination) 


Level: 5 

Range: 0 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 turn 
Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell enables the wizard to contact powers 
or intelligences in the Ethereal or Astral Planes and 
request information in the form of questions that 
can be answered "yes" or “no.” The wizard may 
ask one such question for every level of experi- 
ence. The being or beings contacted are truthful 
and answer to the best of their ability, but they are 
not omniscient and may not be able to answer dif- 
ficult questions, Unlike the priest spell commune, 
which assumes that the caster is in contact with an 
outer planar divinity or its agent, wizards oracle 
places the wizard in contact with a power closely 
associated with one particular location or concern. 

For example, a wizard may discover that a 
swamp oracle knows everything there is to know 
about occurrences in the swamp, but speculations 
about the political situation of a kingdom 500 
miles away may be out of its ken. Many powers 
structure their answers to serve their own ends. 

Oracle powers are notoriously cryptic and 
reclusive. Should a caster attempt to cast this 
spell more than once per week, the power simply 
refuses to come. Such powers are not patient, and 
a caster who hesitates, engages in side discus- 
sions with companions, or pauses to do some- 
thing else is likely to irritate it, causing it to leave. 

The material component is a small fire sprin- 
kled with exotic, aromatic oils worth no less than 
100 gp per question to be asked. 

Notes; Restricted to savants, and diviners; un- 
common. 


1030 


^ Wonderform — Drow " 


Wonderform — Drow 
(Alteration) 


Level: 5 

Components: V, S 

Range: 0 

Casting Time: 2 
Duration: Special 

Saving Throw: None 
Area of Effect: The caster 


This spell allows the caster to instantly take on 
the form of a wingless wonder. No system shock 
roll is required, and the spell conceals the caster's 
true alignment with the chaotic neutral aura of a 
wingless wonder, as well as shielding the caster's 
mind from all contact: it can't be read, influenced, 
or attacked. (Drow wizards commonly use this spell 
to hide from hostile priestesses of the Spider Queen, 
or intruder-mages unfamiliar with the Underdark). 

While in wingless wonder form, a drow wizard 
can cast any memorized spells desired, purely by 
force of will. Somatic and verbal components are 
not necessary; material components are consumed, 
and a spell will fail without them, but they need not 
be brandished (instead, they disappear by them- 
selves from the caster's person, under the conceal- 
ment of the wonderform). 

A wizard can remain in wingless wonder form 


i, 


permanently, though 1 point of Intelligence is lost at 
the end of each full year in wonderform (ignore par- 
tial years). The caster can revert to his or her own 
form at will, or take on another form by casting an- 
other spell that enables a change of shape. In either 
case, the wonderform spell instantly ends; a wizard 
cannot shift back and forth between normal and 
wingless wonder form except by casting multiple 
wonderform spells. 
Notes: Restricted to drow, common. 


Wonderform Curse 

A version of this spell exists both among drow 
priestesses and wizards of the surface world of 
the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting that can imprison 
an individual in wonder form, allowing no speech 
or spellcasting. The individual, who retains full 
intelligence and awareness, can be released can 
be returned to its true form if a dispel magic, 
remove curse, or polymorph other spell is cast for 
this purpose during the round when the wonder 
creates its random effect. Turning back requires a 
system shock survival roll. Each year a being is 
trapped in wonderform, insanity might result 
(50% chance, minus Wisdom, checked at the end 
of each year). 


1031 


Wood Rot 


Wood Rot 
(Alteration) 
Reversible 


Level: 6 

Components: V, S, M 

Range: 10 yds. 

Casting Time: 6 

Duration: | rd. + 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: 10 x 10-ft. section of planking 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell accelerates the decay of a ship's hull 
or deck structure. The wood thus affected crum- 
bles away at a rate of | cubic ft. per round, effec- 
tively destroying the hull integrity, a mast, or up 
to 12 square feet of 1-inch thick deck each round. 
All affected wood must be a continuous area; 
casting this spell more than once in one area 
cannot speed up the rot. 

The material component is a wood-borer 
worm. 

The reverse of this spell is restore wood, 
which can nullify the effects of a rot wood spell 
or the effects of natural decay. 

The material component is a wood-borer 
worm. 

Notes: Uncommon for Sea mages; otherwise, 


very rare. (Updated from DraGon Magazine.) 


Wood Rot — Wu Jen 
(Evocation) 
Reversible 


Level: 5 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 3 

Range: 10 yds. 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Area of Effect: 1 creature or object 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


When this spell is cast, a sickly pale fire leaps 
from the wu jen's fingertips, dancing over the 
wooden object targeted by the spell. If the target 
is a live plant, the spell succeeds 75% of the time. 
If the target is a plant-like creature, a successful 
saving throw vs. spell prevents the spell from 
having any effect. Non-living wooden objects re- 
ceive no saving throw. Once the spell takes effect, 
the wooden object begins to decay at the rate of 1 
cubic ft. per turn. Plant-like creatures lose | Hit 
Die for every cubic ft. so rotted. The decayed 
wood rots and falls away, easily crumbling to the 


touch. The decay continues until the ebject is en- 
tirely rotted away. A wooden door can be de- 
stroyed in several turns, while a large wooden 
building requires several days. The material com- 
ponent is a live termite. 

The reverse of this spell, prevent rot, stops the 
decaying process of the wood rot spell. It does 
not restore wood already decayed, however. 

The material component is a dead termite. 

Notes: Common in oriental settings; other- 
wise, very rare. 


Wood Shape 
(Alteration) 
Level: 3 
Components: V, S, M 
Range: Touch 


Casting Time: 1 rd. 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: | cu. ft./level 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell allows the wu jen to shape and form 
natural wood into any shape desired. Like the 
smoke shape spell, the details of the image are 
rough and crude, but sufficient to fool at a dis- 
tance. Doors can be made in wooden walls or a 
chest from a tree trunk. Once created, the item 
shaped is permanent unless destroyed by fire, rot, 
or chopped apart. The spell does not make the 
material light or easily moved and the wu jen 
needs help moving larger objects into the desired 
position. 

The material component for this spell is a 
miniature carpenter's adze. 

Notes: Common in oriental settings; other- 
wise, very rare. This spell can be optionally un- 
common for Nature mages as well. 


Woodiron 
(Enchantment) 


Level: 4 
Components: V, S, M 
Range: Touch 
Casting Time: 1 
Duration: 5 rds./level 
Area of Effect: Weapon(s) touched 
Saving Throw: None 


whe 


This is a specialized version of enchanted 
weapon that works only on wooden weapons. 
When the spell is cast on a wooden weapon, that 


1032 


Worldwalk "d 


weapon becomes as hard as its iron counterparts 
on other fantasy worlds, with no penalties to 
attack or damage, Weapons normally made of 
wood, such as the club and quarterstaff, are 
granted a bonus of +1 on both attack and damage 
rolls. Only one woodiron spell can be cast on a 
weapon at a time; the effects are not cumulative, 
even with normal wooden weapons like those 
mentioned above. Wooden shields are also af- 
fected by this spell, becoming +1 for defensive 
purposes. Both weapons and shields are fireproof 
for the spell's duration. 

Missiles of wood enchanted in this manner 
lose their dweomer as soon as they hit a target; 
otherwise, the spell lasts for its full duration. It is 
also used in the manufacture of regular magical 
weapons and shields. 

The material component for this spell is a chip 
of the bronze-hard agafari wood of Nibenay. 

Notes: Common for spellcasters from the 
DARK SUN setting, optionally uncommon for 
Savage mages; otherwise, very rare. 


Words of Fire 
(Illusion/Phantasm) 
(Geometry) 


Level: 2 

Components: V, S 
Range: 0 

Casting Time: Special 
Duration: 2 turns/level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell allows one of the caster’s fingers to 
write letters of illusory flame. The caster can 
write at any time for up to one turn after the spell 
is cast, writing 12 letters, characters, or symbols 
per experience level she currently possesses. 
These letters appear to be made of leaping flame, 
and are bright enough for beings within 7 feet to 
read by. They can be written in the air or on any 
inorganic surface. The flames are not real, and 
cannot ignite anything, but do not form on water 
or a wet surface. 

If the caster tries to use the words of fire to 
draw magical glyphs or symbols, they do not 
form. The flaming inscriptions last for two turns 
per level of the caster from when the spell was 
cast, not when they were actually written. All of 
the characters must be written adjacent to each 
other in a space no larger than the caster can en- 
compass with spread feet and hands. 


As the caster writes, she can choose to have 
her writings duplicated on another surface or the 
air somewhere else on the same plane. An ob- 
server in this other locale sees letters of (illusory) 
fire appear, character by character, as the caster 
writes them. This other place must be one the 
caster has visited or seen, for it must be clearly 
visualized as the characters are written. If this 
second area or surface bears an enchantment, the 
letters do not form, though the caster is instantly 
aware of this. 

Notes: Rare in the FORGOTTEN REALMS set- 
ting; virtually unknown elsewhere. 


Worldwalk 
(Alteration) 
(Dimension) 
Level: 9 
Components: V, S, M 
Range: 30 yds. 


Casting Time: 9 
Duration: 1 turn/level 
Area of Effect: 20-ft. disk 
Saving Throw: None 


By means of this powerful magic, the spell- 
caster can open a portal to another dimension or 
plane. The portal appears as a disk up to 10 feet in 
radius, on the far side of which is the other di- 
mension or plane. 

The worldwalk portal can be cast up to 30 
yards away and can be oriented either vertically 
or horizontally. One side shows the opening into 
the other plane, while the other is a smooth, gray 
disk. A portal cannot be cast into an area already 
occupied by something else, though it can be cast 
against a wall or other hard surface. 

The portal can open either into a plane known 
and visited by the caster or into a previously un- 
known plane. In the latter case, the caster needs 
some material object from that plane in order to 
effect the casting (the object is not consumed in 
the process of casting). Worldwalk portals cannot 
be opened into random planes—the caster must 
visualize the destination or must have some 
object from that plane. 

Both connected planes are visible through the 
portal from the other side and creatures can pass 
through easily from one side to the other. 
Nonliving objects cannot pass through the portal 
unless they are carried by a living being. Hostile 
environments cannot affect those on the other 
side of the portal (a portal opened into the 


Ar. - T e uc.) MUNI OM s oto 


1033 


EN Wormhole, Prismal's " 


Elemental Plane of Fire would not harm anyone 
on the Prime Material Plane unless they stepped 
through the portal). 

Up to 10 creatures can pass through the world- 
walk portal per turn. Creatures that cannot fit 
through the portal cannot make the transfer 
unless reduced in size by some means. 

Once cast, the portal is in place for the dura- 
tion of the spell or until it is dispelled either by 
the caster's will or a successful dispel magic 
spell. If a creature is in the portal when the portal 
is dispelled, the creature is immediately sent to 
the Outlands. The status of the wizard who cast 
the spell does not affect the portal. 

There is a 70% chance, plus 1% per level of 
the spellcaster, that the worldwalk connects with 
the desired plane. If the portal does not reach its 
intended target, it instead reaches one of the 
DM's choosing, including alternate Prime 
Material Planes, other worlds, and pocket dimen- 
sions. Once cast, the portal links the two worlds 
and cannot be changed. 

Notes: Rare spell from the FORGOTTEN 
REALMS setting. Known to be in Elminster 's 
Traveling Spellbook. 


Wormhole, Prismal’s 
See Prismal’s wormhole. 


Worship 
(Enchantment/ Charm) 


Level: 6 

Components: V, S 

Range: 120 yds. 

Casting Time: 6 

Duration: 3 turns/level 

Area of Effect: 1 intelligent creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


The spell affects one creature intelligent (semi- 
intelligent or higher), regardless of Hit Dice. 
Creatures with magic resistance have their magic 
resistance reduced by a factor of 60% for purposes 
of determining whether the spell takes effect, and 
receive a normal saving throw. Creatures without 
magic resistance save at a —2 penalty. The effect 
of the spell is to put the entity into a zombie-like 
trance state from which it cannot be revived until 
the spell expires or is dispelled. 

The creature obeys commands willingly and 
to the best of its ability, applying every resource 
available without reservation. Courses of action 
to which the creature would normally be vio- 


lently opposed to are cheerfully executed. The 
only commands the creature hesitates to obey are 
obviously self-destructive orders or direct com- 
mands to cause harm to his close friends or loved 
ones. Even these orders do not allow the chance 
of breaking the charm, but simply cause the crea- 
ture to fall into a confused daze for 1d4 rounds. If 
the caster directly harms the creature, a new 
saving throw to break free of the witch's influ- 
ence is allowed 
Notes: Restricted to enchanters, very rare. 


Worship — Old Empire 
(Enchantment/Charm) 


Level: 6 

Components: V, S 

Range: 0 

Casting Time: 6 

Duration: 2 rds./level 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: Special 


The worship spell raises the effective 
Charisma of the caster to 22. Intelligent creatures 
of 3 Hit Dice (or levels) or less who are in clear 
view of the caster automatically fall to their knees 
and praise the caster. Creatures of 4-6 Hit Dice 
(or levels) get a saving throw to avoid the effect. 
Creatures above 6 Hit Dice are unaffected. 
Unwilling victims of this spell roll a reaction 
check when the spell is finished, with a +8 
penalty to the roll. 

Using this spell to impersonate a Power is 
very dangerous. 

Notes: Uncommon spell. As a FORGOTTEN 
REALMS Old Empire spell, initial exposure re- 
quires a mentor or a read Southern magic spell. 


Wound Bind 
(Alteration, Necromancy) 


Level: 2 

Components: V, S 
Range: 0 

Casting Time: 3 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell stanches the bleeding of open 
wounds and cleanses those same wounds to pre- 
vent disease. The wound bind reduces chances of 
contracting normal diseases from the wound to 


.-. | a= at) aret es CEP NO 


1034 


= Wraithform " 


095, decreases the chance of mummy rot and 
other magical diseases by 10%, and reduces 
chances of contracting lycanthropy by 25%. 
When cast, the wizard must touch the open 
wound or wounds; without visible wounds, the 
spell fails. The spell does not restore hit points, 
but prevents any further loss or damage from pre- 
vious wounds. If cast on wounds caused by a 
sword of wounding, the spell temporarily 
stanches those wounds; after | round, the wounds 
will open again and the weapon's bleeding 
damage continues unless the wounds are ban- 
daged and bound to prevent such losses. 

This spell was developed by the necromancer 
and Cyricist Stavros of the Skulls, by order of the 
Lord's Court. With the Watchful Order of Magists 
& Protectors, he was to create four beneficial 
necromancy spells or be sentenced to 
Undermountain (while a mage of no little power, 
Stavros was genuinely afraid of such a sentence, 
as he'd just returned from there only months ago). 

Notes: In the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting, 
known to the Watch-Wizards Guild of Waterdeep 
and Stavros of the Skulls. 


Wound Conferral 
(Necromancy) 


Level: 7 

Components: V, S, M 

Range: Touch 

Casting Time: 2 rds. 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: Two creatures 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell is similar to the 4th-level spell em- 
pathic wound transfer, except that it enables the 
caster to transfer the wounds (up to 3 hit points 
per level of the caster) between any two crea- 
tures, excluding the caster. The wizard must be 
able to grasp both the wounded creature and the 
creature to receive the wounds without having to 
make attack rolls. Thus, the two beings must 
either be willing to undergo the spell, or else be 
sleeping, unconscious, or otherwise bound and 
secured from escaping the caster's grasp. 

The creature to receive wounds is allowed a 
saving throw vs. spell if unwilling. If the saving 
throw succeeds, the transfer is incomplete and 
nothing happens. If failed, the creature receives 
the wounds of the wounded creature, subject to a 
few limitations. 

The total number of transferred hit points is 


limited to the caster's current hit points (or 3 hit 
points per level, whichever is smaller). Normally, 
the spell functions by conveying the wounds 
from the wounded creature to the caster (during 
the first round of casting) and then from the 
caster to the second creature (during the second 
round of the spell). Should a conferred wound 
drain the wizard below zero hit points (if the 
wizard unwittingly attempts to channel more hit 
points than he or she currently possesses), the ex- 
change effectively backfires and now operates on 
the wizard himself as an empathic wound trans- 
fer. The spell also backfires if it is interrupted 
during the second round of casting, before the 
final conferral of wounds to the second creature. 

This spell is terribly exhausting for the caster. 
After the exchange is complete, the wizard tem- 
porarily loses seven points of Constitution; each 
point may be recovered by two hours of complete 
rest. If the caster's Constitution drops below 3, 
unconsciousness results, and the full Constitution 
is not regained for 24 hours. 

The material components are hair and blood 
from both creatures, two newt eyes, and two wolf 
teeth (each from a different animal). These com- 
ponents are consumed in the casting. The caster 
must also wear, as a focus, a specially fashioned 
ruby brooch or pendant (worth at least 5,000 gp) 
at the time of casting. 

Notes: Restricted to necromancers, rare. 


Wraith Production 
Lost spell, rumored cast by the Deathmaster, a 
rare type of necromancer. 


Wraithform 
(Alteration, Illusion) 
(Shadow) 


Duration: 2 rds./level 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


When this spell is cast, the wizard and all of 
his gear become insubstantial. The caster is sub- 
ject only to magical or special attack, including 
those by weapons of +1 or better, or by creatures 
otherwise able to affect those struck only by mag- 
ical weapons. Undead of most sorts will ignore an 
individual in wraithform, believing him to be a 


" Sind sS e ee ee 


1035 


+ Wrath of the Just — Elf 


wraith or spectre, though a lich or special undead 
may save vs. spell with a —4 penalty to recognize 
the spell. 

The wizard can pass through small holes or 
narrow openings, even mere cracks, with all he 
wears or holds in his hands, as long as the spell 
persists. Note, however, that the caster cannot fly 
without additional magic. No form of attack is 
possible when in wraithform, except against crea- 
tures that exist on the Ethereal Plane, where all 
attacks (both ways) are normal. A successful 
dispel magic spell forces the wizard in wraith- 
form back to normal form. The spellcaster can 
end the spell with a single word. 

The material components for the spell are a bit 
of gauze and a wisp of smoke. 

Notes: Common spell (PHB). 


K E 


~ 
OTT 


Wrath of the Just — Elf 
(Elven High Magic) 


Level: 9 

Components: V, S 

Range: 0 

Casting Time: 2 turns 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 mi./level 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell is a massive one and is to be used 
only if the elves' existence is threatened. It cre- 
ates massive earthquakes, fissures, lightning 
storms, floods, and other natural disasters. 
Anyone in the spell's area of effect must success- 
fully save vs. death magic or be swallowed up by 
the earth, carried away by floods, or fall victim to 
some other disaster. 

High magi using this spell must add +20 to 
their effects roll. It would be considered a terrible 
crime for this spell to be used in any but the most 
dire of emergencies. 

Notes: Restricted to elves able to cast elven 
high magic, common. 


1036 


~ Wylunde’s Ward " 


Wrathful Castigation, Nybor's 

See Nybor's wrathful castigation. 
Write 

(Evocation) 
(Geometry) 
Level: 1 
Components: V, S, M 
Range: 0 


Casting Time: | rd. 

Duration: | hr./level 

Area of Effect: 1 magical spell 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell allows a wizard to transcribe a spell 
that he or she cannot understand at the time (due 
to lack of level or Intelligence) into a tome or 
other compilation used to maintain a library of 
spells. It in no way allows the use of the tran- 
scribed spell unless the other conditions for its 
use are met (for example, a successful “to know” 
roll and sufficient Intelligence to add the spell to 
the number of spells known). 

The wizard must make a successful saving 
throw vs. spell to carry out this procedure, with 
the following adjustments: +2 if the spell is up to 
one level greater than the highest spell level the 
caster currently uses; 0 if two levels higher; —1 if 
three or more levels higher. 

If the saving throw fails, the wizard takes 1d4 
points of damage for every level of the spell to be 
transcribed, and is knocked unconscious for one 
turn per spell level. The damage, if not fatal, can 
be healed only at the rate of 1d4 points per day, as 
it is damage to both the body and psyche. 

Transcribing the desired spell takes one hour 
per spell level; during this time, the wizard is in a 
trance state and can be surprised by any foe. 

In addition to the writing surface upon which 
the spell is to be transcribed, the caster needs a 
fine ink composed of rare substances (a minimum 
cost of 200 gp per bottle, if available at all with- 
out manufacture by the wizard). 

Notes: Uncommon spell. 


1037 


Wylunde's Ward 
(Abjuration) 


Level: 3 

Components: V 

Range: 0 

Casting Time: 1 

Duration: 2 rds. 

Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell is named for its creator, an irascible 
adventurer-mage who disappeared in the wilder- 
ness of the Sword Coast North long ago. It is 
called into effect with the utterance of a single 
word. It shields the caster with energy surges that 
are sometimes visible as a faint shimmering in 
the air around the caster's body. Wylunde s ward 
reduces any damage suffered by the caster by 2d4 
points in each of the two rounds it exists, reduc- 
ing damage to a minimum of | point per round. It 
intercepts hostile spell damage as well as physi- 
cal attacks, and it does not prevent the caster from 
working other magic. 

If no attacks strike the caster during the time 
of protection, the spell is wasted. There is no 
known way for a mage to confer this protective 
ward on another being. If a second Wylunde s 
ward is used by the same mage within a full day 
(24 hours) of the last ward taking effect, it in- 
creases all damage taken by 2d4 points in each 
round it exists. If a such third ward is cast within 
a full day (in other words, it takes effect within a 
full day of two other ward spells), the caster suf- 
fers an immediate 2d12 points of damage and 
must make a successful system shock survival 
roll or die immediately. 

Notes: Very rare in the FORGOTTEN REALMS 
setting; virtually unknown elsewhere. 


X-Ray Vision 


X-Ray Vision 
(Alteration) 
(Alchemy) 


Level: 8 

Components: V, S, M 
Range: 0 

Casting Time: 8 
Duration: 1 rd./level 
Saving Throw: None 
Area of Effect: Special 


This spell allows the caster to see into or 
through substances that are impenetrable to normal 
sight, including solid matter. The range (or depth) 
of the caster's vision is 20 feet, and the caster 
views anything within this range as if it were illu- 
minated to any degree comfortable for him. The 
caster can scan an area of 100 square feet (a 10- 
foot square) per round, but the depth of his vision 
and the speed with which his vision penetrates the 
object in question are limited (see table). 


Substance Rate of Max. Depth 
Scanned Penetration of Vision 
Animal matter 4 ft/rd. 20 ft. 
Vegetable matter 3 ft./rd. 20 ft. 

Stone 1 ft./rd. 10 ft. 

Iron, etc. 1 in./rd. 10 in. 

Lead, gold Nil None 


Secret compartments, drawers, traps, and recesses 
within the area scanned are 90% likely to be located 
by x-ray vision scanning. Note that this spell is unable 
to penetrate unusually dense metals, including lead, 
gold, platinum, and alloys of these substances. 

The material component is a special ointment for 
the eyes valued at 1,000 gp per application. Due to 
ointment's deleterious effects on the caster's eyes, 
this spell can be used safely no more than once per 


: Very rare spell. (Updated from 
POLYHEDRON Newszine.) 


Xorn Talons, Manshoon’s 
See Manshoon’s xorn talons. 


Xult’s Magical Doom 
(Alteration) 
(Geometry) 


Level: 5 

Components: V, S, M 
Range: Touch 

Casting Time: 5 

Duration: Special 

Saving Throw: Neg. 

Area of Effect: 10-ft. radius 


By means of a caterpillar cocoon, a pinch of 
dust, and the tracing of runes during the casting, a 
wizard seals a certain object with Xult s magical 
doom. The runes are traced with one fingertip 
over, for example, the pages of a book or a map. 
They are visible only to a detect magic, and can 
be harmlessly removed by dispel magic. They 
prevent unauthorized perusal of the guarded 
object. Only the caster or someone who is (by 
chance or deliberately) named in or on the mater- 
ial viewed—or who utters the secret word of de- 
activation that the caster establishes during 
casting—can safely examine the object without 
suffering the doom. 

The doom affects all creatures within a 10- 
foot radius when it is activated (the activator 
saves vs. spell at —3; others within the radius save 
at -1). The doom is a specialized polymorph 
other spell that works instantly upon any creature 
within its radius that fails its saving throw. An af- 
fected being suffers a system shock roll during its 
transformation. 

The transformation is permanent, and is 
always into the form of a bat, frog, toad or snake 
(determined randomly). The intelligence of an af- 
fected being is not altered, so if the transformed 
creature can activate a magical item or communi- 
cate with others to bring about its release, it is 
free to do so (another system shock survival roll 
applies). 

The doom lasts only for one activation if cast 
by a mage of 11th level or less. A mage of 12th to 
23rd level can cast the doom to last for up to four 
activations. Mages of higher levels can elect to 
have their dooms last for one additional activa- 
tion per level above 24th. The passage of time has 
no effect on a doom unless the object it guards is 
destroyed. Transformed creatures affected by this 
spell typically go insane if of greater than 7 
Intelligence (see table). 

Notes: Very rare spell. Known to be in the 
Tome of Rathdaen. 


a Uu cs E rl 


1038 


~ Xult's Magical Doom g- 


Time before Insanity 
No danger 
After 6 months 
After 8 months 
After 12 months 
After 24 months 
1396 chance/year* 
* noncumulative 


Year Gifting 


Year Gifting 


Reversed form, see year stealing. 


Year Stealing 
(Necromancy) 
Reversible 


Level: 8 

Range: Special 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: | hr. 
Duration: Special 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: 4 


An evil wu jen can use this spell to steal years 
from a victim’s life and add them to his or her 
own. If successful, the wu jen becomes 2d6 years 
younger, and the victim adds the same amount of 
years to his age (half this if the victim makes a 
successful saving throw vs. spell). This process is 
the reality behind the wives’ tales that a wu jen 
could steal a man’s life. The wu jen becomes 2d6 
years younger, and the victim adds the same 
amount of years to his age. 

Before attempting year stealing, the wu jen 
gathers blood from the intended victim. This is 
mixed with the wu jen’s own blood and water, 
then placed in a special glass screen made for this 
purpose. An unlit black candle is placed on the 
victim’s side of the glass pane and a white candle 
is lit on the wu jen’s side. A unicorn’s horn is 
stuck through the glass pane in the hole left for 
this reason, as a conduit for the magic. 

When the wu jen casts the spell, the glass 
screen glows with the light of the candle and the 
light builds in intensity unti] a flash of white light 
envelops victim, caster, and apparatus. When the 
light recedes, the white candle is now streaked 
with gray and burns with a blue flame. The uni- 
corn's horn has turned to useless dust. 

The reverse, year gifting, allows the wu jen to 
give some of his life force to another, restoring 
2d6 years to the recipient, while aging the same 
amount himself. The positions of the candles are 
reversed. 

Notes: Very rare in oriental settings; other- 
wise, unknown. This art has been lost for hun- 
dreds of years. 


Younger 


Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 1 turn 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: | creature 
Saving Throw: Special 


This obscure and dangerous spell makes the 
recipient up to one year younger per level of the 
caster (one year minimum), as decided by the 
caster. It can be cast only upon a willing recipi- 
ent, negating the penalties of advancing age, and 
restoring a youthful appearance. It will not make 
a creature younger than a young adult. 

The strain of casting temporarily reduces both 
the caster's and recipient's Constitutions by 1 
point per decade and then requires an immediate 
system shock check against death (a wizard cast- 
ing this spell on himself loses | point and makes 
one check). For each casting, the recipient has a 
5% cumulative chance that the Constitution loss 
is permanent and that the spell will not work for 
him again. Thus, a witch who has cast the spell 
upon herself three times would have, on the 
fourth casting, a 20% chance to permanently lose 
a Constitution point and the ability to benefit 
from this spell ever again. 

Temporarily lost Constitution returns to 
normal after one year. Receiving the spell more 
than once in a year means the temporary loss be- 
comes permanent immediately, in addition to the 
usual spell effects. Such long-term effects as a 
normally aging appearance, a degenerative rot 
that cannot be countered by any known means, 
and so forth, might also occur (5?6 chance). 

The spell was created by a long-dead, evil 
wizard, After consuming many elixirs of youth, 
he grew allergic to them. He created this spell to 
compensate for that allergy. 

The material component is a pound of bone 
marrow from a newborn dragon. 

The reverse of this spell, o/der, ages the victim 
by up to one year per level of the caster unless a 
successful saving throw vs. spell is made. The re- 
verse causes no Constitution loss, and its material 
component is a pound of bone marrow from 
dragon of venerable age or older. 

Notes: Very rare spell. 


Se ee AA 


1040 


^ Youth — Witch " 


Youth — Witch 
(Necromancy) 


Level: 8 

Range: 10 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 8 
Duration: | turn/level 
Area of Effect: | creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell temporarily reduces a creature's 
age, turning back the hands of time. A venerable 
character becomes middle-aged; an old character 
becomes mature; and a middle-aged character be- 
comes a young adult. Characters or creatures 
younger than middle-aged receive no appreciable 
effect from this spell. 

Youth may increase the affected character's 
physical ability scores (Strength, Dexterity, and 
Constitution) by counteracting any age-based ef- 
fects the character may be experiencing. 
However, the subject's mind is not affected 
beyond the regression of natural senility; the 


1041 


wisdom and insight of years remain. Naturally, 
the subject experiences a natural increase of 
energy and stamina, and even the creature's ap- 
pearance changes to reflect the temporary age; an 
old man affected by this spell would appear ex- 
actly as he did in his prime. No spell or effect (not 
even a wish) can make this state permanent, al- 
though a wish might extend its duration. 

Against creatures whose physical develop- 
ment is measured by age, such as dragons, this 
spell reduces their age by one or two steps. 
Unwilling creatures receive a saving throw vs. 
spell to negate the effect. 

When the spell ends, the creature returns to its 
true age over the course of 1d3 rounds. 

The material component is a green shoot of 
any kind. 

Notes: Restricted to witches, common. 


Zala's Amberhelm 
(Abjuration, Invocation) 
(Mentalism) 


Level: 4 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 2 turns 
Duration: | turn/level 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


When this spell is cast, an amber sphere of 
translucent energy appears around the caster’s 
head (about 2 feet in diameter for an average 
human), serving as a barrier against mind-af- 
fecting spells and telepathic psionic powers. 

Against mind-affecting spells, the caster has 
a 90% resistance, including charm, ESP, emo- 
tion, hypnotism, fascination, confusion, feeble- 
mind, suggestion and similar spells and effects. 
However, it does not affect the beguiling func- 
tion of the rod of rulership. Illusions are not af- 
fected. The barrier functions in both directions, 
preventing the caster from employing mind-af- 
fecting spells as well. The amberhelm can be 
dispelled normally. 

Against telepathic psionics, Zala s amber- 
helm provides protection from psionic contact 
and attack modes. The caster cannot use any 
psionic powers, except defense modes, while the 
spell operates. 

A psionicist can breach the amberhelm with a 
psionic attack mode. When the initial psionic 
energy is expended, the psionicist meets the 
helm's resistance and must decide to whether to 
breach the amberhelm or have the attack fail. 
(Breaching the spell requires extra psionic 
strength points, PSPs, equal to the amberhelm 
caster's level, plus 1d10 PSPs ; this is rolled se- 
cretly by the DM, who reveals only the PSPs ex- 
pended. Thus, breaching the defenses of a 
7th-level wizard requires from 8 to 17 additional 
points.) A breaching attack with insufficient 
PSPs fails. 

A failed attack wastes the PSPs and the am- 
berhelm remains active. If the breaching attack 
is successful, the amberhelm ends at once, its 
caster is stunned and unable to act for the re- 
mainder of the round, and the psionicist suffers 
1d10 points of damage. The next round, the 
psionicist can try to initiate contact normally. 

The material component is an amber bead 
worth at least 200 gp, a silver piece, and a parrot 


feather. Zala invented this spell after a 
battle with a psionicist who nearly de- 
=" stroyed her. 

Notes: Very rare spell. Known to be in the 
Book of Zala (the Lakharemtolma Zalarem). 
(Updated from DraGon Magazine.) 


Zala’s Deception 
(Alteration, Illusion) 
(Shadow) 


Level: 5 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 5 (or 1 rd.) 
Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: 50-ft. radius circle 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell combines aspects of mirror image 
and blink. It creates two or more exact dupli- 
cates within 50 feet of the caster. The caster's 
true location jumps randomly from image to 
image at the beginning of each round, before 
any other action occurs. 

Zala' deception creates 1d4 illusory dupli- 
cates, plus | additional image for every five 
levels of experience. A 10th-level wizard creates 
1d4+2 images, a 15th-level wizard creates 
1d4+3, and so on to a maximum of 1d4+5 at 
25th level. 

Unlike the images of the mirror image spell, 
this spell's illusory duplicates do not vanish if 
struck. Instead, any creature successfully strik- 
ing an image in hand-to-hand combat at any 
time during the round (including touch-deliv- 
ered spells) is allowed a saving throw vs. spell. 
If successful, the duplicate vanishes; failure 
means the image remains. 

Otherwise, the caster has considerable con- 
trol over the movement of the duplicates, which 
will not become entangled with walls, furniture, 
or other obstacles. If the wizard takes one full 
round to cast the spell (instead of a casting time 
of 5), the images will appear in precisely the 
spots and orientation desired, instead of being 
generally placed by the DM. After that, the 
images mimic the caster's general movements in 
a believable fashion. 

The images can be dispelled normally, 
though each is checked individually. Magics 
such as true seeing can easily determine which 
are the images and which is the true wizard. 

Notes: Very rare spell. Known to be in the 


P SESMMESRIEECE M E FRLI EE Lo endi. 


1042 


- Zala's Icejacket g 


Book of Zala (the Lakharemtolma Zalarem). 
(Updated from DraGoN Magazine.) 


Zala's Disruption 
(Abjuration) 


Level: 6 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: 6 

Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: 40 ft. radius 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


When invoked, this powerful incantation 
erases spells from the memory of any spell- 
using character or creature within the stated area 
of effect. Anyone with memorized spells must 
make a saving throw vs. spell or instantly lose 
1d4 random spells. Anyone failing the first 
saving throw must roll again; failure results in 
another 1d4 spells instantly lost and another 
saving throw, continuing until no spells remain 
or until a saving throw is successful. 

The caster and any allies are also subjected to 
the effects of Zala's disruption, although the 
caster himself gains a +2 bonus to his saving 
throws (+3 if an abjurer specialist wizard). Any 
disrupted magic takes the form of a spectacular 
cloud of shimmering light that hovers in the area 
for several hours before fading from view. 

The material component is a diamond worth 
no less than 5,000 gp, which is shattered in the 
casting of the spell. 

Notes: Very rare spell. Known to be in the 
Book of Zala (the Lakharemtolma Zalarem). 
(Updated from DraGoN Magazine.) 


Zala's Forcebuckler 
(Abjuration, Invocation) 
(Force) 


Level: 3 

Range: 0 

Components: V 

Casting Time: 3 

Duration: | turn + 1 rd./level 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


The forcebuckler is a glowing golden disk of 
magical energy that appears on the wizard's left 
or right forearm, as desired. It does not hinder 
spellcasting, and provides a number of benefits. 


The caster receives a +2 bonus to Armor 
Class and saving throws against attacks from the 
front or protected flank (but not rear). 

Damage from fire, cold, acid, electricity, or 
raw magical energy (such as magic missile) that 
strikes the wizard from the front or protected 
flank is reduced by | point per die. 

Magical rays or bolts that affect only a single 
creature, such as ray of enfeeblement, Melf s 
acid arrow, a beholder's petrification ray, or a 
single magic missile, can be harmlessly de- 
flected, at the option of the caster. The caster has 
a 25% chance plus 2% per level to deflect the 
attack. The forcebuckler is destroyed in the at- 
tempt to deflect the attack regardless of success. 

Zala's forcebuckler cannot be removed or 
concealed, although the wizard can choose to let 
the spell lapse at any time. It sheds as much light 
as a normal candle. 

Notes: Very rare spell. Known to be in the 
Book of Zala (the Lakharemtolma Zalarem). 
(Updated from DraGoN Magazine.) 


Zala's Icejacket 
(Abjuration, Conjuration) 
(Water) 


Level: 1 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 1 

Duration: 5 rds. + 1 rd./level maximum 
Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell coats one creature in magical ice 
and snow, providing excellent protection from 
fire until it melts. The recipient is almost totally 
protected against normal fire—damage from 
nonmagical fires is reduced by 3 points per die 
(to a minimum of 0 points per die). The ice- 
jacket insulates against minor fire spells of Ist 
to 2nd level, reducing damage by 2 points per 
die (to a minimum of 1 point per die). Against 
more powerful magical fire attacks, such as red 
dragon breath or fire-based spells of 3th level or 
more, damage is reduced by 1 point per die (to a 
minimum of 1 point per die). Any magical fire 
attack nullifies the icejacket on contact; the spell 
wards against only one such attack. 

The icejacket increases the subject's suscep- 
tibility to cold-based attacks. The protected 
creature suffers 1 additional point of damage per 
die from cold-based attacks such as breath 


ee a Ll 


1043 


x Zala’s Lifeforce Guardian " 


weapons or spells, and the icejacket ends. 

The spell can be used offensively, though a 
target creature receives a saving throw vs. spell 
to negate the effect. A fire-based creature takes 
2d6 points of damage and the spell ends in- 
stantly. Otherwise, the spell increases the effects 
of cold to the same degree it protects against 
fire; thus, an enemy might be frozen in a bliz- 
zard. The icejacket can be used for camouflage 
in snowy conditions, giving a concealed charac- 
ter a +1 bonus to surprise an enemy, or to keep 
cool in desert climates. 

Notes: Very rare spell. Known to be in the 
Book of Zala (the Lakharemtolma Zalarem). 
(Updated from DraGoN Magazine.) 


Zala's Lifeforce Guardian 
(Abjuration, Conjuration) 


Level: 2 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S 

Casting Time: 1 rd. 

Duration: Maximum 2 rds./level 
Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell creates an intangible, invisible 
double of a creature that interposes itself when 
the creature's lifeforce is in peril. Mere death or 
magical influences do not qualify; only spells or 
effects that directly attack or suppress the pro- 
tected creature's lifeforce are blocked by this 
spell. Such effects include enervation, strength 
and energy drain, magic jar and possession, trap 
the soul, death spell, finger of death, slay living, 
and destruction. This spell can be cast only on a 
willing creature. 

When the effect or attack is about to take 
place, the invisible double interposes, and the 
protected creature makes an unmodified saving 
throw vs. death magic to avoid the effect, even if 
no saving throw is normally allowed. Success 
means the double absorbs the attack, including 
incidental damage, and is destroyed. Failure 
means the attack takes place normally. 

If the double is destroyed, the protected crea- 
ture loses hit points depending on its original 
Hit Dice or level and group, as noted on the 
table. 


Group Damage Taken 
Warrior —3 hp/level 
Priest, Monster — —2 hp/level or HD 
Rogue, Wizard — —1 hp/level 


If the double has not been destroyed within 
two rounds per caster level after its creation, 
then it fades away without further effect. 

Notes: Very rare spell. Known to be in the 
Book of Zala (the Lakharemtolma Zalarem). 
(Updated from DRAGON Magazine.) 


Zikalan Fireform 


(Alteration) 


(Fire) 


Level: 3 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Duration: | hr./level 
Casting Time: 3 

Area of Effect: 1 individual 
Saving Throw: None 


An individual under the effects of this spell 
can meld his body with nonmagical fire. The fire 
must be within 5 feet of the fireformed individ- 
ual so he can leap into the blaze. The fireformed 
creature is then concealed in the flickering 
flames of a torch, campfire, fireplace, or other 
source of nonmagical fire. The fire must be at 
least the size of a torch. 

While in fireform, the individual can see and 
hear normally; the flames do not obscure hear- 
ing or vision. The individual cannot cast spells, 
talk, attack, or suffer damage. To leave the fire, 
the individual can cancel the spell with a mental 
command. Otherwise, the individual is expelled 
from the flames at the end of the spell's duration 
or if the fire is completely extinguished by any 
means. (The spell does not expire if the blaze 
merely dies down to embers.) The spell is also 
cancelled if a spell such as affect normal fires or 
pyrotechnics is cast upon the flames. 

The individual is immune to heat and damage 
from normal fires while moving into and out of 
the source of flame (as well as during the spell's 
effect). A fireformed individual cannot be dis- 
cerned from normal flames unless a detect 
magic spell is cast. In this event, the flames radi- 
ate a faint aura of alteration magic. A detect in- 
visibility spell will not reveal the fireformed 
individual. 

This old enchantment was created by a 


ee SE C E 


1044 


~ Zombie Animation " 


Zikalan court wizard who used it to spy on visit- 
ing dignitaries. The spell enabled the wizard or 
other creature of his choice to hide in the bra- 
ziers and fireplaces of Zikala's palace, temples, 
and other state buildings. 

The material component is a mixture of salt, 
sulfur, and crushed peppercorns that is tossed 
into the fire source. 

Notes: Common on Cerilia, the BIRTHRIGHT 
setting, uncommon or rare for fire mages; other- 
wise very rare. 


Zephyr 
(Evocation) 
(Air) 


Level: 2 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 2 

Duration: | 

Area of Effect: 10-ft. path, 5 ft./level long 
Saving Throw: None 

length 


By means of this spell, a gentle draft of air 
moves outward from the spellcaster in the direc- 
tion faced. It continues outward to the maximum 
distance (5 feet per caster level). The force of 
the zephyr is sufficient to cause small flames to 
waver and dance. It fans flames and fires of 
larger size, making them hotter (+1 to damage 
dice, if applicable). It holds back moving clouds 
of vapor (such as a cloudkill) for 1 round. It 
weakens stationary vapors such as fog cloud and 
wall of fog, reducing their duration by half. It 
moves stagnant air, vapors, and even poisonous 
gases backward by 10 feet, and likewise reduces 
their duration and potency by half, unless the 
vapor is renewed by some source. 

The material component for this spell is a 
piece of fine parchment, accordion-folded and 
tacked near the bottom with a pin of ivory or 
silver. 

Notes: Uncommon spell. 


P 
= 
= 


R 


lh 


NW ` 


Aen ten 


X 


NN 


WN 


Zombie Animation 
(Necromancy, Alteration) 


Level: 3 

Range: 50 ft. + 10 ft./level 
Components: V, S, M 

Casting Time: 2 

Duration: 1 rd./level 

Area of Effect: 1 zombie/level 
Saving Throw: None 


Zombie animation is simply an animate dead 
spell that produces one specially prepared zombie 
for every level of the caster. The corpses can then 
be animated at a range of 50 feet plus 10 feet per 
level of the caster. The zombie is animated for 
only | round per level of the caster (unless de- 
stroyed or dispelled). The corpse must be im- 
mersed in a bath of special salts for 1 full turn at 
any time before the casting of spell. Such a bath 
costs 200 gp and can soak up to ten corpses. 

Notes: Restricted to Deathmasters (uncom- 
mon) and necromancers (rare). (Updated from 
DRAGON Magazine.) 


JE. 4 "GENTE 


^ Zombie Double 


Zombie Double 
(Necromancy) 
Level: 7 
Range: 0 


Components: V, S, M 
Casting Time: | turn 
Duration: | turn/level 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell creates a ju-ju zombie duplicate of 
the caster. The zombie double has the same 
memories, consciousness, and alignment as the 
caster; essentially, the caster now exists in two 
bodies simultaneously. In all other respects, the 
zombie double is the same as a normal ju-ju 
zombie. The double cannot cast spells, but it can 
use a weapon exactly as the caster. It is also able 
to climb walls as a thief, with a 9296 chance for 
success. The double can be turned as a spectre. 
If it strays more than 30 yards from the caster, 
the double becomes inactive and collapses to the 
ground; it becomes active again the instant the 
caster moves within 30 yards. 

The material components for this spell are a 
bit of wax from a black candle and a lock of hair 
from the caster. 

Notes: Restricted to necromancers, uncom- 


mon. 


Zone of Despair 
(Necromancy) 
Level: 5 
Range: 0 
Components: V, S 
Casting Time: 8 


Duration: | to 6 hrs. 
Area of Effect: 100-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


The spell creates an area that causes despair 
in living creatures. Those failing to make a suc- 
cessful saving throw vs. spell upon entering the 
affected area become depressed, suffering a —4 
penalty to their initiative rolls. Any emotion- 
controlling spell, as well a successful dispel 
magic spell, can negate the effect of the zone of 
despair upon an affected being. 

Notes: Uncommon in the RAVENLOFT setting, 
rare for undead spellcasters elsewhere; other- 
wise, very rare. This spell can be researched 
only on the Demiplane of Dread. 


"————— nns! —————á—"—aÓ 
Appendices 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 
Appendix 1: Spells 
CHMENDL ILU, Luis amos wlaca ea acl a una 1048 
Dragon King Spells c.r ssnsti Enana 1065 
Appendix 2: Rules 

Chronomancy: DM Notes ...............255- 1086 

EXD. criss COO EX SR OPE 1087 

TEASE, eos. dos ossia ods 1089 

Pile ORR OWE 2I I sa hated ao en n 1089 

Appendix 3: Lists 

UNIVERSAL SPELL LIST ...... leues n 1093 

GENERAL MAGE SPELL LIST ...............-+- 1093 
(Ist- to 9th-Level Spells, by rarity) 

SCHOOLS OF PHILOSOPHY ... 2.2.06... cece eens 1102 
ae tse ara Na ama PONELE 1102 
PEON (dvi S Lcx es BR ry 9-988 1104 
Conjuration/Summoning ............6..055 1107 
DVO 555 Loris ut re ha wa Maer art 1108 
Enchantment/Charm ...................05: 1109 
Illusion/Phantasm s v p eiio toob Eo a oeda POA 1110 
Invocation/Evocation .......... eee 1111 
PROGENY AETS EEEE EEEE E EN 1113 

SCHOOLE OF BICE onsa lniana aeaa 1114 
[C E E ER OEE PA Tm 1114 
l A T T METTI His 
X CADAT ERA IEEE ILI IET A 1115 
WOOP Vite (ae x exa n3 lan o cleo eae wate 2 1116 
DEMQUE dor evtRE True temas pan 1117 
ROM UE cea hive pee i Ronee vie RA SAP QUÉ 1117 
MMO RE TET TERT TIT EIN TT 1118 
SBMEUW 2 coe Tank a rS irises CREE. 1119 

SCHOOLS OF THAUMATURGY ....... esee 1120 
ANAS ETT ECCEECEET COT ess cnuyieen es 1120 
dri EARRA EPIST ETE TUI TET 1121 
GOI cues i ver e X ALEEEEe RR Y! 1122 
Song (includes Bards and Harpers) .......... 1123 
boo) Co AER, 1124 

Wonrto-Srmonc LISTS 1... eee oot 1126 
AL-QUADIM setting ........ een 1126 
BIRTHRIGHT setting ........... ce cee ee eens 1129 
DARK SON TOE occ 21 Loos rera 1129 
DRAGONLANCE setting 
(includes Dragon Knight spells) ............. 1130 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting 
(includes Halruaan and Old Empire spells) ....1130 
Maztica 
(includes Hishna and Pluma spells) .......... 1131 
Mystara (including Red Steel spells) ......... 1132 


Oriental Adventures setting 

(includes Geisya and Ninja spells) ........... 1133 

PLANESCAPE setting 

(includes Bleaker spells) ...............+-+ 1135 

RAVENLOFT setting 

(includes Undead spells) ......----..0000++ 1135 

SPELLJAMMER setting 

(includes Sun Mage spells) ..............-. 1136 

cato! ERIUEE RN CERELETZIEEULZ TID DOC 1136 

WORLD OF GREYHAWK setting ............++ 1136 
SPELL Lists BY WIZARDS SPECIALTY ............ 1137 

Alliance of the Veil |... eee 1137 


Bard (see School of Thaumaturgy, Song) 
Bleaker (see world setting, PLANESCAPE) 


Bedine Sorcerers and Witches 
Chronomancer. ...... rine nnt 
Dresm Mage .......... ee 
ML E TOT UTFERRD CSS TET 
Dragon Knight 
(see world setting, DRAGONLANCE) 
FIO BN vos sores fuxs dv nie ctos d BR E EN 1139 
Geisya (see world setting, Oriental) 
ACT Por EET ete comb n 1140 
Harper (see School of Thaumaturgy, Song) 
Healer Mage (optional) .................45 1140 
Hedge WENG. oes Mnt rh ce ene ap ue 1141 
Hishna Wizard (see world setting, Maztica) 
pO TIT MARIPOSA TANT Lern E DU Psp 1142 
hoo op s mHfetudm Eier do EAT 1143 
Ninja/Shinobi (see world setting, Oriental) 
UE e v HAE Mb ped VIE ER d nS div. 1144 
Pirates of the Fallen Stars (see Sea Mage) 
Pluma Wizard (see world setting, Maztica) 
Red Wizards of Thay ..............seeeee 1144 
vl EET ESTEE GDOCSE E XE c dy tees 1145 
So Mage 1317.01 aa aa VE T te 1145 
The Seven Sishen: «oov dé ke aides UV 1146 
Son REM ooo ee eerie any eee ae 1146 
Sun Mage (see world setting, SPELLJAMMER) 
WEME MENS. rive vena Ae Ra a E 1147 
Watch-Wizards Guild of Waterdeep .......... 1147 
WR os ct clit EN UON Ie Aie 1148 
RASTA SPUD LASTS: «5005's Cupra gue tei aimee 1149 
PIO PRAECEPTOR IATIAPROHER ETT TE RC 1149 
[OU Tro oes oe Ben e t AÈ 1149 
DRAGON. 205. oR PE E EN 1149 
DR EON PET TTRUTHORUIT IT PES. URT CETT 1149 
Elf (includes High Magic) ................. 1150 
GUI NE become vanos rci rais d 1150 
SO Eee node e oa 4 ol 1150 
QNI. 12.2255 TR en 1150 
NORE ENOS 193« 34 vies SRW s MU 1150 
Phaliipil. oro o env nr ERIS d 1150 
A PED tains Sita DE e 1150 
OO PPP ptores DOS Ue a 1150 
GECOMATE : o SULTS ast TII Urs E 1151 
OFFICAL ERRATA VOL 1-3 esoh aooo awda toie 1152 


T A noD. ry cu NP ee ee 


1047 


^—SX«———————sÓ——a—MÓ 


Cantrips 


This section contains the details of the Ist Edition 
cantrip spells. In the 2nd Edition, this whole rule 
system was replaced by a single Ist-level spell that 
allows a wizard to cast as many different minor ef- 
fects as desired within a long period of time (8 
hours). The 1st Edition cantrips are presented here 
as examples of what a wizard might do with the 
2nd Edition cantrip spell. In the 1st Ed. rules, a 
segment was / of a round. These cantrips were 
originally published in Unearthed Arcana. 


Cantrips are minor spells learned by appren- 
tice wizards during their long, rigorous, and te- 
dious training for the craft of magic-use. An 
aspiring wizard can use one cantrip per day as a 
0-level neophyte (-2,000 XP to —1,001 XP), two 
cantrips per day as a 0-level initiate (—1,000 to 
—501), and three cantrips per day as a 0-level ap- 
prentice (-500 to —1). Cantrips are memorized 
just as are higher-level spells. 

Most cantrips are simple little spells of no 
great effect. When the individual becomes a Ist- 
level wizard, these small magics are usually dis- 
carded in favor of the more powerful spells then 
available. However, a wizard may choose to 
retain up to four cantrips in place of one Ist-level 
spell. This assumes that the wizard has, in fact, 
retained his or her book of cantrips—a tome as 
large as a good-sized book of higher-level spells. 

All cantrips are 0 level, have a 10-yard range, 
have a generally small area of effect. They re- 
quire only soft, simple verbal and somatic com- 
ponents, and are cast in a very short time (4 to 4 
segment). They manifest as a brief burst of magic 
that quickly fades, leaving at most a minor physi- 
cal change that persists until altered by time or 
labor. Only cantrips that involve living creatures 
allow any saving throw. Also, cantrips do not 
generally break states of extreme concentration 
(such as when casting a spell). The effects of 
cantrips, and the people and items affected by 
them, radiate a very faint magical aura that lasts 
for no more than a turn once the magic fades. 

Cantrips are grouped according to general 
effect or purpose into seven categories: useful, re- 
versed, legerdemain, person-affecting, personal, 
and haunting-sound—the last, available only to 
illusionists, is the group of minor illusion cantrips 
(marked '***"). Any wizard might know cantrips in 
any of the first six categories, unless barred by 
specialty oppositions. There is a special section 
on cantrips from the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting; 


these are denoted on the list as very rare cantrips 
(italicized). 


LIST OF CANTRIPS 

FORGOTTEN REALMS cantrips are in italics. 
Useful Spice Reversed 
Cantrips Sprout Cantrips 
Chill Stitch Curdle 
Clean Sweeten Dirty 
Color Tie Dusty 
Dampen Warm Hairy 
Dry Wrap Knot 
Dust Cut Ravel 
Exterminate Gallop Sour 
Flavor Spill 
Freshen Tangle 
Gather Tarnish 
Polish Untie 
Salt Wilt 
Shine Scorch 


a mur TI er 


1048 


^ Useful Cantrips " 


Legerdemain Personal Minor 
Change Cantrips Illusion 
Distract Bee Cantrips 
Hide Bluelight Colored 
Mute Bug Lights* 
Palm Firefinger Dim* 
Present Gnats Haze* 

Mouse Mask* 
Person- Smokepuff Mirage* 
Affecting Spider Noise* 
Cantrips Tweak Rainbow* 
Belch Unlock Two 
Blink Catfeet D'lusion* 
Cough Spark 
Giggle 
Nod Haunting 
Scratch Cantrips 
Sneeze Creak 
Twitch Footfall 
Wink Groan 
Yawn Moan 
Listen Rattle 
Snatch Tap 
Sting Thump 

Whistle 

Horn 

Useful Cantrips 

Chill (Useful) 
(Evocation) 


Area of Effect: 1-ft. cube 
Casting Time: 4 segment 


The caster, using this cantrip, can reduce the 
temperature of nonliving liquid or solid material 
by about 40° F., subject to a minimum tempera- 
ture of freezing (32? F.). The chill lasts for but an 
instant, after which the object warms slowly back 
to normal temperature. 

The verbal component is a soft whistling, the 
somatic component is a downward thrust thumb. 


Clean (Useful) 
(Abjuration) 


Area of Effect: 4 sq. yds. 
Casting Time: 4 segment 


This cantrip enables the caster to remove 
heavy soil, dirt, and like foreign objects from 
floors, walls, dishes, windows, etc. These surfaces 
are then spotless. Usually only one type of mater- 


ial is treated in a single application, as care must 
be taken in removal of pigments and the like. 

The verbal component is a low outrush of air, 
the somatic is a circular hand motion. 


Color (Useful) 
(Evocation) 


Area of Effect: 1 cu. yd. 
Casting Time: 4 segment 


By use of this cantrip, the caster brings color 
to an object. It can restore faded hues or tinge 
those already colored with a different hue. Thus, 
dull or faded fabric can be brightened, pigments 
restored, or even hair or skin changed to another 
color. The effect must be renewed every 30 days. 

The verbal component is humming, the so- 
matic is a back-and-forth or wringing hand 
motion. 


Dampen (Useful) 
(Evocation) 


Area of Effect: 1 cu. yd. 
Casting Time: 4 segment 


When a cantrip of this sort is cast, the area of 
effect is permeated by a fog-like dampness that 
leaves all material within damp to the touch. This 
is hard on parchment, but it does make parchment 
and like substances hard to set aflame. Those in 
the area of effect of the dampen cantrip are en- 
wrapped in a light fog, and objects in this fog, 
while still visible, lose their detail. 

The verbal component is a low hooting or a 
hummed ditty, somatic is a hand gesture upwards 
with writhing fingers. 


Dry (Useful) 
(Abjuration) 


Area of Effect: | cu. yd. 
Casting Time: 4 segment 


This cantrip removes dampness and excess 
moisture from materials in the area of effect. It is 
useful for drying cloth or herbs and for cleaning 
chores. 

The verbal component is a hummed ditty, and 
the somatic is a two-handed wringing motion. 


= RI en E 


1049 


^ Useful Cantrips » 


Dust (Useful) 
(Abjuration) 


Area of Effect: 10-ft. radius 
Casting Time: 4 segment 


A cantrip of this sort removes all fine dust and 
tiny grit particles from exposed surfaces such as 
floors, shelves, walls, and so on. The material so 
removed is transported elsewhere, but new dust 
can accumulate, of course. 

The verbal component is a continuous in- 
drawing of breath, the somatic is a back-and- 
forth hand motion. 


Exterminate (Useful) 
(Abjuration) 


Area of Effect: 1 small creature 
Casting Time: Xa segment 


When this cantrip is used, the caster may kill a 
small pest such as a fly, mouse, rat, beetle, or the 
like. It is useful for indoor and outdoor applica- 
tions. If the subject is very small, an area of up to 
one-half cubic foot can be rid of pests. This 
cantrip is not effective against magical creations 
and normal-sized creatures magically shrunk to 
insect-size, nor on polymorphed creatures and 
similarly enchanted beings. 

The somatic gesture is a pointed finger, while 
the caster verbalizes a low “zzzt” sound. 


Flavor (Useful) 
(Enchantment) 


Area of Effect: 1 object 
Casting Time: 4 segment 


This cantrip enables the caster to give the 
object a superior or better or different flavor. 
Thus, mush can be made to taste as if it were lob- 
ster bisque, but the dweomer does not actually 
affect quality or wholesomeness. Spoiled food re- 
mains spoiled; a poisoned drink would still be 
deadly (though a tell-tale taste of the poison may 
be masked in this fashion). 

The verbal component is a muttered lip- 
smacking sound; the somatic gesture is a shaking 
motion. 


Freshen (Useful) 
(Enchantment) 


Area of Effect: 1 object 
Casting Time: 4 segment 


By means of this cantrip, the caster brings new 
life or freshness to the object desired. The magic 
applies to food and drink items such as milk, beer, 
meat, and raw vegetables. It also works with cut 
vegetables, flowers, herbs, and so on. Although it 
removes a slight taint of spoilage, restores droop- 
ing flowers, and so on, it is not as effective as a 
purify food & drink spell, and lasts for but an hour. 
The object must be of relatively small size: a 
small cask of liquid, a sheep, a bushel of vegeta- 
bles, etc. If used on a creature that is harmed by 
magics such as purify food and drink, the cantrip 
inflicts 1d2 points of damage. 

The verbal component is an "mmmmmm ” 
sound, while the hand makes a mystic symbol 
with thumb and forefinger forming a circle and 
the other fingers upright and apart. 


Gather (Useful) 
(Alteration) 


Area of Effect: 1 sq. yd. 
Casting Time: X segment 


This cantrip enables the caster to neatly gather 
numerous small objects into a stack or pile. For 
instance, if nails, nuts, coins, papers, or like ob- 
jects were spilled, the magic would bring them to- 
gether. [t can be used selectively, for instance to 
separate one type of material from another, but 
only the selected type is gathered neatly. 

The caster verbalizes the type of material to be 
gathered, while making a gathering motion. 


Polish (Useful) 
(Alteration) 


Area of Effect: 1 object 
Casting Time: 4 segment 


When this cantrip is used, the caster magically 
smoothes and brings luster to materials such as 
wood, metal, stone, leather, or ceramic. Naturally, 
the desired object must be relatively clean for this 
cantrip to be effective. The object must be of rea- 
sonable size—a floor of up to 1,000 square feet, 
for example. It works best on smaller objects such 
as boots, mirrors, crystal containers, and so on. 

The caster hums a ditty while making a buff- 
ing motion. 


AU DR 


1050 


N Useful Cantrips g 


Salt (Useful) 
(Evocation) 


Area of Effect: 1 object 
Casting Time: X segment 


This cantrip causes a sprinkling of fine salt to 
magically appear and descend upon the desired 
object; for example, a stew, a troublesome weed 
patch, or a barrel full of fish to be preserved. The 
object must be of a reasonable size—up to about 
4 square yards area or 30 gallons liquid volume. 
Care must be taken to avoid over-salting if the 
object is smaller; if larger, the object does not re- 
ceive much salt. A creature adversely affected by 
salt (such as a giant slug) suffers 1d4 points of 
damage from this cantrip. 

The verbal component is a labial smacking, 
performed while the hand makes a sprinkling 
motion. 


Shine (Useful) 
(Alteration) 


Area of Effect: 1 object 
Casting Time: 4 segment 


Similar to the polish cantrip, this magic allows 
the caster to remove tarnish, rust, corrosion, and 
similar substances from the desired object. This 
cantrip brings about a mirror-bright shine to ob- 
jects capable of such, causing their surfaces to be 
smooth and unmarred. A piece of jewelry, for in- 
stance, could be made more attractive. A single 
object up to a cubic yard in volume can be treated 
by this cantrip. 

As with polish, the caster hums a ditty while 
making a buffing motion. 


Spice (Useful) 
(Evocation) 


Area of Effect: | object 
Casting Time: 4 segment 


Unlike the flavor cantrip, this magic actually 
brings a particular spice to the object of food or 
drink. Thus, ginger, pepper, or a like spice can be 
brought to add zest (or disguise another taste). An 
herb such as bay leaf, garlic, parsley, and so forth 
can likewise be evoked by this cantrip. The quan- 
tity is sufficient to spice food or drink for about a 
half-dozen people. The spice (or herb) appears over 
the object vessel as a fine powder or flake, falls 


upon it, and adds its substance to the dish or drink. 

A ditty is hummed for the verbal component, 
while the hand makes a crumbling and sprinkling 
motion. 


Sprout (Useful) 
(Evocation) 


Area of Effect: 1 cu. yd. 
Casting Time: 4 segment 


By means of this cantrip, the caster causes ac- 
celeration in the growth of plants, particularly 
with respect to the germination of plant seeds. 
The cantrip causes seeds to shoot forth tiny 
sprouts, newly sprouted plants to grow an inch or 
so, buds to flower, and so on. Fruits and vegeta- 
bles can be ripened (even to spoilage) by this 
cantrip. 

A susurrant sound is verbalized while the 
caster’s hand makes hoeing motions. 


Stitch (Useful) 
(Alteration) 


Area of Effect: Special 
Casting Time: 4 segment 


This cantrip magically sews seams in cloth or 
leather. It can make new seams or repair old 
work. About 20 yards of cloth can be thus 
stitched, but only about 2 yards of leather. The 
seam thus created is neither stronger nor weaker 
than a seam done without magic. 

Usually a brief rhyme is recited as the hand 
makes a sewing motion. 


Sweeten (Useful) 
(Evocation) 


Area of Effect: 1 object 
Casting Time: 4 segment 


This cantrip is much like the spice cantrip, 
except that the result is the evocation of a sweet- 
ener—sugar, honey, or even a syrup. The quantity 
is sufficient to sweeten food or drink for about a 
half dozen people. The sweetener appears over 
the object vessel as a fine powder or trickling 
liquid, falls upon it, and adds its substance to the 
dish or drink. 

The components are a buzzing sound and a 
stirring motion. 


_—=.: OO oe ee ee 


1051 


~ Useful Cantrips » 


Tie (Useful) 
(Alteration) 


Area of Effect: 1 object 
Casting Time: 4 segment 


By means of this cantrip, the caster can magi- 
cally cause the object of the magic—thread, string, 
cord, rope, or even cable—to tightly knot itself to 
either its other end or an end of a similar object 
within 1 foot of it. The resulting knot is a normal 
one, such as a square knot, half-hitch, running bow- 
line, or so on, whatever common knot is desired. 

The caster verbalizes the name of the knot 
while holding up three fingers. 


Warm (Useful) 
(Evocation) 


Area of Effect: 1-ft. cube 
Casting Time: 4 segment 


This cantrip is the same as chill, except that 
the magic warms the liquid or solid. The temper- 
ature rises at most about 40° F. The cantrip cannot 
raise the temperatures of a living creature above 
its normal body temperature, nor the temperature 
of an object above 140 ° F. The cantrip lasts but 
an instant, after which the object slowly cools to 
normal temperatures. 

Components are an “aah” sound vocalized, 
while the hands are rubbed briskly together. 


Wrap (Useful) 
(Alteration) 


Area of Effect: 1 cu. yd. 
Casting Time: 4 segment 


When a wrap cantrip is employed, the caster 
creates a strong and sturdy wrapping around the 
object desired—a bit of herbs, a heap of flour, a 
bundle of cloth, and so on. The cantrip creates ma- 
terial of a suitable type and thickness for the items 
to be wrapped. Thus, a few ounces of fine powder 
are contained in a waxy tissue, gem stones in a felt 
envelope, grain meal in cloth, and so forth. The 
wrapping can be undone normally, or ordered 
open by the caster, at which point the wrapping 
material disappears. The cantrip is often used to 
enfold the material components of a spell. 

The caster verbalizes a general class of wrap- 
ping desired while making folding motions with 
his hands. 


Reversed Cantrips 


Curdle (Reversed) 
(Enchantment) 


Area of Effect: 1 object 
Casting Time: X segment 


This cantrip affects many food and drink items. 
The magic curdles milk and hastens spoilage or 
reversed form of purify food and drink. Its effects 
are permanent. It is otherwise similar to freshen. 

The caster verbalizes a retching sound while 
pointing the thumb downward. 


Dirty (Reversed) 
(Evocation) 


Area of Effect: 1 object 
Casting Time: 4 segment 


The opposite of a clean cantrip, this enables the 
caster to soil, spot, and sully walls, floors, dishes, 
garments, and so on. 

The verbal component is a spitting sound, made 
while the feet are shuffled and stamped. 


Dusty (Reversed) 
(Evocation) 


Area of Effect: 10-ft. radius 
Casting Time: 1/6 segment 


By means of this cantrip, the caster causes a film 
of dust and grime to settle upon all exposed sur- 
faces within the cantrip’s area of effect. 

The verbal component is a low humming sound, 
made while the hands move in shaking motions. 


Hairy (Reversed) 
(Alteration) 
Reversible 


Area of Effect: 1 object 
Casting Time: 0 segment 


While this cantrip is not actually a standard 
useful cantrip that apprentices reverse for mis- 
chievousness, it is one generally used for no good 
purpose. It causes hair, fur, or hairlike growth to 
thicken and lengthen. Thus, a head of hair, a 
peach, a beard, a cat, or like object could be af- 
fected. The growth increases the length of the af- 


F ME i PE ar ei aU aM 


1052 


~ Reversed Cantrips g 


fected material by 2d6 inches. The material must 
be trimmed or cut to remove the cantrip’s effect. 
The caster verbalizes snicking sounds while 
making massaging motions. 

This cantrip can be reversed to shorten growth 
or effectively shave, but since the effect on short 
material (under | inch long) is complete absence 
of growth for 2d6 days, it is not often used. The 
caster verbalizes snicking sounds while making 
scissoring motions. 


Knot (Reversed) 
(Alteration) 


Area of Effect: 1 object 
Casting Time: 4 segment 


This cantrip is a permutation of the fie cantrip. 
It causes the thread, string, cord, or rope to knot 
itself in such a manner as to be very difficult to 
untie or undo (2d4 rounds, minus Dexterity 
Reaction bonus of the individual untying the 
knot). It works even on material already affected 
by a tie cantrip, but not on a magical rope, a rope 
being held by a character or creature, or a taut 
line such as a bowstring. 

The caster verbalizes a low zzzz sound while 
moving the arm forward with a strong wrist 
motion. 


Ravel (Reversed) 
(Alteration) 


Area of Effect: Special 
Casting Time: Xo segment 


This cantrip is the reverse of a stitch. It works 
only if there is a loose or broken thread in the 
seam or fabric to be affected, except for material 
magically stitched by the appropriate cantrip. 
When the latter sort of seam or material is in- 
volved, the ravel cantrip always works except 
when the object is otherwise magical: a bag of 
holding, a cloak of protection, boots of elvenkind, 
and so on. 

The name of the cantrip is verbalized while 
the fingers make a plucking motion. 


Sour (Reversed) 
(Evocation) 


Area of Effect: 1 object 
Casting Time: 4 segment 


When this cantrip is used, the caster causes the 
affected food or drink to take on a sour taste, not 
unlike vinegar of the appropriate sort. While it is 
typically used to spoil wine, beer, or some pastry, 
the sour cantrip can be used to useful purpose. 1f 
the caster desires, the cantrip can cause about a 
pint (maximum) of vinegar to appear over the 
object, which can be an empty container. 

The caster purses the lips and makes a w/toosh 
sound while clenching the hand. 


Note: If the vinegar-creating effect is allowed 
using the 2nd Edition cantrip spell, creating vine- 
gar ends the spell. 


Spill (Reversed) 
(Alteration) 


Area of Effect: 1 container 
Casting Time: 4 segment 


The opposite of a gather cantrip, this enables 
the caster to cause the contents of a container to 
spill out. The object container is actually tipped 
by the cantrip, but since the magic is not power- 
ful, containers of more than about gallon size, or 
magical ones, are not affected by the cantrip. Any 
solids or liquids in the container spill out, if the 
container is not securely closed or capped. 

To bring about the magic, the caster verbalizes 
an "uh-oh" sound while making an abrupt hand 
motion. 


Tangle (Reversed) 
(Alteration) 


Area of Effect: 1 object 
Casting Time: X segment 


A permutation of the fie cantrip, this magic 
allows the caster to cause fine material such as 
thread, hair, small grass, and the like to become 
twisted and entwined in a tangle. It does not work 
on heavy material such as rope. Untangling mate- 
rial takes 3d4 rounds unless it is roughly done— 
the material is broken and snapped in the process, 
torn loose, and so on. The cantrip can tangle 
mixed materials such as grass and string, hair and 


di EDEN 


1053 


say Reversed Cantrips a 


threads, and so forth. 
A buzzing is verbalized while the finger 
makes a stirring motion. 


Tarnish (Reversed) 
(Alteration) 


Area of Effect: 1 object 
Casting Time: 4 segment 


The reverse of a shine cantrip, this causes a 
covering of rust, corrosion, verdigris, or the like, 
to cover an object normally subject to such tar- 
nishing. The object must be of about | cubic yard 
or less in volume. 

The verbal component is a spitting sound, 
while the hand makes a sprinkling motion. 


Untie (Reversed) 
(Alteration) 


Area of Effect: 1 object 
Casting time: 4 segment 


This permutation of a tie cantrip is simply the 
reverse of the magic. The caster selects an 
object—thread, string, cord, or so on—that is 
knotted or tied. The cantrip removes the knot or 
tying. The untie cantrip nullifies a tangle cantrip. 

The untie cantrip cannot remove both a knot 
and a normal tying (normal knot or one caused by 
a tie cantrip), but it causes the former to disap- 
pear, so that only a normal tying remains. This 
cantrip has no effect on magical objects. 

Somatic and verbal components vary accord- 
ing to the desired result. In general, a popping 
sound is made while the hands are moved apart— 
as if a knot was being untied or a cord snapped. 


Wilt (Reversed) 
(Enchantment) 


Area of Effect: 1 object 
Casting Time: 4 segment 


The wilt cantrip is a reverse of the freshen 
cantrip that affects only vegetable material— 
whether growing or picked. Thus, a plant can be 
made to wilt (or possibly wither if it is not very 
healthy), or a bunch of cut flowers sag or droop. 

The verbal component is a descending hum, 
while the forefinger is slowly curled from an up- 
right position. 


Legerdemain Cantrips 
Change (Legerdemain) 


(Alteration) 


Area of Effect: 1 object or creature 
Casting Time: 4o segment 


By means of a change cantrip, the caster alters 
one small object or creature to another. The 
object or creature can weigh only a few ounces, 
and must be small enough to fit in the caster's 
hand. 

The change must be within the same kingdom, 
and only animal and vegetable objects can be af- 
fected. Thus, a piece of parchment can be 
changed into a brightly colored square of linen, 
and then the cloth changed into a rose by another 
use of the cantrip. Likewise, a bird can be 
changed into a bat, the bat to a flying squirrel by 
another use of the same type of cantrip, and so 
forth. Each change requires a change cantrip. The 
cantrip cannot cause more than a 50% increase or 
decrease in size/volume, and the effect lasts for a 
base time of 1 turn. 

If the change is radical, then the time is re- 
duced accordingly; that is, changing a dead 
mouse to a live one is a radical change and lasts 
only 1 round. On the other hand, a very slight al- 
teration such as a color change lasts for one or 
more days. A saving throw against this magic 
does not apply as long as only small, nonmagical, 
animal-intelligent creatures of normal sort are 
concerned. 

Typically, a magic word is verbalized while 
the hand makes a pass over the object to be af- 
fected. 


Distract (Legerdemain) 
(Enchantment) 


Area of Effect: Special 
Casting Time: 4 segment 


By means of this cantrip, the caster causes all 
those watching to look at an area of the caster’s 
choice. The area must be to the right or left of the 
caster, and the distraction must be within 10 feet 
of the caster. Thus, the caster can cause viewers 
to watch his or her right hand and a location a few 
feet distant where the caster's finger is pointing, 
while the caster’s left hand does something unno- 
ticed. Saving throws apply only to individuals 
above 0 level, or with at least 1+1 Hit Dice and an 


T mmc MM AMO A 


1054 


^ Legerdemain Cantrips " 


Intelligence ability score greater than Low. The 
distract cantrip has a duration of only 1 segment. 

The caster speaks an attention-getting word or 
phrase and gestures to the left or right to effectu- 
ate the cantrip. 


Hide (Legerdemain) 
(Illusion) 


Area of Effect: 1 object 
Casting Time: Xo segment 


This cantrip allows the caster to magically 
hide an object of virtually any size for a short 
time. The cantrip casts a dweomer over the de- 
sired object so that it becomes invisible to all in 
front of the caster. Note that the magic does not 
affect sound, so that if a crowing rooster were 
made to seemingly disappear, the noise of its cry 
would still be heard. Likewise, if an elephant 
were hidden by the cantrip, the sound of its tread, 
trumpeting, or even breathing might be heard. 
The dweomer does not work if viewers are beside 
or behind the caster. 

The cantrip lasts for 1 turn on an object of 2 
cubic yards or less in volume. The duration is re- 
duced by 1 round for every additional 2 cubic 
yards of volume affected, up to 20 cubic yards of 
volume for one round. Over 20 cubic yards of 
volume, the duration is reduced by | segment per 
2 additional cubic yards. Thus, the Aide cantrip 
lasts 9 segments for 22 cubic yards, 8 for 24 cubic 
yards, 7 for 26, 6 for 28, 5 for 30, 4 for 32, 3 for 
34, 2 for 36, and 1 segment for 38 cubic yards. 
Any object with a volume of more than 38 cubic 
yards disappears momentarily at best, then reap- 
pears. 

The verbal component is an activating word 
such as "abracadabra, " while the hand makes à 
pass across the forepart of the object. The caster 
can dispel the cantrip simply by speaking the ac- 
tivating word. 


Mute (Legerdemain) 
(Alteration) 


Area of Effect: 1 object 
Casting Time: Xo segment 


The mute cantrip allows the caster to alter the 
shape of small objects of a mineral nature. The 
magic is effective upon glass, metal, stone, and so 
on. For example, a thin sheet can be altered into a 
rod or à torus into a sphere. Thus, a coin could be 


changed to be a ring. Similarly, glass could be 
changed to crystal, lead to silver, copper to gold, 
and so on. However, the cantrip cannot affect 
magical items. The duration of the mute is but 1 
round. If another individual actually touches the 
object affected and makes a successful saving 
throw vs. spell, the cantrip is dispelled. 
Typically, a magic word is verbalized while the 
hand makes a pass over the object to be affected. 


Palm (Legerdemain) 
(Illusion) 


Area of Effect: 1 small item 
Casting Time: / segment 


This cantrip enables the caster to secret a 
small object in his hand without seeming to do so. 
The dweomer creates an illusory duplicate of the 
object to be palmed, so that the other can be taken 
while under a form of hide cantrip (which actu- 
ally works regardless of viewer position). The il- 
lusory duplicate of the palmed object lasts but 1 
segment, so it must be covered or screened from 
view or any onlookers see it wink out of exis- 
tence. 

A special word is spoken while a digit points 
at the object to be palmed. The caster may then 
pick up the now-invisible actual object while 
seemingly only touching or handling the illusory 
duplicate. 


Present (Legerdemain) 
(Alteration) 


Area of Effect: 1 small item 
Casting Time: % segment 


A present cantrip enables the caster to bring 
any small object or series of objects from within a 
2-foot radius to his or her hand. 

The object or objects appear magically in the 
caster's hand. If an object as large as a tankard is 
thus presented, the cantrip is exhausted, but as 
many as a dozen coins could be brought to the 
hand before the dweomer failed. The caster must 
know the exact nature and location of the object 
or objects to be presented. If they are on the 
person of another individual, a saving throw vs. 
spell applies to the individual, unless the object or 
objects are in plain sight. 

The cantrip is cast as the wizard raises a hand 
upward or outward with a flourish and speaks the 
key word. 


P dasdscmcEM a. 


1055 


~ Person-A ffecting Cantrips r 


Person-Affecting Cantrips 


Belch (Person-Affecting) 
(Evocation) 


Area of Effect: | creature 
Casting Time: ⁄o segment 


When this cantrip is cast, the subject involun- 
tarily belches. A saving throw vs. spell is allowed 
only to see how loud or muffled the burp. Failure 
indicates a very loud belch, success means the 
sound is relatively low and muffled. 

The verbal component is an almost inaudible 
belch, done at the same time that the caster's 
hand presses his or her diaphragm. 


Blink (Person-Affecting) 
(Evocation) 


Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Casting Time: “o segment 


By means of this cantrip, the caster causes the 
subject individual (person or creature) to blink 
his, her, or its eye or eyes. The blinking reaction 
is only momentary, of course, lasting no more 
than half a second. A successful saving throw vs. 
spell means only a single eye winks, or no effect 
for one-eyed creatures. 

The verbal component is a softly spoken mag- 
ical word (such as “hat-cha-cha"), voiced while 
the caster snaps his fingers. 


Cough (Person-Affecting) 
(Evocation) 


Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Casting Time: 4 segment 


This cantrip enables the caster to make a crea- 
ture cough spasmodically. If a saving throw vs. 
spell is made, the cough is only a brief hacking 
that won't usually disturb other activities. Failing 
the saving throw means the creature is affected by 
a loud and active series of coughs lasting from 1 
to 3 seconds. 

The somatic component is a gagging gesture 
while a gasp is verbalized. 


Giggle (Person-Affecting) 
(Charm) 


Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Casting Time: 4 segment 


By means of this cantrip, the caster causes the 
subject individual to involuntarily giggle. The 
loudness and length of this reaction depend on 
the saving throw vs. spell. Failure results in a 
chuckle or giggle lasting about 2 or 3 seconds. If 
the save succeeds, only a brief chuckle is caused. 

The verbal component is a single word or 
phrase (known in magical circles as a "punch 
line") to be spoken while one finger is moved 
back and forth rapidly. 


Nod (Person-A ffecting) 
(Evocation) 


Area of Effect: | creature 
Casting Time: /o segment 


This cantrip causes the subject to give an in- 
voluntary nod of the head due to muscle contrac- 
tion. The effect is as if the subject were nodding 
in agreement or as a greeting. A successful 
saving throw vs. spell negates the effect. 

The caster gives a slight nod of the head while 
pointing his or her small finger at the subject. 


Scratch (Person-Affecting) 
(Evocation) 


Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Casting Time: X segment 


A scratch cantrip causes the subject creature 
to experience an annoying itch on some portion 
of the body. Unless a saving throw vs. spell is 
successful, the subject involuntarily scratches at 
this itch. The scratching takes but a second and 
immediately causes the itch to cease. 

The verbal component is the name of some 
body pest (flea, louse, or so on), uttered while 
the area of the itch is pointed to. 


Sneeze (Person-A ffecting) 
(Evocation) 


Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Casting Time: 4 segment 


The sneeze cantrip causes an irritation in the 


ee Lo 


1056 


~ Personal Cantrips " 


nasal passages of the subject. Unless the creature 
makes a successful saving throw vs. spell, a 
sneeze occurs. This single sneeze relieves the ir- 
ritation. 

The caster verbalizes the name of an irritant 
substance while touching his or her nose. 


Twitch (Person-Affecting) 
(Evocation) 


Area of Effect: | creature 
Casting Time: 4 segment 


By means of this cantrip, the caster causes a 
muscle contraction in some portion of the subject 
creature’s appendages—head, neck, hand, arm, 
foot, leg, and so on. The twitch is noticeable, but 
won’t cause great discomfort or loss of control or 
concentration. The cantrip is negated by a suc- 
cessful saving throw vs. spell. 

The verbal component is the name of the area 
to be affected while the caster gazes at the area 
and makes a twitching motion with the hand. 


Wink (Person-A ffecting) 
(Enchantment) 


Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Casting Time: Xs segment 


This cantrip enables the caster to cause the 
subject individual to wink one eye. A saving 
throw vs, spell indicates the winking is rapid and 
not greatly noticeable. Failure to save indicates a 
greatly exaggerated, prolonged winking. 

The caster speaks a magical phrase (such as 
“twenty-three skidoo”) while making an imper- 
ceptible winking of his or her eye. 


Yawn (Person-A ffecting) 
(Evocation) 


Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Casting Time: % segment 


A yawn cantrip makes a creature feel a brief 
wave of drowsiness, which in turn evokes a 
yawn. If a saving throw vs. spell succeeds, the 
creature is totally unaffected by the cantrip. 
Failure, however, not only forces an immediate 
yawn, but a creature with 5*2 Hit Dice or less is 
more susceptible to a s/eep spell. 

During the balance of the round in which the 
yawn cantrip is cast, and for the entire following 


round, a creature with less than 4+1 Hit Dice 
falls into comatose slumber from a s/eep spell, ín 
addition to the number of creatures the s/eep 
spell normally affects. A creature with 4+1 to 
52 Hit Dice is 50% likely to be affected by a 
sleep spell in the same way. A creature with more 
than 5+2 Hit Dice only yawns if a saving throw 
is failed. 

The caster hums a lullaby for the verbal com- 
ponent while making a rocking motion with 


cupped hands. 


Personal Cantrips 


Bee (Personal) 
(Summoning) 


Area of Effect: 1 bee 
Casting Time: 4 segment 


When this cantrip is used, the caster summons 
a honey bee from someplace—where is of no im- 
portance, for the creature appears in seconds. 
The bee appears in whatever spot the caster is 
gazing at, up to 10 feet distant. The bee is an- 
noyed and 90% likely to sting any living creature 
it finds itself upon. (This certainly causes the 
creature to react violently if it would to a normal 
bee sting.) 

The verbal component is a low buzzing 
sound, made while the caster moves a forefinger 
through flightlike passes. 


Bluelight (Personal) 
(Conjuration) 


Area of Effect: 3-inch diameter sphere 
Casting Time: 4 segment 


This cantrip enables the caster to conjure a 
small sphere of glowing blue radiance. The light 
has an eerie effect when seen from a distance, 
but the 3-inch sphere only illuminates an area of 
5 feet around itself. Furthermore, the bluelight 
does not cast reflections beyond this radius. The 
light does not affect either infravision or ultravi- 
sion. 

When the caster says a rhyme using the words 
blue and light in any combination, the bluelight 
appears in his or her open palm and remains 
aglow until the caster ceases to concentrate on it. 


ee ee CL gee 1S D ee 


1057 


^ Personal Cantrips " 


Bug (Personal) 
(Summoning) 


Area of Effect: | bug 
Casting Time: 4 segment 


A variation of the bee cantrip, the bug cantrip 
enables the caster to summon some form of 
crawling insect. The beetle or bug appears within 
10 feet of the caster. It is likewise irritated and 
will pinch, bite, or otherwise attack the creature 
it might find itself upon, with appropriate results. 

The verbal component is the name of the 
insect desired, while the caster's forefinger 
makes a sliding and pointing motion at the de- 
sired location of the bug's appearance. 


Firefinger (Personal) 
(Alteration) 


Area of Effect: 6-inch line 
Casting Time: 4 segment 


The firefinger cantrip enables the caster to 
cause a jet of flame up to a half foot long to shoot 
forth from his or her finger. The flame is hot and 
ignites combustible materials such as parchment, 
twigs, kindling, and the like without difficulty, 
providing the materials are relatively dry. The 
flame persists for up to 1 segment. 

The verbal component is a word of power 
over elemental fire (such as “ron-son,” "zip-po, " 
or the much revered "dun-hill, " extends the fore- 
finger, and makes a sideways motion with the 
thumb. 


Gnats (Personal) 
(Summoning) 


Area of Effect: | cu. ft. 
Casting Time: 4 segment 


This cantrip is similar to the bee and bug 
cantrips, except that it summons a cloud of gnats. 
The swarm immediately flies around the head of 
the chosen living creature, which must be no 
more than 10 feet from the caster. Unless the 
creature makes a successful saving throw vs. 
poison, the gnats distract the creature for 1d4 
segments before flying elsewhere. 

The verbal component is a high-pitched 
buzzing sound made with the tongue and upper 
palate while the caster points a digit at the target 
creature. 


Mouse (Personal) 
(Summoning) 


Area of Effect: | mouse 
Casting Time: 4 


Similar to the cantrip that summons a bee or a 
bug, the mouse cantrip enables the caster to bring 
forth a mouse up to 10 feet away. The animal is a 
typical field mouse (or as similar a species as 
possible). When it arrives, the caster has no con- 
trol over the mouse. The animal behaves as 
would any mouse in the given situation. 

The caster speaks a summoning word (typi- 
cally the name of a food desirable by mice) while 
holding his or her hands in such a way as to re- 
semble mouse ears. 


Smokepuff (Personal) 
(Evocation) 


Area of Effect: 1-ft. diameter cloud 
Casting Time: 4 segment 


When this cantrip is employed, a puff of actual 
smoke appears in the desired location, up to 10 
feet distant from the caster, and ascends or is dis- 
sipated as a normal cloud of smoke, depending on 
the prevailing conditions. The caster can create 
smoke that is white, gray, black, brown, yellow, 
or green. 

The caster names the color of smoke desired 
while moving a hand from an extended horizontal 
position to a vertical one, meanwhile breathing 
forth a puff of air. 


Spider (Personal) 
(Summoning) 


Area of Effect: 1 spider 
Casting Time: 4 segment 


This cantrip, much like a bee, bug, mouse, or 
gnats cantrip, summons a small, ordinary spider 
to the location desired by the caster, up to 10 feet 
away. The summoned arachnid is usually a 
common garden spider or the like, no larger than 
an inch or two in diameter, and basically harm- 
less. There is a 5% chance that the creature has a 
powerful poison (black widow, brown recluse, 
and so on). The spider is annoyed and immedi- 
ately bites any creature upon which it finds itself. 
A normal spider has only a momentary effect, 
distracting the target creature for 1 segment. 


a ae EE CC REL Macr EE me D 


1058 


~ Haunting Cantrips " 


However, if the spider is of the very poisonous 
sort, the victim must also make a saving throw vs. 
poison at +4. Success means | point of damage is 
inflicted. Failure means 2 points of damage are 
inflicted, and the victim feels sick and is unable 
to act normally for 1d4 days unless a neutralize 
poison spell is cast to remove the toxin. (A slow 
poison defers the sickness for 1 day.) 

To cast the cantrip, the caster speaks the word 
"arachnid " while spreading his or her fingers and 
wiggling them. 


Tweak (Personal) 
(Conjuration) 


Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Casting Time: 4 segment 


By means of this cantrip, the caster causes an 
unseen thumb and forefinger to harmlessly, but 
annoyingly, tweak some portion of a chosen sub- 
ject within a 10 ft. radius of the caster. These por- 
tions are: cheek, nose, ear, beard, moustache, 
whiskers, or tail. The cantrip's effects do not dis- 
turb spell casting, although the tweaking might 
distract any creature by causing it to turn to dis- 
cover the source of the annoyance. A failure to 
make a successful saving throw vs. spell (for 
creatures with an Intelligence under 7), or failure 
to roll a score greater than Intelligence on 3d6 
(for to creatures with intelligence of 7 or greater), 
means a 1-segment distraction. 

The caster speaks a magic phrase (such as 
*kitchy-kitchy-coo") while making a pinching 
and pulling motion with thumb and forefinger. 


Unlock (Personal) 
(Conjuration) 


Area of Effect; 1 lock 
Casting Time: 4 segment 


This cantrip enables the caster to conjure an 
invisible, key-like force appropriate to the lock- 
ing mechanism to be opened (or closed). The 
unlock cantrip affects only a simple lock of the 
most basic sort—typically one that has a closing 
pressure prong, bolt and pins, or a bolt and spring 
closure. A lock with tumblers or levers, or a 
secret combination lock, is not subject to this 
cantrip. Note that a simple lock with complex 
wards to prevent skeleton key triggering is sub- 
ject to an unlock cantrip. 

While the caster speaks a word or phrase asso- 


ciated with locks (“tick-tock-doublelock” or 
*yay-el" for example) while making makes a 

isting motion with fingers held as if to grasp a 
key. 


Haunting Cantrips 


Creak (Haunting) 
(Evocation) 


Area of Effect: Special 
Casting Time: 4 segment 


By means of this cantrip, the caster evokes a 
noise similar to that of a door with corroded 
hinges slowly opening, or else a sound as if 
someone or something were walking across 
squeaking floorboards. The former sound lasts 
for one-third segment; the latter noise lasts half a 
segment and seems to originate within 10 feet of 
the caster, 

The caster makes a low creaking sound in his 
or her throat while using a hand to make an open- 
ing motion or fingers to make a walking motion. 


Footfall (Haunting) 
(Illusion) 


Area of Effect: Special 
Casting Time: X segment 


When this cantrip is used, the caster creates 
the audial illusion of footsteps. The sound is as if 
a human or humanoid was walking. The footfalls 
can be soft or fairly noisy. They can approach, 
move away from, follow, or otherwise seem to 
parallel a person or party. They must begin within 
10 feet of the caster, but can thereafter move 
away up to a 20-foot distance, or can approach 
closer than 10 feet. 

The caster softly vocalizes sounds similar to 
footsteps while pointing in the area in which they 
are to occur initially and subsequently. 


Groan (Haunting) 
(Illusion) 


Area of Effect: Special 
Casting Time: % segment 


A groan cantrip creates the audible illusion of 
a wracking cry coming from some location no 
more than 10 feet from the caster. Each creature 
within hearing distance is allowed a saving throw 


—_— Le CE MEE ee EL, a 


1059 


^ Haunting Cantrips 


vs. spell. Success means the individual hears no 
such noise. A container or door does not hamper 
the range; thus, a groaning sound can be made to 
seem to come from behind a door, in a chest, and 
so on. 

The caster makes a soft groaning sound in his 
throat while pointing to the area from which the 
sound is to come. 


Moan (Haunting) 
(Illusion) 


Area of Effect: Special 
Casting Time: /» segment 


This cantrip is the same as a groan cantrip, 
except that the sound involved is either a pitiful 
moaning or else an eerie one. It comes from some 
location no more than 10 feet from the caster. 
Each creature within hearing distance is allowed 
a saving throw vs. spell. Success means the indi- 
vidual hears no such noise. A container or door 
won't hamper the range; thus, a moaning sound 
can be made to seem to come from behind a door, 
from within a chest, and so on. 

The desired sound is either a low-pitched one 
for the haunting effect or a high-pitched one for 
the pitiful effect. 


Rattle (Haunting) 
(Illusion) 


Area of Effect: Special 
Casting Time: Xo segment 


By means of this cantrip, the caster causes the 
audible illusion of a rattling sound associated 
with chains. It comes from some location no 
more than 10 feet from the caster. The sound lasts 
for up to 2 seconds. Each creature within 10 feet 
of the sound is allowed a saving throw vs. spell to 
determine whether it hears the illusionary sound. 

The spellcaster names the rattling device de- 
sired to create the illusion, while shaking one 
hand vigorously. 


Tap (Haunting) 
(Evocation) 


Area of Effect: 1 sq. ft. 
Casting Time: XV segment 


By means of this cantrip, the caster is able to 
evoke an invisible force that taps or raps against 


some solid object—a door, lid, floor, table, wall, 
pane, or whatever. The sound occurs once, twice, 
or thrice, according to the number of fingers ex- 
tended by the caster. It is an actual sound; crea- 
tures within 10 feet of the noise will certainly 
hear it if they are able. 

The verbal component is a hollow sound cre- 
ated by the tongue against the palate, or a key 
phrase spoken softly, while the finger makes a 
tapping motion. 


Thump (Haunting) 
(Illusion) 


Area of Effect: Special 
Casting Time: Xo segment 


An audible illusion, the thump cantrip causes 
all creatures within a 10-foot radius of the area of 
effect to hear a loud but muffled thumping sound, 
as if something large just fell from a height of a 
foot or so. A successful saving throw vs. spell 
nullifies the cantrip's effect. The caster can cause 
the sound to seemingly come from any location 
within a 10-foot radius of his or her person. 

The caster swallows loudly while pointing 
toward the point from which the sound is to 
come, while thinking of the thumping sound. 


Whistle (Haunting) 
(Evocation) 


Area of Effect: Special 
Casting Time: XV segment 


When this cantrip is cast, the dweomer causes 
a faint or loud whistling sound. A faint whistling 
can be heard within 10 feet, a loud one within 30 
feet. The sound can be sharp and normal-seem- 
ing, or echoing, hollow, and eerie. 

The caster whistles softly in a manner similar 
to the desired sound while looking at the point 
from which the sound is to come and holding two 
fingers near his or her mouth. 


AB p mco————— EE 


1060 


^ Minor Illusion Cantrips gg 


Minor Illusion Cantrips 


The special minor illusion cantrips are available 
only to illusionists. 


Colored Lights* (Minor Illusion) 
(Alteration) 


Area of Effect: Special 
Casting Time: 4 segment 


When this cantrip is used, the caster creates 
one or more globes of pastel light (like the blue- 
light cantrip). A single globe of illumination | 
foot in diameter can be brought forth, or a pair of 
6-inch-diameter globes, three 4-inch-globes, or 
four 3-inch globes. These can be of any pastel 
color. Each illuminates a radius around itself 
equal to five diameters: A 1-foot globe sheds a 5- 
foot radius, while a 3-inch sphere of light illumi- 
nates only a 15-inch radius. The colored lights 
remain as long as the caster concentrates—the 
globes float near or rest upon the caster, as de- 
sired, within the 10-foot range. 

The globes can be moved back and forth, up 
and down, to and fro, as desired. The illumination 
from any one of them won't cast reflections 
beyond 10, and the light shed cannot be detected 
beyond 30 feet. Infravision and ultravision are 
not affected if light is colored pale pink or blue 
(respectively), but other hues disturb these visual 
capabilities. 

The verbal and somatic components are these: 
The caster must speak the color and number of 
globes desired, then speak a magic word 
(noma, " "mazda," and so on), while directing 
the globes with one or more fingers. 


Dim* (Minor Illusion) 
(Alteration) 


Area of Effect: Special 
Casting Time: 4 segment 


By means of a dim cantrip, the illusionist 
causes a light source to become weaker or the 
very air to become less permeated by light rays. If 
light sources are to be affected, then about 6 
torches, a medium-sized fire (such as in a fire- 
place or campfire), 72 candles, or even a light or 
continual light spell can be affected. 

The dim cantrip causes any of the above light 
sources to shed, at best, only half their normal ra- 
diance for one full round. Torches burn only as 


brightly as candles; candles glow but dimly; a fire 
becomes torchlike in illumination, and all light 
spells dim to half their normal brightness. 
Affected light must be within 10 feet of the caster 
when the cantrip is cast. 

The verbal component is a magical phrase 
(such as “bee-row-nout” or "rhea-oh-stat"), ut- 
tered while making a downward motion with one 
hand. 


Haze* (Minor Illusion) 
(Alteration) 


Area of Effect: 10-ft. cube 
Casting Time: 4 segment 


When a haze cantrip is cast, the atmosphere in 
the area of effect becomes cloudy, as if layered by 
smoke or filled with floating dust. Any creature 
discharging missiles or casting spells at a target 
screened by such a haze is affected. The target is 
5% harder to hit, so missile attack rolls have a —1 
penalty and defensive saving throws have a +1 
bonus. Hiding in shadows is 5% more effective 
when screened by a haze cantrip. The hazy effect 
lasts but a single round. It must be cast over an 
area within 10 feet of the caster. Atmospheric 
conditions destroy the haze if applicable—a 
gentle breeze, rain, and so on. 

The caster hums a melody while his hands 
make passes before his body. 


Mask* (Minor Illusion) 
(Illusion) 


Area of Effect: | person 
Casting Time: 4 segment 


A mask cantrip enables the caster to alter his 
or her visage, or the visage of whatever subject 
individual (human, demihuman, or humanoid) he 
or she chooses, by means of an illusion. Ears, 
hair, head shape, facial features, and all such as- 
pects of appearance are affected. The mask is de- 
tectable only if a viewer peers closely or can 
detect illusion and does so. The effect lasts for 
1d4+2 rounds (that is, 3—6). 

The caster touches his or her face, thinks of 
the desired features, and then speaks a word de- 
scriptive of the visage desired. 


_———“ + eee iR eR EL o 0T 


1061 


EB Minor Illusion Cantrips " 


Mirage* (Minor Illusion) 


(Illusion) 


Area of Effect: Two 10-ft. cubes 
Casting Time: 4 segment 


This cantrip lets the caster cause an area to 
appear to be something other than it is. The 
mirage cantrip creates an illusionary scene to 
cover the area. The area must be relatively flat 
and featureless, and the mirage must be an actual 
place, in existence at the time, which the caster 
has actually beheld. Any creature observing the 
mirage is allowed a saving throw vs. spell to real- 
ize the effect is illusory. The cantrip lasts for as 
long as the caster concentrates, although each 
round there is a 5*6 cumulative chance that it 
wavers and reveals its true nature. Touching a 
mirage instantly dispels the cantrip, as will the 
dispel illusion or dispel magic spells. 

The caster speaks a word or two descriptive of 
the mirage and then makes a single pass to begin 
the magic. Thereafter, the mirage is maintained 
by concentration alone. 


Noise* (Minor Illusion) 
(Illusion) 


Area of Effect: 10-ft. radius 
Casting Time: 4 segment 


The caster of a noise cantrip causes an illusory 
sound of whatever normal or nonmagical nature 
he or she desires, although it is indistinct and con- 
fusing. Thus, he or she can cause a murmuring 
sound as if many voices were speaking behind a 
thick door or at a great distance, a rushing sound 
similar to wings and wind combined, shuffling 
and scraping as if many people were moving 
things or walking slowly but at some distant 
place, and so on. 

All creatures in the area of effect are subject to 
the cantrip, but each receives a saving throw vs. 
spell. Success negates the noise with respect to 
the individual. 

The caster points a digit at the desired area and 
then softly makes sounds imitative of the noises 
desired. 


Rainbow* (Minor Illusion) 
(Alteration) 


Area of Effect: Special 
Casting Time: segment 

By means of this cantrip, the caster brings into 
being a plane of pastel colors that exactly resem- 
bles a natural rainbow. This 30-foot long, 1-foot 
wide band of color can be arched into a bowed 
shape, remain a ribbon, twist and turn, and so on. 
In any event, one end of the rainbow must be 
within 10 feet of the caster when the cantrip is 
cast. 
The colors glow softly and are visible even in 
total (normal) darkness. If no motion is desired, 
the caster can leave the vicinity of the rainbow. If 
motion is desired, the caster must control it by 
hand gesture and remain within 10 feet of it. The 
rainbow lasts for 1 round and then fades away. 
Creatures failing a saving throw vs. spell gaze at 
the rainbow for 1d4 segments, 1d4+1 if the caster 
keeps it in motion. 

The verbal component is a name of power 
("gar-land, " "pegee-lee, " and so on), which is 
spoken while the fingers of both hands form a 
pyramid. 


Two-D'lusion* (Minor Illusion) 
(Illusion) 


Area of Effect: Four 10-ft. cubes 
Casting Time: X segment 


This cantrip is virtually the same as a phantas- 
mal force spell in most respects. The caster cre- 
ates a two-dimensional illusion of whatever he or 
she desires. If any viewer sees it from an angle of 
more than 45? from its horizontal or vertical 
viewing axis, the nature of the illusion is immedi- 
ately apparent. It is dispelled by touch or magic 
(dispel illusion or dispel magic). It is invisible 
from the side or the rear and lasts as long as the 
caster concentrates upon it. 

To effectuate the cantrip, the caster must speak 
a phrase descriptive of the illusion while making 
a circular motion with his closed hand. 


^ FORGOTTEN REALMS Cantrips " 


Cantrips of 
The FORGOTTEN REALMS Setting 


These cantrips originally appeared in DraGon 
Magazine. Here, they are updated in a form com- 
patible with the cantrips in the foregoing section. 


From The Alcaister: 


Cut (Useful) 
(Alteration) 


Area of Effect: 1 object, 4-in. thick 
Casting Time: Xo segment 


This cantrip severs a rope, cord, delicate 
chain, a wax candle, a sausage, and the like, up to 
a half inch thick. A cut 1 foot long can be made in 
a paper-thin material. The caster must be able to 
see the object and be within 10 feet of it in order 
to make the cut. This cantrip does not affect a 
magical item of any type. 

The verbal component is a soft "snikt" sound, 
uttered while two of the caster's adjoining fingers 
make a scissoring motion. 


Gallop (Useful) 
(Alteration) 


Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Casting Time: 4 segment 


The caster using this cantrip can give a crea- 
ture within 10 feet (usually a mount) a sudden 
burst of speed that doubles the creature's land- 
based movement rate for one round. The move- 
ment is arrow-straight, though a saving throw vs. 
spell with a +3 bonus is allowed to avoid an ob- 
stacle such as a snare, pit, or precipice, if the 
creature or its rider knows the obstacle is there. 
Lame or exhausted creatures might require a 
system shock check for survival if the DM de- 
cides this is appropriate. Unwilling creatures with 
more than animal intelligence receive a saving 
throw vs. spell to negate the effect. 

The verbal component is a soft kissing or 
clucking sound, while the caster points in the di- 
rection of movement (impossible directions, such 
as straight up, negate the cantrip). 


Sting (Person-Affecting) 
(Alteration) 


Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Casting Time: 4 segment 


The caster can cause a sudden sharp pain in a 
creature up to 30 feet away. While this inflicts no 
damage, it has one of the following effects if the 
creature fails a saving throw vs. spell: It disrupts 
spellcasting, blinds the creature for the rest of the 
round, stops the creature's coherent speech for 
the rest of the round, or spoils delicate manipula- 
tion of tiny objects for the rest of the round (50% 
chance the tiny objects are dropped). The caster 
specifies the intended effect before the cantrip is 
cast. This cantrip is often used to warn or cow ig- 
norant creatures that threaten the spellcaster. 

The caster makes a buzzing noise while look- 
ing at the target creature and pointing an extended 
finger at an area of his or her own anatomy that 
matches the intended target point on the crea- 
ture's anatomy. 


From Glanvyl s Workbook: 


Horn (Haunting-Sound) 
(Evocation) 


Area of Effect: Special 
Casting Time: Special 


The caster's causes a nonexistent trumpet or 
horn to sound. It can be heard clearly within 20 
feet, 60 feet if loud. The caster controls the pitch, 
volume, and apparent distance. A practiced caster 
can imitate a horn blast perfectly. 

The caster faintly hums a note to set the pitch, 
then opens his mouth into an O shape. The 
volume and steadiness of the note are controlled 
by the fingers, which flare open to increase 
volume, pinch shut to mute it, and shake to give a 
tremulous note. 


Listen (Person-A ffecting) 
(Alteration) 


Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Casting Time: “se segment 


= ws at ee a i 


ET FORGOTTEN REALMS Cantrips r 


The caster’s can attract the attention of a crea- 
ture within 30 feet. The creature is alerted to the 
caster’s presence and can receive a short message 
(up to 6 words) spoken by the caster. The caster 
must be able to see the creature—for example, 
across a crowded room. The cantrip does not in- 
crease the volume of the caster’s voice or im- 
prove the hearing or understanding of the 
creature. The cantrip cannot penetrate a normal 
barrier to sound, nor can it disrupt spellcasting. 

The cantrip is activated by the caster pointing 
first at a creature, then at himself, while murmur- 
ing “ahem.” 

Scorch (Reversed) 
(Alteration) 


Area of Effect: 1 object 
Casting Time: 4 segment 


This cantrip creates neither flame nor heat. By 
magically exciting the molecules of any object up 
to 1 pound weight (such as a sheet of parchment), 
it causes the object to char without noise, smell, 
or smoke. The caster must touch the object, 
which may require a successful attack roll if an- 
other creature actively protects the object. When 
touched the object is allowed an item saving 
throw vs. fire. Failure means the item is con- 
sumed (or suffers severe scorching so as to be 
ruined, such as clothing, for example). Magical 
writings such as scrolls and spellbooks can be 
readily destroyed by this cantrip. 

The verbal component is a hissing sound made 
while the caster touches the object. 


From Sabirine s Specular (in addition to clean, 
freshen, and unlock): 


Catfeet (Personal) 
(Alteration) 


Area of Effect: Caster 
Casting Time: % segment 


The caster's tread is rendered silent for 1d4+1 
rounds. This does not cloak any other sounds 
made by the caster, such as breathing, the swish 
of clothing, sounds made by the hands grasping 
or moving. Objects dislodged or broken by the 
caster's feet make whatever noise they normally 
would. Traps and other devices triggered by the 
caster's feet operate normally. 

In addition, the caster lands balanced and un- 
winded from any fall up to 30 feet, with a falling 


damage modifier of —1 point of damage per die. 
Falls from greater heights occur normally. 

The cantrip is activated by softly vibrating the 
tongue against the upper palate, while making a 
stroking motion with the fingers of one hand. 


Snatch (Person-A ffecting) 
(Evocation) 


Area of Effect: 1 creature 
Casting Time: X segment 


This cantrip causes a brief, violent jerking 
force to act on a limb or body part of a creature. 
This force has little strength, but might cause a 
running creature of small or man-size to stumble 
or turn about, or cause one to fumble and drop a 
small item such as keys, material components, a 
gem, coins, and the like. A saving throw vs. spell 
determines whether the small item is dropped or 
if the holder is merely delayed for 1d3 segments. 
In no case are dropped items conveyed to the 
caster. A large creature is unaffected unless the 
saving throw is failed (in which case it is delayed 
1d3 segment only). Huge and gargantuan crea- 
tures are not affected at all. The snatch cantrip 
has a range of 30 feet. 

The caster hisses softly at the target creature, 
while making a jerking motion with a hooked 
finger. 


Spark (Personal) 
(Evocation) 


Area of Effect: Special 
Casting Time: 4 segment 


This caster creates a large, powerful blue 
spark of electrical energy anywhere within 10 
feet of his location. If created in contact with a 
creature, the spark inflicts a single point of 
damage if the creature fails a saving throw vs. 
spell; otherwise, it merely delivers a harmless, 
uncomfortable jolt. The cantrip energy is con- 
ducted by metal; metal-clad individuals have a —1 
penalty to the saving throw. If the spark would 
reduce a creature to 0 hit points or less, the crea- 
ture suffers no damage, regardless of the saving 
throw. The spark is not affected by dampness or 
other atmospheric conditions. 

The caster enacts the cantrip by making a soft 
verbal popping noise, while snapping his or her 
fingers. 


a ee Nae eie SN DAN 


1064 


C—-————)———Áá— 


DRAGON KING Spells: 
— Do 
In the DARK SuN setting, the Dragon Kings PSIONIC ENCHANTMENT List 
rule stark monolithic cities that dot a barren, 
landscape. Their magical arts, unique to them- Abrasion 
selves and their good-aligned counterparts, the Advanced Domination 
avangions, have embraced and incorporated ^ Defiler Metamorphosis 
psionics in a way unduplicated elsewhere. A pre- Defiling Stasis 
requisite for advancement to either of these states Defiling Regeneration 
is achievement of 20th-level psionicist wizard Dome of Invulnerability 
status. Defiler/psionicists can become dragons at Enchanted Armaments 
2Ist level, preserver/psionicists can become avan- Enslave Elemental 
gions at 21st level, This is the only way defiler and Immediate Animation 
preserver wizards can advance past 20th level. Just Sovereign 
Psionic enchantments are magic, with psion- Life Extension 
ics acting as a catalyst in the process. In the Dark Magical Minions 
SUN setting, they are considered 10th-level spells. Magical Plague 
This appendix is included for DMs who wish to Masquerade 
introduce Dragon King and Avangion encounters Mass Fanaticism 
into other settings. Some of the material has been Mountain Fortress 
updated since its original appearance. Pact 
Unlike other spells, the psionic enchantments Preserver Metamorphosis 
of Athas require special preparations before the Prolific Forestation 
actual casting. Also, in the following spell de- Prolific Vegetation 
scriptions, "cp" stands for ceramic pieces, the Pure Breed 
equivalent of a gold piece on metal-poor Athas. Raise Nation 
Recruitment 
NUMBER OF 10TH-LEVEL PSIONIC Reverse Loyalties 
ENCHANTMENTS Rift 
Rolling Road 
Level 10th Level 10th Undead’s Lineage 
20 (1)* 26 3 Wall of Ash 
21 I 27 3 
22 1 28 3 Abrasion 
23 2 29 4 (Evocation) 
24 2 30 4 
25 2 Level: 10 
Range: 90 yds.0 
*This can be only defiler metamorphosis or preserver Components: V, S, M 


metamorphosis. 


Preparation Time: 10 days 
Casting Time: 10 turns 
Duration: 120 days 

Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


With this spell, a wizard causes the ground to 
vibrate violently, turning loose gravel and sand 
into deadly abrasives. The spell can be cast in the 
following terrains: rocky badlands, stony barrens, 
sandy wastes, salt flats, and boulder fields. 

During the preparation time, the caster must 


enchant and mix the spell components, spending 


ME cus co ee ADIRE Eom Mc SCBECHREE ER 


^ Advanced Domination " 


at least eight hours per day in isolation. 

Once the enchantment is cast, the wizard 
shapes the area of effect. This totals ten 100 yard 
by 100 yard squares, plus five additional squares 
per level of the caster above 20th (a 25th-level 
wizard could, for example, lay them end to end in 
a barrier 100 yards wide and 3,500 yards, or just 
over two miles, long. The area of effect can be 
shaped as desired. The spell does not affect any 
vegetation in the area. 

Any creature putting its full weight on the af- 
fected area suffers damage. The first round of 
contact inflicts 1 point of damage; the second 
round, one point of damage per Hit Die; on the 
third and subsequent rounds 1d3 points of 
damage per Hit Die. Especially tough footwear 
may postpone damage for one or, at most, two 
rounds. Creatures suffering more than half their 
total hit points in damage may be unable to free 
themselves from the area, at the DM’s option. 

The material components are sands caught in a 
driving wind and fragments of bone from crea- 
tures blasted clean in sandstorms. 

Notes: Restricted to defilers and preservers, 
common. 


Advanced Domination 
(Charm) 


Level: 10 

Range: 10 yd./level 
Components: V, S, M 
Preparation Time: 7 days 
Casting Time: | turn 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: | individual 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell allows the wizard to control the ac- 
tions of an individual of a player character race 
(for example, human, dwarf, elf, half-elf, half- 
giant, halfling, mul, or thri-kreen). 

During the preparation time, the wizard must 
be in constant contact with an item once owned 
and emotionally prized by the target individual, 
as decided by the DM (for example, a letter from 
a loved one, the individual's first metal weapon, a 
family heirloom, etc.). The time spent procuring 
the item does not count toward the preparation 
time. The wizard can undertake any activity 
during the preparation time, provided he carries 
the item on his person. 

The subject receives no saving throw, nor the 
benefit of any magical resistance or resistance to 


charms. The caster controls the actions of the 
victim telepathically. This control cannot be re- 
sisted, nor hindered by protections such as the 
protection from evil spell. 

The spell lasts until one of the following 
Occurs: an immediate relative (sibling, parent, or 
child) retrieves the prized item and destroys it; a 
period of time passes equal to the length of time 
the subject cherished the item; the caster chooses 
to end the spell. Keeping a subject under 
advanced domination counts as one 10th level 
spell against the caster's maximum. When the 
spell ends, the item disappears. 

The material component is the prized item, 
which may or may not have any intrinsic value. 

Notes: Restricted to preservers and defilers, 
common. 


Deadwood 
Reversed form, see prolific forestation. 


Defiler Metamorphosis 
(Alteration, Evocation) 


Level: 10 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Preparation Time: Special 
Casting Time: Special 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell is universal to human and half-elf 
defilers, but must be researched sometime after 
reaching the 20th level of experience as a wizard. 
The spell allows human or half-elf defilers who 
have earned sufficient experience points to ad- 
vance to the next stage of the dragon metamor- 
phosis, provided the casting is successful. Each 
casting of the spell mutates the defiler's physical 
form drastically; each time, the defiler becomes 
less human and more dragon. The caster must 
meet stringent ability score requirements: 
Intelligence 18, Wisdom 17, and Constitution 15, 
or the spell fails. 

The defiler can begin the preparation at any 
time as the next level is approached: building 
structures, gathering components, studying, and 
so on. However, the spell cannot be cast before 
all the necessary experience points have been 
earned. The defiler gains no benefits of the new 
level until the defiler metamorphosis spell is cast. 
Each time the spell is cast, the defiler must make 


| AGENT HER ED EELARLLLa o 7 


1066 


~ Defiler Metamorphosis " 


a successful system shock or die in the mutation 
process. Any divergence from the letter of the 
spell description or interruption of the casting 
process kills the caster immediately. 

The exact components, preparation time, and 
casting times differ, depending on the level the 
defiler is about to achieve, grouped by level into 
low, middle, high, and final metamorphosis. In all 
cases, living creatures used in the casting must be 
within one mile of the caster. All castings of this 
spell, except that for the first at 21st level, require 
the caster's dragon orb as a focus as well. 

Low Metamorphosis (21st-23rd levels): The 
preparation time for each of these levels is one 
year, during which time the caster must have 
access to ancient documents, tablets, and scrolls 
that have never been studied by another defiler. 
Such material must be discovered by the defiler 
or his minions and must be studied for at least 8 
hours every day for the entire year. Acquisition of 
such documents will usually be a quest in and of 
itself; once used, these documents cannot be used 
for this spell again. 

The material components must include vast 
riches (10,000 gp value of gems, jewels, coins, 
and or artistic treasures), a vast structure where 
the transformation must take place, and no fewer 
than 1,000 Hit Dice of living creatures for the 
life-leeching process. The riches vanish and the 
living creatures are slain one heartbeat after the 
defiler begins casting. The structure, which must 
cost more than 50,000 to build, is not destroyed 
and can be reused to cast this spell when attaining 
other /ow levels. The spell is cast from the deep 
interior of the structure, where the caster will ac- 
tually transform—no other beings may be present 
at the instant of casting. The casting time is a full 
24 hours. 

Middle Metamorphosis (24th-26th levels): At 
the middle levels, the process is similar. The 
preparation time is two years per casting, during 
which time the caster must befriend and visit a 
powerful creature from an Elemental Plane. The 
caster must visit the planar creature three days of 
every 15 for the entire preparation period. The 
DM creates and plays the elemental creature—it 
is likely that it will force the defiler to perform 
difficult missions, more often than not for its own 
amusement, all through the preparation period. 

The material components include fewer riches 
(at least 5,000 gp) but more living creatures (at 
least 2,000 Hit Dice). A new structure must be 
built, which is usable for the three middle trans- 
formations. This structure must be of stone, take 


at least three years to construct, and must be or- 
nately decorated, costing no less than 125,000 gp. 
The casting time is three days. 

High Metamorphosis (27th-29th levels): This 
process actually must take place on an Elemental 
or the Astral Plane, No structure or riches are re- 
quired, but the caster must travel to the plane of 
choice with no fewer than 200 Hit Dice of living 
creatures from the Prime Material Plane. The 
creatures must be of no fewer than 10 Hit Dice 
each, and must willingly travel to the plane and 
participate in the casting. The actual casting time 
is 24 hours, and the caster must have the full co- 
operation of at least three powerful beings from 
that plane from the entire time. Locating such 
beings willing to cooperate requires exchanges of 
favors, quests, and so forth. The preparation time 
is equal to the time it takes to convince the planar 
beings to cooperate. 

Final Metamorphosis (30th level): The final 
stage of metamorphosis requires no preparation 
time and a single material component: the slain 
body of a good creature defeated in single 
combat. The victim must be intelligent, have at 
least 20 Hit Dice, and be capable of casting 9th- 
level wizard spells or 7th-level priest spells. The 
defiler metamorphosis spell must be cast over the 
fallen individual within one hour of the victim's 
defeat; the casting time is merely one turn. 
Success transforms the caster to full dragon form. 

Notes: Restricted to human and half-elf de- 
filers, common. This spell is sometimes called 
dragon metamorphosis. Other notes on Athasian 
Dragons are given on the next page. 


Defiling Stasis This spell pushes defiling damage away from 
the caster. The damage still occurs, but a point 
more remote from the defiler. The spell can be 
used by a preserver to protect an area against de- 
filing damage or by a defiler to push defiling 
damage out of sight. 

. During the preparation time, the caster must 
Duration: 1 day/level contact the spirit or spirits of the land within the 
Area of Effect: 300-ft. radius radius to be affected. This requires every waking 
Saving Throw: None moment for the entire preparation time. The 


1068 


^ Defiling Stasis a 


contact does not allow speech, only an empathic 
level of understanding that the caster wishes to 
protect the area from defiling damage. The hemi- 
sphere has a 300-foot radius. 

The spell creates a stationary hemisphere cen- 
tered on the caster’s location that confers tempo- 
rary immunity to defiling damage. All such 
damage called for within the hemisphere is redi- 
rected to the closest points immediately outside 
the area. Trees of life within the hemisphere 
cannot be drawn upon for defiling magic—that 


energy, too, is redirected outside. The caster need 
not remain within the area after the spell is cast. 

The defiling stasis spell in no way inhibits the 
magical spell effects of defiler magic within its 
boundaries. If defiling magic is cast by a defiler 
who is inside the area, the resulting ash forms 
outside the protected area. 

The material component is a small glass 
bubble with no air inside it. 

Notes: Restricted to preservers and defilers, 


common. 


1069 


^ Defiling Regeneration = 


Defiling Regeneration 


(Necromancy) 


Level: 10 

Range: 100 yds. 

Components; V, S, M 

Preparation Time: 30 days 

Casting Time: | turn 

Duration: | day/level 

Area of Effect: Creatures totaling 5 HD/level 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell allows a defiler to empower a force 
of creatures to regenerate lost hit points at the ex- 
pense of the vegetation around them. Only de- 
filers can cast this spell. 

During the preparation time, the defiler must 
prepare each creature to be endowed with regener- 
ative abilities. Their faces and hands are inked with 
special designs and their armor with special sym- 
bols of evil magic. The caster must have access to 
the creatures for the entire preparation time. 

Upon casting, the caster can empower crea- 
tures with Hit Dice equal to five times his level 
with this form of regeneration. This spell affects 
only living, corporeal creatures. Such creatures, 
when wounded, regenerate 2 hit points each 
round, including the round of wounding, for the 
duration of the spell. Even when slain, these crea- 
tures regain consciousness when they regenerate 
to | hit point. The spell lasts for a number of days 
equal to the caster’s level. When the spell expires, 
the tattoos and symbols vanish. 

The energy for this regeneration is taken di- 
rectly from the land, just like defiling magic. 
During regeneration, the ground where a pro- 
tected creature was wounded becomes spotted 
with ash. The more damage regenerated, the 
more ash appears (treat 4 hit points regeneration 
is the equivalent of a Ist-level spell). If the land is 
completely blasted, no regeneration is possible. 

Any creature of good alignment under the 
effect of this spell must attempt to have the magic 
dispelled before taking damage. Failure to do so, 
or a willingness to accept the spell, may affect the 
creature's alignment at the DM's option. 

The material components for this spell are 
inks and dyes made from the blood of regenerat- 
ing creatures. 

Notes: Restricted to defilers, common. 


Dome of Invulnerability 
(Necromancy) 
Reversible 


Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Preparation Time: 3 days 

Casting Time: 1 turn 

Duration: | day 

Area of Effect: Special (radius around caster) 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell creates an enormous magical hemi- 
sphere, centered on and mobile with the caster. The 
hemisphere acts as a globe of invulnerability, pre- 
venting any Ist-, 2nd-, 3rd-, or 4th-level spell effect, 
other than those cast by the wizard, from being cast 
or having any effect within the protected area. Innate 
spell-like abilities and spell-like effects from devices 
are also blocked. The caster’s spells, abilities, and the 
devices personally wielded by him are not affected. 

During the preparation time, the caster must fash- 
ion a perfect crystal sphere, which takes every hour 
of the three days. 

Upon casting, the dome appears as a hemisphere 
centered on and mobile with the caster, with a radius 
of 30 feet per caster level beyond 20th. All within the 
dome receive its benefits, whether friends or foes of 
the caster. The dome does not extend below the 
ground—magic cast from below the dome is not af- 
fected. If the caster leaves the ground (by flying or 
by magic such as fly or levitate), or uses teleportation 
or plane shifting magic of any sort, the dome col- 
lapses instantly. A dispel magic cast by a higher level 
caster, or its reversed form in any case, also elimi- 
nates the dome. 

The material component is the crystal sphere, 
worth no less than 500 cp. 

Notes: Restricted to preservers and defilers, 
common. 


I, 


1070 


^ Enslave Elemental "d 


Enchanted Armaments 
(Enchantment) 


Level: 10 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Preparation Time: 7 days minimum 
Casting Time: | turn 

Duration: Permanent 

Area of Effect: 30 yds. 

Saving Throw: None 


With this spell, the wizard can temporarily en- 
chant a large number of weapons against a spe- 
cific foe. The weapons can be of any variety and 
made from any materials, but they must all be 
within the area of effect at the time of casting. 

During the preparation time, the wizard must 
spend at least one hour with each weapon to be 
enchanted, scratching a special symbol onto its 
blade or handle. The wizard must choose a single 
named foe, being specific as to race and origins 
(such as “the elves of Jaura Dai" or “the gith mer- 
cenaries of Rithgar's horde"). The caster cannot 
choose “all elves” or “all of Rithgar’s horde" as 
named foes for this spell. 

Those weapons in the area at the time of cast- 
ing gain a magical +2 enchantment for the dura- 
tion of the spell against the named foe only. This 
bonus applies to both attack and damage rolls, 
and allows the weapons to inflict damage on 
creatures normally requiring magical weapons of 
+2 or less to hit. The weapons receive no benefit 
against other creatures. 

The weapons remain enchanted until one of 
the following occurs: The named foe is com- 
pletely destroyed; half of those wielding the 
weapons are killed or otherwise taken out of 
action; or 30 days have passed since the casting. 
Once the spell’s duration has run out, all the en- 
chanted weapons turn to dust immediately. 

The material components are a powdered 
braxat's horn, and the weapons themselves. 

Notes: Restricted to preservers and defilers, 
common. 


Enslave Elemental 
(Conjuration/Summoning) 


Level: 10 

Range: 120 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Preparation Time: 30 days 
Casting Time: 5 turns 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 1 elemental 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


With this spell, a wizard can both summon and 
then enslave an elemental. The elemental can be of 
earth, air, fire, or water, as desired. The strength of 
the elemental depends on the caster's level: at 21st 
through 25th levels, the elemental has no more 
than 8 Hit Dice; at 26th level and above, the caster 
can enslave a greater elemental of 20 Hit Dice. 

Before an elemental can be enslaved, the 
caster must personally witness destruction 
wrought by that creature. The wizard might con- 
jure the elemental himself, or simply witness it in 
the service of another. In either case, the wizard 
must gather a bit of material evidence from the 
destruction himself—a sliver of charred wood 
burnt by a fire elemental, the teeth of a creature 
drowned by a water elemental, and so on. Once 
this material is procured, the wizard can begin the 
preparation time for the spell. 

During the preparation time, the wizard fash- 
ions the material into an amulet—this takes at 
least 6 uninterrupted hours per day for the entire 
30 days. Once the amulet is completed, the 
wizard must don it and cast the spell before the 
next double moon (14100 days). 

When the spell is cast, the elemental arrives 
under the complete control of the wizard. 
Concentration for control is unnecessary, the ele- 
mental performs every bidding. If the elemental 
ever strays beyond the range of the spell, it con- 
tinues to carry out its last orders until stopped by 
an outside agency. If the amulet is removed from 
around the caster's neck, the elemental attacks 
the wizard immediately. If the wizard is killed or 
the amulet destroyed, then the elemental is freed 
and returns to its home plane. 

The amulet has no intrinsic magical protec- 
tion. It can be destroyed by a successful crushing 
blow vs. the material from which it is made. 

The material components are the amulet, and 
the material component required by the conjure el- 
emental spell: burning incense for an air elemental, 
soft clay for earth, sulphur or phosphorous for fire, 


AL a oet a ee NES M 


1071 


^ Immediate Animation = 


water and sand for a water elemental. 
Notes: Restricted to preservers and defilers, 
common. 


Immediate Animation 


(Necromancy) 


Level: 10 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Preparation Time: Special 
Casting Time: | turns 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: 360-ft. radius 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell allows the caster to animate a large 
number of dead creatures. The creatures must 
have been slain within one hour before the spell 
is cast. All dead creatures must be in the area of 
effect at the time of casting. The caster can ani- 
mate 400 Hit Dice of creatures for each level 
beyond the 20th level (400 at 21st level, 800 at 
22nd, and so on). 

Preparation time for the spell is optional. 
Every day spent in preparation prior to casting in- 
creases the number of creatures animated: Each 
day adds Hit Dice equal to the caster's level. 
Thus, a 21st-level caster adds 21 Hit Dice for the 
first day, 21 more for the second day, and so on. 
The entire preparation time must be spent in a 
dark place, poring over ancient necromantic 
tomes. 

The animated creatures become zombies 
under the control of the caster, with as many Hit 
Dice as they had in life (a 6 Hit Die thri-kreen be- 
comes a 6 HD zombie thri-kreen). Animated 
creatures lose all magical, special, and psionic 
abilities, but retain all physical characteristics. 
Once slain as zombies, the corpses are considered 
too badly damaged to be animated a second time. 
The animated creatures are turned according to 
their Hit Dice (not necessarily as zombies). The 
creatures animated by this psionic enchantment 
must be destroyed or disrupted, magics such as 
dispel magic are ineffective. 

The material component for this spell is the 
gathered weaponry of fallen warriors, stained 
with their enemies' blood; at least one weapon 
per creature animated. As the common practice 
on Athas is to loot bodies of their weapons, this 
component may not be readily available. 

Notes: Restricted to defilers, common. The 
dragon orb is also a required focus. 


Impostor 
Reversed form, see masquerade. 


Just Sovereign 
(Illusion) 
Reversible 


Level: 10 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Preparation Time: Special 

Casting Time: 1 day 

Duration: 3 days/day of preparation 

Area of Effect: 1-mi. radius from leader touched 
Saving Throw: Special 


The wizard can cast this spell on a leader in 
order to pacify a subject population or unit of sol- 
diers, making them believe their leader is far 
kinder than his previous actions would suggest. 
This spell functions only upon a group of crea- 
tures that already acknowledges the touched crea- 
ture as their leader. For example, a hated 
warrior-king would benefit from this spell, but an 
individual with no subjects would gain nothing 
from its casting. 

During the preparation time, the caster must 
spend time in the presence of the leader (or in isola- 
tion if he plans to cast it on himself). The length of 
the preparation time can vary, but the spell's dura- 
tion is three days for each day spent in preparation. 

The number of subjects pacified is 200 Hit 
Dice per level of the caster above 20th. The entire 
group receives a single average saving throw 
against the spell. For example, if the entire group 
is made up of Ist-level warriors, their saving 
throw is 17. If there are fifty Ist-level warriors 
and fifteen 10th-level warriors, the average is (50 
x 17) + (15 x 11)/65 = 15.62 or 16. The group 
saves as a whole, either all passing or all failing. 
Only those in the area of effect at the instant of 
casting are affected. 

Once this spell is successfully cast, the group 
of subjects selectively forgets incidents of torture 
or abuse, forced labor, and other unpleasant 
events. They see their leader as a good creature, 
worthy of respect, hard work, and reverence. The 
leader receives a +5 bonus to the reactions of af- 
fected NPC subjects. These will gladly do the 
leader's bidding and can usually be counted on to 
double their efforts, be it construction, farming, 
or so on. An affected military unit will not rout or 
fall back when in the leader's presence. 

The material component is an item of at least 


P urs CMM CE a 


1072 


^ Mundi o 


1,000 cp value, won for the leader by his sub- 
jects’ efforts. 

The reverse of this spell, evil despot, makes 
the subjects believe that their leader is cruel and 
unjust, regardless of his actual performance. With 
this spell, the leader is allowed a saving throw vs. 
spell; failure means any subjects in the area of 
effect at the instant of casting immediately find 
him repulsive for the duration of the spell. The 
leader suffers a —5 penalty to reactions among the 
affected population. Workers stop working and 
may tear down things they have already built; 
military units may refuse to fight or rout from the 
field when led by their hated leader. 

The material component of the reverse is an 
item of at least 1,000 cp value won for the leader 
by his subject's efforts. 

Notes: Restricted to preservers and defilers, 
common. 


Life Extension 
(Alteration, Necromancy) 


Level: 10 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Preparation Time: 77 days 
Casting Time: | rd. 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


With this spell, the caster can extend his 
maximum age beyond the maximum age created 
from the age tables. 

During the preparation time, the spell requires 
the caster to surround himself with the trappings of 
his youth. These might include clothing or equip- 
ment used as a youth, letters previously received or 
sent, soil from his homeland, tears shed by his 
mother, and so on. Collecting these may be very 
difficult, involving a long journey to the caster's 
homeland. This might even prove impossible if the 
caster is an orphan or has no traceable roots. 

When cast, this spell increases the caster's 
maximum age by a king's age: 77 years. Normal 
aging effects are not suffered for this period, but 


the period itself might be shortened by circum- 
stances, by the caster's activities, or by magical 
and psionic effects. 

As the personal items used in this spell are de- 
stroyed, each casting becomes more difficult than 
the previous one. 

Notes: Restricted to preservers and defilers, 
common. 


Magical Minions 
(Conjuration) 


Level: 10 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Preparation Time: 150 days 

Casting Time: | turn 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: Undead creatures touched 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell lets the wizard enchant a force of 
undead creatures of the same type that, in essence, 
become physical extensions of himself. The wizard 
can observe through their senses and use his 
powers through them, no matter where they are. 
semble the potential minions. Any type of undead 
creature can serve, provided it is of the caster's 
alignment and has a minimum Intelligence of 15. 
The wizard can enchant a number of minions up to 
one-third of his level, rounded down. Good casters 
use only willing subjects. Evil wizards can secure 
their minions through domination or other means. 
Minions and caster must be locked away for the 
entire preparation time, bonding personally, magi- 
cally, and psionically. 

When cast, the spell makes the minions into 


ioo ERES mY 


1073 


~ Magical Plague " 


tools of the caster for the rest of their existences. 
If destroyed and revived by any means, the crea- 
ture is no longer a minion. Minions retain their 
physical forms and attributes, including hit 
points, THACO, Armor Class, attacks, and so on. 
They also retain any spell-like abilities they once 
had. They retain their raw intelligence and their 
original ability to make decisions—the minion's 
free will is not lost—it can undertake long-term 
functions without direct supervision. 

However, a minion loses all of its magical and 
psionic powers; the caster controls all such powers 
in the new union. In addition, the master controls 
all material possessions of the minion. The minion 
does not take possession of any item unless it is 
given by the caster, or unless the caster gives the 
minion specific instructions to obtain and use it. 

The caster has complete, overriding control of 
his minions. Through concentration, he can know 
everything that the minion knows—its location, 
situation, and emotional state. The caster can see 
through the minion's eyes and use its other 
senses. His instructions to the minion will be 
carefully fulfilled. The caster learns nothing 
when not concentrating, but minions can contact 
him empathically if they wish. 

The wizard can cast magical spells and use 
psionic powers through his minions, no matter 
what the physical distance between them. The 
wizard employs any required components—once 
the wizard casts a spell through a particular minion, 
the spell works immediately without action on the 
minion's part. Similarly, psionic checks are made 
and psionic points spent by the wizard, while the 
results are channeled directly through the minion. 
Range and area of effect are measured from the 
minion's viewpoint, not the caster's. The minion 
cannot act in its own during any round in which the 
wizard uses it this way. This connection does not 
work across planar boundaries. 

The strong link between the wizard and min- 
ions can be dangerous. When a minion is de- 
stroyed, the caster must save vs. death magic or 
be stunned for 1d6 turns. The loss of a minion 
disrupts spell casting and any preparation for 
psionic enchantments in progress when it occurs. 
The wizard also loses experience points equal to 
ten times the minion's XP value, and cannot gain 
further experience points until either the minion 
is replaced or its death avenged. 

Opponents can use a minion to locate and 
psionically attack the wizard. If the minion's 
mind is controlled through domination or similar 
magic, psionic powers can be focused through it 


against the wizard, regardless of distance. 

A wizard can have only one set of minions at a 
time. If all are slain, a new set can be started after 
a period of three years. No minion can serve more 
than one wizard. 

The material components are a possession 
taken from each minion that was prized in life, or 
a gift assigned by the caster commensurate with 
the minion's station and level. These are de- 
stroyed in the casting. 

Notes: Restricted to preservers and defilers, 
common. 


Magical Plague 
(Alteration) 


Level: 10 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Preparation Time: 60 days 

Casting Time: ] turn 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: Circle, 10 yds./level radius 
Saving Throw: Special 


With this spell, the wizard creates a spreading mag- 
ical virus that disrupts one chosen school of magic. The 
caster is not affected by his or her own plague. 

The preparation time is spent studying the 
school of magic to be plagued. The wizard must 
spend at least eight hours per day studying. If the 
wizard is a specialist in the school, the preparation 
time is halved (30 days). 

Upon casting, each other wizard in the area 
effect must make a successful saving throw vs. 
spell or become infected. A wizard who success- 
fully saves becomes a carrier and might infect other 
wizards later. Only wizards can become infected or 
be carriers—other character classes are unaffected. 

Infected wizards have great difficulty casting 
spells of the plagued school. The wizard's chance 
of successfully casting such a spell is a base per- 


” SEMEN ur LL AA 


1074 


C'——————————ÓÁ——— máá—nÁ—páÍ—ÓÓ 


centage chance equal to his or her level; double this 
if the wizard is a specialist in the plagued school. 
Failure means the spell is expended and wasted 
without effect. Whether infected or a carrier, a 
given wizard suffers the effects of this spell for a 
number of days equal to the original caster’s level. 

Wizards with the plague take on an ashen, sunken 
appearance, and tend to tire more easily than usual. 
Carriers exhibit no symptoms. Diagnosis is possible 
only through divination magic, though an infected 
wizard certainly knows something is wrong. Carriers 
are unlikely to realize their condition. 

Infected wizards and carriers may pass the 
plague on to other wizards. Any other wizard who 
approaches within 10 yards of an infected wizard or 
carrier must successfully save vs. spell or become 
infected (with a —4 penalty if the wizards actually 
touch). Those who save become carriers. A wizard 
who successfully saves against a plague once need 
never save against that particular plague again. 

The material components for this spell are the ac- 
cumulated spell components of five spells from the 
desired school of magic, combined with rodent hairs. 

Notes: Restricted to preservers and defilers, 


common. 


Masquerade 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
Reversible 


Level: 10 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Preparation Time: 3 days/5 Hit Dice affected 
Casting Time: | turn 

Duration: 1 day/level 

Area of Effect: Special 

Saving Throw: None 


With this spell, the caster can make the most 
powerful individuals in a community believe that 
the spell recipient is their leader. 

Preparation involves studying the community 
to be affected, by living among them. The 
number of individuals convinced is a function of 
their Hit Dice or levels, the caster's level, and the 
preparation time: For every three days of prepara- 
tion time, the caster can convince five Hit Dice or 
levels per caster level. 

The individuals affected are chosen from the 
community in descending order of Hit Dice or 
levels (the highest are convinced first, then 
second highest, etc., until the total Hit Dice or 
levels have been accounted for. Whether or not 
the rest of the community believes the spell recip- 
ient is their leader depends on the situation. If all 
the most powerful people in a small village say 
that the individual is the leader, the entire village 
might go along. However, if a very few powerful 
people in a large city proclaim the recipient as 
their new leader, the rest of the population might 
ignore them or initiate civil violence. Often, the 
rightful leader is affected by the spell, helping to 
legitimize the deception. The spell is inherently 
fraught with dangers. 

The material component is a small golden 
mask fashioned in the likeness of the rightful 
leader (500 cp minimum value). 

The reverse of the spell, imposter, has the op- 
posite effect, convincing the most powerful 
people in a community that their leader is a fraud. 
Again, the situation dictates events, but those af- 
fected are absolutely convinced they are right. 

The material component for the reverse is a 
golden statuette with two faces (1,000 cp mini- 
mum value). 

Notes: Restricted to preservers and defilers, 
common. 


- IBSEIEEMREMEEE AM RUE a i | 


1075 


^ Mass Cowardice 


Mass Cowardice 
Reversed form, see mass fanaticism. 


Mass Fanaticism 
(Enchantment/Charm) 
Reversible 


Level: 10 

Range: 300 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Preparation Time: 15 days * special 
Duration: | day + special 

Casting Time: | turn 

Area of Effect: Special 

Saving Throw: None 


The caster uses this spell to magically boost 
the combat morale of a large group of creatures. 
The caster must know before preparation exactly 
what group of creatures will be affected. 

During preparation, the caster first spends a 
minimum of 15 days living among the creatures 
(for example, traveling with elven raiders, work- 
ing with slave tribe farmers, hunting with thri- 
kreen, and so on). Next he completes the 
preparation by procuring (earns, is given, steals) 
a single item symbolic of the entire group (for ex- 
ample, the fineries from a recent plunder, the first 
grains from the harvest the chieftain’s chatkcha, 
and so on.). 

Upon casting, all individuals in the chosen 
group become fearless in battle (base morale 18). 
This spell in no way charms the group into per- 
forming acts of combat they would not normally 
perform. 

Any number of individuals can come under 
the spell’s influence, provided they are one cohe- 
sive group (one tribe, one army, one village) and 
the symbolic object applies to each individual. 

The effect lasts for one full day, plus one day 
for each two days the caster spent in preparation 
beyond the necessary 15 days. 

The spell requires the symbolic object, and a 
tiny bar of iron. 

The reverse, mass cowardice, requires the 
same preparation. The base morale of the group 
falls to 4 for all combat situations. This spell re- 
quires the symbolic object and the feathers of a 
small, flightless bird round only in the Forest 
Ridge on Athas (and quire rare there). 

Notes: Restricted to preservers and defilers, 
common. 


Mountain Fortress 
(Conjuration) 
Level: 10 
Range: 0 


Components: V, S, M 
Preparation Time: 10 days 
Casting Time: 1 turn 

Duration: 100 days maximum 
Area of Effect: Creates 1 fortress 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell allows the caster to conjure a heav- 
ily protected mountain fortress where was noth- 
ing but empty land before. The spell can be cast 
only on an area of desolate plains—sand wastes, 
salt flats, even boulder fields; the spell cannot be 
used to destroy buildings or creatures. 

During the preparation time, the caster must 
bury the gem material component at least 90 feet 
below the surface exactly where the spell is to be 
cast. The burial means can be magical, psionic, or 
physical. For the entire ten-day period, the wizard 
must remain at that location without interruption. 
The spell can be cast as long as one year after the 
preparation is completed, but until cast, the spell 
counts against the caster's total number of 10th- 
level spells in preparation. After a year, the gem 
disappears and preparation must begin again. 

Upon casting, a roughly circular area, 90 yards 
in diameter around the caster, rises slowly to an 
elevation of 30 yards, plus 10 yards per level 
above 20th. The resulting cylinder has sheer, hard 
stone cliffs. The fortress appears on top of the 
new mountain, complete with stone walls and 
barricades, and multiple buildings surrounding a 
central, four-story tower. If the caster is 23rd 
level or higher, the ground for 30 yards around 
the cylinder is magically dug with trenches and 
pits, and strewn with caltrops. If the caster is 26th 
level or higher, the entire fortress complex is cov- 
ered with heavy netting and pikes to ward off at- 
tacks from the air. 

The fortress remains until one of the following 
conditions is met: The caster leaves the fortress; a 
force of no less than 50 Hit Dice of creatures an- 
tagonistic to the caster manages to take the cen- 
tral tower by force; 100 days have passed since 
casting. 

Conditions in the fortress are spartan. When 
the fortress is created, there is enough water and 
food to last 100 creatures of 1 Hit Die for 100 
days. Additional food can be brought into the 
fortress, of course. 


AETERNUM 


1076 


^ Preserver Metamorphosis a 


The exact layout of the fortress and its fortifi- 
cations are up to the caste, instantaneously trans- 
lated from his imagination to physical form on 
casting. The means of entry is up to the caster. 
Regardless of design, the fortress can protect up 
to 1,000 man-sized creatures. A newly conjured 
fortress has no inhabitants. 

The material component is a gem worth at 
least 1,000 cp. 

Notes: Restricted to preservers and defilers, 
common. 


Pact 
(Summoning) 


Level: 10 

Range: 300 yds. 

Components: V, S, M 

Preparation Time: 1 day/1,000 XP value of crea- 
ture 

Casting Time: 1 turn 

Duration: 101 days maximum 

Area of Effect: 1 outer planar creature 

Saving Throw: None 


This spell lets the caster call on an outer planar 
creature of the same alignment. The act of casting 
the spell gives the outer planar creature magical 
energy to use on its home plane, which fulfills the 
wizard's portion of the pact. The planar creature 
is then obligated to serve the wizard on the Prime 
Material Plane to fulfill its portion of the pact. 
Before preparation begins, the wizard must select 
the type of creature desired, and its alignment 
must be identical to the caster's. 

During preparation, the caster contacts the de- 
sired creature using contact other plane. Ignore 
that spell's knowledge and veracity rolls; no in- 
formation is gained. The contact must be made 
once per day for every 1,000 experience point 
value of the outer planar creature. Since the 
wizard cannot be sure how many experience 
points a specific creature is worth, he must cast 
the spell every day until the DM tells the player 
that the wizard is done. With each casting, the 
wizard makes an insanity check, with a —1% per 
day cumulative modifier as better contact is es- 
tablished (to a minimum chance for insanity of 
1% per casting). Failing an insanity check means 
the caster must begin the preparation anew if and 
when he recovers. 

When the spell is cast, the outer planar crea- 
ture appears at the wizard's location, ready to 
follow commands, within limits. First, the crea- 


ture only aids the wizard when furthering the 
cause of their alignment; for example, a chaotic 
evil creature obeys only chaotic evil commands 
while on the Prime. Second, the creature will not 
take actions that endanger it (in its opinion). 
Third, the creature's attitudes toward law and 
chaos may affect how it honors the pact (see 
table). 

Check every day to see if the creature breaks 
the pact. If it does, it may attack the wizard, 
remain on the Prime Material Plane to pursue its 
own plans, or simply return home. If the creature 
never breaks the pact, it remains in the wizard’s 
service for 101 days. If for any reason the caster 
changes alignment while the pact is still in force, 
the creature takes immediate steps to slay the 
caster. 


Creature’s Alignment Chance to Break Pact 


Lawful 0% 
Neutral 5% 
Chaotic 25% 


For example, a defiler (Intelligence 19) contacts 
a glabrezu (true tanar’ri) to make a pact. Since the 
glabrezu is worth 44,000 experience points, the 
wizard must cast contact other plane every day for 
44 days. The chance of insanity depends on the 
glabrezu’s Intelligence (less than 19) and the 
wizard’s Intelligence (35% — 20% = 15%). On the 
second day, this drops to 14%, then to 13% on the 
third, 12% on the fourth, and so on. Provided the 
wizard survives all 44 castings without going 
insane, the glabrezu arrives to do his bidding for 
101 days or until it decides to break the pact. 

The material component is an item (at least 
100 years old) that was used by an important his- 
torical figure of the caster’s alignment. 

Notes: Restricted to preservers and defilers, 
common. 


Preserver Metamorphosis 
(Alteration, Evocation) 


Level: 10 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Preparation Time: Special 
Casting Time: Special 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell is universal to human preservers but 


aU RTT LEE NN IB uci EORR 


1077 


m Prseevos Metamosphosis " 


must be researched sometime after reaching the 
20th level of experience as a human wizard. The 
spell allows a human preserver who has earned 
sufficient experience points to advance to the 
next stage of the metamorphosis to avangion, 
provided the casting is successful. Once cast, the 
spell mutates the preserver's physical form dras- 
tically; each time it is cast, the preserver becomes 
less human and more avangion, at the rate of 
about one-tenth of the transformation each time 
this spell is cast. The preserver must meet strin- 
gent ability score requirements: Intelligence 18, 
Wisdom 17, Constitution 15, and Charisma 16. 
Preparation can begin at any time as the next 
level is approached: building structures, gather- 
ing components, studying, and so on. However, 
the spell cannot be cast before all the necessary 
experience points have been earned. The pre- 
server gains no benefits of the new level until the 
preserver metamorphosis spell is cast. Each time 
the spell is cast, the preserver must make a suc- 
cessful system shock or die in the mutation 
process. Any interruption or mistake during the 


casting causes the preserver to lose experience 
points to the minimum of the previous level— 
these must be earned again before the metamor- 
phosis spell can be cast. 

The exact components, preparation time, and 
casting times differ, depending on the level the 
preserver is about to achieve, grouped by level 
into low, middle, high, and final metamorphosis. 
In all cases, living creatures used in the casting 
must be within one mile of the caster. All castings 
of this spell require the avangion to withdraw for 
a period. 

Low Metamorphosis (21st-23rd levels): A 
preserver feel a calling within when he has 
earned 75% of the experience needed for the next 
level. The preserver leaves the company of his 
fellows and seeks isolation. The preparation time 
is the entire period necessary for the preserver to 
earn the final 25% of those experience points, ad- 
venturing completely alone. If the preserver earns 
any experience points with the aid of another 
character, all experience points are lost down to 
the minimum required for the current level. 


N Prolific Forestation " 


Failure to gain experience in a solitary fashion, in 
the DM's judgment, means the spell may fail 
when cast. For low-level metamorphosis, the pre- 
server must spend the isolation period gathering 
physical remains of the enemies of life, usually 
those of high level defilers—their bodily re- 
mains, destructive belongings or items, ash from 
defiler spellcasting, and so on. These gatherings 
are evidence of devotion to life and the land. The 
spell must then be cast at night, beneath the light 
of both Athasian moons. The casting time is six 
hours, and any interruption results in spell failure. 
The preserver may have other characters present 
during the casting. 

Middle Metamorphosis (24th—26th levels): At 
the middle levels, the preserver again hears a call 
for isolation when 75% of the next level's experi- 
ence points have been earned. During the prepa- 
ration time, the preserver must attain absolute 
isolation; any contact with intelligent beings that 
aren't foes to be defeated negates the spell prepa- 
ration, and the preserver reverts to the 75% base- 
line of the isolation period. 

The material components at the middle levels 
are gifts gathered from no fewer than three pow- 
erful good creatures during isolation. These pow- 
erful creatures realize the consequences of 
contact for the preserver, so they leave the gifts to 
be found after the preserver achieves extremely 
dangerous or important goals. In addition, the 
spell requires a single tree or bush personally 
saved by the preserver from defiler magic de- 
struction (this is not consumed by the spell). The 
casting time is 12 hours. At the time of casting 
there must be living vegetation for at least one 
mile in all directions, untainted by defiler ash or 
evil creatures. 

High Metamorphosis (27th-29th levels): 
Unlike previous advancements, the preserver 
feels no call toward isolation. Instead, at the 7596 
experience point level, the preserver instead col- 
lects a core group of companions no fewer than 
eight in number and each of at least 10 levels or 
Hit Dice. All of the companions must be of good 
alignment. The preserver must spend the prepara- 
tion time with these characters, earning the re- 
maining 25% of the required experience in the 
company of at least one of these companions— 
failure to do so forces the preserver to revert to 
the current level's 75% base line of experience. 

The material components are a single gift 
from each of the companions in the core group. 
During the casting, the preserver requires the aid 
of a single companion for the entire ceremony. If 


the companion is not absolutely good, the spell 
fails and the companion is slain in the release of 
failed magical energy. Companions cannot repeat 
the process with a single preserver—new com- 
panions must be found for each level. 

Final Metamorphosis (30th level): To cast this 
spell, the preserver must make an area of lush 
vegetation (crops, scrub-grass, forests, or any 
combination) at least five miles in diameter. The 
preparation time for the spell is the time it takes 
the preserver to create these lush lands. At the 
time of casting, these lands must be free of evil 
creatures. 

The material components are a diamond of no 
less than 10,000 gp value with which to capture 
the life-giving qualities of sunlight, a stone tomb 
large enough to hold the preserver's body, and a 
perfectly sealed glass case built around the tomb. 
The casting time is one round. Upon casting, the 
preserver, diamond, and stone tomb disappear, 
bound for planes unknown. The DM then secretly 
rolls 2d12—this is the number of months before 
the return of the preserver, in final avangion 
form, to the glass case. If the glass case is dam- 
aged in the meantime, the avangion is lost to 
oblivion. Only the DM knows how long the final 
stage will take. 

Notes: Restricted to human preservers, 
common. This spell is sometimes called avangion 
metamorphosis. 


Prolific Forestation 
(Alteration, Conjuration) 


Components: V, S, M 
Preparation Time: 30 days 
Casting Time: Special 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


With this spell, a preserver causes a grove of 
trees to magically appear. The area must contain 
no other trees, or the spell fails. 

During the preparation time, the preserver 
must devote eight hours per day for 30 days to 
fashion a staff from a free of life. The preserver 
must carve the staff perfectly smooth with a dia- 
mond dagger. No other task can be undertaken 
during the eight-hour periods. 

The area of effect has a maximum radius that 


db- ir EUM LA emt Dat UM 


1079 


^ Prolific Vegetation r 


varies according to the caster’s level (the caster 
can make the radius smaller if desired; see table). 

To cast the spell, the preserver thrusts the dia- 
mond dagger into the ground in the center of the 
area, then moves with the staff to the circle's edge. 
The preserver then walks around the area of effect, 
dragging the staff. The staff magically ensures that 
the preserver walks a perfectly circular path, even- 
tually returning to the starting point. The preserver 
must walk (not run, fly, or levitate) but may use 
magical means to speed the walk. Interruptions 
lasting more than a single round negate the walk- 
ing and it must be started again. If the dagger at the 
center of the circle is disturbed, the spell fails, so 
the preserver often places a guard over it. When 
the circle is completed, the spell is cast. 


Max Rough Time 
Caster Radius Circum. to Walk Trees in 


Level (yds.) (yds.) (rds) Grove* 
21 10 63 l 15 
22 20 125 l 62 
23 30 188 2 140 
24 45 282 3 315 
25 60 377 4 560 
26 90 565 5 1,260 
27 120 754 7 2,250 
28 180 1,131 10 5,040 
29 240 1,507 13 9,000 
30 480 3,016 26 36,000 


* approximate; can vary as much as 20% 


The forest consists of mature trees, one to four 
feet in diameter, spaced three to six yards apart. 
The thick forest canopy towers 90 to 120 feet. 
This spell creates no brush or undergrowth; the 
forest floor is the same terrain type as before the 
spell was cast. The spacing of the trees hinders 
the movement of huge or gargantuan creatures; 
smaller creatures can move through the forest un- 
hindered. 

Unlike the prolific vegetation spell, the trees 
created have magical protection against natural 
destruction for one year per caster level. Natural 
fires, lightning, lack of water, and harsh weather 
do not kill them. Defiler magic still destroys them 
normally, as can any attack that would affect 
normal trees. 

The material components are the staff and the 
diamond dagger, both of which disappear when 
the spell is cast. 

The reverse of this spell, deadwood, can be 
cast only by a defiler. During the preparation 
time, the defiler must spend at least four hour per 


day among the trees he wishes to destroy. He 
must sprinkle a fine trail of ash, from his own 
spells, around the circumference of the area to be 
affected. Upon casting, all trees in the area of 
effect are stricken dead. Trees will not grow 
within the circle for a number of years equal to 
twice the caster’s level. The material components 
for the reverse are a skull carved from a rotten 
tree stump and the defiler’s own ash. 

Notes: Restricted to preservers, common. The 
reverse is restricted to defilers, common. 


Prolific Vegetation 
(Alteration, Conjuration) 
Reversible 


Level: 10 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Preparation Time: 30 days 
Casting Time: Special 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell causes shrubs and grasses to grow over 
a wide area of previously barren terrain. If the terrain 
is not virtually barren of plant life, then the spell fails. 

During preparation, the preserver must devote 
eight hours per day for 30 days to fashion a staff from 
a tree of life. The preserver must carve the staff per- 
fectly smooth with an obsidian dagger. No other task 
can be undertaken during the eight-hour periods. 

The area of effect has a maximum radius that 
varies according to the caster’s level (the caster can 
make the radius smaller if desired; see table). 

To cast the spell, the preserver thrusts the ob- 
sidian dagger into the ground in the center of the 
area, then moves with the staff to the circle’s edge. 
The preserver then walks the circumference of the 
area of effect, dragging the staff. The staff magi- 
cally ensures that the preserver walks a perfectly 
circular path, eventually returning to the starting 
point. The preserver must walk (not run, fly, or lev- 
itate) but may use magical means to speed the 
walk. If the time taken to complete the circle re- 
quires the preserver to stop to sleep, there is no 
penalty, provided the caster awakens to continue 
the walk. Other interruptions lasting more than a 
single round negate the walking and it must be 
started again. If the dagger at the center of the 
circle is disturbed, the spell fails, so the preserver 
often places a guard over it. When the circle is 
completed, the spell is cast. 


AC © |= d 25 vM SEEN 


1080 


- Pure Breed d 


Caster Max Rough Time 
Level Radius Circum. to Walk: 
21 90 yds. 566 yds. 5 rds. 
22 180 yds. 1,311 yds. 1 turn 
23 300 yds. 1 mi, 2 turns 
24 540 yds 2 mi 3 turns 
25 800 yds 3 mi 5 turns 
26 1,250 yds 4.5 mi 7 turns 
27 1.25 mi 8 mi 2 hrs. 
28 6 mi 38 mi 9 hrs. 
29 12 mi 75 mi 18 hrs.” 
30 25 mi. 157 mi 36 hrs.” 
"Time is for a human in clear terrain and clear weather 
“Requires multiple marching days 


Upon casting, the area inside the circle in- 
stantly grows thick with grass and small shrubs, 
much like scrub plains. The vegetation does not 
emerge from solid stone, but arises from any soil, 
no matter how rocky, sandy, or dry. The vegeta- 
tion is normal in every respect, and has no magi- 
cal properties. It remains until and unless it dies 
from lack of moisture, brushfire, erosion, and so 
on. If this spell is cast in conjunction with the 
priestly psionic enchantment, alter climate, the 
vegetation can grow and last longer. Defiler 
magic still destroys the vegetation normally. 

The material components are the staff and the 
obsidian dagger, both of which disappear when 
the spell is cast. 

The reverse of this spell, sparse vegetation, 
can be cast only by a defiler. During preparation, 
the defiler must spend at least four hour per day 
wandering the scrubland he wishes to destroy. 
The defiler sprinkles a fine trail of ash, from his 
own spells, around the circumference of the area 
to be affected. Upon casting, all scrub, bushes, 
grass, weeds, and similar plants in the area of 
effect die immediately. Such plants will not grow 
within the circle for a number of years equal to 
the caster's level, though the growth of trees is 
not affected. The material components for the re- 
verse are ash from the defiler's own spellcasting, 
and a small bag of woven straw, filled with salt 
from the sweat of slave farmers. 

Notes: Restricted to preservers, common. The 
reverse is restricted to defilers, common. 


Pure Breed 
(Alteration, Divination) 
Level: 10 
Range: Touch 


Components: V, S, M 
Preparation Time: 20 days 
Casting Time: 10 turns 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


With this spell, a wizard can change any half- 
breed character (half-elf, half-giant, mul, and so 
on) into a pure bred creature of either part. The 
caster can change a half-elf into a human or an 
elf, a half-giant into a human or a giant, or a mul 
into a human or a dwarf. To all tests and means of 
detection, the character will appear always to 
have been of the pure breed race. 

During preparation, the caster and subject 
must be in constant proximity, with no more than 
one visitor at a time and no more than one per 30- 
day period. If the subject is unwilling, the caster 
must somehow restrain him during the prepara- 
tion, and even then the subject is allowed a saving 
throw vs. spell to negate the effects. 

Once the spell is cast, the subject is most 
likely switched to a pure breed of the caster's 
choice. However, the creature is 10% likely to 
be transformed into the other breed (—1% per 
caster level over 20th). Either way, the creature 
must make a successful system shock roll to sur- 
vive the process. A survivor subtracts the racial 
ability adjustments of the half-breed race and 
adds those for the new pure breed race. The 
creature also develops the ability to speak the 
language of the pure breed race, if necessary. 
The creature receives no social background for 
the new race. An elf, for example, has no tribe; a 
human has no city or village alliance (this may 
prove to be a hindrance). 

If the creature's character classes conflict with 
any racial class or level limits of the new race, 
then current class abilities are adjusted or lost ac- 
cordingly. All abilities for the new race come into 
force, those available only to the old are lost. 
New height and weight values are rolled. The 
character's age does not change, but that age is 
checked against the age tables for the new race. 
An effectively younger character might lose abil- 
ity score adjustments due to age. A character 
beyond the maximum age range in his new race is 
extremely frail and likely to perish within the 


MET TUE a r AEE 


1081 


^ Raise Nation " 


year. Psionics are unchanged. This spell is very 
difficult to reverse; the DM decides if and how 
this is possible. 

There are no giant player characters. A half- 
giant who becomes a giant also becomes an NPC 
immediately. 

Notes: Restricted to preservers and defilers, 
common. 


Raise Nation 


(Necromancy) 


Level: 10 

Range: 90 yds. 
Components: V, S, M 
Preparation Time: 60 days 
Casting Time: 10 turns 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell allows the caster to animate the 
skeletons of a long-dead civilization. Before 
preparation can begin, the caster must locate an 
appropriate site of ruins. This site need not con- 
tain complete skeletons; these will assemble from 
powdered fragments, it that is all that is left of 
them. The site must not have any creatures living 
there, and must have been abandoned for at least 
100 years. 

During preparation, the wizard must spend all 
his waking hours searching the ruins, learning 
everything he can about them, readying the site 
for his necromancy. 

Once cast, a number of skeletons will animate 
according to the general size of the ruin site. The 
DM knows the extent of the ruins and can use the 
table, modified for any special circumstances he 
envisions (see table). 


Raise Nation Table 
Size Number of Skeletons 
Outpost 10-40 
Village 40-400 
City 200-2,000 
Great City 1,000-4,000 


The skeletons are completely under the com- 
mand of the caster. They are no different from 
other skeletons. They have no knowledge of their 
past lives or civilization—they merely serve the 
caster. The skeletons remain active until de- 
stroyed, but will not venture further than 75 miles 
from their ruins. 


Once cast on a set of ruins, this spell cannot be 
cast there again by any wizard. A randomly dis- 
covered ruin is 10% likely to have had a raise 
nation spell already cast there, but the caster has 
no way to know this without some sort of divina- 
tion magic. 

The material component for the spell is a col- 
lection of items from the ruin site that have been 
well preserved; these items must total at least 
1,000 cp in present day value. 

Notes: Restricted to defilers, common. 


Recruitment 


Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Preparation Time: 10 days 
Casting Time: 1 turn 
Duration: 20 days 

Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


With this spell, the caster summons all living 
creatures around him who have ever drawn blood 
in anger to serve him without fail. 

During preparation, the caster must take the 
ground bones of fallen warriors and sprinkle 
them where the spell is to be cast, out to a radius 
that depends on the caster's level (see table). 

Upon the casting of the recruitment spell, all 
creatures within the circle that have ever drawn 
blood in anger, such as hunters or warriors, must 
make a successful saving throw vs. spell or come 
under its effects. These individuals immediately 
gather their weapons and come to the caster, 
awaiting his every military instruction for the du- 
ration of the spell. 


Recruitment Radius 


Level Radius 
21 60 yds 
22 90 yds. 
23 120 yds 
24 180 yds. 
25 240 yds 
26 360 yds 
27 480 yds 
28 900 yds 
29 1 mi 
30 2 mi 


AA =|" > ee SD 


1082 


| ———————— À IH! 


The affected creatures will not usually form 
military formations, unless an entire formation is 
caught in the area of effect. Affected creatures 
cannot be commanded to perform any action 
other than combat; for example, they cannot be 
forced to build things or carry things other than 
their own personal equipment. They do not fight 
among themselves, regardless of previous dispo- 
sitions, and the serve the caster without fail. 

The material component is at least 100 pounds 
of ground bones of fallen warriors, apportioned 
during preparation. A man-sized humanoid crea- 
ture has about 25 pounds of bone; larger creatures 
have about 25 pounds per Hit Die. 

Notes: Restricted to preservers and defilers, 
common. 


Reverse Loyalties 
(Charm) 
Level: 10 
Range: 60 yds. 


Components: V, S, M 

Preparation Time: 7 days 

Casting Time: 1 turn 

Duration: 21 days 

Area of Effect: 25 HD/level within 300 yds. 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell acts as a mass charm person spell, 
though its effects are more restricted. The subject 
group must consist of bipedal human, demihu- 
man, or humanoid creatures of man-size or 
smaller, such as humans, dwarves, elves, half- 
elves, halflings, and muls; all of whom hold loy- 
alties to one leader. 

During preparation, the wizard locks himself 
away and studies the history and background of 
the target group's original leader. Though the 
spell is cast on the followers themselves, the 
caster researches their leader's background. 

Upon casting, the spell effect expands in a 
circle from the point of casting, until creatures 
equal to the area of effect are enchanted, or until 
there are no possible subject creatures left. The 
maximum radius is 300 yards. 

Unlike the charm person spell, the target 
group regards the caster as the object of their loy- 
alties. They accept logical military orders from 
the caster. For instance, they will break formation 
or turn on their former leader. They do nothing 
obviously fatal to themselves. Their loyalties 
have been magically switched, but are not magi- 
cally maintained—if the caster takes actions that 


make him less worthy of these newfound loyal- 
ties, the subjects of the spell may desert. Even if 
the caster performs well as their new leader, the 
spell recipients can save according to their 
Intelligence, just as for a charm person spell 
(creatures with Intelligence 12 or less have no 
chance to save before the spell runs out). 
Individuals who make their saving throws desert, 
but cannot convince others still under the spell 
effect to do so. Each subject has full memory of 
actions taken while under this spell. 

The material component is a fully dried 
anakore's heart. 

Notes: Restricted to preservers and defilers, 


common. 


Rift 
(Alteration, Conjuration/Summoning) 


Level: 10 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Preparation Time: 120 days 

Casting Time: 10 turns 

Duration: | night 

Area of Effect: Sphere. 360-yd. radius 
Saving Throw: None 


With this spell, the caster creates a rift be- 
tween the Prime Material Plane and the Negative 
Material Plane, centered upon himself, and 
greatly enhancing the potency of undead crea- 
tures. 


During preparation, the wizard must first 
study undisturbed for at least four hours per day 
for four months, reading scrolls and books about 
the planes. 

Upon casting, all undead within the area of 
effect gain nine times their original hit points as 
bonus hit points for the duration of the spell (one 
night). In combat, the bonus hit points are lost 
first. For example, a zombie with 5 hit points, 
gains an additional 45 hit points for the entire 
night. Undead affected by this enchantment are 
turned as “special” undead. 

The area of the rift moves with the caster, pos- 
sibly placing some undead out of the sphere or 


AT a. ee Eb 


1083 


~ Rolling Road " 


encompassing others as he moves. Bonus hit 
point are gained immediately by an undead crea- 
ture upon entering the area, but only once from a 
single casting of the spell. The caster cannot con- 
trol which undead receive the bonus; all undead 
entering the area are affected, and retain the hit 
points even if they leave the area. 

The material component is an obsidian goblet 
containing ground bones from a dead necro- 
mancer. 

Notes: Restricted to preservers and defilers, 
common. 


Rolling Road 
(Alteration) 


Level: 10 

Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Preparation Time: 7 days 
Casting Time: 1 turn 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell creates a short stretch of smooth 
road that extends before the caster wherever 
caster travels. 

During preparation, the caster mixes the mate- 
rial components (dust from roads the caster has 
previously traveled) for four hours every day for 
seven days. 

After casting the spell, the wizard must con- 
tinue to sprinkle the mixed dust in front of him 
while he travels. 

The road itself is a 30 yards wide and extends 
10 yards in front of the caster. It extends behind 
the caster for 90 yards for each level above 20th. 
The road crosses any land, including sand, forest, 
and mountain. In the case of the first two, the 
road appears in front of the caster, pushing obsta- 
cles like trees and rocks aside. In mountains, ob- 
stacles are likewise removed, but the road 
remains a steep as the basic terrain, and might 
still be impassible. The road does not create its 
own firm ground, and cannot be used to cross 
areas of silt (and water barriers in other settings). 
The road leaves no trace once the caster has 
passed by. Structures are not affected in any way, 
the rolling road will pass between them or turn 
around them—the rolling road in such terrain 
conforms to the width of an existing road or path. 

The road offers some protection to those on 
it—natural weather effects do not hinder travel 


on the road, and those on it do not require food or 
water while on the road. 

The spell's duration is measured in distance, 
five miles per level of the caster above 20th. The 
spell does not grant the caster any knowledge of 
direction. 

The material component is at least one pound 
of dust from three roads the caster has previously 
traveled. 

Notes: Restricted to preservers and defilers, 
common. 


Sparse Vegetation 
Reversed form, see prolific vegetation. 


Undead's Lineage 
(Divination) 


Level: 10 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Preparation Time: 120 days 

Casting Time: 1 turn 

Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: Undead creature touched 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


With this spell, the caster can divine the history 
of a single undead creature, thereby gaining great 
power over that creature. 

During preparation, the caster must spend at 
least eight hours per day studying necromancy and 
tomes about undeath. (The caster must procure 
such materials before beginning the preparation 
time.) Adventures that focus on the undead may be 
included as part of the preparation time, if the DM 
desires. 

The wizard must make a successful attack roll 
when the spell is cast. Once the spell is cast, the 
undead creature is allowed a saving throw vs. spell 
at a —3 penalty. Failure means the caster immedi- 
ately knows the personal history of the creature as 
well as does the creature itself. This might include 
(but is not limited to): family history and occupa- 
tion during life; circumstances of death; circum- 
stances of undeath; and history since attaining 
undeath. 

This intimate knowledge gives the caster com- 
plete control over the undead creature. The undead 
performs any task ordered. The details learned may 
lead to some knowledge or old or ancient events, at 
the DM's option. Extremely powerful undead, such 
as liches and some vampires, may receive another 
chance to save each week or even after each task, if 


AU —— —— € a 


1084 


= Wall of Ash a 


the DM so decides. 

The spell lasts until one of the following events 
occurs: The undead creature is permanently de- 
stroyed; the caster is made to forget (even tem- 
porarily) the things he has learned; a wizard of 
higher level casts this spell on the same undead 
creature (thus stealing control); or the caster volun- 
tarily ends the spell. 

While the caster learns much about the undead, 
the undead learns much about the caster. If the 
caster dies with an undead creature under this spell, 
then the caster immediately becomes a weaker 
undead under the creature’s control. Mindless 
undead such as skeletons or zombies exert no con- 
trol; the caster becomes a mindless undead of their 
type. A wizard who becomes undead in this manner 
cannot be revived by known magic. 

The material components of this spell are an 
eye, ear, nose, tongue, and finger, each taken from a 
separate undead creature of the same type as the 
target creature. 

Notes: Restricted to preservers and defilers, 
common. 


Wall of Ash 
(Evocation) 
Level: 10 
Range: 0 
Components: V, $, M 


Preparation Time: 5 days 
Casting Time: 2 turns 
Duration: Special 

Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: Special 


The spell creates a barrier of ash that is deadly 


1085 


to living creatures. Touching it causes damage, 
and crossing it might cause instant death. 

During the preparation time, the defiler must 
dig or have dug a small trench, one foot wide and 
one foot deep, in the shape the wall will take 
when it is cast. A defiler who is not personally in- 
volved in the digging must still personally over- 
see the work for at least four hours per day during 
the preparation time. 

The wall can be of any shape, and as long as 
30 yards per caster level above 20th. The ash ap- 
pears in the trench and is piled one foot above the 
ground. Vertically, the wall's deadly effect ex- 
tends for 10 feet per level of the caster, plus 
20-80 feet (2d4 x 10 ). 

Contact with the ash causes 1d10 points of 
damage (as much as 10d10 points of damage per 
round for continuous contact). A living creature 
crossing completely over the ash within the area 
of effect must make a successful saving throw vs. 
death magic at a penalty of —10. Failure means 
the creature dies, its life completely absorbed by 
the deadly ash. Jumping or flying through the 
barrier makes no difference, and the effects 
extend into the Astral and Ethereal Planes. 
However, teleport and similar spells allow safe 
passage. Magic, psionic attacks, missile weapons, 
non-living things, and undead can cross the ash 
wall without penalty. Ash golems remaining in 
contact with the wall of ash for a complete round 
are restored to full hit points. The caster and any 
allies are as subject to damage and death from the 
wall of ash as their enemies. 

The material component is a sack of ash col- 
lected from the remains of a defiler of the same 
level as the caster. 

Notes: Restricted to defilers, common. 


p S ————————— ——————qná —"nsi 4 


Chronomancy: DM Notes 


Due to the complex and self-correcting nature of the 
timestream, the following details should be withheld 
from a player who has a chronomancer until they 
occur in play. 


Ist Level Spells 

Detect Temporal Anomaly: Large disturbances 
can overlap a closer, yet smaller source, masking it 
completely. Slipgates and creatures in stasis become 
that much harder to find. 

Precognitive Sense: Events sensed with this spell 
start with the worst. Danger is sensed before reward, 
failure before success, hate before love, and so forth. 


2nd Level Spells 

Accelerate Plant Growth: Seasonal crops won't 
produce again without replanting. 

Preserve From Decay: The container's size does 
not matter, only the amount of material placed in it. 

Life Sounding: Traveling in the Demiplane of 
Time creates interruptions in the traveler's lifeline. A 
sounding taken on someone who has been (or will be) 
to the Demiplane of Time can be thrown drastically 
off; the sounding can measure only a single truncated 
segment of time. 

Timeslip: Since the timeslippers have now pre- 
empted their own future (until they return), a small 
amount of turbulence is guaranteed. This turbulence 
might be detected by temporal creatures in the area 
(5% chance). 


3rd Level Spells 

Articus’s Melee Manager: The affected creature 
is not moving faster, but more efficiently. It's motions 
appear fluid and economical. 

Minor Paradox: Actually replaying the events of 
past rounds affected by the spell is not recommended. 
Make a decision summarizing the final effect and let 
it stand. The temporal turbulence created by this spell 
is 5% likely to attract a time dimensional or a time 
Guardian. 

Time Snare: This does not restore a used spell or 
used charges. It allows the casting the same spell if 
the caster has additional memorizations prepared. A 
charged item is drained each time it is used. 


4th Level Spells 
Prophecy: This spell can see forward without 
limit. Most prophecies span years or perhaps decades. 
Temporal Push: If the chronomancer is pushed 
forward, an opponent might believe he has magically 


fled. A wizard who knows of this spell and makes a 
successful spellcraft proficiency check understands 
what has happened. 

Wesley's Temporal Disjunction: When used 
against a time dimensional, the disjunction affects all 
versions of the creature, regardless of which is tar- 
geted. 


5th Level Spells 

Accelerate Animal Growth: Knowledge is not 
gained or lost with this spell. For example, if cast on a 
tiger cub, the result might be a 200-pound kitten. The 
lifeline of the animal grows brighter. 

Articus's Devolutionary Warrior: If the subject 
fails a system shock roll, the devolution can be re- 
versed only by a full wish or a combination of dispel 
magic and a limited wish. A system shock check 
against death is required when the subject is restored 
using either of these methods.. 

Create Slipgate: The opening on any plane but 
the Demiplane of Time can be found only with a 
detect magic, detect phase, or detect temporal anom- 
aly. On the Demiplane of Time, the mist-smoke re- 
volves around the opening in a wispy tunnel 
resembling a vortex. This draws creatures who make 
their lairs in these anomalies. If using a previously 
created slipgate, there is a 20% chance that a creature 
has taken up residence since the last time the slipgate 
was used. 


6th Level Spells 

Conceal Temporal Anomaly: This is often used 
to conceal a slipgate. This must be placed on each side 
of the gate to conceal it from both sides. The turbu- 
lence is harder to detect, but the vortex-like visual 
effect is still present. 

Paradox: The give-and-take process must be 
strictly and fairly enforced by the DM. Every benefit 
is balanced by an equally valuable loss without ex- 
ception. The turbulence created is 20% likely to at- 
tract a time dimensional or a Guardian. 


7th Level Spell 
Wesley's Delayed Damage: If any chronomancy 
spell barred to other spellcasters and with a duration 
greater than instantaneous is cast on the subject of 
Wesley's delayed damage, the defensive spell is 
negated instantly. All delayed damage is applied im- 
mediately. 


JJ tmc 


1086 


Lichdom " 


8th Level Spell 

Accelerate Lifeline: When reversing this spell, 
the recipient is 5% likely to have an adverse reaction, 
with the years added instead of subtracted. This effect 
is cumulative with each casting. The reaction means 
that all years removed with this spell are reapplied im- 
mediately, as if accelerate lifeline had been cast. The 
chance of failure is noncumulative with other age-re- 
ducing effects. 


9th Level Spell 
Sever Lifeline: A caster with a severed lifeline is 
now à native of the Demiplane of Time. Strands do 
not affect the caster, but any spell that affects a tem- 
poral creature does. The wizard can double his lifeline 
and even meet himself. Spells such as life sounding, 


life tether, and accelerate lifeline no longer affect the 
wizard, but Wesley $ temporal disjunction can be used 
against him when off the Demiplane of Time. The 
wizard does not age on the Demiplane of Time, but is 
subject to temporal laws and ages normally if that 
demiplane is left. The wizard remains subject to death 
by misadventure or violence at all times. Nothing 
short of divine intervention can reverse this spell once 
the caster uses it on himself. 

Casting this spell creates serious turbulence, and is 
20% likely to form a permanent vortex. The caster is 
only 10% likely to escape immediate notice by the 
Guardians, and the casting will almost certainly be 
discovered within a few weeks of subjective time. At 
that point, the Guardians will approach the wizard 
with a request to join their Order. 


Lichdom 


Occasionally, a wizard who would otherwise 
perish seeks to preserve some semblance of life. 
When such a wizard is animated as an undead 
creature, the result is a lich, one of the more 
powerful types of undead monsters. 

Seeking this state is not a good act, and the 
procedures, materials, and energies employed 
are both hazardous and baneful. Thus, this state 
is almost exclusively the province of evil non- 
player spellcasters who are willing to go to any 
length to extend their allotted natural lifespans. 
The basic cost of researching the procedures 
should not be less than 100,000 gp. 

While a campaign might offer many different 
ways for a character to achieve the state of lich- 
dom, the one described here can serve as a basis 
for any description of the process the DM needs 
to convey to players. 


Becoming a Lich 

To become a lich, a wizard must attain at least 
the 18th level of experience. The candidate must 
have access to the spells Nulathoe s ninemen, 
magic jar, enchant an item, and trap the soul. 
The procedure is ruined if the candidate dies at 
any time during the process. Even if successfully 
revived, the candidate must begin the process 
anew. The basic procedure involves the fabrica- 
tion of a magical phylactery and a potion. (Most 
candidates prepare the potion first and arrange 
for an apprentice or ally to raise them if inges- 
tion of the potion proves fatal. Fabrication of the 


phylactery is so expensive that most candidates 

do not wish to waste all the effort of the prepara- 

tion by dying after it is completed but before 

they are prepared for lichdom.) 
The potion requires nine ingredients: 

e Arsenic (2 drops of the purest distillate) 

è Belladona (2 drop of purest distillate) 

e Blood (1 quart, from a pegasus foal killed by 
wyvem venom) 

* Blood (1 quart, from a vampire) 

* Heart (Intact, from a humanoid killed by a 
poisonous mixture of arsenic and belladona) 

e Reproductive Glands (from seven giant 
moths, dead for less than 10 days, ground to- 
gether) 

è Venom (1 pint, drawn from a phase spider 
less than 30 days prior) 

e Venom (1 pint, drawn from a wyvern less 
than 60 days prior) 


The ingredients are mixed in the order given by 
the light of a full moon. The potion must be drunk 
within seven days after they combine into a 
sparkling black liquid that gleams with a bluish ra- 
diance. All of the potion must be drunk. Within six 
rounds, it produces an effect from the potion table 
(see page 1089). 

The candidate always knows if the potion has 
worked. A successfully prepared candidate may 
appear somewhat paler of skin than before im- 
bibing the potion, but cannot be mentally or 
magically detected by others as ready for 


ae UE Pam Re qe Ar rae Nr e ARR 


1087 


^ Lichdom " 


lichdom. The candidate, however, is always 
aware of readiness for lichdom, even if charmed, 
insane, or if memory loss has occurred. (A 
charmed candidate cannot be made to reveal the 
location of the phylactery—although he or she 
could be compelled to identify what the phylac- 
tery is, if it is directly shown.) 

Once prepared by the potion, the candidate 
can live for an indefinite number of years before 
becoming à lich. The process fails if death 
comes before the preparation of the phylactery 
and the candidate's undeath. 

The phylactery can take any form—it may be 
a pendant, gauntlet, scepter, helm, crown, ring, 
or even a lump of stone. It must be of inorganic 
material, solid and of high quality workmanship 
if made by humans, and cannot be an item con- 
taining other spells or magical properties. The 
phylactery might be decorated in any fashion. 

Enchant an item is cast on the phylactery (a 
rare case in which this spell can be cast on un- 
worked material); this process requires continual 
handling of the phylactery for a long time. The 
phylactery must make a successful saving throw 
as noted in the spell description. The phylactery 
must be completely enchanted within nine days 
(instead of the 24 hours normally allowed by the 
spell). Note that the “additional spell" times 
given in the enchant an item spell description are 
required. 

When the phylactery is ready, trap the soul 
must be cast on it. Percentile dice are rolled; the 
spell has a 50% chance of working, plus 6% per 
level of the caster over 11th level. The phylac- 
tery glows with a flickering blue-green faerie 
fire radiance for one round if it is receptive to the 
candidate's essence. 

The candidate must then cast Nulathoe 's 
ninemen on the phylactery, and within a turn of 
doing so, cast magic jar on it and enter it with 
his or her life force. No other creature is required 
for this use of the magic jar spell. Upon entering 
the phylactery, the candidate instantly loses one 
experience level, along the commensurate spells 
and hit points (1d4, plus Constitution bonus). 
The essence and lost hit points remain in the 
phylactery, which becomes ACO and maintains 
those hit points from now on. 

The candidate is now a lichnee, and must 
return to his or her own body to rest for 1d6+1 
days. The ordeal of becoming a lichnee is so 
traumatic that the candidate's memory is wiped 
clean of the top three levels of available spells; 


nor can any spells of those levels be regained 
until the rest period is completed. (Candidates 
usually resume a life of adventuring to regain the 
lost level.) 

The next time the lichnee candidate dies, de- 
spite the manner or the planar location of the 
death, or barriers of any sort between the corpse 
and the phylactery, the candidate's life force 
goes into the phylactery. For it to emerge again, 
the caster's own corpse (or such equivalents as a 
slain clone), if within range, must fail a saving 
throw vs. spell with a —10 penalty. The lichnee 
can attempt to enter its own corpse once per 
week until it succeeds. When the lichnee enters 
its own corpse, it rises in 1d4 turns as à full lich, 
with all memorized spells and all undead abili- 
ties described in the MONSTROUS MANUAL tome. 

If for any reason, the lichnee's corpse is not 
available, the lichnee can try to take over the 
corpse of any recently dead creature (less than 
30 days) within 90 feet of the phylactery. The 
corpse must fail a saving throw vs. spell to be 
possessed. A creature that possessed 3 Hit Dice 
or fewer in life saves as a 0-level fighter. A crea- 
ture that had 3+1 or more Hit Dice saves as if it 
were alive, with modifiers based on its align- 
ment (see table). The lichnee might be able to 
use the possessed body to find or recover its own 
body, eventually completing the process of be- 
coming a lich. (A phylactery too well hidden 
might never offer a lichnee a corpse to enter. 
Many lichnees arrange their own final deaths to 
avoid such troubles.) 

Priests might also become liches, although 
these are much more rare. The requirements in 
terms of level, time, expense, and process are 
similar to those of the wizard version. 


CREATURE ALIGNMENT TABLE 
Alignment Saving Throw Modifier 
Any Good 0 
CN, LN, N -3 
LE 4 
NE -5 
CE -6 


M TENETE ic em LR rcl r s 


1088 


The Mythal ag 


D% Roll Effect D% Roll Effect 

01-10 All body hair falls out, but potion is 71-90 Potion works, but candidate is para- 
ineffective (the candidate knows lyzed for 2d6+2 days (no saving 
this). Another potion must be pre- throw, despite curative magic). There 
pared. is a 30% chance for permanent loss 

11-40 Candidate falls into a coma for 1d6*1 of 1d6 Dexterity points. 
days, is physically helpless and im- 91-96 Potion works, but candidate loses a 
mobile, mentally unreachable. Upon sense or speech; it can be regained 
waking, potion works; the candidate only by a limited wish or wish. 
knows this. 01-33 Deaf 

41-70 Potion works, but the candidate is 34-66 Mute 
feebleminded. Any failed attempt to 67-00 Blind 
cure the candidate's condition is 20% 97-00 Candidate dies; potion fails. 
likely to slay the candidate. 

The Mythal 
A mythal is a huge webwork of magical powers operate at half PSP cost. 


force-beams given life by a cabal of mighty wiz- 
ards and sustained by the natural processes of its 
surroundings. It is a living thing. The details of 
mythal creation are lost, but the mythal that 
envelops the ruined city of Myth Drannor in the 
FoRGOTTEN REALMS setting was created by nine 
wizards, of at least 41st level and casting 10th- 
level spells. This huge zone of living magic 
twists normal spellcasting in a number of ways. 
Enchantment and divination magics and de- 
vices do not operate in the mythal, nor do 
clairsentient or telepathic psionic disciplines. 
Translocation magics such as teleport, dimen- 
sion door, and their psionic counterparts operate 
unreliably. On the other hand, dimension-span- 
ning magics such gate, plane shift, banishment, 
and the astral spell are far easier to use, with in- 
creased capacity and little cost. Similar psionic 


All other magics have a 10% per spell level 
chance to create a “wild surge” instead of the de- 
sired spell effect (the Wild Surge table in the 
wild magic section can be used). If this check is 
passed, the caster must still make a saving throw 
vs. death magic or lose control of the dweomer 
in a surge that will either maximize (50%) or 
minimize (50%) the effect of the spell in terms 
of duration, damage, number affected, and so on 
(the DM may vary the effects of each surge 
slightly). 

The mythal has randomly occurring **magic 
strong" and “magic dead” areas, as well as secret 
effects built into the original weave by the wiz- 
ards that constructed it. The weave mythal spell 
creates a temporary zone of stability in which 
magic can function normally for a time. 


Paths of Power 


Path magic (also called pattern magic or web 
magic) allows a mage or specialist wizard to choose 
an area of concentration for further development. 
This increases the chance of developing a given set 
of spells, while limiting development in other ways. 

Paths of magic are fragments of knowledge 
that may cut across many disciplines. They are 
supported by colleges of magic, where the chains 
of related knowledge are passed down from 
master to student. Access to paths can be limited 
by limiting where they can be learned, and which 
colleges have certain types of knowledge can be a 


tool of campaign development. 

A path is a group of related spells that must be 
learned in a particular order. Beginning with the 
lowest level spell on a path, the wizard learns each 
spell in turn. If a path contains more than one spell 
ofa certain level, the wizard only needs to learn one 
of those spells in order to proceed along that path. 

A wizard who becomes a path mage can only 
learn spells to which he can trace a path , and can 
only research new spells that connect to a path of 
spells that he already knows. Even a greatly de- 
sired spell found on an adventure cannot be mas- 


PS MEE i Ec Le cae 


1089 


x Paths of Power r 


tered unless a path to it can be developed. Paths 
that contain Ist-level spells are called greater 
paths, those that do not contain 1st-level spells are 
called /esser paths. 

Generally, spell levels cannot be skipped; if a 
path contains 2nd, 3rd, and 4th-level spells, then the 
wizard must learn a 3rd-level spell before learning 
any 4th level spells on the path, and a 2nd-level 
spell before learning any 3rd-level spells. 

A wizard on a path will always be drawn to 
along it; when sufficient experience levels are 
gained to open a new spell level, the wizard on a 
path can make the requisite “to know” roll for the 
next spell on the path immediately, provided he 
does not skip a spell level to do so. If failure of a 
“to know” roll would close a path, the wizard can 
try again once another experience level has been 
gained. The wizard receives a maximum of one 
roll per experience level, regardless of how many 
paths he is on (this can be supplemented with 
spell research). 

A wizard who has learned two consecutive steps 
on a path can skip one step on the path. Only one 
step on a path can be skipped, and the wizard can try 
to fill it in at a later time. 

A wizard can follow multiple paths, depending 
on his level and Intelligence. Specialists can follow 
fewer paths and cannot access opposition schools 
while following a path; this may halt their progress 
along certain paths. The basic number of paths 
based on level are given on Table 1, to these are 
added bonus paths for Intelligence from Table 2. 
Thus a 10th-level wizard with Intelligence 16 can 
learn spells from 12 different paths. 

Once a path is completed, it no longer counts 
against the maximum number of paths a wizard 
can have. 

If the same spell is on two paths, it is a nexus. If 
a wizard reaching a nexus knows that there are two 
paths, he can continue with the current path, switch 
to the new path, or pursue both (this is called a fork- 
ing path). While this gives the wizard additional 
choices, each fork counts as a separate path, and no 
spell beyond the nexus spell can be skipped. A 
wizard on a forking path can work down the new 
path, filling in missed steps. 

A path master is a wizard who has mastered 
every single spell in a path that is of a level he can 
cast. A wizard cannot be a path master of more than 
one path at a time. A wizard eligible to be a path 
master in several paths can choose the path mas- 
tered, and can change this whenever a new spell is 
added along either path. The benefit of being a path 


master is a —1 penalty to opposing saving throws, a 
+1 bonus per die of damage, and range, duration, 
and area of effect as if the caster was one level 
higher for all spells of the mastered path. 

Creating New Paths: The DM has final approval 
of whether a path is feasible. The creator must be 
able to cast all the spells on the path. The cost of 
“path research" is 1,000 gp times the number of 
spell levels in the path. The chance of success is the 
wizard's level plus Intelligence, minus twice the 
number of spells on the path. Thus, an 15th-level 
wizard with an Intelligence 18 trying to create the 
Path of Ice, consisting of Snilloc $ snowball (1), 
Snilloc S snowball swarm (2), ice storm (4), wall of 
ice (4), and cone of cold (5), would have to invest 
16,000 gp and 16 weeks, and would have a 23% 
chance of success (15 + 18— 10 = 23). 

Generally, a path should contain at least five 
spells divided across three levels. Most paths have 
10 spells or less. A group of more than 20 spells 
probably should be configured as a school, rather 
than as a path. 


TABLE 1: PATHS PER LEVEL 
Wizard Maximum Number of Paths 


Level Mage Specialist 
1 3 2 
2 3 2 
3 4 3 
E E 3 
5 5 4 
6 5 - 
7 6 5 
8 7 5 
9 8 6 
10 9 7 
11 10 8 
12 11 9 
13 12 10 
14 13 11 
15 14 12 
16 15 13 
17 16 14 
18 18 15 
19 20 16 
20 22 18 
21 25 20 
22 30 22 
23 35 25 
24 40 30 
25 All 35 
26 All 40 
27 All All 


a i E 


1090 


p Paths of Power " 


TABLE 2: BONUS PATHS FOR INTELLIGENCE 


Wizard's Bonus Spells Chance 
Intelligence Paths Level toLearn 
9 +0 6 35% 

10 +0 7 40% 

H *1 7 45% 

12 +1 7 50% 

13 +] 9 55% 

14 +2 9 60% 

15 +2 1 65% 

16 +3 11 70% 

17 +3 14 75% 

18 +4 18 85% 

19 +5 All 95% 

20 +5 All 96% 

21 *6 All 97% 
22 +7 All 98% 

23 +8 All 99% 

24 +9 All 100% 
25 +10 All 100% 

Greater Paths of Power 


Alchemist s Road: metamorphose liquids 
(1), Alamir's fundamental breakdown (3), 
hatch the stone from the egg (7), homunculus 
shield (8), glorious transmutation (9) 

Archer s Road: catapult (1), ic missile 
(1), Melf's acid arrow (2), Melf's minute 
meteors (3), acid bolt (4), missile mastery (4) 

Artificer s Path: detect metals and miner- 
als (1), mending (1), Nystul's magic aura (1), 
analyze device (3), duplicate (4), mechanical 
disruption (4), enchant an item (6), recon- 
simpton (6), permanency (8), spell engine 


) 

Bard’ Path: alarm (1), ventriloquism (1), 
deafness (2), ghost pipes (2), magic mouth 
(2), shout (4), Leomund's lamentable be- 

labourment (5), great shout (8), wail of the 
banshee (9) 

Bigby s Path: spectral hand (1), flying fist 
(2), Caligarde's claw (4), Bigby's interposing 
hand (5), Bigby's forceful hand (6), Bigby's 
Bas hand (7), Bi EnA s clenched fist 8), 

s crushing hand (9) 
romatic Path: color spray (1), chro- 
E. orb (1), hypnotic pattern (2), rainbow 
paon (4), prismatic spray (7), Gunther’s 

eidoscopic strike (8), prismatic wall (8), 
prismatic sphere (9) 

Councilor s Road: hypnotism (1), sugges- 
tion (3), dominate (5), mass estion (6) 

Dragon s Road: sleep (1), ). forget (1), ray 
of enfeeblement Q) strength (2), hold 
person (3), snapping teeth (3), suggestion 
(3), hold monster (5), mind Tog (5), dragon 
scales (6), eyebite (6), steal enchantment (7) 


M vcs a featherfall (1), Murdock’s 
(1), ride the wind (2), fly (3), 


pcre hee (4) x (5), Bloodstone's 
spectral steed (6), airboat (8) ” 


cham s athe charm person (1), 
friends (1), dire charm (3), fire charm (4), 
charm monster (4), domination (5), c 
plants (7), mass charm (8), virus charm (9) 

Greater Fire Road: affect normal fires (1), 
burning hands (1), Agannazer's scorcher (2), 
sabe sme (2), fireflow (3), fire aura (4), 

charm (4), fire gate (4), fire shield (4), 
wall of fire (4), Forest’s fiery constrictor (6), 
ee s flame fist (7), meteor swarm 
(9) 

Hangman s Road: chill touch (1), fei 
death Oy paralyze (3), io), rci touch (3), 
enervation (4), death spell eo 
(6), finger of death (7), en 

King's Road: Tenser's floating ng disk (1), 
blink (3), dimension door (4), Bowgentle’s 
fleeting journey (5), teleport (5), gemjump 
(7), teleport without error (7), gateway (8), 
worldwalk (9) 

Knight's Road: armor (1), m mount (1), 
shield (1), invisible mail (3), phantom s 
(3), Ms deae (4), wall of i on (5), dragon 


yere Fire Road: fire burst (1), flamin 
ro ere (2), fireball (3), shroud of flame ce 

layed blast fireball (7), meteor swarm (9) 

Medusa s Road: reflection (1), know 
alignment (2), €— (6), glassee (6), true 
seeing (6), glassteel (8 

Misty Road: wall of fog (1), fo: = Q), 
stinking cloud (2), hold vapor (3), soli d fog 
(4), er eer (5), a fog (5), death f fog (6), 
incendiary cloud 

Path of Vas MUR avert evil eye (1), 
dispel magic (3), dispel mirage (3), Otiluke's 
dispelling screen (4), remove curse (4), 
force shapechange os repulsion (6), ruby 
ray of reversal (7), Mordenkainen’s disjunc- 
tion (9), spellstrike (9) 

Path of Deception: asumen force (1), 
improved phantasma] force (2), spectral 
force (3), advanced illusion (5), programmed 
illusion (6) 

Path of Terror: spook (1), scare (2), fear 
(4), phantasmal killer (4), weird (9) 

Road of Souls Release: sleep (1), forget 
(2), wavers of weariness (2), emotion (4), 
Ne po rl ares (1), blad 

scatterspray (1), e 
"-. (2), oy hewn arrow (3), enchanted w 
(4), Tenser’s transformation 6). 
Mordenkainen's sword (7) 

Sages Road: comprehend languages (1), 
detect magic (1), ray; rod (1), detect 
undead (1), read magic (1), know school, 


Ee a 


1091 


E Paths of Power " 


detect good/evil (2), detect invisibility (2), 
know alignment (2), locate object (2), detect 
scrying (4), locate creature (4), magic mirror 
(4), contact other plane (5), legend lore (6) 

Servant's Path: unseen servant (1), 
Quimby's enchanting gourmet (2), summon 
swarm (2), phantom steed (3), conjure ani- 
mals (6), Mordenkainen's faithful hound (6), 
invisible stalker (6), — guard (7) 

Shapeshifter s Path: change self (1), alter 
self (2), fist of the adder (2), polymorph self 
(4), polymorph other (4), force shapechange 
(5), claws of the umber hulk (6), Tenser's 
transformation (6), tentacles (6), polymorph 
any object (8), E (9) 

Shining Path: dancing lights (1), light Pi 
continual light (2), darkness, 15’ radius (2), 
Nchaser's glowing globe (3), Presper's 

, sunburst (8), Elminster's ef- 
fulgent epuration (9) 
peaker s Path: comprehend languages 


(1), fool's speech (3) tongues (3), sende ss 


Drawmij's instant summons (7), d (8), 
succor (9) 

Stone Road: fist of stone (1), 
Maximillian’s earthen rasp m 
Maximillian's n: ras 3), dig (4), 
stoneskin (4), turn pebble to boulder (4), wall 


of stone (5), stone shape (5), move earth (6), 
sink (8) 

Storm Road: shocking grasp (1), ice knife 
(2), whispering wind (2), gust of wind (3), 
E bolt (3), wind wall (3), ice storm 
(4), wall of ice (4), wind breath (4), cone of 
cold (5),chain lightning (6), control weather 
(6), acid storm (7) 

Trickster s Road: grease (1), jump (1), 
spider climb (1) taunt (1), fool's gold (2), 

asha's uncontrollable hideous laughter (2), 
chastise (3), fool's speech (3), fumble (4), re- 
verse gravity (7), Otto's irresistible dance (8) 

Twin's Road: change self (1), mirror 
image (2), alter self (2), duplicate (4), plague 
(4), guise of the yak-man (5), heat mirage 
(5), seeming (5), qe image (6), simu- 
lacrum (7), clone (8) 

Water Road: lasting breath (1), water 
breathing (3), airy water (5), lower water (6), 
part water (6) 

Wizard s Road: cantrip (1), copy (1), read 
magic (1), deeppockets (2), wizard lock (2), 
dispel magic (3), secret page (3), Rary's 
mnemonic enhancer (4), wizard's eye (4), 
contingency (6), ped (6), Mordenkainen's 
lucubration (6), Elminster’s evasion (9), 
Mordenkainen's disjunction (9) 


Lesser Paths of Power 

Archmage s Road: close path (2), sense 
shifting (2), alacrity (3), dispel magic (3), 
augmentation I (3), far reaching (3), - 
ing the circle (3), dilation I (4), far reac e 
II (4), Mordenkainen’s celerity (4), seal pa 
(4), far reaching III (5), augmentation II (6), 
dilation II (6), burn path (7) 

Beggar s Path: duplicate (4), minor cre- 
ation (4), fabricate (5), major creation (6), 
limited wish (7), wish (9) 

Black Road: blindness (2), blur (2), dark- 
ness 15’ radius (2), blacklight (3), power 
word blind (8) 

Breaker Road: shatter (2), battering ram 
(2), dina (6), crystalbrittle (9) 

Frozen Road: bind (2), hold person (3), 
hold undead (3), hover (4), hold monster (5), 
statue (7), temporal stasis (9) 

Gray Road: cloak from undead (2), invis- 
ibility (2), invisibility 10’ radius (3), im- 

roved invisibility (4), mislead (6), mass 
invisibility (7) 

Otiluke s Road: Otiluke's resilient sphere 
(4), Otiluke's freezing sphere (6), Otiluke's 
telekinetic sphere (8) 

Path of the Mind: ESP (2), levitation (2), 
iron mind (3), feeblemind (5) telekinesis (5), 
disintegrate (6), 's telepathic bond (5), 
mind blank (8), dismind (9) 

Road of Staves: decastave (2), icelance 
(3), thunderlance (4), thun (4), magic 
staff (9. create soundstaff (7) 

Silver Road: rope trick (2), blink (3), 
phase trap (4), Leomund's secret chest G N 
passwall (5), duo-dimension (7), vanish (7 
phase door (7), astral spell (9) 

Twisting Road: glitterdust (2), misdirec- 
tion (2), nondetection (3), distance distortion 
(5), false vision (5), shadow door (5), mirage 
arcana (6), mislead (6), sequester (7), vanish 
(7), maze (8) 

Veiled Path: delude (3), Laeral's dancing 
dweomer (3), hallucinatory terrain (4), va- 
cancy (4), all (5), seeming (5), perma- 
nent illusion (6), veil (6), sequester (7), 
screen (8) 


> 


1092 


^ Universal Spells " 


General Mage Spell List 


This list contains spells that may be available to generalist mages. The list is organized by level, alphabeti- 
cally, but each list is also divided by rarity. Common spells are listed first, in SMALL CAPS. Uncommon 
spells are in normal type. Rare spells are italicized. Very rare spells are SGreened. Any spell marked “#" 
has information in the Note section of the spell that should be consulted. These lists are a conservative 
guideline. The final decision about spell rarity, and whether a spell is available to player character wizards 
rests with the DM. Specialty schools have their own lists, and the rarity ratings of spells on the general lists 
may differ from those presented later. 


COMPREHEND LANGUAGES 
Detect MAGIC 
HOLD PORTAL 


PROTECTION FROM CANTRIPS 
WIZARD LOCK 


3rd Level 
DISPEL MAGIC 


ENCHANT AN ITEM 


7th Level 
TELEPORT WITHOUT ERROR 


AUDIBLE GLAMER 
BURNING HANDS 
CANTRIP 


CHANGE SELF 
CHARM PERSON 
CHILL TOUCH 
COLOR SPRAY 
COMPREHEND LANGUAGES 
DANCING LIGHTS 
DETECT MAGIC 
DETECT UNDEAD 
ENLARGE 

ERASE 

FEATHER FALL 

FIND FAMILIAR 
FRIENDS 

GAZE REFLECTION 
GREASE 

HOLD PORTAL 
HYPNOTISM 
IDENTIFY 

JUMP 

LiGHT 

MAGIC MISSILE 
MENDING 

MESSAGE 

MOUNT 
PHANTASMAL FORCE 
PROTECTION FROM EVIL 


SHOCKING GRASP 
SLEEP 

SPIDER CLIMB 
SPOOK 

TAUNT 

UNSEEN SERVANT 
VENTRILOQUISM 
WALL Or FoG 
WIZARD MARK 


Adhesion 

Catapult 

Conjure Spell Component 
Copy 

Corpselight 

Detect Phase 

Detect Secret Passages And 
Portals 


Detho's Delirium 


Precipitation 

Protection From Vermin 
Ray Of Fatigue 

Spoil Holy Water 
Tenser's Floating Disc 
Write 


Amplify 

Aunty s Bath 

Bigby s Bookworm Bane 

Bigby 5 Feeling Fingers 

Blacksteel 

Blackthorns 

Bloom 

Chromatic Orb 

Color 

Control Vapor 

Disarm 

Divining Rod 

Drawmij Beast Of Burden 

Drawmij s Light Step 

Empathic Seizure 

Empathy 

Feather Float 

Fire Quill 

Flamespin 

Hair 

March 

Mordenkainen $ Protection 
From Avians 

Murdock'5 Feathery Flyer 

Normal Aura 


MM HHÁÓ— I. 


1093 


^ Ist Level (General Spells) A 


Nystul s Dancing Werelight 
Nystul s Flash 

Otiluke s Bubbling Buoyancy 
Otiluke 5 Smoky Sphere 
Otto s Chime Of Release 
Protective Amulet 

Rary $ Empathic Perception 
Tenser s Eye Of The Tiger 
Tenser s Steady Aim 
Wardaway 


BLINDNESS 

BLUR 

CONTINUAL LIGHT 
Darkness, 15’ RADIUS 
DEAFNESS 
DEEPPOCKETS 

Detect EVIL 

DETECT INVISIBILITY 
Detect POSION 


MAGIC MOUTH 
MIRROR IMAGE 
MISDIRECTION 
PROTECTION FROM CANTRIPS 
PYROTECHNICS 

Ray Or ENFEEBLEMENT 
RoPE TRICK 

SCARE 

SHATTER 

SPECTRAL HAND 
STINKING CLOUD 
STRENGTH 


SUMMON SWARM 
WEB 
WHISPERING WIND 


Leomund's Trap 
Melf's Acid Arrow 


Moon Rune 

Move Object 

Mystic Writing 

Past Life 

Preservation 

Preserve 

Protection From Birds 

Protection From Paralysis 

Protection From Poison 

Ride The Wind 

Run 

Sense Shifting 

Spark Shower 

Tasha's Uncontrollable Hideous 
Laughter 

Vocalize 

Zephyr 


Alustriel s Banner 
Bendal's Swoop 

Bigby s Dextrous Digits 
Bigby s Silencing Hand 
Circle Dance 

Circle Of Flame 

Combust 

Dancing Shadows 

Dazzle 

Deny Cold/Deny Fire 
Detect Life 

Drawmij s Adventurer 5 Luck 
Drawmij s Breath Of Life 
Drawmij s Scent Mask 
Drawmij s Swift Mount 
Empathic Control 
Enhanced Olfaction 
Familiar Enhancer I 
Flann 5 Finery 

Flash 

Forcewave 

Gemidan 5 Paralytic Missile 
Ice Knife 

Infratorch 

Maximilian 5 Earthen Grasp 
Mist Magic 


Nimodes ' Unseen Butler 
Nystul s Blackmote 

Nystul s Blazing Beam 
Nystul s Crystal Dagger 
Otiluke s Boiling Oil Bath 
Otto s Soothing Vibrations 
Otto s Tones Of Forgetfulness 
Protection From Mechanical 


Protection From Plants 
Quimby s Enchanting Gourmet 


i EMT c e E eere c 00s c i7 


1094 


3rd Level (General Spells) " 


Rary 5 Aptitude Appropriater PROTECTION FROM NORMAL 
Stealth MISSILES 
Tenser s Brawl SECRET PAGE 
Tenser s Hunting Hawk SEPIA SNAKE SIGIL 
Threestones SLOW 
Unpickable Lock SPECTRAL FORCE 
Wall Of Gloom SUGGESTION 
Warp Sense TONGUES 
Waves Of Weariness VAMPIRIC TOUCH 
Wings WATER BREATHING 
Words Of Fire WIND WALL 
WRAITHFORM 
Alacrity 
Augmentation I 
Bands Of Sirellyn 
Cloudburst 
Curse Tablet # 
Detect Illusion 
Far Reaching I 
Hold Vapor 
Icelance 
Invisible Mail 
Lance of Disruption 
Leomund's Tiny Hut 
Lesser Sign Of Sealing 
Melf's Minute Meteors 
Minor Malison 
Mummy Touch 
3rd Level One-Way Lock 
BLINK Phantom Wind 
CLAIRAUDIENCE Preserve Wood 
CLAIRVOYANCE Protection From Amorphs 
DELUDE Skull Watch 
DisPEL MAGIC Snapping Teeth 
EXPLOSIVE RUNES Solvent Of Corrosion 
FEIGN DEATH Squaring The Circle 
FIREBALL Wall Of Water 
FLAME ARROW Watery Double 
FLY Wizard Sight 
GHOST ARMOR 
Gusr OF WIND Acid Lash # 
HASTE Airbolt 
HOLD PERSON Airsphere # 
HOLD UNDEAD Alahandra s Questing Call # 
ILLUSIONARY SCRIPT Alamir s Fundamental 
INFRAVISION Breakdown 
INVISIBILITY, 10’ RADIUS Animate Fire 
IRON MIND Ball Lightning 
ITEM Bewilder 
LIGHTNING BOLT Bigby s Pugnacious Pugilist 
MATERIAL Call Spirit 
MONSTER SUMMONING [ Cloak Of Adeamozs 
NONDETECTION Cloak Of Warding 
PHANTOM STEED Create Darkness 
PROTECTION FROM Evi, 10’ Death Sight 
RADIUS Detect Charm 


oo. A UE a lem s a SE OR 


Mh Level (General Spelis) í 


Dire Charm Ward Against Undead 

Dispel Fog 

Dispel Silence 

Dissipate Vapor 

Distraction 

Drawmij 5 Iron Sack 

Drawmij 5 Marvelous Shield 

Eagle Vision 

Familiar Enhancer II 

Improved Magic Mouth 

Improved Whispering Wind 

Laeral Dancing Dweomer 

Lorloveim 5 Creeping Shadow 

Lubricity 

Mailed Might 

Maximilian s Stony Grasp 

Mental Block 

Mental Transport 

Moonglow Symbol 

Mordenkainen s Defense 

Against Lycanthropes 

Mordenkainen s Defense 

Against Nonmagical Reptiles 

And Amphibians 

Mordenkainen $ Protection From 

Insects And Arachnids 

Nystul s Crystal Dirk 

Nystul s Expeditious Fire 

Extinguisher 

Nystul s Golden Revelation 

Nystul s Radiant Baton 

Otiluke s Acid Cloud 

Otiluke s Force Umbrella 

Otto s Crystal Rhythms 

Otto s Sure-Footed Shuffle 

Paralyzing Touch 

Proof From Teleportation 

Protection From Cold 

Protection From Fire 

Protection From Illusions 

Protection From Magical Blunt 
Weapons 

Protection From Magical 
Edged Weapons 

Protection From Magical 
Missiles 

Protection From Magical Traps 

Protection From Normal Blunt 
We 

Protection From Normal Edged 
Weapons 

Ray Of Paralysis 

Skywrite 

Tasirin s Haunted Sleep 

Tenser 5 Deadly Strike 

Tenser 5 Eye Of The Eagle 

Unmask 


~ 4th Level (General Spells) " 


Counterspell Immunity 
Delayed Magic Missile 
Destroy Undead 
Dilation I 

Duplicate 

Electrical Wards 
Evard's Black Tentacles 


Vitriolic Sphere 
Wind Breath 


Archveult $ Skybolt 

Beltyn s Burning Blood 
Bigbys5 Battering Gauntlet 
Bigby 5 Construction Crew 
Bigby s Force Scupture 
Caligarde s Claw 

Cook 

Create Darkenbeast # 
Disguise # 

Drawmij s Handy Timepiece 
Drawmij 5 Instant Exit 
Drawmij's Protection From 
Nonmagical Gas 

Drawmij s Tool Box 
Elemental Control 

Elude Blow 


Ivy S Irresistible Scent 


Know Path Of Magic 
Laeral s Aqueous Column 
Merald s Murderous Mist 


Mordenkainen s Faithful 


-—_-. . ~ ta. 2: ee 


Phantom Shield-Maidens 

Mordenkainen s Force Missiles 

Morenkainen 5 Protection From 
Slime 

Nystul s Blacklight Burst 

Nystul s Grue Conjuration 

Nystul s Lightburst 

Oriluke s Steaming Sphere 

Otto s Drums Of Despair 

Otto s Silver Tongue 

Otto S Tin Soldiers 

Otto s Tonal Attack 

Otto s Warding Tones 

Protection From Elementals 
10' Radius 

Protection From Gas, 5* 
Radius 

Protection From Lycanthropes, 
10’ Radius 

Protection From Plants, 10* 
Radius 

Protection From Possession, 
10' Radius 

Protection From Traps, 5° 
Radius 

Rary s Memory Alteration 

Rary 5 Mind Scan 

Rary s Spell Enhancer 

Sargasso 

Special Effects 

Spider Leap 

Tenser s Flaming Blade 

Tenser 5 Giant Strength 

Tenser s Master At Arms 

Tenser s Running Warrior 

Tenser $ Staff Of Smiting 

Vision Stone 

Wall Of Sand 

Weave Mythal 

Whisper Blade 


^ 5th Level (General Spells) "4 


5th Level 
ADVANCED ILLUSION 
AIRY WATER 
ANIMAL GROWTH 
ANIMATE DEAD 
AVOIDANCE 


TRANSMUTE Rock To Mup 


TRANSMUTE SNOW To STONE 


WALL OF Force 
WALL OF IRON 
WALL OF STONE 


Bigby's Interposing Hand 
Disguise Undead 

Dream Globe 

Far Reaching III 

Feign Undead 

Improved Blink 
Invulnerability To Normal 


Mordenkainen's Faithful Spell Shield 

Hound Spidercloak Armor 
Oathbinding Stealweb 
Produce Flame Tenser 5 Destructive Resonance 
Proofing vs. Combusion Tenser s Primal Fury 
Prying Eyes Von Gasik's Refusal 
Read Object Water Bomb 
Rusting Grasp 
Safeguarding 
Shroud Of Flame 
Spell Immunity 
Throbbing Bones 
Vile Venom 


Andrui s Baneful Backfire 

Bigby 5 Fantastic Fencers 

Bigby 5 Strangling Grip 

Bigby s Superior Force 
Sculpture 

Bowgentle 5 Fleeting Journey 

Calm Water 

Calm Wind 

Drawmij 5 Flying Feat 

Familiar Enhancer IV 

Fiendform # 

Ironguard 

Lapis Bonds 

Mind-Control Invisibility 

Mordenkainen s Faithful 

Phantom Defenders 
Mordenkainen 5 Private 
Sanctum 

Motion 

Nystul s Enveloping Darkness 

Nystul s Radiant Arch 

Otiluke s Dispelling Screen 

Otiluke s Electrical Screen 

Otiluke s Polar Screen 

Otiluke s Radiant Screen 

Otto s Gong Of Isolation 

Protection From Acid 

Protection From Cold, 15' 
Radius 

Protection From Fiends, 10* 
Radius 

Protection From Fire, 15* 
Radius 


Protection From Illusions, 10’ 
Radius 


Rary s Mind Shield 

Rary 5 Replay 

Rary 5 Superior Spell Enhancer 
Rary 5 Telepathic Bond 
Shadow Head 

Sighing Chain 

Silent Alarm 

Soul Anchor 


1098 


^ 6th Level (General Spells) A 


Turnshadow 
Weapon Return 


6th Level 
ANTIMAGIC SHELL 
CHAIN LIGHTNING 
CONJURE ANIMALS 
CONTINGENCY 
CONTROL WEATHER 
DEATH FoG 
DEATH SPELL 
DEMISHADOW MAGic 
DISINTEGRATE 
ENCHANT AN ITEM 
ENSNAREMENT 
EXTENSION III 
EYEBITE 
GE^S 
GLASSEE 
GLoBE OF INVULNERABILITY 
GUARDS AND WARDS 
INVISIBLE STALKER 


oe oe ee ee eee 


STONE To FLESH 
TRANSMUTE WATER To DUST 
TRUE SEEING 

VEIL 


Alter Dream 

Barrier Reaver 

Bigby's Forceful Hand 
Claws Of The Umber Hulk 


Bigby s Beseiging Bolt 


Evaporate Fluid 
Familiar Enhancer V 


Fire Eyes 
Forest's Fiery Constrictor 
Gauntlet Of Teeth 


Transfc 
Mordenkainen $ Faithful 
Phantom Guardian 
Otiluke s Diamond Screen 
Otiluke 5 Excruciating Screen 
Otiluke S Orb Of Containment 
Prismatic Eye 


Rary’s Protection From Scrying 


Rary 5 Urgent Utterance 
Spell Mirror 

Teleport Dead 

Tenser s Fortunes Of War 
Tentacles 


1099 


^- 8th Level (General Spells) ra 


7th Level Otiluke s Siege Sphere MASS TELEPORT WITHOUT 
BANISHMENT RaryS5 Plane Truth ERROR 
CHARM PLANTS True Name MAZE 
CONTROL UNDEAD MiND BLANK 
DELAYED BLAST FIREBALL MONSTER SUMMONING VI 
Duo-DIMENSION PERMANENCY 
FiNGER Or DEATH POLYMORPH ANY OBJECT 
FORCECAGE Power WoRD, BLIND 
LiMITED WISH PRISMATIC WALL 
MASS INVISIBILITY SCREEN 
MONSTER SUMMONING V SINK 
PHASE Door SYMBOL 
POWER WORD, STUN TRAP THE SOUL 
PRISMATIC SPRAY 1 
REVERSE GRAVITY Airboat 
SEQUESTER Analyze Dweomer 
SHADOW WALK Bigby's Clenched Fist 
SIMULACRUM Death Link 
SPELL TURNING Defoliate # 
STATUE Enhance 
TELEPORT WITHOUT ERROR Fear Ward 
VANISH Gateway 
VISION Heart Of Stone 

Homunculus Shield 

Bigby’s Grasping Hand Iron Body 
Command Element Mass Polymorph 
Descent Into Madness Otiluke’s Telekinetic Sphere 
Drawmij’s Instant Summons Otto’s Irresistible Dance 


Hatch The Stone From The Egg 

Intensify Summoning 

Mordenkainen's Sword 

Persistance 

Planar Door 

Shadowcat 

Steal Enchantment 

Suffocate 

Acid Storm 

Conjure Greater Elemental 

Gemjump 

Mordenkainen's Magnificent 
Mansion 


Thirst 
Seven-Eyes 


Bloodstone s Frightful Joining 

Bug 

Cacofiend 

Consume Knowledge 

Familiar Enhancer VI 

Malec-Keth s Flame Fist 

Mordenkainen 5 Penultimate 
Cogitation 

Otiluke s Death Screen 

Otiluke’s Fire And Ice 


8th Level 
ANTIPATHY/SYMPATHY 
BINDING 


Serten’s Spell Immunity 


Abi-Dalzim 5 Horrid Wilting 

Airball 

Alter Beast 

Bigby s Most Excellent Force 
Sculpture (G) 

Create Spectral Wizard 

Deep Delve 

Endless Slumber 

Evolve 

Familiar Enhancer VII 

Great Shout 

Gunther s Kaleidoscopic Strike 

Sunburst 

Unlife # 


9th Level (General Spells) f 


9th Level 
ASTRAL SPELL 
CRYSTALBRITTLE 
ENERGY DRAIN 
FORESIGHT 
GATE 
IMPRISONMENT 
MONSTER SUMMONING VII 
PowER WORD, KiLL 
PRISMATIC SPHERE 
SHAPE CHANGE 
SuccoR 
TEMPORAL STASIS 
TIME STOP 
WERD 
WISH 


Bigby’s Crushing Hand 


Wail Of The Banshee 


Death Ward 

Disruption 

Familiar Enhancer VIII 
Worldwalk 


1101 


^—*-—s""ÉD————ss— a 


School Of Philosophy Spell Lists 


These lists are organized by specialty school. Each list is organized by level, alphabetically, but each list 
is also divided by rarity. Common spells are listed first, in SMALL Caps, Uncommon spells are in normal 
type. Rare spells are italicized. Very rare spells are Sere&ned. Any spell marked “#" has information in 
the Notes section of the spell that should be consulted. Spells restricted to specialists, as opposed to gen- 
eralists, are followed by an asterisk (*). The final decision about spell rarity and whether a spell is avail- 
able to player character wizards rests with the DM. 


Abjuration 


Barred: Illusionists, transmuters, shadow mages 


1st Level 

ALARM 

PROTECTION FROM EviL 

Protection From Vermin 

Mordenkainen s Protection From 
Avians 

Protective Amulet 

Wardaway # 


2nd Level 

Filter 

Protection From Birds 
Protection From Mechanical 


Protection From Poison 
Deny Cold/Deny Fire 
Flann5 Finery 
Forcewave 


3rd Level 

IRON MIND 

NONDETECTION 

PROTECTION FROM EviL, 10° 
RADIUS 

PROTECTION FROM NORMAL 
MISSILES 


Dissipate Vapor 

Hold Vapor 

Lesser Sign Of Sealing 
Preserve Wood 

Protection From Amorphs 
Protection From Cold 
Protection From Fire 
Protection From Illusions 
Protection From Magical Blunt 


Protection From Magical Traps 

Protection From Normal Blunt 
Weapons 

Protection From Normal Edged 
Weapons 


Cloak Of Adeamozs # 

Cloak Of Warding 

Dispel Fog 

Dispel Silence # 

Mordenkainen s Defense Against 
Lycanthropes 

Mordenkainen 5 Defense Against 
Nonmagical Reptiles And 
Amphibians 

Mordenkainen $ Protection From 
Insects And Arachnids 

Proof From Teleportation 

Ward Against Undead 


Counterspell Immunity 
Elemental Control 
Elude Blow 
Minor Spell Turning 
Protection From Electricity 
Protection From 
Elementals 10' Radius 
Protection From 
Gas, 5' Radius 
Protection From 
Lycanthropes, 10' Radius 
Protection From 


Mordenkainen s Protection From 
Slime 


5th Level 
AVOIDANCE 


DISMISSAL 
Invulnerability To Normal 
Weapons 


Abjuration (Philosophy) "1 


Lower Resistance 
Protection From Acid 
Protection From Cold, 15' 
Radius 
Protection From 
Fiends, 10' Radius 
Protection From 
Fire, 15' Radius 
Protection From 
Illusions, 10' Radius 
Safeguarding 
Spell Immunity 
Spell Shield 


Andrui $ Baneful Backfire 
Calm Water 


6th Level 

ANTIMAGIC SHELL 

GLOBE OF INVULNERABILITY 

REPULSION 

Barrier Reaver 

Flameproof 

Greater Sign Of Sealing 

Invulnerability To Magical 
Weapons 

Protection From Electricity, 10’ 


Radius 

Spiritwrack 

Dragon Scales 

Rary' Protection From Scrying 

Tenser 5 Fortunes Of War 9th Level 

Turnshadow IMPRISONMENT 
PRISMATIC SPHERE 
Death Ward 
Elemental Aura 


7th Level 

BANISHMENT 

SEQUESTER 

SPELL TURNING 

Gemjump 

Neutralize Gas 

Protection From Hunger 
And Thirst 

Seven-Eyes 


8th Level 

DiSPEL ENCHANTMENT 
MIND BLANK 

Fear Ward 

Serten's Spell Immunity 


1103 


E Alteration (Philosophy) "4 


Barred: Abjurers, force mages 


Ist Level 

AFFECT NORMAL FIRES 
BuRNING HANDS 
COLOR SPRAY 
DANCING LIGHTS 
ENLARGE 

ERASE 

FEATHER FALL 
GAZE REFLECTION 
JuMP 

LiGHT 

MENDING 
MESSAGE 
SHOCKING GRASP 
SPIDER CLIMB 


Adhesion 

Gauntlet # 

Catapult 
Corpselight 
Expeditious Retreat 
Filth’s Bane 

Fire Burst 
Firewater 

Fist Of Stone 
Lasting Breath 
March 
Metamorphose Liquids 
Moonglow 
Phantom Armor 
Precipitation 


Amplify 

Blacksteel 

Chromatic Orb 

Color 

Drawmij 5 Beast Of Burden 
Drawmij s Light Step 
Feather Float 

Fire Quill 

Hair 

Murdock’s Feathery Flyer 
Nystul 5 Dancing Werelight 
Otiluke s Bubbling Buoyancy 
Otto s Chime Of Release 
Tenser s Eye Of The Tiger 
Tenser 5 Steady Aim 


Alteration 


Maximilian s Earthen Grasp 

Mordenkainen s Encompassing 
Vision 

Rary 5 Aptitude Appropriater 

Stealth 


Tenser 5 Brawl 

Tenser s Hunting Hawk 
Threestones 
Unpickable Lock 

Wings # 


Bendal s Swoop 

Bonewood 

Drawmij s Adventurer s Luck 
Drawmij s Breath Of Life 
Drawmij s Swift Mount 
Enhanced Olfaction 
Familiar Enhancer I 

Flash 

Infratorch 


^ ENEMIES Lc EE. M M e 


1104 


E Alteration (Philosophy) "d 


Alacrity 

Cloudburst 

Far Reaching I 
Icelance 

Invisible Mail 
Leomund's Tiny Hut 
Melf's Minute Meteors 
One-Way Lock 
Phantom Wind 

Plant Entrapment 
Snapping Teeth 
Squaring The Circle 


Dispel Silence # 

Drawmij 5 Iron Sack 

Eagle Vision 

Enchanted Torch 

Familiar Enhancer II 
Improved Whispering Wind 
Lubricity 

Maximilian s Stony Grasp 
Mental Transport 
Moonglow Symbol 

Nystul s Golden Revelation 
Otto s Sure-Footed Shuffle 
Skywrite 

Tenser 5 Deadly Strike 
Tenser s Eye Of The Eagle 
Unmask 


PLANT GROWTH 
POLYMORPH OTHER 
PoLvMORPH SELF 
RAINBOW PATTERN 

Soup Foo 

STONESKIN 

WizARD EYE 

Dilation I 

Electrical Wards 

Far Reaching II 

Improved Strength 
Leomund's Secure Shelter 
Otiluke's Resilient Sphere 
Rary's Mnemonic Enhancer 


Turn Pebble To Boulder 
Ultravision — Ist Ed. 
Archveult s Skybolt 

Cook, The Spell 

Create Darkenbeast 
Drawmij 5 Instant Exit 
Familiar Enhancer III 
Gloom 

Ivy S Irresistible Scent 
Laeral s Aqueous Column 
Missile Mastery 
Mordenkainen S Celerity 
Otto s Tin Soldiers 

Rary s Spell Enhancer 
Sargasso # 

Shayn 5 Infallible Identification 
Spider Leap 

Tenser s Flaming Blade 
Tenser $ Giant Strength 
Tenser 5 Master At Arms 
Tenser s Running Warrior 
Tenser s Staff Of Smiting 
Weave Mythal # 


1105 


5th Level 

AIRY WATER 

ANIMAL GROWTH 
AVOIDANCE 

DISTANCE DISTORTION 
EXTENSION II 


TRANSMUTE Rock To Mup 
Bone Growth 

Far Reaching III 

Improved Blink 

Leomund's Secret Chest 
Lower Resistance 

Rusting Grasp 

Bowgentle s Fleeting Journey 
Drawmij 5 Flying Feat 
Familiar Enhancer IV 
Fiendform 

Ironguard 

Mordenkainen s Private Sanctum 
Motion 

Nystul s Enveloping Darkness 
Nystul s Radiant Arch 

Otto s Gong Of Isolation 
Rapid Reflexive Response 
Rary s Mind Shield 

Rary 5 Superior Spell Enhancer 
Rary5 Telepathic Bond 

Silent Alarm 

Stealweb # 

Tenser 5 Primal Fury 


~ Alteration (Philosophy) amiif 


6th Level 

CONTROL WEATHER 

DEATH FoG 

DISINTEGRATE 

EVAPORATE FLUID 
EXTENSION III 

GLASSEE 

GUARDS AND WARDS 

LOWER WATER 

MIRAGE ARCANA 

Move EARTH 

Part WATER 

PROJECT IMAGE 

STONE To FLESH 
TRANSMUTE WATER To DusT 
Claws Of The Umber Hulk 
Dilation II 

Mordenkainen's Lucubration 
Otiluke's Freezing Sphere 
Superior Magnetism 


Tenser's Transformation 


Age Animal 

Drawmij s Beneficent 
Polymorph 

Drawmij s Merciful 
Metamorphosis 
Familiar Enhancer V 
Fire Eyes # 

Prismatic Eye 

Rary s Urgent Utterance 
Ring Of Disintegration # 
Spell Mirror # 

Teleport Dead 

Tentacles 


7th Level 

Duo-DIMENSION 

PHASE DOOR 

REVERSE GRAVITY 

STATUE 

VANISH 

Hatch The Stone From The Egg 


Consume Knowledge 

Familiar Enhancer VI 

Mordenkainen s Penultimate 
Cogitation 

Otiluke s Death Screen 

True Name 

Whirlpool 

Amorphous Blob 


Mass Polymorph 
Otiluke's Telekinetic Sphere 
Abi-Dalzim s Horrid Wilting 


1106 


Alter Beast 
Deep Delve 
Familiar Enhancer VII 


Estate Transference 
Glorious Transmutation 
Mordenkainen's Disjuncti 


Disruption 
Familiar Enhancer VIII 
Worldwalk 


^ Conjuration/Summoning (Philosophy) " 


Conjuration/Summoning 
Barred: Diviners, invokers 

Ist Level Forest Fiery Constrictor 

ARMOR Mordenkainen s Faithful 

FIND FAMILIAR Phantom Guardian 

GREASE Tentacles 

Mount 

PusH 

UNSEEN SERVANT 

Bloom 

Conjure Spell Component 

Aunty 5 Bath Evard's Black Tentacles 7th Level 
Everpresent Record LiMiTED WISH 
Halo Of Eyes MONSTER SUMMONING V 
Summon Lycanthrope PowER WORD, STUN 
Vitriolic Sphere PRISMATIC SPRAY 
Drawmij 5 Handy Timepiece Conjure Greater Elemental 
Drawmij 5 Instant Exit Drawmij's Instant Summons 
Drawmij s Tool Box Intensify Summoning 
Mordenkainen $ Faithful Mordenkainen's Magnificent 
Phantom Shield-Maidens Mansion 

Choke Nystul s Grue Conjuration Planar Door 

Melf's Acid Arrow 

Power Word, Sleep # 

Wall Of Gloom 

Nimodes ' Unseen Butler 

Nystul s Crystal Dagger 

Nystul's Crystal Dirk 

Otiluke s Boiling Oil Bath 

Quimby s Enchanting Gourmet 

Smokescreen 


3rd Level 
FLAME ARROW Mordenkainen's Faithful Hound Ummon 
GHOST ARMOR Vile Venom P d 
MATERIAL Mordenkainen s Faithful 
MONSTER SUMMONING I Phantom Defenders 
PHANTOM STEED Spidercloak Armor 
SEPIA SNAKE SiGiL Water Bomb 
Bands Of Sirellyn MONSTER SUMMONING VII 
Cache Power WORD, KILL 
Snapping Teeth : 
Solvent Of Corrosion c man 
oo Power Word, Banishment 
CONJURE ANIMALS 
ENSNAREMENT 
INVISIBLE STALKER 


ceva Smog MONSTER SUMMONING IV 


Me a a 


1107 


~ Divination (Philosophy) a 


Divination 
Barred:Conjurers, force mages, song mages 


Ist Level 3rd Level Rary s Replay 
Detect SECRET PASSAGES AND CLAIRAUDIENCE Rary 5 Telepathic Bond 
PORTALS CLAIRVOYANCE 
DETECT UNDEAD Call Spirit 
EMPATHY Detect Charm 
READ MAGIC Detect Illusion 
Detect Disease Find Traps 
Detect Phase Find Treasure 
Divining Rod Heartcall 
Know School Wizard Sight 
Know Weight Alahandra 5 Questing Call # 
Rary’s Empathic Perception Alamir $ Fundamental 
Breakdown 
Isoldes Answer —— 6th Level 
LEGEND LORE 
4th Level TRUE SEEING 
2nd Level Detect SCRYING Revelation 
Detect Evi. DIVINATION ENHANCEMENT Rary 5 Protection From Scrying 
DETECT INVISIBILITY MAGIC MIRROR Shadow Speak = = 
DETECT LIFE Find Person 
DETECT POISON Locate Creature 7th Level 
ESP Rastor's Mystical Spy VISION 
KNOW ALIGNMENT Vision Stone Find The Path 
KNow INTENT Know Path Of Magic Manor's Mind Vision 
LOCATE OBJECT Psionic Tracer Anticipation* 
PAST LIFE Rary s Mind Scan Consume Knowledge 
Bloodglass Summon Spirit Rary 5 Plane Truth 
Calder's Starry Sky True Dream Vision Crystal* 
Death Recall 
cc. 5 — gENNENN 
Due North 
Living Link 5th Level 
Projected Magnification CoNTACT OTHER PLANE 
Speak With Dead FALSE VISION 
Value Dream Globe 
Circle Dance # Farscry 
Rary s Aptitude Appropriater Khazid's Procurement 
Know Value 
Manor's Mindsight 
Prying Eyes 
Read Object 
Wizard's Oracle 


Common spells are listed first, in SMALL Caps. Uncommon spells are in normal type. Rare spells are 
italicized. Very rare spells are Séré&ned. The “#” mark means check that spell's Notes section. An 
asterisk (*) means the spell is restricted to a specialist wizard. 


1108 


= Enchantment/Charm (Philosophy) r 


Enchantment/Charm 
Barred: Invokers, necromancers dimensionists, artificers, geometers 


Ist Level HOLD PERSON 
CHARM PERSON SUGGESTION 
FRIENDS Empathic Link 
HYPNOTISM Minor Malison 
SLEEP Seduction III 
TAUNT Watery Double 5th Level 
Detho's Delirium Bewilder CHAOS 
Empathic Seizure Dire Charm DOMINATION 
Seduction I Distraction FABRICATE 
Blackthorns Familiar Enhancer II FEEBLEMIND 
Charm Man I Mental Block HOLD MONSTER 
Divining Rod Otto 5 Crystal Rhythms Leomund’s Lamentable 
Empathy Otto s Sure-Footed Shuffle Belaborment 
Protective Amulet Tasirin s Haunted Sleep Magic Staff 
Mind Fog 
Seduction V 
Drawmij s Flying Feat 
Familiar Enhancer IV 
2nd Level Mind-Control Invisibility 
BiND Otto s Gong Of Isolation 
DEEPPOCKETS Soul Anchor 
FORGET Tenser 5 Primal Fury 
Ray Or ENFEEBLEMENT 
SCARE 
Boneiron 
Empathic Control 4th Level 
Enter Dream CHARM MONSTER 
Insatiable Thirst CONFUSION 
Run EMOTION 
Seal Mouth ENCHANTED WEAPON 
Seduction II FiRE CHARM 
Tasha's Uncontrollable Hideous FUMBLE 
Laughter MAGIC MIRROR 
Bigby 5 Silencing Hand Greater Malison 
Charm Man II Leomund's Secure Shelter 6th Level 
Familiar Enhancer 1 Lesser Geas EYEBITE 
Otto s Soothing Vibrations Rastor's Mystical Spy GEAS 
Otio 5 Tones Of Forgetfulness Seduction IV GUARDS AND WARDS 
Waves Of Weariness Darsson 5 Potion MASS SUGGESTION 
Familiar Enhancer III Alter Dream 
Otto s Drums Of Despair Recharge 
Otto 5 Silver Tongue Seduction VI 
Otto s Tonal Attack Familiar Enhancer V 
Otto $ Warding Tones Psychic Reversal 
Rary 5 Memory Alteration Weapon Return 
Ray Of Oblivion 
True Dream 
True Nightmare 


1109 


~ Illusion/Phantasm (Philosophy) "d 


7th Level 

CHARM PLANTS 

SHADOW WALK 

Descent Into Madness 

Enhanced Empathy 

Hatch The Stone From 
The Egg 

Seduction VII 

Steal Enchantment 

Love 

Familiar Enhancer VI 

True Name 


--. 15 d 


8th Level 9th Level 
ANTIPATHY/SYMPATHY Dismind 

BINDING Mordenkainen's Disjunction 
DEMAND Programmed Amnesia 

MASS CHARM Familiar Enhancer VIII 
SINK 

Airboat 

Endless Slumber 

Otto's Irresistible Dance 
Seduction VIII 
Spellcaster 

Charm Man III 


Illusion/Phantasm 


Barred: Abjurers, necromancers, alchemists, geometers 


Ist Level 

AUDIBLE GLAMER 
CHANGE SELF 
CHROMATIC ORB 
PHANTASMAL FORCE 
SPOOK 
VENTRILOQUISM 
Nystul's Magic Aura 
Phantom Armor 
Reflected Image 
Normal Aura 


2nd Level 

BLINDNESS 

BLUR 

DEAFNESS 

FooLs' GOLD 
HYPNOTIC PATTERN 
IMPROVED PHANTASMAL FORCE 
INVISIBILITY 

MIRROR IMAGE 
MISDIRECTION 
WHISPERING WIND 
Dancing Shadows 
Fascinate 

Leomund’s Trap 
Mimicry 

Alustriel s Banner 
Drawmij s Scent Mask 
Words Of Fire # 


3rd Level 
DETECT ILLUSION 

FACE 

ILLUSIONARY SCRIPT 
INVISIBILITY, 10’ RADIUS 
PHANTOM STEED 
PROTECTION FROM ILLUSIONS 
SPECTRAL FORCE 
WRAITHFORM 

PARALYZATION 

PHANTOM WIND 

SHADOW BLINK 

Shadow Cloak 


Improved Whispering Wind 
Laeral’s Dancing Dweomer 
Lorloveim s Creeping Shadow 
Mailed Might # 
Arachnophobia 


4th Level 
DisPEL ILLUSION 


1110 


Impersonation 
Phantasmagoria 
Greater Spelldream 
Lorloveim s Shadowy 
Transformation 


Shadow Speak 


7th Level 

MASS INVISIBILITY 
SEQUESTER 
SHADOW WALK 


Invocation/Evocation 


Barred: Conjurers, enchanters, illusionists, mentalists, shadow mages, song mages 


Ist Level 
ALARM 
MAGIC MISSILE 


Fire Burst 

Tenser's Floating Disc 
Write 

Bigby 5 Bookworm Bane 
Bigby s Feeling Fingers 
Disarm 


Nystul s Flash 
Otiluke s Smoky Sphere 
Wardaway # 


Spark Shower 

Zephyr 

Bigby s Dextrous Digits 
Bigby s Silencing Hand 
Circle Of Flame 

Combust 

Dazzle 

Forcewave 

Mist Magic 

Nystul's Blackmote 
Nystul s Blazing Beam 
Nystul s Crystal Dagger 
Otiluke s Boiling Oil Bath 
Wings # 


3rd Level 


FIREBALL 

LIGHTNING BOLT 
Melf’s Minute Meteors 
Augmentation I 
Augmentation I 
Invisible Mail 

Wall Of Water 

Acid Lash 


Ht 


Nystul s Expeditious Fire 
Extinguisher 

Nystul s Radiant Baton 

Otiluke s Acid Cloud 

Otiluke s Force Umbrella 

Steeldance 


Bubble Breath 

Delayed Magic Missile 
Otiluke's Resilient Sphere 
Thunder Staff 
Thunderlance 

Wind Breath 


~ Invocation/Evocation (Philosophy) "4 


Bigby 5 Battering Gauntlet 
Bigby s Construction Crew 
Bigby s Force Scupture 
Everlasting Fire 

Great Thump 

Laeral's Aqueous Column 
Merald s Murderous Mist 
Mordenkainen 5 Celerity 
Mordenkainen s Electric Arc 
Mordenkainen 5 Force Missiles 
Nystul s Blacklight Burst 
Nystul s Lightburst 

Otiluke s Steaming Sphere 
Wall Of Sand 

Whisper Blade # 


Bigby's Interposing Hand 

Leomund's Lamentable 
Belaborment 

Shroud Of Flame 

Bigby 5 Fantastic Fencers 

Bigby s Strangling Grip 

Bigby s Superior Force 

Sculpture 

Nystul s Enveloping Darkness 

Otiluke s Dispelling Screen 

Otiluke 5 Electrical Screen 

Otiluke s Polar Screen 

Otiluke s Radiant Screen 


Shadow Head # Otiluke s Death Screen 
Sighing Chain # Otiluke s Fire And Ice 
Stealweb # Otiluke s Siege Sphere 
Tenser 5 Destructive Resonance 


8th Level 
BINDING 
DEMAND 
INCENDIARY CLOUD 
Bigby's Clenched Fist 
6th Level Otiluke's Telekinetic Sphere 
CHAIN LIGHTNING Airball 
CONTINGENCY Bigby 5 Most Excellent Force 
DEATH FOG Sculpture 
GUARDS AND WARDS Great Shout 
Bigby's Forceful Hand Gunther s Kaleidoscopic Strike 
Dimensional Blade Sunburst 
Otiluke's Freezing Sphere 
Spiritwrack 
Bigby 5 Beseiging Bolt 
Gauntlet Of Teeth # 
Greater Spelldream 
Otiluke s Diamond Screen 
Otiluke s Excruciating Screen 
Otiluke $ Orb Of Containment 
Prismatic Eye 9th Level 
ENERGY DRAIN 
METEOR SWARM 
Bigby’s Crushing Hand 
Chain Contingency 
Disintegrate Flesh 
Elemental Aura 


7th Level 


DELAYED BLAST FIREBALL 
FORCECAGE 

LIMITED WISH 

Acid Storm 

Bigby's Grasping Hand 

Hatch The Stone From The Egg 
Mordenkainen's Sword 
Persistance 

Malec-Keth s Flame Fist 


aT ie i S MEE Ll o 


1112 


^ Necromancy (Philosophy) r 


Necromancy 


Barred: Enchanters, illusionists, transmuters dimensionists,mentalists, alchemists, artificers, song 


mages 


CHILL TOUCH 
CORPSE LINK* 
CORPSE VISAGE* 


Cause Light Wounds* 
Command Undead* 
Detect Disease* 
Detho’s Delirium 
Empathic Seizure 
Plant Death * 
Preserve Dead* 

Ray Of Fatigue 
Spectral Ears 
Spectral Eyes 
Spectral Voice* 
Spoil Holy Water 
Summon Undead* # 
Undead Servant* 


2nd Level 
CLOAK UNDEAD 
FIND FAMILIAR (NEC.)* 
Speak WiTH DEAD 
SPECTRAL HAND 
Attract Ghoul* 
Blastbones 
Choke 
Corruption* 
Death Recall* 
Embalm* 
Empathic Control 
Ghoul Touch* 
Living Link 
Shadow Burst 
Skeletal Hands* 
Undead Mount 
Bloodbridge 
Death Armor* 
Ebony Hand* 
Resist Turning* 


BoNE DANCE* 


CALL SPIRIT 
CALL UNDEAD 
DELAY DEATH 
FEIGN DEATH 
HOLD UNDEAD 
VAMPIRIC TOUCH 
Cause Blindness Or Deafness* 
Cause Disease* 
Curse Tablet 
Empathic Link 
False Face* 
Hovering Skull 
Mummy Touch 
Pain Touch* 

Ray Of Paralysis 
Skull Watch 
Skulltrap* 

Spirit Armor* 
Undead Control* 
Bone Knit 

Death Sight 
Double Undead* 
Paralyzing Touch 
Undead Summoning I* 


4th Level 

CONTAGION 

ENERVATION 

Brainkill* 

Cause Serious Wounds* 

Charm Undead* 

Corpse Whisper* 

Death’s Door* 

Destroy Undead* 

Eyes Of The Undead* 

Life Force Transfer* 

Mask Of Death 

Poison* 

Protection From 
Possession, 10’ Radius 

Protection From 
Undead, 5’ Radius 

Putrefaction 

Summon Spirit 

Wall Of Evil # 

Beltyn s Burning Blood 

Empathic Wound Transfer* 


Flesh To Air* 
Undead Summoning 11* 


5th Level 

ANIMATE DEAD 

BiND UNDEAD* 

GRAFT FLESH 

MAGIC JAR 

WALL Or Bones 

Bone Growth* 

Cause Critical Wounds* 
Disguise Undead 
Improved Skull Watch 
Throbbing Bones 
Deathmaster 5 Vial* 
Undead Summoning III* 


REINCARNATION 
Dead Man’s Eyes 
Ghoul Gauntlet 


Imbue Undead With Spell 
Ability 
Lich Touch 


A: —L——— 


1113 


E Air (Effect) "r 


Transmute Bone To Steel Zombie Double* Undead Summoning VI* 
Unlife # 


Trollish Fortitude 
Bloodstone s Spectral Steed 
Grimwald s Graymantle 
Teleport Dead 

Undead Regeneration* 
Undead Summoning IV* 


9th Level 
ENERGY DRAIN 
Create Minion* 
Defoliate Life Force Exchange 
Fear Ward Mass Blindness 
Ghoul Lattice* Wail Of The Banshee 
Graft Limb* Death Ward 
Heart Of Stone Disruption 
7th Level Homunculus Shield Undead Creation 
CONTROL UNDEAD Life Force Transfer Undead Summoning VII* 
FiNGER OF DEATH Shadow Form 
Enhanced Empathy Abi-Dalzim s Horrid Wilting 
Harm* Create Spectral Wizard 
Suffocate Evolve 
Bloodstone's Frightful Joining Exchange Wounds* 
Intensify Summoning Graft Item* 
Undead Summoning V* Temporary Resurrection # 
Wound Conferral* Undead Aides* 
Schools Of Effect Lists 


These lists are organized by specialty school. The elemental lists are based on western campaign spell (Oriental and 
Arabian lists are in a later section). Each list is organized by level alphabetically, but each list is also divided by rarity. 
Common spells are listed first, in SMALL Caps. Uncommon spells are in normal type. Rare spells are italicized. Very 
rare spells are Sefémned. Any spell marked “#” has information in the Notes section of the spell that should be consulted. 
Spells restricted to specialists, as opposed to generalists, are followed by an asterisk (*). The final decision about spell 
rarity, and whether a spell is available to player character wizards rests with the DM. 


Air 
Barred: Earth Elementalists 

1st Level Ride The Wind Improved Whispering Wind 
FEATHER FALL Zephyr Alamir s Fundamental 
WALL OF FoG Breakdown 
Control Vapor Bowers i077 co menge 
Mordenkainen 5 Protection. 
From Avians 3rd Level 4th Level 
Murdock s Feathery Flyer CLOUDBURST SoLip FOG 
Otiluke s Bubbling Buoyancy Gust Or WIND Elemental Control 

WATER BREATHING Elemental Turning 
2nd Level WIND WALL Protection From 
Foc CLoup Airbolt Elementals 10' Radius 
STINKING CLOUD Ball Lightning Protection From 
WHISPERING WIND Dispel Fog Gas, 5' Radius 
Filter Eagle Vision Wind Breath 


Mist Magic Ground Fog 
Potton From Birds Hold Vapor Hae e 


1114 


^ Earth (Effect) f 


Sth Level 

AIRY WATER 

CLOUDKILL 

CONJURE ELEMENTAL 
CONJURE ELEMENTAL-KIN 
Calm Wind 

Ozone Cloud 


Barred: Air Elementalist 


Ist Level 
Fist Of Stone 


2nd Level 

FooLs' GOLD 

Pit 

Maximilian s Earthen Grasp 
Stone Sleep 


3rd Level 
Alamir s Fundamental 
Breakdown 
Maximilian s Stony Grasp 
Mordenkainen s Protection From 
Insects And Arachnids 


4th Level 

Dic 

STONESKIN 
Elemental Control 
Elemental Turning 


Barred: Water Elementalists 


Ist Level 

AFFECT NORMAL FIRES 
DANCING LIGHTS 

Fire Burst 

Fire Quill 

Flamespin 

2nd Level 


FLAMING SPHERE 
PYROTECHNICS 


6th Level 

DEATH FoG 
EVAPORATE FLUID 
SoLiD FoG 


7th Level 

CONJURE GREATER ELEMENTAL 
Command Element 
Neutralize Gas 

Suffocate 

Summon Wind 

Cyclone Chariot 


Earth 


Protection From 

Elementals 10' Radius 
Turn Pebble To Boulder 
Wall Of Sand 


5th Level 

CONJURE ELEMENTAL 
CONJURE ELEMENTAL-KIN 
DISTANCE DISTORTION 
PASSWALL 

STONE SHAPE 
TRANSMUTE Rock To Mup 
WALL OF IRON 

WALL Or STONE 

Ballant 5 Stonestrength 
Stone Drill 


6th Level 
GLASSEE 

MOVE EARTH 
STONE To FLESH 


Fire 


Circle Of Flame 
Combust 
Firestaff 
Smokescreen 


8th Level 
AIRBOAT 
INCENDIARY CLOUD 
Airball 

Air Spiral 


9th Level 
Elemental Aura 
Windwar 


TRANSMUTE WATER To Dust 
Claws Of The Umber Hulk 
Ballant's Stonesplit 


7th Level 

CONJURE GREATER ELEMENTAL 
STATUE 

Command Element 

Hatch The Stone From The Egg 


8th Level 
GLASSTEEL 
SINK 


Iron Body 


9th Level 
Elemental Aura 


Enchanted Torch 

Melf's Minute Meteors 

Mellix's Fire Mouth 

Protection From Fire 

Alamir s Fundamental 
Breakdown 

Animate Fire 

Fire Phantom 


~ Water (Effect) "4 


Searing Serpent 
Zikalan Fireform 


4th Level 

FiRE TRAP 

WALL OF FIRE 

Elemental Control 

Elemental Turning 

Fire Gate 

Fire Lance 

Protection From 
Elementals 10' Radius 

Everlasting Fire 

Fire Aura 

Fire Wake 


Barred: Fire Elementalists 


Level 1 

Feather Float 

Lasting Breath 

Liquid Orb 
Metamorphose Liquids 
Precipitation 


Level 2 

Create Water 
Ice Knife 
Insatiable Thirst 
Mist Magic 
Shark Bolt 
Whispering Tide 


Level 3 
CLOUDBURST 
ICELANCE 

WATER BREATHING 
Airbolt 

Dispel Fog 


ae ee Lc M e 


Flameproof 
Fire Eyes # 
Forests Fiery Constrictor 


7th Level 

CONJURE GREATER ELEMENTAL 
DELAYED BLAST FIREBALL 
Command Element 


Water 


Ground Fog 

Watery Double 

Wall Of Water 

Alamir 5 Fundamental 
Breakdown 

Watery Form 


Level 4 

ICE STORM 

WALL OF IcE 

Control Fluid 

Elemental Control 

Elemental Turning 

Protection From 
Elementals 10’ Radius 

Vitriolic Sphere 

Mordenkainen s Protection From 

Slime 


Level 5 

AIRY WATER 

Cone Or CoLp 

CONJURE ELEMENTAL 
CONJURE ELEMENTAL-KIN 
TRANSMUTE Rock To Mup 


1116 


Flame Chase 
Incendiary Entrapment 
Malec-Keth s Flame Fist 


8th Level 
INCENDIARY CLOUD 
Fire Storm 
Shooting Stars 


9th Level 
METEOR SWARM 
Elemental Aura 


Rusting Grasp 

Vile Venom 

Otiluke's Polar Screen 
Water Bomb 

Calm Water 


Level 6 

LowER WATER 

PART WATER 

TRANSMUTE WATER To Dust 


Otiluke's Freezing Sphere 


Level 7 

CONJURE GREATER ELEMENTAL 
Acid Storm 

Command Element 

Whirlpool 


Level 8 
Deep Delve 
W: 


aterspout 
Abi-Dalzim s Horrid Wilting 


Level 9 
ELEMENTAL AURA 


Cache 
Random s Commodious Pocket 
Proof From Teleportation 


4th Level 

DIMENSION DooR 
Phase Shift 

Drawmij 5 Instant Exit 


Barred: by philosophy 


Quimby s Enchanting Gourmet 


3rd Level 
INVISIBLE MAIL 
Airbolt 

Cloak Of Warding 


Otiluke s Radiant Screen 


Dimensional Blade 
Otiluke s Diamond Screen 
Otiluke s Excruciating Screen 


VANISH 
Drawmij's Instant Summons 


Force 


Improved Magic Mouth 
Otiluke s Force Umbrella 


Mordenkainen's Magnificent 
Mansion 

Planar Door 

Otiluke 5 Death Screen 


9th Level 

GATE 

TIME STOP 

Estate Transference 

Power Word, Banishment 
Sphere Of Ultimate Destruction 
Worldwalk 


6th Level 

REPULSION 

BARRIER REAVER 

Gauntlet Of Teeth # 

Otiluke s Orb Of Containment 


7th Level 
FORCECAGE 
Mordenkainen's Sword 


8th Level 
Otiluke's Telekinetic Sphere 


9th Level 
BiGBY's CRUSHING HAND 


~ Mentalism et) " 


Mentalism 
Note on Mentalists: Even though Alteration school spells are barred to this specialty, telekinetic 
effects are specifically allowed. Barred: by philosophy. 


Psychic Reversal 
Rary 5 Protection From Scrying 


7th Level 

ENHANCED EMPATHY 
Power WORD, STUN 
Descent Into Madness 


Major Domination 
Manor 5 Mind Vision 
Mordenkainen 5 Penultimate 
Cogitation 
Curse Of Forgetfulness 
8th Level 
DEMAND 
MIND BLANK 
9th Level 
Dismind 
Manor 5 Mindsight Mass Domination 
3rd Level Mind-Control Invisibility Programmed Amnesia 
EMPATHIC LINK Rary s Mind Shield 
IRON MiND Rary 5 Replay 
SUGGESTION Rary 5 Telepathic Bond 
Detect Charm 
Detect Illusion 
Mental Transport 
Mental Block 
Masa See FOES 


1118 


Barred: by philosophy 


1st Level 

CHILL TOUCH 

SLEEP 

SPOOK 

Moonglow 

Blacksteel 

Tunnel Vision — — 


2nd Level 

BLUR 

DARKNESS, 15' RADIUS 
Ray OF ENFEEBLEMENT 
SCARE 

SPECTRAL HAND 
Dancing Shadows 
Shadow Burst 

Wall Of Gloom 


Shadow Blink 
Shadow Cloak 
Spirit Armor 
Create Darkness 
Darksense 


Lorloveim 5 Creeping Shadow 
Mailed Might 


4th Level 
ENERVATION 
EVARD’S BLACK TENTACLES 
FEAR 

MINOR CREATION 

SHADOW MONSTERS 
Shadowshield 

Create Darkenbeast 

Gloom 

Whisper Blade # 


SUMMON SHADOW 


Conjure Nightmare 
Mordenkainen’s Faithful Hound 
Phantom Blade 

Shadow Head # 


rege 
i 


Bloodstone's Spectral Steed 
Lorloveim s Shadowy 


Transformation 


Turnshadow 
Duo-DIMENSION 
PHASE Door 
SHADOW WALK 
Shadowcat 

8th Level 
MAZE 

Shadow Form 
9th Level 


ENERGY DRAIN 
Mass Blindness 


Common spells are listed first, in SMALL Caps. Uncommon spells are in normal type. Rare spells are 
italicized. Very rare spells are SteBfi&d. The “#” mark means check that spell's Notes section. An 


asterisk (*) means the spell is restricted to a specialist wizard. 


1119 


^de (Thaumaturgy) " 


Schools Of Thaumaturgy Lists 


These lists are organized by specialty school. The elemental lists are based on Western conventions 
(Oriental and Arabian lists are in a later section). Each list is organized by level alphabetically, but each 
list is also divided by rarity. Common spells are listed first, in SMALL Caps. Uncommon spells are in 
normal type. Rare spells are italicized. Very rare spells are Sere&ed. Any spell marked “#” has infor- 
mation in the Notes section of the spell that should be consulted. Spells restricted to specialists, as op- 
posed to generalists, are followed by an asterisk (*). The final decision about spell rarity and whether a 
spell is available to player character wizards rests with the DM. 


Metamorphose Liquids 
Otiluke s Bubbling Buoyancy 
Otiluke s Smoky Sphere 
Troll Repellent 


2nd Level 

Detect POSION 
FooLs' GOLD 
GLITTERDUST 
PYROTECHNICS 
SENSE SHIFTING 
STINKING CLOUD 
Filter 

Melf's Acid Arrow 
Preservation 
Enhanced Olfaction 
Net 

Otiluke s Boiling Oil Bath 


3rd Level 

FLAME ARROW 

PROTECTION FROM 
EviL, 10’ RADIUS 


Alchemy 


Dissipate Vapor 
Enchanted Torch 

Hold Vapor 

Melf's Minute Meteors 
Solvent Of Corrosion 
Alamir s Fundamental 


Otiluke s Acid Cloud 


4th Level 
ENCHANTED WEAPON 
FIRE CHARM 

FiRE TRAP 


Control Fluid 

Protection From Acid 
Vitriolic Sphere 

Beltyn s Burning Blood 
Darsson $ Potion 

Merald s Murderous Mist 
Otiluke s Steaming Sphere 


Rusting Grasp 


Vile Venom 


1120 


STONE To FLESH 
Otiluke s Orb Of Containment 


Acid Storm 

Hatch The Stone From The Egg 
Neutralize Gas 

Dragon Breath 

Otiluke 5 Siege Sphere 


| 


"Len ——!Á—ÉÀÁ— Bá DÀ m 


Barred: by philosophy 


Infratorch 
Unpickable Lock 


ITEM 
Melf's Minute Meteors 
Preserve Wood 


Artifice 


4th Level 
ENCHANTED WEAPON 
MAGIC MIRROR 
Duplicate 

Electrical Wards 
Rastor's Mystical Spy 
Special Effects 
Thunder Staff 

Vision Stone 
Drawmij’s Tool Box 
Otto s Drums Of Despair 
Otto s Tin Soldiers 
Tenser 5 Staff Of Smiting 


Drawmij 5 Flying Feat 
Motion 
Otto's Gong Of Isolation 


6th Level 

ARROW OF BONE 
GLASSEE 
Dimensional Blade 
Recharge 


Otiluke s Orb Of Containment 
Prismatic Eye 

Ring Of Disintegration # 
Spell Mirror # 


Common spells are listed first, in SMALL Caps. Uncommon spells are in normal type. Rare spells are 
italicized. Very rare spells are S@f@@néd. The £^ mark means check that spell's Notes section. An 
asterisk (*) means the spell is restricted to a specialist wizard. 


1121 


ES Geometry (Thaumaturgy) d 


Barred: by philosophy 


1st Level 

ALARM 

ERASE 

PROTECTION FROM EVIL 
SHIELD 

Copy 

Dictation 

Write 

Fire Quill 


2nd Level 

HYPNOTIC PATTERN 

Due North 

Moon Rune 

Mystic Writing 

Words Of Fire # 
Drenal’s Dry Ink — — — — 


3rd Level 
ExPLOSIVE RUNES 
PROTECTION FROM 

EviL, 10' RADIUS 
SECRET PAGE 
SEPIA SNAKE SIGIL 
Lesser Sign Of Sealing 
Moonglow Symbol 
Protection From Amorphs 
Skywrite 


Geometry 


4th Level 

FIRE TRAP 

MINOR GLOBE OF 
INVULNERABILITY 

RAINBOW PATTERN 

Protection From 
Elementals 10' Radius 

Protection From 
Lycanthropes, 10' Radius 

Protection From 
Possession, 10' Radius 

Protection From 
Undead, 5' Radius 

Thunder Staff 


5th Level 
CONJURE ELEMENTAL 
CONJURE ELEMENTAL-KIN 
Invulnerability To Normal 
Weapons 
Khazid's Procurement 
Protection From 
Fiends, 10' Radius 
Mordenkainen s Private Sanctum 
Von Gasik’s Refusal 


6th Level 
ENSNAREMENT 
Guarps AND WARDS 
GLOBE OF INVULNERABILITY 
Greater Sign Of Sealing 
Invulnerability To 

Magical Weapons 
Tattoo Of Power 


7th Level 

PHASE Door 

SEQUESTER 

Conjure Greater Elemental 
Cacofiend 


8th Level 

ANALYZE DWEOMER 

MAZE 

SYMBOL 

Fear Ward 

Gunther 5 Kaleidoscopic Strike 
Symbol, Spell Loss 


9th Level 
GATE 


Common spells are listed first, in SMALL Caps. Uncommon spells are in normal type. Rare spells are 
italicized. Very rare spells are Séreened. The “#” mark means check that spell's Notes section. An 


asterisk (*) means the spell is restricted to a specialist wizard. 


1122 


^ Song (Thaumaturgy) " 


Barred: by philosophy 


CHARM PERSON 


Amplify 
Drawmij s Light Step 
Otto s Chime Of Release 


Tasha's Uncontrollable Hideous 
ter 

Drawmij s Swift Mount 

Otto 5 Soothing Vibrations 

Otto s Tones Of Forgetfulness 


HOLD PERSON 

MONSTER SUMMONING I 
SUGGESTION 

Improved Whispering Wind 
Otto s Crystal Rhythms 
Otto 5 Sure-Footed Shuffle 


Song 
4th Level 
CHARM MONSTER 
EMOTION 


MONSTER SUMMONING II 
SHOUT 

Otto’s Drums Of Despair 
Otto s Silver Tongue 
Otto s Tonal Attack 

Otto 5 Warding Tones 


5th Level 

DISMISSAL 

HOLD MONSTER 

MONSTER SUMMONING III 

Leomund’s Lamentable 
Belaborment 

Calm Wind 

Otto's Gong Of Isolation 

Calm Water 


6th Level 
MASS SUGGESTION 


MONSTER SUMMONING IV 


Brightsong 


7th Level 

CHARM PLANTS 
MONSTER SUMMONING V 
Power WORD, STUN 
True Name 


8th Level 
Mass CHARM 
MONSTER SUMMONING VI 


The Harpers 


Power WORD, BLIND 
Otto’s Irresistible Dance 
Great Shout 


9th Level 
MONSTER SUMMONING VII 
Power WORD, KILL 


Bard 
Bards tend to have spells on the 
Song list. Spells that are univer- 
sal for wizards are not universal 
for bards. The following list 
contains spells not generally 
wizards. 


This is a special organization and force for good in the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting. While not all Harpers are spell- 
casters, some Harpers are wizards or bards. Special spells to which they might gain access are given below. 


Ist Level 


Alustriel s Fang 


Gamalon s Fiery Backlash 


Alustriel s Mantle 


5th Level 


7th Level 
Alustriel s Improved Mantle 
Anticipation 


1123 


8th Level 
ny 


Lem vibe Blade 


E Wild Magic (Thaumaturgy) "d 


Wild Magic 
Barred: All except wild mages 
Ist Level FIREFLOW* 7th Level 
HoRNuNG's GUESS* Foor's SPEECH* HORNUNG’S SURGE SELECTOR* 
NAHAL’S RECKLESS DWEOMER* SPELL SHAPE* 
PATTERNWEAVE* 4th Level 
THERE/NOT THERE* 8th Level 
2nd Level UNLUCK* HORNUNG'S RANDOM 
CHAOS SHIELD* DISPATCHER* 
HORNUNG'S BANEFUL 5th Level WILDZONE* 
DEFLECTOR* VORTEX* 
NAHAL'S NONSENSICAL WAVEFORM* 9th Level 
NULLIFIER* STABILIZE* 
6th Level WILDFIRE* 
3rd Level WILDSHIELD* WILDWIND* 
ALTERNATE REALITY* WILDSTRIKE* 
TABLE 1: Witp MAGIC LEVEL VARIATION 
True Die Roll (1420) 
Level 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 
1 -b.-1.-1.-1.-1 0 0 0 0*0 0°09 0 O0 O 41 +1 41.41 +41 
2 -1 -1 -l -1 -1 -1 0 0 0 0 0 0 O O *1 *l +1 +1 * +41 


Roll 


5 -3 -2 -2 -1 -i -1 -1-1-1 
6 -3 -3 -2 -2 -i -l -i -i -I 


9+ 


Sh -4 -3 


a -2-2-4- 


0 0 +1 +1 +1 +1 «+! 
0 0 +1 


42 42 43 
TOM +h 4142 4243 143 


0 0 +L +1 42 +2 +3 +3 44 +4 45 


This table give a level variation for wild mages based on a 1d20 roll. A boldface result indicates a 
wild surge; consult Table 2: Wild Surge Results. 


TABLE 2: WILD SURGE RESULTS 


Results 
Wall of force appears in front of caster 

Caster smells like a skunk for spell duration 
Caster shoots forth eight nonpoisonous snakes 
from fingertips; snakes do not attack 

Caster’s clothes itch (+2 penalty to initiative) 
Caster glows as per 


Caster's hair grows on foot in length 

Caster pivots 180 

Caster's face is blackened by a small explosion 

Caster develops allergy to his magical items; 

cannot control sneezing until all magical items 

are removed (allergy lasts 1d6 turns) 

Caster's head enlarges for 1d3 turns 

Caster reduces (reversed enlarge) for 1d3 tums 

14 Caster falls madly in love with target until a 
remove curse 18 cast 

Spell cannot be canceled at will by the caster 

Caster polymorphs randomly 


di00 


Roll Results 


17 


Colorful bubbles come out of caster's mouth in- 
stead of words (words are released when bub- 
bles pop); spells with verbal components cannot 
be cast for | turn 

Reversed tongues affects all within 60 feet of 
caster 

Wall of fire encircles the caster 

Caster's feet ing movement to 
half and adding +4 penalty to initiative rolls for 
1d3 tums 

Caster suffers same spell effect as target 
Caster levitates 20 feet for 1d4 turns 

Cause fear within a 60’ radius centered on the 
caster; all in radius except caster must make 
saving throw 

Caster speaks in a squeaky voice for 1d6 days 
Caster gains X-ray vision for 1d6 rounds 
Caster ages 10 years 

Silence, 15' radius centers on caster 10' x 
10’ pit immediately in front of the 
caster, 5 feet deep per level of the caster 


a SS. eee ee ee 


1124 


^ Wild Magic (Thaumaturgy) "d 


d100 
Roll 
29 


Results 
Reverse gravity beneath caster's feet for 1 
round 


Colored streamers pour from caster's finger- 


tips 
Spell effect rebounds on caster 

Caster becomes invisible 

Color spray from caster's fingertips 

Stream of butterflies pours from caster's 
mouth 

Caster leaves monster-shaped footprints in- 
stead of his own until a dispel magic is cast 
3-30 gems shoot from the caster's fingertips; 
each is worth 1d6 x 10 gp 


Music fills the air 

Create food and water 

All normal fires within 60 feet of caster are 

extinguished 

One magical item within 30 feet of caster 

(randomly chosen) is tly drained 
One normal item within 30 feet of caster (ran- 

pedum chosen) becomes ical 


permanently magi 
All magical weapons within 30 feet of caster 
are increased by +2 for | turn 
Smoke trickles from the ears of all creatures 
within 60 feet of the caster for 1 turn 
Dancing lights 
All creatures within 30 feet of the caster begin 
to hiccup (+1 to casting times, -1 to THACO) 
All normal doors, secret doors, portcullises, 
etc. (including those locked or barred) within 
60 feet of the caster swing open 
Caster and target exchange places 
ai affects random target Within 60 feet of 


Spell Hl fails but is not wiped from caster's mind 
Monster summoning lI 

Sudden change in weather ( 
snow, rain, etc.) lasting 1d6 turns 
Deafening bang affects everyone within 60 
feet; those who can hear must save vs. Spell or 
be stunned 1d3 rounds 

Caster and target exchange voices until a 
remove curse is cast 

Gate opens to a randomly chosen Outer Plane; 
50% chance for extraplanar creature to appear 
Spell functions, but shrieks like a shrieker 


rise, 


Spell reversed, if reverse is possible 

Spell takes physical form as free-willed ele- 
mental and cannot be controlled by caster; ele- 
mental remains for the duration of the spell 
and its touch causes the spell effect (THACO 
equal to caster's) 

All weapons within 60 feet of the caster glow 
for 1d4 round 

Spell functions; any applicable saving throw is 
not allowed 

Spell appears to fail when cast, but occurs 1-4 
rounds later 

All magical items within 60 feet of caster 
glow for 2d8 days 

Caster and target switch personalities for 2d10 
rounds 

Slow spell centered on target 

Target deluded 


d100 


Roll Results 


66 
67 
68 
69 
70 


71 
72 
73 
74 


75 


Lightning bolt shoots toward target 
Target enlarged 
Darkness centered on target 
Plant growth centered on target 
1,000 Ibs. of nonliving matter within 10 feet 
of target vanishes 
Fireball centers on target 
Target turns to stone 
Spell is cast; material components and 
memory of spell are retained 
Every within 10 feet of caster receives the 
benefit of a heal 
Target becomes dizzy for 2d4 rounds (-4 AC 
and THACO, cannot cast spells) 
Wall of fire encircles target 
Target levitates 20 feet for 1d3 turns 
Target suffers blindness 
Target is charmed as per charm monster 
e 

ie cd s feet mar es desee ing movement to 

half normal and g +4 penalty to all initia- 

tive rolls for 1d3 turns 
Rust monster appears in front of target 
Target polymorphs randomly 
Target falls madly in love with caster until a 
remove curse is cast 
Target changes sex 
Small, black raincloud forms over target 
Stinking cloud centers on target 
Heavy object (boulder, anvil, safe, etc.) ap- 
pears over target and falls for 2d20 points of 


begins sneezing and is unable to cast 
pell oft pde radius centered 
ect ' radius on target 
(all within suffer the effect) 
Target's clothes itch (+2 penalty to initiative 
for 1d10 rounds) 
Target's race randomly changes until canceled 
by a dispel magic 
Target turns ethereal of 2d4 rounds 
Target hastened 
= cloth on - crumbles to dust 
arget sprouts leaves (no damage caused, can 
be pruned without harm) 
Target sprouts new nih aj (wings, 
arm, ear, etc.) which remains until oo 
magic is cast 
Target changes color (canceled by dispel 


magic) 

Spell has minimum duration of 1 turn (e.g.: a 

fireball creates a ball of flame that remains for 
1 turn, a lightning bolt bounces and continues, 
possibly rebounding, for | turn, etc.) 

cn iveness (range, duration, area of 

e damage, etc.) increase 20096 


ee e e e | 


1125 


— Ata Setting " 


World-Specific Lists 
AL-QADIM Setting 


The wizards of the arabian setting use this basic spell list instead of the standard lists in the PHB. The 
AL-QaADIM spells listed as being “very rare" in other settings appear only in this list; (that rating ac- 
counting for arabian wizards and those trained by them operating in a western campaign). These lists are 
updated from the Arabian Adventures book and are organized similarly. Since the Elementalist spells in 
this setting tend to be restricted to Elementalist wizards, the Elementalist spells (Flame, Sand, Sea, 
Wind) are listed following the more general spells of each level. 


Ist Level 

Avert EVIL EYE 

ALARM 

ARMOR 

CANTRIP 

CHANGE SELF 

CHARM PERSON 

COMPREHEND LANGUAGES 

Detect MAGIC 

Detect METALS AND MINERALS 

FiND FAMILIAR 

FRIENDS 

GAZE REFLECTION 

GREASE 

HOLD PORTAL 

HYPNOTISM 

IDENTIFY 

JUMP 

LiGHT 

Maaic MISSILE 2nd Level 

MENDING BIND 

MOUNT BLINDNESS 

PHANTASMAL FORCE BLUR 

PROTECTION FROM EVIL CONTINUAL LIGHT 

READ MAGIC DARKNESS, 15' RADIUS 

SHIELD DEAFNESS 
DEEPPOCKETS 
Detect Evit 
DETECT INVISIBILITY 
ESP 
FORGET 
IMPROVED PHANTASMAL FORCE 
INVISIBILITY 
KNOCK 
KNow ALIGNMENT 
LEVITATE 
LOCATE OBJECT 
MIRROR IMAGE 
MISDIRECTION 
RAY OF ENFEEBLEMENT 
Rain Or BLOOD 
Rope TRICK 
SCARE 
SHATTER 


A0 po RE E MT TET T EN s 


1126 


~ AL-Qapis Setting a 


LIGHTNING BOLT 
NIGHT'S JAMBIYA 
NONDETECTION 
PHANTOM STEED 
PROTECTION FROM 

Evir, 10' Raprus 
RITUAL STRENGTH* (SHAI'IR) 
Analyze Device # 
Basket Trick 


DIMENSION Door 
DREAD WHISPER# 
EMOTION 
ENCHANTED WEAPON 
FEAR 


FUMBLE 

HALLUCINATORY TERRAIN 
ILLUSIONARY WALL 
IMPROVED INVISIBILITY 
JACKAL WARD 

LIFESURGE 

MAGIC MIRROR 
MASSMORPH 


5th Level 
ADVANCED ILLUSION 
ANIMATE DEAD 
AVOIDANCE 
CHAOS 
CLOUDKILL 
DOMINATION 
DREAM 
FABRICATE 
FALSE VISION 
FEEBLEMIND 
FLESH MIRAGE 
HOLD MONSTER 
MAGIC JAR 


ee ee 


1127 


6th Level 
ANTIMAGIC SHELL 

CONJURE ANIMALS 
CONTINGENCY 

DEATH SPELL 

DISINTEGRATE 

ENCHANT AN ITEM 

EYEBITE 

GEAS 

GLOBE OF INVULNERABILITY 
GUARDS AND WARDS 
LEGEND LORE 

MASS SUGGESTION 

MIRAGE ARCANA 

MISLEAD 

PERMANENT ILLUSION 
PROJECT IMAGE 

REPULSION 

Tarroo Or PowER 

TRUE SEEING 
VEIL 

Animate Blood 


SIMULACRUM 

SUMMON SHA'IR # 

SPELL TURNING 

TELEPORT WITHOUT ERROR 
VANISH 

VISION 


^ Dank SUN Setting g 


BIRTHRIGHT Setting 


In addition to the core rule lists, the Birthright campaign setting has spells of its own. A few of spells are 
world-specific and cannot be used elsewhere, these are marked with an asterisk (*). The more generally 
used spells, other than those that deal with bloodlines or local languages, have been integrated into the 
other lists. 


Ist Level 3rd Level FACET 
KHINASI TRADE TONGUE ENHANCE BLOOD ABILITY MASS MOUNTS 
KNow BLOODLINE DERIVATION ERIK's QUILLS 
KNow BLOODLINE STRENGTH SUPPRESS BLOOD ABILITY 6th Level 
KNOW CERILIAN ORIGIN HAELYN’s Bow SIDHELIEN MIEN 
SIDHELIEN Bow ZIKALAN FIREFORM SUPPRESS BLOODLINE 
2nd Level 4th Level 7th Level 
CALDER'S STARRY SKY IDENTIFY TIGHMAEVRIL Resist MAGIC 
First STRIKE* IMPROVED ARMOR* 
MASK BLOODLINE MIMIC BLOOD ABILITY 8th Level 
MISFORTUNE Shaefpaete's Shadowy Maaic DRAIN* 
RUORNIL'S TRACKS Distinction 
9th Level 
5th Level BLOOD DRAIN 


DISGUISE BLOODLINE 


DARK SUN Setting 

In addition to the general list, the following specialty spells can be made available to DARK SUN wizards. 
Ist Level 4th Level Psychic Reversal # 
Erpiu CLaw Psonic DAMPER 
Perriry Woop Psionic TRACER# 
GNKNEISI TS RAZE 7th Level 

TRANSMUTE SAND To STONE CONJURE GREATER ELEMENTAL 
2nd Level WOODIRON SANDS Or TIME 
DETECT PSIONICS SPIDER STRAND Doom LEGION 
Wakefulness Semipermanency 
Spawn Heritage 5th Level 

KANK SHELL 8th Level 
3rd Level REJUVENATE PROTECTION FROM TIME 
FLEET FEET Erdlu Egg CREATE TREE Or Lire* 
REVERSE FOSSILIZATION 
RANIKE CLOUD 6th Level 9th Level 
Stoneiron IMPROVED HASTE Vampiric Youthfulness 
Erdlu Hide IMPROVED SLOW 

Psychic Reversal 


Common spells are listed first, in SMALL Caps. Uncommon spells are in normal type. Rare spells are 
italicized. Very rare spells are Sereened. The “#” mark means check that spell’s Notes section. An 
asterisk (*) means the spell is restricted to a specialist wizard. 


1129 


^ DRAGONLANCE Setting "d 


DRAGONLANCE Setting 
This setting uses the general list, and the special spells detailed below. 


Ist Level 
Feather Float 


2nd Level 
Remove Disease 


4th Level 
Fistandantilus's Firequench® = 


Sth Level 
Command Dragon 


Dragon Knights 


In the DRAGONLANCE setting, the Dragon Knights are a spe- 
cial force of riders teamed with dragons who carry them 
into combat A 6th-level dragon knight who was previously 
a wizard can start to learn spells from provided the 
knight is otherwise capable of learning these spells. The 
DM decides if and when a dragon offers a spell (spells are 
most often offered by the knight’s partner. The spells on 
this list are unique to Dragon Knight/Wizards, and can be 


leamed by them in the usual way. 

Ist Level 2nd Level 3rd Level 

Dragon Tongues Dragon Message Dragon Fall 
Eye-Shield 
Wings — 


Unless otherwise noted, the Dragon Knight uses Fighter 
class information. 


Alignment: Any 

Ability Scores: Strength 9, (Prime Requisite) 
Race/Class: Any Fighter 

Role: Seeks to maintain the Balance by shaping and mold- 
ing the powerful forces of other alignments. Every action 
of the paramander is justified in the interests of pure neu- 
trality. Committing good or evil actions without consider- 
ing the effects on the Balance causes loss of status and 
reversion to the fighter class. 


Equipment: Armor is limited to chain mail, and they do 
not use shields or swords. They can use any type of pole 


At Ist level, receive a proficiency in Riding (Dragon) at 
no cost, can use a lance on dragonback with attack penalty 
due to flying, and become immune to dragon awe. 

At 3rd level, can use a preferred missile weapon from 
dragonback with no attack penalty due to flying, receives a 
+1 bonus to the dragon riding proficiency, and becomes 
immune to dragon fear: 

At Sth level, gain proficiency in one dragon tongue (the 
dragon partner's, if not already known), and a +1 attack roll 
bonus with the lance when fighting from dragonback. 

At 6th level, receive +1 to dragon riding proficiency, 
and if previously a wizard, can start learning magic from 


At 7th level, receive *1 to hit with preferred missile 
weapon when fighting from dragonback 

At 8th level, gains proficiency in one dragon tongue or 
improves a dragon tongue proficiency by +1. 

At 9th level, gain the ancient history proficiency at no 
cost (or improve by +1 if known) 

Hindrances: Armor is limited to chain mail. Shields and 
swords are not used. The Dragon Knight starts with three 
weapon proficiencies, one of which must be the lance. 


FORGOTTEN REALMS Setting 


In general, the FORGOTTEN REALMS spells have been integrated into the general spell list. However, some regions have 
spells of their own. This section contains two representative samples, the Old Empire and Halrua, the Shining South. 
Lists lists from the Realms given in the specialty wizard section include: the Bedine sorcerer, the Incantatrix, the Seven 
Sisters, and the Waterdeep Watch-Wizards Guild, with some specialty lists from individual wizards. Harper spells are 
listed in the Song wizard section of the Schools of Thaumaturgy. 


Halruaan Spells 


The spells of the Shining South come from the region of Halruaa in the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting, and only rarely found 
outside that region. 


Ist Level 4th Level 7th Level 
INSULATION RAMAEL'S CYCLICAL LIGHT NERVE DANCE 
2nd Level 5th Level 9th Level 
PROTECTION FROM BIRDS DARSSON's Music Box Power WORD, BANISHMENT 
DARSSON’S COOLING BREEZE RAPID REFLEXIVE RESPONSE Mycontil’s Last Resort 
DARSSON’S FIERY CUBE 
6th Level 
3rd Level RiNG Or DISINTEGRATION 
SCINTILLATING SPHERE SUSPENSION 


ee ON M MC eS 


1130 


Witchweed * 
Foothold * 


Resist Injury * 
Agitate Wounds * 
Slumber * 8th Level 
DEVASTATE * 
5th Level Deathbolt * 
DEATHGUARD * Bombard * 
ETHEREAL BANISHMENT * 
Sandstorm * 9th Level 
Mummy Creation * Army * 
Call * 
Seh Love seit 0 00000 
Protection From Telekinesis * Macr i 
Ti *. avelin 
Te Enfeeble * 


Maztica Setting 


This setting is much like the New World in the 1500’s; the native culture resembles the Aztec or Mayan 
cultures. There are two special spell lists from this setting, Each is a separate magical discipline, these spells 
cannot be learned by other types of wizards, nor can these spellcasters learn other general wizard spells. 


Hishna Spells 
This Maztican spell list is based on animal magic. 

Ist Level HUNTSMAN'S CALL* 4th Level 
CAT CHARM* Hypnosis* CURSED IMAGE* 
PROTECTION* SCALESNARE* Fire* 
SNAKE CHARM* SCROLLSEE* SENDING* 
TALONBLADE* 
DisGuisE* 3rd Level 5th Level 

DRouGHT* CREATE TALISMAN Or HisHNA* 
2nd Level Net* JAGUAR FORM* 
AMBUSH* PESTILENCE* 
HEARTSENSE* 

Pluma Spells 
This Maztican spell list is based on air and bird magic. 

Ist Level BREATHSENSE* 4th Level 
ARROWFLIGHT* FisHER'S LUCK* BIRD CHARM II* 
BiRD CHARM I* GUARDIAN* WATER Move* 
Coo.* Licut* MAGIC RESISTANCE* 
ELEVATE I* SPEARFLIGHT* 
FEATHERWEAVING* 5th Level 
STONEFLIGHT* 3rd Level CREATE TALISMAN OF PLUMA* 
WARMTH* BLOSSOM* EAGLE FORM* 

ELEVATE II* 
2nd Level WATER SUMMONING* 
BAFFLEMENT* WINDRIDER* 


— Ac pd c ccc NG MSS GEOP UELLE e lr 


1131 


say Miszuna Setting " 


MYSTARA Setting 


This adaptation of the D&D game's "Known World" into the AD&D system adds a number of new spells to the stan- 
dard list. The naming conventions of the Known World setting are very flowery; the Wizard Spell Compendium trans- 
lates these spell names for more general play. 


1st Level 

DANCE MACABRE 
EMIRIKOL'S QUESTION 
FiLTH'S BANE 

RELEASE WEAPON 
SOOTHE THE BEAST 
SORCEROUS SCRIBE 
Spirit SERVANT 
Suric’s SWIFT PERUSAL 
WANDBANE 


2nd Level 

BALLIARD’S REJUVENATING 
Touch 

DETECT LYCANTHROPE 

DEGRAS's PILFERING FINGERS 

FLANN’S FINERY 


3rd Level 

BRANNART'S ACIDIC GRASP 
CALLISTRAM'S GONDOLA 
CLOAK OF WARDING 

SPELL SENSE 

SCALDING SPOUT 
IMPROVED MAGIC MISSILE 


4th Level 
COUNTERSPELL IMMUNITY 
ELUDE BLOW 
EVERPRESENT RECORD 
WARD AGAINST CHARMS 


Sth Level 

JAGGAR'S STRENGTHENED 
BASTION 

LAPIS BONDS 

PIERCE MAGIC RESISTANCE 

MORPHAIL’S UNHOLY BLESSING 

PILFER DWEOMER 


1132 


6th Level 

BREACH DEFENSES 
ITEMBANE 

SEEK TELEPORTER 
WALL WiTH No Doors 


7th Level 

CONSUME KNOWLEDGE 
DouBLE DWEOMER 
GUARDIAN MANTLE 
RODBANE (NEW) 


8th Level 
REVERSE TELEPORT 
SPELLDOOR 


9th Level 
ALYSSINDRA’S SUMMONS 
PIERCE ANY SHIELD 
SATHRATH'S INGENIOUS 
RECOLLECTION 


je Oriental Adventures " 


Oriental Adventures Setting 


The wu jen of this setting use this list instead of the standard one from the PHB. The oriental spells listed as being “very 
rare" in other settings appear only in this list (that rating accounts for wu jen) operating in a western campaign. The par- 
enthetical notes are from the original oriental list and serve as a guide to elemental specialties; a “Nature” mage should 
be considered a Wood Elementalist, and “All” indicates all Elementalists. This section includes two special lists, one for 


ninja spellcasters, and the other for an entertainer variant spellcaster, the geisya. 


1st Level 

ACCURACY 

ANIMATE WOOD (NATURE) 
CHAMELEON 

CLOUD LADDER (AIR) 
COMPREHEND LANGUAGES 
DETECT MAGIC 

Drowsy INSECTS (NATURE) 
ELEMENTAL Burst (ALL) 
FIERY Eyes (FIRE) 

GHOST LIGHT 

HAIL Or STONE (EARTH) 
HOLD PORTAL 

HYPNOTISM 

Know HISTORY 


SWIM (WATER) 

UNSEEN SERVANT 
VENTRILOQUISM 

WALL OF Foc (AIR) 

Warp Woop (NATURE) 
WATER PROTECTION (WATER) 
WIZARD MARK 


2nd Level 

ANIMAL COMPANION 
ANIMATE WATER (WATER) 
APPARITION 


FIRE SHURIKEN (FIRE) 
ICE KNIFE (WATER) 
INVISIBILITY 

KNOCK 

LOCATE OBJECT 
MISDIRECTION 

OMEN 

PHANTASMAL FORCE 
PROTECTION FROM CHARM 
PYROTECHNICS (FIRE) 
Rope TRICK 

SMOKE SHAPE (AIR) 
SMOKY FORM (AIR) 


STINKING CLOUD (AIR) 
STRENGTH 

VOCALIZE 

WHIP 

WIND BREATH (AIR) 
WHISPERING WIND (AIR) 
WIZARD Lock 
Candletrick 

Flashpuff 


3rd Level 

ANIMATE FIRE (FIRE) 
CLOUDBURST ( AIR/WATER) 
COMMUNE WITH LESSER SPIRIT 
DETECT SHAPECHANGER 


FIRE WINGS (FIRE) 

HASTE 

HOLD PERSON 

ILLUSIONARY SCRIPT 
IMPROVED PHANTASMAL FORCE 


WALL OF PAPER 
Woop SHAPE (NATURE) 
Iron Kimono 


4th Level 

BARGAIN 

CONFUSION 

DANCING BLADE 
DIMENSION Door (EARTH) 
DisPEL ILLUSION 

DREAM VISION 
ELEMENTAL TURNING (ALL) 
EMOTION 

FIRE ENCHANTMENT (FIRE) 
IMPROVED INVISIBILITY 
MELT METAL (FIRE) 
MINOR CREATION 

PLANT GROWTH (NATURE) 


POLYMORPH OTHER (NATURE) 
POLYMORPH SELF 


5th Level 

AIMING AT THE TARGET* 
ANIMAL GROWTH 
ANIMATE DEAD 

CONE OF COLD (WATER) 


FIRE BREATH (FIRE) 
IRONWOOD (NATURE) 
MAJOR CREATION 
Mass (EARTH) 

METAL SKIN (EARTH) 
SERVANT HORDE 
Spirit SELF 

SHADOW Door 

Spirit SELF 

STONE SHAPE (EARTH) 
SWORD OF DECEPTION 
TELEKINESIS 
THORNBUSH ARROWS 
WALL OF BONES 
WALL OF Force 
WALL OF IRON 

WALL OF STONE (EARTH) 
WATER To Poison 
(NATURE/WATER) 
Woop Rot (NATURE) 


AURA 
CONTROL WEATHER 
DISINTEGRATE 


GLASSEE (EARTH) 
LOWER WATER (WATER) 
MASS SUGGESTION 
METAL To Rusr (EARTH) 
PAIN 


SS eee 


1133 


~ Ninja Spells 


PART WATER (WATER) 
PERMANENT ILLUSION 
PROGRAMMED ILLUSION 
REPULSION 

SPEAK With DEAD 
SPIRITWRACK 

STONE TO FLESH (EARTH) 
SWORD Or DARKNESS 
TRUE SEEING 

VEIL 

VESSEI 

WARP STONE (EARTH) 


7th Level 

Bopy OUTSIDE BODY 

COMMUNE WITH GREATER SPIRIT 
Duo-DIMENSION 

ELEMENTAL SERVANT (ALL) 

ICE BLIGHT (WATER) 


Geisya Spells 


2nd Level 4th Level 
CANDLETRICK JEST 
FLASHPUFF JUGGLE 
THUMP Great THUMP 
3rd Level 

SCARF 


P E 


LIMITED WISH 
OBEDIENCE 

POWER WORD, STUN 
REANIMATION 

TooL 

VANISH 

WITHERING PALM 


8th Level 
ANTIPATHY/SYMPATHY 
CALL 

CLOUD TRAPEZE (AIR) 
FINDING THE CENTER* 
GIANT SIZE 

INCENDIARY CLOUD (FIRE) 
MIND BLANK 
PERMANENCY 
POLYMORPH ANY OBJECT 
Power WoRp, BLIND 


SUMMONING WIND ( AIR) 
SURELIFE 

SYMBOL 

WHIRLWIND (AIR) 


Year Stealing # 


9th Level 

ASTRAL SPELL 
CRYSTALBRITTLE (EARTH) 
GATE 

IMPRISONMENT 

INSTANT REGENERATION 
INTERNAL FIRE (FIRE) 
PLANAR CALL 

SUMMON SPIRIT 

Time Stop 

TSUNAMI (WATER) 
WISH 


Ninja Spells 


Detect THE LiviNG* 
GREATER DISTRACTION* 


4th Level vd: 
IMPROVED FEATHERFOOT* 
IMPROVED MIRROR IMAGE* 


5th Level 
SuADOW-FORM* 


6th Level 
SENSE TREASON* 


~ PLANESCAPE Setting d 


PLANESCAPE Setting 
These spells have been introduced in the PLANESCAPE setting. 


Ist Level 3rd Level 7th Level 
KNOW FACTION Gate Seal CACOFIEND 


RAVENLOFT Setting 


This setting has various unique spells, in addition to the standard list. A spells marked with an asterisk ( #) has the note 
"Can be researched only on the Demiplane of Dread." Such spells appear on this list alone. The DM may allow Vistani 
access to the Gypsy list, as well. 


2nd Level Bone Form* 6th Level 
IMPROVED CHILL TOUCH Bone Seize* Bones Of The Earth* 
STRAHD’S BANEFUL ATTRACTOR* Improved Vampiric Touch* 
Sinister Cantrip # Rain Of Terror* 7th Level 
Misty SUMMONS* 

3rd Level 5th Level STRAHD’S FRIGHTFUL JOINING* 
AUGMENT UNDEAD* SOUL ANCHOR 
Grounb FoG STRAHD'S MALEFIC MELD* 8th Level 
Sleep Of Horror* TRANSMUTE SNOW To STONE* Simulate Skill* 
Skeletal Hand* Feign Undead* 

Mass Contagion* 
4th Level Sinister Surroundings* 
CORPSE WHISPER Zone Of Despair* 9th Level 
Eyes Or THE UNDEAD # Persona Of Death* Allisandro’s Binding Curse* 
NEVERENDING NIGHTMARE* Knoslira's Crypt* — 
SUPPRESS LYCANTHROPY* 


1135 


N SPELLJAMMER Setting 


SPELLJAMMER Setting 
These spells are used in addition to the general spells in a SPELLJAMMER campaign. 
2nd Level 5th Level 8th Level 
LOCATE PORTAL CREATE PORTAL Destroy MINOR HELM 
ENHANCE MANEUVERABILITY Create Atmosphere 
3rd Level FLYFIELD Collapse Portal 
AIRSPHERE 
CHILL FIRE 6th Level 9th Level 
ENHANCE RATING Create Minor Helm Destroy MAJOR HELM 
Disable Helm SUMMON COSMIC STORM 
4th Level 
READ ARCANE RUNES 7th Level 
SPARK BURST Create Major Helm 
ARCANE RUNES 


Savage Setting 


Although there is no official savage setting, these lists can be use for tribal spellcasters any game world. The following list in- 
cludes the “tribal spellcaster" lists from the Ist Edition DMG. Some spells are found only in arctic (A) or jungle settings (J); 
no single caster should have both. The DM should monitor spell selections for consistency with the caster's land of origin. 
Savage mages don't have access to comprend languages, hold portal, teleport, or teleport without error. Their read magic is 
often not compatible with standard read magic. If scroll-equivalents are available at all, they will be in the form of knotted 


strings or carved staves, which requires its own version of a read magic spell to unlock. 


Ist Level DETECT INVISIBILITY 4th Level 
AFFECT NORMAL Fires INVISIBILITY ENCHANT AN ITEM 
DANCING LIGHTS LEVITATE REMOVE CURSE 
Frost FINGERS (A) MAGIC MOUTH WOODIRON 
Frost SHROUD (A) SCARE Sinuous Horrors # 
LocATE REMAINS Misfortune 
MAGIC BOOMERANG # Nature Call # 5th Level 
PusH Protection From Charm # ANIMAL GROWTH 
SERPENT MISSILE # (J) THROBBING BONES 
SHIELD Shock Shield # 
SUMMON FETISH SPIRIT 3rd Level 
VENTRILOQUISM DisPEL MAGIC 6th Level 
WARD STONEIRON ARROW Or BONE 
Petrify Wood Bone Club TATTOO Or POWER 

Minor Malison 
2nd Level Skullwatch 7th Level 
AUDIBLE GLAMER Ghasly Hands — — è Bone Javelin 
BONEIRON 
BONEWOOD 8th Level 

BoNE BLADE 


WORLD OF GREYHAWK Setting 


Nearly all spells from this setting are in the general spell list. Most are named for their creators, of whom Bigby, 
Drawmij, Leomund, Mordenkainen, Murlynd, Nystul, Otiluke, Otto, Rary, Serten, and Tenser are the most prominent, 


AU Oe ee 


1136 


^ Alliance Of The Veil "d 
Spell Lists By Wizard Specialty 


Most of these are based on specialized character types that originally appeared in DRAGON Magazine. Others are 
compiled from several sources. It is not possible to include all class, kit, or specialty wizard details appearing in the 
articles, and in some cases the game system has moved in other directions since they were published. These suggested 
lists, updated for 2nd Edition, can be used as a foundation for specialized wizards. Unless specifically noted otherwise, 
these wizards have the spells from the Universal list as well. 


Alliance Of The Veil 


The Veiled Society, a secret group of preservers in the DARK SUN Setting, have several special spells. Otherwise, they use 
spells from the Dark Sun list. 


Ist Level: SUMMON FETISH SPIRIT 7th Level: WATCHFUL EYES 


Bedine Sorcerers and Witches 
(Anauroch Desert in the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting) 


These "shunned ones" travel the Anauroch wastes, accepted by other Bedine only rarely, when their aid is needed against 
a common foe. They have the ability to sense magic cast within 60 feet (2-in-6 chance), but cannot detect magical items, 
or guess at the source or powers of the sensed spellcasting, except by using their physical senses. 

Bedine sorcerers and witches can duplicate most common and uncommon wizard spells of 1st through 3rd level: 
Air and Earth spells are most typical, while fire and water spells are rare for them. The DM may allow them to draw 
from the AL-QADIM setting list, though the spells listed below are common among them. The spells marked with an 
asterisk (*) are known only to the Bedine. They learn from books, as other wizards do, and highly prize looted spell- 
books. 


Ist Level 4th Level 7th level 
SAND JAMBIYA CONJURE SAND LION SAND GEMS* 
SAND WHISPER SAND HEALING* SUN STONES 
WIND COMPASS SUNFIRE 
WIND BLADE 8th Level 
2nd Level CLEANSE WATER 
FLYING JAMBIYA 5th Level SAND WORM 
PILLAR OF SAND DEATH SMOKE 
SAND SHADOW DESERT FIST 9th Level 
FLESH MIRAGE CREATE WATER 
3rd Level LIFE WATER 
FIND WATER 6th Level SANDSWALLOW* 
WHISPERING SAND SAND SHROUD 


WIND SHADOW 


Common spells are listed first, in SMALL Caps. Uncommon spells are in normal type. Rare spells are 
italicized. Very rare spells are Soréened. The “#” mark means check that spell’s Notes section. An 


asterisk (*) means the spell is restricted to a specialist wizard. 


1137 


—— — —— À————— 2 — a 


Chronomancer 


Unlike most other specialty wizards, including spell lists updated for this series, the chronomancer discipline allows 
certain spells one level lower than other specialties. The casting times do not change and these spells otherwise function 
as they are written. Core chronomancer spells, including the level-adjusted versions of other spells, are barred to other 
wizards, and are marked with an asterisk (*). 


Level 1 
DELAY IMAGE* 


Precognitive Sense* 
Lasting Breath 


Level 2 
Accelerate Plant Growth* 
Alternate Reality* 


Slowspell 


Level 3 

Articus's Melee Manager* 
Life Tether* 

Minor Paradox* 

Time Snare* 

Extension I* 


Plant Growth* 


Level 4 

VCI Tempon Dici" 
esley's j on 

Temporal $ 

Timeheal* 


Extension II* 
Slowspell, 10’ radius 


Level 5 

ACCELERATE ANIMAL GROWTH* 

CREATE SLIPGATE* 

EXTENSION III* 

TEMPORAL WALL* 

Articus’s Devolutionary 
Warrior* 


Level 6 

CONCEAL TEMPORAL ANOMALY* 
MAGIC MANAGER* 

PARADOX* 


Accelerate Metabolism — 
Dream Mage 


TEMPORAL EYE* 
TIMED STASIS 
Sands of Time # 


Wesley’s Delayed Damage* 
Prismal’sreversal — — — 


Level 8 

ACCELERATE LIFELINE* 
FORESIGHT* 

ITEM SUPERCHARGER* 
TEMPORAL STASIS* 
TIMEREAVER* 

TIME Stop* 

Protection From Time # 


Level 9 

MAJOR PARADOX* 
SEVER LIFELINE* 
TEMPORAL SHELL* 


Most spells of the Dream Mage are from the schools of enchantment/charm, conjuration/summoning, and divination; 
barred schools are invocation/evocation and necromancy; illusion/phantasms are rare. Optionally, their spells require the 
rare blue lotus blossom as a material component. 


PROTECTION FROM EVIL 
SLEEP 

UNSEEN SERVANT 
Detho’s Delirium 


SLUMBERWARD 
Waves OF WEARINESS 
WHISPERING WIND 


3rd Level 
HEALING DREAM 
PROTECTION FROM 

Evi, 10’ RADIUS 
PROTECTION FROM ILLUSIONS 
Ray OF PARALYSIS 


SLEEP OF HORROR 
SLUMBER 

SUGGESTION 
WRAITHFORM 

TasiRIN'S HAUNTED SLEEP 


4th Level 
ConsuRE DREAM OBJECT 


PROTECTION FROM 
Possession, 10’ RADIUS 

SLEEPWALKING 

TRUE DREAM 

TRUE NIGHTMARE 


5th Level 

CONJURE NIGHTMARE 

DREAM 

DREAM GLOBE 

MIND-CONTROL INVISIBILITY 

PROTECTION FROM 
ILLUSIONS, 10' RADIUS 

READ OBJECT 

SEEMING 

SLEEPLESS CURSE 


6th Level 

ALTER DREAM 
BLENDING 

GREATER SPELLDREAM 
MASS SUGGESTION 
PROJECT IMAGE 

TRUE SEEING 


7th Level 

CURSE OF FORGETFULNESS 
MINDSPIN 

LULLABY 

SEQUESTER 


8th Level 


BINDING 
ENDLESS SLUMBER 
MAZE 


9th Level 
DISMIND 


WEIRD 
Phezult’s Sleep of Ages 


e aa ea ea he ae 


1138 


~ Frost Mage " 


Deathmaster 


The deathmaster is an evil necromancer specialist who must become a lich before achieving 21st level. At 20th level the 


rate of aging doubles. 


Ist Level 

ANIMATE SKELETONS 
ANIMATE ZOMBIES 
CAUSE LIGHT WOUNDS 
FEATHER FALL 

PLANT DEATH 
PRESERVE DEAD 
PROTECTION FROM Goop 
SCARE 

SHIELD 

UNDEAD SERVANT 
WRITE 


3rd Level 

DELAY DEATH 

DEATH SIGHT 

FEIGN DEATH 

UNDEAD SUMMONING I 

PROTECTION FROM Goop, 10' 
RADIUS 

RAY OF PARALYSIS 

TONGUES 


4th Level 

CHARM UNDEAD 

Dic 

FEAR 

ICE STORM 

LiFE FORCE TRANSFER 
MASK OF DEATH 
SHADOW SUMMONING 
WALL OF Ice 


5th Level 

ANIMATE DEAD 
CLOUDKILL 

CONE OF COLD 
DEATHMASTER'S VIAL 
GHAST CREATION 


Frost Mage 


MAGIC JAR 
MUMMY PRODUCTION 


6th Level 

DEATH FoG 

DEATH SPELL 

IMBUE UNDEAD WITH SPELL 
ABILITY 

TELEPORT DEAD 


7th Level 

CONTROL UNDEAD 

HARM 

FINGER OF DEATH 

NEGATIVE PLANE PROTECTION 


8th Level 
DEATH LINK 
DEATHSHROUD 
TRAP THE SOUL 
UNDEAD AIDES 


9th Level 

DEATH WARD 
ENERGY DRAIN 
MASTER UNDEAD 
UNDEAD CREATION 


Frost mages are a combination of air, water, and enchantment/charm magics, with a few "northern lights." 


1st Level 

COLOR SPRAY 
FROST FINGERS 
FRosT SHROUD 
Gemidan's Icicle 
Precipitation 
Snilloc's Snowball 
Zala's Icejacket 


2nd Level 

Deny COLD 

Foc CLOUD 

RAY OF ENFEEBLEMENT 
WHISPERING WIND 
Frostfire 

Ice Knife 

Snilloc's Snowball Swarm 
Mist Magic 


LIGHTNING BOLT 


PROTECTION FROM COLD 
Cloudburst 

Hold Vapor 

Dissipate Vapor 


4th Level 

ICE STORM 

RAINBOW PATTERN 

SOLID Foc 

WALL OF ICE 

Bands Of Ice 

Leomund’s Secure Shelter 


5th Level 
CONE OF COLD 
PROTECTION FROM 

Corp 15' Rapius 
Mind Fog 
Calm Wind 
Mind Control Invisibility 
Otiluke’s Polar Screen 


6th Level 

CONTROL WEATHER 
DEATH FoG 

INVISIBLE STALKER 
Otiluke’s Freezing Sphere 


7th Level 

DRAGON BREATH (WHITE) 
Ice BLIGHT 

PRISMATIC SPRAY 
PROTECTION FROM HUNGER 
AND THIRST 

SIMULACRUM 

VISION 

WARDMIST 


8th Level 

LIGHTNING STORM 
Power WORD, BLIND 
SINK 


9th Level 
CRYSTALBRITTLE 
GATE 


" cum MEME CRIME D EA EE cel 


1139 


^ Gypsy " 


Gypsy 
Gypsy spellcasters tend to be women. In addition to the spells listed, the spells from the schools of Enchantment/Charm 
and Divination are favored. Spells from this list might also be allowed to the Vistani in the RAVENLOFT setting. 


2nd Level 3rd Level 5th Level 
NATURE CALL CURSE Or THE GYPsiEsS* CHARM ANIMALS* 
SUMMON EQUINE BEINGS* Detect LYCANTHROPE 
ESP (Witcu’s) HEALING DREAM 
HEARTCALL 
Love CHARM 
Healer Mage (Optional) 


Wizards with these skills are not recommended for general campaign settings, but a DM may wish to include them in al- 
ternative settings. Their spell list can be built from the priest spheres of Healing and Necromancy, except that the re- 
versed, harmful effects are not available. Schools barred include alteration, conjuration, greater divination, 
illusion/phantasm, invocation/evocation, all spells of necromancy save those that have healing or curing effects, and all 


other specialty schools, Universal spells are allowed. 


Ist Level 

BLOOM 

CURE LiGHT WOUNDS 
DETECT DISEASE 
EMPATHY 

FRIENDS 

LIGHT 

MENDING 

PROTECTION FROM EVIL 
SLEEP 


2nd Level 

BLOODBRIDGE 

CONTINUAL LIGHT 

CURE MODERATE WOUNDS 
Detect POISON 

Detect EviL 

FORGET 

PRESERVATION 

RESTORE STRENGTH 

SLOW POISON 


3rd Level 
CALM 
CURE BLINDNESS/DEAFNESS 
HOLD PERSON 
HOLD POISON 
RAY OF PARALYSIS 
REMOVE PARALYSIS 
PROTECTION FROM 
Evil, 10’ RADIUS 


4th Level 

CHARM MONSTER 

CURE SERIOUS WOUNDS 

NEUTRALIZE POISON 

PROTECTION FROM 
POSSESSION, 10’ RADIUS 

EMPATHIC WOUND TRANSFER 

UNFAILING ENDURANCE 


Common spells are listed first, in SMALL Caps. Uncommon spells are in normal type. Rare spells are 
italicized. Very rare spells are Screened. The “#” mark means check that spell’s Notes section, An 
asterisk (*) means the spell is restricted to a specialist wizard. 


1140 


5th Level 

BONE GROWTH 

CURE CRITICAL WOUNDS 
DisPEL Evi 

Nulathoe's Nineman 


6th Level 

HEAL 

RAISE DEAD 
STONE TO FLESH 


7th Level 
BANISHMENT 
RESTORATION 


8th Level 
ANTIPATHY/SYMPATHY 
REGENERATE 


9th Level 
RESURRECTION 
LIFEWATER 


^ Hedge Wizard " 


Hedge Wizard 


The hedge wizard is usually a minor local NPC wizard of 9th level or less. No spell of 5th level or higher is universal for them. 
Their spells typically come from the enchantment/charm and divination schools, alterations of the more common sort and con- 
juration/summoning spells of 3rd level or less. The 7th level spell, rebinding, is probably the peak of their powers. The DM 
might allow 9th-level hedge wizards to duplicate this spell as an act of magical fabrication, following the general rules for cre- 


ating magical items from the DMG. 


Ist Level 

AFFECT NORMAL FIRES 
ALARM 

CHANGE SELF 
CHARM PERSON 
DiviNING ROD 
MEND 

MESSAGE 
PROTECTIVE AMULET 
SHARPEN 

Emirikol's Question 


2nd Level 

EVERWATCHING SKULL 

DEEP POCKETS 

FORGET 

GLITTERDUST 

INSATIABLE THIRST 
IRRITATION 

SEAL MOUTH 

Nimodes' Major Delousing* 
Nimodes' Unseen Butler* 


3rd Level 

BEWILDER 

CALM 

MINOR MALISON 

PLANT ENTRAPMENT 
PHANTOM STEED 

PROTECTION FROM COLD/FIRE 
SUGGESTION 

WIZARD SIGHT 

Woop SHAPE 


4th Level 

DETECT SCRYING 
COUNTERSPELL IMMUNITY 
FIRECHARM 

FIRETRAP 

FUMBLE 

MAGIC MIRROR 

PLANT GROWTH 
Leomund’s Tiny Hut 
Vision Stone 


5th Level 

DISMISSAL 

ENHANCE PLANT 
FABRICATE 

FALSE VISION 

HEDGE ENCHANTMENT* 
MAGIC STAFF 


6th Level 
BLENDING 
RECHARGE 
WIZARD SEAL 


7th Level 
CHARM PLANTS 
REBINDING 


| o—————————— HÀ ua( 


Incantatrix 


This extremely rare human or half-elf specialty wizard from the F 
that affects magic. The specialty requires a minimum Intelligence of 13 and Wisdom 12, This list contains only the spe- 
cialty spells. Barred schools include those spells of conjuration/summoning, illusion/phantasm, invocation/evocation, 
and necromancy, save those crosslisted with the schools of abjuration, alteration, or on this list. 


Realms setting focuses on metamagic, magic 


Otto's Chime Of Release 


2nd Level 
FoRGET 

KNOCK 

SENSE SHIFTING 


3rd Level 

ALACRITY 

AUGMENTATION I 

DisPEL MAGIC 

FAR REACHING I 
MALADWEOMER 

MINOR MALISON 

SQUARING THE CIRCLE 
Drawmij’s Marvelous Shield 


4th Level 
DILATION I 


Rary's Spell Enhancer 


5th Level 

DISMISSAL 

EXTENSION II 

FAR REACHING III 

FEEBLEMIND 

LOWER RESISTANCE 

MAGIC STAFF 

PIERCE MAGIC RESISTANCE 

WALL Or FORCE 

Bigby's Interposing Hand 

Jonstal's Double Wizardry 

Mordenkainen's Involuntary 
Wizardry 

Rary's Mind Shield 


FORCECAGE 

INTENSIFY SUMMONING 
PERSISTENCE 

PowER WORD STUN 
Rusy RAY Or REVERSAL 
SEMIPERMANENCY 


SPELL TURNING 


STEAL ENCHANTMENT 

STEALSPELL 

WEIRDSHIELD 

Mordenkainen’s Penultimate 
Cogitation 

Simbul's Synostodweomer 


8th Level 


AU ER im oe e PR E EHE NE 


1142 


^ Nature Mage rd 


Nature Mage 
If the DM allows this type of wizard, a specialty spell lists can be built from the priest spheres of Animal and Plant. 
Barred schools include conjuration/summoning (save spells available through the Animal Sphere), greater divination, il- 
lusion/phantasm, invocation/evocation, and necromancy. In addition, the Nature wizard is allowed only Alteration spells 


that transform creatures or that are also allowed to Elemental wizards of air, earth, or water. 


1st Level WATER BREATHING 6th Level 
ANIMAL SANCTUARY Woop SHAPE BLENDING 
BLACKTHORNS Leomund’s Tiny Hut CONJURE ANIMALS 
BLOOM Maximilian's Stony Grasp CONTROL WEATHER 
CHARM PERSON Mordenkainen’s Defense DEATH FOG 
DANCING LIGHTS Against Nonmagical Reptiles LOWER WATER 
Fist OF STONE And Amphibians PART WATER 
MOONGLOW Mordenkainen's Protection From STONE To FLESH 
PRECIPITATION Insects And Arachnids Drawmij's Merciful 
SOOTHE THE BEAST Nystul’s Golden Revelation Metamorphosis 
Murdock’s Feathery Flyer 
Tenser’s Eye of the Tiger 4th Level 7th Level 

CHARM MONSTER CHARM PLANTS 
2nd Level FEAR CONTROL LYCANTHROPE 
ACCELERATE PLANT GROWTH HALLUCINATORY TERRAIN SUMMON WIND 
CAT'S GRACE MASSMORPH PROTECTION FROM HUNGER AND 
DETECT POISON PROTECTION FROM THIRST 
ENHANCED OLFACTION LYCANTHROPES, 10’ RADIUS VIPERGOUT 
FoG CLoup PROTECTION FROM VISION 
INSATIABLE THIRST PLANTS, 10' RADIUS SEQUESTER 
MIMICRY SoLID FoG 
Moon RUNE SUMMON LYCANTHROPE 8th Level 
NATURE CALL WARD AGAINST CHARMS ANTIPATHY/SYMPATHY 
Pit Laeral's Aqueous Column RISING COLOSSUS 
PROTECTION FROM BIRDS Ivy's Irresistible Scent SCREEN 
PROTECTION FROM PLANTS STORM 
SUMMON SWARM 5th Level SUNBURST 
Maximilian's Earthen Grasp ANIMAL GROWTH 

CALM WIND 9th Level 
3rd Level CHARM ANIMALS IMPRISONMENT 
DETECT CHARM ENHANCE PLANT SHAPE CHANGE 
CLOUDBURST HOLD MONSTER Succor 
DisPeL FOG INSECT SIGHT 
EAGLE VISION SPEAK WITH PLANTS 
LIGHTNING BOLT TRANSMUTE Rock To MupD 
PLANT ENTRAPMENT WATER BOMB 
REMOVE SMELL 


Common spells are listed first, in SMALL Caps. Uncommon spells are in normal type. Rare spells are 
italicized. Very rare spells are S6régned. The *£" mark means check that spell's Notes section. An 
asterisk (*) means the spell is restricted to a specialist wizard. 


1143 


—-«——"——————ns4—Ó[Ó 


Paramander 


A paramander is a rare from of paladin/mage with a unique spell list. The paramander is restricted to this list and other- 
wise functions as a wizard, with the ability to wear armor and cast spells. Except as listed, the following spells are 
summonings, invocation/evocations, necromancies, named spells, and charm person 

(which is received later). First-level spells are gained at 8th level. The special spells in italic become possible as follows: 


barred: abjurations, conjuration/: 
3rd level spell at 12th level paramander, 4th at 14th level, and Sth at 16th level. 


Ist Level KNOW ALIGNMENT CONFUSION 
AFFECT NORMAL FIRES LEVITATION DIMENSION DooR 
BURNING HANDS LOCATE OBJECT EXTENSION I 
Detect MAGIC Maaic MOUTH FEAR 
ERASE SCARE GUARDS AND WARDS 
FEATHERFALL STRENGTH LovALTY* 
FLARE WiZARD LOCK POLYMORPH OTHER 
HOLD PORTAL SPELLTRAP* 
IDENTIFY 3rd Level 
LiGHT CACHE* Sth Level 
MAGIC MISSILE CLAIRAUDIENCE AZURE FLAME* 
MESSAGE CLAIRVOYANCE CONJURE ELEMENTAL’ 
READ PARAMANDIC Maaic* DisPEL MAGIC CONTACT OTHER PLANE 
SHOCKING GRASP EXPLOSIVE RUNE ENCHANTED MIRRORS* 
WRITE FLY MAGIC JAR 

Gust or WIND QuESTION BALL* 
2nd Level DispelGood/Evil' Stow MUTATION* 
AUDIBLE GLAMER Fireball’ 
CONTINUAL LIGHT Lightning Bolt ! granted at 12th level 
DETECT INVISIBILITY ? granted at 14th level 
FLAMING SPHERE 4th Level * granted at 16th level 
Foc CLoup CHARM PERSON? 
INVISIBILITY CHARM MONSTER 

Red Wizards Of Thay 

The Red Wizards of Thay are a group of evil wizards located in the Forgotten Realms setting. Organized into branches 


corresponding to the Schools of Philosophy, thir activities are often opposed by the Seven Stier and tha Humpa This 
list can be used is in addition to the basic school lists. 


1st Level 

AURA FIRE 

CIRCLE 

SUMMON UNDEAD 
Nybor's Gentle Reminder 


2nd Level 

CiRCLE DANCE 

ComBusT 

CREATE ENCHANTED TATTOO 
DAZZLE 

DETECT POISON 

FLAME DAGGER 

PowER WORD, SLEEP 
PROTECTION FROM POISON 
FIND TRAPS 


3rd Level 
ASSIST 


CHANT OF THE RED WIZARDS 


Find Traps 


Nybor’s Mild Admonishment 


4th Level 
DISFIGURE 
FiRE GATE 
FiRE LANCE 


Negate Magical Weapon 


5th Level 


CREATE CHOSEN ONE 


FiRE STONES 


6th Level 

ANIMATE DREAD WARRIOR 
ACID RAIN 

CONTROL WINDS 


7th Level 

Nybor's Joyful Voyage 
Nybor's Stern Reproof 
Simbul's Synostodweomer 


Nybor's Wrathful Castigation 
Simbul's Skeletal Deliquescence 


9th Level 
SPELL-LASH 


FR — n và 


1144 


^ —À 


Savant 
Savants are wise and powerful NPCs. Their primary function is to act as sages and mentors for player characters. They 
should be treated as Greater Divination specialist wizards, in addition to their specialized areas of knowledge. Savants are 
somewhat like bards in that potentially no spell is outside the ability of an individual savant to master, though most tend 
toward the schools of abjuration, enchantment/charm, and in rare cases, necromancy. All named spells are uncommon, all 
the rest are common. 


Ist Level SEE HIDDEN Doors 7th Level 
COMPREHEND LANGUAGE TONGUES Duo-DIMENSION 
Detect UNTRUTH REBINDING 
ERASE 4th Level SPELL DRAIN 
IDENTIFY DIVINATION ENHANCEMENT VISION CRYSTAL 
MESSAGE PHASE SHIFT Drawmij's Instant Summons 
WRITE ULTRAVISION 

WIZARD EYE 8th Level 
2nd Level DEMAND 
Detect Evit/Goop 5th Level MIND BLANK 
ESP CONTACT OTHER PLANE SCREEN 
KNOW ALIGNMENT FALSE VISION SYMBOL 
KNow FACTION Lire STEAL 
KNOW INTENT READ OBJECT 9th Level 
PROJECTED MAGNIFICATION FORESIGHT 

6th Level POWER WORD, BANISHMENT 
3rd Level CONTINGENCY Mordenkainen's Disjunction 
CLAIRAUDIENCE LEGEND LORE 
CLAIRVOYANCE TRUE NAME 
INFRAVISION Mordenkainen's Lucubration 
MATERIAL 
SECRET PAGE 

Sea Mage 


Sea mages are wizards from sea-going cultures. Unlike a water elementalist, a Sea Mage is concerned primarily with the 
sea: its creatures, its hazards, and those who sail upon it. Their monster summoning spells can be used only to summon 
aquatic creatures. 


1st Level 3rd Level NAUTICAL BALL LIGHTNING 
FEATHER FLOAT DisPEL FoG MONSTER SUMMONING III 
HOLD PorTAL Gust OF WIND 
GREASE MONSTER SUMMONING I 6th Level 
LIGHT NAUTICAL IRONWOOD CHAIN LIGHTNING 
MENDING PRESERVE WOOD CONTROL WEATHER 
OILSKIN PROTECTION FROM NORMAL LOWER WATER 
SPIDER CLIMB MISSILES Oars To SNAKES 
WEATHERTELL WATER BREATHING MONSTER SUMMONING IV 
WALL OF FOG WATERY FORM PART WATER 
WIND SERVANT Woop Rot 
2nd Level 
BIND 4th Level 7th Level 
CONTINUAL LIGHT ELEMENTAL CONTROL MONSTER SUMMONING V 
FIREPROOF TONGUES SUMMON WIND 
Foc CLOUD MONSTER SUMMONING II WHIRLPOOL 
KNOCK SARGASSO 
LEVITATE SoLip FoG 8th Level 
Mass Jump Evard’s Black Tentacles DEEP DELVE 
SHARK BOLT MONSTER SUMMONING VI 
WEB 5th Level WATERSPOUT 
WHISPERING TIDE AIRY WATER 
Calder’s Starry Sky CALM WATER 9th Level 
Immurk's Distraction CALM WIND MAELSTROM 
CLOUDKILL MONSTER SUMMONING IV 
CONJURE ELEMENTAL (WATER) TIDAL WAVE 
FABRICATE 


-_ eT eee ee eru o T 


1145 


^ The Seven Sisters m 


The Seven Sisters 


These spells are used by the Seven Sisters and their apprentices. Unmarked spells have been shared with certain Harpers. 
An asterisk (*) means only the Seven Sisters and their apprentices have the spell. A double dagger tł means the spell is 


unique to the individual 


Ist Level 

GHOSTHARP 

TURTLE Soup* 

Laerel's Dancing Whip 
Storm's Frozen Moment* 


2nd Level 
Alustriel's Fang 
Laeral's Cutting Hand 


3rd Level 

LIGHTNING REFLECTION* 
Elminster's Multiple Mouths* 
Laeral's Raging Griffon 
Storm's Swordfire* 


4th Level 

BLOOD LIGHTNING* 
IRON MAIDEN 
SHADOW DANCE* 
SWORDSHUN* 
Alustriel's Mantle 


Galather's Gnostic Chain 
Galkyn's Bolt 

Laeral's Gesture* 

Ottar's Mask* 


5th Level 
FLESHSHIVER 
MOONCLOAK 
PHANTOM BLADE 
Laeral's Disrobement 
Melisander's Harp 
Storm's Spell Thrust* 


6th Level 
DOUBLE STEEL 
SHADOWSTEAL 
SKELETAL BRIDE 


7th Level 

ANTICIPATION 

Alustriel's Improved Mantle 
Alustriel's Sword Of Stars 


Storm Mage 


Simbul's Spell Sequencertt 
Simbul's Spell Supremacy* 
Simbul's Synostodweomer 


8th Level 

DWEOMERDENY 

LiGHTNING RING 

NET Or STARS* 

Laeral's Invisible Blade 
Simbul's Skeletal Deliquescence 
Syluné's Absolute Immunity 


9th Level 

Eye Or MysrRA* 

Eye Or POWER 

RINGWEAVE* 

SPELLSTORM* 

Laeral's Crowning Touch tt 
Simbul's Spell Sequencertt 


Storm mages are wizards who specialize in the study, creation, and control of storms and their effects. They tend to be 
solitary and found mostly in wilderness or savage settings. 


1st Level 
DANCING LIGHTS 
PRECIPITATION 
SHOCKING GRASP 
MAGIC MISSILE 
WEATHERTELL 


2nd Level 
LIGHTNING STRIKE 
Ripe THE WIND 
PYROTECHNICS 
STINKING CLOUD 


3rd Level 

BALL LIGHTNING 
CLOUDBURST 
DisPEL FOG 

FLY 

Gust OF WIND 
LIGHTNING BOLT 


4th Level 

CONFUSION 

ICE STORM 

HAILCONE 

PROTECTION FROM ELECTRICITY 
SHOCK SHIELD 

THUNDERSTAFF 

WIND BREATH 


5th Level 

CHAOS 

Cone Or CoLp 

CONJURE ELEMENTAL 
(AIR/WATER) 

Tenser's Primal Fury 


6th Level 

CONTROL WINDS 

CHAIN LIGHTNING 

LIGHTNINGCLOAK 

PROTECTION FROM ELECTRICITY, 
10' RADIUS 


7th Level 

CYCLONE CHARIOT 
REVERSE GRAVITY 

RuBY Ray OF REVERSAL 
SUMMON WIND 
Lysander’s Bladestorm 


8th Level 
INCENDIARY CLOUD 
LIGHTNING STORM 
SHOOTING STARS 
STORM 
WATERSPOUT 


9th Level 

MAELSTROM 

SKYCASTLE 

SUMMON Cosmic STORM 
TIDAL WAVE 


CCL ee Mem a 


1146 


~ Watch-Wizards Guild "d 


Weather Mage 
Weather mages tend to come from more civilized or agrarian areas. They study weather in general, and attempt to master 
the full range of natural effects. In general, they are not as wild as storm mages. 


Ist Level SKYWRITE INVISIBLE STALKER 
CONTROL VAPOR WIND WALL PROTECTION FROM ELECTRICITY, 
FROST FINGERS 10’ RADIUS 
FRosT SHROUD 4th Level Static FIELD 
PRECIPITATION GASEOUS FORM TRANSMUTE WATER To DUST 
WALL OF FoG GLOOM Woop Rot 
WEATHERTELL ICE STORM Otiluke’s Freezing Sphere 
Nystul’s Dancing Werelight PROTECTION FROM ELECTRICITY 
Nystul’s Flash RAINBOW PATTERN 7th Level 

SOLID FoG CYCLONE CHARIOT 
2nd Level VAMPIRE MIST ELECTRIC Bow 
CONTINUAL LIGHT WALL OF IcE NEUTRALIZE GAS 
Deny COLD/DENY FIRE WiND BREATH SUFFOCATE 
Foc CLOUD SUMMON WIND 
INSATIABLE THIRST 5th Level 
INVISIBILITY CONJURE ELEMENTAL (AIR) 8th Level 
Mist MAGIC THROBBING BONES AIRBOAT 
Moon RUNE CALM WATER LIGHTNING STORM 
RIDE THE WIND CALM WIND SCREEN 
WHISPERING WIND PROTECTION FROM FIRE/COLD, STORM 
ZEPHYR 15' RADIUS WATERSPOUT 

Otiluke's Polar Screen 
3rd Level 9th Level 
CLOUDBURST 6th Level DRAGONSHAPE 
GROUND FoG CHAIN LIGHTNING ELEMENTAL AURA 
GusT OF WIND CONTROL WEATHER INTENSIFY NATURE 
DISSIPATE VAPOR CONTROL WINDS Windwar 
LIGHTNING BOLT DEATH FoG 


Watch-Wizards Guild Of Waterdeep 


The Watch-Wizards Guild of Waterdeep prevents spellcasters from getting out of hand in that city. In particular, they 
are charged with stopping wizard duels and other acts of magical mayhem in the principal city of the Realms. 


Ist Level Gemidan 5 Paralytic Missile 4th Level 
LIGHTNING BuG Wound Bind Duhlark’s Long Reach 
TREMBLING HORN Life Field 
Disarm 3rd Level Life Bolt 
Slingstar FEARFIRE 
LIGHTNING ROD 
2nd Level Healing Touch 
BATTERING RAM Gamalon 5 Fiery Backlash 
NET 


Common spells are listed first, in SMALL Caps. Uncommon spells are in normal type. Rare spells are 
italicized. Very rare spells are Seed. The “#” mark means check that spell’s Notes section. An 
asterisk (*) means the spell is restricted to a specialist wizard. 


1147 


~ Witch r 


Witch 
Many witches are evil NPCs run by the DM; otherwise, witches have much in common with hedge wizards. Witches 
sometimes form covens of nine or thirteen members, and some spells require the entire coven. If witches are allowed 
other spells, their favored schools are conjuration/summoning, enchantment/charm, and greater divination. Also, good 
witches tend toward abjuration, Neutral witches tend toward illusion/phantasm, and Evil witches tend toward necro- 


mancy. Optionally, good witches might be allowed to cast the reverses of the harmful necromancy spells. 


1st Level CONTINUAL DARKNESS SEDUCTION VI 
CHANGE SELF DISSIPATE VAPOR STONE To FLESH 
CHARM MAN I INVISIBILITY Warps Or DEFENSE* 
CONTROL VAPOR LiGHTNING BOLT 
Cause LiGHT WOUNDS Mystic ROPE 7th Level 
FIND FAMILIAR PHANTOM LIGHT CONTROL LYCANTHROPE 
Maaic Disk PLANT ENTRAPMENT Curse Or FORGETFULNESS 
MENDING SEDUCTION III HARM 
MINOR QUEST LIMITED WISH 
PHANTASMAL FORCE 4th Level LOVE 
PROTECTIVE AMULET CHARM MONSTER SEDUCTION VII 
REFLECTED IMAGE CONTROL FLUID VISION CRYSTAL 
SEDUCTION I FiRE TRAP 
Nystul's Dancing Werelight HALLUCINATORY TERRAIN 8th Level 

PLANT GROWTH CHARM MAN III 
2nd Level POISON DISPEL ENCHANTMENT 
CHARM MAN II SHOCK SEDUCTION VIII 
Detect GOOD SUMMON SPIRIT Witcu’s DEATH SPELL 
DETECT INVISIBILITY SEDUCTION IV YOUTH 
ESP* Mass Polymorph 
HOLD PERSON 5th Level Rusting Touch 
LOCATE OBJECT CAUSE CRITICAL WOUNDS 
NATURE CALL CHARM ANIMAL 9th Level 
PACIFY CONTROL UNDEAD* CIRCLE OF BLINDNESS* 
Pir IMMUNITY TO POISON AND COMBINE 
SEAL MOUTH DISEASE* DISINTEGRATE FLESH 
SEDUCTION II PRODUCE FLAME* INTENSIFY NATURE 
SPEAK IN TONGUES SEDUCTION V REFLECTION 
WITCH'S GLAMOR SPIRIT FORM SEEK 

WEAKNESS SOLIDIFY AIR 
3rd Level PARALYZING FIELD* 
CALL SPIRIT 6th Level PARALYZING PrT* 
CALM EVAPORATE FLUID VAPORIZE 
CLAIRVOYANCE GEAS VOLCANIC CIRCLE* 
CAUSE BLINDNESS OR DEAFNESS LEGEND LORE WEIGHT CONCENTRATION* 
COMFORT TRUE SEEING WircH'S BANISHMENT* 


REMOVE LIFE LEVEL 


Common spells are listed first, in SMALL Caps. Uncommon spells are in normal type. Rare spells are 
italicized. Very rare spells are gened. The “#” mark means check that spell's Notes section. An 
asterisk (*) means the spell is restricted to a specialist wizard. 


1148 


^^ Spell Lists by Race "d 


Spell Lists By Race 


These spells are generally restricted by race (marked *). Creatures with these spells can usually draw from the 
common spells of the general list as well. A spell marked (#) has additional information in the Note section of the spell 
text. Most of these races have access to the common spells from the general list as well. 


Alhoon 
(Undead mind flayers.) 


Ist Level 
DEFLECTION* 
DETECT LiFe* 


2nd Level 
DELAYED LiGHT* 
FANG Fist* 
POISONSTAR* 
MIND MANTLE* 


3rd Level 
IMPROVED MIND MANTLE* 


4th Level 
DANCING WEAPON 


5th Level 
DARKBOLT* 


Arcane 


These are the mysterious traders 
from the SPELLJAMMER setting. 


Ist Level 
READ ARCANE RUNES 


4th Level 
ARCANE RUNES 
Beholder 


4th Level 
CONTROL DEATH TYRANT # 


8th Level 
CREATE DEATH TYRANT # 


Dragon 


Spells seldom found as innate 


spell-like abilities; these are used 


by rare individual dragons that 
have wizard abilities. 


1st Level 
SHARPTOOTH* 


Aerial Acceleration* 
Aura Of Terror* 


3rd Level 

FIND FAMILIAR* 
VENOMDUST* 
PSEUDODRAGON* 
Blast Jewel* 


4th Level 

Focus Fear* 

Hoardguard* 

Firetrail* 
Winget ioa i 
5th Level 


Razorfangs* 
Breathblock* 


7th Level 
Contact Archetype* 
Door Of Death* 


8th Level 
Cold Curtain* 


Drow 


Ist Level 

CLING 

Spidereyes 

Immunity To Adherence* 
Masque Mask* 


2nd Level 


CiRCLE DANCE 

Skyhook 

Immunity To Spider Venom* 
Improved Spider Climb* 


3rd Level 

CLOAK Or INSANITY 
HAND Or DARKNESS* 
Create Darkness 
Dark Wings* 

Venom Bolt* 
Arachnophobia 


4th Level 
ACID BOLT 
BACKLASH 
HOVER 
SPIDER LEAP 


Spider Shape 


Sth Level 
WONDERFORM 
PASSWEB* 
SPIDERCLOAK ARMOR 


6th Level 
Summon Spider 


7th Level 
Vipergout 


8th Level 
DEATH SPIDER 


9th Level 
Wes OF SHADOWS* 


e—_—_—— mE cL 


1149 


Galeb Dhur 


6th Level 
Stone Barrier* 


GENIE CONTRACT 
SUMMON SHA'IR* 


Ghul 


These desert ghouls are found in 
the AL QADIM setting. 


5th Level 
DeaTH Bump* 


6th Level 
CONSTRUCT UNDEAD* 


N 
These arachnid slavers are found 
in the SPELLJAMMER setting. 


2nd Level 
VENOM Bite* 
SPIDER GOUT* 


3rd Level 
ARACHNOPHOBIA 


4th Level 
IDENTIFY RACE* 


5th Level 
Lethal Hatchling* 


8th Level 
Death Spider 


Phaerimm 


These weird, alien creatures are 
found in the Anauroch region of the 
FORGOTTEN REALMS setting, as well 
as Myth Drannor. The spell weave 
mythal is universal for them. 


Reggelid 
These Elf-like defilers are found 
in the Jagged Cliffs region of the 
DARK SUN setting. 


3rd Level 
ORGANIC DISRUPTION 


Undead 


Some spells can be cast only by 
undead spellcasters, 


2nd Level 
Greater Detect Undead* # 


4th Level 
Undead Master* 


8th Level 
GRAFT ITEM* 
GRAFT LiMB* 


1150 


An AD&D Glossary 


Ability: Any of the six natural traits that define a player charac- 
ter. These basic character traits are Strength, Dexterity, 
Constitution, Intelligence, Wisdom, and Charisma. 

Ability check: A 1d20 roll against an ability score (with pos- 
sible modifiers. A result equal to or less than the ability score is 
a success. 

Ability score: The numerical rating for an ability. Human 
norms range from 3 to 18, with the average being 8 to 10. 

AC: Abbreviation for Armor Class. 

Alignment: A character's basic attitude toward society and the 
forces of the universe. The character has one of nine possible 
alignments defined by Law-Neutral-Chaos and Good-Neutral- 
Evil (lawful good, chaotic evil, etc.). 

Area of effect: The area in which a magical spell or a breath 
weapon works on creatures unless they make a saving throw. 
Armor Class (abbr. AC): A rating for the protective value of 
armor, from 10 (no armor) to 0 (full plate) or even —10 (the best 
magical armor). 

Attack roll: The 1d20 roll that determines if an attack succeeds. 
If so, a second roll follows for damage. 

Breath weapon: The ability of a dragon or other creature to 
spew a substance out of its mouth, without making an attack 
roll. Those in the area of effect must roll a saving throw. 
Charisma (abbr. Ch): An ability score representing personal 
magnetism, persuasiveness, and ability to lead. 

Class: The specialized profession of a player character. 
Constitution (abbr. C): An ability score representing general 
physique, hardiness, and state of health. 

d: Abbreviation for dice or die. A roll for 2d6, for example, 
means that the player rolls two six-sided dice. 

d3: Roll 1d6, reading | and 2 as 1, reading 3 and 4 as 2, and 
reading 5 and 6 as 3. 

d4, d6, d8, d10, d12, and d20: Respectively,-a four-sided die, 
six-sided die, eight-sided die, ten-sided die, a twelve-sided die, 
and a twenty-sided die, 

d100: Either an actual 100-sided die or two different-colored 
ten-sided dice to be rolled as percentile dice. 

DMG: A reference to the DUNGEON MASTER Guide. 
Damage: The effect of a successful attack or other harmful 
effect, measured in hit points. 

Demihuman: A player character who is not human: a dwarf, clf, 
gnome, half-elf, or halfling. 

Dexterity (abbr. D): An ability score representing agility, re- 
flexes, hand-eye coordination, and the like. 

Dungeon Master (abbr. DM): The game judge, who moderates 
play and takes the role of creatures and NPCs encountered by 
the player characters. 

Encumbrance: The amount, in pounds, that a character is cur- 
rently carrying. This is an optional rule. 

Energy drain: The ability of a creature, especially undead, to 
drain energy in the form of class /evels from a character, in addi- 
tion to causing the normal loss of hit points. 

Experience points (abbr. XP): Points earned for completing ad- 
ventures, for solving problems, and for class-related activities. 
Accumulated XP allow the player character to rise in level in his 
class, becoming more powerful. 

Gaze attack: The ability of a creature, such as a basilisk, to 
attack simply by making eye contact with the victim. 

Hit Dice: The dice rolled to determine a creature's Ait points. 
Player characters usually receive one Hit Die per level they ad- 
vance in their class, up to a certain level. 

Hit points: A number representing: 1. How much damage a 
character can take before being killed (see Hit Dice). The hit 
points lost to injury can be regained later by rest or healing; 2. 
The damage an attack does, (determined by weapon or monster 
type)—this is subtracted from the character's total. 
Infravision: The ability of certain creatures to see in the dark. 
Infravision range is usually 60 feet. 


Initiative: The right to attack first in a combat round, usually 
determined by the lowest roll of a 10-sided die. 

Intelligence (abbr. /): An ability score representing memory, 
reasoning, and learning ability. 

Level: A measure of relative power of: 1. A player character in 
his class, 2. A spell effect (higher indicates greater power). 
Mage: A wizard who studies all magic in general. 
Maneuverability class (abbreviated MC): A ranking for flying 
creatures from A to E, reflecting their ability to turn easily in 
aerial combat. “A” is UFO movement, while “E” is extremely 
clumsy and unmaneuverable. 

Material component (abbr. M): A specific item that must be 
handled in some way during the casting of a magical spell. 
Melee: Hand-to-hand combat. 

Missile combat: Ranged combat with hand-hurled missile or 
devices such as bows and crossbows. 

Movement rate (abbr. MV): A number representing how far and 
fast a character can move in a round. A MV of 6 is 60 feet per 
round in a dungeon. 

Nonplayer character (abbr. NPC)-any character controlled by 
the DM instead of a player. 

Opposition school: A school of magic that is directly opposed 
to a specialist's school of choice; opposition school spells 
cannot be learned by a specialist wizard. 
Percentile dice: See 4/00. 

Player character (abbr. PC):A character in a role-playing game 
controlled by a player. 

Poison: A special attack form requiring a saving throw. 
Proficiency: A skill, not defined by a class, that can be learned 
by a character. The use of proficiencies is optional. 
Proficiency check: A roll of a 20-sided die to see if a character 
succeeds in doing a task. Success is a roll equal to or less than 
the relevant ability score, adjusted by any modifiers that apply. 
Race: A creature's species: human, dwarf, elf, orc, etc 
Reversible: The ability of a spell to be cast "backwards," to 
achieve the opposite of the usual effect. 

Round: In combat, about | minute, during which a character 
can accomplish one basic action. Ten rounds equal a turn. 

S: Abbreviation for somatic component. 

Saving throw: A die roll that allows a character to resist special 
attacks: poison, paralyzation, spells, breath weapons, and the 
like. A d20 is rolled, with a high roll successful. 
School of magic: One of nine different types of magic, based on 
the magical energy used. Wizards who concentrate on a single 
school are called specialists. 

Somatic component (abbr. S); Gestures used by a spellcaster to 
cast a specific spell. 

Specialist: A wizard who concentrates on a specific school of 
magic, as opposed to a mage, who studies all magic. 

Strength (abbr. 5): An ability score representing muscle power, 
endurance, and stamina. 

Surprise roll: A d10 roll made by the Dungeon Master to deter- 
mine if a character or group takes another by surprise. 

System shock: A percentage chance that a character survives 
major magical effects, such as being petrified. 

THACO: “To Hit Armor Class 0," the number rolled on 1d20 
that a character needs to hit a target with AC 0. 

Turn: Approximately 10 minutes (or rounds) in game time. Six 
turns equal one hour. 

Turn undead: An ability of a cleric or paladin to tum away an 
undead creature, such as a skeleton or a vampire. 

Verbal component (abbr. V): Specific words or sounds that 
must be uttered while casting a spell. 

Wisdom (abbr. W): An ability score representing intuition, judg- 
ment, common sense, and will power. 

XP: Abbreviation for experience points. 


1151 


Errata for Wizard Spell Compendium Volumes 1 to 3 


These errata are for the first printings of these volumes. 


Volume 1: 

Andrui's Baneful Backfire is from the WORLD OF 
GREYHAWK setting, add to Notes: (WoG). 

Articus s Melee manager and Articus s Devolutionary 
Warrior frequency is common or uncommon. 

Accelerate Metabolism should precede Accelerate Plant 
Growth. 

Alyssindra $ Summons frequency in the MYSTARA setting is 
common. 

Balliard s Rejuvenating Touch frequency in the MYSTARA 
setting is common or uncommon. 

Banishment is known to be in the Demonomicon of Iggwilv 
(WoG). 

Binding is known to be in the Demonomicon of Iggwilv 
(WoG). 

Blackmantle is also Shadow school, uncommon. 

Bloodline Corruption has a BIRTHRIGHT icon 

Bloodstone 5 Spectral Steed is also Shadow school, uncom- 
mon or rare. 

Blur is also Shadow school, common. 

Brannart Acidic Grip frequency in the MYSTARA setting is 
common. 

Callistram's Gondola frequency in the MYSTARA setting is 
common or uncommon. 

Cool—Pluma has a Maztica icon 

DeGras $ Pilfering Fingers frequency in the MYSTARA set- 
ting is common or uncommon. 

Destroy Undead has a RAVENLOFT icon. 

Disruption col 2, In 3, replace “destruction” with “disrup- 
tion." 


Dismissal and Dolor are known to be in the Demonomicon 
of Iggwilv (WoG). 

Drawmij s Instant Summons frequency is common or un- 
common; all other Drawmij spells are uncommon or 


rare. 
Drawmij s Lasting Breath casting time is 1. 
Drawmij 5 Light Step, add (WoG). 
Drawmij s Merciful Metamorphosis, add (WoG) 
All Drenal spells are “(Updated from DraGow Magazine.)" 
Drought —Hishna has Maztica icon 
“Most Common” list should be included in future printings. 


Volume 2 

Emirikol 5 Question was omitted (it appears here). 

Empathic Control, Empathic Link, and Empathic Seizure 
are also Necromancy school. 

Enhance is renamed Enhance Ability and the 5th paragraph 
is deleted (it duplicates the 4th). 

Enhanced Empathy is also Necromancy school. 

Evard's Black Tentacles frequency is common or uncom- 
mon. 


Ghoul Touch, para 1, line 3. Change “a halfling” to “or half- 


Improved Whispering Wind delete icon. 

Intensify Nature is 9th level. 

Itembane frequency in the MYSTARA setting is common. 

Jaggar s Strengthened Bastion frequency in the MYSTARA 
setting is common or uncommon. 

Janga s Jewel optional school is “Artifice”. 

Khazid s Procurement frequency is uncommon or rare. 

Lesser Sign of Sealing is 3rd level. 

Life Force Transfer optional school is “Artifice”. 

Lifesteal is listed as Life Steal. 


Lysander spells (all) have PLANESCAPE icons. 

Malec-Keth s Flame Fist frequency is uncommon or rare, 
Maximillian s Earthen Grasp frequency is uncommon or rare, 
Maximillian s Stony Grasp frequency is uncommon or rare. 
Melf 5 Minute Meteors frequency is common or uncom- 


mon. 
Memory delete Mentalism school. 
Metal Skin delete Alchemy school. 
Metal to Rust delete Alchemy school. 


Volume 3 

Table of Contents page numbers: Intro 579; How 579; 
Frequency 582; Icons 583; Mo 585; N 610; O 630; P 
651; Q 720; R 723: S 760; List 862. 

Night s Jambiya has an AL-QADIM icon. 

Rain of Terror has a RAVENLOFT icon. 

Remove Gate Ward, the reversed form of gate ward should 
be noted on page 742. 

Sand Gems Note: change "Known" to "Restricted". Delete 


Sandswallow Note: change "Known" to "Restricted". 
Delete “virtually...” 
Seduction—Witch, para 2 In 2, change “ “give” to "gives". 


Spirit Armor is restricted to necromancers and Shadow 
Mages; uncommon. 


Protection From Fiends 10' Radius: (Add) 

“...This spell fails instantly if the creature it is centered on 
crosses a dimensional or planar boundary of any sort; for 
example, plane shift, teleportation, phase shifting, entering 
or leaving an extra-dimensional space, or using a dimen- 
sional gate or portal." 


Add: Remove Gate Ward Reversed form, see gate ward. 
Rip Table: Replace entries in column | as follows: 


Leather: “10” to “15” 
Paper: "I9" to “20” 


Wood, thick: "8" to “10” 


1152 


ISBN 0-7869-1209-X 


| 52495 


91209 
Sug. Retail 
U.S. $24.95 CAN $32.95 


9"780786 


