Sea Book of 


ELVES 


Ro 


Advanced 


Player's Handbook Rules Supplement 


Credits 


Written by Colin McComb 
Edited by Dori Jean Watry 
Overseen and Advice Given by Steve Winter 
Color Illustrations by Brom, Larry Elmore, and John & Laura Lakey 
Black and White Art by Terry Dykstra 
Decorative Art by Robin Raab 
Typeset by Gaye O'Keefe 


Invaluable assistance or sustenance (in one form or another) given by L. Richard Baker III, Wolfgang Baur, Tim Beach, Wendy Bien- 
venu, Elaine Cunningham, William W. Connors, Jeff Dettweiler, Slade Henson, Brad "Sun Dog" Matheson, Roger Moore, Paul Nelis, 
Kevin Pohle, John Rateliff, Teresa W. and Thomas M. Reid, James M. Ward, and David Zenz. These people (including those listed in 
the other credits) sparked the creative urge, and thanks are due each of them. Special thanks are given to all the fantasy /sci fi writers 
who, in one way or another, influenced my writing. Thanks are also due all the gamers who have preceded me and inspired me. The 
Helm of Valor is dedicated to TSR's Siberia Six. Dedicated to the McCombs, the Garbetts, and the rest of my relatives. Thank you all. 


Special thanks from the editor to Timothy B. Brown and James M. Ward, for letting her do Elves in the second place and in the first. 


TSR, Inc. 

POB 756 

Lake Geneva 

WI 53147 U.S.A. 


TSR Ltd. 

120 Church End, Cherry Hinton 
Cambridge CB1 3LB 

United Kingdom 


ADVANCED DUNGEONS & DRAGONS, AD&D, DRAGONLANCE, DRAGON, FORGOTTEN REALMS, GREYHAWK, RAVENLOFT, and 


SPELLJAMMER are registered trademarks owned by TSR, Inc. AL-QADIM, DARK SUN, DUNGEON MASTER, DM, and the TSR logo are 
trademarks owned by TSR, Inc. 


Random House and its affiliate companies have worldwide distribution rights in the book trade for English language products of TSR, Inc. Distributed 
to the book and hobby trade in the United Kingdom by TSR Ltd. Distributed to the toy and hobby trade by regional distributors. 


This book is protected under the copyright laws of the United States of America. Any reproduction or other unauthorized use of the material or 
artwork contained herein is prohibited without the express written consent of TSR, Inc. Printed in the U.S.A. 
Copyright 9 1992 TSR, Inc. АП Rights Reserved. 


ISBN 1-56076-376-0 2131 


© 


ELVEN LORE 
Introduction о... 4 
Chapter One: The Creation of Elves .............. 8 
Chapter Two: Variations on a Theme ............ 12 
Aquatic Elves. oo „ариван ауар 13 
Dark Elves rm 15 
Grey Elves E 16 
High Elves qe 18 
Sylvan Elves .................................. 19 
Half Elves is eases aS SA 20 
Elves of the Worlds ............................ 22 
AL-QADIM™ Campaign World ................. 22 
DARK SUN" Campaign World ................. 23 
DRAGONLANCE? Campaign World ............. 24 
FORGOTTEN REALMS? Campaign World ......... 25 
GREYHAWK? Campaign World ................. 26 
RAVENLOFT? Campaign World ................. 27 
SPELLJAMMER® Campaign World ............... 27 
Chapter Three: Physical Attributes .............. 30 
Physiology ................................... 31 
Communion ................................ 31 
ElvénSighE sess ean Sas a 32 
Manifestation ............................... 33 
The Reverie т. asia ceca e IR Ure as 34 
Resistance to Heat and Cold .................. 34 
Other Elven Abilities ......................... 36 
Stages of Life э.» езше же cid vel dyad eris 36 
Childhood ........ 22.0... usane 38 
Adolescence 2.222: e e Wer ey eae 38 
Adulthood 2.2.2... 00... ccc ccc ccc cece eens 38 
Middle Age ..................... m 38 
Old Аве MD 39 
Venerable Age .............................. 39 
Diets cest xL Se Y OE En M es 39 
Elven Interfertility ............................- 40 
The Elven Bond ............................... 40 
Elven Music: assesses бийк wq IO WR ean 41 
Chapter Four: Mental Attributes ................ 42 
Outlook: i22 ea 4G ees daw od Ose ead Ra RA es 43 
Individual Worth .................55........... 44 
Emotion and Годїс............................. 45 
Generational Splits ............................ 45 
Attitudes Toward Other Races ................... 46 
Chapter Five: Elven Society .................... 48 
The Elven Language ........................... 48 
Livelihood ......- eost ra КЫНЫК Ез 49 
Rituals «Secus ea tee se wanes xe d 50 
Elven Holy Days .............................. 53 
Chapter Six: The Elven Myths .................. 54 
The Legend of Fiona Cassiltenirra ................ 54 
Jarsali and the Treant .......................... 55 
Halimath's Pride ............................... 56 
Haranavei Koehlanna .......................... 57 
Caelestis- «ueber ER Ex Aa SERE aR 58 
Chapter Seven: The Death of Elves .............. 60 
Accidental or Violent Death .................... 62 
Funereal Ceremonies ........................... 63 
Chapter Eight: Elven Dwellings ................. 64 
The Grey Elves’ City ........................... 65 
The High Elves’ Tree Town ...................... 66 
The Sylvan Elves’ Encampment .................. 66 


ZI 0y AS gy Г = 977 


ETS 


ELVEN ROLE-PLAYING 


Chapter Nine: Optional Rules ................... 68 
Level Limit Expansion .......................... 69 
Extra Proficiencies ............................. 70 
Combat Modifiction ........................... 70 
Bladesong Fighting Style ...................... 70 
Archery Modifications ......................... 72 
Using Bows as Weapons ........................ 75 
Arrow Breakage and Loss ...................... 75 
Chapter Ten: Character Creation and Kits ........ 76 
Standard Elf Abilities .......................... 76 
The Elf Subraces: err pere rhe 77 
3.944 Mc" 82 
Priest Kit iacere ажык te prex ex erts 83 
Herbalist „асаасан eet 83 
Warrior Kits asas нги аже ssa 84 
Archer cesses RR TR ó tioni 84 
Wilderness Runner ........................ 85 
Windrider ........ 0.0... cece cece eel 86 
Mage/Thief Kits ............................. 87 
Elven Minstrel ............................ 87 
Spellfilcher ............ cece cece cere ee eens 87 
Fighter/Mage Kits ........................... 88 
Bladesinger =... eere Sad ean nea dass 88 
War Wizard .............................. 90 
Fighter/Thief Kit ............ ен енна 91 
Huntsman: -seor шойын Ех Be ana 91 
Fighter/Mage/Thief Kits ..................... 92 
Collector. 1:5. suse 92 
Infiltrator уке иннек x cies 94 

А Kit for Any Clas ......................... 94 
Undead Slayer ............................ 94 
Chapter Eleven: Elven Equipment ................ 96 
Peywine oo d vvevs e rey e. enam x pM BATT Ko 96 
Elven Harp "c" 96 
Honey Leather 4... ne rr e eR eR TS 97 
Sashling-. кәкре Ee Rer eate tare nes 97 
Thistledown ................... csse 98 
Elven Bow sese ieneetes tnaa annn ned heavens 98 
Arrows (Useful) ............................... 98 
Elven Plate Armor ........ Tm 99 
Chapter Twelve: The Magic of Elves ............ 100 
New Elf Spells. ............................... 101 
Magical Items ................................ 104 
Swords and Armor ......................... 104 
Helms of Valor ............................. 104 
Arrows (Enspelled) ......................... 105 
Arrows (Magical) .......................... 105 
Artificial Limbs .............................. 106 
Chapter Thirteen: Elven Campaigns ............. 108 
Campaign Worlds ............................ 110 
The Elf Campaign .......................... 112 
The Human Campaign ...................... 112 
The Dwarf Campaign ....................... 112 
The Evil World Campaign ................... 113 
The Aquatic World Campaign ................ 114 
The Outcast Campaign ...................... 114 
Appendices. .................................. 115 
Index. чулукка вое semen hee ehe RR Ыбы 115 
MC: Avariel (Winged Elf) ..................... 116 
MC: Cooshee crispe eorr RR ER 118 


Ре р | د‎ 1) D 


We do not deign to acknowledge the slander- 
ous propaganda spread by the stunted humans 
who call themselves dwarves. The little miners 
have always had a rather, shall we say, biased 
outlook on history and the true workings of re- 
ality. They call themselves the finest creatures 
to grace the worlds—with bodies like that, we 
suppose one would have to have an active fan- 
tasy life. 

For those graced with true vision, Elves com- 
prise the finest race in all the worlds. We are 
that which other races aspire to be: Our longev- 
ity, our beauty, and our craftsmanship are all 
the stuff of legends. Certainly, each of these at- 
tributes can be recreated in some fashion by the 
lesser races, but theirs is an artifice of face and 
form and creation—never as fine as those that 
come naturally to us. РА 

Our lives are long and filled with happiness, 
for we recognize the impermanence of all 
things, excepting ourselves. Indeed, we do not 
suffer death as do the mortals. Only through vi- 
olence, accident, or disease do we die at all. Al- 
though we vanish from the ken of mortal 
knowledge after hundreds of years of existence 
in this plane, you may rest assured that we con- 
tinue on elsewhere. Even those who perish on 
the battlefield do not truly die, but instead be- 
come part of the earth's cycle of growth and re- 
birth. Our spirits linger on, for we are 
intimately tied to the world and its core, Indeed, 
we are the integral part of that core. 

We would turn now to other matters, for to 
continue on in this vein would, no doubt, lead 
you to believe that we are boasting of elven 
prowess. We do not boast. Anyone who has 
seen even the slightest fraction of elven ability 
knows the truth of what we say within these 
pages. 

Yes, we are a proud race, but do we not have 
just cause? Are we not Elves— creatures of most 
wondrous might? Simply understand that we 
are what we are and that nothing you can do 
will change us—then may we become good 
friends. But beware: We are a complex race, and 
the workings of our lives will ever be a mystery 
to you, our dreams foreign from yours. You will 
never truly understand us, no matter how you 
try. 


4 * Introduction 


Sa CLO ASUS Ee OOS CE CPL СЕР OE OD GESAGT 


7^. nigmatic and powerful, elves have 

2 1727 dominated the fantasy landscape for 
NÆ years. Although their civilizations and 
powers have always been a mystery to those 
who travel in the realms of fantasy, their influ- 
ence is undeniably strong. Abandoned cities, 
lost technology, forgotten lore . . . all these 
things and more lie within the mystique of the 
elves. Their land, their culture, and their phi- 
losophy remain cryptic mysteries to those not 
blessed with the love of elves. 

No longer. With The Complete Book of 
Elves, many of the elves' mysteries are open 
for perusal. But take care with the informa- 
tion gleaned; some secrets of the elven way of 
life still remain hidden—knowledge forever 
forsworn from non-elves. Be forewarned: The 
pieces of fact and fiction learned within can, if 
incorrectly applied, spell destruction for those 
who misuse this knowledge. 


The AD& D? Game Elf 


Monstrous Compendiums 1 and II as well as 
the Plavers Handbook (PHB) present elves in 
some detail. Are those the final word on 
elves? Hardly not! Here, at last, is the book 
that deals with elves in depth, in all their myr- 
iad facets and mysterious ways. While this 
book may not answer every question about 
elves, it will provide answers and ideas for 
dealing with the typical elf. 

Although elves often follow the same pat- 
terns in their lifestyles and have similar 
thought processes, there is no such thing as a 
"typical" elf. Even more than with humans, no 
two elves are alike. They may react in a like 
way in various situations, but they are com- 
pletely different individuals. Elves have loves 
and hates, fears and superstitions, honors and 
ethics. To assume they are all the same griev- 
ously insults them. 

Chapters One through Eight deal with elven 
lore, including tendencies, societies, lives, and 
more. Chapters Nine through Thirteen detail 
elven role-playing. It is important to remem- 
ber that there are always exceptions to the 
rules, both those presented here and else- 


where. What is presented in this book is the 
"typical" elven way of life—facets that players 
can add to their favorite elf character. Ulti- 
mately, character creation is something best 
left to the imagination of the player and the 
mandates of the Dungeon Master. This book 
offers suggestions for such creation and for 
the role-playing of these elves. 


Like The Complete Book of Elves, the other 
books in the Complete Handbook (PHBR) se- 
ries offer useful advice on the creation of 
unique characters. However, none of these 
books is essential to the play of the game. All 
that is absolutely necessary for playing are the 
core rules: the Players Handbook and the 
DUNGEON MASTER" Guide (DMG). The 
other PHBR books are recapped below, and 
their usefulness to elf PCs is explained. 


e PHBR1, The Complete Fighters Hand- 
book, offers several character kits that work 
very well for elves (such as the Swashbuckler 
and the Cavalier), suiting elf temperaments 
and preferences. Other kits are less elven, but 
still offer interesting role-playing aspects. Still 
others, such as the Berserker and Beast-Rider, 
should be used only by savage elves or those 
who have no connection to elven life. 

The Complete Fighter contributes impor- 
tant fighting styles and offers more weapon 
proficiency rules. These can be especially use- 
ful to the elf PC, allowing him or her to dem- 
onstrate absolute mastery of a weapon. 
Furthermore, the section on combat rules 
adds an interesting flavor to a campaign. 


ә PHBR2, The Complete Thiefs Hand- 
book, is handy for those who wish to play elf 
thieves. The search for knowledge and in- 
triguing new items often leads elves to a life of 
crime, although this is often just a phase 
through which they pass. However, many of 
them find a natural talent for thievery; as 
such, The Complete Thief can provide sugges- 
tions on how to best deal with that thief. 


Whether the elf rogue is simply a street thief 
or one who leads such a life as a demonstra- 
tion of the impermanence of physical things to 
the shorter-lived races, there are myriad ideas 
for the player in this book. 


e PHBR3, The Complete Priests Hand- 
book, does not specifically deal with anything 
pertaining to elves. However, it is useful for 
creating entirely new deities for elves and for 
designing a new pantheon of gods. There are 
also specialty priests and new priest kits, but 
none of these are elf-specific. 


e PHBR4, The Complete Wizard's Hand- 
book. As an extraordinarily magic-oriented 
race, there is much in this book that players of 
elf PCs will find useful. Any wizard, no mat- 
ter his or her race, will find this book a trove 
of information. 


© РНВК5, The Complete Psionics Hand- 
book, is only useful if psionics are available in 
a campaign. If they are, then this book is a 
must. 


e PHBR6, The Complete Book of 
Dwarves, is useful to elf characters only as re- 
search on the dwarf races. However, dwarves 
and elves do not often exchange information 
of this sort. A Dungeon Master (DM) might 
prefer that his or her elf players not have ac- 
cess to this book. 


e PHBR7, The Complete Bard's Hand- 
book, is not recommended for the elf charac- 
ter, although it is a very useful book. The 
section on “Elf Minstrels” is especially helpful 
for those who wish to play a bardlike charac- 
ter of mixed elven descent. There is also a fine 
section on musical instruments and spells, 
which might prove useful for fleshing out an 
elf PC. Otherwise, there is little here for use 
with pure elves. Half-elves, however, will find 
the book invaluable. 


6 * Introduction 


House Rules 


Naturally, everything presented in this book is 
optional to each campaign. Just as the DM has 
the final say on whether any of the rules pre- 
sented in the core books (the PHB and DMG) 
apply to his or her campaign, so does the DM 
have the last word on whether to accept the 
ideas presented in this book. 

Remember, there are no right or wrong 
rules— whatever fits the style of the campaign 
is acceptable. As long as each rule is reason- 
able, appropriate, and fair, any additional 
house rules the DM cares to impose are per- 
missible. If the players do not like these new 
rules, they have the option of discussing them 
with the DM or choosing another campaign. 
On no account should players or DMs try to 
force their views regarding optional rules 
down another's throat— regardless of how ap- 
propriate that action may seem to be. 


Important Note 


Anyone using this book should be aware that 
it is designed for use with the AD&D® 2nd 
Edition game. References to the Player's 
Handbook and the DUNGEON MASTER" 
Guide refer to the AD&D 2nd Edition books. 
Those using older books must consult the in- 
dex of the first-edition books to find the sub- 
ject mentioned and ignore the page numbers 
mentioned herein. 

Furthermore, many of the rules mentioned 
in this book are dependent on the use of op- 
tional proficiency rules. It is strongly recom- 
mended that all players and DMs familiarize 
themselves with these rules in order to fully 
enjoy this book. Otherwise, they are cheating 
themselves out of the opportunity to fully ex- 
ploit the rules contained here. 

Lastly, since elves make no distinction be- 
tween male and female, the personal pro- 
nouns in this book alternate between genders. 
Not all examples will be only of “he” or "him"; 
some will consist of only "she" or “her” 

But, come: The elves are waiting. 


X28 


Rie 


CHAPTER 


(тед ND 
4 _ ں‎ 


of = Э; : 


LEED 


AAD Oy Ge M. 


The Creation of Elves 


S e KE БА : 


From the primordial turmoil at the center of 
the universe sprang the gods full-fledged, full- 
formed. Each claimed jurisdiction over certain 
effects, all being equally endowed with the 
power and force of the cosmos. They cooper- 
ated for the first (and the last) time to create the 
worlds. But some gods used their powers more 
wisely than their brethren. 

An early alliance formed among these wiser 
gods. They knew how to manipulate their 
power. This gathering of gods, who called 
themselves the Seldarine (or the Brothers and 
Sisters of the Wood), imparted their very es- 
sence into creating certain aspects of the worlds. 

While other gods squabbled over jurisdiction 
and possession of this virtue and that attribute, 
the Seldarine modified some of the lands, mak- 
ing their worlds lush and green and beautiful. In 
addition, they created vessels that would one 
day hold the spirit of the first sentient life to set 
foot upon these worlds—the race of beings 
known as Elves. They crafted these vessels with 
thought and care, and gave them extraordinary 
beauty. The other gods grew black with jeal- 
ousy, and they thirsted to imitate the Seldarine. 

These gods hastily fashioned their own ves- 
sels, vying against those created by the 
Seldarine. But they would not invest the time 
vital to creating a race, and so their results were 
flawed—the gods did not care. Their creations 
were nothing like those shaped by the Seldarine. 
Most were Monsters, creatures that would one 
day haunt the dreams of Elves. Of all the crude 
creations, only the vessel reserved for Man held 
a glimmer of potential, for they would one day 
have the ability to change the land as would the 
Elves. 

The gods of the new races tried too hastily to 
reproduce a feat that had taken the wiser gods 
eons. But neither group's constructs would not 
come to life until the historic meeting between 
Corellon Larethian and Gruumsh, leader of the 
Anti-Seldarine. 


—Larian Songshine, 
priest of Corellon Larethian 


8 è Chapter One 


ENS} LOW S CD); es, Sey, 


‘ gods have strangely little to say, leav- 
“© ing one to ponder it as may be. 

The elves believe that their religion is closer 
to actual history than are the religions of other 
races. There may be some truth in this belief, 
since the elves have such long lifespans, with 
memories to match. They have far fewer gen- 
erations between their creation and the 
present day. Thus, they claim, there has been 
far less dilution of the truth; unlike the other 
stories, they state, the elven chronicle is pure. 

The countless years that have passed since 
the beginning of the universe have seen hun- 
dreds of generations of elves. By way of com- 
parison, thousands—even millions—of 
generations of other races have lived and 
passed into dust during that time. Small won- 
der, then, that the elves feel their histories 
have been less tainted through the vagaries of 
time than those of other races. 

There are far fewer variations on the crea- 
tion story in the elf race than in any other. The 
humans have untold numbers, practically one 
for each town. The dwarves have several 
more, and they constantly change them to 
glorify their race and their tribe over others. 
Halflings and gnomes, too, have excessive 
myths, although they are less likely than 
dwarves to extol their own virtues in such a 
manner. Likewise, the orcs and other evil hu- 
manoids all have their favorite stories to com- 
fort them in their dank, smoky caves. 

Following is a continuation of the elven sto- 
ry of creation as told by Larian Songshine. 
While not necessarily an impartial retelling, it 
does manage to capture the essential ingredi- 
ents of the elven story of creation. 


i" F ' n the subject of elven mythology, the 


When the god Gruumsh saw the creation of 
the Seldarine, the Elves, he regarded it as an 
abomination—and he became enraged. For 
the first time, desire for blood pulsed in a 
god's veins. Gruumsh prepared to crush the 
Seldarine, and some gods flocked to his stand- 
ard while others stood aside. Still more, such 
as Moradin Soul-Forger and Garl Glittergold, 
aligned with the Seldarine, for they had— 
though not in conjunction with the Sel- 


OSEE A SUSCI КОҢ E SS EER SIO OR 


darine—set aside areas of the world for their 
own purposes. 

When the inflamed Gruumsh attacked Corel- 
lon Larethian, the leader of the Seldarine, a 
mighty battle began: the Godswar. How long it 
raged over the pristine fields of the planets, no 
one knows. Each combatant drew great wounds 
from the spirit and the body of his or her foe. 
While the other contenders fell by the wayside 
(badly hurt, though not mortally wounded), 
Gruumsh and Corellon would not break off. In- 
stead, they continued their fierce combat. They 
traversed the planes, and they splashed the oth- 
er's blood across the lands. 

As night drew near, the powers of Gruumsh 
strengthened, while those of Corellon waned. All 
seemed lost for the Seldarine. Tears from the moon 
landed on Corellon's upturned, stricken face, and 
they mingled freely with his blood. Then Corellon 
looked to his companions—and it was there he 
found fortitude. He drew back his sword and, 
with one fearful blow, clove out the orb of 
Gruumsh (who became known as Gruumsh One- 
Eye). The god howled in pain, black ichor spewing 
from the wound. Gruumsh turned and fled to the 
netherworld. There he nursed his hate, seeking 
forever after ways to shape the enemies of the 
Seldarine. And the greatest of his creations, made 
in the burning heat of rage and the blackness of his 
blood, was the Orcs. That is why, to this day, the 
Orcs and the Elves are such bitter enemies. From 
the beginning, even before their creation, the very 
essences of their gods strove against one another. 

With Gruumsh's defeat, the Seldarine and their 
allies continued with their works. The Seldarine 
gathered the moon's tears and the blood shed by 
Corellon in that great battle, placed these into the 
vessels they had created, and infused them with 
their own spirit. Each god imparted virtue into 
his or her creation, feeding and nurturing the 
newly formed race. Thus were the Elves born 
from the blood of Corellon Larethian, mixed with 
the soil of the world, blessed with the tears of the 
moon, and given their nearness to divinity. 

The other gods saw this example and set about 
infusing life into their own sadly misshapen ves- 
sels, with varied results. Alas, all other races 
were but sad imitations of the Elves. 


The Creation of Elves #9 


Figure 1: The Elven Tree of Creation 


p High Elves 
Sylvan Elves / 


The Elfwar 
The Fractioning 


Lolth Sows Dissent 


The Branding 


Creation of 
the Others 


of the Drow 


Creation of 
the Elves 


The Godswar 
Alliance of 


— s arit 


Creation of the World 


The tale of the Godswar explains some of the 
elven traits, both physical and mental. Being 
formed of the blood of the god Corellon 
Larethian accounts for why elves possess such 
long lifespans. Tears from the moon provide a 
rationale for the elves’ ethereal beauty—a beau- 
ty that often led the lesser races to think of elves 
as gods. The soil of the earth explains the con- 
nection all elves feel with the land. 

To the elves, their legends provide some mea- 
sure of assurance that they play a grand role in 
the scheme of things. Study of elven legends ex- 
plains why elves are so certain of their rightful 
place in life, and why they rarely worry about 
afflictions that would be crises for lesser beings. 

Other elven myths provide different insights 
into the elf character. Following is an accounting 
from Sarathos-Telanith, which sheds further 
light on elf history—specifically, the times that 
were responsible for initial fragmenting of the elf 
nation: the Elfwar. 


10 e Chapter One 


After the Godswar, the deities divided the 
world among themselves so that their creations 
could prosper and grow. The Seldarine chose 
the forests for their children, the Elves, but se- 
cretly encouraged them to spread as they would. 
The other gods did likewise, and the races 
fought for land: The hatred introduced by 
Gruumsh the Cursed One had spread to the 
mortal species. 

The Elves were, at this time, all one people. 
There were variations, but these were individ- 
ual, rather than any sort of societal rift. All dif- 
ferences were a matter of personal inclination, 
and the Elves lived in harmony with one an- 
other. | 

There were those who lusted for power, and 
those who could not bear to live within the con- 
fining walls of a city. Others were rabidly xeno- 
phobic, wanting to bar outsiders such as 
Humans and Dwarves from the Elflands, keep- 
ing away the taint of those “unfavored by the 
gods.” Still others, more moderate in most 
things, were scorned by their brothers or even 
despised. 

Each Elf thought he knew best, and each tried 
to impose his views on his brother. Evil flourished 
in this atmosphere of distrust and dissent. The 
great Elf cities of old deteriorated, and the Spider 
Queen Lolth gained a foothold in the hearts of 
many Elves. They used her to gain greater power 
and influence, and her evil ways led them even 
further astray. These Elves practiced dark magic 
and forbidden lore to make themselves mighty, 
and they turned from the light they had loved so 
much, | 

The tension grew unbearable. The Elves who 
had embraced the teachings of Lolth marched in- 
to the cities and slaughtered their brethren. The 
first attack came under cover of darkness, and 
the other Elves could not mount a defense. But 
they had seen the dark time to come, and they 
had readied themselves for war. Their prepara- 
tions were not in vain. They returned fire. 

The Elfwar raged for decades, neither side 
gaining victory. Thousands of Elves perished on 
both sides, and the number of wounded grew ev- 
er higher. The Elves of Lolth took the name Drow 
to signify their new allegiance, and they took the 


cities they had captured as their homes. They 
massed for the final battle, and Lolth covered the 
land in loathsome clouds of black to strike fear in 
the hearts of mortal Elves. The Drow were pre- 
pared to win—but then the gods themselves inter- 
vened. 

Corellon Larethian and his companions struck 
deep into the heart of Drow territory. Long and 
hard they fought, seeking the evil in that land. 
Finally, Corellon Larethian came upon the dread 
Spider Queen, and he attacked. Magic flared 
and spat; blood merged in rivulets. Then Corel- 
lon struck Lolth a telling blow, driving her deep 
into the earth. With her defeat, the haze over the 
battlefield lifted, allowing the bright light of the 
sun to bathe the land in its healing rays. 

The Drow turned their faces away from the 
suns purification, preferring instead their fallen 
goddess. They consciously chose the shadows 
over light, and Corellon decreed that such treach- 
ery would forever show upon their faces. It is for 
this reason that the skin of the Drow is dark. 

Corellon forced the evil Elves into the rift 
where he had banished Lolth the Spider. After 
the last Drow was driven underground, he and 
his fellow gods abandoned the Elves to their 
own devices, preferring instead the plane of Ar- 
vandor. 


The rifts and turmoil created by the Elfwar 
have permanently scarred the elf psyche. Al- 
though many factions were appalled at the 
breaking away of the drow, some could not con- 
tain their discontent. Several such groups chose 
to strike out on their own: an event called the 
Fractioning. Thus, the division of elves, begun 
by the drow, continued. The elven race divided 
into the grey elves, who had chosen the moun- 
tains as their home; the sylvan elves, who had 
returned to the forests of their birth; and the 
high elves, who chose to remain in the elven cit- 
ies and be the keepers of the elven way of life. 
Still more sought farther afield, roaming the 
oceans, the arctic wastes, and the skies above. 

In time, these elven nations grew further 
apart, each coming to develop special character- 
istics. The grey elves became ever more aloof, 
while the sylvan elves grew as wild as the for- 


ests. The explorers adapted themselves to new 
lands, regardless of where they settled. Still oth- 
ers continued to roam, leading a nomad's life, In 
campaigns, these nomadic elves are considered 
high elves. 

These nomadic elves encountered the other 
races that had been so haphazardly scattered 
about the world. The elves were often a source of 
legend to the dwarves, humans, gnomes, and half- 
lings. Initial contact was relatively peaceful, par- 
ticularly with gnomes and halflings. But suspicions 
remained, and tensions grew, particularly between 
elves and dwarves. 

None are truly sure of the reason behind the 
war with the dwarves. Some claim the dispute 
was a territorial matter, while others hold it was 
a difference in ideologies. Of course, both elves 
and dwarves name the other as instigator. What- 
ever the cause, they fought brutal, bitter wars 
for many years. They have since reconciled to a 
degree, but there has never been total trust be- 
tween the two races. 

The first elven contact with humans has been 
lost to the mists of time. Since the elves were fig- 
ures out of human myth, the humans were more 
inclined to hold them in awe. This attitude has 
carried over even unto the present day, and the 
elves remain enigmas to humans. 

Although elves and humans have not gone to 
full-scale war with one another, there have been 
a number of small clashes. Many of these are 
over human encroachment into the forests and 
their heavy-handed techniques for logging. The 
elves take exception to the death of virgin forest. 
Further, some humans, out of greed and jeal- 
ousy, have taken advantage of the elves' trust to 
slay and destroy them. 

Thus, elves have come to mistrust humans as 
well; many have withdrawn beyond human 
ken. While some remain in the lands known to 
humans, more have returned to the fabled Elf- 
lands. 

The elves are a proud people. They see the un- 
bridled thirsts in the human race; that, coupled 
with their amazing fecundity, make them a seri- 
ous threat to all that the elves originally accom- 
plished. The elves watch the humans, and there 
is fear in their hearts. 


The Creation of Elves * 11 


MCSA, 


FG 


CHAPTER 


FA 88 tale DEA P. 


MERIAL ROD 


Variations on a Theme 


There are nearly as many types of Elves as 
there are Humans . . . perhaps more. After 
all, you Humans are different only in appear- 
ance. We Elves have more substantial differ- 
ences, more than slight dissimilarities in 
philosophy. The Aquanesti, or Aquatic Elf as 
you call them, is as different from a Grey Elf 
as a dolphin is from a mountain lion, yet 
there are no petty racial quarrels between us 
that characterize the existence of every race 
but ours. What is the problem with Humans 
and Dwarves that you cannot live in peace 
with your own? 

Certainly, we once had a history of intrara- 
cial conflict, but those days are long since 
past. We have our disagreements with one an- 
other, but we settle them like civilized folk— 
and 1 am beginning to believe that Elves are 
the only civilized folk in all the realms known 
to mortals. 

Although we continue to war with the 
Drow, the cause of that war is far more than 
the color of their skin or their beliefs. It is the 
fact that their very existence is an affront to 
ours, that they were created by perversions 
within our own race. Our war is nothing less 
than sublime effort to undo an error made 
hundreds of centuries ago. 

We do not judge anything by the color of 
their skin. Granted, we find it tempting to do 
so in the case of the Drow, but even we—who 
have so often been betrayed by our dark- 
skinned cousins—find it within ourselves to 
judge each of them by their own merits. 

Unlike the Humans, the Dwarves, and the 
Small Ones, we Elves are not so much shaped 
by our heritage as by the way in which we are 
taught to live. Tales of Dark Elves who have 
the heart of High Elves exist, as do tales of 
treachery and deceit among High Elves. 
While both cases are rare, they have hap- 
pened—and will happen. Always, we attrib- 
ute these to the way in which the Elf was 
raised, for we know that is more important 
than blood. The marked differences in our 
brethren appear only when grand conglomer- 
ations make their individual traits societal. 


—Eronion Marathas, elven seer 


12 * Chapter Two 


Jo TAS Uu EA SEA MNA Ж 


ELE > 4 


FE one are truly certain from whence 
у the first elves arose. The elves them- 
“= selves claim they arose from the 


blood of Corellon Larethian, while other races 


hold that they sprang full-fledged into the 
world, without divine intervention. One thing 
is certain, however: No matter where they 
came from, they have spread to nearly every 
world on the Prime Material Plane. Their af- 
finity with the worlds on which they have 
made their homes leads one to suspect a more 
elemental nature to their being. However, 
since they have often been residents of these 
worlds longer than humans have existed, hu- 
man sages are often inaccurate when speculat- 
ing about origins. 

Elves have adapted to life in nearly every 
environment possible. The mountains, the 
forests, the plains, the waters, and the under- 
ground all know the taste of elves. The snowy 
wastes have felt the light touch of elven boots, 
as have the hot sands of deserts. 

The elves’ curiosity about life makes it only 
natural that they expanded their holdings to 
such an extent. They wish to be sure of their 
world, and they cannot understand it if they 
cannot experience it. If an elf accurately re- 
ports her experiences, other elves can under- 
stand that world intuitively. 

Yet elves are notorious for their desire to see 
things for themselves. Even when a place has 
been experienced and reported, many elves 
will still have a wish to see the place. Along 
the journey, they are likely to view each pass- 
ing locale with great interest, stopping to ex- 
plore anything that catches their interest. For 
this reason, the elf race as a whole is likely to 
have heard of any given location on any of the 
worlds they inhabit. 

Through their inherent connection with all 
the worlds, elves adapt more easily than many 
other races. For this reason, they can be found 
in any clime, under almost any extreme. 

Descriptions of the standard AD&D® game 
elves follow. These include aquatic, dark, 
grey, high, and sylvan elves, as well as half- 
elves. (Descriptions of elves specific to a cam- 
paign world—originally all high elves—are 


SOUS EEUU UB E RA NU GE C C 


found later in this chapter.) Tables 1 and 2 list 
the heights and weights, respectively, of the elf 
subraces. Note: Because females tend to be 
shorter and lighter than males, base numbers 
are divided into male/female values. The 
modifiers allow for a broad range in each list- 
ed category. 


TABLE 1: ELF SUBRACES BY HEIGHT 


Height (in Inches) 
Subrace Base Modifier 
Aquatic 50/50 1d8 
Drow 50/55 1410 
Сгеу 60/55 1412 
High 55/50 1410 
Sylvan 60/55 1412 


TABLE 2: ELF SUBRACES BY WEIGHT 


Weight (in Pounds) 
Subrace Base Modifier 
Aquatic 85/75 2d12 
Drow 80/95 3d10 
Grey 85/75 3d10 
High 90/70 3d10 | 
Sylvan 95/80 3412 ZA N 


Any player may feel free to choose one of 
these subraces as a PC with the DM's permis- 
sion. Otherwise, an elf player character is as- 
sumed to be a high elf (the most common 
subrace). 

Naturally, the descriptions contained here 
do not apply to every elf. There are as many 
different types of elves as there are humans, 
each acting differently from his or her fellows. 
What follows is merely the tendencies a sub- 
race tends to evince, not the actual patterns 
each elf must follow. Not all grey elves are 
snobs, nor are all drow elves evil personified, 


Aquatic Elves 


Although not as frequently encountered as 
other elf subraces, aquatic elves (also known 
as sea elves) are actually as common as their 


Variations on a Theme e 13 


DYNES 


Ze ONT UOS 


landbound brethren. They patrol the deeps of 
oceans and large inland waters, holding court 
beneath the waves. Often they are only seen 
when they frolic with dolphins in kelp beds. 

Aquatic elves have gill slits much like fish, 
through which they process oxygen. They can 
also survive out of water for a short time by 
breathing. Their skin is typically silver-green, 
matching the seaweed near their territory. Some 
possess a bluish tinge to their skin, although this 
is quite rare. Aquatic elves’ hair complements 
their skin and is also green or blue-green. The 
overall effect is one that makes them difficult to 
discern underwater, especially near kelp beds. 
Because of their coloring, they gain the typical 
elven ability to camouflage themselves in their 
natural environment. 

Although their lives seem spent in frivolous 
activity, these elves play an important role in 
the underwater ecology: They serve to keep 
the seas safer for inhabitants. As do the elves 
of the forests and the mountains, sea elves 
keep the devastation of such creatures as sa- 
huagin and ixitxachitl to a minimum. The sa- 
huagin are to the aquatic elves what orcs are 
to land elves; they are a nuisance and a men- 
ace, but now a serious threat. Unfortunately, 
the sahuagin do not see things this way and 
often plan wars on the sea elves. 

These elves dislike sharks intensely. Al- 
though a natural part of the ecological cycle, 
elves dislike any creature that is rapacious and 
cruel. Additionally, any beast that the sa- 
huagin identify with closely (as they do with 
sharks) is considered to have few redeeming 
features. Since sharks relish the taste of sea elf, 
the elves organize hunts against this menace. 

Because they fear the strange and terrible 
monsters that dwell in the sea, the aquatic 
elves and the dolphins have taken it upon 
themselves to keep at least some of it safe for 
those who travel across it. In many realms, no 
one would travel on the sea otherwise, for the 
danger would be far too great. Thus, most 
seaside communities severely punish those 
who incur the wrath of sea elves. Only the 
most evil of people encourage the death of sea 
elves and dolphins. Reprisal for their murder 


14 * Chapter Two 


ZG 


ЖО ОКАТО 


is always swift and brutal; the elves tolerate 
not the killing of either brethren or friend. 
Although they may survive on land, aquat- 
ic elves prefer not to do so, for it causes them 
immense pain. They can walk on land for a 
number of days equal to their initial Constitu- 
tion score. However, they endure increasing 
pain as time spent out of water wears on, and 
their ability scores and proficiencies are af- 
fected. Every two days, these scores decrease 
by x until the elves return to water. If a 


tion) reaches 0, the elf dies. 

In salt water, the sea elf's attributes return to 
normal within 15 minutes, In fresh water, an elf 
merely stops losing his or her scores; they do 
not revert to normal until the elf enters salt wa- 
ter. The time spent in fresh water does not count 
against time away from the sea, and these elves 
may dwell in fresh water indefinitely. If they en- 
ter the water before their attributes are to de- 
crease again, the water acts as a revitalizing 
force; the suffering period begins anew when 
they emerge from water. 


EXAMPLE: Theriatis the sea elf must journey to 
the airlands to aid friends, to whom he owes a 
favor. He has a 16 Constitution and can therefore 
stay away from his beloved ocean for 16 days, or 
a little more than two weeks. He travels for four 
days to where his friends are to meet him. Since 
he has been away from salt water for four days, 
he loses two points from all his attributes, and his 
proficiencies suffer accordingly. 

On his way back to the ocean, Theriatis 
must travel another four days. On the third 
day of travel, his scores are at a —7, and he is 
totally exhausted and pain-wracked. He finds 
a pond in which he can rest and stays there 
overnight. The next day, when he begins his 
travel, he is somewhat refreshed and may 
travel for two more days before his scores de- 
scend another notch. Койу, he reaches the 
ocean, and its cool waters wash over him; the 
brine clears out his gills, and the relaxing cur- 
rents massage his exhausted muscles. Within 
15 minutes, Theriatis has returned to normal, 
and he may resume his usual activities. 


A OS 


Obviously, the sea elves do not lightly leave 
the sanctuary of their oceans. The harsh envi- 
ronment of the land world discourages any 
sea elf who foolishly wishes to leave the 
soothing waves. This does not mean that the 
sea elves have no dealings with those who 
breathe air. Any elves (excepting drow) are 
welcome to visit the land of the sea elves, and 
they will be greeted royally. Trade delegations 
are common between land and sea elves, al- 
though it is usually the land elves who must 
travel, for they have magicks more suited for 
the foreign environ of water. 

Sea elves commonly travel with elven 
ships, defending those aboard from attacks 
beneath the waves. Since they are accom- 
plished at scuttling the ships of evil humans 
and humanoids, aquatic elves are feared by 
pirates and those who would prey on elven 
craft. 

Aquatic elves often consort with dolphins 
and hippocampi, and the latter are bred as 
mounts. Dolphins and sea elves are usually on 
the best of terms and easily befriend one an- 
other. They serve each other's needs, giving 
mutual protection and aid. 

Aquatic elf society consists mainly of those 
sea elves who dwell in a five-mile area. There 
is a titular king or queen to whom they pay 
homage, but he has no real power over daily 
life. Sea elves live as they please, coming to- 
gether under a ruler only in times of undersea 
emergency or great trouble for the world in 
general. The lords and ladies of the ocean cit- 
ies do little other than escort visitors and con- 
duct the trade that aquatic elves find so 
enjoyable. The rest of the population consists 
of artists, hunters, and farmers, all concerned 
with making survival possible and life pleas- 
ant for the rest of the community. 

These elves have cities of living coral, sup- 
plemented with glittering crystal domes. Their 
undersea paradise is marked by sea elf farmers 
tending schools of fish; it is also marked by 
the peace one can find beneath the waves. The 
wash of blue- and green-dappled light has in- 
spired abovesea artists for years—and will no 
doubt continue for years to come. 


Dark Elves 


The dark elves (also known as drow) are evil 
cousins of the other elves. Driven beneath the 
surface long ago by the light-loving elves, 
these sinister beings have made a home for 
themselves in what they call the Underdark, 
the niche they have brutally carved in the un- 
derground caverns. They have become the 
masters and mistresses of dark grottoes, and 
any intelligent creature shuns them. 

Originally the drow were simply elves who 
held more with the tenets of might than those 
of justice. In their quest for more power over 
life, they inevitably began dealing with the 
forces that would one day corrupt them. Their 
elven brethren, dismayed at the initial change 
in their formerly peaceful kinsmen, sought to 
reason with them. The drow, seeing this effort 
as aggression, responded by slaying emis- 
saries and invading elven cities. Convinced of 
the evil of the drow, the other elves banded 
together to drive them from the land. 

A long, painful war marched across the cen- 
turies; elf slew elf, and great magicks flew. 
Much of the world lay in devastation, soaked 
in the blood of elves. Finally, however, the 
good and neutral elves triumphed, and they 
drove the drow underground. The corruption 
of the drow echoed in their appearance, for 
their skin darkened and their hair turned 
white. Their eyes glowed red—further evi- 
dence of the fires burning within their breasts. 

The drow are reputedly as widespread as 
the other subraces of elves—perhaps even 
more so. No one not of drow heritage knows 
exactly how far their underground holdings 
extend. It is well known that they have a cer- 
tain grasp on interdimensional magic, for they 
use it to travel long distances. They hate the 
light, and they have extensively researched 
ways to travel while avoiding the sun, which 
is anathema to them. The drow have extensive 
tunnel networks, which may or may not can- 
vass their world. 

Drow are typically shorter than other elves, 
and they retain the Dexterity common to 
elves. In all other respects, save their height 


Variations on a Theme * 15 


GFR EEF ORT OBSS Sg ue VENAE e 


TS ELA CECA 


ОТ CO KO) t 


and coloring, drow resemble their above- 
ground cousins. 

Drow craftsmanship is truly a marvel to be- 
hold, wrought with strange and intricate de- 
signs. Unfortunately, their works are unable 
to exist outside the drow world, and the items 
disintegrate, albeit slowly, when away from 
the radiation of the Underdark. 

Their society is usually matriarchal, with 
the female drow holding the majority of 
power. Male drow are entrusted with the rela- 
tively unimportant jobs of swordplay and 
some sorcery. Females, on the other hand, 
command the important positions in drow so- 
ciety. They are the priestesses of their dark 
goddess, Lolth (or sometimes Lloth), Queen 
of the Spiders. 

These females wield their tremendous god- 
dess-given power mercilessly. Using the threat 
of intense punishment, they keep the males 
cowed and submissive. They are the top of the 
social hierarchy in the Underdark; they jeal- 
ously guard their power against lowly males 
who might try to take that power away. 

Since drow females have greater power 
than males and are physically stronger and 
more intelligent as well, the drow have a diffi- 
cult time believing that males can hold power 
in other societies. Thus, they do not believe 
that any threat mustered by males could seri- 
ously threaten the drow. 

Despite their chaotic evil nature, the society 
of the drow is rigidly structured and divided. 
Social strata and classifications are virtually 
immutable. A drow can advance in her caste, 
certainly, but cannot advance beyond it. The 
chaotic nature of the drow is most evident 
when one seeks advancement—an advance- 
ment typically made through death. 

Drow constantly seek to improve their po- 
sition in society and in Lolth's eyes. If it comes 
at the expense of another's life, so much the 
better—that makes one less drow to challenge 
the newcomer, and it ensures greater security 
in the new position. 

Drow have an abiding hatred of all things 
aboveground, but nothing draws their wrath 
quite like the good elves. The drow take any 


e ae ——— 


16 ® Chapter Two 


chance they can to destroy other elves they 
encounter. Even the few evil elves above- 
ground are seen as enemies, and the drow do 
not hesitate to betray such a one when he or 
she has served a purpose. 


Grey Elves 


Grey elves are at once the most noble and 
most reclusive of the elves. They have with- 
drawn from the world after making their 
mark, which was to ensure that the world was 
well on the path to goodness. The grey elves 
view themselves as the protectors of good in 
the world, but they will stir from their moun- 
tains and meadows to protect the "lesser" 
races only when they are faced with great evil. 

Grey elves act much like human knights— 
supercilious and condescending, full of their 
own importance. They think nothing of 
speaking their minds, provided that this re- 
mains within the bounds of elven decorum. 
They are often haughty, disdaining contact 
with most others, including all other elves 
save grey elves. 

This subrace garbs themselves in wool tu- 
nics of gold, silver, white, or yellow. Over 
these, they wear cloaks of dark blue or purple. 
Their dress alone often makes them the most 
striking of the elves, and their elegant bearing 
and pure beauty make them almost appear as 
supernatural creatures. 

When arming themselves for battle, they 
don shimmering suits of plate or chain mail, 
protecting the head with winged helmets. 
Their weapons, created by master elf crafters, 
shine brightly under any light. Mounted war- 
riors ride griffons or hippogriffs into battle, 
swooping down upon their enemies with 
dreadful perfection. 

Taller and more slender than the other 
elves, grey elves typically have silver hair and 
amber eyes. This does not give them any spe- 
cial abilities, but it does serve to distinguish 
them from their high elven brethren. Some- 
what rarer are those grey elves who have pale 
golden hair and violet eyes. These elves are of- 
ten known as faerie and are probably those 


who first made contact with humans. 

While not exactly bigoted toward other 
races, the grey elves do believe in the purity of 
the elven line. They are the least tolerant of 
other races, and they take pains to ensure that 
they remain secluded from all—sometimes 
even other elves. Only the mightiest mages of 
other races are allowed within their mountain 
citadels, and these are greeted with suspicion. 
The grey elves are not rabid in their dislike of 
the shorter-lived races, but they do fear the 
corruption that the other races can bring to 
the elves. 

Because of their reverence for the sanctity 
of elven blood, grey elves have striven to 
maintain their original ideals. They consider 
themselves to be the purest form of all elves. 
They believe that, since the other elves do not 
concern themselves with maintaining their pu- 
rity, their role in the elven world is less than 
that of the grey elf. These elves feel that they 
are the "true" elves and that others are some- 
how lesser versions. The grey elves staunchly 
believe this to be true, despite the fact that 
they are an offshoot of the original high elf 
line. 

Grey elves disguise the entrances to their 
mountain meadows and remote cities with 
powerful magic, ensuring that only those who 
are elves or familiar with the elven dweomer 
can discover their retreats. If members of an- 
other race find their hideaways, the grey elves 
are not averse to casting a high-level forget 
spell. They have worked long and hard to 
achieve their hidden lands, and they welcome 
not those who stumble across them. 

Of all elves, grey elves rely the most on 
their intelligence. While other elves are by no 
means stupid, grey elves trust less in physical 
prowess than they do the mind. Their line 
breeds more mages and mage combinations 
than any other, and some of the most es- 
teemed of their subrace are scholars. 

Their entire existence is based on develop- 
ing and discovering new knowledge, and they 
therefore spend less time on the pleasurable 
pursuits that occupy other elves' lives. Their 
mages are without peer in the elven world. 


Even mages of greater power from other races 
speak of the knowledge of the grey elves with 
no small measure of fascination. 

Because the only wizard specialties availa- 
ble to elves are Diviner and Enchanter, grey 
elves usually do not become specialist wiz- 
ards. Instead, they learn more about magic in 
general; their long lifespans ensure that they 
are among the most knowledgeable mages on 
any world, though not necessarily the most 
powerful. 

However, like all elves, their crafters have 
had centuries to perfect their art. Since the 
grey elves have a much fiercer dedication to 
perfection than other elves, their products are 
finer than any others in the world. Only some 
dwarves can rival the expertise shown by grey 
elves—but even then they cannot rival the 
sheer beauty exhibited in elven manufacture. 

It is a guaranty that almost any grey elven 
work can hold the strongest magicks and en- 
chantments. The very qualities of the manu- 
facture work subtle charms into the item, 
making it more receptive to whatever potent 
magic a mage might use to enhance it. The 
grey elves have produced most of the magical 
items attributed to elvenkind. They are partic- 
ularly devoted to the creation of tomes and 
scrolls. 

Grey elves often have the most extensive li- 
braries of anyone in the world. Any grey elf 
community of more than 50 years will have a 
communal library rivaling those of any major 
city or wizard. Such libraries are open to all 
elves who wish to better themselves and in- 
crease their knowledge. Since the grey elves 
value the constant expansion of their stores of 
books, many spend their lives in research (ei- 
ther magical or scientific), writing learned 
treatises. 

Because they spend so much time in re- 
search, grey elves often have little time to 
spare for physical labor, although this does 
not preclude craftsmanship. In order to main- 
tain their cities, they must rely on "lesser" 
elves for the upkeep of their realms. Since al- 
most all of these servant elves have been 
brought up in the particular atmosphere of the 


Variations on a Theme * 17 


grey elves, they believe that their lot in life is 
to serve the grey elves. Although some do 
leave, most do not have the spirit to do so. 
Many are truly happy performing tasks for 
their masters and would not dream of depart- 
ing. The stratified society offers them security 
and comfort. 

Grey elves are not harsh taskmasters, but 
neither are they forgiving. When a servitor elf 
fails in a task or performs it poorly, punish- 
ment is swift and to the point. Few make the 
same mistake twice. 

Grey elf society is among the most rigidly de- 
fined in any world. They are ruled by a heredi- 
tary monarch, either male or female, who can 
be succeeded by any of the other members of 
the House Royal. This is subject to approval by 
a majority of the House Noble. The ruler must 
have all decisions ratified by such a majority. 

Beneath these two Houses are the Merchant 
Houses, of which the Guild Houses are a part. 
The House Protector is equal to the Merchant 
Houses. Beneath the Merchant Houses are the 
Servitor Houses. Beneath them are the caste- 
less elves, who have almost no voice in grey 
elf society. 

Interestingly enough, most other elves do 
not readily befriend grey elves, for they see 
the grey elves as far too serious and arrogant. 
Indeed, some elves think the grey subrace is 
far closer to the word “human” than “elf” 
They think the grey elves have lost the elven 
joy of life, for the grey elves prefer to spend 
their time with books rather than revel in the 
outdoors and the goodness of life. Instead of 
exploring the boundaries of life, they are 
learning to be serious. 

In some elves' eyes, grey elves have even 
gone so far as to enslave other elves—if not in 
fact, then at least in spirit. The grey elves' 
"servants" have none of the typical elven love 
of life, nor do they have that spark that is so 
particularly elven. This causes many elves to 
shun much contact with the grey elves. Even 
though the servitor elves are there by choice, 
such order and lawfulness inherent in the grey 
elf society seems repulsive and even dwarvish 
to most elves. 


18 * Chapter Two 


High Elves 


The most commonly seen of all elves, the high 
elves are also the most open and friendly. 
They have no compunction about traveling in 
the world outside their lands, and they do so 
much more often than other elves. Since they 
have the most contact with the non-elven 
world and since their subrace is more adven- 
turous than other elves, most elf PCs are high 
elves. 

While at first they may seem aloof and arro- 
gant, a glimmer of true self can be learned 
with a little effort. High elves know the value 
of friendship and alliance with the other good 
races of the world. However, they are not al- 
ways easily befriended. Many high elves are 
cautious about trusting the shorter-lived 
races; quite a few learned to distrust humans 
and dwarves in their younger days. Thus, al- 
though high elves serve the cause of good, one 
can never be sure of what the reception from 
them will be. | 

High elves are very pale. Though they 
spend a great deal of time outdoors, their skin 
simply doesn't tan, no matter how long they 
are in the sun. However, their skin is less a 
corpselike pallor than the color of new cream. 
Their hair and eyes fall into two major varia- 
tions. One is fair not only of skin, but of hair 
as well. These elves generally have blond hair 
and blue eyes. The other variation, equally 
numerous, seems far more mysterious. They 
have dark hair, ranging from sandy brown to 
sheerest black, and intense green eyes. These 
two varieties of high elves have no other sig- 
nificant differences, but they are nonetheless 
often treated differently simply because of 
their appearance. | 

High elves prefer light pastel shades over 
the colors worn by grey elves. Since they rely 
on hunting and woodsmanship, they often 
wear cloaks of green for camouflage in for- 
ests. 

Their preferred weapon is the bow, but they 
are also adept with long and short swords. In 
battle, they wear their gleaming elven chain 
mail beneath cloaks "woven of the essence of 


SEE SGT OL RONCHI OL AOT a 


PAPAS р O ОЛ Ce ARN 


S GESTOR) 


the woods,” which allows them to move silent- 
ly through forests, strike quickly, and then re- 
treat. Although they may befriend giant 
eagles and occasionally use them for trans- 
port, they rarely use mounts because horses 
and the like are too unwieldy in the forest. 
Only on the long-distance journeys or on the 
plains will high elves use mounts. 

High elf civilization is much like that ru- 
mored in children's fairy tales. Elven homes 
are enchanted, the lands under their jurisdic- 
tion places of goodness. The realms of high 
elves are fabled in the lands of men, and the 
highest aspiration of many a human is to slip 
into the arms of death while basking in the se- 
renity of the elf lands. 

These elves do not place a great deal of val- 
ue on society, preferring instead to live as they 
wish rather than how someone tells them to. 
Their villages are peaceful places, for the elves 
all look out for one another. They have a roy- 
al bloodline of sorts, but few elves pay it 
much heed. They do not respect someone 
purely on the basis of birth. 

High elves live in a constant relationship 
with nature, never taking more than they need 
and giving back ever more. They replenish the 
forests and the plains constantly, ensuring 
that there will always be nature within their 
world. As such, they are often regarded by 
other good-aligned races as the highest epit- 
ome of goodness. Although those who prefer 
law over freedom do not always agree, they 
nearly always have respect for the quality of 
elven life. There is no doubt that the high 
elves lead a fine life: Freedom, nature, and the 
sheer vitality of being alive comprise the daily 
existence of a high elf. 

These elves have few cares or worries, and 
their lives are often characterized by idyllic 
splendor. While they face problems from ram- 
paging humanoids or the encroachment of hu- 
mans, they seem to live free of the cares that 
so often plague other elves. Because they live 
so closely in harmony with nature, they have 
little trouble finding sustenance in the areas 
near their homes. Game proliferates near high 
elf communities, and the earth is fertile for 


them. However, should the high elves roam 
farther afield, they often discover a different 
matter entirely. A band of elves on the march 
must sometimes rely upon the generosity of 
others. 


Sylvan Elves 


Although wood elves (as sylvan elves are of- 
ten called) are descended from the same stock 
as the other elves, they are far more primitive 
than their kin. Their lives are geared toward 
the simple matter of survival in the wood- 
lands, rather than enjoyment. Yet sylvan elves 
find that this life, more than anything else, 
gives them their greatest pleasure. Not for 
them the sophistication of art and delicate mu- 
sic. They prefer a simpler life. Their music is 
that of wind through leaves, the howl of 
wolves, and the cries of birds. Their art—in 
the form of tattoos—is inspired by the ever- 
changing cycle of seasons. 

Wood elves, by their very nature, seem 
more prone to violence than their civilized 
cousins. Their muscles are larger, their com- 
plexions more florid. They have yellow to 
coppery-red hair, which contrasts with their 
lightly tanned skin. Their eyes are generally 
light brown, although bright green is not un- 
common. Hazel or blue eyes are exceptionally 
rare, cropping up only two to ten times in an 
entire generation. The superstitious wood 
elves believe that twins who have blue or 
hazel eyes are an omen of good fortune for 
both the twins and wood elves as a whole. 
Thus far, they have not been disappointed. 

Wood elf clothing is much less gaudy than 
one would normally expect from an elf. The 
focus of their clothing is to allow the wearer to 
blend with the woods easily. A typical outfit is 
dark brown and green, or tan and russet in 
fall. Winter finds sylvan elves wearing white 
leather so that they can hide in snow. 

About once every five years, these elves in- 
dulge in a festival of art and music more mate- 
rial than the ephemera of nature. When the 
summer solstice arrives, the nomadic tribes 
gather in the center of the forest. For half a 


—= e M i M — M e —— I —À — —— — ae 


Variations on a Theme ө 19 


moon, the tribes celebrate the turning of the 
Seldangith, wherein the constellations of the 
Seldarine are obscured by the northern lights. 
They claim that the gods come to earth during 
this time to celebrate in the revels of their chil- 
dren. Wood elf celebrations involve oak wine, 
bonfires, dancing to wooden drums, and sing- 
ing. The carousing is primitive, even savage, 
but fiercely exciting to them. Their every in- 
stinct is aroused, taking them back to the 
roots of nature. 

Wood elves are often described as wild and 
temperamental. This is true to the extent that 
these elves are a very emotional people. They 
live with their hearts, not their minds as do 
the grey elves. Whatever they feel, they know 
it is the right answer. Logic plays little part in 
their lives, for logic cannot save one from the 
charging boar or the falling tree. Intuition and 
strength are all that counts in the wildwood. 

Sylvan elves are an independent folk and do 
not lightly brook intruders into their forests. 
Anyone, even another elf, who even draws 
near to a wood elf encampment (within three 
miles) will have a constant, unseen escort of at 
least two wood elves (possibly more) until the 
intruder leaves the area. Unless the camp is di- 
rectly threatened, the wood elves will leave 
the intruder strictly alone. Twenty-five per- 
cent of the time wood elves will allow tres- 
passers to know that they are being watched. 

If those encroaching the encampment draw 
too near and evince hostile intent, the wood 
elves have no compunctions about utterly de- 
stroying them. Wood elves are extraordinarily 
reclusive—even more so than grey elves. 
They have no wish to let others expose them 
or their lifestyle to the harsh scrutiny of the 
civilized world. Therefore, they may even de- 
stroy those who bear the wood elves no par- 
ticular ill will. They feel this is the only way to 
ensure their lives and privacy. 

Although they are of elven descent, wood 
elves tend toward total neutrality. This is not 
out of any inherent evil, but only out of a de- 
sire to be left alone. They do not care about 
the proceedings in the outer world; only when 
such acts impact their realm do the wood elves 


20 * Chapter Two 


take interest. Even then, that interest is only in 
removing the nuisance and in returning to the 
wildlands as quickly as possible. Only other 
elves can break their solitude without suffer- 
ing potential death. 
Sylvan elves associate more often with the 
animals of the forest than with any other be- 
ings. They have giant owls guarding their tent 
homes or, rarely, giant lynxes. Their isolation- 
ist tendencies have corrupted the only racial 
language they know (Elvish); however, some 
do learn the languages of various creatures of 
the forest. 
Wood elves are probably the least friendly 
of all the surface elves. They are certainly not 
as outgoing as high elves, nor are they as ad- 
venturous as aquatic elves. While grey elves 
are quite arrogant, they at least will not casu- 
ally kill intruders. However, it should be re- 
membered that wood elves are not evil; they 
simply value their solitude above all else. 


Half-Elves 


Although not properly elves, half-elves are in- 
cluded in this book because they do possess el- 
ven ancestry. Half-elves have at least half elf 
in their blood; those half-elves that breed back 
with elves are always considered half-elven, 
regardless of how long ago the non-elf blood 
was introduced. Those half-elves who do not 
breed with elves (thus diluting the elven strain 
even further) are considered by elves to be to- 
tally non-elven. These crosses have none of 
the abilities normally associated with either 
elves or half-elves. | 

Some half-elves are not readily accepted in 
either elf or human communities, and they of- 
ten become introverted, sullen, and embit- 
tered. Lucky half-elves gain access to both 
races, for often elves and humans find half- 
elves fascinating. Largely, it is a matter of the 
half-elf in question and the societies with 
which he or she deals. Half-elves are never ac- 
cepted in grey elf society, for half-elves serve 
as a palpable reminder of all that the grey 
elves wish to eradicate. 

Although there are rare exceptions, half- 


elves are predominantly also half human; el- 
ven genes typically cannot cross with any- 
thing other than human genes. Those 
descended of stock other than human must be 
specially approved by the DM if they are to be 
used as a PC race. 

Most half-elves are of high elf descent. The 
reasons for this are simple: Aquatic elves can- 
not live with humans; grey elves will not 
knowingly approach humans in such friendly 
circumstances; wood elves would simply flee 
or hide; and drow would slaughter the fool 
who trusted them. 

There are always exceptions to these gener- 
alizations, of course. Some elves will always 
break the mold of their kind by doing some- 
thing unpredictable. A few grey elves consent 
to speak freely with humans, and it is possible 
one could consort with a human out of love. 
Not all wood elves are recluses, nor are all 
drow ruthless, evil killers. Aquatic elves are 
not as unreachable as they might seem, for hu- 
mans have long used magic to visit the under- 
water realms. 

It is entirely possible to encounter half-elves 
from all the major subraces; they are simply 
not as common as half-elves of high elf stock. 
However, few of them have inherited all, if 
any, of their parents' abilities. This is a matter 
best left to each ОМ; it is recommended that 
half-elves receive only the bonuses delineated 
in the Players Handbook. Even half-elves de- 
scended from aquatic elves should not have 
the ability to breathe under water unless the 
campaign is based around seafaring adven- 
tures. Even then, it is a matter best considered 
very carefully. 

Since they are human and elven both in de- 
meanor, half-elves are generally easily recog- 
nizable as such. They are taller and heavier 
than the average elf, though their hair and 
eyes often reflect those of their human parent. 
However, they also take on some of the fea- 
tures of the elven parent. 

The skin of those descended from sea elves 
is a blend of human and elven flesh, often ap- 
pearing as a pale green or a very light blue. 
Their hair echoes that of their human parent, 


though it can contain a hint of green or blue. 

Grey half-elves, while extremely rare, exist 
only in human society, since they never find 
homes with grey elves. They are less easy to 
spot than many other half-elves, for the hair 
and eyes of grey elves are often close to hu- 
man standards. The hair and eyes of these 
half-elves are of a lighter tinge than many hu- 
mans, but aside from the pointed ears, these 
half-elves can be confused as smaller humans. 

As with grey elves, the descendants of high 
elves can easily be mistaken for humans for a 
short while. Since the high elf coloration is 
nearly identical to that of humans (although 
the skin is somewhat paler), their half-elf chil- 
dren pass among the shorter-lived races with 
few problems. As long as they keep their ears 
covered and perhaps do something to disguise 
their angular features, they can usually re- 
main unnoticed. 

The half-elves of sylvan blood have the 
easiest time passing through human lands. 
Since sylvan elves are the largest of their breed 
and their skin tans, the sylvan half-elves can 
pass themselves off as humans fairly well. 
These half-elves take to the forest easily and 
often become rangers; since they are on the 
fringes of society anyway, it is only natural 
that they would take a life that reflects this. 

The half-elf children of drow are the most 
unusual in appearance of all half-elves. Their 
skin is dusky grey, their hair bleached white. 
Their ancestry is perfectly obvious to all, and 
they typically find no solace or sanctuary in 
either elf or human communities. Even worse, 
the drow will often seek out the individual in 
order to expunge the blot on drow honor. 

The children of two half-elves generally ap- 
pear as did their parents. In cases where a 
half-elf's parents were descended from differ- 
ent subraces of elf, the results are varied. Fifty 
percent of the time, the child will take on a 
mixture of the parents' characteristics; 25% of 
the time the child will resemble the mother, 
and 25% of the time resemble the father. 

Obviously, half-elves do not have an easy 
time integrating themselves. They are often 
outsiders, playing out their roles on the bor- 


Variations on a Theme * 21 


ders of society. There is a pervasive racism in- 
herent in many of the societies in which half- 
elves take part, although not many will admit 
to it. Such racism exists in both human and elf 
lands, and it is often hard for half-elves to 
form attachments to either race. 

Instead, many create their own communi- 
ties, where all are free to live as they will. Un- 
fortunately, many half-elves have allowed 
their experiences with humans and with elves 
to sour them toward both races; in half-elf 
communities, the members of their parents' 
races are not always welcome. 

Humans, despite their fascination with half- 
elves, hold half-elves in some suspicion. Since 
many half-elves turn to a life of carefree adven- 
turing or even outright thievery, they cannot 
be trusted with great responsibility. In addi- 
tion, they are a mingling of the blood of two 
disparate races, and no one can ever be sure of 
what the result of such a union will be. Many 
half-elves are also the unhappy byproduct of 
war crimes, and they are feared to echo the cir- 
cumstances of their conception. Their motives 
are, for humans at least, suspect. 

Elves, on the other hand, typically see these 
children as inferior mongrels. They may try to 
tolerate presence of half-elves, but they view 
them as simply longer-lived humans. Thus, 
while half-elves are not often driven from elf 
lands, neither are they made to feel overly 
welcome, even as children, nor are there tears 
at their departure. 

Neither humans nor elves seems to recog- 
nize the unique gifts half-elves have to con- 
tribute. As beings longer-lived than humans, 
they are in a position to understand the elven 
point of view. Likewise, as creatures who 
have the weight of impending mortality over 
their heads, they can comprehend the curious 
speed at which humans go about their lives. 
They are thus perfectly suited as ambassadors 
from one country to the other. They are guar- 
anteed to be impartial, as they have relations 
on either side. They can become virtually any 
class and are multifaceted individuals in more 
ways than can be listed. However, elves and 
humans cannot forget the fact of parentage, 


ST 


22 * Chapter Two 


and they lose a valuable opportunity for un- 
derstanding each other. 

Since they have difficulty being totally ac- 
cepted in either world, half-elves tend to be 
travelers and loners, alternating between hu- 
man and elf societies. When life sours in one, 
they move to the other for a time. They have 
come to see the best of both worlds. 


Elves of the Worlds 


Beyond the elves described above, there are 
elves of different ilk populating separate 
worlds, Offshoots of the nomadic high elves 
who searched the worlds far and wide, the 
elves described below settled on worlds that 
struck their fancy. In time, they became new 
subraces of elves. (A diagram on page 29 
shows the interrelationship of these subraces.) 
In some lands, the elves are entirely distinct, 
bearing little resemblance to the original high 
elf stock. In others, the elves vary mostly in 
name and attitude, rather than through any 
physical basis. All of them carry a definite au- 
ra that pervades their world, shaping it as 
surely as they shape history. 

One important thing to remember is that 
not all elves of these areas conform to these 
descriptions. There are always exceptions in 
every land. Any player characters from these 
lands may act as they wish. 


| 
AL-QADIM* Campaign World 


The elves of Zakhara, the Land of Fate, are 
the same physically as the elves found just 
north in the FORGOTTEN REALMS® world. 
What distinguishes these elves is their attitude 
toward life, other races, and their creed. 

In Zakhara, all races tend to adopt a more 
cosmopolitan perspective toward other races. 
It is more important, they feel, to believe in an 
enlightened god than to be an elf, a dwarf, or 
a human. What one is, inside, is more impor- 
tant than who one is outside. They recognize 
that no one can control the circumstances of 
their birth, that it is the actions and the beliefs 
that make a being truly good, rather than the 


race of that being. 

For this reason, there is no separate elf soci- 
ety in Zakhara. There are certainly those 
bigots who prefer elves over other races, but 
the truly enlightened individuals make no dis- 
tinction between elves and other races. In 
Zakhara, no one is surprised when an elf takes 
a job many in the other worlds would con- 
sider traditionally dwarvish. 

Neither is there racial intolerance and antip- 
athy. It is perfectly reasonable for an orc to be 
good friends with an elf (inasmuch as elves be- 
come good friends with anyone). Again, races 
are judged by their actions and their beliefs. 
Only in the uncivilized portions of Zakhara 
will one find evidence of the antipathies so 
prevalent in other lands. 

Indeed, the elves of the Land of Fate are 
considered valuable members of society. Be- 
cause of their ability to live to a great age and 
the fact that even young elves are of an age 
with the most venerable humans, they are 
sought after for their wisdom. Many of the 
qadi (judges) are, in fact, elves. Their lifespans 
give them a unique view of the world and the 
opportunity to serve for hundreds of years. 

Many elves serve as sages for universities. 
Again, their age gives them an advantage. 
Any creature that lives hundreds of years can 
accumulate knowledge of nearly any topic. 

None of the elves native to this area wor- 
ship the gods of the elves. Like the other citi- 
zens of Zakhara, they worship the enlightened 
gods. Any who worship their gods through 
idols and icons are regarded as savages. Any 
gods found in Zakhara will be represented on- 
ly in symbols, for there is no other way to fair- 
ly represent a god. 

The Zakharan elves consider the northern 
elves barbarians. The northern elves continue 
to subscribe to the system of hatred for other 
races, worship through the idols of their prim- 
itive religion, and keep to themselves. It is far 
more likely that a Zakharan elf would side 
with a fellow believer against a northern elf 
than the other way around. They know no ra- 
cial loyalty; they know only the loyalty to 
one's brothers and sisters in belief. 


FOE URSUS S UU 
rr ань 


DARK SUN? Campaign World 


Athasian elves are entirely different from the 
high elves that settled Athas eons ago, for 
they have adapted to a life in the burning 
world. Understandably, these elves do not 
dwell in woodlands as do their more typical 
cousins, for there are few forests on Athas. In- 
stead, they live on the plains and in the bar- 
rens, scratching out an existence where few 
survive. They are runners and raiders, dis- 
daining the transport used by the weaker spe- 
cies in the desert. They, like the other races on 
Ses are much more savage than the typical 
elf. | 

The elves of Athas are very tall, often 
reaching heights of 7 feet or more. Their long 
legs make them excellent runners, and they 
can cover unbelievable distances in a single 
day. They are the terror of the deserts, and 
their hunting bands are widely feared. 

Not only do they prey on those foolish 
enough to pass through their territory, they 
exploit the gullible in the marketplaces of the 
city-states. Few of these places do not have 
some sort of market where the elves sell their 
ill-gotten or shoddy goods; the elves make an 
incredible profit from those who pass through 
because they are the only suppliers. 

Although they act ignobly toward members 
of other races and even other elf tribes, the 
Athasian elves are not an evil people. They 
have strong ties to their tribes and are only as 
harsh as their planet dictates. The bonds that 
unite them are amazingly strong; elves of a 
tribe often have no other friends than their 
tribe members. Their lives depend on their 
companions, and so they trust only those who 
have proven they can be trusted. 

Like the other inhabitants of Athas, the 
elves struggle to endure. Under the fires of the 
Dark Sun, only the strongest survive. The 
elves plan to be among that number, and if 
they must crush others . . . well, if such is the 
path to survival, they will take it. . 


Variations on a Theme * 23 


DRAGONLANCE® Campaign World 


The high elves settled the world of Krynn long 
ago, and their history on this wondrous world 
is rich. Although analogous to the history of 
elves in the AD&D® world, it is not exactly 
the same. Indeed, some misinformed histo- 
rians argue that these elves are not related to 
the elf explorers mentioned earlier in this 
chapter. This theory seems highly implausible 
after reading the history of elves on this 
world. 

On Ansalon, the main branch of elves was 
called the Kagonesti, the source from which 
other elves sprang. These others quickly 
abandoned the sylvan role, taking up more 
civilized pursuits, They eventually formed a 
realm called Silvanost, after their great leader 
in the First Dragon Wars. The Silvanesti are 
reminiscent of the grey elves in their attitude 
and outlook, for they are haughty and most 
concerned about racial purity. 

The Qualinesti broke from the Silvanesti 
centuries later, over a dispute of the best way 
to deal with the non-elven world. The 
Silvanesti, a xenophobic, caste-ridden batch, 
nearly drove the Qualinesti from the land for 
their sympathetic tendencies toward humans. 

The Qualinesti, commanded by Kith- 
Kanan, left Silvanost when it became appar- 
ent that the Silvanesti had stagnated as a 
society. They traveled west until they found a 
place where they could live in freedom from 
the structure demanded by the Silvanesti. The 
relations between these two races are strained, 
at best. The Qualinesti most resemble high 
elves, and they are by far the most common 
elves seen in the DRAGONLANCE® cam- 
paign world. 

The sylvan elves of Krynn are the Kagones- 
ti. Although they are of the first variety of 
elves that ever set foot on Krynn, they are dis- 
regarded by the other races, shunned as wild 
and uncivilized. The Kagonesti, however 
much they dislike this situation, have chosen 
to reject civilization and its “corrupting” val- 
ues. They prefer, instead, the wild harmony of 
nature, the contact with the earth that the oth- 


24 * Chapter Two | 


er elves seem to have thrown away in their 
quest for newer and better forms of govern- 
ment. The Kagonesti often wear tatoos or 
paint their faces to intimidate their enemies or 
to blend in with their surroundings. 

The Dimernesti and Dargonesti are the two 
races of aquatic elves found on Krynn. Cre- 
ated by the chaotic passage of the Greystone 
of Gargath, these sea elves possess the ability 
to transform themselves into otters or dol- 
phins. The relations between the two races of 
sea elves are much like that of the Qualinesti 
and the Silvanesti. The Dargonesti are only 
rarely seen and are very reclusive. 

The elves native to the other continent of 
Krynn tend to resemble the Kagonesti more 
than any other variety of Krynnish elf. Tala- 
dan elves of the Tamire are nomads and raid- 
ers, distrustful of outsiders. They identify 
their clans with totem animals, using these an- 
imals as spirit guides and protectors. 

The other race of elves on Taladas consists 
of refugees, elves from а Silvanesti armada 
driven off course to the new land. They have 
founded a land called Armach and are trying 
to build a land reminiscent of Silvanesti. 

However, the humans of the region proved 
too resilient to be driven from their homeland, 
and they forced the elves to accept them into a 
confederation. The humans have thus become 
more elven, and the elves have become more 
human in outlook. However, the elves have 
influenced the primitives of Taladas much 
more than they have been changed. 

A fanatical desire to keep themselves purely 
elven has preserved these elves' culture well. 
Although they dwell in a loose confederation, 
they have clearly delineated the license the 
non-elves of Armach may take with the elves. 
They guard their new "homeland" fiercely, ex- 
ecuting those who cross its borders without 
consent. Overall, the Armachnesti (as they 
have come to be called) are much more intol- 
erant than their Silvanesti brothers ever were. 
Although they must deal with humans, their 
life has become all the more rigid, and some 
say their inflexibility is a direct effect of their 
necessary contact with humans. 


Both races of elves on Taladas must con- 
front the League of Minotaurs on occasion, 
which sits squarely between the two. The Ar- 
machnesti currently have a truce negotiated 
with the League, but both countries know that 
the truce will be broken when it is convenient 
for either side. The elves of the Tamire are in 
more serious danger, for the minotaurs think 
nothing of raiding their lands to replenish 
their stock of slaves. 


FORGOTTEN REALMS” Campaign 
World 


The elves of Toril do not follow the standards 
of most other worlds. What unites almost all 
the elves of the Realms is their self-bestowed 
title: Tel'Quessir. This translates to “The 
People.’ All non-elves are known as the 
"N'Tel'Quess;" or “Not-People.” 

While these elves possess the standard elf 
abilities, their appearance is markedly differ- 
ent. These elves are of human height, though 
there the resemblance ends. Like their more 
typical cousins, the elves of the Realms are 
much more slender and delicate in appear- 
ance. Breaking down the elf nation still fur- 
ther, there are five separate, distinct subraces 
of elves in the Realms, each of which is viewed 
differently by the other races. 

The first subrace is that of the gold elves. 
Some also call them sunrise elves or high 
elves, although they do not closely resemble 
the standard high elves and, indeed, seem 
more like grey elves. Gold elves are generally 
viewed as the most civilized and, at the same 
time, the most contemptuous of other races. 
They are the nobility of elves on Toril, leading 
the other elves in the elven way. They are the 
equivalent of the Silvanesti on Krynn. 

The second subrace is known variously as 
moon, silver, or grey elves, although again the 
name is the main similarity to the typical grey 
elf. They more closely resemble high elves 
than grey elves, which is not surprising since 
the nomadic high elves settled Toril. They are 
the most common of elves on this world, or at 
least the variety most often seen by non-elves. 


Because of their higher tolerance for other 
races, the moon elves are more likely to be- 
come adventurers than are the other elves. 
Likewise, most half-elves in the Realms are de- 
scended from moon elves. Although moon 
elves are considered less noble than gold elves, 
the Queen of Evermeet is a moon elf, 

The third subrace is roughly equivalent to 
sylvan elves. They are called wild, green, or 
forest elves. They deal almost exclusively 
with other elves, keeping any contact with 
other races to a minimum. Since they try to 
live far from humankind, they are one of the 
least-seen races of the elves. Although they do 
not have a kingdom of their own, they perme- 
ate every elf nation. 

The sea elves comprise the fourth subrace. 
They, too, are fairly uncommon, although they 
aren't as reclusive as wild elves. They swim in 
two waters: those of the Great Sea and the Sea 
of Fallen Stars. There is only a slight difference 
in appearance between the two. One race 
breathes salt water and the other fresh, but they 
can survive in either. Water elves make their 
homes anywhere but are most common near the 
island retreat of Evermeet. 

The final subrace on Toril is that of the dark 
elves. Like their drow cousins, the dark elves 
are almost universally shunned for their evil. 
Cruel creatures living underground, these 
drow emerge only at night, trying to avenge 
themselves on their “oppressors,” the elves re- 
sponsible for their underground retreat. 

The elves of the Realms are one of the oldest 
races native to that world. While humans 
were living in their caves, learning to hunt 
each other, the elves flourished. Their nations 
spread across Toril, and they lived in harmony 
with the land. But as humans became more 
and more civilized and expanded their hold- 
ings, the elves had to retreat. 

Since the elves could not react quickly to 
the constant change humans wrought, they 
had to devise an alternate plan. From their 
court in Myth Drannor, the elves began argu- 
ing the virtues of a Retreat to a land beyond 
humans. They argued this matter for many 
centuries and, after T all the evi- 


Variations on a Theme * 25 


dence available, came to a consensus. 

During their debates, they located a land far 
beyond human reach. Called Evermeet, an is- 
land thousands of miles out in the Trackless 
Sea, it suited their purpose perfectly. Holding 
deep and glorious forests as well as many of 
the other features elves consider essential for a 
home, there was little doubt that this should 
be the last home of the Elf Nation. 

Only elves 2ге welcome in Evermeet. All 
others (including drow and half-elves) are 
turned away. Since there seems no way of 
magically traveling to Evermeet, it is only by 
ship that anyone can journey to there. The El- 
ven Navy, the largest known, protects the 
sanctity of Evermeet by destroying non-elven 
ships that come inside Evermeet's jurisdiction. 
The navy also provides passage for elves seek- 
ing Retreat or protection for elves beset by hu- 
mans. The navy seems to know when their 
services are needed. 

Although they were once the most powerful 
group of the Realms, the elves are a group in 
sad decline. They retreat from their world in 
ever-greater numbers. One day, humans will 
find the Realms devoid of elves. The greater 
world will no doubt miss their presence. 


GREYHAWK* Campaign World 


The elves of Oerth resemble the standard 
AD&D® elves in nearly every respect. They 
are very much the stereotypical elf, concerned 
with those things most elven. Some contend 
that Oerth is the elven homeland, the place 
from which all others sprang. 

Contesting this claim, however, are the ex- 
istence of the grugach and the valley elves. Al- 
though these two races may be merely 
offshoots of sylvan elves and grey elves, re- 
spectively, they are found nowhere outside 
the world of Greyhawk. Were Oerth truly the 
elven homeland, then these two variants 
would be found outside it. Perhaps the true 
birthplace of the elves is lost in the shadows of 
time, or perhaps it was destroyed during the 
great Elfwar. Whatever the case, it is likely 
that Oerth is not the origin planet. 


26 * Chapter Two 


Still, the elves of Oerth tend to be "purer" in 
form than the elves of many other worlds. Their 
ideals and their goals are often closer to the 
AD&D standard than those of other worlds. In 
almost every regard, they are the average elf, 
save for the grugach and the valley elves. 

The grugach are much like sylvan elves, liv- 
ing like them in the deep, pristine forests of 
unpopulated areas. Like sylvan elves, grugach 
tend to be much less civilized than their other 
cousins. One area in which they differ, how- 
ever, is in their savagery. 

While ordinary sylvan elves are ornery and 
unfriendly, the grugach are downright vi- 
cious, Sylvan elves resent intrusion into their 
lands, while grugach usually kill those who do 
so. Grugach cannot stand the company of any 
other humanoids not naturally of the forest. 
This includes druids and other elves, although 
it does not apply to nymphs or dryads. 

On the other hand, they possess a close kin- 
ship with the animals of the woodlands, often 
dealing with them more equally than with hu- 
manoids. The grugach’s attitude of brutality 
for all outsiders is well known. Their hatred 
carries far into the realm of violence. The gru- 
gach generally use traps and snares to capture 
outsiders who approach too closely to their 
camp. These traps become more and more 
cruel the closer one nears such a camp. 

The other subrace of elf in the world of 
Greyhawk is the valley elf. Their name is de- 
rived from their home in the Valley of the 
Mage. As servants or allies to the Mage, they 
protect the land in exchange for the Mage's 
ability to protect them from outside threats. 

The Mage has, many believe, set up a net- 
work of valley elf spies to protect the land and 
raid nearby powers. Since valley elves are 
roughly the same height as humans, they can 
usually pass in disguise through human lands. 
Understandably, such infiltration disturbs the 
neighboring peoples, and they would be hap- 
py to see the valley elves eliminated. 

Most other elves despise valley elves. The 
common elven belief is that these elves have 
sold out their dignity bas independence 
for the fleeting protection of a human wizard. 


OS st 


OS 


ORT OK 


Since the elf lifespan is so much greater than 
humans’, the elves will no doubt outlive their 
“protector,’ unless he chooses the option of 
becoming a lich. If this is the case, the other 
elves may well come and eliminate their way- 
ward brethren. They won't stand to see more 
of their kind corrupted by evil. The valley 
elves already live under a cloud of suspicion 
for their tendency to follow the orders of the 
Mage's drow lieutenant, and becoming vassals 
of an undead beast would be the last straw for 
any right-thinking elf. 

The valley elves have adapted well to the 
dangerous environment of the Barrier Peaks. 
Even before the coming of the Mage, they 
fended well for themselves in the perilous 
lands nearby. After his arrival, they became a 
part of the danger in the area by protecting 
their lord fanatically. Some say there can be 
few better bodyguards than zealous elves. The 
Mage of the Valley is well protected indeed. 


RAVENLOFT* Campaign World 


There are no known elves native to the dark 
domains. The majority of elves found in the 
demiplane live in the domain of Sithicus and 
are originally from Krynn. Here, they are 
forced to remind Lord Soth of his crimes, 
keeping alive the memory of his heinous past. 
Although they do not consciously perform 
this service, he cannot but help recall the elves 
who engineered his downfall. The elves here 
live a tortured, cheerless existence, never 
knowing when Soth may choose to avenge 
himself for this offense. 

This domain is not entirely natural, so elves 
feel no connection with it. The forests do not 
respond to their merriment, lying lifeless instead 
beneath their feet. The joy that elves typically 
feel in the forests of more natural lands is absent 
from Sithicus, and any happiness they might 
show is forced. Their lives are tortured; for this 
reason, elves experiment extensively with meth- 
ods to escape the clutches of Soth. Thus far, few 
(if indeed any) have been successful. 

In the other domains revealed at the time of 
this writing, elves and their derivatives tend to 


AYERS Wey ay T, KS SG 


be regarded with intense suspicion. The peo- 
ple of Ravenloft are usually very human and 
inherently superstitious. Anything that does 
not fit with their carefully structured beliefs is 
an object of fear and hate. Only warily will 
elves ever be accepted by these folk, and even 
then they will be distrusted. 

Most undisguised elves in Ravenloft are 
hunted by frightened citizens. After a few at- 
tempted lynchings, any elf worth his bow will 
understand the need for disguise while travel- 
ing in the dark lands. Thus, any elves who 
might be journeying through these realms will 
not be readily apparent, although they will 
typically offer aid to a fellow elf in danger. 
Since undead radiate no heat, elves can spot 
imposters easily at night . . . which comes all 
too frequently in Ravenloft. 


SPELLJAMMER*? Campaign World 


Those elves who travel through wildspace and 
the phlogiston consider themselves the quintes- 
sential breed of elf, for they are the link between 
elves throughout known space. Because elves 
do not typically attain higher levels in magic, 
they are not as apt to construct planar travel de- 
vices. Thus, they rely on the Elven Imperial Na- 
vy to keep contact between the scattered 
settlements across the worlds. Paradoxically, it 
may be for lack of magical power that the elves 
are currently one of the strongest forces in 
space. 

Some say that these descendants of the no- 
madic high elves have developed cloaking 
technology for their ships, allowing them to 
discreetly observe potential trouble spots. 
Further, rumor holds that there is a sizable 
fleet located at the Rock of Bral, hidden with- 
in the bowels of the asteroid with the consent 
of Prince Andru. It is well known that the 
elves have an embassy located on the Rock, 
for it is an important location in wildspace. 
Thus, any elf spelljammers can report directly 
to the Elven Imperial Navy at the Rock. 

The Elven Imperial Navy travels to each of 
the major elf nations on each planet where 
elves are known to hold power. They carry 


Variations on a Theme ө 27 


CB MC ESSA C) eO 


МЕРКЕ S NS SPA COO RR E E ОАР?» М ©, Су дух о ДЕУ, 


news from other elf nations and offer assist- 
ance to the various rulers. Fortunately, they 
recognize each monarch as sovereign in their 
own nation, so there is little friction between 
spacebound elves and groundlings. 

The assistance they offer is usually in the 
form of advice as the spelljammers do not like 
to make their presence known to the average 
inhabitants of a planet. Occasionally, they 
will offer something a bit more substantial, 
but this will generally only be in an emer- 
gency. In return for this help, they expect that 
the beneficiary will provide aid for the lesser 
elf nations in an area. 

Some say that the Elven Imperial Navy also 
protects the elf homeworld. They claim that 
they are a naturally occurring race throughout 
the spheres, united in a common bond with the 
universe. Others point to the obvious similari- 
ties between elves on so many different worlds. 
These folk claim that the elves sprang from one 
world to spread across the spheres. 

If it were true that the elves did originate 
from one world, it should come as no surprise 
that they deny it. Having seen what other 
races have done to their worlds and how 
many of these worlds are now obliterated, the 
elves would naturally want to make sure that 
none of these races would discover and then 
destroy the elf homeworld. 

Conversely, another theory states that elves 
only learned to live in harmony with their 
new worlds through the destruction of their 
original home. This, the critics claim, is the el- 
ven shame, and they hide the planet because 
they don't wish it known that they weren't al- 
ways as insufferably perfect as they are now. 

It is due to the elves that so much of trav- 
eled space is relatively safe for good-aligned 
folk. The elves drove the orcish races from the 
known spheres in the Inhuman Wars, crushing 
their fleets almost entirely. Although the 
goblinoids have vowed revenge, the elves are 
not overly worried. If they did it once, they 
can do it again. This sentiment, of course, oc- 
curred prior to the Second Inhuman War. 

The events leading up to the destruction of 
the goblinoid fleets stem from another debate, 


28 * Chapter Two 


much like the one which prompted the move 
of the elves of Toril to Evermeet. This debate, 
too, took several hundred years from begin- 
ning to completion but, once decided, the 
doom of the goblinoids was sealed. With re- 
lentless precision and determination, the elves 
ensured that the goblin races would pose no 
threat for some time to come. 

Because of their power and dominance of 
many spheres, the elves have grown arrogant. 
They have appointed themselves the police 
force of space and often decide to extend their 
jurisdiction to planet surfaces. Sometimes, it 
seems, the spelljamming elves embody all that 
is worst in the elf race. They use their age as 
power, claiming experience and wisdom be- 
yond that held by others. They are haughty, 
hardly deigning to speak to “inferiors” They 
often interact with other races only when they 
suspect the other race of wrongdoing or con- 
spiracy. The actions of these spelljamming 
elves contribute to, or even cause, the nega- 
tive view of elves that many races hold. 

Elven spelljamming ships are organically 
grown, bred for aesthetic beauty and function- 
ality in wildspace. Thus, they are easily recog- 
nizable, as are those stolen from the elven 
gardens. The rejects are often violently colored 
monstrosities and are visible for long distances. 

Elves from all worlds can be found in space, 
although it is typically only the grey and high 
elves (or their equivalents) who travel by spell- 
jamming. Aquatic elves cannot leave their wa- 
tery homes, and wood elves hate to be parted 
from their forests for even a short while. Drow 
cannot abide the light of the stars at such close 
range. (For that matter, drow can easily travel 
to other places by extraplanar means and so 
have no need to endure the brightness of space.) 

In the middle of the Second Inhuman Wars, 
elves are finding that they have been too lax too 
long. Their inability to change at the same rapid 
pace as other races is leading to their downfall at 
goblinoid hands. The elves see their “empire” 
crumbling around their pointy ears. They have 
become just another spacefaring race rather 
than the feared power they had been for so 


long. 


ESO US 


KKR OTM 


AERIENE 


Gold or Sunrise Elves (grey elves) 


Elves of the Great Sea (aquatic elves) 


77 


1240 


v С? e 4 t " fay ` 

Q 2 GAG Wy 

Moon or Silver Elves 
(high elves} 

/ 

\ 


Tamirnesti (sylvan elves) 
| 
| \ 


Silvanesti (grev elves) 
x \ 
\ Armachnesti (sylvan elves) 
\ " е 


Elves of the Sea of Fallen Stars (aquatic elves) 


\ 


Qualinesti | М. Y 
| N 
N \ \ 
Lo" 


(high elves) 
ЕЈ 
Kagonesti 
(sylvan elves) 
ғ 

\\ 

م | 

> 
2 

a Dark Elves (drow) 
— 


“ 


Grugach (sylvan elves) 


Dargonesti 
Valley Elves (grey elves) 


(aquatic elves) 
N = Wild or 
Green Elves 
(sylvan elves) o 
3 T 
ب‎ 
> 
Dark Elves (drow) 


5 A 
- Sea Б], 
Ve P. А 
е ££ 
Ы 5 
Ре: Су 
From all worlds 


Dimernesti 
aquatic elves) 
"uo n 
E 4, 
be 2 = 
4, Q £ 
2. 
БУЗ С, М m et 
+ ۶ ES 
| с?” а 
сх 
From all worlds 
; 


Athasian Elves | 
\ 
\ | 
үк # Е 
| j | м 
е 
/ 


Zakharan Elves (high elves) 
سے‎ а ALQADIM з \ 
^ 
\ \ 
Figure 2: The Elven Tree of Evolution \ \ | 
\ | 
кї T - t 2 GN | | 
Note: This tigure represents the evolution of Neh | 
elves in the known worlds. Each world was \ A 
settled by nomadic high elves: in turn, these \ / 
eloped new characteristics and \ \ / 
МАИ 
M 
VELEZ 


elves dey 
1 into world-specific subraces. In 
Nomadic High Elves 


eve ›] ec 

SES ғ‏ ی 
parentheses аге the standard elves these new‏ 
subraces most closely resemble: aquatic, drow‏ 
grey, high, or sylvan elves‏ 


Variations on a Theme ® 29 


Т ее 


= СЛ 


CHAPTER 


> К EON TE «350 


] 


MOG бу RNA 


Physical Attributes 


Well, of course we're different. We live 
longer, often more than 400 years past the 
typical Human. We can function easily and 
comfortably in places where the only light is 
from the heat radiated by our brothers—and 
our enemies. Our skill with bow and sword 
has been called paranormal by some, while 
others recognize this skill as simply the mas- 
tery and artistry it truly is. We do not even 
need sleep, instead deriving our rest by dwell- 
ing within our memories and hopes of the 
past: the act of Reverie. Some claim this stag- 
nates us and causes us to live in the past. This 
is not so. We learn for the future by reliving 
the past. 

We are the overlords of the forest, and for 
good reason. We are intimate with the very 
soil on which we walk, for our souls are tied 
to the soil. The ground beneath our feet holds 
us up, never betraying us to the enemy. Our 
forests embrace us by hiding us in their 
branches, ensuring that we do not inadver- 
tently betray ourselves. 

We can adapt to any environment any- 
where, and there are members of our race in 
places most have deemed too inhospitable. 
Although you may not see our brethren, you 
may rest assured that they are there watching 
you... making sure уои do not do anything 
to offend them. 

We are, in short, the guardians and keepers 
of this world. We do not try to prove that we 
are naturally better than everyone else. We 
only know that our abilities far exceed those 
of most, and our long lives give us the per- 
spective to use these abilities to their fullest 
extent. 

This is not to say that the world should sit 
at our beck and call. To the contrary, we do 
what we can to ensure that we do not inter- 
fere with its workings too greatly. Indeed, we 
see our mission as one of restoring the world 
after you others are done with it. Unlike you 
people, our lives are not devoted to the idea 
that we must change the world, for we are 
fully aware that the world will change itself 
when it must needs. 


— Laranis Callirr, high elf ranger 


30 * Chapter Three 


Jo E OM ESSA ERG C RA REED SACS) RAS 


“yi lves generally | resemble humans 
vi physically. Although they tend to be 
^». shorter and slimmer, they can often 

successfully disguise themselves as small hu- 

mans. Without this disguise, however, their 
true origins are readily apparent. They are be- 
trayed in this respect by their distinctive coun- 
tenance. Many elves, however, find this is not 

a problem; they have no wish to be confused 

or identified with humans in any way. 

Elves have delicate chiseled features that are 
typically quite angular and beautiful. There is 
really no such thing as an elf born ugly; those 
who have low Charisma were either scarred 
accidentally or marred magically. However, 
Charisma is not only an indication of outward 
beauty. The fact that many elves have average 
Charisma is a testament to the fact that beauty 
is not, contrary to popular belief, the only im- 
portant thing about a person. 

All elves are very slim, hiding their natural 
strength under a veil of fragility. Their slight 
build belies a power seemingly drawn from 
the earth itself. Looking at them, one would 
never believe that these creatures were some 
of the most powerful ever created, or that 
they very nearly witnessed the birth of the 
world. Elves saw the rise of other races—the 
craw] of humanity from the primordial ooze. 
They are older than many trees and will live 
to see generations of trees and humans alike. 
Yet they hide this innate power beneath a deli- 
cate exterior; many thus assume they are 
harmless. 

Elven hair and eye color varies by subrace. 
This is, in fact, how many people identify the 
separate types of elf at first glance, most espe- 
cially grey and high elves. With other elves, 
the differences are often immediately obvious. 
However, it is still useful for any character to 
be familiar with the various traits that distin- 
guish the elf subraces. 

One interesting elven characteristic that few 
are aware of is the elves’ lack of canine teeth. 
Since they sprang full-fledged into the form 
they now occupy, they skipped the evolution 
process undergone by so many other races. 
Thus, although they are omnivores and their 


teeth are all strong, they have no pointed, ca- 
nine incisors. 

Elven skin is usually quite pale. The obvi- 
ous exceptions are, of course, the drow and 
the aquatic elves. Even half-elves are rather 
fair when compared to their human parents. 

Of course, all elves have pointed ears. This 
affords them sensitive hearing, and they can 
hear sounds unheard by human ears. How- 
ever, the range is not really great enough to 
make a significant difference; it is only enough 
for elves to distinguish certain tones, which 
enables them to pass messages not meant for 
human ears. 

This chapter discusses the physical aspects 
of elves, including innate abilities, stages of 
life they go through, diet, and fertility. It also 
discusses two uniquely elven qualities: the el- 
ven bond and elven music. They are included 
here rather than in Chapter Four because of 
the physical ramifications each has on elves. 


Elves have certain abilities not accessible to 
most humans except through powerful ma- 
gicks. They are aware that other races do not 
have these faculties, and they take great pride 
in knowing that they are the only mortal race 
blessed with them. However, most elves do 
not treat other races as inferior simply because 
they were born without these abilities; rather, 
they rejoice in their own uniqueness. The 
elves feel truly blessed. 

Among the abilities all elves are born with 
are communion, elvensight, manifestation, 
the reverie, and a limited resistance to heat 
and cold. Each of these is more fully explained 
in the following text. 


All elves have the inborn ability to share their 
experiences, their feelings, and their lives with 
those elves they love or trust implicitly. This 
sharing, called communion, can only be un- 
dertaken by fully willing elves. It does not 
work with half-elves, nor does it function 


Su 


i "WEN 
aun e АША! 


Jg CE A PLAS йу O CAS 


EEE COS SAO Oe ey 


A 


when one of those participating has even the 
slightest reservation. This includes those un- 
der the influence of charm-related spells, for 
they hold qualms deep in their hearts, even if 
told they do not. 

Communion requires all elves involved (to 
a maximum oí four) to be in a state of total 
relaxation. They must be in a place of peace, 
preferably where the world is not likely to in- 
trude with its troubles and its cares. A natural 
surrounding works best for this operation. 

Communion requires the participating 
elves to be totally serene, thinking only of the 
others in this most intimate bond. (Thus, 
communion is not an effective method of re- 
laying messages of any urgency.) All the elves 
must free themselves of judgments and preju- 
dices about the others, which may take some 
time. Indeed, some communions have been 
known to take a fortnight or more merely in 
preparation for the bonding. 

When the participants have sufficiently 
calmed and retreated from the rigors of the 
world, they lightly touch palm to palm, finger 
to finger. They open their minds to the others, 
freely and completely joining together; if even 
a tiny reservation remains, the bond fails. 
During communion, the elves explore all the 
facets of the others' personality—the loves, 
hatreds, hopes, and fears. 

While in this trance, communing elves are 
totally vulnerable to anything that might hap- 
pen to them physically, for they cannot defend 
themselves against any attacks while com- 
muning. Mentally, they are even more vulner- 
able to attack, saving at —4 against most 
mental attacks, for their minds are totally un- 
guarded. 

Interestingly enough, the very act of com- 
munion offers a protection of sorts. Those in 
communion are defended against being spied 
upon, either mentally or physically; this de- 
tense takes the form of an invisible barrier sur- 
rounding the communing elves. It is 
speculated that the elves are so enrapt with 
each other that they project a mental shield 
that keeps discovery to a minimum. Of 
course, this offers no protection against an at- 


32 * Chapter Three 


tack from someone who knows of the time 
and whereabouts of a communion. 

The benefit of communion is not only that 
elves learn the most secret facets of others. Be- 
cause of the sharing, they also become inti- 
mately acquainted with others’ habits, 
fighting styles, and ways of thinking. For the 
day immediately following communion, the 
bonded elves can fight in perfect harmony, 
one's weapon following through where an- 
other left an opening. If fighting side by side 
against common foes, they gain a +2 to hit 
and a —1 to AC for the next day only, and 
only if they work together. All the elves must 
have at least one partner from the communion 
at their sides if this bonus is to be brought into 
play. 

Communion can only be effected once a 
week. Those who try it more often with the 
same partners find themselves sharing with es- 
sences that are essentially themselves, for 
those who have participated together have 
shared enough of their spirits that there is little 
difference between them. Furthermore, com- 
munion tends to be somewhat draining even 
while it invigorates. Bonding so totally is sim- 
ply too much of a drain on one's psyche to be 
attempted lightly and frequently. Communion 
works best when the participants have some- 
thing to learn or gain from one another. 


Elvensight 


Elves have extremely keen eyes. Although 
they are not as sharp-eyed as most birds of 
prey, their eyes are still sharper than those of 
the average human. In addition, their eyes 
have the ability to see further into the infrared 
spectrum, allowing them to function in most 
unlighted places. In most landbound elves, 
this sight extends only to a range of 60 feet. 
Aquatic elves, as described below, have an en- 
tirely different sort of sight. 

Naturally, there must be no other light at all 
for elvensight, or infravision, to function. If a 
greater intensity of light than starlight (includ- 
ing moonlight from a half full or fuller moon) 
is within the elf's line of sight up to 100 feet 


away, his or her elvensight will not work at 
all. Although the range of infravision is typi- 
cally 60 feet, bright light farther away affects 
them adversely. 

Elf eyes must, of course, adjust to a change 
in light. They can no more immediately use 
their elvensight any more than a human can 
immediately adjust to the sunlight after 
spending a time in darkness. As well, if they 
are exposed to bright light while using their 
infravision, they suffer a —2 penalty to all 
actions for 1d4 rounds while their eyes adjust 
to the change. 


TABLE 3: ELVENSIGHT (INFRAVISION) 


Subrace Distance Type of Sight 
Aquatic elves 360' Aquatic vision 
(sonar)* 

Drow 120' Infravision* * 
Grey elves 60' Infravision 
Half-elves 60' Infravision 
High elves 60' Infravision 
Sylvan elves  60' Infravision 


* Aquatic elves do not have infravision, per 

se, above the water; however, they can locate 
their way or their enemies through dark and 
even stormy waters by a version of infravision 
adapted to underwater environments. They 
do not see heat or cold, but rather the move- 
ments of water currents. 
** Drow infravision is so intense that their 
eyes actually radiate heat; someone viewing a 
drow through infravision sees two burning 
eyes atop a normally glowing torso. 


Manifestation 


Despite the fact that elves are shorter than hu- 
mans and often appear childlike because of 
their height, they are usually not discounted 
as such. There are the rare occasions when 
they are, however, and it is at such times that 
they invoke the elven ability manifestation. 
When elves wish, they have an imposing 
presence. Suddenly, they can seem far larger, 
more there, than their actual height and weight 


would indicate. They use this ability to good 
effect against impressible humans; it keeps the 
credulous ones at a distance and occasionally 
attracts necessary attention to the elf. 

The manifestation ability is purely a result 
of the elven connection with the land; the only 
trick involved is in demonstrating this connec- 
tion. Naturally, manifestation does not work 
on planes other than the Prime Material. Fur- 
thermore, it functions only when the elf is in a 
natural environment or in one that the elves 
have shaped, in which case they generally do 
not wish to make their presence known. Fi- 
nally, manifestation works only on an elf's 
home world or after an elf has lived on a 
world for more than 50 years, whereupon the 
elf has grown used to the natural rhythms of 
the world. 

If an elf from Toril were to travel to Oerth, 
he could not manifest for half a century. After 
such time, he would have made the planet his 
home. To do the manifestation back on Toril, 
he would have to return to that land and be- 
come reattuned to the planet. 

Any elf away from his home world for 50 
years, no matter where he is, loses this ability 
until he reattunes himself to the land. Note 
that it takes only five years to readjust to an 
original home world, unless an elf has attuned 
himself to another. In this case, he must en- 
dure the entire 50-year process, for he has 
made himself a native of that other land, and 
must entirely readjust to the cycles of his 
home world of old. 

Manifestation has no real definition in 
game terminology. It is suggested that this 
ability allow a +3 on reaction checks (reac- 
tions for enemies would be —3), as well as 
draw attention to the elf in question. This 
might be useful when trying to distract a band 
of orcs from an injured party member or when 
attempting to impress a simple woodsman. 
Aside from impressing people, the power is 
largely useless. Elves are immune to this abili- 
ty and any displays of it. They are aware of its 
presence when it is used and may admire the 
timing if particularly noteworthy. . 


Physical Attributes ® 33 


() 
ЧИР аа n Ж 


JOO RAD BO OO EE CS 


The Reverie 


Yet another difference between elves and the 
other humanoids of the worlds they share is 
that elves do not sleep in the typical sense, 
though they can enter that state if they desire. 
Instead, they gain their rest through a process 
known as the reverie. The reverie is akin to 
sleep, yet is very much unlike it. When elves 
enter this state, they vividly relive past memo- 
ries, those both pleasant and painful. Like the 
dreaming of humans, elves have no control 
over which memories rise to the fore when 
they relinquish their bodies to the reverie. Oc- 
casionally, elves do actually dream, but this is 
not a frequent occurrence and mostly occurs 
only when they truly sleep. 

Elven dreams, when they happen, are 
sometimes prophetic. Whether these dreams 
are an indication of some sort of precognitive 
ability on the part of the elves or granted by 
their gods is a matter of debate. However, not 
all elven dreams are prophetic. Indeed, 
enough of their dreams are like those of hu- 
mans that they cannot rely on their dreams for 
guidance. Still, all of their dreams are highly 
symbolic, providing insight into each individ- 
ual’s character. 

In a very real way, the reverie accounts for 
the elven desire to lead happy, joyous lives. 
Who would look forward to reliving unpleasant 
memories every night? Very few, though there 
are some truly noble elves who take on the pain 
and suffering of others so that they relive the 
memories with each reverie instead. These elves 
have accepted this sacrifice for the good of their 
people, taking upon themselves the burden that 
could not (or should not) descend to the lives of 
other, more innocent elves. They perform the 
unpleasant task of drawing into themselves the 
suffering of their people. 

When they enter reverie, elves do not usu- 
ally close their eyes unless there is a bright 
light present. They relax their bodies entirely, 
each muscle losing its rigidity, until they are 
absolutely calm. Their faces relax into a dazed 
and distant look as if they were seeing another 
land or another time. 


EEE SA CARS 


CHO rs 
| 

During this time, they are aware of their 
surroundings, but they cannot act to influence 
them any more than a human can while 
asleep. Only by an act of will can an elf tear 
herself from reverie, and she will be confused 
for a short time, just as a human would be 
who has torn himself from sleep. 

Although the reverie provides rest, it is pri- 
marily an important memory tool that helps 
the elf maintain a strong sense of identity. 
Since their lifespans are so great, elves must 
periodically recall the events in those hun- 
dreds of years that were integral to the making 
of their personality. 

The fact that elves go into this reverie, rath- 
er than enter actual sleep, could help to ex- 
plain their natural resistance to sleep spells. 
Since sleep is, for the most part, alien to their 
nature, they can ward off its effects easily. But 
since the reverie is akin to sleep, they suffer no 
ill effects when they do fall victim to sleep 
spells and like magicks. | 

The combination of reverie and manifesta- 
tion may also account for the elves' near- 
immunity to charm-related enchantments. 
The reverie imparts a strong sense of self, giv- 
ing them a secure identity. They are intimately 
attuned to their own lives, wants, and needs 
and are therefore not easily misled about their 
goals. They allow only themselves to deter- 
mine their course of action. 

Their innate manifestation ability makes 
them well aware of efforts to influence them 
through extranatural means. Since they can 
sway others, they are conscious of attempts to 
manipulate them and can resist these endeav- 
ors with more authority and success than 
most other races. | 

| 


Resistance to Heat and Cold 


Elves are keenly attuned to the world and its 
meteorological cycles. As such, they are less 
affected by extremities of temperatures than 
are many other races. The blazing sun of the 
desert and the chill of the arctic cause elves 
discomfort, but not nearly as much as such ex- 


tremes do others. 


CHOSE 


eee 


34 * Chapter Three 


| 


A 


Л 


Elves can withstand up to 100°F with only 
mild discomfort. Likewise, they can remain 
clad in their usual clothes to a low of the freez- 
ing point of water and be only mildly uncom- 
fortable. Below 32°F, they suffer the same ill 
effects as anyone else, but until that point they 
feel little different. Above 100°F, they suffer 
as do others but exhibit no undue stress until 
that temperature is surpassed. They lose no 
body water to sweat, nor do they need to 
lighten their clothing. 

It has been surmised that this is why elves 
have pale skin and only rarely tan. Their re- 
sistance to the elements prevents much of the 
skin damage that other races suffer. Only 
those elves who are constantly exposed to the 
elements suffer even the slightest amount, and 
even then they do not tan as deeply as some 
humans and dwarves. 

The elves' immunity to a range of tempera- 
tures does not extend to fire or snow, or any- 
thing that simulates these conditions. For 
example, an elf could not stick his hand into a 
fire and be undamaged, nor could he walk 
through freezing rain without effect. Neither 
are elves immune to spells that rely on fire, 
ice, wind, and other weather-related effects. It 
is only to natural temperatures that elves have 
even the slightest resistance. A cone of cold or 
a fireball has the usual adverse effect on an elf. 


Other Elven Abilities 


Despite their frail appearance and lowered 
Constitutions, elves have a remarkable resist- 
ance to ordinary disease. While it is not on a 
scale with the paladin's total immunity to non- 
magical diseases, elves are only rarely afflict- 
ed by disease. Although immunity does not 
easily translate into game terms, the DM has 
the option of setting elven resistance to dis- 
ease. Anywhere from 0% to 50% is accept- 
able and is unlikely to destroy game balance. 

On the negative side, there are some purely 
elven diseases (which are, thankfully, very 
rare), to which all other races are immune. 
These include certain nervous disorders, some 
poxes, and other equally virulent diseases. 


36 * Chapter Three 


Elves, although not necessarily ashamed of 
their afflicted, do try to keep those who are ill 
from the prying eyes of the rest of the world. 
They do not want the other races to think of 
ways to use these diseases against the elves. 

Unless a disease is fatal, the effects usually 
fade simply with the passing of time, for elves 
have a strong regenerative ability. Scars (not 
wounds) on their bodies heal more quickly 
than they do on other races, eventually disap- 
pearing almost entirely. Such scars show up 
only under intense scrutiny or under harsh 
lighting conditions. This ability works only 
on scars; elves do not recover hit points more 
rapidly than any other PC race. 

Their regenerative ability does not extend 
to regrowing lost limbs or organs, although 
some contend that the elves are the original 
creators of the magicks that enable this. Elves 
are, however, on the pioneering edge of creat- 
ing artificial limbs to replace lost ones (see 
page 106). In addition, elf crafters are working 
on ways to replace the more sensitive organs, 
such as eyes and ears, as well as the heart, 
stomach, and other internals. 


Stages of Life 


Elves have the longest known lifespans in the 
known worlds. The length of their lives often 
surpasses even the ancient trees, although the 
elves typically leave the lands known to hu- 
mans before reaching 600 years. Some have 
been known to stay for as long as 750 years, 
but very few remain after that time. The siren 
call of the unknown beckons to them, and 
they leave the world in Bi capable hands of 
their successors. 

Elves live long ough to see the changes 
the world has to offer—to see things humans 
regard as permanent deteriorate into dust. 
One generation of elves can see the rise and 
fall of a mighty human empire, the birth and 
death of a forest, the gradual eroding of a 
mountain range. The face of the earth can 
change dramatically during the time an elf 
spends on the world. This gives them a far 
broader range of values than humans are usu- 


ally capable of understanding. 

Elves do not feel the effects of age as hu- 
mans know them. After an elf has grown to 
maturity, her features cease to change or, at 
least, change very slowly. There is very little 
difference between the way a 100-year-old elf 
and a 400-year-old elf appear. The only way 
to tell between young and old is the degree of 
exuberance, spontaneity, and enthusiasm each 
exhibit. Only at venerable age do elves begin 
to show their years, yet they still appear 
younger than most humans do at age 50. 

Older elves are less likely to charge off to do 
great deeds rashly, preferring instead to think 
the matter through a bit more. Younger elves, 
on the other hand, have not yet discovered the 
value of patience. They dash hither and yon in 
an effort to squeeze the most from life, realiz- 
ing but not quite understanding that they have 
hundreds more years in which to do so. 

Elves go through several stages of life, in- 
cluding childhood, adolescence, adulthood, 
middle age, old age, and venerable age. Once 
elves have tired of the world, usually by their 


TABLE 4: ELF SUBRACES BY CATEGORIES OF AGE 


600th year, they pass on to a place called Ar- 
vanaith. Because this final rite of life is such 
an important part of the elven way, Chapter 
Seven is devoted entirely to Arvanaith and the 
passing on of elves. 

Table 4 below shows the ages at which elf 
subraces fall into the stages of life categories 
described in this chapter. The table is also use- 
ful to calculate any changes to abilities due to 
the effects of age. Please note that this table 
varies slightly from Table 12: Aging Effects 
(found on page 24 of the Players Handbook) 
in order to represent the variances between 
the elf subraces and other races. That table 
noted that the maximum ability scores an elf 
could have is 18. New maximums for each 
subrace are given in Chapter Ten; these are 
initial maximum ability scores and do not re- 
flect the bonus age bestows on Intelligence 
and Wisdom. Because all elves live such long 
lives, they have the opportunity to increase 
these two attributes to 20, purely by observ- 
ing life. This adjustment is regardless of sub- 
race. 


Subrace Childhood Adolescence Adulthood” 
Aquatic 1-59 60-99 100-159 
Drow 1-49 50-79 80-139 
Grey 1-79 80-119 120-209 
High 1-74 75-109 110-174 
Sylvan 1-69 70-104 105-169 


Middle Venerable Maximum 
Age** Old Aget Agett Age 
160-219 220-299 300 + 300 +34100 
140-189 190-224 225+ 225 +34100 
210-209 300-424 425+ 425 +54100 
175-249 250-349 350+ 350 +44100 
170-229 230-324 325+ 325 +44100 


Full normal abilities 
** —1 Str, -1Con; +1 Int,. +1 Wis 
+ —1Str, -1 Соп; +1 Wis 
++ -2 Str, -2 Dex, –2 Con; +2 Int, +2 Wis 


Note: Modifiers to abilities are cumulative per age category. For example, the total ability adjustments to a 
grey elf of venerable age would be as follows: —4 Str, =2 Dex, —4 Con, +3 Int, and +4 Wis. However, 
elves’ Intelligence and Wisdom abilities can never be increased beyond 20, except by magical means. Like- 
wise, all their abilities can never deteriorate below certain minimums, again except by magical means. 
Minimum statistics for all elf subraces are as follows: Strength 3, Dexterity 6, Constitution 7, Intelligence 8, 


Wisdom 3, and Charisma 8. 


—————-——— 


Physical Attributes * 37 


| 


OZER ERT DA ROSEN OY RASER 


Childhood 


Elves remain children for approximately 65 to 
75 years. They grow slowly throughout these 
years, achieving a height of 4 feet at most. It is 
during this stage of life that they learn what it 
means to be an elf. They learn the basics of 
archery and swordplay. However, they are still 
essentially children and continue with their 
childish ways until they reach adolescence. 


Adolescence 


At about age 75, elves enter adolescence. 
Whether male or female makes no difference; 
both sexes mature at roughly the same time 
and at the same rate. This is the time of life 
when elves begin growing, some to a height of 
5 1/2 feet or more, although the norm is often 
approximately 5 feet. 

The end of this period is also the age at 
which they are inducted fully into elven 
society—the age when they must bear the re- 
sponsibilities of adulthood. It is during ado- 
lescence that older elves teach younger ones 
how to continue finding joy in the years to 
come without succumbing to the crushing 
boredom that advanced years often bring. 

Those elves who were not prepared for the 
prospect of centuries stretching before them 
may fail to manage the weight of those years. 
Indeed, such elves (not to mention other be- 
ings given such longevity) often come to a ter- 
rible end if forced to live those hundreds of 
years. The most common example of this mis- 
fortune is an elf who grows up in a human 
community. Such elves do not let the years 
slide past as do other elves; instead, they try 
to cram as much living as possible into as 
short a time as possible—as do their human 
teachers. These elves don't learn the true value 
of relaxation and merriment, and these are of- 
ten the elves who become insane or suicidal. 

Of course, this isn't true of all non-elf- 
raised elves, or even many of them. Most 
elves have an instinctive grasp of the way they 
should live so that they can enjoy the entirety 
of their lives. 


38 * Chapter Three 


Adulthood 


When elves reach age 110, they are considered 
adults. They are allowed to make their own 
way in society, human or otherwise, and are 
free to make all personal choices. They are al- 
so ready to take responsibility for their 
actions—whether good or bad. Adult elves 
can now experience life fully, for they are fully 
grown and are in the prime of life. 

This is the age when many elves begin ad- 
venturing. Free of the constraints of child- 
hood and free to follow their own guidance, 
they relinquish their role in society for a time. 
They yearn to satisfy their boundless curiosity 
about the universe. | 

This is, unfortunately, also the age when 
many of these adventuring elves die. Having 
had no true experience d the world outside 
their homelands, they are usually unprepared 
for what lies beyond the fields they know. 

Less than one-fourth the adult population 
of elves goes уени; Most—although 
curious about the world find enough joy 
and beauty right where they are. Those who 
take up the sword and the bow to campaign in 
the outerlands often feel some driving need. 
They are not ostracized by their fellows for 
the wish to experience more; indeed, those 
who stay at home may feel a little wistfulness 
that they have chosen to remain behind. 


Middle Age 


At the age of 175, elves reach middle age. 
They have slowed somewhat and become 
slightly more vulnerable to disease and age. In 
trade, they know much more about the world 
and its workings, having affirmed their con- 
nection to the land countless times. Elves of 
this age have the wisdom to know what their 
abilities are and the intelligence to not push 
themselves beyond their means. 

Many elves cease adventuring at this point. 
More than 60 years of one's life devoted to 
pursuing fleeting treasure and fame is quite 
enough for most elves. The priests settle in 
one community, the wizards retire to perform 


magical research full time, the warriors train 
others, and thieves establish their own guilds. 

There are a few elves who never cease the 
campaigning life. They are likely to remain 
actively adventuring forever—or until their 
enemies catch up with them. Often, they have 
some epic quest or some inner need driving 
them. These are the elves most often spoken 
of in legends, for they will not retreat from 
what they perceive as their duty. They do 
what they must, not always what they want. 
They are among the most admired beings on 
whatever world they exist; their most hated 
enemies hold them in grudging respect. Dec- 
ades and even centuries have given these elves 
a reputation of might and power. Even if these 
elves have no great ability, that reputation is 
enough to cow most opponents. 


Old Age 


Around the age of 250, the elf has entered "old 
age.” He still hasn't become visibly old, but he 
feels the effects of age. He slows his activities, 
preferring less strenuous ones. Rather than 
sprint through the forests as he might have as 
a young elf, he sits in the rays of sunlight and 
composes songs. He has tapped into the mys- 
tic rhythms of the earth and become ever 
more attuned to its cycles. 

Few elves continue adventuring upon 
reaching old age. Their bodies and minds 
evolve into something more suited for a quiet, 
contemplative life. Still, their bodies do not 
appear any different than they did 100 years 
before, and their skills are still as sharp as they 
ever were. There is a slight slowing in their 
limbs, but that is all. 


Venerable Age 


Here the elf, at age 350 or older, begins to 
show signs of age. Wrinkles start mapping her 
face. Her physical condition deteriorates still 
further, but her knowledge and her wisdom 
continue to grow ever greater. Physically, she 
can still exert herself, but not nearly as much 
as a younger elf. Fortunately, no one expects 


her to do so. She has earned the right to be 
called elder, and other elves defer to her wis- 
dom and vast experience. 

Unlike humans, even the very old elves do 
not lose much vitality—only endurance. Their 
willpower grows to phenomenal might, and 
these elves can force themselves to great deeds if 
need be. As a rule, venerable elves prefer to lead 
a relaxed lifestyle, playing music and singing, 
and listening to others do the same. There is no 
such thing as a naturally senile elf. 


Diet 


Elves can subsist on any food palatable to hu- 
mans, although their tastes are generally more 
discerning. Their preferences are clearly to- 
ward delicate foods and wines, particularly 
those that possess a great degree of subtlety. 
Heavier foods, such as beef and coarse bread, 
distress the elf stomach. 

Humans usually find elven food unsatis- 
fying, for the portions are too small. Elves, of 
course, require less food than do humans. 
They very rarely hunt for or make more food 
than they can eat in a day. However small the 
portions, the food elves do make is such that 
the finest human chef blushes in shame at his 
inadequacy. Indeed, many humans who 
would be gourmet cooks try to procure an ap- 
prenticeship among elves. Those who learn 
the elven techniques have a right to boast of 
their achievements. 

Elves tend to be more vegetarian than hu- 
mans, for this has less of an impact on their 
environment. When they do eat meat, it is 
carefully culled from the excess animal popu- 
lation of their area and done in such a way 
that it doesn't disrupt the land. 

Elves almost never keep herd animals. Not 
only do these creatures take up space that could 
more properly be forest, animals require almost 
constant maintenance and feeding. No elf wants 
to be saddled with the joyless burden of watch- 
ing animals eat all day long. 

Let the humans rake in the profits to be had 
from ranching; elves can survive on the fruits of 
the forest. Besides, elves don't believe in raising 


Physical Attributes • 39 


animals simply to kill them. That is not nature's 
way and therefore not the elves' way. 

For drink, elves mostly subsist on sparkling 
waters from cold mountain springs. However, 
they are not averse to wine and beverages of a 
similar nature, and many elf cities and towns 
cultivate the grapes and grains necessary to 
the making of such refreshments. 

Elves enjoy drinking mead, or fermented 
honey. This delicate drink agrees well with the 
elven palate and gives them a pleasant feeling. 
Greater quantities act on elves much as alco- 
hol does on humans. Fortunately, elves feel 
none of the ill effects humans do when drink- 
ing this beverage. However, elves are suscep- 
tible to human brews such as ale and beer. 

The elves favorite drink, however, is a nec- 
tar created from the juice of flowers, mixed 
with honey and an additional, secret ingredi- 
ent. This nectar is of ancient origin and is 
called feywine. What its secret ingredient 
might be has long been a mystery to humans, 
dwarves, and the demihumans, as well as 
most elves. Feywine is used liberally at elven 
festivals. It induces frivolous behavior, lasting 
for days or even weeks. 

Elves can, however, turn off feywine's ef- 
fects when necessary (for example, when de- 
fending against rampaging orc hordes). 
Humans, dwarves, and other races are not so 
lucky. The effects of feywine on these races is 
much greater than it is on elves, and large 
quantities can make a human lose all sense of 
self for months. Too much feywine is the cause 
behind stories of humans waking after revel- 
ing with the elves, only to discover that 
months have passed since their last memory. 

Because of this, elves rarely allow humans 
to consume feywine. The side effects are sim- 
ply too great, and consumption only increases 
enmity against the elves. Any human attend- 
ing an elven festival can expect water, mead, 
or nectar; only when the elves are particularly 
mischievous or when their judgment is some- 
how impaired will they allow a human to 
sample feywine. Since feywine doesn't keep 
well, elves never carry it on their travels. 


40 * Chapter Three 


Elven Interfertility 


Elves have been known to produce children 
with beings of other races. Most of these are 
the offspring of a union between elves and hu- 
mans. Elf females sometimes find themselves 
drawn to human men for a brief while, and 
human women cannot resist the charms of 
certain elf males. The child of these unions is 
usually born and reared in the civilization of 
its mother; elf males rarely want humans in 
their lands, and most elf females don’t want to 
bear a child outside the elven realms, nor to 
abandon it to humans. 

While elves may dally with members of oth- 
er races, there is usually no offspring from 
such unions. Something in the natures of the 
races involved makes such a child distinctly 
improbable. Only with the aid of strong ma- 
gicks or unforeseen coincidences has there 
been any result from these dalliances. 

Apart from the physical differences, elves 
find most other races unappealing in appear- 
ance. Dwarves have their beards, and half- 
lings have their hairy feet and considerable 
girths. While elves may get along with these 
races, they do not, for the most part, seek to 
grow any closer than good friends would. 

Thus, while elves may be physically inter- 
fertile with other races, they generally choose 
not to be. While there are many half-elves in 
existence, most of those known are of human 
descent. One or two half-elf/half-dwarves 
have cropped up in legends, but little remains 
of what their abilities were like or what the 
circumstances of their births were. 


The Elven Bond 


Very rarely, an elf will form a mystical and un- 
breakable bond with another being, whether 
elf, human, dwarf, or otherwise. Some signify 
this bonding through the giving of gifts de- 
signed to demonstrate one's love. Others 
merely forge the bond quietly, without any 
outward signs. Whatever the process through 
which this bond is formed, the elves involved 
and their chosen can sense the strong emo- 


tions of each other. They feel the joys and sor- 
rows of the other, their triumphs and angers 
as well. Should distance separate the two in 
this bond and one pass away, the other can 
feel the death through the breaking of the 
bond. This is an even stronger version of the 
communion ability elves share, for this is a 
lifelong bond and not lightly broken. 

For this one person, elves become truly al- 
truistic. Their lives are focused around mak- 
ing their loved one happy, even to the extent 
of sacrificing their own life. When this bond is 
broken, whether through betrayal or death of 
one of the pair, it is a tremendous shock to the 
other member of the union, Elves can die from 
the grief caused by such partings. 

Because they can enact this union only once 
(or twice, in extremely rare cases) in their 
lives, elves are very careful about those to 
whom they attach themselves. Many elves go 
through life without joining their spirits to an- 
other, for many find no mates suitable for or 
deserving of such an important union. 

Few elves bestow this gift on humans, for 
humans are so short-lived that the bond 
would be all but wasted on them. Still, there 
are some who consider this a small sacrifice 
for the love of a particular human. The very 
number of half-elves attests to this, for al- 
though most half-elves aren't children of this 
union, there are enough who are. The blink of 
an elf's eye spells an end to these ties, but the 
love they gain lasts for the rest of their life. 

This bond applies, to a lesser extent, to the 
earth itself. If confined or kept away from the 
land or the company of other elves for too 
long a time, an elf can die from grief and lone- 
liness. Even if being held prisoner near nature 
or with other elves, the elf can lose hope 
and—without sustaining physical injury— 
force his or her own death. This is done only 
in the darkest of times, and only when there is 
no hope left at all to the elf. 

This ability to choose death over life is one 
that defeats captors and would-be torturers, 
for they are unable to maintain their grip on 
their victim for long should the elf choose this 
method of “escape.” 


Elven Music 


Song and dance play an important part in eve- 
ryday elven life. They find that music pro- 
vides an outlet for their centuries of 
experience, pain, and joy. The elf that does 
not have at least some experience with an in- 
strument or some proficiency in dancing is a 
rare being, and one might suspect that he or 
she is somehow emotionally stunted. 

Elven music is an incredibly complex and 
beautifully crafted art, although it is not often 
played around non-elves. Elves have learned 
that their tunes haunt anyone who has an ear 
for music, for it leaves these people with a 
vague, unsatisfied yearning that can never be 
filled with anything but elven music. 

It is for this reason that there are very few 
traveling elf bards. For one thing, they don't 
want to destroy the enjoyment humans find in 
their own music. For another, they know hu- 
mans would never leave the elf cities alone if 
they knew of the sublime beauty elves are ca- 
pable of producing with music. 

Those who have been fortunate enough to 
hear elven music claim that humans learned 
music from the elves. Although human music 
is but a poor imitation, the humans contin- 
ually strive toward the ultimate musical expe- 
rience that the elves provide. The best human 
and half-elf bards are those who have learned 
from elf masters, yet even they can only echo 
the elves. This is the reason, some sages sur- 
mise, that so many wonderful musicians re- 
main dissatisfied with their work. 

Elven songs of grief are often acappella 
wordless melodies. Those listening to such 
songs who are non-elves will find themselves 
in tears before the elves are halfway through, 
for the anguish expressed in the lilting voices 
of the elves transcends the human experience 
of heartfelt pain. Those who hear the elven 
mourning rituals are never quite the same, re- 
turning to the present sadder and somehow 
wiser. The sorrow that the songs express often 
haunts the listeners for the rest of their lives. 


Physical Attributes e 41 


LAESA 


(774627 


CHAPTER 


Е & К e ONT o EAD << FAVOR SS VD 


PX TAR 


Mental Attributes 


1 2 is КОҢ ЕЗ Б 


AS 
2 


In the not too distant past, a dwarf bounty 
hunter made a terrible mistake. While pursu- 
ing a fleeing half-elf foe, he came upon an elf 
hamlet. He wrongly assumed it to be the 
home of the half-elf culprit. Nothing would 
satisfy him that this was not the case, and he 
grew ever more enraged that the elves were 
“hiding” his rightful prey from him. 

In the dwarfs anger and his lust for the re- 
ward money, he cruelly slew a woodsman— 
using the elf's own axe to cleave the widower 
in two. The elfs four children, who had been 
playing nearby, froze in fear. Ignoring the 
grief-stricken children, the ruthless dwarf 
turned once more to the woods. There he 
found old tracks made by the fleeing half-elf, 
and the dwarf set off after his foe again. 

Elves being elves, the children were taken in 
and nurtured as best the hamlet could. Most 
were eventually fostered away to other villages, 
for the hamlet couldn't support children whose 
provider had passed on. Despite being sepa- 
rated, the four children nursed a private longing 
for vengeance in their hearts. Each trained dili- 
gently to understand the ways of the forest and 
of tracking, learning its subtle nuances that they 
might avenge their father. | 

Fifty vears passed after the death of their 
father before the young elves deemed they 
were ready. They reunited and swore a sol- 
emn oath not to rest until they found the slay- 
er of their father. The four then split off, each 
heading in a direction of the compass. Burned 
in their minds was the image of the dwarf. 
They questioned all they came across, and 
some sought certain magical items. Finally, 
one of them found a lead and left word for her 
siblings to follow as soon as possible. — 

The old dwarf had retired from bounty hunt- 
ing to live alone in the mountains. The four 
elves swooped into his house and stole him 
from his doze by the fire. None ever saw the 
dwarf again, but his house still stands. Hacked 
limbs are left on the doorstep every few years— 
the hacked limbs of an old dwarf. To date, there 

A ring of regeneration can work wonders in 
vengeance. 


42 * Chapter Four 


XB REP GS OR SPIELE TS 


Tae 3 


№) he key to understanding the elven 
%7 mind is comprehending the years an 
КЕЕ elf must fill. Most races do not (and 
cannot) understand the perspective hundreds 
of years of life lend an elf. This incredible li- 
fespan often gives the elf a terrible, driving 
ambition. Paradoxically, it can also give elves 
a lackadaisical attitude. 

Above all, elves are patient. They have 
years to complete any task, and they don't 
mind the wait. After all, they have created 
many ways to wile away time. They find im- 
patience to be an especially amusing vice pos- 
sessed by the other races. If the need for haste 
is urgent, however, elves can move faster and 
more decisively than most of the other races. 

Elves tend to be very clever and devious, 
having had years to practice their skills and 
hone their minds. Their conversation and 
their games possess many degrees of subtlety, 
most of which goes unheeded by non-elves. 

Elves delight in paradox and humor, for it is 
through these attributes that they express 
themselves most fully. These two qualities al- 
low them to communicate with one another 
and affords great verbal play as elves try to 
outwit each other. Although elves are primar- 
ily happy folk, they are capable of great emo- 
tions of a much darker nature. 

An angry elf is a terrible foe. An elf bent on 
vengeance is even worse. As mentioned, elves 
have an inexhaustible store of patience. They 
can wait for years before exacting revenge— 
after their prey has been lulled into a false 
sense of security. Or they can hunt their ene- 
mies over the years, never faltering or slowing 
in the pursuit of their quarry. 

Occasionally, elves will make a pretense of 
the hunt and let the person “escape.” After the 
person has taken to flight, the elf is likely to 
appear at random intervals—a tactic designed 
to keep fear instilled in the heart of the person. 
This can make for a life of anxiety for anyone 
who has earned the wrath of elves, for that 
person never knows when the elf may strike to 
claim vengeance. This is one reason that the 
elves are so feared as foes, for no one wishes 
to live a paranoid life fearing elven wrath. 


M. 


7 


DPA X AGO RM ACH 


Their lifespan gives elves a unique perspective 
on life than most other races can't share. Elves 
don't worry about not experiencing enough in 
their lives; rather, they look for the next new 
thing to excite their curiosity and enthusiasm. 

This lifespan also means that elves develop 
an attitude and a character that is uniquely 
their own. No one can tell exactly how their 
years will affect each individual elf. Typically, 
elves begin their lives as carefree, fun-loving 
spirits. As they grow older, most of them be- 
come slightly more cautious, yet still retain 
the warmth and vitality necessary for elves to 
fully enjoy their lives. 

Still, some of them start life with a more se- 
rious attitude, believing (despite the advice of 
their elders) that their time is too short to be 
spent frittering it away on such foolishness as 
dancing and singing. As these elves grow old- 
er, they often become obsessed with finding a 
meaning to everything, seeking the funda- 
mental truths of existence. Some few realize 
that their years are enough for both truth and 
fun. Most, however, continue on in a some- 
what joyless existence, spending their years 
associating exclusively with sages and elder 
beings. Eventually, they lock themselves away 
from true life. In seeking the “truth,” they lose 
the meaning and purpose of that which they 
value most: their lives. 

Most elves, as has been noted, are more in- 
terested in living life fully. They can begin sev- 
eral projects within the span of a year, such as 
writing songs, creating works of art, learning 
swordplay, and so forth. They think nothing 
of setting aside each project when something 
more interesting comes along. After all, with 
centuries at one's disposal, taking a decade or 
two on a task is nothing to worry about. If 
they lose interest in the product in the inter- 
vening time, they can always ignite interest by 
reliving it through the reverie. 

Obviously, elves see no need to hurry them- 
selves through anything. If their short-lived 
friends legitimately need something quickly, 
elves will rush to fill that need. If left to their 


own devices, however, elves will take a much 
longer time than might otherwise be appreci- 
ated by a human. Elf lives simply aren't short 
enough to worry about haste. But elves are far 
from lazy. They are almost constantly active 
during daytime, engaged in some project or 
another. If they want to spend a day lying on a 
grassy hillside watching birds or just relaxing, 
who complains? 

Elves do not regard material acquisitions as 
anything important, instead preferring to cul- 
tivate music, art, and poetry that will outlive 
the years and the treasured possessions of oth- 
ers. Elves do not therefore try to accumulate 
gold or other treasures, except as a means to 
acquire the things that they truly treasure. 
Even the greatest paintings eventually fall to 
the weathering effects of time, becoming use- 
less and valueless. 

On the other hand, elves love to gaze at 
works of beauty and true craftsmanship. 
Oddly enough, elves are rather bad portrait 
artists. Perhaps because they try so hard to 
capture the inner elf that they haven't mas- 
tered the human method of painting, which 
combines the outer shell with inner beauty. As 
such, elves have been known to locate master- 
pieces of human artists, take them to their 
homes, and then use a secret technique to pre- 
serve them through the years. Although this is 
not a perfect means of preserving these pieces, 
it does give the art many more years of life. 

Elves have developed other magical meth- 
ods of preserving such works but will not 
share these with other races; the other races 
do not have a proper appreciation for the in- 
tricacies of art, and thus the preservation 
would be wasted on them. However, any of 
these races are free to journey to the elf cities 
to gaze on the works elves have felt important 
enough to save from the ravages of time. 

Although they place little importance on 
material possessions, elves do have a clearly 
defined sense of ownership. Treasured items, 
such as magic or fine weaponry, sculpture or 
favored instruments, are definitely the prop- 
erty of their owners. Thievery of such items is 
highly frowned upon. Most elf thieves take 


44 * Chapter Four 


their skills to the cities of humans or to the un- 
derground, where they may be put to use by 
adventuring parties. Elves caught stealing the 
treasures of other elves are cast away for half 
a century — preferably to learn proper loyalty 
to one’s гасе. 

Items that aren't important to their owners 
are usually freely loaned to other elves or to 
their non-elf friends. As long as the item is 
available when the original owner needs to 
use it, there is no problem. Most elves have 
learned that bickering over small questions of 
ownership and property are one of the surest 
ways to lose friends. They do their best to ig- 
nore the finer points of ownership and to 
share the fruits of their labors with others (as 
well as share the fruits of others' labors). 


Individual Worth 


Elves care very little for structured society, 
preferring instead to focus on the needs of the 
individual. There is nothing so important to 
elves as the feelings and the needs of the indi- 
vidual. This doesn't mean that one individ- 
ual's needs outweigh those of the rest of the 
elves. Instead, the majority of elven society 
and law is geared so that the right of each elf is 
to become as happy as he or she may need to 
be. Elves don't interfere in the lives of other 
elves unless there are other elves who would 
be harmed by inaction. All elves are believed 
capable of dealing with their own problems. 
Although other elves may be curious about a 
certain elf's choices, they will not intervene in 
the action. Free will is all-important to the elf 
mind. Still, there are few atypical elves who 
are so purely selfish as to reap the love and 
understanding of their fellows without return- 
ing any love. A typical elf in an elf community 
puts the needs of others before his or hers, rec- 
ognizing that without these others, life means 
less. 

While elves are strongly individualistic 
creatures, they also have a strong sense of du- 
ty toward their kindred. Just as the human 
ranger believes in furthering the cause of his 
people even while avoiding most of them in 


the wilderness, so too do elves. They know 
that all their fellows are essential for a bal- 
anced life, and so they look out for their peo- 
ple as a whole as well as individually. 


Emotion and Logic 


Some consider elves to be totally emotional 
creatures, driven by the whim of the moment. 
Others see them only as coldly calculating 
creatures who do nothing without first con- 
sidering the benefit to themselves. Neither of 
these is really true. Elves are often seen as dis- 
tant and self-serving creatures, probably be- 
cause of their legendary haughtiness. Once 
one can get past their exterior, they find that 
elves are a freely emotional, intuitive people. 

On the other hand, elves do not let their 
emotions rule their lives. They have a finely 
developed logical system and use it daily. 
Since it is a logic that is based on their long 
lives and the elven mindset, it can freely incor- 
porate all aspects of elven life. Logic naturally 
includes feelings. Humans and dwarves can- 
not seem to grasp that emotion is an impor- 
tant part of one’s life, to be cut off only at risk 
of losing one's personality. Those who live 
solely by the word of heartless logic ignore 
fully half of their lives, to their detriment. Or 
so say the elves. 

Although elves fear very little in this world, 
those things that they do fear they regard with 
utmost terror. They conceal their fears from 
the other races, not wishing to appear weak 
before them. Also, they wish to appear invin- 
cible to such petty things as fear, for to do so 
might expose a weakness to enemies. 

Elves don't really fear death, but if closeted 
away from nature, that fear is likely to sur- 
round them. When they encounter a spirit- 
destroying creature (such as a tanar'ri or a 
wraith), they suffer mortality pangs of the 
worst kind, fearing as desperately for their 
lives as any human would. 

Elves hate and fear undead. They see them 
not only as perversions of nature, but also as 
nearly immortal foes to be dreaded and loath- 
ed. Since undead can live even longer than 


elves, these creatures are a serious threat to 
the elven way of life. Their plans can span 
centuries, their machinations of purest evil. 

Elves therefore often become hunters of the 
undead. The elves have set themselves as the 
natural adversaries of undead. The undead 
are a blemish on the face of the world, an oth- 
erworldly perversion of the life force. Elves, 
embodying the life force, find the undead far 
more repugnant than most ordinary people 
do. (To become an undead elf is, to elves, tru- 
ly a fate worse than death. ) Only good- or 
neutral-aligned liches may even hope to es- 
cape elven hatred, and these are feared. 

The elves' ability to hunt the undead is im- 
pressive, especially in older elves. Many ad- 
venturing elves have gained the experience 
necessary to fight monsters, and they bring 
this wealth of knowledge with them when 
they begin hunting undead. Elves somehow 
seem able to sense the very foulness in the air 
when undead are present, and this leads them 
to their prey. Although this ability is not easi- 
ly applied in game terms, the DM should be 
more lenient in allowing elves to find undead. 
Undead lairs are such rank holes of un-nature 
that elf senses are acutely aware of the evil au- 
ra left by these foul beasts. 

Elves are never necromancers (either mage 
or priest), except for those who have turned to 
evil. These elves resemble the drow in attitude 
and, as such, do not mind the foulness and 
corruption associated with the undead. The 
only time an elf associates their name with ne- 
cromancy is when they study necromancers' 
tomes for clues about those they seek. 


Generational Splits 


There are no serious troubles between mem- 
bers of separate generations, as is often the 
case with humans, but the variations in views 
held between elf generations are huge. Indeed, 
because of the unique nonaging physiology of 
elves, one of the few ways to tell between 
young and old elves is the difference in per- 
sonality. Of course, this is still not a clearly 
defining test, for elves have as varied person- 


Mental Attributes € 45 


alities as humans. 

The personality of younger elves is charac- 
terized by curiosity, a strong streak of individ- 
ualism, and a willingness to learn. They are 
just getting used to their long lives. Young 
elves are often found wandering into places 
where few would expect an elf to be. These are 
the elves who make friends with humans and 
the short-lived races, for they have not yet re- 
alized the speed of years for humans. 

Older elves, on the other hand, lean toward 
isolation and quiet enjoyment of the world. 
Few, if any, elves of more advanced age leave 
the elf lands, for they have seen enough of the 
world to last their lifetime. While they don't 
become entirely inactive, their activities are of 
a contemplative nature, rather than the more 
boisterous activities of young elves. 

This difference in outlook creates a genera- 
tional gap, but the older elves do not attempt 
to restrict the youths. They remember all too 
well their wilder, younger days and have no 
wish to repress that which they valued them- 
selves. Because elves are so closely connected 
to their own pasts, they never wonder at the 
motives of youth. The reverie helps older 
elves remember the excitement and passion of 
youth and the need to be independent and ex- 
plore the world. 


Attitudes Toward Other Races 


Elves generally do not hate other races. Al- 
though they may dislike these races, they still 
feel a kinship with them as living beings. Hu- 
mans never understand this, for they have not 
the time to make a true connection with the 
life force of the world. Only the true mystics 
of other races can understand the affinity 
elves have for all life. 

Those races that hate the elves with an all- 
consuming passion are not worth any such 
emotion from elves. Irritating as these species 
may be, the elves regard them with nothing 
more than strong antipathy. Only those who 
routinely defile the forest for their own evil 
ends arouse much anger in elves. 

The elves reserve their darkest emotion— 


46 * Chapter Four 


E EZ SE ELO UC ESAE SPAGNA ES 


hatred—for the drow. The drow have thrown 
away all that the elves consider sacred and 
have instead embraced foulness, corruption, 
and death. They have betrayed the heritage 
that was theirs by right and forsaken the light 
of the sun to live with pure evil: Lolth. 

Not only do most of the surface elves fail to 
comprehend this choice, they don't under- 
stand how beings created from the blood of a 
god could descend to the depths of evil as 
have the drow. They do understand, how- 
ever, that the drow mean only to destroy 
them. The drow dreams of world conquest 
and domination are secondary to their hatred 
for surface elves. The elves of sunlight know 
this hatred well and return it in full measure. 

With regard to other races, elves have been 
accused of being haughty, arrogant, and con- 
temptuous. This accusation is not entirely 
true. While elves do hold themselves apart 
from the other races, they do not hold them in 
contempt. (Granted, dwarves do come close.) 
Most elves, however, don't befriend these oth- 
er races because of their short lives, not be- 
cause of any inherent dislike. While the elves 
believe in living life to its fullest, they don't 
relish the idea of watching myriad friends 
grow old and die. 

Since elves can live through twenty human 
generations before leaving for Arvanaith, 
many see no point in befriending those whom 
they will only lose immediately. (While 
dwarves are longer lived, they don't agree 
well with the elven disposition.) Younger elves 
are sometimes willing to accept the sure pain 
of impending death for the joy friendship with 
these vital beings brings. After a few decades, 
however, they see that their companions are 
aging at an absurd rate when compared to elf 
friends. This is always a shock to the young 
elves. For the first time, they must come to 
grips with the concept of mortality and death. 
This proves more difficult for some than for 
others, though it comes to almost all finally. 

Despite their short lives, each of the other 
races holds a unique place in the elven heart. 
Outlined below are typical dynamics between 
elves and humans and demihumans. 


Dwarves: Although elves and dwarves both 
fight on the side of goodness, they often find 
themselves at odds over everything else. The 
main point of contention between the two is 
the definition of a good life. Dwarves strongly 
believe in the work ethic (elves do not). 
Dwarves don't feel that happiness is essential 
to a good life (elves certainly do). Dwarves 
believe life should be organized and well cared 
for—not haphazard and spontaneous as elves 
prefer. These views, so contrary to the elven 
enjoyment of life, don't allow dwarves to see 
things on the elven level. 

Yet each race secretly appreciates the other, 
and some of the strongest bonds in the world 
are between elves and dwarves. The two races 
are actually a good complement to each other. 


Gnomes: Elves and gnomes get along well 
when they meet. Gnomes have an apprecia- 
tion of humor and a zest for life that appeals 
to the elves. In elven opinion, gnomes take 
what is best about the dwarves and combine it 
with a healthy dose of elvendom. Indeed, 
some ancient elven legends say that gnomes 
were created by crossing elves with dwarves. 

This is not to say that gnomes are entirely 
loved by the elves. They take their obsession 
with digging into the earth a little too seri- 
ously, and they seem to regard elves with 
some suspicion. Elves return that regard. Still, 
as with dwarves, the two races will defend 
each other if necessary. 


Halflings: Elves genuinely like halflings, al- 
though in a somewhat patronizing way. They 
regard halflings as an amusing race and treat 
them for the most part as children. The half- 
lings don't have enough curiosity for elven 
taste; halflings are usually content to remain 
in their burrows and comfortable little farm- 
steads without ever experiencing the outside 
world. Elves are very impressed when a half- 
ling manages to amount to something more 
than a connoisseur of food and drink. 
Halflings sometimes resent the elven view 
that the halflings are like children, but they 
are very much in awe of elves and so rarely 


speak out against them. To associate with an 
elf is all the excitement a halfling needs in his 
or her life. To travel a time with elves is more 
than many halflings can bear. 

Elves regard halflings as children and are 
very protective of them. They don't appreci- 
ate attempts to harm halflings in any way and 
will do their best to avenge any wrongs. 


Humans: Elves have a difficult time classifying 
humans. Many humans are friendly and even 
a little in awe of elves. Others are bigoted and 
unfriendly, even downright hostile. While 
other races have variations in their racial 
makeup and general views, none are as varied 
as the humans. This means that elves will re- 
gard every human they meet with some degree 
of suspicion until that human has proven him- 
or herself a friend. 

Elves, despite their many accomplishments, 
are amazed at humans. Humans are prolific 
producers of children, and many have incredi- 
ble innate ability. Humans have managed to 
convert lands elves had once thought unliva- 
ble into homes. The elves are impressed—and 
perhaps a little frightened. 

Despite their constant bickering and war- 
like nature or perhaps use of it, humans 
now dominate the world, They have accom- 
plished in a few short years what it took elves 
hundreds of years to achieve. It is because of 
the humans’ soaring population and expan- 
sionistic tendencies that elves find themselves 
retreating to the forests and secluding them- 
selves from the world. | 

The vast variance of human nature is 
enough that elves have no set reaction to 
them. Their variety confuses elves, and they 
stay away from humans as much as possible. 


ran Attributes • 47 


OE 


FOPA 


CHAPTER 


o ee COMO OS АР 


+ 


FAY PANY уа, 


2 Gp XE Ve 


у Б 


Elven Weg 
ERIE 


Of all the festivals Гое been to over the 
years, none compares to the elven Rite of 
Spring, which celebrates the return of spring. 
I am a ranger and a lover of the forest, but I 
am only human. Being human—no matter 
how close to nature—1 did not expect the 
honor of being invited to witness one of the 
finest elven festivals known to mortal man. 
Perhaps my vears of service to the good of the 
forest earned me the goodwill of the elf lords. 

As I traveled to the designated meeting 
place, I heard the sounds of elven laughter 
shimmering through the woods. The light of a 
huge bonfire shone through the night, guiding 
revelers to their destination. When I arrived 
at the feasting site, many of the elves were al- 
ready well into the celebrations. My host, one 
Alarrain Mistraveler, guided me to my place 
and bade me enjoy the festivities. The mead 
and elfwine, or feywine as they call it, flowed 
freely even before the meal properly began. 

I cannot do justice to the food by describing 
it. Suffice to say that normal human food is 
forever ruined for me, for I shall never again 
taste anything as heavenly as that which was 
served to me those many vears ago. Although 
some elves tried to make conversation with 
me, 1 could not return the compliment. I was 
as dumbstruck as a miser in a gold mine. 1 had 
never known that such perfection as was 
around me could exist. 

After the meal came the dancing and the 
singing. Although I admit 1 was giddy from 
the elfwine, I can reliably swear that no mor- 
tal will ever be able to duplicate the beauty I 
saw and heard that night. The graceful forms 
of the elves twisted in a huge celebratory 
dance around the bonfire to the tune of elf 
musicians harmonizing with the wind, the 
sky, and the stars. The last thing 1 remember 
is being dragged into the dancing circle and 
losing myself to the wilderness. 

l awoke in the morning covered with dew. 
Although I would swear I was in the same 
place as the celebrations held the night pre- 
vious, I found no sign that there was anyone 
in that PROS n night save me, 

Leafwalker, human ranger 


LA, 2V/9 (y Оу) AQ) 


Ve ега statements will be made about 
7 various elven tendencies in this chap- 
=" ter. Note that these are not absolutes 
o all elven societies; grey elves and drow in 
particular do not have the vast range of free- 
doms available to most other elves. Although 
grey elves are not evil like the drow, the 
movement within their society is carefully re- 
stricted. Grey elves tend to be more lawful 
than chaotic in nature and alignment and 
therefore do not value individual freedoms as 
much as other elves might. Likewise, while 
drow are chaotic in nature, they will brutally 
crush any who seek to show any semblance of 
free will. 

Because of the vastly different world views 
between these two elf subraces and their kin, 
many of the descriptions below apply only to 
aquatic, high, and sylvan elves. There may 
certainly be exceptions (a city of good drow or 
a grey elf realm where stratified society is re- 
jected), but these will be of the utmost rarity. 

As a rule, most elves are the epitome of all 
that champions the individual's cause for 
goodness. They believe a single strong indi- 
vidual, focused on making the world a better 
place, is far better than an entire weak society 
determined to do the same thing. Elves seek to 
be as powerful as they can for the side of 
goodness. 

There is no discrimination based on gender 
in elven society. Female elves are considered 
on an equal basis with male elves—in all 
things and in all ways. As often as not, it is elf 
women who rise to positions of power, fame, 
and glory. At least half of elven legends re- 
volve around female heroes, and historically 
there have been more elf queens than kings. 
More than any other race, elves recognize the 
value of women and their full potential. 


The Elven Language 


The elven language is melodic and fluid, con- 
sisting of musical words that are a joy to hear. 
There are nuances and lilting intonations, all 
of which combine to make Elvish a lovely lan- 
guage. Even Drow Elvish is an attractive lan- 


AES C MON 


ye =”) “Эъ АЁ, TEAVE 
АКУЛУ ЛЛ ОТУЗ 


SO 


48 ө Chapter Five 


ACE OSA УЛОУ M Oa ий бар Retro N/A QA p f) жд ir S OL AOT a G, 


guage, full of dark mystery and secrets. 

When spoken by non-elves, Elvish seems 
strangely brutalized, although it is hard to de- 
fine exactly why. Elves know that this is be- 
cause the subtleties inherent in Elvish only 
fully translate for them (or for those using 
magic to communicate). Elves, because of 
their keen hearing, perceive an additional cur- 
rent in their tongue, one which also conveys 
emotion should the speaker wish. 

Because of this hidden feature, elves can 
carry on a conversation within a conversa- 
tion. The subtleties of the language and the 
nuances available allow elves to pass on the 
substance of an entirely different topic pro- 
vided, of course, it is not a difficult or confus- 
ing one. This ability also allows elves to pass 
hidden messages to one another even in front 
of a human who understands Elvish, which is 
one reason why elves make such excellent 
spies. They can speak of inconsequentialities, 
yet pass along vital information to other 
elves. No one hearing them without magical 
aid can discern the additional message that is 
carried on the wings of the conversation. 

The intricate care involved in the structure 
of the elven language extends to naming chil- 
dren. Elven names, although they often sound 
somewhat similar, are all individual. No two 
elves have ever shared the same name, save as 
a matter of choice, for elves are far too indi- 
vidualistic to stoop to using identical names 
for their children. 

Elves prefer names that flow off the tongue 
like wind through trees. Sibilants and "th" 
sounds are common, as are others of the softer 
consonants. Occasionally, to add interest to a 
name, elves will include a hard consonant, 
such as a “К” or a “t” Overall, they prefer to 
allow the name to remain fluid and melodic, 
much like their language. 


Livelihood 


Elves earn their livelihoods through whatever 
craft pleases them most. Often, this will be 
something that is beneficial to the entire com- 
munity. Sometimes the goods are traded with 


Elven Society e 49 


TAPA RSS M Bite OO OBE E BEA 


humans for manmade wares but, more often 
than not, the items remain within the elf com- 
munity. 

Since elves need not be concerned with 
money to the extent humans are, their home 
lives are rarely marked with worry about 
when the next meal is coming. As long as they 
produce something of value for their commu- 
nity (and probably even if they did not), the 
other elves will support them. Giving some- 
thing as ephemeral as humor or laughter to 
brighten the days of others would be reward 
enough for the easygoing elves. 

Even in the harshest winters and the driest 
summers there is plenty of sustenance for all 
elves. Because they are so closely connected 
with nature, they know when bad seasons are 
brewing and thus plan well ahead to meet the 
demands of such troubling times. 


Rituals 


Elves have no end of festivals to lighten the 
weight of passing years. They create many oc- 
casions to celebrate life—so many, in fact, 
that other races have sometimes concluded 
that elves do nothing but engage in revelry. Of 
course, this isn't true, but they do have a dis- 
proportionate number of celebrations— 
particularly when compared to dwarves. 

Although elves prefer simple revels to struc- 
tured rituals, there are times in their lives 
when they feel the need for more formal, seri- 
ous ceremonies. Typically, the priests of the 
elven gods preside over such ceremonies. 
They are there to fulfill the function of the cer- 
emony and to instill the proper respect and so- 
lemnity required for that ceremony. 

Because elves lead such long lives, the cere- 
monies each village and city celebrates are 
equally unique. Although different, all are 
based on certain traditional milestones in el- 
ven life and so retain an air of similarity. 
These events include birth, adulthood, mar- 
riage, the journey to Arvanaith (which is cov- 
ered in Chapter Seven), and blood oath. 


50 * Chapter Five 


Celebration of Birth 


Since elf children are few (or at least far fewer 
than human children), the birth of an elf is a 
cause of great celebration. Births are always 
times of great joy. The village turns out in pro- 
fusion, setting aside the day's work to cele- 
brate with the infant's parents. 

Following a two-year pregnancy, elf women 
are glad to celebrate the lightening of their bur- 
den. They happily join in the festivities honor- 
ing their newborn. Such celebrations typically 
last several days and conclude with the naming 
of the infant. Children are given a private name 
by their parents and then given a public name. 
The secret name is known only to the elf, his or 
her parents, and the priest presiding over the 
ceremony. While knowing the name gives no 
power over an elf, it is a sign of love and respect 
when an elf reveals his or her true name. 

Gifts and wishes are often bestowed upon 
an elf child at birth by family and close friends 
of the parents. Such presents usually have a 
lasting impression on the elf, for favors given 
to an infant are far from ordinary. One child 
was given the ability to speak to dragons; she 
later used this gift to great advantage when 
she averted a war between her village and a 
nest of green dragons living nearby. Another 
child was gifted with always knowing when 
someone lied to him. 


Passage to Adulthood 


Rites of adulthood are common in many cul- 
tures, and that of the elves is no exception. 
When elves reach the age of 110, they are con- 
sidered young adults, with all the freedoms 
and responsibilities that entails. They no long- 
er live in the house of their parents, for it is 
time to make their own way in the world. 

Elf families hold a ceremony to formally an- 
nounce the young elfs passage into adult- 
hood. New adults are given gifts—most often 
adventuring gear if they are so inclined. The 
older elves regale the family with tales of their 
pursuits, and they wish luck upon those who 
follow their steps. 


` ^ 
) 


a 


N 
@ 
© 
© 
ө 
© 
9 
9 
9 
9 
Ole 
ө 
Ө 
ө 
9 
© 
Ө : 
[c] 
© 


9099090009000 


S 


If the new adult isn't inclined toward the ad- 
venturing life, they are given tools of their 
chosen trade and a house of their own. From 
this point on, they make their own way in life, 
working with other elves to make a life full of 
happiness and joy. 


Celebration of Marriage 


Marriage is an occasion for great joy among 
elves, for the union symbolizes the continua- 
tion of the elf race. Those who disrupt this 
ceremony to kill the betrothed earn the wrath 
of the elves forevermore, and they will hunt 
such marauders and their kin for eternity. 
Marriage is a rarer occurrence for elves than 
the short-lived races, and there are few things 
so dangerous as to profane the sanctity of this 
ritual. Sometimes weddings occur to seal trea- 
ties and for other diplomatic purposes, but 
more often it is through love that elves 
achieve a state of marriage. 

Marriage between elves lasts until one part- 
ner dies. (There has been only one known di- 
vorce in the last three thousand years, and 
that was between two extremely opinionated 
grey elves.) Elves rarely take a new partner af- 
ter the death of a mate. Their vows bind more 
than honor; they bind the spirit and heart of 
each to the other. By taking this step, many 
elves give up some measure of their individu- 
alism. Often, only the most ardent and devout 
lovers choose the path of marriage; others 
prefer a less formal arrangement. 

The marriage ceremony itself is typically 
formal (although it can be as informal as the 
lovers like) and is presided over by elf priests 
of Helani Celanil. The priests themselves 
serve no purpose at the ceremony other than 
as witnesses, for it is the partners who per- 
form the ritual and the binding vows. 

In a true elven marriage of love, vows tie 
the spirits of the loved ones together, allowing 
them access to the other's inner self. This is a 
form of the elven ability communion. Wedded 
elves become fully aware of their partner's 
needs and emotions, allowing them to antici- 
pate and fulfill these needs. They are not 


52 * Chapter Five 


SI OLS EO OSS RS ESSENT EO RD EP XOT HEU OVES CO Xd 
o —MM—À —————M———— ا‎ M ——— MÀ M Á— ————— MÀ e — MÀ — MÀ — 


aware of the other's exact thoughts. 

Because elves relive their past through the 
reverie, the circumstances attracting one elf to 
another are always fresh. Thus, elves seldom 
fall out of love. Only the gravest of tragedies 
and disloyalties can tear an elf couple apart. 
Although they might have disagreements and 
even fights, they continue to love each other. 

But elves can grow tired of a partner, even 
when they are joined spiritually and have be- 
come more intimate than any non-elf could 
suspect. Elves reignite the spark of passion 
and love through absence. For stretches of 
time, one partner in an elven marriage will 
live apart; this allows both elves to gain time 
to themselves so that they might grow as indi- 
viduals. When the two rejoin, they shower 
complete love and affection upon the other. 

Elves also tend to spend time away from 
their loved ones in order to make their time 
together that much more precious. After all, 
there are fewer sure ways to grow bored of a 
person than to spend hundreds of years with 
him or her. Time alone allows them to think 
on the relationship and to experience new 
things to share with their mates, thus keeping 
the marriage fresh and vital. 


The Blood Oath 


Elves are not always peaceful folk. If they or 
their friends have been grievously insulted or 
injured, they swear the sacred oath of 
vendetta—a ceremony carried out in the dark- 
est hour before dawn. When they swear this 
terrible promise, they forsake all other pas- 
times to seek retribution. Elves understand 
this oath and will release the avenging elf from 
his or her tasks. 

The avenging elves hunt down the offender 
to exact some form of vengeance, be it merely 
a sincere apology for an insult or something 
more severe. Typically, a time of service given 
to the injured elf is enough to satisfy this oath. 
However, there are occasions when nothing 
less than death will satisfy the demand of the 
blood oath. 


SN EROR UA S UU UE 


Elven Holy Days 


Every day is a day of celebration for elves; 
their love of music, poetry, and song imbues 
their lives with a festive air. However, there 
are particular days that elves traditionally 
commemorate. These celebrations, despite 
their rituals (or perhaps because of them), are 
the most anticipated days of the year. 

Naturally, these days have a special signifi- 
cance attached to them, for they mark events 
in the hearts of elves. The following is a list of 
the major festivals elves celebrate each year, 
although it is by no means complete. Each 
gathering of elves will have other celebrations 
in addition to those below, each with its own 
unique observance. The holy days are pre- 
sented in chronological order. 


Yeartide: Yeartide takes place during the 
winter solstice, marking the end of the death 
that autumn brings. During this time, the 
elves believe the earth is purified while she lies 
underneath her blanket of snow. Even in those 
regions where the sun doesn't rise and the 
snow lies eternally across the land, the winter 
solstice is seen as the changing of the old year 
into the new. 

Elves celebrate Yeartide with quiet medita- 
tion on the year past and on things to come. 
They regard the human practice of ushering in 
the new year with feasting and drinking sense- 
lessly barbaric—the mark of people unable to 
truly understand the passing of time. 


Faerieluck: This is a day in early spring when 
elves celebrate with their cousins—the pixies, 
leprechauns, and so forth. Too often elves for- 
get their kinship with these other races, and 
this festival reminds them all of their relation- 
ship. It is a day spent in practical jokes and 
merriment, and participants try to demon- 
strate their cleverness at the expense of an- 
other. The games are never acrimonious; they 
draw to a close long before any irreparable 
damage can be done to one's pride. 


Springrite: Although winter is seen as the 
turning point of the year, the vernal equinox 
(spring) represents a time of fertility among 
the elves, who spend this season engaged in 
the pursuits of romance and song. Elves spend 
the week around the equinox dancing and 
singing, involved in nothing but merriment. 
All important decisions and actions are post- 
poned until the week is over. This is the time 
of year when most couples bond in marriage 
or announce that they are promised. 


Agelong: Agelong is the celebration of the el- 
ven creation, the observance of the legendary 
battle between Corellon Larethian and 
Gruumsh One-Eye. This holy day serves to re- 
mind the elves of the presence of their ene- 
mies. Held at the summer solstice, Agelong is 
the perfect elven excuse to go orc-hunting. On 
the night of the hunt, elves nick themselves 
with obsidian daggers and let their blood flow 
into the earth, simulating the bloodletting that 
made their existence possible. They then 
swoop down from their homes and kill as 
many orcs as they can find during this night. 


Fallrite: As Springrite is to birth, so is Fallrite 
to death. Held during the autumnal equinox, 
Fallrite is a weeklong period when elves con- 
template the spirits of their ancestors, the pas- 
sage to Arvanaith, and the immediacy of 
death even in a nearly immortal lifetime. 

Unlike some races, elves do not hide behind 
merriment to avoid facing death, because they 
feel that death is merely a passing on to a dif- 
ferent stage of life. The most important duties 
of the year and the most difficult decisions are 
reached during Fallrite. The elf kings and 
queens traditionally sit in judgment at this 
time of year to hear any capital cases. 


Elven Society * 53 


IA 


CHAPTER 


ORK 


ЖТС РОКУ 


The Elven Myths 
IOS SNE CRS NS AY AY I 


The Legend of Fionna Casilltenirra 
When the Elves all lived in the forests and 
had not yet spread to the seas or the mountains, 
there was a beautiful Elf named Fionna Ca- 
silltenirra. Barely past 100 years old, she met a 
Human who intrigued her completely. Shy and 
retiring at first, she grew more open and let her- 
self be seen when he traveled in the woods, 
Their elders swore to them that such a 
match would never work, but Fionna and Kil- 
lian had eyes only for each other. They wed in 
secret. Five years of bliss passed before Fion- 
na saw that Killian was aging far more rap- 
idly than she, The lovers searched for some 
way to avoid the cruel hand fate would one 
day deal them, but they could find no answer, 
In abject despair, Fionna went to a Human 
Vampire of whom she had heard. She begged 
Vasily for his help, asking that Killian be 
made a Vampire so the two could share life 
for the length of her days instead of Killian's. 
The Vampire was overwhelmed by Fionna's 
beauty and agreed to her plans, with one stip- 
ulation: that she, too, consent to become a 
Vampire. In her love for Killian, Fionna never 
thought of the danger to her very spirit—she 
agreed to Vasily's dastardly request. The 
Vampire took Fionna in his arms and told her 
he would bestow upon Killian the "gift" of 
eternal life. He drained her, then laid her on 
the floor of his catacomb. He looked at Fion- 
na and marveled at her beauty; desire coursed 
in him, as did treachery, and he vowed that 
none but he should possess her. When Vasily 
found Killian, he snapped the Human's neck 
instead of making him anew in Vampire form. 
When Fionna discovered Vasily's treachery, 
she flew at him in rage. Confident that she 


was his thrall, Vasily was amused rather than 


alarmed. That proved a fatal error on his 
part, for his head was ripped from his shoul- 
ders by the grieving Elven Vampiress. 

Bereft of her love and her life, Fionna wan- 
dered the world searching for someone new 
to take the place of her beloved, but only ha- 
tred and fear met her advances. Anger and 
malice found their way into her heart, and she 
gave herself wholly to evil. 


54 * Chapter Six 


7 names and deeds of their heroes. Fre- 
^. quently, some of the heroes from other 
races have been fabricated — mostly to illus- 
trate some religious point or another. Not so 
with the elves. Although their heroes also 
serve to make a point of some sort, all of them 
existed in some form or another. 

Heroes such as Fistilanthus Woodhelvin and 
his half-elf brother Gilanthus (both of whom 
faced the dread pit fiend Marlikora at the cost 
of their own lives and saved the elf lands) live 
on in the glorious tales of storytellers. Elven 
legend tells that they will someday return when 
the elves most need them and that they will aid 
certain blessed elves or half-elves in times of 
gravest need. Their bravery and courage thus 
inspires those in mortal peril. 

Other heroes, like Feradar Jaralmus, serve 
as examples of elven life. Although in his life 
he neither slew terrible beasts nor single- 
handedly fought off menaces from the planes 
beyond, his love and compassion saved the 
elves from fractioning still further, teaching 
them the value of life and tolerance. Many 
other heroes once lived (and, indeed, still live) 
in the halls of the sages, inspiring and teaching 
those who hear the tales. 

Elven lore is not solely concerned with tales 
of goodness; there are also tales of dark, twisted 
evil. Fionna Casilltenirra, the first elf vampire, 
still haunts the dreams of romantic young elves 
seeking delight in the arms of humans. And the 
story of Besathan Ridire, the elf who made a 
pact with the Spider Queen Lolth and suffered 
eternal torment at her hands, is told every now 
and then to show children the questionable val- 
ue of dealing with evil. 

АП elven legends make a point of some sort, 
whether they deal with an inspirational story 
of heroics and valor or with more humble val- 
ues such as compassion and simple charity. In 
both life and deeds, elves strive to teach and 
to learn. They see their lives as quests for un- 
derstanding, and they do their best to com- 
plete their personal quests; elven legends often 
help point the way to fulfilling those dreams. 

Sometimes there is more to an elven myth 


LOTIONS RRNA MODACO 


than meets the human eye. The moral gem 
hidden within a tale may be far too subtle for 
humans to understand completely. This chap- 
ter presents but a few of the tales the elves 
have collected over their millenia of existence. 


Jarsali and the Treant 


Following a similar, though ultimately contra- 
dictory, view to the tale of Fionna Casilltenirra, 
the story of Jarsali and the Treant glorifies love 
of any sort—provided that love is true and 
good. While some elves refuse to acknowledge 
the truth of this story, claiming it is truly myth 
and has no basis in fact, others believe it holds 
the germ of truth. They cling to it as a justifica- 
tion for the paths they have taken themselves. 


Jarsali Oaklimbs was a sylvan elf of the tru- 
est grain—even to the point of shunning oth- 
ers of her race, preferring instead the 
company of the woodlands well over that of 
her fellows. How her heart came to be full of 
suspicion and bitterness at her mortal com- 
rades, no one knew; they only knev that Jar- 
sali was a strange girl, even for an elf. 

Nothing assuaged the sorrow in her soul 
save the nearness of the primordial trees. Her 
wanderings from camp took her deeper and 
deeper into the virgin forest, to places where 
even few elves had ever set foot. In the heart 
of the wood, she found a living tree holding 
court with his minions. Her shock was great. 

Remember, this was a time before the elves 
had spread across the world, and they knew 
little of all its races. Few had ever heard of a 
treant, much less seen one. Although her tribe 
had, Jarsali had never heeded the lessons of 
her compatriots, for she had no desire to learn 
from their experiences. 

Entranced by the sight of the treant, she 
crept closer to investigate. Suddenly, great 
bark-covered limbs from a nearby "tree" lifted 
her from the ground and held her captive. The 
animated oak brought her before its liege. 

Jarsali stood prisoner before the treant lord, 
and something in her heart cracked and was 
set free. The elf maiden fell instantly in love 


The Elven Myths * 55 


with the enduring beauty of the craggy wood 
before her. The treant eyed Jarsali's flushed 
cheeks and bright eyes. Suthurithidan, the son 
of Garanahil the First Treant, saw hidden be- 
hind the elfs truculent air a spirit of fire that 
could not be quenched. It was the treant's first 
true look at an elf, and he was entranced. 
With a silent flicker of his twiggy finger, he 
commanded the tree to release the elf maid. 
The two stared at each other, sunlight filtering 
through the dappled leaves; then Suthurithi- 
dan turned and melted into the forest. 

Jarsali returned to her camp. Her companions 
were amazed at her newly softened manner, so 
changed was it from her usual self. They won- 
dered what could have happened on her latest 
excursion into the woods, but none said any- 
thing, feeling only gratitude and not caring the 
cause. When Jarsali crept away a week later, un- 
able to forget the treant Suthurithidan, some 
few smiled, thinking perhaps she had found a 
lover with a nearby tribe. One elf, however, did 
not smile—he frowned. Azalarer had thought 
to wed Jarsali himself, for he lusted after the elf 
maid. The words of his people were an irritant 
to his pride. 

Jarsali found again the treant lord, and this 
time neither could deny the truth of how well 
their souls matched the other. The initial exhila- 
ration inspired by their first meeting provided 
the impetus for the rest of their relationship, and 
the feelings between two such dissimilar beings 
deepened. In time, they found that they were 
truly in love, each unwilling to continue life 
without the other beside them. 

But Azalarer grew suspicious of Jarsali's 
continued change. He and his cohorts fol- 
lowed her into the depths of the forest. Intent 
only upon meeting her love, Jarsali's ordinari- 
ly sharp hearing did not warn her of this pur- 
suit. Azalarer and the others found her then, 
and they beheld a sight none had ever thought 
to witness in all their years: An elf maid em- 
braced by a living tree! 

Azalarer's heart grew black. He taunted Jar- 
sali cruelly and incited the prejudices of his 
comrades. In righteous wrath, they tore Jarsa- 
li from the arms of the surprised tree lord and 


56 * Chapter Six 


spirited her back to camp. There Azalarer 
fanned the flames of xenophobia. The elves 
had never heard of such a strange coupling: 
they were outraged that Jarsalis chosen was 
not even humanoid, much less elven. They 
locked her behind a stout wood stockade and 
angrily began debating what to do with her. 

Jarsali called upon all the elven gods of the 
forest and of love, and she called upon the 
gods of Suthurithidan, too. She prayed for 
both release from the stockade and from her 
elven form, that she might not have to endure 
the cruelties the elves inflicted upon her in the 
name of racial purity. The gods heard her 
pleas: They gave her the answer to one by 
granting the other. 

Inside the stockade, Jarsalis body stiffened. 
Her hair grew long and turned green, and her 
limbs became limbs of wood and not flesh. Her 
feet sought the cracks in the ground, and she ex- 
tended her new roots into the soil beneath. 
Shouldering aside the flimsy blockade, she 
forced her way into the sylvan camp. The elves 
scattered before her. Some prostrated them- 
selves in abject terror, fearing for their lives. 

Azalarer, along with those who had been 
deliberating Jarsali's fate, came forth from the 
council chambers. The elf's heart turned ever 
more black and cracked with rage; he grabbed 
a firebrand but the council restrained him. 
With utmost respect, they bowed to Jarsali 
and bade her good speed and clean water, for 
her transformation showed them that her love 
was real—that nothing they could say or do 
would change this simple fact. 

With only the faintest bow, Jarsali turned to 
the forest and was reunited with her true love. 
The elves watched her go with a newfound re- 
spect; to this day, the sylvan elves and the 
treants share the custody of the woods. 


Moral: True love transcends race—and some- 
times even species. 


Halimath’s Pride 


The story of Halimath Arnuanna is a caution- 
ary tale relating the dangers of pride and arro- 


gance, even in those who have again and 
again proven their superiority of skill. 


Halimath was a smith who had transcended 
all boundaries of metalworking in his craft. A 
true master with the hammer and tongs, each 
piece of precious metal commanded his com- 
plete attention, each blow of the hammer 
comprised his entire world. His creations were 
truly marvelous and inspired such awe in oth- 
ers. With each passing year, his skill grew ever 
greater. Elves traveled the world over to see 
his works of art. 

Centuries passed, and the grey elf decided 
that his life's work should culminate in the crea- 
tion of one truly magnificent artifact —prefera- 
bly a sword—to be wielded in the cause of 
good. He had no doubts about his skill, and he 
had the costly metals and gems with which to 
make and ornament this sword. But the grey 
elves had banned the making of any more 
weapons of power. They wanted no reminder of 
the Elfwar or the Fractioning, and they forbade 
Halimath to make such a sword. The elf would 
neither listen nor obey; breaking the laws of his 
land was but a small price to pay for the glory of 
the magic he would wrought. 

Thus commenced Halimath's destruction. 

The rituals the elf sought to enchant the 
blade were dark and arcane, their powers 
hardly more than he could contain. Halimath 
continued without regard, believing that the 
creation of the Sword of Justice would atone 
for any evils he committed while creating it. 
The first spell he cast almost cost him his life, 
so strong were the magicks within it. This 
spell ensured life to the wielder of the blade 
for as long as the Sword was held. A second 
spell enchanted the weapon so that it could 
only be used on the side of goodness, and the 
third ensured the Sword would strike down 
the foes of the wielder with but a single blow. 

Rumors of Halimath's transgressions 
reached the ears of the grey elf elders. The 
wisest and most just of them, Andriana, con- 
fronted Halimath and demanded the truth. To 
her folly, she held up the Sword to emphasize 
her point. The master smith flew into an in- 


sane rage at his creation being so touched. His 
massive fist struck the frail elf woman, and 
she crumpled to the floor. Blood splattered 
across the blade in Andriana's hands and 
stained the carpet beneath her still-breathing 
form. Halimath stared down at the woman in 
horror, his senses returning to him in the cold 
light of what he had done. He knew the other 
elders would never allow him to finish the 
Sword of Justice, and that thought alone con- 
sumed him. He grabbed the Sword and fled. 
Shortly after, the grey elf elders discovered 
Halimath's misdeeds. Though Andriana lived, 
the elders swore the blood oath against Hali- 
math. They hounded the xi day and night, until 
they finally cornered him; though bruised in 
body and spirit, he was still unrepentant. 
Halimath let out a great cry and raised the 
Sword of Justice in defiance against the elves 
who harried him. He leaped to attack, but the 
blade crumbled to dust in his hands. When the 
arrows pierced his body, i fell dead. 


Moral: Obsession destroys everything. 


Haranavei Koehlanna 


Although many human cultures have adapted 
this familiar story for their own use, the elves 
claim original credit for it 


An elf village was destroyed by an orc raiding 
party—the only survivor an elf woman, great 
with child, She fled into the burning forest and 
forded a swollen stream. On the other side, she 
found refuge in a tiny hu village. There, she 
gave birth to her child, for labor was brought 
on by her traumas. With dying breath she 
named her infant daughter. Haranavei Koehlan- 
na, and she bade a woodcutter care for her 
child. The elf woman perished that night. 

Under the care of the villager, who was now 
the mayor, Haranavei into a child of 
amazing beauty. The human women of the 
household took exception to this beauty, and 
they did their best to ensure that such loveliness 
would never show. The mother and her daugh- 
ters made Haranavei clean the middens, the 


The Elven Myths ® 57 


sties, and the M. day. The poor elf Malissin Ariessus was a high elf architect 


child worked from before dawn to after dusk. 
The people whom she called "family" sought al- 
ways to humiliate her for her pointed ears and 
thin features, and to belittle her beauty. Their 
taunts hurt an innocent heart. 

And so matters went for many vears, until 
one day a prince rode through the now pros- 
perous village. He was an elf prince, this much 
is true, and he stopped at the human village to 
water and feed his stallion. The mayor's 
daughters were smitten with his charm and el- 
egance; in him they praised the very features 
they taunted in Haranavei. 

The elf amused himself at the human girls' ex- 
pense—until he saw the thin figure of Haranavei 
trudge by, bearing her heavy burden of fire- 
wood. The prince grabbed the elf maid by the 
arms and stared long and hard into her eyes. 
Then, slowly, he smiled, for his search was 
over. Drawmij Koehlanna had found his sister. 
The two wept with joy when the truth was re- 
vealed, though Drawmij was saddened at the 
news of his mother. He disclosed that he had 
been away at the time of the orc attack; he had 
returned to discover his home in flames. But 
there was no sign of his mother, whom he knew 
to be pregnant, and so Drawmij went in search 
of her and her child. 

More truth was revealed at the house of the 
mayors, for the elf prince saw that the hu- 
mans had made a slave of his sister. He retali- 
ated by slaying the mayors wife and 
daughters, only just sparing the mans life at 
the request of Haranavei. 


Moral: Suffer not the vanity of others. 


Caelestis 


The elven love of creation has extended itself 
into their stories, as has their unique perspec- 
tive on the nature of time. Perhaps this story 
helps to explain why elves are so willing to de- 
vote years to a single project—and why they 
can take years away from a venture before re- 
turning to it with a fresh, new perspective. 


58 © Chapter Six 


and artist of exceeding vision, though he had 
no exceptional skill. His dream was to one day 
create the perfect tree town, where all elves 
could live in harmony and peace in a setting of 
unimaginable splendor—and improbable en- 
gineering. 

Malissin did, indeed, create his city within 
the trees. Caelestis exceeded even Malissin's 
dreams, and the city excited all who saw it. 
Even the gods were filled with wonder at the 
magnificent tree town. Alas, Malissin forgot 
to weave the final enchantment on his city. 

For many vears it stood tall and proud, а 
monument to one elf's dream. Malissin passed 
on to Arvanaith, happy and secure that his 
tree city was all that he had hoped it would be. 
A great storm brewed the night of Malissin's 
death—a storm so great it tore asunder even 
the mightiest oak trees. Malissin's city was de- 
stroyed for lack of the binding spells that 
would have made his structures permanent— 
an oversight in an otherwise flawless creation. 

Though the architectural principles Malis- 
sin employed are long since lost, his dream 
lives on in all of us. The desire to design per- 
fection that is beloved by the gods burns in the 
breast of all who create, and the urge for such 
immortality is often irresistible. 


Moral: Love of creation is the element of per- 
fection. Patience and love of creation are the 
permanence of perfection. 


M 
LI 


M “i ч NS 


IEZA 


TATA 


CHAPTER 


TEILA DAO ANNO 


The Death of Elves 


After the Godswar, Corellon Larethian 
walked the world of mortal Elves, hoping to 
gain knowledge and experience of our lives so 
that he could give us the aid that a true god 
should. During his journeys, he came across 
an Elf woman of such beauty and generosity 
of soul that he was stricken with love. Elana 
returned that love. Two years later, a child 
was born: Eliara Larethian. Corellon's daugh- 
ter was the most perfect Elf ever born. Men 
and Elves alike hoped to win her favor. 

Eliara could not oblige them all with her 
love—nor could she choose who was worthy 
of her. For a time she spurned them all and 
devoted her life to the bow; asthe daughter of 
Corellon, her skill was uncanny. The Men 
and Elves fought between them to see who 
could carry her golden quiver, and war 
threatened to break out between the races. 
Corellon and Elana turned to their daughter, 
and she agreed that such squabbling must 
stop. And so Eliara held a contest to judge her 
suitors’ skills. A hunt there would be to see 
who could match her ability with the bow; 
the winner should have her as his bride. 

During the hunt, a great red dragon was 
drawn to the noise and bustle of the hunting 
party. Seeing the Men and Elves, it opened its 
maw and poured forth a great gout of fire— 
slaying half the party outright. Eliara drew 
her bow and let loose an arrow. The shaft en- 
tered the beasts eye, killing it instantly. The 
dragons body crashed to earth, uprooting 
trees as it did. The massive limb of a falling 
oak caught Eliara in the chest and she was 
crushed beneath its deadly weight. 

A great funeral was held in Eliara's honor, 
with all her suitors in attendance. One of 
these, an Elf master singer named Clain 
Windsong, threw back his head and let forth 
a melodic cry of sheer, wordless anguish. As if 
on a cue, the other Elves took up the cry, their 
voices mingling and harmonizing in an out- 
pouring of overwhelming grief. The Humans 
in the party, overcome by the terrible beauty 
of the music, died of heartbreak. 

The tradition of the elven mourning song 
continues to this day, and it is song of such 
anguish as to break a listener's heart. 


60 * Chapter Seven 


E 


Je ERR E S ЭУ ОМО ЛЕЙ О On P LO OE CONS 


‘PA here are those who consider the elves 
2 to be virtually immortal. While they 
СФУ can die through accident or violence, 
no one has ever seen an elf die of "old age" 
That is because no truly old elves remain in 
the world known to humans; "old" elves have 
left the world and journeyed on to a place 
called Arvanaith. At about age 550 years old, 
elves feel an irresistible urge to make one last 
journey. An elf can defy this urge only mar- 
ginally more than a man can defy death when 
it comes, 

PC elves, with the permission of the DM, 
can continue adventuring rather than suc- 
cumbing to the siren call of the beyond. Of 
course, if they do, they stand the chance that 
the doors to the otherworld will be forever 
closed to them. If so, they will never know the 
delights that await them there in Arvanaith. 
The DM should stress that few elves make this 
choice after having experienced all that the 
world has to offer; change—by way of Arva- 
naith—is an attractive option at old age. 

With the spells available for prolonging 
ones life, elves do have the choice of tempo- 
rarily forestalling the inevitable. However, 
because of their attachment to the natural cy- 
cles of the world, most elves feel disdain for 
those who attempt to avoid the unavoidable. 
Only those elves who feel no respect for the 
tuggings of the seasons or those who have cru- 
cial tasks yet unfinished take this option. 
Otherwise, old elves travel to Arvanaith, the 
hidden elven homeland. No elf who has trav- 
eled to Arvanaith has ever willingly left that 
land, nor has any elf regretted such a journey. 
The sylvan glory awaiting all elves there is be- 
yond any ever experienced by humans—and 
is barely conceivable by the elves themselves. 

Arvanaith is a place full of natural beauty, 
hidden away from all but elves. Some human 
sages have speculated that this pocket is a 
piece of Arvandor on the plane of Olympus, 
but none have ever been able to reach it—save 
through death. Those sages who have made 
such a journey and were able to return to their 
original plane are unable to speak of Arva- 
naith. The memory of the beauty is too in- 


tense for their human minds to bear. It is truly 
a realm only for the elf. 

Those elves who have passed into its wood- 
ed glories can experience anything they've ev- 
er wanted for as long as they want. 
Unimaginable happiness lies in this realm, and 
every elf can expect to enter Arvanaith upon 
his or her departure from temporal kingdoms. 

The only way to return from Arvanaith is 
through reincarnation, resurrection, or some 
way of retrieving the spirit from this realm. 
(The last two methods are always done 
against the elf's will.) A very few return vol- 
untarily, having spent millenia enjoying the 
splendor of Arvanaith; they volunteer to be 
reincarnated, and their souls begin anew. 
Those who leave seldom regain their original 
bodies. They find themselves reincarnated in 
the form of any animal ranging the spectrum 
of the animal kingdom. Sometimes these 
elves return as creatures so low on the evolu- 
tionary scale that they lose their elven spirit 
altogether. 

Only a legendary few have ever returned 
through time to their original forms. These 
elves have returned to complete quests of epic 
valor and salvation. More likely, those truly 
heroic elves who have requested to be reincar- 
nated are reborn as a new elf. 

Some elves are ripped from Arvanaith by 
the spells or prayers of those still on the mor- 
tal plane. A very few of these survive the 
shock of returning to their old bodies; they re- 
gain their mortal lives, albeit their spirits are 
now touched with a strange sorrow. Most 
elves, however, fight to remain in Arvanaith. 
Their spirits do not willingly leave the glori- 
ous forests of this most ancestral land. Should 
powerful magicks force them against their 
will, the elves will return—but at great cost. 
Such elves usually succumb to madness and 
despair; a few cannot survive the return and 
are transformed into banshees. 

In Arvanaith, all things are possible. Any- 
thing elves might want, including forgetful- 
ness or even oblivion, is available. The winds 
of Arvanaith are enough to soothe even the 
most troubled spirit, causing it to set aside his 


The Death of Elves * 61 


or her fears and torments. Only those few 
who refuse to give up their sorrows retain the 
memory of former troubles. 

Instead, memories of friends and happy 
times make up an elfs new life, along with 
new dreams and challenges. Troubling memo- 
ries remain largely in the back of an elf's mind, 
serving only as a reminder and measure for 
the goodness of existence in Arvanaith. Most 
elves are happy to relinquish the memories of 
their suffering, retaining only the knowledge 
of its passing to more fully appreciate their 
current happiness. 

Of course, no elf is forced to stay in Arva- 
naith against his or her will. However, only a 
few elves have chosen to return to the mortal 
plane—and then only after centuries have 
been spent in Arvanaith. It is largely incon- 
ceivable that any elf would not want to re- 
main in the eternal lands, 

It should be noted that elves don't die the 
way other mortal races do; in fact, elves only 
rarely suffer true death. Those that do are 
mourned for months, for their spirits can nev- 
er return to nourish the earth once again. 
Their children are cherished in hopes that they 
will carry on the works of their parents, pro- 
vided the parents did not die dishonorably. 

There are only a few ways that elves can 
suffer this fate. The attacks of certain undead, 
suicide, dying in an unnatural place, and oth- 
er extraordinary circumstances can com- 
pletely eradicate the existence of an elf. The 
only way to recover these brave elves is 
through magicks no less powerful than a wish. 

The bodies of those who have died the true 
death are often burned. This prevents the un- 
dead life force from occupying the body. Elf 
villages have learned from experience that an 
unwhole spirit is worse than an undead one. 


Accidental or Violent Death 


Seemingly unlike many other races in the 
worlds, elves try to avoid violence. Their 
actions are typically more cautious, despite 
the fact that they seem impetuous. This is 
more true of older elves than younger ones. 


62 * Chapter Seven 


When embarking on a course of action, elves 
remind themselves that it could be their last. 
This has sobering effect on even hotheaded 
elves. 

Elves live long enough that they don't want 
to risk their lives on an insignificant issue. On- 
ly truly earth-shattering events and dire emer- 
gencies will stir older elves from their retreats 
in the forests or mountains. Nothing less will 
entice them to risk their lives; although they 
are not cowards, they have no desire to lose a 
life for something petty. 

This is one of the reasons why elves have 
become legendary for their skill with the bow; 
it keeps their foes at a safe distance, affording 
the elves little danger. At closer distances, el- 
ven training with the sword is proficient 
enough that few need worry. Still, elves have 
no foolish notions about killing an opponent 
“honorably.” The method of least resistance is 
more likely to preserve precious lives. 

Unlike most races, elves have no ingrained 
fear of death. Their longevity ensures that 
they have a healthy respect for the cycles of 
life and—because of their interrelationship 
with nature—they accept death in nature. In- 
deed, elves look forward to their “death,” for 
it signifies the journey to Arvanaith and a new 
way of life rather than the surcease of life. 
However, elves do fear death by other means. 

Elves also fear the violation of their spirits 
and their free will, for these are essential in en- 
tering Arvanaith. Any creature that feeds on 
the lifeforce of another is zealously avoided 
(or slain, if the means are available) by elves, 
for these creatures are among the few who can 
inflict true oblivion upon an elf. Even those 
elves who live under the shadow of evil find 
no kinship in these creatures. 

If an elf suffers a fatal accident or is mur- 
dered, she cannot re-enter the grand cycle, 
that mystical rhythm that hurtles the earth 
through the spheres. Instead, her body lies 
cold and useless wherever the physical death 
occurred, her spirit cast out and swallowed by 
the nameless void surrounding her. If her 
body is returned to the land of her birth, the 
story is another matter. Only then can the elf's 


death once again have meaning, for there her 
physical form can contribute to the well-being 
of her world, nourishing the plants and ani- 
mals of her birthland. Her spirit is free to enter 
Arvanaith and partake in its glories. 

Any elf of good or neutral alignment is al- 
lowed in Arvanaith. Even drow so aligned are 
welcomed and allowed to share in the beauties 
of spirit found in Arvanaith. In Arvanaith, 
subrace is not important as long as the soul is 
good or neutral. Any spirit residing there has 
earned the right to do so, regardless of what it 
might have been in life. This is truly a reward 
for those who lived their lives under a pall of 
suspicion simply because of the circumstances 
of their birth. 

Aquatic elves, too, are welcome in Arva- 
naith. Although they probably had no real 
contact with the surface-dwelling elves in life, 
they can revel in the company of these elves in 
the afterlife, for in Arvanaith all things are 
possible. Aquatic elves and land elves mingle 
in a world where the air is water and water is 
air; there is no difference to them. 


Funereal Ceremonies 


Since most elves pass on to Arvanaith, their 
passing is not mourned for long. Although it 


is unlikely that they will return to the earth in 
the same form as they had assumed before or 
even with the same personality, their spirit 
continues on. As such, death rituals are more 
often a celebration that the elf has achieved 
the joys of Arvanaith. While the elf may be 
missed for a while, others know their compan- 
ion has passed on to something better. 

The ceremony surrounding each elf funeral 
varies even from village to village. Some gath- 
er with great pomp to watch the body be in- 
terred in the ground, with speakers 
expounding on the merits of the deceased. 
Others bury the body with dispatch; they re- 
gard it as a mere husk from which the life 
force has departed. After ridding the shell, 
they celebrate the spirit of the elf who once re- 
sided there. Still other elves believe that burn- 
ing is the only way to truly rid the spirit of its 
earthly ties; not only does it free the spirit for 
Arvanaith, it prevents anyone from using the 
body for nefarious purposes. Each burial is 
typically related to the nature of the elf, so 
that the burial is personalized and the point 
made that the spirit has left the body. 


The Death of Elves * 63 


Т ООРУ 


FCF 


CHAPTER 


red tae, 


ONDA AROS 


Elven Dwellings 


АОУС 


Му first glimpse of the grey elf city Ce- 

was nothing special: It appeared as a 

city of exceptional beauty, even under the 

cloudy night, but certainly no place that 1 

would lose my soul to. I, Master Thief Gerril 

Haka, have seen a thousand sights of beauty 
in my life, and this was merely another. 


I had easily avoided the patrols wandering 


the nearby mountainside; their 
was obviously a sham, for only I noticed the 
admittedly minor mistakes I з in ap- 
proaching the city. I had no trouble with the 
sentries when I entered, for my pet mage shield- 
ed me from all prying eyes. I crept through the 
arched marble gates with catlike stealth, hug- 
ging the shadows all the way to the base of the 
towering spire that was my target. The white 
streets glowed with an inner radiance as they 
spiraled up the hillside, but my ability to move 
through the slightest shadow held true, and | 
encountered no resistance. 

I climbed the tower as would a spider, hard- 
ly pausing to admire the carvings that deco- 
rated its entire surface, appreciating them only 
for their usefulness in ascending to the upper 
rooms. Once inside the obelisk, I found it ri- 
diculously easy to overcome the magical 
ee аси и Bee fe ш 

the incursions of those such as myself. 1 
retrieved the Jewel of Dajarmarak, and I found 
myself mesmerized by the beauty surrounding 
me. This was only a momentary pause, how- 
ever, and 1 resumed my business. 

As I climbed out the towers uppermost 
window, I cast a glance below to ensure that 
no prying eyes watched my descent. At that 
exact moment, gods be cursed, the moon 
chose to show her face from behind the clouds 
and illuminate the city. So awestruck was I by 
the symmetry and form of the city, the exqui- 
site perfection of its design that I must have 
fallen into a trance. 

My next memory is of lying on the cobble- 
stones surrounded by the City Guard, my 
mangled body twitching. My last thought 
was that I only hope other would-be thieves 
never enter another grey elf city so unwarned 
as was I, for the city itself was literally my 
downfall and may lead to theirs. 


64 * Chapter Eight 


PAY Oy nf £25 ELS ys KOT > 


Py hose who have visited an elf city will 
л often wonder why any elf feels the 
У need, or even an urge, to leave. The 
peace and beauty of these places is legendary 
among the younger races, so much so that 
their ideas of paradise are often modeled on 
fabled elf cities. Some say that each elf city, 
tree town, and encampment is a fragment of 
the elves' Homeland, such is the magnificence 
of these places. 

Whether it is a sylvan elf encampment, a 
high elf tree town, or one of the grey elves' cit- 
ies, each of these places radiates a charm and 
splendor unrivaled anywhere else. While hu- 
man cities and dwarf strongholds can aspire to 
the beauty and harmony of the elf homes, 
they can never truly rival these places. 

While elf crafters can still learn from the 
dwarves regarding strength and durability of 
masonry, they need no such tutelage in un- 
locking the beauty from the stones. With their 
long familiarity with the earth, the elves seem 
to know instinctively how best to carve a rock 
to reveal its beauty. One might think that 
elves would then be the primary shapers of 
stone in the world; dwarves have always held 
that position and always will. While elves do 
feel an affinity for working in stone, it is that 
affinity which holds them back. Most elves 
cannot work with stone that has been ripped 
from the earth, for it seems to scream under 
their fingertips. Very few elves will pull apart 
the earth to pull out a chunk of rock. 

When elves work with stone, the rock is al- 
most always a part of the living earth or a 
piece that has become detached. Thus, elven 
statues are often subject to the movements of 
the earth. In general, few elves other than the 
grey elves devote much time to stoneworking, 
although all elves keep the craft alive. 

Elves far prefer working with living wood 
than with stone. Wood is more flexible, for it 
will shape to both the elves' needs and the 
needs of the tree. Elves do not wish to cause 
unnecessary stress to any living being in their 
world, and they try to keep their impact on 
the trees to a minimum. 

Each of the surface-dwelling elves has a dif- 


FISTS COOKS РОК УКА 


ferent perspective on how the layout of a 
home should proceed. Following is a brief de- 
scription of a typical grey elves’ city, a high 
elves’ tree town, and a sylvan elves’ forest en- 
campment. The descriptions are necessarily 
brief, allowing the referee to flesh out the 
dwellings as appropriate for his or her cam- 
paign. Bear in mind that the vastness and full- 
ness of life in elf settlements makes them 
nearly impossible to fully describe. 


The Grey Elves’ City 


The grey elves have an abiding love for all 
things permanent. In their mountains, they 
have found nothing so permanent as stone, 
and so they make virtually all of their beauti- 
fully sculpted buildings from this material. 
Although their skill is not that of the dwarves, 
grey elves have learned a trick or two with 
stoneworking, and they put them to good use 
in their cities. When the rare dwarf is admitted 
to these lands, tears have welled up in his eyes 
at the beauty the grey elves have wrought in 
granite and shale and the other stones com- 
prising their mountains. 

The grey elf cities are strictly divided by 
caste. Those of lower social level are kept well 
away from those of higher social class. Still, 
even those of low social standing have perma- 
nent housing. Grey elves know of the impor- 
tance of a secure home, and they provide it for 
all who dwell in their cities. 

Grey elf cities are also divided into at least 
five walled concentric rings, with those of 
higher classes closer toward the secure center. 
On the outer rings live those of the noncaste, 
or of extremely low class. As one progresses 
through the rings, the finery in construction 
and ornamentation increases as well, until one 
reaches the palace and government buildings 
in the center of the city. The few humans and 
other races who have seen the center of a grey 
elf city have often sworn that there was no 
more lovely sight in all the world, and that 
they must be in the home of the gods. While it 
is true that the central portion of a grey elf city 
is elaborate, even the meanest sections of the 


Elven Dwellings € 65 


city are stunningly beautiful—crafters work 
on these sections in their free time. 

Not only does this arrangement keep each 
social class physically distinct, it allows for 
tremendous protection of the most important 
parts of the city. Further, all grey elves are 
trained in at least the rudiments of weaponry, 
and the people themselves provide an ideal de- 
fense against any unwanted visitors. 


The High Elves’ Tree Town 


The high elven philosophy is somewhere be- 
tween that of the grey and sylvan elves. While 
they value permanence and works of art, they 
also try to stay well in touch with nature. 
Therefore, they do not build many stone edi- 
fices. They prefer to stay within the forest, re- 
ceiving its bounties and creating a pure 
synthesis between the two other elven per- 
spectives on dwellings. 

Instead of the stone cities of the grey elves 
and the tents of the sylvan elves, many (al- 
though not all) high elves create tree towns. 
Using only the mightiest of trees in the ancient 
forests as a base, they build their homes high 
above the ground. Although many have 
thought this might make high elves especially 
vulnerable to fire, those who have tried to ex- 
ploit this have found otherwise. The elves al- 
ways keep liquids and water spells handy to 
protect their beloved trees, and bows are al- 
ways near to hand to discipline those who 
have the audacity to try to burn them. 

Tree towns are usually based around the 
tallest and strongest of the trees in the forest. 
One must keep in mind that these are virgin 
woods—forests that have never been logged. 
Thus, these forests are old beyond measure, 
and their trees are tall with age. One could fall 
from the lowest level of a tree town for per- 
haps 100 feet before hitting the ground. 

Ropes and ladders connect the levels. There 
are pulleys and rising platforms to aid those 
who aren't as spry on the ropes as the elves, 
such as the fairly frequent visitors. Rails and 
balconies surround the houses, keeping one 
from inadvertently plummeting to the ground. 


66 * Chapter Eight 


Although these high elves live in the trees, 
they are just at home on the ground as they 
are in the heights. They conduct most of their 
festivals and meetings on the ground, so that 
their non-tree-dwelling brethren may attend. 


The Sylvan Elves' Encampment 


Sylvan elf encampments are built with both 
defense and admiration of nature in mind. 
Low, mottled-green tents are pitched in a cir- 
cle, with the openings toward the central fires. 
Occasionally, the elves will engage in shifting 
the earth about to provide added protection. 
These encampments represent the only home 
sylvan elves know. The land readily returns to 
normal when the elves continue on their no- 
madic course. 

In the winter or when they intend to stay 
for a year or more, wood elves build semiper- 
manent wood lodges, rather than use tents. 
Many barbarian human tribes have emulated 
this practice, for they and the wood elves 
would rather not endure harsh winters with 
only a thin canvas separating them from the 
elements. Still, even the sylvan elves’ wood 
tents are well disguised, and casual travelers 
passing within 100 yards will not spot the 
campsite. Even if they did, the wood elf 
guards would dissuade them from advancing 
any nearer with some well-placed arrows. 

The bivouac is nearly always established in 
a clearing or on a hill, or both, if possible. The 
escape routes and battle tactics are thoroughly 
established at the same time a camp is, so 
wood elves are never caught unawares. They 
usually move only twice a year. 

Whatever their schedule, the wood elves 
have as great a love for impermanence and 
change as the grey elves have for permanence. 
While a grey elf city radiates a feeling of time- 
lessness, comforting its citizens with the 
knowledge that it will never change, a wood 
elf encampment always gives the impression 
of constant readiness to change. 


(EA 


МЕХ? 


CHAPTER 


Fee BE Ow ROSE 


Optional Rules 
IAS Be LS OLN RAO Oy S 


Cylithera Swanflight had but one driving 
ambition as she grew; She would be the finest 
swordswoman the world had ever seen. From 
the tender age of 45 until she was 150 years old, 
Cylithera practiced obsessively every day, ne- 
glecting even her studies of other subjects. 

“All anyone need know of me is that I have 
the fastest sword arm,” she scoffed. “I do not 
need to bother with other learning, for the 
historians would never recount how I knew 
Orcish. Legends of me will only tell of my ge- 
nius with the sword—not the dusty facts my 
elders would have me learn.” 

And so Cylithera continued to sidestep true 
education. For “variety,” she studied under 
the finest archers in elvendom, honing her 
archery skills to perfection. Her every waking 
moment was filled with bow and sword prac- 
tice; her only purpose to one day become a 
legend. Already stories were being told of her 
single-mindedness in pursuing her goal (not 
all of them complimentary). Her skills sur- 
passed those of her masters, and she knew the 
day had come. 

Cylithera traveled to a forest alone, seeking 
some monster to test her abilities. What she 
encountered was far different than her expec- 
tations. Rounding a bend in a path, she came 
across an elf sitting atop a rock. He was of 
amazing beauty, but even to her untutored 
senses he stank of evil. Drawing her bright 
sword, Cylithera immediately challenged him 
to a duel. Smirking, he stepped from his 
perch, made a mocking obeisance to her, and 
gestured idly. Suddenly unable to move even 
her fingers, Cylithera could only watch as the 
older elf sauntered toward her. He struck the 
sword from her hand, scrawled a note on a 
piece of parchment and impaled it on her dag- 
ger, then plunged the blade into her back. 

After Cylithera recovered, she found the 
courage to look at the parchment. It read: “Ig- 
norance is sometimes bliss, but more often 
death.” From that moment forth, she devoted 
herself to studying the unknown and eventually 
became a sorceress of great repute. The stories 
told now of Cylithera Swanflight praise her for 
the vast knowledge she came to learn. 


68 * Chapter Nine 


*.iven what is known about elves, it 
; may seem logical that they be allowed 

“= various alternatives not normally 
granted in the core rules presented in the 
DMG and the PHB. Their incredibly long li- 
fespans make a few of these rules seem ques- 
tionable. 

This chapter should address some of these 
concerns. However, the reader must under- 
stand that any changes proposed in this chap- 
ter are purely optional. The DM may allow or 
forbid any of these rules as is appropriate to 
his or her campaign. 

Since the rules presented in this chapter ex- 
pand the abilities of elves with only minor 
drawbacks (thereby upsetting game balance 
to potentially unmanageable degrees), each 
addition of these options must be weighed 
carefully to determine to what degree the cam- 
paign will become imbalanced. The Dungeon 
Master should either disallow the rule or, if he 
or she wishes to use the option, compensate 
for any imbalance it causes. Many of these op- 
tional rules will add spice to a campaign (par- 
ticularly an all-elf campaign), but— 
again—the game referee must determine 
whether the price to be paid is worth the gain. 

Naturally, in an all-elf campaign, these 
rules will not really affect the characters over- 
all. In any other campaign, however, the ad- 
vantages and disadvantages must be carefully 
considered to determine the ramifications. 
Balance must be preserved so that the game 
remains enjoyable to play any sort of charac- 
ter. That's why the various rules are there. 

A good idea when considering the options 
presented here is to figure out disadvantages 
to accompany each advantage. This will force 
the players to decide whether they want the 
advantage so badly that they will pay for it. If 
they do, and the DM is willing to include such 
alternatives, by all means give the optional 
rule a try. If it doesn't work, retire the ruling. 

Options presented in this chapter include 
expanding level limits, allowing extra profi- 
ciencies, modifying combat and archery 
skills, using bows as weapons, and adjusting 
arrow breakage. 


D 


As an option to consider, if the DM permits, 
elf characters may progress in their levels as 
far as a human might. This option reflects the 
fact that elves have many extra years in which 
to prove themselves. Although a typical elf 
may become bored with an extended sojourn 
in any one class and would prefer to retire 
than continue in his or her vocation, there are 
always exceptions. PCs are, of course, the 
most notable exceptions to any rule. 

Naturally, given the long life of the stand- 
ard elf, this could rapidly lead to elves domi- 
nating their campaign world. This may or 
may not be desirable to the DM, depending on 
the flavor of the campaign. If the elves are the 
dominant race of a particular world, having 
built or fostered other civilizations, the 
Dungeon Master might wish to think about 
this option. If the other races have developed 
legends about the skill, wisdom, and sage 
counsel of the elves, the elves most likely do 
not have level limitations. 

If, on the other hand, the DM prefers the 
elves to follow the AD&D® game standard as 
just another PC race, he or she may wish to 
somehow limit the elves' levels. Please note, 
however, that this does not mean halting their 
advancement in their chosen class entirely. 
Rather, as suggested in the Dungeon Master's 
Guide, simply slow their advancement. Re- 
member that time is a far different matter to 
elves than to humans; taking longer to achieve 
something is natural to elves. 

Charging elves double the experience points 
necessary to achieve levels beyond their maxi- 
mums seems a reasonable compromise. This 
reflects the enthusiasm elves feel when first en- 
tering an enterprise, as well as their subse- 
quent diminishing commitment to their 
chosen class. Eventually, most elves grow 
bored with the repetition that adventuring as 
a fighter (or as a priest, mage, or rogue) pro- 
vides. Such lack of concentration is indicated 
in the additional time it requires an elf to ad- 
vance in levels. 


Extra Proficiencies 


This section should only be used if the DM us- 
es the optional proficiency system. If the DM 
doesn't use that system, players may want to 
skip this section. Or, they may want to famil- 
iarize themselves with the system and then 
read this section. 

Using the optional proficiency system, all 
elf PCs get a number of skills they can use to 
round out a character. Adding extra proficien- 
cies for older elf characters is a natural step in 
the evolving PC. 

Adding positive modifiers to existing profi- 
ciencies for older elf characters is also a possi- 
bility to consider. А being who has more than 
100 years to practice a skill will certainly be 
one of the better practitioners of that skill to 
be found anywhere. 

However, it's unlikely that elves would 
spend their youth practicing weapon skills ex- 
clusively. Parents would rather these young 
elves learned more of life's many facets before 
devoting time to a single pursuit, including 
weaponry. More likely than not, a young elf's 
life is dominated by music, dancing, and 
learning craftsmanship. Few elf parents would 
ever want their child to grow up to be an ad- 
venturer; while they value free will, they 
would definitely discourage their child from 
such a path. They would want their child to 
experiment with all options available in life, 
and most would prefer that the child concen- 
trate on the gentle, lovely side of existence. 

For this reason, elves shouldn't be allowed 
extra adventuring proficiencies such as blind- 
fighting or endurance. Only those applicable 
to an elfs young life should be considered. 
Even the more rugged proficiencies, such as 
survival and fire-building, are questionable 
choices for an elf's early years. 

Instead, think about a human child's life. 
Human children are taught singing, musical 
instruments, or art. Few of them learn the in- 
tricacies of gaming or forgery. Only the most 
exceptional of children would be allowed pro- 
ficiencies such as these. 

The same is true for elf children. Those 


ж ——————————————-+—‏ س 


70 * Chapter Nine 


whose destinies are in a certain craft (such as 
blacksmithing, hunting, or study) will learn 
the skills applicable to their craft as well as 
those necessary to become a well-rounded elf. 
If they want to develop other skills (such as 
those they might need for an adventuring life), 
they will have to develop them in the future as 
would anyone else. 

Thus, it is suggested that elves be allowed 
two or possibly three extra nonweapon profi- 
ciencies (such as Dancing, Musical Instru- 
ment, and Singing), as they begin play. Those 
elves who start play at a later age might gain 
one for every 10 years over age 100. 


Combat Modification 


Elves are fiercely interested in any art to 
which they may dedicate themselves for dec- 
ades or even centuries. This includes the fight- 
ing arts. The optional modification described 
in this section, the bladesong fighting style, re- 
flects that interest. 

When an elf has devoted him- or herself to 
improving prowess in combat, the result can 
often be a frighteningly efficient individual. 
The services of elves who have exclusively 
trained for battle are in high demand in hu- 
man lands, for the elves’ knowledge of tactics, 
strategy, and swordplay often rivals that of 
the most accomplished human generals. 


Bladesong Fighting Style 


Dedicated elf warriors take their craft seri- 
ously enough to have created a uniquely elven 
fighting style. Unlike the martial arts of other 
races, the elven fighting style, also known as 
the bladesong, emphasizes beauty and econ- 
omy of movement over sheer destructive 
power. However, the elven bladesong is de- 
ceptively dangerous, for all its seeming gentle- 
ness and apparent grace. 

There are two types of bladesingers: those 
who learn it as an additional skill (described 
below), and those who have made it their 
lives. Those in this second category are 
known as Bladesingers, and they are de- 


Qe ENSE dA EOS 


OER 


Ste tale CoA 


STR: XE р C) f TUA. ta COA 067 


scribed in Chapter Ten. 

Bladesong is so named for several reasons. 
The first and most obvious is because of the 
whistling of the blade as it slices through the 
air when this style of fighting is used. The sec- 
ond is for the haunting, wordless tune many 
of its practitioners sing as they fight. 

Those who practice the bladesong appear as 
if they are dancing when they fight. Their 
movements seem misleadingly slow and ele- 
gant, deflecting opponents’ blades while lazily 
drifting back to score hits themselves. The 
technique requires, above all, misdirection 
and subtlety. The bladesingers do not believe 
in smashing blows or strong and crushing of- 
fense, but rather in guiding their opponents to 
anticipate a different attack entirely, thus 
overbalancing the foe and making him seem 
clumsy. 

Bladesinging can be done with any Small- 
or Medium-sized melee weapon, although the 
majority of practitioners practice their art 
with the sword. Due to the awkwardness of 
polearms and two-handed weapons, there are 
no known students of bladesinging proficient 
in these weapons. 

To take advantage of the bladesinging tech- 
nical benefits, the character (who must be a 
member of the warrior, priest, rogue, or war- 
rior/mage classes) must devote at least two 
weapon proficiency slots to the style. Other- 
wise, the character can gain no benefits from 
the technique. This cost does not include the 
initial slot devoted to learning rudimentary 
use of the weapon, so the total cost is three 
weapon slots. 

Obviously, rogues and priests cannot pick 
up this technique until they reach the 4th level 
or higher, since they start out with only two 
weapon proficiency slots and don't acquire a 
third until having progressed in levels. (As 
noted above, mages cannot learn this style at 
all.) Even if rogues and priests devote all their 
initial slots to a weapon and the first half of 
the bladesong proficiency, they must take a 
significant amount of time away from adven- 
turing to learn the second half. Unless their 
companions are remarkably understanding 


WER SAG e 


2/9), KOSS AGO 


Уух, 


and willing to wait some years, this could 
cause party friction. Thus, the style is usually 
practiced only by warriors and warrior/ 
mages. 

Please note: Elves never teach this style to 
non-elves, including half-elves and drow (the 
latter of whom have their own teachers and 
their own style anyway). Elves make no excep- 
tions to this rule, even for those who have 
proven themselves eternal friends to the elves or 
even those who have married into the elven life. 
Elves have several reasons for not doing so. 

The first is that this style could be a terrible 
weapon against the elves should any non-elf 
students choose to use it that way. Though 
they may trust someone with their lives, the 
teaching of the bladesong i is most definitely a 
racial secret—a secret that will not be revealed 
even under pain of death. The only conceiv- 
able way for a non-elf to gain this knowledge 
is by using powerful magicks to force it from a 
practitioner. In such a case, elves would swear 
the blood oath and doggedly hunt the thief 
until he or she is destroyed. They would not 
hesitate to use every trick at their command. 

The second is that there are so few teachers 
of bladesinging that they have no desire to de- 
vote the time required to any other than elves. 
Although this is biased against non-elves, 
bladesinging masters are adamant about not 
teaching any other than elves. While a few 
other creatures might have the grace neces- 
sary for the intricacies of the bladesong, they 
certainly do not have the judgment and dis- 
cernment most elves possess. 

Finally, and most compellingly, few other 
beings have the time necessary to properly 
learn bladesinging. In jo years it takes to 
master even the rudiments of the bladesong, a 
human could raise a family, build a successful 
business, and retire a wealthy man. There are 
numerous other ways to become a fierce fight- 
er, all of which demand less time than learning 
the bladesong. Even most elves are not willing 
to take the time necessary to learn this tech- 
nique. Only the most fiercely devoted will 
spend the decades required for this fighting 
style. 


Optional Rules ө 71 


4 {chu 9 r= OP Me d 


М2 


Advantages 

Although the cost is rather steep to learn 
bladesinging, its practitioners swear by it. Its 
wide versatility often astounds those who are 
not familiar with its intricacies. The things 
even an amateur bladesinger can do with one 
blade echo tricks that accomplished warriors 
can do with two, or with a weapon and shield. 

Those elves willing to devote two slots to 
learning the rudiments of bladesinging gain 
the use of the following benefits: 

1. They may gain a +1 bonus to their AC 
or, if they wish to spend an extra slot, may 
boost this bonus to +2 to their AC. That is 
the highest bonus those who choose blade- 
singing as an additional skill can attain. or 

2. They may gain a +1 to hit or, if they 
wish to spend an extra slot, may boost this to 
a *2to attack. As with the AC bonus, +215 
the best they can hope for. or 

3. They may attack and parry in that same 
round, without wasting any additional at- 
tacks. 


Note that these three benefits are not cumu- 
lative; that is, practitioners cannot use all 
three at once. However, they do have the op- 
tion of varying between these three options 
during the course of a combat. 


EXAMPLE: Amaranth Silversword, a 6th-level 
fighter fully proficient in the bladesinging 
weapon style with three slots, encounters a 
band of 20 orcs while he is walking well ahead 
of his party. He immediately shifts into a de- 
fensive posture, giving himself a +2 bonus to 
his AC so that he may gauge the orc band's 
capability. 

When they fail to hurt him appreciably in 
the first exchange of attacks, Amaranth places 
his back to a tree so that fewer of them can 
approach. He shifts to a slightly offensive 
stance, going with one attack and one parry. 
He dispatches an orc, and the rest still have 
failed to harm him severely. 

Now that he has fully learned their mea- 
sure, he goes totally on the offensive and 
whirls through their midst with deadly capa- 


72 * Chapter Nine 


bility. When the rest of his party finally 
catches up with him, hurried by the sound of 
clashing blades, they find Amaranth standing 
atop several dead orc bodies, calling elaborate 


and inventive insults after those who have 
fled. 


Disadvantages 

The most obvious disadvantage to acquiring 
the bladesinging weapon style is that a charac- 
ter cannot carry a shield and practice the style 
at the same time. This technique requires far 
too much concentration on movement and 
flow, and the shield gets in the way of the gra- 
ce and balance necessary to successfully use 
the style. 

A more esoteric disadvantage is that this 
style is most often used by loners— solitary in- 
dividuals who have no desire to be part of a 
group. Rarely, this technique may be prac- 
ticed by someone whose companions will part 
company with the PC for a decade. Since 
bladesinging is a very demanding style, the 
training is intense, difficult, and, above all, 
long. Therefore, a PC would be well advised 
to study this style in his or her early years be- 
fore joining up with a group of adventurers— 
or else develop some long-lived and 
understanding friends. 


Archery Modifications 


Elves are, with few exceptions, the undisputed 
masters of the bow. They have developed 
their art to a state of true excellence. This sec- 
tion details several techniques elves have de- 
vised to hone their archery skills—for fun, 
profit, and protection. Many other races have 
seen these tricks, and those that were not on 
the receiving end of them have diligently tried 
to practice these arts. 

Seven optional techniques for firing a bow 
are outlined in this section; these modifica- 
tions are cumulative with any others that a 
character might have. Also, most of these 
tricks are usable only with long or short bows 
(or the composite versions thereof). A few can 
be used with the crossbow, but because most 


elves disdain the use of that weapon, its modi- 
fiers are not included. 

An important note regarding elven archery: 
Elves may, because of their agility, fire their 
bow, move, and fire once again. Alternative- 
ly, they may choose to move, fire their bow, 
and then move again. 


The Broken-Charge Shot 


One of the most effective weapons of a 
mounted enemy is the ability to charge. One 
of the most effective ways to rid foes of this 
advantage is to take out their mounts from 
underneath them. Although this isn't a meth- 
od elves generally employ because the mount 
usually isn't a threat, they will use the tactic if 
things are looking grim on the field of battle. 
Elves will also use this optional maneuver if 
the mount itself poses a threat. 

Unless such animals are well trained in the 
ways of combat and in dealing with pain, a hit 
by an arrow will break the charge. Riders 
must make a Land-Based Riding check to see if 
they retain their seating atop an injured 
mount. If they fail this check, they must fol- 
low with a Dexterity check. Those who don't 
have the proficiency may only do the Dexteri- 
ty check; if this check fails, the rider is hurled 
to the ground for 1d4 points of damage. 


The Double-Arrow Shot 


Another trick that is impressive (though good 
for little else) is the double-arrow shot. By 
adding a +1 penalty to initiative and taking a 
—] to hit and damage, the archer may fire 
two arrows from the bow with one pull of the 
string. 

The arrows can be directed toward a single 
target or at two separate targets within a 60- 
degree arc if the attacker is willing to take an 
additional +1 penalty to initiative and an- 
other —1 to hit and damage. This reflects the 
time the archer takes to adjust the fletching 
and arrange the arrows on the string. 

This shot does not allow more than two ar- 
rows on a single string. Lastly, if this option is 


taken, no more than one additional arrow 
may be fired in the same round. 


EXAMPLE: Kanali, a 3rd-level/3rd-level high 
elf fighter/mage, faces two ogres. She has ex- 
hausted her spells and must rely only on her 
archery skills. Taking two arrows from her 
quiver, she rips the fletching a bit, nocks them 
both on the string (taking a +2 to initiative), 
and lets loose the arrows. To hit the ogres’ AC 
4, she rolls a 16 and a 13. Taking all her modi- 
fiers into effect (+1 for being an elf, —2 for 
the difficulty of the shot), her total modifier is 
—1. Her modified rolls are then 15 and 12. 
Since she needs 13 to hit AC 4, she hits one of 
the ogres, inflicting 146-2 points of damage. If 
she had focused both shots on one ogre, the 
damage would have been greater. She still has 
one shot left this round, and she'd better not 
waste it. 


The Foot Shot 


In some situations, an archer may find one of 
her arms unable to grip the string or shaft of a 
bow. Perhaps the other hand is holding onto 
something to keep the elf from falling, or per- 
haps the arm has been injured. Or maybe the 
elf just wants a bit of extra pull on the bow, to 
inflict just a little more damage. 

In a case like this, if a shot is absolutely re- 
quired, elves have developed the foot shot. 
The elf must have a secure place to rest her 
hindside and at least one arm free. Using the 
feet as a base against which to pull, the elf 
aims the bow and pulls back the string with 
the free hand (or both, if possible). Although 
there is а —1 penalty to hit, the damage is in- 
creased by +1 because of the extra pull grant- 
ed by using her feet. 


The Hanging-Tree Shot 


Because elves spend so much time in and 
around with trees, they obviously have found 
a need to incorporate trees into their archery. 
Elf scouts and spies especially have learned to 
use trees effectively. They drop from branches 


Optional Rules е 73 


to land in front of their enemies or use trees as 
concealment. 

One of the tricks elf archers are most proud 
of is the dangling shot. In this shot, the elf 
wraps her legs around a sturdy tree branch 
and drops downward while simultaneously 
firing right into the faces of her oncoming 
enemies. 

Unfortunately, the disadvantages to this 
shot are numerous. The most obvious is that 
anything on the elf that isn't tied down or 
strapped in (arrows, daggers, loose change, et 
cetera) will fall to the ground. Another disad- 
vantage is the —3 to hit. Lastly, the elf can't 
fire her usual two shots. 

However, the elf can still take an action, 
such as swinging back up into the tree or 
jumping to the ground. Further, the enemy 
suffers a —6 to his surprise roll! This advan- 
tage alone often outweighs the drawbacks, 
and the hanging tree shot is a favorite trick of 
elves ambushing lone outriders. 


The Quick-Draw Shot 


Every once in a while, there arises a situation 
where an archer must fire more than two ar- 
rows a round or where the archer must bring a 
bow to bear very quickly. In response to this 
need, elves have developed the quick draw 
shot. Their agility and the near-constant com- 
panionship of their bows has helped them 
achieve that end admirably. 

Because of the speed involved in firing from 
a quick draw, the elf has less time to aim. 
Therefore, accuracy of the shot is severely af- 
fected. The first shot in a round is made at no 
penalty. From there, penalties add up quickly. 
The second shot is at —2. The third is at =4. 
The fourth is at —8. If the elf wishes to at- 
tempt a fifth shot, the penalty for it is —16. 

The archer gets off two shots on his first at- 
tack sequence. When all combatants have fin- 
ished their first attacks, the archer may take 
the next two, if so desired. Finally, after every- 
one has completed second attacks, the archer 
may take one final shot. Although this shot is 
almost guaranteed to miss, it may be the last 


74 * Chapter Nine 


hope of a party, so many try it in moments of 
desperation, 

A sixth shot in a round is virtually impos- 
sible unless the elf has been hasted or has 
otherwise been made exceptionally speedy. In 
such magically enhanced cases, the first two 
shots are without penalty. The third and 
fourth are at —2. The fifth and sixth are at 
—4. The seventh is at —8. The eighth (and fi- 
nal) shot is at —16. 


The Stapling Shot 


When an elf wants to disarm or otherwise in- 
capacitate someone, he can attempt a stapling 
maneuver. By making a called shot ( 1 penal- 
ty to initiative, —4 to hit), the character can 
staple some part of the target's clothing to a 
nearby object, as long as that object is of a 
material that is reasonably subject to penetra- 
tion by an arrow (such as wood or plaster). 
The target must be standing near such an ob- 
ject or the shot is wasted. 

If the shot is successful, the target is pinned 
to that object. The target must spend a round 
tearing free, although this requires no roll. 
Pinned targets defend with a —2 to AC and to 
attacks rolls. After three rounds, if they have 
not taken the time to free themselves, they 
break free due to exertion. During these three 
rounds, the penalties to Armor Class and at- 
tack rolls still apply. 

The stapling shot is not only good for pre- 
venting various actions on the part of a hostile 
person, it serves to demonstrate that the elves 
are far from defenseless. Furthermore, many 
elves like to embarrass targets by affixing 
them to the nearest piece of “furniture.” 


The Trick Shot 


Elves do not always choose to nail an offen- 
sive person to the nearest tree. Often, they 
prefer another means to convey their disdain 
or enmity. Thus, elves have perfected their 
aim so that they can make a spectacular retal- 
iatory shot that says to an enemy that he is not 
needed nor, indeed, wanted in the elves' por- 


tion of the world. 

Trick shots of this sort include knocking off 
hats, sending an arrow an inch away from an 
intruder's ear, or placing an arrow in interest- 
ing and amusing places (such as the behind of 
an orc). Deliberate trick shots also include 
shots intended to be clearly warning shots and 
not simply missed targets. These trick shots 
require the elf to takea +1 to initiative and a 
—4 to hit. 

If the attack roll is made, the arrow can do 
exactly what the elf wanted. Otherwise, it will 
either fly away harmlessly (informing victims 
that someone is shooting at them), or it will 
actually hit the one for whom the warning 
was intended. If so, the arrow inflicts 1d3 
points of damage. If the targets were not pre- 
viously enemies, they certainly would be by 
now. 


Using Bows as Weapons 


When archers wielding a bow are attacked in 
melee, they have little choice but to defend 
themselves with the bow. In the past, this typ- 
ically spelled the destruction of the bow, but 
elves have learned how to deflect some of the 
force of a blow—thus making the bow repara- 
ble. Furthermore, elves have developed bows 
that are more resistant to this sort of damage. 

Elves can attempt to turn aside the worst of 
crushing blows, and their bows are allowed to 
make a save vs. crushing blow (as thick wood) 
at +1. Piercing weapons are easily deflected 
as long as the elf succeeds in the parry, and 
they cause no damage to the bow. However, a 
parry against a slashing weapon is a sure way 
to destroy a wood bow. 

More importantly, archers occasionally 
can't reach their melee weapons when some- 
one engages them in close combat. In these 
cases, they must resort to using their bows as 
clubs against their attackers. The damage 
caused is 1d6-1 against S or M creatures, 1d4 
against L. If used in this way, a wood bow 
must save vs. crushing blows at —1. 


Arrow Breakage and Loss 


Although most fletchers make their wares 
with great care, the force of bow shots is often 
enough to induce breakage. And, although 
most archers will deny it, occasionally they do 
miss. This section presents an optional rule to 
cover such situations. 

When an arrow or bolt is fired and the mis- 
sile strikes its target, the missile must make a 
saving throw vs. crushing blow at +6 with 
other applicable bonuses (or penalties) to the 
save. If the save fails, the shaft is broken and 
cannot be used again. If the save is a success, 
the missile can be reused. 

If the missile misses its target, it travels out 
to its maximum range (if there are no obsta- 
cles to impede its movement), which is 25% 
greater than long range. It skids across the 
ground, ricocheting against rocks, gravel, 
plants, etc. There is a 10% chance to find a 
lost missile that has reached its maximum 
range, unless special precautions have been 
taken with proper modifiers for different ter- 
rains at the DM's discretion. Certain types of 
terrain will, of course, make recovery impos- 
sible. Aerial and naval battles are two exam- 
ples of such terrains. Even if the missile is 
found, it still must roll a saving throw vs. 
crushing blow at +3 to be unbroken. 

Not only does this optional rule make for 
more realistic game play, it also allows charac- 
ters with the Bowyer/Fletcher proficiency to 
make use of their skills. Furthermore, this rule 
will allow characters to spend far less time 
searching for possibly broken arrows. 


Optional Rules e 75 


ES 


| OCH 


CHAPTER 


10 


Random Elf Generator 


The Random Elf Generator allows the DM to 
create believable elf PCs and NPCs quickly 
and easily. He or she should feel freeto ed 
the results to suit a campaign and playing 
style. The Level Compared to PCs Table is 
only for NPCs. 


eoo EAS. 


К eoe н EAS) 


Age (1d100) 
1-30 100-200 

31-50 201-250 

51-75 251-300 

76-95 301-350 

96-100 350-700 
Fighter/Mage 
Fighter/Thief 
Fighter/Mage/ 
Thief 


Subrace* (146) 


Sex (1d6) 
1-3 Female 
4-6 Male 


Personality (1d6) 
Compassionate 
Cruel 
Haughty 
Frivolous 
Proud 
Obsessed 


Level Compared to PCs (1d3) 

1 Lower (3 or fewer) 

2 Equal (within 2) 
Higher (3 or more) 


76 * Chapter Ten 


АА. 4 


ALEKS GY: Us od AO XY 93 YMO 


Character Creation and Kits 
УЭ OS 


EXT RK = nf LA 


1۴ characters may be warriors, Wiz- 
Ye? ^ ards, priests, thieves, or multiclass 

“> combinations. If they are multi- 
classed, they may select from fighter/mage, 
fighter/thief, mage/thief, or fighter/mage/ 
thief kits. If a player chooses a multiclass kit, 
he or she should be familiar with the abilities 
and limitations of the classes in the Player's 
Handbook. The character's abilities will be 
further modified by subrace, as noted in this 
chapter. Note: Elf PCs may become bards on- 
ly if they adopt the Elven Minstrel Kit. 


Standard Elf Abilities 


Unless otherwise stated, each elf has the fol- 
lowing abilities: 

* Elves are 90% resistant to sleep- and 
charm-related spells. Even if they fail a check, 
they get the save usual for such spells. 

* Elves gain a special bonus to find secret 
or concealed doors. Passing within 10 feet of a 
secret door, elves will detect it on a roll of 1 on 
a 146. If they search a 10-foot-square area, 
elves can find a secret door on a roll of 1 or 2 
on a 146. Elves find concealed doors on a roll 
of 1, 2, or 3 on a 146. 

* Elves gain a special bonus with bows, ex- 
cluding crossbows. When firing a bow, an elf 
gainsa *1 to hit. This does not apply to dam- 
age unless a specially made bow is used that 
takes advantage of a Strength bonus. 

* Elves are especially good with short and 
long swords. Like their abilities with bows, 
they gain a +1 to hit (but not on damage) 
when using one of these weapons. This is in 
addition to any bonuses of the weapon itself. 

* Elves move through forests and other 
natural terrain silently and almost invisibly. 
As long as elves are not attacking, they can 
only be spotted by someone who can spy in- 
visible objects. When elves move through the 
woods, if they are careful, they will appear 
only as shadows of the leaves of trees, dancing 
in the undergrowth. This is of immense value 
to elves, who can thus gather information 
about their enemies—enemies who often do 
not even suspect an elven presence. . 


= UN ATUS AC AA 
AC КОЛО 


* Finally, elves have the ability to give their 
enemies a —4 penalty to a surprise roll if the 
elf is: 1) moving alone, 2) is 90 feet away from 
the rest of their party, or 3) is with other elves 
or halflings and all are in nonmetal armor. If 
the elf must open a door or screen to get to the 
enemy, the penalty is reduced to — 2. 


The Elf Subraces 


Each elf subrace has different talents and hin- 
drances in an adventuring career. Each 
achieves levels differently and at a different 
rate than the others. 

Some, such as the drow, have a large num- 
ber of benefits while suffering few disadvan- 
tages. (Of course, the major disadvantage to 
being a drow is being a drow.) Subraces that 
have more advantages require more experi- 
ence points to advance to the next level than 
those with few advantages. 

A player character created from a specific 
elf subrace will have a number of adjustments 
to the standard character abilities. These are 
defined as follows: 

* Ability Score Adjustments. Adjustments 
to be added to, or subtracted from, the base 
ability scores when creating characters in a 
subrace. 

e Ability Scores. The minimum and maxi- 
mum scores characters of a subrace may have 
after the initial adjustments have been made. 
A character who does not meet the minimum 
requirements of a subrace cannot be a member 
of that subrace. Scores over the maximum 
must be reduced. 

© Languages. The languages members of a 
subrace typically know. Elves may speak ei- 
ther a specific form of Elvish or "Elvish com- 
mon,' depending on the campaign. Even if 
they are speaking a specific form of Elvish, 
elves can usually understand most of what is 
being said in another dialect; pronunciation 
and usage of some of the words may be differ- 
ent, but Elvish is basically Elvish. 

© Infravision. The range of the subrace's 
infravision. 

* Special Advantages. Abilities of a given 


Character Creation and Kits e 77 


subrace that set them apart from others. 

* Special Disadvantages. The disadvan- 
tages of a subrace that offset its advantages. 

* Additional Experience Cost. The penalty 
for playing a naturally powerful subrace. Be- 
cause certain subraces have a number of ad- 
vantages that other subraces do not, they 
must work harder to become better in their 
chosen professions. Experience adjustments 
for high ability scores cannot be taken by 
races with additional experience costs. 

А +10% experience cost means that a char- 
acter of that subrace must earn an additional 
10% of experience points normally required 
to increase in levels. Multiclass characters 
must gain the necessary points per level plus 
an additional 10% for each class. As with any 
multiclassed PCs, they may advance in one 
level while remaining fixed in another. 


Aquatic Elf 


Ability Score Adjustments: Aquatic elves, be- 
cause they need the ability to move quickly 
underwater, gain +1 to their Dexterity. How- 
ever, since their undersea world is fundamen- 
tally one-dimensional, they suffer a —1 
penalty to Intelligence. 


TABLE 5: AQUATIC ELF ABILITY SCORES 


Ability Minimum Maximum 
Strength 3 18 
Dexterity 6 19 
Constitution 8 18 
Intelligence 7 17 
Wisdom 3 18 
Charisma 8 18 


Languages: Aquatic Elvish, kuo-toa, sa- 
huagin, dolphin, merman, abovesea com- 
mon, undersea common. 

Infravision: 360 feet. 

Special Advantages: Aquatic elves have gill 
slits that enable them to filter air from water. 
Impure water, like fouled air for surface 
dwellers, is difficult for them to breathe. 


MA MM M ——— $a —M a — M M — M — — —— ———— —— ———— 


78 * Chapter Ten 


Special Disadvantages: These elves cannot 
be out of water for extended periods because 
their gill slits close when exposed to air. This 
offsets their underwater breathing ability. 

They do not gain a +1 to hit with bows. 
Since bows are ineffective underwater, they 
have had no chance to learn the intricacies of 
these weapons. Only an elf who has traveled 
to the upper lands may learn the use of the 
bow, and even then this does not gain the bo- 
nus conferred by a lifetime of practice. 

Additional Experience Cost: None. 


Drow 


Ability Score Adjustments: Drow are extraor- 
dinarily dexterous and intelligent. They gain a 
bonus of +2 to Dexterity and a +1 to Intelli- 
gence. However, their personalities can be de- 
scribed as grating at best (although not 
usually to their faces), and they have the typi- 
cal elf Constitution. Thus, they have a —2 
penalty to Charisma and a —1 to their initial 
Constitution scores. 


TABLE 6: DROW ABILITY SCORES 


Ability Minimum Maximum 
Strength 3 18 
Dexterity 8 20 
Constitution 7 17 
Intelligence 9 19 
Wisdom 3 18 
Charisma 6 16 


Languages: Drow Elvish, Elvish, duergar, 
svirfneblin, deep dwarf, illithid, undercom- 
mon, sign language, kuo-toa, bugbear, orcish. 

Infravision: 90 feet. 

Special Advantages: Once per day, all drow 
can use the spells dancing lights, faerie fire, 
and darkness. They achieve this through force 
of will, rather than spell components. A 4th- 
level drow can cast levitate, know alignment, 
and detect magic once per day. In addition, 
drow priests can cast clairvoyance, detect lie, 
suggestion, and dispel magic once a day. 


At the start, drow are 50% magic resistant, 
and every level they rise increases the resist- 
ance by 2% (to a maximum of 80%). Multi- 
classed drow use the higher level to determine 
this bonus. 

In addition to their high magic resistance, 
drow also receive а +2 bonus on all saves in- 
volving magic. This includes those devices that 
emit magical effects or are powered by magic. 
This magic resistance does not hamper their 
ability to use magic themselves, however. 

Special Disadvantages: The major disadvan- 
tage of the drow is their inability to see in bright 
light. Any light greater than that of torches or 
continual light spells (including bright sunlight) 
will blind them and severely affect their ability 
to fight. Wan light, like that of a light spell, does 
not trigger this disadvantage. 

Bright light causes the drow to suffer, tem- 
porarily, —2 to Dexterity. Attack rolls are 
made at a —2 penalty, and opponents gain a 
+2 save against drow spells if they are within 
the light. When a drow is in darkness and his 
opponents are in the light, he retains his Dex- 
terity and surprise advantages but still suffers 
a penalty on attack rolls. 

If the drow spends more than two weeks 
away from the subterranean caverns of the 
Underdark, the special advantages fade at the 
rate of one power a day. This starts from the 
most innate spellcasting and works down to the 
least powerful. Thus, a drow priest would first 
lose dispel magic, followed by suggestion, clair- 
voyance, and detect lie. Drow magic resistance 
is lost at a rate of 10% per day. This process can 
be halted and the powers regained if the drow 
returns to the Underdark and spends one day 
there for each week spent aboveground. 

Finally, all other elves hate the drow, and 
reactions to them are with at least a — 4 penal- 
ty. This modifier is cumulative to any kits the 
drow player might be using. Only after a par- 
ticular elf comes to accept a particular drow as 
a friend, does this penalty disappear. 

Additional Experience Cost: 20%. 


mm 


80 * Chapter Ten 


Grey Elf 


Ability Score Adjustments: Grey elves are the 
most intelligent of all the elves and are more 
dexterous than most. They receive a +2 bo- 
nus to Intelligence and a +1 to Dexterity. 
However, because they spend so much time 
studying, their physique is frail. They have a 
penalty of —2 to Constitution and a —1 to 
Strength. 


TABLE 7: GREY ELF ABILITY SCORES 


Ability Minimum Maximum 
Strength 3 17 
Dexterity 7 19 
Constitution 5 16 
Intelligence 8 20 
Wisdom 3 18 
Charisma 8 18 


Languages: Grey Elvish and all other lan- 
guages requiring speech or gestures. Since 
grey elves spend so much time in their li- 
braries and with their sages, they can learn 
virtually any language they desire. 

Infravision: 60 feet. 

Special Advantages: Grey elves have unlim- 
ited access to their own libraries and sages. 
Any information the grey elf council deter- 
mines to be good for the elf race may be fur- 
nished to grey elf PCs for a cheaper price than 
they would find elsewhere. This is purely dis- 
cretionary on the part of the DM and should 
be played accordingly. 

Special Disadvantages: Because of their 
haughtiness and arrogance, grey elves receive 
a —3 onall reaction adjustments when dealing 
with non-elves. Their disdain, whether inten- 
tional or not, communicates itself to others 
and leads to very poor relations. 

With other elves, grey elves suffer a —1 on 
reaction adjustments. This adjustment reflects 
their irritating and condescending attitude, even 
toward other elves. With other grey elves, of 
course, there is no reaction adjustment. 

Additional Experience Cost: 15%. 


XS RS EIAS TEE 


E e OLAS ER 


KSA 


SAH ЗА ЖОКЕДЕ 


LEVEE} 


Ab tale 


Half-Elf 


Half-elves, as noted earlier, are not truly a 
subrace of elves. They have no adjustments or 
advantages and disadvantages to note here, 
although a DM may wish to make an excep- 
tion in special cases. 


High Elf 


Ability Score Adjustments: The most common 
type of elf, the high elf has only the standard 
ability adjustments, which are a +1 to Dex- 
terity and a —1 to Constitution. 


TABLE 8: HIGH ELF ABILITY SCORES 


Ability Minimum Maximum 
Strength 3 18 
Dexterity 6 19 
Constitution 7 17 
Intelligence 8 18 
Wisdom 3 18 
Charisma 8 18 


Languages: High Elvish, other forms of El- 
vish, dwarvish, gnomish, halfling, common, 
orcish, hobgoblin, and goblin. 

Infravision: 60 feet. 

Special Advantages: None. 

Special Disadvantages: None. 

Additional Experience Cost: None. 


Sylvan Elf 


Ability Score Adjustments: Because their lives 
are spent in constant exertion, wood elves are 
stronger than other elves. However, they are 
less sociable because of their upbringing. 
They have bonuses of +1 to Strength and 
Dexterity and penalties of —1 to Constitution 
and Charisma. 


TABLE 9: SYLVAN ELF ABILITY SCORES 


Ability Minimum Maximum 
Strength 6 19 
Dexterity 6 19 
Constitution 7 17 
Intelligence 8 18 
Wisdom 3 18 
Charisma 7 


EAFA 


F Ry AG Oy Ay 


Languages: Sylvan Elvish, High Elvish, 
centaur, pixie, dryad, treant, and other wood- 
land creatures. Wood elves only rarely learn 
common; they are trying to keep humans and 
others away from their woods, and they think 
learning those languages would just encour- 
age visitors to their realm. 

Infravision: 60 feet. 

Special Advantages: Sylvan elves have an 
instinctive, natural connection to the land. 
Their skills in dealing with the woodland are 
surpassed only by rangers, whose bonds with 
the forests are legend 

Sylvan elves easily befriend natural wood- 
land creatures. Unlike rangers, however, 
wood elves can only 
woodland creatures; 
they must be as careful as any other being. 

With the natural creatures of the wood- 
lands, the wood elves' power is especially use- 
ful. Unless the animal is already hostile, 
sylvan elves can automatically shift its reac- 
tion by two categories. This ability applies on- 
ly to natural forest creatures. It is not a charm 
spell and cannot be to enthrall creatures 
of the forest. Creatures friendly to the elf will 
not accompany him unless persuaded some- 
how. The ability does not work on monsters. 


rience with this sort of oor and do not gain 
the typical bonus for fi g them. 

Above all, wood elves never try to leave 
their forests. They withdrew into the woods 
to escape the outer world, and whenever they 
leave they rediscover why they withdrew in 
the first place. Wood elves take a dim view of 
those who try to forcibly remove them. 

In general, wood elves are unfriendly and 
unhelpful. Any wood elf PC who is friendly to 
people he or she has just met (within the past 
five years or so) should be docked experience 
points for bad role-playing. 

Finally, wood elves have an aversion to 
most settings that are not of the woods. They 
hate the sea (although they can travel on 
lakes) and will not willingly board a seagoing 


Character Creation and Kits е 81 


YAN GR ЛБ & y , (5 


ЖОЕ Sa ЖУ» O Ойлай o GM CAPS 


ZEN (E) AR e E ЖЕТИСУ 


ship. They hate the underground and become 
claustrophobic beneath the soil. 

These elves are even worse in the cities and 
lands of other races, including those of other 
elves. Sylvan elves regard cities as a perver- 
sion. They cannot deal with technology and 
civilization, for it was civilization that drove 
the wood elves into their isolation. 

Additional Experience Cost: None. 


EIf PC Kits 


Kits are optional additions to the campaign, 
allowing a player to add detail to his or her 
PC. These kits are collections of various abili- 
ties and disadvantages that can help a player 
better define his or her character. 

Most of these kits are uniquely elven; al- 
though other races may have similar kits, the 
kits in this book are for elves only. The kits in 
the other Complete Players Handbook series 
are also available for elves to take, unless ex- 
plicitly stated otherwise. 

Before using one of these kits, a player must 
first generate the character's initial statistics. 
First, roll ability scores and choose an elf sub- 
race, an alignment, and a class. Then, choose 
the kit that's most appealing and assign profi- 
ciencies, money, equipment, and other de- 
tails. 

Once a player has chosen a particular kit 
for a PC, he or she cannot exchange it for a 
new one. Neither can a character have two 
kits. It is only possible to have one kit at a 
time. 

If characters want to abandon a kit for any 
reason, they cannot select a new one, for the 
kit describes their development and growth. 
These PCs can abandon the kit's hindrances, 
but they also loses any benefits as well. 

Characters can only use a kit that is specific 
to their class. That is, warriors may take one 
of the warrior kits, but cannot use the 
warrior/mage kits. Multiclass characters 
choose kits that are part of their class. For ex- 
ample, a mage/thief can use a mage kit, a thief 
kit, or a mage/thief kit. A warrior or a 
warrior/thief kit could not be selected, how- 


82 * Chapter Ten 


ever, because they contain elements that are 
totally foreign to that character. 

In addition, although a player might want a 
multiclass character to specialize in a weapon, 
this is not possible. While some of the kits 
may echo weapon specialization, no one who 
is not a pure fighter can have a weapon 
specialization— including rangers. 

Each kit presented in this chapter is made 
up of twelve different parts. The first is a gen- 
eral description of the kit and the require- 
ments of entry into that kit. Any who do not 
meet the requirements cannot take the kit for 
their character—No Exceptions! The remain- 
ing eleven parts are as follows: 

* Role. This is the role of the PC in general 
and in elven society in particular. Note that 
the exclusion of either male or female pro- 
nouns does not mean the kit is restricted to 
gender. All kits are available to both sexes. 

* Secondary Skills. If a campaign does not 
use the proficiency rules, the character must 
take his secondary skills from this section 
rather than randomly rolling for them. 

* Weapon Proficiencies. These are the 
weapon proficiencies required of the elf to fill 
the slots available. Usually, not all of these 
slots will be filled by the required weapons, 
leaving some degree of choice. Please note 
that weapon proficiencies are not bonus profi- 
ciencies unless specified as such. Most are sim- 
ply required, not actual bonuses. 

* Bonus Nonweapon Proficiencies. Most 
kits provide some nonweapon proficiencies. 
These are free—even if they belong to other 
character classes. Note: АП civilized elves 
know Reading/Writing. 

* Recommended Nonweapon Proficien- 
cies. These nonweapon proficiencies are rec- 
ommended, but are not bonus slots. If an elf 
character wishes to take one of these profi- 
ciencies, he must pay the full cost of the profi- 
ciency. Again, these are recommended to 
maintain kit flavor, but are not required. 

* Equipment. This is a list of equipment 
that the kit typically uses. Some kits use spe- 
cial equipment, while others require that their 
users refrain from using certain items. 


E Seis s XS: 


* Distinctive Appearance. As if elves were 
not distinctive enough, certain kits accentuate 
appearance. They make the character easily 
recognizable as a certain type. 

* Special Benefits. Most of the kits allow 
certain privileges to their users. 

* Special Hindrances. To counterbalance 
the benefits received from these kits, most kits 
also have some specific hindrances. 

* Wealth Options. This is the limit on how 
much money a PC receives when created and 
how wealth gained must be spent. 

* Suggested Elf Subraces. Although any elf 
subrace can take any of the kits listed below, 
certain elf subraces are more likely to take 
some kits than others. This provides clues for 
the selection of kits by the various subraces. 


Priest Kit 


Although all races claim a special connection 
with their gods, the elven claim has, perhaps, 
the greatest truth. They sprang from the blood 
of Corellon Larethian, united with the tears of 
Sehanine Moonbow, and mingled with the 
soil of the very earth. The specialty priests of 
the elven gods hold special powers and even 
ordinary elven priests are foes to be feared. 


HERBALIST 

Even when these priests have run out of heal- 
ing spells, they are not useless as healers. The 
elf Herbalist can soothe fevers and mend 
wounds with the utmost ability and speed. 

* Role. Each Herbalist must choose a ter- 
rain in which to be proficient. His or her abili- 
ties are not nearly as effective outside this 
terrain. 

* Secondary Skills. Farmer, Forester. 

* Weapon Proficiencies. Bonus: Sickle. 
Recommended: Blunt instruments, long bow, 
lasso, net. 

* Bonus Nonweapon Proficiencies. Heal- 
ing and Herbalism. 

* Recommended Nonweapon Proficien- 
cies. Fire-Building, Religion, Rope Use, Weav- 
ing. 

* Equipment. Aside from vials and pre- 


UE EGGS SEA UL SER 


servatives, the Herbalist carries the same 
equipment as anyone el 

* Distinctive Appearance. Herbalists are 
notable only for their lack of a distinctive ap- 
pearance. They seem to be unassuming and 
scholarly fellows, unprepossessing in nature 
and dedicated to their art. 

* Special Benefits. If in their chosen ter- 
rain, Herbalists function nearly perfectly. 
They can restore 1d4 points of damage to a 
wounded creature if they can reach it within 
four rounds after being wounded. Under the 
Herbalist's ministrations, the creature will re- 
cover twice as fast than it normally would (see 
the Player's Handbook, p. 59). 

Herbalists are very на about 
the various herbs ien in their domains. 
They can locate even the hard-to-find ones, 
although that might take some searching. 
Their herb lore is unsurpassed, except by 
druids. 

A Herbalist can, at 5th level, identify plants 
and pure water without error, so long as the 
items are within his chosen terrain. This 
makes the Herbalists task much easier and 
means that there is little chance of inadver- 
tently poisoning a friend. 

Finally, Herbalists can add a new terrain 
every five levels. That is, if they have traveled 
far enough outside their own terrains that the 
DM feels they warrant an additional terrain, 
they may take one. The new terrain confers all 
the abilities mentioned above, although they 
must again work thro five levels before 
they can identify its plants without error. 

* Special Hindrances. Herbalists are highly 
trained within their own field. Unfortunately, 
when they venture beyond that field, they 
may make mistakes. When outside their cho- 
sen terrain and attempting to heal a friend 
nonmagically, Herbalists must make an Her- 
balism proficiency check at —2. Failure indi- 
cates the possibility of having picked a 
poisonous plant (25% chance). 

Herbalists may never brew poison. Al- 
though they have the knowledge necessary to 
do so, they feel that their skills are better suit- 
ed for healing than for killing. The only time 


1 


Character Creation and Kits e 83 


they will experiment with poison is to test an- 
tidotes against it. Any Herbalist who brews 
poisons for use against others loses all the 
abilities in this kit. 

* Wealth Options. The Herbalist begins 
with 30 to 180 (346 х 10) gp. There are no re- 
strictions on how the money may be spent. 

* Suggested Elf Subraces. Aquatic elf, high 
elf, sylvan elf. 


Warrior Kits 


Many of the less scholastically inclined elves 
lean toward the warrior way of life. They are 
the protectors and guardians of elven society, 
and play a vital role advancing elven interests. 


ARCHER 

The Archer is the epitome of elven skill with 
the bow. If there is a difficult shot to make, 
she will make it. Whether the target can only 
be reached by firing through high winds or is 
totally concealed, the Archer is confident of 
her ability to make the shot. 

* Role. The Archer easily fits in as a border 
guard for elf towns. She's also excellent for 
making her own way as an adventurer. Her 
skill with a bow is highly prized anywhere. 

* Secondary Skills. Bowyer/Fletcher. 

* Weapon Proficiencies. Bonus: Two profi- 
ciency slots with long or short bow. Recom- 
mended: Continued specialization with 
weapon, proficiency with another type of bow. 

® Bonus Nonweapon  Proficiencies. 
Bowyer/Fletcher, Hunting. 

* Recommended Nonweapon Proficien- 
cies. Animal Lore, Endurance, Fire-Building, 
Jumping, Running, Survival, Tracking. 

* Equipment. The Archer carries whatever 
other equipment she deems necessary. 

® Distinctive Appearance. Archers have по 
distinctive appearance, aside from their trade- 
mark bows, which gleam with polish and lov- 
ing care. 

% Special Benefits. The Archer is an expert 
with her style of bow. In combat, the Archer 
may elect to do one of two things. She may 
either fire faster than most are able to, or she 


84 ‘Chapter Ten 


may use a bonus on trick shots. 

If she elects to fire faster, she may take an 
extra shot every two rounds. That means the 
rate of fire becomes 5/2, rather than the usual 
2/1. This still includes her movement. If she 
chooses to stand still and fire, she may in- 
crease her rate of fire to 3/1; however, this en- 
ables enemy archers to target her more easily. 

If she elects to go with trick shots, she not 
only gains the usual bonus for specialization 
and high Dexterity, she also gains a +1 to 
each shot for every four experience levels. 

If the Archer keeps and cares for a bow for 
more than a month and keeps her arrows 
sharpened to a keen edge, she may cause 1 hp 
of additional damage when using these items. 
If using a different bow or new arrows, she 
does not gain the bonus. It can only be used 
with familiar, well-cared-for equipment. 

* Special Hindrances. The Archer is limited 
in her choice of melee weapons, since she dis- 
dains them so much. She may choose only a 
long sword, short sword, and dagger. Even 
then, the Archer has a —1 penalty to hit when 
using one of these weapons because she is unfa- 
miliar with anything but the flight of an arrow. 

Later weapon proficiencies may be devoted 
to other weapons, but the Archer will never 
gain a bonus to hit with these weapons, de- 
spite any Strength or proficiency bonus. This 
includes losing the normal elven +1 to hit 
with the long or short sword. 

The Archer must always be concerned 
about the quality of her bow and arrows. If 
any are faulty, she must repair them or replace 
them with equipment of higher quality. She 
can never use missile equipment of inferior 
quality—except when in mortal danger or 
when necessary for the success of a mission. 

œ Wealth Options. The Archer starts with 
50 to 200 (5d4 X 10) gp and must buy her bow 
at 150% of the normal cost. This reflects the 
high quality and fine workmanship of the 
bow. She may use the rest of the money as she 
wishes to outfit herself. 

Suggested Elf Subraces. Grey elf, high 
elf, sylvan elf. 


WILDERNESS RUNNER 

There are rangers, and then there are rangers. 
Elves are uniquely connected with the 
rhythms of the forests, some more deeply than 
others. Only those who have chosen to be- 
come rangers may elect to become more fully 
part of the forest. They are called Wilderness 
Runners. 

* Role. Wilderness Runners have cast aside 
the trappings of even elven society to serve the 
needs of the wood. Although they still respect 
and serve their own society, they take no part 
in its functions. They may serve as scouts or 
advance guards for elf cities, but they will not 
willingly enter civilization. 

If the Wilderness Runner is a high elf, he is 
far less civilized than his brethren and demon- 
strates the tendencies of sylvan elves. 

* Secondary Skills. Trapper/Furrier. 

* Weapon Proficiencies. Bonus: Quarter- 
staff, long bow. Recommended: Two-handed 
style, dagger, organic weapons. 

* Bonus Nonweapon Proficiencies. Endur- 
ance, Running, Set Snares. 

* Recommended Nonweapon Proficien- 
cies. Fire-Building, Fishing, Hunting, Moun- 
taineering, Survival, Swimming. 

* Equipment. The Wilderness Runner is 
notable for his lack of encumbrance. He trav- 
els light whenever possible, preferring to own 
distance rather than material goods. 

* Distinctive Appearance. Wilderness Run- 
ners never wear "civilized" clothes, preferring 
instead to dress in leather. They also tend to 
bathe only while swimming or if caught in a 
downpour. They do not care for the petty 
habits and concerns of city folk. 

* Special Benefits. Wilderness Runners, 
like all rangers, gain the Tracking proficiency. 
However, because of their proximity to the 
land, they gaina +2 bonus and are usually far 
better trackers than their cousins. 

Because of their constant exposure to the el- 
ements, they have inured themselves to all but 
the most extreme temperatures. Unless the air 
is below 32°F or above 100°F, Wilderness 
Runners feel nothing. The variation in tem- 
perature is merely a pleasant change. 


Runners can use the sa Snares proficiency 
to entrap people as can thieves. Their under- 
standing of the ways to lure people and ani- 


mals into these traps is rarely exceeded. 

Wilderness Runners never run out of equip- 
ment. Although they very little and 
need even less, they can fashion weapons and 
other working gear fr organic materials 
with astounding speed. While their work may 
seem crude, it is functional and works as well 
as, or better than, much of the equipment 
manufactured by civilized folk. 

* Special Hindran Wilderness Runners 
are acutely uncomfortable in civilization. Their 
need for fresh air and the freedom of the forest 
overwhelms them within one day unless they 
can make a Wisdom check at —4. Past the sec- 
ond day, they cannot remain within walls and 
must wait outside for their companions. 

Likewise, they find it difficult to remain 
within dungeons, crypts, or other unnatural 
caverns for long. If a cave is natural, Wilder- 
ness Runners will be able to remain inside 
without having to make a Wisdom check. 
Even then, they do retain their claustrophobia 
and long for the open air. 

Wilderness Runners never use mounts. For 
one thing, mounts cannot move through the 
forests quickly enough for them. For another, 
the Runners respect animals too much to 
abuse them in such a fashion. 

Wilderness Runners are greeted with some 
contempt by civilized elves who, although 
they respect the abilities of the Wilderness 
Runners, sneer at their "backward" ways. 
Most civilized elves react at a —2 to Wilder- 
ness Runners. They will not be overtly hostile, 
but they will be unfriendly to any unwashed 
elves. Sylvan elves and their allies, however, 
will react to their unwashed Wilderness Run- 
ner cousins at a +2. 

* Wealth Options. Wilderness Runners 
start with 3 to 30 (3d10) gp. They must create 
the rest of their gear from natural sources. 
They scoff at material wealth and are unlikely 
to have more than 10 or 20 gp at any time. 

* Suggested Elf Subraces. High elf, sylvan 
elf. 


Character сп and Kits e 85 


WINDRIDER 

Few mounted cavalry are as glamorous and 
exciting as the Windriders. The elite of the elf 
forces, they are greatly envied by common 
elves and greatly feared by foes. 

* Role. The Windrider is the knight of the 
air, defending elf lands against aerial attacks. 
In times of war, they are both shock troops 
and scouts. 

The DM may not wish to allow Windriders 
in a campaign, for they vastly increase the 
scope of a PC's operations. Then, too, the 
Windrider's mount may very well make a low- 
level PC far more powerful than he or she 
ought to be. It is recommended that DMs 
thoroughly familiarize themselves with Win- 
driders before allowing them into a campaign. 

* Secondary Skills. Groom. 

* Weapon Proficiencies. Bonus: Lance 
(Light, Medium, or Heavy—one only). Rec- 
ommended: Short bow, flail, long sword. 

* Bonus Nonweapon Proficiencies. Air- 
Based Riding, Animal Handling (for mount's 
species only), Animal Training (for mount's 
species only). 

* Recommended Nonweapon Proficien- 
cies. Astrology, Navigation, Direction Sense, 
Weather Sense. 

* Equipment. Windriders must, of course, 
keep saddles and food for their mounts. 
Otherwise, Windriders are free to carry what 
they will if their mount can bear the burden. 

* Distinctive Appearance. When separated 
from their beloved mounts, Windriders do 
not appear much different from ordinary 
elves. They may be more haughty, but other- 
wise they appear as normal elves. 

® Special Benefits. The Windrider is one of 
the few kits where players receive no benefits 
until reaching high levels. Likewise, they do 
not suffer the hindrances until they have 
reached this level, which is typically 4th to 6th 
level, although it can be later (or earlier, if the 
character is especially worthy). Those aspir- 
ing to be Windriders must prove themselves 
worthy of this kit before actually being al- 
lowed entrance. They may not have a kit be- 
fore becoming a Windrider. 


86 * «Chapter Ten 


Although they do not gain many benefits, 
the quality of their benefits is enough for the 
Windrider. First is the reaction bonus they re- 
ceive from members of the higher classes in 
both elven and human society. When they are 
traveling with their mounts, Windriders gain 
a *2reaction bonus when dealing with them. 

A more important benefit, however, is the 
mount. When admitted to the ranks of the 
Windriders, characters receive intensive train- 
ing with a mount of the species available. 
They are effectively out of commission for 
one year while learning to be a Windrider. Af- 
ter that time they are full Windriders, and 
they gain a winged mount from one of the fol- 
lowing races: griffon, hippogriff, or pegasus. 

Their choice of mount confers no other spe- 
cial ability except the ability to communicate, 
in a very basic fashion, with the members of 
the mount's species. They also gain the mobili- 
ty of flight and a companion who is prepared 
to defend them with its life. 

* Special Hindrances. While they are re- 
spected by the higher social classes in elven so- 
ciety, Windriders are the object of great 
jealousy—sometimes even hatred—from the 
lower classes. Their arrogant manner and dis- 
regard for beings of a lower social status earn 
them the enmity of the lower classes. They 
suffer a —3 penalty to their reaction rolls 
when dealing with these folk. 

Though able to strike awe into their hearts, 
Windriders can also earn the enmity of hu- 
mans. After the initial awe has worn away, 
Windriders suffer a —3 penalty for reactions 
from lower-class humans. 

If his animal dies, the Windrider is tempo- 
rarily without the benefits of this kit. Al- 
though he may eventually regain a mount, the 
loss is such that it causes him to suffer all of 
the hindrances without gaining any of the 
benefits of this kit. 

The major hindrance of the kit is also the 
major benefit. The Windrider must always be 
concerned with the welfare of his mount, for 
he would not be a Windrider without it. Con- 
stantly worrying about one’s mount is the 
chief occupational hazard of the Windrider. 


* Wealth Options. The Windrider begins 
with 60 to 240 (6d4 X 10) gp and can spend these 
as he pleases. However, he must ensure the care 
of his mount by finding it food and shelter or 
else lose the benefits of the kit when the animal 
flees its master to take care of itself. 

* Suggested Elf Subraces. Grey elf, high 
elf, sylvan elf. 


Mage/Thief Kits 


Although they are not exactly common, elf 
mage/thieves have their own niche in elven 
society. Their magical abilities allow them to 
enter places normally denied to mere thieves, 
and their skills with physical objects can often 
spell the difference between life and death for 
many who depend on them. 


ELVEN MINSTREL 

Although not actually a mage/thief, the elven 
minstrel kit that originally appeared in The 
Complete Bard's Handbook has characteristics 
of both classes. In the interest of conserving 
space, it is not reprinted here. This elf version of 
the bard does exist for those who have been 
yearning to play just such a character. 


SPELLFILCHER 

This mage/thief is adept at breaking into wiz- 
ard's domiciles to purloin magical goods, par- 
ticularly spellbooks апа rare spell 
components. Through a strange inner talent, 
the spellfilcher has an amazing ability. 

* Role. When there is a magical trap to be 
disarmed or magical treasure to be gotten, the 
Spellfilcher is the one to do it. Trained from 
her early years, the Spellfilcher uses an innate 
magical ability to locate and disarm traps that 
would victimize another. 

* Secondary Skills. Jeweler, Scribe. 

* Weapon Proficiencies. Bonus: None. 
Recommended: Short bow, dagger, darts, 
short sword. 

* Bonus Nonweapon Proficiencies. Ap- 
praising, Spellcraft, Tightrope Walking. 

* Recommended Nonweapon Proficien- 
cies. Disguise, Gaming, Gem Cutting, Jump- 


ing, Rope Use, Tumbling. 

* Equipment. The Spellfilcher always car- 
ries at least a minimal set of lockpicks and 
usually a full housebreaker's harness. 

* Distinctive Appearance, Spellfilchers, by 
their very nature, do not want a distinctive 
appearance. They go out of their way to make 
themselves look like average elves, deliber- 
ately ridding themselves of any identifying 
habits. 

* Special Benefits. The Spellfilcher is a spe- 
cial breed, selected from birth to be a mage/ 
thief because of an exceptional inborn talent. 
This talent, which can only be nurtured by the 
Spellfilcher Guilds, allows the Spellfilcher to 
detect magic once per day, per experience 
level. Infant elves are tested for their latent 
sensitivity to magic, something which only 
the masters of the Spellfilching Guilds can de- 
termine. If the infant shows promise, she is 
taken from her parents (with their permission) 
and the talent is nurtured into a usable skill. 

The Spellfilcher le. to identify and cir- 
cumvent magical traps. Although they cannot 
remove these traps without a dispel magic 
spell or similar item, they can often get 
around them long enough to remove the items 
these wards were protecting. Thus, Spellfil- 
chers gain а +5% chance to Find/Remove 
Traps of a magical nature. This chance in- 
creases by +5% every four levels. They do 
not actually remove the traps but disarm them 
for 144 rounds, +1 round per three levels, 
which should be eno for them to retrieve 
the item they seek. 

* Special Hindrances. The Spellfilcher's 
first loyalty must always be to her guild. The 
guild demands total compliance with its rules, 
for it serves the elf race in its own way and 
demands that its members do so as well. Un- 
fortunately, this service occasionally requires 
that the Spellfilcher called away from 
whatever she may wish to do. If the Spellfil- 
cher fails to heed the call, the wrath of the 
powerful guild descends upon her head. 

The Spellfilcher's Guild will not, on the oth- 
er hand, call a Spellfilcher away from a mis- 
sion of dire ar to the elf race or a 


Character к and Kits ® 87 


mission that the Spellfilcher claims is of ex- 
treme importance. Since Spellfilchers operate 
on an honor system, they trust her. If, how- 
ever, too many excuses keep her from her du- 
ties, the Guild has a right to demand 
cooperation and will not tolerate excuses. 

To help keep discipline, the Spellfilcher 
must ask permission of the guildmaster before 
leaving on adventures. Depending on the 
Spellfilcher's past record and loyalty to the 
guild, the guildmaster may agree or disagree. 

The Spellfilcher character has a hard time 
dealing with non-elf mages. Once they discov- 
er who she is and what she does for a living, 
they simply do not trust her near their pre- 
cious spellbooks and valued items. Elf mages 
trust Spellfilchers, for they know that the 
Spellfilcher does it for the good of the race and 
would not harm an elf wizard. Other wizards, 
however, are not so sure of this. For this rea- 
son, Spellfilchers take great pains to disguise 
themselves and their intentions. 

Spellfilchers also take great pains to dis- 
guise themselves because they are hunted by 
both vengeful wizards and greedy thieves. 
The wizards desire the return of their property 
and perhaps revenge on the one audacious 
enough to steal from them. 

Conniving thieves wish to find a Spellfil- 
cher to either recruit her into their guild or to 
get her to work for them. Failing that, they 
want to discover the secret to the Spellfilcher's 
success and to exploit that secret. They will 
not accept the fact that hers is an inborn tal- 
ent. Thieves can make a Spellfilcher's life cha- 
os if she is discovered by their guild. 

€ Wealth Options. Spellfilchers receive 30 
to 90 (2d4 * 1 X 10) gp, which can be spent as 
the Spellfilcher desires. There are no limits, 
but it is suggested that they purchase thieves' 
tools. 

è Suggested Elven Subraces. Aquatic elf, 
drow, grey elf, high elf. 


Fighter/Mage Kits 


Combining the offensive physical power of 
the warrior and the intelligence and magical 


88 e Chapter Ten 


abilities of the mage, these are truly fearsome 
fighters. They have knowledge—not only of 
strategy and tactics—but of magical theory 
and offense. They are vital to the elves. 

It is important to note that fighter/mages 
can cast spells only when unarmored or clad 
in elvenmade or magical armor. All other ar- 
mor is too unresponsive to the ways of magic 
for magic to flow through it properly. 


BLADESINGER 

Of the roving elves, there are few as deadly as 
the Bladesinger. They are masters of their 
weapons and have spent their lives in the 
study of their chosen weapons. They have al- 
so learned to cast spells while engaged in com- 
bat, and thus they double their might. 

To be a Bladesinger, a character needs at 
least a 13 Strength and Constitution, as well 
as a 15 Dexterity and Intelligence. 

* Role. While some characters may stay at 
home to defend the elven way, Bladesingers go 
out and actively promote it. They do this by 
seeking out their race's foes and eliminating 
them, either through words or actions. Acting 
as both diplomats and one-elf armies, they in- 
sure the safety of the elf race. 

@ Secondary Skills. Hunter, 
Barterer, Trapper/Furrier. 

è Weapon Proficiencies. Bonus: None. 
Recommended: One-weapon style for use in 
combat and spells; two-handed style for use 
when spells run out. 

è Bonus Nonweapon Proficiencies. Blind- 
Fighting, Dancing. 

è Recommended Nonweapon Proficien- 
cies. Etiquette, Juggling, Singing, Tumbling, 
Weaponsmithing. 

è Equipment. The Bladesinger is always 
identifiable by his weapon of choice. Such an 
item is always ornate and beautiful, enhanc- 
ing the Bladesinger's appearance in battle. 

e Distinctive Appearance. Not only are 
they easily identifiable by their weapon of 
choice and catlike grace, Bladesingers are dec- 
orated with their weapon guild's distinctive 
tattoo. Each guild has a separate and unique 
tattoo depicting its style of weapon through 


Trader/ 


IOUS Ea C OS RB RS past FRING) DANN REORDER OE ADD e b 
RS ا کے رر ا ی ر ا ی‎ A RA RR ا ا‎ ааа ааа аа مچ د کے‎ е e 


an animal representation. Long swords are of- 
ten represented by great cats such as lions or 
panthers, a whip would be shown as a striking 
snake, and so forth. 

* Special Benefits. There are four special 
benefits to the Bladesinger kit, as follows: 

1. The Bladesinger chooses one weapon 
and practices with it extensively, to the exclu- 
sion of most other weapons. If practice makes 
perfect, the Bladesingers are very well prac- 
ticed in their weapon of choice—for they are 
virtually perfect. 

The poised steps of the bladesong (the act of 
attack by a Bladesinger) not only reveals the 
Bladesinger to be a creature of beauty even 
during battle, but the steps also carry him into 
advantageous positions for either offense or 
defense. He can instinctively grasp the flow of 
the battle around him, and his feet will carry 
him through the intricate maneuvers neces- 
sary to optimize his attack. 

Such is the intensive training of the Blade- 
singer that he gains an automatic +1 to hit as 
well asa +1 for damage. This is in addition to 
the normal elven +1 for use of the long or 
short sword (if applicable). Despite any addi- 
tional, further training, this is as high as the 
bonus can be. 

2. Bladesingers receive a special bonus 
when they wish to try an unusual maneuver 
with their blade. This bonus is equal to +1 for 
every four levels the Bladesinger has attained. 
The bonus only serves to cancel the penalties 
normally applied for such a maneuver. All 
other penalties and bonuses still apply. 


EXAMPLE: Vilana Pyreen, a 5th-level Bladesinger 
proficient in the long sword, attempts to disarm 
her opponent (a special maneuver). Normally, 
this gives her a +1 to initiative and a —4 to hit. 
Since she is a 5th-level Bladesinger, however, 
her bladesinging ability gains her a +1 on her 
disarm maneuver. Since she is an elf, she gains 
an additional +1 because she is using her 
sword. Finally, she gains a +1 for her blade- 
singing ability with her sword. Her total is only 
a —1 to disarm her foe. If she were 12th level, 


3. Bladesingers have been taught from an 
early age to grasp the flow of magic around 
them and to turn it to their advantage. They 
can cast spells even while in the front lines. 
Although they cannot actually attack while 
casting their spells, they may defend them- 
selves against incoming melee attacks. 

Their defense is equal to their level divided 
by 2, plus 1. All fractions are rounded down. 
Thus, a 6th-level Bladesinger gains a +4 to 
AC (6th level + 2=3+1= +4 AC). The same 
goes for 7th-level Bladesingers (7+2=3.5 
—.5=3+1= +4 AC). This does not apply to 
rear or missile attacks, for it is nearly impos- 
sible to defend against those while casting a 
spell. 

Bladesingers have practiced the somatic 
portion of their spells well enough that they 
may cast their spells one-handed, suffering 
only a slight penalty. It adds * 2 to their cast- 
ing times, making it easier to disrupt their 
spells. Like any other spellcaster, if they are 
hit they lose the concentration necessary for 
maintaining their spells; they lose the spell. 
Their spells are, therefore, usually of an offen- 
sive nature with very short casting times. 

4. The training is hard enough that only a 
3rd-level Bladesinger can begin to teach even 
the rudiments of the bladesong. If another elf 
wishes to learn the bladesong, he must seek 
one of the masters of the blade. Bladesingers 
charge a high price for sharing their skills. 

* Special Hindrances. To offset their abili- 
ties, Bladesingers suffer some severe penalties. 
Not only must they attempt to advance the 
cause of elvendom somehow at all times, they 
must also lend aid to any elf in need. Unless 
the elf is proven to be ai enemy of the elven 
way of life, the Bladesinger must sacrifice life 
and limb to save that elfs life. 

Of course, the Bladesinger is free to deter- 
mine whether there is, in fact, an elf in danger. 
Too many times other races have tried to elim- 
inate the Bladesinger menace through illusion 
and trickery. The Bladesingers have grown 
wary and have, unfortunately, allowed fellow 
elves to perish while trying to determine the 


she would have a * 1 on her disarming attack. truth of the threat. T. most Bladesingers 


Character t les and Kits * 89 


BBCSO Sa OM Be OA RE ONDE CFR AG EORR SX 


^ 
E 


carry at least one detect magic spell in order to 
avoid possible errors. 

Bladesingers are so devoted to their chosen 
weapon that they can never learn another 
one. Unlike other elves, they do not gain a +1 
to hit with a bow. With all other weapons, 
they suffer a —1 penalty to hit, even if they 
have taken it as a proficiency. If they have 
not devoted the slot to learn the weapon, the 
Bladesinger suffers the ordinary nonproficien- 
су in addition to the —1 penalty. 

If the player is using The Complete Fighter's 
Handbook, he may not allow his character to 
specialize in weapon groups. The Bladesinger 
focuses on a single weapon only. 

Bladesingers may wear no armor heavier 
than elven chain or studded leather. Bulkier 
armor restricts the Bladesingers movement 
enough that they have at least a —2 penalty to 
attacks if they try to use their bladesinging 
ability while wearing such armor. The penalty 
is greater for heavier armor, although this is at 
the DM's discretion. 

Bladesingers rarely use weapons other than 
swords. With only rare exceptions, they never 
learn two-handed fighting styles. They may 
not use shields or two-handed weapons, for 
these interfere with the bladesong. Even when 
they have run out of spells, Bladesingers will 
fight one-handed or with both hands on their 
single-handed weapon. To do otherwise ne- 
gates all bladesinging bonuses. 

* Wealth Options. Bladesingers start their 
adventuring lives with 30 to 180 gp (3dé x 10), 
and only one restriction: They must purchase 
their weapon of choice. Any monies left after 
buying their initial equipment must be re- 
turned to the Bladesingers Guild. Later in 
their adventures, they must take opportuni- 
ties to upgrade their weapons. Other than 
these restrictions, they are free to do as they 
wish with their money. 

* Suggested Elf Subraces. Grey elf, high 
elf. 


WAR WIZARD 
Although elves do not desire war, preferring 
instead to live their lives in peace and idyllic 


90 * Chapter Ten 


happiness, they recognize that the world is full 
of races hostile to elves, all of whom would 
love to see them driven into the dirt. A War 
Wizard is one who has devoted her life to de- 
fending against such attacks. 

* Role. The War Wizard is usually the per- 
son in charge of defense for any given elf 
town. When there is a problem with an ene- 
my, the War Wizard is the one to call. 

Even if not associated with a town, the War 
Wizard is an invaluable asset to any group 
that expects to face trouble. Simple strategic 
knowledge is her bread and butter, but her ex- 
pertise does not end there. She can work of- 
fensive marvels physically, and her 
spellcasting skills are excellent. 

* Secondary Skills. Scribe, Tactician. 

* Weapon Proficiencies. Bonus: Long 
bow, long sword. Recommended: Short bow, 
short sword, weapon style specialization 
(trom The Complete Fighters Handbook). 

* Bonus Nonweapon Proficiencies. Spell- 
craft, plus Engineering or Survival. 

* Recommended Nonweapon Proficien- 
cies. Blind-Fighting, Heraldry, Land-Based 
Riding, Languages (Ancient or Modern), Set 
Snares, Weather Sense. 

* Equipment. A War Wizard can carry 
whatever equipment she likes. 

* Distinctive Appearance. War Wizards 
have no distinctive appearance. They may 
dress as they please on their own time. How- 
ever, they often have a military aura. When in 
a military capacity, they must wear a uniform. 

* Special Benefits. The War Wizard, be- 
cause of her knowledge of strategy, can enable 
her side to add +1 to their attack rolls for the 
duration of a battle. This bonus applies only if 
all the following conditions are met: 1) The 
War Wizard has had a chance to survey the 
area and map it. 2) The War Wizard holds a 
strategy meeting with all who gain the +1 bo- 
nus. 3) All members of the War Wizard's side 
who are to gain the bonus successfully make 
an Intelligence check that has been modified 
by the difficulty of the instructions and 
changes in the terrain. Those who fail do not 
gain the bonus, and they run the risk of de- 


RIE EAS SO 


DE GEAN A 


SASSI EOC OIG 


stroying another team member's bonus during 
battle. If these conditions are met, the War 
Wizard's side gains the bonus. If any part is 
left out or ignored, the bonus is negated. 

The War Wizard is allowed a weapon of 
choice. She gains a +1 to hit with this weapon, 
cumulative with all other applicable bonuses. 

She also gains a "spell of choice,” once every 
four levels. This spell is usually a large-scale, 
offensive spell or it may be a handy defensive 
spell. Only rarely are they personal in scope 
and, even then, it must have some applicabili- 
ty to a larger party. The spell can be of any 
level the War Wizard can cast at the time she 
chooses the spell. Thus, at the 4th level, a War 
Wizard can choose spells of the 1st or 2nd 
level. At the 8th level, she can choose spells of 
up to the 4th level. 

The chosen spell is not a bonus spell for the 
War Wizard. It must still be memorized as 
would a normal spell. However, the spell can 
be either cast more quickly, firing at a +1 to 
initiative, or force the opponent to takea —1 
on his save. For every four levels the War Wiz- 
ard has practiced this spell, she gains a +1 bo- 
nus to either side. For example, if a 12th-level 
War Wizard had chosen sleep as her spell at 
the 4th level, she would now gain either +2 to 
initiative when casting it or would cause her 
opponents to save at —2. 

* Special Hindrances. The War Wizard is 
limited in her choice of weapons. Although a 
warrior/mage ordinarily receives the full 
gamut of weapons, a War Wizard may only 
take certain weapons. Any of the normal wiz- 
ard's weapons, any blade, any bow, or a lance 
may be chosen. The selection cannot extend 
beyond these, however. 

War Wizards have a Code of Conduct that 
they must abide by at all times. Even when 
they are apart from their units, the code may 
never be broken. If it is and they are discov- 
ered, they will be drummed from the unit. It is 
up to the DM and the player to determine 
what the Code is for each unit, but it should 
fierce, demanding, and restrictive. 

Finally, there are demands the unit will 
place on the War Wizard. She must comply 


with these demands or lose her benefits. The 
unit will typically take up about one month 
per year of the War Wizard's time. 

* Wealth Options. The War Wizard has 30 
to 180 (3d6X10) gp initially, which can be 
spent however she likes. | 

* Suggested Elf Subraces. Drow, grey elf, 
high elf. 


Fighter/Thief Kit 


These are the toughest elves around (and the 
most quintessentially elven), for they rely on 
skill rather than muscle. Although warrior/ 
thieves may not be truly adept with any weap- 
on, their thief skills more than make up for 
that. Fighter/thieves are very useful in a cam- 
paign based more on subtlety than force. 


HUNTSMAN 

Although some call them bounty hunters, the 
Huntsmen know better. Their chief joy in life 
is the hunt, and they have trained themselves 
in the ways of life: fighting and stealth. 

* Role. A Huntsman is at home in both the 
city and the wilderness. His job is to track 
down errant wrongdoers and bring them to 
justice. He can be good, evil, or neutral; he 
may ethically bring criminals to face the law 
or hunt them just for money. Whether he is 
good or not good, his motivation is more the 
thrill of the hunt than material gain. 

* Secondary Skills. Trapper /Furrier. 

* Weapon Proficien Bonus: Net. Rec- 
ommended: Blowgun, long bow, lasso, long 
sword. 

* Bonus Nonweapon Proficiencies. Hunt- 
ing, Tracking. 

* Recommended Nonweapon Proficien- 
cies. Blind-Fighting, Disguise, Endurance, In- 
timidation, Juggling, Jumping, Running, Set 
Snares, Tumbling. 

* Equipment. The Huntsman, like the 
ranger, does not like being heavily encum- 
bered. He carries only those things he cannot 
quickly and cheaply replace and is usually 
prepared to make the things that cannot be 
easily replaced. His most valuable piece of 


Character TNR and Kits € 91 


equipment is his mind. 

* Distinctive Appearance. The Huntsman 
has no distinctive appearance. 

* Special Benefits. The Huntsman gains an 
automatic +10% to both his Move Silently 
and Hide in Shadows skills; this applies to 
both city and wilderness settings. Because he 
has spent so much time learning stealth, this is 
in addition to his regular modifiers for high 
Dexterity and race. 

The Huntsman also takes a smaller penalty 
to his Tracking proficiency than other non- 
rangers. His life has been spent in the hunt, 
and he therefore is more familiar with the 
signs of the forest than many others. 

* Special Hindrances. Although the Hunts- 
man fetches those who need fetching, he is not 
regarded well. His trade is in flesh, and people 
dislike his company. He receives a —2 reac- 
tion penalty when dealing with good-aligned 
people. In evil society, they hate him, even if 
he is evil, because he and his kind are respon- 
sible for the capture of friends and allies. He 
receives a —2 penalty there as well. 

The Huntsman may never take the Read 
Languages ability available to most thieves. 
His style of life does not require learning new 
languages and, indeed, forces him to be con- 
stantly on the move. He has not the time. 

* Wealth Options. The Huntsman begins 
play with 30 to 180 (3d6 x10) gp. He can 
spend this money however he wishes. 

* Suggested Elf Subraces. АП. 


Fighter/Mage/Thief Kits 


The most eclectic of elf PCs, the warrior/ 
mage/ thief class is both the most free and the 
most limited. While options are nearly limit- 
less for these kits, it takes a lot of doing to get 
there. But elves have much time on their 
hands, and they don't mind the "short" wait 
required to reach these goals. 


COLLECTOR 

Occasionally, humans will come into posses- 
sion of items that either aren't theirs or are too 
dangerous for these short-lived beings to 


92 * Chapter Ten 


have. The Collector is there to make sure 
these things return to elf hands. 

The Collector must have a 13 Intelligence 
and 15 Charisma, for she must deal with both 
esoteric knowledge and people. 

* Role. The Collector's role in life is to re- 
trieve things from dangerous places. Whether 
this item is a stolen suit of elven plate armor or 
an ancient, unearthed artifact, the Collector 
will get it back. When humans seem in danger 
of destroying things of beauty or of historical 
power, the Collector makes sure those objects 
are spirited away to safety. 

The Collector is not only a thief, but an ar- 
chaeologist as well. She uses all her classes' 
skills to retrieve the items from wherever they 
lie, even deep beneath the earth, then keeps 
them from the hands of the elves' enemies. 

* Secondary Skills. Any. Artist, Jeweler, and 
Historian/Sage are especially appropriate. 

* Weapon Proficiencies. Bonus: None. 
Recommended: Short bow, dagger, short 
sword, whip, and small weapons that can fit 
into the tight places into which a Collector 
must sometimes venture. 

* Bonus Nonweapon Proficiencies. An- 
cient History, Engineering. 

* Recommended Nonweapon Proficien- 
cies. Appraising, Artistic Ability, Gem Cut- 
ting, Jumping, Modern Languages, Musical 
Instrument, Rope Use, Stonemasonry, Tight- 
rope Walking. 

* Equipment. The Collector is never far 
from her archaeological tools and burglary 
equipment. She is prepared to dig in the earth, 
venture into a fortress, or swing between two 
tall towers. She is ready for nearly any even- 
tuality in the quest of her prize. 

* Distinctive Appearance. Although they 
might imagine they are sharply dressed, Col- 
lectors are often rumpled and disheveled, 
more than likely covered with the dust and 
muck of their most recent adventure. Though 
they may wear fashionable clothing, Collec- 
tors simply cannot keep clothing neat and 
clean. There are always exceptions but, for 
the most part, Collectors appear musty and 
dirty. 


QI AIL /F XE OG 


So tae CARS 


NIAC OARS 


* Special Benefits. The Collector, because 
of her research into the histories of artifacts 
and ancient civilizations, has a chance to 
know something about nearly every impor- 
tant magic item on her world. If she can lay 
her hands on an object and study it, she can 
attempt to identify it, much like the bard's 
ability. 

Collectors have a 5% chance per two levels 
(that is, 5% at 1st to 2nd level, 10% at 3rd to 
4th level, and so forth) to identify an item's 
history, purpose, and alignment (if it has one). 
The only idea a Collector has of an item's 
power lies within the pages of the histories the 
Collector has read. 

This chance increases (at the DM's discre- 
tion) if the Collector has access to a research 
facility with an extensive collection of books 
on magical items and artifacts. If not, there is 
no bonus. The Collector spends 1d3 days find- 
ing the pertinent information. 

Likewise, the Collector can find informa- 
tion leading to the discovery of such magical 
items, which is the main part of her job. If she 
spends a week or more in research, depending 
on the rarity of the item and the difficulty of 
finding it, she can discover the general area in 
which to begin her search. 

The Collector is an expert at rumor gather- 
ing. By spending 10d100 gp and making a suc- 
cessful Intelligence and Charisma check, the 
Collector can usually get a lead on where an 
item lies. Sometimes the information received 
is as vague as a general location; sometimes it 
is as specific as the exact hiding place. Now all 
the Collector needs to do is to find a way past 
all the protections. . . . 

Fortunately, Collectors gain a +10% bonus 
to their Find/Remove Traps skill. It is impor- 
tant to remember that finding a trap and re- 
moving a trap requires two separate rolls. 
Because so many of the old places are fraught 
with peril, the Collectors have found this ben- 
efit to be of inestimable value. 

Finally, Collectors are rather lucky elves. 
Once a day, they may +1 or —1 from one of 
their rolls, if they desire. The modification may 
be to any roll, including attack rolls, damage 


rolls, saving throws, and so forth. It cannot be 
used in character creation, nor can it be saved 
from day to day! The player must declare that a 
modification is being used before the roll is actu- 
ally made or the roll is void. 

* Special Hindrances. Although Collectors 
are, for the most part, decent people, they re- 
ceive a —2 reaction penalty. The penalty re- 
flects their tendency to lecture, forgetting that 
others do not share their passion for digging in 
the earth. 

Far more hindering is the fact that Collec- 
tors will never knowingly use a magically 
charged item. They are afraid that the use of 
such items might deplete its last charge; their 
purpose is to ensure the preservation of such 
items. They are cautious around all other 
magical items unless certain they are not 
charged or are heavily charged. 

Furthermore, Collectors will never perform 
an action that is potentially destructive to a 
magical item unless it is the only way to save 
their own lives and the lives of their compan- 
ions. Even then, they will hesitate, agonizing 
over the loss to the world. 

Collectors even have a difficult time de- 
stroying sentient, earth-shaking artifacts of 
utter evil. Although they know the artifact is 
irredeemably evil, they can barely bring 
themselves to destroy an item that has 
plagued the history of the world. 

If she has been persuaded to eliminate an 
item or after she has destroyed an item to save 
a life, the Collector will go into a state of deep 
unhappiness, lasting for at least a week. Dur- 
ing this time, she is not capable of intelligent 
discussion and her saves and attack rolls are 
all at —2. Note that this depression has a ba- 
sis: If the Collector destroys more than five 
items during her career or simply allows five 
such items to be destroyed, she will lose all of 
the benefits of this kit. 

* Wealth Options. The Collector begins 
with 30 to 240 (3d8 X 10) gp. At least half of 
this money must be spent on house- and lock- 
breaking equipment and on excavating tools 
such as shovels and picks. The rest of the 
money can be spent as the character desires. 


Character Creation and Kits * 93 


ЖОТО CESS 


* Suggested Elf Subraces. Aquatic elf, grey 
elf, high elf. 


INFILTRATOR 
The Infiltrator is the very model of an elf 
scout. Whether in urban or wilderness situa- 
tions, the Infiltrator is the master of stealth 
and disguise. 

* Role. When elves need quick and reliable 
information with a minimum of fuss, they call 
on an Infiltrator. The Infiltrators' motto is "If 
it's a secret, it's not.’ Sometimes, the Infiltra- 
tor will gain information simply for the sheer 
joy of knowing it. Although this is a typically 
elven trait, only the Infiltrators go to such an 
extent to learn a secret. 

* Secondary Skills. Any. 

* Weapon Proficiencies. There are no bo- 
nus weapon proficiencies for this kit. 

* Bonus Nonweapon Proficiencies. Dis- 
guise, Forgery, Information Gathering, Ob- 
servation, Tightrope Walking. 

* Recommended Nonweapon Proficien- 
cies. Ancient History, Etiquette, Modern Lan- 
guage, Reading Lips. 

* Equipment. Every Infiltrator must have a 
good disguise kit. Otherwise, they are free to 
choose whatever equipment they like. 

* Distinctive Appearance. The only thing 
distinctive about the appearance of an Infil- 
trator is that he has no distinctive appearance. 
Elves can, by word of mouth, sometimes find 
out who the Infiltrators are, but only if the In- 
filtrator wishes to be found. 

* Special Benefits. One of the special bene- 
fits the Infiltrator receives is the large number 
of bonus nonweapon proficiencies. Please 
note that some of these appear in The Com- 
plete Thief s Handbook. These all enable him 
to carry out his job more effectively, and he is 
so practiced in these proficiencies that he gains 
a +1 bonus when he uses one of them. 

When an Infiltrator wishes to appear as a 
member of another race, he can usually pass 
himself off as a tall dwarf or a short human 
with only a —4 penalty. This bonus increases 
by *1 for every four levels the Infiltrator ob- 
tains in his most expensive class. That is, it in- 


94 * Chapter Ten 


creases when he reaches 10,000 experience 
points in all three classes, making the Infiltra- 
tor a 4th-level fighter/4th-level mage/5th- 
level thief. Note that this applies only to the 
bonus proficiencies given by the kit; it doesn't 
apply to either the recommended or the char- 
acter-chosen proficiencies. 

The Infiltrator also gains a +10% bonus to 
the two thief skills of his choice. This is a one- 
time only bonus and cannot be changed later 
in the Infiltrator's career. 

* Special Hindrances. The Infiltrator 
spends so much time taking on the roles of 
other people that he may begin to lose his own 
sense of identity. Even the reverie, which ordi- 
narily reinforces an elf's identity, may not help 
prevent his sense of self slipping away. 

Therefore, for each level an Infiltrator ac- 
quires, he loses 10% from his ordinary resist- 
ance to charm-related and sleep spells. This 
decreases his 9096 resistance downward, to a 
minimum of 30%. Thus, until the point when 
the 8th level is achieved, Infiltrators will lose 
10% of their resistance at each level. 

Such loss of self means that the Infiltrator 
will never be as sure of himself as an ordinary 
elf, although his sense of self will still be 
stronger than that of a human. Unless he is 
acting a role, the Infiltrator will be somewhat 
unsure of himself and may question his own 
motives. 

* Wealth Options. The Infiltrator begins 
play with 40 to 140 (2d6 *2X10) gp. This 
money can be spent however desired. 

* Suggested Elf Subraces. Drow, high elf, 
sylvan elf. 


A Kit for Any Class 


Every elf has the capability to achieve some of 
the same ends, although in different ways. 
The following is a classwide kit that any elf 
can take, regardless of profession, class, or 
multiclass combination. 


UNDEAD SLAYER 
As elves loathe the undead, it is only logical 
that they develop methods to combat the un- 


Sz Ss CA ME PA O OZ ER EE RE SEDE ST Eee ORE EC NES CO M 


dead menace. Whether they stay behind to 
protect elf homes from ravening undead 
hordes or actively seek out the unliving to de- 
stroy them in their foul nests, the Undead 
ciun learn all they can about their wretched 
oes. 

* Role. The Undead Slayers are schooled in 
the ways of the undead, seeking to destroy un- 
dead monsters wherever they can find them. 

* Secondary Skills. Any. Undead Slayers 
are drawn from all lots in life. 

* Weapon Proficiencies. Bonus: One 
bludgeoning weapon of Medium size, as long 
as it is allowed by the initial class. Recom- 
mended: A piercing or slashing weapon to 
complement the bludgeoning weapon. 

* Bonus Nonweapon Proficiencies. Blind- 
fighting. 

* Recommended Nonweapon Proficien- 
cies. Healing, Herbalism, Ancient History, Lo- 
cal History, Ancient Languages, Survival. 

* Equipment. Every Undead Slayer carries 
the common items necessary for this trade. 
Most of them carry backpacks containing at 
least a mirror, two vials of holy water (if not 
more), several sharpened stakes, holy symbols, 
tinder for torches, and so forth. For weapons, if 
their class allows, they carry at least two silver 
weapons, one each of piercing and bludgeoning 
type, as well as ordinary weapons. 

* Distinctive Appearance. Most Undead 
Slayers have a grim, determined look—the re- 
sult of the grisly nature of their work. These 
elves have lost the typical elven enjoyment of 
life, for they have become obsessed with death 
and the undead. 

* Special Benefits. Undead Slayers have 
chosen a particular form of undead to combat 
and have researched it thoroughly. They 
know every nuance and variation between the 
various members of that species. For this rea- 
son, Undead Slayers, if properly prepared, 
gain a +2 to hit and to damage against their 
chosen undead foes. 

Undead Slayers hunt the undead more easi- 
ly than most. They know the signs of undead 
infestations and can trace them back to their 
sources. Their keen elven senses are honed to 


| 
detect the unnatural rhythms of undead, and 
they can therefore find their lairs. 

This does not mean that they can find a dis- 
tant vampire's secret lair. Instead, by listening 
to rumors and observing the local phenom- 
ena, they can find the general area where the 
lair might be. Then they may search for the 
creature more personally. 

* Special Hindrances. Although they can 
fight other foes, the Slayers will never turn 
down a chance to eliminate an undead enemy. 
While this does not mean charging blindly in- 
to battle, they will not hesitate to sacrifice 
their lives if it means the undead will perish. 
They will never back away from the opportu- 
nity to rid the world of these blasphemous cre- 
ations, regardless of the cost to themselves. 

Mindless undead are rather low on their list 
of priorities for destruction. Skeletons and 
zombies do not arouse the hatred and loathing 
of the Undead Slayer as much as sentient un- 
dead do. Anything with a mind raises the 
hackles and the anger of the Undead Slayer. 

Such is the Undead Slayers’ devotion to 
their cause that they will plan ways to destroy 
even those undead who have proved them- 
selves friendly. Dealing with a good or neutral 
lich, for example, is impossible for an Undead 
Slayer. Simply knowing of the existence of 
such an abomination is enough for this char- 
acter to seek ways to annihilate it. 

* Wealth Options. Undead Slayers start 
out with the same amount of wealth as any 
other players within their class. 

Undead Slayers must purchase at least two 
vials of holy water and a silver mirror before 
buying any other equipment. For weapons, 
they usually carry an edged weapon (if al- 
lowed) as well as a bludgeoning weapon. Af- 
ter they have satisfied this minimum 
requirement, they may spend their money as 
they wish. However, it is recommended that 
at least half of their funds be spent on equip- 
ment for locating and holding undead at bay. 

* Suggested Elf Subraces. All. 


Character Creation and Kits e 95 


9. G3 757. 


RIE 


CHAPTER 
| SORORIS 


= 


How and why feywine—that elixir to glad- 
den the heart and encourage the soul of every 
Elf—came to be is a tale ancient in age. Some 
of you say it is merely mead, that Human 
drink. You say it is nothing more than flowers 
and honey, left to ferment and age in oak bar- 
rels. You are, in part, correct, but you know 
not the full story. Let me recount for you the 
truth of feywine’s origin. 

The First Elves roamed the land, well 
pleased with all they saw and all that the gods 
gave them. They had no need for sustenance 
then, those First Elves—no need for bread, 
and meat, and fruits and vegetables that we 
now so much enjoy. These Elves had the 
blood of gods burning bright in their veins. 
The tears of the Moon and the soil of the land 
also coursed through their blood. 

Little remains of those early years of our 
existence. Certainly there are no remnants of 
the original vessels made by the Seldarine, 
which they created to house our spirits. 
Those First Elves existed solely through the 
life-giving form provided by the Seldarine. 
Then they joined with one another, and they 
begat children. 

Although still nourished by the earth and the 
stars, these children were a step removed from 
the gods. They had needs that could not wholly 
be satisfied by their fathers and mothers. And 
the First Elves beseeched the gods, crying out as 
their children lay dying, for they did not under- 
sorrow, and they were moved to act. 

They asked the Moon to bless the land with 
her tears a second time, as she had when Cor- 
ellon Larethian fought in the Godswar, and 
she did. The tears fed the children of the First 
Elves, and the children lived. 

In time, the Elves learned to take nourish- 
ment from other sources, and they can now 
survive without the gods' gift. But an Elf who 
is routinely deprived of feywine turns into 
but a pale imitation of his or her self . . . an Elf 
who has lost the soul of the gods. 


BOARS 


—Firiel Anani'Mahs, 
Keeper of Feywine 


SOR PA y 


(XX PATE ME 


eee каше nc 


ESE SA At ROTEL CHOP OL AO 


ў ost of this equipment is available only 
M. to elves, for they are not willing to sell 

“ithe best of their stock to humans or 
duarum There are countless more items that 
the elves have invented; the following list is 
only a sample of what they are capable. 

The chapter contains beverages, weapons, 
and other items elves find useful. Most items 
have multiple uses, for the elves hate to re- 
strict anything to but one purpose. 

Finally, please note that few of these items 
are forged or constructed in great quantities. 
Elves believe in the unique qualities of each 
item and, unlike dwarves, do not enjoy mass- 
producing anything, no matter how good it is. 


Feywine 


This is a fermented mixture of crushed 
flowers, honey, and an ingredient that some 
claim is distilled moonbeams. It is available 
only through elves, and most elves will not al- 
low members of other races to drink it. The 
sole exception to this rule is the race of half- 
lings, who appreciate all good things in life. 
Humans become far too stuporous, and 
dwarves do not appreciate the subtleties in- 
herent in the taste, preferring instead to swill 
it. It simply does not affect them. Gnomes 
have their own variant, which they prefer, 
and they rarely ask for feywine. 

Although feywine lasts only two days when 
bottled away from fresh air, some elves carry 
it with them for such a period to use as a secret 
weapon against unsuspecting foes. While their 
enemies are sleeping off the effects, the elves 
can make good their escape. Otherwise, elves 
drink it only when they are celebrating some 
victory or festival. 

Cost: Unavailable 

Weight: As water 


Elven Harp 


These masterworks are highly prized in the 
musical communities of any culture. The el- 
ven harp produces a clear, dulcet tone, un- 
heard of in any non-elven crafted instrument. 


AG) AOI ORE 


A. 


-—————- —— 


96 * Chapter Eleven 


ПЕЕЛ PILSEN DADO OTL C A ie 


Not only does it produce a sound rivaled 
only by the gods of music, the elven harp is a 
beauty to behold as well. Intricately carved, 
with attention paid to the smallest detail, the 
elven harp is almost as beautiful to look at as 
it is to hear it. 

There are several different sizes of elven 
harp. Some can be carried by adventuring 
elves, while others are clearly intended only 
for stationary use. Whatever the size, they are 
well worth their cost. 

Cost: 500-2,500 gp 

Weight: 10-100 lbs. 


Honey Leather 


Honey leather is really a light canvas used as 
protection against rain and dampness. Elves use 
it for tents and to protect camping gear. Unfor- 
tunately, it doesn't offer much protection 
against snags, and it tears easily. However, as 
long as it is used only in camp, it is a fairly dura- 
ble canvas. It is also completely waterproof, 
and it is highly valued because of that. 

Cost: 50 gp/sq. yard 

Weight: 1 sq. yard = 1/10 lb. 


Sashling 


This broad, billowing sash was the precursor 
and the inspiration for the girdle of many 
pouches, for its seemingly small exterior hides 
a great many interior pockets. Ten pockets are 
sewn into the folds of the sashling, each capa- 
ble of holding about a fourth of a pound. 

The nature of the sashling is such that, un- 
less the item inside is too bulky, it will conceal 
most of what the elf is carrying. It is thus ideal 
for carrying hidden coins, spell components, 
or other easily concealable items. 

For those who need to carry more supplies, 
many sashlings are made with hooks on the 
outer side. This enables the wearer to hang 
pouches and other things from the outside of 
the sashling as well. 

Cost: 10 gp 

Weight: 1 lb. 


Elven Equipment * 97 


IPSS Ct OAS CS OPP NS AO) OTE 


Thistledown 


This is the grayish material from which cloaks 
of elvenkind are made. It is a light, downy 
material that does not snag on branches, Since 
it is a fine quality material, it can easily be en- 
chanted with the spells that enable the elves to 
produce their woodswear. 

Cost: 100 gp/sq. yard 

Weight: 1 sq. yard=1/10 lb. 


Elven Bow 


During their years of experience, elves have 
found that often archers are attacked without 
much chance to defend themselves. They have 
therefore created the elven bow. It is designed 
to fire with the same rate of fire and accuracy, 
and yet the elves can use it to fend off attacks 
until they can defend themselves with a better 
weapon or spell. 

The elven bow is a beautiful piece of work, 
carved mostly from wood, and is highly deco- 
rated and polished. To fully fulfill its function, 
the elf crafters have also given it metal inlays. 
These enable the bow to be used as a parrying 
weapon until the elf can draw a more suitable 
weapon. Meanwhile, the elf's bow has not been 
damaged by the attack and can be used again. 

If used as an offensive weapon, the elven 
bow acts as a club, causing 1d6 points to S- or 
M-sized creatures, 1d3 to L-sized or larger 
creatures. 

Cost: 150 gp 

Weight: 8 lbs. 


Arrows (Useful) 


As with their bows, elves have found that the 
initial, simple designs are not always what is 
needed in a given situation. Sometimes, an ar- 
row must be able to do more than simply 
damage a foe. Therefore, they have designed 
the following arrows, each with a specific pur- 
pose. These are certainly not the limit of the 
specific arrows that they have designed; they 
are but a small sample of specialties. The list 
here is merely a representation. 


98 * Chapter Eleven 


Cost: Variable 
Weight: Variable 


Flare Arrow 


Designed so that the archer may be more easi- 
ly found or so that a distraction for enemies 
can be created, the flare arrow produces an in- 
tensely bright light in the skies, visible for 
long distances on clear nights. 

The arrowhead is a special detachable 
piece. It houses a small air-catching device 
that slows the arrow on its descent, allowing it 
to drift to the earth instead of plummeting. 
The interior of the arrow is filled with a slow- 
burning, elven powder that flares brightly 
when ignited. This powder is a closely guard- 
ed secret of the elf crafters. 

To send a flare arrow, one simply touches a 
flame to the fuse trailing behind the fletching 
and shoots the arrow into the sky. The head 
detaches when the arrow reaches the top of its 
flight, releasing the parachute, which ignites 
the powder. The arrow burns merrily all the 
way to the ground. Naturally, flare arrows 
can only be used once. Unfortunately, they 
are somewhat fragile, and they break rather 
easily. 

If fired at an enemy, a flare arrow shatters, 
causing 1d4 points of damage and spreading 
its load of powder all over the target's body. 
There is a 50% chance that the arrow's fuse 
will light the powder on this enemy, causing 
144 points of damage per round for three 
rounds. It can only be extinguished by im- 
mersing one's entire body in water. Simply 
beating at the flames or throwing water on 
them will not extinguish them. 

The flare arrow's range is S: 5, M: 10, and 
L: 15. If fired straight up, it can go as high as 
120 yards. 

Cost: 10 gp each 

Weight: 1/5 Ib. 


Message Arrow 


Sometimes, one needs to get an urgent mes- 
sage to a distant compatriot in a hurry. The 


(PEMD d S 


OG REY tale. EAD 


: AYES 


Е7: q^ 
P E 8 OHS v 


elves developed message arrows for just this 
purpose. They resemble normal arrows out- 
wardly, although the head is rather more 
rounded than most other arrows. It is the inte- 
rior that makes the message arrow special. 
The shaft is hollow, enabling the archer to fit 
a tightly rolled scroll inside. The arrow can 
accommodate no more than one sheet of 
papyrus or paper. 

If used as a weapon, the message arrow will 
cause 146 points of subdual damage, only a 
quarter of which is permanent. Because of its 
fragility, it will most likely break if it is used 
offensively. In such cases, it must make a save 
vs. crushing blow as thin wood or be perma- 
nently splintered. Its ranges are S: 6, M: 13, 
and L: 20. 

Cost: 2 sp 

Weight: 1/10 lb. 


Elven Plate Armor 


While dwarves and humans certainly have the 
edge on constructing various types of plate ar- 
mor, it is hardly a forbidden science to the 
elves. Although there are even fewer suits of 
elven plate than there are of elven chain, in- 
trepid explorers have turned up several varia- 
tions. The DM should keep in mind that elven 
plate is rare enough that few PCs will run 
across it and, if they do, it will likely belong to 
an elf warrior. 

Elven plate is mostly used as ceremonial ar- 
mor, for elves do not like the lack of mobility 
plate affords. This means that virtually every 
suit of elven plate is ornately decorated; it is 
not often that elf armorers are given a chance 
to combine such utility with beauty. 

Still, despite its decorative appearance, el- 
ven plate provides as much protection as any 
human suit of plate armor. And because of the 
skill of elf armorers, it is lighter than most 
plate armor, weighing only as much as typical 
human chain mail. Unfortunately, elven plate 
does not allow the silent movement that elven 
chain does, and it cannot be worn by any but 
fighters, clerics, and their multiclass varia- 
tions. 


Multiclassed spellcasters find elven plate to 
be a special boon for, like elven chain, it al- 
lows its user to cast spells and still wear ar- 
mor. However, as mentioned before, elves do 
not wear this armor as often as they do elven 
chain, for it hampers the freedom of move- 
ment they relish. 

Elf cavaliers are the main users of elven 
plate. It inspires humans, they find, and they 
savor the impressions made on these people. 
Other races also tend to be impressed by elves 
wearing elven plate; for what reason the elves 
fail to fathom. Many elves capitalize on this 
effect, however. 

Elven plate, of whatever variety, is extraor- 
dinarily rare. In reality, perhaps 5% (if even 
that) of elven chain found is actually elven 


would not be hard to ascertain by the decora- 
tions on the armor. Rest assured that the own- 
er or any heirs would be very happy to see the 
armor returned; likewise, they would take se- 
rious offense if another being had stolen it or 
was wearing it. 

If it is difficult for a human to earn elven 
chain, it is impossible to earn elven plate. On- 
ly elves can wear it, for each suit is custom- 
made and unique. Unless a human is 
exceptionally slight, there is no chance of fit- 
ting into a suit of elven plate. Halflings, 
dwarves, and gnomes cannot wear it either, 
unless they are especially tall and slender. On- 
ly half-elves can reasonably expect a suit to fit 
them, and even they can squeeze in only with 
discomfort. In most cases, it is far easier sim- 
ply to return elven plate to its rightful owners 
and hope for a token of appreciation. 


Elven Equipment ө 99 


SM AE 


RIC 


CHAPTER 


SS NB CORN SRI AO Goo IRA OE OES 


1 ? The Magic of Elves 
ez5 SALA IN II 


The First Elves rejoiced in the goodness of 
their life. The Seldarine showed the First Elves 
the ways of the world that had been created for 
them. The vessels that had been created for 
them—their bodies—were strong. They knew 
each thought and emotion of the world around 
them, for they were as intimately connected 
with the land as if they were a part of it. 

These Elves explored their world, rejoicing 
in the trees and flowers, in the rocks and the 
earth, and in the wind. They bore their chil- 
dren and fed them nectar and moondrops. 
They crafted their pieces of silver and gold, 
encasing the gems of the earth to display their 
beauty. They played with magic and wrought 
many a wondrous, whimsical item. The Elves 
laughed, for life was good. 

Then came the stirring of Lolth. 

The Elves' thoughts grew dark, and they 
mistrusted their brother. Many turned to the 
sanctuaries of home and hill, seeking to un- 
derstand what was happening. Whispers 
spread, promising dark power should some 
follow the Spider Queen's tenets. 

Some Elves were wise and foresaw the terri- 
ble war to come, They quietly began to gather 
their people to forge items of might: armor, to 
protect the heroes they must send to battle; 
helmets, to inspire faith and trust in all who 
see them; and swords, to smite their foes. 
They constructed, too, other weapons of 
force: subtle arrows of defense and attack, 
not-so-subtle rings of power, and awesome 
spells of destruction designed to fight the 
coming of the Drow. 

The Elfwar began, and brother fought broth- 
er, daughter against mother. Mages from all 
sides unleashed their powers. Sparks lit each 
clash of sword e plate, pointing the way 
for arrows to seek and wound— hoping to kill. 

Long and bloody was the Elfwar. In the 
end, the True Elves won. The Dark Ones re- 
treated to the underground. Disheartened, 
sick with shame at the parting of their people, 
the Elves abandoned their weapons, their ar- 
mor, their rings and staves of might. They left 
them littering the battlefields, for they could 
bear no more the taste of war. 

Some say those items are still there. 


100 * Chapter Twelve 


У: agic is an integral part of the elven life- 
M. style. Elves’ very lives are inherently 
= "=i magical; the blood of a god flowing 
through one's veins tends to give that person a 
much different perspective on the workings of 
magic. 

Magic fascinates elves—no one particular 
spell, certainly, but magic as a whole. Al- 
though they are limited by their very nature as 
to how much power they can attain via magic, 
elves find the whole process absolutely mes- 
merizing. No other race, aside from humans, 
can attain as much magical power. And hu- 
mans, while they can grow more powerful, 
understand magic less perfectly than elves. 

Some sages theorize that elves are naturally 
less powerful magicians than humans are sim- 
ply because their frailer frames cannot chan- 
nel as much energy. To protect their own best 
interests, the high levels of spellcasting are de- 
nied to them. However, this does not mean 
that the elves' insight into such magic is any 
the less. Indeed, the understanding of those 
elves who have devoted their lives to the 
study of magical theory surpasses that of the 
greatest of human enchanters. Elves' weapons 
and magical items are certainly among the 
most powerful in any world, and humans who 
seek power in the magical arts often turn to 
elves for tutelage. 

Elves have an aversion to nonmagical tech- 
nology, however, for they have no real incli- 
nation toward invention. One would think 
that with the long lives available to elves, they 
would research and create technologically 
advanced items. Yet they avoid doing so in all 
areas save that of prostheses. 

The reason for this is lost in times long since 
past, recollected only by elf sages and histo- 
rians. Apparently, during the time of the 
Elfwar, elf inventors were fairly common. 
However, most of them joined ranks with the 
Spider Queen, seeing in her the one to take the 
elves into a new age. Since then, most elves 
have been somewhat leery of both inventors 
and inventions. 

This chapter details a few specific spells and 
magical items that elves have developed over 


the years; they zealously guard this magic, 
and they will not trade the secrets of these 
spells or the whereabouts of these items to 
other races under any circumstances. This 
magic is meant for elves alone. 


Camouflage (Alteration) 


Level: Wiz or Pr 2 
Range: 20' radius 
Components: M,S 

Duration: 1 turn/level 
Casting Time: 2 

Area of Effect: One person/level 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


The elves jealously guard this spell. It allows 
the mage to instantly and completely hide the 
number of people allowed by the spell, con- 
cealing them against even thorough searches. 
This spell functions only in the wilderness, 
however, for it changes the appearance of the 
affected characters into a facsimile of natural 
surroundings. It is effective even against infra- 
vision and is therefore perfect for use by spies 
and infiltrators. Characters in this form still 
have all their faculties and abilities, and they 
can emerge from this cover at any time they 
desire. 

It is even possible for characters to move 
while within this form. Those affected may 
move up to 10 feet in a single round, creeping 
more closely to their targets. If they travel 
faster than this, the spell dissipates. As long as 
the movement is surreptitious and stealthy 
(“Look, Thrag! That bush moving!"), they 
should be safe. As with the invisibility spell, if 
the enspelled characters attack they gain the 
initiative and a +4 bonus to hit because of to- 
tal surprise, yet lose the benefits of the spell. 

The characters cannot be detected except by 
magic or by moving stupidly. Until the spell 
wears off, the characters can enjoy near-total 
invisibility and gain much-needed informa- 
tion. The material component for the spell is a 
mistletoe berry. 


Conduit (Enchantment, Invocation) 


Level: Wiz 5 
Range: Touch 
Components: V, 5, М 
Duration: Special 
Casting Time: 5 

Area of Effect: 5 missiles 
Saving Throw: None 


Using this spell, the caster can temporarily en- 
chant five missiles with another spell of a level 
no higher than 4th. This spell combines the 
best aspects of fighters and mages, for they can 
work in harmony to maximize both the effects 
of the spell and the damage of the missile. 

The conduit spell effectively extends the 
range of the second spell, casting that spell out 
to its full range from the target point when the 
missile hits the target. Unless otherwise speci- 
fied when the spell is cast, the effects of the 
spell radiate forward from the point the ar- 
rowhead strikes. 

Missiles affected by this spell must begin to 
be fired within one turn after the last is en- 
chanted, and they will not hold the spells for 
longer than an hour. Since the missiles are not 
specially prepared to hold enchantments for 
longer, the spells tend to bleed off with the 
passage of time. 

The spells cast on the missiles must be sepa- 
rate ones that the caster has memorized that 
day. For example, if a sorceress has memo- 
rized conduit and a single fireball, she can 
place a fireball only on one of her arrows, not 
on all five. 

The loaded spells are triggered when the head 
of the missile strikes something, whether that be 
the target, the ground, a tree, a rock, or what- 
ever. This is good for radius attacks, such as a 
fireball, although it does no good for spells such 
as burning hands or shocking grasp. 

Targets are allowed normal saves against 
these spells, as if the wizard were right there 
casting the spell. However, if the missile car- 
ries the enspelled arrow beyond the spell's 
normal range, the wizard has no more control 
over the spell. 


102 © Chapter Twelve 


For example, web and dimension door 
spells require the caster to manipulate the 
spell, and casters cannot do so unless the 
range of their spell can reach back to them. 
Unless such wizards want to make the neces- 
sary calculations before casting the spell into 
the missile, these spells usually won't work. If 
a caster wishes to do so, fine, but this is as- 
suming a lot of faith in the ability of whoever 
fires the bow, for the archer must make a suc- 
cessful to-hit roll against AC 6 (including 
modifiers for range) to hit the area. 

The casting time does not include the cast- 
ing time of the loaded spells. The material 
component is a copper wire twisted into the 
shape of an arrow. 


Seeking (Enchantment, Invocation) 


Level: Wiz or Pr 2 

Range: 100 yards 

Components: У, 5 

Duration: 1 turn 

Casting Time: 2 

Area of Effect: 1 missile/3 levels of the cast- 


er, up to a maximum of five 
Saving Throw: None 


The seeking spell takes the normal laws of mo- 
mentum and gravity, and then twists them 
slightly in a way that is favorable to the caster 
of the spell. 

The caster can ensorcel a number of nor- 
mal, nonenchanted missiles no larger than a 
javelin, equal to one-third his level, to a maxi- 
mum of five missiles. When they have been 
enchanted, the caster may either use them or 
distribute them to his or her companions. 

When shot or hurled at a target, the missiles 
unerringly seek the target. They will hit noth- 
ing else but that target. The missiles can go 
around objects of corners if the target was vis- 
ible when the spell was cast, but the missiles 
cannot pass through solid obstructions. For 
example, if the target closes a door, the mis- 
siles slam into the door and cannot be re- 
moved until the spell wears off. 

The normal range can be extended to the 


distance of the target creature as long as the 
opponent uses only ordinary methods of es- 
cape. If the target plane shifts, teleports, 
blinks, or uses some other means of instanta- 
neous transport, the missile can no longer 
home in on its target. It falls to the ground, 
useless. 

This spell is not an automatic guarantee of 
success. Rather, it ensures that archers and 
slingers, when firing into melee, will not acci- 
dentally hit those who are on their side. This 
spell is especially useful for battles or shots in 
narrow corridors. If the person firing the ar- 
row or bullet can see the target, he can fire for 
normal damage without fear of damaging 
comrades. 


Magical Items 


Most of the magical items listed in this chapter 
are rare and will not be found lying around in 
just any hoard. Instead, they can be incorpo- 
rated into a campaign (preferably with elven 
overtones) to suit the Dungeon Master's pur- 
poses. These items should never be just ran- 
dom treasure. If they are going to be used in a 
campaign, there must definitely be a reason 
for their inclusion. 


Swords and Armor 


Despite being relatively peaceful folk, elves 
have a tremendous knowledge of war and 
warfare. But even in war, the elves find time 
to be artistic—as evidenced by the stunning 
beauty of their weaponry and protection. 

Elven swords are often legendary, especially 
those produced by the crafters of the early 
millenia. These were originally created to bat- 
tle titanic beings of old, creatures who could 
be slain only if powerful magicks were cast 
upon a blade and armor given mighty protec- 
tions. 

Because of the threat these beings posed to 
the world, elf crafters rose to the challenge, 
creating artifacts of wondrous power. Even 
though the monsters they were created to de- 
stroy have long since passed from the world, 


104 * Chapter Twelve 


the blades themselves are rumored to have 
survived the toll of the ages. Even now, some 
find their way into the hands of humans. 

Some races have spread the rumor that, be- 
cause of superior elven craftsmanship, these 
blades continue to grow in power through the 
ages, rather than decrease as so many magical 
items do. If this is indeed true, then a weapon 
from the long-ago Elfwar would have since 
become a weapon of awesome might. In the 
right hands, such a weapon could work won- 
drous good. And in the wrong hands? . . . Un- 
told devastation. 


Helms of Valor 


This item appears as a typical elven winged 
helm, but will radiate enchantment/charm if a 
detect magic spell is used on it. Originally in- 
spired by those battle leaders who walked un- 
flinching through hails of enemy arrow fire, a 
helm of valor enables its wearer to ignore mis- 
sile fire. However, in order to do so, the users 
of such helms must have implicit trust in both 
themselves and their helm. 

When a wearer first tries to use a particular 
helm, he or she must make a successful Wis- 
dom check to attune with it. In unsuccessful, 
that helm will not function for the user until 
the individual's Wisdom score has changed for 
either better or worse (thus allowing another 
check). 

A user who succeeds at the Wisdom check 
may then attempt to harness the helm's 
powers. The next time someone successfully 
attacks the wearer with a missile weapon, he 
or she may make another Wisdom check to 
avoid all but 1 point of damage, no matter the 
usual damage of the missile. 

If this second Wisdom check fails, the wear- 
er suffers the maximum damage the missile 
can inflict. This check is made for every mis- 
sile fired at the wearer during this combat, 
and the modifiers listed below do not apply 
until the next combat. 

If this second Wisdom check is successful, 
the wearer gains a +1 to the Wisdom check 
for the next combat. Note: This applies only 


to the next combat in which enemies attempt 
to harm the user. The helm does not work dur- 
ing sparring practice or training. A user who 
fails a Wisdom check picks up а —1 penalty 
for the next three combats, while he or she 
learns to trust in the powers of the helm again. 
No matter how often the user succeeds in the 
Wisdom check, the bonus can never exceed 
19; a roll of 20 always fails. 

Helms of valor provide no defense against 
melee weapons (although hurled daggers, ax- 
es, and other propelled melee weapons count 
as missile weapons), nor do they offer any 
protection against spells such as magic mis- 
sile. Magical missiles, including enchanted ar- 
rows, affect the Wisdom check by —1 per +1 
of the enchantment. 

The helm is usable by warriors, priests, and 
psionically empowered individuals. As with 
all helms, it is not usable by either wizards or 
thieves who wish to practice their crafts. 


Arrows (Enspelled) 


For untold centuries, the elves have used or 
modified various priest and mage spells for 
use with arrows—spells for which they have 
found quite interesting alternative uses. By 
placing a simple spell on the arrow, they are 
able to significantly increase that spell's range, 
effectiveness, and efficiency. This is not to 
speak of the conduit spell; these are spells that 
can be cast on the arrows themselves. 

Indeed, any type of spell that requires a spe- 
cial focal point can be cast on an arrow in or- 
der to deliver the spell to a great distance 
away. The permanent spells make these ar- 
rows far better foci for magic, but that is not 
always feasible. 

Although such enspelled arrows are not, in 
the main, permanent magical items, they are 
included here to give some additional ideas to 
the players for experiments they might like to 
try. Some examples of enspelled arrows in- 
clude the following: 

* Avoidance/Attraction. This 5th-level 
wizard spell is an especially nasty one to place 
on an arrow, especially when the reversed 


version, attraction, is used. Attracted arrows, 
if they hit, cannot be removed from the vic- 
tim's body until a dispel magic is cast upon 
that person. Meanwhile, the arrow begins to 
fester within the wound, causing infection and 
even death to the unfortunate. 

* Darkness or Light. These are among the 
most permanent and most used of enspelled 
arrows. If a continual light or a continual 
darkness spell is cast upon the shaft of an ar- 
row, it can then be used to either spotlight or 
blind an enemy. These arrows are common 
among elf scouts, who carry them sheathed 
until there is a use for them. 

* Fire Seeds. Like the fire trap arrow (be- 
low), this one requires a special hollow pot- 
tery tip, wherein the fire seeds are placed. 
When the arrow strikes the target, the seeds 
detonate, inflicting 2d8 points of damage to 
all within 10 feet of where the arrow falls. If 
the arrow actually hits someone, that person 
suffers 1d4 points of damage, as well as the 
2d8 points from the fire seed; the victim 
doesn't even get a saving throw to take only 
half damage. 

* Fire Trap. By casting a fire trap spell on 
a tiny and delicate box, then sealing this box 
inside a special, fragile arrowhead, an elf 
priest can create an effective flame arrow. In 
theory, when the arrow hits a firm enough tar- 
get (anything harder ha water), it triggers 
the spell, engulfing its target in a sudden blaze 
of flame. In game t , the head and box 
must make a single saving throw against 
crushing blow (as pottery) in order for the fire 
trap to detonate. Otherwise, the arrow is a 
dud, though it could possibly be reused 
against the archer. 

The damage caused by this arrow is 1d4 +1 
plus the variable damage caused by the fire 
trap. Even if the arrow misses its target, it will 
still create a conflagration in the area if the 
head cracks open. 


Arrows (Magical) 


By far the most common of magical elven 
weapons, magical arrows are still fairly rare 


The "= of Elves * 105 


ОЕ ALAS NS 


SEK PSI 


for campaign purposes. Workmanship on el- 
ven magical arrows is such that the missiles 
are not always destroyed when they hit their 
target. Furthermore, if they miss their target, 
these arrows break only 25% of the time. If a 
magical elven arrow hits its target, it will be 
destroyed 75% of the time. Otherwise, it can 
be used repeatedly until it is finally destroyed. 

Ancient elf arrowsmiths have created some 
amazing combinations of the following ar- 
rows, but they are extremely rare. Legends tell 
of wooden arrows of seeking and—rarest of 
all—a wooden arrow of seeking and extended 
range. If these could be found, they would 
make the owner a most happy individual. 

Some examples of elven magical arrows in- 
clude the following: 

9 Arrow of Extended Range. There are 
three versions of this arrow, which allow the 
user to double, triple, or even quadruple the 
normal ranges for any type of bow. The first 
version, which allows double range, is en- 
countered about 60% of the time. The triple- 
range version is found about 30% of the time, 
and the quadruple-range arrow is chanced 
upon only 10% of the time. 

Although these arrows do not have a to-hit 
bonus, they are effective against creatures 
who are immune to all but magical weapons 
(up to +1). In addition, these arrows cancel 
out the normal range modifiers of the bow be- 
ing used, using instead the modified, multi- 
plied range for purposes of figuring modifiers. 

These arrows are usually found in bunches 
of 2d10. 

* Arrow of Seeking. This is a more pow- 
erful version of an arrow imbued with the 
seeking spell. Not only does it round corners 
in pursuit of its prey, it also gains a bonus of 
+2 damage. These arrows are usually found 
in groups of 1d10, although sometimes as 
many as 2d8 can be found. 

* Wooden Arrow. This is a totally organ- 
ic arrow. Made completely from wood and 
carved with ornate runes, it appears as noth- 
ing more than a novelty, or perhaps a wood- 
carver's doodle. In reality, this arrow is a most 
dangerous weapon, and it radiates strong en- 


106 * Chapter Twelve 


ZA tale CAS 


423 ON OS SOV Oy; Nc JG NO VEY 7 S ES 


chantment magic. | 

This weapon completely ignores all nonor- 
ganic armor. Thus, metal armor offers no pro- 
tection against this missile, while leather, 
hide, and scale mail made from a creature's 
skin offer their normal bonus. Studded leather 
protects only as leather armor. 

Those wearing metal armor are considered 
to be AC 10 against this arrow. Magical pro- 
tection still applies; thus, plate mail +4, al- 
though normally AC —1, would instead be 
only AC 6 against the wooden arrow. 

These arrows are never found in bunches. If 
encountered, there will be but a single shaft. 
Furthermore, the wooden arrow is an excep- 
tion to elven arrows in that it will always be 
destroyed when fired, regardless of whether it 
hits. The wood necessary to the enchantment 
is such that it can function no other way. 


Artificial Limbs 


With such incredibly long lifespans, one thing 
elves fear more than nearly anything is perma- 
nent maiming. Even some magicks are not 
powerful enough to restore limbs to those 
who have lost an arm or a leg through acci- 
dent or misadventure. Thus, the surface elves, 
like the drow, nurture a number of crafters 
who work replacing lost limbs. There are very 
few of the elves who comprehend this extraor- 
dinary technology of theirs, for the design of 
artificial limbs is something beyond that of 
magic. Most elves do not understand inven- 
tion or even the desire to create something not 
inherently magical, but the existence of these 
limbs proves that some few do, and do so very 
well. 

Nevertheless, artificial limbs are exception- 
ally rare. Since they must be individualized 
and their creation often takes years, they are 
not typically found lying about a dungeon. 
More likely, they will be discovered on the 
skeletons of elf warriors, or in those places 
where warrior elves once fought. Regardless 
of whether their skeletons have turned to dust 
over the ages, their magical limbs remain. 

With extensive (and expensive) retooling, 


| 


AES 


these devices can be worked so that they fit 
other races who have lost limbs. Likewise, if a 
PC can somehow convince the elves that it 
would be in their best interest to forge a limb 
for the PC, he or she might gain one. Other- 
wise, the chances of finding a device such as 
these are practically nonexistent. 

Made of mithril or an especially strong al- 
loy, artificial limbs can duplicate nearly any 
action the original flesh-and-blood limb could 
perform. They are more versatile, however, 
for they can be fitted with special attachments 
that enable their owner to execute myriad 
functions. 

Artificial feet, for example, could have the 
toes replaced with spikes for ease in climbing 
or use as a secret weapon during combat. Fin- 
gers can be replaced with a variety of tools 
and picks for locks, or they can be combined 
to form a single, deadly blade. Possibilities are 
limited only by the imaginations of the crafter 
and the character, by the application of good 
sense, and by the realities of engineering the 
devices. Finally, if they are of particularly fine 
make, they can hold an enchantment. 

While nearly any limb can be replaced if 
lost, elves have not yet been able to develop 
internal organs of any sort. However, they 
can rebuild a person if his or her vitals remain 
intact. 

Lest any PCs think that a body given over 
to such technology would be a good idea, let 
them consider the following hindrances: First, 
the character must be an elf, for elves will not 
perform this service for any but an elf. Sec- 
ond, elves neither revere nor respect those 
who have lost many limbs. Their generals and 
those of the warrior Houses may wear up to 
two artificial limbs without shame; anyone in- 
jured beyond that point must, to the elven 
mind, be a total incompetent. Such a person's 
bungling and sheer stupidity has obviously 
led to that state, and that person commands 
no respect from the elves. Such individuals are 
actively avoided, for their mere presence is 
viewed as bad luck. 

Finally, and perhaps most importantly, 
elves are not proud of their scars as members 


of the lesser races so often are. Elves who have 
these limbs take pains to hide them, for they 
are ashamed that their lives have not followed 
the elven way. These individuals wear long 
gloves, heavy tunics, or thick breeches to hide 
the fact that their bodies are not perfect. 

Those whose bodies have been totally al- 
tered go to even greater lengths to hide their 
restructuring. Their bodies have become 
something that are not natural, and so the 
much-vaunted elven connection to the earth 
seems a hollow mockery of the way they once 
were. Indeed, most elves are far too proud to 
allow themselves to be "preserved" in such a 
way, preferring instead what they perceive as 
the sanctity of death. 

This is not to say that elves refuse these 
limbs outright. Rather, the artificial limbs are 
a convenience, a last resort when regeneration 
and other natural methods of replacement are 
exhausted. 

For the sake of play balance, the damage- 
causing potential of these limbs should not ex- 
ceed 146, plus Strength bonuses. Although 
other types of abilities might be slightly en- 
hanced (such as the thief's Pick Locks ability), 
these bonuses should not exceed +10%. Play- 
er and DM alike should keep in mind that 
good tools are no substitute for sheer talent, 
expertise, and experience. 


The Magic of Elves ® 107 


ОЯ 


RIS 


CHAPTER 


Ro tae CS 


2/9 PA CA 17553 2 КОКЕ 


Elven Campaigns 


1 3 IE ADU EUST 


T, 


Hidden in the leafy undergrowth, Garana- 


hil and her five companions watched the orcs 
fell yet another dryads tree. The dryads 
scream of agony echoed bitterly in their ears. 


The orcs were intent on savaging this land 


of trees and green, This was the tenth dry- 
adhome they had destroyed this week; the 
orcs laughed wickedly, heedless of any who 
might hear them. Who would attack the thir- 
ty of them? 

The elves were slowly being crushed under 
the orcish boot. They were too few and too 
far apart to countermand the fast-breeding 
orcs, Attacks such as this were now common. 
Garanahil and her comrades were all that re- 
mained of a village of more than fifty elves. 

As the tree crashed to the ground, Garana- 
hil gritted her teeth in anger. They had harried 
the orcs for days, unleashing arrows at strag- 
glers and slitting the throats of those few who 
wandered too far from their encampment. 
Now the elves were out of arrows, and none 
of the trees nearby were of suitable quality. If 
the tiny band paused to make more, they 
would surely lose the remaining orcs to the 
open plains less than a day's travel away. 

The answer was simple for the maddened 
elves. They followed the orcs through the rest 
of the day, planning to catch the humanoids 
when they least expected an attack, The elves’ 
hand was forced but hours later, when the 
orcs found another dryad tree and slew the 
dryad before she could protest. Unable to 
contain their rage, the elves rushed to attack. 

The battle was short but fierce. The elves 
eliminated all save four of the orcs before 
they breathed their last of the autumn air. 
Garanahil fell near the dryad's body. 

Then Garanahil's blood joined with the dry- 
ad's and seeped into the ground. Their blood in- 
fused the tree with mad despair, and a sudden, 
primal groan oozed through the soil and into 
the surrounding air. The sound of snapping 
roots filled the forest as the tree lifted its pon- 
derous bulk from the earth and moved. The re- 
maining orcs stood, full of fear, unable to 
move. Garanahil the Treant crushed the orcs in- 
stantly and went in search of more. . . 


108 * Chapter Thirteen 


VESSELS 


IA j his chapter is for referees who plan to 
run elven campaigns. Whether these 
~ campaigns are all elven, mostly elven, 
or even just based around elvenkind, this 
chapter should give the DM a few ideas for 
creating a setting. 

First, the DM must consider the importance 
of the history of the world. What is it? Why? 
What happened to make it the way it is? How 
do the elves interact with the other races of the 
world if, indeed, there are other races? If not, 
why not? Did something happen to them? 

Next, the DM must decide on the type of 
campaign that he or she will be running. After 
all, not all campaigns are the standard adven- 
turing scenario. Some focus on political in- 
trigue, while others focus purely on combat. 
Others rely on problem-solving, while still 
others focus on epic quests instead of simple 
dungeon crawls. | 

The referee can ne all of these or 
can run one single type. The important thing, 
though, is that the DM decides on the type of 
campaign he or she is going to run. This will 
determine much of what follows hereafter. 


The World 


First, the DM must create the world in which 
the campaign is to be played. Its geography, 
its seas, and its oddities are all things that 
must be taken into account. How was the 
world created? Was it spun from the very fab- 
ric of reality by the gods, or was it simply a 
blob hurled forth from primal matter? Per- 
haps it was a combination between the two, 
where the birth of the world spawned the 
gods. | 

Whatever the cause of creation, it has 
shaped the events that will become the planet's 
history and perhaps produced some of the 
most important artifacts. It is vital for the DM 
to create a believable story of creation for the 
world. For added interest, the DM can have 
the major religions and races of the world dis- 
agree on its origins, leading to vast internecine 
conflicts that have shaped the face of the 
world still further. 


SACO XI) qo Wr 


VM SLAC} 


UA CEA PS aX OS AD BE ORE Э.Е OV CEO 


The History 


Now that the world has been created, the DM 
must create the world's history. What are the 
important events in the world's past, and what 
caused them? Most importantly, where do 
elves fit in the picture? 

Maybe they were created as the Story of 
Creation in Chapter One suggests, from the 
blood of Corellon Larethian as he battled the 
evil orc god Gruumsh. Maybe the elves sim- 
ply sprang from the world and are the true 
children of the earth. Whatever the truth, the 
DM must explain the existence of the elves 
and how they have come to be as they are and 
where they are today. 


The World's Races 


Next, the referee must decide from whence the 
various other races sprang, the order in which 
they were born, where they were born, where 
they moved, and what they did. A timeline is 
useful here, as the referee must create each race's 
history, its notable achievements, and its wars. 
What have they invented? Have there been any 
tragedies in their pasts that they as a race keep 
locked away in shame or sorrow? 

What is the role of elves in this world? Is there 
a difference between the elves of this campaign 
and the standard AD&D® game elves? If so, 
what is it? Perhaps these elves are taller, or 
shorter-lived, or longer-lived, or have some im- 
portant distinction that makes them vastly dif- 
ferent. Although it is not necessary to give each 
elf race from world to world a difference, it does 
add to the flavor of game play and can therefore 
enhance everyone's enjoyment. 

More important, what are the dominant 
races of the world? What are the elf characters 
most likely to be? What are their beliefs? The 
gods will play some part in this, but if they are 
not important to the elves, their divine influ- 
ence is greatly undercut. Also, a Dungeon 
Master simply must determine what all the 
civilizations are like in the world and who has 
the grandest. 


Elven Campaigns ө 109 


AM EA A PLATE ar) CARAS CB CSA NS NOY EN S oy WO a MES AC) AOI ASG 


ST E Ae EE S SCA: BOSS BE LEBEN EAT EYI ALS Ol МӘЛ): 


Possible Conflicts 


In a standard AD&D® game campaign, the 
various races of the world do not always live 
in peace. Indeed, circumstances in fantasy 
worlds are usually such that there is almost al- 
ways warfare between at least two groups, 
and often far more than that. The possibilities 
and variations of anger erupting into armed 
conflict between different groups are nearly 
endless. 

There are several conflicts that spring im- 
mediately to mind involving elves. There are 
so many philosophical and physical differ- 
ences between elves and other races that con- 
Hict seems almost predestined. Not all of these 
need be used in a campaign nor, indeed, must 
any of them. However, such conflicts are cer- 
tain to add spice to a campaign or at least pro- 
vide interesting diversions for the players. 

For example, in elf against elf scenarios, 
players could take the role of characters at the 
dawn of time, before the great Elfwar, seeking 
to avert the catastrophe of the drow sunder- 
ing. As an alternative, they could play more 
modern elves, trying to unite all the races of 
the world despite the utter stubbornness of the 
grey elves. 

PCs could also be involved in one of the 
greatest rivalries in fantasy: the dwarf/elf an- 
tagonism. Although it is true that both sides 
serve the cause of good, their radically differ- 
ent views on life often lead to serious, some- 
times violent disagreements. Taking this one 
step further, the two races could each so de- 
spise the other for its philosophy that they 
clash on a regular basis. 

There is also the possibility of elves against 
humans. Suppose that humans began destroy- 
ing the elven forests and killing the elves they 
met. The elves, sick of the wanton annihila- 
tion the humans insist on continuing, finally 
decide to strike back. Elves begin killing way- 
ward humans, and the humans retaliate by 
razing elven villages. The escalations con- 
tinue, and the player characters can either 
take part in the war itself or attempt to talk 
some sense into the heads of their leaders. 


110 * Chapter Thirteen 


There is also the scenario wherein the elves 
are against everyone but themselves. Because 
of the natural elven predilection for arro- 
gance, they have managed to inadvertently 
unite everyone against them. This is a cam- 
paign of struggling where the PCs must at- 
tempt to placate all sides before whole 
civilizations are swept away by the tides of 
war. 

Finally, there is the old elf vs. orc conflict. 
Although they are the hereditary enemies of 
the AD&D game, there are ways to make the 
conflict more interesting. After all, not all orcs 
are the smelly kind that live in caves. Orcs 
could have a bustling culture of evil and per- 
version, right next to an elven paradise of syl- 
van beauty. Naturally, the orcs would want to 
despoil this beauty, not to mention capture 
some slaves and sacrifices for their gods. At 
first, the two sides maintain guerilla tactics, 
not willing to commit to a full-scale war. 
Meanwhile, the player characters could have 
the unenviable task of having to infiltrate the 
orc settlements in order to free their captured 
comrades. 

Naturally, the possibilities for adventure 
and excitement are nearly endless. They are 
limited only by the imaginations of the DM 
and the players. 


Campaign Worlds 


Most of the published AD&D campaigns have 
a fairly even mix of the various races, al- 
though they tend to allow humans to predom- 
inate more often than any other race. Since 
humans have the most drive and ambition of 
any of the established humanoid races, it is 
only natural that their power always be taken 
into account when considering who controls 
the world. 

However, it's possible to create a campaign 
world wherein humans are not the dominant 
race. What follows is an outline of possibili- 
ties for other races' dominance and how such 
changes would affect the lives of elves on 
these worlds. 


SOOO OF M PR OO EA ONE SA SEPA 


The Elf Campaign 


On this world, elves are clearly the dominant 
race. Their world-spanning civilization has 
control of the portions of the world the elves 
find desirable. The race is fairly isolationistic, 
preferring to let the rest of the world run its 
course, rather than interfering with it in any 
way . . . usually. If something comes along 
that would disrupt the normal flow of nature, 
the elves will certainly be quick to step in to 
make sure it doesn't become too glaring a 
problem. 

Most of the elves here have little contact 
with other races because their scouts and bor- 
der guards keep the other races away from the 
elf sanctums. The elves will allow a rare few 
to journey unmolested past the borders of the 
elf lands, but usually only invited guests are 
allowed inside. The perimeter system is very 
thorough, with few living or unliving beings 
getting through unobserved. 

Because they do not have to worry about 
other races threatening their power, the elves 
of this world spend quite a bit of time in magi- 
cal research; the magical content of the world 
is thus very high. Most of elven civilization 
has become very much like that of the familiar 
grey elves, although their intolerance for oth- 
ers has not reached those proportions. 

Indeed, the elves are faintly amused by the 
antics of the other races, and they enjoy 
watching the others' rapid ascents and de- 
clines in fortune. Elves are guaranteed to live 
in comfort (if not outright luxury) on this 
world and would take up adventuring only to 
provide themselves with excitement or to 
quell the incursions of other races. Most of the 
quests would be along the nature of epic ad- 
ventures, for there would simply not be any- 
thing else that would rouse elf interest enough 
for the elves to take part. 

The time period of this campaign world 
would probably be near the time of creation, 
before humans became too populous. If not 
then, it would probably be after some world- 
wide war, wherein the populations of the oth- 
er races were decimated, while the elves 


e ص‎ —— —P 


112 * Chapter Thirteen 


repelled the worst of the catastrophe from 
their forests and survived. 

These elves might very well see humans to 
be as threatening as orcs; both are prolific 
breeders, both are expansionistic, and both 
encroach into the elf lands readily. While the 
elves hate neither of these races, they will hunt 
them to keep them away from the elf lands. 


The Human Campaign 


On this world, because of the human propen- 
sity for rapid growth and their expansionist 
tendencies, the once mighty elven civilization 
has been driven into decline. The elves have 
abandoned their fabled homes in the hearts of 
the ancestral forests, seeking refuge in lands 
untouched by human taint. Although the 
elves do not hate the humans at this point, 
they pity them for their total misunderstand- 
ing of nature's forces and for their short lives. 

The elves here have either mostly retreated 
from the world or have set secure strongholds 
past which no other races may pass. While 
their intolerance is no more than usual, they 
do not admit outsiders to their lands, which 
they consider inviolate. [n short, the elves of 
this world are similar to standard sylvan 
elves, although there may be exceptions (as 
there always are). 


The Dwarf Campaign 


In this sample world, the elves have been 
nearly exterminated by the orcs and their hu- 
manoid allies. They fought a good fight, 
struggling mightily and nearly holding the 
orcs back. In the end, however, the sheer 
numbers of the orc hordes spelled disaster for 
the elves. 

However, the elf resistance managed to se- 
verely weaken the evil humanoids, making 
them easy pickings for the dwarves from the 
mountains, who finally marched a little too 
late to aid the elves. However, they banished 
the last of the orc hordes from the elf woods 
and offered assistance to help the elves rebuild 
their cities. 


CYA: Xa. ОЙ 


CE A SESS 


Although the elves accepted the dwarves' 
generous offer, they remained suspicious of 
the dwarves' timing. When the dwarves began 
lumbering operations in the forests, cutting 
down the very trees the elves had once pro- 
tected against orc hordes, they felt their worst 
suspicions regarding the dwarves were con- 
firmed. These elves watched in shocked out- 
rage as the dwarves grew wealthy off the 
trees, living lives of luxury once paid for by 
the blood of elves. 

There were other elves beyond those who 
had survived the Battle of the Woods. Those 
who were off adventuring or acting as mer- 
chants returned home now to find the forests 
devastated and the dwarves lumbering the re- 
mains, with little regard for the sacred and 
valued places of the elves. 

The elves joined together and swore an oath 
that they would not rest until they had repaid 
the dwarves for their monstrous deed. 

These elves began harrying dwarf loggers, 
firing arrows at the miscreants and disrupting 
dwarven trade in general. The dwarves retali- 
ated against these "ungrateful elves" by in- 
creasing their logging efforts and killing the 
renegade elves who were killing precious 
dwarves. They also rounded up the few re- 
maining elf villagers and enclosed them in 
closely guarded camps, using the threat of vi- 
olence against the innocents as a cold-hearted 
means of quelling the elf rebels' actions. 

The PCs have the option of trying to dis- 
cover who was responsible for the delay in the 
march of the dwarf army and who is ulti- 
mately responsible for the rape of the forests. 
Since dwarves are essentially good beings, 
there should be some mystery and intrigue in- 
volved in this campaign as well as the expect- 
ed out-and-out fighting against the oppressive 
dwarf forces. 

Perhaps the fault lies in the messenger sys- 
tem that ran between the elven and dwarven 
civilizations, or maybe a corrupt dwarf gen- 
eral accepted bribes from an oily extortionist 
to begin the dwarf army's march so late. If the 
player characters discover the mystery behind 
the late arrival of the army and manage to re- 


ONT UT SES ESSERE 


store relations between the elves and the 
dwarves, they will still have their hands full 
trying to rebuild the elf race to its former glo- 
ry. Considering the years of culture destroyed 
by the battles, it would not be an easy task. 

This world, too, is probably either without 
humans (set at some t before the time 
when they came into power) or has very few 
humans (perhaps set sometime after their in- 
fluence had waned). Remaining humans could 
be either on the dwarves' side, on the side of 
the elves, or hanging on the brink of extinc- 
tion themselves. Whatever their role, they 
will need some clearly defined relationship to 
the elves. 

This is not, of course, the only scenario that 
could be played in this world. The dwarves 
could simply be the dominant race because the 
world is situated so that every forest is ringed 
by mountains. The dwarves thus keep the elf 
population from growing too large, although 
they may not be entirely conscious of this 
fact. Regardless of the circumstances, the 
elves are likely to be resentful that the 
dwarves prosper while the elves suffer. Al- 
though they will not necessarily be filled with 
venom when dwarves are mentioned, they 
will certainly not go out of their way to be- 
friend the little runts. 


The Evil World Campaign 


In this campaign, the forces of evil have some- 
how taken control of the world. As a result, 
the forces of good have been driven under- 
ground. The evil ones, who might be orcs or 
some other humanoids, may have been domi- 
nant right from the beginning of the world's 
history, or they may have seized power only 
as recently as twenty years ago, perhaps with 
the aid of some powerful ical artifact. 
The PCs play elf characters from the Wild 
Lands, where the good folk have been cap- 
tured. Their job, naturally, is to restore the 
world to the side of good. They harry trav- 
elers and fight the heroes of the orcs. Eventu- 
ally they undertake earth-spanning quests in 
search of the power that will enable their side 


Elven lise ° 113 


7 


К. 


x ROSA DROGAS OL ODS GE 


Ji. GAY 


to overthrow the orc empire's brutal regime. 

The tone of the campaign is, naturally, rath- 
er dark. The situation might seem somewhat 
hopeless initially, as the orcs are breeding the 
sort of adventurers the players are used to 
playing themselves. But in this campaign, the 
players get to see what the orcs and goblins 
must routinely experience in other worlds— 
that is, when PCs trounce them in search of 
adventure. This should give the players a bet- 
ter perspective on the adventuring life and the 
effects of their rampaging through the lands of 
humanoids. 

An interesting variation on this theme 
would be to have the elves and humans in the 
Wild Lands revert to a savage bestiality, while 
the orcs and their allies come to flourish in the 
cities. Consequently, the orcs grow ever more 
civilized, learning the value of cooperation, 
while humans and elves begin a descent into 
savage evil, fighting among themselves only 
for their own individual benefit. 


The Aquatic World Campaign 


Not all campaigns have to take place on dry 
land. Since landbound elves have their aquat- 
ic cousins, they find it easier than most to re- 
ceive a welcome beneath the waves and to 
gain a base from which to operate. The play- 
ers need not necessarily play landbound elves, 
either, for they have the option of playing 
aquatic elf characters. 

There are at least two viable options for the 
underwater campaign. In one, the players 
take the part of landbased elves who have 
gone beneath the waves to combat a menace 
to the upper world. While there, they can 
learn to understand the undersea lands and 
fight the creatures that pose threats to their al- 
lies, the aquatic elves. If or when they defeat 
the threat to the upper world's peace, they 
have the option of remaining below the waves 
with the aquatic elves or of returning to their 
sunlit lands above the waves. 

The second campaign has the characters 
playing aquatic elves themselves, giving them 
more mobility underwater. This campaign, 


114 € Chapter Thirteen 


naturally, has little chance of going to places 
beyond the sea, but that is quite all right. 
There is enough that is unknown about the sea 
that the players should constantly be amazed 
by what is going on around them. If the DM 
throws in fantastic monsters, the undersea life 
will be doubly interesti 


The Outcast Campaign 


Everyone knows how Ta elves fee] about 
half-elves. But how do they feel about the par- 
ents of half-elves, especially those who will- 
ingly created their children? What about those 
elves who disregard the few elven laws, pre- 
ferring to make their own way in life? 

There are numerous other possibilities for 
characters in the outcast campaign, most of 
whom have been exiled from the elf lands. 
They wander the world, seeking either to 
atone for their crimes or to make the elf na- 
tions pay for the indignity of exile. 

This is a good campaign to play for both 
role-playing and the tone of the epic quest, for 
the outcasts will constantly be trying to prove 
themselves to the realms that rejected them. 
They will always seek to be bigger and better 
than their peers thought they could be, wheth- 
er to prove them wrong or to seek readmit- 
tance to their ancestral homes. 

But the campaign es unfortunately, 
somewhat limited, for there are only so many 
role-playing opportunities with outcasts. Cer- 
tainly, they have as much opportunity for ad- 
venture as other characters, but their attitudes 
all tend to be rather similar. Still, an outcast 
campaign could be used to introduce a player 
to a gaming group, a person who has chosen 
to play a half-elf. | 

Whatever campaign wb a DM chooses to 
design, he or she should keep in mind the sim- 
ple need for plausibility. A world can be as 
fantastic and as original as a referee desires, 
provided it works for the players. This, after 
all, is what gaming is all about. 


Ze COND OS ERN 


Рр сез 


ACE nS 


Т РРО СА 10-11, 26, 100 Оіѕіпсіуе арреагапсе ........... 83 
Index Elven Imperial Navy ............ 27225. Воени (eres e Heaut Neo Se rr 82 
^ Elvensight |... нонни 32-33 
Ability зсогев..,,,.,,............. 77 Elves of the Great 5беа.............. 9 proBtiences ... eret 82 | 
Ability score adjustment ........... 77 Elves of the Sea of the Fallen Stars ...29 Ҝоје........................... 82 
AD&D® elves ......... 4,12, 29, 76-77 Куегтее{...................... 25-26 Secondary skills ............::... 82 
Adolescence ................... 37,38 Experience cost ................... 78 Special Hs SESS EEE 83 
Adulthood .......... massa 30:38: "Paene EONS ESR 16 Special hindrances ..........:.... 83 
Age (categories and effects) ......... 37 JB у), Ms 96 Suggested subraces .............. 83 
AL-QADIM® elves .......... 22-23,29  Fighter/mage kits ................. 88 Weal options .............-.-- 83 
Aquanesti .................---.... 12 Fighter/mage/thief kits ............ 92 Weapon proficiencies ............ 82 
Aquatic elves ........ 12, 13-15, 29,78  Fighter/thief kit ............ sss. 9f РЫ У esce centers 30-31 
Aquatic vision ........,,......,‚.‚. 33 Find concealed doors .............. Ж PRENS ые? УЛ 83 
Archery ..-.. eee 72-75, 84 Find secret doors .................. 76 РПС суза хуже знн olds 70 
Broken-charge shot... 73 Forest elves: ueiran ieks 25  Chualinesti: еее 24, 29 
Double-arrow shot .............. 73 FORGOTTEN REALMS* elves ОРТ? еуез ,........::. | 
ГООО cece E Эрла кс сы T Im Il e 
Hanging-tree shot ............ 73-74 Fractioning 
Quick-draw shot ............... 74 Funereal ceremonies ...............63 Reverie ......... eee 
Stapling shot ................... Qe or coco ex ENDE... 47 Rituals Ho ME ep c ccr n 50 
Trick shot ...... eee MIS EOSIN еселе вана sA Da OSEE. 8S EXPERS EA 52 
Armach |... esee ene 24-25 Gold elven SSE 25,29 Celebration of birth ............. 50 
Armachnesti ............... 24-25,29  Greenelves ;... eee 25 Celebration of marriage .......... 52 
Armor wenn en 99,104 Сүеуе]уез........... 12, 16-18, 29,80 Passage to adulthood ......... 50-52 
Arrow breakage .................. 75 CRESS r RA 46-56. беа eles sla casa 25, 29 
Arrows (enspelled) ........... 105-106 — GREYHAWK* elves ,,....... 26-27,29 Seeking spell] .............:.. 102-104 
Avoidance/attraction ........,.. ДЕО WU GEISACRIES. career E 25,29. ЗИНОИ Е «aa aia ААН 20 
Darkness or light ............... 105 Gruumsh One-Eye ............... 8-9 Seldarine ..1.........- 8-9, 10, 20, 100 
Fire seeds ... lee J05  Halkelvss. eco j2,20:23, 81 Еи berS 24, 29 
Pip. реза SVU ED 105-100 HARES a ш.м» {УУ BIVASONI s eer reenter 24 
Arrows (magical) ................ 106 Height by subrace ................. 13 Silver elves . 
Extended range ................ 106 Helm of valor ............... 104-105 Spellfilcher |................... 
Seeking «cene 106 Herbalist ......:.. ааган 83-84 
Wooden ...............++.. 106 Highelves .............. 12,18-19,81 Spo derer енен 
Arrows (useful) .............+--.- 98 Tree town. .. eere £00 Spider Queen .......... 
Flare |l Er =F A RO ure rn RS 53  Subraces ..|.....›... 
Message .................... 98-99 АЛШ. Дачи erect eee 53 
Artificial limbs ............... 36, 106 Fasrieiuekt asus et hte 53; AUR EO oo ee moreno 
Arvanaith ................,, 60-63 Васли ето О 53 i EE 
Arvandor ... ене TL60 Springe 4... aoreet ora 53 iso SG eo m 
Athas «eene 23; бате... олоро WEN 077777 И ИНО арра 
Athasian elves saacan isa ees 23,29 олары. 20-22, 40-41, 47 
Attitudes toward other races ..... 46-47. Huntgmàan ;.... RD 91-92 
Avariel esis 6327 ЧАН on va ao pon e 94 $ипгвее!уев|.................. 
Bladesinger واھ ھوک و ےد واو‎ 70-72, 88-90 Tara alm. Lees ace»: m v ا‎ 33, 77 AGH 2.57222 2/2271). d Meri kin rp 
Bladesong fighting style ......... 70-72. ЗБЕК... есен eere 40. SUUM isle с уу БОРӘШЕЕЕ rS 
Bonus to hit, bow ..,,............: IMBRE. сула ctio eR 76 Sylvan elves|...... 
Bonus to hit, sword Kagonesti roka ачасына найза oie 24, 29 
BOWS ...eeeee ees «s Krynn сеооа 24 
Camouflage spell РАИЛ 20, 48-49 
Canine teeth ................... LEVEN LIS LS ees a КАИН 69 
Childhood .............+...- Lifespan: eA Toes 36-37 
Collector RU OOK as TOR EA 10-11, 16, 54, 100 
Combat ...... eee Mage/thief kits eat mee BF Оуу a aK d E e aa 
Communion ................... Magical items ‚...........»....» 104-107  Undeadslayer .................... 
Conduit spell ...................- Manifestation |... cernere 33 
COSI! (eee еее n чите ете вает Middle age ................, 37, 38-39 Valley elves |................... 
Corellon Larethian Minstrel nizane 87  VEREHADICUER. serr 
Dargonesti ...........+++55.. Moon elves: ET na aA, BP  MWALWIZAIG. |е еони 
Dark elves .......:..: Mourning song ................... 60 BONN TELS н «ээде ole 
DARK SUN? elves ............. .23,29 Myth Drannor ...... irren 25 ight by subrace ................ 
Death |... 62-53 МЕРСЕР... эзуу 25 üd'elves- |; coss seien a sss 
Diet ares 925%. %ззз4 39-40 Nomadic high elves ...... 11,22, 27,29 Wilderness runner :.........:::.... 
Dimernesti |... eee DEBE iO oerseserensertemt nn ES 26 | 
Disease essere nnn 39. HON aah sonore rte S 37,39  Woodelves |......,...... 
DRAGONLANCE* elves ..... 24-25, 29 Optional rules ................. ics cm ЗИ ОИ DR МДА coit: 
Drow 10,11,12,15-16,25,29,77,78-80 Ores ives 9 Zakharanelves ............. 
Dwarves 10/12,47. "BO minen ienasi ret ea 82-95 
ОР РОО 0 929 EUR 10, 11 Bonus nonweapon proficiencies ... 82 


د 


Appendices 115 


Avariel (Winged Elf) 


2131 


CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Temperate to subtropical mountains, 
forests 

FREQUENCY: Rare 

ORGANIZATION: Bands 

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any 

DIET: Omnivore 

INTELLIGENCE: High to Supra (14-20) 

TREASURE: Individual N; G, S, T in lair 

ALIGNMENT: Neutral or chaotic good 

NO. APPEARING: 5-20 

ARMOR CLASS: 8 (10) 

MOVEMENT: 9". FI 18" (C) 

HIT DICE: 1*1 

THACO: 19 (18) 

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1 

DAMAGE/ATTACK: By weapon 

SPECIAL ATTACKS: +1 with crossbow or sword, wing 
buffet 

SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below 

MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil 

SIZE: M (5 +' tall) 

MORALE: Champion (15) 

XP VALUE: 650 


The avariel, or winged elves, is a rare race of reclusive elves that 
dwells high in the mountains or forests away from other civiliza- 
tions. They appear even more delicate than their landbound 
brethren, their facial features even more chiseled and angular. 
The characteristic of the avariel that is most stunning, however, 
is their beautiful, soft wings. Although these wings are generally 
white, avariel have been seen with wings whose colors range to 
black. The wings are their pride and joy, and an avariel who has 
lost his wings is intensely pitied by the other avariel. Since elves 
do not generally accept the pity of others, a wingless avariel of- 
ten leaves the community to find a life elsewhere. 

Avariel eyes tend to be a little larger than most elves', although 
they are the same color that most grey and high elves possess. 
Their hair is most often white or black, but there have been nu- 
merous exceptions. The avariel have a tendency to adopt a far- 
off look in their eyes when their immediate attention is not 
required, They are very much at home in the outdoors, and they 
appear out of place indoors or underground. 

Avariel clothing is most reminiscent of togas, for other types of 
clothing often snag on their wings. Togas and their like wrap easi- 
ly around the avariel's body and wings. 


Combat: To those not bred to aerial combat, the avariel are a 
confusing opponent. While most humanoids tend to think two- 
dimensionally in combat, the avariel think in a third dimension, 
which they utilize to devastating effect. 

They have incredible eyesight. Not only do they have the 
standard elven infravision, when flying or outdoors they can fo- 
cus their vision to notice details at over a mile away or those ob- 
scured by underlying forest. They use this incredible perception 
to maximum advantage and thus are excellent scouts. 

From a distance, avariel in flight appear as large birds. Thus, 
while opponents may notice their silhouettes, they usually disre- 
gard them. This has, more than once, resulted in the nearly total 
elimination of enemy forces. Since the avariel are efficient 
hunters, they ruthlessly stalk those who have escaped the battle- 
field, more often than not finding and destroying those who 
would report their presence. 

In combat, avariel prefer to use light weapons, for heavier 
ones inhibit their flight. The lasso, bola, and sword are their 


weapons of choice, and they gain a +1 to hit and damage when 
using these weapons. Note that the momentum generated by any 
sword longer than a long sword interferes with flying. For this 
reason, they use bastard swords and two-handed swords only in 
foot combat; they do not gain the +1 bonus. Avariel, unlike oth- 
er elves, have a difficult time using ordinary bows. Their wings 
interfere with the smooth movements required to fire a bow, and 
they therefore do not gain the +1 bonus other elves have when 
using bows. 

The strength of the avariel is also their downfall. If they lose 
more than 50% of their hit points in damage, they become too 
weak to fly and must continue their battle on ground. Until they 
lose 75% of their hit points, however, they can still glide for short 
distances. They can also jump to a height of 10 feet. 

Their wings are susceptible to fire, and they burn quickly once 
set ablaze. Only several weeks of recuperation will restore wings 
to flying condition. A favorite tactic of their enemies is to launch 
a fireball into the midst of a group of high-flying avariel and 
watch them plummet to their deaths. Because of this, avariel are 
highly suspicious of fire-using mages. The winged elves will nev- 
er fully trust these individüals, even if they are elves. 

Another weakness avariel have is claustrophobia. They can- 
not bear to be in closed places, most especially under the earth. If 
confined in such a place, avariel must make a Wisdom check eve- 
ry day they are so confined. Failure spells temporary insanity, 
and the avariel will become violent, catatonic, or panicked. Such 
insanity lasts until the avariel reaches open air. If the winged elf 
failed more than four Wisdom checks, he or she has gone perma- 
nently insane, This can only be cured by a heal or remove disease 
spell. 

Winged elves can carry à mass equal to their own body weight 
before their wings will not support them. Each half of their body 
weight that they carry reduces their maneuverability class by 1; if 
they carry more than light encumbrance, their maneuverability 
becomes Class D. 

Avariel can become fighters (not rangers or paladins), mages, 
and clerics, as well as the multiclass combinations available to 


$1992 TSR. Inc. All Rights Reserved 


Avariel (Winged EIf) 2131 


these three. There are no recorded instances of avariel rogues. 
For every five avariel in a group, there will be at least one fighter 
of at least 3rd level. For every 10, there will be a mage of equal 
level to the fighter. Groups of 20 have a 7th-level warrior/7th- 
level mage leading them, as well as a 6th-level fighter, a 5th-level 
mage, and a 6th- level cleric. This roster also includes the four 
groups of 5 and the two groups of 10. 


Habitat/Society: In some areas, the avariel are known as "Al 
Karak Elam;' and non-elf races have built mythologies around 
glimpses of these reclusive beings. To propagate this foolishness, 
certain mischievous avariel have contacted humans, pretending 
to be agents of a higher power. The older avariel object to this 
because it leads the humans to search for them, but this ban has 
not yet stopped any of the younger winged elves. However, as 
the avariel become more common, the instances of this activity 
have lessened dramatically. 

As among the other elves, the avariel have adapted themselves 
and their communities to their environments. There is no exclu- 
sion based on gender; females often hold as many, if not more, 
positions of power within an avariel community. 

There are two types of avariel society that are especially com- 
mon no matter what the environment. Both have drawn on as- 
pects of their elven heritage, to the exclusion of others. However, 
these two types of society are never found far from one another, 
so that they may more easily communicate. 

It seems that many of the avariel have bred themselves for 
combat. Much of avariel society is based on a warrior code of 
honor, seeking greater glory for themselves and their allies. Their 
lives are geared around war and battle, and they answer to their 
war chiefs. These are the avariel that are feared by the humanoid 
nations, for they are a deadly foe. They have little of the respect 
for lives of others that landbound elves have; instead, the avariel 
live for the fight and the destruction of their opponents. They are 
a proud, hearty group, and they form eternal friendships with 
those who earn their trust. Though they care little for the lives of 
their enemies, they try to live theirs to the fullest. 

The other half of avariel society knows little of war. These ava- 
riel have focused mainly on the arts and the intellectual aspects of 
life rather than the warlike facets. Where the other avariel make 
much of war and manhood ritual, these avariel rely solely on 
their brains and diplomatic ability to get by. They are a popula- 
tion of artists and philosophers, creating for the sheer joy of crea- 
tion. 

The relations between the two halves of avariel community are 
perfectly harmonious, and they stay in constant communication. 
Both respect the other greatly, often trading their youths in cul- 
tural exchange programs. Since their children are often curious 
about the other aspect of their culture, they are given the chance 
to participate in that feature for a time, leading to a well- 
balanced elf. Strangely, after experiencing the other side of life 
for a few decades, most avariel are eager to return to their origi- 
nal homes and lead the lives to which they were born. 

Of course, there are more than just these two avariel societies; 
these are just the most common. There are others that have a 
more equal footing between the aspects of their societies, others 
that are better balanced. However, none of these seems to have 
flourished so well as the warrior/thinker combination. These 
two have somehow achieved a harmony that makes their civili- 
zations greater than others. The creative and destructive im- 
pulses, when paired, make the avariel a formidable opponent. 

The avariel are a particularly religious sect of elves, although 
they are not fanatical about promoting their beliefs. They wor- 
ship Aerdrie Faenya, the elven goddess of air and weather, al- 
most exclusively. They believe that it is due to her intervention 
that they are able to survive at all, and they make their obeisance 
to her accordingly. They also believe that she takes a more direct 


involvement in their lives than the gods of other elves. It is due to 
worship of her that the warrior avariel do not become enamored 
of law and thus remain elves at heart 

The weapons crafted by avariel usually of glass or obsidi- 
an. The open forges used by other races to shape metal can singe 
their wingfeathers; the avariel tend to avoid these. Thus, they use 
furnaces to shape glass into workable, durable weapons. Avariel 
glassmiths are master crafters. Any metal weapons that the ava- 
riel have are the result of trade with other races or other elves. 
Glass weapons designed by avariel may occasionally break in 
combat. (On a natural roll of 1, roll 1d6; the weapon shatters on 
a roll of 1-3.) 


Ecology: No one knows whether the avariel are a natural off- 
shoot of the elven line or the result of powerful magicks. There 
are those who claim that the avariel are the original elves and 
that the other elves have fallen from this high state. Most, how- 
ever, maintain that the avariel are the result of magic that com- 
bined elves with their beloved giant eagles. Some few think the 
avariel are simply the offspring of irs who had wings of flying 
permanently attached to their backs. 

The avariel keep in contact with 
elves tend to be somewhat above the 
ing concerns them overmuch, unless it impinges upon them. 
They usually try to avoid contact with other races, despite the 
fact that some insist on seeing the world. 

Avariel do not lay eggs, contrary to popular speculation. 
However, like birds they do have hollow bones, making them 
more fragile than a typical elf. This is the price they pay for their 
wings for, without hollow bones, they could not fly. Even flying 
causes some discomfort because it is strenuous exercise to keep so 
much weight aloft. However, they find the pain a minor incon- 
venience, for the sheer joy of flight is so intoxicating. Each hour 
of flight, the avariel must make a successful Constitution check. 
If they fail, they cannot continue to fly for at least half an hour 
for each two hours of flight previous to the check. 

Avariel wings are sought after by mages and evil giants. The 
mages prefer to use these wings in ting potions and wings of 
flving, and they will pay huge amounts for any brought to them. 
The giants, on the other hand, use the avariel's wings as decora- 
tions for headgear. They think it loo s particularly fine to have a 
beautiful pair of wings on their war helmets. 

Avariel do not remain in the world as long as most elves. Their 
typical lifespan is only 300 years because they feel the call of the 
unknown so much more clearly than other elves. Thus, they tend 
to act more human than other elves because they know that they 
have less time than other elves. They take things more seriously 
and try to fit as much living in as possible. This is not to say that 
they are as frantic as humans, but they do try to accomplish 
many things before their departure. 

With the DM's permission, the avariel may be used as a PC 
race. Their ability adjustments are -2 Con, due to their hollow 
bones, and +2 Dex for their speed. 


her elves, but the winged 
fairs of the world. Noth- 


The Avariel originally appeared in DRAGON® Magazine, issue 
#51, as "The Winged Folk." The race has been modified here. 


Cooshee 


2131 


CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Elven Lands 
FREQUENCY: Rare 
ORGANIZATION: Pack or Solitary 
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any 

DIET: Carnivore 
INTELLIGENCE: Semi- (4) 
TREASURE: Nil 
ALIGNMENT: Neutral (good tendencies) 
NO. APPEARING: 1-8 

ARMOR CLASS: 5 

MOVEMENT: 18" , Sprint 24" 
HIT DICE: 3+3 

THACO: 17 

NO. OF ATTACKS: 3 (claw/claw/bite) 
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-4/1-4/2-8 
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Overbearing 
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Camouflage 
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil 

SIZE: M (4' at shoulder) 
MORALE: Steady (12) 

XP VALUE: 270 


The cooshee, or elven hound, is a huge, long-lived dog. It is most 
commonly found in the company of sylvan elves, who use it for 
both hunting and guard duties. Occasionally, high or grey elves 
will keep kennels of these dogs, but these are generally few and 
far between. 

The cooshee has a thick greenish coat, often spotted with large 
brown spots or patches. This coat allows it to conceal itself in the 
forests and fields near its home with a 75% efficiency. Where 
most dogs crash through the forest, the cooshee moves as silently 
as its elf masters, gaining a +4 bonus on surprise rolls. 

Cooshee weigh more than 160 pounds and often weigh as 
much as 300 pounds, Their huge paws house equally huge claws, 
which are curved to ensure better traction in the soft loam of the 
forestlands. Their tails generally arc over their backs, though 
they hang between their legs when they are being scolded. Their 
ears come to a point on top of their heads, giving the cooshee an 
attentive, intelligent look. 


Combat: In combat, the cooshee is a fearsome opponent. Its 
powerful jaws are enough to frighten any normal person; coup- 
led with its fierce claws and demeanor, the cooshee is a very ef- 
fective fighting machine. With a party of elves providing 
distraction with their arrows, the cooshee can become a creature 
from a nightmare for its prey, Elves say that one cooshee is worth 
five orcs. 

Although cooshee can go head-to-head with many creatures, 
their strength lies in the chase. When they are pursuing an oppo- 
nent, whether it be game or humanoid, the cooshee can begin an 
all-out sprint, increasing its speed to 24" for five rounds. At the 
end of this time, if it didn't catch its prey, it slows down to 15" for 
at least five additional rounds while it catches its breath. 

When they draw within range of their foe, cooshee may at- 
tempt to overbear their enemy. If this opponent is fleeing, the 
cooshee gains a one-round size bonus. That is, it becomes Size L 
for the purpose of the overbearing attack roll and thus gains +4 
to hit (see "Overbearing" in the Players Handbook, р. 98). If it 
rolls a successful "to hit,” the cooshee has successfully dragged or 
knocked its opponent to the ground. 

If it attempts to overbear, it must forfeit all its other attacks 
during that round. In the round following, it automatically pins 
the quarry and may make its ferocious bite attack on the helpless 
prey. The victim may attempt to break the pin by making a suc- 


^A WI A 
о, EN Ж (NIZA 


س 


cessful Strength check. If it fails, the victim loses any Dexterity 
bonus to his or her Armor Class. Further, the cooshee gains a +4 
to attack targets so pinned. They tend to favor the throat of the 
creature over any other ae If the cooshee have been ordered 
to subdue their target, they simply close their jaws over the quar- 
ry's throat, resting their teeth against its skin. This tends to be an 
effective method of forcing surrender. 


Habitat/Society: Cooshee mate for life. If one of the pair is killed, 
the other generally wastes away. Cooshee puppies bond strongly 
to their parents, and the parents are highly protective of their 
offspring. Only a fool comes between an adult cooshee and its 
children. | 

Cooshee tend to avoid other "normal" dogs, seeming to find 
them inferior. In this regard, the cooshee echo their elf masters, 
refraining from much contact with other races. 

The cooshee have an intredibly loud bark that can be heard 
more than a mile away. However, they only bark to warn their 
masters or packmates. In almost no other circumstances will a 
cooshee emit noise. 

Cooshee often live to be more than 100 years old. 


Ecology: No one seems to know whether cooshee are a naturally 
occurring creature or if they are a creation of the elves. The 
cooshee seem almost too perfectly designed for their tasks to be 
anything but created beasts. However, their affinity with nature, 
closely mirroring that of the elves, leads one to believe that they 
are, in fact, entirely natural. 

Although elves have had much success in gaining the trust of 
the cooshee, few other races have been able to establish a rapport 
with the hound. Even experienced animal handlers of other races 
find it incredibly difficult (о approach one of these magnificent 
creatures. Thus, unless the|cooshee has been magically charmed 
(it saves at +3 vs. any charm spell), it will only be found in the 
company of elves. 


manae TCO tee АМ Dlake Did 


Character 
Alignment Level 
Players Name. | | Ватйу 


Homeland —. . |. |  Á.. Lo  Liege/Patron 
Sex 


Ht. 
Hair 


Adjusted AC Armor Type (Pieces) 
Surprised 

Shieldless 

Rear 


WEAPON COMBAT 
#AT Attack Adj/Dmg Adj THACO Damage (ЅМ/) 


Special Attacks 


ODEO EE ee 
HORDE ETDE 


Racial Abilities Priest Abilities Proficiencies/S 
90% resistance to sleep/charm spells TURN UNDEAD s= FW) 
* 1 to hit with sword Skeleton/1 HD: 

* 1 to hit with bow Zombie: 


= 4 to opponent's surprise Ghoul/2 HD: 

1 on 1d6 pass find secret door Shadow/3-4 HD: 

1,2 on 1d6 search find secret door Wight/5 HD: 

infravision Ghast: 

Wraith/6 HD: 
Mummy/7 HD: 
Spectre/8 HD: 
Vampire/? HD: 
Ghost/10 HD: 
Lich/11* HD: 
Special: 


By permission of TSR, Inc., this page may be reproduced for personal use only. * and ^ 1992 TSA, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 


s/Languages 


Item Location — Wt. 


2 П 


OaE ERE} LES. wi 


Тгеаѕиге 


Соіпѕ Miscellaneous (Magical Items, Command Words, etc.) 


Dang imimimimim 


ппптппппп п 
pag BOO OO 
CHAO BEBE og 
OU 0go woe 
DEE Bebe ШЕ 
EGE! БИЗШЕ ES 
спа BOOED nng 


Ability bonus: — 1 1. 

KED ——— | 
Kit penalty: 

Subrace bonus: 


Subrace penalty: Css 


| 


Spells per Level: 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th oth 


School/Sphere: 
Component: «^ Duration: 
Saving Throw: 1 1 Reversible?: 


7th 


Source: —— | Pages: 


School/Sphere: 
Range ss 1. — Component. ——  — —  |Duratiom 
Area of Effect — 1 1 11 SavingThrow:. | . Reversible?: 


ӨОШ. PARU 
Sl É———— os шше 


Level — — Жай — — — — Oomponedr.—— — ——— IDanHón === — — 
Casting Tim: — 1 1 1 AreaofEffect — 1. SavingThrow 1. Reversible: 0 
Effect: 

Source: — AES 
OSS ЭЭ ойр | 
Lwh.—— — — — Qngn. — — Components — — —-— Риоя 


Casting Tin: — à à à à AreaofEffett — Saving Throw: . Reversible? 
Effect: 


Soiree —— —— СС Pages: 


Henchmen/Animal Companions 
HD/Lvl. #AT THACO Dmg/Effects 


OO 
od 
ee 


Status 
ocial Class 


ction Adjustment 


SAVING THROWS 


ETE SOOLE 
ооооао FOEGE 


Proficiencies/Skills/Languages 


i 


ЕЕ 


тппппп@пп 
£ Ooogo 
ооо ппппп oo 


Ili 
f 
ооо anodi 

опоо o0080 ao 
HEG HEHEHE oo 
ооо uonag oo 
SEE GEHE ПШ 
0o00 OOOO пп 
OOO HERES oo 


oog 
ooo 


| 
jak ur | 
Б EC EU —| (2 
E === es a 


Henchmen/Animal Companions 
HD/Lvi #ATTHACO Dmg/Effect 


Name AC Race/Class р hp 

a DEM es Е ИШ ire) — EN 

Background 

hh do Де ше и MEME B‏ — —— 0-1 ا 
—Ó—ÀÁUÜÜ € MEN RENE NR [R— a BEC ч x5‏ — 

D ёш ыы TT 00 000—757 ЗЕБЕРА 8 al 


DEA 
| - 
| Character 
| Alignment Level 
Fue NRE 7 0 gy Е — у 
Homehnd. — — — Mo Liege/Patron Religion 
Sex Age # Siblings Status 
Ht. Wt. Birth Rank scial Class 
| Hair... Eyes_______ Appearance 
- a ———————— - X——— — — S — Reaction Adjustment 
| ABILITIES MOVEMENT SAVING THROWS 
: 
$ 8 
i 6 
f 4 
| 1 
5 Ёл 
i 36 
| 48 
К 60 
( 
ы 
i 
1 
| — WEAPON COMBAT 
d #AT Attack Adj/Dmg Adj THACO Damage (SM/L) 
i 
r 
t] 
{ 
0 LL. ү lI. “TT үү E E Ере лла Ас 
wll 
Special Attacks "n oooo 
—,ü nnn: CU BOD 0000 
E E GRE 0000 
Racial Abilities Warrior Abilities Proficiencies/Skills/Languages 
| 90% resistance to sleep/charm spells ڪڪ‎ ———— — oc HEUTE ) 
|  *1tohitwith sword Е са ЕСЕ 
E +1 to hit with bow "d C Lu 
N —4 to opponent's surprise MU T зешш ше — ge T 79$, 
: 1 on 1dé pass find secret door —— SSG =_= ey 
| 1,2.0n 146 search find secret door а. ЕЕ S/R 
/ ——— — infravision —M س‎ == a pg 
i ey 
| Se Se) 
RED 
S (ушу 
| E EE) 
| „== гше =) 
1 z = 548) 


Chad" a 7 су с 
АНА ——— ——— ОМИ 


PlayersName— — — ~ — Раши 
Homeland. — — —  —. Word. .—  — — ——  Liege/Patron 
# Siblings 
Birth Rank 
Appearance 


Adjusted AC Armor Type (Pieces) 
Surprised 

Shieldless 

Rear 


Special Attacks ==» 
BORED Marag 
ооооо опооо 


Racial Abilities Wizard Abilities Proficiencies/Skills/Languages 

90% resistance to sleep/charm spells — —————— Ld) E WE ap д) 

* 1 to hit with bow 

74 to opponent's surprise 

1 on 146 pass find secret door 

1,2 on 1dé search find secret door 
infravision 


—— AO уш) 
L —— Asien) 
E 
= eS = 
7 a= ee 

pay 
— eee) 
—— "A nr) 
Ss a 
es 
ae EE | 
ee eee 
отт seme tme 


FERMEUM due ont ARN OOOO 7 ЭРОНИ тсс qm. БК МЕЗ ei má MM Амос ITALIAE, 


o 


ear 


Item Location Wt.  |ltem Location Wt.  |Item Location Wt, Water/Wine 
Heke 
do I Te 
pF en т + 
р анаан ис Nn 
ооооа OOO OG 
р E ooa onnon 
Pod Se OT ПЕЕ 
Pd ШЕСЕ Сеа Seen 
> ل‎ ee Eee | Ea 
8985 пиповп 
| ee ee eee 
GO NENE E) Шш I aa 0 
Treasure 
Coins Miscellaneous (Magical Items, Command Words, etc.) 
Ability bonus: - 
Kit bonus: 
Kit penalty: | 
Subrace bonus: | 


Subrace penalty: Сей 


Spells per Level: 
Spell: School/Sphere: 
Teveb) — o iit ۹ COMO, | Duration: 
Casting Time: — 1 1 1.  AreaofEffett — 1 1 1 SavingThrow. 1 Reversible?: 
Effect: | 


Soute. LL Áo | agen 


Ist 8th 


Spe — ——— ———ÉÉ——Á——— >ш Ушин 
Deb SCS Renee — Il "Componente Duration: 
Casting Time: 1 1 à à à.  AreaofEffett Saving Throw: Reversible?: 


Duration: 
Reversible?: 


Range: 
Area of Effect: 


| Pages: 


=ЕЕ I E Me EL 
Lee. — — —— Бая — ——  — —— "Componente == Duration: 
Casting Time: — 1 1 1. Area of Effect 1 1 Saving Throw: Reversible?: 


Source: Pages: 


Henchmen/Animal Companions 


eee E тыс з == ee is See (Ss ас Sa eS 


Background 
ре ee "STO UAR a eee 
a E m eee E eee eee 


Character 
Alignment 


Player's Name 
Homeland 
Sex 

Ht. 


Reaction Adjustment 


SAVING THROWS 


Adjusted AC Armor Type (Pieces) 
Surprised 

Shieldless 

Rear 


WEAPON COMBAT 
#AT Attack Adj/Dmg Adj THACO Damage (SM/L) 


Special Attacks ee ал 
йб ийи а а Dug 
ооооо оооо0 


Racial Abilities Multiclass Abilities Proficiencies/Skills/Languages 
po ÁN 


90% resistance to sleep/charm spells Pik sockets — — hhL c 
+1 to hit with sword Ор E Ss OUT, 
+1 to hit with bow Find/remove traps: — (ae EUM 
74 to opponent's surprise Move silently: — < 1ш) 
1 оп 146 pass find secret door Hide in shadows: ET RUNS 
1,2 on 1d6 search find secret door Detect noise: NEM Eh 

infravision Climb walls: I aa Mm 
TURN UNDEAD Read languages: ae ma Set ли. 
RES —— -ol. Бы — — — — —- | == COE 
Элби n Mummy HN LI ÉL КИИ EE WE 
Chonta HD; — — — 1. petir —— c Ia X t 
Shadow/3-4 HD: — 1.  Vampire/? HD: Hr IL TE 
WightSHD: — 1  . .  .  Ghosti10 HD: IEEE UM 0 
Ghat.  udWitt HDi ШЕ — ку 
Wraith’6 HD: = = Special: ي‎ S 


: By permission of TSR, Inc., this page may be reproduced for personal use оту. * and © 1992 TSR, Inc. мн 


i 
HER 


ا 


OO 
atu 
Dru 
oo 
oOo 


on 


ки [шшш 
ппппп 
oo00g0 
oo0o0g0 
ппппп 


00000 
pod 


00 00000 


fon 


]tem Location Wt. Item 


Location Wt, 


ппппгп 


Dun 
Dur 
ooo 
000 
o00 


Boo 
Duc 
sjaja; 
aoa 


00000000 


| 


ems, Command Words, etc.) 


Miscellaneous (Magical I 


2nd 


کا = 


Spells per Level: 


| 


Henchmen/Animal Сотрапіопѕ 


N 


Gear | 
Шет Location Wt. [єт [осоп Wt. [ет Location Wt | 


os 

ook 
0$ E 
5 


COO OOOOH O 
OOO ogogo оо 


gu 
= 
© 
gng maman wo? 


DOD Е.О), HO 
opa BORED ma 
БЕЗЕ KHE CE 
DOO SETEM oo 
gou HOODOO EDS 


ооо ооооо 
ciaag&gadoggadtcagd 


Other Valuables 
Ability bonus: 
Kit bonus: 
Kit penalty: 
Subrace bonus: 
Subrace penalty: 


Henchmen/Animal Companions 


Race/Class HD/Lv) ;AT THACO Dmg/Effects Skills/Abilities 


hp 
= — ——— = Щщ = 
Bpod —— —— i e ا‎ 
Pd ee ш EET суш 


Background 


ву permission of TSR, Inc., this page may be reproduced for personal use only. * and 1992 TSR, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 


The Complete Book of 


ELVES 


The glorious world of elvenkind shines from these 
pages! Detailed herein are their societies, rituals, 
and myths—and their physiology and psychology. 
Description of every kind of elf abound. Rounding 
out this information are 11 new kits; new optional 
rules and suggestions for running elven campaigns; 


and special elven equipment, spells, and magical 
items. Forget what you thought you knew about 
elves—The Complete Book of 
Elves sheds new light on this 
mysterious race! 


TSR, Inc. س‎ TSR Ltd 
POB 756 Q. 120 Church End, 
Lake Geneva, > | Cherry Hinton 
WI 53147 ОШ! Cambridge CBI 3LB 
U.S.A = United Kingdom 


ADVANCED DUNGEONS &. DRAGONS and AD&.D 
are registered trademarks owned by TSR, Inc. 
The TSR logo is a trademark owned by TSR, Inc. 
*1992 TSR, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 
Printed in the ULS. A. 


0-92Е-92095 -Т NASI 


<OOSLS 


$15.00 U.S. £9.99ULK. $18.00 CAN 


