The 
Complete 


Ranger's 


Handbook 


Advanced 


ungeons& Dragons 


Player’s Handbook 


Rules Supplement 


The 
Complete 


Ranger’s 
Handbook 


by Rick Swan 


This book is protected under the copyright laws of the United States of America. Any reproduction or unauthorized 
use of the material contained herein is prohibited without the express written permission of TSR, Inc 


Distributed to the book trade in the United States by Random House, Inc. and in Canada by 
Random House of Canada Ltd. Distributed in the United Kingdom by TSR Ltd 
Distributed to the toy and hobby trade by regional distributors. 


ADVANCED DUNGEONS & DRAGONS, AD&D, WORLD OF GREYHAWK, DRAGONLANCE, FORGOTTEN 
REALMS, DUNGEON MASTER, and MONSTROUS COMPENDIUM are registered trademarks owned by TSR, Inc. 


The TSR logo is a trademark owned by TSR, Inc 


©1993 TSR, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Printed in the U.S.A. Fourth printing, October 1996 


TSR, Inc, 


TSR Ltd. 
201 Sheridan Springs 120 Church End, 
Lake Geneva, Cherry Hinton 
WI 53147 Cambridge CB1 3LB 
U.S.A. 


United Kingdom 


Table of Contents 


FR EO GUI CHONG. 5. ccsecctceccecszovsssvvecteticsiesses 4 

CVT aaa o restart E EA S E 4 

How to Use This Handbook............. 6 

Before We Get Started............0..0000 6 
Chapter 1: 

Character Cation ersero 7: 

Ranger Requirements... 7 

Level Advancement.............0:c0000000 8 

SPEL USE n emanita 9 

Armor and Weapons .........csseeesesesens 9 

THICEABUTHES casi ..csssccscsesseccevsseesyaseee 1¢ 

PRISIIATY. TOTAN ccc covevascspteercusssvenesdabsesbeooncnvesseverstvess 12 
Chapter 2: 

Ranger Abilities .............:ccsecceeeee 14 

etanan Es ees A S 14 

é Hide in: Shad OwS....ccccsssesvescevesseseeyess 17 

Move Silently -mossies 18 

SPECIES: ENEMY:....:c.rerconesssscaatronsnarsseas 18 

Animal Empathy’......ros.crerscrsveseneortss 21 

Nåt LOE enra OKEAN iaa 24 

AEAII ta AA A E O E 26 
Chapter 3: 

HOMO WEES A E R 27 

Gaming Followets.........:.cscssseceseees 27 

General Behavior of Followers.......35 

Training Animal Followers.............37 

Parting COMpPANy’cnsoncsenerscvscerssxenreset 42 

Humans and Demihumans............. 43 

Notes On BalcOnry: jcvcsyscescarsocsstarsuvasicesctescoeseaarebens H 
Chapter 4: 

Kanger Kitsa acscancvcexscneseivesessvves 45 

Acauiring Kits....ccccsvassssecsssessenresssasens 45 

DM DECISIONS i rer-sserztepearsieaetroriedi nsare 45 

l Kit SüDpsectionS,.. ereer 45 

Bist: OF KIES -cccccccecsecstecsecccstcasscctsevasraas 47 

BeCASHMASCCR no cssicccesceverscovesoxsoncssaes: 47 

EXPONE sansssensaesnvencovssmtessonsententessanessbryracenacrssek 49 

BATCOM OTS <occocseacccsanansoinevavsapetccssccavootonectanossovoeveuss 51 

Fetalai oaiae harees trAth 52 

Forest RUNN asmina OAE NAA 


2 » Table of Contents 


(RTE ETE nE E a E ETE 56 
Greenwood Ranger ..eosesseseseeeeeresrseoeeeeserrosesesses 59 
Guada ien OG 62 
PaaS GR Gi AS EAE ET EA EE E 63 
Mountain WEAR saxcevesscevavaccosvscevesvernasessasosscosayeossre 65 
Pahina cae a a 67 
a OA R A S SR ES 69 
r a a EAE E AE E A A AA E 71 
rT oo OR EPEE A E A a N A TE, 73 
WEGO cananea aa a O A 75 
Abandoning Kitssccisccssscassrocsoascisvacrcsconssiseseanssoloossve 77 
Creating NEW Kate vccscicussisssascssnsecssssaateosonsbenncadenes 78 
Demi- RANGES seco terreseorreesonencsssrrokecsrrtates hotira 78 
Dual-Classed RangaTS:...seecerserseereceerecerseecereesereeress 79 
Multi-Classed Rangers........2..:s.cesccsssssessesssseeseses 79 
Chapter 5: 
ProficiOncies: aosan 80 
Compiled Proficiencies ....-....+......- 80 
J Clarifications and Modifications ...80 
New. ProficiencieSi...snssrorcoessscsrerressse 82 


Chapter 6: 

WABI RE E EAI 87 
NeW SPENS roiasca 87 
New Magical Items.............:ccscess+ 92 


Chapter 7: 

KAUPMENN E: sicisicincaicctssccescsvsessesoscese 94 
CION iat ace cotnsscaynsoisuvatanacecormcacen sence 94 
PANS POTE ee e AE A 95 
Miscellaneous Equipment .............. 95 
WRORDIORS osciscarssstastessercssriessstevcaverneasse 98 


Chapter 8: 

GLO =P LAER sree cccvcecrscestesrserreoesatoxs 101 
x% Pemogra PIES oa rA 101 
Becoming a Ranger .........--s-csese 102 

Common Traits: the 
CIBSSICIRAN GGT, <..ssrcéceoarerscanerssord 103 
Daily, Like srccscccissisessiswisisaiscosvoscassanevs 104 
The Ranger’s Personality ...........s+scsssesessernes 108 
EXP€TICNCCs.....sssrisererrcvesnsnsresnsnscersonenseosssenssnvnensennn 111 


Table of Contents 


Chapter 9: 
Rangers and Religion.................. 113 
Aspects of Fath sisia 113 
TYPOS. OF Fatt ccanscopestsccessrcssercasccsses 113 
Expressions Of Faith... 114 
Rangers and Druids... 115 
Rangers and Clerics «0.0... 116 
Chapter 10: 
FOrgatherings gesinti 118 
& Attending a Forgathering ............. 118 
Types, Sites, and Dates .........0000 118 
FRYSICAL LAV OME. eeo menem 120 
Activities and Events.......ccceee 121 
Appendix: AD&D* Ist Edition Ranger.......... 122 
Ranger Kit Record: SHEEE.........25.s2:-r-croconsesrroseees 124 
Ranger Character Record Sheets .........s:ssssseee 125 
TABLES 
Ps Class QualAcatons ssc..c<csecscsnsssvzossasecevsscvesseoees 7 
2: Pregenerated Ability Scores .........cscessssessesneeee 7 
3: Experience Leveaar guens 8 
4: Level IMmprovemMenttS ....c..cc0cssscsssssecssssssssessesnseavs 9 
St Spell ProeressiOnn sessionerne sessi 9 
62 lhe Ranper g Army, serverserie 10 
7: Ranger Attacks Per Round...........:.ecsesssseeeeeees 10 
8: Base Thief Abilities..:....:.......s.ccsscsssssesssecseesneas 10 
9: Racial Adjustments.............ccsecscsscssorssssceseeneees 11 
10: Dexterity Adjustments......,.....----.c-sscsescerersecess 11 
11; Armor Adjustment......ccsssesersseseserssesesesseseees 11 
12: Kit A USEN S 'sascoccccsssssessssscezvssoctcssccoassscotsess 11 
13: Optional Armor Adjustments..........::cssss00 11 
14: Random Primary TErTaN...,emreesoesessesaepueseeereses 13 
15: Terrain Tracking Modifiers..........essseseevee 15 
16: Illumination Modifiers..........c.ccccsscseseseseeneees 15 
17: Special Tracking Modifiers..........sssssessesssereees 15 
18: Movement While Tracking..........ccscssssreesenes 15 
19: Identification Check Results ........:.-s:se:se+eseese 17 
20 ATCHC Species ENEMY «n.cssiccssccessacaccossictcoriaseess 20 
21: Aquatic Species Enemy ........:..ssecsssseseeneees 20 
22; Desert Species ENEMY c-.sccssoseeveveresevneevyssssivees 20 
23: Forest Species EN@My...:...:ccccscccssesssesocceesssenssuee 20 
24: Jungle Species Enemy .......-cssecresssseereereesnenes 20 
25: FRU Species HEM Ya aeure mener 20 
26: Mountain Species Enemy ........:ccccsescsesesssessenes 21 
27: Plains Species ENEMY- :..cssecsossstcccesssesonssessnsetsa 21 
28: Swamp Species ENEMY ..........cscecsssesesssensessees 21 
29: Underdark Species Enemy..............-.<e-ssscceseree 21 


30: Amimal Attitudes ....cccssisssocesssecsrecscsassessassessevees 23 
31: Animal Empathy Modifier... cca 23 
Diet Datu EOE a ran Fiyeh 25 
IS APUC POMOW SRS sistsisainivaassvascesnsxasacosayapsesbensesoss 31 
34: Aquatic Followers ..::sssssvssaseccecesesccoscsesesssvens 31 
SO DRIE ROMO WETS nnno aina 32 
BE: Forest HOMO Wer neiitran iranere 32 
B72 FAME RON OWOIS 5 s50sii cansscaveseascaitecorvarcveccenternTiaee 32 
38: Jungle FOUOW CLS sisaronvessssaoverssinsnssausnsassesseronsseve 32 
39: Mountain Follow ers..,......-rossyeosereenreteronsysencess 33 
40: Plains FOlOWETS........isssesssseccccsssoveosssseseesssecssoes 33 
41: Swamp Followers .i.s...cccesesessdsesenscsossessenscsaseoes 34 
42: Underdark Followet..........:.:seressesssesssssasesee 34 
43: Human/Demihuman Followers ..........-+:00: 34 
44: Follower Training Ratings .........:s:sssesseseeeses 42 
45: Feralan Spell Progression ........:ssessssssesecessees 55 
46: Justifier Spell Progression .....-..<c.s:ssesesseeeres 65 
47: Crude Weaponsmithing (Mountain Man) ...66 
48: Mountain Man Spell Progression.................. 67 
49: Terrain Costs for Pathfinders...........cs1ss0 68 
50: Parliament of Fishes Results ..........sccssses-0 71 
51: Seeker Spell Progression.......s:csersecresseseeeenees 72 
92: Sacred AHMAS ariarian 73 
DAN DOMUFRAN SOLS a ornssasscsnnssersvavoviessoaun sesstpanescstece 79 
54: Demi-Ranger Spell Progression 

and Dexterity Modifiers ..........cecsecsesessesseneses 79 
55: Nonweapon Proficiencies.........:.s:ssesssecseses 81 
56 RANGER SCN S noon eitaserssceonssiacconsesccossxtieos=eKeseonine 91 
57; Clothing, Transport, and Misc. 

EMP narnii NRA 99 
98: WEAPONS yas ruscsscecescsconessscsusstenssescndascasvennsepniveoss 100 
59; Ranger Experiente ..eieroseirnseererrecareerrrn? 111 
60: Optional Individual Experience Awards....111 
61: Experience Levels (1st Edition) .................-. 122 
62: Attacks Per Round (1st Edition).................. 122 
63: Underground Tracking Chances ........:000 122 
64: Outdoor Tracking Modifiers ............-:::0+++: 123 
65: Spell Progression (1st Edition).........00.00000 123 
66: Giant Class CreatureS........cssscesseecsseeseeseeees 123 

CREDITS 


Design: Rick Swan 
Editing: Elizabeth Danforth 
Black and White Art: Terry Dykstra 
Color Art: Julie Bell, Clyde Caldwell, 
Fred Fields, Keith Parkinson 
Icon Art: Tony Diterlizzi 
Typography: Nancy J. Kerkstra 


Special thanks to Bear Peters 


Table of Contents è» 3 


Introduction 


The ranger is one of the most popular character 
classes in the AD&D® game. A woodsman and 
tracker, as well as a dangerous fighter, he com- 
bines good combat skills with a few extra abilities 
that give him many options and decisions during 
play. He boasts the courage and strength of a war- 
rior and the stealth and self-reliance of a thief. He 
combines the druid’s affinity for the outdoors 
with the devotion and magical aptitude of a priest. 
He’s a hunter, a tracker, and a survivalist. By tem- 
perament and by choice, he’s a loner, often prefer- 
ring the company of animals to people. Without 
question, he’s one with nature, sworn to protect 
the inhabitants of the wilderness and preserve the 
integrity of the land. 

The ranger’s origins can be traced to the time 
when isolated human settlements were first 
founded in areas of unclaimed wilderness, or in 
areas occupied only by savage humanoid tribes. 
Those who were at first hunters, trappers, and 
guides were turned by the necessities of survival 
into canny wilderness warriors; and ultimately 
into the principle protectors of the scattered settle- 
ments of humans and demihumans, which had to 
fend off countless humanoid raids. 

Few in number, but effective far beyond the 
power of local militias or the occasional military 
patrol of a ruling lord, the rangers have kept a 
protective watch on the forward frontier of human 
expansion. There are seldom more than one or 
two to be found in any place, but somehow, as a 
group, they manage to cover huge areas of the 
frontier. Where the tide of expansion has been 
turned back, they are the last to fight a desperate 
rear guard action against encroaching hordes of 
evil humanoids. 

In more civilized areas, it is common for kings 
and wealthy nobles to annex large tracts of forests 
for personal use. Some are maintained as private 
game preserves, others are harvested for the valu- 
able timber. As a king's wilderness holdings grow, 
so does the need to protect them. But suitable can- 
didates are hard to come by. Often, from among 
local woodsmen and hunters, able-bodied and 
trustworthy retainers are recruited as forest jus- 
tices or wardens. Skilled in the management of 
land, wilderness survival, and natural lore, the 
forest justices are charged with guarding the 


me 


4 » Introduction 


king’s holdings, preserving his game from poach- 
ers and his subjects from outlaws and brigands. 

In other places, the local authorities have either 
lost control or become tyrannical. Perhaps the 
local order has broken down and the land is over- 
run by bandits or robbers, Perhaps a bad ruler has 
taken over and driven the peasantry beyond all 
possible tolerance. At such time a hero may arise, 
striding out of the wilderness, setting right the 
wrongs, returning a just overlord to power, and 
then disappearing back into wild and unknown 
lands. Such is the stuff of legends. Such is the 
legacy of the ranger. 


Overview 


The ADVANCED DUNGEONS & DRAGONS® 
2nd Edition Player's Handbook and DUNGEON 
MASTER® Guide contain all the basic information 
you need to create and play ranger characters. But 
for players wanting to go a bit deeper, The Com- 
plete Ranger's Handbook provides a wealth of detail 
that expands on that basic information, adding 
more options and rules to make your rangers 
come alive like never before. 

For instance, we'll examine the ranger’s talents 
for tracking, animal empathy, and nature lore, 
suggesting methods for using these abilities in 
ways you might not have considered. If you’ve 
wondered what a ranger does with his followers 
or exactly how he acquires them, you'll find the 
answers here. If you're tired of playing ordinary 
rangers, there's more than a dozen new character 
kits for your perusal, including the Giant Killer, 
the Pathfinder, and the Stalker. There are also 
plenty of new spells, proficiencies, and equipment 
to expand your ranger’s horizons. Use what you 
like and ignore what you don't. 

Though much of this material will be of interest 
to the Dungeon Master, particularly the clarifica- 
tion of old concepts and the introduction of new 
rules, The Complete Ranger's Handbook is a supple- 
ment to the Player's Handbook. Every word is 
intended for the players. Note, however, that all of 
material is optional, and none may be incorpo- 
rated into a campaign without the express permis- 
sion of the DM. These caveats aside, feel free to 
turn the page and enjoy. 


How to Use This Handbook 


If you're a casual player, or have only a passing 
interest in the ranger character, begin by looking 
over the table of contents and noting any topics 
that catch your eye. Read the most appealing sec- 
tions, skim over the rest, and consult with your 
DM about any new ideas you'd like to try. Later, 
you can read the entire book at your leisure, or 
keep it on the shelf as a reference, along with the 
previous handbooks in this series (including The 
Complete Fighter's Handbook, The Complete Priest's 
Handbook, The Complete Wizard's Handbook, The 
Complete Thief's Handbook, The Complete Psionics 
Handbook, and The Complete Bard’s Handbook). 

Players who take their rangers seriously are 
advised to read the entire book. You'll discover a 
host of new ideas and character options, expanded 
tables, and tips for fine-tuning your role-playing 
techniques. As mentioned, all of the rules in this 
book must be cleared with the DM before you can 
use them in a game. 

Players of all persuasions should take a look at 
the new ranger character sheets located in the 
back of the book. The sheets have been custom- 
designed to record virtually every detail about a 
ranger character, and also feature a number of 
helpful notes to minimize the amount of time 
spent referring to the rulebooks. And speaking of 
the rulebooks, we've also compiled all of the key 
rules from the DUNGEON MASTER Guide and 
Player's Handbook relevant to rangers; you'll find 
most of them in the first three chapters. We've also 
made every effort to elaborate on the most inter- 
esting concepts from the DMG and PH. 


6 » Introduction 


Before We Get Started... 


..-here are a few more points to keep in mind: 


First Edition Rules 


The ranger has undergone several changes since 
the publication of the Ist Edition AD&D® rules. 
For that reason, those using the Ist Edition rules 
may find the ranger character described in these 
pages all but unrecognizable. Our suggestions: (1) 
take the plunge into the 2nd Edition rules, and 
become familiar with the 2nd Edition DUNGEON 
MASTER Guide and Player's Handbook before con- 
sidering the ideas in this handbook, or (2) ignore 
the chapter references in this book, as they all refer 
to the 2nd Edition rulebooks. Find the relevant 
material by consulting the indexes or contents 
pages of the original books, then carefully adapt 
the handbook rules of your choice to the style of 
your campaign. For reference, a summary of the 
Ist Edition ranger rules can be found in the 
Appendix of this book on page 122. 


Proficiencies 


The ideas in this book lean heavily on the con- 
cepts of weapon and nonweapon proficiencies 
introduced in Chapter 5 of the 2nd Edition Player's 
Handbook. If you haven't been using proficiencies 
in your campaign, we suggest you review the 
rules before proceeding with this book. (And if 
you're not using the proficiency rules, you ought 
to reconsider—they’re not that hard, and they 
make the game a lot more fun!). 


A Note About Pronouns 

For convenience and clarity, masculine pro- 
nouns are used throughout this book. This in no 
way implies favoritism towards the male gender; 
in fact, males and females are equally represented 
in the ranger population. In all cases, read he as he 
or she, and his as his and her. 


Character Creation 


Let’s begin our examination of the ranger with a 
look at the numbers—the statistics, adjustments, 
and level progressions that define the ranger class. 
This is the raw data common to all rangers, regard- 
less of their backgrounds or personalities. 

This chapter compiles the basic information in 
the Player's Handbook regarding the ranger class, as 
well as the relevant material from the warrior sec- 
tion. In addition, some concepts, such as armor 
adjustments and level improvements, are clarified 
and expanded. A new concept, primary terrain, is 
also introduced. 

In later chapters, we'll be discussing the 
ranger’s special abilities in more detail, along 
with role-playing tips and options for refining 
his personality. But for now, we'll concentrate 
on the fundamentals, beginning with the most 
basic consideration of all—the ranger’s class 
requirements. 


Ranger Requirements 


It’s tough being a ranger. The requirements are 
high, among the most demanding of any character 
class. 


Table 1: Class Qualifications 


Ability Requirements 
Strength 13 
Dexterity 13 
Constitution 14 
Wisdom 14 


Prime Requisites 
Strength 
Dexterity 
Wisdom 


Races Allowed 
Human 
Elf 
Half-elf 


Alignments Allowed 
Lawful good 
Neutral good 
Chaotic good 


As any player knows who's tried to roll up a 
ranger using the standard method (Method I, that 
is, described in Chapter 1 of the Player's Handbook), 
the dice seldom cooperate. In fact, it’s just about 
impossible to generate the high die-rolls required 
for a ranger by this method. Method II isn’t much 
better, and though Methods III and IV improve 
the chances somewhat, the odds are hardly favor- 
able. Only by using Methods V and VI do you 
have a fighting chance of rolling up a ranger from 
scratch. 

Not all Dungeon Masters allow these alternative 
methods, effectively restricting the number of 
rangers in their campaigns to a tiny minority. Players 
wanting ranger characters may find such restrictions 
frustrating, but remember that good DMs usually 
have their reasons for imposing these limitations. 
Perhaps rangers aren't prevalent in the campaign 
world, or he may feel that rangers will introduce 
problems of balance; rangers are, after all, a most for- 
midable character class. 

However, if your DM is agreeable to having 
rangers in his campaign, Table 2 is a quick way to 
generate ranger ability scores. Roll 1d12 and use 
the statistics indicated. 


Table 2: Pregenerated Ability Scores 


D12 

Roll Str Dex Con Int Wis Cha 
1 15 14 17 14 15 10 
2 15 15 18 13 14 6 
3 14 16 15 14 17 12 
4 15 14 15 14 16 9 
5 15 15 14 13 15 13 
6 16 13 15 13 14 8 
7 18* 13 14 15 14 Á 
8 13 15 15 13 16 10 
9 16 13 14 14 17 14 

10 13 14 15 16 15 14 

1 14 17 14 13 14 15 

12 16 13 16 13 14 13 


*Make a percentile roll with d100 to find the 
ranger’s exceptional Strength Score. 


Character Creation * 7 


Level Advancement 


As rangers earn experience, they advance in 
level at a different rate than normal fighters. They 
acquire 1d10 hit points for each level up to 9th, 
and thereafter gain 3 hit points per level. The rates 
of advancement and hit point acquisition, along 
with the ranger’s THACO scores (the number 
rolled on 1d20 to hit armor class 0), are listed in 
Table 3. 

Two adjustments to these figures also apply: 


Rangers with Strength, Dexterity, and Wis- 
dom scores of 16 or more receive a 10% bonus 
to their awarded experienced points. A ranger 
must have 16 or more in all three of these abil- 
ities to qualify for this bonus. 


ə Rangers with exceptionally high Constitution 
scores are entitled to a special hit point adjust- 
ment. A score of 17 give the ranger a +3 bonus 
per hit die, while a score of 18 results in a +4 
bonus. 


8 * Chapter One 


Table 3: Experience Levels 
XP Needed Hit Dice (d10) 


Level 


SONATE WN 


0 

2,250 
4,500 
9,000 
18,000 
36,000 
75,000 
150,000 
300,000 
600,000 


1,500,000 
1,800,000 
2,100,000 
2,400,000 
2,700,000 
3,000,000 
3,300,000 
3,600,000 


SOND SP UN e 


THACO 


20 
19 
18 
17 
16 


mh We GIO) SI CO 


Table 4 summarizes the proficiency slot 
allowances and saving throws applicable to the 
ranger as he advances in level. Note that, like a 
fighter, if a ranger uses a weapon with which he 
isn’t proficient, he incurs a -2 penalty. 


Table 4: Level Improvements 


Prof. Saving Throws 
Level W N/W PPDM RSW PP BW S 
1 d 3 14 6 B Z 
2 4 3 14 16 J5 TM Y 
3 5 4 13 15 14 16 16 
4 5 4 13 15 «14-16 16 
5 5 4 1 13°. AZ 33) IA 
6 6 5 11 13m 32 13) 14 
7 6 5 10 12 1 12 13 
8 6 5 10 R ii 12 B 
9 7 6 8 10 9 9 H 
TOS 6 8 AD uc Pe dt 
A 6 4 9 BSR! N i) 
TE arig 7 7 9 SNe TT 
13 8 7 5 7 6 8 8 
14 8 7 5 7 6 & B 
15 9 8 4 6 5 4 7 
i= 9 8 4 6 Si Sipe 
17 9 8 3 5 ee EREE) 
18-19" 9 3 5 4 4 6 
19 10 9 3 5 4 4 6 
20 10 9 3 5 4 4 6 


Proficiency Abbreviations 
W = Weapon proficiency slots 
N/W = Nonweapon proficiency slots 


Saving Throw Abbreviations 
PPDM = Paralyzation, Poison, or Death Magic 
RSW = Rod, Staff, or Wand 
PP = Petrification or Polymorph 
BW = Breath Weapon 
S = Spell 


Spell Use 


When a ranger reaches 8th level, he can learn 
priest spells of the animal and plant spheres. He 
acquires and employs spells the same way as a 
priest. Chapter 6 lists the spells available to a 
ranger. Chapter 9 explains the special relation- 
ships between rangers and priests. 


Table 5 shows the number of spells a ranger 
may have memorized at each level. The “Casting 
Level” indicates the level at which spells are cast. 
For instance, the 1st level invisibility to animals 
spell cast by a 12th-level ranger has duration of 1 
turn + 5 rounds (the spell lasts for 1 turn + 1 
round/level, and the 12th-level ranger casts the 
spell at 5th level). The 2nd level warp wood spell 
cast by a 16th-level ranger has a range of 90 yards 
(the range is 10 yards/level, and the 16th-level 
ranger casts the spell at 9th level). 

Regardless of his actual character level, a 
ranger’s spells are never cast beyond 9th level. 

The following restrictions also apply: 

e Unlike priests, rangers don’t get bonus spells 

for high Wisdom scores. 

è Rangers may only use magical items specifi- 

cally allowed to the warrior group. In no case 
may a ranger use clerical scrolls. 


Table 5: Spell Progression 


Ranger Casting Priest Spell Levels 
Level Level 1 2 3 
1-7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16+ 


Armor and Weapons 


Like all warriors, the ranger is allowed to wear 
any type of armor. However, lighter armor pro- 
vides him with special benefits, while heavier 
armor imposes a few restrictions. 

A ranger may use two weapons simultaneously 
without the standard penalties (which are -2 for his 
main weapon, —4 for the second weapon) when 
wearing studded or lighter armor (armor with an 
Armor Class of 7 or more). The following restrictions 
also apply: 

The ranger must be able to wield his main 

weapon with one hand. 

The second weapon must be smaller in size 

and must weigh less than the main weapon. 


i 
' 


SOnND Oe Wh 
WwWwwoNNNN — | 
WQwnnwNnee: 
WNNKS I 


TT 


Character Creation * 9 


© The ranger can’t use a shield when using two 

weapons. 

The ranger’s choice of armor also determines 
whether he can hide in shadows and move 
silently. Armor with an AC of 6 or less—scale 
mail armor or heavier—is too inflexible and too 
noisy to enable him to take advantage of these 
special abilities. 

Table 6 summarizes the AC, costs, and weight 
of the armor available to the ranger. The table 
also notes whether the armor allows the ranger 
to fight with two weapons without penalty, and 
to use his abilities to hide in shadows and move 
silently. 


Table 6: The Ranger's Armor 
Cost Weight 


Armor AC (gp) (lb.) T-W HS/MS 
Leather 8 5 15 Yes Yes 
Padded 8 4 10 Yes Yes 
Studded Leather 7 20 25 Yes Yes 
Ring Mail 7 100 30 Yes Yes 
Hide 6 15 30 No = 
Brigandine 6 120: 35. NO - 
Scale Mail 6 120 40 No — 
Chain Mail 5 75 40 No _ 
Splint Mail 4 80 40 No - 
Banded 4 200 35 No - 
Bronze Plate 4 400 45 No = 
Plate Mail 3 600 50 No - 
Field Plate 2 2,000 60 No _ 
Full Plate 1 4,000+ 70 No - 
Abbreviations 


T-W = Two-weapon fighting penalty. (“Yes” 
means the standard penalties for two-weapon 
fighting are ignored while wearing this armor.) 

HS/MS = Hide in shadows/move silently. 
(“Yes” means these abilities can be used while 
wearing this armor. A “—” means these abilities 
can be used if the DM uses the Optional Armor 
Adjustments; see Table 13.) 


Rangers can use any weapons listed in Chapter 
6 of the Player’s Handbook. As they rise in level, 
they’ré able to make more than one attack per 
round, as shown in Table 7. 


10 * Chapter One 


Table 7: Ranger Attacks Per Round 


Level Attacks/Round 
1-6 1/round 
7-12 3/2 rounds 
13-20 2/round 


As explained in Chapter 9 of the Player's Handbook, 
a character fighting with two weapons is allowed to 
make an extra attack each combat round with his sec- 
ond weapon. This is added to any multiple attack 
routine the ranger receives at higher level. For 
instance, a 13th-level ranger normally makes two 
attacks per round (see Table 7). However, when fight- 
ing with two weapons, he’s allowed three attacks per 
round, two with the primary weapon and one with 
the secondary weapon. 


Thief Abilities 


A master of stalking and tracking, the ranger 
shares the thief’s talents for hiding in shadows 
and moving silently when he is in a natural out- 
door setting. As a ranger’s level increases, so do 
his abilities, as shown in Table 8. 


Table 8: Base Thief Abilities 


Level HideinShadows Move Silently 
1 10% 15% 
2 15% 21% 
3 20% 27% 
4 25% 33% 
5 31% 40% 
6 37% 47% 
7 43% 55% 
8 49% 62% 
9 56% 70% 

10 63% 78% 
11 70% 86% 
12 77% 94% 
13 85% 99% 
14 93% 99% 
15+ 99% 99% 


The base percentages in Table 8 are modified by 
the ranger’s race, Dexterity score, and armor. 
Tables 9-11 list these adjustments. Table 12 shows 
adjustments for the character kits described in 
Chapter 4. These adjustments reflect the predispo- 


sitions of various character types for hiding in 
shadows and moving silently. 

When attempting to hide in shadows, the ranger 
armor is assumed to cover his armor. Except for 
leather armor and elven chain mail, which can be 
concealed by normal clothing, a cloak or equiva- 
lent is needed to cover armor. 

If a ranger attempts to move silently or hide in 
shadows in an indoor or underground setting, his 
cumulative chance of success is halved. Further 
considerations and restrictions of a ranger’s thief 
abilities are discussed in Chapter 2. 

Regardless of modifiers, the ranger’s chance to 
hide in shadows or move silently can never be 
more than 99% or less than zero. 


Table 9: Racial Adjustments 


Hide in Move 
Race Shadows Silently 
Human - - 
Elf +10% +5% 
Half-elf +5% = 


Table 10: Dexterity Adjustments 


Hide in Move 
Dexterity Shadows Silently 
13-16 - - 
17 +5% +5% 
18 +10% +10% 
19 +15% +15% 


Table 11: Armor Adjustments 


Hide in Move 
Armor Shadows Silently 
None* +5% +10% 
Leather - - 
Padded -20% -20% 
Studded Leather -20% =20% 
Ring Mail -30% -40% 


*This includes magical apparel such as cloaks 
and bracers, but not large or bulky garments. 


Table 12: Kit Adjustments 


Hide Move 
Kit in Shadows Silently 
Beastmaster +5% - 
Explorer - - 
Falconer - - 
Feralan +10% +10% 
Forest Runner +5% +5% 
Giant Killer = - 
Greenwood Ranger - -5% 
Guardian = — 
Justifier +5% +5% 
Mountain Man -5% -5% 
Pathfinder - ~ 
Sea Ranger N/A N/A 
Seeker - - 
Stalker +10% +10% 
Warden = - 


Optional Rule: Normally, thief abilities are denied 
to rangers wearing armor heavier than studded 
leather. However, the DM may decide to override 
this rule in his campaign, allowi ers to wear 
any armor they like and still be able to hide in 
shadows and move silently. (Also, certain charac- 
ter kits described in Chapter 4 allow rangers to 
hide in shadows and move silently when wearing 
armor of AC 6 or less). Table 13 lists adjustments 
for optional armor, 


Table 13: Optional Armor Adjustments 


Hide Move 
in Shadows Silently 
-20% -30% 
-30% 40% 
-50% 60% 
-30% 40% 
-10% -10% 
-30% 40% 
-50% 60% 
-75% -80% 
-75% -80% 
-95% -95% 
-95% 


Field Plate 
Full Plate -957a 


Character Creation * 11 


Primary Terrain 


Though rangers work well in all types of out- 
door settings, most of them have one particular 
environment with which they are exceptionally 
familiar and feel especially comfortable. This envi- 
ronment, called the primary terrain, may be similar 
to the area where the ranger grew up, received his 
training, or currently calls home. A ranger oper- 
ates best in his primary terrain, thanks to his inti- 
mate knowledge of this type of setting. 

A ranger’s primary terrain has no particular 
function in and of itself. Rather, it’s used to gener- 
ate special benefits and other variables described 
elsewhere in this book. For instance, certain charac- 
ter kits in Chapter 4 grant bonuses to rangers when 
they occupy their primary terrain. A ranger’s pri- 
mary terrain also helps determine his species 
enemy (Chapter 2) and followers (Chapter 3). 


Types of Primary Terrain 


The concept of primary terrain presumes that 
similar survival techniques, modes of transporta- 
tion, flora and fauna, and physical features prevail 
in similar environments, regardless of where in the 
world they’re located. Therefore, primary terrain 
doesn’t refer to a particular area, such as the High 
Moor of the FORGOTTEN REALMS? setting, but 
to a general category of terrain, such as swamp or 
mountains. Conceivably, any combination of geo- 
graphical features and climate could serve as a pri- 
mary terrain, but for convenience, we'll confine the 
possibilities to nine general types: 

Aquatic. This terrain type includes all areas 
consisting primarily of water, such as lakes, 
oceans, and rivers. At the DM’s discretion, this 
category may also include islands and coastal 
regions. 

Arctic. This includes any region covered with 
ice and snow where temperatures rarely rises 
above zero degrees. The North Pole is good exam- 
ple of arctic terrain. 

Desert. This includes any barren, flat areas cov- 
ered with sand or hard-packed earth. Desert cli- 
mates are extremely dry and hot, with daytime 
temperatures commonly in excess of 100 degrees, 
followed by much colder nights. Vegetation is 
usually sparse, with special adaptations. Much of 
a desert may be unsettled or unexplored. 


12 * Chapter One 


Forest. This category comprises any woodland 
areas in temperate climates. At the DM’s option, 
subarctic and subtropical climates may also be 
included. Forests abound with a variety of animal 
species, and vegetation flourishes. Not surpris- 
ingly, Forest is the primary terrain of choice for the 
majority of rangers. 

Hill. These are highlands, often wild and rough, 
which may or may not be forested. They usually 
form an intermediate zone between lowlands, 
such as Plains or Desert, and the highest lands, 
which are Mountain terrain. 

Jungle. These are tropical lands (including rain 
forests) overgrown with dense vegetation and 
trees, and teeming with animal life. Such regions 
are often hot, humid, and hostile to civilization. 

Mountain. This category includes terrain con- 
sisting of high rocky peaks, typically 4,000 feet or 
more above sea level, with sparse vegetation, 
severe slopes, and jagged cliffs. Subtropical to 
subarctic climates are typical, though a wide 
range of temperatures is possible. 

Plains. These are flat areas with stretches of low 
rolling land, including pastures, meadows, fields, 
and farmlands. Grazing animals are common 
here. Such regions are usually covered with 


grasses or scrub vegetation and are usually tem- 
perate in climate. 

Swamp. This includes bogs, marshes, and other 
low elevation areas with standing water or water- 
logged soil. Many species of reptiles, birds, and 
insects live in these regions. Vegetation grows in 
abundance. The climate may be oppressively hot 
and humid or cold and misty. 


An ambitious DM may wish to define these pri- 
mary terrain categories more precisely. Instead of 
a general Aquatic primary terrain category, he 
may include both Freshwater Aquatic and Saltwa- 
ter Aquatic, or distinguish them further by desig- 
nating Temperate Freshwater Aquatic, Tropical 
Freshwater Aquatic, and so on, In such cases, the 
DM will need to adjust the primary terrain refer- 
ences elsewhere in this book; for instance, creating 
his own Freshwater Aquatic Species Enemy Table 
like the tables in Chapter 2. 

For most campaigns, however, the nine cate- 
gories listed above should suffice. Though obvi- 
ous differences exist, say, between saltwater and 
freshwater settings, a ranger’s associated skills— 
the ability to swim, an understanding of aquatic 
ecology, a familiarity with water-breathing crea- 
tures—are applicable to both. Hence, a ranger 
whose primary terrain is Aquatic is presumably 
comfortable in a variety of watery environments. 


Choosing a Primary Terrain 


The player chooses his ranger’s primary terrain 
as part of the character creation procedure, subject 
to the DM's approval. Each ranger has only one pri- 
mary terrain. Because the primary terrain reflects 
many years, perhaps a lifetime, of exposure to a 
particular environment, the primary terrain never 
changes. In exceptional campaign circumstances, 
however, the DM may allow a ranger to discard an 
old primary terrain and choose a new one; for 
instance, if a ranger whose primary terrain is Forest 
spends a few decades exploring the Great Glacier, 
his primary terrain may become Arctic. But as a 
rule, the primary terrain remains constant through- 
out a ranger’s career. 

In most cases, the choice of the primary terrain 
will be obvious, as it usually derives from the 
ranger’s background. It will be similar to the area 
where the ranger was raised, or the region where 


he’s spent most of his life. The primary terrain of a 
ranger who grew up in the barren wastelands of 
the WORLD OF GREYHAWK® Sea of Dust would 
probably be Desert. A ranger trained to oversee a 
private hunting reserve in the Wendle Wood of the 
DRAGONLANCE” setting would probably have 
Forest as his primary terrain. 

A ranger’s primary terrain can be randomly 
rolled on Table 14. The results are subject to the 
approval of the DM. 

Once the ranger has a primary terrain, it can be 
used as a basis for developing the character’s per- 
sonal history. If the primary terrain is Arctic, for 
example, consider how the ranger might have 
become familiar with such an extreme environ- 
ment. Was he hired by a king to oversee a seal 
refuge? Abandoned in the Great Glacier as a 
youth when his explorer parents were killed by a 
polar bear? Accepted as an apprentice by a famous 
white dragon hunter? Let your imagination soar! 


Table 14: Random Primary Terrain 


D100 Roll Primary Terrain 
01-04 Aquatic 
05-06 Arctic 
07-10 Desert 
11-50 Forest 
51-65 Hill 
66-75 Jungle 
76-85 Mountain 
86-95 Plain 
96-00 Swamp 


Character Creation © 13 


CHAPTER 


Ranger Abilities 


Regardless of whether they’re wardens of private 
game reserves, arctic explorers, or freelance mon- 
ster hunters, all rangers share a set of special abili- 
ties that distinguish them from other character 
classes. Just as wizards have an innate aptitude for 
casting spells and thieves have a natural talent for 
picking pockets, rangers have the inborn ability to 
track other creatures, hide in shadows and move 
silently in outdoor settings, react to specific ene- 
mies, empathize with animals, understand the 
complexities of nature, survive in extreme condi- 
tions, build strongholds, and acquire followers. 
Quite a list—but that’s what makes the ranger 
such an exceptional character. 

We'll spend this chapter examining each of the 
ranger’s abilities in detail, looking at their applica- 
tions and special rules. The ranger’s ability to 
attract followers—a topic complex enough to 
merit special attention—will be saved for the next 
chapter. 


Tracking 


Thanks to his keen senses and thorough under- 
standing of animal behavior, the ranger is an 
expert tracker. He reads an impression in the mud 
or a bend in a twig like words on a printed page. 
He can determine the identity of his quarry and 
how fast it was traveling by the depth of a foot- 
print. He can tell the size of a slug from the trail of 
slime it left behind. He can track an orc in the 
darkest forest, a rabbit though the thickest jungle, 
an escaped convict across the most desolate moun- 
tain range. 

A ranger’s tracking skills apply to characters as 
well as creatures, and to underground and interior 
settings as well as all types of outdoor environ- 
ments. His tracking skills are inherent; that is, he 
receives the Tracking nonweapon proficiency auto- 
matically at the outset of his career, expending no 
proficiency slots. 


O 
MAS 
`Y 


14 + Chapter Two 


Pre-Conditions 


A ranger can’t just track anything, any time he 
likes. In order to track a particular quarry, the fol- 
lowing conditions must be met: 

1. The quarry must be capable of leaving a 
physical trail. Elements of a trail may include 
footprints, bent twigs, waste matter, or any other 
physical signs that a ranger can follow. Certain 
categories of creatures—including swimming and 
flying creatures, small insects, and ghosts and 
other non-corporeal creatures—seldom leave 
physical evidence of their passage. In most cases, 
such creatures can’t be tracked. However, since 
tracking involves all the senses, not just sight, it’s 
possible that the aroma of burning metal might 
linger after the passage of a particular spectre, or a 
ghost might reveal itself by its eerie voice, heard 
faintly in the distance. Still, only the most skilled 
rangers are capable of following trails devoid of 
physical evidence, and the DM should allow such 
tracking in only the rarest of circumstances. 

2. The ranger must be able to find the trail. If 
the trail is outdoors, the ranger must actually see 
the creature (he spots a fox darting into the brush), 
notice obvious signs of his quarry (such as foot- 
prints or droppings), or hear reliable reports of the 
quarry’s whereabouts (“Looking for that old silver 
dragon? She likes to drink from the pond by the 
twin palm trees.”). If the trail is indoors, the 
ranger himself must have seen the quarry within 
the last 30 minutes, and begin tracking from the 
location where the quarry was last seen. As 
always, the DM is the final arbiter as to whether 
the ranger has enough evidence to enable him to 
track the quarry. 


Tracking Check 


If the above conditions are met, the ranger can 
attempt to trail the quarry by making a Tracking 
check, using his Tracking score. The base Tracking 
score is equivalent to the ranger’s Wisdom, Con- 
sult Tables 15-17 for other relevant modifiers; 
these tables may be used in place of Table 39 in 
Chapter 5 of the Player's Handbook. In non-natural 
surroundings, the Tracking chances are halved. 


Table 15: Terrain Tracking Modifiers 


Terrain (use only one) Modifier 
Fresh snow (clearly outlined footprints) +6 
Soft or muddy ground, loose dirt floor 
(good impressions of prints, but not 


as defined as fresh snow) +4 
Thick brush, dense jungle (broken branches, 

crushed weeds) +3 
Forests, fields, dusty indoor area 

(occasional marks of passage) +2 


Normal ground, wood floor, plains with sparse 
vegetation (infrequent marks of passage) 0 


Desert, dry sand -2 
Swamp (spongy surface but little mud 
for prints, much vegetation) -5 


Rocky terrain, solid ice, stone floors, 
shallow water (prohibits all but the 
most minute signs of passage) -10 


Table 16: Illumination Modifiers 


Illumination (use only one) Modifier 
Good illumination, sunny day; 

continual light or equivalent indoors 0) 
Twilight, light fog, snow, single torch in 

dark interior of building -3 


Night with full moon, day with moderate fog -6 
Overcast night with no moon, dense fog, 
blizzard, blowing sand -10 


Table 17: Special Tracking Modifiers 
Situation (use all applicable) Modifier 
Every two creatures in group being tracked +1 
Every three experience levels (round 


down) of the ranger +1 
Each additional tracker assisting ran 

(use the score of the best tracker)* +1 
Animal follower assists in tracking** +1 


Trail is in specialized ranger’s primary terrain = 
Every 12 hours since trail was made 
Every hour of rain, snow, or sleet since 
trail was made -5 
Creature being tracked attempts to hide trail 
(covering footprints, detouring into stream, 


passing through secret door) =5 
Specialized ranger being tracked in his 
primary terrain attempts to hide trail -2 


* Total bonus for assistance is limited to ranger 
level bonus; i.e. +1 per 3 levels. 

** See Chapter 3. The animal follower does not 
count as an additional tracker for purposes of the 
previous bonus. 


If the modified Tracking score is zero or less, the 
ranger is unable to track the quarry in question. 

If the modified Tracking score is greater than 
zero, the ranger makes a Tracking check by rolling 
1d20. If the roll exceeds the ranger’s tracking 
score, or if the roll is 20, the check fails and no trail 
has been found, If the roll less than or equal to the 
ranger’s Tracking score, the ranger has found the 
quarry’s trail and may begin to follow it. 


Interrupted Tracking 


Once a ranger has found the trail, he may track 
the quarry indefinitely until any of the following 
situations occur: 

The ranger moves too fast. The ranger must 
move slower than his normal movement rate in 
order to stay alert for signs of the trail. His move- 
ment rate limit depends on his modified Tracking 
score, as shown in Table 18. 


Table 18: Movement While Tracking 
Modified Tracking Score Movement Rate Limit 


1-6 14 normal 
7-14 12 normal 
15+ 34 normal 


Should the ranger exceed the movement rate in 
Table 18—for instance, if a monster abruptly 
ambushes him and he’s forced to run—he loses 
the trail. 

The modifiers change. If the trail leads to a new 
terrain type, night falls, or any other change 
occurs that requires a new Tracking modifier (as 
described in Tables 15-17), the ranger loses the 
trail. The new conditions may dictate the use of 
modifiers reflecting a trail that is easier to follow, 
not more difficult, and DMs should consider 
applying a bonus in such conditions. Neverthe- 
less, the new roll must still be made. 

A second track crosses the first. Crossed 
trails mingle the physical signs of each, making 
tracking difficult. The DM determines if such a 
situation exists. If so, the ranger’s efforts fail. (If 
the ranger wishes to continue tracking, as 
described below, he must decide which of the 
crossed trails to follow.) 

The ranger becomes distracted. An attack 
from a monster may interrupt the ranger’s 


Ranger Abilities * 15 


progress. Further, the ranger may intentionally 
choose to stop if he needs to rest, eat, or hold a 
discussion with his companions. Any of these 
interruptions qualifies as a distraction. 


When any of these conditions occur, the ranger 
loses the trail. To continue tracking the quarry, he 
must spend at least an hour exploring the imme- 
diate area for new signs of the trail. After an hour 
of searching, he makes a new Tracking check, 
based on a Tracking score calculated from the 
new conditions (if the illumination has changed 
from daylight to twilight, he must now modify 
his Tracking score by —3). If other trackers assist 
the ranger, modify the tracking check by +1 per 
assistant; add the bonus to the Tracking score of 
the most adept tracker. This bonus is limited to 
+1 per 3 levels of the ranger (round up), If the 
check succeeds, the ranger may continue follow- 
ing the trail as before. If he fails the check, he has 
lost the trail for good. 

£7 
q 4 
+f \ ) 

ITA 


EA 


16 * Chapter Two 


Identification Check 


By noticing details that other characters might 
overlook—the depth of a footprint, the thickness 
of a snapped branch, a hair caught in barbed 
bush—the ranger can deduce a sizeable amount of 
information about his quarry. The more skilled the 
ranger, the more information he deduces. 

Whenever a ranger makes a successful Tracking 
check, he may then attempt an Identification 
check. The Identification check uses the same 
score and modifiers as the Tracking check; essen- 
tially, the Identification check is a second Tracking 
check. 

If the Identification check is successful, the DM 
provides the ranger with some information about the 
quarry based on the guidelines in Table 19. The 
ranger’s experience level determines the type of 
information he receives. The information is cumula- 
tive; that is, a 6th-level ranger who makes a success- 
ful Identification check receives all types of 


information available to rangers of level 6 and below. 

The DM provides only general information, not 
exact details. At his discretion, the DM may give 
more precise or less specific information than sug- 
gested in Table 19. The information may be 
ambiguous (“The tracks resemble those of a large 
bird, though they could have been made by some 
sort of reptilian creature.”) but the DM shouldn't 
intentionally mislead the ranger (for instance, by 
telling him the tracks were definitely made by a 
bird when in fact they were made by a reptile). 
The parenthetical comments in Table 19 indicate 
how a DM might respond to a ranger studying 
tracks that were made by a pair of juvenile red 
dragons, each with a human rider. 


Table 19: Identification Check Results 


Ranger 

Level Information Received 

1-2 General type of creature 
(“A dragon or other large reptilian creature.” ) 

3-4 Specific type of creature and where it was 
heading 

(“Some kind of dragon, probably red. It appears 
to have been headed to the mountains to the 
north.”) 

5-6 Probable number of creatures 
(“Looks like two of them.”) 

7 Approximate size and/or age 
(“From the length of the prints, the dragons 
were probably juveniles.” ) 

8 Pace of creatures 
(“There's no indication of haste; they were 
probably taking their time.”) 

9 How recently the trail was made 
(“The tracks were made within the last three or 
four hours.”) 

10+ Special conditions of creatures: wounded 
or healthy, mounts, etc. 
(“The unusual depth of the prints and the space 
between steps indicates the dragons had riders. 
A tiny scrap of cloth is similar to the material 
worn by soldiers in this area. The riders were 
probably human.”) 


Covering Movement 


Not only is the ranger able to track the movement 
of others, he’s also adept at concealing his own trail. 
If a ranger moves at half his normal movement rate, 


he may cover his footprints, avoid snapping twigs, 
and execute similar actions necessary to conceal his 
trail. When other characters, rangers included, 
attempt to track a ranger who has concealed his 
trail, they do so at a —5 penalty to their Tracking 
scores. (If a terrain-specialized ranger concealed his 
trail while moving through his primary terrain, oth- 
ers suffer a -7 penalty to their Tracking scores.) 


Hide in Shadows 


By flattening his body or crouching in such as way 
as to blend into dark areas, and remaining perfectly 
still while doing so, the ranger can render himself 
nearly invisible in natural surroundings. This ability 
to hide in shadows works equally well in fields of tall 
grass, clumps of bushes, rocky hills, or any other 
wilderness area with dark or shaded terrain. 

When hiding, the ranger can conceal himself 
from attackers and eavesdrop on his enemies. He 
can hide near a well-traveled road and secretly 
observe passersby, or conceal himself near an 
enemy campsite, waiting for an opportune 
moment to steal their treasure or supplies. 

Table 8 in Chapter 1 gives the base chance for a 
ranger to hide in shadows, subject to the modifiers 
for race, Dexterity and armor (Tables 9-11). The 
following restrictions also apply: 

e If attempting to hide in shadows on city 
streets, inside a building, or in any other 
non-wilderness setting, the ranger’s chance 
is halved. Apply this reduction after all the 
other modifiers have been taken into 
account. 

¢ The ranger must be unobserved while 
attempting to conceal himself. If an NPC or 
creature is watching him, the ranger can’t 
hide successfully. If the NPC or creature 
becomes distracted, even momentarily, the 
ranger can slip into the area of concealment 
and attempt to hide. 

è While hiding, the ranger must remain immo- 
bile, except for slow and careful movements, 
such as readying a weapon or sipping from a 
flask. 

e If the area is completely dark—for instance, if 
there’s an overcast sky in the dead of night— 
the ranger gains no special advantages from 
hiding in shadows, and can’t use this ability. 


Ranger Abilities * 17 


If all these conditions are met, the DM rolls per- 
centile dice as soon as the ranger has concealed 
himself. The DM doesn’t tell the ranger the result of 
the roll; rather, the ranger learns if the attempt is 
successful from the reactions of those in the area. 

If the check is less than or equal to the ranger’s 
adjusted hide in shadows score, the ranger has suc- 
cessfully concealed himself. He’s essentially invisi- 
ble to all others in the area, including his 
companions. He has hidden successfully until he 
changes locations; an attempt to hide in shadows in 
a different area requires a new die roll. Characters 
using spells or magical items that reveal hidden or 
invisible objects can detect him. Likewise, creatures 
who use their sense of smell to locate prey or other 
exceptionally keen senses have their normal chance 
of sniffing out a ranger hiding in shadows. 

If the check is greater than the ranger’s hide in 
shadows score, he’s failed to conceal himself and 
is as exposed as any normal character would be in 
the same area. This doesn’t necessarily mean that 
others will notice him, especially if the area of con- 
cealment provides a lot of natural cover, such as a 
cluster of bushes or the long shadow from a tall 
tree. However, the ranger may not know if he’s 
succeeded or failed until it’s too late—for instance, 
if an NPC suddenly turns and charges. 


Move Silently 


Moving silently enables the ranger to move 
with a minimum of sound, almost as if he’s walk- 
ing on air. Even creatures with the sharpest ears 
are no more likely to detect his presence than they 
are to hear a feather drop. The ability works 
equally well in icy mountains, heavily wooded 
forests, or any other type of wilderness terrain. 

Getting from place to place without being heard 
is only the most obvious application of this ability. 
Other uses include: 

Sneaking up on one or more opponents in 

order to surprise them. 

ə Examining the contents of a cart or a cabinet 
by removing the objects one by one, then 
replacing them in silence. (However, silent 
movement applies to the character’s actions 
only; therefore, this ability would not negate 
the sound of a squeaking cabinet door or 
rusty hinge of a trunk.) 


18 * Chapter Two 


œ Change armor or clothes. 

@ Other actions the DM allows, such as restring- 
ing a bow, or cutting a slit in the back of a tent. 

Table 8 in Chapter 1 provides the base chance 
for moving silently, modified by the variables in 
Tables 9-11. If the ranger attempts to move 
silently inside a building or in any other non- 
wilderness area, his modified score is halved. 
Other restrictions: 

ə He can move no faster than % his normal 

movement rate when moving silently. 

e He can’t be observed when attempting to use 
this ability (moving silently isn’t of much use 
to a ranger who’s being watched). 

ə If he draws attention to himself either inten- 
tionally (speaking) or inadvertently (sneez- 
ing), the effects of moving silently are 
immediately negated. 

The DM rolls percentile dice as soon as the 
ranger makes an attempt to move silently. If the 
roll exceeds the ranger’s move silently score, he 
is as likely to be heard as any other character 
moving in the same terrain; snapping a twig or 
kicking a pebble may draw the attention of NPCs 
or creatures. 

If the roll is less than or equal to the ranger’s 
move silently score, he is able to move without 
sound. He continues to move silently until the ter- 
rain changes (for instance, if he enters an area of 
pebbles, shallow water, or dried leaves), or he 
attempts a new action that affects his ease of 
movement (such as carrying an unconscious com- 
panion or a large jug of sloshing water). Any such 
change requires a new roll. 


Species Enemy 


Every ranger has a particular creature for which 
he harbors a deep loathing. Even an otherwise 
pacifistic ranger has no reservations about harm- 
ing this creature. In fact, he may actively seek it 
out for the express purpose of destroying it. 

The creature that a ranger opposes above all 
others is called his species enemy. A ranger gains 
special combat modifiers when encountering his 
species enemy, reflecting both his knowledge of 
the creature and his intense emotions. 

The player must choose his ranger’s species 
enemy before the character advances to 2nd level. 


The DM has final approval of the choice. Once the 
species enemy is determined, it never changes; the 
ranger retains the same species enemy for the 
duration of his career. 

Though it’s not required, the DM may wish to 
suggest or assign a species enemy based on the 
ranger’s personal history. Conversely, the player 
may use a DM's choice of a species enemy to fill in 
some details about the character’s early life. Here 
are a few ways a species enemy might reflect a 
ranger’s background: 

© The species enemy was responsible for a per- 
sonal tragedy in the ranger’s youth. The enemy 
may have killed a ranger’s friend or sibling, or 
may have destroyed the ranger’s village and 
everyone in it. The ranger has vowed to avenge 
himself against the hated creature. 

e The ranger had an intense phobic reaction 
against a particular creature, perhaps as a 
result of a childhood trauma. When the ranger 
was an infant, for example, a snake may have 
slithered into his crib and tried to swallow 
him. After years of struggle, the ranger even- 
tually overcame his phobia. In the process, the 
creature became his species enemy. 

eA lord or king hired the ranger as a young 
man to rid the region of a particular creature. 
What began as a job became a personal 
vendetta, and the ranger has come to regard 
the creature as his species enemy. 


Optional Rule: To determine a ranger’s species 
enemy, consult Tables 20-29, rolling on the 
table corresponding to the ranger’s primary 
terrain. The DM isn’t confined to the creatures 
on the tables, and the tables can be expanded 
at will. At the DM’s discretion, a skeleton or a 
wight may be an appropriate species enemy 
for a ranger whose primary terrain is Swamp 
or Mountains, and an ogre may be as appropri- 
ate in the Jungle as the Forest. The DM may 
also override any illogical selections; a shark, 
for instance, is a poor choice for an Aquatic 
ranger who’s spent his life at a freshwater lake. 

A table is given for Underdark (deep subter- 
ranean) enemies, even though no ranger has 
the Underdark as a primary terrain, 


A ranger receives the following modifiers in 
regard to his species enemy: 

Attack Bonus. Because of his special under- 
standing of the species enemy’s vulnerabilities 
and combat strategies, the ranger receives a +4 
bonus to his attack rolls when fighting the crea- 
ture. This bonus is in addition to any other 
bonuses the ranger normally receives. 

Reaction Penalty. So intense is the ranger’s 
emotional response to the species enemy that it’s 
nearly impossible for him to conceal it. For this 
reason, the ranger suffers a -4 penalty to all 
encounter reactions with the species enemy. 

Combat Preference. In most combat situations, 
the ranger will actively seek out his species enemy 
as the object of his attacks to the exclusion of all 
other potential opponents. If the party encounters 
three orcs and a troll, and the troll is the ranger’s 
species enemy, the ranger will attack the troll and 
leave the orcs to his companions. If the ranger 
spots a troll in the wilderness, he may feel com- 
pelled to attack the troll unless his companions 
convince him otherwise or forcibly restrain him. 

This compulsion doesn’t automatically override 
the ranger’s good judgement or sense of duty. If a 
species enemy accidently falls into a bottomless pit, 
the ranger won't jump in after it. If he hears rumors 
that a species enemy was sighted in a distant vil- 
lage, he won't abandon his party to investigate, 
although he may argue strongly for the party to 
check it out. If a companion cries for help, he will 
abandon his fight against a species enemy to come 
to the companion’s aid, resuming his attacks against 
the species enemy when the companion is safe. 

The modifiers apply wherever the ranger 
encounters his species enemy, not just in the 
ranger’s primary terrain. A ranger whose primary 
terrain is Desert and whose species enemy is the 
blue dragon will receive a +4 combat bonus 
regardless of whether he meets a blue dragon in 
the desert, mountains, or anywhere else. 

Further, the modifiers apply only to the specific 
creature (or creatures) designated as the species 
enemy, including any leaders, nobles, shamans, 
etc. If the species enemy is a blue dragon, the 
modifiers don’t apply to black dragons, red 
dragons, or dragons of any other color. However, 
the modifiers affect blue dragons of all ages, from 
hatchlings to great wyrms. The ogre species 


Ranger Abilities * 19 


enemy includes ogre leaders, shamans, and chief- 
tains, but not ogre mages or merrows. (As a rule of 
thumb, if a variant creature has a separate listing 
in its MONSTROUS COMPENDIUM* entry, it’s 
not included as a species enemy). The DM is free 
to make exceptions to the lists in Tables 20-28 
based on local conditions within the campaign. 
For instance, he may decide to include merrows as 
part of the ogre species enemy, or he may exclude 
advanced lizard men from the lizard man species 
enemy if campaign logic dictates. 


Table 20: Arctic Species Enemy 


D8 Roll 


D 
cae’) 
UI Oo 


omnia 


© 


Enemy 

Frost giant 
White dragon 
Cryohydra 
Ice Toad 

Vi 

Winter wolf 
Yeti 


Table 21: Aquatic Species Enemy 


D10 Roll 


DOoaouDURUUN= 


Enemy 

Dragon turtle 

Koalinth 

Kraken (may include giant squid) 
Kuo-toa } 

Lacedon. 

Pirate/buccaneer, human 
Seawolf, lyc. (includes greater) 
Sahuagin 

Scrag 


Table 22: Desert Species Enemy 


D10 Roll 


SeeCunankwn- 


Enemy 

Blue dragon 

Desert brigand, human 
Fire giant 
Hieracosphinx 
Jackalwere 

Jann, evil 

Lamia 

Manscorpion 

Naga, evil (may include desert snakes) 
Sandling 


Table 23: Forest Species Enemy 


D10 Roll 


CSCOnN DTI OUN =| 


10 


Enemy 

Green dragon 

Bugbear 

Ettercap (may include forest spiders) 
Ghoul/ghast 

Goblin 

Hobgoblin 

Kobold 

Ogre 

Orc (may include orog) 

Troll (may include other types) 


Table 24: Jungle Species Enemy 


D10 Roll 


Enemy 

Black dragon 

Carnivorous ape 

Bullywu 

Lizard aon (includes advanced 
lizard men and lizard king) 
Naga, evil (may include jungle 
snakes) 

Slaver, human 


Tasloi 


Table 25: Hill Species Enemy 


D10 Roll 


BoOoT wn 


Enemy 

Red dragon 
Brigand, human 
Bugbear 
Gnoll/flind 
Hobgoblin 
Leucrotta 

Ogre 

Ogre mage 
Werewolf, lyc. 


20 « Chapter Two 


Table 26: Mountain Species Enemy 


D10 Roll 


SeCmnautun— 


Enemy 

Red dragon 

Cyclopskin (may include cyclops) 
Ettin 

Hill giant 

Fomorian giant 

Gnoll/flind 

Manticore 

Ogre 

Orc (may include orog) 

Troll (may include other types) 


Table 27: Plains Species Enemy 


D10 Roll 


Enemy 

Hill giant 
Brigand, human 
Gnoll/flind 
Goblin 


Harpy 

Hobgoblin 

Ogre 

Ore (may include orog) 
Troll (may include others) 


Table 28: Swamp Species Enemy 


D10 Roll 


Enemy 

Black dragon 

Behir 

Bullywug 

Ghoul (may include ghast) 
Goblin 


Hydra (may include lernaean hydra 


and/or pyrohydra) 

Lizard man (includes advanced 
lizard men and lizard king) 
Muckdweller 

Su-monster 

Troll (may include other types) 


< 


ANN 3% 


roglodyte 
Troll (may include other types) 
Umber hulk 


1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 


Animal Empathy 


Many characters regard animals as non-think- 
ing beasts that react purely on instinct, incapable 
of responding to reason. The ranger, on the other 
hand, sees animals as emotionally complex crea- 
tures whose fears and desires may be less sophisti- 
cated than those of humans, but are no less real. 
This innate understanding of animal behavior 
gives the ranger a limited ability to influence their 
emotions and manipulate their behavior. 

The ranger knows the meaning of a twitching 
tail, a cocked head, a low growl. He knows that a 
snarling wolf positioned in a crouch may be more 
frightened than hostile. If approached correctly, a 
hissing snake may slither away rather than strike. 
By calling on his animal empathy, a ranger can use 
soothing words and gestures to turn hostility to 
indifference, and indifference to friendship. 


Conditions 


A ranger can’t influence an animal’s reactions 
at will. The following limitations apply: 

The animal must be native to the real world; 
natural animals. Rangers can’t modify the reac- 
tions of supernatural creatures (skeletons and 
ghouls), magical creatures (basilisks and 
golems), or creatures of extra-planar origin (aer- 
ial servants and elementals). The ranger can 
affect giant animals. 

The animal must be intelligent, but not 
exceptionally so. To respond to a ranger’s 
words and gestures, the animal must be able to 


Ranger Abilities * 21 


comprehend them. In practice, this means that a 
ranger can’t use this ability to influence the 
behavior of non-intelligent animals (those with 
Intelligence scores of zero) such as centipedes 
or barracudas. Conversely, creatures of higher 
intelligence, such as leprechauns, ogres, and a 
paladin’s warhorse, resist the ranger’s animal 
empathy. As a rule of thumb, rangers can only 
use this ability on natural animals whose intel- 
ligence ranges from Animal to Low (Intelli- 
gence score of 1 to 7), 

The animal can’t be the ranger’s species 
enemy. A ranger who confronts the species 
enemy is too overwhelmed by intense emotions 
to establish the proper empathy. Therefore, a 
ranger can never modify the reaction of his 
species enemy using this ability. 

The ranger must remain calm. The ranger 
must move towards the animal quietly, slowly, 
and confidently, all the while speaking soothing 
words and making calming gestures. Fear can- 
not be shown, nor a weapon wielded, nor any 
action taken that might frighten or enrage the 
animal. 

The ranger be distanced from the rest of the 
party. If the ranger approaches with compan- 
ions, the animal will react to the presence of all 
the characters, not just the ranger. The ranger’s 
efforts to soothe the animal will go unnoticed. 
Ideally, the rest of the party will be out of the 
animal's sight when the ranger approaches. If 
this is impractical, the ranger’s companions 
should be at least 10 feet behind him, remaining 
quiet and taking no actions that the animal 
might interpret as hostile. 

The animal must be able to hear and see the 
ranger. The ranger must be in plain sight for the 
animal to size up; the ranger may not be con- 
cealed in the brush, hidden in shadows, or have 
erected any type of physical barrier between 
himself and the animal. The animal must also be 
able to hear the ranger, meaning that the area 
must be relatively quiet, free of distracting or 
disturbing sounds. In most cases, the ranger 
must be within a few feet of the animal, or close 
enough for the animal to see the ranger’s eyes. 
The DM may make exceptions in special circum- 
stances. For instance, if the ranger approaches an 


22 * Chapter Two 


animal in total darkness, the DM may rule that 
soothing words are sufficient to calm the animal. 
In situations where silence is imperative, ges- 
tures alone may suffice. However, in all cases, 
the ranger must still be relatively close to the 
animal to modify its reaction. 

The ranger must soothe the animal for an 
uninterrupted period. A ranger can’t attempt to 
soothe an animal that’s charging or attacking; the 
animal must be stationary or moving only 
slightly (a pacing wolf, a weaving serpent). Once 
the ranger moves close to the animal, the creature 
must be soothed for 5-10 (1d6+4) uninterrupted 
rounds; the DM may increase this time if the ani- 
mal is unusually anxious or exceptionally hostile. 
(This time can be lapsed by the DM if nothing 
else is going on.) 


A ranger who meets these conditions can use 
animal empathy in an attempt to modify the ani- 
mal’s reactions. Though the game result is the 
same, technique differs depending whether the 
animal is wild or domestic. 


Wild Animals 


This group includes animals not normally 
domesticated, such as lions, snakes, and rats. It 
also includes domesticated animals that have been 
trained to attack, such as dogs. 

Before the ranger attempts to soothe a wild 
animal, the DM must determine the animal's cur- 
rent attitude, taking into account its natural tem- 
perament (Is it naturally aggressive, or inclined 
to flee rather than fight?), immediate conditions 
(Did it just wake up? Is it sick or wounded? Hun- 
gry?) and pre-existing circumstances (Has it 
recently been harassed or befriended by charac- 
ters similar in appearance to the ranger? Is it 
guarding its nest or lair?) The DM should then 
select the animal's current attitude from Table 30. 
The attitude should not be announced (“The wolf 
is Cautious.”). Instead, clearly describe the ani- 
mal’s appearance and behavior and let the ranger 
come to his own conclusions (“The wolf paces 
back and forth, eyes darting. It begins to snarl as 
you approach.”). 


Tabie 30: Animal Attitudes 


Attitude Description 

Frightened Filled with panic and terror. Will 
flee at earliest opportunity. 

Friendly Feels warm or conciliatory toward 
stranger. Will not attack. May 
nuzzle or lick stranger to express 
affection. 

Indifferent Bored or unimpressed. Oblivious 
to stranger. 

Cautious Suspicious, guarded, nervous. 


Ready to defend itself if attacked. 
Openly belligerent. Growling, 
snapping, crouched to spring. 
Likely to attack if stranger doesn’t 
withdraw. 

Aggressive, violent, enraged. Will 
definitely attack if stranger 
doesn’t withdraw; may pursue 
even if he does. 


Threatening 


Hostile 


To determine if the ranger is able to modify the 
reaction of a wild animal, the animal must make a 
saving throw vs. rods (even though the ranger’s 
animal empathy ability isn’t magical). As shown 
on Table 31, the ranger’s experience level imposes 
a penalty to the creature’s roll. 


Table 31: Animal Empathy Modifier 


Ranger Level Modifier 
1-3 -1 
4-6 -2 
7-9 -3 
10-12 -4 
13-15 =5: 
16+ -6 


If the animal fails its saving throw, the ranger 
has successfully modified its behavior. The atti- 
tude of the animal shifts one category, up or 
down, on Table 30 as decided by the ranger. If 
the animal was Indifferent, it now becomes 
either Cautious or Friendly, and behaves 
accordingly. This new reaction applies only to 
the ranger. An animal that the ranger changed 
from Threatening to Cautious may still behave 
in a Threatening manner to other members of 


the party, particularly if another character 
decides to interfere with the ranger’s efforts or 
otherwise draws attention to himself. However, 
as long as the ranger stays near the animal and 
continues to soothe it, the animal's attention 
will remain focused on the ranger, and it will 
remain Cautious. After the ranger leaves the 
area, the animal's attitude remains altered for a 
short time (from a few minutes to an hour, as 
decided by the DM) before it reverts to its origi- 
nal disposition. 

If the animal succeeds in its saving throw, it 
resists the ranger’s efforts and its attitude 
remains unchanged. The ranger notices no signif- 
icant difference in the animal’s behavior. An 
Indifferent animal continues to ignore the ranger, 
a Hostile animal may suddenly charge him. The 
ranger can’t make a second attempt to modify its 
behavior. 


Domestic Animals 


This group includes animals that have non- 
hostile dispositions and are routinely domesti- 
cated, such as horses and dogs. It also includes 
formerly wild animals, such as bears and mon- 
keys, that have been tamed and now are com- 
fortable around people. 

Such animals are presumed to be Frightened, 
Friendly, Indifferent, or Cautious. Regardless of 
their initial disposition, when a ranger 
approaches and soothes them, they become 
Friendly. No saving throws are necessary; this 
change is automatic. It’s also permanent, so 
long as the ranger stays in sight of the animal. 
If the ranger leaves the area, the animal reverts 
to its original disposition a short time later 
(within a few minutes to an hour). 

The attitude change applies to the ranger only; 
an Indifferent dog feels Friendly to the ranger but 
remains oblivious to the ranger’s companions. A 
Cautious horse is Friendly to the ranger and will 
carry him on its back, but bucks furiously if any- 
one else attempts to mount it. 

Additionally, the ranger can ascertain the gen- 
eral qualities of any domestic animal he befriends. 
By observation alone, he could determine: 

© Which puppy in a litter will become the best 

hunter and most loyal companion. 


Ranger Abilities + 23 


e Which horse at a sale is the healthiest, 
strongest, and fastest mount. 

è Which sheep in a flock will produce the high- 
est quality wool. 

$ Which sow ina sty will give birth to the 
largest broods. 


The DM should provide any information of this 
type that the ranger wants to know, though he 
should refrain from answering specific questions. 
For instance, the ranger can determine which 
horse in a corral is the fastest, but he can’t tell the 
horse’s exact speed just by observing it. 

A special case occurs if an animal has been 
attack-trained. This is most usual in the case of 
dogs, horses, and hunting birds such as falcons, 
but might apply to other animals, such as bears or 
leopards. These are treated as wild animals, and 
receive the saving throw vs. rods to resist the 
ranger’s empathy as described above. 


24 + Chapter Two 


Nature Lore 


Though the experiences of a ranger living in 
an arctic wasteland may differ dramatically from 
one who makes his home in a jungle, both have 
spent many years observing the patterns of 
nature, and both have arrived at similar conclu- 
sions about the relationship between living 
things and their environment. 

All rangers, then, have an inherent under- 
standing of natural lore, encompassing a broad 
set of principles involving conservation, ecology, 
and natural order. Though not every ranger 
knows specific details about particular situa- 
tions, all of them understand the general con- 
cepts at work. Some examples: 

è The plant and animal life in any given habitat 
tend to be interdependent. The butterfly polli- 
nates the flower, the flower produces nectar to 
feed the butterfly. 


dy 
hai 


A 


\V\ 


4s 


aT 


] 
Vit 


e Animals and plants adapt to natural changes 
in the environment. Grass becomes dormant 
in the winter and grows again in the spring. A 
wolf's fur thickens as the temperature drops, 
and thins when the weather becomes warmer. 
ə To avoid ruining the land, natural resources 
used by man must be replenished. If trees are 
harvested in a forest, new trees should be 
planted in their place. 

A ranger’s knowledge of natural lore enhances 
his reverence for all living things. In practical 
terms, it allows him to recognize ecological and 
environmental problems, both actual and poten- 
tial. In some cases, he may be able to offer sugges- 
tions for correcting them. 

There are no hard and fast rules for determining 
the extent of a ranger’s natural lore and its appli- 
cation. The DM must decide how much a particu- 
lar ranger knows on a case by case basis, taking 
into account the ranger’s training, background, 
and primary terrain. In most situations, experi- 
ence is the main factor; the higher the ranger’s 
level, the more he’s likely to know. 

Table 31 provides natural lore guidelines for 
rangers of various levels. The information is cumu- 
lative; a 7th-level ranger also knows the informa- 
tion available to lower-level rangers. Keep in mind 
that these are generalizations; a 2nd-level ranger 
who was raised on a farm may know as much 
about the ecology of growing crops as another 
ranger of 10th level. By way of illustration, the par- 
enthetical comments indicate what the ranger 
might know if attempting to figure out why crops 
no longer grow in a once-fertile farmland. 


Table 32: Nature Lore 


Ranger 
Level Quality of Information 

1-3 Knows general principles of how cli- 
mate, terrain, and life forms interact. 
Can identify problems, but can only 
guess at causes. 

(The topsoil has eroded away.) 

4-6 Can determine causes of problems. 
(Heavy rainfall washed away the top- 
soil and leached away the nutrients.) 

7+ Can suggest solutions to problems. 
(Add fertilizer to the remaining soil. 
To prevent further erosion, keep land 
covered with grasses or trees.) 


If the DM is stumped as to whether a ranger 
knows a particular piece of information, he may 
require the ranger to make a Wisdom check, 
adding bonuses or penalties to the roll depend- 
ing on the relative difficulty of the question. For 
instance, knowing if a particular substance will 
work as a fertilizer is a relatively easy question, 
requiring no penalty to the roll. Knowing which 
specific crops the fertilizer will nourish is a more 
difficult question, and a penalty to the roll may 
be in order. In all cases, the DM should use com- 
mon sense. A ranger who's never been out of the 
desert won't know much about the effects of a 
hurricane on a coastal environment, regardless 
of his level. 


Survival 


The ranger is exceptionally skilled at surviving 
harsh conditions associated with his primary ter- 
rain. In game terms, the ranger is considered to 
automatically have the Survival proficiency in his 
primary terrain. This skill costs no proficiency 
slots. A ranger can spend slots in the Survival pro- 
ficiency to acquire survival skills in environments 
other than his primary terrain. 

The ranger’s survival skill helps in the follow- 
ing ways, all of which apply only in the primary 
terrain. In certain cases, the DM may require a 
Survival check (which is equivalent to an Intelli- 
gence check). A ranger rolling less than or equal to 
his Intelligence score on 1d20 succeeds in the 
check. 

è The ranger knows the basic precautions nec- 
essary to enhance the chances of survival, 
and can instruct and assist any companions 
accordingly. For example, a ranger whose 
primary terrain is Mountains realizes that 
physical exertion in high altitudes may 
result in headaches and fatigue (due to low 
air pressure). A Desert ranger knows that in 
arid climates, it’s better to rest in the still air 
than exposed to a strong wind (wind pro- 
motes evaporation from the skin, increasing 
the degree of dehydration). An Aquatic 
ranger understands that saltwater can’t be 
used for drinking. An Arctic ranger realizes 
that temporary protection can be had from a 
bitter wind by tunneling inside a snow drift. 
This knowledge doesn’t guarantee survival 


Ranger Abilities * 25 


by any means; it merely improves the odds. 
If the ranger wonders about any particular 
piece of information, the DM will decide if 
he knows it, requiring a Survival check if 
necessary. 

è The ranger can stave off starvation by finding 
small amounts of food. A successful Survival 
check locates enough food to feed himself or 
one other character. He can locate food in this 
Way once per day. 

* The ranger can find enough water to keep 
himself or another character alive for one 
day by making a successful Survival check. 
This assumes that the water is there to be 
found. 

© The ranger can interpret subtle changes in the 
environment to anticipate natural disasters. A 
Plains ranger can recognize the appearance of 
the sky associated with a coming tornado. A 
Mountain ranger can identify the rumbling 
sound that precedes an avalanche. The DM 
may require Survival checks to verify a 
ranger’s interpretations. 


Optional Rule: One way in which a DM can 
use the Survival ability in a “quick-and-dirty” 
fashion is to set up special penalties (cumula- 
tive penalties for fatigue or exposure) in espe- 
cially harsh climes. A party with a ranger, or 


one that is properly prepared and outfitted, 
simply avoids the potential penalties. Those 
who are unprepared take the penalties until the 
DM decides they have acclimated to the setting, 
or until they take other appropriate actions 
determined by the DM. 


Strongholds 


Like fighters, rangers have the ability to build 
and maintain castles, forts, and strongholds. 
Unlike fighters, rangers are not joined by free sol- 
diers or other special followers in doing so. 

Theoretically, any ranger can build a strong- 
hold. In practice, most rangers who build them are 
9th level or higher, since rangers of lower level 
usually lack the necessary resources, reputation, 


26 * Chapter Two 


and skills. A DM may allow a lower-level ranger 
to have a stronghold under exceptional circum- 
stances; for instance, a ranger might come into an 
inheritance, or a group of peasants might build a 
castle in gratitude for his assistance. 

Some rangers acquire strongholds in coopera- 
tion with the local king or ruler. The ranger 
begins the process by petitioning the ruler for 
permission to build a stronghold in a particular 
area. If the ranger demonstrates good will and 
has a reputation for trustworthiness and strong 
leadership, the ruler usually grants permission. 
In exchange for this permission, the ranger may 
have to pay an annual tax, or make himself 
available to serve in the ruler’s military forces in 
times of war. If the ranger meets his obligations, 
the ruler may loan royal forces to the ranger if 
his territory is invaded or his stronghold 
besieged. 

More commonly, rangers prefer to build their 
strongholds in the unsettled wilderness, beyond 
the sovereignty of any government. Though free 
of obligations to a ruler, the ranger must also 
fend for himself in times of peril; if an army of 
orcs lays claim to the ranger’s territory, the 
ranger is on his own. 

Because a ranger’s stronghold gains him no 
special followers, it tends to be significantly 
smaller and less elaborate than that of a fighter 
of comparable level. Though a fighter may 
receive money by selling products produced on 
his land, taxing settlers, or charging rent, these 
options are rarely available to rangers. In most 
cases, a ranger’s stronghold generates only a 
modest income, if any. 

Guidelines for building and maintaining 
strongholds are beyond the scope of this book. 
For more information, you might investigate the 
DMRG2 Castle Guide, which includes details of 
castle construction along with a number of stan- 
dard floor plans. 

Though most rangers prefer castles and forts 
made of wood and stone, these are by no means 
the only types available. Other possibilities 
include tree houses (in Forest and Jungle terrain), 
fortified encampments (Desert), observation plat- 
forms (Mountains), floating citadels (Swamp and 
Aquatic), and ice towers (Arctic). 


Perhaps the ranger’s most interesting ability is the 
chance to attract unusual followers. Unlike fighters 
and other character classes that acquire followers, 
the ranger’s followers include animals and magical 
creatures as well as humans and demihumans. In 
fact, it’s possible that all of a ranger’s followers 
may be animals, which can result in unexpected 
benefits (strangers aren’t as likely to mess with a 
ranger accompanied by a wolf pack) as well as 
unforeseen complications (ever try getting a room 
at an inn with a bear trotting behind you?). 

Humans and demihumans (and magical crea- 
tures) are drawn to a ranger because of his sterling 
reputation. They serve as followers out of loyalty 
and respect, remaining true to the ranger so long 
as he treats them decently. In this way, such fol- 
lowers are different from normal hirelings and 
mercenaries who serve for pay. 

The motivations of animal followers are less 
obvious. Animals have no conception of what 
constitutes a reputation, sterling or otherwise. 
Instead, animals bond to rangers by instinct. The 
nature of this bond lies somewhere between the 
relationship of an infant animal and its parent 
(picture a baby duck contentedly swimming 
behind its mother), and a master and his pet 
(think of a dog’s affection for the person who pro- 
vides him with companionship). If the ranger hon- 
ors the bond, the follower will often remain loyal 
for its entire life. 

It’s important to keep in mind that this bond 
has no magical basis. The follower stays with a 
ranger of its own volition, not from some super- 
natural compulsion, and may leave if condi- 
tions become intolerable. Likewise, a ranger 
doesn’t control the actions of his followers, 
though he may instruct human followers to 
carry out specific functions, and train animal 
followers to perform various tricks and tasks. 


Gaining Followers 


It’s strictly up to the Dungeon Master to deter- 
mine when a ranger receives his followers, how 
many he’s entitled to, and the circumstances 
under which they appear. Though the player is 
free to express his preferences, the DM has the 
final word. 


CHAPTER 


Followers 


Number of Followers 


As soon as a ranger reaches 10th level, the DM 
secretly rolls 2d6. The result indicates the maxi- 
mum number of followers the ranger will receive 
over the course of his career. This roll is made only 
once, and the number is never revealed to the 
player. The DM should make a note of the number 
on a sheet of paper; he can use the same sheet to 
keep track of the followers as the ranger receives 
them to make sure he doesn’t exceed his allot- 
ment. The player should also keep track of his 
ranger’s followers; the record sheets at the end of 
this book are designed for this purpose. 

Lost followers are not replaced. If a ranger has a 
limit of two followers and both are killed, he'll never 
receive another follower for the rest of his career. 


Identity of Followers 


After the DM makes the 2d6 roll to determine 
the number of followers, it’s time to think about 
who or what they’re going to be. He should 
begin by deciding the identity of the first two or 
three followers, so that he can make plans to 
smoothly introduce them into his campaign. He 
can determine the identities of the remaining fol- 
lowers later, whenever he likes. 

To determine the identity of followers, the DM 
may roll on Table 19 in Chapter 3 of the Player's 
Handbook, use Tables 33-43 in this chapter, or sim- 
ply choose any particular creature he likes. 
Regardless of the method preferred, the DM 
should keep the following restrictions and recom- 
mendations in mind: 

The type of followers should make sense 
within the context of the campaign. Lions and 
crocodiles shouldn't show up in the arctic, just 
as dolphins shouldn't appear in the desert. 

The use of powerful creatures as followers 
should be kept to a minimum, so as not over- 
shadow the efforts of the ranger and other 
player characters. It’s difficult to design chal- 
lenging encounters for a ranger with a dozen 
giants at his beck and call! Such creatures 
should be introduced with care and pacing; it 
is more fun for the player to have a chance for a 
powerful ally in his ranger’s future. 


Followers * 27 


LY 


* A species enemy can’t be a follower. The 
ranger’s antagonism for his species enemy 
makes bonding impossible. 

© Generally, the follower will not be a poisonous 
creature. Rangers do not use poisons, and their 
followers tend to follow suit. Occasionally a 
ranger may find himself with an intelligent and 
poisonous follower; remember that poison use 
is not a good act, and that to some extent the 
ranger is responsible for his followers. This can 
beused by the DM as a special hindrance or to 
encourage role-playing. 

è Certain character kits have specific follower 
requirements or limitations which take prece- 
dence over other considerations. See Chapter 
4 for details. 


Using the Follower Tables 


The DM may find the Follower Tables (Tables 
33-43) especially useful for determining followers, 
as they provide a variety of types associated with 
specific terrains. To use the tables, select a terrain 
and roll 1d100. Some explanations: 

If the result has an asterisk (*) and the ranger 
already has a follower of this type—or if he’s 
had a follower of that type and lost it—ignore 
the result and roll again. 

© If more than one species of a particular animal 
is given in parentheses, the DM can choose 
whichever species he likes. For example, if the 
result on Table 33 is a herd animal, the DM can 
choose either a caribou, reindeer, or musk ox. 

elf the result is “Human/demihuman,” roll 
again on the Human/Demihuman Followers 
Table (Table 43). See the Humans and Demi- 
humans section at the end of this chapter for 
further guidelines. 

© The Trainability column indicates an animal 
follower’s aptitude for learning tricks and 
tasks; these notations are explained in the 
Training Followers section later in this chapter. 

ə Statistics for some creatures not found in core 
MONSTROUS COMPENDIUM” collections 
are in the Helpful Statistics section. 

The DM isn’t confined to the creatures listed on 
the tables. New entries can be drawn from the 
MONSTROUS COMPENDIUM volumes and 
other sources. New tables can be created, based on 


unique terrain and cultural demographics of a 
campaign; the Aquatic Followers Table, for 
instance, may be subdivided into Saltwater and 
Freshwater Tables. 

The DM must also choose which tables to use for 
each ranger. He may decide to use only the table 
corresponding to the ranger’s primary terrain (for 
instance, a ranger whose primary terrain is Desert 
receives followers only from the Desert table), use 
the table corresponding to the ranger’s current 
location in the campaign, or focus on the primary 
terrain table with occasional use of the other tables 
(most of the Desert ranger’s followers come from 
the Desert table, but he receives a few from the 
other tables as well). 

There are advantages and disadvantages to 
each method. For instance, if you're only using the 
primary terrain table, a Desert ranger is likely to 
end up with a collection of creatures he’s comfort- 
able with, but he may have a hard time acquiring 
any followers at all if the campaign keeps him out 
of arid environments. Using the local table ensures 
that a ranger will have regular access to followers, 
but he may end up with a bizarre menagerie 
(imagine a Desert ranger with a merman, skunk, 
and baboon!). Regardless of which method you 
prefer, it’s best to settle on one at the outset of a 
campaign and use it throughout. 


How and When Followers Appear 


To give the DM maximum flexibility for intro- 
ducing followers into his campaign, no fixed rules 
exist for determining exactly when they show up. 
Once the appropriate level is attained, followers 
should trickle in, one at a time, throughout the 
course of the ranger’s career. As a rule of thumb, 
assume that a new follower makes an appearance 
no more than once every few months. 

Keep the terrain in mind when deciding how 
often animal or special followers appear. Regions 
heavily populated with animals, such as dense 
jungles or lush forests, are more likely to generate 
such followers than barren mountains or bleak 
arctic landscapes. As seen in Tables 33-43, certain 
types of followers tend to show up in particular 
areas; for instance, a ranger is more likely to 
acquire a camel follower in the desert than in the 
jungle. But exceptions abound; a ranger might 


Followers * 29 


encounter a camel that accidently wandered into 
the plains, or encounter one on display in a zoo in 
the mountains. As long as the DM creates an 
explanation, animal and special followers can 
show up in a surprising variety of places. 

Regardless of when and where followers show 
up, the DM should strive to work their appear- 
ance into the events of a campaign. Here are a few 
situations that may result in a new follower: 

Use of Proficiencies, Special Abilities, or Spells. 
After the successful use of the animal handling or 
animal training proficiency, the affected creature 
might take a liking to the ranger and offer itself as a 
follower. This may also occur after a ranger uses his 
animal empathy ability. Likewise, an animal 
enchanted by a spell such as animal friendship might 
linger in the area after the magical effects wear off. 
In any case, the effects of the proficiency or spell no 
longer apply; the animal in question has decided of 
its own accord to stick around. 

Planned Encounters. As part of an adventure, 
the DM may decide to stage one or more encoun- 
ters featuring potential followers. For instance, the 
party may need to explore a cave containing a 
curious bear, search for a sunken treasure chest 
surrounded by friendly dolphins, or navigate a 
jungle filled with mischievous baboons. Assum- 
ing that the ranger doesn’t inadvertently sabotage 
the encounter—he kills the bear or avoids the trea- 
sure chest—this is one of the most dependable 
methods for introducing new followers. 

Hunting or Shopping. When shopping for a new 
mount, a ranger may be surprised to find one of the 
horses in the stable noses its way to the front, as if 
presenting itself for purchase. When hunting for the 
evening meal, the ranger might suddenly notice 
that a deer or other game animal is following him. 
Perceptive rangers may realize that these animals 
are offering themselves as followers. 

Character Interaction. The ranger spares a foe, 
only to be adopted by the grateful creature. An 
NPC youth of long acquaintance (perhaps one 
rescued on a previous adventure) decides to take 
ranger training with the PC as a mentor. 

Abrupt Appearance. For no apparent reason, 
an creature may present itself to the ranger. Hik- 
ing through the woods, the ranger becomes aware 
of a brownie sauntering behind him. The ranger 
wakes up with a sleeping fox curled up on his 


30 ¢ Chapter Three 


chest. A pseudodragon flutters from the sky and 
perches on the ranger’s shoulder. From a purists 
point of view, this is the least satisfying option for 
introducing followers, as it doesn’t arise directly 
from the events of the story. But it's an acceptable 
method when all else fails. 


Acquiring Specific Followers 


Clearly, some types of followers are more desir- 
able than others. Most rangers will find a horse to 
be more useful than a rabbit, a dog more advanta- 
geous than a mouse. Even in the best of situations, 
a snake or scorpion follower may be more trouble 
than it’s worth. 

There's not much a ranger can do to ensure he 
gets the type of followers he wants. Becoming a 
follower is essentially a choice made by the animal 
or NPC, not the ranger. Though the ranger can 
influence animal behavior to a certain degree, a 
ranger can’t force a particular creature to become a 
follower against its will. 

However, a ranger can increase his chances of 
acquiring specific followers in several ways. The 
easiest and most obvious way is to go where the 
animals live. A ranger who wants a polar bear fol- 
lower should go to arctic. Farms and market 
places are good sources of domestic animals, 
while zoos and carnivals may stock a wide variety 
of exotic creatures. 

The frequent use of the animal training or ani- 
mal handling proficiencies, as well as the animal 
empathy special ability, brings the ranger in close 
contact with potential followers. Spells such as 
locate animals or plants can lead him to particular 
species, while the call animal follower spell 
(described in Chapter 6) may successfully sum- 
mon a follower. 

Note that such efforts don’t guarantee the arrival 
of a follower in any way. In many campaigns, how- 
ever, extra efforts made to locate followers increases 
the likelihood of their appearance. 


Recognizing Animal Followers 


A good DM tries to capture the behavior of real ani- 
mals, and doesn’t just announce to the ranger that an 
animal follower just presented itself. Instead, the DM 
describes the actions and behavior of the animal and 


allows the ranger to come to his own conclusions. 

How does a ranger know if a particular animal 
is indeed a follower? Here are some signs: 

è The animal doggedly follows him. If the 
ranger climbs a steep mountain, the animal 
struggles to keep up. If he goes swimming, 
the animal waits on the shore. 

è The animal shows signs of affection. A lion 
rubs against the ranger’s legs, a wolf licks his 
face, a horse nuzzles him. 

è The animal is uncharacteristically docile. A 
tiger sits peacefully in the grass while the 
ranger has dinner. A wild dog yawns when 
the ranger approaches, but growls when the 
ranger’s companion comes near. 

A day or two spent observing such actions 
should convince even the most skeptical ranger 
that he’s acquired a follower. The DM may verify 
this conclusion, but is under no obligation to do 
so. If doubt remains in the ranger’s mind, he may 
be able to ask a companion to use speak with ani- 
mals or a similar spell to verify the animal's status. 

Human and demihuman followers tend to 
express their admiration openly and unambigu- 
ously, fawn over the ranger’s every utterance, gaz- 
ing admiringly at him, or offer their assistance at 
every opportunity. Unless he’s exceptionally sus- 
picious or just plain dense, a ranger should have 
much less trouble recognizing human and demi- 
human followers. 


Table 33: Arctic Followers 


D100 Roll Follower Trainability 

01-07 Animal, herd (caribou, 

reindeer, musk-ox) Low 
08-15 Avian (penguin, tern, 

snowy owl) Low 
16-25 Bear (polar) Med. 

26 Elephant (mammoth, 
mastodon)* Med. 
27 Elephant (oliphant)* High 

28-30 Great cat (snow leopard) Med. 
31-32 Great cat (giant lynx)* High 
33-34 Great cat (smilodon)* Med. 
35-37 Dog (wild, war) Med. 
38-43 Mammal, small (ermine, 

snow hare) Low 
44-45 Remorhaz* Low 
46-49 Seal Med. 
50-52 Selkie - 
53-54 Toad (ice)* High 
55-56 Walrus Med. 
57-62 Wolf (common, dire) Med. 
63-66 Wolverine (normal, giant) Med. 


67-70 Yeti - 
71-00 Human/demihuman = 


Table 34: Aquatic Followers 


D100 Roll Follower Trainability 
01-12 Avian (gull, duck, osprey, 
parrot, pelican) Low 
13-14 Crab, giant Neg. 
15-18 Crocodile (common) Neg. 


19-20 Eel (electric, giant, weed) Neg. 


21-22 Fish, giant (pike, catfish) Low 
23-24 Frog, giant Neg. 
25-32 Dolphin High 
33-34 Hippocampus* High 


35-36  Locathah* = 
37-41 Mammal, small (beaver, sea 


otter, giant otter) Low 
42-43 Merman = 
4445 Nixie* = 
46-47 Octopus, giant* Neg. 
48-50 Seahorse, giant Med. 
51-54 Sea lion Med. 


55-58  Selkie = 
59-60 Triton* = 
61-00 Human/demihuman -= 


Followers è 31 


Table 35: 


D100 Roll 
01-08 


09-13 
14-23 
24-25 
26-28 
29-35 


36-40 
41-42 
43-44 
45-50 


51-52 
53-55 
56-58 
59-60 
61-00 


Table 36: 


D100 Roll 
01-04 
05-12 
13-14 
15-16 
17-28 
29-31 
32-34 
35-41 


Desert Followers 


Follower Trainability 
Avian (falcon, hawk, owl, 

vulture) Low 
Camel Low 
Dog (wild, war) Med. 
Dog, moon* High 
Griffon* Med. 
Horse (medium, light, 

wild) Med. 
Jackal Med. 
Jann* - 
Lizard (giant) Neg. 
Mammal, small (jackrabbit, 
kangaroo rat, prairie dog) Low 
Scorpion (large) Neg: 
Snake (poisonous) Neg. 
Thri-kreen - 
Toad (fire, giant) Neg. 
Human/demihuman - 
Forest Followers 

Follower Trainability 
Animal, herd (deer, stag) Low 


Low 
Low 


Avian (falcon, hawk, owl) 
Badger (common, giant) 
Bat (common, giant) 

Bear (black, brown) 

Boar (wild, giant) 
Centaur, sylvan = 
Mammal, small (ferret, 

fox, squirrel, raccoon, rabbit, 
woodchuck, chipmunk) 
Pegasus* (if ranger is female, 
50% chance for unicorn*) = 
Pixie* - 
Porcupine (black, brown, 
giant) 

Pseudodragon* — 
Satyr* - 
Skunk (normal, giant) 
Treant* - 
Voadkyn* - 
Weasel (wild, giant) 
Werebear* = 
Wolf 
Human/demihuman - 


Low 


32 * Chapter Three 


Table 37: Hill Followers 


D100 Roll Follower Trainability 
01-05 Animal, herd (deer, goat, 
sheep) Low 
06-07 Aurumvorax* - 
08-17 Avian (falcon, hawk, owl) Low 
18-19 Badger (giant, common) Low 
20-21 Bat (common, large) Low 
22-32 Bear (black, brown, cave) Med. 
33-36 Boar (wild, giant) Med. 
37 Brownie* ~ 
38 Draconet (firedrake)* Med 
39 Hippogriff* Med. 
40-43 Horse (medium, light, pony, 
wild, mule) Med. 
44-46 Lizard (minotaur) Neg. 
47-54 Mammal, small (fox, i 
mouse, rabbit, squirrel) Med. 
55 Pegasus* High 
56-59 Wolf Med. 
60 Wereboar* = 
61-00 Human/demihuman - 
Table 38: Jungle Followers 
D100 Roll Follower Trainability 
01-05 Animal, herd (zebra, 
giraffe, antelope) Low 
06-07 Ape, carnivorous* High 
08-15 Avian (parrot, cockatoo, 
toucan) Low 
16-17 Bat (common, large) Low 
18-19 Bøoalisk Low 
20-21 Boar (warthog) Med. 
22 Couatl* - 
23-24 Faerie dragon* - 
25-26 Elephant Med 
27-36 Great cat (lion, tiger, jaguar, 
leopard) Med. 
37-38 Grippli Med. 
39-40 Lizard man (advanced) - 
41-47 Mammal, small (ferret, 
monkey, mouse) Low 
48-50 Primate (baboon, orangutan) High 
51-52 Rhinoceros* Low 
53-56 Snake (normal constrictor, 
giant constrictor, jaculi) Neg; 
57-58 Weretiger* = 
59-60  Tabaxi = 
61-00 Human/Demihuman — 


Table 39: Mountain Followers 
D100 Roll Follower 


01-03 
04-11 


12-21 


Aarakocra* 

Animal, herd (goat, deer, 
sheep) 

Avian (wild eagle, falcon, 
hawk, owl) 

Badger (giant, common) 
Bear (black, brown, cave) 
Dragonet (firedrake)* 
Eagle, giant* 

Galeb duhr* 

Great cat (mountain lion) 
Griffin* 

Hippogritf* 

Lizard (minotaur) 
Mammal, small (fox, 
mouse, squirrel, beaver) 
Wolf 
Human/demihuman 


Trainability 


Low 


Low 
Low 
Med. 


High 


Med. 
Med. 
Med. 
Neg. 


Med. 
Med. 


E a iA tally, 

r EEUN, MENN pa n 
yt ho a 4 ) 
Mwy 


Table 40: Plains Followers 


D100 Roll Follower 
Animal, herd (deer, goat, 


01-06 


07-18 


19-21 
22-24 
25-26 
27-32 
33-35 
36-42 


buffalo, sheep, cattle, 
antelope) 


Trainability 


Low 


Avian (falcon, hawk, owl, 


pigeon, crow, raven) Low 
Badger (common, giant) Low 
Boar (wild, giant) Med. 
Brownie* = 
Dog (wild, war) Med. 
Dog, blink* High 
Mammal, small (mouse, fox, 
chipmunk, rabbit, wild 

pig, gopher, hamster) Low 


Cat, small (domestic, wild) Med. 


Horse (heavy, medium, 
light, pony, wild, mule) 
Hyena 

Rat (common, giant) 
Wemic 
Human/demihuman 


Followers » 33 


Table 41: Swamp Followers 


D100 Roll Follower 


01-08 


09-11 
12-14 
15-17 
18-22 
23-25 
26-28 
29-32 
33-39 


40-41 
42-44 


Trainability 
Avian (owl, heron, loon, 
raven) Low 
Badger (common, giant) Low 
Bat (normal, large) Low 
Boar (wild, giant, warthog) Med. 
Crocodile (common) Neg. 
Frog (giant) Neg. 
Lizard (giant) Neg. 
Lizard man (advanced) - 
Mammal, small (ferret, fox, 
otter, mouse, muskrat) Low 
Naga (water)* = 
Porcupine (black, brown, 
giant) Low 
Rat (common, giant) Med. 
Shambling mound* Low 
Snake (constrictor, giant 
constrictor) Neg. 
Toad (giant) Neg. 
Werebear* - 


Human/demihuman 


Table 42: Underdark Followers 


D100 Roll Follower 


01-06 
07-18 
19-21 
22-24 
25-26 
27-34 


35-38 
39-40 
41-48 
49-51 
52-53 
54-59 
60-62 
63-65 
66-00 


Subspecies: This assumes a subspecies native 
to the Underdark that is more intelligent or 
trainable than the standard species. 


Bat (normal, large) 
Bear (cave) 

Beetle (fire, boring) 
Crocodile (common) 
Doppleganger* 
Lizard (giant— 
subspecies) 

Lizard (subterranean) 
Mimic (common)* 
Mongrelman 
Myconid* 

Otyugh* 

Owlbear 

Rat (common, giant) 
Spider (giant—steeder) 
Human/demihuman 


34 • Chapter Three 


Trainability 


Low 
Med. 
Low. 
Neg. 


Med. 
Neg. 
High 
Low 
Med. 
Low 
Med. 
High 


Table 43: Human/Demihuman Followers 


D100 Roll Follower 


01-02 Bard 

03 Bard (half-elf) 
04-06 Druid 
07-08 Druid (half-elf) 
09-14 Cleric 


15 Cleric (elf)* 
16 Cleric (half-elf) 
17-23 Fighter (elf) 
24-28 Fighter (gnome) 
29-33 Fighter (halfling) 
34-51 Fighter 
52 Fighter/Cleric (half-elf) 
53-54 Fighter/Mage (elf)* 
55 Fighter / Illusionist (gnome)* 
56-67 Ranger (half-elf) 
68-92 Ranger 
93 Ranger/Cleric (half-elf) 
94-95 Thief (halfling) 
96-97 Thief 
98 Thief (gnome) 
99-00 DM's Choice 


* If ranger has had a follower of this type, roll 
again. 


Sea Ranger: Any full elf follower is 80% likely 
to be an aquatic elf. 

Mountaineer: Replace any full elf with moun- 
tain dwarf. Any full elf fighter /mage is replaced 
by a gnome fighter/ illusionist. 


Helpful Statistics 

Avian (tern, penguin, pelican, duck, parrot, cocka- 
too, toucan, crow, raven, loon, heron): Int animal; 
AL N; AC 7; MV 1-3, Fl 24-36 (B) (penguin: MV 
3); HD 1-4 hp; THACO nil or 20; #AT nil or 1; 
Dmg nil or 1; SZ T or S; ML 5-7; XP 0 or 15 

Boar, giant: Int animal; AL N; AC 6; MV 12; HD 7; 
THACO 13; #AT 1; Dmg 3d6; SD fight 1d4 rounds 
if hp 0 to -10; SZ L; ML 11; XP 650 

Caribou: Int animal; AL N; AC 7; MV 21; HD 3; 
THACO 17; #AT 2; Dmg 14/1-4; SZ L; ML 5-7; XP 
120 

Dragonet, Firedrake: Int semi-; AL N; AC 5; MV 6 fl 
18 (C); HD 4; THACO 17; #AT 1; Dmg 2d4; SA fire 
breath 5/day, 2d8 in 60’x10' cone; SD 1-2 fire 
damage per P or S weapon hit unless save vs. 
breath; SZ S; ML 9; XP 420 

Catfish, giant: Int animal; AL N; AC 7; MV Sw 18; 
HD 7; THACO 13; #AT 1; Dmg 3d4; SA swallow 
size S if 4+ over hit roll; two toxic feelers, 2d4 
each (1d4 if save); SZ L; ML 9; XP 2,000 

Giraffe: Int animal; AL N; AC 6; MV 21; HD 4; 
THACO 17; #AT 1 or 2; Dmg 1-4 or 1-2/1-2; SZ H; 
ML 5-7; XP 120 

Goat: Int animal; AL N; AC 7; MV 15; HD 1+2; 
THACO 19; #AT 1; Dmg 1-3; SA charge (+2 attack, 
+1-2 dmg); SZ M; ML 8-10; XP 35 

Musk-ox: Int animal; AL N; AC 7; MV 12; HD 4; 
THACO 17; #AT 2; Dmg 1-4/1-4; SZ L; ML 8-10; 
XP 120 

Primate (orangutan): Int low; AL N; AC 7; MV 9; 
HD 1+1; THACO 19; #AT 1; Dmg 14; SZ S; ML 5- 
7; XP 35 

Reindeer: Int animal; AL N; AC 7; MV 24; HD 2; 
THACO 19; #AT 1; Dmg 1-4; SZ M; ML 5-7; XP 35 
Rhinoceros: Int animal; AL N; AC 6; MV 12; HD 8; 
THACO 13; #AT 1; Dmg 2-8; SA charge (double 
damage), trample 2-8/2-8; SZ L; ML 8; XP 975. 
Seal: Int animal; AL N; AC 6; MV 3, Sw 18; HD 1; 
THACO 19; #AT 1; Dmg 1-3; SZ M; ML 8-10; XP 35 
Small mammal (hamster, kangaroo rat, prairie dog): 
Int animal; AL N; AC 9; MV 12, Br 1; HD 1 hp; 
THACO0 nil; #AT nil; Dmg nil; SZ S; ML 2-4; XP 0 
Zebra: Int animal; AL N; AC 7; MV 24; HD 2; 
THACO 19; #AT 1; Dmg 1-3; SZ L; ML 5-7; XP 65 


General Behavior of Followers 


This section pertains to animal followers, as 
do the three sections which follow—Training 
Animal Followers, Follower Loyalty, and Parting 
Company. Information relevant to human and 
demihuman followers can be found in the last 
section of this chapter. 


What exactly does an animal follower do, any- 
way? 

At first, animal followers do little more than 
that—they follow. While an avian follower may 
perch on the ranger’s shoulder for a few miles or a 
dog may scout up ahead, for the most part, fol- 
lowers linger behind, keeping perhaps 10-20 feet 
between themselves and the ranger. 

In general, an animal follower attempts to 
accompany the ranger wherever he goes. If the 
ranger enters a cave, the follower goes in after 
him. If the ranger paddles a canoe, the follower 
attempts to swim alongside. If the follower can’t 
swim, it waits on shore for the ranger to return. If 
the follower is too big to squeeze through an 
underground passage, it may surface and wait for 
the ranger outside. 

Likewise, if a ranger moves at a pace faster than 
the follower can maintain, the follower will 
attempt to pursue as best it can. When a ranger 
interrupts his travels—for instance, if he stops to 
camp—he may give the lagging follower enough 
time to catch up. If a follower is unable to rejoin 
the ranger because of a lost trail (the animal hasn’t 
seen the ranger in several days and can no longer 
track him), physical barriers (the animal is inca- 
pable of following the ranger across a vast river) 
or inhospitable terrain (a seafaring ranger has left 
for the shore, abandoning a water-breathing fol- 
lower), the follower is considered to be released; 
see the Parting Company section below for details. 


Routine Activities 


For the most part, an animal follower can take 
care of itself. Assuming there’s an adequate sup- 
ply of game or edible vegetation in the area, the 
animal will hunt or graze as necessary to keep 
itself fed. It will find its own water, keep itself 
groomed, and rest when tired. If the ranger 


Followers * 35 


marches by day and rests by night, nocturnal ani- 
mals will either reverse their normal sleeping pat- 
terns and sleep when the ranger sleeps, or sleep 
by day and catch up with the ranger in the 
evening. 

In extreme circumstances, an animal follower 
may depend on the ranger for routine care. If an 
animal follower accompanies a ranger into a city 
or other area where it’s unable to hunt, the ranger 
will probably have to supply food. In a hot desert, 
a ranger may need to share his water. Wounded or 
ailing animals sometimes require medical atten- 
tion. If an animal fails to receive adequate care, it 
may abandon the ranger (see the Parting Com- 
pany section). 

As an animal becomes more attached to a 
ranger, it may require extra attention or reassur- 
ance. Usually, an animal lets the ranger know 
when it needs attention by rubbing against him, 
frolicking in front of him, or whining incessantly. 
Usually, a ranger can soothe an anxious animal 
follower by playing with it for a few minutes, 
offering some comforting words, or stroking its 
fur. If the ranger makes a habit of ignoring a fol- 
lower, it may abandon him. 


Procreation 


Most healthy animals have a powerful instinct to 
procreate. On occasion, a follower will disappear 
into the wilderness to seek a mate. Usually, the fol- 
lower returns in a few hours, or at most, a few days. 
However, so strong is the urge that the follower 
may abandon the ranger altogether if it has to 
travel long distances to find a suitable partner. 
Also, the quest for a mate is not without risk; a 
male follower may die while fighting a rival for the 
attentions of a desirable female (which may account 
for why some followers mysteriously disappear 
and never come back). But more often than not, a 
follower will complete its liaison without incident, 
rejoining its ranger unharmed and content. 

Should a female animal follower give birth, the 
offspring don’t automatically become followers. 
Initially, offspring are considered “followers” of 
the parent, as their relationship with their mother 
more or less parallels the mother’s relationship 
with the ranger. As the offspring mature, they 
may wander away to start lives of their own, or 


36 * Chapter Three 


they may stay and become followers, as decided 
by the DM. Offspring who become followers 
count against the ranger’s normal limit. 


Combat 


Animal followers will rarely defend their 
rangers against attack unless trained to do so (see 
the Training Followers section below), especially if 
the opposition is supernatural or uses fire. In gen- 
eral, a follower is mainly concerned with its own 
safety, fighting only when necessary to protect 
itself. An exceptionally violent animal may relish 
any opportunity to attack, and some will stand 
guard over or attempt to drag away their incapac- 
itated ranger, but most of the time, a follower is 
more likely to take cover or retreat than engage in 
combat. The DM determines the combat reactions 
of a follower just as he would for any animal in 
the game. 


Communication 


When a ranger acquires an animal follower, he 
gains no special way of communicating with it. 
Unless the ranger trains the creature to respond to 
specific vocal sounds or physical signals, the fol- 
lower passively accompanies the ranger on his 
travels, oblivious to his commands. 


Reactions to Others 


Animal followers feel loyal and friendly to their 
rangers. Most animal followers would no more 
harm their rangers than they would their own 
mothers. A follower would be unlikely to retaliate 
violently if the ranger mistreated it; instead, the 
follower would simply leave. 

The ranger’s presence has a calming influence on 
wild animal followers which tempers their reactions 
to the ranger’s other companions. The animal fol- 
lowers will generally leave other player characters 
alone, so long as the PCs keep their distance and 
don’t antagonize them. However, if a PC comes too 
close to a lion, tiger, or other wild animal follower, 
the follower may respond with a warning snarl or 
even a swipe of the paw. If the PC doesn’t get the 
message, the follower may attack. Such an attack 
continues until the PC withdraws or the ranger 


intervenes. If the ranger has trained the follower to 
attack only when ordered, fellow PCs won't have to 
worry about assaults. Otherwise, the ranger’s com- 
panions are advised to keep their distance. Even a 
ranger will not approach a predatory follower just 
after it has made a kill. 

Naturally docile animals, such as sheep and 
mice, pose no threat to the party. Neither do 
domesticated creatures, such as farm animals and 
pets. Unless a trained animal is responding to its 
ranger’s commands, the DM will decide how 
docile followers react, exactly as he does for fol- 
lowers that are wild animals. 

Wild animal followers respond to non-player 
characters in much the same way as they do the 
ranger’s companions; that is, they ignore NPCs 
who keep their distance and make no hostile 
actions, but may attack NPCs who get too close or 
threaten them. Docile animals respond timidly to 
unfamiliar NPCs, possibly cowering behind the 
ranger or seeking cover. 

A ranger’s calming influence also extends to 
followers who would normally consider each 
other predator and prey. If a deer and a lion are 
both among a ranger’s followers, they co-exist 
harmoniously so long as they remain with the 
ranger. Though it’s unlikely the pair would cuddle 
up together to go to sleep, neither would the lion 
eat the deer. At the same time, the lion follower 
would consider all other deer fair game, hunting 
them as necessary to satisfy its hunger. Should the 
ranger abandon or dismiss his lion and deer fol- 
lowers, the animals would shortly revert to their 
natural states, and the deer might stand a good 
chance of becoming the lion's next meal. 


Disadvantages 


Animal followers provide many benefits to 
rangers, but there can be drawbacks as well. Here 
are a few typical complications, which the DM can 
use to add color to a campaign, serve as story 
springboards, or enliven an otherwise routine 
encounter. 

ə Some animals attract predators. A rat follower 
could attract a giant snake, or a boar follower 
might lure a hungry dragon. The ranger and 
his companions could be ambushed along 
with the followers. 


è Certain followers may be sought by hunters 
and collectors. A weasel follower with lus- 
trous ivory fur might prove irresistible to 
unprincipled sportsmen. A renegade wizard 
could target the party to get her hands on the 
feathers of a black owl follower, which she 
needs for a spell component. Rustlers might 
assault a party just to steal a ranger’s horse 
follower. 

* The presence of unusual followers may make 
NPCs less likely to deal with the party. A trav- 
eler may hesitate to share information when a 
growling bear lurks in the background. A 
giant eagle fluttering overhead could discour- 
age a merchant from trading with the PCs. 
The DM may modify an NPC's reaction by as 
much as —4 when disconcerting, threatening, 
or obnoxious animal followers are present. 

è Some animals have habits which can make life 
uncomfortable, if not downright miserable, 
for the ranger and his companions. A filthy 
hyena follower might smell so bad that it 
makes the PCs’ eyes burn. A parrot follower 
may insist on keeping the party up all night 
with its incessant chatter. A curious squirrel 
follower could pick the pocket of a slumber- 
ing wizard, steal a crucial spell component, 
then bury it in the forest. 


Training Animal Followers 


Rangers can train their animal followers to 
perform a remarkable variety of tricks and tasks. 
Because of the ranger’s unique rapport with his 
animal followers, he can teach them more effi- 
ciently than other characters are able to train 
normal animals. And because of the followers’ 
eagerness to please, they learn their tricks and 
tasks more quickly. 

Two methods are provided for representing this 
special relationship with animal followers. The 
Standard method is the simplest and most 
straightforward, but treats all animals more or less 
the same. The Alternative method requires extra 
bookkeeping, but is a bit more realistic, as it takes 
into account the learning capacities of different 
species. Both methods are similar to and compati- 
ble with the animal training proficiency (the ani- 
mal training proficiency itself isn’t used to train 


Followers * 37 


followers). Whichever method you prefer, it’s best 
to stick with it throughout the entire campaign. 

Before examining the training methods, let's 
clarify what is meant by tricks and tasks. These 
definitions apply to the animal training profi- 
ciency as well as the training methods described 
below. 

A trick is a specific action performed in response 
to a specific stimulus, such as a command, a 
sound, or a gesture. The action involves only a sin- 
gle step and requires no independent decision- 
making. In every instance, the animal performs 
the action exactly as taught, without i improvisa- 
tion of any kind. The stimulus must be unambigu- 
ous and precise (“Stay”); any variance in the 
stimulus (“Don’t move”) is likely to be misinter- 
preted, resulting in a failure to perform the trick as 
intended. 

A task is general sequence of actions performed 
in response to a stimulus. The action may involve 
multiple steps and require some independent 
decision-making. Completion of the task may 
require a certain amount of improvisation. The 
stimulus may be non-specific (for instance, if 
taught the task of tracking, the follower is able to 
track a variety of animals, not just one particular 
species). Obviously, tasks are more difficult to 
master than tricks. 


The Standard Method 


This training method uses essentially the same 
rules as the animal training proficiency 
described in Chapter 5 of the Player’s Handbook. 
The ranger announces the trick or task he wishes 
to teach a particular follower (examples of tricks 
and tasks are given below). The DM may disal- 
low the trick or task if he decides the follower is 
incapable of performing it; a reptile, for instance, 
may be too dull to come on command, or a chip- 
munk may lack the attention span needed to 
track. If the DM approves, the ranger proceeds. 
It takes the ranger 2d4 weeks to teach a trick toa 
follower and two months to teach a task. 

When the training period ends, the ranger 
makes a Wisdom check (using his own Wisdom 
score). If the check succeeds, the animal has mas- 
tered the trick or task. If the check fails, the ranger 
can make another attempt to teach the follower 


38 Ħ* Chapter Three 


the same trick or task by expending the same time 
and effort. He then makes another Wisdom check. 
If it succeeds, the animal learns the trick or task. If 
it fails, then the animal cannot be trained to per- 
form that trick or task. A follower can learn a max- 
imum of 2d4 tasks or tricks, in any combination of 
the two. 

A ranger can train up to three followers at the 
same time. As all followers are naturally cooper- 
ative with the ranger, he doesn’t need to prepare 
“wild” animal followers by taming them (unlike 
the requirement given in the animal training 
proficiency). 

Successful training assumes the ranger works 
with the followers for short periods on a regular 
basis; the amount of time spent is less important 
than working with the follower every day. If the 
ranger fails to maintain a regular schedule—say, 
if he skips a full week or so of training—he must 
start over, investing another two months for a 
task or 2d4 weeks for a trick. 

The DM should write down the number of 
tricks and tasks a particular follower is able to 
learn. The player should also note the tricks and 
tasks on his ranger’s record sheet as the followers 
learn them. Additionally, when teaching a fol- 
lower a new trick or task, the player should keep 
track of how many weeks have passed for each 
training period. 


The Alternative Method 


The Alternative method involves the use of a 
trainability rating, a general indication of a fol- 
lower’s capacity to learn. The higher the trainabil- 
ity rating, the more tricks and tasks an animal can 
know and the faster it can master them. The train- 
ability rating is primarily based on the animal's 
Intelligence score, but also takes into account its 
fondness for humans and demihumans, its will- 
ingness to learn, and its eagerness to please. Train- 
ability ratings apply only to a ranger’s followers 
and have no bearing on the relationships between 
animals and other character classes or on the ani- 

mal training proficiency. 

Tables 31-42 give trainability ratings for a vari- 
ety of animal followers. The DM can use the train- 
ability ratings in these tables as guidelines for 
assigning ratings to species not listed, should he 


decide to modify or expand the tables. 

The DM may also make exceptions for animal 
individuals. He may decide, for instance, that a 
particular squirrel is smart enough to merit a 
Medium rating rather than the Low rating given 
on Table 34. Likewise, he may rule that an excep- 
tionally dull wolf deserves no better than a Low 
rating. In any case, the DM should make such a 
determination as soon as the follower arrives. A 
follower’s trainability rating should not change 
once it has been assigned. 

The four ratings—Negligible, Low, Medium, and 
High—are discussed in detail below. Each describes 
the types of animals encompassed by the rating, the 
time required to learn tricks and tasks, and the 
maximum number of tricks and tasks that follow- 
ers with the rating can learn. For convenience, 
Table 44 summarizes this information. 

Additionally, each description lists several 
tricks and tasks associated with the rating. The 
lists don’t include all possible tricks and tasks, but 
a general sample; the DM should use the lists as a 
basis to determine the difficulty of any other trick 
or task that the ranger wishes to teach a follower. 
A follower can learn tricks and tasks associated 
with all lesser ratings, as well as those associated 
with its own rating; a Medium trainability fol- 
lower, for instance, can learn tricks and tasks asso- 
ciated with Negligible, Low, and Medium ratings. 

In all other respects, the Alternative method 
uses the same rules as the Standard method. Only 
the types and numbers of tricks and tasks, along 
with the training times, are different. 


Negligible Trainability 

This category includes animals with little apti- 
tude for learning, such as fish, insects, arachnids, 
and reptiles. Most of these creatures have Intelli- 
gence scores of 0. Followers with negligible train- 
ability can learn only the simplest tricks, such as 
those requiring movement towards or away from 
a stimulus. They can’t learn tasks. Since some of 
these creatures are unable to discern sound, the 
ranger may need to use a bright light (such as a 
torch) or a broad gesture (a sweep of the hands) 
instead of a vocal command to get the follower to 
respond. 

A follower with negligible trainability can learn 
no more than a few (1d4) tricks, though the DM 


may decide that a particular animal is not capable 
of learning any tricks. Training time is 2d6 weeks 
per trick. 

Sample tricks: 

Withdraw. The follower moves away from the 
ranger at maximum speed for 1-4 rounds, then 
stops. 

Come. The follower advances toward ranger at 
maximum speed, stopping when it comes within a 
few feet. 

Stay. The follower stays in place for 2-12 rounds, 
after which it resumes its normal activity. 

Attack. The follower aggressively attacks any 
creature indicated by the ranger. The attacks per- 
sist until the ranger breaks the command. Whether 
a follower fights to the death is up to the DM; in 
many cases, a follower in danger of losing its life 
(an animal that has lost half of its hit points) will 
withdraw. If the ranger commands such an animal 
to continue its attacks, a morale check may be in 
order (see the Parting Company section below). 
Animals that have been attack-trained usually 
have a base morale of at least 11. 

Attack-trained animals get a save vs. rods 
against another ranger’s animal empathy ability. 


Low Trainability 

Animals in this category have an average but 
unexceptional aptitude for learning. They can 
learn a wide range of tricks, but few tasks. The cat- 
egory includes herd animals, small mammals, and 
birds, most of which have Intelligence scores of 1. 
The majority of animals either belong to this cate- 
gory or the Medium trainability category. 

A follower with Low trainability can learn 2-8 
(2d4) tricks and tasks, of which half or less can be 
tasks. Training time is 2-8 (2d4) weeks per trick 
and 10 weeks for tasks. 

Sample tricks: 

Heel. The follower remains within a few feet of 
the ranger, mimicking his movement. The fol- 
lower tries to move as fast as the ranger, stop 
when he stops, and stay with him until the ranger 
breaks the command. This type of movement is 
distinct from the follower’s normal movement, as 
the follower remains at the ranger’s side at all 
times, rather than lurking in back of the party. 
Mastery of the Come and Stay tricks usually pre- 
cedes the learning of this trick. 


Followers * 39 


Sit. The follower sits on its haunches until the 
ranger breaks the command, at which time the 
follower resumes its normal actions. Variations 
include Standing, Rearing, Rolling Over, Playing 
Dead, and other simple physical feats, all of 
which are distinct tricks and require individual 
training periods. 

Speak. The follower growls, barks, chirps, or 
makes any other natural sound on command. 

Fetch. The follower retrieves a specific object 
and brings it to the ranger. Typical objects include 
coins, balls, bones, or sticks. In order for the fol- 
lower to execute the command, the ranger must 
first show the object to the follower before throw- 
ing it or hiding it. The follower won't search indef- 
initely; if the ranger tosses the object in a field of 
high grass, for instance, the follower may search 
for 10-30 minutes before giving up and returning 
to the ranger. Note that the Fetch trick doesn’t 
allow the follower to hunt for and recognize 
objects belonging to a general category; that is, a 
follower can’t enter a building and look for hid- 
den gems or other treasure items. 

Carry Rider. This assumes the animal is physi- 
cally able to carry a rider. It obeys simple move- 
ment commands from the rider, such as turning 
left and right, stopping, and trotting. However, 
the follower can’t execute any of the maneuvers 
associated with the Stunt Riding task explained in 
the Medium trainability section below. This does 
not replace riding proficiency; any maneuvers 
performed by the rider, such as using the mount 
as a shield or leaping from the steed’s back to the 
ground, require the riding proficiency checks. 

Sample tasks: 

Retrieve. The follower can locate and bring 
back a specific type of item from a general loca- 
tion. Such items might include coins, jewelry, 
weapons, or food; a general location might be the 
interior of a building, a grove of trees, or a shallow 
stream. The ranger must show the follower a sam- 
ple similar to the desired item, and must also indi- 
cate the area which the follower is to search. The 
follower won't search indefinitely; if unable to 
find an item, it usually will return empty-handed 
(or empty-mouthed) within an hour. 

Bodyguard. The follower protects the ranger 
or a designated friend from attacks by keeping 
opponents at bay or by attacking them directly, 


40 « Chapter Three 


as commanded by the ranger. The follower will 
fight alongside the ranger, making its own deci- 
sions which enemies to attack (it may, for 
instance, attack an unnoticed opponent sneaking 
up behind the ranger). The Attack trick must be 
learned before this task. 


Medium Trainability 

Exceptionally bright animals belong to this 
group, including those commonly found as pets, 
trained for circuses, or used in warfare. These 
animals will tend to have Intelligence scores in 
the 2-4 range. 

A follower with medium trainability is able to 
learn 4-10 (2d4+2) tricks or tasks in any combina- 
tion. Training time is 2d3 (2-6) weeks for tricks, 
and 8 weeks for tasks. 

Sample tasks: 

Track. The follower can follow the trail of an 
animal, human, or demihuman; in general, only 
followers capable of tracking prey by scent are 
eligible to learn this task. The follower must be 
familiar with the creature being tracked, or the 
ranger must provide a sample of the scent (a 
piece of clothing, a scrap of hide). It can retrace 
its path to lead the ranger to the creature. If the 
follower assists the ranger in tracking, the ranger 
adds +1 to his Tracking proficiency checks (see 
Chapter 2). If the follower is tracking by itself, it 
makes Tracking checks independently of the 
ranger. Assume that the base Tracking score of a 
wolf, lion, or similar predator ranges from 13-16. 
A hunting dog’s score may be as high as 19, 
while a young badger’s score as low as 11; the 
DM makes the call. 

Stunt Riding. An animal follower with this 
proficiency can ride, performing all of the feats 
associated with the airborne and land-based rid- 
ing proficiencies (as appropriate to the fol- 
lower's size and species). For airborne mounts, 
animal’s Stunt Riding score is the same as the 
ranger’s Wisdom score, with a -2 penalty. For 
land-based mounts, the Stunt Riding score is 
equal to the ranger’s Wisdom score, with a +3 
bonus. Therefore, a ranger with Wisdom 14 who 
wants his stunt-riding dog to balance on a horse 
leaping a gap wider than 12 feet must roll his 
Riding score of 17 or less (14 for his Wisdom, +3 
for a land-based mount). 


High Trainability 

Only a handful of followers, such as dolphins 
and certain primates, qualify for this category. 
Animals with high trainability can reason, weigh 
options, and arrive at their own conclusions. Their 
ability to learn tasks rivals that of some humans 
and demihumans. Their Intelligence scores begin 
at 5 and go up. 

A follower with high trainability can learn 6-12 
(2d4+4) tricks or tasks, or any combination of the 
two. Training time is 1d4 weeks for tricks, and 6 
weeks for tasks. 

Sample tasks: 

Lookout. As directed by the ranger, the follower 
stands watch or scouts ahead, keeping alert for 
signs of trouble. If the follower perceives a threat, 
it unobtrusively alerts the ranger. This training 
includes a special signal the follower can give for 
the ranger’s species enemy. 

Complex Chore. The follower can perform a 
complex chore requiring decision-making or a rel- 


Hho) 


atively detailed series of steps. Such chores include 
building a fire, washing dishes, or grooming a 
horse. Learning each chore requires a separate 
training period. 

Weapon Use. The follower wields a sword, dag- 
ger, or other simple weapon, using it when attack- 
ing. Each weapon requires its own training period, 
and opposable thumbs are needed in most 
instances. This task is most useful when the fol- 
lower has already mastered the Attack trick or 
Bodyguard task, described above. 


Not Applicable (-) 

Creatures who can communicate with spoken 
language and whose Intelligence scores are on par 
with those of humans don’t have trainability rat- 
ings. To determine their behavior as followers, 
consult the guidelines in the Humans and Demi- 
humans section below, along with the relevant 
information in their Monstrous Compendium 
entries. 


Followers * 41 


Table 44: Follower Training Table 


TR TT (Tricks) TT (Tasks) Max. Number 


Neg. 2d6 weeks - 1d4-1 
Low 2d4weeks 10 weeks 2d4* 

Med. 2d3 weeks 8 weeks 2d4+2 
High 1d4weeks 6 weeks 2d4+4 


* Up to half of these can be tasks 


Abbreviations: 

TR: Trainability Rating 

TT: Training Time (time required to learn trick 
or task) 

Max. Number: Maximum number of tricks and 
tasks (in any combination) the follower may learn 


Success of Tricks and Tasks 


Followers perform most tricks and simple tasks 
automatically; no die rolls or success checks are 
necessary. If the outcome of a particular task is 
uncertain (a follower taught to pull a wagon has a 
heavy load to haul) the DM may require an ability 
check if the relevant ability score is known (the 
follower pulls the wagon if a Strength check suc- 
ceeds), or he can assign a percentile chance based 
on his assessment of the situation (the load is 
exceedingly heavy; the DM sets the chance of suc- 
cess at 20%). 

The DM should adjudicate the Attack trick, the 
Bodyguard task, and similar combat-oriented 
tricks and tasks just as he would for normal com- 
bat situations, determining attack and damage 
rolls as required. 


Parting Company 


If a ranger treats his followers well, they'll 
remain with him indefinitely. If the ranger has not 
neglected the well-being of his followers, or vio- 
lated their trust, loyalty checks for them are rarely 
necessary. 


When a Follower Abandons a Ranger 


However, there is a limit as to how much abuse 
a follower will tolerate. The actions—or inaction— 
of the ranger may necessitate morale checks, as 


42 « Chapter Three 


determined by the DM. Should a morale check 
succeed, the follower remains with the ranger. 
Should a check fail, the follower goes its own way, 
in most cases never to return, Followers who per- 
manently abandon their ranger are considered lost 
and are not replaced. 

Here are some situations that may result in a 
follower abandoning its ranger. It’s up to the DM 
to decide when a given situation becomes stressful 
enough for the follower to require a morale check. 

Inhospitable Terrain. An animal may hesitate 
to enter an environment radically different from 
its own. A hawk follower native to the mountains 
probably won't resist following a ranger into a for- 
est or plain, but it may balk at entering an arctic 
region. Even if an animal follows a ranger into 
hostile terrain, it may not remain there for long; 
for example, a hawk may tolerate the freezing cli- 
mate of the arctic for no more than a day or two. 

Reckless Endangerment. Followers trained for 
combat willingly participate in encounters that 
may result in injury or even death. However, if the 
ranger forces an animal to participate in an unre- 
lenting series of battles, resulting in serious dam- 
age or chronic fatigue, the follower may rebel and 
leave. Likewise, if a ranger regularly compels an 
animal to follow him into caverns, ruins, and sim- 
ilarly dangerous places, the animal may flee. 

Starvation. Though followers usually find their 
own food, in certain situations they may depend 
on their rangers for nourishment. If a ranger 
neglects to keep a follower fed, the follower may 
decide to look for greener pastures. 

Mistreatment. Most followers won’t stand for 
beatings, whippings, or other physical mistreat- 
ment. (Being of noble character, most rangers 
won't administer such punishments, but excep- 
tions do occur.) If the ranger persists in this behav- 
ior, abandonment is inevitable. 

Inattention. Some followers, particularly dogs 
and other domestic animals, have emotional as 
well as physical needs. A ranger who consistently 
ignores or withholds praise and affection from his 
followers risks losing them. 

Mating Season. An animal's urge to mate may 
overwhelm its loyalty to its ranger. An animal 
may disappear during mating season and never 
return, particularly if it has trouble finding a suit- 
able partner. Morale checks usually aren’t applica- 


ble in these situations; instead, the DM may take 
advantage of mating season to restore balance to 
the game by eliminating a powerful follower, or 
getting rid of a cumbersome follower that’s prov- 
ing to be too much of a burden to a ranger. 

Impending Death. When certain followers 
reach the end of their days, due to illness or old 
age, they may abandon their ranger to die alone 
(an aged elephant journeying to an elephant’s 
graveyard). Morale checks aren't usually neces- 
sary. Instead, the DM may engineer a poignant 
scene where the ranger realizes that death is near 
for his loyal companion, and must come to terms 
with the loss. 


When a Ranger Abandons a Follower 


Situations may arise where the ranger wants to 
rid himself of a particular follower. A follower 
with negligible trainability may prove to be more 
annoying than helpful. A filthy or frightening fol- 
lower may make the party uncomfortable. A fol- 
lower may eat too much, move too slowly, or scare 
off too many NPCs. Whatever the reason, the 
ranger has two options for abandoning a follower, 
either of which he can exercise any time he likes. 

Release. This is a form of temporary abandon- 
ment. Using commanding gestures and a firm 
voice, the ranger lets the follower know that he 
wants it to remain behind. Because of the special 
bond between the follower and the ranger, the fol- 
lower instinctively understands what the ranger is 
telling it, and responds by reluctantly wandering 
away into the wilderness. Should the ranger 
return to the general area where he released the 
follower, and call out to the follower or otherwise 
make his presence known, the released animal 
may show up again, ready to resume its role as a 
follower. (The DM decides if a released follower 
returns; generally, if the ranger attempts to locate 
the follower within a few months of its release, the 
animal will show up within a day or so. Other- 
wise, the ranger should assume that the released 
follower has died or relocated.) 

Dismiss. This is a form of permanent abandon- 
ment. As with release, the ranger communicates 
his desire to dismiss a follower through a series of 
gestures and vocal commands. The dismissed fol- 
lower moves away into the wilderness, never to 


be seen again. A dismissed follower will not 
return to the ranger. A ranger can’t replace dis- 
missed followers; they still count against his nor- 
mal limit. 


Other Options 


A ranger who doesn’t want to release or dismiss 
an unwanted animal follower has a host of other 
options, limited only by his imagination and the 
DM’s approval. He can arrange for a farmer, a zoo 
keeper, or other NPC to care for the follower 
(making sure, of course, the caretaker is of good 
alignment). He can keep it in his stronghold, ask- 
ing a human or demihuman follower to care for it. 
He can also give it to a friendly NPC as a gift 
(again, presuming the NPC is of good alignment; 
failure to do so may be taken as a sign of betrayal 
by the ranger’s remaining followers). 


Humans and Demihumans 


Humans and demihumans become followers 
for different reasons than animals. Drawn to a 
ranger’s reputation for honor and integrity, 
humans and demihumans serve as followers out 
of respect, admiration, and hero-worship. They 
remain loyal so long as their basic needs are met, 
and the ranger doesn’t betray their trust. 

Trainability doesn’t apply to human and demi- 
human followers. Instead, they will perform any 
duties or functions within reason. Typically, such 
followers serve as soldiers, but they may also 
work as guards, servants, or personal aides. 

Human and demihuman followers accompany 
the ranger as long as their basic needs are met and 
their are fairly treated. Some may serve with the 
understanding that the ranger will teach them the 
ways of the wilderness. It’s up to the ranger to 
determine the needs and expectations of each new 
follower when he arrives. 

A ranger’s human and demihuman followers 
aren't confined to a stronghold. They may accom- 
pany him on his travels or undertake independent 
missions. In other respects, a ranger’s followers 
adhere to the guidelines given in Chapter 12 of the 
Player's Handbook. The DM should prepare a char- 
acter sheet with all relevant statistics for each new 
follower. The DM, not the player, controls the 


Followers * 43 


actions of the follower. 

Restrictions. In general, human and demihu- 
man followers should be of 1st to 4th level when 
they appear; a 15th-level fighter has better things 
to do than tag along after a 10th-level ranger. 
Additionally, the follower should be of good 
alignment; except in rare cases, rangers won't tol- 
erate neutral or evil followers. 

Followers can be of either sex. The age of the fol- 
lower is also unimportant, although because of their 
low levels, most followers will be relatively young. 

Personalities. Impressionable youths, curious 
scholars, impulsive vagabonds, and orphaned wan- 
derers all make good followers. Interesting quirks or 
personal problems make followers more fun for the 
players, and also provide springboards for adven- 
tures. Chapter 12 of the DUNGEON MASTER Guide 
offers suggestions for creating NPC personalities, 
which are also suitable for followers. 

Abandonment. Just as he may do with animal 


followers, the ranger may dismiss or release his 
human and demihuman followers. Released fol- 
lowers may rejoin the ranger at a later time. 
Human and demihuman rangers who are dis- 
missed or otherwise lost can’t be replaced. 

Human and demihuman followers may also 
abandon their rangers. Situations that may trigger 
abandonment include reckless endangerment, 
continual verbal abuse, or inattention to the fol- 
lower’s needs. If the ranger commits an act of 
cowardice or otherwise violates his code of honor, 
a follower may become disillusioned and abandon 
the ranger in disgust. The DM might make morale 
checks to determine if a follower stays or goes, he 
may resolve the situation by role-playing (the fol- 
lower requests an explanation for the ranger’s 
cowardly behavior; the follower stays if the ranger 
offers a reasonable justification), or in extreme 
cases, he may have the follower simply disappear 
without explanation. 


Notes on Falconry 


The principle of training hunting birds is that 
all food comes from the trainer, otherwise they are 
likely to fly off. They will be very dependent on 
the trainer; failure to feed them for 24 hours is 
pushing their limits. If more than 36 hours pass, 
the birds will likely die. 

Birds should be flown and exercised daily. 
Their health will deteriorate if they are not flown 
once at least every 3-4 days. 

Flying multiple birds at once is nearly impossi- 
ble, as species dominance instincts take over; the 
higher status bird will let the lower status bird do 
the dirty work, then come in and steal the kill. 
Rarely, a species will hunt in family groups—one 
main hunter and several others to flush out the 
prey. A real-world example of this behavior is the 
Harris hawk. 

No falconer will fail to wear a heavy leather 
gauntlet on his catching arm (the “off” arm, usu- 
ally the left). The gauntlet will not be metal, which 


44 «+ Chapter Three 


is uncomfortable for the bird. It will cover the 
forearm, perhaps extending as far as the elbow. 
Carrying birds like this is tiring, so a perch of 
some sort (as on a staff) is desirable. 

Hunting birds are never carried on the shoul- 
der. Their natural instinct is to take out an eye or 
ear (which they can do with unbelievable speed) 
and their training reinforces the instinct. Even a 
well-trained bird cannot be trusted so close to 
the face. 

Owls can be flown as hunting birds. They are 
much harder to train than hawks or falcons (com- 
parable to the independent feline versus the 
eager-to-please canine). Unlike other birds, owls 
can be flown in the dark; however, their instinct is 
to strike stationary targets. They will not attack 
while a target is moving, but only when it pauses, 
stops, or hunkers down. Owls will kill hawks and 
falcons; the two types of birds cannot be flown 
together. 


Although they share similar abilities and philoso- 
phies, no two rangers are quite alike. But how do 
you make one different from another? 

This chapter offers a convenient solution in the 
form of character kits. Character kits are structured 
collections of proficiencies, traits, benefits, and 
limitations that help define different rangers as 
unique individuals. A kit can serve as a basis for a 
ranger’s personality, background, and role in a 
campaign. 

Character kits are entirely optional—ranger 
characters can get along without them just fine. 
But they’re a lot of fun, adding color and depth 
to a campaign, as well as making rangers more 
interesting to play. We'll take a look at a number 
of kits in detail, and explain how to use them. 
We'll also give some tips on designing new kits 
from scratch. 


Acquiring Kits 


Players choose character kits for their rangers as 
part of the character creation process. Only one kit 
can be chosen for a particular ranger. 

When creating a new ranger, begin by determin- 
ing his ability scores (Player’s Handbook, Chapter 
1), race (PH, Chapter 2) and alignment (PH, Chap- 
ter 4). At this point, select a character kit, record- 
ing the pertinent information on the character 
sheet (the record sheets at the end of this book are 
designed for character kits; permission is granted 
to copy these pages for personal use). In accor- 
dance with the kit information, flesh out the char- 
acter by determining other relevant details, such 
as character proficiencies (PH, Chapter 5; and 
Chapter 5 of this book) and equipment (PH, Chap- 
ter 6; and Chapter 7 of this book). 

A player chooses a character kit at the outset 
of his ranger’s career. It’s possible, however, to 
incorporate the character kit rules into an exist- 
ing campaign, providing the DM agrees that the 
kit is appropriate. A kit must be compatible 
with a ranger’s personal history, his back- 
ground, and his established personality traits. 
For example, the Mountain Man kit doesn’t 
make sense for a ranger who's never been to the 
mountains. On the other hand, the Sea Ranger 
kit is a logical choice for a ranger who's spent 
most of his life at sea. 


CHAPTER 


Ranger Kits 


DM Decisions 


Before players create their characters, the DM 
should examine each of the kits and consider the 
following questions: 

Is this kit appropriate to the campaign? Not all 
kits fit with every campaign, and the DM is free to 
exclude any he feels are inappropriate. If the cam- 
paign takes place entirely on land, for instance, 
players may be barred from choosing the Sea 
Ranger kit. Before the players create their charac- 
ters, the DM should tell them which kits are 
allowed and which are forbidden. 

Do the players need additional information 
about any kit? Any campaign details relevant 
to a particular kit should be explained to the 
players before they create their characters. For 
example, the DM may announce that an army 
of orcs have allied with a group of stone giants 
and declared war against all Giant Killers, or 
that the local king has levied a hefty tax on any- 
one charging for guide services, Pathfinders 
included. 

Are there changes in any kit? The parameters 
for each kit aren’t engraved in stone, and the DM 
is free to make any changes he likes. He may 
decide that only female Guardians are allowed in 
his campaign world, or that all Justifiers must be 
members of a particular military order. All such 
changes should be made clear to the players 
before they create their characters. 


Kit Subsections 


All character kits described in this chapter con- 
sist of the following elements: 

Description: This section describes the features 
that distinguish a character associated with this 
kit, including his cultural background, duties, 
manner, and appearance. 

Requirements: Any special racial, ability score, 
or alignment requirements are listed here. Charac- 
ters can’t take the kit if they don’t meet the listed 
qualifications. “Standard” means that no special 
racial or ability requirements apply to this kit. A 
good alignment is assumed. 

Primary Terrain: Certain kits tend to be associ- 
ated with specific environments. Required indi- 
cates that a character taking the kit must take the 


Ranger Kits * 45 


indicated primary terrain; if more than one type is 
listed, the player may choose whichever type he 
prefers. Recommended means that a character tak- 
ing this kit is advised to use one of the listed pri- 
mary terrain types, but isn’t required to do so. Any 
means that there are no required or recommended 
types for this kit; the player may use any primary 
terrain he likes. 

Role: The character’s role in society and in a 
campaign is detailed here. Typical motivations, 
personality, and beliefs are examined, along 
with common relationships with other people, 
reasons for joining an adventuring party, and 
usual function within a party. Note that these 
traits don’t necessarily apply to each and every 
character associated with this kit; players may 
shape the personalities of their characters based 
on these suggestions, or they may disregard 
them entirely and create personalities of their 
own design. 

Secondary Skills: If you're using the rules for 
secondary skills from Chapter 5 of the Player's 
Handbook, the character is restricted to the choice 
of skills listed in this section, or “no skill.” 

Weapon Proficiencies: If you're using the 
weapon proficiency rules, a kit may require the 
character to take specific weapon proficiencies or 
choose from a restricted list. Alternately, the char- 
acter may have the option of choosing from a list 
of recommended weapons. 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: Although non- 
weapon proficiency rules are technically optional, 
they’re strongly recommended when using ranger 
kits. However, if you’re using secondary skills, 
you shouldn't use nonweapon proficiencies. 

Bonus proficiencies are received free of charge; 
they cost no proficiency slots. A required profi- 
ciency must be taken and does cost slots. Recom- 
mended proficiencies are skills typical for the kit. 
They cost the normal number of proficiency 
slots. It’s a good idea for a beginning player to 
spend all or most of the ranger’s initial slots on 
recommended proficiencies. Barred proficiencies 
cannot be taken initially, though they can be 
taken during play. 

An asterisk (*) indicates a new proficiency 
described in Chapter 5. 


46 + Chapter Four 


Armor/Equipment: Some character types tend 
to use specific equipment, while others have lim- 
itations on the items available to them. Require- 
ments and recommendations are given here, 
along with any style preferences associated with 
the kit. Unless indicated otherwise, a character 
must buy the required equipment, including 
weapons, from his initial funds. Like all mem- 
bers of the warrior group, a ranger begins with 
50-200 (5d4 x 10) gp. If he lacks the funds to buy 
all of his required equipment, he should buy as 
much as he can, then pick up the rest as soon as 
he gets the money. 

Species Enemy: A particular species enemy 
may be required or recommended. If the enemy is 
required, the character has no choice; he must take 
the indicated creature as a species enemy. If more 
than one creature is listed as a required enemy, the 
character can pick the one he prefers. Recom- 
mended enemies are only suggestions; the charac- 
ter may choose one if he likes, or ignore the 
recommendation. Any means that a ranger should 
choose his species enemy normally, as described 
in Chapter 2. 

Followers: As with the species enemy entry, this 
section may include either required or recom- 
mended followers. The DM should make sure that 
at least one of each required type shows up as a fol- 
lower some time in the ranger’s career (depending 
on there being enough slots available). Recom- 
mended followers show up at the DM’s option. Any 
means that the character has no special follower 
restrictions or recommendations. 

Special Benefits: All kits give special benefits 
that aren’t normally available to other characters. 
Typical benefits include improved abilities, special 
relationships with followers, and reaction 
bonuses. All benefits are received free of charge, 
and don’t count against the normal limitations of 
the ranger class. 

Special Hindrances: To balance their special 
benefits, kits also carry special hindrances. Hin- 
drances may include reaction penalties, cultural 
restrictions, or ability limitations. All special hin- 
drances are in addition to any disadvantages nor- 
mally associated with the ranger class. 


List of Kits 


Beastmaster 


Description: A wanderer, the Beastmaster has a 
natural affinity for animals; in fact, he has a lim- 
ited form of telepathic communication with them. 
This is often the result of a magical bond with the 
Animal Kingdom, formed either at the time of his 
birth or upon reaching young adulthood. Unlike 
other adventurers, the Beastmaster does not com- 
mand, train, or control his animal companions, 
rather they are his friends and comrades-in-arms. 
Misunderstood and feared by nobles and common 
folk alike for his unnatural abilities with animals, 
the Beastmaster seldom stays in one place for 
long, nor is he comfortable in civilized lands. 

Requirements: Standard. 

Primary Terrain: Any outdoor land. 

Role: Beastmasters tend to walk alone, accom- 
panied only by the fierce natural beasts that are 
their friends and allies. Traveling the fringes of 
settled lands, the Beastmaster has small use for the 
trappings of civilization, but even less for the min- 
ions of evil, particularly those of a magical or 
priestly nature. Thus, a Beastmaster will often find 
himself aiding the oppressed or enslaved, and pit- 
ted against the cruelties of evil priests or wizards 
and their allies. 

Secondary Skills: Hunter, Fisher. 

Weapon Proficiencies: A Beastmaster is ini- 
tially limited to weapons that he can make him- 
self: axe (any), club, dagger, dart, javelin, knife, 
quarterstaff, sling, or spear. 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: Bonus: None, but 
see Special Benefits. Recommended: Agriculture, 
Bowyer/ Fletcher, Endurance, Hunting, Leather 
working, Running, Swimming, Weather Sense. 
Optional: See Weaponsmithing (Crude) in the 
Mountain Man section). 

Barred: Armorer, Etiquette, Heraldry, Naviga- 
tion, Weaponsmithing. 

Armor/Equipment: The Beastmaster starts only 
with leather armor and weapons he has made. 

Species Enemy: Standard. 

Followers: None, but see Special Benefits. 

Special Benefits: 

Stealth: The Beastmaster has a +5% chance to 
hide in natural surroundings. 


Animal Henchmen: Although a Beastmaster 
receives no special followers at high level, he can 
acquire normal or giant animals as henchmen. He 
may acquire them at any level, and their number 
depends on his Charisma. If these animals are 
slain or driven away, they can be replaced by new 
animals without penalty (though this may take 
some time). 

Animal Telepathy: The Beastmaster can establish 
telepathic communication with any normal or 
giant animal within 30’, if he does nothing else in 
the round. The animal must have a minimum 
Intelligence of 1. This has the following benefits: 

© The Beastmaster can communicate to the crea- 
ture that he desires its friendship. If the offer is 
sincere (and the animal will be able to sense if it 
isn’t), the creature can be calmed and will not 
attack or flee unless it is attacked. 

e The Beastmaster can recruit an animal he has 
befriended as a henchman if he is not at his limit 
and if the creature fails a saving throw vs. rods. 
The saving throw is penalized by -1 for every 
three levels of experience the Beastmaster has 
earned. At the DM’s option, animals may present 
themselves for recruitment in the same way that 
followers appear to other rangers. 

Animal Bonding: The Beastmaster forms a men- 
tal bond with any animal he recruits as a hench- 
man. There is no distance limit, but this ability 
does not cross planar boundaries. This bond has 
the following effects: 

e The Beastmaster can communicate directly 
with any animal henchman to which he has a 
bond. This gives him the ability to directly explain 
tricks or tasks he wishes the animal to attempt, or 
to communicate needs and desires. Conversely, 
the animal can also communicate its needs and 
desires to him. 

© He can see through the eyes of the animal by 
concentrating on the mental link. He can see 
through the eyes of one creature in a round (him- 
self included). 

e He has the animal lore proficiency with 
respect to the bonded animal. Furthermore, if he is 
mentally linked to the animal, success with the 
proficiency is automatic. 

© Every time the Beastmaster gains a level, all of 
his current animal henchmen gain an additional 
hit point. 


Ranger Kits * 47 


ð 
` 
9 —— 
{ 
ra 
y -= 
; 


` 


Thy 


i, 


Animal Horde: At 9th level, the Beastmaster can 
summon a horde of wild animals to fight for him. 
They must come from a land that he controls, and 
it takes one week to gather them. 

They can be brought together only for some 
great purpose that can be explained simply. Up to 
100 Hit Dice of animals per level of the Beastmas- 
ter will come. For every 10 animals, there will be a 
pack leader with one additional Hit Die and maxi- 
mum hit points. The horde will stay together for 
one week for each level of the Beastmaster. There 
is no record of a Beastmaster summoning more 
than one horde in a year. 


Optional Rule: The Beastmaster can split his 
experience award, giving up to half of his 
earned experience to any or all of his animal 


henchmen that played a role in the adventure. 
Such henchmen advance on the Fighter Experi- 
ence Table, receiving +1 to attack rolls and +3 
hit points for every level gained. 


Special Hindrances: 

Empathic Shock: The Beastmaster feels pain 
when one of his henchmen is wounded, suffering 
a —2 penalty to all rolls in the next round. If he is 
mentally linked with a henchman when it is 
killed, he suffers a -2 penalty to all rolls for the 
next 24 hours. 

Unruly Allies: The Beastmaster’s animal hench- 
men are free to come, go, or act as they will. Any 
attempt to arbitrarily restrict or regulate their free- 
dom, or habitually ignoring their needs and 
desires, will result in resentment, sulkiness, and 
possible abandonment. 

Outcast: The Beastmaster suffers a -1 penalty to 
reaction rolls by common NPCs, and a -2 when 
dealing with a civilized aristocracy. Further, his 
maximum effective Charisma when dealing with 
his own race is 15. 

Limited Funds: The Beastmaster starts with 1d4 x 
10 gp. 

No Fortress: At no time will the Beastmaster 
build a fortress. At 9th level, he may establish 
himself as the protector of an area of land equiva- 
lent to a barony. 


Explorer 


Description: The restless spirit of the Explorer 
makes him the most nomadic of all rangers. His 
travels take him around the world, as he continu- 
ally seeks new lands to investigate and new cul- 
tures to study. No region is too remote, no society 
too primitive to pique the Explorer’s interest. An 
expert in communication, survival, and anthro- 
pology, the Explorer’s skills are invaluable for 
safely navigating uncharted terrain and negotiat- 
ing with suspicious natives. 

Requirements: An Explorer must have a mini- 
mum Intelligence score of 12. 

Primary Terrain: Any (no specialization; use for 
followers and species enemy only). 

Role: Motivated as much by curiosity as money, 
the Explorer spends more of his time planning 
expeditions than looking for employment. Still, 
Explorers are in high demand as guides, mapmak- 
ers, and scouts. A reputable Explorer can demand 
a high price for his services. However, rumors of a 
lost civilization are more likely to intrigue an 
Explorer than the promise of treasure, and he 
chooses his jobs accordingly. 

Though a Pathfinder (discussed elsewhere in 
this chapter) or similarly skilled guide plays a cru- 
cial role in leading an expedition through unex- 
plored territory, it’s often an Explorer who's 
actually in charge. The Explorer decides when it’s 
best to forge ahead and when to rest. He knows 
that small parties travel better than large ones, as 
each additional member increases the likelihood 
of delays from injury and disease. Above all, he 
understands the relationship between safety and 
self-restraint. He discourages his companions 
from taking unnecessary risks whenever possible. 

An Explorer balances his natural impulsive- 
ness with healthy doses of caution and common 
sense. More of a scholar than a brawler, he is 
usually a reluctant combatant, resorting to vio- 
lence only when all other options fail. But when 
attacking, he fights with a single-mindedness 
that can border on savagery. A seasoned Explorer 
counsels his companions to follow two rules vital 
to wilderness survival, particularly where primi- 
tive civilizations are suspected to exist: (1) negoti- 
ating is usually preferable to attacking; and (2) if 
you intend to attack, then attack to kill. 


Ranger Kits * 49 


Secondary Skills: Fisher, Forester, Hunter, Nav- 
igator, Trader/Barterer, Trapper /Furrier. 

Weapon Proficiencies: Because an Explorer 
favors lightweight, easy-to-use weapons, his 
weapon proficiencies are confined to the follow- 
ing choices: short bow, light crossbow, dagger, 
dart, knife, sling, short sword. 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: Special Bonus: Sur- 
vival; the Explorer receives the benefits of this 
proficiency in all terrain types. Assigning addi- 
tional slots to this proficiency does not enhance its 
use in any way. Required: Cartography”, Read- 
ing /Writing. Recommended: Ancient History, 
Bowyer / Fletcher, Camouflage*, Direction Sense, 
Distance Sense*, Endurance, Fire-building, Fish- 
ing, Foraging*, Herbalism, Hunting, Languages 
(Ancient and Modern), Mountaineering, Naviga- 
tion, Rope Use, Signaling*, Swimming, Trail 
Marking”, Trail Signs*, Weather Sense. 

Armor/Equipment: An Explorer has no special 
armor or equipment requirements. However, he 
rarely wears armor heavier than leather and most 
Explorers find shields awkward and confining. 

Species Enemy: Any. 

Followers: An Explorer has the normal 2d6 
career limit (however, see Special Hindrances). 

Special Benefits: 

Languages: An Explorer has the capability of 
learning twice the normal number of languages 
allowed by his Intelligence score (see Table 4 in 
Chapter 1 of the Player’s Handbook). For instance, 
an Explorer with an Intelligence score of 12 can 
learn six languages instead of the usual three. All 
languages still cost a proficiency slot each. 

Find the Path: The Explorer can use this ability to 
sense the correct direction that will eventually 
lead to a desired geographical locale, which must 
be in an outdoor setting. The Explorer must have 
some clue, map, information, or body of research 
about the locale in order to use this ability. It can 
be used once per week, providing a day’s worth of 
guidance (hence it is of greatest use on an expedi- 
tion of weeks or months duration). 

Culture Sense: This ability allows the Explorer to 
acquire general knowledge about the laws and 
customs of a tribe, village, or settlement. Once per 
week, the Explorer may attempt to use this ability 
by touching a member of the tribe or village. The 
villager must have the knowledge the Explorer 


50 ¢ Chapter Four 


wishes to gain; for instance, the villager can’t be 
an infant or mentally deficient. Cooperation of the 
villager isn’t required; touching an attacking or 
sleeping villager works as well. 

The villager must make a saving throw vs. 
spells. If the throw succeeds, the Explorer learns 
nothing. If the throw fails, the Explorer acquires 
an instant understanding of the villager’s laws 
and customs, including those applicable to 
related clans or tribes (such as the social eti- 
quette pertaining to all aarakocra in the region, 
not just this particular group). Information 
learned through this ability might include local 
laws (no one is allowed on the village streets 
after dark without written permission), accepted 
courtesies (strangers bow to all children), and 
cultural taboos (hats and other head coverings 
are considered offensive). Successful use of this 
ability also gives the Explorer a +1 reaction 
adjustment when encountering any other mem- 
bers of the tribe, village, or settlement. 

The DM may limit the quality and amount of 
information in any way he sees fit. The knowledge 
acquired through this ability doesn’t ensure 
proper conduct; the Explorer’s behavior (and the 
player's decisions) will ultimately determine the 
reaction of all villagers. 

Special Hindrances: 

Limited Animal Empathy: Because he spends 
little time in one place, and much of his time is 
spent on native cultures and geographical stud- 
ies, an Explorer does not develop animal empa- 
thy to the degree of other rangers. When dealing 
with wild or attack-trained animals, the ani- 
mal’s saving throw vs. rods has a +2 bonus. Fur- 
ther, the Explorer must make a successful 
Wisdom check when trying to calm or befriend 
domestic animals. 

Few Followers: The Explorer would travel 
lightly, unencumbered by followers that require 
his attention. Thus, he will have no more than 
two followers at the same time. If he already has 
two followers, a new follower won't arrive until 
one of his current followers is dismissed, lost, or 
killed. 

No Fortifications: An Explorer has little interest 
in the responsibilities associated with property 
ownership. He will never build a castle or any 
other fortification. 


Falconer 


Description: The Falconer is an expert in the 
handling and training of falcons, birds of prey 
capable of learning an impressive range of tricks 
and tasks. Under the direction of a skilled Fal- 
coner, a falcon can be taught to snatch a coin purse 
from a victim's belt, bring down game birds in 
mid-flight, and fight effectively against creatures 
many times its size. In addition to his expertise as 
a bird trainer, the Falconer excels as a hunter and 
outdoorsman. 

Requirements: Standard. 

Primary Terrain: Required: The Falconer must 
choose a primary terrain where falcons are most 
commonly found: Desert, Forest, Hill, Mountain, 
or Plains. 

Role: Many Falconers serve as retainers of kings 
or nobles. Others freelance as guides and merce- 
naries. Some stage public performances in rented 
halls or on street corners, demonstrating their 
birds’ remarkable stunts for appreciative crowds. 
Regardless of how they make a living, Falconers 
are held in high regard by most people, who never 
fail to be impressed by the Falconer’s amazing 
rapport with his birds. 

As falcons are extremely sensitive creatures, 
most Falconers by necessity must be even-tem- 
pered, patient, and self-assured. These traits also 
make the Falconer a valuable asset to an adventur- 
ing party. The Falconer’s comrades will usually 
find him dependable and supportive, though per- 
haps a bit preoccupied with the needs of his bird. 
Sometimes falconers will have traits much like 
their birds—fierce, swift, and observant. 

In combat, the Falconer fights aggressively, he 
and his falcon generally conducting their attacks 
against the same opponent. If his falcon and a 
human companion are both threatened, the Fal- 
coner will often choose to defend his falcon. To 
prevent misunderstandings, an honorable Fal- 
coner will make it clear where his loyalties lie 
before he joins an adventuring party. 

Secondary Skills: Bowyer/ Fletcher, Forester, 
Groom, Hunter, Leather worker, Trader. 

Weapon Proficiencies: Required: A Falconer 
must take two of his initial weapon proficiency 
slots in any of the following: bow (any), crossbow 
(light), dagger, knife, sling, spear. The remaining 


slots, as well as all subsequent slots, can be used 
for any weapon of the Falconer’s choice. 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: Bonus: Falconry*. 
Recommended: Alertness*, Bowyer/ Fletcher, 
Endurance, Hunting, Leatherworking, Veterinary 
Medicine’. 

Armor/Equipment: A Falconer has no special 
armor or equipment requirements. However, each 
falcon he trains requires a set of falconry training 
equipment (see Chapter 7). 

Species Enemy: Any. 

Followers: Unlike other rangers, a Falconer 
receives an allotment of 3d6 followers, deter- 
mined at Ist level. The falconer immediately 
receives a falcon follower at this time, which 
counts against his allotment. This falcon will be 
exceptionally strong and able. The DM may use 
the statistics in the Falconry proficiency descrip- 
tion (see Chapter 5) for the initial falcon follower, 
as well as for any subsequent falcon followers, 

Until 10th level, a Falconer can only have one 
follower, and that follower must be a falcon. If the 
falcon follower dies or is otherwise lost, a new fal- 
con follower will arrive in accordance with the 
guidelines in Chapter 3. The new falcon counts 
against the 3d6 allotment. 

A Falconer becomes eligible to receive followers 
other than falcons when he reaches 10th level. At 
10th level and beyond, the Falconer may have 
more than one falcon among his followers, 
depending on the circumstances of the campaign 
and decision of the DM. 

Important Note: Remember that a Falconer’s fol- 
lower will be a bird of rare and remarkable charac- 
teristics and loyalty. The Falconer can also train 
lesser birds for himself or others, using the stan- 
dard training rules. 

Special Benefits: 

Enhanced Training: If a normal falcon has failed 
to learn a trick or task and become untrainable, 
the Falconer can try again after gaining a level. 

Attuned Follower: Under certain conditions, a 
Falconer is able to establish an exceptionally 
strong bond with a falcon follower. The bond 
enables the falcon to learn more efficiently, and 
enhances communication between the falcon and 
the Falconer. 

Whenever a Falconer acquires a new falcon fol- 
lower, including the falcon he receives at 1st level, 


Ranger Kits * 51 


the falcon may be trained as a normal follower 
(see Chapter 3). However, once the Falconer 
begins to train the falcon (using either the Stan- 
dard or Alternate method), the falcon cannot 
become attuned. 

Otherwise, the Falconer can forego training 
until he attempts to become attuned to the new 
falcon. The attuning attempt takes six weeks. For 
at least an hour each day, the Falconer talks to the 
bird, strokes its feathers, and engages in other nur- 
turing behavior. The bird learns to respond to the 
Falconer’s voice, though the Falconer refrains 
from teaching it any specific tricks or tasks during 
this time. (In combat encounters which take place 
in this period, the falcon will fly to safety at the 
first sign of trouble, then return to the Falconer’s 
shoulder when all's clear). 

At the end of the six-week period, the Falconer 
makes a Wisdom check. If the check fails, the 
attuning attempt has likewise failed. The falcon 
continues its relationship with the Falconer as a 
normal follower. The Falconer may begin to train 
the falcon according to either the Standard or 
Alternate method described in Chapter 3. The Fal- 
coner can’t make a second attempt to attune the 
falcon. 

If the check succeeds, the falcon is attuned. 
Normally, the Falconer can teach the attuned fal- 
con a task or trick each time he gains a level, at 
the same time he undergoes his own level train- 
ing. The Falconer may also use the normal train- 
ing rule, either the Standard or Alternative 
method. Training time is half that given in the 
falconry proficiency (see Chapter 5). Regardless 
how it is trained, an attuned falcon can learn 
tricks or tasks in any combination, up to one per 
level of the falconer. An attuned falcon never 
becomes untrainable. 

Additionally, once a falcon becomes attuned, it 
receives a one-time hit point bonus equal to twice 
the Falconer’s level. For example, if a falcon 
becomes attuned to a 3rd level Falconer, the falcon 
receives a bonus of 6 hit points. This bonus 
remains the same, even if the Falconer later 
advances in level. 

The following benefits apply only to a Falconer 
and an attuned falcon. 

Fearless Falcon: When fighting on behalf of a Fal- 
coner or under a Falconer’s direction, an attuned 


a  ————————————— 


52 « Chapter Four 


falcon never needs to make a morale check. 

Falcon Species Enemy: An attuned falcon has its 
own species enemy. When a falcon follower 
becomes attuned, determine its species enemy, 
either by rolling on the appropriate table in Chap- 
ter 2 (Tables 20-27), or by the DM choosing a par- 
ticular enemy. The falcon and ranger may share 
the same species enemy. The falcon has all of the 
species enemy bonuses and penalties described in 
Chapter 2. 

Attack Bonus: An attuned falcon receives a +2 
bonus to all attack rolls, except when fighting its 
species enemy (when it receives a +4 bonus), 

Speak With Falcon: A Falconer who reaches 10th 
level acquires the ability to speak with an attuned 
falcon follower. The ability is similar to the 2nd 
level priest spell speak with animals, except it 
requires no components or casting time, and the 
Falconer can do so at will. 

Mental Communication: At 15th level, the Fal- 
coner can communicate mentally with an attuned 
falcon follower. Both the Falconer and attuned fal- 
con can send and receive thoughts at will, up toa 
distance of 100 yards per level of the Falconer. 
Walls or other physical boundaries have no effect 
on this ability. 

Special Hindrances: If an attuned falcon dies, 
or is lost for any other reason, the Falconer suc- 
cumbs to grief and despair for 1-4 weeks. During 
this period of mourning, the Falconer makes all 
attack rolls and ability checks at a -2 penalty. 
Additionally, during this period, no new followers 
can be acquired, nor can the Falconer use the ani- 
mal empathy ability. 


Feralan 


Description: What happens to children who 
wander into the wilderness and are never recov- 
ered? Or worse, children who are abandoned by 
their families, left in the woods to fend for them- 
selves? Sadly, most of them eventually succumb to 
the dangers of the wild. But a fortunate few are 
taken in by animals, raised as part of a lion’s 
brood or a wolf's litter. Cut off from civilization, 
they gradually take on the characteristics of the 
creatures who adopted them. In the process, they 
become Feralans, beings who combine the sav- 
agery of a beast with the intellect of a man. 


The Feralan may look like a human, but for 
the most part, he acts like a wild animal. He 
speaks the language of animals and lives in their 
lairs. He leads them on hunts, defends them 
against predators, and considers them his fam- 
ily. Yet, the Feralan retains vestiges of his own 
race, characterized by his agile mind and an 
unshakable curiosity about human civilization. 
Many Feralans have picked up enough human 
language to communicate with them, albeit on a 
limited basis. 

Despite his bestial tendencies, the Feralan’s 
moral principles are not so different from other 
rangers. He values the well-being of his followers 
as much as his own. He avoids needless killing 
and considers himself the nemesis of hunters who 
stalk game for sport. Greed and jealously are as 
unknown to the Feralan as they are to the crea- 
tures of the forest. 

Familial Species: At the beginning of his career, 
the player should choose a familial species for his 
Feralan, representing the type of animal that 
raised him. A Feralan can have only a single famil- 
ial species, which never changes. The familial 
species must share the Feralan’s primary terrain 
and is subject to the DM’s approval. Animals suit- 
able as familial species include wild dogs, bears 
(any), wolves, great cats (any), and primates (any). 
The DM may augment this list with additional 
choices if he likes; familial species can’t be human, 
demihuman, humanoid, or of magical or super- 
natural origin. 

Requirements: Feralans must have a minimum 
Constitution of 15 and a minimum Strength of 14. 
They cannot be of lawful alignment. 

Though some humans and demihumans raised 
by wild animals have neutral or evil outlooks, 
only those with good alignments qualify as Fer- 
alans. Because Feralans have little use for the laws 
and regulations of the civilized world, most are 
chaotic good. 

Primary Terrain: The vast majority of Feralans 
have Forest or Jungle as their primary terrain. Arc- 
tic, Hill, Mountain, Plains, and Swamp are possi- 
ble but less common. 

Role: Many people fear Feralans, wrongly 
considering them to be ferocious wildmen or 
savage werecreatures. Those who befriend Fer- 
alans, however, come to know them as trustwor- 


thy, noble, and even gentle. Still, Feralans 
remain wary of most humans and demihumans, 
finding their actions unpredictable and often 
incomprehensible. 

Feralans rarely volunteer to join adventuring 
parties. However, because Feralans are fervent 
animal advocates and protectors of the wild, they 
are inclined to cooperate with parties who share 
their concerns. 

While a Feralan’s human companions may 
admire his courage and respect his instincts, they 
may find his beast-like behavior offensive at best, 
frightening at worst. After a hunt, a Feralan may 
drag the carcass of his prey back to the party’s 
campsite and eat it raw, tearing off chunks with 
his familial followers. Personal hygiene is rarely 
among a Feralan’s priorities, though he may 
occasionally lick himself clean. He grooms his 
animal friends by picking bugs from their fur, 
then cuddles up with them to go to sleep. When 
disturbed, he may snarl like a wolf. To celebrate 
victory over a predator, he may howl at the 
moon. He communicates in grunts, growls, and 
sentence fragments. He may disconcert new 
associates by sniffing them. 

Secondary Skills: Fisher, Forester, Hunter, 
Trapper/Furrier. The secondary skills reflect tal- 
ents that Feralans have picked up in the wild; 
therefore, all skills have wilderness applications 
only. A Fisher Feralan, for instance, may know 
how to swim and catch fish, but won't be able to 
operate a boat. 

Weapon Proficiencies: Required: club, knife. A 
Feralan’s remaining slots must be spent on primi- 
tive weapons: blowgun (rare), dagger, short bow, 
dart, hand axe, sling, spear. 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: Bonus: Hunting or 
Fishing; Trail Signs*. His remaining initial profi- 
ciencies must be chosen from these: Alertness*, 
Animal Handling, Animal Lore, Blind-fighting, 
Direction Sense, Endurance, Fire-building, Fish- 
ing, Foraging, Hunting, Rope Use, Running, Set 
Snares, Survival, Swimming, Veterinary Healing*, 
Weather Sense. 

Armor/Equipment: Feralans adorn themselves 
in crude smocks or loincloths made of furs and 
hides. They wear only what is necessary to keep 
themselves warm and comfortable. 

A Feralan wears no armor, nor does he carry a 


Ranger Kits * 53 


shield. His main weapons—the ones associated 
with his weapon proficiencies—he makes himself 
from bones, branches, rocks, and other natural 
materials. If he loses or breaks one of these 
weapons, he can come up with a replacement in 
few hours, assuming suitable materials are avail- 
able. He can use weapons other than those he 
makes, but prefers not to. 

Species Enemy: Any. 

Followers: Unlike other rangers, the Feralan 
begins to receive followers at 5th level. At least 
half (rounded up) of his followers will be of his 
familial species. A Feralan will receive at most one 
human, demihuman, or humanoid as a follower, 
and this only at 10th level or higher. 

Special Benefits: 

Stealth: The Feralan receives a +10% chance to 
hide in natural surroundings and a +10% chance 
to move silently. 

Feral Rage: During melee combat, the initial 
wounding of an opponent may impel the Feralan 
into a frenzy of blood lust, increasing his fighting 
effectiveness. A Feralan can make one attempt to 
become enraged at any particular opponent. After 
the first round in which a Feralan inflicts damage 
on an opponent, the Feralan has the option of 
making a saving throw vs. death magic. If the roll 
succeeds, the Feralan goes into a feral rage for the 
next 2d6 rounds. During that time, the rage gives 
the Feralan a +2 bonus to all attack and damage 
rolls, and his base Armor Class improves by 2 (an 
unarmored Feralan’s AC is temporarily raised to 
8). However, all attacks must be made against the 
designated opponent and the Feralan must attack 
in every round he’s able; he can’t voluntarily 
break off an attack, or choose to attack a different 
opponent. 

An enraged Feralan must continue to attack 
the designated opponent until the feral rage 
wears off, or the opponent dies or escapes. If the 
rage wears off, the Feralan may continue to 
attack normally, or take any other action; how- 
ever, the Feralan can’t attempt to become 
enraged again against the same opponent. If the 
opponent dies, the feral rage automatically ends. 
If the opponent flees, the Feralan will pursue for 
the duration of the rage. 


54 + Chapter Four 


Climbing: The Feralan has a base climbing suc- 
cess rate of 60%. This allows tree climbing at the 
Feralan’s normal movement rate (cliff climbing 
instead if the primary terrain is Arctic, Desert, or 
Mountain). This ability is much more limited 
than the thief ability to climb walls. The climb- 
ing modifiers discussed in Chapter 14 of the 
Player's Handbook apply in all situations other 
than those given. 

Speak with Animals: The Feralan can use this 
ability at will with animals from his familial 
species. The ability is similar to the 2nd level 
priest spell speak with animals, but requires no 
components or casting time. 

Familial Rapport: The familial followers of a Fer- 
alan will generally do what they’re asked, assum- 
ing they’re physically capable of doing so, when 
the Feralan speaks to them in their own language. 
Mistreated familial followers may still abandon a 
Feralan, as detailed in the Parting Company sec- 
tion of Chapter 3. 

Animal Training: The Feralan may train non- 
familial followers (use guidelines in Chapter 3). 

Call of the Wild: When in his primary terrain, the 
Feralan may attempt to summon familial species 
animals by howling at the top of his lungs for 1-6 
rounds. The DM then secretly rolls percentile 
dice. If the result is less than or equal to the Fer- 
alan’s Wisdom score plus his level (a 5th level 
Feralan with Wisdom 15 has a base chance of 
20%), 1-4 familial animals show up within the 
next hour. Once they arrive, these animals act as 
followers for the next 1-4 hours. During this time, 
the Feralan may command them with his speak 
with animals ability. At the end of the 1-4 hour 
period, the summoned animals disappear into 
the wilderness. A Feralan can attempt call of the 
wild once per day. 

Special Hindrances: 

Limited Magic: Because of his mental predisposi- 
tion and animalistic tendencies, a Feralan can only 
learn and cast a limited number of spells. He has 
access only to spells of the animal sphere and can’t 
cast spells any higher than 2nd level. Table 41 
show the Feralan’s spell progression. 

A Feralan may use any magical item normally 
allowed a ranger. 


Table 45: Feralan Spell Progression 


Feralan Casting Priest Spell Level* 

Level Level 1 2 
1-7 - - - 
8-9 1 ] - 
10-11 2 2 - 
12-13 3 2 1 
14-15 4 2 2 
16+ 5 3 2 


* Animal sphere only 


Limited Money: A Feralan has little interest in 
money or gems, which for the most part are as 
worthless to him as rocks. He keeps only enough 
funds to cover training costs, equipment replace- 
ment, and basic living expenses. He usually 
allows fellow party members to divide the remain- 
der of his share of treasure as they wish. (How- 
ever, the Feralan still receives all experience points 
due him for finding treasure and fellow party 
members receive no experience point benefit for 
the Feralan’s share.) 

No Fortifications: Lacking extensive resources 
but mainly lacking the inclination, a Feralan will 
not build a castle or any other type of fortification 
at any point in his career. 

Reaction Penalty: The rough manner and appear- 
ance of the Feralan inflicts a -3 penalty when 
encountering human, demihuman, or humanoid 
NPCs, including other Feralans. 

A Feralan will seldom, if ever, develop any close 
relationship with politically powerful human, 
demihuman, or humanoid NPCs, 


Forest Runner 


Description: Wherever a corrupt or oppres- 
sive regime holds power, there’s bound to be a 
Forest Runner. Forest Runners rise in opposition 
to such regimes, living on the fringes of society, 
usually one step ahead of the law. They're crimi- 
nals only in a technical sense, as they adhere to a 
personal code that compels them to wage war 
against greedy aristocrats and unjust rulers. 
While the powers-that-be view the Forest Run- 
ner as a lawless troublemaker, commoners see 
him as hero, perhaps their best hope against a 
tyrannical government. 


Constantly on the move, Forest Runners live by 
their wits and have learned to make do with mini- 
mal resources. They excel in combat and make for- 
midable opponents. Ever active and brimming 
with self-confidence, Forest Runners delight in 
harassing authority figures, particularly the 
pompous and well-to-do. Many a hapless aristo- 
crat has been left bound, gagged, and penniless 
after a humiliating roadside encounter with a For- 
est Runner. 

Any time after reaching 4th level, the Forest 
Runner will acquire a personal nemesis. This is an 
NPC of near equal level whose campaign goal is 
to capture or kill the Forest Runner. 

Requirements: A Forest Runner must have a 
Charisma score of at least 12. 

Primary Terrain: Most Forest Runners hail from 
civilized regions in Forest, Hill, Plains, Mountain, 
or Jungle. However, no terrain type is excluded, 
providing it contains a reasonably sized and suffi- 
ciently corrupt settlement. (A Forest Runner from 
a primary terrain other than Forest, modifies the 
name accordingly, such as Mountain Runner, 
Swamp Runner, and so on.) 

Role: The Forest Runner is usually selfless, 
resourceful, and roguishly charming. A loner by 
circumstance and not by choice, a Forest Runner 
readily allies with adventuring parties who share 
his outlook. As a champion of underdogs every- 
where, the Forest Runner doesn’t necessarily feel 
bound to his homeland, and may journey any- 
where in the world to promote justice. Occasion- 
ally, he may join a party to acquire treasure for 
distribution to the needy. If the local authorities 
are putting the heat on, he may accompany a 
party simply to disappear for a while. 

Secondary Skills: Bowyer/ Fletcher, Forester, 
Farmer, Hunter, Leather worker, Teamster, 
Weaponsmith. 

Weapon Proficiencies: The Forest Runner 
receives a bonus weapon proficiency slot, above 
and beyond those he’s normally allowed. The 
bonus slot must be filled with one of the following 
weapons: long bow, quarterstaff, long sword, or 
dagger. He must then fill three of his first six slots 
with the remaining weapons on this list. Once he’s 
met this requirement, he may fill subsequent slots 
with any weapons of his choice. 


Ranger Kits * 55 


Nonweapon Proficiencies: Required: Bowyer/ 
Fletcher. Recommended: Alertness*, Blacksmithing, 
Camouflage", Disguise, Endurance, Leatherwork- 
ing, Persuasion", Riding (Land-based), Rope Use, 
Weaponsmithing, 

Armor/Equipment: Standard. 

Species Enemy: A Forest Runner’s species 
enemy should have some association with the cor- 
rupt regime he opposes. It may be the king’s pet 
(such as a wolf or tiger), an evil race with which 
the monarchy has aligned itself (goblins or ogres), 
a symbol of the government (a snake or a hydra) 
or a creature the opposed officials have used in 
war (a dragon or a giant). 

Followers: Any. 

Special Benefits: 

Stealth: The Forest Runner has a +5% chance to 
hide in natural surroundings and a +5% chance to 
move silently. 

Inspire: Once per day, prior to making an attack, a 
Forest Runner may spend 2-5 (1d4+1) rounds boost- 
ing the morale of his companions with flattering 
words and expressions of confidence. He can influ- 
ence a number of companions equal to his level. If the 
Forest Runner makes a successful Charisma check 
afterwards, the companions enjoy a +2 bonus to their 
morale for the next 3-12 (3d4) rounds. Each compan- 
ion also receives a +1 bonus to his first attack roll. The 
inspiring speech doesn’t affect animals, other Forest 
Runners, or himself. The Forest Runner can’t attempt 
to inspire his companions in the midst of battle or 
while they're occupied in any other activity. 

Disguise: The Forest Runner can take the Dis- 
guise proficiency for one proficiency slot. 

Reaction Bonus: In his homeland or any region 
where his reputation precedes him, a Forest Run- 
ner can count on food and shelter at no charge for 
himself and his companions from supportive com- 
moners. A Forest Runner also receives a +1 reac- 
tion modifier from peasants of good or neutral 
alignment of all cultures. 

Special Hindrances: Forest Runners will rarely 
develop a close relationship with any NPC with 
political power. Additionally, a Forest Runner 
runs a constant risk of arrest by authorities of his 
homeland, as well as from other regimes with 
which his homeland has extradition agreements. 
Law-enforcement authorities may plague a Forest 
Runner through his entire career. 


56 * Chapter Four 


Giant Killer 


Description: The Giant Killer is a skilled com- 
batant, often from humble beginnings, trained to 
the specific purpose of slaying giants. He has mas- 
tered combat techniques designed to fell giants, 
and has become an expert in their behavior and 
habits. A Giant Killer is nothing if not confident; a 
giant’s immense size merely means he makes a 
good target. 

For the purposes of this kit, giants include true 
giants, such as: cloud giants, fire giants, frost 
giants, hill giants, stone giants, and storm giants. 
Also included are giant-kin, such as cyclops, 
ettins, firbolg, fomorians, verbeeg, and voadkyn. 
The DM may augment this list with other giants 
relevant to his particular campaign 

Requirements: A Giant Killer must have a min- 
imum score of 15 in both Strength and Dexterity. 

Primary Terrain: Any terrain is acceptable, so 
long as some type of giant calls it home. 

Role: Giant Killers have keen minds, strong 
bodies, and unshakable egos. Most Giant Killers 
tirelessly promote their own skills and accom- 
plishments, boasting of their latest triumphs to 
anyone who'll listen. Not surprisingly, their repu- 
tations precede them in most civilized regions. 
However, reactions among residents vary. For 
every person who reveres the Giant Killer as a 
hero, there’s another who dismisses him as a 
blowhard. But when giants plague a community, 
everyone welcomes a Giant Killer with open arms. 

Even when their services are desperately 
needed, Giant Killers rarely exploit their position. 
Most charge only modest fees, or settle for a 
medal or other token of appreciation in lieu of 
payment. As often as not, Giant Killers seek no 
remuneration of any kind, fighting giants for the 
sheer pleasure of it. 

Unsurprisingly, the mere promise of an 
encounter with a giant is reason enough for most 
Giant Killers to join an adventuring party. For the 
most part, a Giant Killer leaves decision-making 
to others. Though in principle, he may share the 

party’s fervor for the expedition at hand, he’s usu- 
ally more concerned with finding giants. He may 
become impatient and surly if the party goes for 
too long without meeting one. 

The Giant Killer relishes violent encounters 


of all kinds, if only to exercise his combat skills. 
Of course, he comes into his own when fighting 
giants, and it’s a wise party that follows his 
lead in such situations. 

Secondary Skills: Bowyer/Fletcher, Forester, 
Groom, Hunter, Tailor, Weaponsmith. 

Weapon Proficiencies: Because the Giant Killer 
faces tall adversaries, he must become proficient 
with missiles and hurled weapons. The first 
weapon slot, and every odd slot (third, fifth, and 
so on), must be a missile weapon: bow (any), 
crossbow (any), sling, staff sling, or any melee 
weapon that can be hurled. The even-numbered 
slots may be filled with any weapons of the Giant 
Killer’s choice. 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: Giant Killers pursue 
their interest in giants with such single-minded- 
ness that they have little time left to master other 
skills. Therefore, a Giant Killer is allowed only one 
nonweapon proficiency at first level. This must be 
selected from the following: Bowyer/Fletcher, 
Cobbler, Cooking, Hunting, Pottery, Riding (Land- 
based), Running, Tailor, Swimming, Weaving. 

Armor/Equipment: Giant Killers have no spe- 
cial equipment requirements. They often carry 
shields decorated with medals and ribbons 
awarded them from grateful communities for 
slaying troublesome giants. Though such shields 
can be used normally, they're mainly for show; 
Giant Killers generally put them aside before 
engaging a giant in battle. 

Species Enemy: None; however, see Special 
Bonuses against giants. 

Followers: Normal (but see optional rule). 

Special Benefits: 

Attack Bonuses: A Giant Killer has all the follow- 
ing bonuses when attacking giants: 

e Giant Killers inflict bonus damage against 
giants, +1 point of damage for every level of 
the Giant Killer. For example, if a 7th level 
Giant Killer makes a successful attack with a 
spear, the giant suffers 1-8 points of damage 
from the spear, plus 7 for the Giant Killer’s level. 

è Giants have a base —4 to hit when attacking 
Giant Killers. A giant with a THACO of 10 
needs a 14 to hit a Giant Killer with AC 0. 

e Giant Killers can dodge giant attacks. If a 
giant with initiative attacks and hits, the Giant 
Killer may give up his action to dodge. If the 


58 ° Chapter Four 


Giant Killer saves vs. death magic, the giant's 
attack misses. If the Giant Killer has initiative, 
he can dodge instead of attacking for the round. 

Infuriate: A Giant Killer can goad a giant into 
making careless and ill-conceived attacks. To infu- 
riate a giant, the Giant Killer spends two rounds 
darting between the giant's legs, waving his 
hands, and hollering insults. The Giant Killer can- 
not make attacks or take any other actions while 
attempting to infuriate the giant; if interrupted (to 
dodge, for example), he must start over. During 
this time, the giant can attack the Giant Killer; 
however, because of the Giant Killer’s erratic 
movement, the giant's attacks are made at an 
additional -2 penalty. 

At the end of this period, the giant makes a sav- 
ing throw vs. spells. If the throw succeeds, nothing 
special happens. If the throw fails, the giant becomes 
enraged for the next 2-12 (2d6) rounds. During that 
time, the giant directs all of his attacks against the 
Giant Killer; the giant’s attacks are made at an addi- 
tional —4 penalty. The Giant Killer may attack nor- 
mally while the giant is infuriated. 


Optional Rule: Follower Infuriation 

A Giant Killer may enhance his chances of 
infuriating a giant by using an animal follower 
that has been trained to infuriate. The follower, 
which must be a bird or other flying creature of 
small size (S), learns this trick in accordance to 
the Training Followers rules in Chapter 3. The 
trick counts against the follower’s normal limit 
of tricks and tasks. Only a Giant Killer can train 
a follower to infuriate. 

While the Giant Killer is executing his infuriat- 
ing routine, the follower may also infuriate the 
giant by swooping around his head and screech- 
ing. The giant's saving throw against the infuria- 
tion is reduced by a—2 penalty for the infuriating 
follower. This effect is not cumulative with addi- 
tional followers, An infuriated giant might direct 
its attacks at the infuriating follower in addition 
to the Giant Killer. If the giant tries to attack an 
infuriating follower, the follower successfully 
dodges the blow unless the attack roll is a 19 or 
20. A follower can’t attempt to infuriate alone. A 
follower can only augment the infuriating 
attempts of the Giant Killer. 


Giant Lore: If a Giant Killer discovers a footprint, 
lair, campsite, or any other physical evidence of a 
giant, a successful Wisdom roll enables him to 
learn some general information about the giant in 
question. Such information may include the 
giant's type, approximate size, and companions. 
He may also learn how recently the giant was in 
the area and in what direction the giant traveled. 
The DM decides the quality and amount of infor- 
mation the Giant Killer receives. 

Special Hindrances: 

Tracking Limitation: Unlike other rangers, the 
tracking ability of the Giant Killer is limited to 
tracking giants. A Giant Killer who selects a gen- 
eral Tracking proficiency can track other creatures 
as non-ranger character. 

Because Giant Killers seldom make an effort to 
conceal their identities, they're often singled out 
for harassment. Insecure villagers may challenge 
Giant Killers to duels to impress their friends, or 
bullies may ambush Giant Killers to demonstrate 
their toughness. 

To avenge the death of a companion, some 
giants may target Giant Killers for assassination. 
Giant tribes occasionally offer bounties for proof 
of a Giant Killer’s death, making the Giant Killer a 
prime candidate for attacks. 


Greenwood Ranger 


Description: The rarest and certainly the most 
unusual ranger, the Greenwood Ranger, or Lim- 
bant, combines characteristics of both humans and 
plants. The Greenwood Ranger begins life as a nor- 
mal human, but through resolute appeals to the 
gods, he gradually acquires plant-like qualities that 
enhance his relationship with the vegetable king- 
dom and endow him with remarkable powers. 

A Greenwood Ranger resembles a normal 
human covered from head to toe with a layer of 
thick brown bark, similar to that of an oak tree. 
The bark on the back of his head and the backs of 
his hands and arms is tinged with green; the green 
bark enables him to absorb nutrients directly from 
the sunlight (see the Special Benefits section 
below). He has no body hair, no teeth, and his 
tapering fingers and toes look like gnarled 
branches. Tangles of short roots grow from his feet 
and ankles. 


Aside from these physical differences, the 
Greenwood Ranger moves, speaks, and behaves 
much like an ordinary human. As his human qual- 
ities are dominant, he has a +2 bonus when saving 
against hold plant, charm plant, and similar plant- 
related spells. Otherwise, the Greenwood Ranger 
makes saving throws, attack rolls, and ability 
checks as a normal human ranger. 

Becoming a Greenwood Ranger: A ranger must 
make the commitment to become a Greenwood 
Ranger at Ist level, even though the Greenwood 
Ranger’s special abilities are not acquired until 4th 
level. From 1st through 3rd level, he is considered 
to be a latent Greenwood Ranger. A latent Green- 
wood Ranger operates as the standard ranger 
described in the Player's Handbook, though follow- 
ing the Secondary Skill, Weapon Proficiency, and 
Nonweapon Proficiency restrictions described 
below (and receiving the indicated Bonus Profi- 
ciencies), He may wear any armor allowed a nor- 
mal ranger. He does not have any of the 
Greenwood Ranger’s special benefits or hin- 
drances at this time. 

During this latency period, the ranger must 
spend a minimum of three hours per week in 
silent prayer, petitioning the gods to transform 
him into a Greenwood Ranger. It isn’t necessary 
for the player to keep track of the hours spent in 
prayer; presumably, the character will set aside 
enough spare time to meet this requirement. The 
gods may tolerate an occasional lapse—for 
instance, the ranger may be too sick to pray ina 
particular week—but the ranger is otherwise 
expected to keep up with his prayers. If the ranger 
intentionally neglects his prayers on a regular 
basis (as determined by the DM), the gods will 
inform the ranger in a dream that he’s no longer 
eligible to become a Greenwood Ranger. The 
ranger is forced to abandon the kit, and may not 
take another. 

When the latent Greenwood Ranger reaches 4th 
level, the gods give him a simple task to complete, 
involving the protection or support of plant life. 
Typical tasks include assisting a treant, replanting 
an area of forest devastated by fire, and teaching a 
primitive tribe how to grow and harvest their own 
crops. A latent Greenwood Ranger who fails to 
complete this task within a month must spend an 
additional 1-4 months praying, at which time the 


Ranger Kits * 59 


gods will grant a new task. 

A latent Greenwood Ranger who completes the 
task then locates an isolated area of forest or jun- 
gle, lies on the ground, and covers himself with 
leaves and branches. He then falls asleep for a full 
day. If disturbed before 24 hours elapse, the trans- 
formation is interrupted; the ranger may try again 
at another time. Otherwise, upon awaking, the 
ranger will have transformed into a Greenwood 
Ranger. Once transformed, the Greenwood Ranger 
cannot abandon this kit, although actions that 
would normally cost a ranger his class result in 
the loss of spell use and other penalties deter- 
mined by the DM. 

Requirements: A Greenwood Ranger must be 
human. Otherwise, the ability requirements are 
the same as those for a normal ranger. 

Primary Terrain: Required: Forest or Jungle. 

Role: Because he must sacrifice a portion of his 
humanity to become a Greenwood Ranger, a 
human drawn to this kit usually has only a tenu- 
ous link with formal society. He is an outsider, 
with few close friendships or family ties, capable 
of walking away from the civilized world without 
regret. Orphans, social outcasts, and eccentric per- 
sonalities are good candidates to become Green- 
wood Rangers. 

Greenwood Rangers live deep in the forest or 
jungle, far from urban centers. Most people tend to 
shun Greenwood Rangers, repulsed by their 
appearance or fearful of their strange powers. But 
their distrust is unwarranted. Greenwood Rangers 
are gentle-natured, thoughtful souls to whom all 
life is precious. A Greenwood Ranger will mourn 
the loss of a favorite shade tree as much as the pass- 
ing of a human companion. To the Greenwood 
Ranger, the wilderness is a glorious, sacred place. If 
necessary, he will risk his life to preserve it. 

In most cases, a Greenwood Ranger will align 
with any adventuring party who shares his affin- 
ity for nature, providing he agrees with their 
cause. A Greenwood Ranger tends to keep to him- 
self, offering his opinion only when asked and 
deferring to the party's leader in most situations. 

Secondary Skills: Bowyer/Fletcher, Farmer, 
Forester, Woodworker / Carpenter. 

Weapon Proficiencies: A Greenwood Ranger’s 
weapon proficiencies are limited to the following 
choices: axe (any), bow (any), crossbow (any), 


60 « Chapter Four 


dagger, knife, quarterstaff, sling, spear, long 
sword, short sword. 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: Bonus: Herbalism. 
Required: Agriculture. Recommended: Carpentry, 
Endurance, Foraging*, Swimming, Trail Marking*, 
Weather Sense. Barred: Armorer, Blacksmithing, 
Fire-building, Engineering, Leatherworking, Min- 
ing, Mountaineering, Navigation*, Riding (Land- 
based and Airborne), Seamanship, Spelunking*, 
Stonemasonry, Weaponsmithing. 

Armor/Equipment: A Greenwood Ranger can’t 
wear armor. However, his bark-like skin provides 
comparable protection. At 4th level, the Green- 
wood Ranger’s skin gives him an Armor Class of 
5. For every level thereafter, the AC increases by 1; 
an 8th level Greenwood Ranger, for example, has 
an AC of 1. At 15th level, the Greenwood Ranger 
reaches his maximum AC of —6. 

Normally, Greenwood Rangers don’t wear 
clothing aside from a cloth loincloth or simple 
smock. Thanks to their tough feet, shoes are 
unnecessary. Some Greenwood Rangers are fond 
of decorative pins made of gems or colorful min- 
erals. Greenwood Rangers wear such pins by 
attaching them directly to their skin. 

Species Enemy: Any. 

Followers: A Greenwood Ranger will have at 
least one treant follower at some point career. 

Special Benefits: 

Speak with Plants: The Greenwood Ranger can 
speak with plants at will. This ability is similar to 
the 4th level priest spell, except it requires neither 
components nor a casting time. 

Photosynthesis: Unlike a normal human, the 
Greenwood Ranger has no need to drink or eat. 
He receives nourishment directly from the sun. So 
long as he is exposed to sunlight at least an hour 
per day, he stays healthy. He suffers 1-2 points of 
damage every day he goes without exposure to 
the sun. Overcast days are sufficient to nourish a 
Greenwood Ranger. 

A Greenwood Ranger satisfies his thirst by dip- 
ping his feet in any pool or puddle of fresh water 
for 10 minutes every other day. Exposure to a light 
rain or soaking his feet in a bucket will also suf- 
fice. If he goes without water for 48 hours, he 
begins to suffer damage at the rate of 1-2 points 
per day. 

Buoyancy: A Greenwood Ranger requires oxy- 


Maiy 
`“ M WY, M wN Mi 4 


gen like any other human and is subject to drown- 
ing and suffocation. However, because the Green- 
wood Ranger's woody skin makes him naturally 
buoyant, he can’t drown unless he’s physically 
held underwater. 

Rooting: Upon reaching 8th level, a Greenwood 
Ranger can accelerate healing by rooting. He may 
attempt this once per week. To use this ability, the 
Greenwood Ranger must bury his feet in the earth 
(not sand or snow; the soil must be capable of sup- 
porting plant life) up to his ankles. He must stand 
stationary and silent for 1-4 hours, taking no other 
actions during that time. If interrupted, the root- 
ing fails; he may try again the following week. If 
uninterrupted, tiny roots sprout from his feet and 
bury themselves into the ground, absorbing heal- 
ing nutrients from the soil. At the end of the root- 
ing period, the roots withdraw, and the 
Greenwood Ranger has recovered 3-12 (3d4) 
points of damage. 

Limbing: Under certain circumstances, a Green- 
wood Ranger can grow an extra limb. The limb 
grows from the center of the Greenwood Ranger’s 


y { M 
M 


aba ido 


chest and functions as a normal arm. 

Only Greenwood Rangers of 10th level or higher 
can attempt limbing. A Greenwood Ranger may 
make an attempt once a month by lying on the 
ground and covering himself with leaves, 
branches, and earth. For the next 24 hours, he 
enters into a state of suspended animation, similar 
to that caused by a temporal stasis spell. If the 
Greenwood Ranger is disturbed during this time, 
the enchantment is broken and limbing will not 
occur. The Greenwood Ranger can try again the 
following month. 

If the Greenwood Ranger is undisturbed, he 
awakens in 24 hours with a new limb extending 
from his chest. The new limb may be useful to the 
Greenwood Ranger in several ways: 

e The Greenwood Ranger can wield three 
weapons at the same time. Attacks made with the 
third weapon suffer a -2 penalty. The Greenwood 
Ranger’s reaction adjustment (based on his Dex- 
terity) modifies this penalty, although it can’t 
result in a positive modifier. The Greenwood 
Ranger gains only two additional attacks per 


Ranger Kits * 61 


round, regardless of the number of attacks he’s 
normally allowed. Therefore, a Greenwood 
Ranger able to attack 3/2 with one weapon (once 
in the first round, twice in the second) can attack 
7/2 when using three weapons (three times in the 
first round, four times in the second). 

e The Greenwood Ranger with a third limb 
receives a +3 bonus when punching, wrestling, 
or overbearing. 

e A Greenwood Ranger with a third limb can swim 
at 150% of his normal swimming speed. He 
receives a +20% modifier to all climbing attempts. 

e The extra limb helps the Greenwood Ranger 
perform ordinary activities more efficiently. 
For instance, he can carry three buckets of 
water at the same time or wash dishes in half 
the normal time. 

e The third limb improves the Greenwood 
Ranger’s performance when using certain 
nonweapon proficiencies involving the hands. 
For example, when using the juggling profi- 
ciency to catch items, he makes an attack roll 
vs. AC 2 instead of AC 0. When using the 
Weaving proficiency, he can create three 
square yards of material per day instead of 
two. The DM determines the extent of the 
improvement depending on the particular 
proficiency and the attempted task. 

The Greenwood Ranger’s new limb withers and 
falls off in 1-4 days. A Greenwood Ranger can’t 
have more than one extra limb at a time. 

Special Hindrances: 

Stiff Limbs: The Greenwood Ranger has a -5% 
penalty when trying to move silently. He gets no 
Dexterity bonus to his armor class. 

Vulnerability to Fire: If an opponent attempts any 
normal or magical fire-based attack against a 
Greenwood Ranger, he qualifies for a +4 bonus to 
his attack roll and a +1/die bonus to his damage 
roll. The Greenwood Ranger suffers a —4 penalty 
to all saving throws involving fire-based attacks. 
Any fire-based attacks that hit inflict +1 hit point 
per die of damage. 

Vulnerability to Extreme Climates: Though his skin 
provides protection in most environments, the 
Greenwood Ranger risks damage from prolonged 
exposure to extreme temperatures. After any full 
day spent in a climate where the temperature is 
below freezing, or averages 100 degrees or more, a 


62 * Chapter Four 


Greenwood Ranger must make a Constitution 
check. Failure results in the loss of 1-4 hit points. 

Limited Magic: A Greenwood Ranger can only 
learn and cast spells from the plant sphere. He 
uses the ranger’s normal spell progression (given 
in Table 5 in Chapter 1). 

Reaction Penalty: Because of his bizarre appear- 
ance, the Greenwood Ranger suffers a -3 reaction 
adjustment penalty when encountering any NPCs, 
with the exception of learned nobles, sages, and 
other high level characters of good or neutral 
alignment. Such worldly characters aren't intimi- 
dated by his appearance. 


Guardian 


Description: The Guardian is a self-appointed 
protector of the wilderness. Compelled by a strong 
sense of duty, he has assumed responsibility for an 
unsettled tract of land, doing his utmost to main- 
tain it in its natural state and protect its animal 
occupants. Though he feels kindly towards woods- 
men, elves, and others who share his respect for 
nature, he has little patience for those who would 
exploit the wilderness for gain or spite. 

A Guardian constantly monitors the region he 
has sworn to protect. He scrutinizes the activity of 
strangers, advises travelers, and intercepts care- 
less hunters. He keeps an eye out for fires, floods, 
and other natural disasters, and does what he can 
to comfort animals in times of crisis. 

Domain: All Guardians have a specific region 
that they protect. The DM should establish the 
boundaries of a Guardian’s domain at the begin- 
ning of his career. There are no fixed rules for 
assigning domains, but in general, a Ist level 
Guardian's domain shouldn’t exceed a few square 
miles. The domain expands by several square 
miles each time the Guardian increases in level. By 
5th level, a Guardian’s domain might encompass a 
region about 20-25 miles across. By 15th level or 
higher, the domain might comprise an area the 
size of a small country. 

A Guardian’s domain should correspond to his 
primary terrain. The domain is typically located in 
an uncivilized part of the world, such as a remote 
mountain range or unexplored jungle. Two or 
more Guardians may share an especially large 
domain, but such cases are rare. 


Requirements: Standard. 

Primary Terrain: Forest, Hill, Jungle, Mountain, 
or Plains. 

Role: A Guardian operates of his own volition, 
having no official sanction or title. He carries out 
his custodial duties as he sees fit, taking whatever 
steps he deems necessary to protect his domain. 
Despite his independence, he usually maintains 
good working relationships with officials of bor- 
dering lands. The relationship benefits both par- 
ties. The Guardian notifies the officials of 
approaching armies or other potential threats, 
while the officials may provide help for problems 
the Guardian can’t handle alone. Though many 
governments would jump at the chance to have 
such able warriors in their employ, Guardians 
resist all such offers, and steadfastly maintain 
their autonomy. 

An adventuring party entering a Guardian’s 
domain has a good chance of encountering the 
Guardian himself. A Guardian will usually agree 
to guide a party through his domain and—pre- 
suming the party’s intentions are compatible 
with the Guardian’s philosophy—assist them in 
their efforts. Though a Guardian is reluctant to 
leave his domain, he may do so if presented with 
a compelling reason, such as the ravaging of a 
pristine wilderness or a threat to the ecology in 
another land. 

Guardians tend to be self-sufficient, clear- 
headed, and conscientious. They make excellent 
leaders. Though a Guardian may develop deep 
friendships with other party members, he always 
parts company at the end of an adventure, return- 
ing to his domain as soon as he can. 

Secondary Skills: Bowyer/ Fletcher, Farmer, 
Fisher, Hunter, Trapper/Furrier, Woodworker/ 
Carpenter. 

Weapon Proficiencies: Recommended: Bow (any) 
or crossbow (any), dagger, javelin, knife, quarter- 
staff, sling, spear, staff sling. 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: Bonus: Hunting or 
Fishing. Recommended: Agriculture, Bowyer/ 
Fletcher, Fire-building, Fishing, Foraging*, Herbal- 
ism, Hunting, Riding (Land-based), Rope Use, Set 
Snares, Swimming, Veterinary Healing*, Weather 
Sense. 

Armor/Equipment: Standard. 

Species Enemy: Any. 


Followers: A Guardian acquires at least one 
human or demihuman follower at some point in 
his career. There are no other restrictions or recom- 
mendations. 

Special Benefits: 

Bonus Sphere: The Guardian has miner access to 
the Protection sphere. 

Bonus Spells: A Guardian can cast certain spells 
within the boundaries of his domain. These are 
detect evil (three times per day), and bless and com- 
mune with nature (once per week each). 

Revive Plants: This ability enables the Guardian 
to revitalize any type of natural plant life suffering 
from drought, disease, insect infestation, or other 
forms of non-magical trauma. Dead plants can’t 
be affected, nor can the Guardian invigorate 
plants beyond their normal limits (for instance, a 
Guardian can’t cause an apple tree to blossom in 
the winter). 

The process requires 8 hours and can affect a 
square area whose sides are 10 yards times the 
Guardian’s level (a 5th level Guardian can revive 
all of the plant life within a 50 yd. x 50 yd. square). 
The Guardian can use this ability once per month. 

Special Hindrances: If a Guardian leaves his 
domain for any length of time, he must make 
arrangements for someone else to assume his 
duties. He may hire a caretaker, or assign tempo- 
rary custody of his domain to a human or demi- 
human follower. There are no fixed penalties for a 
Guardian who fails to do this. However, should a 
Guardian abandon his responsibilities for more 
than a few days, the gods may deny him the use of 
the special benefits associated with this kit. If he’s 
absent for longer periods—say, a few weeks—the 
gods may also deny him the use of all spells. The 
Guardian recovers use of his special benefits and 
spells as soon as he returns to his domain. 


Justifier 


Description: Some expeditions are so 
demanding and some foes so dangerous that 
they require the attention of a highly trained 
specialist whose combat skills far exceed those 
of the typical ranger. Enter the Justifier, a master 
tactician whose military instincts, fighting versa- 
tility, and steely nerves places him in the first 
rank of elite warriors. 


Ranger Kits * 63 


Though the Justifier specializes in neutralizing 
monsters, his skills qualify him for a wide range of 
adventures. He may organize guerilla forces and 
lead them into hostile territories. He may stage 
reconnaissance operations to gather information 
concerning enemy strength and logistics. He may 
execute strikes against monster lairs, rescue 
hostages, or eliminate tribal leaders or spell cast- 
ers. For a determined Justifier, no job is too diffi- 
cult, no enemy too formidable. 

Requirements: Justifiers must have minimum 
scores of 14 in Strength and Dexterity. They must 
be human and of lawful good alignment. 

Primary Terrain: Any. 

Role: Justifiers boast extensive training in 
weapon use, scouting, warding, and outdoor sur- 
vival. Some learn these skills in a regular standing 
military, others are trained by military orders. A 
few highly motivated individuals are self-taught. 
Justifiers are in high demand by rulers as army 
officers, as well as by private individuals who use 
them as bodyguards. Many hire themselves out as 
mercenaries or volunteer for causes that further 
their own ideals. 

As Justifiers thrive on action, most are eager to 
join adventuring parties. On occasion, freelance 
Justifiers may demand a retainer from a party or a 
guaranteed percentage of any treasure found. But 
more often than not, a freelance Justifier will join a 
party without remuneration if their task is just 
and promises him the chance to exercise his com- 
bat skills. 

A Justifier’s companions will find him disci- 
plined, focused, and unyielding in his determina- 
tion to accomplish his objectives. He socializes 
little, preferring instead to keep his body strong 
with punishing exercise and his mind sharp with 
quiet meditation. A natural leader in combat situ- 
ations, he fights with grim intensity and fearless 
perseverance. 

Secondary Skills: Armorer, Bowyer /Fletcher, 
Forester, Hunter, Trapper /Furrier, Weaponsmith. 

Weapon Proficiencies: Recommended: Bow 
(any), crossbow (any), dagger, sling, spear, sword 
(any). See Special Bonuses. 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: Bonus: Survival; in 
addition to having this proficiency in his primary 
terrain, the Justifier receives the proficiency in an 
extra terrain of his choice (see also, Special Hin- 


64 e Chapter Four 


drances). Recommended: Alertness*, Blind-fighting, 
Bowyer/ Fletcher, Camouflage*, Endurance, Fal- 
conry*, Hunting, Mountaineering, Navigation, 
Riding (Land-based), Rope Use, Running, Set 
Snares, Swimming, Weaponsmithing. 

Armor/Equipment: A Justifier has no special 
armor or equipment requirements. Though most 
Justifiers prefer light armor, such as leather, they 
can wear any type of armor and still hide in shad- 
ows and move silently. Refer to Table 13: Optional 
Armor Adjustments in Chapter 1 for adjustments 
to success chances. 

Species Enemy: Any. A Justifier is more 
respected by his enemies than other rangers, and 
therefore suffers only a -2 penalty on encounter 
reactions with his species enemy, and no penalty if 
there is a formal truce. 

Followers: Any. 

Special Benefits: 

Weapon Specialization: Because of his extensive 
combat training, the Justifier must use some of his 
initial proficiency slots to take one weapon spe- 
cialization (see Chapter 5 of the Player’s Handbook). 
The weapon of specialization is taken from the list 
of recommended weapons. 

Stealth: The Justifier receives a +5% bonus to his 
chance of hiding in natural surroundings and to 
his chance of moving silently. 

Tactical Advantage; This ability allows the Justi- 
fier and his companions to gain a combat advan- 
tage by studying the enemy and exploiting their 
weaknesses. The Justifier must spend at least a 
full, uninterrupted turn secretly observing an 
enemy or group of enemies prior to making an 
attack. At the end of this period, the Justifier 
makes a Wisdom check. If successful, the Justifier 
has correctly assessed the enemy's weaknesses 
and is able to maximize the timing of an attack. 
The Justifier and his party automatically surprise 
the enemy and gain the initiative for the first 
round. A Justifier can attempt to gain a tactical 
advantage only once in a particular encounter. 

Unarmed Combat Expertise: When fighting with 
his bare hands, the Justifier inflicts 1-4 points of 
damage on a successful attack roll. If the Justifier 
throws an unmodified 20 on his attack roll, the 
victim suffers 1-4 points of damage and must also 
make a saving throw vs. paralyzation. If the throw 
fails, the victim is stunned for 1-6 rounds. 


Coordinated Attack: The Justifier can use this 
ability, in conjunction with a trained animal fol- 
lower, to inflict maximum damage on an oppo- 
nent. The animal follower must have been trained 
to attack on command (see the Training Followers 
rules in Chapter 3). 

To attempt a coordinated attack, the Justifier 
and the animal both make a single attack on the 
same enemy in the same round (even if one or 
both are normally allowed multiple attacks; the 
animal will use its most damaging attack), If 
either roll misses, then that attacker automati- 
cally loses initiative in the next round. If both 
rolls hit, each attack causes twice the normal 
amount of damage. A coordinated attack 
involves only one follower. A coordinated attack 
may be attempted at any time during a combat, 
but only once against any particular opponent 
during an encounter. 

Special Hindrances: 

Limited Proficiencies: The Justifier’s mastery of 
weapons and combat comes at the expense of 
learning other skills. For this reason, he receives 
only one nonweapon proficiency slot at 1st 
level (in addition to his Survival bonus). He 
acquires additional proficiency slots at the nor- 
mal rate. 

Limited Spell Use: Because the Justifier devotes 
less time to the study of magic than to the mili- 
tary arts, he has less access to spells than other 
rangers. The Justifier doesn’t acquire spells until 
he reaches 10th level. Table 46 shows the Justi- 
fier’s spell progression. 


Table 46: Justifier Spell Progression 


Justifier Casting 
Level Level 
1-9 - 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16+ 


Priest Spell Level 
2 


3 


ND OF Wr 
WONNNNMNM— + & 
NNN NN 
NN 


Mountain Man 


Description: Some people find the lure of the 
wild irresistible. Having tasted the pleasure of life 
in its purest, most primitive state, these hardy 
souls reject the trappings of civilization and 
wholeheartedly embrace the challenges of the 
untamed wilderness. These Mountain Men (and 
Women) spend their lives in relative isolation, 
enduring uncertain climates, hostile creatures, and 
chronic shortages of food and other vital supplies. 
They couldn’t be happier. 

The typical Mountain Man is robust, coura- 
geous, and uncomplicated. Book learning and 
formal schooling mean far less than self-reliance 
and common sense. Though uneducated by 
conventional standards, the Mountain Man has 
mastered all the skills needed to survive. He 
can manufacture his own weapons from the 
crudest materials, brew potent medicines from 
wild herbs, and doggedly persist in strenuous 
physical labor when others have long since suc- 
cumbed to exhaustion. While hunting wild 
game and navigating dangerous terrain may be 
daunting to an outsider, it’s all in a day’s work 
for the Mountain Man. 

Requirements: A Mountain Man must have a 
minimum Strength of 14 and a minimum Con- 
stitution of 15. The Mountain Man cannot be a 
full elf. 

Primary Terrain: Required: Mountains. 

Role: Mountain Men value privacy more than 
comfort. Accordingly, they make their homes in 
secluded caves or crude shacks hidden in remote 
mountain ranges. Many are nomadic, wandering 
from place to place with their possessions strapped to 
their backs, or carried by a bear or other loyal animal 
follower. They have little need for money, but occa- 
sionally procure goods from traveling salesmen or 
small town merchants, bartering with fur or hides. 

Even the most stubbornly independent Moun- 
tain Man hankers for human companionship now 
and then, which is one of the reasons he might 
agree to hook up with an adventuring party. 
Faced with a problem too formidable for him to 
tackle alone—such as an encroachment from an 
enemy army or an infestation of powerful mon- 
sters—a Mountain Man may seek out an agreeable 
party to lend him a hand. 


Ranger Kits » 65 


The Mountain Man speaks his mind openly 
and directly, regardless of who he might offend. 
Etiquette is hardly his strong suit, nor is per- 
sonal hygiene. While some party members may 
find the Mountain Man’s straightforward 
approach to life refreshing, or even endearing, 
most will probably view him as an unsophisti- 
cated brute, gruff and ill-mannered. Some 
Mountain Men have a crude sense of humor 
that compels them to play adolescent practical 
jokes, such as leaving bear droppings in a com- 
panion’s sleeping bag. The Mountain Man has 
little interest in art or philosophy, but is a nat- 
ural storyteller and loves to tell outlandishly 
embellished tales—often of his own exploits. He 
approaches combat much as he does the other 
elements of his life, attacking with vigor. 

Secondary Skills: Bowyer/Fletcher, Fisher, 
Forester, Hunter, Miner, Trapper /Furrier. 

Weapon Proficiencies: A Mountain Man must 
choose his initial weapon proficiencies from 
among the following: axe (any), bow (any), cross- 
bow (any), club, dagger, dart, javelin, knife, quar- 
terstaff, spear, staff sling, warhammer. 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: Bonus: Moun- 
taineering. Required: Hunting. Recommended: 
Alertness*, Endurance, Fire-building, Foraging, 
Mining, Running, Set Snares, Signaling*, Trail 
Marking’, Trail Signs*, Weather Sense. Barred: 
Agriculture, Armorer, Blacksmithing, Boating", 
Bowyer/ Fletcher (included in the special 
Weaponsmithing bonus, described below), Char- 
ioteering, Engineering, Etiquette, Falconry", 
Heraldry, Navigation, Reading/Writing, Sea- 
manship, Spellcraft. 

Special Bonus: The Mountain Man also receives 
Weaponsmithing (Crude) as a bonus proficiency. 
He is restricted to making the weapons listed in 
Table 47, and can only make weapons in which he 
is proficient. He uses stones, wood, and other nat- 
urally available materials, so these weapons are 
made at no cost. This proficiency can’t be 
improved; that is, assigning additional slots to 
Crude Weaponsmithing has no effect. 

Optional Rule: If a weapon made of stone or bone 
scores a hit, roll 1d6. A stone weapon shatters on a 
roll of 1; a bone weapon shatters on a roll of 1 or 2 
(as per The Complete Fighter's Handbook). 


66 * Chapter Four 


Table 47: Crude Weaponsmithing 
(Mountain Man) 


Weapon Construction Time 
Arrows 7/day 
Axe, Battle 4 days 
1 day 
6 days” 
Idas 
12 days 
2 days 
3/day 
Javelin 1 day 
Knife 2 days 
Quarterstaff I day 
Spear 2 days 
Staff Sling 3 days 
Warhammer 5 days 


*Seasoning the wood takes 1 year. 


Armor/Equipment: A Mountain Man begins his 
career with any two weapons in which he has a 
weapon proficiency. He receives these weapons at 
no charge. These weapons are handmade. Once 
his career is begun, the Mountain Man may manu- 
facture additional weapons in accordance with the 
rules for his Crude Weaponsmithing proficiency. 
He may also use weapons he obtains from his 
companions or other sources. 

A Mountain Man normally doesn’t wear armor. 
Instead, he wears a handmade suit of leather and 
fur which gives him an Armor Class of 8. A Moun- 
tain Man often decorates his suit with dyed porcu- 
pine quills or strings of colorful pebbles. He 
sometimes adds bone necklaces, elaborate leather 
fringes, or a hat made of beaver or raccoon skin. 

Though not strictly forbidden from wearing 
metal armor, a Mountain Man is so uncomfortable 
when doing so that he suffers a -2 penalty to all 
attack rolls. 

Species Enemy: Any. 

Followers: A Mountain Man has only a 20% 
chance of attracting human, demihuman, or 
humanoid followers. Treat a roll of 81-00 as a bear 
(type determined by DM: usually black, brown, or 
cave). Any followers rolled as full elves will be 
dwarves instead (except for full elf mages, who 
will instead be gnome illusionists). 


Special Benefits: 

Will to Live: Where others would submit to 
death, the hardy Mountain Man clings to life fero- 
ciously. This ability manifests itself in the follow- 
ing ways: 

ə If missing a saving throw vs. death magic 
would be fatal, the Mountain Man receives a 
+2 saving throw bonus. 

@ If a damage roll would reduce the Mountain 
Man to zero hit points or less, the Mountain 
Man makes a Constitution check. If the check 
succeeds, he is reduced to 1 hit point. A Moun- 
tain Man cannot use this ability if he has only 
1 hit point remaining. 

e If an encounter results in the death of a Moun- 
tain Man, he may not die immediately. If he 
makes a system shock roll, he fights on for 
another 1-4 rounds or until he suffers damage 
below -10 hit points equal to his level, 
whichever occurs first. He then drops dead. 

Brew Healing Elixir: When a Mountain Man 
reaches 7th level, he gains the ability to brew a 
special healing elixir. He must spend 1-4 hours 
gathering the necessary fresh herbs and mosses, 
usually available in any forest, jungle, or moun- 
tain region (as determined by the DM). It takes an 
hour to brew the elixir, which remains potent for 
24 hours. The elixir acts as one dose of a potion of 
healing. The Mountain Man may brew the healing 
elixir once per day. 

Special Hindrances: 

Limited Stealth: The Mountain Man has a -5% 
chance to hide in natural surroundings and a -5% 
chance of moving silently. 

Limited Magic: A Mountain Man lacks the 
patience and discipline to wield magic effectively. 
He memorizes fewer spells than other rangers and 
doesn’t acquire them until he reaches 10th level 
(see Table 48). 


Table 48: Mountain Man Spell 


Progression 

Mountain Casting Priest Spell Level 
Man Level Level 1 2 3 

1-9 - - - - 

10-11 1 1 - - 

12-13 2 2 - 

14-15 3 2 1 = 

16+ 4 2 2 = 


No Fortifications: A Mountain Man has no inter- 
est in fortifications and will never build one. 

Limited Money: Other than his weapons and 
clothing, a Mountain Man may own only a single 
item worth 15 gp or more. The total value of all of 
his other possessions, including money and trea- 
sure, save training costs, cannot exceed 100 gp. 
Excess treasure and possessions are given away as 
the Mountain Man sees fit. (However, the Moun- 
tain Man still receives all experience points due 
him for finding treasure and fellow party mem- 
bers receive no experience point benefit for the 
gifts from a Mountain Man.) 

Reaction Penalty: The Mountain Man’s crude 
manner and ungainly appearance make strangers 
uncomfortable. He suffers a —1 reaction adjust- 
ment from all NPCs. 

The Mountain Man suffers a -2 reaction penalty 
when encountering nobles, aristocrats, and other 
cultural elite, as they find him particularly 
unpleasant. 


Pathfinder 


Description: The Pathfinder has an uncanny 
knack for blazing trails, a skill that allows him to 
find the easiest routes, reduce travel time, and avoid 
natural hazards. His acute sense of direction mini- 
mizes his chance of getting lost. He can estimate the 
number of miles he’s covered with startling accu- 
racy. The Pathfinder makes an invaluable guide, 
helping to ensure safe and efficient passage. 

Though Pathfinders come from all walks of life, 
most have homelands in sparsely settled or excep- 
tionally hostile terrains where learning to find 
one’s way can mean the difference between life 
and death. A Pathfinder usually demonstrates an 
aptitude for trailblazing early in life, but diligent 
practice is required to refine his skills. Often, a 
young Pathfinder exercises his skill by asking a 
companion to blindfold him, lead him into an 
unexplored area in the wilderness, then abandon 
him. The Pathfinder must find his way home 
using only his wits. Experienced Pathfinders occa- 
sionally engage in this game to brush up on their 
technique or to impress potential clients. 

Requirements: Same as standard ranger. 

Primary Terrain: Forest, Hill, Jungle, Mountain, 
or Plains. 


Ranger Kits * 67 


Role: Though some Pathfinders are retainers of 
kings or lords, most operate independently. 
Pathfinders are generally regarded as honest, 
although their services are rarely inexpensive. 

Being characters of high principle, Pathfinders 
often offer their services to parties undertaking 
adventures to promote the common good. Rarely 
will a Pathfinder join a party purely for gain, 
though he may consider such an arrangement 
when business is slow. 

As a member of an adventuring party, the 
Pathfinder usually finds himself in front, scouting 
the terrain ahead to ascertain the best route and 
spot potential hazards. Unless the Pathfinder has 
organized the party himself, he usually leaves the 
leadership role to someone else while he concen- 
trates on trailblazing. 

Secondary Skills: Farmer, Forester, Groom, 
Hunter, Navigator, Trapper /Furrier, 

Weapon Proficiencies: A Pathfinder must fill an 
initial weapon slot with the machete (see Chapter 
7), hand axe, or sword; such weapons are useful 
for cutting away brush and clearing paths. Subse- 
quent slots may be filled with any weapons of his 
choice (see also Special Benefits). 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: Bonus: Direction 
Sense, Distance Sense*, Trail Marking*. Required: 
Alertness*. Recommended: Camouflage*, Endur- 
ance, Fire-building, Foraging*, Mountaineering, 
Navigation, Signaling*, Trail Signs*, Weather 
Sense. 

Armor/Equipment: Because he spends a lot of 
time on foot, the Pathfinder favors light armor, 
such as leather or padded. He seldom carries a 
shield. Otherwise, the Pathfinder has no particular 
preferences or requirements. 

Species Enemy: Any. 

Followers: All species are eligible, though the 
Pathfinder is likely to attract followers with 
higher movement rates (12+), as he tends to have 
little patience with creatures that can’t keep up 
with him. 

Special Benefits: 

The first two benefits, trail sense and overland 
guiding, apply only when the Pathfinder leads the 
party. At least 20 feet must separate the Pathfinder 
from the rest of the party; the proximity of others 
distracts the Pathfinder, making him unable to 
take advantage of these benefits. 


68 * Chapter Four 


Trail Sense: The Pathfinder’s chance of getting 
lost in any outdoor land setting is reduced by 10%. 
Furthermore, his base chance of getting lost in his 
primary terrain (i.e. the Surroundings column of 
Table 81 in the DUNGEON MASTER Guide) will 
not exceed 20%. This is not cumulative with other 
benefits, such as the one for the direction sense 
proficiency. 

Overland Guiding: A Pathfinder is able to find 
the optimum trail through rough terrain, increas- 
ing the party’s movement rate when traversing 
long distances. To determine terrain costs for over- 
land movement when a Pathfinder leads the party, 
use Table 49 in this book in place of Table 74 in 
Chapter 14 of the DUNGEON MASTER Guide. The 
movement costs indicate points of movement 
spent per mile of travel; when moving through the 
various terrain types, subtract the points from the 
total movement available to the party for that day. 
(Note that less rugged terrain types are relatively 
unaffected, as the optimum paths are usually 
obvious, even without the help of a Pathfinder.) 


Table 49: Terrain Costs for Pathfinders 


Terrain Type 
Barren, wasteland 
Clear, farmland 
Desert, rocky 
Desert, sand 

Forest, light 

Forest, medium 
Forest, heavy 
Glacier 

Hills, rolling 

Hills, steep (foothills) 
Jungle, medium 
Jungle, heavy 
Marsh, swamp 
Moor 

Mountains, low 
Mountains, medium 
Mountains, high 
Plains, grassland, heath 
Scrub, brushland 
Tundra 


Movement Cost 


NEB DRWWADRKRWHHWHeNHE 5H 


Marksmanship: Owing to his steady hand and 
acute vision, the Pathfinder has a +1 bonus to the 


attacks made with a favorite missile weapon. It 
must be one in which he has proficiency and 
selected as a weapon of choice. 

Recognize Trail Hazard. By observing subtle 
changes in the terrain, the Pathfinder is able to rec- 
ognize natural hazards, enabling him and his 
companions to avoid them. Typical hazards 
include quicksand, sinkholes, slippery slopes, and 
thin ice. A Pathfinder has no special ability to rec- 
ognize man-made hazards, such as pit traps or 
dangerous bridges, nor does he have any special 
talent for anticipating encounters with hostile 
natives or animals. 

A Pathfinder’s chance of recognizing a hazard 
is 10% per experience level; to a maximum chance 
of 90% at ninth level. If the DM determines that 
the Pathfinder is approaching an area containing a 
natural hazard, he secretly rolls percentile dice. If 
the roll is equal to or less than the Pathfinder’s 
chance, the Pathfinder recognizes a potential haz- 
ard. (Optionally, the DM might only describe an 
unusual aspect of the terrain and let the Pathfinder 
come to his own conclusions. For example, if the 
Pathfinder is approaching a pool of quicksand, the 
DM might say that the ground feels exceptionally 
spongy. If the Pathfinder nears a patch of thin ice, 
the DM might point out that the ice ahead is dis- 
colored and laced with tiny cracks). 

Special Hindrances: By moving ahead of the 
party, the Pathfinder places himself in a position 
of risk. Separated from his companions, the 
Pathfinder is more likely to be the victim of enemy 
attacks. He runs a greater risk of drawing fire from 
snipers, and is more susceptible to ambushes from 
hostile creatures. If he fails to recognize a hazard, 
he'll probably be the first to become a victim. 


Sea Ranger 


Description: Though most rangers live and work 
on land, the Sea Ranger makes his home at sea. 
Whether sailing the ocean in a mighty galleon or 
riding a river’s currents in a handmade raft, the Sea 
Ranger finds the world’s waters an endless source 
of wonder. A sailor and an adventurer, he guards 
his watery domain with vigilance, and counts many 
of its creatures among his friends and allies. 

He has an extensive understanding of weather 
patterns at sea and of the behavior of marine ani- 


mals. He specializes in combat, both on and under 
the water. He may be a member of a formal navy, 
an independent operator, or a mercenary. He may 
be charged with enforcing naval laws. Some Sea 
Rangers protect ports or fishing territories. Others 
serve as escorts for trade fleets. 

Aquatic Terrain: For the purposes of this kit, 
Aquatic terrain includes oceans, lakes, ponds, and 
rivers, as well as coastlines, beaches, and small 
islands. 

Requirements: Because a Sea Ranger must 
master a wide range of knowledge he requires a 
minimum Intelligence score of 12. Because few 
elves and half-elves have the temperament for the 
seaman’s life, virtually all Sea Rangers are human 
(though being human isn’t a strict requirement). 

Primary Terrain: Required: Aquatic. 

Role: Sea Rangers have reputations as dedi- 
cated, sharp-minded professionals. As such, they 
are often sought by adventuring parties in need of 
their special skills, particularly when an adven- 
ture takes them to aquatic environments or they 
expect to face opponents of oceanic origin. Though 
Sea Rangers generally prefer to remain at sea, they 
travel on land as necessary to achieve the goals of 
their party. As many of a Sea Ranger’s followers 
are waterbound, he obviously has less access to 
them when adventuring on land, a handicap he 
endures graciously but without enthusiasm. 

The environment has a profound effect on a Sea 
Ranger’s attitude. On land, his party companions 
will find him hesitant and uncertain, following 
orders without comment and reluctant to offer 
advice. In an aquatic setting, however, he becomes 
a different person—confident, assertive, and com- 
manding. Only the most stubborn or foolish par- 
ties will decline a leadership role to a Sea Ranger 
in watery terrain. 

Secondary Skills: Fisher, Navigator, Sailor, 
Shipwright, Trader /Barterer, Weaver. 

Weapon Proficiencies: Recommended: Dagger, 
knife, harpoon, sword (any), pole arm (any), tri- 
dent; Optional: Belaying pin, cutlass, gaff/hook. 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: Bonus: Boating* or 
Seamanship; Swimming. Recommended: Cartogra- 
phy*, Direction Sense, Distance Sense*, Endurance, 
Fishing, Navigation, Riding (Sea-based)*, Rope 
Use. Barred: Agriculture, Blacksmithing, Chari- 
oteering, Falconry*, Mining, Mountaineering, Rid- 


Ranger Kits * 69 


ing (Land-based), Spelunking*, Stonemasonry. 

Armor/Equipment: Because heavy armor inter- 
feres with swimming and makes moving around a 
ship uncomfortable, most Sea Rangers wear armor 
with an AC of 8 or less. 

Species Enemy: Any aquatic creature is eligible 
as a species enemy. 

Followers: The primary terrain of all animal fol- 
lowers must be Aquatic. Any full elf follower is 
80% likely to be an aquatic elf. 

Special Benefits: 

Sea Tracking: Because of his knowledge of pre- 
vailing winds, currents, and other general aquatic 
conditions, the Sea Ranger can effectively track 
waterborne craft and aquatic creatures. This is not 
so much a reading of physical signs as an instinc- 
tive deduction of the probable course and destina- 
tion of the quarry. For purposes of general play, 
the Sea Ranger uses the normal Tracking profi- 
ciency check rules. 

Land Scent: When at sea, the Sea Ranger can 
smell the presence of land (including islands) 


70 * Chapter Four 


within 50 miles. Further, if the Sea Ranger has ever 
been to that land before, he has a 10% chance per 
level of identifying it precisely. 

Sea Legs: The Sea Ranger has a fine sense of bal- 
ance, which comes into play when he must fight 
on a narrow beam (such as a yardarm or boarding 
plank) or a pitching deck. Not only is he sure- 
footed under such conditions (avoiding any attack 
penalties for them), but any saving throws or Dex- 
terity checks made to maintain his balance are 
made at a +2 bonus. 

Aquatic Combat: A Sea Ranger suffers no penalties 
to his attack rolls when in water; otherwise he fol- 
lows the standard rules for underwater combat given 
in Chapter 9 of the DUNGEON MASTER Guide. 

Parliament of Fishes: When a Sea Ranger reaches 
12th level, he may attempt to call a parliament of 
fishes. He may use this ability once per week. If 
successful, the Sea Ranger can demand a service 
of the school. Typical services include the location 
or recovery of small items, the provision of edible 
water plants, information about local monsters or 


conditions, and perhaps transport across a small 
body of water if the parliament members are large 
enough. Once a month this can be the equivalent 
of a commune with nature spell. 

To call a parliament of fishes, the Sea Ranger 
locates a pond, lake, or any other body of water 
containing aquatic life. Sometime between sunset 
and dawn, he kneels beside the body of water and 
concentrates for a full turn. An attack or interrup- 
tion in any other way during this time will break 
his concentration, and he can’t attempt to call a 
parliament of fishes until the following week. 

Otherwise, at the end of 10 rounds, 10-100 
(10d10) fish or other aquatic creatures (as appro- 
priate to the body of water) surface and stare 
expectantly at the Sea Ranger. The Sea Ranger 
must then toss an offering into the water; the gift 
may be food, a coin, or any other object of the 
ranger’s choice. 

The DM then rolls 1d10 and consults Table 50. If 
the offer was reasonably generous, increase the 
result by +1. If the offering was exceptionally 
valuable, increase the result by +2. If the offering 
was meager (a copper piece or a chunk of bread), 
decrease the result by —1. If the offering was essen- 
tially worthless (a bone or a chunk of rock), 
decrease the result by —2. The result can’t be 
decreased below 1 or raised above 10. 


Table 50: Parliament of Fishes Results 


D10 Roll Results 

1-2 The fish immediately submerge; the 
offer is rejected. From dawn to sun- 
rise the following day, the ranger suf- 
fers a —1 penalty to all attack rolls and 
ability checks. 

3-7 The fish swim listlessly in circles for a 
few moments, then submerge; the 
offer is neither rejected nor accepted. 
The ranger is unaffected. 

8-10 The fish dive and splash excitedly for 
a few moments, then submerge; the 
offer is accepted. The parliament 
grants the ranger a boon within their 
power. 


Special Hindrances: 
Tracking Limitation: A Sea Ranger’s chance of 


tracking in non-Aquatic terrain is halved. 

Move Silently/Hide in Shadows: The Sea Ranger 
has neither of these abilities, replacing them with 
Sea Legs and Aquatic Combat. 


Seeker 


Description: Devoted to spiritual awareness 
and self-enlightenment, the Seeker’s deep beliefs 
affect him more than any other elements of his life. 
The Seeker seeks fulfillment by following the 
tenets of his faith and striving to understand the 
relationship between himself and the natural 
world. He views animal followers as fellow travel- 
ers on his spiritual journey. 

Seekers can come from any culture, but typi- 
cally originate from societies placing a premium 
on religion and scholarship. Many Seekers begin 
their spiritual quests as students of priests. Others 
are self-taught philosophers or restless academi- 
cians hungry for knowledge that can’t be learned 
from books. Regardless of their background, all 
Seekers have felt compelled to embark on a 
wilderness pilgrimage that may last the rest of 
their lives. 

No particular religion is common to all Seekers. 
Some worship specific gods, while others venerate 
nature itself as an unknowable but all-encompass- 
ing force. All Seekers, however share a reverence 
for life and a philosophy that embodies discipline, 
and personal responsibility, and self-sacrifice. 

Requirements: A Seeker must have a Wisdom 
score of 15 or more. A particular religion may 
impose additional requirements, as determined by 
the DM. 

Primary Terrain: Any. 

Role: Good people of all cultures tend to look 
favorably on Seekers. At worst, Seekers are dis- 
missed as useless but harmless eccentrics. More 
often, they’re regarded as sensitive seekers of 
truth, admired and respected for their devotion. 
Priests of compatible alignment are especially def- 
erential to Seekers; even if such a priest follows a 
different belief system, he recognizes that the 
Seeker shares his veneration of a higher power. 

Though Seekers generally prefer solitude, they 
constantly seek opportunities to broaden their 
outlook and stimulate spiritual insight. For these 
reasons, they may join adventuring parties solely 


Ranger Kits * 71 


for the promise of new experiences. Moral con- 
siderations also motivate Seekers; parties can 
sometimes recruit Seekers by appealing to their 
sense of justice. 

Typically, the companions of a Seeker will find 
him amiable, thoughtful, and comforting. Seekers 
aren't proselytizers—rarely are they interested in 
converting others to their beliefs—but they enjoy 
nothing more than debating philosophical issues. 
A companion who engages a Seeker in such a dis- 
cussion may find himself listening to a detailed, 
scholarly discourse that may last the better part of 
the day. 

Though Seekers usually decline to make deci- 
sions for the party, they often serve as counselors 
and advisors to the leaders. Non-aggressive by 
nature, Seekers avoid combat whenever possible, 
but fight fearlessly to thwart attacks against their 
followers or comrades. A Seeker is reluctant to 
take the life of another creature except to protect a 
companion, a follower, or himself, or to destroy 
his species enemy. 

Secondary Skills: Farmer, Forester, Groom, 
Mason, Scribe, Tailor/ Weaver, Woodworker /Car- 
penter. 

Weapon Proficiencies: A Seeker receives only a 
single weapon proficiency at first level. This profi- 
ciency must be spent on one of the following 
weapons: club, light crossbow, dagger, dart, knife, 
quarterstaff, or sickle, sling. He cannot ever use a 
sword of any type. 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: Bonus: Religion. Rec- 
ommended: Agriculture, Ancient History, Artistic 
Ability, Astrology, Carpentry, Cobbling, Etiquette, 
Languages (Ancient), Pottery, Reading/Writing, 
Spellcraft, Veterinary Healing*, Weaving. The 
Seeker can take clerical proficiencies at the listed 
(non-doubled) costs. 

Armor/Equipment: In most cases, Seekers have 
no special equipment restrictions beyond those 
normally associated with rangers. However, Seek- 
ers worshipping particular gods or adhering to 
strict religious doctrines may have additional 
restrictions, as determined by the DM. Certain 
Seekers, for example, may be forbidden from 
using any bladed weapon or wearing any type of 
armor. Such restrictions should be made clear at 
the outset of the Seeker’s career. 


SS 


72 « Chapter Four 


Seekers have little interest in material posses- 
sions. After keeping enough money to meet their 
basic needs, they typically give away the rest of 
their gold and treasure to the poor. 

Species Enemy: The species enemy must be 
evil. Alternately, a specific evilly-aligned religious 
group or cult may be taken, in which case mem- 
bers and minions of the group are considered the 
species enemy. Other common species enemies 
include ghouls (and other undead), evil dragons, 
death dogs, evil humanoids, etc. 

Followers: All creatures are eligible as follow- 
ers, except the species designated as a sacred ani- 
mal (see the Special Hindrances section). 

Special Benefits: 

Increased Access to Spells: Unlike other rangers, 
the Seeker acquires spells when he reaches 6th 
level. He can also cast 4th level spells. Table 51 
shows the Seeker’s spell progression. 

The Seeker has access to spells from an extra 
sphere in addition to those of plant and animal. 
When reaching 6th level, he chooses an extra 
sphere from the following options: divination, 
healing, protection, weather. This extra sphere 
remains the same for the rest of his career. 

Magical Staff Use: The Seeker can use any magi- 
cal staff that can be used by a druid. 


Table 51: Seeker Spell Progression 


Seeker Casting Priest Spell Levels 
Level Level 1 2 3 4 


1-5 - 


' 
' 
(J 


BE OWWDWNNNNE : 
BP ERWWNNNM NEE | 
vU U GND = = ı 

Ne eet 


Special Hindrances: 
Mediation: A Seeker must spend a full hour 
each day in silent meditation. This hour must 


always occur at the same time of day, such as the 
first hour of dawn or at high noon; once decided, 
it can never be changed. If a Seeker neglects to 
mediate or is interrupted more than once (for 
more than a total of two rounds), he suffers a -1 
penalty to all ability checks and attack rolls the 
following day. 

Sacred Animal: Every Seeker has a sacred animal 
that symbolizes his ideals. A Seeker’s sacred ani- 
mal at the same time he is determined at the same 
time as the species enemy. The player selects the 
sacred animal from the options listed in Table 52, 
subject to the DM's approval; for example, if the 
Seeker's primary terrain is Arctic, his sacred ani- 
mal might be the polar bear, the snow leopard, or 
the seal. A Seeker retains the same sacred animal 
throughout his career. He cannot acquire a fol- 
lower of the same species as his sacred animal. 
The player may choose a sacred animal other than 
those listed in Table 52, so long as it’s different 
from the Seeker’s species enemy. 


Table 52: Sacred Animals 


Primary 

Terrain Species 

Aquatic Dolphin, whale, or giant turtle 

Arctic Polar bear, snow leopard, or seal 

Desert Camel, owl, or hawk 

Forest Bear (brown or black), wolf, or small 
mammal (raccoon, fox, squirrel, or 
rabbit) 

Hills Bear (black or brown), elk, or wolf 

Jungle Elephant, lion, or chimpanzee 

Mountains Wild eagle, giant eagle, or bear (black 
or brown) 

Plains Falcon, horse, or raven 

Swamp Owl, raven, or small mammal (fox, 


otter, or mouse) 


In compliance with his religious principles, the 
Seeker has vowed to protect his sacred animal in 
the following ways: 

œ He is forbidden from intentionally or uninten- 
tionally inflicting harm on his sacred animal, 
or standing by while others do. 

He is required to care for injured or ailing 
sacred animals. 

«He must liberate captive sacred animals held 


against their will. This requirement excludes 
followers of other rangers, or domesticated 
animals serving as pets or mounts. However, 
it includes farm animals that are being raised 
for consumption. 
eHe must protect his sacred animal from 
hunters, trappers, and predators. 

If the Seeker violates any of these requirements, 
as determined by the DM, he is consumed with 
guilt and remorse, preventing him from casting 
spells of any kind for the next week. If his action 
or inaction directly results in the death of a sacred 
animal, he is unable to cast spells for a full month. 
If he benefits from an atonement spell cast by a 
sympathetic priest, the one week suspension is 
reduced to four days, and the month suspension is 
reduced to two weeks. 


Stalker 


Description: At first glance, this soft-spoken, 
rather nondescript character seems hopelessly 
out of place in an adventuring party, looking 
instead like an town dweller who’s wandered 
into the wilderness by mistake. But the drab 
demeanor is only a facade, concealing keen 
senses, a shrewd mind, and remarkable insight. 
Only his closest friends realize the extent of his 
expertise in intelligence-gathering. And that's 
just the way he likes it. 

Stalkers serve as spies, informants, and inter- 
rogators. Unlike other rangers, Stalkers are com- 
fortable in both wilderness and urban settings. A 
Stalker may covertly observe a bandit camp to 
inventory their supplies and hostages, or eaves- 
drop in the corridors of an evil wizard’s castle. A 
few innocuous questions enable him to distin- 
guish friend from foe, and fact from fiction. His 
mastery of stealth makes him a deadly opponent. 

Requirements: A Stalker must have a minimum 
Intelligence score of 14. Stalkers must be human. 

Primary Terrain: Any; in addition, the Stalker’s 
primary terrain can be Urban (see Special Benefits). 

Role: Stalkers tend to be introspective and 
reflective, valuing intellect over physical 
prowess. They avoid drawing attention to them- 
selves, seldom speaking unless directly 
addressed, then responding succinctly and with- 
out elaboration. They avoid small talk and 


——— eee 


Ranger Kits * 73 


socializing, instead preferring the company of a 
good book or an hour spent examining an 
unusual footprint. Stalkers tend to suppress 
their emotions so their decisions aren't colored 
by what they consider to be irrelevancies. 

Though most people respect Stalkers, they are 
also wary of them. The Stalker’s stealthiness and 
secrecy make many people uneasy, as these are 
traits usually associated with thieves and sneaks. 
But Stalkers value honor as much as any ranger, 
and nobles rarely hesitate to hire one in times of 
crisis. A hired Stalker can be trusted to focus on 
the job at hand, complete it efficiently, make his 
report, then go his own way without comment. 

Adventuring parties often hire Stalkers on 
retainer, though occasionally, a Stalker will join a 
party with no assurance of monetary reward if the 
adventure presents an intriguing challenge. Stalk- 
ers rarely are party leaders, though they express 
their opinions freely when invited to do so. In 
combat, most Stalkers are brave but cautious, 
waiting for tactical opportunities to present them- 
selves rather than charging into the fray. They pre- 
fer to surprise their opponents, striking silently 
and quickly. 

Secondary Skills: Any. 

Weapon Proficiencies: Stalkers become profi- 
cient only with weapons they can easily conceal. 
Their weapon proficiencies are limited to blow- 
gun, dagger, dart, knife, short sword, staff, and 
sling. Optional: garrote, rapier (walking stick), 
stiletto. 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: Bonus: Alertness”, 
Camouflage*. Recommended: Blind-fighting, Eti- 
quette, Modern Languages, Persuasion’, Signal- 
ing*, Trail Marking”, Trail Signs’. 

Armor/Equipment: A Stalker prefers to carry 
no more gear than he can comfortably strap to 
his back. He wears well-made but unpretentious 
clothing, similar to that of a laborer or peasant, 
that allows him to blend in with crowds. Though 
he can wear any type of armor (see Special Ben- 
efits) he favors leather. Stalkers almost never 
carry shields, finding them awkward and 
restrictive. 

At the beginning of his career, a Stalker receives 
a free “terrain suit” (see Chapter 7). The terrain 
suit corresponds to his primary terrain (night 
black for Urban). 


74 * Chapter Four 


Species Enemy: Any. Optionally, the Stalker can 
declare a specific thieves’ guild or assassin’s guild 
as his enemy. 

Followers: Because a Stalker prefers to work 
unhampered, his followers are limited in number, 
species, and size. Though he receives a career total 
of 2d6 followers like other rangers, a Stalker has 
only one follower at a time. A new follower won't 
appear until the Stalker’s current follower dies or is 
dismissed. A Stalker won't acquire a new follower 
even if he releases his current follower or arranges 
for its care elsewhere; he must sever all ties with the 
old follower before another will arrive. 

A Stalker never accepts human or demihuman 
followers. Nor will he accept followers whose 
intelligence compares favorably with that of 
humans, such as pixies or aarakocra, as he fears 
such beings are undependable and may cause 
unnecessary distractions. Because he wishes to 
minimize the chances of attracting attention, all 
animal followers must be less than four feet tall 
(size “S” or “T”). 

Special Benefits: 

Tracking: A Stalker has normal ranger tracking 
abilities in outdoor land settings. In addition, he 
has full (not half) tracking capabilities in urban 
settings. 

Stealth Abilities: 

è A Stalker has a +10% bonus to his base chance 
to hide in shadows/hide in natural surround- 
ings and a +10% bonus to his chances to move 
silently. 

e A Stalker has the full (not half) chance for suc- 
cess when attempting to hide in shadows or 
move silently in urban settings or in non-nat- 
ural constructions such as crypts or dungeons. 

e Stalkers can hide in shadows and move 
silently when wearing armor of AC 6 or less 
(see Table 13: Optional Armor in Chapter 1). 

è When a Stalker successfully uses his move 
silently ability to sneak up on a opponent to 
surprise him, the opponent suffers a -3 
penalty to his surprise roll. The Stalker must 
be 90' or more from party members without 
similar silent movement abilities. 

Interrogation: When interrogating an NPC for 
any reason, a Stalker can acquire special knowl- 
edge about the NPC in one (but not both) of the 
following ways: 


* By making a successful Intelligence check (use 
half the Intelligence score, rounded up), the 
Stalker can determine the general alignment 
of the NPC. If successful, the Stalker learns 
the good-evil component of the NPC's align- 
ment (good, neutral, or evil). 

è The Stalker can ascertain the NPC’s honesty. 
The DM secretly makes an Intelligence check 
for the Stalker. If the check fails, the DM tells 
the Stalker nothing about the honesty of the 
NPC. The Stalker must make up his own 
mind about the NPC’s reliability based on the 
NPC's responses. 

If the check succeeds and the NPC is being 
honest with the Stalker, the DM tells the Stalker 
that the NPC is telling the truth to the best of his 
knowledge. A successful check in no way com- 
pels the NPC to reveal any information to the 
Stalker. The NPC may refuse to cooperate, but 
the Stalker is assured of the truthfulness of any- 
thing the NPC decides to share (note that the 
NPC may still pass along unreliable information 
that he believes to be true). 

If the check succeeds, and the NPC is being dis- 
honest with the Stalker, the DM tells the Stalker 
that the NPC may be lying. It’s up to the Stalker to 
separate the truth from the lies; a successful check 
only tells him that he shouldn't take everything 
the NPC says at face value. 

Photographic Memory: When a Stalker reaches 
10th level, he acquires a limited photographic 
memory, enabling him to recall details about any- 
thing he’s seen or heard since achieving 10th level. 
He can recall a fragment of a conversation, conjure 
up a mental image of a place he’s visited, or 
remember words on a printed page. To use this 
ability, the DM secretly makes a Intelligence check 
for the Stalker, with a -2 penalty. If the roll fails, 
the memory is too vague to be of any use to the 
Stalker. If the roll succeeds, the DM tells the 
Stalker what he wishes to remember. If the roll is a 
natural 20, the DM gives the Stalker intentionally 
misleading information about whatever he’s try- 
ing to remember (a room, for instance, is incor- 
rectly recalled as having a locked window or 
mysterious claw marks on the walls). Because of 
the mental stress involved, this ability can be used 
only once per day. 

Special Hindrances: Neither lawbreakers nor 


outlaws appreciate snoops. Typically, the harshest 
possible penalties are reserved for captured Stalk- 
ers. Should a band of orcs or goblins realize that a 
Stalker is in their midst, they're likely to chase him 
down and beat him mercilessly. A Stalker caught 
lurking in private residence will probably be pros- 
ecuted to the fullest extent of the law. An other- 
wise friendly NPC may be less likely to cooperate 
with the party if he recognizes one of the members 
as a Stalker. 


Warden 


Description: The Warden works for a noble, 
king, or wealthy land-owner, and is charged with 
managing and protecting a tract of land owned by 
his overlord. He keeps his overlord’s land free of 
monsters, guards against spies and trespassers, 
intervenes when natural disasters occur, and sees 
to the welfare of the animal population. While a 
Warden may operate alone, making decisions as 
he sees fit, he ultimately answers to a higher 
authority. 

Areas overseen by Wardens vary by size and 
geography, depending on their overlords’ hold- 
ings and interests. A Warden may be in charge of a 
game reserve or oversee a parcel of farmland. He 
may supervise a private park, or be responsible 
for undeveloped property in the mountains or 
desert. The size of a guarded land may range from 
a few square miles for Wardens just beginning 
their careers, to vast estates for high-level War- 
dens, Generally, as a Warden's experience 
increases, so do the boundaries of the land he 
supervises. 

Requirements: As a representative of a greater 
lord, a Warden is required to deal diplomatically 
with a variety people from all walks of life. There- 
fore, a Warden must have a minimum Charisma of 
12. A Warden cannot be of chaotic alignment. 

Primary Terrain: Any, though Forest and Plains 
are the most common. The primary terrain should 
correspond to the area the Warden is first assigned 
to supervise. 

Role: In most societies, Wardens occupy posi- 
tions of modest status, comparable to those of 
mid-level bureaucrats or well-to-do merchants. 
Some are members of the military, but more 
often, they're aides to government officials or 


Ranger Kits * 75 


affluent civilians. Wardens tend to hold the same 
job for life. 

A Warden serves his lord with the loyalty of a 
good soldier. He tends to be fastidious in his 
behavior and strictly law-abiding, which also 
makes him a bit inflexible. To most Wardens, 
rules are rules, and there’s not much middle 
ground. 

When an adventuring party enters a Warden’s 
guarded area, he may agree to assist them for the 
sake of expediency; the sooner the party leaves 
his area, the sooner things will get back to nor- 
mal. Conversely, a Warden may seek out a party 
to help with a particularly difficult task, such as 
ridding the guarded area of destructive crea- 
tures or locating a treatment for a crop disease. 
Depending on the circumstances, a Warden may 
journey anywhere in the world; he is not bound 
to remain in his guarded area. However, a War- 
den will not undertake any adventure without 
direct orders from, or with the express permis- 
sion of his overlord. 

Other members of an adventuring party may 
find a Warden to be cordial but distant. A War- 
den’s loyalties lie primarily with his overlord, 
not with his companions, and this can create 
stress for party members who insist on comrade- 
ship. Some Wardens are also prone to homesick- 
ness; the further an expedition takes him from 
his guarded area, the more anxious and sullen he 
may become. 

Nevertheless, a Warden’s dedication and pro- 
fessionalism can only enhance a party’s effec- 
tiveness. Many comply unwaveringly with 
orders from the party leader, offer pointed 
advice when needed, and fight courageously on 
the battlefield. 

Secondary Skills: Armorer, Bowyer / Fletcher, 
Farmer, Forester, Groom, Weaponsmith, Wood- 
worker /Carver. 

Weapon Proficiencies: Recommended: Bow 
(any), crossbow (any), quarterstaff, pole arm 
(any), spear, sword (any). 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: Recommended: Agri- 
culture, Carpentry, Engineering, Etiquette, Fal- 
conry*, Heraldry, Hunting, Languages (Modern), 
Reading/Writing, Riding (Land-based), Stone 
Masonry. 

Armor/Equipment: Wardens have no special 


LL 


76 * Chapter Four 


armor or equipment requirements. Depending on 
the affluence and generosity of the overlord, War- 
dens may have access to the finest equipment 
money can buy, such as gem-studded shields and 
onyx-tipped arrows. As a rule, Wardens take 
meticulous care of their gear, spending much of 
their free time honing their blades to razor-edge 
sharpness, and polishing their armor until it 
gleams like silver. Wardens affiliated with the gov- 
ernment may wear elaborate uniforms embla- 
zoned with medals, ribbons, and other service 
commendations. 

Species Enemy: Any, though the species enemy 
is often a creature that plagues the Warden's 
guarded land or torments his overlord (in human 
lands, this is likely to be brigands). 

Followers: Any. 

Special Benefits: 

Stipend; A Warden in good standing with his 
overlord receives a monthly stipend commensu- 
rate with his responsibilities and experience. War- 
den salaries average 30-50 gp per month, plus a 
monthly bonus of 10 gp times the Warden’s level. 

Expenses: When undertaking an expedition on 
behalf of his overlord, the Warden may receive a 
small stipend to cover his expenses. A typical 
stipend ranges from 100-500 gp, depending on the 
length of the expedition, the level of the Warden, 
and the generosity of the overlord. The Warden 
may spend these funds only on goods and ser- 
vices directly relating to the success of the expedi- 
tion. In lieu of money, the Warden may receive 
loan of a mount, weapons, or equipment neces- 
sary for the undertaking. 

Annual Boon: Once per year, the Warden can ask 
the overlord for a boon. It is traditional that this be 
granted insofar as the resources of the overlord 
(and the judgement of the DM) allow, although 
exceptionally greedy or ill-considered requests 
will reflect badly upon the Warden. 

Reaction Bonus: When representing his over- 
lord, a Warden receives a +2 bonus to his reac- 
tion checks with all good and neutral characters 
of high social status (including aristocrats, gov- 
ernment officials, and affluent citizens), regard- 
less of their culture or whether he’s met them 
before. 

Special Hindrances: 

Accountability: A Warden is held fully account- 


able for any actions that may reflect badly on his 
overlord. Should the Warden break the law, insult 
a noble, or otherwise behave improperly, his over- 
lord will demand an explanation. An unsatisfac- 
tory explanation will result in a reprimand at best, 
and termination of his job at worst. A terminated 
Warden is forced to abandon this kit, suffering all 
of the penalties described in the Abandoning Kits 
section elsewhere in this chapter. 

If a Warden receives expenses (as detailed in his 
Special Benefits), he must make a full accounting of 
his expenditures and return any excess funds at the 
conclusion of his expedition. Should a discrepancy 
be discovered, the Warden may be fined or impris- 
oned. If he’s been given special equipment instead 
of or in addition to a expenses, all items must be 
returned in good condition. Otherwise, money may 
be deducted from the Warden’s stipend to replace 
them, or the overlord may confiscate an equivalent 
amount of the Warden's goods. 

Overlord Demands: A Warden is always subject 
to orders from his overlord. Some orders are criti- 
cal, others trivial, but all must be followed in 
order for the Warden to remain in good standing. 
Failure to comply with an order may result in a 
variety of penalties, ranging from fines to termina- 
tion of employment. 

An overlord may require the Warden to carry out 
a special order in conjunction with his primary 
assignment, or a Warden may receive burdensome 
duties as part of his regular job. In all cases, the DM 
decides when the overlord makes a special 
demand, the type of demand, and the penalties for 
violation. Some sample demands of a Warden: 

e When an expedition takes the Warden far 
from home, he must take along a young rela- 
tive of the overlord who wants to see the 
world. The Warden accepts responsibility for 
the relative’s safety and behavior. 

@ While on an expedition to a distant land, the 
Warden must make contact with a long-lost 
friend of his overlord and extend an invitation 
to visit. 

ə At all times and wherever he goes, the War- 
den must display a banner bearing the 
insignia of his overlord. 

e In times of austerity for the overlord, the War- 
den must turn over some or all of the treasure 
he collects on an adventure. 


Abandoning Kits 


Once a kit is chosen for a ranger, it can’t be 
exchanged later in the game for a different one. 
However, unless otherwise specified, it can be aban- 
doned entirely, the character continuing the game as 
a standard ranger; that is, a ranger as described in 
the Player's Handbook without any of the benefits or 
hindrances associated with a particular kit. 

Why would a player want to abandon a kit? 
Maybe recent campaign events have made the kit 
less fun to play (the king has declared amnesty for 
all Forest Runners). Perhaps the player feels limited 
by the kit restrictions (he wants more spells than 
those allowed to the Greenwood Ranger). Or maybe 
he’s just tired of it (the Sea Ranger is fed up with life 
on the water). Whatever the reason, the DM should 
honor a player’s request to abandon his kit. The 
abandonment may take place gradually, if the DM’s 
wishes to work the change into an adventure, or 
immediately, if the DM doesn’t see the change as 
significantly affecting the story line of his campaign. 

A character who abandons a kit undergoes the 
following modifications: 

@ All of the kit's bonuses and benefits are lost. 

All penalties and hindrances are ignored. 

The character may use any weapons and 
armor normally available to the ranger. 

@ Should the character acquire new weapon 
proficiency slots, they may be spent on 
weapon proficiencies of the player’s choice. 

The nonweapon proficiencies associated with 
the kit, including requirements and recom- 
mendations, no longer apply. 

e Bonus proficiencies aren't forfeited. Instead, they 
are set aside (written down but not used) until 
the character acquires new nonweapon profi- 
ciency slots. The new slots must be spent paying 
for the former bonus proficiencies, in an order 
determined by the player. The player must pay 
for all former bonus proficiencies before he can 
choose any new nonweapon proficiencies. 


Ranger Kits * 77 


Creating New Kits 


Players aren't restricted to the ranger kits 
described in this chapter. If a player is interested 
in a certain type of character not discussed here, 
he can design a new kit from scratch, using the 
above examples as guidelines. 

Before going to all the trouble of designing a 
new kit from the ground up, study the existing 
kits to see if any of them can be modified to fit the 
archetype you have in mind. If not, copy the 
Ranger Kit Record Sheet in the back of this book. 
Begin by filling out the description of the new kit, 
then write down the information needed in each 
section. Refer to the Kit Subsections descriptions 
at the beginning of this chapter if necessary. 

When you've finished filling out the Record 
Sheet, let your DM look it over. He may make 
some adjustments to ensure that characters tak- 
ing the new kit aren’t too powerful or that the kit 
is sufficiently different from existing kits. The 
DM reserves the right to make additional adjust- 
ments after he sees how it works in the context 
of a campaign. 

Stuck for ideas? Here are some suggestions that 
might be developed into new kits: 

Crypt Ranger. Cemeteries, battlefields, or other 
locales associated with death are his primary ter- 
rain. His followers are non-evil undead. 

Dragon Killer. Similar to the Giant Killer, he 
has special abilities that increase his effectiveness 
when fighting dragons. 

Extra-Planar Ranger. His primary terrain is 
another plane of existence. His followers include 
extra-planar creatures. 

Militant Ecologist. He’s a conservation expert 
who retaliates violently against despoilers, pol- 
luters, and poachers. 

Lycanthropic Ranger. He can change into an 
animal and counts werecreatures among his fol- 
lowers. Werebears and weretigers are suggested. 

Ranger-Knight. He’s a private landowner pri- 
marily interested in protecting and expanding his 
own holdings. 

Survivalist. He can thrive in any terrain, under 
any conditions. He can improvise deadly weapons 
from the simplest materials. 


78 * Chapter Four 


Demi-Rangers 


According to the Player’s Handbook, only 
humans, elves, and half-elves can be rangers. But 
using the rules in this book, it’s possible to include 
characters of other races with ranger-like abilities 
in a campaign. However, lacking the necessary 
qualities to become rangers in the true sense, these 
other races are subject to specific limitations. They 
are known as demi-rangers. 

Demi-rangers are restricted in the following 
ways: 

© Demi-rangers must take character kits. Only a 
few kits are available to each race, as indi- 
cated in Table 53. Further, they must meet all 
the initial ability score requirements for both 
the ranger class and the kit. 

* Demi-rangers use only the basic Tracking pro- 
ficiency; they do not track as rangers, nor can 
they specialize in a primary terrain if that 
optional rule is being used, 

e Demi-rangers do not get the two-weapon 
attack ability of standard rangers. 

* Demi-rangers do add their racial modifier (if 
any) to their move silently and hide in 
shadow abilities. 

è Demi-rangers are limited as to the maximum 
level they may achieve. Table 53 lists the max- 
imum level for each kit. 

è Demi-rangers attract 2d3 followers instead of 
the 2d6 normally allowed rangers. (Dwarf 
demi-rangers will rarely have elf or half-elf 
followers; gnomes will have an exceptionally 
high number of burrowing mammals.) 

è Demi-rangers are restricted as to their terrain 
types. These include: 

è Dwarf: Arctic, Hill, Mountain, Desert. 

ə Gnome: Arctic, Forest, Hill, Underdark. 

Halfling: Aquatic, Forest, Plains, Jungle (excep- 
tion, Explorer). 

ə Halfling demi-rangers are unable to learn the 
priest spells normally available to rangers. 
Dwarf and gnome demi-rangers may learn 
priest spells (from appropriate spheres) but 
not until they reach 10th level. As indicated in 
Table 53, they learn fewer spells than other 
rangers and cast them at lower levels. 


Table 53: Demi-Rangers 


Race Kit Maximum Level 
Dwarf 
Guardian G 
Mountain Man 15 
Warden 15 
Gnome 
Forest Runner 11 
Pathfinder 11 
Stalker 11 
Halfling 
Explorer 9 
Feralan 9 
Sea Ranger 9 


Table 54: Demi-Ranger Spell Progression 
and Dexterity Modifiers 


Demi-ranger Casting Priest Spell Level 


Level Level 1 2 

1-9 - - ʻ 

10 1 1 - 

1 2 2 1 

12 3 2 2 
Hide in Move 

Race Shadows Silently 

Dwarf - - 

Gnome +5% +5% 

Halfling +10% +15% 


New Kits for Demi-Rangers 


Just as you're free to create new ranger kits, it’s 
also possible to design kits specifically for demi- 
rangers. Follow the suggestions outlined in the 
Creating New Kits section above. The DM has the 
right to disallow any kit he feels is inappropriate 
for his campaign. 

Some suggestions for demi-ranger kits: 

Dwarven Spelunker. This is a subterranean 
ranger whose primary terrain encompasses caves 
and underground passages, 

Gnomish Terraformer. He pursues techniques 
for physically reshaping the lay of the land. 

Halfling Agronomist. He’s a master of agricul- 
ture and animal husbandry, 


Dual-Classed Rangers 


Dual-classed characters must be human. A dual 
class ranger may be of any character kit, presum- 
ing the DM allows it in his campaign. 

To change from a ranger to another class, the 
ranger must have a minimum score of 15 in Strength, 
Dexterity, and Wisdom. He must have a score of 17 
or better in the prime requisites of the new class. 

If a character from another class wants to switch 
to a ranger, he must have a minimum score of 15 
in his prime requisites and a score of 17 or better 
in Strength, Dexterity, and Wisdom. 


Multi-Class Rangers 


The main multi-class option open for a ranger is 
the half-elf cleric/ranger. The half-elf advances in 
both classes simultaneously, up to 16th level 
ranger and 14th level cleric. All the usual rules for 
multi-class characters as given in the Player's 
Handbook should be followed. 


Optional Rule: The Ranger-Druid 

Generally, a ranger/druid combination is not 
possible, due to the conflicting alignments of 
the classes. However, campaign conditions may 
allow their creation, should the players and DM 
decide that they wish to experiment with them. 

First, there must be a nature deity of good 
alignment whose specialty priests are druidic. 
Second, the priesthood must have an allied 
group of rangers. Given these conditions, a half- 
elf ranger/druid character may be possible. 

Such a character is still bound by racial level 
limits, in this case 16th level ranger and 9th level 
druid. Even if the optional level advancement 
for exceptional ability scores is used, sucha 
character is unlikely to become a 12th level 
druid (a level for which the character must 
fight). At the very least, the character will have 
formidable enemies among conservative mem- 
bers of the priestly hierarchy, and is likely to 
become the target of subtle plots. Also, such a 
character would be under constant pressure 
from divided loyalties, as his chosen professions 
will tend to pull him in different directions. 


Ranger Kits * 79 


CHAPTER 


Proficiencies 


It’s strongly suggested that you incorporate the 
optional proficiency rules into your campaign, 
especially if you’re using the character kits from 
Chapter 4. This chapter presents all of the non- 
weapon proficiencies relevant to the ranger 
from the Player’s Handbook, along with descrip- 
tions of a few new ones and clarifications of 
some old ones. 


Compiled Proficiencies 


Table 55 lists all of the nonweapon proficiencies 
normally available to the ranger, which includes 
all of the proficiencies associated with the warrior, 
wizard, and general groups. Rangers may also 
acquire proficiencies from the priest and rogue 
groups described in Chapter 5 of the Player's 
Handbook, but at a cost of one additional profi- 
ciency slot above the listed number. 

Bold-faced entries are new proficiencies 
described in this chapter. 

Italicized entries require the player to select a 
specific area of specialization. For instance, a 
ranger proficient in artistic ability must specialize 
in one particular art form, such as painting, sculp- 
ture, or origami. Spending another slot on this 
proficiency allows him to improve an already cho- 
sen art form, or to pick another one. 

Entries marked with an asterisk (*) are profi- 
ciencies with special applications for rangers, 
explained in the Clarifications and Modifications 
section. 


Clarifications and Modifications 


The following modifications are used in addi- 
tion to the information in the proficiency descrip- 
tions given in Chapter 5 of the Player's Handbook. 
The modifications apply to rangers only. Except 
where specified otherwise, rangers must spend 
the slot points indicated in Table 55 to acquire any 
proficiency. 

Whenever a proficiency bonus is indicated, the 
bonus is added to the normal check modifier. For 
example, if a terrain-specialized ranger with a 
Wisdom of 14 uses direction sense (Wis +1) in his 
primary terrain (+2), the check is made at Wis +3. 
A roll of 17 or less on 1d20 is a success, 


80 © Chapter Five 


Animal Handling 


A ranger’s animal empathy ability (see Chapter 
2) can produce essentially the same calming effect 
on an animal as the animal handling proficiency. If 
a ranger also has the animal handling proficiency, 
he may attempt to soothe an animal either by mak- 
ing a proficiency check or by using his animal 
empathy ability—but not both. 

If an animal is among a ranger’s followers, nei- 
ther animal empathy nor the animal handling profi- 
ciency is necessary to control the follower. Use the 
guidelines in Chapter 3 instead. 

The animal handling proficiency has no effect 
on a ranger’s species enemy. 


Animal Training 


Rangers are more efficient than other characters 
at training animals. In the Standard method (see 
Chapter 3) a ranger needs two months to train an 
animal to perform a general task. Training for a 
specific trick requires 2d4 weeks. At the end of the 
training period, he makes a proficiency check. If 
the check is successful, the animal has learned the 
task or trick. If the check fails, the ranger may 
make a second attempt at teaching it the same task 
(requiring another two months) or trick (requiring 
another 2d4 weeks), followed by a second profi- 
ciency check. If this second proficiency check fails, 
the animal is too dumb or too stubborn to learn 
that particular trick or task. The ranger may repeat 
the training process with a different trick or task. 
An animal can learn a maximum of 2d4 tasks or 
tricks, in any combination of the two. 

The animal training proficiency isn’t necessary 
to train followers. Use the guidelines in Chapter 3 
instead. 

A species enemy can’t be trained by the ranger, 
neither with the follower guidelines nor the ani- 
mal training proficiency. 


Riding, Airborne and Land-based 


A ranger cannot use his species enemy as an air- 
borne or land-based mount. If the mount is a fol- 
lower, use the guidelines in Chapter 3 instead of 
the proficiency rules. 


Survival 


All rangers have basic survival skills in their 
primary terrain. Additional proficiency slots may 
be spent to add more terrain types. Thus, if a 
ranger spends slots to acquire this proficiency, he 
must choose a terrain type other than his primary 
terrain, giving him the survival proficiency in two 
types of terrain. 


Table 55: Nonweapon Proficiencies 


#of Slots Relevant Check 

Proficiency Req'd. Ability Modifier 
Agriculture 1 Int 0 
Alertness 1 Wis +1 
Ancient History 1 Int -] 
Animal Handling* 1 Wis =I 
Animal Lore I Int 0 
Animal Training* 1 Wis 0 
Armorer 2 Int -2 
Artistic Ability 1 Wis 0 
Astrology 2 Int 0 
Blacksmithing 1 Str 0 
Blind-fighting 2 NA NA 
Boating 1 Wis +1 
Bowyer/ Fletcher 1 Dex -1 
Brewing 1 Int 0 
Camouflage 1 Wis 0 
Cartography 1 Int =2 
Carpentry 1 Str 0 
Charioteering 1 Dex +2 
Cobbling 1 Dex 0 
Cooking 1 Int 0 
Dancing 1 Dex 0 
Direction Sense 1 Wis +] 
Distance Sense 1 Wis 0 
Endurance 2 Con 0 
Engineering 2 Int -3 
Etiquette 1 Cha 0 
Falconry 1 Wis =I 
Fire-building 1 Wis -1 
Fishing 1 Wis =] 
Foraging 1 Int -2 
Gaming l Cha 0 
Gem Cutting 2 Dex -2 
Heraldry 1 Int 0 
Herbalism 2 Int -2 
Hunting 1 Wis -l 


Tracking 


Most rangers will have this proficiency in out- 
door land terrain without spending any slots, as 
discussed in Chapter 2. Generally, success chances 
in urban, man-made, or aquatic terrains are halved, 
unless a specific kit description says otherwise. 
Some kits give tracking in alternative terrains 
instead of the usual outdoor land environment. 


#of Slots Relevant Check 


Proficiency Req'd. Ability a 
Languages, Ancient 1 Int 
Languages, Modern 1 Int 0 
Leatherworking 1 Int 0 
Mining 2 Wis =3 
Mountaineering 1 NA NA 
Navigation 1 Int -2 
Persuasion 1 Cha 0 
Pottery 1 Dex -2 
Reading/Writing 1 Int +1 
Religion 1 Wis 0 
Riding, Airborne* 2 Wis -2 
Riding, Land-based* 1 Wis +3 
Riding, Sea-based 2 Dex -2 
Rope Use 1 Dex 0 
Running 1 Con —6 
Seamanship 1 Dex +1 
Seaunstress Halo 1 Dex -1 
Set Snares 1 Dex -1 
Signaling 1 Int -2 
Singing 1 Cha 0 
Spellcraft 1 Int =2 
Spelunking 1 Int 2 
Stonemasonry 1 Str -2 
Survival* 2 Int 0 
Swimming 1 Str 0 
Tracking* - Wis Special 
Trail Marking 1 Wis 0 
Trail Signs 1 Int =] 
Veterinary Healing 1 Wis =3 
Weaponsmithing 3 Int -3 
Weaponsmithing, 

Crude 1 Wis =3 
Weather Sense ] Wis -1 
Weaving 1 Int -1 


Proficiencies * 81 


New Proficiencies 


Rangers of any character kit can acquire these 
proficiencies by spending the points listed in Table 
55. The “Crossover Groups” mentioned at the end 
of the description are eligible to buy the profi- 
ciency at the normal cost. Groups not mentioned 
may buy the proficiency by paying one additional 
point beyond the listed cost. 


Alertness 


A character with this proficiency is exception- 
ally attuned to his surroundings, able to detect 
disturbances and notice discrepancies. A success- 
ful proficiency check reduces his chance of being 
surprised by 1. (This replaces the description of 
this proficiency in The Complete Thief’s Handbook.) 

Crossover Groups: General. 


Boating 


This proficiency allows the character to pilot 
any small boat, such as a kayak or canoe, operat- 
ing it at maximum speed. It also allows make 
minor repairs and improvements in these boats, 
such as waterproofing them and patching holes. A 
successful proficiency check enables the character 
to handle the craft in treacherous situations; for 
instance, maneuvering the boat though choppy 
water without capsizing it, or avoiding collisions 
when guiding it through a narrow channel choked 
with rocks or ice. Note that while the navigation 
and seamanship proficiencies deal with ships in 
oceans, seas, and other large bodies of water, the 
boating proficiency is confined to small craft on 
rivers, lakes, on oceans close to shore, and over 
similar terrain, usually on relatively calm waters. 

Crossover Groups: General. 


Camouflage 


By using this proficiency, the character can 
attempt to conceal himself, his companions, and 
inanimate objects by using natural or man-made 
materials. Successful use assumes the availability 
of all necessary materials. In forests and jungles, 
the character can use shrubbery, mud, and other 
readily available resources. Arctic or similarly bar- 


—————— TE 


82 * Chapter Five 


ren terrain usually requires special clothing, 
paints, or other artificial materials (although “dig- 
ging in” is an old trick which may be applicable in 
such terrain, depending on local conditions), It 
takes a character a half-hour to camouflage him- 
self or another person, two or three hours to con- 
ceal a cart or inanimate object of comparable size, 
and a half-day to hide a small building. 

Neither human, demihuman, monster, nor ani- 
mal passersby will be able to see a camouflaged 
character, presuming the character makes a suc- 
cessful proficiency check. Camouflaged compan- 
ions will also go unnoticed; only one proficiency 
check is required for the entire group. 

Objects may also be camouflaged. Objects the 
size of a person require no penalty to the check; 
cart-sized objects require a —1 penalty, while build- 
ing-sized objects require a -3 penalty. The DM 
may adjust penalties based on these guidelines. 

Camouflaging has no effect on predators that 
locate prey by scent or other keen senses; a hungry 
wolf can still sniff out a camouflaged human. A 
camouflaged person has no protection against a 
passerby who accidently brushes against or 
bumps into him. Likewise, a camouflaged person 
may reveal himself if he sneezes, cries out from 
the sting of a bee, or makes any other sound. 

Note that camouflaging is only necessary for 
persons or objects that would otherwise be par- 
tially or entirely exposed. A person hiding behind 
a stone wall wouldn't need to be camouflaged to 
avoid detection, nor would a buried object. 

Crossover Groups: Fighter, Rogue. 


Cartography 


This proficiency grants skill at map making. A 
character can draw maps to scale, complete with 
complex land formations, coastal outlines, and 
other geographic features. The character must be 
reasonably familiar with the area being mapped. 

The DM makes a proficiency check in secret to 
determine the accuracy of the map. A successful 
proficiency check means that the map is correct in 
all significant details. If the roll fails, the map con- 
tains a few errors, possibly a significant one. A roll 
of exactly 20 means the map contains a serious 
errors, making it useless. 

Crossover Groups: General. 


Distance Sense 


This proficiency enables a character to estimate 
the total distance he’s traveled in any given day, 
part of a day, or a number of consecutive days 
equal to his level. For instance, a 7th level charac- 
ter can estimate the distance he’s traveled in the 
previous week. The estimate will be 90% accurate. 

Crossover Groups: General. 


Falconry 


This is most properly the Animal Training (Fal- 
con) proficiency. A character with this proficiency 
is an expert in training and handling falcons, 
enabling him to teach them tricks and tasks (This 
proficiency also allows the training of hawks at a 
-1 penalty. Owls are a separate proficiency and 
can be trained at —2). 

A character can teach a falcon 2d4 (2-8) tricks or 
tasks in any combination. It takes 2d6 weeks to 
teach the falcon a trick, three months for a task. At 
the end of a training period, the character makes a 
proficiency check. If the check succeeds, the falcon 
has learned the trick or task. If the check fails, the 
falcon is incapable of learning more. 

If not using falconry training equipment (see 
Chapter 7), the success roll required for training is 
penalized by -2. 

Crossover Groups: General. 


Note: The foregoing is the standard proficiency. 
Optionally, the training rules for rangers given in 
Chapter 3 can be used. Training times and number 
of tricks/tasks may vary. 


Sample general tasks: 

Hunting: The falcon is trained to hunt its natural 
prey: small mammals and game birds; and to 
return with them to the falconer. Nearly all trained 
falcons receive this training first. 

Ferocity: The falcon receives a +1 bonus to all 
attack and damage rolls, and a +2 morale bonus. 

Guard: The falcon shrieks at the approach of 
strangers. If approached closer than 20' or 30', the 
falcon will attack unless ordered not to. The bird 
can recognize designated friends, 

Homing: The falcon recognizes one place as its 
roost and returns there upon command. 


Loyalty: The falcon is exceptionally loyal to an 
individual selected by the trainer. It has a +4 sav- 
ing throw bonus against charm, control, empathy, 
or friendship attempts by others. Further, it comes 
when the individual summons it, guards its 
master from attack and may perform unusual acts 
of loyalty as decided by the DM. 

Species Enemy: The falcon is trained to recognize 
an entire species as a natural enemy. Its basic reac- 
tion will be hostile, it will reject empathy, and 
have a +4 saving throw bonus against the enemy’s 
charm or control attempts. It will attack the species 
enemy in preference to others. 

Track: The falcon will track a designated crea- 
ture and return. It can retrace its path to lead the 
falconer to the creature. 


Sample specific tricks: 

Attack: The falcon will attack on command a crea- 
ture designated by the falconer until called off. The 
falcon’s base morale is at least 11. The falcon 
receives a save vs. rods against another ranger’s 
animal empathy ability. 

Capture Prey: A hunt-trained falcon will return 
with the prey alive and unharmed. 

Catch Object: Upon command, the falcon will 
catch a small object thrown into the air or a small 
falling object and return to the falconer. 

Distract: The falcon is trained to feint at an 
opponent. The opponent must make a saving 
throw vs. paralysis or lose its next action. 

Eye Attack: The falcon is trained to strike at an 
opponent's eyes. A beak hit has a 25% chance of 
striking an eye. An opponent struck in the eye is 
blinded for 1d4 rounds and has a 10% chance of 
permanently losing sight in the eye. 

Hand Signals: The falcon can be commanded by 
hand signals as well as by voice. 

Hide Object: The falcon takes an object from the 
falconer, flies away with it, and conceals it. The 
falcon will retrieve the object on command. 

Pit Fighting: The falcon is trained as a fighting 
bird. It has a +2 attack bonus against any fighting 
bird that is not so trained. 

Recall: The falcon will immediately return to the 
falconer upon receiving the command. 

Nemesis; The falcon is trained to attack a specific 
individual. The falcon never checks morale when 
attacking the individual. 


Proficiencies * 83 


Foraging 


By using this proficiency, a character can search 
a wilderness area to locate a small amount of a 
desired material, such as a branch suitable for 
carving into a bow, enough kindling to start a fire, 
a medicinal herb, or a component required for a 
spell. The character must spend 2-8 (2d4) hours 
searching, and the material must theoretically be 
available in the area being searched (for instance 
an icicle isn’t available in the desert, nor dry kin- 
dling on the ocean floor). The DM doesn’t confirm 
if the material sought is actually available until 
after the character has searched for the designated 
period. If the DM decides the material isn’t in the 
area, no proficiency check is necessary; he merely 
reveals that the search was in vain. 

If the DM decides the material is indeed avail- 
able, a successful proficiency check means the 
character has found what he’s been looking for. As 
a rule of thumb, the character locates no more 
than a handful of the desired material, though the 
DM may make exceptions (if searching for a few 
leaves of a particular herb, the character may 
instead find an entire field). 

If the check fails, the material isn’t found. The 
character may search a different area, requiring 
another 2-8 hours and a new proficiency check. 

Crossover Groups: Warrior, Rogue, 


Persuasion 


This proficiency enables the character to make a 
compelling argument to convince a subject NPC 
character to see things his way, respond more 
favorably, or comply with a request. The character 
engages the NPC in conversation for at least 10 
rounds (meaning that the subject must be willing 
to talk with the character in the first place); sub- 
jects whose attitudes are threatening or hostile 
aren't affected by this proficiency. 

A successful proficiency check means that the 
subject's reaction is modified by +2 in favor of the 
character (see Table 59 in Chapter 11 of the 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide). This bonus is not 
cumulative with any other reaction modifiers, such 
as those derived from Charisma; other reaction 
modifiers don’t apply. For every additional slot a 
character spends on this proficiency, he boosts the 


1 TEE IaM 


84 + Chapter Five 


reaction modifier by +1 (for example, spending two 
slots on this proficiency gives a +3 reaction bonus). 
Crossover Groups: General. 


Riding, Sea-based 


This proficiency allows the character to handle a 
particular species of sea-based mount The type of 
mount must be specified when the proficiency is 
acquired. The character may spend additional 
slots to enable him to handle other species. 

In addition to riding the mount, the proficiency 
enables the character to do the following: 

@ When the mount is on the surface of the water, 
the character can leap onto its back and spur it 
to move in the same round. No proficiency 
check is required. 

e The character can urge the mount to leap over 
obstacles in the water that are less than 3' high 
and 5' across (in the direction of the jump). No 
proficiency check is required. Greater jumps 
require a proficiency check, with bonuses or 
penalties assigned by the DM according to the 
height and breadth of the obstacle and the type 
and size of mount. Failure means the mount 
balks; an immediate second check determines if 
the character stays on the mount or falls off. 

The character can spur the mount to great 
speeds. If an initial proficiency check fails, the 
mount resists moving faster than normal. 
Otherwise, the mount begins to move up to 
2d6 feet per round beyond its normal rate. 
Proficiency checks must be made every five 
rounds. So long as the checks succeed, the 
mount continues to move at the faster rate for 
up to two turns. After the mount moves at 
this accelerated rate for two turns, its rate then 
drops to % of its normal rate. It can move no 
faster than % of its normal rate until allowed 
to rest for a full hour. 

If the second or any subsequent check fails, the 
mount’s movement drops to half its normal rate. It 
continues to move at this half-speed rate until 
allowed to rest for a hour. 

lf a sea-based mount on the surface of the 
water is attacked, it will normally submerge 
unless it makes a successful morale roll. If the 
morale roll fails, the rider can command the 
mount to re-surface by making a successful 


proficiency check. If the check fails, the rider 
can attempt another check each round there- 
after, so long as he is physically able. While 
submerged with the mount and attempting to 
force it to surface, the rider risks drowning 
(see Chapter 14 of the Player's Handbook), 
Because he’s exerting himself, the number of 
rounds the rider can hold his breath is equal 
to half his Constitution score. 
Crossover Groups: General. 


Signaling 


This proficiency gives the character the ability 
to send messages over long distances. The charac- 
ter must designate his preferred method for sig- 
naling. Typical methods include smoke signals, 
whistling, waving flags, drums, or reflecting mir- 
rors. For each additional slot spent, the character 
may choose an additional method. 

Because signaling is essentially a language, 
messages of reasonable complexity can be com- 
municated. A practiced signaller can transmit as 
many as 10 words per combat round. 

To interpret the signal, the recipient must be 
able to see or hear it. He must also have the signal- 
ing proficiency and know the same signaling 
method as the sender. To send a message and have 
it understood, both the signaler and the recipient 
must make successful proficiency checks. If one 
fails his roll, the message is distorted; the message 
can be sent again in the following round, and pro- 
ficiency checks may be attempted again. If both 
checks fail, or if either character rolls a natural 20, 
an incorrect message was sent and received; the 
message has the opposite of the intended mean- 
ing. Characters without the signaling proficiency, 
as well as characters who have the proficiency but 
use a different signalling method, can’t under- 
stand the signals. 

Crossover Groups: General. 


Spelunking 


A character with this proficiency has a thorough 
understanding of caves and underground pas- 
sages, including their geology, formation, and 
hazards. The character generally knows what nat- 
ural hazards are possible and what general equip- 


ment a spelunking party should outfit itself with. 
A successful proficiency check can reveal the fol- 
lowing information: 

@ Determine, by studying cracks in the walls 
and pebbles on the floor, sniffing the air, etc., 
the likelihood of a cave-in, flash flood, or 
other natural hazard. This only works with 
respect to natural formations, and is negated 
if the natural formations have been shored up, 
bricked in, or otherwise tampered with. 

© Estimate the time required to excavate a pas- 
sage blocked with rubble. 

è While exploring extensive underground cav- 
erns, a successful check reduces the chance of 
getting hopelessly lost when confronted by 
multiple unmarked passages, sinkholes, etc. 
to a maximum of 30%, assuming good light- 
ing (see DMG Table 81-82). 

Crossover Groups: Warrior. 


Trail Marking 


By notching trees, scattering pebbles, piling 
stones, and clipping weeds, the character can 
mark a trail through any wilderness area. Provid- 
ing he moves at % his normal movement rate, he 
can mark a continuous trail as long as he likes; 
however, the longer the trail, the less likely he'll be 
able to follow it back. 

A successful proficiency check enables a back- 
tracking character to follow his own trail for a dis- 
tance equal to his level in miles. If he fails a check, 
he loses the trail. For instance, assume a 3rd level 
character marked a 12-mile trail. His first success- 
ful proficiency check enables him to follow this 
trail back three miles. A second successful profi- 
ciency check means he can follow the trail another 
three miles. The third check fails, and he loses the 
trail; he’s only been able to follow his trail for a 
total of six miles. 

The tracking proficiency isn’t necessary to use the 
trail marking proficiency. However, when a ranger 
loses his own marked trail, he may still attempt to 
follow it using his tracking proficiency. Any other 
characters with the tracking proficiency may also 
attempt to follow a ranger’s marked trail, using the 
rules applicable to the tracking proficiency. 

A marked trail lasts unless it is obscured by pre- 
cipitation, a forest fire, or the passage of time (an 


Proficiencies * 85 


undisturbed trail marked in a forest should last 
for weeks, while an arctic trail may last less than a 
day during periods of heavy precipitation; the DM 
decides). A ranger or other character with the 
tracking proficiency may still attempt to follow an 
obscured trail using the tracking rules. 

Crossover Groups: Warrior. 


Trail Signs 


A character with this proficiency can read sym- 
bolic messages indicated by an arrangement of 
stones or other physical objects. The character 
must designate the method of leaving messages 
preferred by his family, tribe, or culture. Typical 
methods include piling rocks, stacking branches, 
or building snow sculptures. When the character 
encounters such a message, he understands the 
meaning if he makes a successful proficiency 
check. (“A dragon dwells in these woods.” “Eat 
the green berries for restored health.”) The mes- 
sage is meaningless to characters without the trail 
signs proficiency. A character with the trail signs 
proficiency who uses methods other than the one 
encountered can try to read it at half the normal 
chance for success. This proficiency can also be 
used to identify the cultural group or tribe that 
has left a specific trail sign. 

Crossover Groups: Warrior, Rogue. 


Veterinary Healing 


The character can attempt to heal all types of 
normal animals, following the same procedures 
described in the description of the healing profi- 
ciency (returns 1-3 hit points if done within one 
round of wounding, once per creature per day; 
continued care can restore 1 hit point per day 
during non-strenuous traveling for up to 6 crea- 
tures; gives a +2 to save vs. poison if treated for 5 
rounds within a round after poisoning; diagnose 
disease, magical origins identified, natural dis- 
eases take mildest form and shortest duration). 
Supernatural creatures (such as skeletons or 
ghouls) or creatures from another plane (such as 
aerial servants or xorn) cannot be treated with 
this proficiency. 

This proficiency is not cumulative with the heal- 
ing proficiency—the first used will take prece- 


86 » Chapter Five 


dence. The veterinary proficiency can be used on 
humans, demihumans, and humanoids at half the 
normal chance for success. 

Crossover Groups: Priest. 


Weaponsmithing, Crude 


This proficiency allows the making simple 
weapons out of natural materials. This skill is 
most often found in those from a primitive, tribal, 
or savage background. 

The crude weapons are limited to natural mate- 
rials: stone, wood, bone, sinew, reed, and the like. 
Crude weapons take a certain amount of time to 
make. The DM may add additional primitive 
weapons to the basic list. 

The chance for success is based on the charac- 
ter’s Wisdom, with a-3 penalty. Any warrior or a 
character with the hunting proficiency has a +3 
bonus. The fashioner must be proficient in the use 
of the weapon. 

If successful, the weapon can be used normally. 
If failed, the weapon is so badly flawed as to be 
useless. On a roll of 20, the weapon seems sound, 
but will break upon first use, On a roll of 1, the 
weapon has no chance of breaking except against 
a harder material. 

Optional: Crude weapons check for breaking 
upon inflicting damage; roll 1d6. Bone weapons 
break on a roll of 1 or 2, stone weapons break on a 
roll of 1. 

Crossover groups: Warrior. 


Weapon Construction Time 
Arrows 7/day 
Axe, Battle 4 days 
Axe, Hand 1 day 
Axe, Throwi 6 days 
Bow, Long* 15 days 
Bow, Short 12 days 
Dagger 2 days 
Dart 3 day 
Javelin 1 day 
Knife 2 days 
Quarterstaff 1 day 
Spear 2 days 
Staff Sling 3 days 
Warhammer 5 days 


* Seasoning the wood takes 1 year. 


A ranger who reaches 8th level can learn and use 
certain spells. Unlike a wizard, he doesn’t need a 
spell book, nor does he need to roll to learn 
spells. Instead, he obtains spells like a priest, 
acquiring the spells he wants to memorize 
through meditation and prayer. Chapter 8 exam- 
ines the relationship between rangers, priests, 
and faiths in more detail. 

Unlike priests, rangers have access to spells 
only from the animal and plant spheres. As shown 
on Table 5 in Chapter 1, a ranger can cast spells at 
an increasingly higher level as he himself 
advances in level; a 9th-level ranger casts spells as 
a 2nd-level caster, while a 12th-level ranger casts 
spells as a 5th-level caster. Also note that a ranger 
choose to memorize any plant or animal sphere 
spell of the level shown on Table 5; for instance, a 
13th-level ranger can have any three Ist-level 
spells from the plant and animal spheres and any 
two 2nd-level spells from the plant and animal 
spheres memorized at one time. 

This chapter presents several new spells that the 
ranger should find especially useful, along with a 
few new magical items. For quick reference, Table 
56 lists all spells available to the ranger. Bold-face 
spells are described in this chapter; the rest are 
detailed in the Player’s Handbook. 


New Spells 


First-Level Spells 
Allergy Field (Alteration) 


Sphere: Plant 

Range: 10 yards/level 
Components: V, S, M 

Duration: 3 rounds + 1 round/level 
Casting Time: 4 

Area of Effect: 5-foot/ level cube 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell causes characters entering the affected 
area to suffer extreme allergic reactions. It may be 
cast on any field, meadow, forest, or other outdoor 
area with an abundance of plant life, causing the 
plants to produce pollen, antigens, or similar aller- 
gens. Characters coming in contact with the 


affected area who fail their saving throws vs. spell, 
experience swelling of the eyes, fits of sneezing, 
and dull headaches for the next 2-5 (1d4+1) turns. 
During that time, they make all attack rolls and 
ability checks at a -1 penalty. 

The spell affects a cubic volume whose sides are 
5 feet long per level of the caster; thus, a 9th-level 
caster could affect a 45'x45'x45' cube. The spell 
lasts until the end of the indicated duration, or 
until the first frost, whichever comes first. 

The material component for this spell is a pinch 
of ragweed. 


Recover Trail (Divination) 


Sphere: Plant 

Range: Special 
Components: V, S 
Duration: Special 
Casting Time: 4 + Special 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


A caster who has lost a quarry’s trail while 
using the tracking proficiency can use this spell to 
proceed. The spell only works in terrain contain- 
ing some type of vegetation (such as trees, grass, 
or seaweed). The quarry must have left some 
potential trail on which the spell can act (the spell 
cannot track a creature that has feleported or plane 
shifted, for example). 

If successful, within an hour after casting the 
spell, the vegetation in a particular area will begin 
to flutter, as if being blown by a gentle breeze. If 
the wind is already blowing, the vegetation moves 
up and down, or moves in another unusual way 
to attract the caster’s attention. When examining 
this area, the caster will notice a footprint, broken 
twig, or other sign previously overlooked, indicat- 
ing to correct trail. The spell has a success chance 
of 60% + 2% per level of the caster. 

This spell will immediately negate a pass without 
trace spell if cast directly for that purpose, other- 
wise it will still function normally to allow track- 
ing along the disguised trail. 

Any spellcaster with access to both the plant 
sphere and the tracking proficiency can use this 
spell. 


Magic * 87 


Revitalize Animal (Necromancy) 


Sphere: Animal 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S 
Duration: Permanent 
Casting Time: 4 

Area of Effect: One animal 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell allows the caster to heal an animal 
by transferring life force (hit points) from him- 
self to the animal. If the animal is touched with 
one hand, it regains 1d4 hit points, just as if it 
had received a cure light wounds spell. Touching 
the animal with both hands restores 2d4 hit 
points. In either case, the caster temporarily 
loses the number of hit points that the animal 
regains. The caster will recover his lost hit points 
1-4 hours later (if he transferred 3 hit points, he 
recovers 3 hit points in 1-4 hours). The caster’s 
recovery of these hit points has no effect on the 
restored animal. 

During the 1-4 hours before the caster recovers 
his transferred hit points, he feels weak and dizzy, 
making all attack rolls at a -1 penalty during that 
time. Should the ranger die during that 1-4 hour 
period, the recovery process stops immediately 
and no hit points are recovered. 

The animal cannot recover hit points beyond 
the normal allotment. For instance, an animal that 
normally has 10 hit points, but has been reduced 
to 6 due an injury, can’t receive more than 4 hit 
points from this spell. Also, the caster will have at 
least 1 hit point remaining after using this spell; if 
the caster has 6 hit points, he won't transfer more 
than 5 to a damaged animal. 

Revitalize animal works on animals only; it has 
no effect on humans, demihumans, humanoids, 
magical creatures, etc. The spell is not reversible; 
that is, an injured caster can’t receive hit points 
from an animal. 


Second-Level Spells 
Animal Eyes (Necromancy) 


Sphere: Animal 
Range: 0 


88 + Chapter Six 


Components: V, S, M 

Duration: 3 rounds + 1 rnd/level 
Casting Time: 5 

Area of Effect: One creature 
Saving Throw: None 


By using this spell, the caster can temporarily 
see through the eyes of any animal. The caster 
points at any single animal within 100 yards, 
then closes his eyes and remains stationary. In his 
mind’s eye, he sees whatever the animal is see- 
ing. If the subject animal is a squirrel studying 
the party from a tree branch, the caster sees him- 
self and the party from the perspective of the 
squirrel. If the subject animal is a bird soaring 
overhead, the caster gets a bird’s eye view of the 
area below. 

The spell has no effect on the subject animal, nor 
can the caster control the animal's actions in any 
way. The animal is unaware of the spell and acts 
as it normally would. The spell persists until the 
end of its duration, or the caster moves or takes 
another action. The caster may voluntarily negate 
the spell by opening his eyes. The spell also ends if 
the animal is killed, or moves more than 100 yards 
away from the caster. 

The subject animal must be one normally found 
in nature. It may not be supernatural, human, 
demihuman, nor of extraplanar origin. 

The spell requires a glass lens no larger than one 
inch in diameter as a focus, which is not con- 
sumed in the casting. 


Locate Animal Follower (Divination) 
Reversible 


Sphere: Animal 

Range: 60 yards + 10 yards/level 
Components: V, S, M 

Duration: 8 hours 

Casting Time: 5 

Area of Effect: 1 animal follower 
Saving Throw: None 


Occasionally, a ranger’s animal follower may 
wander away in search of food or a mate. An ani- 
mal follower may also be abducted or trapped. 
The locate animal follower spell helps the ranger 
find such lost creatures. 


The spell takes affect once the ranger fixes in his 
mind the follower being sought. The spell locates 
only that specific follower. 

Once the spell is cast, the ranger slowly turns in 
a circle, If the follower is within range, the ranger 
senses when he is facing in the direction of the 
sought follower. If the follower isn’t within range, 
the spell doesn’t work. If the follower moves out 
of the area of effect, the spell is immediately 
negated. As soon as the ranger sees the lost fol- 
lower, the spell ends. The spell is blocked by lead. 

The spell works only on a natural animal fol- 
lower (including giant animals); not a supernat- 
ural creature, human, demihuman, humanoid, or 
other. If the follower is dead, the spell still seeks it 
out, providing other conditions of casting are met. 

The material component is a hair, feather, scale 
or other physical remnant of the lost follower. 

The reverse of this spell, obscure follower, hides 
an animal follower from detection by spells, crys- 

tal balls, and similar means for eight hours. 


Third-Level Spells 


Call Follower (Conjuration /Summoning) 


Sphere: Animal 
Range: 0 
Components: V, S 
Duration: Special 
Casting Time: 6 
Area of Effect: 10 mile radius/level 
Saving Throw: None 

A ranger who has not yet received his full allot- 
ment of followers can use this spell in an attempt to 
summon one. After the spell is cast, the DM secretly 
consults the list of followers he’s chosen for the 
ranger, or rolls an appropriate table. If the DM 
decides that a potential follower exists within the 
area of effect, the follower appears within the next 
24 hours. If the DM decides that a follower isn’t 
available within the area of effect, nothing happens 
(no follower appears). Note that the ranger can’t 
request a specific type of follower; as always, the 
type of follower is up to the DM. The spell can be 
attempted no more than once per month. 

DM Note: Notes on staging the arrival of the fol- 
lower are also given in Chapter 3. 


Chatterbark (Divination) 


Sphere: Plant 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S 
Duration: Special 
Casting Time: 1 turn 
Area of Effect: One tree 
Saving Throw: None 


A variation of the 4th-level priest spell, speak 
with plants, this spell enables a ranger to ask a sim- 
ple question to a tree and receive a spoken 
response. The tree can be any species, so long as 
its trunk is at least 1 foot in diameter. Before cast- 
ing the spell, the ranger must spend at least an 
hour carving a humanoid face in the trunk; if the 
ranger has a proficiency in wood carving (a varia- 
tion of artistic ability), he can carve a suitable face 
in one turn. 

After carving the face, the ranger spends 1 turn 
casting the spell, at which time the face becomes 
animated, twitching and grimacing as if just 
awakening from a long sleep. The tree face then 
looks at the caster expectantly, waiting for a ques- 
tion. The caster may ask the tree any single ques- 
tion that can be answered in a single word or short 
phrase. Typical questions might include: “Has a 
dragon passed this way within the last few days?” 
“Has it rained here recently?” “Are there any fruit 
trees nearby?” The tree answers the question hon- 
estly. If the question is beyond the scope of its 
knowledge, the tree says, “I don’t know.” After 
answering, the face disappears. 

The DM should keep in mind that a typical 
tree doesn’t know very much, as it has little 
experience, never travels, and rarely interacts 
with other living things in meaningful ways. As 
a rule of thumb, a tree’s knowledge is limited to 
things it has observed (passersby, weather con- 
ditions) and general information about the 
immediate area (animal populations, location of 
landmarks). A tree can’t give dependable advice 
or make judgements. If the DM is in doubt about 
what a particular tree knows, the tree answers, 
“I don't know.” 


Magic * 


Animal Trick (Enchantment) 


Sphere: Animal 

Range: 30 yards 
Components: V, S 
Duration: 1 round/level 
Casting Time: 6 

Area of Effect: One animal 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell temporarily enables any animal to 
perform a trick it normally doesn’t know or lacks 
the intelligence to execute. The animal must be 
within 30 yards of the caster and must be able to 
hear his spoken commands. If these conditions are 
met, the animal will do exactly what the ranger 
tells it. A lion will batter down the door of a cell, a 
cat will fetch a key and carry it in its mouth, a par- 
rot will draw a circle in the sand with its claw. A 
creature with less than 5 hit dice and no prior alle- 


90 » Chapter Six 


giances receives no saving throw. Any willing 
creature predisposed to aid the caster (such as an 
animal follower) will not resist this spell at all. 

The animal can’t execute a trick or task that 
exceeds its physical limitations. A snake can’t pick 
a lock, and a horse can’t play a trumpet. Note also 
that the caster must give specific instructions, not 
general commands. If the caster commands a lion 
to “Get something to help me put out this fire,” 
the puzzled lion won't know what do to. How- 
ever, if the caster says, “Take this bucket in your 
mouth, dip it in the stream, and carry the water 
back to me,” the lion will do as it's told. 

The caster can take other actions while the ani- 
mal is completing the trick. Once the animal com- 
pletes its trick, the caster may give it additional 
tricks to complete until the spell! expires. If the 
spell expires while the animal is in the middle of a 
trick, or if the spell is broken by some means, the 
animal immediately stops what it’s doing. 


Polymorph Plant (Alteration) 


Sphere: Plant 

Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Duration: Permanent 
Casting Time: 6 

Area of Effect: One plant 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell enables a ranger to transform any sin- 
gle plant, including a fungus or mold, into any 
other type of plant of the ranger’s choice. The 
change is permanent. The changed plant has the 
physical appearance of its new form, but not all of 
the associated properties. If edible, the new form 
tastes as bland as cotton. If normally used as a 
spell component, the new form has only a 50% 
chance of actually functioning as a component. If 
normally used for medical purposes (such as for a 


Table 56: Ranger Spells 


Level Name Sphere 
1 Allergy Field Plant 
l Animal Friendship Animal 
1 Entangle Plant 
1 Invisibility to Animals Animal 
1 Locate Animals or Plants Both 
1 Log of Everburning* Plant 
1 Pass Without Trace Plant 
1 Recover Trail Plant 
1 Revitalize Animal Animal 
1 Shillelagh Plant 
2 Animal Eyes Animal 
2 Barkskin Plant 
2 Charm Person or Mammal Animal 
2 Goodberry Plant 
2 Locate Follower Animal 
2 Messenger Animal 
2 Snake Charm Animal 
2 Speak With Animals Animal 
2 Trip Plant 
2 Warp Wood Plant 
3 Animal Trick Animal 


healing salve or poison antidote), the new form 
has only a 50% chance of having any beneficial 
properties. 

Only living plants can be polymorphed; the 
spell won't work on a fallen leaf, a nut, or a picked 
fruit. The size of the plant is not relevant; a blade 
of grass may be polymorphed into a towering oak 
tree and vice versa. The new form doesn’t have to 
be indigenous to the environment; an evergreen 
tree on a frigid mountain may be polymorphed 
into a cactus (although it may not thrive for long). 

Neither the original vegetation nor its poly- 
morphed form can be an intelligent plant or a 
plant-like creature. Nor are unnatural plant 
forms allowed; a mushroom may be transformed 
into a normal-sized cornstalk, but not a 50-foot- 
tall cornstalk or a stalk that produces apples 
instead of corn. 

The material component for this spell is any 
seed, 


Level Name Sphere 
3 Call Animal Follower Animal 
3 Chatterbark Plant 
3 Hold Animal Animal 
3 Plant Growth Plant 
3 Polymorph Plant Plant 
3 Slow Rot* Plant 
3 Snare Plant 
3 Spike Growth Plant 
3 Summon Insects Animal 
3 Tree Plant 
4> Animal Summoning I Animal 
4" Call Woodland Beings Animal 
4** Giant Insects Animal 
4"* Hallucinatory Forest Plant 
art Hold Plant Plant 
E bid Plant Door Plant 
E ag Repel Insects Animal 
4 Speak With Plants Plant 
4** Sticks to Snakes Plant 
*Tome of Magic 


** Seeker Kit 


Magic * 91 


Medallion 


Portable 
Shadow 


New Magical Items 


The following magical items are intended for 
rangers, but if the DM so chooses, he may allow 
fighters, wizards, and other character classes to 
use them, too. All of these items are relatively rare 
and should turn up no more often than a typical 
item listed in the Miscellaneous Magic Tables in 
Appendix 2 of the DUNGEON MASTER Guide; if 
you like, you may use any of these items as an 
option when a DM’s Choice is rolled. 


Chameleon Cloak. This lightweight cloak, which 
covers the wearer from neck to foot and also 
includes a hood, may be worn comfortably over 
studded leather or lighter armor. The color of the 
cloak automatically changes to blend in with the 
surrounding terrain. If the wearer enters a jungle, 
the cloak becomes mottled with patches of green 
and brown. If the wearer enters a plain of snow, the 
cloak turns white. At night, the cloak becomes 
black. The color changes are instantaneous. 


92 + Chapter Six 


Species Enemy 


Horn of 
Animal Calls 


Chameleon 
Cloak 


Thorn of Sleep 


A chameleon cloak allows a character to be per- 
sonally camouflaged, as if using the camouflage 
proficiency, in any terrain. The chameleon cloak can 
only conceal one person at a time. The cloak con- 
ceals with an effective Wisdom equal to its rating. 


d20 roll Wisdom Rating XP 
1-6 15 750 
7-15 16 800 
16-19 17 850 
20 18 900 


Horn of Animal Calls (1200XP). This wooden 
instrument, painted bright red with tiny silhou- 
ettes of various animals along the sides, resembles 
a recorder about six inches long. The instrument 
can duplicate the cries and calls of any animal. 
The user closes his eyes, pictures the animal in his 
mind, then blows into the instrument. The sound 
is indistinguishable from the cry of the actual ani- 
mal. The instrument can be used to call particular 
animals or frighten them away. The DM deter- 


mines the effect of any particular use of the horn; 
for example, summoning 2d4 animals might be 
80% likely in an animal's home terrain, with an 
arrival time of 1-4 rounds. 


Ice Box (800 XP). This is an airtight box one foot 
square, made of black metal with a single hinged 
panel. Opening the panel reveals the hollow inte- 
rior. Centered on the outside of the panel is a 
white metal pointer resembling a small arrow. 
This pointer can be rotated in any direction to reg- 
ulate the temperature inside the box. If pointed 
straight up (toward the hinges), the temperature 
remains at 70°F. For every complete clockwise 
rotation of the arrow, the temperature inside the 
box drops 1 degree. Therefore, if the arrow is 
rotated 30 times, the temperature drops to 40°F. 
Rotating the arrow counter-clockwise raises the 
temperature 1 degree per rotation. The tempera- 
ture can’t be lowered below zero degrees or ele- 
vated beyond 70 degrees. The box is useful for 
making ice and preventing food spoilage. 


Portable Shadow (1,000 XP). Similar in appear- 
ance to a portable hole, a portable shadow resembles a 
gauzy black circle about 10 feet in diameter that 
can be folded up into a packet about 6 inches 
square. When unfolded and laid on any horizontal 
surface, the portable shadow looks like any normal 
area of shade, as dark as a shadow cast by a tree or 
other solid object under a midday sun. This magi- 
cal item is useful for concealment and makes as 
good a hiding place as any naturally shaded area; 
rangers, thieves, and others have their normal 
chance of hiding in shadows when standing in a 
portable shadow. The shadow can be picked up by 
lifting the edge and folding it like a tablecloth. 

Dungeon Masters should use common sense 
adjudicating the use of a portable shadow. If a char- 
acter attempts to use it to hide in shadow while 
crossing a featureless plain, the presence of a 
“black hole” attached to nothing will be more 
likely to attract attention than to divert it. How- 
ever, it can provide a shady place to cool off away 
from the desert sun. 


Species Enemy Medallion (750 XP). A charac- 
ter wears this copper disk on a chain around his 
neck and under his clothing so that the metal 


touches his chest. When the character comes 
within 100 yards of his species enemy, the medal- 
lion becomes warm, alerting him to the enemy’s 
presence. The intensity of the warmth varies 
according to the number and proximity of the 
enemy. The medallion doesn’t get hot enough to 
cause damage, nor does it reveal the exact location 
or number of enemies in the vicinity. 


String Cage (500 XP). This looks like a piece of 
white thread 20 feet long, flecked with gold. When 
arranged in a circle so that the ends touch, the 
string cage creates an invisible barrier that pre- 
vents any creature contained inside from leaving. 
The invisible barrier has the strength of a wall of 
force and has the shape of a closed cylinder about 
6’ tall. The string cage only functions if placed on 
the ground or other solid surface; if moved, the 
barrier dissipates. Because of its light weight, the 
string can’t be thrown like a lasso; if rocks or other 
weights are attached, its magic is negated. There- 
fore, the device is mainly useful to contain crea- 
tures that are sleeping, trapped, restrained, or 
cooperative. 

A string cage can contain any single creature, so 
long as the creature fits inside the circle. Physical 
attacks and most spells have no effect on a string 
cage. The creature trapped inside can’t move it. A 
disintegrate spell destroys the device, as will a rod 
of cancellation or a sphere of annihilation. A creature 
contained in a string cage can escape by using 
dimension door, teleport, or a similar spell. 

Only the person who originally formed the cir- 
cle can separate the ends and free the creature 
inside. Otherwise, a string cage lasts for 3-12 (3d4) 
hours, at which time the ends separate automati- 
cally. A string cage can be used only once per day. 

Thorn of Sleep (100 XP each). The thorn of sleep 
looks like the thorn of a plant, about three inches 
long. It is dry and smooth to the touch. If pricked 
by the thorn, a creature must make a saving throw 
vs. paralyzation. Failure means the creature falls 
into a deep slumber. The creature will not waken 
until attacked or strongly roused. Noises, even 
those of battle, will not awaken the sleeping crea- 
ture. Each thorn can be used but once. Only 1-8 
thorns will be found at any one time. A thorn of 
sleep can be projected by a blowgun. 


Magic * 93 


CHAPTER 


Equipment 


To help him thrive in a variety of environments, 
the ranger has developed a wide range of special- 
ized equipment. This chapter describes some of 
the more useful items, along with some of the 
more unusual. 

Table 57 lists costs and weights of clothing, 
transport, and miscellaneous equipment. Table 58 
provides similar information for weapons; see 
Chapter 6 of the Player's Handbook for the meaning 
of weapon size, speed factors, and type. 


Clothing 


Aba. This desert robe is made of lightweight 
fabric and covers the entire body. Typical colors 
include brown, gold, black, and white. Elaborate 
embroidery, made of brightly colored cloth strips 
or gold thread, often decorates the hem. A silken 
or cotton sash ties the aba at the waist. 

In deserts and other dry climates, such garments 
help prevent evaporation, allowing the wearer to 
retain more moisture and function more comfort- 
ably. Assuming adequate water, a character wear- 
ing a desert robe is no more likely to suffer heat 
exhaustion on days of extreme heat than a normal 
person would on days of moderate temperatures. 
Note that desert robes don’t help in areas of high 
humidity; in humid environments, as much skin 
should be exposed as possible to encourage cooling 
from the evaporation of perspiration. 


Arctic Coat. Designed for protection against 
extreme cold, the arctic coat is a knee-length sin- 
gle-piece garment with a billowing hood. The long 
sleeves allow the wearer to warm his hands by 
drawing them inside and holding them against his 
chest. Arctic coats are usually made of thick bear 
fur, lined with seal skin for comfort. An arctic coat 
keeps the wearer comfortable in temperatures 
well below zero degrees F. 


Rain Poncho. A one-piece garment resembling 
a large cloak with a head-sized hole in the center, a 
poncho helps keep the wearer dry during rain 
storms. Ponchos are made of canvas or similar 
material, often treated with a waterproofing oil. A 
poncho can double as ground cover and can also 
be used as an emergency tent. Crude ponchos are 
sometimes woven from grass or reeds. 


94 + Chapter Seven 


Snowshoes. Each about three feet long, these 
oval-shaped wooden frames are laced with leather 
webbing to allow the wearer to walk across snow 
without sinking. A character newly introduced to 
wearing snowshoes moves at half his normal rate 
until he gets used to them. After a day or so of prac- 
tice, he moves at his normal rate. A character wear- 
ing snowshoes receives no bonuses for charging. 


Terrain Suit. Made of lightweight material, usu- 
ally fine linen or silk, the terrain suit consists of a 
long-sleeved shirt or blouse and long trousers, 
dyed in various colors to help the wearer blend in 
with his surroundings. Styles include arctic (col- 
ored solid white), sand (mottled patches of vari- 
ous shades of brown, for desert and similarly 
sandy terrain), woodland (patterns of green and 
brown, for forests and jungles), and urban (black). 
A terrain suit must be precisely made and fitted to 
the person to wear it. It is worn most commonly 
by Stalkers, though some individual tribes and 
groups of warriors, woodsmen, or thieves use 
them, too. (As a rule of thumb, terrain suits should 
be slightly more common than elven chain mail.) 

A terrain suit gives the same advantages as the 
camouflage proficiency when worn in the appro- 
priate terrain, using a base Wisdom rating of 14. A 
character wearing a terrain suit with the camou- 
flage proficiency uses his Wisdom (or 14, 
whichever is higher) with an additional +1 bonus. 


Waterproof Boots. These thick boots are made of 
tough, water-resilient hide (such as alligator or cari- 
bou) treated with a waterproofing oil (typically 
derived from seals or minks). The wearer tucks his 
trousers inside the boots, then ties them near the 
knees with a leather drawstring. The boots keep the 
feet dry, even when wading in water. 


Wilderness Harness. This device resembles a 
thick leather belt with straps that cross over the 
wearer’s back. Both the belt and the straps con- 
tain a series of small pouches, useful for storing 
supplies, ammunition for missile weapons, and 
other materials. A secret compartment in the 
back section of the belt conceals a 6-inch-long flat 
knife (the knife comes with the harness; see Table 
58 for statistics). 


Transport 


Dog Sled. One of the best ways to travel in 
snowy or icy terrain, a dog sled consists of a 
wooden frame for carrying supplies, wooden run- 
ners extending the length of the sled, a platform 
on which the passenger stands, and a lattice on the 
front to which the dog team is harnessed. About 6- 
11 dogs (or equivalent) can pull a sled 10 feet long 
and 3 feet wide, carrying up to 880 pounds 
(including the weight of the sled). Fewer animals 
are required for smaller sleds. A typical 8-dog sled 
travels at a movement rate of 15 with a load of 
about 680 Ibs., including the sled. 


When adjudicating movement via dog sled, 
DMs should take into account that animals not 
bred or trained to pull a sled can create a consider- 
able amount of trouble for the driver—tangling 
traces, fighting with nearby animals, and so on— 
and movement could be slower than expected. 


Kayak. This is a single-person boat, fast-moving 
and easy to maneuver. Its lashed wooden frame is 
about ten feet long and two feet wide, covered with 
canvas, sealskins, or hides of similar water- 
dwelling animals. The skins are attached to the 
frame, allowed to tighten by drying, then coated 
with oil to make the craft water resistant. The pas- 
senger squeezes into the hole in the top of the craft 
and sits so his legs extend into the bow. To seal out 
water, the opening of the kayak has an “apron” 
(often made of whale intestines) which the kayaker 
laces around his waist. He propels the kayak with a 
single long oar with a paddle on either end. A 
kayak can move 200'/round (its movement rate can 
be rounded down to 6) and it can carry 250 pounds. 


Water Sled. This resembles a dog sled with 
inflated skins in place of runners, enabling the 
craft to float on the surface of the water. Long 
leather reins, treated with waterproofing oil, con- 
nect with the animals pulling it, usually a team of 
eight seals or six dolphins. A water sled carries no 
more than two passengers (about 480 pounds, 
including the sled), unless the animals pulling it 
are exceptionally fast and strong. Made to ride as 
much above the water as in it, the sled can achieve 
a top movement rate of 15 if pulled by strong 
steeds, but 9-12 is a more sustainable speed. 


Miscellaneous Equipment 


Breathing Tube. This simple device helps a 
character function underwater. A breathing tube 
made of a hollow reed, about a foot long, strength- 
ened with wax and treated with waterproofing oil. 
The user places the tube in his mouth, then sub- 
merges himself with the end of the tube protrud- 
ing from the water. The tube enables the 
submerged user to breathe indefinitely. 


Camouflage Paint Kit. This compact leather 
case contains several cakes of greasepaint (in vari- 
ous shades of brown, green, yellow, and black), 
applicator brushes, a jar of paint removal cream, 
and a small mirror. Characters apply the paint to 
areas of exposed flesh to help them blend in with 
their surroundings. A kit contains 12 uses. 


By itself, camouflage paint doesn’t give a char- 
acter any particular advantage. However, when 
used with a terrain suit (described above), it 
boosts the character’s success chances by +1. The 
camouflage proficiency is required to apply the 
camouflage paint well; those without this profi- 
ciency have half the usual chance of success. A 
character using camouflage paint and a terrain 
suit gains a +2 bonus to his camouflage check. 


Chain Leash. Made of chain links with a leather 
muzzle, this leash can be adjusted to fit any ani- 
mal ranging in size from a small dog to a wolf. 
The length of the leash varies from 6-12 feet long. 
When using a properly-fitted chain leash on an 
animal, a character receives a +1 bonus to his ani- 
mal training proficiency checks. Chain leashes are 
available in other sizes and lengths to fit larger 
and smaller animals. 


Falconry Gauntlet. Also called a perch glove, this 
is a heavy arm-length glove of thick leather upon 
which a falcon or hawk can perch. 


Falcon Training Equipment. This equipment 
makes falcon training more efficient. A character 
using the falconry proficiency without this equip- 
ment suffers a —2 penalty to training proficiency 
checks. One set is required for each falcon. 


Each set consists of jesses (leather bands with 
rings, attached to the falcon’s legs), talon guards 
(metal coverings for the bird's claws to prevent it 


Equipment * 95 


from harming the owner during training), a cre- 
ance (a slender leather leash attached to the 
jesses, held by the user or secured to the perch 
glove), and a hood (a leather covering fitting over 
the falcon’s head that restricts vision; the hood 
forces the falcon to rely on its senses of hearing, 
touch, and taste). Customized or richly appointed 
equipment, such as an embroidered hood or 
golden jesses, is also available, usually at double 
or triple the normal price. 


Fishing Tackle. This meticulously crafted set of 
polished wooden lures, colorful flies made of 
feathers and catgut cord, bone hooks, and cork 
bobbers can be quite useful in the hands of a 
skilled fisherman. If used by a character with the 
fishing proficiency, the proficiency checks are 
modified by +1. 


Healing Kit. This is a waterproofed leather or 
canvas backpack or handbag containing cloth ban- 
dages, splints, needles and thread (for stitching 
wounds), ointments, and a selection of herbs for 
soothing pain (these don’t heal damage). It also 
has room for special medicines, such as poison 
antidotes or healing potions, but these are not 
included in the standard kit. The kit is useful in 
treating injuries of all types; a character with the 
healing or veterinary healing proficiency without 
this kit or equivalent may not be able to use the 
proficiency, depending on the situation. 


Insect Repellent. Applying this rare, minty 
cream over a character’s face, arms, and other 
areas of exposed flesh repels bees, ants, and all 
other types of insects less than 1 Hit Die in size. 
One application wears off after 8 hours. A jar of 
insect repellent contains 12 applications. 


Scent Lure. A scent lure is a pungent liquid 
used to attract animals in the wild. Each scent lure 
attracts a specific type of animal, usually wood- 
land game such as deer, wolf, or fox; individual 
animals of the species find the odor irresistible. 

Each bottle of scent lure contains five applica- 
tions. One application near a tree, rock, or snare 
has a 15% chance of attracting an animal of the 
given species within 24 hours, presuming the ani- 
mal passes within 100 yards of the application (the 
DM determines if an animal comes close enough). 
Extra applications do not increase the chance of 
attraction. The scent evaporates in 24 hours. 


96 * Chapter Seven 


Sleeping Bag. More comfortable, but bulkier 
than blankets, the sleeping bag is made of two lay- 
ers of canvas or wool, stuffed with down for 
warmth. The user slips inside the sleeping bag 
and secures the open side by fastening several 
buckles or tying a series of leather straps. 


Sun Goggles. Arctic or mountaineering sun 
goggles are made from solid wood. The wearer 
peers through two narrow slits. These reduce or 
eliminate the effects of dazzling lights, such as 
fatigue from traveling under very bright sun (for 
example, across deserts, or flat plains on cloudless 
days). Sun goggles also prevent snowblindness, 
where the eyes become swollen from exposure to 
bright sun reflecting off ice and snow. (Attack 
penalties for snowblindess vary from —1 to —4.) 


Sun goggles will not prevent blindness caused 
when a light spell is cast directly against the 
wearer's eyes. Sun goggles also reduce the field of 
vision; the wearer can’t see above or below with- 
out moving his head. This may increase chances of 
being surprised or attacked from a blind side, at 
the DM's option. 


Sunburn Ointment. Characters risk damage 
from sunburn in any terrain during seasons of 
bright sunlight, not only in deserts, but also in the 
arctic, where the sun reflects off the ice and snow. If 
characters don’t protect exposed flesh with scarves, 
mask, or other covering, they risk suffering 1 point 
of damage from sunburn per day. An application of 
sunburn ointment, gives protection against sun- 
burn for a full day. A jar of sunburn ointment con- 
tains 14 applications. 


Sunburn ointment gives no protection from 
magical or non-magical fire; it is ineffective 
against any source of damage other than the sun. 


Sunburn ointment is rare, found only in the 
best-stocked shops in large cities. 


Survival Kit. A character may strap this small 
leather pouch, about four inches on each side and 
an inch thick, around his thigh, upper arm, or any- 
where else where it can remain concealed. The kit 
contains a number of small items useful in emer- 
gencies: a scrap of parchment and piece of 
graphite (for writing messages), a fish hook, a 25- 
foot length of fishing line on a spool, one gold 
piece (good for bribing guards), a small razor (for 


Bell Tent 


P p 
po fi 


Al /, 


il Mil 
severing rope or inflicting 1 hit point of damage 
against captors), a wooden whistle (for signaling), 
a cloth pad (for making an emergency bandage), 
and a few pieces of sugar candy and dried fruit 
(for quick energy, or luring animals). Similar items 
may be substituted to customize individual kits. 


Tents. These portable shelters, usually made of 
canvas or tanned animal skin, provide shelter 
from the elements for weary travelers. They’re 
easy to erect and light to carry. Here a few of the 
most popular small tents, suitable for one or two 
occupants: 


Bell Tent. This is one of the simplest tents, consist- 
ing of a single sheet of fabric arranged around a 
pole to form a cone. Ropes attached to stakes sur- 
rounding the bottom of the tent are pulled to 
stretch the fabric tight. Though quick to construct 
and easy to transport, bell tents don’t provide 
much protection against strong winds. 

œ Wedge Tent. Also known as an A-frame tent or 
a wall tent, the wedge tent is built on a frame 
consisting of two vertical poles with a hori- 
zontal pole secured between them. The fabric 


toto 


Bundle Tent 


is laid across the horizontal pole, then 
stretched with ropes attached to stakes. The 
wedge tent is somewhat sturdier than the bell 
tent, although like that tent, it provides only 
modest protection against severe weather. 

œ Pyramid Tent. Combining elements of both the 
bell and wedge tents, the pyramid tent frame 
is made of four vertical poles arranged in a 
square, with horizontal poles attached 
between them. A longer pole rises from the 
center of the square. The fabric extends from 
the center pole to form four slanting walls, 
secured with stakes. The sturdy pyramid tent 
resists light to moderate winds, 

@ Bundle Tent. Particularly useful in cold cli- 
mates, the bundle tent consists of from six to 
eight ribs about five feet long, connected to 
each other by the tent covering. The covering 
consists of two layers of skin from a furry 
animal, such as a bear or caribou. The layers 
are arranged fur-side out, creating a pocket 
of air for extra insulation. The tent opens like 
an umbrella to form a domed shape or folds 
into a bundle. 


Equipment = 97 


Traps. These finely-crafted metal traps can be 
set up in a matter of minutes. Two general types 
are available; both come in small (rabbit), medium 
(wolf), and large (bear) varieties. A character using 
either type of trap adds a +1 bonus to his set 
snares proficiency checks. 


e Enclosing Trap: This type of trap resembles a 
box. It catches animals alive. Lured by edible 
bait or a shiny object, the animal enters the box 
and steps on a trigger which causes the front 
of the box to snap shut. 

ə Killing Trap: A killing traps has two metal jaws 
lined with sharp points. A small platform, 
which holds a lure, rests in between the jaws. 
The slightest pressure on the platform causes 
the jaws to snap shut, killing the animal. 


Tinderbox, Waterproof. This waterproof box 
contains flint and steel, along with a small sup- 
ply of wood shavings for kindling. The box 
keeps the contents dry during a rainstorm or 
when submerged underwater. Once per round, a 
character can attempt to start a fire using these 
materials. A roll of 1 or 2 on a 1d8 is necessary to 
start a fire in normal, dry conditions. A 1 ona 
1d8 is necessary if the area is damp; the DM may 
require more difficult rolls (for instance, a 1 on 
1d12) in wet terrain, or may rule that a fire can’t 
be started at all. 


Weaponblack. When rangers or thieves apply 
this oily paste to their weapons or armor, it makes 
the metallic surfaces non-reflective and nearly 
invisible. Modify their base chance to hide in 
shadows by +5%. A coat of weaponblack lasts 
until the character engages in melee combat, at 
which time enough of the substance flakes away 
to negate any camouflaging advantage. The sub- 
stance is flammable; if lighted, a sword coated 
with the paste will become the equivalent of a 
flametongue for 2-5 rounds, and will also inflict 1d4 
points of heat damage upon the wielder unless he 
is magically protected. A vial of weaponblack con- 
tains 1 application. This substance is uncommon 
and only available through shady under-the- 
counter dealing. 


98 * Chapter Seven 


Weapons 


Flail, Grain. This consists of a leather strap two 
or three feet long that connects a wooden handle to 
a block of wood about a foot long. Farmers use the 
grain flail to thresh wheat, barley, and other grassy 
crops. It also makes a good bludgeoning weapon. 


Hatchet. This one-handed woodsman’s axe has 
a broad blade, a smooth wooden handle for a 
good grip, and its own leather scabbard for the 
head, which can be strapped to the wearer’s belt. 
The hatchet is useful for chopping wood and 
serves as an excellent melee weapon. 


Ice Pick. This special type of metal awl is used 
to break holes in frozen lakes for ice fishing and to 
chip away ice chunks when building snow houses. 
(Note, however, that the snow blade, or iuak, 
described below, is the primary tool for sucha 
job.) Consisting of a bone or wood handle and a 
sharp metal point about six inches long, an ice 
pick also can be used as an impaling weapon. 


Snow Blade. Also called an iuak, the snow blade 
resembles a machete made of bone, about two feet 
long and six inches wide. The end is flat rather 
than pointed. Mainly used by arctic rangers to 
slice blocks of snow to make shelters, the snow 
blade also doubles as a weapon. 


Machete. Farmers in tropical regions use this 3- 
foot-long flat blade to chop cane and clear under- 
growth. Wielded like a sword, it can inflict serious 
damage. The price of a machete includes a canvas 
sheath. 


Ritiik. This 6-foot-long weapon consists of a 
wooden shaft with a point and a hook on the same 
end. Primarily used by primitive tribes of arctic 
and tundra regions for hunting bear and other 
large game, the ritiik is thrust, not thrown. When 
the point pierces the animal, the user jerks and 
twists the shaft to embed the hook. 


Scythe. A curved blade attached to a 5-foot 
wooden pole, this farm tool is used to cut grain at 
harvest and also doubles as a weapon. A user 
wields the scythe by holding the short wooden 
bars on the end opposite the blade. The scythe is 
always used as a two-handed weapon. 


Table 57: Clothing, Transport, and 
Misc. Equipment 


Item 
Aba** 
Common 
Embroidered 
Arctic coat** 
Boots, Waterproofed 
Breathing Tube 
Camouflage Paint Kit 
Chain Leash 
Dog Sled 
Falconry Gauntlet 
Falconry Training Equipment 
Fishing Tackle 
Healer’s Kit 
Insect Repellant 
Kayak (& paddle) 
Poncho, Rain 
Scent Lure 
Sleeping Bag 


Ice Pick 


Sa 


Snowshoes 2gp 1 
Sun Goggles 1gp $ 
Sunburn Ointment 2 gp aj 
Weight Survival Kit 10 gp S; 
Cost (Ib.) Tents 
Bell 4 gp 10 
9 sp 3 Bundle 20 gp 12 
20 gp 3 Pyramid 15 gp 15 
10 gp 5 Wedge 5gp 10 
4 gp 2 Tinderbox, Waterproof 8 sp n 
2 sp s Trap 
50 gp 1 Enclosing*** 3/7/12 gp 3/8/15 
6 gp 1 Killing*** 2/5/10gp 5/10/20 
30 gp 40 Water Sled 35 gp 30 
5 sp 1 Weaponblack**** 2gp . 
10 gp 1 Wilderness Harness 2gp 1 
2 gp 1 
25 gp 1 * Weight is inconsequential (a few ounces). 
5gp i * Price is double to triple this amount unless 
35 gp 50 bought in a desert setting. 
6 gp 2 *** Prices and weights are for small, medium, 
3 gp >: and large sizes, respectively. 
3 gp 8 *e* Rare. Only available under-the-counter. 


y 
TTT RSA 


Snow Blade 
(luak) 


Ritiik 


Hatchet 


Machette 


Equipment * 99 


Table 58: Weapons 


Cost Wt. Speed Damage 

Item (gp) (Ib.) Size Type Factor S-M 
Flail, Grain 3 3 M B 6 1d4+1 1d4 
Hatchet 2 3 S 5 G 1d4+1 1d4+1 
Ice Pick 1 2 S P 2 1d4 1d3 
Knife, Harness* - = S P/S 2 1-2 f 
Machete 30 4 M S 8 1d8 1d8 
Ritiik 10 6 L Lig 8 1d6+1 1d8+1 
Scythe 5 8 M P/S 8 1d6+1 1d8 
Snow Blade 
(iuak) 10 3 M $ 4 1d4 1d6 
Optional Weapons from The Complete Fighter 
Belaying Pin 2cp 2 S B + 1d3 1d3 
Gaff/Hook 

Attached 2gp 2 S P 4 1d4 1d3 

Held 5p 2 S P 4 1d4 1d3 
Main-Gauche 3gp 2 5 P/S 2 1d4 1d3 
Stiletto 5 sp V2 S 2 1d3 1d2 
Sword 

Cutlass 12 gp 4 M S 5 1d6 1d8 

Rapier 15 gp d M P 4 1d6+1 1d8+1 

Sabre 15 gp 5 M p - 1d6+1 1d8+1 


*The harness knife’s cost is included as part of the cost of the wilderness harness (Table 57). The knife 
itself weighs only a few ounces. 


Optional Weapon Notes 


Belaying Pin: A short wooden rod used on ships (rigging lines are tied to them). This can be used as an 
improvised club. If using related proficiencies, the belaying pin is related to club and mace. 


Gaff/Hook: This is a metal hook with a metal or wooden crossbar at the base. “Attached” means the hook 
has been used to replace a hand. 


Main-Gauche: A large-bladed dagger with a basket hilt, used as a secondary weapon in a two-weapon 
fighting style. Gives +1 to disarm attempts. Hilt gives +1 to parry and the effect of an iron gauntlet when 
punching. 

Stiletto: A narrow-bladed knife, with a sharpened point only. Has a non-magical +2 bonus against ring 
mail, chain mail, and plate mail. Knife proficiency covers the stiletto. 


Cutlass: Short heavy slashing sword, sharp along one edge, with a basket hilt (+1 to parry, punch as iron 
gauntlet). If using related proficiencies, related to dagger, knife, and short sword. 


Rapier: Long-bladed sword, with point only, requires its own proficiency. A basket hilt can be added for 2 
gp (+1 to parry, +1 Ib., punch as iron gauntlet). If using related proficiencies, this is related to sabre. 


Sabre: A light slashing sword. Can be fitted with a basket hilt for 2 gp (+1 parry, +1 lb., punch as iron 
gauntlet). If using related proficiencies, this is related to rapier. 


100 © Chapter Seven 


Each ranger is a unique individual with his own 
feelings, motivations, and personal history. 
Because there are an endless number of possibili- 
ties for ranger personalities, step-by-step guide- 
lines for generating them are not practical, nor are 
they particularly desirable. Strong characters have 
constantly evolving personalities, reflecting their 
experiences as well as their players’ inclinations. 
Just about anything goes, so long as the DM 
approves and the resulting character is fun to play. 

Look over the topics in this chapter and con- 
sider how they relate to your character. Ask your- 
self how he become a ranger in the first place. 
Where does he come from? What drives him? 
What makes him feel angry, happy, fulfilled? How 
does he spend his free time? As you answer these 
and other questions, your mental image of the 
character should begin to sharpen. Before you 
know it, he'll be as familiar as an old friend. 


Demographics 


The total number of rangers is difficult to deter- 
mine. Because of their independent nature and 
tendency to avoid civilized society, rangers aren't 
likely to cooperate with a formal census. Addi- 
tionally, many rangers reside in the most remote 
regions of the world, making a population count 
impractical if not impossible. 

Still, it’s safe to say that rangers are among the 
less numerous of the character classes, if for no 
other reason than the demanding ability score 
requirements limit their number. It’s a good bet 
that there are fewer rangers than bards. They’re 
perhaps more common than paladins. Beyond 
these generalities, it's anybody’s guess. 

Terrain preferences are a little easier to ascertain, 
Most rangers prefer forests, hills, and plains, thanks 
to the flourishing animal life and comfortable cli- 
mates. Rugged mountains, and jungles attract the 
more adventurous rangers, while only the hardiest 
rangers make their home in the harsh lands of the 
desert and arctic. As a rough guideline, assume that 
about 40% of all rangers have Forest as their pri- 
mary terrain, about 15% have Hill, another 10% or 
so each have Jungle, Mountain, or Plain, and the 
rest are more or less equally divided among Swamp, 
Desert, Arctic, and Aquatic. 


CHAPTER 


Role Playing 


Race 


Unless the demi-rangers described in Chapter 4 
are allowed in your campaign, rangers must be 
human, elf, or half-elf. Roughly 70% of all rangers 
are human, 10% are elves, and 20% are half-elves. 
Even in demi-ranger campaigns, less than 1% of 
the ranger population are dwarves, gnomes, or 
halflings. 


Gender 


Gender plays no part in determining one’s 
aptitude for becoming a ranger. About half the 
ranger population is male, and the other half, 
female, reflecting the percentages in the general 
population. 


Social Background 


No particular social background predominates 
in the ranger population. Lower, middle, and 
upper class rangers are more or less equally repre- 
sented, with a slight bias toward the lower classes 
at low levels because these are closest to the land. 

Certain kits also tend to favor certain social 
classes. Feralans and Greenwood Rangers tend to 
come from lower economic backgrounds, while 
Falconers, Sea Rangers, and Wardens often come 
from wealthier families. Social class, however, is 
only one element that influences a ranger’s per- 
sonality. A Guardian with a lower class back- 
ground who has worked his way up might 
behave little differently than one with middle 
class origins. 


Family 


More relevant to the ranger’s choice of career is 
the size of his family and his role within it. Because 
his duties place him into a life of relative isolation, 
the best candidates for rangers are those with few 
family ties. Orphans and late children are dispro- 
portionately represented in the ranger population, 
as are those who have been disowned or cast out 
by their families. 


Role Playing * 101 


Age 


There are no rigid age requirements for rangers. 
However, few adolescents are capable of com- 
manding the respect due a ranger, while many 
older individuals have trouble managing the rig- 
ors of the wild. Consequently, the majority of 
rangers fall between the ages of 18-60. 


Alignment 


All rangers are of good alignment, and the num- 
ber of lawful good, neutral good, and chaotic 
good rangers are approximately equal. The more 
independent and isolated a ranger, the less likely 
he'll be lawful good. Lawful good rangers are 
often drawn to the Guardian, Justifier, and War- 
den kits. The Pathfinder and Explorer kits tend to 
have more than their share of neutral good 
rangers. Chaotic good rangers are generally asso- 
ciated with the Feralan and Mountain Man kits. 


Becoming a Ranger 


Unlike many other character classes, rangers 
have no clear career paths. Wizards may be 
taught in magic academies and clerics may be 
recruited by a church, but no structured training 
centers exist for rangers. There are guilds for 
thieves and worldwide hierarchies for druids, 
but rangers stubbornly resist organizations of 
any kind. Since the ranger class stresses self- 
reliance and independence, it’s not surprising 
that the circumstances under which they acquire 
their skills are as varied as the rangers them- 
selves. Here are some of the most common ways 
to become a ranger, along with a few kits typi- 
cally associated with them. Of course, the stan- 
dard ranger might have any of these. 


Apprenticeship 


An elderly ranger may wish to make sure that 
his territory will be in good hands after his death. 
Rather than award conservatorship of the territory 
to another ranger or a local government, he may 
instead decide to recruit an apprentice. The elder 
not only teaches the ways of the wilderness to the 
young man or woman, but also passes along his 


102 * Chapter Eight 


values, ensuring that his philosophy will live on. 
Friends or family members of the elder make ideal 
candidates for apprentices, as do orphans and 
human followers. 

Suggested Kits: Falconer, Forest Runner, Green- 
wood Ranger, Guardian, Pathfinder, Sea Ranger, 
Seeker. 


Self-Determination 


Individuals attracted to this character class 
may take it upon themselves to master the neces- 
sary skills without a formal apprenticeship. Such 
an individual may be motivated by curiosity 
(he’s fascinated by nature and longs to learn 
what books can’t teach), a compelling event (an 
army of orcs makes a surprise attack against his 
village from an unpatrolled forest; he vows to 
guard the forest to prevent a recurrence), or a 
restless urge to explore the world (he feels smoth- 
ered by the secure but boring life his parents 
have planned for him). 

A self-determined ranger often takes a cir- 
cuitous route to learning his craft. He may begin 
by petitioning his lord or king to allow him to 
accompany military personnel on wilderness 
excursions, learning from observation how sol- 
diers survive in the field and track their enemies. 
He may offer to keep house or work for a sage or 
hedge wizard in exchange for private lessons in 
botany and other natural sciences. A few years as 
a neophyte in a nature-oriented church may give 
him access to priestly magic. And a surreptitious 
partnership or adoption by a notorious thief may 
teach him the knack of hiding in shadows and 
moving silently. 

Suggested Kits: Explorer, Forest Runner, 
Guardian, Justifier, Pathfinder, Sea Ranger, Seeker, 
Stalker. 


Conscription 


Occasionally, a king or other official requires a 
ranger to explore, settle, or administer a recently 
annexed territory. A replacement may be needed 
for a ranger who has retired or died. If a suitable 
candidate isn't available, the most suitable young 
man or woman may be drafted. Generous authori- 
ties may reward the draftee’s family with a 


monthly stipend in exchange for the cooperation 
of their son or daughter. More often, however, the 
authorities offer no remuneration, expecting some 
type of service from all citizens; recruitment as a 
ranger is generally preferable to the risky life of a 
soldier or dull routine of a bureaucrat. 

Conscripted rangers often receive first-class 
training, perhaps at the hands of elder or retired 
rangers. Some countries have special units of bor- 
der runners or scouts, which can provide a train- 
ing ground for the potential ranger. Terms of 
services range from several years in most cases to 
a few decades in extremely militaristic societies. 
Though many choose to re-enlist when their ser- 
vice terms expire, most conscripted rangers even- 
tually part company with the established rulers 
and continue their careers as free agents. 

Suggested Kits: Justifier, Giant Killer, Pathfinder, 
Sea Ranger, Warden, Stalker. 


Happenstance 


A common way for a young character to become 
a ranger is though circumstances beyond his con- 
trol. The following are typical. A youth who 
makes his way to an uninhabited island after his 
ship sinks has to master the skills of a ranger in 
order to survive. The lone survivor of a pioneer 
family slaughtered by grizzly bears wanders for 
years in the wilderness, becoming a ranger in the 
process. A youth captured by slavers escapes into 
the wilderness and eventually learns ranger skills. 
He returns much later as an accomplished ranger 
with a mission to destroy or drive out the band of 
slavers who imprisoned him. 

Suggested Kits: Beastmaster, Explorer, Feralan, 
Guardian, Mountain Man, Pathfinder. 


Divine Intervention 


For purposes of their own, the gods may choose 
a mortal to receive the skills of a ranger. If the 
gods see a need for a protector of a favored tract of 
land, or desire an advocate for threatened animals, 
they may seek out a youth with the prerequisite 
physical skills, mental agility, and moral attitude. 
If the youth is open to their offer—generally, the 
gods won't bother with an unreceptive candi- 
date—he will be guided through a lengthy series 


of quests and training exercises to develop the 
skills necessary to become a ranger. In some cases, 
the gods may grant him the skills directly. 

Suggested Kits: Beastmaster, Greenwood Ranger, 
Guardian, Justifier, Mountain Man, Sea Ranger, 
Seeker. 


Social Misfit 


Society has no use for some of its citizens, shun- 
ning them because of their appearance, race, social 
standing, or nonconformist philosophies. Outcast 
youths often find solace in the wilderness. Ani- 
mals, they discover, are far less judgmental than 
humans. In time, those with strong wills and a 
knack for survival may become rangers through 
sheer tenacity. 

Suggested Kits: Feralan, Greenwood Ranger, 
Guardian, Mountain Man, Stalker. 


Common Traits: the Classic Ranger 


Perhaps the most important aspect of creating 
a three-dimensional character is determining his 
core traits, the values and principles upon which 
he bases his philosophy. A character with specific 
values tends to be more consistent in his reac- 
tions. And while few real-world people are 
wholly consistent, the more consistently a char- 
acter behaves, the more lifelike he'll appear in 
the context of a game. 

While no two rangers are exactly alike in their 
outlook, all share a set of common traits which 
form the foundation of their personality. These 
traits are described in general terms below, and 
are not intended to straitjacket a good role-player. 
A player doesn’t necessarily have to incorporate 
all of these traits into his character, but he should 
think carefully before setting them aside. Ina 
sense, these traits are as crucial to defining the 
ranger character class as his ability scores. 


Strong Ethics 


Rangers have firm values that impel them to 
promote goodness and justice. Regardless of 
whether he’s lawful good, neutral good, or chaotic 
good, a ranger has definite ideas about the differ- 
ence between right and wrong. He behaves hon- 


Role Playing * 103 


estly, and most rangers believe in altruism and 
service. Selfishness and greed are antithetical to 
the ranger. He champions the powerless and 
fights for the weak. In many cases, a ranger’s 
respect for life extends to animals as well as 
humans. Though in essence rangers are warriors, 
most have no fondness for war. Even when fight- 
ing for a cause in which he believes, the ranger 
looks forward to the end of the conflict and the 
natural healing process promised by peace. 


Love of Nature 


A ranger is as much a creature of the wilder- 
ness as a lion or wild horse. Many rangers find 
urban life suffocating and would no more make 
their homes in a city than volunteer for a prison 
sentence. A typical ranger prefers songbirds to 
orchestras, flowers to jewelry, and forests to 
grand castles. Most rangers are sophisticated 
enough to handle themselves well in urban set- 
tings, but they generally can’t wait to finish their 
business and leave. 


Solitary 


By virtue of his duties and disposition, the 
ranger spends a lot of time alone. Most rangers 
come to enjoy the solitary life, and have no partic- 
ular need for the company of other people. In 
most cases, animals satisfy a ranger’s desire for 
companionship. 

On the positive side, the ranger’s penchant for 
solitude encourages him to be self-reliant and 
independent. On the negative side, rangers may 
come across as remote and detached, even antiso- 
cial. While a ranger may be perfectly capable of 
social etiquette, his companions may believe that 
he’s not especially interested in fostering lasting 
friendships. 


Taciturn 


By observing wild animals, many rangers have 
learned the importance of keeping their emotions 
in check. A juvenile wolf who charges impulsively 
is certain to scare away his prey. A young lioness 
who makes unprovoked, pointless attacks against 
the pride leader may find herself ostracized and 


104 + Chapter Eight 


alone. Consequently, rangers often conceal their 
feelings from friends and strangers alike, reveal- 
ing little about themselves in actions or words. For 
all but the ranger’s closest companions, it’s often 
difficult to tell if he’s happy or sad, angry or for- 
giving, troubled or content. 

Though rangers certainly experience emotions 
as deeply as anyone else, many suffer in silence 
when wounded, and grieve in private at the loss 
of a beloved animal or comrade. A ranger’s com- 
panions invariably find him to be a dependable, 
competent, and trustworthy professional. But as a 
person, he often remains an impenetrable enigma. 


Devout 


Many rangers are deeply and privately spiri- 
tual, perceiving their access to spells and their 
appreciation of nature as gifts from a greater 
power. Whether a ranger worships nature itself as 
a unifying force or follows an established religion, 
he combines his love of nature with his faith to 
form the foundation of his moral code. Such 
rangers regularly reaffirm their commitment 
through moments of quiet reflection. (See Chapter 
9 for more about rangers and religion.) 


Daily Life 


When a ranger is not adventuring, he still has 
plenty to do to keep busy. Some of the more com- 
mon ranger activities are described below. 

Most of a ranger’s daily routine occurs off stage; 
that is, neither the player nor the DM need keep a 
detailed record of what a ranger does between 
adventures. However, a creative DM may use ele- 
ments of a ranger’s routine as the basis for an 
adventure—while patrolling his territory, a ranger 
intercepts a goblin who turns out to be a scout for 
an advancing army; or as a springboard fora 
ranger to acquire a new follower—a bear rescued 
from poachers takes a liking to the ranger. A 
ranger’s routine might also generate encounters to 
introduce him to important NPCs—the ranger 
provides first aid to a hunter who turns out to be a 
powerful official in a prosperous kingdom; or gain 
him experience—the ranger earns experience 
points by fighting a small forest fire. 

Of course, not every ranger regularly engages 


in all of these activities. A ranger occupying an 
arctic territory doesn’t have to worry much about 
forest fires, while a Warden probably spends 
more of his time enforcing laws than a Green- 
wood Ranger or Feralan. Still, the activities 
described here should give you a good idea of 
how a typical ranger fills his day. 


Patrolling 


The ranger spends much of his free time 
patrolling his territory. He may follow the same 
route every day, or he may wander wherever his 
fancy takes him. He keeps an eye out for signs of 
trouble, such as eroded fields or withered plants, 
and makes contact with other sentient residents, 
listening to their problems or engaging in small 

talk. Some rangers ride mounts, particularly if 
they have a lot of ground to cover, but most prefer 
to patrol on foot, which enables them to traverse 
obstacles more easily, as well as minimizing the 
chance of drawing attention to themselves. 


Though patrolling is necessary to keep abreast of 
the condition of their territories, rangers also 
patrol for the sheer pleasure of basking in the 
open air and savoring nature's splendor. 


Monitoring Strangers 


A ranger is ever-watchful for strangers in his 
territory. Followers or other contacts may alert 
him to the presence of strangers, or he may 
become aware of them himself by noticing distur- 
bances in the terrain or observing them directly. 

In most cases, a ranger monitors strangers dis- 
cretely, watching them from the cover of | trees or 
shadows, or requesting his followers to make reg- 
ular reports of their activities. Usually, a ranger 
can ascertain the intention of strangers without 
ever making direct contact with them. Most turn 
out to be harmless travelers or hunters who pose 
no threat to the ranger or his territory, and the 
ranger leaves them alone. 

If a stranger’s motives are more ambiguous— 


Do, SS zg E 


Sa! 


Role Playing * 105 


for instance, if he’s chopping down trees or hunt- 
ing animals beyond his needs—the ranger will 
confront him, politely but firmly inquiring about 
his intentions. Generally, the abrupt appearance of 
an intimidating ranger, particularly if he’s accom- 
panied by a bear or two, elicits immediate cooper- 
ation. If the stranger explains himself satisfactorily, 
the ranger departs, perhaps implying that he'll be 
back if the stranger doesn’t keep his nose clean. 
Should the stranger resist the ranger’s authority, 
the ranger may take whatever actions he deems 
necessary to ensure compliance, using violence as 
a last resort. 

However, physical confrontations are rare. 
More commonly, strangers require directions, 
medical care, or advice. A ranger is usually will- 
ing to help, especially if his assistance facilitates 
their leaving his territory more quickly. If the 
strangers are lost, the ranger will point out the 
best route leading to their desired destination. In 
some cases, he'll volunteer to guide them. Most 
rangers have a rudimentary knowledge of first 
aid, and can bind sprained ankles, splint bones, 
and attempt to resuscitate for drowning victims. A 
ranger can explain which plants are edible and 
which are poisonous. He can direct strangers to 
sources of fresh water, orchards of ripe fruit, and 
safe campsites. 

In return, the ranger may well insist that 
strangers clean up after themselves, avoid disturb- 
ing local habitats, and preserve the natural beauty 
of the environment. Those who violate the 
ranger’s trust can expect a brisk escort out of his 
territory. 


Trailblazing 


A ranger who occupies an undeveloped wilder- 
ness must spend a fair amount of time making 
and maintaining trails. Some of these trails may be 
permanent roads or paths, usable by anyone tra- 
versing the ranger’s territory. Other trails may be 
known only to the ranger, concealed by dense 
woods or similar terrain. The ranger and his fol- 
lowers use these concealed trails to get from place 
to place while monitoring the movement of 
strangers. Although animals in their native habi- 
tats are efficient trailmakers, the ranger may 
improve their trails by making the footing safer, or 


106 * Chapter Eight 


linking feeding grounds, watering holes, grazing 
pastures, and lairs. 

An effective trail system requires a thorough 
understanding of the land, including the precise 
location of streams, hills, and other significant ter- 
rain features. A ranger occupying a small territory 
may be able to hold this information in his head. 
For larger regions, the ranger may need to keep 
maps. In this case, a conscientious ranger will reg- 
ularly review and update his maps, adding new 
features and looking for discrepancies. 

Constructing a new trail begins with clearing 
debris and smoothing the ground. This may 
involve cutting trees, pulling stumps, and filling 
in holes. If a road passes though a valley or ravine, 
the ranger may have to dig ditches to direct rain- 
water away from the trail. He may then need to 
plant grasses along the roadside to prevent soil 
from washing into the ditches. 

Trail maintenance is an ongoing chore, requir- 
ing weeding in the spring and ice removal in the 
winter. In exceptionally harsh climates, the ranger 
may have to build snow fences, which are con- 
structions of wood or stone that run parallel to a 
trail. During blizzards, blowing snow piles up 
along the fence instead of covering the trail. 


Wildlife Management 


A dutiful ranger looks after the interests of the 
wildlife in his territory. He tracks down poachers 
and unprincipled hunters, relocates creatures that 
have been displaced by natural disasters, and 
cares for young animals whose parents have been 
killed. He notes fluctuations in animal popula- 
tions and tries to determine if an excess of preda- 
tors (or prey) is only a temporary adjustment to 
current conditions, or if it foreshadows a more 
serious problem. A sudden drop in the number of 
songbirds or frogs, for instance, may indicate that 
the insects they eat have been poisoned by some 
outside source, 


Conservation 


A ranger is dedicated to the preservation of his 
environment. He uses timber, water, and other 
natural resources judiciously and encourages oth- 
ers to do the same. If he cuts a tree, he replaces it 


with a new seedling. If he raises herd animals, he 
keeps them moving so as not to overgraze a pas- 
ture. If he farms, he rotates his crops so as not to 
exhaust the soil, replacing the nutrients with nat- 
ural fertilizers. 

Unfortunately, the ranger must continually 
struggle against the carelessness and greed of 
those who don’t share his concerns. They strip the 
land of timber and minerals, and level entire 
forests to build new cities. For commerce or sport, 
they hunt scarce species to extinction. They relent- 
lessly farm the same acreage until the soil can no 
longer support crops, and dump raw sewage and 
other waste products into lakes and rivers until 
the water is no longer fit to drink. 

The ranger employs several methods to counter 
this selfishness and indifference. He educates 
travelers passing through his territory, demon- 
strating the importance of proper waste disposal 
and the danger of smoldering camp fires. He 
negotiates with local villages to regulate mining 
and farming, and to set aside virgin forests and 
jungles as protected sanctuaries. In extreme situa- 
tions, a ranger may resort to guerilla tactics, such 
as sabotaging oppressive and ruinous activities. 

A ranger must also be constantly vigilant for 
natural disasters. As prevention is the key to effec- 
tive disaster management, a ranger remains alert 
for the earliest signs of trouble, taking immediate 
steps to intervene before the problem becomes a 
full-blown catastrophe. 

Here are some the most common natural disas- 
ters a ranger might have to face: 

Insects/Disease. Infestations of beetles, locusts, 
aphids, and other insects can strip forests and pas- 
tures in a matter of days or weeks. Molds and 
rusts can ravage woodlands if unchecked. Old 
trees, which aren’t as resistant to disease as 
younger ones, are particularly vulnerable. To pre- 
vent the spread of destructive insects and fungi, 
rangers remove and dispose of infested plants as 
quickly as possible. 

Flood. An excess of precipitation, sudden 
snowmelt, or high winds producing strong 
coastal waves may result in flooding. Floods can 
wash away valuable topsoil, destroy trees and 
buildings, and drown the unprepared. Rangers 
reduce the severity of river flooding by planting 
and maintaining the trees and grasses in ele- 


vated lands. This vegetation controls runoff and 
absorbs melted snow, preventing it from run- 
ning off into rivers and causing the water to rise 
over the embankments. Ambitious rangers with 
leadership skills will sometimes coordinate the 
local population to assist him building levees to 
contain rivers prone to flooding. This must be 
handled with care, as such rivers can silt up, 
causing worse problems later. 

Seacoast floods, on the other hand, are almost 
impossible to prevent. A ranger’s best strategy 
for dealing with them is to become familiar with 
the weather patterns that precede them. With 
sufficient warning, a ranger can warn others to 
seek protection in the highlands until the storm 
subsides. 

Earthquake. Violent shifting of the earth's inner 
layers may produce earthquakes, which can occur 
anywhere in the world. Earthquakes can indi- 
rectly cause flooding and fires, but the biggest 
danger comes from avalanches, falling rocks, 
trees, mudslides, and collapsing buildings. 

As with seacoast floods, there’s not much a 
ranger can do to prevent earthquakes, but he can 
learn to recognize the signs that precede them. 
Unusual animal behavior (such as the agitated 
prancing of small mammals), spontaneous geyser 
eruptions, and clusters of small tremors often 
indicate an impending major earthquake. While 
the warnings may not come long in advance, a 
forewarned ranger can spread the word to head 
for plains or open fields, which may be safer 
havens in the event of a major earthquake. 

Drought. Higher than average temperatures 
and a lack of rainfall may result in a drought. 
When water is scarce, rivers dry up, vegetation 
withers, and animals suffer from dehydration. 

Rangers can’t accurately predict when droughts 
will occur. However, in regions of irregular rain- 
fall, he can check tree rings, which give an excel- 
lent indicator of rain received in previous seasons. 
Thick rings occur in wet years, thin rings in dry 
years. Since wet periods tend to alternate with dry 
periods, studying the rings can help the ranger 
anticipate the next drought. A ranger can’t offset 
the overall effects of a drought, but he can reduce 
the local impact of the drought on marginal habi- 
tats by storing water, and encouraging others to 
do the same. 


Role Playing ¢ 107 


Fire. Fires are perhaps the most devastating of 
all natural disasters. A fire not only wipes out 
trees and vegetation, it also kills animals and pol- 
lutes lakes and rivers with ash. Travelers who 
carelessly burn trash or toss unwanted torches 
into the brush are a common source of fires. While 
lightning strikes are a primary cause of forest fires, 
some fires are intentionally set by enemies. 

Rangers occupying forests or other territories 
susceptible to fire constantly watch for smoke. Tall 
mountains make the best vantage point, but 
where mountains are unavailable or where scaling 
them frequently is impractical, rangers may con- 
struct lookout towers—simple platforms sup- 
ported by long poles and nearby trees. A rope or 
wood ladder gives the ranger access to the tower. 

Fighting fires isn’t easy, nor is it something one 
ranger can effectively do alone. Because fires 
spread so rapidly, particularly in dry seasons, a 
ranger’s chance of stopping a fire decreases with 
every moment it’s allowed to burn. Water or dirt 
can be used to smother small fires. If a ranger has 
prepared for help beforehand, he can coordinate 
the building of a fireline—an area cleared of all 
vegetation and other combustible material. This 
helps contain larger fires, but an adequate fireline 
usually requires the efforts of many individuals 
working as a team. Once a fire is extinguished, a 
close watch must still be kept for many days, lest a 
smoldering limb start the fire blazing once again. 


Law Enforcement 


Certain rangers, such as Wardens and Sea 
Rangers, may be charged with enforcing the laws 
of the local ruler. They arrest and punish poachers, 
patrol the lands they guard, and sometimes nego- 
tiate land use agreements with farmers, loggers, 
and others. If a royal decree protects a particular 
animal species, the ranger may be charged with 
enforcing it. Some rangers have the authority to 
act as judge and jury, allowing them to try cases 
on the spot and pass sentences as they see fit. 
Fines may be levied for minor infractions, such as 
trespassing, while more severe crimes, such as 
killing an animal from the king’s private stock or 
picking fruit from the king’s tree, may be punish- 
able by death. In such cases, the ranger will have a 
charter or royal writ from the ruler. 


NNER EE nner ———_—_—_——— 


108 * Chapter Eight 


The Ranger’s Personality 


After considering the ranger’s background, core 
traits, and routine duties, let’s focus on his person- 
ality. The purpose of this section is to help players 
and DMs determine how ranger characters may 
behave in a campaign—for instance, how he 
responds to NPCs, interacts with other PCs, and 
reacts in combat situations. There are several 
courses to consider. 

To begin with, you can consult the previous vol- 
umes in the Complete Handbook series. The first 
four books The Complete Warrior, Priest, Wizard, 
and Thief provide lists of archetypes drawn from 
literature, film, and other fictional and mythologi- 
cal sources. In these books, players are encour- 
aged to adopt the Folk Hero, the Vigilante, or 
other archetypes as models for their characters’ 
personalities. Many of these archetypes can also 
be adapted to ranger characters; the archetypes in 
The Complete Fighter’s Handbook are especially 
applicable. 

The Complete Bard's Handbook features a series of 
tables containing traits associated with intellect, 
interests, and other personality components. The 
key traits listed on these tables can be picked or 
determined randomly. The tables can be used for 
rangers as well as bards (or for that matter, any 
other character). 

You can also refer to the kit descriptions in Chap- 
ter 4 of this book, many of which suggest traits 
associated with a particular ranger type. Players 
can use the descriptions as springboards for work- 
ing out the details of their rangers’ personalties. 

Another way to shape a character’s personality 
is to come up with a single word that summarizes 
his identity. This word—which we'll call the defin- 
ing characteristic—describes the essential nature of 
the character and how he comes across to others. 
While a character’s personality is comprised of 
many elements, the defining characteristic is the 
most dominant, the trait from which all other per- 
sonality components arise. 

If basing a personality on a single word seems 
restrictive or artificial, think about how you 
describe people in your own life. A particular 
teacher may be crabby, a close friend may be funny, 
a favorite game designer may be eccentric. Defin- 
ing characteristics may also spring to mind for fic- 


tional characters; consider the noble Sir Galahad, 
the brilliant Sherlock Holmes, the stingy Ebenezer 
Scrooge. The defining characteristic forms an 
overall impression. The details come afterwards. 

There’s no best method for choosing a defining 
characteristic. Whatever word seems appropriate 
to you is good enough, so long as it brings the 
character into focus and feels right. To get you 
started, a sample list of defining characteristics 
appropriate for rangers is given below. The 
descriptions are intentionally vague, since per- 
sonal interpretations are more important than 
rigid definitions. After all, it’s your character! 

You'll know if you’ve chosen a good defining 
characteristic if you can immediately begin to 
visualize how the ranger will respond in various 
situations. For instance, an arrogant ranger may 
enter a deserted castle without hesitation, certain 
that he can contend with whatever dangers wait 
inside. In combat, he may fight aggressively and 
enthusiastically, each blow accompanied by a 
declaration of his own magnificence. If defeated, 
the arrogant ranger may sulk for days, his ego 
taking longer to heal than his fleshly wounds. Of 
course, it’s not necessary to think through every 
situation before it occurs—having your character 
react spontaneously is a big part of what makes 
role-playing fun—but deciding on a primary 
characteristic can be a lot of help in getting him 
off the ground. 

If you like, you can choose secondary traits that 
complement the defining characteristic. These sec- 
ondary traits, called corollary characteristics, add 
dimension to the character; in combination with 
the defining characteristic they help define a 
unique individual. The entries below list several 
corollary characteristic suggestions for each defin- 
ing characteristic. Choose one or two that appeal 
to you, or make up your own. Any corollary char- 
acteristics are fine, so long as they don’t contradict 
the defining characteristic; an arrogant ranger 
might also be proud and but it’s unlikely he'd be 
shy, too. 

Some kits work with certain defining characteris- 
tics better than others, and each entry below lists a 
few recommendations. However, don’t feel 
restricted by them. You can use any defining char- 
acteristic with any kit that feels right to you. Like- 
wise, you can mix and match the various corollary 


characteristics, or ignore them altogether. You may 
also use the defining characteristics in conjunction 
with the archetypes from the first four Complete 
Handbooks or to supplement the trait tables from the 
Complete Bard. Regardless of your approach, the 
goal remains the same—to create ranger personal- 
ties that are believable and interesting. 


List of Defining Characteristics 


Altruistic 

A selfless humanitarian who puts the welfare of 
others before his own, the Altruistic ranger tire- 
lessly fights for the common good. Unhampered 
by jealousy or self-interest, he commands respect 
from friends and foes alike. He shows mercy to his 
opponents, compassion to the dispossessed, and 
unwavering loyalty to his friends. 

Corollary Characteristics: Kind, honest, reserved, 
introverted, reverent, courteous. 

Suggested Kits: Beastmaster, Greenwood Ranger, 
Guardian, Seeker, Warden. 


Analytical 

An agile mind and eclectic interests mark the 
Analytical ranger. He loves knowledge and rel- 
ishes every opportunity to ponder the mysteries 
of nature. New cultures, unusual creatures, and 
scholarly strangers fascinate him. He respects 
intellectual prowess more than physical skills, and 
may seek to negotiate with a potential opponent 
rather than engage in combat. 

Corollary Characteristics: Ponderous, meticulous, . 
dignified, thoughtful, cautious, dispassionate. 

Suggested Kits: Explorer, Seeker, Stalker. 


Arrogant 

An arrogant ranger believes he can do no 
wrong. He views indecision as weakness and 
compromise as cowardice. He glories in the mem- 
ory of his accomplishments, which typically have 
been both numerous and impressive. If there are 
stronger, smarter, or more skilled rangers than 
himself, he is unaware of them—or at least, he 
chooses not to acknowledge them. 

Corollary Characteristics: Haughty, confident, 
patronizing, energetic, extroverted, optimistic. 

Suggested Kits: Falconer, Forest Runner, Giant 
Killer, Mountain Man, Warden. 


Role Playing * 109 


Boisterous 

A boisterous ranger has little patience with 
social etiquette. He says what he thinks and 
behaves as he pleases, and may be oblivious to 
how his actions might offend others. A man of 
action, he likes to get to the point, avoiding what 
he considers to be time-wasting conversation and 
endless planning. Beneath it all, there often beats a 
heart of purest gold. 

Corollary Characteristics: Brash, impulsive, lusty, 
spontaneous, intimidating, vulgar. 

Suggested Kits; Feralan, Forest Runner, Giant 
Killer, Mountain Man, Pathfinder. 


Distrustful 

Usually as a result of limited contact with other 
people, the distrustful ranger remains emotionally 
distant from strangers and comrades alike. He 
may be cordial and cooperative, but he rarely gets 
close to anyone other than his animal followers. 
He is awkward in social situations, uncomfortable 
in large groups, and suspicious of friendly over- 
tures. The reason is usually hidden in his past. 

Corollary Characteristics: Suspicious, paranoid, 
cold, reflective, lonely, moody. 

Suggested Kits: Beastmaster, Falconer, Feralan, 
Forest Runner, Mountain Man. 


Inspiring 

The inspiring ranger radiates authority and con- 
fidence, making him a natural leader. He instinc- 
tively takes charge in times of crisis, displaying 
bold initiative when others hesitate to act. His 
companions depend on his decisiveness and com- 
mon sense, and he rarely lets them down. Always, 
he is the first to the battlefield and the last to leave. 

Corollary Characteristics: Flamboyant, fearless, 
cheerful, driven, virtuous, honorable. 

Suggested Kits: Explorer, Forest Runner, Justifier, 
Sea Ranger, Warden. 


Laconic 

The laconic ranger is a soft-spoken, thorough 
professional. He says little, sees much, and lets 
others go their own way as he goes his. He takes 
quiet pleasure in a job well done, and avoids 
needless confrontation with lazy, the foolish, and 
the incompetent (though he might remark with 
shrewd humor upon their foibles). He nearly 


110 * Chapter Eight 


always lends his neighbor a helping hand. 
Corrollary Characteristics: Steady, thoughtful, 
pithy, keen, practical, skilled, canny. 
Suggested Kits: Falconer, Guardian, Justifier, 
Pathfinder. 


Melancholy 

The melancholy ranger shoulders the weight of 
the world. Plagued with self-doubt and tormented 
by the injustice of a seemingly indifferent uni- 
verse, he is preoccupied with his own misery and 
prone to deep depression. Ironically, though he 
may perceive himself as a failure, he may actually 
be quite accomplished. Whatever success he expe- 
riences, however, doesn’t seem to bring him much 
pleasure. 

Corollary Characteristics: Brooding, quiet, cyni- 
cal, tentative, impulsive, neurotic. 

Suggested Kits: Guardian, Greenwood Ranger, 
Justifier, Warden, Seeker. 


Merry 

The merry ranger is full of the joy of life. He 
spreads springtime and sunlight wherever he 
goes, regardless of how bleak the situation may 
be. Always ready with a tale, a story, or a practical 
joke to break the tension, he puts the counsel of 
the eternal doom-sayer to shame. Though he may, 
in fact, have serious problems of his own, these 
never discourage him for long, nor does he inflict 
them on his companions. 

Corrollary Characteristics; Bright, flippant, vibrant, 
honest, buoyant, optimistic. 

Suggested Kits: Forest Runner, Mountain Man, 
Pathfinder, Sea Ranger. 


Mysterious 

The mysterious ranger envelops himself in an 
aura of secrecy, keeping even the most pedestrian 
details of his background hidden from his com- 
panions. He seldom speaks, and when he does, his 
words may be ambiguous or laden with cryptic 
overtones. Though he dutifully fulfills his role 
within a party, he minimizes his contact with his 
comrades. For no apparent reason, he may disap- 
pear for days at a time, then reappear as unexpect- 
edly as he departed. He may whisper poetry to his 
followers, make bizarre notations on the trunks of 
trees, or brew sweet-smelling soup which he 


dumps on the ground rather than drink, all with- 
out explanation. His strange behavior may be due 
to religious reasons, cultural requirements, or 
merely a desire to keep his companions at arm's 
length. 

Corollary Characteristics: Eccentric, threatening, 
somber, distant, taciturn, studious. 

Suggested Kits: Feralan, Pathfinder, Seeker, 
Stalker. 


Nurturing 

The nurturing ranger serves as a caretaker and 
counselor, supporting his companions and follow- 
ers in times of stress. He comforts the troubled, 
reassures the doubtful, and soothes the anxious. He 
has a kind word for all and strives to bring out the 
best in his friends by bolstering their self-esteem. 
He may leave leadership roles to others, preferring 
to work in the background, or a loss of leadership 
or sudden crisis may bring him to the fore. 

Corollary Characteristics: Diplomatic, inquisitive, 
philosophic, humble, passive, empathetic. 

Suggested Kits: Falconer, Guardian, Greenwood 
Ranger, Seeker. 


Obsessed 

A single, all-consuming goal motivates the 
obsessed ranger to the exclusion of all else. Typical 
obsessions include destroying a species enemy, 
revenge on an overlord who illegally annexed his 
territory, or locating a animal believed to be 
extinct. Though an obsessed ranger may function 
effectively within his party, the party’s objectives 
are always secondary to his own. Often, such a 
character will mature out of the obsession as the 
campaign continues. 

Corollary Characteristics: Irritable, grim, passion- 
ate, anxious, determined, tireless. 

Suggested Kits: Explorer, Giant Killer, Justifier, 
Sea Ranger. 


Experience 


As explained in Chapter 2 of the DUNGEON 
MASTER Guide, rangers gain experience much 
like other warriors. Table 59 summarizes their 
standard experience awards. 


Table 59: Ranger Experience 


Action XP 
Per hit die of creatures defeated 10/level 
Monster experience Typ* 
Other group experience Typ* 


* Typ = Typical share of experience, as described 
in the DMG. 


Table 59 is fine as far as it goes, but for those 
using the guidelines in this book, it may not go far 
enough. If the DM decides that a little more detail 
is needed when determining experience awards 
for rangers, he may decide to use Table 60 to 
award experience points instead DM. 


Table 60: Optional Individual 
Experience Awards 


Action XP 
Per spell level cast to overcome foes or 

problems, or further ethos* 100 
Per successful use of special ability 

(class or kit) 100 
Per Hit Die of creatures defeated 10/level 
Per Hit Die of species enemy 

defeated 20/level** 
Follower, per trick or task trained 100 
Monster experience Typ*** 
Other group experience Typ*** 


* Like priests, rangers gain experience for using 
spells to promote their philosophies and princi- 
ples. A ranger who’s accepted the responsibility of 
protecting a forest would not gain experience for 
using charm person or mammal to coerce an wood- 
cutter into finding some tasty fruit, but he would 
gain experience for using the spell to ensure the 
woodcutter helps him put out an uncontrolled fire 
in the forest. 

** The ranger receives double the normal 
amount of experience points when defeating a 
species enemy (20/level). In addition he receives a 
1,000 experience point bonus for defeating the 
long-range plans of a species enemy. 

*** Typ = Typical share of experience, as 
described in the DMG. 


m 


Role Playing « 111 


CHAPTER 


Rangers and Religion 


Most rangers are privately religious, convinced 
that there are powers at work in the world much 
greater than themselves. Though different rangers 
may worship in different ways, all regard the 
embodiment of their devotion with awe and 
respect, and try to abide by the ideals it represents. 


Aspects of Faith 


Rangers manifest their faith in a number of 
ways: 


Inner Peace 


A ranger’s devotion gives him a sense of pur- 
pose, a feeling that his life has a purpose. Even 
though his role may seem at times to be minor, 
he feels that he has a definite place in the scheme 
of things. 


Code of Behavior 


A ranger’s beliefs give structure to his life by 
providing a set of principles for him to follow. 
Being of good alignment, rangers tend to adopt 
beliefs that encourage honesty, compassion, and 
selflessness. 


Access to Spells 


In practical terms, the access to spells enjoyed 
by the high level ranger is one of the most imme- 
diate and visible results of a life of service. Much 
like a druid, the ranger receives his spells as a con- 
sequence of his beliefs. Though prayer or medita- 
tion, the ranger asks for the spells he wishes to 
memorize, and in most cases, his requests are 
granted. 

Unlike the druid and other priests, the ranger’s 
access to spells is limited. A priest, after all, 
devotes much energy to the service of his faith, 
while a ranger’s other activities and duties place 
great demands on his time. For this reason, the 
ranger is able to acquire spells only when he 
reaches 8th level, and then has only minor access 
to the plant and animal spheres. The ranger can 
fill his spell slots with any spells of the appropri- 
ate level listed for those spheres. Some kits may 
have expanded or restricted spell use. 


Types of Faith 


Many rangers venerate nature itself. Others 
develop private faiths, more follow recognized 
religions that are based on established traditions 
and doctrines. Rangers aren’t necessarily affiliated 
with churches or monasteries; in fact, rangers gen- 
erally avoid formal religious organizations, pre- 
ferring to worship alone or with a small group of 
trusted followers. Certainly the travels of most 
rangers often take them far from the centers of 
organized religion. As a result, a ranger’s worship 
may differ from that of a priest, even if they tech- 
nically share the same faith. 

Regardless of how a ranger practices his faith, 
there will be some power that is the beneficiary of 
his devotion. Most rangers worship the divine in 
nature; monotheistic rangers worship one particu- 
lar god, while polytheistic rangers may worship 
several. A few base their faith on an individual 
philosophy. All of these approaches provide sup- 
port to their disciples, as well as access to the 
spells available to the a ranger. In game terms, 
they all function identically. 


Nature 


Many rangers choose nature itself as the focus of 
their devotion. Nature worshipers revere nature as 
a process and a source of life; whether it was 
designed by a greater intelligence or arose from the 
interaction of primal forces is largely irrelevant. 
Ethics and morals are derived from observing the 
natural order, and the perception of the majesty of 
the natural world and its relationship to the ranger 
is a closely personal one. The natural life force of 
the world can be felt by the ranger who becomes 
attuned to it. Any ranger may be drawn to the wor- 
ship of nature. For some rangers, particularly those 
with few ties to the civilized world (such as Beast- 
masters, Feralan, Greenwood Rangers, and Moun- 
tain Men), the pull is especially strong. 


Gods 


Gods are supernatural beings considered by 
their worshipers to be the supreme sources of 
might and authority. Often, a god embodies a par- 
ticular principal that is manifested or promoted in 


Rangers and Religion * 113 


the material world. 

The total number of gods is impossible to know, 
as are the number and identities of the rangers 
who worship them. These factors will vary from 
campaign world to campaign world. DM’s who 
design customized pantheons for their own cam- 
paigns should consider including gods specifi- 

cally intended for rangers. Gods concerned with 
agriculture, animals, plants, birth, fertility, geol- 
ogy, weather, and hunting are appropriate, pro- 
viding they're of good alignment. One place to go 
for ideas is The Complete Priest's Handbook, which 
contains many suggestions for adding religions to 
a campaign, and dozens of sample priesthoods. 

Rangers with gods worship them in a variety of 
ways. Some may erect simple shrines to their deities 
that complement the natural features of their pri- 
mary terrain. For instance, a ranger whose primary 
terrain is Forest might plant a private grove. An 
Arctic ranger might build a towering ice pillar. 

Religious practices for the same deity may also 
vary from ranger to ranger, depending on their pri- 
mary terrain. Prior to an important hunt, a Desert 
ranger might immerse his hands in the sand, a For- 
est ranger might conduct a spirited dance under a 
tall tree, and a Plains ranger might snap an arrow in 
two to attract the god’s attention (a smooth break 
may be interpreted as an omen of a favorable hunt, 
while jagged edges may indicate that the god dis- 
courages hunting at that particular time). 


Philosophy 


A belief system derived from intellectual con- 
cepts rather than supernatural forces or the nat- 
ural world may also be the basis for a ranger’s 
religion. The sheer intensity of the believers’ devo- 
tion is sufficient to attract the magical energy nec- 
essary to cast spells. 

Worshipers of philosophic faiths tend to concen- 
trate in small sects in isolated areas of the world. 
For example, the lulutiun rangers of the Great Glac- 
ier, for example, follow an animistic philosophy 
called qukoku, which holds that all creatures share a 
life essence called eaas. The teachings of qukoku 
maintain that all creatures are morally equivalent, 
and that animals and men share the same emotions 
and intellect, which their eaas compels them to 
express in different ways. (For more about the Iulu- 


a 


114 « Chapter Nine 


tiuns and qukoku, see the FORGOTTEN REALMS® 
FR14 Great Glacier sourcebook.) 


Expressions of Faith 


Regardless of whether a ranger worships nature, 
gods, or a philosophy, he is assumed to engage in 
various practices to affirm his faith. Some of these 
practices may be formally established; for 
instance, a particular group of disciples may be 
required to kneel before the setting sun every day. 
Other practices may be self-imposed; a ranger 
may decide for himself that the best way to express 
his devotion is to refrain from violence during 
nights with a full moon. Once a player establishes 
a practice as routine for the ranger, the player and 
DM can assume the character continues it “off 
stage” unless campaign events dictate otherwise. 

[t's up to the DM, in conjunction with the player, 
to decide what, if any practices a ranger should 
follow in order to remain true to his faith, Typical 
practices might include any of the following: 

Meditation. Having private moments of quiet 
reflection and communion is a common practice. 
These may take the form of the soft verbal recitation 
of sacred verse, spoken at the same time every day, 
to periods of silent meditation, performed when- 
ever the ranger gets a chance. Observing particular 
phenomena, such as a shooting star, or experiencing 
certain events, such as acquiring a new follower, 
may inspire special periods of this type. 

Offerings. The ranger make regular offerings of 
food or treasure. Offerings may be given to the 
underprivileged, cast into the sea, or buried in the 
ground. Small offerings, such as a scrap of meat or 
a few copper pieces, usually suffice. 

Symbol Display. The ranger may declare his 
devotion to the world by displaying the symbol of 
his faith. The symbol may be a distinctive article of 
clothing, a brooch or pendant, a tattoo, or a tiny 
mark made on a tree or stone wherever the ranger 
spends the night. The ranger might mark his ani- 
mal followers with the deity’s symbol. The symbol 
may be engraved in a collar or bracelet, shaved into 
the animal's fur, or notched in the animal's horn. 

Pilgrimage. The ranger may make a periodic 
journey to a sacred location, such as a temple, 
mountain peak, or holy village. The pilgrimage 
may take place on a particular date (say, the first 


day of spring) or whenever he gets the chance 
within a particular timeframe (he must make the 
pilgrimage once a year). 

Taboos. Some faiths may impose strict prohibi- 
tions on the ranger’s behavior. For example, the 
ranger may not be allowed to eat meat, wear head 
coverings, or start more than one fire in the same day. 

Players and DMs may also make up their own 
religious requirements. Remember that a ranger 
might follow practices unlike other disciples of 
the same faith; just because most worshipers of a 
nature deity make shrines out of polished stone 
doesn’t mean that a ranger can’t build a shrine out 
of deer bones. Care should be taken to ensure that 
the practices don’t conflict with the requirements 
of the ranger’s character kit (it's unreasonable to 
expect a Sea Ranger to make an annual pilgrimage 
to the middle of a desert). 

Most importantly, any routine practices should 
be simple enough that they don’t distract from the 
campaign or tie up an undue amount of the 
ranger’s time and effort. A ranger who has to 
come up with a weekly offering of 500 gp or must 
spend four hours per day in solitude won’t be 
welcome in very many parties. 

Once the practices are established, the ranger is 
expected to follow them. Should a ranger fail to 
uphold the requirements of the religion, or inten- 
tionally violate them, he may lose the use of his 
spells for a brief period, he may become ill, or one 
or more of his followers may desert him. The DM 
determines the penalty based on the severity of 
the ranger’s negligence. In most cases, a warning 
should be enough (which the ranger may experi- 
ence as a dream or vision), but continued abuse 
may call for a more severe response. 


Rangers and Druids 


Rangers have much in common with druids. 
For instance, both classes are predominantly ori- 
ented toward nature. Both receive spells in similar 
ways; in fact, both of the ranger’s spheres are 
shared with druids. Both strive to live up to the 
tenets of a higher power. They are natural allies 
against raiders, evil humanoids, and others who 
would despoil and ruin the land. 

Some rangers won't form anything other than 
casual relationships with druids. They may work 


with them on projects of mutual interest and occa- 
sionally call on them for guidance or advice, but 
otherwise the rangers go their own way, oblivious to 
how druids exercise their faith and not particularly 
concerned with what goes on in their places of wor- 
ship. In special circumstances, however, rangers and 
druids may establish more formal alliances, espe- 
cially when a druid becomes a ranger’s follower. 

Any ranger may acquire a low-level druid as a 
follower, and may do so for a variety of reasons. If 
the ranger is skilled in areas in which the druid is 
deficient, the druid may seek him out as a teacher. 
The druid’s superior may instruct him to serve a 
ranger as part of a penance, or to serve as a go- 
between for a network of wilderness protectors that 
exchanges information and favors. Or like other 
human followers, the druid may be drawn by the 
ranger’s reputation, hoping for a working relation- 
ship that will allow the projects of both to prosper. 

Secretive and mysterious, a druid may never let 
on as to why he’s chosen to follow a ranger. He 
may simply show up, tag along, obey orders, then 
abruptly disappear a few weeks later. His initial 
appearance may be equally cryptic; a ranger who 
believes he’s acquired a lizard or raccoon follower 
may be shocked to discover that the animal is, in 
fact, a shapechanged druid. 

Likewise, a low-level ranger may become a fol- 
lower of a druid. Though many druids are reluc- 
tant to take on such strong-willed characters, 
open-minded druids are often receptive to rangers 
with a thirst for nature lore and a commitment to 
conservation. 

Most of the time, however, rangers and druids 
operate independently. On occasion, they may find 
themselves competing for dominance of the same 
territory. A novice ranger who wishes to move into 
a region occupied by a druid may be wise to peti- 
tion for permission, even though such permission is 
rarely required by law. Failure to do so may result in 
lasting resentment at best, open hostility at worst. 
Should the ranger act courteously and respectfully, 
permission is usually granted. 

Conversely, an initiate assigned to a ranger’s 
territory would do well to request an audience 
with the ranger before settling in. Most rangers 
will appreciate the gesture, which minimizes the 
likelihood of misunderstandings or conflicts. A 
ranger probably won't attempt to drive away a 


Rangers and Religions 115 


druid who doesn’t bother to make contact— 
assuming that the druid otherwise behaves him- 
self—but relations between them may remain 
strained indefinitely. 

Because their outlooks are so similar, rangers 
and druids can usually share the same territory 
without any trouble, though their paths may sel- 
dom cross. Druids tend to keep to themselves 
even more than rangers. They are less likely than 
rangers to involve themselves in the affairs of 
men. Since they’re of neutral alignment, druids 
aren't particularly interested in promoting the 
ranger’s conception of justice. Rangers tend to 
work more openly, druids more deviously. 

Rangers and druids may informally agree to 
divide the responsibilities of their territory. The 
ranger may agree to deal with human and demi- 
human travelers, while the druid handles the 
problems of the native animals. They may join 
forces to contend with a natural disaster, only to 
part company when the danger has passed. 


Rangers and Clerics 


Low-level clerics may become followers of 
rangers for many of the same reasons as druids. 
Not all clerics make suitable followers. The cleric 
must be of good alignment and should be several 
experience levels lower than the ranger. Since most 
rangers are human or half-elven, clerics of these 
races are the most likely to sign on, though a ranger 
will rarely reject a follower solely on account of 
race. Gender considerations usually aren't impor- 
tant, but a cleric with a strict upbringing may hesi- 
tate to follow a ranger of the opposite sex. 

The faith of a clerical follower should be com- 
patible with that of the ranger. This doesn’t mean 
that the faiths must be identical—an inquisitive 
cleric might want to follow a ranger solely to 
study the nuances of an unusual religion—but the 
goals of the faiths can’t be diametrically opposed. 
For instance, if the cleric believes that anyone who 
prays to inanimate objects is a heathen, he won't 
follow a ranger who worships mountains. 

A cleric serves the ranger in the same way as 
other followers—assisting him in combat, per- 
forming routine chores, and offering advice. In 
turn, the ranger benefits from the cleric’s priestly 
skills and loyalty. The cleric may be able to assist 


ae 


116 * Chapter Nine 


with some of the ranger’s religious requirements; 
for example, the cleric might handle the blessing 
of new followers, or come up with the daily offer- 
ing of food or treasure. If they share the same 
faith, the cleric may teach the ranger new ways to 
worship, as well as engaging him in enlightening 
conversations concerning all things spiritual. 

As with all followers, a cleric will remain in the 
company of a ranger as long as the relationship is 
mutually beneficial. When the cleric reaches the 
end of his penance or learns what he wants to 
know, he may express his desire to leave. A gra- 
cious ranger will grant this request, either dis- 
missing or releasing the cleric at the earliest 
opportunity. Should the cleric prove to be a nui- 
sance—or worse, if the ranger finds the cleric’s 
religious practices to be unacceptable—the latter 
may be dismissed without explanation. 

Conversely, a ranger may find it advantageous to 
serve as a temporary follower of a cleric. He may 
seek out a cleric because an obligation requires him 
to spend a period of time working for a church, or 
because he wishes to learn more about that religion 
in a structured setting. Alternately, a ranger may 
volunteer to protect a clerical stronghold, or his 
deity may have commanded him to become a fol- 
lower to show his dedication. Regardless of his 
motivation, a ranger usually serves as a follower 
for a limited period of time, seldom exceeding a 
few months. He typically begins his term of service 
early in his career, usually before reaching 3rd level. 
When his term ends, however, he may continue an 
informal relationship with that particular church 
for a much longer period. 

Clerics of 8th level or higher who establish large 
places of worship may accept ranger followers. Some 
clerics may have gender, racial, or kit preferences for 
their followers, but usually they'll accept any ranger 
whose faith is compatible with their own and who 
demonstrates a sincere commitment to serve. Once 
accepted, the ranger is expected to obey his clerical 
superiors and adhere to their traditions. The ranger 
may be required, for instance, to pay a weekly offer- 
ing for the upkeep of the fortification, take a vow of 
chastity, or wear a distinctive cloak or other garment. 
He may also be expected to perform any number of 
special duties. Typical duties might include: 

e Performing routine maintenance on the strong- 

hold. This may include repairing damage, 


sweeping floors, polishing metalwork, cleaning 
latrines, and so on. 

è Constructing a wilderness shrine or temple. 
Usually, this is performed under the supervi- 
sion of a superior. The ranger handles most of 
the manual labor. 

è Recopying faded sacred texts on fresh parch- 
ments. Often the language will be unfamiliar 
to the ranger, as some clerics believe that 
copying foreign script enhances the discipli- 
nary benefits of the practice. 

e Supervising the fortification’s herd animals. 
This includes feeding, watering, administering 
to sick animals, and cleaning barns and stables. 

è Tending the church’s gardens and harvesting 
the crops. 

è Protecting the stronghold against monsters 
and enemy armies. 

A ranger can expect to be disciplined if he 
refuses to obey his superiors or becomes derelict 
in his duties. For minor infractions, he may be 
confined to his quarters or given additional 
chores. Major infractions may result in beatings or 
even a banishment from the fortification, In 


extreme cases, the ranger’s superiors may be able 
to exert their influence to permanently separate 
the ranger from their religion, causing him to lose 
all associated privileges and benefits. 

In the context of a game, a ranger’s term as a cler- 
ical follower may take place between adventures, or 
it may be incorporated into a campaign, possibly as 
a springboard for an expedition involving the entire 
party (the ranger must complete a quest for his 
cleric, and recruits other companions to help him). 

A ranger’s term as a clerical follower may 
have a variety of consequences, for weal or woe. 
On the good side, he may make some powerful 
new contacts and learn some new skills. He may 
even acquire a new follower or two of his own (a 
low-level cleric or fighter decides to accompany 
the ranger when he leaves). On the other hand, 
the ranger may become burdened with new 
duties to perform (in exchange for his training, 
his clerical superiors now expect him to offer 
extra donations every month in their honor). At 
any time, he may be unexpectedly summoned to 
the clerical stronghold to help train novices or 
defend against attackers. 


iat, colt FP) 
Rp erie 


¥ 


Rangers and Religion * 117 


Forgatherings 


Though they generally avoid organizations and 
communal events, many rangers participate in 
informal get-togethers called forgatherings or 
moots. At forgatherings, rangers can exchange 
ideas, barter for supplies, and participate in con- 
tests of skill, as well as catch up on gossip and 
blow off steam. Attendance at forgatherings is by 
no means mandatory, but most rangers look for- 
ward to the opportunity to spend a few days 
socializing with others who share the same gen- 
eral philosophy and professional challenges. 

These are often times of much merriment and 
celebration. Old friends are greeted warmly and 
new rangers are initiated, sometimes with raucous 
practical joking. There are food and fun for all, 
and tests of skill and prowess to pass the time and 
take each other’s measure. 


Attending a Forgathering 


A ranger can go through his entire life without 
ever hearing about a forgathering, let alone attend- 
ing one. But chances are that sooner or later, he'll 
hear a rumor about an upcoming forgathering, or 
receive an invitation from another ranger. He may 
also notice strange symbols etched on trees or 
stones, intended as guideposts to lead attendees to 
the forgathering site (depending on how secret is 
the location of the meeting, a ranger might need 
the trail sign proficiency to translate the symbols). 

In most cases, forgathering attendance requires 
no prior arrangements. These gatherings are by 
their nature informal, and they are rarely inter- 
rupted by serious business except under the most 
unusual circumstances. Any ranger who shows 
up is usually welcome; rangers who bring extra 
meat, fruit, or wine to share are welcomed with 
open arms. Attendees are expected to supply their 
own bedding, tents, and food. First-timers may be 
required to perform extra chores, such as guard 
duty or trash disposal. 

A ranger may bring non-ranger companions with 
him as guests, providing the guests keep to them- 
selves and stay out of the way. The ranger is respon- 
sible for his guests’ behavior; should they cause 
trouble or make nuisances of themselves, both the 
ranger and his guests will be summarily ejected. It's 
unlikely that ranger will be welcome at any future 
forgatherings unless things are smoothed over. 


118 * Chapter Ten 


Types, Sites, and Dates 


There are as many types of forgatherings as there 
are rangers. Some are held in well-traveled forests, 
others in remote deserts. Some attract only specific 
kit types, such as Mountain Men or Sea Rangers, 
while others are primarily intended for specific races, 
such as elves. In general, however, most forgather- 
ings are open to any ranger who cares to come. 

Though some established forgatherings occa- 
sionally change locations and dates, most are 
held in the same place and at the same time 
every year for the convenience of the attendees. 
Any open wilderness area, reasonably isolated, 
can serve as a forgathering site. Forests, moun- 
tains, and plains are preferred, as they give the 
easiest access to the greatest number of rangers. 
Because travel can be difficult in the winter, and 
summer can bring uncomfortably hot tempera- 
tures, forgatherings are usually held in late 
spring or early fall. Most forgatherings last from 
two to three days, but some drag on for several 
weeks or until the last few diehards call it quits 
and head for home. 

Specifics about individual forgatherings are 
hard to come by, since rangers tend to keep the 
details to themselves. Brief descriptions follow, 
the pieced-together bits and pieces of information 
that have trickled out over the years regarding a 
few of the best-attended and longest-lived meet- 
ings: feel free to add to them and adapt them to 
your campaign world. 


Equinox Festival 


One of the most important annual meetings is 
the gathering at this festival, held during the six 
days following the first full moon after the autumn 
equinox. Rangers of every type and specialty can 
be found here, though standard rangers outnumber 
all the others. The site shifts every other year, alter- 
nating between a heavily forested area and a plains 
region, far from any civilized settlement. The orga- 
nizers announce next year’s site at the end of the 
current festival. As this is primarily a trade fair, 
rangers bring a wide variety of goods to sell, and 
haggle with each other long into the night. Prices 
tend to be high, but so does the quality. 


Wh ty 
in i 


9 
li 
. 

rings 

her 

rgatt 

Forg 


Glass Eye Concourse 


This is one of the wildest and least structured for- 
gatherings, attracting Mountain Men by the dozens, 
along with a few rowdy Giant Killers, Pathfinders, 
and Forest Runners. The name derives from the per- 
son who organized the first of these forgatherings, a 
rowdy Mountain Man who lost an eye in a drunken 
sharpshooting contest. Held near the base of a tall 
mountain in mid-spring, the Glass Eye Concourse 
features a weekend of physical contests, lewd jokes, 
and lots and lots of cheap ale. 


High Tide Assembly 


In contrast to most forgatherings, the High Tide 
Assembly is downright sedate, emphasizing 
philosophic discussion and formal lectures. This 
forgathering takes place during the first high tide 
of spring on a quiet seashore. The Assembly lasts 
for three days. Seekers, Sea Rangers, and Explor- 
ers are the primary attendees. By tradition, the for- 
gathering climaxes with a wild boar hunt. 
Following a traditional feast, the bones of the wild 
boars are tossed into the sea, to the accompani- 
ment of triumphant cheers and whistles. 


Solstice Jamboree 


Most often held in a central plains location, the 
Solstice Jamboree attracts all types of rangers, as well 
as a number of bards and druids. The event lasts for 
six days, beginning on the first day of the summer 
solstice. Lavish banquets, featuring exotic meats and 
rich candies are held three times daily, and general 
good fellowship is encouraged. This is an important 
event, for much serious business is discussed on the 
side, Comrades who died the previous year are hon- 
ored on the last day of the forgathering with poetry 
recitations and silent meditations. 


Physical Layout 


Most forgathering sites have few permanent 
features or structures. Upon their arrival, atten- 
dees construct any necessary buildings or fixtures, 
and take them down when the forgathering ends. 
Forgathering fixtures are simple but functional, 
with building materials consisting usually of 


120 * Chapter Ten 


wood, stones, and mud. Here are a few features 
common to most sites: 

Sleeping Area. The driest and clearest patch 
of ground makes the best sleeping area. Atten- 
dees pitch their tents or lay out their sleeping 
bags in lines, spaced well apart. In colder cli- 
mates, the sleeping area is located where the sun 
(whatever there is of it) can warm the earth 
before nightfall. In warmer climates, shady loca- 
tions are preferred. 

Dining Area. A typical dining area consists of a 
few benches or logs for sitting on, some stone bar- 
becue pits, and a simple lean-to for storage. The 
optimum location for the dining area is several 
hundred feet from the sleeping area, positioned so 
that breezes don’t carry the cookfire smoke in the 
direction of resting rangers. A stream nearby for 

washing up is also desirable, if available. 

Fire Pit. A pit for burning waste is constructed 
near the dining area, preferably away from trees 
or brush to minimize the chance of a fire getting 
out of control. It’s located where the prevailing 
breezes don’t carry the smell of burning garbage 
toward the sleeping or dining areas. 

Barn. A barn, stable, or pen is constructed to 
house the rangers’ animal followers for the dura- 
tion of the forgathering. Large forgatherings may 
require several pens and stables to accommodate a 
variety of species. Rangers are responsible for the 
feeding and grooming of their animals, and are 
also held accountable for their animals’ behavior; 
it’s considered a grievous breech of etiquette for a 
lion follower of one ranger to eat the goat follower 
of another ranger. 

Chapel. The forgathering chapel may be as sim- 
ple as a stone platform, or as elaborate as a full- 
sized cabin with a podium and wooden pews. 
Religious symbols are not exhibited here, so that 
the chapel may accommodate worshipers of 
diverse beliefs. Most often, the chapel is isolated 
from the main forgathering site, erected ina 
nearby woodland or other quiet location. 

Campfire. The communal campfire, typically 
constructed in a central location, serves as the 
focal point of the forgathering. The campfire 
burns all night and day, continually tended and 
fed deadfall logs. At any hour, rangers can be 
found crowding around the camp fire, roasting 
meat and exchanging stories. 


Activities and Events 


As forgatherings are primarily intended as 
social events, rarely are there fixed agendas or 
schedules. Activities tend to develop sponta- 
neously, continue as long as the rangers show an 
interest, and end when the participants have had 
enough. Following are a few of the activities and 
events most likely to occur: 


Trading. 

Trading goes on virtually non-stop at most for- 
gatherings, ranging from private transactions 
between individuals to dozens of rangers ped- 
dling their wares in what amounts to an open air 
market. Merchandise includes both the common 
(rope, saddles, boots) and the unusual (chainlink 
leashes, camouflage paint, homemade wine). 
Weapons and maps are especially in demand, 
particularly bows and quarterstaves with hand- 
carved designs, and maps of exotic territories 
that detail the newest trails. Rangers pay for their 
purchases in fur, food, and trinkets as well as 
gold pieces. 

Magical items are occasionally available, but 
many rangers are more inclined to loan them to 
needy comrades rather than sell them outright. 
Rangers who borrow magical items are expected 
to return them at the next forgathering. Being men 
and women of integrity, the borrowers rarely fail 
to honor their agreements. 


News and Gossip. 

Information flows freely at forgatherings, and 
most rangers are eager to learn about the trials 
and tribulations their comrades have experienced 
in the previous year. They hear of marriages, 
births, and deaths, as well as followers acquired 
and abandoned. They learn which expeditions 
resulted in new discoveries and which ended in 
disaster. Rumors abound of lost civilizations, hid- 
den treasures, and gruesome monsters. An atten- 
tive ranger may hear about employment 
opportunities or new hunting grounds. If he’s 
lucky, an unattached ranger may make contact 
with a potential mate. 


Training. 

The typical forgathering attracts rangers with a 
wide range of skills. Often, they’re willing to give 
instruction to novices for a small fee or as a ges- 
ture of friendship. If he locates a willing teacher, a 
ranger may be able to pick up hunting or tracking 
tips, acquire cooking secrets from a master chef, or 
learn how to construct emergency shelters from an 
elder woodsman. (The optional training rules in 
Chapter 8 of the DUNGEON MASTER™ Guide 
can be used to allow rangers to acquire new skills 
as a result of their forgathering experiences.) 


Contests. 

No forgathering would be complete without 
games and contests for rangers to demonstrate 
their skills and compete for prizes. Conservative 
forgatherings feature debates, target shooting, and 
knotting matches (where contestants see who can 
untangle complex knots in the shortest time). The 
Glass Eye Concourse and similarly rowdy for- 
gatherings feature contests of a more physical 
nature, such as head-slamming (contestants butt 
heads as hard as they can until one passes out), 
dagger juggling (often done blindfolded), and 
bear wrestling. 

Mountain Men in particular have a tradition of 
rather intense competition. For example, Moun- 
tain Men enjoy a bizarre drinking contest where 
bitter roots, fish scales, rotten vegetables, and 
other distasteful substances are mixed with water; 
whoever consumes the most of this vile brew is 
declared the winner. 

Other contests common to forgatherings include 
horse races, rabbit hunts, and mock battles using 
swords and spears bound with thick layers of 
cloth. Winners are awarded silver pendants, hik- 
ing boots, or other prizes donated by the more 
affluent attendees. If donations aren’t available, 
each participant puts a few coins in a pot before a 
contest begins; whoever wins claims the pot. 
Wagering is rampant for all types of contests, with 
rangers betting everything from animal pelts and 
dried meat, to arrowheads and leather gloves. 


Forgatherings * 121 


Appendix 


Class Description 


Rangers are a sub-class of fighter who are adept 
at woodcraft, tracking, scouting, infiltration, and 
spying. All rangers must be of good alignment, 
although they can be lawful good, chaotic good, 
or neutral good. A ranger must have a Strength 
score of at least 13, Intelligence of at least 13, Wis- 
dom of at least 14, and Constitution of at least 14. 
If the ranger has ability scores of greater than 15 in 
Strength, Intelligence, and Wisdom, he gains the 
benefit of adding 10% to experience points 
awarded by the referee. 

Unlike other members of the fighter group, rangers 
have eight-sided Hit Dice (d8) but at first level they 
get 2, rather then 1, Hit Dice. It should also be noted 
that rangers get 11 Hit Dice rather than the 9 of other 
fighter-types. Table 61 shows the experience points 
needed for each level, along with the associated titles. 
Table 62 lists the number of attacks per round a 
ranger can make at various levels. 


Table 61: Experience Levels (1st Edition) 


XP Hit Dice Level 

Level Needed (d8) Title 

1 0 2 Runner 

2 2,251 3 Strider 

3 4,501 4 Scout 

4 10,001 5 Courser 

5 20,001 6 Tracker 

6 40,001 7 Guide 

7 90,001 8 Pathfinder 

8 150,001 9 Ranger 

9 225,001 10 Ranger Knight 

10* 325,001 11 Ranger Lord 

11 650,001 11+2 Ranger Lord 
(11th level) 

tar 975,001 114+4 Range Lord 
(12th level) 


* Rangers gain 2 hit points per level after the 
10th. 

** 325,000 experience points per level for each 
additional level above the 12th. 


122 * Appendix 


AD&D” 1" Edition Ranger 


Table 62: Attacks Per Round (1st Edition) 


Level Attacks/Round* 
1-7 1/1 round 
8-14 3/2 rounds 
15+ 2/1 round 


* This applies to any thrusting or striking 
weapon. 


Special Abilities 


In addition to considerable prowess as fighters, 
rangers have druidic and magical spell capabili- 
ties when they attain high levels. Thus, they are 
very formidable opponents, for they have other 
abilities and benefits as well. 

When fighting humanoid-type creatures of the 
“giant class,” listed hereafter, rangers add 1 hit 
point for each level of experience they have 
attained to the points of damage scored when they 
hit in melee combat. Giant class creatures are 
listed on Table 66. Example: a 5th level ranger hits 
a bugbear in melee combat, and the damage done 
to the opponent will be according to the ranger’s 
weapon type, modified by his Strength, and +5 
(for his or her experience level) because the oppo- 
nent is a bugbear (a “giant class” humanoid). 

Rangers surprise opponents when rolling 1-3 on 
1d6 and are themselves surprised only when 
rolling 1 on 1d6. 

Tracking is possible both outdoors and under- 
ground (in dungeons and similar settings). Under- 
ground, the ranger must have observed the 
creature to be tracked within 3 turns (30 minutes) 
of the commencement of tracking, and the ranger 
must begin tracking at a place where the creature 
was observed. Table 63 lists the ranger’s chance to 
track creatures underground in various situations. 


Table 63: Underground Tracking Chances 


Creature’s Action Chance to Track 
Going along a normal passage or room 65% 
Passes through normal door or uses stairs 55% 
Goes through a trap door 45% 
Goes up or down a chimney or 

through a concealed door 35% 
Passes through a secret door 25% 


Outdoors, a ranger has a base 10%, plus 10% 
per level, chance of following a creature (1st: 20%, 
2nd: 30%, etc). Table 64 shows the modifications to 
the base chance. 


Table 64: Outdoor Tracking Modifiers 


Situation Modifier 
For each creature above 1 in the 

party being tracked +2% 
For every 24 hours that have elapsed -10% 
For each hour of preparation -25% 


At 8th level, rangers gain limited druidic spell 
ability. Additional spells are added through 17th 
level. At 9th level, rangers gain limited magic-user 
spell ability, as with druidic spell ability (see Table 
65). Rangers can’t read druid, cleric, or magic-user 
spells from magical scrolls in any event. 


Table 65: Spell Progression 
(1st Edition) 


Spell Level 
Druidic Magic-User** 
1 ‘2 


Ranger 
Level 
8 

9 

10 

11 

12 

13 

14 

15 

16 
17* 


YNYNNN NNN =m 


NNNN == i 
1 
NNSA. 


*Maximum spell ability 
**The ranger must check which spells he can 
learn, just as if he was a magic-user. 


At 10th level (Ranger Lord), rangers are able to 
employ all non-written magical items which pertain 
to clairaudience, clairvoyance, ESP, and telepathy. 

Also at 10th level, each ranger attracts 2-24 
(2d12) followers. Note that these henchmen once 
lost can never be replaced, although mercenaries 
can be hired, of course. These followers are deter- 
mined by the DM who then informs the ranger. 


Special Restrictions 


Any change to non-good alignment immediately 
strips the ranger of all benefits, and the character 
becomes a fighter, with eight-sided Hit Dice ever 
after. He can never again regain ranger status. 

Rangers may not hire men-at-arms, servants, aides, 
or henchmen until they attain 8th level or higher. 

No more than three rangers may ever operate 
together at any time. 

Rangers may own only those goods and trea- 
sures which they can carry on their person and/or 
place upon their mount. All excess must be 
donated to a worthy communal or institutional 
cause (but never to another player character). 

Rangers do not attract a body of mercenaries to 
serve them, but when (and if) rangers construct 
strongholds, they conform to the fighter class in 
other respects. 


The following is a list of “giant class” creatures for 
which the ranger receives his special combat bonus. 


Table 66: Giant Class Creatures 


bugbear kobold 
cyclops meazel 
cyclopskin norker 

dune stalker ogre/merrow 
ettin ogre mage 
giant (all) ogrillion 
giant-kin (all) orc/orog 
gibberling quaggoth 
gnoll/flind spriggan 
goblin tasloi 
grimlock troll/scrag (all) 
hobgoblin/kaolinth xvart 


Optional Rule (from Unearthed Arcana) 
The Ranger’s Weapons 


By the time a ranger gains a fourth weapon pro- 
ficiency at 4th level, the character’s weapons must 
include: 

a bow (of any sort) or light crossbow* 
a dagger or knife 

® a spear or an axe 

a sword (any type) 


* This choice must be made at 1st level. 


AD&D’ Ist Edition Ranger* 123 


Ranger Kit Record Sheet 


Player 


Kitt =o 


Requirements 
Ability Scores Races 


Alignments Primary Terrain 
Species Enemy Followers 


Description** 


Secondary Skills Weapon Proficiencies 


Armor/Equipment 


Special Benefits* 


#1 
#2 
#3 
#4 
Special Hindrances* 


** = These categories should be fully detailed on another sheet of paper. 
This form may be photocopied for personal use in playing ADSD® games. 


124 


Character 


Campaign 


Nonweapon Proficiencies 
B = Bonus R=Required S= Suggested 


©1993 TSR. Inc. All Rights Reserved 


Ranger Character Record Sheet 
Player Character 
Date Created Kit Name 
Alignment 


Ability Scores 
ity DEn Experience 


)in20 Litt Gates +10% Bonus if 
16 Str, Dex, and Wis Limit [_] 


Individual XP 

Thief Skills 

Spell Levels 

Special Ability 

Train Follower 

Hit Die Defeated 

Species Enemy 

Other PHBR or OMG 


Hit Points Armor Class 


Odd levels 
ist-9th level = 1d10+ 12, 15,1 
10th on = +3 only (Con.) SIA /teele 
HP egenerate SS 1-15 
Death: Max #[] Initial (Con. + 1) : 8-16 


Resurrection 
To date Survival 


Attack Number | | | |_| 


Weapon Siots 


Shots Fired 
| we | 


Used 


This form may be photocopied for personal use in playing ADSD® games. 1993 TSR, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 


Ranger Character Record Sheet 


Nonweapon Proficiencies 
Slotsf0+__ +34 (1 at 3,6, 9, 12. etc.) 


E Secondary Skill: Racial Abilities 


mesan [aoe [ose [ow [ono] wt [ma 


me | | | [tt 


Spells Primary Terrain 
Casting Level _ Species Enemy 
— Animal Empathy Modifier 


2nd (begin at —1; level 4, -3 at 
ard level 7, —4 at level 10, etc.) 


Special Benefits 
#1 

#2 

#3 

#4 

Kit Notes 


This torm may be photocopied tor personal use in playing ADAD® games. ©1994 TSR, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 


Ranger Character Record Sheet 


Vital Statistics Personality Traits 
à Sex Om OF 
fi z "Date Born Height 
Natural Unatural Year 


Weight 


Middle ~1 Str & Con; +1 Int & Wis Hai 
ir 

Old -2 Str & Dex; Con; +1 Wis 

Venerable —1 Str & Dex & Con; + Int & Wis bi 


Skin 


Maximum Age 


Followers 
Name/Species 


Equipment Carried 


ltem/Location 


Vision æ Intravision Movement Rate 


Base 188 Ss 

i a a ee el 
ee M ee 

; ee eee 

Potent O o) Mote | - S dal- i 

Debts/Will |Heawgsm| - | | | -2 | | 

| seve) | + | | | + | +3 | 


This form may be photocopied for personal use in playing ADAD® games. 71993 TSA, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 


ar i ve mom the 0 


TE AGON Mag azine delivers new ideas 


sew e E 
New spells & monsters 
cy Folk: 182 SEREN previos 
gor the Wee *New kits and classes 
ee 


paeneine 


DRAGON FUL FREES 


SUBSCRIPTION 


Dungeonsf}Dragons 


Zhe ~ Edition ras 
The Complete 
9 
Ranger's 
Handbook 


Forest guardian, border runner, bounty hunter, and 
more—the full potential of the ranger class has nev- 
er been plumbed. Until now. Come learn the inner- 
most secrets of one of the most popular AD&D 
character classes. Details on every part of the Rang- 
er's life, from allied forest brethren to unusual out- 
door equipment. With 15 new and exciting character 


kits, this book is an information-packed accessory 
for the AD&D 2nd Edition Game. A special appendix 
gives the rules for the original AD&D ranger class. 


NQSI 


TSR, Inc. = TSR Ltd. 
POB 756 [s 120 Church End, 
Lake Geneva, Cherry Hinton 
WI 53147 Sey Cambridge CBI 3LB 
u.s.A - United Kingdom 


997£5992109S18216 


9-729-9209S-1 


ADVANCED DUNGEONS & DRAGONS and AD&D 
are registered trademarks owned by TSR, Inc. 
The TSR logo is a trademark owned by TSR, Inc. 
©1993 TSR, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Printed in the US.A_ 


<O08LS 


$18.00 U.S. $23.00 CAN £10.99 U.K. 


