The 
Complete Book 


Player's Handbook 


The 
Complete Book 
of 


10WORVWES 


CREDITS 


Written by Jim Bambra 

Edited by Doug Stewart 

Illustrated in color by Brom, Clyde Caldwell, 
Larry Elmore and Keith Parkinson 

Illustrated in black and white by Larry Elmore and 
Karl Waller 

Typeset by Gaye O'Keefe 

Icons by Laurie Yockey 


ADVANCED DUNGEONS &. DRAGONS, AD&.D, and WORLD OF GREYHAWK are registered trademarks owned by TSR, Inc. The TSR logo is a trade- 
mark owned by TSR, Inc. 


91991 TSR, Inc. All rights reserved. 

Printed in the U.S.A. 

Random House and its affiliate companies have worldwide distribution rights in the book trade for English language products. 
Distributed to the book and hobby trade in the United Kingdom by TSR Ltd. 


This product is protected under the copyright laws of the United States of America. Any reproduction or other unauthorized use of the material 
or artwork contained herein is prohibited without the express written permission of TSR, Inc. 


TSR, Inc. 

POB 756 

Lake Geneva, 
WI 53147 U.S.A. 


TSR Ltd. 

120 Church End, Cherry Hinton 
Cambridge CB1 3LB 

United Kingdom 


Biitoducton. .... реками elel se вее ве 4 
Chapter 1: The Creation of Dwarves .................. 7 
Chapter 2: The Dwarf Subraces...................... 12 
ИШ DWREVEE о... 00 E 070 наза аео еее e lS 12 
Mountain DWAfVes. ээл iad cece iV V adu 12 
Deep Dwarves... sses оное ое herren nnn 13 
Sundered War ves | . sisia s'apelo е oit 4 660 On 70 ев 14 
Duergar (Gray Омагуеѕ)............................ 14 
Gully Dwarves ss ssori tales saaadsasesssivereveweeeeis 15 
Chapter 3: Your Life as a ЮзеагЁ...................... 17 
Dwarf Cil |... ccs ee ex VS AO Veacticcos dps veu A 17 
LOVE. IDEAS 20 
Wotld VIEN. osos и 20 
Dwarven Ctafís. Saas Haass rale e йе 20 
Dwarves and Hurnor уе PSST Sa eie a 21 
ОАО СРОК 21 
РА ое ааа еее а 22 
Individualism. сеооа Ties sS 22 
Te e ЫЫ УЛ Bee SORT К SS ADESSO ANA 23 
Attitudes Toward Other Касеѕ....................... 23 
War to the Death ә.» аж» ә» ә. Sees asses 23 
Inolation ААА ЧОН 24 
Dwarven Певне CIA Aaaa В e Ede eee dar vos 24 
Dwarves ТИЕР а Ре 26 
СЩ... ever ento etr А 27 
Music and Singing |... osaansa ооа toot alto 27 
Chapter 4: Character СгеаНоп....................... 28 
FH DWREV6S 1 aer овен 30 
Mountain Dwarves......0.scccccccssssscctsancasees 30 
Dép O eee etre wf 30 
DORRE ESLE ое овен 31 
Sundéred DWEBIVES у; э азу кек voa 14 CC C9 6337060088 33 
Gall Dwarves 225.000 aste eie ns n VER AA АА ае 33 
Ability Score Modifiers ............ e nnn 34 
Cher. Gharacfardeh iue зә зә «FREI ее аена еа 36 
Chapter 5: Proficiendes. ......... nese mese ne meine 38 
Acquiring Proficiencies ......... cen 38 
Weapon Proficiencies and Specialization .............. 38 
Nonweapon Proficiency Groups ..................... 38 
Nonweapon РгоНсїепсїеё$.......................... 40 
Dwarven Detection Proficiencies..................... 48 
Chapter 6: Dwarf Kits ......... eee nnn n 49 
The Composition of the Ки......................... 49 
МОК аб ҮКЕ 50 

PAL PARDEE ЕСС 50 

А ROE PED БОСА UI XS RM DORT DOO CREE TID 51 

URIG I RTT сое DOO белка ао 52 

Hearth Guard РАТУЕ 53 

БЕТА ылда» керу VO SEP SS 54 

FIORD ees а ае ает 57 

ges SS EOLA SF бе аэ жае егер аео чан 58 

Rapid Response Rider oss CONN Ss ad 59 

а so sacan a SULTON УКТ ҮЛГҮ 60 
1:179 «7 E EEA ENTE 61 

СОУ KS U кк» EAE 61 

РАН SSSR ae SESE RE 62 

РАЕН 5: кез кәк web USE aA 63 

Ritual PES a a ioral Sore Sa TS 64 
WarHor/Prest КЕ LS DLR и 64 

О Келе OO ES E ra TEE em 64 

"emple Guard. i.e sie saab le ase e sie oo» 65 


VindieBtoE. a e НОСОК 66 
Bus < КН 67 
Diplomat Srv DEIR GR a 67 
ст ООН 67 
О О НЫЕ 68 
ПО СОНО НН 68 
Warrlor/ ТАМЕКИ...» э. зз ә 30a 05 otto онооно енота 69 
Ghetto Fighter сен ое 69 
TERI РЕВ АРИ ЛА наза о) еее 70 
МИШ ее ое O 71 
УЗУН с. зууну ое rap A 72 
Chapter 7: Role Playing and Personalities ............. 74 
The Dwarven Personalities.......................... 75 
The Decadent OSS ves o n9 3:8 ala аана егесте 75 
The Glory SECS ev ee PV pe VET Ves sss S 76 
Thé CINE ее AR OO R A 76 
The ее са. гика» € Tbeb Ren Yard ceno 78 
The ОНИ луы Ле е саи е зае ааа 78 
JU AUT s AERE ES COUT Se COLIC ROU а IOS 79 
Thea РАЕВ Dein nes gus P eli MAT E 79 
'The Pragmatiét: иене ень коне Pian 80 
UI Ae or. a ОА Ca aaa aa Rae 80 
Chapter & Мышв..... ‚еее жечь 81 
Conducting a SUVE e ere a aa а 81 
it Зы О seve oon eee eats etree Tie 81 
Quality OF WE acc eee nos sina tty р. жала зыл ол 82 
Types СЕМЕ. sea ooo шыба os 84 
Excavating a Tunnel Мїпе........................... 84 
Playing Out a ME e eNO NT FORE 87 
Overseeing Mining Орега!нопвз....................... 87 
Chapter 9: Equipment .... ооо екяне 88 
Г ООО ОО 88 
New Weapons CSAS еее 88 
Two-handed Battle Ахе........................... 90 
Close Combat У барона: SO 90 
Head Splka. s еее еее 90 
Knee and Elbow Ѕрікеѕ ........................... 90 
ОМ сае da das 90 
и ее 91 
Wer MIGINGE.. о 91 
GUNG за оао iere A Ra M a 91 
оо КЕ бант ROBO E COS: 92 
Е LU ven Ups eese rtis NSR SEO’ PE 92 
Chapter 10: Dwarf Strongholds...................... 93 
Designing Dwarf Strongholds........................ 93 
The Stronghold of Bazzakrak....................... 110 
Chapter 11: Designing Dwarf Campaigns ............ 114 
Creatitin a dot ono ooi paaa TRES E VEIT aaa aaa 114 
The Importance of Муіћ...........,............... 115 
The Importance of the Содѕ........................ 115 
The Races of the Уогіа..,......................... 116 
Viars и Ве, ПРАВО ААА a энже 116 
Campaign Епуігоптепіѕ,....,..................... 118 
д: Пр ООВ ЛОКИ 121 
ие 123-128 
Dwarf Stronghold Design Sheet .................... 123 
Dwarf Character Kit Design Sheet .................. 124 
Complete Dwarf Warrior's Character Sheet........... 125 
Complete Dwarf Priest's Character Sheet............. 126 
Complete Dwarf Thief's Character Sheet............. 127 
Complete Dwarf's Character Sheet (Back) ............ 128 


У 


Table of Contents e 3 


ADAM 


Introduction 


Balor the Hill Dwarf Introduces 
the Dwarves 


Dwarves are the greatest race ever created 
by the gods. We are far superior to the pansy 
elves, smelly goblins, dirty orcs, and mis- 
shapen humans. Dwarves are perfectly 
shaped, solid and strong, like the stones that 
form our dwellings. Our skins are the color of 
the earth, our hair and beards are of the finest 
hue and texture imaginable. 

Dwarves are more than just an attractive 
race, Imbued with unchanging attitudes and 
steadfastness, we do not waver, even in the 
face of great adversity. Well suited to our lives 
underground, we can see in the dark and de- 
tect underground dangers and pitfalls. Our 
craftsmen have created the finest cities and 
buildings in the world. Our bridges and high 
vaulted chambers are wonders to behold, 
with a strength and permanence of form that 
other races have never duplicated. 

We have no fear of magic. We shake off its 
effects as easily as we slay the goblins who 
lurk in the dark. We are impervious to poisons 
and noxious substances that would kill those 
of lesser races. Such is our vigor that even 
cursed weapons fail to possess us, for our in- 
herent vitality is invincible. 

Dwarves are also great warriors, well disci- 
plined, and organized into armies that strike 
fear into evil monsters everywhere. Our com- 
bat skills against the filthy dark dwellers are 
beyond question. It is a particularly stupid 
goblin, pig-faced orc, or brainless hobgoblin 
who does not quake with fear at the sound of 
dwarven boots. Our battle axes have drunk 
deeply of the blood of such creatures, our ham- 
mers have smashed thousands of their skulls. 
We will continue until there are none left to 
kill. That is not an idle boast, it is an oath. 


4 * Introduction 


Yet we are a peaceful people. We do not 
seek war, nor do we steal from others. Those 
are the actions of other, less honorable races. 
We see to our own and those who attempt to 
steal that which is ours will die. That is not a 
threat, it is the way of the dwarf. If vou do not 
wish to feel our wrath, leave us alone. 


Dwarves As You Know Them 


The MONSTROUS COMPENDIUM®, 
Volumes One and Two, discussed hill and 
mountain dwarves, and the duergar (gray 
dwarves); where they live, their appearance, 
combat abilities, friends, enemies, and how 
they view the world. 

The ADVANCED DUNGEONS & DRAGONS® 
2nd Edition Players Handbook and DUNGEON 
MASTER? Guide introduced methods of creating 
dwarf characters. The Complete Book of Dwarves 
expands the scope of previous texts by making 
available new subraces of dwarves and by provid- 
ing new rules for players and DMs. АП of the new 
information is directed specifically to dwarf char- 
acters. 


Dwarves As You Will Know Them 


Player characters have usually been hill 
dwarves. Now you will be able to choose from 
six subraces of dwarves. In addition to hill, 
mountain, and duergar, three other types of 
dwarves are introduced in this book: deep, gul- 
ly, and sundered dwarves. While these have 
appeared in other AD&D® game products, 
they are made available here with the same at- 
tention to detail that the hill dwarves were 
given in the Players Handbook. Each of the six 
subraces of dwarves has its own special advan- 
tages and limitations, which make the charac- 
ters unique and fun to play. 


Your Life as a Dwarf examines the social or- 
ganizations of the dwarves and the crafts 
clans. It describes a typical family and details 
dwarf education. 

Character kits have been previously intro- 
duced with this series. They enlarge the basic 
character classes of warrior, thief, and priest. 
The Complete Book of Dwarves presents 24 
new kits created especially for dwarf charac- 
ters, including seven kits designed exclusively 
for use by multi-class characters. Kits like ani- 
mal master, axe for hire, and hearth guard 
greatly expand the kinds of characters which 
can be played. 

In Chapter 7, players will find useful hints 
on playing typical, and not so typical, charac- 
ters. You will also find extensive information 
on the background and stronghold of your 
character, in Chapter 11. Dwarf strongholds 
are not merely fortresses, but homes and work 
places as well. Some strongholds may not 
even be fortified, but dwarves will always re- 
fer to their home as a stronghold. It is a matter 
of racial pride and a warning that a dwarf's 
home is well defended. 

DMs will find the expanded information in- 
valuable in fitting dwarf characters into their 
campaign worlds. Whether dwarves are a 
dominant race or just a people living in isola- 
tion under the earth, there are plenty of sug- 
gestions and ideas for strongholds and 
adventure settings. 


The Complete Player's Handbook 
Series 


The Complete Book of Dwarves comple- 
ments the other books in the series. The hand- 
books contain information useful to dwarf 
characters and there is a wide range of charac- 
ter classes to choose from. The Complete 


Priests Handbook, with its descriptions of 
dwarf religions and optional rules for priests, 
is particularly recommended. Also recom- 
mended are the Complete Fighters and Com- 
plete Thief s Handbooks for their new combat 
options, weapon specializations, thief abili- 
ties, and thieves' guilds. All three of these 
books are indispensable to DMs and players 
with dwarf characters. 

The Complete Book of Dwarves is specifi- 
cally targeted to dwarves adventuring in their 
own societies and provides extensive back- 
ground information on dwarf cultures, socie- 
ty, creation myths, and campaign settings. 

Like the other books in this series, the rules 
presented in this book are optional. Although 
the other books in this series are useful they 
are not essential. All you need to use this book 
are the Players Handbook and the 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide. 

If you use the Complete Book of Dwarves 
with the original AD&D® game, instead of the 
AD&D 2nd Edition game, be aware that the 
references refer to AD&D 2nd Edition books. 
Players using older books will need to ignore 
some of these. In most cases, the relevant ma- 
terial will be found in the index or table of 
contents. 

Finally, many of the rules presented in this 
book depend upon the use of weapon and 
nonweapon proficiencies described in the 
Players Handbook. If you have not been us- 
ing these proficiences in your campaign, we 
highly recommend that you familiarize your- 
self with them and introduce them into your 
game. 


а 


Introduction * 5 


CHAPTER 


1 The Creation of Dwarves 


Wu == > hz: >\; 
P > (7 | s 
№ =. = à 
| iy M 
= ) a @ 


ча ЧЕГ 5 
dip T a oe a (<= 


6 * Chapter One 


Recorded by Marak, Golden-Hammer, son of 
Jardak, Hammer of the Orcs 


In the age before the beginning of time there 
were no dwarves, elves, or humans and the 
world was not yet made. Only the Eternal 
Forge existed, in the Home of the Maker, in 
the Caverns of the Everlasting Flame. Into the 
Eternal Forge the Maker placed stone and fire. 
As the fire heated the stone it expanded, and 
rivers of molten ore ran from the interior of 
the stone, flowing along its sides. With tongs 
and hammer the Maker forged the world. He 
struck and titanic mountains rose from the 
surface; again, and hills formed, leaving deep 
valleys and great hollows. 

When he was pleased with its shape and 
form, he quenched the world in the Trough of 
Life. As the water struck the surface, clouds of 
steam rose to form the sky. The waters of the 
Trough settled in valleys and flowed into the 
hollows to become seas. 

The Maker held up his work and saw that it 
was fitting. He set the world upon a great pin- 
nacle of the finest mithril, and there it remains 
until this day. 

The Maker laughed and decided to test his 
world. He would make a race of miners and 
forgers and they would strive to find the mith- 
ril pinnacle upon which the world rests, deep 
in its heart. 

And so the Maker returned to the Eternal 
Forge in the Caverns of the Everlasting Flame. 
Taking water from the Trough of Life and 
stone from the earth he held them together. 
When he was satisfied, he added molten iron 
to strengthen it. He gathered this fine alloy 
and shaped it on the Anvil of Spirit. To assist 
him, the Maker created the gods. He beat 
them into their shapes. Like him, the gods 
were broad and stocky, with fine, long beards 
of rusty-red iron or shimmering mithril. 


Then he quenched them in the Trough of 
Life so that they, like the world, could take 
part of its life-giving waters. One by one he 
lifted them up and blew on them. Their eyes 
opened and they lived. 

The Maker had forged the gods from the el- 
ements of the earth, but his work was not yet 
finished. He took the Gods of Crafts and 
taught them how to make things that would 
please him; he taught the God of Fire to burn 
and to fan the flames of life. He taught the 
Gods of the Elements the use of their powers. 
He revealed to them all the place of the gods in 
the world. 

Then the Maker took rock and iron and 
heated them in the Eternal Forge. He forged 
the most pleasing shapes. These he took and 
quenched in the Trough of Life, and so the first 
dwarves were created. 

Each of the gods then took one of the 
dwarves and revealed to him the secrets im- 
parted by the Maker. But to Frar, the Father of 
Dwarves, the first King, the Maker himself 
spoke. He told Frar of the mithril pinnacle and 
gave him the gift of wisdom to rule his people. 
And so the First Dwarves came into the world 
in full knowledge of their arts and crafts. 

Once the First Dwarves had learned these 
things, the Maker placed them in a land he had 
chosen for them on the earth, into the mines 
and caverns he had created for their entertain- 
ment and their joy. In these sacred caverns the 
First Dwarves multiplied and prospered, but 
some became restless and went in search of 
greater riches. These were Glordin Anvil Forg- 
er, son of Bardin Hammer Beater. . . 


The original text continues with a catalog of 
genealogies. As we resume the narrative, a 
thousand years have passed, and dwarfkind 
has expanded through the valleys and moun- 
tains of the land. 


—— TIU 


Chapter One e 7 


After the First Dwarves had been laid in 
their tombs, Blight came into the world. The 
god of Evil nursed a dark and ancient envy of 
the Maker' creation of the dwarves. In cheer- 
less caverns, which knew not the glow of 
dwarves' hearts, he labored to imitate the 
maker. Goblins, hobgoblins, evil giants, and 
other monsters he made, and dreamed that 
they would destroy the dwarves. In imitation 
of the Maker he labored, but he lacked the 
true water from the Trough of Life to mix with 
the stone and to make clean clay. And so they 
were tainted with his impurities. 

Not content to work his own will, his twist- 
ed tongue sowed discontent among the gods. 
A few began, like him, to imitate the Maker. 
So it was that elves, gnomes, halflings, and 
humans came into the world. But these races 
lacked the iron that had been forged into eve- 
ry dwarfs soul, they were sickly and pale to 
behold. To compensate for their deficiencies, 
the god of Evil bestowed magic. He had over- 
looked dwarven resistance to his evil, so it 
was used by other races against themselves. 

Then did the god of Evil send his creatures 
against the dwarves. The monsters were driv- 
en back many times, yet they bred quickly 
and returned again and again in ever increas- 
ing numbers. 

Now at this time the lesser races spread over 
the world above, and they learned of the 
wealth of the dwarves. And so, men and elves 
began to covet the dwarves’ jewels and miner- 
al wealth. Some sought to trade, others lied 
and used treachery to acquire dwarven trea- 
sures. An alliance of men and elves formed 
against the dwarves and they brought war to 
the mountain homes. Thus were the great 
gates of the dwarf kingdoms closed and the 
stone halls sealed from the evil of those be- 
neath the sun. 

The lesser races, not content to leave the 


8 * Chapter One 


dwarves in peace, began to dig into the earth, 
but knew naught of its ways. Their folly 
awakened the dragons. 

The dragons rose in the fury of broken sleep 
demanding tribute, but the lesser races could 
not satisfy their greed. They appeased the 
dragons with tales of dwarven gold, and told 
them that the mining of the dwarves had dis- 
turbed their slumber. Those who had traded 
with dwarves told what they had learned of 
the secrets of their realms. And so the dragons 
came to our ancestral halls and blew in the 
gates. Spitting fire, they slew many. Those 
who survived fled their inheritance into the 
world above. 

Since that day new homes have been cre- 
ated and we give thanks to the Maker for our 
increased wealth. But prophecy says that one 
day the caverns of the First Dwarves will be 
reclaimed. Then will we be free from the at- 
tacks of monsters and the ways of elves and 
humans. 

I, Marak Golden-Hammer, son of Jardak, 
Hammer of the Orcs, son of Makktat Elf-Slay- 
ORs 


The text again is given over to genealogies 
before ending with Marak Golden-Hammer's 
seal. 


The Creation of the World 


Dwarves are a long-lived race, 350 years on 
average, and so they are closer to the creation 
of the world than shorter lived races, such as 
humans. Dwarves have a clear idea of how 
they and the world came into existence and 
this in turn affects how they see themselves, 
the world, and other races. Many are the 
myths of creation. The Scrolls of Narvil, 
D debated, describe creation as an acci- 

ent. 


After the Creator had forged the world and 
made the dwarves, he became weary and 
slept. Some Lesser Gods, jealous of the Crea- 
tors skill, bound him as he slept. They heated 
the Great Forge to make races in their own 
likenesses, men, and elves. These they placed 
upon the world. 

But they fell to arguing among themselves 
over which part of the world should be given 
to their peoples. The clamor of dispute woke 
the Creator who saw what they had done and 
became angry. But they laughed at him and 
bound him fast and swore he would never be 
released. 

They fueled the fire of the Eternal Forge and 
continued to work. However, they did not 
know how to control the Great Forge and it 
became too hot. Great globules of molten 
stone flew into the air and fell to the earth. As 
they fell, the Creator breathed on them to cool 
them so that his people would not be injured. 
The force of his breath gave life to the molten 
fragments and these became dragons. 

And so, of all the creatures of the earth, on- 
ly the dwarves and the dragons were made by 
the Creator. Dwarves by the skill of his hands, 
and dragons by the power of his breath. 


The idea of a forge to create the world and 
its people is a typical dwarven myth. Marak 
and Narvil share the myth, though they name 
it differently. Marak speaks of a Maker and 
Narvil of a Creator. Dwarves in different 
parts of the world will have contrasting views 
of the creation myth, in far kingdoms even 
contradictory views. 

Some might believe the world was an acci- 
dent, a piece of rock that was chipped away 
from a greater one by the blow of a hammer 
or other force, and became separated from it, 
and developed on its own. 

The creation story is normally part of a 


greater cycle of creation, in which the world is 
created only to be ravaged, but ultimately 
saved, as Narvil foretold: 


The Creator tried to break his bonds, but 
they were too secure. He argued with the 
Lesser Gods but they would not listen. 'You 
cannot rule the world unless you can work the 
forge, he warned. 

Sometimes when the forge became too hot 
or too cold, he gave the Lesser Gods advice, 
‘add more air’, ‘use less fuel’. They laughed at 
him for his weakness in telling the secrets of 
the forge. Again he warned: ‘One day, the 
forge will burn beyond your control and the 
world will be seared by the heat of its flames. 
Then you shall free me or all will perish, even 
we. Then will I bring justice to the world you 
have abused. And my people shall be saved 
from your waging of war. 


Other myths exist. Gully dwarf priests be- 
lieve the world was swallowed by a giant 
monster, digested, and later reformed. 

Many foretell the destruction of all within 
the world. Some tell of a world ravaged by 
dragons who burned away all life with their 
fiery breaths. Only the races living deep with- 
in the world survived. Dwarves, orcs, and 
goblins, protected in their subterranean 
homes, escaped the wrath of the dragons. 

Different mythical beliefs may cause fric- 
tion between dwarves and other races and 
even among the dwarves themselves. Most 
mountain dwarves shun humans and believe 
in the quest for mithril, the metal of uncon- 
querable weapons. Irvak, a mountain dwarf 
teacher, tells children why. 


Beware the ways of man. He is greedy and 


avaricious beyond understanding. He seeks to 
possess wealth and riches, but most of all 


The Creation of Dwarves e 9 


power over others. It is our duty to resist the 
mad lust of humankind to dominate other 
races. Not all men are evil, but the worst are 
their leaders who lead them into wars against 
us. It is written that only through the power of 
mithril can we protect our halls. 


This mountain dwarf credo is rejected by 
Yakir, a gully dwarf priest. 


Learn to accept the ways of humans, we 
have no other choice. If a man kicks you, keep 
out of reach of his boot. If he spits at you, it 
will not break your bones. We breed slowly 
and must protect our numbers. If we fight 
mankind, they will eventually kill us all. 
Avoid wealth and riches, but if you must have 
treasure, hide it well in a filthy place where 
none would guess to look. Always avoid 
mithril and those who bear it. It is so precious 
that men are driven crazy with desire. 


What is the World? 


To most dwarves the world is made up of 
the dark places underground. The lands 
above are strange and remote. Almost cer- 
tainly they would have been formed or shaped 
by the gods of other lands. Most dwarves be- 
lieve that the world is made up of a number of 
parts created for different peoples. Dwarves 
were given the deep earth as their own, elves 
the forests, halflings the fields; each in their 
own place. 

Many believe that the whole world was 
originally given to the dwarves. Their legends 
contain tales of how parts of the world were 
taken away by other gods when they created 
the other races. 

Few dwarves could have any real knowl- 
edge of the shape of the surface of the world 
and their subterranean lives have caused them 


10 * Chapter One 


to develop some very strange beliefs: worlds 
shaped like a globe, an egg, a flattened disk, a 
jagged rock with a central pinnacle and even a 
great depression in the earth, among them. 

Many legends are concerned with the depth 
of the earth. Many deep dwarves believe that 
it is possible to tunnel so far down that the 
diggers emerge through the bottom of the 
world. Their priests and sages argue inces- 
santly as to what lies at the bottom of the 
word. Some claim that only empty space ex- 
ists beneath the world. Most deep dwarf min- 
ers believe that the world rests on a spike of 
gold that will one day make them rich beyond 
even dwarven dreams of avarice. Some 
duergar religions proclaim that the world rests 
on their dwarvish equivalent of hell and, if 
they dug through to it, they would gain the 
aid of the evil creatures who dwell there. With 
the aid of these allies, the duergar would de- 
stroy all who oppose them. 

Some think the world is a living organism 
or an intricate machine that needs careful 
maintenance if it is to continue. They believe 
each race was created to look after its part of 
the world, the dwarves caring for the under- 
ground realms. 


What Are the Celestial Lamps? 


Dwarves may have been created under- 
ground, but sooner or later they emerged into 
the world above. At that point they wondered 
about the lights moving in the sky, and what 
the sun was. The dwarves compared these ce- 
lestial bodies to fire beetles or bright gems 
rather than natural phenomena. Narvil's 
scrolls equate the sun with the blazing flames 
shooting from the chimney of the Great Forge. 


After their arguments, the Lesser Gods 
grew weary and slept. The Creator, bound 
and tied, remained vigilant. Through the 
night he watched the Great Forge slowly cool. 
When the flames were almost extinguished, 
and all was dark, he blew on the embers to 
light the fire. Red embers and fresh flames 
blew up the chimney of the forge and created 
the First Dawn. 


The heavens are interpreted differently by 
Or-Kazil, the gem-master and mystic who 
caught the light of the sun and placed it in the 
gems of Arbir. On the stone of his hall is an 
inscription. The difficult text is a masterpiece 
of dwarven poetry. 


Fear is the sun. The light. Carried by the 
watchman in daily traverse. 

Great is the light of his torch. It conceals his 
presence. 

Fear is the moon. Its ghostly light. Gray 
scarred surface, a spoiled gem. 

Bring me a jewel from the night sky. One 
that twinkles in the watchmans light as he 
walks behind the world. 

Set it upon my tomb. 


The Dwarven Gods 


In one creation myth the gods were made 
by the Maker into shapes he found pleasing. 
In other creation tales all gods descend from a 
common ancestor, and have since multiplied. 
Each god, at his birth, chose his own form to 
be superior, then created a race in his own im- 
age. The gods mated with their creations to 
make other gods, which then took their place 
in the pantheon. 

Tales abound of racial heroes elevated to 
godhood for great deeds or leading exemplary 
lives. Ancestor worship thrives among these 
heroes' descendants. 


The Dwarven Afterlife 


Like humans and other races, dwarves have 
their own view of the afterlife. The majority 
of dwarf warriors and priests expect to jour- 
ney to some great hall of heroes to wait for the 
day when they will be called upon to fight 
their enemies once again. Craft oriented 
dwarves look forward to an afterlife of hard 
work and other pleasures. The more pessimis- 
tic religions even claim that no afterlife exists. 
They do, however, say that a dwarf can gain 
immortality by leaving stories of his deeds, or 
by creating superior artifacts. 


————————————————————————————————————————————————————————— ————— 


The Creation of Dwarves ® 11 


E 12 ۰ 
T А. „МА; “We safe 


CHAPTER 


The Dwarf Subraces 


Maz > 65 


LM 


Basic information on dwarves can be found 
in the Players Handbook. This chapter pro- 
vides additional material about hill, moun- 
tain, sundered, deep, duergar, and gully 
dwarves. The differences between them may 
have been part of their creation or may have 
evolved over thousands of years of hard liv- 
ing. 

The following descriptions are provided as 
background only, not definitive guidelines. 
Although each subrace is given an alignment, 
individuals may have their own alignments. 
Similarly, the subrace does not depend on lo- 
cation. Mountain dwarves may be found liv- 
ing at depths normally associated with deep 
dwarves. Although they live at such depths, 
they are mountain dwarves, not deep 
dwarves. 

Chapter 4 describes adjustments to attrib- 


12 * Chapter Two 


utes and experience levels for each type of 
dwarf. Here we are concerned with origins, 
appearance, and the social and psychological 
differences between the subraces. 


Hill Dwarves 


Hill dwarves live in areas of rolling hills. 
Their strongholds are primarily located un- 
derground, though they frequently have out- 
posts on the surface. 

A typical hill dwarf stands 4 feet tall and 
weighs about 150 pounds. He is stocky and 
muscular. His skin is a deep tan or light brown 
in color and he has ruddy cheeks and bright 
eyes. His hair could be black, gray, or brown. 
He favors dark, somber, earth-toned clothes, 
and wears little jewelry. 

Hill dwarves are the most common 
dwarves. They have adapted well to life 
above and below ground. They claim that 
they have always lived in the hills, but they 
may have migrated there either by traveling 
above ground, or via underground passages. 
If by surface travel, they are probably de- 
scended from mountain dwarves. 

The alignment of the hill dwarves is usually 
lawful good, but there is no reason they can- 
not be of another alignment. So long as the 
majority remain lawful good, strongholds of 
chaotic, neutral, or evil dwarves will not un- 
balance a campaign and will give it more fla- 
vor and variety. 


Mountain Dwarves 


These dwarves live beneath the mountains. 
Their strongholds are usually isolated and 
they have little contact with other races. 
Mountain dwarves tend to like their privacy 
and actively discourage visitors to their 
strongholds. 


А typical mountain dwarf is, on average, 
41/2 feet tall and weighs about 170 pounds. 
His hair is a lighter shade than his hill cousin's, 
and his skin is slightly more red in color. 

Mountain dwarves claim that they are the 
first dwarves and all other dwarves are de- 
scended from them. They are wary of hill 
dwarves because of their closer dealings with 
humans, elves, and other races. They are clan- 
nish and keep to themselves. The majority are 
of lawful good alignment. 


Deep Dwarves 


Deep dwarves live far beneath the surface 
of the earth. They may always have lived 
there, or they may have gone deep under- 
ground to escape a dreadful cataclysm, ma- 


rauding monsters, or perhaps were driven 
downward by mountain or hill dwarves. 

Deep dwarves average 4 feet to 41/2 feet tall 
and weigh about 120 pounds. They are large 
boned, but leaner than other dwarves. Their 
skin varies from pale brown to light tan, and 
often carries a reddish tinge. Their eyes are 
large, but without the sheen of their surface 
cousins; in color, a washed-out blue. Hair col- 
or ranges from flame red to straw blond. The 
females wear their beards long, unlike other 
dwarf women (who are typically clean- 
shaven). 

Deep dwarves have little or no contact with 
the surface. It is too far for them to travel to 
the world above. They may be on friendly 
terms with hill and mountain dwarves, or 
they may harbor a grudge against them. They 
may avoid them because they consider them 


The Dwarf Subraces * 13 


tainted by the influence of other races. 

Frequently neutral in alignment, deep 
dwarves may also be lawful good or lawful 
neutral. They are just as conservative as hill 
or mountain dwarves, and consider them- 
selves to be the sole repositories of dwarven 
culture. 


Sundered Dwarves 


Unlike most dwarves, sundered dwarves 
live on the surface. Once hill or mountain 
dwarves, they were cut off from their kin and 
traditional ways of life. Where deep dwarves 
went downward, sundered dwarves were 
forced onto the surface. 

They may have been driven there by volca- 
noes or earthquakes which shattered their 
subterranean homes, or perhaps by orcs or 
dragons. Finding no safe haven underground, 
they were forced above. Some may even have 
chosen to abandon their homes and give up 
the subterranean life. 

Over the centuries sundered dwarves 
adapted as best they could, but abandoning 
their natural habitat has taken its toll. They 
have lost much of their racial pride, and tend 
to be a miserable and dirty people. They have 
developed an irrational phobia of dark places, 
yet are uncomfortable under the open sky, in 
rain, and with most surface conditions. 

Sundered dwarves may be found living 
among other races. They may make up the 
majority of the inhabitants in a ghetto, or 
small groups of them may be found living or 
adventuring with other races. 

Although their traditional homes are gone, 
sundered dwarves continue to follow the 
crafts, especially mining and smithing. They 
will work for humans or elves. 

With a height of 41/2 to 5 feet, a typical sun- 


14 * Chapter Two 


dered dwarf is slightly taller than a mountain 
dwarf, but he is of slimmer build, weighing 
about 155 pounds. His skin is usually lighter 
than a hill dwarf's, more pink than brown. His 
hair is dark with tinges of blue. Stronger than 
other dwarves, they gain a +1 bonus to 
Strength in character generation. 

Sundered dwarves are usually lawful neu- 
tral in alignment. Their society retains its tra- 
ditional lawful organization, but is more 
concerned with maintaining its laws than en- 
suring that all citizens share in its benefits. 


Duergar (Gray Dwarves) 


Duergar, or gray dwarves, live deep under- 
ground, sometimes below the deep dwarves. 
They rarely venture above ground, finding it 


painful, except during heavily overcast days 
or at night. The light does not cause them 
damage, but it does affect their ability to see 
clearly. 

A typical duergar is 4 feet tall and weighs 
120 pounds. Emaciated, they possess pasty 
skins and white or dull gray beards. Men and 
women may be bald, and those who are not 
usually shave their heads. 

Most duergar are lawful evil with neutral 
tendencies. Other dwarves find their ways re- 
pulsive. Duergar war on other dwarf races, 
and sometimes even join forces with orcs and 
other evil races to raid dwarf strongholds. 

They frequently compete with deep 
dwarves for living space and minerals. Usu- 
ally the duergar are bested in such struggles. 
Consequently, numerous duergar strongholds 
are exceptionally poor, having been driven in- 
to areas rejected by others. In some cases, 
however, this may have been to their advan- 


tage and may have led them to the discovery 
of hidden subterranean wealth which they 
could secretly acquire. 

Duergar may at one time have lived with 
other dwarves before they were driven into 
the deep for their worship of evil gods. They 
may have been created by the evil gods to bal- 
ance the races of lawful good dwarves. If that 
is the case, they will have a divine mission to 
eradicate or enslave all dwarves of good align- 
ment. 

Even though their society is evil, they still 
retain many of the social structures of hill and 
mountain dwarves. They are clan based, but 
their crafts are usually inferior to those of oth- 
er dwarves. 


Gully Dwarves 


Gully dwarves are the most degenerate of 
all the dwarf races. Lacking any racial pride, 
they make virtues of cowardice, filth, witless- 
ness, and dirty tricks. They live in abandoned 
strongholds, human villages, or in old mines 
and caves, in sewers, refuse dumps, or the 
slums of larger towns and cities. Elves will not 
tolerate their depravity. 

An average gully dwarf is 4 feet tall and 
weighs only 100 pounds. He is more slender 
than hill or mountain dwarves and has thin 
fingers. It is a status symbol for a gully dwarf 
to have a large pot belly for it displays his skill 
as a scavenger. 

Skin ranges in color from olive brown to 
light yellow, reminiscent of old parchment. It 
is often hard to determine a gully dwarf's skin 
color, however, because of the thick layers of 
dirt, scar tissue, boils, and scabs covering his 
skin. 

Their beards and hair range from a dirty 
blond to a dull, indeterminate color. Female 
gully dwarves have hairy cheeks, but no 


The Dwarf Subraces e 15 


beards. The eyes of both sexes are dull and 
lifeless, varying in color from watery blue 
through green to hazel. 

Gullys are renowned for being stupid and 
obnoxious. In spite of this they have high 
opinions of themselves and take themselves 
very seriously. They consider other dwarves 
to be “uppity” and "stuck up warts.” Gully 
dwarves will lie, steal, bully, and cheat each 
other and every other race they encounter. If 
attacked, they grovel, whine, run away, or do 
whatever it takes to avoid injury. If combat 
cannot be avoided they will fight half- 
heartedly, usually with their eyes closed. 

Because gully dwarves live in places that 
even orcs consider unattractive, they have 
few racial enemies. Scavenging most of their 
equipment from the junk heaps of other races, 
their "wealth" does not tempt others. Carrion 


16 * Chapter Two 


crawlers have been known to turn up their 
tentacles rather than eat a gully dwarf. 

Where do they come from? Other dwarves 
claim they are a cruel jest played by the gods 
on a mischievous stronghold of dwarves. Nar- 
vil believes that they are outcasts from a 
stronghold who later bred and infested the 
world. Perhaps they are the result of cross 
breeding between dwarves and gnomes, or 
dwarves and goblins. They may even have 
been the result of a vile experiment by an evil 
wizard. No one knows for sure, least of all the 
gullys themselves. 

They are always treated with contempt, al- 
though they may be employed to perform me- 
nial tasks, Enclaves of gully dwarves could 
exist in most strongholds where they would be 
little better than slaves. 

Gully dwarves are often of chaotic neutral 
alignment, but this diverse people may be of 
any alignment. 


CHAPTER 


Your Life As a Dwarf 


This chapter examines the lifestyle of the 
dwarves, the organization of the clans, and 
the family, the smallest unit of dwarf social or- 
ganization. 

The clans are the basis of dwarf society. A 
few dwarves follow professions which set 
them apart, but they are influenced by main- 
stream dwarf society, its values and struc- 
tures, though they may no longer follow 
these. 


Dwarf Clans 


Gareth, a human merchant, on the dwarf 
clans: 


The dwarves are a close knit bunch, all 
right. Make no mistake, entire families carry- 
ing out the same trade. It's almost unheard of 
for one of them to take up a different trade 
from that of their clan. They like to keep 
things in the family. Most of them don't differ- 
entiate between their clan and their guild. 

The dwarves like to keep things tightly reg- 
ulated. Every product has a fixed price and a 
time assigned to making it. 

Trying to bargain with them is like trying to 
batter down one of their strongholds with 
your head. No give and take. No matter how 
many of them you try to deal with, the price is 
always the same. Take it or leave it. It's the 
worst kind of restrictive trade. Worse than we 
had 'round here before the government 
stopped it. 

Still, I'll say one thing for them, you know 
you're getting quality goods every time. They 
never try to sell you anything shoddy or of in- 
ferior quality. It's a matter of pride for them. 


Dwarf clans are family groups which are all 
related to one another. All the members of a 
clan trace their lineage back to a common an- 
cestor. This could be the founder of a strong- 
hold, but it may go back only as far as the 


previous generation. 

Each clan specializes in a particular craft or 
skill: blacksmithing, mining, and weapon- 
smithing are examples. 

Different clans usually live close to each 
other so that they can trade skills among 
themselves. The relationships between clans 
are complicated and interdependent. The 
blacksmith clan needs to eat, so they trade 
with bakers and butchers. 

Most clans are concerned with the manu- 
facture of goods and services. They love to 
create things from raw material, and delight in 
the working of stone and metal. There are 
clans which specialize in military and political 
activities. Military clans include specialists, 
such as Hearth Guards, Animal Masters, and 
Sharpshooters. A political clan is usually re- 
sponsible for governing the stronghold and 
comprises the king's or rulers own family, 
plus other high born dwarves. These dwarves 
have undergone long apprenticeships in their 
chosen trade and are experts. Like other 
dwarves, they are convinced that they are al- 
ways right. They tend to be argumentative 
with outsiders, even with political families 
from other strongholds. 

In major strongholds, each clan practices its 
own craft. In smaller ones, a clan may prac- 
tice a number of crafts. Out of preference, 
dwarves practice one craft only, and that one 
skill may be honed to a higher level than 
would be possible if two, three or four skills 
were practiced. 

Dwarf priests are drawn from all the clans 
in a stronghold and may be the only dwarves 
who are not tied closely to their clans. Many 
priesthoods, like those concerned with arts 
and crafts, are a part of their clans and closed 
to all others. The priests who serve the black- 
smith's god, for example, are the spiritual 
leaders of that clan. 


АЉ 


Your Life As a Dwarf e 17 


Clans and Gullds 


The clans are regulated by guilds which leg- 
islate all matters of trade. Guilds specify 
weights and measures, quality, and the pricing 
of items. 

For example, the Guild of Bakers estab- 
lishes the weight, price, and ingredients of 
loaves of bread. All clans conform to these 
strictures. Those of other strongholds will 
have different strictures imposed by their 
guilds. This leads to situations where dwarves 
from one baker's clan will get into heated ar- 
guments with a baker's clan from another 
stronghold over which one’s loaf is of the cor- 
rect weight. This, combined with their stub- 
born nature and inability to compromise, is 
why dwarves are so wary of each other. One 
view is always right, and all others always 
wrong. 

(Note, however, that this does not mean 
that dwarves slavishly adhere to narrow pro- 
duction standards. Within the limits estab- 
lished by the guilds is tremendous room for 
individual expression. In fact, two loaves of 
bread which conform to the same guidelines 
may appear completely different to the unini- 
tiated. And each guild typically has a bewil- 
dering array of accepted standards to choose 
from for any specific type of item.) 

Even though the guilds control the business 
of the clans, they may not control the clan po- 
litically. This is left to elders who handle mar- 
riage arrangements, housing, and political 
dealings with other clans. The elders are the 
oldest dwarves in the clan. They are frequent- 
ly also the richest, having amassed large for- 
tunes over the centuries. Some may be guild 
masters, but this is not a requirement. When 
this does occur, differences between clan and 
guild become even more blurred. 


18 * Chapter Three 


New Clans 


New clans are formed when a dwarf decides 
to take up a different profession from that of 
his own clan. He may learn a new profession 
by apprenticing himself to another clan with 
the understanding that he will either become a 
member of the clan through marriage, or that 
he will practice his new trade at a different 
site. In both cases, he relinquishes member- 
ship in his original clan and swears never to 
reveal the secrets of its guild to others. 

If he has served his apprenticeship and does 
not marry into the new clan, he is obliged to 
move to a different stronghold or found a new 
one. His descendants follow his profession. 
Although still related by blood to his original 
clan, he is no longer considered to be part of 
that clan. Ties to his immediate family remain 
strong, and he may call upon them for aid if 
he needs assistance. If he is attacked or in- 
sulted, his brothers and sisters will quickly 
come to his aid, as will others of their clan, 
but he cannot expect their help in matters of 
trade and daily life. 


Clans and Society 


A sick or injured dwarf will be fed and 
cared for by his clan. Those in good health are 
expected to work in order to maintain the wel- 
fare and reputation of the clan. No dwarf 
would ever do otherwise. 

Someone who cheats or doesn't pull his 
own weight earns the disapproval of his fel- 
low clansmen. He will be warned and pressure 
will be brought to bear to ensure that he does 
not bring the name of the clan into disrepute. 
If he does not heed the warnings, he will be 
ostracized. An ostracized dwarf loses all bene- 
fits provided by the clan. The clan's guild will 
prevent him from working and confiscate his 
tools if it can. If he shows a desire to mend his 
ways, he will be allowed back into the clan, 


DLL M E 
ү! 


L Я | Aj) WR 


s 2 


Д 
t 


Т. 


ТТ 


1 Г П | A 
| м 2 


rji n Ma | | 1 
| AEN. ALTE 
Ke [| * дү. ©) mcer 11 
1 ) id | | 
кз А 1 р. к yit. 
Ní A а; : 
p 3 |" у LR SU 
7 y ) 
Wá vy m 
к БУ | it | | 
mw | 1\ ES ! ^а ' 
h № A ) W ; 
` ПОД 
А / 6» у. àv zum M S SA, 
You a E was 19 


and the guild will lift the ban. If not, he will be 
left to himself and even his family will shun 
him. 


Loyalties 


To an outsider, dwarf clans appear very 
complex, and the relationships between them 
highly convoluted, because they are. Dwarves 
would not organize their lives any other way. 
They know where their loyalties lie: first to 
the family, then to the clan, the guild, the 
stronghold, and then to any other strongholds 
to which the clan is allied. Dwarves are a 
proud race and maintain their loyalties. They 
are willing to defend each other, often to the 
death. An insult against one dwarf is consid- 
ered to be an insult against all dwarves. 


World View 


Most dwarves choose life underground. It is 
unusual for them to live in a surface settle- 
ment unless events force them up. 

Living underground for thousands of years 
has affected the world view of dwarves dra- 
matically. They believe themselves to be the 
dominant race in the world, the primary force 
of civilization and culture. This attitude ap- 
plies even in campaigns where other races are 
actually predominant. Dwarves who live be- 
low ground don't care who controls the land 
above so long as they are left alone. The sur- 
face races may as well be on another plane of 
existence. Dwarves see little reason to com- 
municate with other races unless an overpow- 
ering common cause exists. 

This dwarfcentric view is deeply rooted in 
all dwarves, regardless of where they live, 
even when among other races. Dwarves in 
such places may grudgingly admit that hu- 
mans or elves have achieved some level of civ- 
ilization and political power, but these are 
inferior to their own achievements. 


——————————————————————————————- —————— 


20 * Chapter Three 


Love of Stability 


Life underground has had a lasting effect on 
dwarf personalities. They have developed an 
instinctive love of earth and rock which repre- 
sent stability and permanence. Earth and rock 
may be tunneled and carved, arched and but- 
tressed, yet they remain always solid and reli- 
able. 

The sea, however, is ever changing, with no 
stability, and prone to tempestuous storms. It 
represents the force of chaos prevalent in the 
world above, and is the antithesis of the safe, 
womblike caverns that are home to the 
dwarves. 

Themes of solidity and reliability recur con- 
tinually in the dwarvish world view. The 
world is solid and constant, so life should be 
conducted in the same manner. This is closely 
allied to their predominantly lawful good 
alignment. 

Dwarves value law and order, and see these 
as part of the natural order of the world. Soci- 
ety should be as solid and reliable as the stone 
of the earth. Dwarves live 350 years on aver- 
age, during which time trees grow and die, axe 
hafts are made and replaced many times, and 
wooden structures decay and rot away. Com- 
pared to the strength and durability of metal 
and rock, other things seem very transitory. 
Building to last means building well. 


Dwarven Crafts 


Dwarves are expert craftsmen not out of 
some god-given ability, but because they serve 
long, exacting apprenticeships. Dwarves tra- 
ditionally serve a 25-year apprenticeship, 
which begins at the age of 25. To dwarves this 
is part of life. "A job worth doing, is worth 
doing well.” This attitude is deeply ingrained 
and explains why dwarves love to create 
beautiful objects and lavish so much time on 
them. They seek to create that which will last 


until time's end, and they have difficulty com- 
prehending why other races consider work a 
chore rather than an act of artistic expression 
to be savored and enjoyed. Dwarf craftsmen, 
because of their skills, produce weapons, ar- 
mor, and other goods more quickly than other 
races, yet of superior quality. 


Dwarves and Humor 


Dwarves are viewed as humorless, if not 
downright grumpy, by other races. This is a 
fair assessment. They do not often tell jokes, 
and have no appreciation of practical jokes. 
Society is based on law, order, and a respect 
for one's fellows. A dwarf does not abuse that 
respect by ridiculing another's dignity. 

Dwarves love to work and find pleasure in 
it. This pleasure is so spiritually uplifting that 
any attempt at humor appears facile. Those 
not content with work or their position in life 
may need such diversion, but humor is seen as 
insult. 

That's not to say that dwarves are humor- 
less, they have a very black humor concerning 
their racial enemies, but their sense of humor 
is very different from that of humans, for ex- 
ample. They do not find jokes about personal 
suffering or failure funny. They do find those 
based upon clever stories entertaining. The 
problem is that dwarven jokes tend to follow 
a standard narrative pattern. Because of their 
great length, endless genealogies, and catalogs 
of dwarven concerns, it is difficult for other 
races to maintain any interest in them. Dwarf 
comedians, telling jokes to other races, are 
frequently annoyed when audience attention 
slips after 15 minutes or so, or when the audi- 
ence has no concept of the importance of lin- 
eage in the joke's ‘punch paragraph!’ Races 
who have been subjected to dwarven humor 
fail to realize that it does not rely on the deliv- 
ery of one liners, but on the slow presentation 
of a chapter, if not an entire book. 


Wealth 


The dwarven concept of wealth is different, 
as well. Dwarves are attracted to objects for 
their intrinsic beauty, not for any commercial 
value. They prize fine workmanship, but 
know that craftsmen only augment what the 
earth has provided. 

Gold has the greatest significance to them, 
not for its value, but for its natural beauty and 
pliability. In the hands of a master craftsman, 
gold can be heated and poured into molds, 
beaten with a hammer, drawn into wires, or 
carefully filigreed with a chisel. Well made 
golden objects are treasured for workmanship 
and beauty. Poorly made objects are melted 
down to be remade as coins or other objects. 

Dwarves are aware of the scarcity of gold, 
and of its value. No dwarf has ever sold gold 
at less than its current value, a fact which has 
led other races to see them as mean and avari- 
cious. 

The dwarves' passion for gold is well 
known, as is their love of gemstones. They 
love to possess these treasures of the earth, 
polishing and cutting them into brilliant 
shapes that catch the light perfectly. Each 
stone is seen as a shining example of the beau- 
ty of the earth. To those who have left their 
underground homes, they are reminders that 
true beauty comes from within the earth. 

Dwarves are well aware of the value of 
gems. Where others value stones by weight 
and scarcity, dwarves value them according to 
their beauty. 

They have, however, no desire to own or 
collect pearls. As products of the sea and 
shellfish, they are not considered to be gems. 
Dwarves find them unattractive. Pearls lack 
the deep lustre of natural stones. Still, it is a 
foolish dwarf who does not realize that beauty 
is in the eye of the beholder. While pearls are 
worthless, dwarves are aware of their trade 
value. 


Your Life As a Dwarf * 21 


Gold and gems are their greatest loves, but 
other metals are important to them too. Plat- 
inum has many of the attributes of gold and 
is even rarer. Silver is easy to work and holds 
its shape better than gold. Its color is not as 
desirable, but it has its own appeal. Copper 
and other metals are also considered beauti- 
ful. While other metals are more common 
than gold, their comparative rarity lends 
them value. 

Iron ore is crucial to the dwarves. With it 
they make weapons, armor, forges, and tools. 
Iron ore veins are seen as the bones of the 
earth; bones bequeathed to the dwarves to be 
used for their own purposes. When forged 
with carbon, dwarves transform iron into 
steel which is durable and hard without being 
brittle. 


Crafts 


Though they would love to work exclusive- 
ly with gold and gems, dwarves are a practical 
folk. They know that iron and steel wear hard 
and are infinitely more practical as tools. 
Therefore they work extensively in iron and 
steel. Dwarf craftsmen produce some of the 
finest weapons, armor, and tools in any 
world. These goods, because of their quality, 
bring higher prices which are gladly paid for 
dwarven craftsmanship. All crafts necessary 
to ensure the strongholds are places of beauty 
are also worked. 


Individualism 


Dwarves willingly live under lawful institu- 
tions, respecting privacy and personal space. 
Law induces order, organization, and a stable 
society. The society reflects the natural order 
of the world, with everything in its proper 
place. Laws exist to be obeyed, not to be bro- 
ken. Society exists so that dwarves may be 


22 * Chapter Three 


free from unnecessary intrusions. 

Even though law is important, dwarves are 
fairly individualistic. They have personal 
views which they rarely make known to oth- 
ers, one reason they are seen as a taciturn 
race. However, when a dwarf thinks that his 
own views are not being heard, he will be- 
come grumpy, silent, and bear his distress sto- 
ically. 

This stoicism, and the desire not to grieve 
others, is evident in the way they view wealth 
as a private matter. Only powerful and re- 
spected dwarves are expected to display 
wealth openly, and even then ostentatious dis- 
plays are frowned upon. All dwarves are ex- 
pected to, and prefer to, keep their wealth 
hidden. 

It is considered bad manners to flaunt accu- 
mulated wealth. Such behavior is offensive 
and has caused dwarves who travel in the sur- 
face world to be deeply insulted. Wealth, par- 
ticularly gems and precious metals, are for 
personal delight. They should be carefully 
hoarded and displayed for one's closest family 
or cherished friends. It is a mark of acceptance 
and friendship among dwarves for one to re- 
veal his wealth. By doing so, he is not only 
sharing the joy of his possessions, but is say- 
ing, "You are my friend, whom I trust not to 
steal from me^ (The exception to this, of 
course, is wealth displayed through excellent 
craftsmanship in utilitarian items. A beauti- 
fully crafted and gilded axe with an inlaid gem 
or two is not ostentatious if it is functional. 
Dwarves claim this is not a subjective distinc- 
tion, but most other races find it hard to fol- 
low the reasoning.) 

Other races, and elves in particular, find 
this attitude very strange. Humans and elves 
delight in the display of their wealth, allowing 
others to admire its beauty. No dwarf would 
do such a thing. It's no surprise that dwarves 
are considered mean and greedy by races who 
cannot understand their motivation. 


Emotions 


A private people, dwarves often have diffi- 
culty expressing emotion. Their society is 
structured to make displays of anger, envy, 
jealousy, and hatred unnecessary. They are ca- 
pable of harboring grudges and hatreds, but 
these are usually directed outside of the 
stronghold. 

Dwarves rarely insult or distress each other, 
but other races distress them greatly. Not giv- 
ing them the respect they demand, enquiring 
casually about wealth, or making them the 
butts of jokes, are guaranteed to make 
dwarves angry. But this anger will normally 
only show itself as a scowl or a contraction of 
the brows. Other races have concluded, there- 
fore, that dwarves are humorless, not realiz- 
ing that dwarves do not release their anger. 
They allow it to simmer and increase until 
they explode, becoming their own 
stereotypes—grumpy, taciturn, stubborn, and 
unyielding. Dwarves often despair at the ex- 
tremely poor manners of other races. 


Attitudes Toward Other Races 


Dwarves are basically good people. They 
seek to harm no one, merely to coexist with 
them, or even better, to be left alone. Because 
of their good nature, dwarves have been 
known to persevere in the face of insults and 
inexplicable behavior. They have banded to- 
gether with men and elves in times of crisis, 
and have entered long term trade agreements 
of mutual benefit. 

They have little patience for the ways of hu- 
mans who simply do things wrong. Humans 
either waste time in petty pursuits or are so 
keen to achieve their goals, they are willing, 
almost eager, to be forceful and rude. They 
have no conception of the proper rhythm of 
the world, which is hardly surprising since 


they allow their lives to be dominated by the 
changes of night and day and the seasons. No 
sooner do they achieve something, than their 
children want to change it, replace it, or 
worse, lose interest in it entirely. 

Elves should know better, but they lack the 
simplest virtues of patience, diligence, and 
consistency. They are renowned for wasting 
their lives enjoying themselves instead of pro- 
ducing lasting goods. 

The differences between elves and dwarves 
have led to many disagreements. This usually 
occurred because dwarves considered agree- 
ments to be binding until the end of time, 
while the elves thought they were to last as 
long as they were useful. Entire strongholds 
may have been threatened or destroyed be- 
cause elves failed to honor a pledge. Perhaps 
some minor slight elves have forgotten, has 
been harbored and nurtured and passed on to 
the next generation. 

As fellow underground dwellers, gnomes 
are looked upon more favorably by dwarves, 
though the gnomes’ delight in black humor 
and practical jokes has caused friction. 


War to the Death 


Dwarves do not compromise when dealing 
with evil races, particularly when competing 
with them for living space or when their wel- 
fare is threatened. 

Dwarves detest drow, orcs, goblins, hob- 
goblins, and evil giants, eradicating them 
whenever found. Some strongholds are not 
above enslaving such creatures and forcing 
them to work in labor camps. 

Their hatred of evil races is as ancient as the 
dwarves themselves. Originally, wars were 
fought to determine who had the right to live 
underground, but the conflict has spread to 
the surface. In most game worlds there should 
be places where dwarves have been driven 


EEE! 


Your Life As a Dwarf ө 23 


from their ancient strongholds by orcs, gob- 
lins or other creatures of darkness. They now 
bear a burning and eternal hatred for them. 

Dwarves have no doubt that they are in- 
volved in a war of massive proportions. It is 
known as the “War to the Death,” for the 
dwarves have sworn to fight until their ene- 
mies are destroyed. 


Isolationism 


The dwarves' desire for isolation should be 
no surprise. Clannish by nature, many are 
suspicious even of dwarves from other clans, 
to say nothing of other strongholds. 

It is among mountain dwarves that isola- 
tionism is strongest. Mountain dwarves prefer 
not to deal with other races. They even have 
difficulty understanding hill dwarves. Some 
of them believe that hill dwarves have been 


24 * Chapter Three 


contaminated by living closely to other races; 
"hill dwarves have lost the rock of their 
dwarvishness.” 

All dwarves have a tendency to isolation- 
ism; to what extent that affects individual 
player characters depends on the background 
of the character. 


Dwarven Hearths 


Dwarven families are called hearths, a term 
which means “the place where children are 
born and raised.” The hearth is the basic unit 
of dwarf society. A clan may be composed of 
two to a hundred or more families, depending 
on its strength. 

A hearth includes grandfather and grand- 
mother, their children, and any offspring of 
their children. Family members share the 
same dwelling and are extremely close-knit. 


Unlike human or elf families, the dwarven 
hearth is not an insular unit, but part of a larg- 
er clan. Hearths within a clan are united by 
blood, and this links the clan together, making 
it more than just a collection of individual 
families. 

A hearth has a single line of descent. Cous- 
ins, aunts, and uncles are not part of the 
hearth but, as members of the clan, are close 
to the family. 

In some ways the hearth is a convenient so- 
cial organization rather than an important en- 
tity in its own right. Its primary purpose is to 
create a legal and social environment into 
which children may be born and to provide a 
stable environment in which children may be 
nurtured and educated in the rudiments of 
dwarf beliefs and conduct. At the core of the 
hearth is the institution of marriage. 


Marriage 


Dwarves are not romantics. The vast ma- 
jority of marriages are arranged by clan el- 
ders. Their main concern is to secure the 
continuation of the clan by ensuring that chil- 
dren are properly raised. They select suitable 
males from eligible candidates and ensure that 
the family has a warm and secure place to 
live. 

Dwarf society is about one-third female. 
Dwarves are monogamous, and marriages are 
entered into for life. That, along with the fact 
that males outnumber females about two to 
one, means that many males do not marry. A 
woman who loses her spouse will, after a year 
of mourning, remarry. Grandparents play as 
important a role in child rearing as do parents; 
elders find mates for widowed grandmothers. 

Divorce does not exist in dwarf society. 
Couples who have grown distant from one 
other will continue to share the hearth and the 
responsibilities of child rearing. Only death 
can end a marriage. 


Life Cycle of the Dwarves 


Dwarves reproduce very slowly compared 
to humans and orcs. The birth of twins is rare 
and triplets and quadruplets do not occur. The 
majority of families have only one or two chil- 
dren to care for. This is seen as a virtue be- 
cause it allows them to lavish their time and 
care on one child, and give that child a better 
education than would be possible with sev- 
eral. 

Until the age of 10, young dwarves are 
cared for within the hearth. During these for- 
mative years, they learn to speak and are 
taught the traditions and history of their clan 
and stronghold. The children socialize with 
others daily, often in a special clan nursery, 
while their parents and grandparents are at 
work. In the nursery the children are taught 
the rudiments of their clan's craft. Children 
from an armorer's clan will play with minia- 
ture suits of armor, those from a baker's clan 
will play with scales and bread dough. They 
are allowed to follow their natural instincts 
and are provided toy tools and allowed to dig 
tunnels and "hidey-holes" in the nursery. 

At the age of 10, more formal education be- 
gins. For eight hours every day the children 
learn runes and local history. Training in 
crafts begins with basic techniques and skills 
constantly drilled into them. Their education 
continues until their 25th year. 


Apprenticeship 


On their 25th birthday, great celebrations 
are held to mark the coming of age. The whole 
clan assembles to witness the event and join in 
the fun. The climax of the celebration arrives 
when parents deliver the youth to the clan's 
guild master and apprenticeship begins. Males 
and females both serve the same apprentice- 
ship, with no differentiation based on sex. 

Once the apprenticeship begins, the youth 


Your Life As a Dwarf * 25 


leaves his family hearth and goes to live in the 
apprentices' dormitories; if apprenticed to in- 
dividual craftsmen, to the craftsman's hearth. 
They may return home for one day a week, 
otherwise they are busy learning their trade. 

Dwarf apprenticeships are served for 25 
years. At the end of the apprenticeship, cele- 
brations are held to mark the dwarf's entry in- 
to adulthood and the acceptance of adult 
responsibilities. 


Marriageable Age 


Once dwarves have attained adulthood, 
they are eligible for marriage. Most female 
dwarves are expected to marry at this time. 
Females from military clans, such as Hearth 
Guards, frequently delay marriage until later 
in life. Few young males have much hope of 
marrying soon, as the clan elders invariably 
choose suitors who have plied their craft for at 
least 10 years after apprenticeship. Males, 
achieving adult status, will spend their time 
honing their skills and amassing wealth. 
Those from military clans may leave their 
strongholds to go adventuring, in the hope of 
acquiring wealth and reputation enough to 
enhance their chances of marriage. 


Adult Life 


Adult dwarves usually work 8 to 12 hours a 
day. Those with children are limited to 8 
hours a day and are expected to spend the rest 
of the time with their children. Female 
dwarves work the same hours until a month 
before they are ready to give birth. Pregnan- 
cies are 12 months long, and tradition dictates 
that the month preceding the birth be spent 
preparing the hearth for its new member. 

After working hours, the time of unmarried 
dwarves is their own. For the first few hours, 
unmarried dwarves usually seek their own 
solitude, and an opportunity to count their 


26 * Chapter Three 


wealth. Then they will visit the hearths of 
married relatives. Around the hearths stories 
are told, songs are sung, and children play. 
Single dwarves often congregate in one of the 
clan's great halls to feast and swap stories, and 
to be amused by entertainers with juggling, 
acrobatics, and other displays of skill. After 
an evening's amusement, they sleep 8 hours 
before rising to work. 


Dwarves' Diet 


Dwarves enjoy a wide variety of food, with 
a preference for meat. Hill, mountain, and 
sundered dwarves keep cattle, goats, sheep, 
pigs, and fowl. These animals are grazed 
above ground on upland meadows or pla- 
teaus. Sundered dwarves keep their livestock 
close to home, hill and mountain dwarves al- 
low their stock to roam. 

In high ranges, mountain dwarves keep ani- 
mals more suited to subterranean existence: 
giant lizards and beetles. Deep dwarves and 
duergar also keep lizards and beetles, and 
these are selectively bred for cooking. Gully 
dwarves eat anything they can scavenge and 
rarely breed or maintain any animals for 
food. The few gullys who have tried were so 
wretched at it their animals sickened and died. 

Although meat is a staple of their diet, large 
quantities of grains are also consumed. When 
possible wheat, rye and barley are grown 
close to the stronghold. They are harvested 
and kept in underground granaries. Many 
who live close to humans or halflings buy 
large quantities of grain to supplement their 
own production. 

Dwarves who live in the deep earth substi- 
tute various types of fungi for grains. Like the 
giant lizards and beetles, many of these fungi 
have been carefully bred to produce a wide 
variety of flavors to excite the palate. Most 
are very careful about the kinds of fungi they 
eat, but gully dwarves will eat anything. As a 


result, many gully dwarves suffer from indi- 
gestion and abdominal disorders. 

Dwarven cooking also makes use of vegeta- 
bles for flavor and variety. They do not eat 
spicy or heavily seasoned food, and conse- 
quently dwarven cooking tastes bland to hu- 
mans and elves, but the food is wholesome, 
consisting of thick stews served on broad 
slices of bread. While they are not voracious 
eaters like halflings, few humans or elves can 
eat as much as a dwarf in a single meal. 


Clothing 


Dwarven clothing tends to be heavy, som- 
ber in color, and serviceable. Made from thick 
wool or spun strands of fungi, it is designed to 
keep the dwarves warm in the unheated places 
in their strongholds. To the untrained eye, col- 
ors are uniformly drab grays and browns. 
Dwarven languages have over 500 words for 
rock, and almost as many to describe different 
rock hues. Particular shades of gray and 
brown reveal much about the clan and status 
of dwarves, if one has the eye to see. 

Boots, belts, and hats are usually made by 
the leather guilds of tanned leather from the 
hides of cattle or giant lizards. 


Music and Singing 


Dwarves love to sing. Many have rich bari- 
tone voices that echo splendidly about their 
chambered halls. Numerous great halls are 
specially constructed around natural acoustic 
properties. Except for solo performances by 
entertainers, singing is a group activity. On 
formal occasions songs written to display 
their vocal ranges are sung by massed choirs. 
On less formal occasions, any dwarf may sing 
within a hall or around the hearth. 

Their songs speak of the beauty of the 
earth, commemorate famous deeds of valor, 


or sing of the construction of a magnificent 
bridge or other edifice. Some are laments 
which tell of the death of a loved one or great 
hero, or the loss of a stronghold to monsters. 

The songs tend to be long and very well 
written. Most races would lose patience with a 
spoken story, but even elves have sat en- 
tranced for hours by the story songs of 
dwarves. 

Dwarves also enjoy playing instruments— 
flutes, horns, bagpipes, drums, and percus- 
sion instruments especially. They rarely play 
stringed instruments because short fingers are 
ill suited to plucking strings and picking out 
chords. Their music is either martial or 
mournful. Rarely will musicians accompany 
singers: music dampens the true resonance of 
the voice. However, special songs have been 
written, and are performed, for voice and in- 
strument. 


т 


Your Life As a Dwarf 927 


CHAPTER 


Character Creation 


Balur the Hill Dwarf delivers his “unbiased” 
opinions on his cousins. 


Pah! The only decent dwarves are hill 
dwarves. That's because ain't nothing funny 
or odd about us. Not like others. You can de- 
pend on hill dwarves. We keep to ourselves. 
We don't cause any trouble and we don't steal 
from decent folk. 

Not like those sundered and gully types. 
Steal the clothes off your own back, they 
would, if you didn't constantly watch 'em. 
Dirty too. Never known one of 'em to wash, 
or change his clothes either. They must sell all 
the clothes they steal. Probably to deep 
dwarves and duergar. 

Nasty those duergar. Name means "lurkers 
in the dark." Shifty, dangerous bunch. Like to 
ambush you. Pepper you with crossbow bolts 
and stab you in the back. They give us all a 
bad name. Bunch of murdering goblin lovers. 

Deep dwarves 're all recluses. Greedy they 
are, only live that deep 'cause they've tunnel- 
ed out all the gold above. That was our gold 
too! They stole it, but we can't prove it. Say 
they were there first. Liars. 

Now, mountain dwarves. They're not a bad 
lot. A bit uppity, but that's because they live 
in the mountains. We leave 'em alone. No 
point going all that way just to find you're not 
wanted. Most of 'em live behind locked doors. 

So there you have it! If you want to deal 
with dwarves, deal with us. We not only live 
closer to you, we don't harbor any grudges 
against other folk, except pansy elves, gob- 
lins, pigfaced orcs, and filthy hobgoblins. No 
fairer folk considering what we had to put up 
with! 


28 * Chapter Four 


Creating Dwarf Characters 
Selecting Class or Multi-Classes 


Dwarves may be warriors, priests, thieves, 
or multi-class warrior/priests or warrior- 
thieves. If you choose a multi-class character, 
familiarize yourself with their benefits and 
limitations in the Players Handbook. 

You can determine your character's class in 
several ways. You may choose which class or 
multi-class combination you want to play or 
you may generate the character's attributes 
and decide which character to play according 
to the die rolls; or your DM may assign you a 
character class. 

The advantages and limitations of each 
character class will be further modified by the 
subrace of your character. 


Ability Scores 


Any of the six dice rolling methods in the 
Players Handbook are acceptable. However, 
if you want to generate a specific class of char- 
acter, methods V and VI work best. They al- 
low you to custom design your character and 
are more likely to result in good ability scores. 
Don't make any adjustments to your rolled at- 
tributes until you've read the chapter on sub- 
races, the procedures are different from those 
of the Player's Handbook. 


Subraces 


The maximum experience levels that can be 
achieved by each subrace are listed in Charac- 
ter Class Maximum Levels in this chapter. 
Take a look at these before deciding on your 
subrace. If you wish to play a thief, see the 
Thieving Skill Adjustments Table. 


Subraces have advantages and disadvan- 
tages. A character of a subrace that has a large 
number of advantages will require more expe- 
rience points than usual to advance in level. 


Subrace Distinctions 


Each subrace has the following elements: 

Ability Score Adjustments are made to the 
character's attributes when the subrace is first 
selected. Add them to or subtract them from 
your rolled attributes and enter them on your 
character sheet. 

Ability Scores list the maximum and mini- 
mum abilities scores that a character of that 
subrace can have when created. A character 
whose attributes exceed the maximum is re- 
duced accordingly. If he does not qualify for 
the minimum attributes, he must choose an- 
other subrace. 

A character's ability scores may change 
through play, in which case he may exceed or 
fall below those given here. Initially, the char- 
acter's scores must conform to the those of the 
subrace. 

Languages are the languages commonly 
known by members of the subrace. Depend- 
ing on the campaign background, all dwarves 
may speak the same language or different lan- 
guages such as hill, deep dwarf, or duergar. If 
all dwarves speak the same language, entries 
such as "hill dwarf" are treated as dwarf. Your 
character always speaks his own native lan- 
guage. 

If you are using the nonweapon proficiency 
system, languages cost proficiency slots as de- 
scribed in the proficiencies chapter. A charac- 
ters own language does not cost a slot. 
Without the proficiency system, your charac- 
ter will know a number of additional lan- 
guages depending upon his Intelligence score 
(see Players Handbook). 


Infravision gives the range of the subrace's 
infravision in feet. 

Special Advantages that the race enjoys are 
listed here. Advantages common to all subraces 
are not included, but will be covered later. 

Special Disadvantages, such as fighting at 
penalties in bright light, are described here. 

Racial Enmities sometimes allow special 
combat modifiers to take effect when fighting 
specific enemies. 

Additional Experience Costs are levied 
against certain subraces because they benefit 
from a number of advantages, which make 
them more powerful than others. To balance 
this, they are required to earn additional expe- 
rience points before they can gain a new level. 
These additional experience point costs are ex- 
pressed in terms of percentages that need to be 
earned. A +10% experience cost indicates 
that members of the subrace must earn an ad- 
ditional 1046 experience points to increase in 
level. 

For example, deep dwarves require an addi- 
tional 10% experience points. A 1st level deep 
dwarf warrior therefore requires 2,200 experi- 
ence points to become a 2nd level warrior in- 
stead of the usual 2,000. A 3rd level deep 
dwarf thief would require 5,500 experience 
points to become a 4th level thief. 

In the case of multi-class characters, the 
character needs to gain the additional experi- 
ence points in both classes. A 1st level deep 
dwarf warrior/cleric requires 1,650 experi- 
ence points to achieve 2nd level priest status, 
and 2,200 to become a 2nd level warrior. 

Life Expectancy is an average, used to deter- 
mine initial and maximum ages of characters. 


للل 


Character Creation ® 29 


Hill Dwarves 


The most common dwarf, hill dwarves are 
found in many AD&D® campaign worlds. 
Methods for creating them are in the Player's 
Handbook, and are included here to complete 
the subraces. 

Ability Score Adjustments: The initial abili- 
ty scores are modified by a —1 penalty to 
Charisma and a *1 bonus to Constitution. 
The minimum and maximum ability scores 
are as shown. 


Hill Dwarf Ability Scores 

Ability Minimum Maximum 
Strength 8 18 
Dexterity 3 17 
Constitution 11 18 
Intelligence 3 18 
Wisdom 3 18 
Charisma 3 17 


Languages: Hill dwarf, common, gnome, 
goblin, kobold, orc. 

Infravision: 60 feet. 

Special Advantages: None. 

Special Disadvantages: None. 

Racial Enmities: Ogres, trolls, ogre magi, 
giants, and titans suffer a —4 penalty to hit 
hill dwarves. 

Additional Experience Cost: None. 

Life Expectancy: 350 years. 


Mountain Dwarves 


Mountain dwarves are also fairly common. 
Players who have existing mountain dwarf 
characters generated by using the Player's 
Handbook need only make minor adjust- 
ments to their characters. These include 
height, weight, and age. Otherwise keep the 
character as he is. 

Ability Score Adjustments: Initial ability 


scores are modified by a —1 penalty to Cha- 
risma and a * 1 bonus to Constitution. The 
minimum and maximum ability scores are as 
shown. 


Mountain Dwarf Ability Scores 


Ability Minimum Maximum 
Strength 8 18 
Dexterity 3 17 
Constitution 11 19 
Intelligence 3 18 
Wisdom 3 18 
Charisma 3 16 


Languages: Mountain dwarf, common, 
gnome, goblin, kobold, orc, ogre, troll. 

Infravision: 60 feet. 

Special Advantages: None. 

Special Disadvantages: None. 

Racial Enmities: Ogres, trolls, ogre magi, 
giants, and titans suffer a —4 penalty to hit 
mountain dwarves. 

Additional Experience Cost: None. 

Life Expectancy: 400 years. 


Deep Dwarves 


Deep dwarves live far under the earth and 
have superior infravision. 

Ability Score Adjustments: Initial ability 
scores are modified by а —2 penalty to Cha- 
risma and a +2 bonus to Constitution. The 
minimum and maximum ability scores are as 


shown. 

Deep Dwarf Ability Scores 

Ability Minimum Maximum 
Strength 8 18 
Dexterity 3 16 
Constitution 13 19 
Intelligence 3 18 
Wisdom 3 18 
Charisma 3 15 


т 


30 * Chapter Four 


Languages: Deep dwarf, duergar, drow, il- 
lithid, kua-toa, troll, troglodyte, svirfneblin, 
undercommon, sign language. 

Infravision: 90 feet. 

Special Advantages: Excellent saving 
throws against magical attacks and toxins. A 
deep dwarf figures his Constitution saving 
throw bonuses for a normal dwarf and adds 
an additional +1 to his bonus. 

Special Disadvantages: Deep dwarves suf- 
fer a —1 penalty to all rolls in bright sunlight 
or within the radius of a continual light spell. 
Light spells have no additional effect. 

Racial Enmities: Ogres, trolls, ogre magi, 
giants, and titans suffer a —4 penalty to hit 
deep dwarves. 

Additional Experience Cost: +10% experi- 
ence points to gain a new level. 

Life Expectancy: 380 years. 


Duergar 


Duergar, or gray dwarves, are typically 
evil, but player characters can be of any align- 
ment. Most good or neutrally aligned races 
are suspicious of duergar. 

Ability Score Adjustments: The initial abili- 
ty scores are modified by а —2 penalty to 
Charisma and a *1 bonus to Constitution. 
The minimum and maximum ability scores 
are as shown. 


Duergar Ability Scores 

Ability Minimum Maximum 
Strength 8 18 
Dexterity 3 17 
Constitution 11 18 
Intelligence 3 16 
Wisdom 3 18 
Charisma 3 15 


Languages: Duergar, deep dwarf, drow, il- 
lithid, kua-toa, troll, troglodyte, under- 
common, sign language. 

Infravision: 120 feet. 

Special Advantages: Duergar are stealthy. 
Parties or individuals at least 90 feet ahead of 
non-duergar gain a surprise bonus. This 
causes a — 2 penalty to the opponent's surprise 
rolls. If a door or other screen is opened, the 
bonus is lost. Duergar receive a +2 bonus on 
their own surprise rolls. 

In addition to the standard saving throw 
bonuses against magical attacks (see Saving 
Throws), duergar are unaffected by paralysis, 
illusion and phantasm spells. They are im- 
mune to all magical and alchemical poisons. 
Against natural poisons they gain the stand- 
ard dwarf saving throw bonus. 

In addition they possess the innate magical 
abilities of enlarge and invisibility. They can 
use each of these powers once per day. A 
duergar uses the enlarge ability as though he 
were a wizard twice his own level. At 2nd level 
duergar uses enlarge as though he were a 4th 
level wizard. He may use it only to affect him- 
self and whatever he is wearing or carrying. 

Special Disadvantages: Duergar are ad- 
versely affected by bright light such as sun- 
light or a continual light spell. They are not 
affected by the light of torches, lanterns, mag- 
ic weapons, light or faerie fire. 

Affected by bright light, his enhanced abili- 
ty to gain surprise is negated. Dexterity is re- 
duced by —2 and hit rolls are made at a —2 
penalty. 

In situations where a duergar is in darkness 
but his opponents are in bright light, his Dex- 
terity and surprise advantages are unaffected, 
but he suffers a —1 penalty to his attack rolls. 

Other dwarves distrust duergar and react to 
them at —3 penalty. If the character kits are 
being used, this penalty is cumulative with 


Character Creation * 31 


any incurred when choosing a particular kit. 

Racial Enmities: Ogres, trolls, ogre magi, 
giants, and titans suffer a —4 penalty to hit 
Duergar. These dwarves do not gain any ad- 
vantage when fighting orcs, half-orcs, gob- 
lins, or hobgoblins. 

Additional Experience Cost: Duergar re- 
quire 20% additional experience points. 

Life Expectancy: 400 years 


Sundered Dwarves 


Sundered dwarves are unlike any other 
dwarves, tending to be dirty and unkempt, 
though not as filthy as gully dwarves. They 
live on the surface and suffer from claustro- 
phobia. 

Ability Score Adjustments: The initial abili- 
ty scores are modified by a —1 penalty to 
Charisma, and +1 bonuses to Constitution 
and Strength. The minimum and maximum 
ability scores are as shown. 


Sundered Dwarf Ability Scores 

Ability Minimum Maximum 
Strength 8 18 
Dexterity 3 17 
Constitution 11 18 
Intelligence 3 16 
Wisdom 3 18 
Charisma 3 16 


Languages: Common, any dwarf dialect, 
elf, goblin, orc, gnome, kobold, halfling, hob- 
goblin. 

Infravision: 30 feet. 

Special Advantages: None. 

Special Disadvantages: Sundered dwarves 
are claustrophobic. A sundered dwarf must roll 
a successful saving throw vs. death in order to 
overcome his fear of the underground before he 
can enter dungeons, caves, and tombs. If the 
check fails, he may not enter. Once under- 


ground he must make a saving throw each day. 
If he fails, he will want to leave the underground 
by the most direct route. 

Underground, a sundered dwarf attacks 
with a —2 penalty to his rolls. Should he fail 
his claustrophobic saving throw, the penalty 
increases by —1 for each additional day he 
stays underground. If he fails to reach open air, 
he may attempt further saving throws each day 
to overcome his claustrophobia. These saving 
throws are made at the same penalty as the 
dwarf's current attack roll penalty. 

Racial Enmities: Sundered dwarves are 
harder for ogres, trolls, ogre magi, giants, and 
titans to hit. These races subtract —4 from 
their attack rolls when fighting sundered 
dwarves. 

Additional Experience Cost: None. 

Life Expectancy: 250 years. 


Gully Dwarves 


Gully dwarves are stupid. They are master 
scavengers and have raised groveling to an art 
form. They do not fight very effectively. Play- 
ers should bear these restrictions in mind 
when considering playing a gully dwarf char- 
acter. 

Ability Score Adjustments: The initial abili- 
ty scores are modified by a —2 penalty to 
Charisma and +1 bonuses to Strength and 
Dexterity. The minimum and maximum abili- 
ty scores are as shown. 


Gully Dwarf Ability Scores 

Ability Minimum Maximum 
Strength 6 18 
Dexterity 6 18 
Constitution 8 16 
Intelligence 3 12 
Wisdom 3 14 
Charisma 3 12 


Character Creation ® 33 


Languages: Gully dwarf, common, gnome, 
orc, goblin. 

Infravision: 60 feet. 

Special Advantages: A gully dwarf may at- 
tempt to grovel. Any time he is in a dangerous 
situation and is not immediately engaged in 
melee, he may throw himself on the mercy of 
his attacker, or faint in the hope that he will be 
ignored in the ensuing melee. This causes his 
opponents to make a saving throw vs. spells. 
If they are successful they may attack the gul- 
ly dwarf. If they fail they may not attack him 
for 1d6 rounds, but they may restrain him or 
tie him up. The saving throw is modified by 
the gully dwarf's level as shown on the Grov- 
eling Table. 


Groveling Table 
Level Modifier 
1-4 0 
5-8 =з 
9-12 -3 
13+ =з 


Special Disadvantages: Gully dwarves are 
usually stupid. A player character gully dwarf 
is an exception to the rule, being superior to 
others of his kind by virtue of his ability to 
think. However, players should not abuse this 
ability and allow their characters to concoct 
clever plans and schemes. Intelligence checks 
may be requested to see if the character could 
actually come up with such ideas. 

The chance of a magical item failing in the 
hands of a gully dwarf is increased from 20% 
to 40%. 

Racial Enmities: Ogres, trolls, ogre magi, 
giants, and titans suffer a —4 penalty to hit 
gully dwarves. 

Additional Experience Cost: None. 

Life Expectancy: 250 years. 


34 * Chapter Four 


Ability Score Modifiers 


Constitution Modifiers 
Dwarves are nonmagical and gain the fol- 
lowing bonuses to saving throws against poi- 


sons and magical attacks. 


Saving Throw Bonuses Table 


Constitution Save Bonus 
3 "s 
4-6 +1 
7-10 +2 
11-13 +3 
14-17 +4 
18-19 +5 


Deep dwarves add а +1 to all above bo- 
nuses. 


Magical Malfunctions 


Although they gain some benefits from be- 
ing nonmagical, dwarves suffer from it as 
well. If a magical item is not specifically cre- 
ated for the dwarf's class, there is a 20% 
chance (40% for gully dwarves) that the item 
will malfunction when it is used. A check is 
made each time the dwarf uses the item and 
affects only the current use; it may work 
properly the next time. This applies to rods, 
staves, wands, rings, amulets, potions, horns, 
jewels, and most other magical items. Also, 
DMs should note that a malfunction is not 
usually just a simple failure to function. The 
item usually does something dramatic and 
colorful, at the DM's discretion. 

Dwarves have learned to master some mag- 
ical items. Weapons, shields, armor, gaunt- 
lets, and girdles always work. 


Dwarf priests and warrior/priests may use 
clerical items without malfunction. 

Dwarves also recognize cursed magical 
items that malfunction in their hands. They 
may dispose of malfunctioning items. 


Underground Detection Abilities 


Since dwarves are essentially creatures of the 
underground, they gain certain detection abil- 
ities automatically: 


Detect or Determine... Roll 1d6 
Grade or slope in passage 1-5 
New tunnel/passage construction 1-5 
Sliding/shifting walls or rooms 1-4 
Stonework traps, pits, and deadfalls 1-3 
Approximate depth underground 1-3 


Combat Bonuses 


All dwarves, unless otherwise specified in 
the sub-class section, gain a +1 bonus to hit 
orcs, half-orcs, goblins, and hobgoblins. If the 
campaign background makes it possible, this 
bonus may be changed. Instead, the object of 
their hatred may be any other monster. The 
character may come from a stronghold which 
has never fought orcs, but does have a long 
history of warfare against drow and duergar. 
In that case, give the +1 attack bonus against 
drow and duergar instead. 

If this option is used, bonuses gained from 
character kits are added to it. 


Character Class Maximum Levels 


The maximum levels dwarves can achieve 
are restricted and are listed according to sub- 
race. Multi-classed characters may advance to 
the maximums of each class. 


Standard Class Limit Table 


Character Class 
Subrace Warrior Priest Thief 
Hill 15 10 12 
Mountain 16 10 12 
Deep 14 12 10 
Duergar 12 12 14 
Sundered 14 10 15 
Gully 8 8 16 


Exceeding Level Limits 


Characters may exceed the maximum levels 
and advance to any level, but they must earn 
two, three, or even four times the amount of 
normal experience points required for each 
level. This is an optional rule. 

Alternatively, a character may exceed maxi- 
mum level limits if he has extremely high abili- 
ty scores in his prime requisites. For example, 
a hill dwarf warrior is limited to 15th level. 
With a Strength of 18, he may be allowed 
three bonus levels and advance to 18th level. 
Bonus levels required are as follows: 


Bonus Levels Table 


Prime Requisite Bonus Levels 


14, 15 +1 
16, 17 #2 
18 +3 
19 +4 


Movement Rates and Encumbrance 


All dwarf subraces have a base movement 
rate of 6. If the optional encumbrance rules 
are used, these may be adjusted for dwarf 
characters. Because they are stocky and stur- 
dy folk, they are more adept at carrying 
heavy loads than other races. To simulate this 
with the encumbrance category rule, allow 
dwarves to reduce the movement penalty as 


Character Creation ® 35 


Sub-racial Thieving Skill Adjustments Table 
Hill 


Skill Mountain 
Pick Pockets — — 
Open Locks +10% +10% 
Find/Remove Traps +15% +15% 
Move Silently — E 
Hide in Shadows — — 
Detect Noise — — 
Climb Walls -10% -10% 
Read Languages -5% -5% 


follows: Light encumbrance has no effect on 
movement, Moderate reduces movement by 
one-third, Heavy by one-half, and Severe by 
two-thirds. 

If the optional system is used, the charac- 
ter's movement rate is determined using Table 
48 on page 78 of the Players Handbook, ex- 
cept that the modified movement rate is read 
from the next column to the left. Cross refer- 
ence the character's Strength with his encum- 
brance. At the top of the column is the 
movement rate, shift one column to the left 
and use the modified movement rate. For ex- 
ample, a dwarf with a Strength of 16, carrying 
100 pounds, has a movement rate of 5. 


Thieving Skill Adjustments 


The Thieving Skill Subracial Adjustment 
Table gives adjustments to be made to a char- 
acter's thieving skills by subrace. Those for 
hill and mountain dwarves are the same as in 
the Player's Handbook. 


Other Characteristics 


Each dwarf name consists of a prefix and a 
suffix. To create a name either select or roll for 


36 * Chapter Four 


Deep Duergar — Sundered Gully 
+5% +5% — +10% 
— — +5% =5% 
+10% +10% +10% +5% 
— +10% +5% — 
+5% +5% +5% -5% 
— +10% — — 
-10% — 1046 — =5% 
—1596 -15% -10% —2596 


a prefix and a suffix. Gender is indicated by 
the suffix, so male character names are gener- 
ated using the Male Suffix Table and female 
names on the Female Suffix Table. For exam- 
ple, a roll of 2 on the Prefix Table gives “Bal-,” 
and a roll of 1 on the Male Suffix Table gives 
us "-aim;' for the name Balaim. 


Dwarf Name Generator Tables 


Prefixes (1420) 
1 B- 11 Gil- 
2 Bal- 12 Gim- 
3 Bel- 13 Kil- 
4 Bof- 14 Mor- 
5 Bol- 15 Nal- 
6 D- 16 Nor- 
7 Dal- 17 Оу- 
8 Dor- 18 Th- 
9 Dw- 19 Thor- 
10 Far- 20 Thr- 
Male Female 
Suffixes Suffixes 
1 -aim 1 -a 
2 -ain 2 -ala 
3 -ak 3 -ana 
1 -ar 4 -ip 


5 -i 5 -ia 
6 -im 6 -ila 
7 -in 7 -ina 
8 -0 8 -on 
9 -Or 9 -ola 
10 -ur 10 -ona 


If you cannot create a name you like, try 
adding a "b “а” SEN eq" “К “m” sd РИ Hay or 
“z” between the prefix and the suffix. 


Height and Weight 


Either choose your character's height and 
weight or generate them randomly. They are 
listed on the table below for each subrace. 
Take the base score appropriate for your race 
and add the die roll modifier. Bizarre combi- 
nations should be ignored and rerolled. 

Females tend to be lighter and shorter than 
males so the base numbers for height and 
weight are divided into male/female values. 
There is a broad range in each category. 


Average Height and Weight Table 


Starting Age and Life Span 


Choose or generate a character's starting 
age and possible life span using the table be- 
low. To determine starting age, add the die 
roll to the base starting age. You will only 
have an idea of how long he is likely to live, 
assuming he dies of old age! 

As an alternative you may play an older 
character, one who has been drawn or forced 
into adventuring late in life. Your character 
starts at 1st level, but his ability scores are ad- 
justed to reflect his greater age as shown on 
the Aging Effects Table. 

These adjustments may result in either ex- 
ceeding or falling below the minimum and 
maximum abilities required for your subrace, 
but this is not a problem as long as the charac- 
ter met them before he aged. 


Appearance 


Now decide on the appearance of the 
character—hair and beard color, eyes, skin, 


Race Height (in.) Weight (Ibs.) and so forth. Look at the typical appearances 
Deep 45/42+2d6 100/80 +4d10 given for each subrace of dwarf for an idea of 
Duergar 41/40+2d6 95/75 +5410 what the character might look like. Each of 
Gully 40/38+2d6 — 80/65 +4410 the optional character kits contains а suggest- 
Hill 43/41+1d10 130/105 +4410 ed distinctive appearance to further flesh out 
Mountain 49/47+1d10 145/115 +5410 any dwarf character. 
Sundered 50/48+1410 135/110 +3d12 
Aging Effects Table 

Starting Middle Old Venerable Maximum 
Race Age Аве" Аве" * Age*** Age 
Deep 45 +3412 140 187 280 * 2d100 
Duergar 40 * 4d6 150 200 300 +24100 
Сшу 30 +2412 100 134 200 +5420 
Hill 40 * 5d6 125 167 250 * 2d100 
Mountain 50 +6d6 150 200 300 * 2d100 
Sundered 25 +444 100 134 200 +5420 


* —1 Str/Con; +1 Int/Wis 
** —2 Str/Dex; -1 Con; +1 Wis 


*** —1 Str/Dex/Con; +1 Int/Wis 


Character Creation ® 37 


CHAPTER 


Proficiencies 


Proficiency Slots 
Weapon Nonweapon 

Proficiencies Proficiencies 
Group Initial f Levels 
Warrior 4 3 
Priest 2 4 
Thief 2 4 
Warrior/Priest 4 3 
Warrior /Thief 4 3 


Detection 
Proficiencies 
Penalty Initial #Levels Initial #Levels 
-—: 3 3 5 4 
=з 4 3 5 4 
x 3 4 5 3 
-2 4 3 5 4 
"2 3 3 5 3 


Proficiencies are the best way to quantify 
the various skills that distinguish dwarves 
from each other. 


Acquiring Proficiencies 


How weapon and nonweapon proficiency 
slots are acquired is described on page 51 of 
the Player's Handbook. Detection proficiency 
slots are described below. 

Refer to the following table when it is neces- 
sary to determine the number of proficiency 
slots a character starts with, the number avail- 
able, and at what levels new ones are ac- 
quired. 


Weapon Proficiencies 
and Specialization 


Only single-class fighters may have weapon 
specialization. Multi-class fighter/priests and 
fighter/thieves have other benefits to offset 
their lack of specialization. The Complete 
Fighters Handbook contains many new and 
useful forms of weapon specialization that 
will enhance the abilities of dwarf warriors. 
You do not need to use it in your campaign, 
the AD&D® game works perfectly well with- 
out the optional rules, but they are recom- 
mended. 


38 * Chapter Five 


Nonweapon Proficiency Groups 


Nonweapon proficiencies are used to add 
more depth to a character and to assess his 
chances of success at certain tasks. Dwarves 
come from a different cultural background 
than humans and other races so they do not 
automatically learn their nonweapon profi- 
ciencies from the same groups. Dwarves may 
draw proficiencies from the groups below, in- 
stead of those on pages 54-55 of the Player's 
Handbook. 

The number of slots needed for proficien- 
cies and the ability modifier may differ from 
those in the Players Handbook. These 
changed costs and ability modifiers are used 
for dwarf characters only. 

Initial nonweapon proficiencies have been 
selected for the various dwarf kits in the next 
chapter. If you are using the kits, the tables be- 
low are only useful when the character gains 
experience and becomes eligible for additional 
slots. If you design your own kits, or do not 
use kits, these tables will still prove useful. 

There are six dwarf nonweapon proficiency 
groups: General, Crafts, Warrior, Rogue, 
Priest, and Special Background. When a play- 
er selects a proficiency from those categories 
listed under "Proficiency Groups,” it requires 
the number of proficiency slots listed. If a pro- 
ficiency is selected from any other category, it 


will require one additional 
proficiency slot beyond the 
number listed. A proficiency 
not listed in any of the dwarf 
groups may still be purchased 
(from the Players Handbook 
or other supplement), but at 
the cost of two additional pro- 
ficiency slots 

General Group: This group 
is available to all dwarves. It is 
part of their background and 
training. 

Craft Group: The craft 
group represents the clan- 
based nature of dwarf society 
and the long apprenticeships 
that young dwarves undergo 
before becoming adults. A 
dwarf may choose one craft at 
no cost in proficiency slots. 

Warrior, Priest, and Rogue 
Groups: Multi-classed charac- 
ters may select proficiencies 
for each of their classes. A 
warrior/priest could choose 
from both Warrior and Priest 
groups. 

Special Background: This 
group is only used if the dwarf 
is from an unusual back- 
ground, such as dwarves who 
live in a stronghold subject to 
heavy flooding during the 
spring thaw. These dwarves 
would have learned to swim to 
avoid drowning when their 
tunnels filled with water. They 
may also have become expert 
boatwrights and boat han- 
dlers. 


Dwarf Nonweapon Proficiency Groups 
GENERAL 


Proficiency Slots 
Animal Handling 
Appraising 


Artistic Ability 


Endurance 

Etiquette 

Fire-Building 

Fungi Recognition 
Heraldry 

Languages, Modern 
Local Dwarf History 
Navigation, Underground 
Riding, Land-Based 
Rope Use 

Sign Language 
Signalling 

Singi 

Slow Respiration 
Sound Analysis 
Survival, Underground 
* Underground only. 


nnm 


CRAFTS 


Proficiency Slots 
Agriculture 
Animal Training 
Armorer 
Blacksmithing 
Bowyer/Fletcher 
Brewing 
Carpentry 
Cobbling 
Cooking 
Engineering 
Gem Cutting 


PNR Re ee نر نز نریم‎ 


Relevant 
Ability 
Wisdom 
Intelligence 
Wisdom 
Dexterity 
Wisdom 
Intelligence 
Constitution 
Charisma 
Wisdom 
Intelligence 
Intelligence 
Intelligence 
Charisma 
Intelligence 
Wisdom 
Dexterity 
Intelligence 
Intelligence 
Charisma 


NA 
Wisdom 
Intelligence 


Relevant 
Ability 
Intelligence 
Wisdom 
Intelligence 


Strength 
Dexterity 
Intelligence 
Intelligence 
Dexterity 


Check 
Modifier 
= 
+3 


Check 
Modifier 


Proficiencies ® 39 


Herbalism 
Leatherworking 
Locksmithing 
Mining 

Pottery 
Seamstress/Tailor 
Smelting 
Stonemasonry 
Weaponsmithing 
Weaving 


WARRIOR 


Proficiency 
Alertness 
Animal Lore 
Blind-fighting 
Gaming 


Hunting 
Intimidation 


Mountaineering 
Survival 
(Hills, Mountains) 


THIEF 


Proficiency 
Alertness 
Blind-fighting 
Disguise 
Forgery 

Lip Reading 


Local History 
Juggling 


Musical Instrument 
Pest Control 


Ventriloquism 


rrr Ӱт 
40 * Chapter Five 


HON EE EE ee ep 


н н 


Slots 


M oH e e ык E EE ыу ы рз ш 


Intelligence 
Intelligence 
Dexterity 
Wisdom 


Strength 
Intelligence 
Intelligence 


Relevant 
Ability 
Wisdom 
Intelligence 


Charisma 
Wisdo: 
Strength/ 
Charisma 
NA 

NA 


Relevant 
Ability 
Wisdom 
NA 
Charisma 
Dexterity 
Charisma 
Intelligence 
Charisma 
Dexterity 


Dexterity 
Wisdom 


Dexterity 
Intelligence 


Check 
Modifier 


Nonweapon 
Proficiencies 


New proficiencies are de- 
scribed here, with additional 
information about dwarf pro- 
ficiencies. Those not described 
are unchanged from the de- 
scriptions in the Player's 
Handbook. 


Alertness 


A character with this profi- 
ciency is able to instinctively 
recognize signs of disturbance 
in the immediate vicinity. This 
gives a +1 bonus on the char- 
acter's surprise rolls when he 
makes a successful proficiency 


check. 
Animal Lore 


The effectiveness of this 
proficiency varies according 
to the background of the 
dwarf. A dwarf who has lived 
his entire life underground 
knows little about animals liv- 
ing above ground, but he will 
be very knowledgeable about 
those underground. In this 
case, a dwarf gains a +1 mod- 
ifier to his Intelligence when 
dealing with underground ani- 
mals, but has no knowledge of 
surface creatures. А sundered 
dwarf who fears the under- 
ground may only have knowl- 
edge of above ground animals. 


Dwarves with backgrounds 
of trade with other races or 
who live both below and 
above ground, may have nor- 
mal animal lore proficiency 
with no modifiers, knowing 
both above and below-ground 
animals. 

A character may imitate the 
calls and cries of animals as 
described in the Player's Hand- 
book. 


Armorer 


Dwarves are more adept at 
making armor than other 
races. Their armorers are the 
finest in any world and their 
special skills are carefully hid- 
den from outsiders. They are 
capable of producing high 
quality armor very quickly. 
Instead of 2 weeks per level of 
AC below 10, a dwarf armorer 
requires only 1!/2 weeks per 
point of AC below 10. While a 
human armorer takes 10 
weeks to make a suit of chain 
mail, a dwarf armorer labors 
only 71/2 weeks (5 X 11/2). 

The Complete Fighter's 
Handbook contains extensive 
rules about the use of the ar- 
morer proficiency and is rec- 
ommended to any character 
interested in utilizing this pro- 
ficiency to the fullest. 


PRIEST 


Proficiency 


Ancient History 


Astrology 
Healing 


Herbalism 
Languages, Ancient 
Local History 
Musical Instrument 
Reading/Writing 


Religion 
Spellcraft 


SPECIAL BACKGROUND 


Proficiency 
Boating 
Boatwright 
Fishing 


Mountaineering 


Navigation 


Riding, Airborne 


Survival 
Swimming 


Weather Sense 


Ree Re تم تم‎ NN دد‎ 


Slots 


н mr IN MIB Ree 


Relevant 
Ability 
Intelligence 
Intelligence 
Wisdom 


Intelligence 
Intelligence 


Charisma 
Dexterity 
Intelligence 
Wisdom 
Intelligence 


Relevant 
Ability 
Wisdom 
Intelligence 
Wisdom 
NA 
Intelligence 
Wisdom 
Intelligence 
Strength 
Wisdom 


Check 
Modifier 
0 
0 
2 
و‎ 
0 
0 
=2 
+1 
0 
= 2 


———————————————— OO 


Proficiencies ® 41 


Astrology 


Astrology is only available to dwarves who 
live on or near the surface of the world. Deep 
dwarves and others who do not have easy ac- 
cess to the surface do not have the astrology 
proficiency. In order to use astrology, you 
have to see the stars. 


Blind-fighting 


Blind-fighting is cheaper for dwarves; they 
only gain the benefit when fighting invisible op- 
ponents. Their inherent infravision allows them 
to fight effectively, even in total darkness. 


Boating 


A character with the boating proficiency is 
needed to guide a boat down a rapid stream 
and to reduce the danger of capsizing a canoe 
or kayak. He also assures the maximum speed 
of a boat. 


——-—————-_ ———-—— 


42 * Chapter Five 


This proficiency is distinct from Navigation 
and Seamanship, which apply to ships on 
oceans, seas, and large lakes. 


Boatwright 


The boatwright proficiency allows a char- 
acter to construct all kinds of watercraft up to 
a maximum length of 60 feet. Larger vessels 
cannot be built. 

The time required to build a boat depends on 
size. As a general guide, a boat requires one 
week of construction time per foot of length. 
Two characters with the boatwright proficiency 
cut this time by half; three reduce it to one- 
third. A maximum of one boatwright per five 
feet of length can work on the same vessel. 

The basic boat includes hull, masts (if appli- 
cable), deck, and benches as required. Fea- 
tures such as a cabin or a sealed hold add 
about a week apiece to complete. Characters 
without the boatwright proficiency can aid 


the boatwright in construction, but two such 
characters equal the time savings that one ad- 
ditional skilled boatwright could provide. 


Direction Sense 


Dwarves receive a +2 bonus to their modi- 
fier when using their direction sense under- 
ground. They may use it above ground, but at 
a ~2 penalty to Wisdom. Sundered dwarves 
should reverse these modifiers to reflect their 
fear of the underground. 


Dwarf Runes 


Dwarf runes are the basic dwarven alpha- 
bet and are taught to all young dwarves as a 
part of their basic education. Depending on 
the campaign background, runes may have 
been a gift (rom the gods, a creation of the 
dwarves themselves, or an altered form of 
some other written language. Dwarves will 
still claim runes to be an intrinsic part of their 
cultural heritage, and they may take offense if 
accused of having copied runes! 

Dwarven runes are found engraved in stone 
and only rarely written on such transitory ma- 
terials as parchment, cloth, or paper. They are 
used to denote ownership, give warnings of 
nearby dangers, and record history. The 
tombs of dwarves who have been properly in- 
terred, as opposed to hasty burial during bat- 
tle, are engraved with runes which tell the 
occupant's clan, parentage, children, and 
deeds of his life. In the absence of proper in- 
terment, dwarves erect stone monoliths or en- 
grave entire cavern walls depicting the deeds 
of their dead. These list the clans, the names 
of those who died, and the nature of their 
deaths. The numbers of slain enemies are 
greatly detailed. 

Dwarven runes are not a phonetic form of 
writing, but a conceptual one, with each rune 
delineating an idea or implying a range of 
ideas depending on placement. А single rune 


might convey pages of human or elf writing or 
be as simple as a sign saying "stairs." It's a mat- 
ter of knowing what the rune means and how 
it is to be interpreted in context. Dwarven 
runes do not contain conjunctions or pro- 
nouns, but proper names are represented by 
altering an existing rune. This makes runes 
difficult for other races to understand, and 
dwarves consider themselves superior to races 
who cannot read even the most simple of 
them. Only dwarves know them at no cost. 


Endurance 


A hardy and resilient race, dwarves auto- 
matically gain the Endurance proficiency (see 
the Players Handbook, page 58) at no cost. 


Fungi Recognition 


Although they prefer not to, dwarves some- 
times have to survive on a diet of fungi. They 
would rather use these as supplements to their 
regular diet, but when times are hard, or when 
involved in an extended underground expedi- 
tion, it is useful to be able to tell edible fungi 
from the poisonous or unwholesome vari- 
eties. Approximately 50% of underground 
fungi are poisonous. They may cause an upset 
stomach or be so poisonous they cause death. 
It is impossible to harvest edible fungi without 
the fungi identification proficiency. 

If the character has plenty of light and an 
opportunity to study the fungus in question 
closely for 10 minutes, no proficiency check is 
required. If he is unable to see the fungus 
properly, often the case when using infra- 
vision, or has to make a hasty decision about 
edibility, a proficiency check must be made. 


Gem Cutting 


A dwarf with this proficiency may cut 2d8 
gems per day instead of 1d10. He also has a 
greater chance of increasing the value of a 


Proficiencies * 43 


gem. If a dwarf rolls a 1 or a 2 during cutting, 
he increases the value of the gem to that of the 
next most valuable class (see page 134 of the 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide). For example, 
Duram is cutting a fancy stone with a finished 
value of 100 gp. He does an exquisite job and 
actually increases its value to that of a pre- 
cious gem with a value of 500 gp. 

Any character who fails a gem cutting roll 
cuts the gem, but does so poorly and reduces 
its value to the next lower category. Duram, 
flushed with success, tries his hand at a pre- 
cious stone with a finished value of 500 gp but 
he slips with his chisel and reduces its value to 
that of fancy gem (value 100 gp). 

A character who rolls a 20 when cutting a 
gem splits it in half and ends up with two uncut 
gems with a combined value one class lower 
than that of the original gem. Duram starts one 
more gem. It has a value of 50 gp. He places his 
cutting clamp, over tightens the jaws, and splits 
the gem in half (he rolls a 20!). He now has two 
uncut gems with a value of 5 gp each. 


Intimidation 


This proficiency allows a character to in- 
timidate others to do as he wishes. It involves 
an implicit threat of violence. Threatened 
NPCs will do as they are told, but will harbor 
resentments against him. If an opportunity 
arises for intimidated NPCs to revenge them- 
selves they will do so. 

Intimidation may be attempted with one of 
two abilities, Strength or Charisma. If intimi- 
dating by Strength, the character is threaten- 
ing immediate, personal, bodily harm. If by 
Charisma, the intimidation consists of subtle 
threats, which need not be physical. No mat- 
ter which ability is used, the intimidation at- 
tempt is always modified by the difference 
between the experience level of the intimidat- 
ing character and the experience level or Hit 
Dice of the victim(s). Creatures with less than 
one Hit Die are considered to have a level of 0. 


44 * Chapter Five 


A 6th level warrior attempting to intimidate 
an НО1 -1 goblin would gain a +6 bonus to 
his intimidation ability. Against a 10th level 
human warrior, our 6th level dwarf's intimi- 
dation proficiency would be reduced by —4. 
Higher level characters are less likely to be in- 
timidated. 

When a character is attempting to intimidate 
more than one character, and all are within 1-4 
experience levels of each other, the level is the 
average of them. If one or more characters are 
over five experience levels above the others, 
the highest experience level is used, the other 
characters gaining confidence from the pres- 
ence of a powerful individual. 

When attempting to intimidate more than 
one, the number of characters is used as a neg- 
ative modifier. If a dwarf is attempting to in- 
timidate five goblins, his intimidate 
proficiency is reduced by —5. 

Intimidation may only be used against in- 
telligent creatures; slimes and shambling 
mounds are too stupid to notice that someone 
is trying to intimidate them. 

Player characters are never forced to sub- 
mit to intimidation, and may choose how they 
are going to react to an attempt. 


Local Dwarf History 


This proficiency is different from the local 
history proficiency, a character with this pro- 
ficiency is only knowledgeable about dwarf 
history. This is chiefly concerned with lin- 
eages and events affecting dwarves. It deals 
with the founders of the clans and strong- 
holds, and traces the descendants to the 
present. The battles and events of clan and 
stronghold are known, as well as the fates of 
those who have left to establish new homes or 
who perished while adventuring. 

The extent of geographical knowledge is 
dependent on the campaign background. 
Those who have had no contact with the 
world above may be totally ignorant of what 


lies on the surface, but will have extensive 
knowledge of their own stronghold. Those 
whose relatives have established new strong- 
holds or are members of such strongholds 
would have knowledge of the area between 
the two and some knowledge of the geogra- 
phy surrounding them. Even so, most 
dwarves, unless they live in close proximity to 
other races, have a very hazy idea of where 
the sea is, for example. 

While a character with this proficiency 
knows dwarf history, his knowledge of the 
history of other races is minimal. If humans 
fought a great battle against each other, a 
dwarf who did not live with humans is not 
likely to have heard of it. If the battle in- 
volved dwarves he would probably know of 
it. If it involved dwarves from his own strong- 
hold or clan, he would have extensive knowl- 
edge of the events leading to it and the course 
of the battle. As with some other dwarf profi- 
ciencies the exact extent of an individual's 
knowledge is determined by his background. 

The local dwarf history proficiency may be 
used to entertain other characters. When so 
engaged, he gains a +2 bonus to his Charisma 
while dealing with dwarves. With other races 
he does not gain the bonus, because dwarf sto- 
ries tend to be dull, slow moving and overly 
concerned with who is related to whom, their 
places of origin, and all of the places the he- 
roes' ancestors founded along the way. Trying 
to tell a dwarf story to hostile beings is likely 
to incite them to violence. Orcs will not be im- 
pressed, even with the best-told dwarf tale. 


Locksmithing 


With the locksmithing proficiency a charac- 
ter can make and repair all kinds of mechani- 
cal locks. Thieves with this proficiency gain a 
1046 bonus to their lockpicking skill, because 
they are intimately familiar with the internal 
structure and working of locks. 


The Players Handbook provides basic in- 
formation on mining and this proficiency is 
described in detail in Chapter 8. Mining oper- 
ations are usually at the heart of dwarf strong- 


holds. 


Modern Languages 


The modern languages dwarves may learn 
are determined by the campaign background. 
If a character lives in a stronghold which has 
had no contact with goblins, he is unlikely to 
have learned goblin. The languages for 
dwarves in the Players Handbook should be 
considered as suggestions only. Dwarves may 
learn any language that suits their background. 
Suggested languages are: deep tongue (under- 
common), drow, elf, gnome, goblin, local hu- 
man common tongue, kobold, orc, troll, ogre. 


Pest Control 


This proficiency is used to keep dwarf 
strongholds free of pests like rats, carrion 
crawlers, jermalaines, kobolds, and other 
small creatures. Similar to the set snares profi- 
ciency, it is concerned with catching under- 
ground pests and does not use snares. Traps 
are set to trigger metal cages, drop nets, or 
iron doors which shut off individual tunnel 
sections. Spring traps or small deadfalls may 
be rigged (damage 1d6 maximum) using this 
proficiency. There is no —4 modifier when us- 
ing pest control to trap larger creatures. 

Only thief characters may use this profi- 
ciency to rig larger traps suitable for human or 
orc sized creatures. These traps may include 
crossbows, larger deadfalls, and spiked 
springboards. 

A character with this proficiency does not 
have the ability to make the items required for 
these devices, he can only set the traps and 
their triggers. 


 —е_єүү .уү .уү ._ .  —.—-+———— ———— 


Proficiencies e 45 


А proficiency check must be rolled when 
the trap is set. A failed proficiency check 
means that the trap will fail to operate. It may 
not have been set properly, was poorly con- 
cealed, or it was too small or too large for the 
creature to trigger. 

Setting a trap takes one hour and the char- 
acter must have the proper equipment and 
materials with him. 

Characters with the animal lore proficiency 
gain a +2 bonus when attempting to set traps 
to catch animal pests. 


Riding, Airborne 


This proficiency is rare among dwarves, 
and is most frequently found in those living in 
remote mountain areas, among dwarves who 
have befriended giant eagles or have tamed 
and trained winged mounts: griffins, hippo- 
griffs, or others. This proficiency may not be 
used to leap onto the backs of mounts, unless 
you also have the jumping proficiency. In oth- 
er respects, this proficiency is unchanged from 
the Player's Handbook. 


Riding, Land Animals 


Because of their stout, stocky build, 
dwarves are uncomfortable riding horses or 
other animals of similar size. They are capable 
of riding donkeys, ponies, and smaller crea- 
tures. Dwarves may leap onto their saddles. 


Some suitable mounts for dwarves are dire 
wolves, giant boars, and giant lizards. 


Sign Language 


Sign language is most frequently used by 
dwarves who were engaged in long running 
warfare with other dwarves or races. It per- 
mits silent communication with anyone who 
sees and understands the signals. The maxi- 


46 * Chapter Five 


mum range is usually line of sight in a lit area, 
or the extent of the receiver's infravision. Sign 
may be an extensive language capable of han- 
dling long conversations, or simply a means 
of communicating a few easy to understand 
phrases such as “attack,” “orcs behind the 
rock,” or “you three move left.” A proficiency 
check is made when speaking or interpreting 
sign. The +2 bonus should only be used when 
giving short, easily recognized commands. 
More detailed signals require a —1 modifier. 


Signalling 


The signalling proficiency allows a charac- 
ter to send messages underground using 
sound. To send a signal, tap on a section of 
wall with a rock, hammer, or a piece of metal. 
The sound will echo through rock to a dis- 
tance of 1d4 miles. The sound transmitted by 
this proficiency resembles morse code and it 
may be used to send extensive messages or 
short commands and instructions. To send a 
message, roll a proficiency check. If success- 
ful, the message transmits as desired. If not, 
the message may be only partially understood 
or complete nonsense. It may even convey a 
meaning contrary to the message sent. Suc- 
cessful transmission of a message is no guar- 
antee that it will be understood by the 
receiving end and proficiency checks are re- 
quired to correctly interpret the message. It is 
possible to fail to understand an incorrectly 
sent signal, yet still infer a message from it, 
one very different from what was intended. 


Slow Respiration 


A character with this proficiency has the 
ability to enter a deep trance and reduce the 
amount of air he needs to stay alive. To in- 
duce the trance, he must be in a restful posi- 
tion, either sitting or lying down. After 
concentrating for one turn, pulse and breath- 


ing drop well below normal, so that breath- 
ing requires only 1096 of the rate when rest- 
ing. The character emerges from his trance at 
will, fully aware of anything which has oc- 
curred nearby. 


Smelting 


The smelting proficiency is closely tied to 
the Mining proficiency. Between them they 
provide all of the metal to the strongholds. 
With this proficiency a smelter can be operat- 
ed. See Chapter 9. 


Sound Analysis 


This proficiency allows a character to gauge 
the size of underground areas by generating 
noise and analyzing the echoes that return. 
Using this skill, he can calculate distances up 
to one mile, and determine sound direction. 

To use sound analysis, the character must 
work in absolute silence. The sound created 
must have a sharp, staccato quality. A howl 
or wail is ineffective, but a clicking sound, or 
loud "hey" works well. 

The PC must make a proficiency check. If 
the check is successful, he has correctly ana- 
lyzed the size of the area in question to within 
plus or minus 25% of its height, width, and 
length. If the check fails, the echo has become 
garbled in its reverberations. No further at- 
tempts by the PC to analyze that area will suc- 
ceed, though others with the proficiency may 
try. 

A proficiency check of 5 or less means the 
character has learned not only the size of the 
analyzed area, but other details as well: the 
number of branching side passages, whether 
there is a straight or wandering corridor, and 
whether or not water exists. 

The disadvantage of this ability is that, 
while it is useful for learning about a com- 
pletely unknown area, it announces the char- 


acters to all creatures in hearing range. They 
will certainly be prepared, and may go look- 
ing for the intruders. 


Survival, Underground 


Underground survival provides knowledge 
of the underground. It helps the character dis- 
tinguish between edible and poisonous insects 
and to be able to determine the safety and sta- 
bility of tunnels, cavern ceilings, and the like. 


Underground Navigation 


A character with this proficiency can deter- 
mine direction underground and the shortest 
route to the surface. By careful analysis of air 
currents and contents, a character can even de- 
termine whether there are any pockets of poi- 
sonous gas in the air. A successful proficiency 
check is required to use the proficiency. 


Weaponsmithing 


А dwarf weaponsmith is not only more 
skilled than a human one (Intelligence — 1, in- 
stead of —3), but capable of producing weap- 
ons at a faster rate. The costs remain the 
same. 


Weapon Construction Table 
Construction Material 


Weapon Time Cost 
Arrowhead 7/day 1 cp 
Battle Axe 7 days 10 sp 
Hand Axe 3 days 5 sp 
Dagger 3 days 2 sp 
Heavy Crossbow 15 days 10 sp 
Light Crossbow 12 days 5 sp 
Fork, Trident 15 days 10 sp 
Spear, Lance 3 days 4 sp 
Short Sword 15 days 5 sp 
Long Sword 23 days 10 sp 
Two-handed Sword 34 days 2 gp 


‌چدکklkl€ekÃkQÃQÃQÃKLÃQÃ€Ã€ÃHoÃükÃhگفم——k€—k—k—kH—H—HگHگگ€€—گ‎ 


Proficiencies e 47 


The Complete Fighters Handbook contains 
extensive rules on the use of the weapon- 
smithing proficiency and is highly recom- 
mended to those interested in using the profi- 
ciency to the fullest. 


Dwarven Detection 
Proficiencies (Optional) 


Not all dwarves have the same ability to de- 
tect underground phenomena, some are better 
than others. Detection proficiencies may be 
used as an alternative to the system described 
on page 21 of the Player's Handbook to detect 
slopes, new tunnels, sliding walls, stonework 
traps, pits, deadfalls, and depth underground. 
Like nonweapon proficiencies, it is an option- 
al system. If you don't use nonweapon profi- 
ciencies in your game, then detection 
proficiencies may be ignored. If you do use 
them, detection proficiencies will adapt the 
abilities more smoothly to your game. 


Number of Detection Proficiencies 


A dwarf character receives his standard 
number of nonweapon proficiency slots ac- 
cording to his character class. In addition, he 
receives another five slots solely to buy detec- 
tion proficiencies. The initial number of profi- 
ciencies increases if he is of high Intelligence. 
Detection proficiency slots must be used to 
purchase detection proficiencies, but may be 
spent on any the player wishes. 


Dwarven Detection Proficiencies Table 


Using Detection Proficiencies 


Detection proficiencies may be used any 
time a dwarf is underground, within 10 feet of 
the particular phenomena. Determining depth 
underground is the exception to this rule and 
may be attempted any time. 

To use a detection proficiency, a dwarf must 
concentrate for one melee round. Any modi- 
fier for the proficiency listed in the Detection 
Proficiency Table is added to the appropriate 
ability score. А * 1 modifier is acquired if the 
dwarf is actually touching stonework. Detec- 
tion proficiencies are checked by rolling 1d20. 
If the character rolls his adjusted ability score 
or less, he is successful, otherwise he fails. A 
roll of 20 always fails. 

If successful, the dwarf sees the phenome- 
non or becomes aware of his approximate 
depth underground. If he fails, he cannot try 
again within that 10-foot area. 


Improving Detection Proficiencies 


The Proficiency Slots Table shows the num- 
ber of levels the character needs to attain to ac- 
quire new detection proficiency slots. These 
slots may be spent on any detection proficiency, 
but not nonweapon or weapon proficiencies. 
However, nonweapon proficiency slots may be 
spent to improve detection proficiencies. 


Detect or Determine... # of Slots Relevant Check 
Required Ability Modifier 
Grade or Slope in Passage 1 Wisdom +4 
New Tunnel/Passage Construction 1 Wisdom +4 
Sliding/Shifting Walls or Rooms 1 Wisdom +2 
Stonework Traps, Pits, and Deadfalls 1 Wisdom 0 
Approximate Depth Underground 1 Wisdom 0 


48 * Chapter Five 


The kits in this chapter allow further indi- 
vidualization of dwarf characters. Each kit is a 
collection of abilities, proficiencies, advan- 
tages, and disadvantages which better define 
the character. 

The kits are entirely optional. A dwarf 
character can easily be created without them, 
but the kits will add detail. Only one dwarf kit 
is allowed per character. 

It is possible to incorporate these kits into 
existing campaigns. A kit must be compatible 
with a character's past actions, background, 
and established personality traits. If a fighter 
has been played as cautious and careful, re- 
sorting to combat only when negotiation has 
failed, it would be unseemly to make him a 
Battlerager. 

Once a particular kit has been assigned, it 
cannot be exchanged for a new one. The char- 
acter can abandon it, but gives up all benefits 
and hindrances. 

When designing a new character, first deter- 
mine his ability scores, class or classes, spe- 
cialization, and alignment. Once these 
elements have been decided, choose a kit, pro- 
ficiencies, money, equipment, and other de- 
tails. 

The kits in this book are unique to dwarves. 
Although other races may have similar kits, 
these kits are permitted to dwarf characters 
only. However, the kits in the Complete Play- 
ers Handbook series may be used with dwarf 
characters, unless explicitly stated otherwise. 
When using the Complete Fighters, the Com- 
plete Priest's or the Complete Thiefs Hand- 
books, their guidelines should be followed. 

Five different character classes are discussed 
in this chapter. There are kits for warriors, 
priests, thieves, warrior/priests, and warrior/ 
thieves. A character may only use a kit which 
belongs to his class. It is not possible, for ex- 
ample, for a thief to use a warrior kit. Multi- 


CHAPTER 


Dwarf Kits 


class characters are an exception. A player 
with a multi-class character is not restricted to 
these options. He may choose any one kit 
from those relevant to his character. A war- 
rior/priest could choose a warrior, a priest, or 
a warrior/priest kit. A character may have 
only one kit. 

A multi-classed character is not allowed to 
specialize in any weapon when selecting a 
warrior kit. A few of the multi-class kits allow 
characters to be weapon specialists, but these 
are the only ones allowed. The Battlerager 
cannot be used as a multi-class kit, only single 
class warriors may use this kit. 


The Composition of the Kits 


Each kit consists of several elements: 

First is a description of the background, ap- 
pearance, and manner of the characters in this 
kit, including any requirements necessary to 
take the kit. 

Role: The role of the character in dwarf so- 
ciety and in the campaign. 

Secondary Skills: If you are using the sec- 
ondary skills rules from the AD&D® 2nd Edi- 
tion game, the kit may require your character 
to take a specific skill instead of choosing or 
randomly rolling for it. It is recommended 
that, in order to get the most out of the kits, 
you use the weapon and nonweapon profi- 
ciency rules instead. 

Weapon Proficiencies: The kit may require 
a dwarf to take a specific weapon proficiency, 
or to choose one from a limited range. 

Weapon proficiencies required for a kit are 
not bonuses unless specified. They must be 
taken to fill the weapon proficiency slots 
available to a 1st level dwarf. 

Bonus Nonweapon Proficiencies: Charac- 
ter kits provide bonus nonweapon proficien- 
cies free, without having to spend any of the 


а ——— 


Dwarf Kits € 49 


slots they would normally be granted. Even if 
the proficiencies belong to groups other than 
Dwarf or General, there is no charge for them. 

Recommended Nonweapon Proficiencies: 
Some Nonweapon Proficiencies are recom- 
mended, not required. If the character decides 
to take a recommended nonweapon proficien- 
су, it still fills one of the slots. 

Equipment: Some dwarf characters use spe- 
cific equipment, while others have limitations 
or restrictions on the way they acquire or use 
equipment. 

Distinctive Appearance: Many kits have a 
distinctive appearance, making the character 
special and more easily recognizable for what 
he is. These are suggestions only, and not re- 
quirements. 

Special Benefits: Most kits grant special 
benefits. 

Special Hindrances: Any disadvantages 
which hinder a character. 

Wealth Options: Some kits have special 
rules regarding wealth. These specify the 
amount of money received when a character is 
created and limit how it can be spent. 


Warrior Kits 


Warriors make up the majority of any 
dwarf stronghold, being both craftsmen and 
soldiers. Other, more specialized dwarf war- 
riors are described below. 


Animal Master 


The Animal Master has a close affinity with 
the animals employed to guard strongholds. 
He looks after and controls them, making sure 
they are properly fed and exercised. He trains 
them to act as guards and to attack on com- 
mand. Animal Masters develop a deep bond 


50 * Chapter Six 


with their animals and are reluctant to endan- 
ger the animals’ lives. 

An Animal Master must have a Wisdom of 
12 or more. 

Role: Well respected members of dwarf so- 
ciety, Animal Masters are usually welcome at 
any stronghold, though they are treated with 
wary respect. If they are willing to train others 
in the art, they are even more welcome. 

Animal Masters are responsible for looking 
after a stronghold's animal guards. These are 
usually 2d4 brown bears or 5d4 wolves, but 
other animals such as giant lizards, cave 
bears, boars, or giant rats may be used. They 
may train a stronghold's cavalry mounts, if 
these are present. 

Secondary Skills: An Animal Master should 
have Groom (animal handling) and Trapper/ 
Furrier secondary skills. 

Weapon Proficiencies: They may be profi- 
cient with any weapon. 

Bonus Nonweapon Proficiencies: Animal 
Lore, Animal Training (chosen animal), En- 
durance. 

Recommended Nonweapon Proficiencies: 
Animal Handling, Animal Training (other an- 
imal), Appraising, Direction Sense, Dwarf 
Runes, Etiquette, Herbalism, Hunting, Mod- 
ern Languages, Rope Use, Sign Language, Sig- 
nalling, Underground Survival. 

Equipment: When created, the Animal 
Master may have any kind of weapons and 
equipment. He starts with one fully trained 
animal of his choice, which he may equip with 
leather or metal armor. 

Distinctive Appearance: Animal Masters 
frequently dress in the pelts or skins of their 
animal charges. This helps bond him to his an- 
imals and makes them more accepting of his 
presence. 

Special Benefits: An Animal Master gains 
an Animal Training proficiency. This bonus 


proficiency is automatically at +1. He must 
choose the kind of animal he is capable of 
training upon taking the proficiency. He may 
buy another Animal Training proficiency but 
the second does not gain the +1 bonus. 

The bonus Animal Mastery proficiency al- 
lows him to train four animals at one time, in- 
stead of three. For each additional slot spent 
on Animal Training, one extra animal can be 
trained. 

Because of his affinity with them, an Ani- 
mal Master reduces the time it takes to train 
the animals by one week per slot spent on the 
proficiency, but it never takes less than two 
weeks. This extra slot includes the Animal 
Trainer's initial * 1 bonus. He can increase the 
number of tasks he can teach an animal by +1 
for each slot spent on Training. One who 
chooses brown bears as the animals for his bo- 
nus proficiency can teach four bears at one 
time. He can teach them 244 + 1 tricks or tasks 
іп 246 – 1 weeks. 

When working with wild animals, he gains 
a +4 ability modifier to his chances of taming 
them, if the animals are of a litter whose 
mother he has trained. When working with 
such animals, an Animal Master's commands 
are obeyed on rolls of 1-19 on a 1d20. Only 
when he rolls a 20 will the animals refuse to 
obey. 

If an Animal Master has the Sign Language 
proficiency, he may direct his own trained ani- 
mals with it. They must be able to see his 
hands for this to work. 

An Animal Master with the Signalling pro- 
ficiency can direct personally trained animals 
by using simple sound signals. When working 
with animals other than his own, he may di- 
rect them by making a successful Animal 
Training check. 

Special Hindrances: Animal Masters tend 
to be loners, spending more time with animals 


than with other dwarves. Consequently, there 
is always a level of distrust. Most dwarves, 
obsessed with their crafts, have little in com- 
mon with Animal Masters who dedicate their 
lives to creating a rapport with their animals. 
Other dwarves react to Animal Masters at 
— 2. This does not mean they will be antago- 
nistic, but that they are wary of the trainer 
and his animals. They will show respect, but 
without friendship. 

Wealth Options: An Animal Master starts 
with only 4d4x10 gp. 


Axe For Hire 


An Axe For Hire is a mercenary who is will- 
ing to sell his services to the highest bidder. 
Usually an all-round fighter, capable of en- 
gaging in hand to hand combat, he is able to 
use a crossbow and other missile weapons. 

Role: He is frequently a dwarf with a severe 
case of wanderlust and a strong desire to trav- 
el beyond his stronghold. The best way to ac- 
complish this is to hire out as a guard or a 
mercenary. He may find employment with a 
merchant who is setting out on an expedition 
deeper underground, or planning to travel 
above. He may be working for a dwarf noble 
who is visiting relatives in other lands, or try- 
ing to recapture a mine from orcs or dragons. 
Perhaps he has traveled to aid a stronghold at- 
tacked by monsters. 

He may accept employment with another 
race, providing the money is good enough. He 
wants to be paid to fight. 

Secondary Skills: An Axe for Hire should 
have the Weaponsmith, Armorer or Bowyer/ 
Fletcher secondary skills. 

Weapon Proficiencies: They may choose 
any weapons they like. 

Bonus Nonweapon Proficiencies: Endur- 
ance, Local Dwarf History, Local History. 


д 


Dwarf Kits ө 51 


Recommended Nonweapon Proficiencies: 
Alertness, Armorer, Bowyer/Fletcher, Direc- 
tion Sense, Fire-building, Dwarf Runes, 
Survival, Underground Navigation, Weapon- 
smith. 

Equipment: An Axe for Hire may spend his 
starting money on whatever arms, armor, and 
equipment he can afford. When he is created, 
if it is agreed that he is part of a military force 
with specific equipment requirements, he is 
required to buy that equipment, but at half 
the price. 

Distinctive Appearance: These are the most 
individualistic of dwarves and do not con- 
form to any single standard. 

Special Benefits: Fighters receive one free 
weapon specialization (a hand or missile 
weapon). It must be one commonly associated 
with dwarves. 

When employed, he never pays for his own 
upkeep. Rooms at inns, food and drink are all 
supplied by his employer. 

Special Hindrances: Dwarves are clannish 
folk who distrust anyone with an independent 
attitude. When reacting with other dwarves in 
any situation other than military, an Axe for 
Hire suffers a —3 reaction penalty. 

In addition, an Axe for Hire who is part of 
a military force is subject to the discipline 
and dictates of its commander. He is no long- 
er free to come and go as he pleases. He is fur- 
ther restricted by the contract he has signed 
with his employer. Many of these are for a 
fixed duration, and require him to be availa- 
ble throughout the term. Disappearing be- 
fore the end of the contract is likely to give 
him a poor reputation as a mercenary. 

There is always a fear that he has been hired 
to undertake a suicidal mission or to act as a 
decoy or sacrifice, while others have more im- 
portant, and safer, duties. 


52 * Chapter Six 


Wealth Options: He receives the standard 
5d4x10 gp starting money. 


Clansdwarf 


The Clansdwarf is what most people think 
of whenever dwarves are mentioned. They 
are the majority in dwarf society, its craftsmen 
and militia. They are skilled in a craft and re- 
ceive military training from adolescence. 

Role: Clansdwarves are usually closely 
bound to their stronghold and only leave to 
conduct their craft somewhere else (at a loca- 
tion which is usually turned into another 
stronghold). They give dwarf society its par- 
ticular qualities of kinship and careful opti- 
mism. 

They are not restricted to the strongholds 
and may be found living in ghettoes or on the 
edges of the towns and cities of another race, 
making a living by selling their services. 

While clansdwarves are craftsmen, all 
dwarf settlements pride themselves on their 
militia. They are armed and equipped with 
items of their own manufacture, and train reg- 
ularly in small unit and large scale tactics. 
Many clansdwarves are justifiably proud of 
being expert fighters as well as superb crafts- 
men. 

Secondary Skills: Any suitable craft skill. 

Weapon Proficiencies: Clansdwarves may 
be proficient with: axe, hammer, light or 
heavy crossbow, mace, pick, polearm, short 
sword, spear. 

Bonus Nonweapon Proficiencies: 
Clansdwarves gain two craft proficiency slots 
of their choice. Both must be spent on the 
same craft. They also receive the Dwarven 
Runes and Endurance proficiencies. 

Recommended Nonweapon Proficiencies: 
Appraising, Artistic Ability, and any related 
to their first craft. 


Equipment: Clansdwarves may buy any 
equipment they like. 

Distinctive Appearance: The craft of a 
clansdwarf is readily apparent from his cloth- 
ing. Each clan has a unique emblem or cut of 
cloth that distinguishes them from all other 
clans. This may be as obvious as a leather- 
working apron or as discrete as a small anvil 
badge. 

Special Benefits: Clansdwarves gain a +3 
reaction bonus when dealing with others of 
their clan. They gain a +2 reaction bonus 
when dealing with dwarves of other clans en- 
gaged in the same craft. 

Clansdwarves are always sheltered and 
given aid within their own clan. Unless one is 
known to have injured members of his own 
clan, he will be fed and housed gladly. 

Special Hindrances: A Clansdwarf is part of 
a tightly- knit society which never forgets ei- 
ther a misdemeanor or shoddy workmanship. 
He is expected to be scrupulously honest and 
professional in his dealings with others. Any 
dwarf who violates that trust becomes an out- 
cast, no longer welcome at the hearths of his 
clan. News of bad behavior spreads quickly, 
and other dwarves, hearing of it, will react to 
him with a —3 penalty. 

A Clansdwarf who becomes an outcast may 
again be accepted by his kin, but the process 
takes years. It is better to keep one's nose 
clean and do the job than to provoke trouble. 

Wealth Options: A Clansdwarf starts with 
the standard 5d4x10 gp. 


Hearth Guard 


A Hearth Guard is a female dwarf who has 
received intensive military training. Frequent- 
ly a weapon specialist, she fights as well as, if 
not better than, most males. 

Not all strongholds have Hearth Guards. 


Some see fighting as a male role and do not 
encourage women to take up arms. In most 
strongholds, Hearth Guards form a respected, 
elite fighting force dedicated to defending the 
stronghold and its children from external 
threats. 

Not all female warriors are Hearth Guards. 
Any of the kits can be used for female charac- 
ters, so a player is not restricted to playing a 
Hearth Guard character just because she is fe- 
male. No male dwarves, however, may be- 
come Hearth Guards. 

Role: Hearth Guards were originally 
formed as a purely defensive force to defend 
the stronghold in case of attack. In a few 
strongholds, male dwarves have come to see 
women as superior and leave all important de- 
cisions to them. 

Hearth Guards are highly regarded. They 
form an effective fighting force, well trained 
in combat and tactics. Outside dwarf society, 
they are a curiosity, if others are even aware of 
them. As a result, other cultures are suspi- 
cious of Hearth Guards, if not scathingly criti- 
cal of their abilities. Any who see them in this 
light are in for a nasty surprise. 

Although originally formed to protect 
strongholds, members are as free as any dwarf 
to adventure or travel; they are not restricted 
to a stronghold. 

Secondary Skills: She should have Weapon- 
smith, Armorer, or Bowyer/Fletcher second- 
ary skills. 

Weapon Proficiencies: Hearth Guards must 
be proficient in traditional weapons of battle; 
axe (one or two handed), spear, and light 
crossbow. She may only specialize in these 
weapons. 

Bonus Nonweapon Proficiencies: Endur- 
ance, Fire Building, and Local Dwarf History. 

Recommended Nonweapon Proficiencies: 
Alertness, Blind- fighting, Direction Sense, 


Dwarf Kits ® 53 


Dwarf Runes, Fletcher/Bowyer, Intimidation, 
Local Dwarf History, Rope Use, Sign Lan- 
guage, Signalling, Slow Respiration, 
Weaponsmithing. 

Equipment: When a Hearth Guard is cre- 
ated she must be equipped with at least chain 
mail armor, a battle axe, a spear, and a light 
crossbow. 

Distinctive Appearance: Hearth Guards are 
distinguished by red surcoats with orange fire 
badges embroidered on the front. 

Special Benefits: A Hearth Guard fighter re- 
ceives one free specialization in battle axe, 
spear, or light crossbow. She must pay the ini- 
tial weapon proficiency, but the specialization 
is at no cost. 

She also gains an additional +1 bonus to 
hit and damage when defending her strong- 
hold. When fighting to protect young 
dwarves, she gains a +2 bonus to hit and 
damage rolls. To gain this bonus the attacker 
must be in a position to physically harm the 
young, or about to enter a nursery or home. 

Special Hindrances: Within dwarf society 
only the most male oriented strongholds react 
negatively to Hearth Guards. In the male 
dominated societies of other races, a female 
dwarf wearing armor and carrying weapons is 
sometimes not taken seriously; NPCs react at 
—3 to the Hearth Guard. 

Wealth Options: She receives the standard 
5d4x10 gp. If this is not enough to buy the re- 
quired equipment, the equipment is provided 
free, but the character starts with no money. 


Battlerager 


The Battlerager fills a particular niche in 
dwarf society and culture. He is a fearless 
warrior, able to create an insane rage within 
himself which increases his fighting ability 
and distorts his physical features. 


54 * Chapter Six 


While enraged, a Battlerager's face becomes 
twisted and his teeth grind together. Spittle 
flies from his mouth and dribbles down his 
beard. His eyes enlarge, bulge, and become 
bloodshot. Size increases (his height by an 
inch or more) as his muscles swell and his 
body expands. 

His fighting ability becomes awesome, al- 
lowing him to fight longer and harder than 
any other dwarf. While in his rage, he is al- 
most unstoppable. A dangerous enemy, he is a 
menace to friend and foe alike. 

A Battlerager must have a minimum 
Strength of 15 and Intelligence and Wisdom 
scores no higher than 10. 

Role: He is believed to have been touched 
by a dwarven deity, and is held in reverence 
and fear by his fellows. Madness and irratio- 
nal behavior are commonly associated with 
Battleragers. Many believe that, if killed in 
battle, Battleragers return to the earth, to be 
reborn with more power. Therefore they have 
no fear of death. 

While there is no Battlerager Guild, they 
tend to band together and occupy outlying 
sections of strongholds. They are given to 
drinking, rowdy and boisterous singing, and 
drunken dancing. Others prefer not to social- 
ize with Battleragers if possible. They are 
quick to anger and will avenge any imagined 
insult with a battle axe. 

In war Battleragers come into their own. 
Groups, and even individuals, will charge 
ahead of the military to attack the enemy with 
no regard for their own safety. 

In a campaign, Battleragers are dangerous 
not only to others but to themselves. Battlera- 
gers must be reckless, never weighing the 
odds. They are argumentative, coarse, and 
definitely not diplomats! "If it moves, kill it!" 
is the likely response of a Battlerager. Most of 
them live short, often glorious, lives. 


Secondary Skills: Battleragers have no sec- 
ondary skills of any worth. 

Weapon Proficiencies: Battleragers must 
specialize in the battle axe (one or two hand- 
ed) or war hammer. Warhammers are thrown 
at enemies while charging, usually accompa- 
nied by a battle cry such as "Stitch that, Gob- 
lin!" They cannot start with any other ranged 
weapon proficiency, and it is forbidden to 
learn or use a ranged weapon. (Unthinkable! 
Missile weapons are coward's toys!) 

Bonus Nonweapon Proficiencies; Endur- 
ance, Intimidation, Singing. 

Recommended Nonweapon Proficiencies: 
Appraising, Armorer, Blind-fighting, Danc- 
ing, Direction Sense, Sound Analysis, Under- 
ground Navigation, Underground Survival. 

Equipment: Battleragers must start play 
with a battle axe and a warhammer. They 


may wear any type of armor, but it must be 
slightly larger than required to accommodate 
the increased size when in battle rage. They 
usually carry wineskins containing a vile con- 
coction of fermented goat's milk and herbs— 
'gutshaker'. They are the only creatures 
known to drink gutshaker without becoming 
violently ill. 

Distinctive Appearance: Battleragers are the 
most distinctive of warriors. With rings 
through their noses, ears, and sometimes lips, 
they will dye their hair and beards vivid col- 
ors. They often shave their faces and heads, 
sometimes leaving long tufts of hair which are 
stiffened with lime or thick grease. Tattoos on 
the face and body in the form of spirals and 
abstract designs are a source of intense pride 
for all Battleragers. 

Special Benefits: They excel at fighting. Not 


SS —+ ——-—— ї —— 


Dwarf Kits ө 55 


only are they specialists with battle axe or war 
hammer, they are able to enter a furious kill- 
ing rage which endangers friend and foe alike. 
They have little control over it. Any time one 
feels insulted, threatened, or when in combat, 
he will bellow a battle song at the top of his 
lungs. After five rounds, during which time he 
can fight or perform other activities, he enters 
the rage. This lasts until there are no enemies 
left to slay. Whether enemies are standing to 
fight or lying wounded on the ground, the 
Battlerager will hack them apart. He will then 
turn to anyone left alive, even his friends. 
During the rage, Battleragers continue to sing, 
pausing only to scream insults at foes. 

A Battlerager can try to come out of the 
rage at the beginning of each round by making 
a Wisdom check. If he succeeds, his rage ends 
and he suffers the effects below. If not, he re- 
mains enraged. He may attempt withdrawal 
each round, until he succeeds. 

He may attempt to prevent a killing rage by 
making a successful Wisdom check. If he suc- 
ceeds, he can control himself for the rest of the 
encounter. During the next five rounds, he 
will gnaw ferociously on his shield rim or 
grind his teeth together in an effort to control 
himself. If he fails the check, he enters the 
rage. 

A silence spell will prevent him from enter- 
ing a rage, but he will attack the character 
who cast the spell, if he can tell who it was. If 
not, he will attack all who get in his way. 

The Killing Rage: While in a killing rage, 
the Battlerager receives the following special 
benefits: 


€ +1to hit, +3 to damage, +10 hp, and -1 
bonus to his AC (e.g., AC 4 drops to AC 3). 
* [mmunity to these wizard spells (no saving 
throw necessary)— charm person, emotion, 
fear, friends, hypnotism, sleep, irritation, 


56 * Chapter Six 


ray of enfeeblement, scare, geas—and these 
clerical spells—command, charm person or 
mammal, enthrall, cloak of bravery, re- 
move fear, symbol. 

e He gets a +4 saving throw bonus, on top of 
his dwarf bonus, against these wizard 
spells—blindness, Tasha's uncontrollable 
hideous laughter, hold person, charm mon- 
ster, confusion—and against these clerical 
spells—hold person, hold animal. 

* The finger of death spell kills a Battlerager 
instantly, if he fails to make a saving throw. 
If he makes his save, he doesn't suffer the 
2d8 +1 points of damage until his killing 
rage ends. 

* While in the rage, he is immune to KO re- 
sults from the Punching and Wrestling rules 
and takes only half damage from bare- 
hand attacks. 


Killing Rage Disadvantages: A Battlerager 
suffers the following disadvantages while en- 
raged: 


® He is oblivious to pain. The DM takes note 
of the Battlerager's current hit points when 
the character first enters his killing rage, re- 
ducing them as he takes damage. The play- 
er is not told how many points of damage 
he takes from enemy attacks, or how many 
he has left. He is only aware that he is en- 
joying himself tremendously. He is told 
how much damage his character has re- 
ceived when he falls over dead or the rage 
ends. 

® He must continue to fight each melee round 
until all opponents have been killed. He 
may attack any enemy within range of his 
weapon. If none are in range, or once he 
kills an opponent, he must attack the near- 
est enemy. 


® He cannot take cover from missile attacks. 

e [f another character does something which 
he interprets as an attack, such as hitting 
him to move him out of the way, he must 
roll an Intelligence check. If successful, the 
Battlerager may ignore his friend. If he 
fails, his friend becomes his enemy, and is 
treated as an enemy until the fight is over 
and the rage has passed. 

® He is temporarily unaffected by the clerical 
spells bless, cure light wounds, aid, cure se- 
rious wounds, cure critical wounds, heal, 
regenerate, and wither. He only gains the 
benefits of these spells when he is not en- 
raged. 

e The taunt spell is automatically successful 
and causes him to abandon his current ene- 
my and rush to attack the taunter. 

® Once the rage is over, he loses all of its ad- 
vantages, including the 10 bonus hit points. 
This could cause him to die instantly, or 
collapse unconscious, if he has 0 or less hit 
points remaining. 

e After the rage subsides, he suffers a —1 
penalty to his attack rolls, a —3 penalty to 
damage rolls, and +1 penalty to his AC. 
This effect remains for the same number of 
rounds that he was enraged. 


Special Hindrances: Being a psychopathic 
killer with an axe is a special hindrance in it- 
self, particularly because he is a liability to 
himself and all who adventure with him. Oth- 
er dwarves react to Battleragers with a —3 re- 
action adjustment penalty. But instead of 
attacking, they will withdraw. Other races 
automatically sense the latent violence in a 
Battlerager and react to him with a —2 penal- 
ty, though they may not have enough com- 
mon sense not to attack him. 

Wealth Options: The Battlerager receives 
the normal 5d4x10 gp. 


Highborn 


Highborns are members of families who 
hold political power within a clan. A High- 
born dwarf may belong to the ruling family of 
a stronghold. They are able to trace their lin- 
eage back to the beginnings of time. Highborn 
ancestors include the great warriors and 
craftsmen of legend. They tend to behave in 
an arrogant manner to other dwarves, believ- 
ing their lineage makes them superior to their 
fellows. They consider themselves the epit- 
ome of dwarf culture, the finest members of 
their race. 

Role: Highborn dwarves are the law enforc- 
ers of a stronghold. They uphold the law, in- 
suring that they continue to benefit from the 
order of dwarf society. They expect to be ad- 
mired and treated with much respect, if not 
subservience. 

Highborns believe that the continuance of 
dwarf society rests firmly on their shoulders. 
It is their responsibility to ensure that life con- 
tinues in a regular, orderly manner, so that 
clansdwarves may ply their crafts in peace 
and security. 

Highborn dwarf adventurers are the youn- 
ger sons or daughters of a wealthy family. As 
part of their education they are expected to 
travel in order to learn how other dwarf 
strongholds are managed, and to experience 
first hand the way other races organize them- 
selves. Usually, this simply increases the high- 
born's sense of his and his race's importance, 
as he constantly compares the shortcomings 
of others to his own inflated opinions. 

Secondary Skills: The Scribe secondary 
skill is suitable for Highborn dwarves. 

Weapon Proficiencies: Highborn dwarves 
must take the sword, hammer, and light cross- 
bow proficiencies. The last proficiency may 
be used for a weapon of his choice, or to spe- 


Dwarf Kits © 57 


cialize in one of the required choices. 

Bonus Nonweapon Proficiencies: Endur- 
ance, Etiquette, Heraldry, Local Dwarf 
History. 

Recommended Nonweapon Proficiencies: 
Appraising, Artistic Ability, Blind-fighting, 
Hunting, Modern Languages, Mountaineer- 
ing, Survival (any). 

Equipment: Highborn dwarves must always 
look their best to set an example to other 
dwarves. They must start with at least banded 
mail armor. Since this is worn to reflect status, 
it costs at least 10% to 25% more than usual, 
as do the fine weapons Highborns must use. 

Distinctive Appearance: Their status is ap- 
parent from the fine craftsmanship of weap- 
ons, armor, and clothing. 

Special Benefits: Dwarves of lawful align- 
ment respect Highborn dwarves and react to 
them with a +3 bonus. A Highborn may also 
demand food and shelter from other dwarves, 
and this is willingly provided for him and his 
retinue. The Highborns administer justice 
among members of their clan. In matters in- 
volving two clans, only the ruling family of 
the stronghold can make binding decisions. 

Special Hindrances: A Highborn dwarf 
may administer justice, but his decisions may 
be later overruled by a Highborn clansman of 
greater status. 

Highborns need to maintain their status by 
finding and purchasing the best goods availa- 
ble. This means that they always spend an ad- 
ditional 10% to 25% on goods and services. If 
a Highborn fails to do so, his reaction bonus 
drops by —1 each occurrence, until it reaches 
0. He may only increase his reaction to its 
former level by engaging in conspicuous con- 
sumption. This means a new suit of clothes 
and new equipment for himself and his retain- 
ers, all purchased at 25% above the usual 
price. He must throw a banquet for his entire 


58 * Chapter Six 


clan (costing 1,000 to 5,000 gp), giving gifts to 
show that he deserves the respect offered him 
by those of lower status. These gifts are usu- 
ally craft related, such as a fine set of tools, an 
anvil, or a loom. 

Nonlawfully aligned dwarves tend to be ir- 
ritated by Highborn dwarves' superiority and 
react to them at —3. 

Highborn dwarves are too proud for their 
own good, seeing themselves and their race as 
superior to all others. This attitude causes oth- 
er races to react to them with a —2 penalty. 

Wealth Options: Highborn dwarves start 
with 400 gp, plus the standard 5d4x10 gp. 


Outcast 


The Outcast is the misfit, the dwarf who 
breaks all the rules governing behavior; he 
refuses to fit easily into any niche, or to settle 
at one job for long. His behavior is usually so 
at odds with others that he is soon ostracized 
by his fellows. Outcasts can be found wander- 
ing deep underground or among humans, 
elves, gnomes, or monsters. 

Role: Outcasts are typically of neutral or 
chaotic alignments. They may be good or evil, 
but the one thing they have in common is an 
aversion for the regimented lifestyles of their 
fellows. Evil Outcasts are likely to become ra- 
cial traitors and lead the dwarves' enemies 
against them. Good-aligned Outcasts are 
likely to find the company of other races more 
in line with their own natures. 

Although Outcast dwarves are normally 
not found in strongholds, whole communities 
of them have grown up at the edges of certain 
strongholds. They have usually been given 
unpleasant jobs that no one else wants, such 
as cleaning sewers or disposing of garbage. 

Secondary Skills: Outcasts may choose any 
secondary skill. 


Weapon Proficiencies: They often pick 
weapons that are not normally associated 
with dwarves, such as the short bow, quarter- 
staff, sickle, sling, or whip. They may have 
any weapon they choose. 

Bonus Nonweapon Proficiencies: Apprais- 
ing, one craft proficiency (player choice), En- 
durance, Survival (any). 

Recommended Nonweapon Proficiencies: 
Animal Handling, Blind- fighting, Direction 
Sense, Dwarf Runes, Intimidation, Modern 
Language, Riding (pony). 

Equipment: Outcast dwarves may have any 
kind of equipment. 

Distinctive Appearance: Many who live 
among other races follow their adopted race 
in matters of dress. They often wear bright 
colors. Near strongholds they are usually 
poorly dressed, wearing only rags and cast- 
offs. 

Special Benefits: By paying an additional 
10% experience cost to increase in level, an 
Outcast may Move Silently as a ranger of the 
same level. For example, a warrior needs 
2,000 experience points to reach the 2nd level. 
If he takes the Move Silently option, he pays 
an additional 10%, or 2,200 experience points 
to become a 2nd level warrior. This ability 
must be taken when the character is first cre- 
ated, or it is forever lost. The xp penalty must 
be paid at every level. 

Special Hindrances: The Outcast suffers a 
—3 reaction penalty from all other dwarves 
with the exception of other Outcasts and 
Wayfinders. 

Wealth Options: Outcasts start with only 
3d6x10 gp. 


Rapid Response Rider 


Rapid Response Riders are the dwarves' 
equivalent of cavalry. Mounted on suitably 


sturdy beasts, they are capable of moving 
faster than other dwarves, and packing more 
punch when they attack. Ponies or mules are 
commonly used as mounts, but creatures 
such as bears, boars, and dire wolves are 
sometimes used. Flying creatures, griffons, 
hippogriffs, or pegasi, may be employed. In 
such cases, Land Based Riding Proficiency 
references should be changed to Airborne 
Riding. 

Rapid Response Riders are found in only a 
few strongholds. They are not extensively 
used and appear chiefly in strongholds that 
are under constant threat of attack. 

They are often quite tall, as dwarves go, 
and that extra height helps a lot when riding. 

Role: They are well trained, but something 
of an anomaly in a military based on infantry 
units. While respected, they are considered 
odd by other dwarves. They stick together 
and consider themselves both elite and superi- 
or to other dwarves, whom they see as lowly 
foot sloggers. 

Secondary Skills: The character should take 
the Groom (Animal Handling) secondary 
skill. 

Weapon Proficiencies: Rapid Response 
Riders must be proficient, and ideally special- 
ized in, the lance (any, according to mount's 
size). They may use any other weapons they 
see fit. 

Bonus Nonweapon Proficiencies: Animal 
Training, Endurance, Riding (Land Based). 
The type of mount must be noted for profi- 
ciencies. 

Recommended Nonweapon Proficiencies: 
Animal Handling, Armorer, Blind-fighting, 
Intimidation, Leatherworking, Sign Lan- 
guage, Signalling, Tracking, Underground Di- 
rection Sense, Underground Navigation. 

Equipment: They may wear any kind of ar- 
mor except plate mail. They must start play 


rr e س‎ 


Dwarf Kits ® 59 


with a lance, but otherwise may have any 
kind of weapon. 

Distinctive Appearance: They will usually 
wear some form of leather trousers to protect 
their legs. They tend to select fierce looking 
armor, with studs, protruding hooks, or 
horned helmets. 

Special Benefits: A Rapid Response Rider 
starts with a fully grown mount which has at 
least 7596 of its possible hit points. Roll hit 
points normally; if they come to less than 
75% of the possible total, increase it to 75%. 

Their mounts are highly trained and re- 
spond to all commands given by their mas- 
ters. They do not have telepathic rapport with 
their mounts, and if the mount is killed, they 
lose only the mount. 

Rapid Response Riders gain a +1 to attack 
and damage rolls when fighting mounted. 

Special Hindrances: Because of their close 
affinity to their mounts, most dwarves react 
with a —2 penalty. 

Wealth Options: Rapid Response Riders 
start with 5d4x10 gp. 


Sharpshooter 


A Sharpshooter is highly skilled with either 
the light or heavy crossbow. He has spent the 
majority of his youth training as a Bowyer/ 
Fletcher, and has had regular practice with his 
crossbow. He is skilled in rapid loading and 
expert at inflicting the most damage possible 
with his weapon. Exuding confidence in his 
abilities, he tends to disdain those who resort 
to hand-to-hand combat. 

Role: Sharpshooters form either part of a 
crossbow unit or make their living shooting 
for prize money at fairs. When in battle, a 
Sharpshooter's targets are enemy officers, 
wizards, and clerics, to prevent them from co- 
ordinating attacks or casting spells. 


60 * Chapter Six 


Secondary Skills: He should have the 
Bowyer/Fletcher secondary skill. 

Weapon Proficiencies: A Sharpshooter 
must be a specialist with either a light or 
heavy crossbow (and, therefore, must be a 
fighter). He may not begin play with any hand 
weapon specializations, but may learn them 
later in his career. If gunpowder weapons are 
used, a sharpshooter may specialize in the ar- 
quebus. All the special benefits for crossbows 
are available for arquebuses; the character has 
a supply of perfectly molded arquebus balls 
and superior gunpowder. 

Bonus Nonweapon Proficiencies: Artistic 
Ability, Bowyer/Fletcher, Endurance. 

Recommended Nonweapon Proficiencies: 
Alertness, Appraising, Direction Sense, Rope 
Use, Sign Language, Signalling. 

Equipment: Sharpshooters start with the 
crossbow of their choice, at no cost. 

Distinctive Appearance: They are set apart 
from other dwarves by the care they lavish on 
their crossbows and bolts. The crossbow is 
made of the finest materials and the butt is of- 
ten inlaid with intricate patterns. The bolts 
have only the finest flights, and they burnish 
the points to a fine, razor sharpness. 

Special Benefits: In addition to his cross- 
bow specialization, he gains a further +1 to 
hit. He fires faster than other specialists as 
shown on the Sharpshooter Attacks Table. 


Sharpshooter Attacks Table 


Light Heavy 
Level Crossbow Crossbow 
1-6 3/2 1/1 
7-12 2/1 3/2 
13+ 5/2 2/1 


This increased rate of fire assumes that the 
Sharpshooter has time to lay out his bolts in 
easy reach, minimizing the time required to 


nock a bolt. He gains these advantages only 
with the type of crossbow he has specialized 
in. 

When using his personal weapon and 
sharpened bolts, a Sharpshooter can inflict ex- 
tra damage. In his hands, a light crossbow 
causes 146 damage vs. any size creatures. А 
heavy crossbow causes 146 * 1 vs. S/M, and 
148 +1 against larger creatures. He only gains 
these bonuses when he uses his personally 
built and maintained crossbow and his own 
sharpened bolts. 

Special Hindrances: Sharpshooters may not 
start with any hand weapon specialization, 
and are limited to short weapons, daggers, 
and hand axes. 

If a Sharpshooter loses his custom-built 
crossbow or has no time to sharpen his bolts, 
he loses his ability to increase damage. He 
cannot just pull out another crossbow previ- 
ously built; it must first be used for 1d4 weeks 
to “break it in.” In addition, it takes one hour 
to sharpen each bolt and they must be careful- 
ly stowed, if they are not to become dulled. 

Wealth Options: Sharpshooters start with 
5d4x10 gp, plus their own customized cross- 
bow. 


Priest Kits 


The creation myths of the dwarves de- 
scribed in Chapter 1 can be used as the basis 
for designing numerous dwarf religions. Play- 
ers will benefit from the Complete Priest's 
Handbook which describes 41 priesthoods 
which may be used with dwarf characters. 
While recommended, the Complete Priest's 
Handbook is not essential. The priest and 
warrior/priest kits work as well with clerics 
from the Players Handbook. 

Barred: This paragraph applies only to 
dwarf priests (single or multi-classed) using 


the Complete Priest's Handbook. It refers to 
priesthoods in the handbook and details 
which of the priest classes (plus cleric) may 
not take the kit. If it is not being used, the sec- 
tion may serve as a guide to the kind of reli- 
gion the kit should have. 


Crafts Priest 


Crafts priests are those who are dedicated 
to the patron deities of one of the dwarven 
crafts. Although they frequently will have a 
temple in a stronghold, they usually preside 
over a shrine or chapel in the workshops 
where their craft is practiced. They are usually 
members of that craft's clan. 

Barred: Crafts priests usually worship the 
god of crafts, but they may belong to most 
other religions. In such cases, they are the 
priests who prepare ceremonial and sacrificial 
items. Priests of the following gods may not 
be crafts priests: birth and children, death, 
evil, disease, fertility, justice, marriage, love, 
mischief, trickery, and trade. 

Role: Crafts priests are more concerned 
with their crafts than with the welfare of fel- 
low dwarves. They will seek out the finest raw 
materials and are often engaged in expeditions 
to discover new mines or found new strong- 
holds. Their expertise in these matters is high- 
ly sought. Rarely tied to a central temple, they 
are free to go where they please. 

Secondary Skills: Crafts priests may choose 
any secondary skill. 

Weapon Proficiencies: They may be profi- 
cient with any of these weapons: axe, ham- 
mer, light or heavy crossbow, mace, pick, 
polearm, short sword, spear. 

Bonus Nonweapon Proficiencies: Artistic 
Ability, any Craft proficiency, Endurance, 
and Religion. 

Recommended Nonweapon Proficiencies: 


———.—-—-—-—-———-— —-—-—-— 


Dwarf Kits ® 61 


Appraising, Dwarf Runes, Etiquette, Local 
Dwarf History, Underground Navigation. 

Equipment: Crafts priests must have access 
to the tools required for their craft. If these are 
large, such as a forge, the priest is not required 
to own one, but the DM should inform him 
where he can go to use one. Apart from that, 
Crafts priests may use any kind of equipment. 

Distinctive Appearance: According to the 
specific religion. 

Special Benefits: A Crafts priest gains a +3 
reaction bonus when dealing with dwarves of 
his own clan, and a +2 reaction bonus with 
dwarves from other clans engaged in the same 
craft. 

Unless a Crafts priest has injured members 
of his own clan, he will gladly be given food 
and shelter by his clansmen. 

Special Hindrances: Crafts priests have no 
special hindrances. 

Wealth Options: They start with 3d6x10 


62 * Chapter Six 


Pariah 


A Pariah is a priest who has left his strong- 
hold, either voluntarily or under pressure. His 
practice of religion was so repulsive that other 
dwarves expelled him. He will often worship 
gods of an evil alignment, but may worship 
chaotic good or chaotic neutral gods. 

Pariahs may be priests who have turned to 
one of the darker gods of a pantheon, or he 
may be part of a group of Pariahs, within or 
on the fringes of dwarf society. Priests from 
evil strongholds are usually pariahs. 

Barred: Priests of the god of community 
and most good aligned deities may not take 
this kit. However, pariahs may be priests of 
chaotic gods. 

Role: They may be the priests for a commu- 
nity of Outcasts, in which case they are the 
spiritual leaders of such communities. These 
may be situated on the outskirts of strong- 


holds or within a ghetto of another race's 
town or city. 

Pariahs may also exist in a dwarf commu- 
nity, where they keep their power hidden from 
those who do not share their religion. They 
are secretive, and often fearful of discovery. 
Even so, their religion may have a substantial 
number of adherents among the otherwise 
lawful good dwarves. In an evil campaign, 
they may engage in kidnapping and sacrifice. 

They may be wandering priests who join 
adventures for financial reward or to pursue 
some personal goal. 

Secondary Skills: Pariahs may choose any 
secondary skill. 

Weapon Proficiencies: A Pariah may use 
any weapon that is not forbidden by his reli- 
gion. 

Bonus Nonweapon Proficiencies: Disguise, 
Endurance, and Religion. 

Recommended Nonweapon Proficiencies: 
Any. 

Equipment: А Pariah must spend all of his 
starting funds on equipment. Any money not 
spent is lost. 

Distinctive Appearance: Pariahs have no 
distinctive appearance, as they have no desire 
to be singled out. 

Special Benefits: By paying an additional 
10% experience cost to increase in experience 
level, a Pariah may Move Silently as a ranger 
of the same level. 

If a Pariah is of chaotic or evil alignment, he 
may elect not to have any superiors. 

Special Hindrances: Unless he lives in a 
community of Outcasts, a Pariah is not free to 
openly worship his deity. Priests of other 
dwarf religions will actively prevent him from 
doing so, even by imprisonment or execution. 
They are more likely, however, to try to per- 
suade him of the error of his ways by engaging 
him in interminable religious debates. 

Wealth Options: A Pariah starts with the 
standard 3d6x10 gp. 


Patrician 


A Patrician is a priest of a Highborn clan. 
He often acts as the voice of his family in reli- 
gious matters and sees to their spiritual wel- 
fare. The priestly equivalent of the Highborn 
warrior, he traces his lineage to the very be- 
ginning of time. 

Because of their background, Patricians often 
rise quickly in the hierarchy until they gain a 
position commensurate with the political clout 
of their families. They have little to do with eve- 
ryday religion and have little contact with the 
mass of dwarves. With the exception of other 
Highborns, Patricians are frequently arrogant 
and patronizing toward others. 

Barred: A Patrician is not barred from being a 
member of any religion. However, he will not 
join a religion that calls upon him to give his 
money away or to dress in a common fashion. 

Role: Patricians can be aggravating individ- 
uals who shirk religious duties. They expect 
and demand respect, if not subservience. 
Their patronizing manner can be fun to play, 
but should be tempered with a willingness to 
heal or to aid others in times of need. 

Secondary Skills: Patricians may choose 
any secondary skill. 

Weapon Proficiencies: Patricians may choose 
any weapon permitted by their religion. 

Bonus Nonweapon Proficiencies: Endurance, 
Etiquette, Local Dwarf History, Religion. 

Recommended Nonweapon Proficiencies: 
Appraising, Artistic Ability, Blind-fighting, 
Herbalism, Hunting, Modern Languages, 
Mountaineering, Reading/Writing, Survival 
(any). 

Equipment: They must dress according to 
their station and start play with at least band- 
ed mail armor. This costs 10% to 25% more 
than usual, the same as for any Highborn. 
Patricians must also have fine weapons cost- 
ing 10% to 25% more as well. 

Distinctive Appearance: They are clothed in 


Dwarf Kits e 63 


the finest regalia of their religion, even when 
performing mundane tasks. 

Special Benefits: Dwarves of lawful align- 
ments respect Patricians and react to them 
with a +3 bonus. Other dwarves willingly 
provide food and shelter for Patricians. 

Special Hindrances: Although a Patrician is 
primarily a political appointee, he is some- 
times asked by the high priest of his religion to 
undertake dangerous missions. The Patrician 
is expected to organize and equip a party of 
dwarves out of his own funds. 

As a Highborn, he is expected to keep up 
appearances, buying only the finest equip- 
ment for the party and spending 10% to 25% 
more on equipment and services. If a Patrician 
fails to do this, his reaction bonus drops by 
—1 for each dwarf that he fails to adequately 
equip until it reaches 0. He may increase his 
reaction bonus to its former level by donating 
large amounts of money to his religion and by 
undertaking some hazardous mission. 

Nonlawfully aligned dwarves are irritated 
by the Patrician's superior airs and react to 
him at —3. 

Wealth Options: A Patrician starts with 350 
gp, plus 3d6x10 gp. 


Ritual Priest 


The Ritual Priest is the most common priest 
in dwarf society. He officiates at religious 
meetings and insures that worship is properly 
conducted. He presides over marriages, 
deaths, and name- giving ceremonies for chil- 
dren. 

Adept at fighting, the Ritual Priest is often 
willing to give his life in the defense of his 
stronghold. 

Barred: There are no barred religions for a 
Ritual Priest. 

Role: He devotes most of his time to the 
worship of his gods and the needs of his fellow 
dwarves. He is often called upon to intercede 


64 * Chapter Six 


with his deity on their behalf. His deity may 
call upon him to perform some quest or he 
may be granted a vision. He may be ordered 
by his superiors to perform a special task. A 
party of adventurers is then formed. 

Secondary Skills: He should have the Scribe 
secondary skill. 

Weapon Proficiencies: A Ritual Priest may 
be proficient in any of the weapons available 
to priests, plus: battle axe, crossbow, hand/ 
throwing axe, morning star, military, and 
warhammer. 

Bonus Nonweapon Proficiencies: Dwarf 
Runes, Endurance, Local Dwarf History, Reli- 
gion. 

Recommended Nonweapon Proficiencies: 
Ancient History, Astrology, Healing, Herbal- 
ism, Local History, Reading/Writing. 

Equipment: Ritual Priests may have any 
kind of armor. 

Distinctive Appearance: According to his 
religious custom. 

Special Benefits: He is always respected by 
other dwarves, and may ask and be granted 
shelter in any stronghold. He receives a +1 re- 
action adjustment when dealing with dwarves. 

Special Hindrances: A Ritual Priest has no 
special hindrances. 

Wealth Options: A Ritual Priest receives 
the standard 3d6x10 gp. 


Warrior/Priest Kits 


Warrior/priests are common in dwarf soci- 
ety. They combine the fighting abilities of the 
warrior with the spiritual powers of the priest. 
They may be part of a religion comprised of 
warrior/priests or they may complement a re- 
ligion, providing it with additional muscle. 


Champion 


A Champion is a member of a religion who 
has been selected to undergo intensive train- 


ing as a warrior. He is expected to defend his 
creed at all times, and may be called upon to 
do so in single combat against an evil monster 
or members of an enemy religion. 

A Champion must have Strength and Wis- 
dom scores of at least 15. He must also have a 
Charisma of at least 14. 

Barred: A Champion cannot belong to a re- 
ligion that has restrictions against violent be- 
havior. 

Role: The Champion defends his religion 
with his life and superior combat ability and 
maintains a clear head to promote it. As a de- 
fender of his creed, he must always act in its 
best interest, even when doing so causes him 
distress or physical harm. 

Secondary Skills: He should have the Ar- 
morer and Weaponsmith secondary skills. 

Weapon Proficiencies: He may have any 
weapon proficiency. Unlike other warrior/ 
priests, he may specialize in one weapon. This 
weapon must be chosen when the kit is taken 
and cannot be changed. He uses magical 
weapons only of this one type. 

Bonus Nonweapon Proficiencies: Endur- 
ance, Intimidation, Religion. 

Recommended Nonweapon Proficiencies: 
Alertness, Ancient History, Blind-fighting, 
Dwarf Runes, Hunting, Local Dwarf History, 
Musical Instrument, Singing. 

Equipment: A Champion is allowed one 
weapon specialization (this is an exception to 
the restriction against multi-class characters). 
This weapon is specially blessed and acts in all 
respects as a +1 magical weapon; it can even 
harm monsters which can only be hit by magi- 
cal weapons. The weapon may be +2 or high- 
er and/or have added bonuses when used to 
attack certain types of monsters, such as un- 
dead. The blessed weapon belongs to his 
church and he is charged with its care. It may 
never be lent and, if lost, his paramount duty 
becomes its recovery. 

A Champion who finds a superior weapon 


and decides to keep it must return his blessed 
weapon to the main temple of his religion as 
soon as he is able. 

Distinctive Appearance: Champions are 
marked by their role and have an air of super- 
iority. They usually dress in fine clothes, un- 
less specifically forbidden to do so by their 
religion. 

Special Benefits: See Equipment and Weap- 
on Proficiencies. 

Special Hindrances: He may never a refuse 
a fight related to his religion. He must defend 
it at all times. He may be requested to perform 
tasks set by his superiors. If he refuses to ac- 
cept a challenge or a quest, he loses his weap- 
on specialization and his religion will send 
another Champion to reclaim his blessed 
weapon. 

Wealth Options: A Champion starts with 
6d4x10 gp. 


Temple Guard 


Temple Guards are warrior/priests normal- 
ly stationed in a religion's temple. They have a 
good mix of abilities from both classes, and 
form the elite of a religion's warriors. 

Barred: If The Complete Priest's Handbook 
is used, Temple Guards cannot belong to a re- 
ligion which has poor fighting abilities. 

Role: A Temple Guard has a number of 
roles in a campaign. He guards the precincts 
of his temple, protecting its members from at- 
tack. He is the weapon instructor for priests of 
his religion, and it is his duty to train them in 
the use of the religion's chosen weapons. 

He may act as a representative of his reli- 
gion and may rise in its hierarchy, like any 
other priest. His duties, however, are con- 
cerned with organizing defenses and outfitting 
and leading expeditions, rather than with reli- 
gious services. 

Secondary Skills: A Temple Guard may 
have any secondary skill. 


ЫжЖж —————————————————————————————————————————.—_—____—_ 


Dwarf Kits e 65 


Weapon Proficiencies: He must be profi- 
cient in a weapon that is representative of his 
religion. If he worships the god of war, his 
proficiency would be battle axe. 

Bonus Nonweapon Proficiencies: Alert- 
ness, Religion. 

Recommended Nonweapon Proficiencies: 
Blind-fighting, Dwarf Runes, Etiquette, In- 
timidation, Modern Languages, Sign Lan- 
guage, Signalling. 

Equipment: After he has bought his weap- 
ons and holy symbol, a Temple Guard must 
buy the best armor he can afford. 

Distinctive Appearance: Temple Guards dress 
according to their religion, but always have a 
more martial appearance than other priests. 
They always carry a weapon and shield. 

Special Benefits: Any time the Temple 
Guard is fighting in defense of his temple or 
other holy place of his religion, he gains a +2 
to attack and damage rolls and a +2 to his 
saving throws. 

Special Hindrances: A Temple Guard is 
rarely a free agent and is usually given his or- 
ders by a High Priest. This may lead to long 
periods of temple duty, interspersed with spe- 
cial missions. 

Wealth Options: Temple Guards start with 
5d4x10 gp. 


Vindicator 


The Vindicator is imbued with the spiritual 
power of his deity. When this power is mani- 
fested, he becomes a fearless and powerful 
warrior. He is able to enter a rage similar to 
that experienced by Battleragers; his face be- 
comes contorted and he grinds his teeth to- 
gether. See Battlerager for details concerning 
changes in appearance. 

A Vindicator must have a minimum 
Strength of 15, Intelligence no higher than 10, 
and Wisdom no higher than 14. 


——————————————————————————— 


66 * Chapter Six 


Barred: Vindicators cannot belong to any 
religion that is concerned with peace or love. 
They worship gods of war, death, elemental 
forces, lightning, fire, strength, or thunder. 

Role: They are often the most potent force 
of a religion, expected to give their lives for 
their religion. Most are well aware that their 
lives are likely to be short, though sometimes 
glorious. 

Secondary Skills: Vindicators may choose 
any secondary skill. 

Weapon Proficiencies: They must be profi- 
cient in battle axe (one or two handed) and 
warhammer, regardless of the restrictions im- 
posed by their religion. They cannot start play 
with any ranged weapon other than war- 
hammer, and may not have any other ranged 
weapon proficiency. 

Bonus Nonweapon Proficiencies: Endur- 
ance, Intimidation, Religion, Singing. 

Recommended Nonweapon Proficiencies: 
Appraising, Armorer, Blind-fighting, Danc- 
ing, Direction Sense, Healing, Herbalism, 
Sound Analysis, Underground Navigation, 
Underground Survival. 

Equipment: Vindicators must start play 
with a battle axe and a warhammer. They 
may wear any type of armor, but it must be 
slightly larger in size than normal to accom- 


modate their increased size when in a killing 
rage (see Battlerager). 

Distinctive Appearance: They usually have 
facial and body tattoos. 

Special Benefits: Vindicators gain all the 
special benefits of Battleragers, but are not al- 
lowed to specialize in any weapon. 

Because of their higher Wisdom, Vindica- 
tors are usually able to exert more control 
over their own actions. 

Special Hindrances: Vindicators have the 
same hindrances as Battleragers, except that 
members of their own religion do not react to 
them with a negative penalty. 


When enraged, Vindicators cannot cast any 
spells, but may benefit from spells cast prior 
to becoming enraged. 

Wealth Options: Vindicators start with 
5d4x10 gp. 


Thief Kits 


True dwarf thieves who steal from other 
dwarves to make a living are almost nonexist- 
ent in dwarf society. Dwarves caught stealing 
are heavily fined, and may be banished if they 
continue. True dwarf thieves are usually 
found plying their illegal trade among other 
races. The Complete Thiefs Handbook con- 
tains kits for them. Here we look at characters 
who, while technically of the thief class, are a 
part of lawful dwarf society. They may be of 
any alignment. 


Diplomat 


Diplomats are found only in strongholds 
which have dealings with other races. They 
act as middlemen, translators, and spokes- 
men. They must rely on their wits to smooth 
the way, particularly when negotiations sour. 
A Diplomat's minimum Charisma is 13. 

Role: Diplomats may represent their 
stronghold, act as interpreter for the strong- 
hold's leader, or be employed by a dwarf mer- 
chant. Sometimes a Diplomat will be hired by 
humans or other races to assist making deals 
with the dwarves of a particular stronghold. 

Many use their position to spy upon other 
race's defenses. Most races consider such ac- 
tivities as espionage, but dwarves view it as 
merely taking necessary precautions. 

Secondary Skills: A Diplomat should have 
the Trader/Barterer secondary skill. 

Weapon Proficiencies: Any kind of weap- 
ons normally permitted thieves. 

Bonus Nonweapon Proficiencies: The Dip- 


lomat starts with any four modern languages. 

Recommended Nonweapon Proficiencies: 
Alertness, Blind- fighting, Disguise, Gaming, 
Local History, Reading Lips, Sign Language, 
Tightrope Walking, Ventriloquism. 

Equipment: Because of the sensitive nature 
of their missions, Diplomats should dress as 
unobtrusively as possible and possess easily 
concealed weapons such as daggers and darts. 

Distinctive Appearance: Diplomats tend to 
look like everyone's idea of a typical dwarf. 
Even though different races or cultures see 
them in different ways, Diplomats know how 
to dress in order to match the preconceptions 
of others. 

Special Benefits: Diplomats gain a +10% 
modifier to Detect Noise and a +5% modifier 
to the Open Locks ability. 

They gain a +3 reaction bonus dealing with 
other races, except racial enemies; then the re- 
action bonus drops to * 1. 

Special Hindrances: Diplomats suffer a 
— 10% penalty to their Pick Pockets ability. 

Wealth Options: Diplomats receive 3dóx10 
gp instead of the normal 2d6x10 gp. 


Entertainer 


Dwarves enjoy entertainment during lei- 
sure hours, although other races are surprised 
there are dwarves whose trade is to entertain. 
There are dancers, singers, jugglers and tum- 
blers, musicians, tightrope walkers, and fire 
eaters. They rarely tell jokes. 

To be an Entertainer, a character has to 
have a minimum Dexterity of 14. 

Role: Like most dwarf trades, Entertainers 
are governed by a guild. They are trained 
from an early age and are very adept at what 
they do. 

Humans and elves often find the sight of 
dwarf Entertainers gamboling around a stage 
hilariously funny, much to the annoyance of 
the Entertainers and dwarves in the audience. 


—— TUE 


Dwarf Kits ® 67 


The performance of an Entertainer is meant to 
display the physical prowess of the dwarves in 
an edifying manner. They are certainly not 
meant to be laughed at! 

Secondary Skills: Any. 

Weapon Proficiencies: Entertainers may 
use any weapon. 

Bonus Nonweapon Proficiencies: An Enter- 
tainer may choose two of the following skills: 
Dancing, Juggling, Local Dwarf History, Mu- 
sical Instrument, Rope Use, Singing, Slow 
Respiration, Tightrope Walking, Tumbling, 
Ventriloquism. 

Recommended Nonweapon Proficiencies: 
АП of the above, plus Alertness. 

Equipment: Entertainers start with rope, 
juggling balls and skittles, and a musical in- 
strument. These are provided by the Enter- 
tainers' Guild. 

Distinctive Appearance: Entertainers usu- 
ally dress in sober dwarven colors; dark 
browns or slate grays. They can easily be 
identified by their equipment, which they take 
everywhere. 

Special Benefits: Entertainers gain а +1 
ability modifier when using the Singing, 
Dancing, Juggling, and Rope Use proficien- 
cies. 

Special Hindrances: Entertainers tend to be 
laughed off stage when they perform outside 
dwarf society. This makes them reluctant to 
perform for any audience not made up of 
dwarves. 

Wealth Options: Entertainers start with on- 
ly 2d4x10 gp. 


Locksmith 


Locksmiths are masters at building and tak- 
ing apart locks. These craftsmen are well re- 
spected in dwarf society. In many ways the 
true thief's worst enemy, locksmiths make it 
hard for a thief to exercise his trade. 

Role: They are expert in making and open- 


68 * Chapter Six 


ing locks. They are also expert at finding and 
disarming traps. Their craft safeguards homes 
and builds strong locks for the gates of dwarf 
strongholds. 

To adventurers, there are many benefits to 
having a locksmith along. They can find and 
remove traps, open locks, and have all of the 
other skills of thieves. 

Secondary Skills: Locksmiths often have 
technical skills, such as Mason, Miner, or 
Woodworker/Carpenter. 

Weapon Proficiencies: They usually carry 
axes and hammers. Practical dwarves, they 
know that not all locks can be picked. Some- 
times it is necessary to break a door down in- 
stead. 

Bonus Nonweapon Proficiencies: Carpen- 
try, Locksmithing. 

Recommended Nonweapon Proficiencies: 
Alertness, Engineering, Stonemasonry. 

Equipment: Locksmiths should have one set 
each of lock making and lock picking tools. 

Distinctive Appearance: No distinctive ap- 
pearance. 

Special Benefits: They gain a +10% modi- 
fier to their Open Locks ability in addition to 
that provided by the Lockpicking proficiency, 
and a +10% bonus to their Find/Remove 
Traps ability. 

Special Hindrances: Locksmiths have a 
— 10% penalty to their Climb Walls ability and 
а —5% penalty to their Pick Pockets ability. 

Wealth Options: They start with 4d4x10 
gp. 


Pest Controller 


Pest Controllers keep a stronghold free 
from rats, giant spiders, centipedes, carrion 
crawlers, kobolds, and other pests. They are 
experts at setting traps and in eradicating mi- 
nor animal and monster nuisances. 

Role: Pest Controllers are members of the 
Pest Control Guild. Through experience they 


learn all of a stronghold's tunnels, passages, and 
sewers. Although they perform an invaluable 
service keeping underground settlements habit- 
able, their true worth becomes apparent when a 
stronghold is under attack. Then they use their 
expertise to rig traps along passages of expected 
enemy advance to slow and kill the invaders. 
Enemies entering a dwarf stronghold are likely 
to find their way beset with deadly traps. 

As members of an adventuring party, Pest 
Controllers are useful to protect the party's 
camp area and to find and disarm traps set by 
others. 

Secondary Skills: They should have the sec- 
ondary skill of Trapper/Furrier. 

Weapon Proficiencies: Pest Controllers 
usually carry daggers and darts, but may use 
any type of weapon normally permitted to 
thieves. 

Bonus Nonweapon Proficiencies: Animal 
Lore, Pest Control. 

Recommended Nonweapon Proficiencies: 
Alertness, Blacksmithing, Blind-fighting, Car- 
pentry, Direction Sense, Set Snares, Sign Lan- 
guage, Signalling, Stonemasonry, Tracking, 
Underground Survival, Weaponsmithing. 

Equipment: Pest Controllers should equip 
themselves with cages and other traps. If one 
has the blacksmithing or weaponsmithing 
proficiencies it can be assumed he has built 
1d4 traps before starting play. 

Distinctive Appearance: Pest Controllers 
wear shiny black leather armor and black 
leather helmets. 

Special Benefits: They gain a +5% bonus 
to their Move Silently and Find/Remove 
Traps abilities. 

Special Hindrances: They have a —10% 
penalty to their Pick Pockets ability. Other 
dwarves, except Vermin Slayers and Wayfin- 
ders, consider them to be unsavory characters 
and react to them with a —2 penalty. 

Wealth Options: They start with the stand- 
ard 2d6x10 gp. 


Warrior/Thief Kits 


Multi-class warrior/thieves fill many spe- 
cialist roles. With their ability to fight effec- 
tively, coupled with their thieving abilities, 
their services are much in demand. Warrior/ 
thieves are often more than just the sum of 
their parts. The kits below describe some of 
the ways in which they fit into dwarf society. 


Ghetto Fighter 


Ghetto Fighters live in the ghettos of non- 
dwarven towns or cities. Generally from poor 
families, they have had to look after them- 
selves from an early age. The typical Ghetto 
Fighter has a hardbitten, self-centered atti- 
tude, developed in order to survive the rigors 
of the ghetto. 

Ghetto Fighters may come from dwarf 
strongholds. In such cases they would be from 
poor clans with bad reputations. Such charac- 
ters are always suspect to other dwarves, and 
they find it difficult to make a living by honest 
means. 

Role: The Ghetto Fighter never forgets his 
lowly origins and may harbor resentments 
against dwarves who are better off. However, 
he stays true to his roots, and will try to better 
the lives of ghetto children. 

Secondary Skills: A Ghetto Fighter may 
have any secondary skill. 

Weapon Proficiencies: Weapon proficien- 
cies available to Ghetto Fighters are deter- 
mined by the campaign background. If the 
Ghetto Fighter is from a repressive city, most 
weapons may be forbidden to citizens, and 
dwarves may be especially restricted. It may 
be illegal for dwarves to possess any weapons 
within the city, with stiff fines or imprison- 
ment the usual punishments. In such a city, a 
Ghetto Fighter would be restricted to con- 
cealed weapons; daggers or darts. In other so- 
cieties, Ghetto Fighters may be allowed to be 


—е——.—.—.—.—-—-—<-—<—-—-—-—-— سس‎ 


Dwarf Kits * 69 


proficient in any weapon. 

Bonus Nonweapon Proficiencies: Alert- 
ness, Disguise, Endurance. 

Recommended Nonweapon Proficiencies: 
Blind-fighting, Forgery, Gaming, Local Histo- 
ry, Lip Reading, Sign Language, Tumbling, 
Ventriloquism. 

Equipment: Ghetto Fighters should start 
play with thief's picks and a rope. Otherwise, 
they may equip themselves as they see fit. 

Distinctive Appearance: Ghetto Fighters do 
not have a distinctive appearance, but many 
bear scars or have amputated fingers from 
street fighting. Some wear an eyepatch. 

Special Benefits: A Ghetto Fighter gains a 
*1 bonus to hit and damage when using a 
dagger or knife. When attacking with two 
weapons, he does not suffer any penalty with 
his primary weapon, and only a —2 attack 
penalty with his secondary weapon (see the 
Players Handbook, page 96). If his secondary 
weapon is a dagger or knife, he still gains the 
+1 to hit and damage. 

He gains a +5% modifier to his Pick Pock- 
ets and Hide in Shadows skills. 

Special Hindrances: Ghetto Fighters have 
bad reputations with the authorities of the 
town, city, or stronghold in which they live. 
Law enforcement agents of the same town, 
city, or stronghold react at —3 to a Ghetto 
Fighter. 

He suffers a —5% penalty to his chance to 
Find/Remove Traps. 

Wealth Options: A Ghetto Fighter starts 
with only 3d4x10 gp. 


Trader 


Dwarf merchants who trade mainly with 
other races, the Traders seek to drive the hard- 
est bargain they can. They usually deal in 
dwarven weapons, armor, and other metal 
goods, but will trade in uncut gems, iron, or 
other ores when there is a glut of them. 


__——-—.—-—-—-—-—-—-—-—-—-—-—-—-—-—-—-—-—-—-—-—-—-—-—-—— 


70 * Chapter Six 


Traders transport their wares on mules or 
ponies, taking their goods to human and elven 
towns or cities where they sell them to local 
merchants. Some traders have established 
their own shops in such places, eliminating the 
middleman. 

Role: They are often willing to travel vast 
distances in search of bargains. Some Traders 
deal with the races of the Underdark, particu- 
larly deep gnomes, and sometimes with drow 
or duergar. Others act as the only contact some 
mountain dwarf strongholds have with the 
outside world. Traders are vital to the strong- 
holds, bringing in goods which local dwarves 
are unable to manufacture themselves. 

Traders are adventurous by nature and are 
always looking for a good deal. Entire cam- 
paigns may be based around the activities of a 
Trader and his companions, transporting 
goods through hostile lands or in search of 
lost treasure. 

Secondary Skills: Traders should have the 
Trader/Barterer secondary skill. 

Weapon Proficiencies: Traders should be 
proficient in light crossbow and a concealable 
hand weapon such as a dagger, knife, or hand 
axe. Otherwise, they may be proficient in any 
weapon they choose. 

Bonus Nonweapon Proficiencies: Apprais- 
ing, Endurance, Navigation. 

Recommended Nonweapon Proficiencies: 
Alertness, Animal Handling, Direction Sense, 
Hunting, Local Dwarf History, Local History, 
Riding (Land Based), Survival (as appropri- 
ate), Underground Navigation. 

Equipment: A Trader starts his career with a 
mule and packs and panniers for carrying 
goods and equipment. 

Distinctive Appearance: Traders do not 
have to belong to a guild and have no stand- 
ard appearance. 

Special Benefits: A Trader gains a +1 to hit 
and damage only when protecting his goods 
or animals. 


A Trader also gains a +1 reaction bonus 
from merchants and other traders. This bonus 
is based on his reputation as a fair and honest 
Trader. If he cheats on a deal and is later dis- 
covered, the bonus changes to a —2 penalty. 

Special Hindrances: Traders have no special 
hindrances. 

Wealth Options: A Trader starts with 
4d4x10 gp. 


Vermin Slayer 


The Vermin Slayer is a highly skilled spe- 
cialist who enters the tunnel systems of mon- 
sters such as kobolds, goblins, and jermlaines, 
with the intention of eradicating them. Ver- 
min Slayers are also adept at negotiating the 
constricted passages created by giant rats, 
centipedes, and other pests and vermin. 

They are used to fighting in confined spaces 
and are experts at hiding in shadows, where 
they wait to surprise their prey. 

Vermin Slayers are similar to Pest Control- 
lers, but where a Pest Controller uses traps to 
catch his prey, Vermin Slayers actively hunt 
victims with light crossbows and hand axes or 
hammers. 

A Vermin Slayer must have minimum 
scores of 14 in Strength and Dexterity. 

Role: They belong to their own guild, 
which sells their services to those who require 
them. Many operate as freelancers, selling 
their skills to humans and other races who are 
experiencing problems with “vermin.” 

Within dwarf societies plagued by pests, 
Vermin Slayers are highly regarded. Their 
willingness to enter narrow tunnels is seen as 
commendable by other dwarves. In strong- 
holds where they are not constantly em- 
ployed, they are often viewed with suspicion 
and distaste. Many have been known to turn 
to illegal activities in order to support them- 
selves, but their willingness to enter even 
sewers has proved their worth as recoverers of 


lost items and has earned them a reputation 
for being incredibly tough. 

Outside of dwarf society, Vermin Slayers 
are something of an enigma. They do not 
readily fit the image other races have of the 
trades. Most humans are amazed that a skill 
as specialized as Vermin Slayers even exists. 
Even so, they easily find work in human cit- 
ies as pest exterminators, and their services 
have often been called upon to eradicate 
bands of raiding kobolds and goblins from 
their lairs. 

Secondary Skills: A Vermin Slayer should 
have the Hunter secondary skill. 

Weapon Proficiencies: Vermin Slayers must 
be proficient in light crossbow and hand axe, 
hammer, or dagger. Many favor the specialist 
weapons of the close combat fighter. Gener- 
ally, Vermin Slayers should choose fast weap- 
ons that require little space. 

Bonus Nonweapon Proficiencies: Alert- 
ness, Endurance, Tracking, Underground 
Navigation. 

Recommended Nonweapon Proficiencies: 
Direction Sense, Sign Language, Under- 
ground Survival, Pest Control, Blind- 
fighting, Intimidation, Set Snares, 
Swimming. 

Equipment: Vermin Slayers may spend their 
money on any kind of equipment. Depending 
on the current job, they have a wide variety of 
armor options available. If stealth is required, 
they should wear no more than leather armor. 
When seeking to destroy the opposition, 
metal armor may be worn, even though this 
causes their thief skills to be negated. 

Most Vermin Slayers carry at least two light 
crossbows, allowing them to fire two shots be- 
fore having to reload. 

A new Vermin Slayer character receives a 
light crossbow, 10 bolts, and a quiver free of 
charge. 

Distinctive Appearance: They are distin- 
guished by the bandannas around their heads, 


—_—_—_— كك 


Dwarf Kits e 71 


and by their habit of hanging the dried heads 
or skulls of their vermin victims about their 
waists. 

Special Benefits: Vermin Slayers receive a 
+5% bonus to their Find/Remove Traps, De- 
tect Noise, and Move Silently skills. Because 
of their special training, Vermin Slayers re- 
ceive a +1 bonus to hit and а +2 bonus to 
damage with one chosen hand weapon, when 
fighting small sized creatures. They receive a 
— 1 initiative bonus anytime they are fighting 
in a restricted tunnel or passage. 

Special Hindrances: Vermin Slayers have a 
— 10% penalty to their Pick Pockets skill and 
a —5% penalty to their Read Languages skill. 

They are not trained to fight large crea- 
tures, so ogres, trolls, ogre magi, giants, and 
titans find them easier to attack than other 
dwarves. Large creatures are only penalized 2 
when attacking Vermin Slayers. 

Wealth Options: Vermin Slayers receive the 
standard 5d4x10 gp starting gold, plus their 
free light crossbow, 10 bolts, and quiver. 


72 * Chapter Six 


Wayfinder 


The Wayfinder is a hardy mix of warrior 
and thief who usually operates independently 
of other dwarves. He cares for himself, acting 
on his own initiative, and is able to survive for 
long periods of time on a minimum of food. 

A Wayfinder must have a minimum Intelli- 
gence of 12. 

Role: Wayfinders are traditionally em- 
ployed as underground explorers and spies. 
They chart the best routes underground, note 
supplies of food and water, and mark down 
the location of any mineral deposits they find. 

Wayfinders are frequently employed to ex- 
plore new areas for mining and to chart un- 
derground waterways. This is the only dwarf 
kit with Swimming as a bonus proficiency. 

The dwarven military employs them as un- 
derground scouts and guides. These intrepid 
explorers frequently venture into monster- in- 
fested caverns in order to learn the numbers 
and positions of guards, and any weakness in 
the monster defenses. Once they have report- 


ed their intelligence, they guide the dwarf troops 
to the locations, following their own mapped 
routes. 

In human society the Wayfinder has found 
employment with mine owners, prospectors, 
and parties of adventurers. The Wayfinder's 
combat and thief skills make him doubly useful 
to his colleagues. 

Some Wayfinders have become very rich dis- 
covering lodes of the finest silver, gold, and 
even mithril during their explorations. Their 
ability to find alternate routes makes hiding the 
discovery from their employers a simple task, 
and then they can exploit it themselves. 

Secondary Skills: A Wayfinder should have 
the Navigator secondary skill. 

Weapon Proficiencies: Wayfinders may 
chose any weapon proficiencies permitted to 
warriors and thieves. 

Bonus Nonweapon Proficiencies: Endurance, 
Swimming, Underground Navigation, Under- 
ground Survival. 

Recommended Nonweapon Proficiencies: 
Alertness, Blind- fighting, Direction Sense, 
Fungi Recognition, Herbalism, Local Dwarf 
History, Locksmithing, Mining, Modern Lan- 
guages, Rope Use, Set Snares, Sign Language, 
Signalling, Slow Respiration, Tracking. 

Equipment: Wayfinders should start with a 
suit of leather armor and a shield. They should 
carry basic survival equipment such as ropes, 
pitons, a hammer, food supplies, waterskin, etc. 

Distinctive Appearance: They usually dress in 
black leather armor and carry black shields. Un- 
like most dwarves, their beards are either worn 
very short or braided into tight ringlets, which 
give their chins a jagged appearance. 

Special Benefits: They gain a +10% bonus to 
their Hide in Shadows and Move Silently skills. 
They are also able to learn languages easily. 
Each language learned by a Wayfinder costs on- 
ly half its listed number of slots. So, for the cost 
of one slot, a Wayfinder could learn both the 
Sign and Goblin Language proficiencies. 


Special Hindrances: Wayfinders have a 
—10% penalty to their Pick Pockets and Read 
Languages skills. 

They are not quite trusted by other dwarves 
due to their independent nature. The fact that 
some Wayfinders have cheated on their em- 
ployers in the past has deepened the distrust. 
As a result, Wayfinders have —2 reaction pen- 
alty when dealing with other dwarves. This 
penalty is ignored in situations where a Way- 
finders services are being actively sought; 
then their independent nature is viewed more 
positively. Other dwarves will remain suspi- 
cious of a Wayfinder's motives. 

Wealth Options: Wayfinders start with the 
usual 5d4x10 gp for multi-classed warriors. 


3 


т 


Dwarf Kits € 73 


CHAPTER 


Role Playing and Personalities 


Farondil, an Elf, Speaks of Dwarves 


Let's get one thing straight, I have nothing 
against dwarves personally. It's just that they- 
те so different from regular folk. They really 
are a bit freakish. Just look at them. Four foot 
six at best, often just as wide. The proportions 
are all wrong. And that hair! It grows all over 
the place. Most of them look like they've rugs 
stuck to their faces. And the smell! The less 
said about that, the better. 

I'm really not prejudiced, but I do believe in 
calling a squat a squat. And that's just what 
they are, squat and ugly things, the victims of a 
mean joke of the gods. No wonder they live be- 
low ground. No one takes them seriously, ex- 
cept themselves. And they do take themselves 
seriously. A few have even had the nerve to 
call me flighty, if you can believe that. 

Besides, they are so obsessed with work 
they never laugh, never have any fun. Work, 
work, work, that's all they do besides sleep, 
drink vast quantities of alcohol, and smell. 
Mind you, it's hardly surprising given their re- 
pressive society. Those guilds are nothing 
short of legalized slavery. 

Underground is the best place for them. 
Down there, they can't go ‘round depressing 
other folk. You can tell how bad it is down 
there by the number of them who escape eve- 
ry year. You know the type, either greedy mer- 
chants or homicidal killers. Have you ever 
tried discussing philosophy with a dwarf? 
They're not at all interested in life, stars, 
flowers, or freedom. One rude little beast had 
the effrontery to tell me to shut up with my 
"mindless pansy drivel," or he'd hack my legs 
off. Ha! The stumpy little runt couldn't reach 
any higher, my legs were all he could hit! 

Oh, they're all right from a distance, I sup- 
pose. Just keep them in their holes, away from 
decent folk, and everything will be fine. I'm 


т 


74 * Chapter Seven 


not prejudiced, but I still don't want any liv- 
ing in my woods! 


Other races tend to stereotype dwarves, 
lumping them all together as suspicious, ava- 
ricious, taciturn, obstinate, grumpy, grim, 
and humorless creatures. They see them as 
rigid and unyielding as stone, while grudg- 
ingly admitting that dwarves are hardy and 
tenacious fighters. 

While all that is true, it is a gross generaliza- 
tion. Many dwarves will not fit neatly into an- 
other race's conception of them. No two are 
exactly alike. They may have the same char- 
acter kit, but each has his own goals, interests, 
quirks, and flaws setting him apart from his 
fellows. There are, however, certain discern- 
ible qualities shared by the entire race. 


The Dwarven Personality 


"Humph! Get lost!" 
Dwarven Maxim 


Dwarves are not humans with short legs, 
broad torsos, and long beards. They are an- 
other race entirely, with distinctive personali- 
ty traits and beliefs which set them apart from 
humans. Playing a dwarf is more challenging 
than playing a human warrior, cleric, or thief. 
As humans, we know our basic traits, and 
portray them easily in a game. It is more diffi- 
cult to make dwarves believable and fun, but 
the potential reward is worth the effort. 


Basic Personality 


Dwarven personality is molded by many 
factors. They see themselves as a proud and 
noble race, maintaining their own ways. This 
is not because they are stubborn, but because 
experience has taught them that their ways are 


best. They do not understand why other races 
consider them dour and taciturn. Believing 
that there is a time and place for everything, 
dwarves approach work seriously, with an at- 
titude of commitment. Dealing with other 
races is always seen as work and dwarves al- 
ways work solemnly. While this has led to 
false portrayals, dwarves don't care. They 
know they are superior to all other races. If 
others fail to recognize this, it is not the 
dwarves' loss. They are content to leave oth- 
ers alone, unless they are in direct conflict or 
competition for living space or resources. 
When attacked, the entire stronghold will 
fight. 

Knowing how the race generally feels about 
most things helps to define individual player 
characters. Even if the character's personality 
is entirely different from the norm, it can be 
defined by noting the differences. 


The Dwarven Personalities 


The following personalities are provided 
as spurs to the imagination. They are intend- 
ed as concepts to be used and developed by 
players with dwarf characters. Each person- 
ality provides a framework for the charac- 
ters role playing personality, and can be 
amended, added to, or combined with other 
personalities. 

Players are encouraged to alter and modify 
the personality types in any way they like. 
Characteristics can be combined to create new 
types. 

A player may wish to change his character's 
personality. In the course of adventuring, he 
may have experiences which cause him to 
change and grow. Such changes should be 
rare, and should mark a major turning point 
in life. A personality should not be changed 
just for the sake of trying something new. The 


change should develop naturally out of the 
events of the campaign, perhaps as a result of 
a catastrophic event. 

Each personality description includes the 
following information: 

It starts with a general description of the 
character's attitudes, motivations, and out- 
look. It suggests how he is likely to function in 
a typical campaign. In some cases, recommen- 
dations are made as to what type of player 
may find a particular personality the most en- 
joyable to play. 

Best Suited For: Some personality types are 
more appropriate for certain alignments than 
others, and some are more appropriate for 
certain kits. These are recommendations, not 
hard and fast rules. Novice players are ad- 
vised to remain within the alignment and kit 
recommendations. 

Combat Situations: Each personality type 
approaches combat situations differently. 
Some might charge straight ahead with weap- 
ons swinging, while others might hold back to 
size up the enemy before committing them- 
selves. 

Role Playing Situations: How is a character 
likely to react to NPCs? These suggestions 
should be used as guidelines when role- 
playing conversations, small talk, interroga- 
tions, and interviews. There are also ideas 


about how the character might interact with 
other PCs. 


The Decadent 


The Decadent is one who follows the ways 
of other races instead of dwarven ways. He 
may have been living in close proximity to 
other races, such as elves or humans, or he 
may have made a conscious decision that an- 
other culture had superior qualities to his 
own. Possibilities include a dwarf who was 


Role Playing and Personalities ® 75 


captured while young and raised by a tribe of 
orcs. His loyalties would be to orcs, rather 
than his own race. А character may have con- 
verted to the other race's religion, forswearing 
dwarven things. 

Best Suited For: Decadent dwarves are suit- 
able for all kits and alignments except the Bat- 
tlerager. The Outcast kit is a good choice. A 
Decadent personality allows a player to role- 
play someone who is outwardly dwarven, but 
is far from dwarven inside. It also allows 
dwarf priests or warrior/priests to be mem- 
bers of another race's religion. 

Combat Situations: There is no specific 
Decadent combat response. 

Role Playing Situations: Decadent dwarves 
may act like humans, elves, or others in dwarf 
form, and will share the attitudes of their 
adopted race. 

They are viewed with suspicion by other 
dwarves. They are never completely trusted. 
Dwarves will be circumspect with a Decadent 
dwarf. 

They don't get on very well with other 
dwarves, seeing them as deficient in some 
way. Many other races have difficulty accept- 
ing a Decadent dwarf unless he grew up as 
part of their society. A dwarf who was raised 
by a tribe of orcs would be accepted by the 
orcs of that tribe, but he would still be a racial 
enemy to other orcs who don't know him. 


Glory Seeker 


The Glory Seeker hopes to become famous 
by performing heroic deeds. He dreams of be- 
coming one of the heroes of legend whose 
deeds are still sung though the hero died a 
thousand years ago. 

Best Suited For: Axe for Hire, Battlerager, 
Highborn, or any priest or warrior/priest kit. 
Lawful and good alignments are best for a 


т 


76 * Chapter Seven 


Glory Seeker, but chaotics may also fill this 
role. 

Combat Situations: He fights for glory, rev- 
eling in the action, and dreams of his por- 
trayal by storytellers to generations yet 
unborn. His love of action causes him to take 
risks, but he will try to avoid endangering his 
companions. He will place himself in grave 
danger to protect others or to rescue them, or 
even just to see if he can survive it, if that 
action alone would be heroic. 

Role-Playing Situations: He enjoys being 
the center of attention, but is not necessarily a 
skilled speaker. He may recognize his weak- 
nesses and allow others to lead in negotia- 
tions. He wishes only to be acknowledged for 
the hero he is. When dealing with dwarves, 
particularly if he is the only dwarf in a party, 
he will take command of the situation, or at 
least make it clear that he is the leader of the 
party, even if he is not. He wishes others to see 
him as an epic figure. 


The Grumbler 


The Grumbler loves being unhappy. Noth- 
ing satisfies him. Its either too damp, too 
dark, too smelly, too cold, too hot, or simply 
wrong. There is never a right. He may grudg- 
ingly admit that things are not too bad, but 
they are bad enough. He is only happy when 
he has something to be unhappy about. 

He is not always vocal about his unhappi- 
ness. А few well-placed moans may be the 
best protest, as long as everyone knows that 
he is not happy. 

Best Suited For: Most kits, except the Dip- 
lomat, will work. To give him something to 
grumble about, see to the negative side of the 
kit. For instance, a Locksmith could be com- 
plaining that he's always the one to open locks 
and look for traps. The Vermin Slayer risks 


N 
мА 


— 4 22 


* 
a 
i, 


n | M P 
W et KFS 


a à 
t 
ў 
N 
T 5 


3 


his neck exploring tunnels, with little thanks. 
The real key to playing a grumbler is remem- 
bering that he actually enjoys what he does, 
he just never admits it. 

Combat Situations: The Grumbler may ap- 
proach combat as just another chore to be 
done, or as an opportunity to take out his un- 
happiness on others. He may approach com- 
bat with disguised zeal, never admitting his 
enjoyment. Taken to extremes, the Grumbler 
will complain about the sloppy fighting meth- 
ods of his opponents, or their treachery, 
which caused him injury. 

Role-playing Situations: He fits the stereo- 
type of the dour, taciturn dwarf. He only 
speaks to complain, and something as simple 
as ordering a room at an inn sounds like a 
complaint ("And don't stick me in a room in- 
fested with lice, I want a decent one—make 
sure it isn't over the common room or I won't 
get any sleep"). 


The Hoarder 


This character is obsessed with acquiring, 
hoarding, and counting wealth. He never 
spends it if he can avoid it, and he is always 
the first one to search the pockets of van- 
quished opponents. In his spare time he 
counts his gold and polishes his gems. He 
takes the race's love of wealth to an avaricious 
extreme, and may become violent if someone 
even looks at his treasure. He doesn't like talk- 
ing about it because talk arouses others' greed. 
He covets any treasure that isn't his, and is of- 
ten spotted eyeing it enviously. Other party 
members can easily manipulate him by offer- 
ing gems and other material rewards. 

Best Suited For: Any alignment. A good 
character will be a private individual who 
doesn't want others prying into his affairs. He 
won't steal from other party members, but he 


———————————————————————— 


78 * Chapter Seven 


is not averse to pocketing an odd gem or trin- 
ket found on an enemy or in a treasure haul 
(especially if no one else noticed it). He readily 
rationalizes why he should have things which 
aren't currently his. Neutral and evil charac- 
ters are more likely to steal, but they are smart 
enough not to be obvious. Leave one of them 
alone with a treasure chest and he is guaran- 
teed to rifle it, pocketing the choicest items. 
This is the wrong character to leave guarding 
the packs. 

Any type of thief character makes an ideal 
Hoarder, as do most other character kits ex- 
cept Diplomat and Highborn. 

Combat Situations: The Hoarder is often a 
determined fighter who realizes that the 
quickest way to get more loot is to take it from 
people or creatures who no longer need it 
(i.e., dead ones). His greed can lead him to be 
foolhardy, or to go off on his own in danger- 
ous areas. The sight of a beautiful gem in the 
eye of a statue, across a chamber full of orcs, 
is likely to lead a Hoarder to fight his way to 
it, or leave his companions to fight while he 
sneaks around the edge in the hope of pocket- 
ing the gem in the confusion. 

Role-playing Situations: The Hoarder is al- 
ways looking for the best deal in any situa- 
tion. Unlike the Statesman, he is frequently 
not very good at getting it; his greed is so ap- 
parent that others can easily manipulate him 
and strike hard bargains. 


The Optimist 


The optimist is an outgoing, cheerful char- 
acter, always looking on the bright side, even 
when circumstances are dire. To the optimist, 
there is always a brighter and better tomor- 
row, and even the worst situation can be turn- 
ed to advantage. 

Best Suited For: Ideally suited to players 


who wish to play cheerful characters. Taken 
to its extreme, an Optimist can be as much an 
irritation as a Grumbler. Instead of finding 
fault, every situation has a redeeming quality. 

The Optimist works best with good or neu- 
tral characters, evil isn't very optimistic (but 
may hide behind an optimistic facade). 

Entertainer, Animal Master, and Sharp- 
shooter work well with this personality, but it 
can be used interestingly with Ghetto Fighter. 

In Combat Situations: The Optimist is no 
fool. In combat he is capable of weighing the 
opposition and acting to ensure the best possible 
result. He is not given to rushing into combat, 
but neither will he shirk his responsibilities. He 
may counsel a timely retreat or a rear-guard 
action, rather than a frontal assault, but when 
the chips are down, he'll meet his fate with a 
grin. He genuinely believes that any odds can be 
overcome with the right plan. 

Role-playing Situations: The cheery good 
nature of the Optimist suits him well. He en- 
joys meeting people of other races and he of- 
ten changes the opinions of those who think 
all dwarves are dour. 


The Paragon 


The Paragon takes racial pride to the ex- 
treme. Dwarf achievements are the highest 
possible and no other race can hope to measure 
up to the standards dwarves have set. He finds 
fault with others, especially other races, but he 
can just as easily find fault with other subraces. 
He is always comparing the lifestyles and 
actions of others to his own way of life, and 
they rarely, if ever, match his standards. 

To this character, elves are flighty and apa- 
thetic; orcs are wretched, brutal, and de- 
praved; humans and halflings too easily 
distracted; and gnomes are obsessed with the 
wrong things. 


Best Suited For: Any alignment will work 
well. Lawful good Paragons will be helpful 
and offer unwanted suggestions of how others 
can improve themselves and benefit from be- 
ing lawful and good. Chaotics will simply be 
showoffs and fault finders. Evil and neutral 
characters can be vindictively opinionated 
and callous about others. A Paragon may be 
used with any kit. 

Combat Situations: Paragons can always 
find reasons to be in combat. "Pah! They need 
a dwarf in there to show them how it's done; 
humans and elves got no idea.” They can just 
as easily find reasons not to get involved; 
"Don't see why I have to fight 'em; it's a hu- 
man problem, not mine!" 

Role-playing Situations: A bad choice for a 
Diplomat. It is too easy for him to be obnox- 
ious and rude to others. Given the will to re- 
main silent, he's still likely to open his mouth 
and cut loose with barbed comments. In eve- 
ryday situations, he is likely to make more en- 
emies than friends. He creates friction among 
fellow party members, particularly if there are 
other races present, with his opinions. 


The Phobic 


He is scared. He may be unable to approach 
bodies of water, or has a morbid fear of 
heights, or a fear of open spaces, or of en- 
closed places, or of certain types of monsters: 
goblins or umber hulks, perhaps. 

Whatever the phobic is afraid of, it prevents 
him from fully functioning when dealing with 
the object of his phobia. He may simply refuse 
to go anywhere near it. This may be repre- 
sented in gaming terms by giving the character 
penalties to his attack and damage rolls; pen- 
alties of —2 to —5 are suitable. Or he may 
have to make a saving throw vs. paralyzation 
to approach the thing he fears. 


Role Playing and Personalities e 79 


Best Suited For: Players who enjoy flawed 
characters will find Phobics good fun to play, 
though they are more restricted than other 
character types. 

Any alignment or character kit can be used 
with a Phobic. Sundered dwarves are always 
claustrophobic. A Phobic may easily be com- 
bined with another personality; a Glory Seek- 
er with a fear of water, for example. 

Combat Situations: The Phobic performs 
well until faced with the object of his phobia. 
Then he becomes reluctant to fight, and may 
even flee as if affected by a fear spell. A saving 
throw may be called for in such situations to 
see whether he continues to fight, or flees. 

Role-playing Situations: In most situations 
the Phobic functions normally, acting as the 
player wants, but faced with his phobia, he 
changes dramatically. When he is combined 
with other personalities, there are intriguing 
possibilities. Imagine an orc-hating Battlera- 
ger who has a suicidal disregard for his own 
safety when fighting orcs, but turns and flees 
when faced with a single kobold. 


The Pragmatist 


In any given situation, the pragmatist 
knows what has to be done and does it, ruth- 
lessly and efficiently. He takes only calculated 
risks, and is never foolhardy. 

Best Suited For: Pragmatists are only suit- 
able for neutral and evil characters. Good 
characters suffer from having to do the right 
thing; Pragmatists do the required thing. Suit- 
able for Axe For Hire, Vermin Slayer, Sharp- 
shooter, Trader, or Ghetto Fighter. 

Combat Situations: He prefers to weigh the 
odds before committing to combat, consider- 
ing weaknesses and opportunities that may be 
exploited to best advantage. Once engaged, 
he will fight to eliminate his opponents as 


80 * Chapter Seven 


quickly as possible, by any means, however 
ruthless or underhanded. 

Role-playing Situations: A Pragmatist can 
be gruff and taciturn, or he may be more 
open, even happy and gregarious. In negotia- 
tion, he pushes for the best deal, but he also 
knows when he has achieved all he can. 


The Statesman 


The Statesman is concerned with getting the 
best deal for his clan, stronghold, and race, in 
that order. He exudes natural leadership, or at 
least likes to think that he does. This may be a 
result of his birth, his upbringing, or his own 
inflated opinion of himself. He takes charge of 
most situations, acting in a decisive and im- 
posing manner. 

Best Suited For: The Statesman is best suit- 
ed for the Diplomat and Highborn kits. The 
Champion and Ghetto Fighter are also useful. 
Chaotic characters are usually too carefree or 
self-centered to make good Statesmen. 

In Combat Situations: He does not see him- 
self as a good combatant. He would rather en- 
gage in diplomacy, but if that fails he may try 
to take command of a party. His success de- 
pends on whether he is also a competent com- 
mander. 

Role-playing Situations: In these situations, 
he is at his best. He loves to present his creden- 
tials and debate issues and try to obtain the 
best deal. He tends to become the mouthpiece 
for a party, negotiating for necessities. 


Mining 


New dwarf strongholds are established for 
a wide variety of reasons, but they are almost 
always sited near substantial deposits of min- 
erals or gems. This chapter contains rules for 
establishing and operating mines. lt is as- 
sumed that most existing strongholds are built 
around profitable and extensive ones. 


Conducting a Survey 


Not all regions will yield something of val- 
ue, regardless of the success of the proficiency 
roll. Examples of places where mining is a 
waste of time include regions of deep sand or 
dirt and areas of hardened lava. Streams flow- 
ing through these regions may have carried 
traces of ores or a gemstone, but a character 
with the mining proficiency knows that min- 
ing these areas is guaranteed to yield nothing. 

If a miner seeks to excavate an area that 
might yield valuable material, he can make a 
Mining proficiency check after surveying the 
area. He may determine that increasing the ar- 
ea of his survey sweep could yield something 
of value. 

The length of time required for a survey will 
depend upon the conditions of the search. Un- 
der ideal conditions, it would take a week to 
survey an area of 4 square miles. Ideal condi- 
tions mean that the character is not constantly 
fending off goblins and marauding bandits, 
nor is he hunting for food. If the search is be- 
ing conducted above ground, deep snow 
could make prospecting nearly impossible, 
while even a thin layer would triple the time 
needed. Steady rainstorms, rough terrain, and 
short daylight hours all interfere with a survey 
of the surface. 

Underground searches are limited by the 
natural formations of caverns and passages. 
The area which can be examined in one week 
is reduced underground to 2 square miles, 
conditions permitting. The natural shape of 


CHAPTER 


the passages may be such that the character is 
restricted to a narrow 100-yard stretch, or 
that the search must be carried deeper into the 
earth. 

After the search is completed, a proficiency 
check must be made by the miner. If unsuc- 
cessful, the search has either failed to discover 
anything of value or the character thinks he 
has found the best site for the mine. The miner 
may search the area again, seeking to verify 
his original findings, but it becomes increas- 
ingly more difficult; the amount of time re- 
quired is multiplied by the number of surveys 
(the second survey takes twice as long, the 
third takes three times as long, etc.) and a cu- 
mulative —1 penalty is imposed on each sub- 
sequent proficiency check ( ^ 1 on the second 
check, —2 on the third check, etc.). 

If the check is successful, the surveyor has 
determined the extent of mineral wealth in the 
area, within a reasonable margin of error. 
This does not guarantee a successful mine, but 
does locate the best site for one. If the area 
contains nothing of value or is unsuitable for 
mining, a successful proficiency check reveals 
that fact. 


Mine Products 


When a miner locates minerals, consult the 


Mining Products Table. 
Mining Products Table 
D100 Roll Product of Mine 
01-30 Copper 
31-40 Tin 
41-66 Lead 
67-84 Iron 
85-92 Silver 
93-97 Gold 
98 Platinum 
99 Mithril* 
00 Gemstones* 


* Indicates only that mithril or gemstones may 
be present. Mithril exists deep under the earth, 


т 


Mining * 81 


in dense metamorphic formations. The actual 
presence of mithril must be confirmed by 
checking the Mithril Formation Table. If gem- 
stones are indicated, check the Gemstones Ta- 
ble. 


Mithril Formation Table 
D10 Roll Metal Discovered 
1-5 Silver (highest quality) 
6-8 Gold (highest quality) 
9 Platinum (highest quality) 
10 Mithril 


Gemstones Table 


D100 Class of Stone 

01-25 Ornamental 

26-50 Semi-precious 

51-70 Fancy 

71-90 Precious 

91-94 Gems 

95-96 Jewels 

97-99 Roll twice on this table 

00 Roll three times on this table 

Quality of Mine 


Because a mine has been established does 
not mean that it automatically yields valuable 
metal or gems. The quality of the ore must be 


determined. Even the highest quality metal re- 
quires some processing before it can be sold. 


Metals 


If the yield of the mine is a metal, it will 
probably be in the form of ore (metal-bearing 
rock). While pure nuggets may be discovered 
occasionally, a character with the smelter pro- 
ficiency must separate the metal from the ore. 

The quality of the ore is equal to the num- 
ber of coins which can be produced from it by 
a single miner in one week. A copper mine, 
with a rating of 200 cp, would mean that a sin- 
gle miner, working for one week, produces a 
pile of ore which can yield 200 cp of copper 
when smelted. The amount of coinage indi- 
cates how much is produced, not that coins 
must be produced. One-thousand coins of 
iron, for example, equal one suit of plate ar- 
mor, 100 spear heads, or 500 arrowheads. 

To determine the quality of the mined ore, 
roll 1d10 and compare it to the result for that 
metal on the Ore Quality Table. This equals 
the coin equivalent produced per week per 
miner. 


Ore Quality Table (roll 1d10) 


Metal 1 2 3 4 

Copper 100 200 250 300 
Iron 200 300 500 700 
Silver 25 50 100 200 
Gold 10 25 50 100 
Platinum 5 10 20 40 


6 7 8 9 10* 
400 500 750 1000 2000 
1200 1600 2000 3000 4000 
400 500 750 1000 2000 
300 400 500 750 1000 
100 250 400 800 1000 


* If a 10 is rolled, roll 1410 again. If another 
10 results, the mine is a pure vein of the high- 
est quality and requires no smelting. If 1-9 re- 
sults, the metal must be smelted. 

Ideally, the smelted metal has the same val- 
ue as its coin equivalent: i.e., 20 10-coin in- 


82 * Chapter Eight 


gots of silver are worth 200 sp. In a true medi- 
eval economy, however, everything is nego- 
tiable. Miners may not be able to get this 
much for their bullion, or may get more, de- 
pending on local conditions, who the buyer is, 
and regional supply. 


If a character sells the ore without smelting, 
the selling price can be no more than 2596 of 
the value of the pure metal, and it may be as 
low as 5%. The asking price will depend on 
the difficulty of transportation and the cost of 
smelting the ore. 


Gemstones 


Newly mined gemstones are not nearly as 
valuable as they are after finishing. Gem- 
stones are rough and even unrecognizable 
when first discovered. Characters with the 
Mining or Gem Cutting proficiencies can cor- 
rectly identify a stone after 146 rounds of 
study. 

The quality of a gemstone mine depends on 
the number of stones in each find and the val- 
ue of the stones. The number of stones is that 
which one miner can excavate in one week. 

The value of the stones is the average value 
for an uncut stone, which is 1096 of its cut val- 
ue. To realize the full amount from the gem- 
stones, a miner needs to employ a character 
with the Gem Cutting proficiency. Some 
stones are more or less valuable than this 
amount, but the average is as accurate as we 
need to get to calculate the income from the 
mine. 

The output of a gemstone mine does not re- 
main constant, it is rolled each week to deter- 
mine the worth of that week's output. The 
number of miners at work each week is deter- 
mined before the dice are rolled. 


Gemstone Quality Table 

Class of #/dwarf Average 
Stone /week Uncut Value 
Ornamental 4d10 1 gp 
Semi-precious 3d6 5 gp 
Fancy 1412-1 10 gp 
Precious 1d10-1 50 gp 
Gems 146—1 100 gp 
Jewels 144-1 500 гр 


In addition to the base value of the stones 
mined in a given week, there is a 1% chance 
per week of operation that a miner will dis- 
cover an exceptional stone. If an exceptional 
stone is found, its value is equal to the base 
value of the mine's stones multiplied by a d100 
roll. For example, an exceptional stone found 
in a semi-precious stone mine is worth 10 gp 
(the average value of an uncut, semi-precious 
stone) X d100. Players may also consult the 
Type of Stones Table to determine the exact 
types of stones found. 


Types of Stones Table 

Ornamental Stones 
14100 Stone Туре 
01-08 Azurite 
09-16 Banded Agate 
17-24 Blue Calcite 
25-32 Eye Agate 
33-40 Hematite 
41-48 Lapis Lazuli 
49-56 Malachite 
57-64 Moss Agate 
65-73 Obsidian 
74-82 Rhodocrosite 
83-91 Tiger Eye Agate 
92-00 Turquoise 

Semi-Precious Stones 
1d100 Stone Type 
01-07 Bloodstone 
08-15 Carnelian 
16-23 Chalcedony 
24-31 Chrysoprase 
32-39 Citrine Quartz 
40-47 Jasper 
48-55 Moonstone 
56-59 Onyx 
60-67 Quartz Crystal 
68-75 Rose Quartz 
76-83 Sardonyx 
84-91 Smoky Quartz 
92-00 Zircon 


—————-—<—<—<—-— 


Mining ® 83 


Fancy Stones 


1d100 Stone Type 

01-12 Alexandrite 

13-25 Amber 

26-38 Amethyst 

39-51 Chrysoberyl 

52-64 Flourite 

65-77 Jade 

78-90 Jet 

91-00 Tourmaline 
Precious 

1d100 Stone Type 

01-25 Aquamarine 

26-50 Blue Spinel 

51-75 Peridot 

76-00 Topaz 
Gems 

1d100 Stone Type 

01-25 Garnet 

26-50 Jacinth 

51-75 Opal 

76-00 Red Spinel 
Jewels 

1d100 Stone Type 

01-25 Diamond 

26-50 Emerald 

51-75 Ruby 

76-00 Sapphire 
Types of Mines 


The two types of mines commonly in use 
are placer mines and underground mines. 


Placer Mines 


Placer mining involves a pan or sluice to sift 
gravel, dirt, sand, and water from a flowing 
stream or river. This technique is most com- 
monly employed above ground, but can be 
conducted below. Placer mining is a relatively 
simple operation requiring little equipment. 


84 * Chapter Eight 


At the basic level, the only requirements are a 
character with a shallow pan and a great deal 
of patience. 

Placer mines collect mineral deposits from 
underground veins eroded by water and tum- 
bled downstream. Finally deposited in the 
streambed, the miner harvests them from the 
water. Only mineral wealth, eroded from de- 
posits, collects along the streambed. Since 
erosion is slow, placer mining is much less 
profitable than deep mining. 

Placer mines do not yield profitable 
amounts of copper, iron, mithril, or gem- 
stones. Characters who have discovered gold, 
silver, or platinum may try to mine the de- 
posits. Underground mines are required for all 
other metals and gems. To calculate the value 
of placer mines, determine the quality and 
then roll 1d4 and multiply by 10. This is the 
percentage of its top value the mine will yield. 
For example, if a gold mine could yield 100 gp 
per week, a placer mine will yield only 10 to 
40 gp per week. 


Tunnel Mines 


Operating an underground, or tunnel, mine 
requires a great deal more work than placer 
mines, but the potential for wealth is much 
greater. Underground mining tunnels into the 
earth, searching for veins of ore and gem- 
encrusted rock that is removed and the miner- 
als and gems then extracted. 


Excavating a Tunnel Mine 


Excavating a tunnel is hard work and time 
consuming. The rates for excavating by the 
various races follow. Rates are in cubic feet, 
per miner, per eight-hour day. 


<> 

CA № 
M AM N 
, At. 


kA 


Mining * 85 


Mining Rates Table 
Type of Rock 
Very 
Race of Miner Soft Soft Hard 
Gnoll, Halfling, 

Human 75 50 25 
Gnome, Kobold 80 60 30 
Goblin, Orc 85 65 30 
Dwarf, Hobgoblin 90 70 35 
Ogre 150 100 50 
Hill Giant 250 150 75 
Fire Giant, Frost Giant 300 200 100 
Stone Giant 500 350 175 


A tunnel mine must follow the shifting vein 
of mineral through the earth. Such a path typ- 
ically requires a tunnel 10 feet wide and 10 feet 
high. 

When a miner discovers a vein, roll 1d10 
and multiply by 10; this is the depth in feet 
needed to intersect the vein. Mining may now 
begin in earnest. To determine the path of the 
vein, roll 1d4 and consult the Mineral Vein Di- 
rection Table. 


Mineral Vein Direction Table 


D4 Roll Vein Runs 
1 North-South 
2 East-West 
3 Northeast-Southwest 
4 Northwest-Southeast 


The vein always runs at least 20 feet in the 
direction indicated. After each 20-foot section 
is excavated, roll 1d10 and check the Vein 
Path Alteration Table to determine the new 
path of the vein. 


86 e Chapter Eight 


Vein Path Alteration Table 
D10 Roll Change 


1-2 Steep descent 

3-4 Shallow descent 

5 Curves right (10-60 degrees) 
6 Curves left (10-60 degrees) 
7 Continues straight 

8 Shallow ascent* 

9 Steep ascent” 

10 Vein ends 


* If the mine starts on the surface, the first 
time this is rolled it is treated as descent rather 
than ascent. 


Miners who wish to continue working the 
mine must follow the vein, even if it goes in a 
direction they do not wish to follow. If the 
path of the vein takes a course that makes it 
impossible to follow, such as emerging into 
thin air through a cliff face, that particular 
course of the mine has run out. If the vein ends 
in both directions, the mine is played out. 
This rule takes priority over the Duration of 
Mining Site rules. 

In unusual circumstances, say a tunnel 
which ends at a cliff which overlooks a gorge, 
miners may try to pick up the vein again on 
the other side. The DM must decide how 
likely that vein is to continue, depending on 
the situation. 


Shoring a Tunnel 


A tunnel mine must be supported, or 
shored, with wood or stone pillars. Other- 
wise, sections of the tunnel will almost cer- 
tainly cave in. Shoring can be done by 
characters with Mining, Carpentry, or Stone- 
masonry proficiencies. 

Each 10-foot section of tunnel requires two 
side and one ceiling brace, each at least 1 foot 
thick. If the tunnel is 10 feet wide and 10 feet 
high, each brace uses 30 feet of bracing mate- 
rial. Each shoring brace requires four hours to 


build. 


Playing Out a Mine 


Mines contain finite amounts of mineral 
wealth. Sometimes, this amount is enough to 
keep miners busy for generations. More fre- 
quently the mine plays out after a period of 
intensive mining. 

To determine the length of time a mine will 
produce before depletion, roll 1d100 at the 
start of the mining operation. The result is the 
number of weeks the mine can be worked. If 
the result was doubles (11, 22, 33, etc.), the 
mine has a much longer duration. Roll 1d100 
again, the result is the additional number of 
months the mine will produce. Add this figure 
to the number of weeks set by the first roll. If 
the second roll is also doubles, roll 1d100 a 
third time, the result is the number of addi- 
tional years the mine is will operate. Further 
doubles rolls are treated as tens of years, hun- 
dreds of years, and so on. 

For the sake of convenience, treat each 
month as four weeks and each year as 48 
weeks or 12 months when totaling up the 
mine's longevity. Please note that a "week" is 
the amount of work that one dwarf can per- 
form in a week. If 12 dwarves are engaged in 
excavating a mine, 12 weeks of the mine's life- 


time are used up for each week of operation. 

If the mine is a placer mine, disregard any 
doubles rolls for the duration of the find. A 
placer mine is always depleted after 1-100 
hours of work. 


Overseeing Mining Operations 


In order for a mine to produce at maximum 
efficiency, the character in charge must make 
a successful Mining roll each week of the 
mine's operation. If the roll succeeds, the mine 
produces normally. If it fails, production is re- 
duced by half for that week. This could be the 
result of pilfering among laborers, a cave-in 
which causes the loss of valuable production 
time, the intrusion of some monster—an um- 
ber hulk or ankheg, perhaps—or plain old bad 
decisions on the part of management. The ex- 
act details should be worked into an adven- 
ture if possible; hunting the umber hulk 
through the tunnels or rescuing trapped min- 
ers before they suffocate. 

Although overseeing a mine provides 
steady work, player characters will probably 
find it best to hire an NPC with Mining profi- 
ciency to act as overseer, freeing themselves 
up for more exciting pursuits. 


m ————————————————————————————————————————————————————— 


Mining * 87 


CHAPTER 


Equipment 


This chapter describes the equipment used 
by dwarves: smelters, two-handed battle ax- 
es, close combat weapons, and war machines. 


Smelters 


A smelter is a very hot furnace used to sepa- 
rate metal from ore-bearing rock. The furnace 
is super-heated by forcing air from a bellows, 
often operated by two or more dwarves, 
through burning coal. Ore is fed into the 
smelter in iron buckets moving along a chain, 
which tows the buckets along a rail and 
dumps their contents into the furnace. 

The ore is heated to the metal's melting tem- 
perature (which is below the rock's). Water or 
acid are occasionally added to enhance the 
process. The molten metal runs out from the 


88 * Chapter Nine 


base of the smelter and into molds or troughs 
known as “pigs,” hence the term pig iron. The 
pigs are sold to blacksmiths, weaponsmiths, 
and armorers to produce metal goods, weap- 
ons and armor. Smelters can also make alloys, 
such as steel or bronze. 

The amount of ore that can be processed is 
more a function of the size of the smelter than 
of any character's work rate. A small smelter 
can process ore as fast as four miners can dig 
it. A medium smelter can process the ore pro- 
duced by up to 20 miners. A large smelter can 
process ore excavated by up to 100 miners. 

In addition to the cost of smelting equip- 
ment, a smelter is expensive to maintain be- 
cause of the materials required to operate it. A 
small smelting operation costs 5 gp per day to 
operate, the cost of a medium operation is 12 
gp per day, and a large one costs 25 gp per day 
to run. Smelter costs only apply when the 
smelter is in operation. To keep it operating at 
maximum efficiency, it is common practice to 
collect a stockpile of ore before firing the fur- 
nace. Once all the ore is smelted, the equip- 
ment is allowed to cool and is then cleaned. 

Given its bulk, even a small smelter is not 
very portable. 


Smelters Cost Size 

Small 1,000 gp 30' x 30' 
Medium 2,000 gp 50' x 50' 
Large 5,000 gp 75' X 75' 


New Weapons 


Most weapons used by dwarves are de- 
scribed in the Players Handbook. Here we 
look at the two-handed battle axe and close 
combat weapons. 


Equipment e 89 


Two-Handed Battle Axe 


The two-handed battle axe has a longer haft 
than a standard battle axe and must be wield- 
ed with two hands. With two large blades ex- 
tending from it, it allows the user to swing it in 
an arc without having to change the angle of 
the blade. 


Close Combat Weapons 


A whole range of weapons have been devel- 
oped to suit the close fighting style of some 
warriors. These weapons are not standard to 
any kit, but are favored by warriors who fight 
in confined spaces. Axes For Hire, some Bat- 
tleragers, and aggressive Hearth Guards may 
decide to specialize in them. A character's 
Strength bonus is added to the damage they 
cause. 


Head Spike 


This unusual weapon consists of an iron hel- 
met with a large (1 to 2 foot) spike on the top, 
sometimes called a “belly skewer.” A fighter 
employs this weapon when charging. Running, 
bent forward, he attempts to spear his oppo- 


nent in the stomach. The attack roll is made at 
a —3 penalty, and he loses any armor class 
benefits high Dexterity may give him. If he im- 
pales his enemy, he scores double damage. 


Knee And Elbow Spikes 


These are spiked guards used in close com- 
bat to elbow and knee opponents. When not 
in use they appear to be decorative stubs at 
the center of the knee and elbow cups, but, ac- 
tivated by pressure, spiked blades jet out and 
lock in place. Since they are strapped to the 
character as part of his armor, it is virtually 
impossible to disarm him. 

When a fighter is being grappled or wrestled 
he may elect to make an attack with his 
spikes, instead of boxing or wrestling. This at- 
tack is made with a —2 attack penalty. 


Glove Nail 


This is a gauntlet constructed of iron or 
steel, with a large spike protruding from its 
face. Warriors usually wear glove nails on 
both hands. Used for slashing, generally at an 
enemy's face, these are sometimes called "face 
rippers.” 


Weapon List 


Cost Weight 

Item (gp) (Ibs) Size 
Two-handed 

battle axe 10 10 M 
Close Combat Weapons 
Head Spike 10 10 M 
Elbow spike 1 2 S 
Knee spike 3 2 S 
Glove Nail 2 2 S 
Chain Flail 1 5 L 


—— ———————————  ———MM Hán ———ná 


90 * Chapter Nine 


Speed Damage 
Type Factor S-M L 
S 9 1410 248 
P 4 146 148 
S 2 1d4 1d4 
P 1 1d4 1d4 
P 2 1d4 +1 194 
В 6 144+2 1d4+1 


Chain Flail 


The chain flail is a 6-foot length of weighted 
chain. In combat it is whirled around very fast 
and swung at the enemy's legs. A character 
who is proficient with a chain flail will use it 
to knock his opponent off balance. He must 
state that he is attacking the legs, and rolls at 
—4 to hit. If he succeeds, he rolls for damage 
normally. In addition, his target must succeed 
in a Dexterity check or be knocked to the 
ground by the chain's impact. 


War Machines 


Dwarves produce some technologically 
advanced war machines for the defense of 
their strongholds, and to attack their enemies 
above and below ground. 


War machines have both an armor class, in- 
dicating how difficult the machine itself is to 
damage, and hit points, measuring how much 
damage the machine can take and continue 
working. 


Grinder 


A grinder is constructed of wood or metal 
and consists of a series of huge, rotating 
blades designed to chop up and drive back at- 
tackers. They are custom built to the widths 
of the corridors where they will be used. The 
blades in front fill the corridor, leaving only a 
few inches at the sides. 

With the aid of a complicated gearing sys- 
tem, six dwarves are able to propel a grinder 
at high speeds using pedals and cranks. The 
pedalers sit behind an iron shield, which pro- 
tects them from missiles and many spells. 

A grinder has a THACO of 10 and inflicts 
3d8 damage per round on anything within 
reach of its blades. The best way to avoid one 
is to flee or to cause enough damage to stop it 
from working. 

The flaws of the grinder are its inability to 
turn corners and the difficult ascent of steep 
corridors. Dwarf engineers have been able to 
overcome these problems to a limited degree. 
Most areas designed for grinder usage have 
smoothly curving corners that channel, rather 
than restrict, the grinder's movement. Circu- 
lar rooms have also been constructed at points 
where tunnels converge to allow grinders to 
change direction (much like a roundhouse). 
There are even a few turntables set in the 
floors, at strategic locations, to allow even 
faster redirection. 

To permit grinders to ascend steep passages, 
a cable is fastened to the back of the machine 
and connected to a winch at the top of the as- 
cent. As the grinder descends the tunnel, the 


Equipment e 91 


cable is let out. When it reaches bottom, the 
cable is winched back, pulling the grinder to 
the top, ready for another run. 


Ballista 


Three sizes of these giant crossbows are 
used by dwarves. They fire large bolts in flat 
trajectories. Each ballista requires a crew to 
move, load, and fire. They are slow to load; 
the rate of fire displays how often they may be 
fired. 

When used in dwarf strongholds, ballistas 
have pedal and gear systems similar to a 
grinder. This, coupled with a winch system, 
allows them to be moved back and forth and 
traversed from side to side. A ballista is ped- 
aled forward to fire its bolt, then winched 
back, out of sight, to be reloaded. 


Orc Masher 


The orc masher is not a war machine as 
such, but it is found as a standard part of most 
stronghold defenses. It is a large iron slab, at 
least 1 foot thick, covered with spikes. The 
full width of a corridor, it is mounted either on 
rollers or hinged to the ceiling. 


The roller version is placed at the top of 
steep slopes. If invaded, teams of dwarves lure 
the invaders up the slopes. Niches have been 
hollowed out of the walls to allow the 
dwarves to dodge out of the corridor. The orc 
masher rumbles down, picking up speed, and 
smashing everything in its path. It is then 
winched back, ready for another run. 

The ceiling version is less effective. It is 
mounted at T-junctions and swings down 
from the ceiling, slamming invaders into the 


Weapon Table 
Damage Hit 

Weapon Movement 5/М L ROF AC Pts Crew 
Grinder 12/6/1* 3d8 3d8 NA 0 100 6 
Light ballista 9 2d6 3d6 1/3 2 30 1 
Medium ballista 6 3d6 4d6 1/4 0 50 2 
Heavy ballista 3 4d6 5dé 1/5 0 75 4 
Orc masher, roller 12 446 446 МА МА МА МА 
Огс , ceiling МА 346 3d6 NA NA NA NA 


92 * Chapter Nine 


Dwarf Strongholds 


Malakar the Orc on Dwarf Strongholds 


Us orcs is ‘ard. But them stunty dwarves is 
ard, too. Much 'arder than elves 'n' oomans. 
They dig into those ‘oles of theirs, and fill ‘em 
wif traps 'n' hurty stuff. Theyz got loads of 
twisty tunnels wif big iron gates and fings wot 
fall on yer п’ squash yer flat. 

We is bestest at nicking their 'oles from 'em. 
We got lots, much more than wot you can 
count on two 'ands. Orcs are right 'ard. We 
kill dwarves, cook ‘em, eat ‘em, п’ then use 
their beards fer beds. We's takes their gold 
too, they gots lots. 

I 'eard of a place wot got both stunties 'n' 
orcs in it. Big, 'uge place it is, wif lots and lots 
of tunnels. Orcs got one ‘alf, stunties got t' 
other 'alf. Fight'n all the time. Ain't many 
stunties left there, them bin done for by orcs. 
Them all be dead soon, but ain't it 'alf great of 
'em to build us strongholds! 


Strongholds are the homes and workplaces 
of the dwarves. They can range from simple 
family residences to huge subterranean cities. 
The stronghold design sequence allows you to 
design a stronghold, either by making a series 
of choices, or by random die rolling. You may 
also combine the two methods. 

Designing a stronghold by making choices 
creates the most consistent and logical strong- 
hold, one that fits perfectly into your cam- 
paign world. A major stronghold is an ideal 
adventure setting. 

The random method uses a series of die 
rolls, often modified by previous rolls. If you 
choose this method you may ignore or aug- 
ment any unusual results. 

Ideally, the random method should be used 
in conjunction with making choices. This 
way, you can guide the design process by se- 
lecting certain features while omitting others. 


CHAPTER 


10 


You can let the dice decide those areas of 
stronghold design about which you have no 
clear ideas. It can also be an entertaining 
method to rationalize some of the strange re- 
sults achieved by purely random design. 

When using the tables it is important to 
bear in mind that they are guidelines. They do 
not attempt to cover the enormous diversity 
of factors that determine a stronghold's con- 
stituent parts. Do not feel constrained by 
them. Expand on any of the categories as 
needed. 

For example, the design sequence places one 
dominant subrace in a stronghold containing 
several. You may decide that you want the 
subraces to be equal, no one being more pow- 
erful than the others. You may also want all 
six subraces to be present in the stronghold. 
While this scenario cannot be created using 
the design sequence, follow your own in- 
stincts and ignore those parts of it which limit 
you. 

If the player characters are to adventure in a 
dwarven setting, then the setting should be as 
detailed as you can make it, including the 
names of the leaders, clans, military forces, 
and the backgrounds of the subraces. 

If the campaign is to take place in a human 
or other setting, then players need only 
enough information to give an idea of what 
the strongholds are like. This does not have to 
be very detailed. 


Designing Dwarf strongholds 


The stronghold design tables are intended 
to make creating a stronghold an easy task. 
They do not attempt to deal with every aspect 
of design. The tables do not define the num- 
bers or sizes of individual dwellings or work 
places, or specify the exact numbers of NPCs 
within them. 


иии 


Dwarf Strongholds ® 93 


VE 73 
Wi і 
(і —4- / ul 


94 * Chapter Ten 


Name of the Stronghold 


Every stronghold needs a name. You may 
choose a name or randomly create one using 
the Stronghold Name Generator. To use the 
generator, first turn to the dwarf name genera- 
tor in Chapter 4. Roll 1d4 to determine the 
number of syllables in the stronghold's name. 
Roll for each syllable on the Dwarf Name Pre- 
fix Table. Then, either assemble them in the 
order generated or rearrange them to make a 
better sounding name. Then turn to the 
Stronghold Suffix Table, below, and roll once 
to finish the name. Feel free to add other let- 
ters between each prefix and/or suffix if the 
name is too difficult or simply does not 'sound 
right’. 


Stronghold Suffix Generator 


Roll 1d20 

1 -ack 11 -hak 
2 -arr 12 -hig 
3 -bek 13 -jak 
4 -dal 14 -kak 
5 -duum 15 -lode 
6 -dukr 16 -malk 
7 -eft 17 -mek 
8 -est 18 -rak 
9 -fik 19 -tek 
10 -gak 20 -zak 


Subraces Present 


Most strongholds were created by a partic- 
ular subrace of dwarf. This subrace is the one 
which controls the stronghold and comprises 
the majority of its citizens. You may choose, 
or you may wish to generate randomly on the 
Subrace Table, who holds the stronghold. 

Choose or randomly determine the number 
of dwarves present. This will give you the 


number of male dwarves living in the strong- 
hold. There are approximately half as many 
females as males, regardless of subrace. The 
number of children is equal to about half of 
the female population. If, for example, the to- 
tal population of the stronghold is around 
400, there would be 225 males, 112 females 
and about 63 children. 


Subrace Table 

1d100 Main Subrace # Dwarves 
01-10 Deep Dwarves 3d100 +50 
11-20 Duergar 2d100 +100 
21-30 Gully Dwarves 14100 + 100 
31-70 Hill Dwarves 3d100 + 100 
71-90 Mountain Dwarves 34100 +100 
91-95 Sundered Dwarves 2d100+50 
96-00 Mixed Subraces See below 


You may decide that your selected subrace 
is the only one present, or you may wish to 
add others to the stronghold. A mixed strong- 
hold is one having more than a single subrace 
of dwarves. The primary one is dominant and 
holds political power over the stronghold, but 
they do not have to be the majority within it. 

The Dominant Subrace Table determines 
the subrace which controls the stronghold. If 
you want to add other minor subraces to the 
stronghold, the table will show you how 
many are present. You can select this or deter- 
mine it randomly. 


Dominant Subraces Table 


# Other 
1d100 Dominant Subrace Subraces 
01-10 Deep Dwarves 1d3 
11-20 Duergar 1d4 
21-25 Gully Dwarves 1d2 
26-70 Hill Dwarves 1d4 
71-90 Mountain Dwarves 1d4 
91-00 Sundered Dwarves 1d3 


ل 


Dwarf Strongholds € 95 


Modifying the Dominant Subrace 


In strongholds having one or more minority 
subraces, the number of the dominant subrace 
is altered by the Modified Subrace Table, ac- 
cording to the number of other subraces 
present. If, for example, there are there are 
200 deep dwarves in a stronghold with three 
other minor subraces present, the number of 
deep dwarves is reduced by 50% to 100. 


Modified Subrace Table 
Other Subraces 
Present Modifier 
1 -10% 
2 -25% 
3 —50% 
4 — 75% 


Determining the Number of Subrace 
Members 


So far, you know how many subraces are in 
the stronghold, but not which ones they are, 
nor their numbers. The Subrace Tables list the 
main subrace and the subraces likely to share 
a stronghold with them. Once the minor sub- 
races have been selected, choose or randomly 
determine their numbers. 

In the event that a random roll results in the 
same subrace being designated more than 
once, maintain their numbers each time they 
occur, as though they were a different sub- 
race. Total the results to determine the num- 
bers present. 


Deep Dwarves Subraces Table 
1d100 Subrace # of Subrace 
01-25 Duergar 5d10 
26-50 Gully 3d12 
51-75 Hill 2d10 
76-00 Mountain 3d6 


96 * Chapter Ten 


Duergar Subraces Table 


1d100 Subrace # of Subraces 
01-40 Deep Dwarves 3d12 
41-60 Gully Dwarves 3d10 
61-80 Hill Dwarves 2d12 
81-00 Mountain 

Dwarves 2d12 

Gully Dwarves Subraces Table 

1d100 Subrace # of Subrace 
01-20 Deep Dwarves 1d10 
21-40 Duergar 2d6 
41-60 Hill Dwarves 3d12 
61-80 Mountain 

Dwarves 2d10 
81-00 Sundered 

Dwarves 2d6 

Hill Dwarves Subraces Table 

1d100 Subrace # of Subrace 
01-10 Deep Dwarves 1d12 
11-20 Duergar 2d8 
21-40 Gully Dwarves 4410 
41-90 Mountain 

Dwarves 3d6 
91-00 Sundered 

Dwarves 3d6 


Mountain Dwarves Subraces Table 


1d100 Subrace # of Subrace 
01-10 Deep Dwarves 2d10 
11-20 Duergar 2d10 
21-25 Gully Dwarves 2d6 
26-70 Hill Dwarves 2d12 
91-00 Sundered 

Dwarves 3d6 

Sundered Dwarves Subraces Table 

1d100 Subrace # of Subrace 
01-60 Gully Dwarves 10d10 
61-80 Hill Dwarves 3d12 
81-00 Mountain 

Dwarves 2d10 


Subraces living in strongholds held by oth- 
ers are almost always a minority. They are 
there because they are exiles, traders who 
have established a sizable base, or because 
they have particular skills to sell. Subraces 
may also be present because they have experi- 
ence in fighting certain kinds of monsters, or 
because they have been cut off from their own 
people by disaster. They may have intermar- 
ried with the dominant race. 

You may generate these subraces in more 
detail by treating them as trading enclaves or 
family strongholds. The following paragraphs 
give some general guidelines on how the vari- 
ous subraces function within another sub- 
race's stronghold. 

Deep dwarves usually live at great depths 
and keep to themselves. As minor subraces, 
they tend to be in small family groups, plying 
a craft or trade. 

Duergar living among other subraces are 
usually not of an evil alignment unless the 
stronghold's alignment is evil. They may be 
tolerated by neutral dwarves, but are always 
treated with wary suspicion. 

Other subraces living among the duergar will 
usually be evil and will have joined the duergar 
to avoid persecution in their home strongholds. 
Evil duergar strongholds will tend to enslave 
other subraces, unless they are allies. 

Gully dwarves may be found living among 
any subrace of dwarf, usually employed to 
perform menial or unpleasant tasks. 


A gully dwarf stronghold may contain other 
subraces, but these will usually share similar 
attitudes and behavioral patterns with them. 

Hill and mountain dwarves may be found 
at any depth and living with any other sub- 
race. They are clannish and keep to them- 
selves. They are likely to be the employers of 
other subraces. While these others will usually 
be present in the stronghold on a fixed term 
contract, it is not unusual for a stronghold to 
have enclaves of other dwarves who have 
been there for generations. 

Sundered dwarves are only found living 
among other dwarves when a part of the strong- 
hold is above ground. Hill dwarf strongholds, 
which are built above and below the hills, are 
ideal. If the stronghold is entirely below ground, 
sundered dwarves will congregate around one 
of its entrances, where they will construct shan- 
ty towns in order to conduct trade. 


Overall Alignment 


You may either select a stronghold's align- 
ment to match that of its dominant race or roll 
on the Overall Stronghold Alignment Table. 
A stronghold's overall alignment determines 
its general outlook. Not all of the stronghold's 
inhabitants need to be of this alignment. In 
good aligned strongholds, evil characters will 
usually keep their alignment hidden from 
their fellows. 


Overall Stronghold Alignment Table 


246 Deep Duergar Gully Hill Mountain — Sundered 
2 CN LG LG LE LE CE 

3 NE NE LN LN LN NE 

4 NG LN LE LN LN LG 

5 N LE NG LG LG LE 
6-8 N LE CN LG LG LN 

9 N N N LG LG N 

10 LN CN NE NG NG N 

11 LG CE CG CG N CN 

12 LE NG CE N N CG 


kkk 


Dwarf Strongholds ® 97 


Types of Strongholds 


Strongholds vary in size and importance. 
You may have an idea of the kind of strong- 
hold you want. If not, you can determine it 
randomly. 

The population modifier is used to deter- 
mine the number of dwarves who live in a 
stronghold and the numbers of each subrace 
will be modified by this percentage. For all 
strongholds, other than secondary ones, 
you'll need to adjust the numbers previously 
acquired. To do this, multiply the numbers 
you have by the percentage given. 

Depending upon who built the stronghold, 
it may extend above ground, with stone tow- 
ers and battlements, spreading over the sides 
of hills or mountains. Sundered dwarves al- 
ways build their strongholds above ground. 
Deep dwarves and duergar never do. 


Stronghold Type Table 
1d100 Type of Population 
Stronghold Modifier 
01-05 Major 200% 
06-55 Secondary 100% 
56-70 Outpost* 40% 
71-80 Ghetto 2596 
81-90 Trade Enclave 10% 
91-00 Family 5% 


*35% chance this is a mine. 


Major strongholds are capital cities. Some 
dwarves who live in them are powerful, and 
often rule secondary strongholds. 

Gully and sundered dwarves never build 
major strongholds. Gully dwarves may live in 
them, but they will have moved into them on- 
ly after the original inhabitants have been 
killed or driven away. 

Major strongholds contain large numbers 
of dwarves. They are the height of dwarf engi- 


98 * Chapter Ten 


neering and construction and are nearly al- 
ways located around a very profitable mine. 
The gates of major strongholds are sturdy and 
flanked with stone towers. 

Secondary strongholds are the most com- 
mon. They are similar to major strongholds, 
but are not as large. They may be independent 
or allied politically and militarily with a major 
one. Most major strongholds began as sec- 
ondary and grew in size and importance over 
centuries. 

An outpost is a stronghold that has been 
founded to protect an area or to expand the 
realm of a secondary or major stronghold. It 
may have been a mine that grew in size and 
began to accommodate more than just the 
miners who worked there. 

Mines are established to extract minerals 
from the earth. The dwarves who live in them 
are engaged chiefly in the mining of gemstones 
or in mining and smelting ores. Such an out- 
post is rarely self-sufficient, but relies heavily 
on trade or outside supply. 

Trade enclaves are situated in the towns 
and cities of other races and subraces for the 
purpose of conducting trade. They may be 
fortified houses or stone forts for the traders, 
their guards, and their families. 

Ghettoes are areas within cities and towns 
of other races where clusters of dwarves live. 
This could be a wealthy city block inhabited 
by well-to-do dwarf merchants and craftsmen 
or an impoverished shanty town where 
dwarves eke out a living as best they can. 

A family stronghold is home to a single 
family of dwarves. They are small and often 
consist of a single house or underground ca- 
vern inhabited by a family. Dwarves who live 
in family strongholds tend to be very reclusive 
and clannish. 


The Age of the Stronghold 


Because they live so long, dwarves find it 
easier to measure the passage of time in terms 
of generations, instead of years. A dwarf 
thinks of his stronghold as being founded 
three generations ago, not 1,000 years before. 
Using the size of the stronghold, determine its 
age using the Number of Generations column. 

The period represented by a generation will 
vary between subraces. To find the approxi- 
mate number of years since a stronghold's 
foundation, multiply the number of genera- 
tions by the dominant race's life expectancy 
on the table below. 


Age of Stronghold Table 

Type of Stronghold # Generations 
Major 2d10 
Secondary 2d6 
Outpost 1d6-1 
Ghetto 1d4-1 
Trade Enclave 1d4 -2 
Family 146—1 


On any roll of 0 or less (after modifiers аге 
applied) the stronghold has been founded in 
the current generation. 


Racial Modifiers: 
Subtract 2 for gully dwarves, 1 for sundered 
dwarves. 


Life Expectancy Table 


Type of Dwarf Life Expectancy 
Hill 350 years 
Mountain 400 years 
Deep 380 years 
Duergar 400 years 
Sundered 250 years 
Gully 250 years 


Government 


Dwarves are traditionally ruled by a king or 
chief, but these are only two of the possible 
forms of government available. Major strong- 
holds are always ruled by a feudal king. You 
may decide otherwise, but this should be a 
conscious decision, not determined by a ran- 
dom roll of dice. You may select the type of 
government in other strongholds or roll on the 
Government Table. 


Government Table 


1d100 Government 
1-10 Colony 
11-20 Conquered 
21-60 Feudal 
61-80 Guild 
81-90 Oligarchy 
91-100 Theocracy 
101-110 Anarchy 
Modifiers: 


Add 10 for gully dwarves 
Add 10 for chaotic aligned strongholds 


A colony is a stronghold specifically estab- 
lished by another stronghold and under the di- 
rect rule of its parent. Colonies may be 
founded to expand political power, to subju- 
gate conquered races, or to exploit mineral re- 
sources. They may also be established to 
protect strategically important areas or to re- 
distribute excess population. 

А conquered stronghold has been con- 
quered by invaders and is now controlled by 
them. The conquered people may have been 
enslaved by the conquerors. To discover who 
the conquerors are, consult the War Table be- 
low. 

Chances are that the conquered dwarves 
will not be allowed any weapons or armor. 


ee 


Dwarf Strongholds ® 99 


Some may have banded together to form a re- 
sistance and may be hiding in secret locations 
in or near the stronghold. 

Feudal strongholds are ruled by a dwarf 
king or one of his nobles. Major strongholds 
nearly always have monarchs, but even a low- 
ly family stronghold may be ruled by a king 
whose power extends only to his immediate 
family. 

Secondary strongholds and outposts may 
be ruled by a king, or by a prince or duke who 
owes allegiance to a major stronghold. 

A guild stronghold is ruled by the guild 
masters of each clan. The guild masters meet 
to regulate all aspects of life within the strong- 
hold. They may be headed by a guild master 
who is elected by the others, for one or more 
years. 

An oligarchy is an elite group of dwarves, 
elected or selected on the basis of their wealth, 
to rule a stronghold. Oligarchies usually work 
to further their own goals and ambitions. The 
oligarchic members may be Highborns, Guild 
Masters, or merchants who have amassed 
large fortunes. 

A theocracy is a stronghold ruled by priests 
of one or more dwarven deities. Theocracies 
attempt to impose their strictures and beliefs 
on all the inhabitants of the stronghold. They 
will typically strive to suppress other reli- 
gions. 

An anarchy is a form of nongovernment 
usually restricted to gully dwarves, but may 
be found in any stronghold with a chaotic 
alignment. In anarchy, citizens do what they 
want, when they want to do it. An anarchy 
could be tempered by a desire to maintain so- 
ciety by avoiding harm to others, as in a com- 
munity which is chaotic good. Alternatively, 
it could be a case of no one having any regard 
for the effects of their actions on others. 


100 * Chapter Ten 


Attitude 


A stronghold does not exist in isolation; it 
has contact with other strongholds and races. 
The nature of these contacts determines the 
stronghold's attitude and its military strength. 
The percentage of dwarves in the militia refers 
to the number of male and female dwarves 
who regularly drill and carry arms. They are 
included when determining the armed forces 
of a stronghold (see Military Forces). 


Attitude Table 
Dwarves 
1d20 Attitude in Militia 
1 Decadent 2596 
2-3 Declining 50% 
4 Dispossessed 50-100% 
5 Exiled 50-100 96 
6-7 Expansionist 100% 
8-9 Friendly 50% 
10 Integrated 25% 
11-20 Isolationist 75-100 96 


А decadent stronghold is one in which tra- 
ditional dwarf values have been forgotten or 
are little used. These dwarves will exhibit per- 
sonality traits more in keeping with other 
races. 

The NPC military forces of a decadent 
stronghold are likely to be badly trained and 
fight at —1 to hit and damage. 

А declining stronghold was once powerful 
and rich, but has fallen upon hard times. Its 
mines may have played out, or it may have 
been struck by a plague that devastated the 
population. Perhaps the once profitable trade 
it conducted with neighboring races has end- 
ed, and now the stronghold is short of com- 
modities that it once took for granted. A 
declining stronghold may have been involved 


in a war that so taxed its resources that real 
recovery was too expensive. 

Dispossessed dwarves have lost their ances- 
tral homes and now live in a situation they be- 
lieve is temporary, even though they may 
have been there for generations. They have a 
passion to reclaim their ancestral homes and 
may even mount expeditions to do so. Or they 
may accept that their homes are lost and es- 
tablish new ones for themselves. Even then, 
groups will periodically set out to attempt to 
recapture the ancestral stronghold. Consult 
the War Table to determine who drove them 
from their ancestral hearths. 

Exiled dwarves have been expelled by their 
own kind. This may have been for some evil 
act or practice, or they may have been forced 
out by others who were evil. In either case, 
they seek to return to their homes. 

Expansionist societies are strong and ro- 
bust. They seek to expand into new areas, 
even if they must go to war to acquire them. A 
stronghold with this attitude is frequently an- 
tagonistic toward other races. It may seek to 
expand underground at the expense of other 
subterranean races. It may be expanding 
above ground, perhaps driving elves from a 
nearby forest so that the dwarves can get at 
the mineral deposits beneath it. 

Friendly dwarves are as open as dwarves 
ever get. This doesn't mean that other races 
are welcome, but that friendly types are less 
closed than the rest of their race. They usually 
have more dealings with humans or elves than 
others, except for integrated strongholds. 

Integrated strongholds are those which 
have become a part of another race's society. 
They most frequently occur among sundered 
dwarves or dwarves in trade enclaves. They 
will retain their traditional ways and life- 
styles, but are more knowledgeable about the 
races they live among than other dwarves. In- 


tegrated strongholds are most likely to have 
trade and military agreements with other 
races. They are likely to join with armies of 
other races to defeat a common foe. 

Isolationist dwarves avoid dealings with all 
races, and often with other dwarf subraces. 
They look only inward and keep their gates 
firmly locked. Visitors are unwelcome and 
trespassers are dealt with sharply. They usu- 
ally live in remote or inhospitable regions. 
Mountain and deep dwarves are frequently 
isolationist. Some live close to other races, but 
shun all contact with them. 


Resources 


No absolute figures are given for strong- 
hold resources because campaigns frequently 
have different scales of wealth. The Strong- 
hold Resources Table uses relative divisions of 
wealth, but does not express what these re- 
sources are. 

The Starting Gold Modifier is an optional 
rule which may be applied to a character's 
starting wealth to take into account the rela- 
tive wealth of his home stronghold. These 
modifiers cannot reduce a character below the 
minimum character funds for his class. That 
is, if he rolls 5d4x10 gp for his starting wealth, 
the minimum he could generate is 50 gp; his 
starting wealth may not fall below this 
amount. 

For example, a warrior from a poor strong- 
hold must subtract 10-60 gp from his starting 
gold. He rolls his normal 5d4x10 gp for a mi- 
serly total of 60 gp. Then he rolls his poor 
stronghold penalty of 1d6x10 gp and gets —60 
gp! Since this would leave him with no money 
at all, he automatically receives the minimum 
of 50 gp. 


Dwarf Strongholds * 101 


~~ 


T ج‎ 
=> 


Tho 
ПИП 
= سےا‎ 


102 * Chapter Ten 


Stronghold Resources Table 


Starting 
Gold 
1d20 Relative Resources Modifier 
1 Very Poor (subsistence) —1d8x10 gp 
2-5 Poor —1d6x10 gp 
6-10 Fair —1d4x10 gp 
10-14 Average no modifier 
15-17 Comfortable + 1d4x10 gp 
18-19 Wealthy + 1dóx10 gp 
20* Rich * 1d10x10 gp 
Racial Modifiers to 1420 Roll: 
Duergar: =5 
Gully Dwarves -10 
Sundered Dwarves -8 
Mountain and Hill Dwarves +2 


Relationship to Other Player Character Races 


Stronghold Modifiers to 1d20 Roll: 


Major +3 
Secondary *1 
Outpost 0 
Ghetto =3 
Trade Enclave +2 
Family 0 


Relationships with Other Player 
Character Races 


Even the most isolationist strongholds must 
have some sort of relationship with other 
player character races, even if very distant 
ones. Strongholds may have friendly ties with 
other races, or they may be at war with them. 

Whether you select the stronghold’s rela- 
tionships, or determine them randomly, a sep- 


1d20 Elves Gnomes Halflings 

1 Friendly Friendly Friendly 

2 Indifferent Friendly Friendly 

3 Indifferent Friendly Friendly 

4 Indifferent Friendly Indifferent 
5 Cautious Indifferent Indifferent 
6 Cautious Indifferent Indifferent 
7 Cautious Indifferent Indifferent 
8 Cautious Indifferent Indifferent 
9 Cautious Indifferent 

10 Threatening Indifferent Cautious 
11 Threatening Indifferent Cautious 
12 Threatening Indifferent Cautious 
13 Threatening Cautious Cautious 
14 Threatening Cautious Cautious 
15 Hostile Cautious 

16 Hostile Cautious Threatening 
17 Hostile Threatening Threatening 
18 Hostile Threatening Threatening 
19 At War Threatening Hostile 

20 At War Hostile Hostile 

21+ At War At War At War 


Modifiers: 

Humans 
Friendly Stronghold Alignment 
Friendly lawful good -2 
Friendly lawful evil *2 
Indifferent neutral evil *2 
Indifferent chaotic neutral *1 
Indifferent chaotic evil *5 
Indifferent 
Indifferent Race's Alignment 
Indifferent lawful good -2 
Indifferent neutral good =1 
Cautious lawful neutral -1 
Cautious 
Cautious Stronghold's Attitude is: 
Threatening Expansionist *5 

tening Friendly -$ 
Threatening Isolationist* 0 
Hostile 
Hostile * If the stronghold is isolation- 
Hostile ist, treat all results of 4 or less 
At War 9's on the Relationship Table. 
At War 


Dwarf Strongholds * 103 


arate determination must be made for each 
race that lives near the stronghold. DMs who 
want the detail can determine different rela- 
tions toward each settlement in the area, even 
if many of them house the same race. 

If the stronghold has a friendly, open rela- 
tionship with the race, members of the race 
may visit the dwarves regularly and a few 
may even live among them. Trade is brisk. 

An indifferent relationship is one that is 
neutral and businesslike. Trade is likely, but 
few members of the race visit the stronghold. 
The only ones likely to live among the 
dwarves are merchants. 

In a cautious relationship, the stronghold 
does not welcome visitors from the other race. 
Those who enter are searched and watched 
closely. The stronghold tries to avoid confron- 
tations and giving offense, but relationships 
are strained and guarded. No one of the out- 
side race lives among the dwarves. 

In a threatening relationship visitors are ac- 
tively discouraged by the threat of violence. 
They are turned back at the borders or held 
and interrogated to learn why they are in the 
dwarves' territory. 

In a hostile relationship, intruders are at- 
tacked and driven back from the stronghold's 
borders. Armed forces are ready to repel in- 
vaders. Relationships are strained and an un- 
easy peace might exist as described under 
War/Peace. 

In a war situation, combat is regular and se- 
rious. The DM can decide who started the war 
and why. In any case, all of the stronghold's 
resources are allocated to gaining victory over 
the enemy. 


War and Peace with Other Races 


Dwarves not only have dealings with other 
human and demihuman races, they also.have 


— III 


104 * Chapter Ten 


to contend with evil monsters and other races 
below ground. A war may have been raging 
for generations, or it may have just begun. To 
determine if the stronghold is at war with any 
underground races, use the War/Peace Table. 


War/Peace Table 

1d20 Situation 

1-10 Peace 

11-15 Uneasy Peace 
16-20 War 

Attitude Modifiers: 
Declining *2 
Dispossessed *10 
Expansionist *5 
Friendly =5 


If the stronghold is at peace now, it may 
have been at war in the past. Roll on the Peace 
Table to determine how long the stronghold 
has been at peace. 


Peace Table 
1d10 Duration 
1 1d12 months 
1d6 years 
2d6 years 
3d10 years 
5d10 years 
1d4 generations 
246 generations 
2d10 generations 
10 Always at peace 


MJ с Oi i WN 


' O со 


If the stronghold has been at war, roll on the 
War Table to determine its enemies. To discov- 
er the length of the war, roll on the War Dura- 
tion Table. 

The reasons for peace are as varied as the 
reasons for war. The enemies may have been 
eliminated, or injured so badly that they 


moved to another place. The war may have 
collapsed a major tunnel system, sealing off 
the defenders from their attackers. 

An uneasy peace is one in which friction 
still exists between the dwarves and their ene- 
mies. The stronghold may again go to war, 
but one or both sides are licking their wounds. 
Diplomatic incidents may still occur over dis- 
puted territory. 

Roll on the War Table to determine the 
stronghold's enemies. To establish the length 
of the peace, roll 1d8 on the Peace Table. 

Even defeated enemies may still be in a posi- 
tion to threaten a stronghold, and may be pre- 
paring a renewed assault even now. Bands of 
orcs, for example, could have been defeated 
three generations ago. Since then, they have 
been breeding and enlisting other orcs and gi- 
ants against the day when they will storm the 
stronghold's defenses. 

An Aggressive stronghold is likely to be 
preparing a preemptive attack against its foes. 
An Isolationist one will be engaged in 
strengthening its defenses, anticipating an at- 
tack. A Decadent stronghold is likely to ig- 
nore the buildup, while a Declining one may 
be powerless to do anything about it and may 
well be overrun when the attack comes. 


War 


To determine who is at war with the strong- 
hold or has been at war with it, choose or roll 
on the War Table. Feel free to select races not 
on the table if that suits your campaign. Crea- 
tures on the War Table are listed by general 
category only. All giants are included in the 
giant entry. Some races may have other races 
serving them as troops or slaves. As always, 
ignore any illogical results. 


War Table 

1d100 Enemy 

01-05 Beholders 
06-10 Dragons 
11-20 Drow 

21-30 Dwarves* 
31-35 Giants 

36-40 Gnolls 

41-50 Goblins 
51-60 Hobgoblins 
61-65 Lizard Men 
66-70 Mind Flayers 
71-75 Ogres 

76-85 Orcs 

86-90 Trolls 

91-95 Undead 
96-98 Roll two more times 


Roll three more times 


* [f dwarves are rolled they will be duergar if 
the stronghold is good or neutral in align- 
ment. If the stronghold is evil, roll on the 
Main Subrace Table (page 95) to determine 
their enemies. These enemies can also be evil 
dwarves (i.e., duergar can fight duergar). 


Duration of the War 


The length of the war is determined first in 
terms of years, and then generations. If the 
duration of the war is more than the age of the 
stronghold, then the stronghold has been at 
war since its founding. Its inhabitants have 
never known peace. 


Dwarf Strongholds ® 105 


War Duration Table 
1d10 Duration 
1 1d8 days 
1d4 weeks 
1d12 months 
1d6 years 
2d6 years 
3d10 years 
5d10 years 
1d4 generations 
2d6 generations 
0 2d10 generations 


н ص‎ сомо Us WN 


Types of War 


Once it has been determined that a war is in 
progress, or that one occurred in the strong- 
hold's past, you can then determine what type 
of war it was. 


War Type Table 
1d10 War Type 
1-3 Sporadic 
4-5 Steady 
6-8 Escalating 
9 Siege 

10 Invasion 
Attitude Modifiers: 


Declining +3 
Isolationist +1 


Sporadic: The war consists of sporadic skir- 
mishes and border incidents. No major battles 
have been fought and neither side is making 
any real progress, or even pushing the point 
very hard. Enemies rarely penetrate far into 
the stronghold and are content just to test its 
defenses every once in a while. 

Steady: A steady war consists of constant 
pressure maintained by both sides. Border 
skirmishes are common and the enemy makes 


106 * Chapter Ten 


regular raids against the stronghold. The 
stronghold sends forces to attack enemy 
camps and lairs. 

Escalating: The war steadily increases in 
scale. Both sides are adding more resources in 
an effort to prevail. Large battles are likely 
and the stronghold's militia is always armed 
and ready to fight. Wars may continue to es- 
calate for years, or they may quickly culmi- 
nate in one decisive battle. 

Siege: One side has adopted (or been forced 
to adopt) a completely defensive stance. Per- 
haps goblin forces surround the stronghold, 
cutting it off from all outside contact. Or per- 
haps the dwarves have done the same to a gi- 
ant fortress. In either case, constant pressure 
must be maintained against the besieged. At- 
tempts are made to pollute or poison water 
supplies, destroy food reserves and crops, and 
shut off supplies of air to underground de- 
fenders. The defenders may send out parties 
to secure aid from other strongholds, or con- 
duct sorties to disrupt the attackers. 

Life in strongholds under siege is much 
harsher than normal. Food and water are of- 
ten in short supply and the inhabitants must 
contend with the constant threat of storming 
parties, disease, and declining morale. 

Invasion: The primary defenses of the strong- 
hold have been overrun and enemy forces occu- 
Py substantial portions of the stronghold. 
Alternatively, the dwarves may have advanced 
from their stronghold into the enemy’s territory 
in force. The goal may be to punish raiders, or 
capture ground, or conquer and subjugate the 
enemy, or eliminate the enemy entirely. 


Militia 


We have already established the number of 
citizens in the militia on the Attitude Table. 
Look up the dominant race and multiply the 


total militia number by the percentage given 
to determine how many militia members are 
of the dominant race. 

All members of the militia are 1st level. 
Their leaders are usually of higher levels and 
are in addition to the total number of militia 
in a stronghold. 

The armor type is assigned for an average 
stronghold. This may be adjusted to reflect 
the wealth of the stronghold. The militia of a 
poor stronghold may only be able to afford 
leather armor, while a rich one could outfit its 
militia in banded or even plate mail armor. 

Morale: An average morale is furnished for 
each militia. This is modified according to the 
attitude of the stronghold. 

Leaders: The number and experience level 
of leaders is determined by the number of 
dwarves in the militia. In the case of hill 
dwarves, for example, for every 40 militia 
members there is a 2nd-6th level leader 
present. For every 160 militia there is a 6th 
level leader present, and so on. 


Morale Modifiers: 

Decadent: =3 
Declining: =2 
Expansionist: *2 
Isolationist: +1 


Deep Dwarves 


Morale: Elite (13) 
Deep dwarf militia are equipped with scale 
mail armor and carry shields. 


Weapons Total Militia 
Axe and light crossbow 15% 
Axe and heavy crossbow 15% 
Axe and hammer 25% 
Spear and sword 25% 
Pick and hammer 10% 
Two-handed sword 10% 


Deep Dwarf Leaders (Plate mail and shield) 


# Militia 
every 40 
50+ 


100 + 


200 + 
300 + 


Duergar 


Class 

Warrior 
Warrior 
Warrior 
Warrior/Priest 
Warrior 
Warrior 
Warrior 
Warrior/Priest 
Warrior/Priest 
Warrior/Priest 


Morale: Elite (13) 
Duergar militia are equipped with chain 


mail armor and carry shields. 


Weapons 


Pick and hammer 
Spear and pick 

Spear and hammer 
Pick and light crossbow 
Hammer and sword 
Hammer and heavy crossbow 10% 


Level 

3 

7 

4 
4-7/5-8 


Total Militia 
20% 
20% 
20% 
20% 
10% 


Duergar Leaders (Banded mail and shield) 


# Militia 
every 4 
every 9 
50+ 


100+ 
300 * 


Class 

Warrior 
Warrior 
Warrior 
Warrior 
Warrior/Priest 
Warrior 
Warrior 
Warrior/Priest 
Warrior/Priest 
Warrior/Priest 


Level 
2 

4 

6 

4 
3-6/4-7 
10 

8 

7/8 
5/5 
4/4 


Dwarf Strongholds * 107 


Gully Dwarves 


Morale: Unsteady (7) 

Gully dwarf militia is equipped with leather 
armor and shields. They only fight when 
forced to. The first reaction of most gully 
dwarves, militia or otherwise, to danger is to 
drop their weapons and run away! 


Weapons Total Militia 
Any they can scavenge100 ?6 
Gully Dwarf Leaders (Chain mail and shield) 
# Militia Class Level 
every 4 Thief (Leather) 2-6 
every 5 Warrior 2-4 
every 10 Warrior 2-6 
50+ Warrior 8 
100 + Warrior 10 

Priest 1-10 


Hill Dwarves 


Morale: Elite (13) 


Hill Dwarf Leaders (Plate and shield) 


# Militia Class 

every 40 Warrior 

160 + Warrior 
Warrior 

200 + Warrior/Priest 

320+ Warrior 
Warrior 
Warrior/Priest 
Warrior/Priest 


Mountain Dwarves 


Morale: Elite (13) 
Mountain dwarf militia is equipped with 


chain mail armor and shields. 


Level 
2-6 

6 

4 
3-6/4-7 
8 

7 

6/7 
4/4 


Hill dwarf militia is equipped with chain 
mail armor and shields. 


Weapons Total Militia 
Sword and spear 20% 
Sword and light crossbow 15% 
Axe and hammer 25% 
Sword and polearm 10% 
Axe and heavy crossbow 10% 
Axe and mace 10% 
Hammer and pick 10% 


Weapons Total Militia 

Sword and spear 30% 

Sword and light crossbow 10% 

Axe and hammer 25% 

Sword and polearm 05% 

Axe and heavy crossbow 10% 

Ахе апа тасе 10% 

Hammer and pick 10% 

Mountain Dwarf Leaders (Plate and shield) 

# Militia Class Level 

every 30 Warrior 2-6 

150 + Warrior 6 
Warrior 4 

200 + Warrior/Priest 3-6/4-7 

300 + Warrior 8 
Warrior 7 
Warrior/Priest 6/7 
Warrior/Priest 4/4 
Warrior/Priest 4/4 


e 


108 * Chapter Ten 


Sundered Dwarves 


Morale: Steady (11) 
Sundered dwarf militia is equipped with 
ring mail armor and shields. 


Weapons Total Militia 
Axe and sword 15% 
Axe and spear 15% 
Axe and light crossbow 15% 
Polearm and mace 05 96 
Polearm and hammer 1096 
Hammer and heavy crossbow 15% 
Pick and dagger 10% 
Масе and sword 1096 
Two-handed sword 05% 
Sundered Dwarf Leaders (Chain mail 
and shield) 
# Militia Class Level 
every 50 Warrior 2-7 
100 + Warrior 8 
Warrior 5 
150 Warrior/ Priest 2-7/3-8 
300 + Warrior 9 
Warrior 8 
Warrior/ Priest 7/8 
Warrior/Priest 3/3 
Warrior/ Priest 3/3 


Special Forces 


In addition to militia, a stronghold may 
have special types of forces. These are de- 
scribed in the Character Kits and include 
Hearth Guards, Battleragers, and Vermin 
Slayers, among others. The number of special 
forces should not be more than 10 to 20% of 
the total number of male dwarves present in a 
stronghold. For simplicity, add these to the 
number of male dwarves in the militia rather 
than subtracting them. 


War Machines 


A stronghold may also have war machines 
available. These are described in Chapter 9. 
Roll once for every 50 militia members in the 
stronghold. 


War Machine Table 
1d10 # War Machines 
1-5 None 
6-8 1 
9 2 
10+ 3 
Attitude Modifiers: 
Decadent: -3 
Declining: =2 
Isolationist: +1 
Expansionist: +2 
Animals 


Certain strongholds are guarded by ani- 
mals. Select these according to whether the 
Animal Master kit is being used, and the sub- 
race of the dwarf. Suitable animals include 
bears and wolves for mountain and hill 
dwarves, steeders for duergar, giant lizards 
for deep dwarves, giant rats and beetles for 
gully dwarves, and dogs and wolves for sun- 
dered dwarves. 


Total Strength 


Finally, add up the number of leaders in the 
militia, plus special troops, and add these to 
the number of dwarves in the stronghold to 
determine its total strength. 


Dwarf Strongholds e 109 


The Stronghold of Bazzakrak 


In this example, we are going to create a 
major stronghold for mountain dwarves. The 
DM has already decided that this is to be a 
powerful and expansionist stronghold. How- 
ever, since the details have not yet been 
worked out, he consults the stronghold design 
sequence for inspiration. He will choose those 
elements he wants from the design sequence, 
rather than rely on random die rolls. But, 
working through the sequence, he allows the 
dice to determine certain features for him. 


Naming the Stronghold 


The DM has already come up with a name 
and, because he is creating a mountain dwarf 
stronghold, there is no need to roll for a pri- 
mary subrace. He wants the stronghold to be 
very large so he selects the maximum number 
of mountain dwarves possible, 350. He notes 
this on the design sheet. 


Subraces Present 


As he looks over the next part of the design 
sequence, the DM decides that it would be fun 
to have a few other subraces of dwarves 
present. He selects two: duergar and gully 
dwarves. He also chooses the maximum num- 
ber possible, 20 duergar and 12 gully dwarves. 

Rather than generate separate strongholds 
for the subraces, the DM assigns them as part 
of the mountain dwarf stronghold. He decides 
that the duergar once lived beneath the 
stronghold, where they fought the mountain 
` dwarves. Two generations ago, the duergar 
were finally defeated and most of them fled. A 
few, however, were captured and imprisoned. 
These later renounced their evil ways. When 


110 * Chapter Ten 


they did so, they were given their freedom and 
permitted to remain within the stronghold. 
Although they have not married into any 
mountain dwarf clan, the duergar have 
proved themselves to be loyal and valuable 
members of the stronghold. They remain a 
distinct group, but have served admirably in 
the stronghold's military forces. They even 
helped to defend against other duergar who 
attacked the stronghold. 

The gully dwarves, on the other hand, have 
never been really íntegrated ínto the strong- 
hold. They are outcasts who live and work in 
the garbage pits. They have been here for four 
generations, and were first attracted to the 
stronghold by wondrous tales of "huge trea- 
sure pits,” filled with broken items and bones. 
The gully dwarves serve a useful role recy- 
cling garbage. They pretty much keep to 
themselves and rarely venture far from the 
garbage pits. They continue to follow the 
ways of gully dwarves. A wily deep dwarf 
merchant sells whatever useful items the gully 
dwarves recover and provides them with trin- 
kets and toys in exchange. While few moun- 
tain dwarves will socialize with them, the 
gully dwarves are recognized as performing 
a useful and valuable function within the 
society. 

Without consciously doing so, the DM has 
also introduced a deep dwarf merchant into 
the stronghold. To keep matters simple, he de- 
cides that this deep dwarf is the only one 
present. He is the sole survivor of a deep 
dwarf stronghold that was overrun by drow. 

The DM now has three other subraces 
present in his stronghold, but he decides not 
to reduce the number of mountain dwarves 
accordingly. Bazzakrak is to be a very large 
stronghold. 


Alignment 


As he wants Bazzakrak to be expansionist, 
the DM chooses lawful neutral for its align- 
ment. This allows it to impose the will of its 
leaders on others without being too concerned 
about whether their actions are seen as 'good'. 
He does not want the player characters to be 
evil, so he dismisses lawful evil as a possible 
alignment. The other alignments do not fit his 
conception of how the stronghold operates, so 
he does not consider choosing one of those. 
When he later discusses alignments with his 
players, he decides that he will give them the 
choice of lawful good, lawful neutral, or neu- 
tral good for their characters' alignments. But 
he also knows that it may be necessary to al- 
low other alignment choices depending on the 
character kits he makes available to them. 


Size of Bazzakrak 


As it is a major stronghold, the DM now in- 
creases the numbers of dwarves present by 
200% . This gives him 700 mountain dwarves, 
24 gully dwarves, and 40 duergar. At first he 
considers not doubling the number of 
duergar, but later thinks it would be good to 
allow them as player characters. He increases 
the number of deep dwarves to three by giving 
the merchant a son and a daughter. Now the 
son and the daughter can become player char- 
acters, if any of the players wish to play them. 


Since Time Began 


The DM wants Bazzakrak to be very old, so 
he decides that 20 generations have passed 
since its founding. This equates to 8,000 
years, a very long time for a stronghold to 
have grown and expanded. 

Bazzakrak is to be very important in the 


DM's campaign world, and he decides that it 
was founded by the mountain dwarves' god of 
war. Not only does this fit in with his concep- 
tion of the stronghold, but it also gives the 
stronghold a religious significance that is in 
keeping with its importance in the campaign. 


Death to Our Enemies 


Originally, the DM intended to make Baz- 
zakrak a feudal stronghold, but it now occurs 
to him that, because Bazzakrak was founded 
by a god, it would be logical to have it ruled 
by the priests of that god. He determines that 
the high priest is also the king, making the 
stronghold a feudal theocracy ruled by 
warrior/priests. He decides as well that the 
king's office is hereditary, passing to the king's 
eldest son. 

A stronghold ruled by warrior/priests fits 
neatly into his original conception of an ex- 
pansionist stronghold. On the stronghold de- 
sign sheet he notes that all of the stronghold's 
mountain dwarves and duergar are in its mili- 
tia. The gully dwarves keep to themselves, so 
there is no need to include them in the militia 
(they wouldn't be much help anyway). 


The Riches of the Earth 


As Bazzakrak is to be the largest stronghold 
in his campaign world, the DM wants it to be 
a wealthy one. It will not only have the re- 
sources to pursue its ambitions of conquest, 
but the player characters will benefit from the 
optional starting gold rules when they first 
outfit their characters. 


——ÓÁMÁ А — 


Dwarf Strongholds e 111 


Threatening the Enemy 


Bazzakrak is an expansionist stronghold, 
but does not have any ambition or desire to 
spread above ground. Therefore, the DM is 
not concerned about its relationship to other 
player character races apart from the gnomes. 
He determines randomly that the relationship 
with the gnomes is “cautious.” Gnomes are not 
welcome at Bazzakrak, but the stronghold 
does not seek to conquer gnomish territory. 

Then, out of curiosity, he decides to roll re- 
lationships with elves and humans, too (ig- 
noring halflings because he has decided that 
none live in the area). He gets an “at war” re- 
sult with the elves, but downgrades that to 
“hostile.” Relations with the humans are “in- 
different,” so the two races have little to do 
with each other. 


War is Our Life 


Up until now, the DM has not really consid- 
ered whose territory the dwarves of Bazzakrak 
are expanding into. He knows that at one time, 
Bazzakrak defeated a force of duergar and that 
the duergar have attacked the stronghold with- 
in the current generation. So it is safe to assume 
that the stronghold is at war with them. The 
two subraces are competing for the same un- 
derground territory and resources. But this is 
all too neat. An expanding stronghold would 
also have come into contact with other subter- 
ranean races. He adds trolls and goblins to the 
list of the stronghold's enemies. 

Bazzakrak is now at war with three races. It 
is time to determine how long these wars have 
been going on. The war with the duergar has 
been sputtering on for at least two genera- 
tions. The DM decides to randomly roll for its 
duration, using 2d6, and discovers that the 
war has been fought, off and on, for eight gen- 


112 * Chapter Ten 


erations. It has been a steady war of occasion- 
al small skirmishes. 

The DM has no clear idea about the wars 
against the trolls or goblins, so he lets the dice 
decide. He rolls 1d10 to determine the Troll 
War's duration and gets a 5—2d6 years—with 
a followup roll of nine years. Checking the 
war type, he gets a sporadic war. This looks 
good. The dwarves expanded into troll terri- 
tory nine years ago. Since then the two races 
have been fighting. The dwarves have not 
pushed any further into troll country, and the 
trolls content themselves with minor raids. 

The DM then discovers (through the magic 
of dice rolling) that the war with the goblins 
has only just begun, four weeks before. This 
war is much more intense. It is an invasion; 
the dwarves have entered the goblin's territo- 
ry and are intent on wiping out their hated en- 
emies. This is also good for his campaign, as it 
allows his 1st level player characters to fight 
in the front line without too much danger of 
them being killed. 

After a bit of thought, the DM decides that 
the war will spread. There are more goblins 
than the dwarves anticipated, plus they have 
allies who may come to their aid (the trolls are 
logical friends at this time). The war could 
even turn into a subterranean world war, as 
more races are drawn into it. But all that is for 
the future. The DM can provide this extra in- 
formation after he sees how the actual cam- 
paign progresses. 


The Militia of Bazzakrak 


With war on three fronts, Bazzakrak needs 
a well-equipped militia. As a wealthy strong- 
hold, this is not a problem. Its mountain 
dwarf and duergar militias wear plate mail ar- 
mor and enjoy higher-than-normal morale. 


Special Forces of Bazzakrak 


To allow his players a wide choice of char- 
acter kits, the DM does not specify any special 
forces. He is going to wait to see what kits his 
players choose. Then he'll decide how many 
special forces he wants the stronghold to 
have. As an alternative, the DM may decide 
that he wants the adventuring party to consist 
primarily of Wayfinders and Vermin Slayers 
and possibly a Vindicator or Battlerager along 
to spice things up. In this case, he would de- 
fine which special forces are available, and 
this would limit the choices available to his 
players. 


War Machines and Animals 


He has no clear idea of what he wants here. 
He decides to leave these sections until he 
knows which characters his players choose. 


Finishing Touches 


The DM has completed the design sequence 
and has created the bare bones of Bazzakrak. 
He now needs to flesh out some NPCs and 
draw a few maps. Once he's done that, its 
ready for play. Later he can elaborate upon its 
history and background, as his campaign pro- 
gresses or as he feels inspired. For now, Bazza- 
krak provides sufficient information to give 
him and his player characters the impression 
that it is a real and vibrant place. 


Dwarf Strongholds ® 113 


CHAPTER 


1 1 


This chapter is for DMs who want to design 
the background of a dwarf campaign. We 
have looked at the creation myths of the 
dwarves, how they and the world were 
formed, how dwarves have developed, their 
history, why subraces of dwarves exist, and 
how dwarves interact with other races. We 
shall now explore the kinds of campaigns 
that can be run using dwarves as the main 
characters. 


Creating a History 


The creation text of Marak is one of many 
possible backgrounds for a dwarf campaign. 
It revealed how a stronghold of dwarves 
might view the world and their place in it. You 
could use this as part of your campaign back- 
ground or develop your own myth cycle. The 
myths may be accepted by all dwarves, or 
may only be held by one stronghold or sub- 
race. The creation myth may be believed as 
truth by all dwarves, but with dissension 
among elements of related history, such as the 
names of the heroes or the precise role of the 
gods. 

In the first creation myth all dwarves began 
life together and later migrated to new strong- 
holds. They could trace their lineage back to 
the First Dwarves, their common ancestors. 
Since all of them came from common stock, 
subrace variations had to be explained. 

As an alternative, after they were created, 
they could have been placed by the gods in ca- 
verns around the world. This would permit them 
to live in any place or situation, without having 
to make up stories about how they spread across 
the world. They could live beneath tropical is- 
lands, under ice caps, or steamy jungles, as well 
as the more temperate hilly and mountain coun- 
try. They may have been isolated from others 
and their developments and subsequent histories 
may have diverged in countless ways. In such 
cases, you will need to decide how these dwarves 
would differ from the more traditional hill 
dwarves of the Players Handbook and 


114 * Chapter Eleven 


Designing Dwarf Campaigns 


MONSTROUS COMPENDIUM? Appendix. 
Do they constitute definitive subraces of 
dwarves, with marked differences in appearance 
and outlook, or are they just hill dwarves living 
in unusual places? 


Choices of Subraces 


As DM you have full control over which 
dwarf subraces to include in your campaign 
world, either as player or nonplayer charac- 
ters. You may decide that some of these sub- 
races do not exist in your campaign world at 
all. In Chapter 4, six different subraces are 
available for player characters. You do not 
have to use all of them. You may wish instead 
to restrict players to hill and mountain 
dwarves. 

If dwarves are an underground race, with 
little surface contact, why are hill and moun- 
tain dwarves different? The distinctions may 
have arisen from an encounter with other 
races such as elves or humans, or because the 
mountains are also inhabited by evil mon- 
sters, and the hills are less prone to monster 
incursions. 

Mountain dwarves have far less contact 
with humans and elves, who only expand into 
the mountains in search of mineral wealth or 
when population pressures or warring ene- 
mies force them into new areas. 

If, in your campaign world, the gods cre- 
ated the different subraces of dwarves, then 
there is no reason to come up with any other 
rationale why there are several kinds of 
dwarves in the world. The creation myth ex- 
plains the differences. If not, you need to in- 
clude the separation of the subraces as part of 
your history of the dwarves. 

If you have already worked up the mythic 
history of your world, using the suggestions in 
The Complete Priest's Handbook, all you 
need to decide is how dwarves fit into that his- 
tory. 

Alternatively, you may create your own 
myths for your world. There is no reason why 


dwarves and humans should agree how the 
world was created. They could share common 
beliefs, but with more emphasis being given to 
the gods of each race and their role in the 
mythic history of the world. 


The Importance of Myth 


You will need to decide on the importance 
of dwarves in your campaign world. If hu- 
mans are the dominant race, then much of 
what follows can be worked into a human ori- 
ented campaign world. If dwarves are to play 
an important role in the campaign, then it is 
important to have more fully defined creation 
myths and histories for the dwarves. 

However you design your campaign set- 
ting, you need to make some key decisions. 
Do dwarf myths tell the whole story? Do oth- 
er races share the dwarf myth? Does each race 
and culture have its own interpretation of a 
common myth? Was the world created by one 
being or by many? What role did each being 
take in creating it? Was it the god or gods of 
one particular race who created the world? Or 
was the world created by a variety of racial 
gods, each one concerned with protecting his 
own creation? 

In some belief systems, the world may al- 
ways have existed. Creation myths would 
then be concerned with the creation of a par- 
ticular race and their place within it. You don't 
have to work up all the answers in detail, all 
you need is a general framework, so that you 
can develop other aspects of the campaign's 
design around the mythos. 

Some readers may be wondering why they 
should bother with this at all. Yes, you could 
just define things as they are now, with no re- 
gard for the distant past. But a well-developed 
mythology makes your campaign more vi- 
brant. The religious beliefs and mythological 
backgrounds of dwarves, humans, and other 
key races helps not only to explain, but to de- 
fine, racial friendships and animosities. A his- 
tory of the races can be built on that 


background to explain the times and events of 
your campaign. 

How much you tell your players is up to 
you, depending on the type of campaign you 
are running. Remember that no religion holds 
all the answers to the questions of the universe. 
Where gaps disturb our understanding, people 
tend to make up suitable stories to fill them. 
Uncomfortable truths sometimes get hidden 
this way. Even when mythic history is largely 
true, each race has a vested interest in empha- 
sizing its own importance and supporting its 
racial views. The history of a war between 
dwarves and elves is likely to sound very dif- 
ferent when recounted by those two sides. 

Bear in mind that, given the pride and stub- 
bornness of the dwarves, they are likely to be- 
lieve that they were the first race, even if other 
races claim (and can support their claims) that 
they existed before the dwarves. The dwarves 
may even see other races as failed attempts to 
produce beings as perfect as dwarves. 


The Importance of the Gods 


You will also need to decide how important 
the dwarven gods are to the dwarves. Do the 
gods govern all aspects of life, or are they only 
worshipped for certain key functions or to re- 
quest favors? Do the gods hand down laws as 
masters addressing servants, or do they sim- 
ply light the way and let their followers inter- 
pret signs as best they can? 

You need to determine the size of the dwar- 
ven pantheon. This is particularly true in a 
campaign which involves priest player char- 
acters. Each of the gods within a pantheon 
should have some special attribute for which 
he or she is venerated. Some may have more 
than one. Typical attributes for dwarven gods 
are arts and crafts, each art and craft with its 
own deity. War, justice, earth, elemental 
forces, good, metalwork, race, and strength 
all have their patron deities. Given that 
dwarves breed so slowly, and that this is seen 
as a reason for their decline, an interesting re- 


Designing Dwarf Campaigns 9 115 


ligion might deal with fertility. Perhaps the 
fertility goddess is dead or imprisoned. If she 
is held prisoner, where and by whom? 

The Complete Priests Handbook will be 
very useful in helping to create and populate 
your pantheon. It includes 41 sample religions 
suitable for dwarves. DMs interested in creat- 
ing well-balanced and detailed religions will 
find it an invaluable tool. 

When designing a dwarven pantheon, it is 
not necessary to flesh out all of the gods. A 
few of the major deities are enough to start 
with; others can be added as needed. As with 
all gods, a few decisions must be made about 
their abilities. 

Are they immortal? Do gods live forever, or 
will they eventually age and die? Are they in- 
destructible? The gods may be immune to 
damage, or they may be injured. Does rapid 
healing follow injury, or can they actually be 
killed? 

How much influence do the dwarven gods 
exert upon the world? The gods may use the 
dwarves as pawns in a cosmic game, or they 
may be remote from daily events. In a cam- 
paign where each race has its own pantheon, 
it is advisable to let the various races of gods 
take a background role, rather than compet- 
ing for power. 

How interested are the dwarven gods in the 
world? They may not take any interest in the 
world on the surface and be content to restrict 
their activities to the subterranean realms. 
Why, for example, would a dwarvish God of 
War be concerned with conquering the agri- 
cultural lands belonging to humans or half- 
lings? He would be far more interested in 
capturing the mineral rich lands beneath the 
surface, and leave the world above to other 
races. Dwarven gods of the arts and crafts 
may also be so absorbed in the development 
of their own skills that they are not interested 
in other affairs. 

What are the gods' intentions toward the 
world? This is an important question. What 
do the dwarven gods want with the world and 


116 * Chapter Eleven 


its races? The gods might want to see their 
own race dominant, or at least protected. Or 
they may simply wish to pursue their own af- 
fairs. Most dwarven deities may be content to 
be properly recognized and worshipped, but 
don't overlook the activities of evil or chaotic 
gods who act out of malice or a sense of mis- 
chief. They may be more interested in upset- 
ting the stable lifestyle of the dwarves and 
their fellow gods than with establishing their 
own power base. Perhaps they are so discon- 
tented that they are prepared to lead evil races 
against the dwarves in order to destroy the 
other gods. 


The Races of the World 


You also need to decide whether dwarf crea- 
tion stories for other races are true or whether 
they are simply the views of the dwarves. 

Humans are traditionally seen as a new race 
in the process of seizing power from the de- 
clining elder races of elves and dwarves, or as 
having already usurped them. This may be the 
case in your world, or you may have human 
lands existing far from dwarf and elf territory 
with little contact between them. Another in- 
teresting twist is to look at the earlier stages, 
when humans are still an upstart race in a 
world dominated by dwarves and elves. 


Wars and Conflicts 


Unless dwarves in your world are a rela- 
tively recent race, they will have a long histo- 
ry of conflict behind them. These conflicts 
could have involved strongholds of dwarves 
fighting each other, or their traditional goblin, 
orc, hobgoblin, and giant enemies. Wars 
against humans or elves may also have oc- 
curred. 


Dwarf Versus Dwarf 


Conflicts between dwarves could have led 
to the original separation of the subraces. Un- 
less you are running a deep earth campaign, 
it's best to allow hill or mountain dwarves to 
be the victors of such conflicts, so that they 
retain possession of the strongholds which are 
higher and better positioned. 

Conflicts may take place between strong- 
holds of hill dwarves. A real or imagined 
slight could cause them to turn on each other. 
Such a war could rage for hundreds or even 
thousands of years. It may even have gone on 
for so long that its original causes have been 
forgotten and all either side now knows is 
their vehement hatred for the enemy. 

Civil wars are, alas, a possibility within in a 
stronghold. A major disagreement between 
clans may lead to a stronghold being split into 
factions, each controlled by separate clans 
more than prepared to make war upon the 
others. 

Intradwarven wars may also be caused by 
competition over mineral rights, particularly 
where rich lodes of gold or mithril exist. Dis- 
putes may arise over possession of a powerful 
artifact, such as an anvil capable of creating 
magical weapons. 

Wars may also be initiated by the interven- 
tion of evil deities, or by other races who suc- 
ceed in fomenting trouble between rival 
strongholds. Duergar are invariably ready to 
attack other strongholds in order to capture 
slaves and loot, or merely to exercise their ha- 
tred of other dwarves. 


Dwarves Against Evil 


Dwarves have traditionally fought long and 
bitter wars against their evil enemies beneath 
the earth. This struggle has become one of 
“kill or be killed.” As well as goblins, orcs, 
hobgoblins, and giants, the war could involve 
drow, mind flayers, ogres, trolls, or any other 
intelligent race which inhabits the deep earth. 


In some worlds these wars have raged con- 
stantly for centuries. In others they are spo- 
radic affairs where evil races make small 
gains, or are pushed back each time they try 
to advance. Entire mountain ranges once 
filled with majestic dwarf strongholds may 
have fallen to hordes of goblins and orcs. 
These once exalted halls are now infested with 
evil monsters. The descendants of those who 
were driven from their ancestral halls now 
long to drive out the goblins and restore those 
halls to their former splendor. 

Situations can exist where the dwarves are 
constantly under siege. They beat back the 
orcs, but orcs breed faster than dwarves do, 
so it is only a matter of time before the orcs’ 
losses are replenished. (By extension, it can be 
seen that in order to prevail in a war against 
any of the fast-breeding goblinoid races, 
dwarves must inflict much heavier casualties 
than they suffer. In fact, dwarves must be 
very careful to avoid heavy losses in any but 
the most desperate engagements.) Dwarves 
have been known, grudgingly, to turn to hu- 
mans and elves for assistance in times of need. 


At War with Humans and Elves 


Dwarven relationships with humans and 
elves are usually cautious. Dwarves may have 
fought elves or humans over mineral rights or 
other disputes, Elves are often haughty to- 
ward the dwellers underground and this 
attitude makes for tense interracial under- 
standings. 

Previous conflicts could have ended in 
stalemate with neither race gaining the upper 
hand. A tenuous peace may now exist be- 
tween them. Alternatively, a war could have 
been fought which ended with few dwarves 
left alive. In self-defense, the survivors shut 
themselves in their strongholds and severed 
all ties with other races. 

Another possibility is that, in a war be- 
tween elves (or humans) and dwarves, the 
dwarves emerged victorious. The difficulty is 


Designing Dwarf Campaigns € 117 


that success took a very heavy toll upon 
dwarf lives and resources. The victors re- 
turned to their strongholds only to come un- 
der attack by goblins and orcs. Already 
weakened by the first war, they found them- 
selves unable to defeat the monsters and were 
driven from their stronghold. During the 
years that followed, the elves (or humans), re- 
covered from the war and prospered, while 
the dwarves struggled to survive. The 
dwarves would be very resentful toward the 
elves (or humans), even accusing them of in- 
citing the goblin/orc attacks. (And at the 
same time, the elves and humans might seize 
the opportunity to work some revenge on the 
enemy which so recently humiliated them.) 

These are broad historical scenarios, even 
the most cataclysmic of wars may have taken 
place so long ago that no one really remem- 
bers it. But dwarves and elves, especially, 
have long memories. The resultant racial ani- 
mosity survives and trust between the races 
has vanished. 

Relationships between humans, elves, and 
dwarves do not have to be antagonistic. They 
may simply fail to understand one another 
and find it difficult to adapt to the ways of the 
other. Rather than risk conflict, trade and oth- 
er deals could be carried out diplomatically, in 
order to minimize the possibility of misunder- 
standings. 


Dragon Wars 


Dragons, with their love of treasure, have 
always looked with envy on the wealth of the 
dwarves. Dragons cannot mine gems and ores 
and dwarves can. Dragons look at dwarves as 
a race which has been created, not only to 
supply them with wealth, but with nourish- 
ment as well. 

Dragons have taken over entire strong- 
holds, killing or driving the inhabitants away. 
These strongholds may be held by a single 
dragon, families of them, or by one dragon 
with hordes of other evil allies. 


118 * Chapter Eleven 


The dwarves would then attempt to take 
back their homes and treasures. They may not 
react favorably when humans and other races 
drive out the dragons, only to keep dwarven 
ore and gems for themselves. When the 
dwarves demand their treasures and are told 
that they cannot have them, it is likely to lead 
to war. 


Campaign Environments 


In the standard adventure campaign char- 
acters are drawn from a wide range of classes 
and races. The heroes travel through a variety 
of lands, meeting different races and cultures. 
Your knowledge of dwarves may now be used 
to good effect to develop strongholds, and to 
provide additional background information 
for player characters. 


The All-Dwarf Party 


In this campaign all of the characters are 
dwarves. There are no wizards in the party. 
Warriors, priests, thieves, warrior/priests, 
and warrior/thieves may be present, but there 
are no dwarf wizards. There may be reasons 
for human wizards or gnome illusionists to 
join the party to alleviate the deficiency in 
magic. You may decide to retain the true 
dwarven flavor by allowing wizards only as 
opponents. 

This type of campaign works well when the 
dwarves are beset by an outside threat. Per- 
haps the stronghold is under attack by hordes 
of monsters and no other assistance can be se- 
cured. 


The Outcasts' Party 


In the outcast, party the player characters 
are principally or exclusively dwarves, but are 
outcasts from their own society. Perhaps they 
befriended an elven wizard or warrior/ 
wizard. They may have been falsely accused 


of some heinous crime, murdering their lord 
or betraying their own stronghold to orcs. 
They would wander the world, above or be- 
low ground, seeking to clear their good names 
and to become wealthy and famous heroes. 


The Single Class Party 


Here, all the characters have the same class. 
They are all warriors, priests, thieves, or 
multi-classed. They may be part of the same 
military force, temple, or guild, and may have 
been given a mission to perform. This cam- 
paign can be very exciting while the group has 
a clear and common goal. If there is no goal, 
however, the campaign can quickly fall apart. 
For this reason it works best as a limited- 
duration adventure, with everyone under- 
standing that the group of characters will 
disband when their quest is completed and a 
new group will be created. 


The Vendetta Party 


This campaign is similar to the standard ad- 
venturing party except that it emphasizes in- 
terracial animosity. The characters are 
members of different races (or subraces) and 
each has a grudge against the others. There 
may have been fierce wars and broken alli- 
ances in the recent past, so that there is no 
trust among them. This type of party needs to 
have clear adventuring goals that depend 
upon the cooperation of the whole party, in 
order to achieve a final purpose. Otherwise, 
its members will fall to squabbling endlessly, 
and it would probably end in them killing 
each other. Ideally, by the end of the mission, 
they will have learned enough about each oth- 
er to overcome their prejudices. 


The Vendetta Campaign 
This campaign involves one of the tradi- 


tional enemies of dwarves: orcs, goblins, 
elves, or humans. Perhaps the elves are trying 


to discredit the dwarves or shut down their 
trading operations, or the dwarves have de- 
cided that they don't want humans expanding 
into their mountains. The dwarves may have 
explained to the humans that they are not wel- 
come and the humans responded by murder- 
ing the dwarves' ambassadors. If the humans 
are a young race, they may have been tricked 
into an evil alliance by crafty giants or venge- 
ful elves. 


The Wide World Campaign 


In the wide world campaign the dwarves 
travel around the globe, often in the company 
of other races. Dwarves in this campaign may 
visit strongholds, but they travel primarily 
through human lands. This is closest in tone 
to what many players would consider a "typi- 
cal” AD&D® game. 


The Deep Earth Campaign 


In this campaign the dwarves can be mem- 
bers of any subrace and the entire campaign is 
set underground. It may be deep within the 
earth where deep dwarves and duergar live. It 
may be a stronghold of hill or mountain 
dwarves who have either turned their backs 
on the world above or have had little contact 
with the outside. 

A big advantage in this campaign is that 
you don’t need to design any of the world’s 
surface and you can effectively dispense with 
the histories of humans and elves. You will 
need maps of the extensive caverns and 
dungeons where the campaign is to take place. 
The deep earth campaign can take place with- 
in caverns or a hollow earth. It may involve 
an epic journey to the center of the globe. 

While some people consider this setting lim- 
iting, it really is no different from a surface 
campaign. The biggest difference is that char- 
acters never see the sky. Anything that is pos- 
sible on the surface is possible beneath the 
surface (this is a fantasy game, after all). And 


Designing Dwarf Campaigns ® 119 


the unusual setting can make even familiar 
and worn-out plots seem fresh and exciting! 


Dwarf Wars 


Interdwarven warfare can involve wars be- 
tween subraces or between different strong- 
holds of the same subrace. It will work best if 
one side is clearly the bad guys and the other 
side (preferably the one the PCs are on) is 
clearly the good guys. The player characters 
may be able to resolve the dispute through 
clever diplomacy or intervention before the 
war escalates out of control. It could be a 
blood feud between two clans which has been 
raging for years and will only end when one 
side has been destroyed or driven away. 


The Lost Clan 


Considering the way dwarves move, ex- 
pand, and relocate, it is not unreasonable to 
assume that occasionally an entire clan could 
drop from sight. The PCs may be an expedi- 
tion sent out from the central stronghold to 
track down and reestablish contact with a lost 
clan of dwarves which disappeared genera- 
tions before. Or they could be from that lost 
clan, trying to work their way back to the sur- 
face of the world to once again link up with 
other dwarves. 


The Siege Campaign 


A siege campaign is set within a stronghold 
or a series of strongholds. The dwarves are 
under constant attack by bands of evil mon- 
sters in a fight to the death. The evil creatures 
are probably under the sway of a powerful 
and charismatic tyrant who is leading them on 
a rampage across the dwarves' territory. For 
added tension, the dwarves may possess a 
powerful artifact that this tyrant needs to 
guarantee his conquests, and now he will stop 
at nothing to get it. The evil forces may have 
already captured the upper or lower levels of 


the dwarves' stronghold, along with hundreds 
of captives, and cut the dwarves off from the 
outside world. 

For a different twist, the PCs may be a re- 
turning party of adventurers who find them- 
selves unable to get back into their stronghold 
because it is ringed by besieging enemies. Or 
this scenario could be combined with the lost 
clan concept, and the characters must escape 
through the enemy camp, find the fabled lost 
clan, and return at its head to drive the mon- 
sters from the gates and save the stronghold. 


Creating New Kits 


After you have designed your campaign 
world, you may wish to add proficiencies 
which are specific to the world you created. 
Using Chapter 6 as a guide, many new kits can 
be created. If you wish to design a kit, con- 
sider the following questions about the dwarf 
and his role in your campaign: 

Description: What is the dwarf like? Is he 
drawn from specific literary or mythological 
sources? Are there any special requirements 
for a character who wishes to play this type of 
dwarf? 

Barred: If the dwarf is a priest, are there any 
reasons certain dwarves should not be al- 
lowed to be priests in this kit? 

Role: What place does he have in the cam- 
paign? How is he regarded by his own race 
and culture? By other races and cultures? Is 
there a particular attitude or outlook he needs 
in order to acquire this kit? 

What kinds of activities does he perform in 
a campaign? Is he a typically taciturn dwarf, 
or a loud-mouthed oaf? What is his relation- 
ship with other characters? Is he friendly, dis- 
tanced, wary, impassive? Does he harbor any 
strong racial hatreds? How does he react to 
elves, gnomes, and other nonhuman races? 

Secondary Skills: If you are using the sec- 
ondary skills system, decide whether the kit 
requires any particular skills. 

Weapon Proficiencies: Certain types of 


——— IU 


Designing Dwarf Campaigns 9 121 


dwarves favor particular weapons. Note 

these, along with any weapons the character 

must have. 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: Many dwarves 
have certain skills in common, and all should 
have the Endurance proficiency. You may as- 
sign one or two proficiency slots which are 
without cost to the character. If appropriate, 
these may come from listings other than the 
Dwarves and General listings in Chapter 5. 

Equipment: If a kit is best known for spe- 
cific types of equipment, the character should 
purchase the specified equipment at the start 
of the campaign. If some, but not all, dwarves 
of this type use the same equipment, it need 
not be required. In that case, simply list it as 
recommended. 

Special Benefits: Although not necessary, 
most kits should have some special benefit. 
Any kind of benefit is acceptable, but it 
should relate to the way this particular dwarf 
operates in fiction, mythology, or in your own 
image of him. 

Possible benefits include: 

* Bonuses to reaction rolls, particularly with 
certain races. 

* Bonuses on proficiency use, especially in 
specifically defined situations. 

* Bonuses to attack and/or damage rolls, es- 
pecially against certain enemies or in spe- 
cial circumstances. 

* A free weapon specialization. 

* Special resistances, such as immunity or a 
saving throw bonus against specific magical 
attacks. 

* Special rights within the culture in which 
the dwarf normally travels, such as immu- 
nity from prosecution or free lodging on de- 
mand. 


122 * Chapter Eleven 


Special Hindrances: One or more special 
hindrances should be imposed to limit the 
character. 

Possible hindrances include: 

ө Penalties to reaction rolls, especially from 
certain races. 

@ Penalties to attack and/or damage rolls, 
particularly against certain enemies or in 
special circumstances. 

& Restrictions against learning certain profi- 

ciencies. 

€ Social or cultural restrictions affecting how 
easily the character can mingle with diverse 
groups. He may be prohibited from carry- 
ing weapons within his stronghold, or can- 
not marry, or is punished excessively for 
certain crimes. 


Wealth Options: Does the dwarf have less 
or more starting gold than other characters? 
Are there any restrictions placed on how start- 
ing gold must be spent? 

You may also adapt kits to other classes by 
adjusting the kit's skills, weapons, proficien- 
cies, benefits, and hindrances. 


Dwarf Stronghold Design Sheet 


Name of Stronghold: 


Main Subrace: 


Number: 


Minor Subraces: 


Number: 


Overall Alignment: 


Typeof Stronghold: —— е __—————Є— 
Ков OF Stronghold: ————— ини инь 
Founded By: 
Government: 
Attitude: 


Resources: 


Relationship with Elves: 


Relationship with Gnomes: 
Relationship with Halflings: 
Relationship with Humans: 
Peace/War: 
Length of Peace/War: 
Type of Peace/War: 
Military Forces 
Total Number of Militia: 
Militia Weapons: 
Numbers: 
Militia Leaders 
Class 
Level 


Armor — 
Special Forces: 

War Machines: 

Animals: 


Total Stronghold Strength: 


©1991 TSA, inc. TSR, inc. grants permission to 
photocopy for personal use only 


Dwarf Stronghold Design Sheet 9 123 


NS 
N 


^SC^v Dwarf Character Kit Design Sheet 


Character Class: 


Campaign: 


Player: 
DM: 


DESCRIPTION: nM 


BARRED (if priest): А 


ROLE: — ......ы.м.ы..ы.м.м.ы.ы.м.ыы.."."<}Х_ЬЫ $$ 


SECONDARY SKILLS (if used) 
WEAPON PROFICIENCIES 


Required: ции 


Recommended: е eu 


BONUS NONWEAPON PROFICIENCIES: 


_——————— M —— — — —————————— 


RECOMMENDED NONWEAPON PROFICIENCIES: 


_————————-—— 


———————————-—-—-—— 


EQUIPMENT: 


DISTINCTIVE APPEARANCE: 
SPECIAL BENEFITS: 


SPECIAL HINDRANCES: 


THIEF SKILL BONUSES/PENALTIES: 
Pick Pockets: 
Open Locks: 
Find/Remove Traps: 


Move Silently: 
Hide in Shadows: 
Detect Noise: 

Climb Walls: 

Read Languages: 
WEALTH OPTIONS: 


124 * Dwarf Character Kit Design Sheet ©1901 TR, inc. TSA, inc. grant permission to 


for personal use only 


Сма ыы: 
Айда Dwf c5 — kað DWARF WARRIOR PC RECORD 


FMoegeciNM——IIPRe€AAA——ll ds 
ЗОО МИРЕ — кшш 
Зах ——— ОСАО ыы әм 
a ==. ‘НА و‎ 
: ХЕЕЕ _______ Appearance 

Subrace 


SAVING THROWS 


ARMOR Adjusted AC Armor Type (Pieces) 
Surprised 
Shieldless 
AC Rear 


СОО00 00000 
GAGU 900000 


Proficiencies/Skills/Languages 
Grade or slope: 


I 


Character. 


Align. Rae DMa Cas — level DWARF PRIEST PC RECORD 
Players Мате Family Clan 

Stronghold ———  —————————————————— Liege/Patron Religion 
Sex. Age. Social Class Status 
HC Wi Birth Rank # Siblings 

Hair .  . Eyes  . . Appearance 

Subrace XP Bonus Kit 


SAVING THROWS 


—— — м — че —À чш 


ARMOR Adjusted AC Armor Type (Pieces) 
Surprised 
Shieldless 
Rear 


WEAPON COMBAT 


0000 00000 
ооооо 00000 


Racial Abilities Class Abilities Proficiencies/Skills/Languages 
Grade or slope: Turn undead: Ie p e SS 
New tunnel: 1st level spells: [TTG шшш Wes zoe jr Muere ee 
Shifting wall: 2nd level spells: SSS кү) Е РЕД 
Trap, pit: 3rd level spells: Е у) SSS SS 
Depth undergrd: 4th level spells: ЕЕ Е, gue cmm ЕЕ 
Infravision: Sth level spells: mm Se) ae) 
6th level spells: Е ا‎ 
7th level spells: SSS wo veu = چ‎ 


+1001 TSA, Inc. TSA, Inc. grants permission to 


Character 


ARMOR Adjusted AC 
Surprised 
— — — Shieldless 
AC 


Racial Abilities 
Grade or slope: 
New tunnel: 
Shifting wall: 
Trap, pit: 

Depth undergrd: 


Infravision: 


Armor Type (Pieces) 


Class Abilities 
Pick pockets: 
Open locks: 
F/R traps: 
Move silently: 


Hide in shadow: 


Hear noise: 
Climb wall: 
Read lang.: 
Backstab: 


DWARF THIEF PC RECORD 


EO KEE 98806809 
йш ийке Boone 


Clan 
Religion 
Status 

# Siblings 


SAVING THROWS 


Proficiencies/Skills/Languages 


Gear 


Item — Location Wt. |Item Location Wt [ltem — Location Wi | 
EST Pan рааараа сае 


Treasure 


ME — 


ея 


. > 

T rae ^ 
* 

> — = 


eee, a 5 
ту а ы ^ 
EY sae ue 

ЛЕ < t 


ппптпппппрп 
#пппппёп 
gag gaoaosd 
oon 00000 oo 
000 ппппп 00 


ooo 


EFE, BAHO QU 
ооо ooooo OO 
Hoe Beet 168 
ооо 00000 oO 
ооо 00000 OO 


The 
Complete Book 


of 
iSwarves 

Battle axes and beards. Good companions when 
traveling underground. Handy with tools. If that was 
your view of dwarves, you need The Complete Book 
of Dwarves. Discover 24 new character kits, new 
weapons, and new possibilities, including six dwarf 
subraces, new proficiencies, strongholds, origin 
myths, and a look at dwarven personalities. After 
reading The Complete Book of Dwarves, you may 
still look down on these short folk... but only to see 
them! 


$15.00 U.S. 1-56076-110-5 


TSR, Inc. - - TSR Ltd 
POB 756 . 120 Church End, 
Lake Geneva, Cherry Hinton 
WI 53147 EE Cambridge CB1 ЗІБ 


United Kingdom 


ADVANCED DUNGEONS & DRAGONS, AD&D, 
and the TSR logo are trademarks owned 
46563 02124 5 by TSR, Inc. $1991 TSR, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 
Printed in the ULS. A. 


