i aera r Pha i Loe kes 


ls 


sel SAREE ERRE tan ge EE Ree AMO Go RAMI A ENF 


RASET 


j: 


? RO n 
PERA 


GEN SASA a NAE ASIN 


4 wise ts A 


} 


Encyclopedia Magica™ 


Accessory 


Credits 


Design: It is impossible to list all of the creators of the items cataloged in these volumes, 
but credit goes to everyone who has created a magic item in a module, boxed set, accessory, 
hardbound, or magazine article published in the last 20 years. 

Compilation and Development: slade 
Development and Editing: Doug Stewart 
Project Coordination: Steve Winter 
Interior Black and White Art: Arnie Swekel 
Interior Color Art: Clyde Caldwell, JeffEasley, Fred Fields, Paul Jaquays, 

John & Laura Lakey, and Robh Ruppel 
Art Coordination: Peggy Cooper 
Graphic Design: Dee Barnett 
Graphic Coordination: Sarah Feggestad 
` Typesetting: Nancy J. Kerkstra 
Production: Paul Hanchette 
Acknowledgements: L. Richard Baker III, Anne Brown, Ed Greenwood, Bruce Heard, 
Colin McComb, Roger E. Moore, Steven E. Schend, slade, Georgia S. Stewart, and Doug Stewart 
who supplied new and unique magical items. And, of course, James M. Ward, for laughing 
when he heard slade had this project. 


Volume Two 


Decoy Dust to Phylactery of Riteousness 


"TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Dy? Burdinds caus teaayhie i aiaei kubayn eh 6 Race EE EE iE ERT pea Ragestuie ve Moa heehee 419 
BE east tiieds Sua cas E aa outa aap aay area S it E E Sua deten Slane a's -oeaydh E E buster Ge tle aves es 425 
Pes wierd ca Saas eles Sided EA cee eid Pea hand Cale Dake I ent eae 465 
Sd tee crete raed Boe Rae E eee ea te dele Be Roe bg Akos EAS om eee eee 501 
FA scot Seba RAS Siete BES ea ds Ge E E E O E on Peale abe Desay OEE aes eae dea EE 551 
EE cas EEE ae hee E E E E EE E EEA 607 
A E E E E E EE OEE EAE A E N E 621 
K orreee ore n E eT r e a eat e e e e A E Secon SE A A UN ee 627 
EREE E E inated E E E E E TO E E atc 635 
M aaah naren ora ae a a a EE a aE a S I E E R E 675 
Na a E a ei a sears ie A tas ees E ace ads aC a EEA E AEAEE 745 
OD Saeed ale Sho Sate E NS PES AE EE A ane E a A a a a eae RAA EAA 761 
ENNE NE N E E E Se tt EE EEEE AE AE EEEE 801 
TSR, Inc. TSR Ltd 
201 Sheridan Springs Road 120 Church End 
Lake Geneva Cherry Hinton 
WI153147-0756 Cambridge, CB1 3LB 
USA United Kingdom 


AD&D, ADVANCED DUNGEONS & DRAGONS, AL-QADIM, BATTLES YSTEM, BLACKMOOR, CARDMASTER, D&D, DARK SUN, DRAGON, 
DRAGON'S CROWN, DRAGONLANCE, DRAGON MOUNTAIN, DRAGON QUEST, DUNGEON, DUNGEONS & DRAGONS, DUNGEON MASTER, 
FIEND FOLIO, FORGOTTEN REALMS, GAMMA WORLD, GREYHAWK, HOLLOW WORLD, MONSTROUS COMPENDIUM, POLYHEDRON 
RAVENLOFT, RPGA, the RPGA Logo, SPELLJAMMER, and WORLD OF GREYHAWK are registered trademarks owned by TSR, Inc. 

ALWAYS AN ADVENTURE!. CREATURE CRUCIBLE, DEITIES & DEMIGODS, ENCYCLOPEDIA MAGICA, MONSTROUS MANUAL, MYSTARA, 
PLANESCAPE, RAVENS BLUFF, ROLE PLA YING GAME ASSOCIATION, WILDSPACE, and the TSR Logo are trademarks owned by TSR, Inc. 
LANKHMaAR is a trademark owned by and used under license from Fritz Leiber. 

All TSR characters, character names, spell names, magical item names, unique place locations, and the distinct likenesses thereof are trademarks owned by TSR, Inc. 
Random House and its affiliate companies have worldwide distribution rights in the book trade for English language products of TSR, Inc. Distributed to the toy 
and hobby trade by regional distributors. Distributed to the book and hobby trade in the United Kingdom by TSR Ltd. This work is protected under the copyright 
laws ofthe United States of America. Any reproduction or unauthorized use of the material or art work presented herein is prohibited by law without the express 
written permission of TSR, Inc. 


61995 TSR, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 
First Printing, February 1995 


LS 


Dust 


Decoy 
XP Value: 400 GP Value: 1,200 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

This dust forms the shape of a snake monster. It 
appears to attack creatures in the area of effect, 
but it is merely a decoy and cannot actually dam- 
age anyone. It tries to draw attention and then 
attacks until someone realizes it is harmless. 
However, if any creature tries to use a bite attack 
against the snake dust, it automatically hits and 
the creature must then make a saving throw vs. 
death magic or die in one round, choked by the 
dust. Claw and weapon attacks merely pass 
through the dust, appearing to damage the decoy 
but not actually affecting it. Decoy dust lasts for 
one turn. 


of Disappearance 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide, Ist Edition 

This dust looks just like dust ofappearance, and 
it is typically stored in the same manner and 
quantity. All things touched by it reflect and bend 
light of all sorts (infrared and ultraviolet 
included), becoming invisible. Normal sight is 
useless when trying to locate dusted creatures or 
objects—they can't even be detected by magical 
means, let alone anything else. Even detect invisi- 
bility spells don't work. Dust ofappearance, 
however, does reveal people and objects made 
invisible by dust ofdisappearance. 

Invisibility bestowed by the dust lasts for 2d10 
turns (1d10+10 if sprinkled carefully upon an 
object). Attacking while invisible is possible, 
always by surprise ifthe opponent fails to note the 
invisible thing and always at an Armor Class 4 bet- 
ter than normal (while invisibility lasts). Unlike the 
invisibility spell, dust ofdisappearance remains 
effective even after an attack is made. 


of Dryness 
XP Value: 250 GP Value: 750 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide, 1st Edition 
This special dust has many uses. Ifa pinch is cast 
into a cubic yard of water, the liquid is instantly 
transformed to nothingness, and the dust pinch 
becomes a marble-sized pellet, floating or resting 
where it was cast. Ifthe pellet is hurled down, it 
breaks and releases the same volume of water. 


Dust of Dullness 


When the dust is sprinkled over an area 
(such as with a wave of the arm), it 
= negates & precipitation or cloudburst 
spell, or else dries up as much as 15 cubic feet of 
water. The dust affects only water (whether fresh, 
salt, brackish, or alkaline), not other liquids. 

Ifthe dust is employed against a water elemental 
or similar creature, the creature must save vs. spell 
or be destroyed. A successful save still inflicts 5d6 
points of damage upon the water creature. 

A pouch of this dust contains 1d6+4 pinches. 


of Dullness 
XP Value: 250 GP Value: 500 
Mordenkainen's Fantastic Adventure 

This appears to be normal, silty dust. One large 
pinch affects one human-sized creature; a handful 
can affect 1d4+1 human-sized creatures. It may be 
thrown up to 10 feet, cascading down upon 
intended targets. When the dust is cast on any liv- 
ing creature with senses (sight, taste, hearing, 
touch, smell, and/or a "sixth sense" such as psion- 
ics or magic that provide unusual sensory capabili- 
ties), roll 1d6, and consult the table below. The 
number rolled affects all senses with a number 
equal to or lower than the result. (Example: A roll 
of 3 would affect sight, taste, and hearing.) 


Roll Sense 
1 Sight: Vision is blurred for 1d6 hours. 
Roll 1dl0 to find the severity: 
1-3 -3 penalty to attack. 
4-8 -5 penalty to attack and -3 penalty to 
movement rate; attempts at faster move- 
ment result in a stumble and fall, for no 


damage. 
9-0 Blinded 
2 Taste: The victim loses the sense of taste 


for 1d6 hours. 

3 Hearing: The victim is deaf for 1d6 
turns; a -1 penalty applies to all initiative 
rolls, and the victim suffers a 50% chance 
of being surprised in situations where 
sound (footsteps, howling, etc.) is the pri- 
mary factor. Unless some nonaural sig- 
naling method is used, the victim does 
not react to unseen situations until after a 
1d4 initiative delay (or until physically 
warned by other characters). 

4 Touch: The victim cannot feel anything 
for 1d6 turns, including being touched, 


burned, frozen, etc. A penalty of-3 applies 
1472 


7 419 ` 


Dust, Feather 


eee 


to the movement rate, and any attempt at 
running results in a stumble and fall (for no 
damage) within one round. Dexterity is 
temporarily penalized by -2 points. When 
holding objects in hand, there is a 30% 
chance per object of dropping it, checked 
each turn and whenever an item is used. 


5 Smell: The victim loses all olfactory fac- 
ulties for 1d6 turns, and cannot smell 
anything (a boon when investigating 
garbage heaps). 

6 Sixth Sense: The victim may not receive, 


transmit, use, or interpret psychic, magi- 
cal, or psionic powers for 1d6 turns. All 
those functions related to dreams, intu- 
itions, "hunches," extra sensory percep- 
tions, and/or magical spells or items that 
would produce, heighten, or elaborate 
these areas are "wiped clean" from the 
victim's mind. No telepathic or empathic 
communication is possible. Spells 
affected are listed below. Magical items 
that resemble these spells are treated in 
the same way, and their use is not pos- 
sible. Spells affected/negated: 
Priest/Druid: All detect spells, commune -with 
nature, commune, divination, find traps, find the 
path, know alignment, locate animals, locate 
object, locate plants, stone tell, and true seeing. 
Wizard: All detect spells, clairvoyance, claurau- 
dience, contact other plane, ESP, identify, legend 
lore, locate object, mass suggestion, mind blank, 
nondetection, suggestion, telekinesis, true sight, 
vision, and wizard eye. 


Feather 
XP Value: 250 GP Value: 500 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
This dust appears identical to allergy dust of 
some type. However, it merely creates a cloud of 
small, harmless feathers in the area of effect. The 
feathers may obscure vision to a limited extent, 
but settle to the ground in six rounds. 


Fertilization 
GP Value: 900 
DRAGON Magazine 30 
Dust of fertilization, when sprinkled on any plant, 
causes it to gain a year's growth (or full growth in 
the case of shorter-lived plants) in one week. The 
dust does not work on treants or enchanted plants. 


XP Value: 300 


Fodder 
XP Value: 200/pinch GP Value: 600/pinch 
DRAGON Magazine 178 

This is the solution to many logistical problems. 
A single pinch of this magical dust added to a 
gallon of water balloons out into a heap of veg- 
etable fodder sufficient to feed 30 horses or the 
equivalent for a day. It usually comes in a small, 
flat box of 3d4+1 pinches. A single dry pinch, if 
consumed inadvertently, expands to kill the 
imbiber in gruesome fashion—save vs. death 
magic at+1 or die. 


of Forgetfulness 
XP Value: 1,500 GP Value: 4,000 

DRAGON Magazine 99 
This dust looks exactly like other magical dust, 
and is stored and delivered in the same manner. 
When thrown at a character or other living crea- 
ture, the dust causes the victim to forget every- 
thing that has happened in the last hour (including 
having the dust tossed at him or her). Enemies 
encountered during that time will be forgotten, 
paths explored look unfamiliar, and newly made 
friends are viewed with suspicion. Ifa character's 
immediate surroundings are similar to those the 
character was in an hour before, the victim won't 
even be aware of the difference without close 
examination (if any differences in environment 
exist). After one week, lost memories are 
restored—no experience is lost. 

Player characters, if sprinkled with dust, 
should be forbidden by the DM to use "forgotten" 
knowledge. No saving throw is given against this 
power. 


Green Sleeping 
XP Value: 800 GP Value: 1,600 
Kara-Tur 
Green sleeping dust is made from the bija tree of 
the Quang Muku. It is primarily used by ninjas of 
the Soretyo family, a secret society based in Foo 
Nakar. Shady merchants can get it at a high price, 
but it is completely effective. There is no saving 
throw ifthe dust is inhaled, the victim sleeps for 
five turns. 


of Illusion 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 1,500 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide, Ist Edition 
This unremarkable powder resembles chalk dust 


or powdered graphite—unless one stares at it. 
1478 


i e ci as aa a aaa. 


420 


Dust, Paralyzation 


ee eT a ee 


Stare at it and the dust changes color and form. 
Put a pinch of dust ofillusion on a creature and 
the creature appears to become any other creature 
of similar shape, with a size variance of 50% 
(plus or minus) from the actual size of the effected 
creature. An unwilling recipient is allowed a sav- 
ing throw vs. spell to escape the effect. Thus, a 
halfling could appear as a human of small stature, 
a human as an ogre, a pegasus as a mule, etc. 

The individual who sprinkles the magical dust 
must envision the illusion desired as the powder 
is shaken over the affected subject. The illusion- 
ary power lasts for 1d6+6 hours unless otherwise 
dispelled. A typical pouch of this dust contains 
1d10+10 pinches ofthe substance. 


Leech 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 2,000 
DRAGON Magazine 5 
The ominous name of this magical dust is derived 
from its ability to absorb blood, leeching it out of 
the victim's flesh, veins, and even bone marrow. 
When a satchel of leech dust is thrown (up to 20 
feet away) it forms a cloud of the same dimen- 
sions as cloudkill (40 feet wide, 20 feet high, and 
20 feet deep). The dust adheres to all living crea- 
tures within its area of effect, causing immediate 
weakness. This weakness manifests itself as a 
50% reduction in Dexterity and Strength (with all 
penalties or reduction of combat bonuses applica- 
ble). In two rounds the victim is unable to fight or 
use spells, in three rounds paralyzed, and after 
four rounds, dead. All these effects, except weak- 
ness, can be countered with a successful saving 
` throw vs. death magic. 

This sadistic powder may only be removed by a 
sprinkling of holy water or the use of dispel 
magic or wish or similar spell. If the victim sur- 
vives his or her contact with the dust, the lost 
Strength and Dexterity return at the rate of 1 
point per day. However, if a ring ofregeneration 
or similar regenerative magical item is worn, lost 
points can be recovered at double the rate. 


Malto's Dust of Mind Dulling 
XP Value: 1,500 GP Value: 3,000 
1992 Fantasy Collector Card 508 
Malto is known as "the Everything Man" because 
he changes form so easily and frequently. His 
special dust of mind dulling not only slows the 
ability of wizards and priests to cast spells, but it 
has the additional effect of aforget spell. Malto 


blows the dust into the air and then changes 
form—as the dust spreads through the area, all 
characters who fail a saving throw vs. spell forget 
about Malto's shapechange and lose track of him. 
Even those Spellcasters who successfully save are 
still slowed during casting, giving Malto time to 
react if need be. 


of Mind Dulling 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 3,000 
Tome of Magic 
This dust appears to be harmless, but it is the 
bane of Spellcasters. One pinch of the dust can be 
flung up to 30 feet from the user and scatters to 
fill a sphere with a 5-foot radius. 

All Spellcasters within the area must make a 
saving throw vs. spell or find their minds dulled 
and their wits slowed. All casting times less than 
one round are increased by two as the wizards 
hesitate, trying to remember the procedures. 
Spells that normally require one round to cast 
now require one full round plus a casting time of 
5 on the following round; spells which normally 
have a casting time of two rounds or longer now 
require 50% more time to cast. The dust persists 
in the area for one turn unless somehow removed 
(a gust of wind spell would be helpful). Those 
Spellcasters affected by the dust are impaired for 
1d4+1 turns after that. 


of Opposition 
XP Value: 100 GP Value: 500 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

This dust appears identical to decoy dust, but when 
the decoy is created, it turns on the user. The victim 
must make a saving throw vs. death magic or die in 

one round, choking on the dust. Even ifthe roll is 
successful, the victim coughs and is unable to 
attack or cast spells for one turn until the decoy 
disappears. The victim cannot flee from the dust. 

The dust ofopposition may be dispersed by spray- 

ing it with a large amount of water (for example, a 
create water spell) or by dispel magic cast at the 
dust (treating it as 15th-level magic). 


Paralyzation 
GP Value: 2,500 
DRAGON Magazine 2 
Paralyzation dust is similar to dust of sneezing 
and choking, but the effect of a missed saving 
throw vs. paralyzation is paralyzation for one 
hour. 


XP Value: 500 


1483 


Ze ee ee o e A 


421 


Dust of Revealing 


B,C es SE ee ee a 


of Revealing 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 4,000 
DRAGON Magazine 126 

This special dust is commonly found in one or 
more eggshell grenades, the price is one such 
powder-filled grenade. When released into the 
air, the dust magically expands to fill a 30-foot, 
radial area. Everything in this area that is dis- 
guised is revealed for what it truly is. 
Shapechangers (such as lycanthropes and 
hengeyokai) are forced into their natural forms, 
all magical and mundane disguises are removed, 
and spells such as face and apparition are nulli- 
fied. Unlike dust of appearance, dust of revealing 
does not reveal invisible, astral, ethereal, or out- 
of-phase creatures. 


Rust 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
DRAGON Magazine 86 

Rust dust looks like a fine metallic powder simi- 
lar to dust ofappearance or other magical dust. It 
is usually contained in small silk pouches for dis- 
persal by hand or spread by blowing the dust 
through a hollow bone tube. If it is shaken out by 
hand, one pouch will cover a 10-foot, radial area; 
dust blown from a tube will create a cone 20 feet 
long, 1 foot wide at the start and 15 feet wide at 
the end. Usually, ide containers of either sort 
may be found at one time. 

Any nonprecious, metallic materials within 
the area of effect of rust dust rust (or otherwise 
deteriorate) and fall into useless scrap one round 
after contact. Precious metals (gold, platinum, 
and silver, for instance) are not affected. Objects 
of iron, copper, bronze, tin, and similar metals 
or alloys (including mithral and adamantite) are 
affected automatically if the metal of the item is 
nonmagical. 

Magic items (swords, armor, shields, rings of 
protection, and similar items) must save as if 
struck by a rust monster, gaining a 10% chance to 
withstand the dust for every "plus" of enchant- 
ment; thus, a sword +4 has a 40% chance of not 
corroding. Magical items or objects without a 
"plus" rating (such as an iron flask, iron golem, 
or ring of spell storing), have a 10% chance to 
save against the dust. All such saving throws must 
be rerolled every time a new dose of rust dust is 
encountered. 


Sleep 

XP Value: 400 GP Value: 800 
Dragon Dawn 
Sleep dust is created with the aid of pixie-cast 
sleep spells. Its physical components consist of 
exceptionally rare ingredients—the dusty coating 
of pixie wings and the breath of a hibernating 
bear, among others. These ingredients, hulderfolk 
magic, and the unusual sleep spells of the 
faeriekind give the dust its surprising potency. A 
sparse handful causes a giant to slumber; a sprin- 
kle puts a human-sized person to sleep, and a sin- 
gle pinch is sufficient to bespell kender and other 
diminutive humanoids. Even elves are not 
immune to its effects, which are differently 
achieved from those of an ordinary sleep spell. 

When sleep dust touches a living target, that 
person (or animal) falls asleep immediately, into 
an enchanted slumber lasting 1d4+1 hours. There 
is no saving throw allowed to resist the effect. The 
dust is most efficient when sifted upon persons 
from above, or cast on them from a short distance 
(a foot or two) away. Sleep dust is light, and easily 
blows away in a breeze. If it should blow back on 
the one who cast it, that person is as susceptible 
to its effects as any other. Once it settles to the 
ground or other surface, its magical dweomer dis- 
charges, and it has no more power to cause sleep. 
If an insufficient portion is cast on the target (as, 
for example, when just a pinch lands upon a 
giant), the victim is allowed a saving throw vs. 
spell to resist the dust's effects. Failure means 
slumber for 1d3 hours. 


of Sleeping 
XP Value: 400 GP Value: 800 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

This dust is coarser than others. When used, it 
looks much like fine sand, falling quickly to the 
ground. Each victim of 9 or fewer Hit Dice in the 
area of effect must make a saving throw vs. spell 
or be put to sleep. The sleeping victims can be 
awakened easily by force, but noises do not stir 
them. The effect lasts for 24 hours at most. 


Small Bird Repulsion 
XP Value: 50 GP Value: 250 
DRAGON Magazine 30 
Probably a pest-control device, the dust ofsmall - 
bird repulsion, sprinkled on an area of up to 20 
feet square, prevents any bird smaller than an 


eagle from landing there for one year. 
1488 


* 422 ~ 


Dynamo of Flying 


N 


of Sneezing 
XP Value: — GP Value: 600 
DRAGON Magazine 2 
This is a nonfatal variant of dust ofsneezing and 
choking. Saving throws are at -2. Sneezing dust 
causes a coughing spell lasting 2d4 melee rounds. 


of Sneezing II 
XP Value: — GP Value: 1,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
This dust causes all victims within its area of effect 
to make a saving throw vs. spell or start sneezing. 
Victims cannot attack or cast spells; the effect lasts 
for one turn or until a remove curse is cast. 


of Sneezing and Choking 
XP Value:- GP Value: 1,000 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide, Ist Edition 
This fine dust appears to be either dust ofappear- 
ance or disappearance. If spread, however, it 
causes those within a 20-foot radius to fall into 
fits of sneezing and coughing. Those who fail a 
saving throw vs. poison die immediately; those 
who make the saving throw are disabled, choking 
for 5d4 rounds. 


Sparkling 
XP Value: 95 GP Value: 150 
Dragon Magic 
This dust allows anyone who shares a use from 
the same bag to be able to communicate by 
telepathy for the next 2d6 hours. The telepathy is 
effective for up to 50 feet. There are 5d4 uses in 


each bag. 


of Tracelessness 

XP Value: 500 GP Value: 2,000 

DUNGEON MASTER Guide, 1st Edition 
This seemingly normal dust is actually a highly 
magical powder that can be used to conceal the 
passage of its possessor and all companions. 
Tossing a pinch of this dust into the air causes a 
chamber of up to 1,000 square feet to become as 
dusty, dirty, and laden with cobwebs as if it had 
been abandoned and unused for a decade. 

A pinch of dust sprinkled along a trail causes 
evidence of the passage of as many as a dozen 
adventurers and horses to be obliterated for a 
mile back into the distance. No magical radiation 
occurs from the use of this dust. The dust is typi- 
cally found in a finely sewn pouch containing 
1d12+12 pinches. 


of Trail Dispersion 

XP Value: 200 GP Value: 600 
The Complete Thief's Handbook 
A generous pinch of this magical dust, scattered 
over the beginning or head of a trail (such as at 
the bottom ofa wall surrounding a house that was 
burgled, at the point where the thief reached the 
ground) prevents the trail from being followed by 
normal sensory methods (rangers, bloodhounds). 
The dust is usually found in a small box, or pack- 
ets; one container is usually sufficient for 1d4+4 
uses. 


Violet Dindower's Dust 
of Disappearance 

XP Value: 2,500 GP Value: 5,000 

1992 Fantasy Collector Card 143 
Violet is a smuggler who uses numerous means to 
hide her contraband, but she saves her dust ofdis- 
appearance for herself on those uncomfortable 
days when pirates or neogi attempt to board "her" 
ship. Since the dust renders her invisible, even to 
those who can detect invisibility, and she remains 
unseen even while slipping a blade into the back of 
someone threatening to steal her cargo—Violet 
has endeared herself to the captain many times. 
Violet's dust has bad permanency cast upon it, but 
she still fades into view in 5d10 turns. 


Dynamo of Flying 


XP Value GP Value 
Lesser: 500 2,500 
Normal: 1,500 7,500 
Greater: 4,500 22,500 


Champions of MYSTARA™ 

This permanent, magical device converts spell 
energy to motive power, lift capacity, and some- 
times other vessel-wide spell effects. Usually 
crafted as a large black box (1-cubic-yard, weigh- 
ing 800 pounds), a dynamo offlying can function 
anywhere on board a ship. For convenience and 
safety, it's typically secured in the vessel's control 
area. A dispel magic attack by a Spellcaster may 
cause the dynamo and all spell effects powered by 
it to "go down" for ite 
a vessel rarely relies solely on her dynamo for 
lifting capabilities. 

Dynamos of flying are usually tailor-made for a 
specific vessel. They may be enchanted with mul- 
tiple effects: fly, teleport, travel, invisibility, 
dimension door, and so on. The user chooses 
which effects to activate. 


rounds. For this reason, 


1496 


423 


Dynamo of Flying 


> a N, a 


To power a dynamo offlying, the user must 
cast a spell on the device. This requires physical 
contact, but can be done with any spell—even 
those that create something, such as a form 
spell, and those that normally affect the caster 
only. It does not work with spells cast from 
scrolls or other magic items. The dynamo gains 
the equivalent of one charge per level of the 
spell cast upon it. It can store up to 50 charges 
at a time. 

Each spell effect the dynamo creates costs one 
charge per spell level. (For example, fly costs 
three charges, while travel costs eight charges.) 
Duration of effect is the same as though cast by 
an 18th-level Spellcaster. (If the enchanter's level 
is known, use that instead.) Dynamos offlying 
come in different strengths. 

e A lesser dynamo can power vessels only up to 
50 tons. Moving larger ships with a lesser 
dynamo requires twice the normal number of 
charges per spell effect for a 100-ton vessel; 
three times the number of charges for a 150- 
ton vessel; and so on. Cost to enchant a lesser 
dynamo is halved. 

A normal dynamo can power vessels up to a 
Tonnage of 150. Affecting a 300-ton vessel 
costs twice as many charges, as explained 
above. 

A greater dynamo can power vessels up to a 
tonnage of 450. Cost to enchant a greater 
dynamo is doubled. 

Ifthe dynamo is used to provide lift as well as 
motive power, its lift capacity is double the ton- 
nage of the ship. Charges used and spell dura- 
tions are like other spell effects. 

A dynamo's user can elect to spend more 
charges to increase the vessel's air speed past 
the normal maximum of the spell involved (fly, 

similar spells). Each increase costs the same 
number of charges as evoking the effect, in 
return for a 20% increase in air speed—and a 
20% chance the dynamo will malfunction, los- 
ing all charges for 1d6 days. Doubling air speed 
costs five times as many charges as the initial 
effect, with a 100% chance the dynamo will be 
unusable for 1d6 days once the effect's duration 
ends. 

Spellcasters enchanting a dynamo offlying 
must know spell turning (the base spell for creat- 
ing a dynamo), as well as any spell the dynamo of 

flying will need to provide. Dynamos offlying 
must be made permanent. 


4 


2 


Examples: A dynamo offlying enchanted 
withfly and shield by an 18th-level Spellcaster 
can lift and fly a 100-ton skyship for 19-24 
turns per three charges used. Using an addi- 
tional charge to activate the shield improves the 
vessel's AC by 1 for two turns. A particularly 
impressive greater dynamo might use fly for 
normal flight and teleport or travel for special 
situations. It may also be enchanted with other 
effects—shield, invisibility, haste, antimagic 
Shell, and weather control. (Such a powerful 
device is extremely difficult to create and phe- 
nomenally expensive to acquire.) 

Optional Rule: Ifthe DM wishes, a dynamo of 

flying can make even a nonmagical vessel fly. 
This is especially appropriate if you use the 
optional rules allowing wizards to enchant nor- 
mal vessels and buildings tofly. 


4 


Earring 


Earing is a general term for any piece of ` 
jewelry worn on or hanging from the ear, regard- 
less of shape. Earrings are common jewelry, and 
magical earrings may easily be mistaken for the 
normal sort. 


Alignment Detection 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 5,000 
DRAGON Magazine 80 

This earring has a gold spring clamp with a chain 
holding a large, polished, irregular piece of clear 
sapphire worth 5,000 gold pieces. It detects 
alignment of any creature touched, by turning 
color. The table below depicts the colors and their 
corresponding alignments. The user will have to 
do some experimenting to determine the colors 
and the alignments they register. 


Alignment Earring Color 
LE Black 
CE Red 
NE Orange 
NN Brown 
CN Gold 
LN Steel Gray 
NG Green 
CG Blue 
LG White 
of Burrowing 
XP Value: — GP Value: 1,000 


The Book of Marvelous Magic 

This item appears to be an earring of protection. 
However, when worn it changes into a small bur- 
rowing bug that enters the ear immediately. The 
victim becomes deaf in that ear (-1 penalty to 
surprise rolls) and dies in 24 hours unless a 
remove curse spell is applied by a caster of at 
least 15th level. A cure disease spell stops the bug 
for four hours, increasing the cursed victim's sur- 
vival time by that amount. 


of Defense 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 7,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
This earring is adorned with a small "X" design. 
Upon command, the "X" turns into a sword and 
dagger ofnormal size. These items cannot return 
to their original form; however, ifa sword +1 and 
dagger +1 are placed by the remainder of the ear- 


Earring, Equus 


ring and a command word is spoken, the 


ll) magical items shrink and become part of 


the design, as originally found. When 
enlarged, the weapons are nonmagical. The same 
procedure can be repeated whenever desired; the 
earring disguises only two weapons and only in 
the manner described. 


Equus 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 8,000 
DUNGEON Magazine 22 

An equus is a magical piece ofjewelry that, upon 
command, polymorphs into some form of a beast 
of burden. The word "equus" (plural "equi") 
comes from an ancient language and has no lit- 
eral translation in the common tongue. The clos- 
est translation is "beast of burden" or "horse," but 
the word can be applied to anything that is used 
like a horse. Thus, an actual horse, mule, worg, 
camel, dog-sled team, nightmare, or any other 
creature that can be ridden, used to pull a load, or 
carry goods can be termed an equus. Equi come 
in many different varieties, with the most com- 
mon listed below. While 80% of equi are either 
good or neutrally aligned, 20% polymorph into 
evil creatures such as nightmares, worgs, and 
giant spiders. It is said that the death knight Shan 
Nikkoleth once possessed an equus that polymor- 
phed into gorgon form. 

The earring is the identical to an equus pen- 
dant, but is worn through the ear on a wire 
instead of around the neck. 


Creature List 

The DM may choose the form ofthe creature into 
which the equus polymorphs from the following 
table. The jewelry form polymorphs into one type 
of creature only. A DM who prefers to roll ran- 
domly should add the roll of 1d8 to that of 1d12 
and consult the table below. The DM should use 
only a creature that he or she feels comfortable 
with and is sure will not give the PCs an unfair 
advantage in the campaign. Types of creatures 
can be added to or deleted from the list as the DM 
sees fit. Any ofthe following creatures that do 
not appear on Table 49 in the PHB should be 
considered equal to a heavy horse in movement 
rate and encumbrance. 

If the equus is slain (reduced to 0 hit points or 
less) in creature form, the creature immediately 
reverts to earring form and cannot change into 


creature form again. Damage to the creature form 
1500 


> a i a an 


425 


Earring of Paralysis 


Tc ee ellie ci ad 


of the equus can be healed magically by cure 
wounds spells. Ifthe creature is allowed food and 
rest, it heals naturally at the rate of 1 hit point per 
day. However, the equus can neither heal itself 
nor be healed while in earring form. 


Roll 
02 


Animal Type 

Unicorn: AC 2; MV 24; HD 4+4; hp 
28; THACO 15; #AT 3 (hooves and 
horn); Dmg 1d6/ld6/ld12; SA charge, 
+2 to attack when attacking with horn, 
-6 penalty to opponents’ surprise rolls; 
SD teleport, immune to poison, charm, 
hold, and death spells; can sense 
approach of enemy 240 yards distant; 
makes all saving throws as 11th-level 
wizard; ML 14; AL CG. The unicorn's 
Intelligence is 8-10 (1d4+8). It can be 
ridden only by female characters; if a 
male character rolls the unicorn, use the 
ultraheavy war horse (#20) instead. 
Giant stag: AC 7; MV 21; HD 5; hp 
30; THACO 15; #AT 1 (antlers) or 2 
(hooves); Dmg 4d4 or 1d4/ld4; ML 14; 
ALN. This creature's Intelligence is 
47 (1d4+3). 

Bull: AC 7; MV 15; HD 4; hp 24; 
THACO 15; #AT 2 (horns); Dmg 
1d6/ld6; SA charge; ML 15; ALN. The 
bull has an Intelligence of 4-7 (1d4+3). 

Superheavy war horse: AC 6; MV 15; 
HD 4+4; hp 28; THACO 15; #AT 3 
(hooves and bite); Dmg 1d8/ld8/ld4; 
SD 30! infravision, immunity to all hold 
and charm spells; ML 16; AL NG. This 
horse has an Intelligence of 7-12 
(1d6+6). 

Heavy war horse: AC 7; MV 15; HD 
4+4; hp 21; THACO 17; #AT 3 (hooves 
and bite); Dmg 1d8/ld8/ld4; ML 15; 
ALN. This horse has an Intelligence of 
5-8 (1d4+4). 

Superheavy war horse (special): Same 
as above (roll of 6-8), though it has MV 
18, a 40-lb. bonus on its carrying capac- 
ity load limits, and no infravision. 

Camel: AC 7 MV 21; HD 3; hp 18; 
THACO 17; #AT 1 (bite); Dmg 1d4; SA 
spitting; ML 14; ALN. This camel is of 
a more mellow disposition than its 
meaner cousins and has an Intelligence 
of 4-7 (1d4+3). 


03 


04-05 


06-08 


09-13 


14-16 


17-18 


19 Water buffalo: AC 7; MV 15; HD 5; 
hp 30; THACO 15; #AT 2 (horns); 
Dmg 1d8/ld8; ML 16; ALN. This 
water buffalo has an Intelligence of 
4-7 (1d4+3). 
Ultraheavy war horse: AC 5; MV 24; 
HD 5+5; hp 35; THACO 15; #AT 3 
(hooves and bite); Dmg 1d8/ld8/ld4; 
SD 60' infravision, immunity to poison 
and all hold and charm spells; ML 18; 
AL LG. This special horse can under- 
stand but not speak the common tongue 
and is able to use animal friendship and 
pass without trace spells three times per 
day each, locate animals orplants once 
per day, and water walk once per week. 
This horse has an Intelligence of 9-16 
(1d8+8). 


20 


of Paralysis 
XP Value: 900 GP Value: 4,500 
Top Ballista 
This earring casts the equivalent of a holdperson 


spell three times per day at 16th level. 


of Protection 
XP Value GP Value 
+1: 1,000 5,000 
+2: 2,000 10,000 
+3: 3,000 15,000 


The Book of Marvelous Magic 

When worn on one ear, this item adds a +1 to +3 
bonus to saving throws and Armor Class, similar 
to that of other protective devices. Its effect may 
be added to other bonuses gained through magi- 
cal armor, shield, cloak, ring, buckle, and the like. 
An earring may be enchanted to +2 or +3 quality 
but cannot be made any more powerful. 


Roll Protection 
O1-06+1 
07-09 +2 
00 +3 
of the Sea 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 2,500 


Gateway to RAVENS BLUFF™, The Living City 
This device enables the wearer to speak and 
understand the languages ofall sea creatures. It is 
usable once per day for a duration of 10 minutes. 


1503 


Bs Re 


426 


Earring of Seamanship 


j RC 


of Seamanship 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 2,500 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

This earring appears to be an earring ofdefense 
and is usually found with a matching nonmagical 
earring. A detect invisible spell or similar means 
reveals the X to be a mast and spar with a faint 
sail drawn around them. When the magical ear- 
ring is worn in the left earlobe, the user gains all 
the knowledge of an able-bodied seaman—how 
to use any sort of seagoing vessel (and any part of 
it)—and is able to instruct others in its operation. 


of Understanding 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 4,000 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 82 
These earrings are often made of polished wood 
or silver. Each bears a picture of an ear in its cen- 
ter. When the user wears a pair of these enchanted 
earrings, any language can be understood, though 
the earrings do not confer the ability to speak the 
tongue. If only one of the earrings is worn, the 
user must save vs. petrification or be confused for 
one turn. 


Eartrumpet 
XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 15,000 

Thieves of LANKHMAR™ 
This small metal cone increases any character's 
ability to hear noise. When held to the ear, it 
gives a thief a bonus of 25% to his or her roll to 
detect noise (to a maximum of 95%). Other char- 
acter classes receive a +1 bonus to their die roll to 
hear noise. The eartrumpet can also be held near 
a combination lock, in which case it magnifies 
the tiny sounds from within the lock, giving a 
thief a 15% bonus to his or her roll to open locks 
(to a maximum of 95%). 


The Edu'sascar 
XP Value: 700 GP Value: 7,000 
Kara-Tur 
These magical placards are painted with the hal- 
lowed symbols of the monks of old S'tung 
Monastery. Each is a cream-colored card two 
hands tall by one and a half wide, with a power- 
ful, magical symbol painted in black and etched 
with gold. The ink of the giant river squid was 
used to pen the signs, and it was purified and 
blessed by the monks. The cards were formed of 
flax and silk fibers, mixed with bamboo pulp, a 
local tuber called tocara root, and dried flowers of 


the dogwood tree. This mixture was rolled out flat 
and cut with a holy blade from the S'tung Temple. 
The five cards are kept wrapped in silks and 
stored in a dragon leather satchel made to hold 
them. The dragon leather is from the throat of a 
river dragon and it resembles alligator skin. It is a 
very soft and pliable leather, but it is highly resis- 
tant to scratches and cuts. 

The five Edu'sascar were made by the 
founder of the S'tung Monastery in 894. This 
shukenja-turned-monk's real name is lost, but 
his posthumous title is "Sky Father," for he was 
an avid astronomer and left many charts of star 
paths and records of shooting stars and comets. 
He had his followers create the placards, then 
the ancient abbot carried the blank cards and 
ink on a purging journey into the wilderness. 
When he returned four months later, he had 
drawn the magical symbols. The golden high- 
lights were added by later generations of ador- 
ing and pious monks. 

The Edu'sascar have always been held by the 
monks of S'tung, and the few times they were 
stolen, a terrible curse hounded the thieves and 
they returned the plaques. The curse causes 
everything alive that is touched by the cursed 
person to soon die by a stroke of bad luck. 
Plants are trammelled, trees are struck by light- 
ning, horses stumble and break their backs, 
people are drowned or killed in accidents. The 
weights of the deaths and anticipation of a dis- 
mal future or guilty consciences drove the crim- 
inals back to the monastery to return the holy 
relics. 

The Edu 'sascar are brought out to the walls of 
the monastery for the yearly ceremony honoring 
the gods of the seasons, held on the winter 
equinox. At this time, they are held out and their 
combined powers sweep the sky with colorful 
rays of light, like an aurora borealis. All the cards 
are invoked by concentrating on the ink image. 
The placards can be used individually and their 
symbols and powers are as follows: 

Ki, the symbol of the Power Within. With this 
card a monk or shukenja can the increase the ki 
power of a congregation one level for one round. 
The number of people affected increases by three 
per level of the character using the card. It does 
not work in the hands of laymen or women. 

Mo, the sign of the Calm Sea, the symbol of 
Inner Calm. This card can be used by any charac- 


ter of any class or level to calm storms. It is 
1507 


ee ee O a 


428 


Egg, Antimagic 


CY a A 
Qt 
LY ag 


rT El 
P àA 


reversible by inverting the card, which calls 
winds and thunderstorms. This placard's side 
effects cause the wielder's skin to pale to an 
ashen white. It can return to normal only after a 
long and restful sleep. 

Di, the sign of Flowers of Spring, the symbol 
of Nature's Strength. This allows a shukenja, 
monk, or wu jen to speak with plants and cast the 
spell quickgrowth with no prior training in this 
sort of magic. Laymen have no ability with this 
card. >. 

Po, the sign of Cloudy Sky, the symbol of Hid- 
den Power. This card works only for monks of 
neutral good alignment. All others receive an 
electrical shock that causes 1d4 points of dam- 
age. By focusing on this card the monk can cast 
immunity to weapons and invisibility to enemies. 
A monk can also hold this card over his head and 
pronounce the word symbolized on the card, and 
it is as if the word were a holy word, as in the 
spell. 

La, the sign of Bridges over the Depths, is 
the symbol of Strength in Brotherhood. This 
card can only be wielded by a shukenja of at 
least 10th level. It allows the manipulator to 
mass heal, a particularly handy battlefield skill. 
The spell heals a total of 100 hit points per cast- 
ing, and can be spread among as many individu- 


als as desired by the caster in increments of 5. 
In other words, 10 characters would get 10 
points, or 20 would receive 5, or 1 might receive 
20 points while another got 80, at the caster's 
whim. This powerful card is the most coveted of 
the Edu sascar—it has been used to support and 
rally T'u Lung troops when joined by the monks 
of S'Tung. Its side effect is that it ages its 
wielder by 1d6 years each use, so it is used 
sparingly. 


E 


Magical eggs are ovoid spheres that are enchanted 
to produce an effect under specific circum- 
stances. These circumstances can include the fol- 
lowing: throwing the egg at a target, cracking the 
egg, placing the egg on end, spinning the egg, or 
as recounted in the item's description. Magical 
eggs make their saving throws as ceramic or pot- 
tery unless otherwise noted. 


Antimagic 
GP Value: 20,000 

Lost Ships 
This egg-shaped container of oil-darkened steel 
bears a single engraved rune. If the rune is 
touched and the command word spoken, the egg 
is activated. A "one-shot" magical device, it 
slowly melts away (causing no physical damage, 
even if held). All magical items within 30 feet 
must make a save (as their base material vs. mag- 
ical fire at -5, plus item magical bonuses) or be 
drained. Each spell on a scroll as well as each 
dose of a potion must save separately. 

Artifacts and helms "drained" by an 
antimagic egg are nullified and dead for 1d4+1 
turns; chargeable items lose 1d12 charges and 
are dead for an 1d4+1 turns as well. Spellcast- 
ers within range who have memorized spells 
must save vs. spell or instantly forget one spell 
(selected at random). Natural, magical powers 
are unaffected, but cannot be used within the 
30-foot range of the egg for 1d4+4 rounds after 
the egg is activated (the time the egg takes to 
entirely disappear). 

The method of making such eggs is known to 
many priests and wizards, but those who know 
keep the secret. The Grafting is said to be a long 
and expensive process—thought by some to be 
the work of the arcane. Well-traveled sages, such 
as Otiluke of Oerth, know that the arcane try to 


purchase or destroy such devices whenever they 
1508 


XP Value: 4,000 


ee ee pee 


429 


~~ Egg, Apprentice's r 


can, and believe antimagic eggs to be weapons 
devised for use against the arcane. Otiluke 
believes the means of making such eggs to be 
among the earliest triumphs of human magic, or 
perhaps the work of renegade elves of long-time 
past. Elminster thinks them the work of illithids, 
perhaps working with humans or drow. To call 
these eggs "human invention" is pure hubris. 


Apprentice's 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 10,000 
DRAGON Magazine 182 

When a wizard of Krynn declares an alignment 
and passes the Test of High Sorcery, he or she is 
apprenticed to a greater wizard to learn the 
secrets of the craft. One such secret is the manu- 
facture of magical items, and the apprentice's egg 
is a minor part of this training, usually forgotten 
by more accomplished wizards. 

The apprentice's egg is an inch-long magical 
construct used to hold the energies of a single 
cantrip spell in place, to be released when the egg 
is destroyed. The exact effect of each cantrip 
depends on the creator's wishes (subject to the 
DM's approval). Apprentice's eggs each cost 10 stl 
and take one day to produce. The egg can be thrown 
up to 30 feet, and the spell it contains will be 
released at the point of impact, ifthe egg fails an 
item saving throw as glass (see "Grenade-Like 
Missiles" in the DMG for targeting information). 
As apprentice's eggs are made without use of 
enchant an item or permanency spells, they are 
somewhat unreliable, having a percentage chance 
of failing to work (rolled when the egg impacts) 
equal to the maker's intelligence subtracted from 
25. A wizard with a 9 Intelligence could make eggs 
with a 16% failure rate, and one with an 18 Intelli- 
gence could make eggs with a 7% failure rate. 

Some dragons are said to have learned the 
methods for creating these items, using them for 
their own amusement, though they would never 
admit it to any but their own kind. 


Black 
XP Value: 150 GP Value: 900 
Ronin Challenge 
This egg is hollow, but if cracked open, the inner 
part of the shell glows with a soft light. The egg 
shell acts as a magical conduit. Ifa character 
touches any glowing section of the shell, he or 
she is instantly transported to a random location 


(the piece of shell touched does not transport). 


All characters who touch the shell of the same 
egg are transported to the same location. Trans- 
port is one way only; even if a character takes 
another piece of the shell along, that item cannot 
be used to return to the original location or to 
another random location. The magic of the shell 
only functions for one turn after an egg is broken. 
Determine the location of transported characters 
as follows: 

Direction: Roll 1d8 (1=N, 2=NE, 3=E, 4=SE, 
5=S, 6=SW, 7=W, 8=NW) 

Distance: Roll 1d20 and multiply the result by 5 
for the distance in miles. 

Characters will always arrive at ground level 
when transported to their new destination. How- 
ever, note that users may be in trouble if they are 
randomly transported to a body of water. 


Cloudkill 
XP Value: 1,200 GP Value: 6,000 
The Land Beyond the Magic Mirror 
When shattered,this egg produces a cloudkill 
effect as though cast by a 12th-level Spellcaster. 


of Desire 
XP Value GP Value 
Black: 500 5,000 
Bone: 900 10,000 
Crystal: 800 9,000 
Golden: 600 4,000 
Scarlet: 700 3,500 


The Land Beyond the Magic Mirror 

There are at least five different types of these 
eggs, each more strange and potent than the next. 
An egg ofdesire is a small ovoid that, when 
placed upon its large end and touched in a certain 
way, rocks back and forth rhythmically, issuing a 
soft chiming sound in the process. Viewers must 
save vs. magic or become enspelled by the egg's 
dweomer. The effect of each sort of egg is as fol- 
lows: 

Black: Holds viewers until circumstances per- 
mit breaking the spell or they die. 

Bone: Causes viewers to place their most 
prized magical item before the egg, and then 
leave and forget what occurred. 

Crystal: Causes viewers to place all the gems 
they possess before the egg, and then leave and 
forget what occurred. 

Golden: Causes viewers to place all precious 
metals they possess before the egg, and then 


leave and forget what happened. 
1512 


ee 


430 


Egg of Dragon Breath 


> ee a 


Scarlet: Causes viewers to become enraged 
and attack the first living thing they see after a 
full minute of viewing this egg. 

The viewing area of an egg is 20 feet. The 
effects of an egg can be removed only by a dispel 
magic or remove curse spell. Even unintelligent 
creatures can be affected by an egg, as each sends 
signals directly to the viewer's brain, but the 
bone, crystal, and golden eggs ofdesire affect 
creatures of under 7 Intelligence differently. 
These creatures covet the item, take it, and regard 
it as their most secret and valued treasure. 


Disintegration 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 10,000 
The Land Beyond the Magic Mirror 
This egg, when shattered, produces a disintegra- 
tion effect as though cast by a 12th-level Spell- 
caster. 


of Distraction 

XP Value: 300 GP Value: 3,000 
DRAGON Magazine 182 
The egg of distraction was created during the first 
attempt at perfecting the device known as the egg 
offascination. It was made by a wizard of the 
White Robes whose name has been lost to time. 
Still, both devices are useful, and a number of 
copies of each have been crafted since. When 
inactive, the egg ofdistraction looks like a nor- 
mal egg, though made of hard stone, with lus- 
trous highlights gleaming in it. When spun on its 
wide end, the glints of color intensify, though not 
enough to provide any useful light in darkness. 
Anyone within 20 feet of the egg who is in a posi- 
tion to see it, even in a mirror, must save vs. spell 
or be momentarily distracted by it. If distracted, 
the victim forgets what he or she was about to say 
(including spells about to be cast) and suffers a 
-] penalty on attack rolls and armor class for one 
round, because the eyes keep being drawn back to 
the spinning egg. 

While this would seem to be a particularly effec- 
tive weapon, its shortcomings are that it is indis- 
criminate, distracting friend and foe alike, and that 
the view of the egg is easily obstructed in a melee. 
It is useful, however, as a protection against mind- 
affecting spells like hypnotism or illusions, because 
the mind and eyes of someone distracted will 
always be drawn to the egg and away from the 
effects of any such spell another being used. This 
allows anyone it affects a bonus of +2 on saving 


throws vs. "mind-magic" (spells against which a 
Wisdom bonus would be applicable). 

Keeping the egg spinning is no easy task, 
requiring a spin every round and penalizing the 
Armor Class of the spinner by —2 while so 
engaged. In addition, the spinner must make a 
saving throw each round or become distracted, 
forgetting to continue spinning the egg. A spinner 
can keep an egg ofdistraction in motion for one 
turn per point of Constitution, after which time a 
rest for an equal period of time is required. 

Interestingly, dragons are immune to the hyp- 
notic effects of this device. At least one small 
dragon was known to have used this item in the 
defense of its lair. 


of Dragon Breath | 


XP Value GP Value 
Hatchling: 100 1,000 
Very young: 200 2,000 
Young: 400 4,000 
Juvenile: 800 8,000 
Young adult: 1,600 16,000 
Adult: 3,200 32,000 
Mature adult: 6,400 64,000 
Old: 12,800 128,000 
Very old: 25,600 256,000 
Venerable: 51,200 512,000 
Wyrm: 102,400 1,024,000 
Great wyrm: 204,800 2,048,000 


DRAGON Magazine 182 

During the Second Dragon War of Silvanesti, 
many magical weapons and spells were devel- 
oped to use against the rampaging dragons. One 
was developed that was considered too horrible to 
be employed by the honorable warriors of that 
age. The knowledge of how to create this weapon 
was never lost, however, and people with fewer 
scruples eventually did employ eggs ofdragon 
breath to a small extent during the War of the 
Lance, over 3,000 years later. 

An egg ofdragon breath is an actual dragon's 
egg, shrunken and hardened by powerful magic 
(this perversion of the egg is the reason why 
good-aligned wizards are hesitant to make them). 
The egg becomes a device that shatters when 
hurled against a hard surface, releasing the 
effects of the breath weapon appropriate to that 
egg's dragon-type in a 20-foot-radius around the 
impact site. 

The damage done is dependent on the amount 


of effort the creating wizard used in its manufac- 
1515 


ee IR 


4 


3 


1 


~ Egg, Dreamhold = 


ture. First, 1,000 steel pieces and one week of 
time must be put into the wizard's creation efforts 
to produce a "hatchling's egg." Doubling this 
amount raises by one dragon's age group the 
damage done by the egg (a "very young dragon's 
egg"). This doubling process continues until the 
enormous sum of 2,048,000 stl and 40 years is 
reached, which would be needed to make an egg 
ofgreat wyrm 's breath. The maker of such an 
item gains experience points equal to one-tenth of 
its manufacturing cost. 

There is nothing to stop a rich wizard from fes- 
tooning himself with powerful eggs ofdragon's 
breath. However, there is a danger in this, besides 
the hazards entailed in procuring the dragon eggs 
themselves. An egg ofdragon breath is necessar- 
ily rather brittle, and if an egg carrier falls down 
or otherwise takes a physical blow, and if there is 
no adequate protection for the egg (that makes 
item saving throws vs. all effects as if it were 
made of glass), the egg's effects are released 
around the bearer. Some magical weapons are 
best used in moderation. 


Dreamhold 

(The Promise) 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 8,000 

DRAGON Magazine 182 

The majority of magical items found on Krynn 
were created by elves or humans, but there are 
exceptions, such as the dwarven hammer ofKha- 
ras. The rarest are items constructed by dragons. 

Dragons have little use for magical weapons. 
The magical items they do make cater to different 
needs. Dreamhold, a gigantic quartz crystal 
carved into the shape of a multifaceted dragon's 
egg about | foot long, is such an item. Gazing 
into the various facets of Dreamhold one can see 
vignettes including scenes of sculpted caverns, 
great eggs hatching, the first flight of dragon- 
young, gleaming piles of treasure, and, as an 
unpleasant climax, the banishment of the dragons 
at the end of the Second Dragon War. Those who 
know the proper command words can even pro- 
ject these moving images into any space within 
30 feet of Dreamhold itself. 

During the exile of the Queen of Darkness, 
what had once been an entertaining toy became 
an object of veneration. It was used by Takhisis to 
incite the evil dragons in their return to Krynn at 
the onset of the War of the Lance. Thus, while 
this bauble was once valuable only for the mater- 


ial of its construction, it was renamed by Takhisis 
as the Promise, eventually becoming a religious 
icon an evil dragon might die to possess or pro- 
tect. Good dragons are not caught up in this 
fanaticism and still view the Dreamhold as a 
device for entertainment, not veneration. Its sale 
value has never been calculated, but to the right 
buyer, such as a desperate dragon, it could fetch a 
colossal price. 


of Fascination 
GP Value: 3,500 
DRAGON Magazine 182 
Created five years after the perfection of the egg 
ofdistraction, the egg offascination is a consid- 
erable improvement over that device. It appears 
much the same, a speckled, stone egg, and it 
operates in roughly the same way—being spun on 
its wide end by someone who suffers a two-step 
penalty to Armor Class every round spent 
engaged in spinning, but its effects are more pow- 
erful. This egg is also more difficult to spin than 
its predecessor, and a spinner can keep it in 
motion for only five rounds per point of Constitu- 
tion, eventually resting for twice the amount of 
time it was kept in motion. 
When spun, the highlights of the egg seem to 


spring off its surface and straight into the eyes of 
1517 


XP Value: 350 


ga e E a eee oh NR 


432 


Egg of Ghastar, Golden 


aA Af 


everyone within 30 feet who can see it (except the 
spinner), forcing each victim to make a saving 
throw vs. spell or be affected as if by a hypnotic 
pattern spell, standing fascinated until two 
rounds after the spinning stops. If something 
blocks the view of the egg, afascinated viewer 
remains transfixed for two more rounds; if the 
user's view of the egg is restored before the time 
runs out, the character is once again under its 
sway without benefit of an additional saving 
throw. Because the glints of light from the egg of 
fascination actually project from its surface when 
in use, its effects are more exceptional in a dark- 
ened area than in normal light. Thus, saving 
throws against the egg are made at -2 ifthe egg is 
used in darkness. Magical darkness, on the other 
hand, overwhelms the power of the egg, making it 
useless. Dragons are not immune to the effects of 
this device as they are to the egg ofdistraction. 


Flame 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
Kara-Tur 
Made from duck eggs or rubbery lizard eggs, 
flame eggs are fragile wards usually set on a trea- 
sure or as a trap. The slightest tremble sets them 
off, causing 2d6 points of damage to all subjects 
in a 10-foot-radius. A steady hand and calm 
movements are needed to create these powerful 
objects. 

First the wu jen making the eggs must have 
mastered the Element of Fire enough to possess 
the ability of fire breath (Sth-level spell). Fresh 
eggs are required, and the yolks are blown out by 
pricking a hole in both ends of the egg and using 
a straw to blow through the hole. Then the bot- 
tom hole is sealed with the chip removed from 
the egg. 

Over a small fire, the wu jen must bring oil 
from the karmak tree to a full boil, then fill the 
eggs with the hot oil. A scale from a flame adder 
is used to seal the eggs. The wu jen places the hot 
egg in his or her mouth and recites all the words 
to the spell fire breath except for the very last, 

-then removes the egg. When the egg cools, it is 
ready to be placed. 

After the egg has come to the spot it is to 
guard, the wu jen leans down close to the object 
and whispers the final word to the spell. The egg 
will tremble, for the spell has been set off inside 
but the shell is just strong enough to hold back 
the flames. The lightest touch causes it to explode. 


Karmak trees are found in the Winto Forest in 
scattered groves. They are considered useless, 
for their wood is thick with an oily sap and warps 
when cured. The sap must be purified and dis- 
tilled into a fine oil for this spell. The better the 
oil, the more effective the eggs, according to the 
recipe. 


Fog Cloud 
XP Value: 800 GP Value: 4,000 
The Land Beyond the Magic Mirror 
This egg, when shattered, produces afog cloud 
effect as though cast by a 12th-level Spellcaster. 


Golden 

GP Value: 4,000 
Ronin Challenge 
If this egg is broken, a small bird, made entirely 
of fire, swoops from the shell fragments, circles 
the user, and then flies away into the distance. 
The fire bird has a movement rate of 24. (Use the 
fire bird to lead the party in any direction you 
want them to go.) The fire bird leads the party for 
10-100 (1dl0 x 10) miles before it disappears. 


XP Value: 600 


Golden Egg of Ghastar 
XP Value GP Value 
Gold: 1,300 6,500 
Obsidian: 1,500 7,500 
Gold: 1,200 6,000 
Silver: 1,500 7,500 
Kara-Tur 


The golden eggs of Ghastar originally numbered 
nine, but only four are now known to be in the 
possession of the lamas of Pokarr Gompa. They 
were created by the ancient craftsmen of old 
Tabot before the lamas came, and each was 
endowed with a different magical power. Ghastar 
was the last one known to have all nine. The four 
at Prokarr Gompa are: 
e The golden egg with ruby snakes that can stop 
floods and avalanches. 
e The obsidian egg with silver crocodiles that 
can cause earthquakes (as the spell). 
e The golden egg withjade elephants that can 
control minds (as a mass charm spell). 
e The silver egg with lacy, emerald inlays that 
can cause a volcanic eruption. 
The missing five are just as powerful, but 
knowledge as to their whereabouts and powers is 
lost. The eggs can be used by a shukenja or monk 


of 10th level or higher who has a lawful alignment. 
1520 


, ee a” 


433 


~~ Egg, Gray r 


Gray 
XP Value: 200 GP Value: 2,000 
Ronin Challenge 
Ifthis egg is broken, a hkum yeng nat material- 
izes from the shell fragments. Ifthe user is within 
20 miles of any village, the nat assumes the user 
is a threat to the village under its protection and 
attacks them; the nat ignores all attempts at nego- 
tiation. Ifthe user isn't within 20 miles of a vil- 
lage, the nat assumes they are in need of 
assistance and asks how it can help them. The nat 
will undertake any task within its powers to com- 
plete, but it has no useful information for the 
party. Whether the nat is vicious or helpful, it 
vanishes five rounds after it materializes from the 
shell. 


Hkum yeng nat (lesser spirit): AC 0; MV 12, 
Fl 12; HD 4; hp 25; THACO 17; #AT 2; Dmg 
1d6/ld6; SA radiate fear in a 10-foot radius, 
causing all those who fail a saving throw vs. 
spell to flee in panic for 1d4+] rounds; SD 
purify food and drink, create spring, snake sum- 
mon, dispel magic, castigate, oath, hail of 
stones, fire rain, elemental burst, and become 
ethereal (all once per round); animate fire and 
animate wood (three times per day); quell and 
remove curse (once per day); ancient curse 
(once per week); can be hit only by -2 or greater 
weapons; MR 30%; AL N. 


Guardian 

GP Value: 2,500 
DRAGON Magazine 5 
This brass egg is the size of a helmet and weighs 
25 pounds. A command word transforms it into a 
metal servant that obeys and protects its sum- 
moner until the first ray of sunlight at dawn. 
Once the glimmer of the sun can be seen on the 
horizon, it returns to globular form. 

If the command word is called before it is on 
the ground, the egg takes the shape, Strength, and 
dimensions of a hill giant. Ifthrown into the air, a 
metal roc is the result. If submerged in a pool of 
liquid, it transmutes into a 7-foot dragon turtle. 

The metallic monsters are unintelligent and 
only fly, swim, or go where directed. Due to their 
metal bodies, treat all the guardian eggs’ trans- 
forming shapes as Armor Class 2. Ifthe guardian 
is destroyed in combat, it does not return to egg 
shape. This item is employable once every 48 
hours. 


XP Value: 500 


Dragon turtle: AC 2; MV 3, Sw 9; HD 12; hp 
84; THACO 9; #AT 3; Dmg 2d6/2d6/4d8; SA 
breath weapon (20d6), capsize ships; SD nil; MR 
nil; SZ G (30'); XP 10,000 


Hill giant: AC 2; MV 12; HD 12; hp 86; THACO 
9; #AT 1; Dmg 1d6+7 or by weapon (2d6+7); 
SA Hurl rocks 2d8; SD nil; MR nil; SZ H (16'); 
XP 3,000 


Roc: AC 2; MV 3, Fl 30; HD 18; hp 105; THACO 
5; #AT 2 or 1; Dmg 3d6/3d6 or 4d6; SA surprise 
(-5 penalty), 95% chance to carry off victim if 
both claws hit; SD nil; MR nil; SZ G (60'); 
XP 10,000 


Hard-Boiled 

XP Value: 300 GP Value: 1,500 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
This item appears to be a normal hen's egg but is 
very hard to break. If struck with a full blow from 
any weapon (treat as AC 9), the egg shatters, 
bestowing a special protection on the creature 
breaking it: a —6 bonus to Armor Class and a +1 
bonus to all saving throws, both effects lasting for 
four rounds. 


1523 


> Ja (a 


434 


~ Egg, Incubalum g” 


of Imprisonment 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 5,000 
DRAGON Magazine 182 

This item was created by an Abanasinian wizard, 
Shishushkiri, to capture his foes for later ques- 
tioning. It takes the form of a featureless, fist- 
sized black egg. To work, the caster throws the 
egg at a victim, making an attack roll against AC 
10 minus any Dexterity, shield, or magical 
bonuses the victim possesses. If the egg misses 
its target, it falls to the ground without harm. If 
it strikes the target, it expands into a dark, 7- 
foot, conelike shape that is 6 feet wide at its 
base (part of the egg's bottom is below floor 
level, 2 feet deep, anchoring the egg in an 
upright position). If the prey then fails a saving 
throw vs. paralyzation, the egg ofimprisonment 
confines the victim inside its mass; otherwise, 
the victim escapes from the egg, which then 
returns to its small form. 

The enlarged egg is porous enough to allow a 
relaxed and calm being to breathe easily within 
it, but a struggling person will fall unconscious 
from lack of air after a number of rounds equal 
to Constitution points (though suffocation is not 
possible). The shell is immune to internal 
attack, and there isn't enough room for a 
human-sized victim to cast spells or to be acci- 
dentally injured trying to escape. On the out- 
side, the egg is more fragile, being AC 7 and 
able to take 16 points of damage. If the egg is 
broken open by comrades of the victim, if it is 
voluntarily opened by someone knowing the 
proper command word, or if 24 hours elapse, 
the victim is released with no harm done. The 
egg cannot be moved. It makes item saving 
throws as glass, and failing the saving throw 
destroys the egg; destructive spells such as fire- 
ball can destroy it if more than 16 points of 
damage are taken, even if the saving throw is 
made (the victim inside takes either half or full 
damage, depending on the egg's success at its 
own saving throw). Eggs opened violently are 
destroyed in the process, but those that either 
"hatch" at the end of their one-day duration or 
are opened using the correct command word 
will revert to normal form, ready for reuse. 

Although an egg ofimprisonment expands to a 
size large enough to encompass eight tiny-sized 
creatures or four small-sized creatures, this can 
only occur if the creatures to be imprisoned are 
already within such a small volume of space. Two 


human-sized creatures may be caught if standing 
very close to each other. Creatures larger than 
human-size cannot be trapped by the egg; if it is 
thrown at one, the egg attempts to encompass it 
and, upon failing, contracts back into normal 
form to fall to the ground. This item has proven 
popular with at least one dragon in the years after 
the War of the Lance, since it stops attackers 
quite effectively for later disposal. 


Incubalum 

GP Value: 3,000 
DRAGON Magazine 182 
Many strange things came into existence in the 
wake of the Graystone of Gargath's travels 
across skies of Krynn, one of which was the 
Incubalum, an egg-shaped object almost a foot 
in length and made of a hard, gray substance 
reminiscent of the Graystone itself. The 
Incubalum is AC 2 and is immune to all effects 
except physical force. (It saves as rock +2 
against crushing blows and falls only.) If its 
shell is ever cracked, it will burst open, and a 
full grown, adult specimen of an egg-laying, 
land-dwelling animal will spring forth. 

The hatched creature can be of any sort, from 
a normal bird or reptile up to a dragon (but not a 
draconian. Such things did not exist when the 
Incubalum came into existence). The more com- 
mon the creature is in the world, the more likely 
it is to emerge from the Incubalum. It will not 
have memories of its "childhood," as it did not 
exist before the moment of hatching, nor will it 
have any pre-existing loyalties besides those pro- 
vided by instincts such as hunger and alignment. 
(The DM should determine the exact nature of 
the creature that appears, given the guidelines of 
the table below; it might be good to create the 
creature before the device is placed in the cam- 
paign, with a few notes on its reactions upon 
hatching.) The device has at times opened to 
reveal a beast of a type not known to be native to 
Krynn, though whether such oddities are from 
other worlds or merely from unexplored areas of 
Krynn is not known. 

When the creature eventually dies, the shards 
of its egg come together (from wherever their 
location or condition) to form the Incubalum 
once more. It then teleports to a random location 
on the planet to await another hatching. 


XP Value: — 


1525 


A a a S 


435 


~ Egg, Khenel's Philospher's - 


Roll Creature hatched (examples) 

01-16 Amphibian, normal (frog, toad) 

17-23 Amphibian, giant (giant frog, giant 
toad, killer frog) 

24-25 Amphibian, special (bullywug, fire toad) 

26-37 Bird, normal (eagle, raven, owl) 

38^t3 Bird, giant (giant eagle, giant raven, 
giant owl) 

44-45 Bird, special (roc, aarakocra) 

46-63 Insect/Arachnid, normal (ant, beetle, 
spider) 

64-71 Insect/Arachnid, giant (skrit, giant scor- 
pion, giant beetle) 

72-75 Insect/Arachnid, special (phase spider, 
ankheg, carrion crawler) 

76-91 Reptile, normal (snake, turtle, lizard) 

92-98 Reptile, giant (giant snake, giant lizard) 

99-00 Reptile, special (hydra, dragon, dino- 
saur) 
Khenel's Philosopher's 


XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
1992 Fantasy Collector Card 501 

Khenel has always looked upon magic as a means 
to wealth, but not through such "dangerous, yet 
mundane" methods as adventuring. He prefers 
the treacherous world of brokering power. Trade 
and politics are his sword and shield. Recently, 
Khenel engineered the political takeover of a 
thieves’ guild, solely because he knew that the 
guild had come into the possession of a philoso- 
pher's egg. Now that he has the retort, he will fin- 
ish his preparations ofa philosopher stone, and 
then use it to "revitalize the economy." In other 
words, he's going to be filthy rich. 


Mishakal's Token 
XP Value: — GP Value: — 
DRAGON Magazine 182 

This beautiful, translucent egg, the size of a 
chicken's egg, is smooth to the touch. Constella- 
tions of gems are visible beneath its ivory sur- 
face. This was a gift from the goddess, Mishakal, 
to the people of Krynn, celebrating the peace 
after the Kinslayer and Ergoth/Thorbardin wars 
that tore apart the world in earlier centuries. 

It has no martial applications, but when placed 
overnight, beneath the pillow of a woman who 
truly desires pregnancy, it will grant the woman's 
desire, without need for masculine participation 
(although most women who request the use of the 
token have a partner anyway). Once the token's 


part in conception is played, the pregnancy pro- 
gresses normally and in complete health. Children 
born in this way show a normal resemblance to the 
parents, not to Mishakal or any other. There is a 
5% chance ofa multiple birth of 1d4+1 children. 

The token was freely loaned on a nightly basis 
to women of any race who came seeking the gift 
of Mishakal. When any area was no longer in 
need of the token's services, it was moved to 
another of Mishakal's temples. Following the 
Cataclysm, there is no record of the token's 
whereabouts, but it could conceivably still be in 
use somewhere in Krynn. 

Those of the Temple of Mishakal would not 
offer money for its return should it be found, 
expecting those in possession of it to return it of 
their own accord. If some other person or institu- 
tion wishes to hold the token, no one can predict 
what price they would pay for it. It is rumored 
that one good dragon that lost its eggs during the 
War of the Lance is searching for the item, hop- 
ing to start a new family. 


Multicolor 
XP Value: 200 GP Value: 400 
Ronin Challenge 
If eaten, this egg has the same properties as one 


dose of apotion ofhealing. 


Philosopher's 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
Tome of Magic 
This item is an enchanted retort: a long-necked 
piece of glassware in which substances are dis- 
tilled. It is a highly prized addition to a wizard's 
laboratory, for it has two very important uses. 

The first use of the philosopher s egg is in the 
creation of any magical or mundane fluid. The 
time required to create such a fluid is cut in half 
through use of the philosopher's egg. 

The egg's second use is as a required compo- 
nent for creating the substance that turns lead into 
gold—the legendary philosophers’ stone. Thus, it 
is sometimes said by wizards that "the stone 
hatches from the egg." 


of the Phoenix 
XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 15,000 
The Elves of Alfheim 
This is an artifact, said to be the creation of 
Mealiden—the artifact he created in the process 


of becoming an Immortal. Breaking the egg sum- 
1528 


> i a i a a T 


436 


Egg ofthe Phoenix II 


ee YA 


mons a phoenix from the Elemental Plane of Fire. 
If the phoenix is summoned, it does the will of 
the summoner for three days, then immolates 
everything within 1,000 feet and builds a nest of 
the ashes. It then immolates itself and leaves a 
new egg in the ashes. 

The egg, which is about the size of a kickball, 
bestows fire resistance in a 10-foot radius andfly 
at all times, and the ability to throw three fireballs 
(one of 6d6, one of 8d6, and one of 10d6) per day. 
Once any of its abilities has been used, it places 
the user under compulsion to always be in fire- 
light and never touch pure water. This makes for a 
user who is generally foul-smelling and drunk. 


of the Phoenix II 
XP Value: 6,000 GP Value: 30,000 
The Egg of the Phoenix 
The egg ofthe phoenix is an egg-shaped artifact 
of great power, and a "foldbox" (that is, bigger 
inside than outside). It is a source of great power, 
but it must be used properly. It has beneficial and 
malevolent powers aplenty, and it is complicated. 

In game terms, the egg is usable only by a wizard, 
and supplies the magical energy normally drawn 
upon by the casting of a magical spell. One unique 
aspect is that the user can cast any spell he or she 
knows (that is, has written in a spell book) by using 
the egg, without memorizing the spell. Using it does 
not cause the loss of the spell, nor do spells have to 
be one memorized at the time. Furthermore, as the 
magical energies are a bit different from "normal," 
there is only a one-halfnormal chance for dispelling 
the effects produced by egg spells. 

In addition, the operator ofthe egg (the character 
who discovers how to open and activate it) gains a 
subsequent magic resistance while touching the 
egg. This resistance is 10% per stage of opening (to 
magic from an 11th-level caster, adjusted by 5% 
per level difference); 20% when using the egg in 
stage 2, 30% in stage 3 and so forth. 

When found, the egg is a 3-foot-long egg 
shape, 2 feet in diameter, and seems to weigh 
about 30 pounds. It appears to be made of black 
onyx, shot with fine strands of gold and silver, 
with several large runes inscribed upon it. Oddly, 
neither the metallic strands, the runes, nor the 
weight exists in reality. They cannot be touched, 
interpreted, read, or affected in any way. 

The egg itself is immune to nearly all forms of 
damage. A being with a Strength score of 24 may 
dent it, and if struck with the full force of a 25 


Strength, it may implode (violently collapse into 
itself). No known magical spell has any affect on 
it at all. It is rumored that magical weapons of +7 
or greater enchantments (unknown and beyond 
the power of mortals) can harm it similarly (DM's 
option, depending on the level ofthe campaign). 

If the egg is dented, it cannot be opened or 
closed further until repaired by some being who 
knows how and has an Intelligence of at least 20 
(plus the necessary tools and materials). Ifthe 
egg is actually damaged at all by any of the above 
methods, it implodes, disintegrating itself and 
everything within the given radius around it. The 
radius is 20 feet per stage of opening (measuring 
from its current dimensions); at stage 4, for 
example, everything within 80 feet of it disap- 
pears. All matter thus disintegrated (including 
microscopic particles) goes into the Astral Plane, 
along with the remains of the egg, lost forever- 
more (wishes notwithstanding). The aftereffects 
of the implosion, when the surrounding air rushes 
in to fill the total void left where the egg had 
been, is left to the DM's imagination. 

Ifa qualified operator experiments with the 
egg, the secret of opening it may be found (1% 
chance per point of Intelligence per hour of con- 


. tinuous study). The egg may then be opened to 


437 


stage 2, but the process of opening it will trigger 
a defensive flame that inflicts 10 hit points of 
magical fire damage to everything (and every- 
one) within a 10-foot radius, with no saving 
throw and no protections (similar to the flames of 
the phoenix itself). 

At stage 1 (when discovered), the egg can give 
the operator the ability to cast any Ist-level alter- 
ation spell. The user will take 1 hit point of dam- 
age for each spell used, and the damage is not 
curable except by time, at the normal rate of one 
point per day. 

In a process identical to the opening procedure 
that takes as long to learn, the egg may be opened 
further, to stage 2. The fire damage at stage 2, 
however, is 20 hit points in a 15-foot radius. At 
stage 2 (twice the initial size), any Ist-level spell 
may be cast, plus any 2nd-level alteration. The 
damage per use rises to two points, regardless of 
the level of the spell actually cast. 

The third opening procedure inflicts 30 hit 
points of magical fire damage to everything 
within 20 feet, again disregarding all protection 
and with no saving throws. At stage 3 (twice the 


size at stage 2), all 1st- and 2nd-level wizard 
1529 


Egg, Pink l 


ji a E 


spells are usable, plus all 3rd-level alterations. 
Damage per use is 4 points per spell, again 
regardless of level. 

Further opening ofthe egg is impossible for 
any being with less than 18 Intelligence, 9% 
chance per hour of study with that score, and nor- 
mal chances (1% per point per hour) for Intelli- 
gence 19 and greater. Opening damage rises by 
10 points per opening thereafter (to 40 points 
when opening stage 4, 50 points at stage 5, and so 
forth), and damage per spell used rises propor- 
tionately (to 6 hit points, 8 hit points, and so on). 

On a purely physical note, the first three times 
that one opens the egg, it merely gets bigger. 
Thereafter it becomes first a large black cube 
(almost identical to the gate in the Black Forest 
of Northending), then a 90-foot high archway, 
and then a mammoth slab 30 feet high and 120 
feet square. It then assumes shapes inconceivable 
by normal humans; it is more properly a tool of 
the gods, too dangerous for mortal use. 


Pink 
XP Value: 400 
Ronin Challenge 
This egg is similar to a flash powder grenade. If 
the egg is thrown onto a fire source, it explodes in 
a brilliant flare of light. Those looking at the light 


GP Value: 900 


who fail to save vs. petrification are blinded for 
1d3 rounds. An unbroken egg can be saved and 
used later. 


of Reason 
XP Value: 250 GP Value: 1,250 
Unearthed Arcana 
A specially enchanted egg of this sort is always 
coated with oil oftimelessness. Although very old 
and quite vile smelling, each such egg has the 
possibility of increasing the eater's Intelligence or 
Wisdom. However, an individual who consumes 
an egg ofreason must first make a saving throw 
vs. poison—with no bonuses whatsoever—or 
else the matter consumed slays him or her. The 
effect of the poison cannot be neutralized. If eat- 
ing the egg does not prove fatal, there is a possi- 
bility that the consumer will gain one point of 
either Intelligence (60% chance) or Wisdom 
(40%). The chance of successful enhancement is 
equal to the eater's current ability score 
(whichever applies), doubled and subtracted from 
100. 

Example: An egg that improves intelligence is 
eaten by a character with an Intelligence score of 
17. The chance of successful enhancement is 
100-(17x2) = 68%. Ability scores of 18 or higher 
are effectively enhanced by only '/;o-point at a 
time (see the DMG "The Effect of Wishes on 
Character Ability Scores"). A character would 
have to successfully consume 10 eggs ofreason 
(if, somehow, that many were available) in order 
to raise an ability score from 18 to 19. 

Racial limitations apply when determining 
how much an ability score can be enhanced. Ifthe 
oil oftimelessness is removed from an egg ofrea- 
son before it is consumed, the egg still has a 
chance of poisoning the eater but it has lost its 
ability-enhancing property. 


. Rotten - 

XP Value: — GP Value: 400 
The Book of Marvelous Magic i 

This egg appears identical to a soft-boiled or 
hard-boiled egg. However, when broken, it cre- 
ates a 10-foot cube of nauseating yellow gas. The 
victim suffers penalties equal to the reverse of the 
normal item (+6 penalty to AC, -1 to saving 
throws), for the same duration (12 or 24 rounds), 
and each victim within the cloud must make a 
saving throw vs. poison or be affected in the same 


manner. 
1532 


SO ——<$—<—<—<<—Sa eee er 


438 


Egg, Turquoise 


>) ee, 


of Shattering 

GP Value: 500 
Unearthed Arcana 
This magical egg is undesirable, for when it is 
handled normally or touched by a detection spell, 
it shatters with a loud noise, sending sharp pieces 
of its casing everywhere within a 10-foot radius. 
Each creature in the area of effect suffers an 
attack by 1d4 fragments of the egg. Hit probabil- 
ity is determined using actual Armor Class only, 
with no dexterity bonuses applicable. Each frag- 
ment that hits inflicts 1d6+1 points of damage. 
Note: Fragile objects within 1 foot ofa shattering 
egg are broken automatically from the force of 
the shattering, while those within 2 feet must save 
vs. crushing blow or likewise suffer breakage. 


XP Value: — 


Shell of Protection 


XP Value GP Value 
Standard: 1,000 10,000 
vs. Birds: 500 5,000 
vs. Dragons: 500 5,000 
vs. Evil: 500 5,000 
vs. Fiends: 500 5,000 
vs. Good: 500 5,000 
vs. Humanoids: 500 5,000 
vs. Humans: 500 5,000 
vs. Lycanthropes: 500 5,000 
vs. Planars: 500 5,000 
vs. Scalekind: 500 5,000 
vs. Undead: 500 5,000 


DRAGON Magazine 182 

This item, which appears to be a silver chicken's 
egg, was created by Magius of the Red Robes 
during the Second Dragon War and given to one 
of the war's heroes because of a stricture prevent- 
ing wizards from using weapons of war. Thus it 
was not with him when he was captured by the 
Dark Queen, a captivity Magius did not survive. 
Since that time, the shell has passed through the 
hands of many an adventurer and nobleman. 

To operate this steel-hard egg device, one 
places it on a level surface and spins it on its wide 
end. From the egg's surface, a translucent shell of 
light springs forth in all directions to form a 
shimmering egg-shaped shell of protection 10 
feet in diameter and 15 feet high (although 5 ver- 
tical feet are under the surface the egg is spinning 
on, making the visible portion of the shell cone- 
shaped). 

The device grants fall protection from normal 
missiles within its boundaries. Additionally, any 


creatures that attempt to enter its field are usually 
turned aside without injury, in a random direction 
that does not allow for penetration of the field. 
The percent chance of making it through the field 
equals the creature's Hit Dice multiplied by five, 
with bonus hit points added as percentage points. 
For example, a wyvern of 7+7 HD has a (7x5)+7 
= 3547 = 42% chance of making it through the 
field to attack the device's user. One attempt to 
enter the field may be made per round. Magic 
resistance must be checked before a creature pos- 
sessing this characteristic (such as a dragon or 
fiend) makes its "turn away" roll; ifthe resistance 
check succeeds, the creature may enter the field 
easily. 

The shell's effects last as long as the egg is kept 
spinning, an activity a spinner can keep up for 
one turn per point of Constitution. After that the 
user has to rest for as long as the shell spun. The 
spinner suffers an Armor Class penalty of -2 
while concentrating on keeping the shell in 
motion, spinning it with the fingers. 

Variations of this item have been seen that pro- 
tect specifically against certain types of crea- 
tures, such as undead, dragons, and so forth, but 
these are half the XP and GP value of the type 
stated above. 


Soft-Boiled 
XP Value: 200 GP Value: 500 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
This egg appears and functions as a hard-boiled 
egg, but its effects last for 12 rounds. 


Stinking Cloud 
XP Value: 200 GP Value: 500 
The Land Beyond the Magic Mirror 
This egg, when shattered, produces a stinking 
cloud effect as though cast by a 12th-level Spell- 
caster. 


Turquoise 
GP Value: 1,200 

Ronin Challenge 
If broken, this egg emits a cloud of blue gas that 
causes all characters within a 5-foot radius to 
choke and gag. Those who successfully save vs. 
poison can take no other actions other than gag- 
ging for 1d2 rounds; those who fail a saving 
throw are incapacitated for 1d4 rounds and suffer 
1d2 points of damage. An unbroken turquoise 

egg can be saved and used later. 


XP Value: 700 


1537 


439 


~ Egg of Wonder 


of Wonder 
XP Value GP Value 
Black bear: 300 3,000 
Boar: 300 3,000 
Draco lizard: 800 8,000 
Gecko lizard: 600 6,000 
Giant bat: 100 1,000 
Giant ferret: 300 3,000 
Grizzly bear: 600 6,000 
Mountain lion: 500 5,000 
Panther: 500 5,000 
Racer snake: 600 6,000 
Rock baboon: 100 1,000 
Wolf: 200 2,000 


DUNGEONS & DRAGONS" Rules Cyclopedia 

This strange item is the size of a chicken's egg, 
though it may be of any color. An egg breaks 
when dropped or thrown (to 60 feet maximum 
range); in the following round, a creature emerges 
from it and grows to normal size, thereafter obey- 
ing the thrower of the egg to the best of its ability. 
(Note that the creature must be able to hear the 
user's commands.) The creature disappears after 
one hour of existence or when slain. The creature 
appearing is never determined until the egg actu- 
ally breaks; characters can never know what crea- 
ture will appear beforehand. The DM may add 
other creatures, if desired. To determine the type 
of creature appearing, roll 1dl2: 


Roll Animal 
Baboon, rock 
Bat, giant 
Bear, black 
Bear, grizzly 
Boar 
Cat, mountain lion 
Cat, panther 
Ferret, giant 
Lizard, gecko 
Lizard, draco 
Snake, racer 
Wolf, normal 


Eidolon of Khalk'Ru 
XP Value: 5,000 GP Value: 10,000 
DRAGON Magazine 45 
This object is a translucent, yellow crystal 
lozenge about 6 inches by 4 inches by 2 inches. 
Within the crystal is the image of an octopus or 
squid with 12 tentacles. Only priests and wizards 
may be affected by or possess the eidolon. Any 


DREW MADWNAFWN— 


priest or wizard viewing this object for the first 
time must save vs. spell or fall into a hypnotic 
trance lasting 2d4 rounds, during which time he 
or she attempts to possess the eidolon, and will 
kill anyone attempting to stop the theft. If a char- 
acter succeeds in possessing it, another saving 
throw vs. spell must be made or the owner will do 
everything in his or her power to reach the sea 
and swim with the eidolon as far out as possible, 
eventually drowning due to exhaustion. 

If a priest or wizard is successful in obtaining 
the eidolon without dying in the process, then 
telepathic methods reveal some of the following 
powers of the eidolon-summon and charm (as a 
20th-level wizard) one of the following types of 
monsters, provided the user is within range of the 
sea: 


Roll Monster #AP 
01-10 Killer Whale (15 HD) 1 

11-20 Giant Squid 1-3 
21-54 Vampire Ixitxachitl (5+5 HD) 14 
55-00 Giant Octopi 2-5 


The charm ofthe eidolon works exactly like 
the 4th-level wizard spell charm monster with 
regard to the percent chance of breaking the 
influence of the eidolon. What the user of the 
eidolon does not know is that when the monster is 
freed of the charm, it will try to destroy the user. 
Only the power of a wish can negate this effect of 
the eidolon. 

The range of the eidolon's summoning power 
is the user's level multiplied by five miles. The 
eidolon will function in this manner 2d4 times 
before losing its power, at which time it will dis- 
solve into sea water. 


Elemental Compass 
XP Value: 10,000 GP Value: 50,000 
Tome of Magic 
This device aids travelers seeking the Elemental 
Planes of Earth, Air, Fire, and Water. The com- 
pass, a small urn carved of stone and containing 
hollow pockets, works only in the Ethereal Plane, 
an Inner Plane, or the Prime Material Plane. 

To make the compass work, a representative 
sample of material from the target plane must be 
placed in the urn and the lid sealed. Thus, to 
find the Elemental Plane of Fire, a small, burn- 
ing fire must be placed in the urn. Once sealed, 


the fire burns until the lid is opened (just as 
1540 


, nn ne 


440 


Elixir, All-Purpose Healing 


> —————— RE 


water does not evaporate from the urn as long as 
the lid is sealed). 

When used on an Inner Plane or the Ethereal 
Plane, the urn glows yellow when the characters 
are heading in the direction of a portal for the 
elemental plane they seek. On an Inner Plane, 
the compass leads to the paraelemental or quasi- 
elemental planar border that exists between the 
planes. In the Ethereal Plane, the urn leads to 
the ethereal curtain of the desired plane. There 
are no range restrictions on the Inner or Ethereal 
Planes. 

On the Prime Material Plane, the compass 
glows when the characters are headed for elemen- 
tal vortices of the correct element, provided the 
vortex is within range. The range on the Prime 
Material Plane is 300 miles. 


Elixir 

These magical fluids are typically found in 
ceramic, crystal, glass, or metal flasks and vials. 
A container generally holds enough fluid to pro- 
vide one person with a single dose that will 
bestow the effects defined in the elixir's descrip- 
tion. Sometimes a user can enjoy a diminished 
benefit or one of shorter duration by drinking a 
partial dose. Cursed elixirs, however, have their 
full effect whether the user tastes it or drinks the 
whole thing. 


of Additional Weaponry 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 5,000 
DRAGON Magazine 168 

Every flask of this rare elixir carries this 
announcement in Common: "Whoever drinks this 
elixir will be able to use twice as many weapons 
as normal." What it does not say is that this elixir 
was created by drow worshipers of Lolth, the Spi- 
der Goddess. An individual of any race who 
drinks this elixir immediately grows a second 
pair of arms from the sides of his or her chest. On 
an elf, the arms are fully functional and allow the 
elf to use twice as many weapons as he or she 
could with one pair of arms. If the arms appear 
on a character of any other race, they act in a hos- 
tile manner, taking off the character's armor, 
striking the character with his or her own weap- 
ons, and the like. Worse yet, the arms won't go 
away by themselves! A remove curse spell from a 
priest of at least 12th level will eliminate the 
extra arms on any character. 

Armor or clothing worn on the trunk of the 


body will be ruined when the extra arms appear, 
an effect that also causes Idl0 points of damage 
to the user if armor is strapped on the body. Any 
armor worn later must be especially designed or 
modified. With the exception of the drow, the 
dark elves who worship Lolth, any being who 
sees a character with this deformity reacts with 
horror and loathing; surface elves know the ori- 
gin of this potion and will attack any elf possess- 
ing four arms on sight. An adventurer who grows 
the arms loses half his or her Charisma (but never 
dropping below 3). 

The drow will do anything in order to obtain a 
sample of this potion. A drow who gains the extra 
arms also gains great respect among other drow, 
but no other race. If an individual of any other 
race is found by the drow to bear this mark of 
Lolth, the character will be put to death in a most 
gruesome manner and the most painful tortures 
for insulting the goddess. 


Ail-Purpose Healing 
XP Value: 250 GP Value: 2,000 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 65 
This elixir, made from casterous fish, cures any 
illness or disease (including lycanthropy). The 
elixir, which does not heal hit points, tastes ter- 


rible, incapacitating the imbiber for 1d6 rounds. 
1542 


, a | an. 


441 


Elixir, Distillate of Wolfsbane 


je Hh ie 


Distillate of Wolfsbane 
XP Value: 700 GP Value: 1,600 
Night Howlers 

This liquid is poisonous to Lycanthropes. Any 
werecreature who smells or touches the liquid 
must save vs. poison or flee, as per the fear spell. 
(Lycanthropes in human form get +2 to their 
save.) If a werecreature drinks it, he or she must 
Save VS. poison or die. 

Any non-lycanthrope who drinks distillate of 
wolfsbane feels a tingling in the mouth, lips, and 
throat. Within one turn the character becomes 
nauseous and dizzy (-2 to attack rolls, saving 
throws, and ability or skill checks). The next turn, 
breathing becomes difficult (-4 to actions), 
unconciousness follows, and the victim collapses 
on the following turn. Bed rest alleviates the 
symptoms, and complete recovery occurs in 24 
hours. Distillate ofwolfsbane retains its potency 
for only 1d4 days if kept in a bottle or 6d4 hours 
in open air. 


Glitz & Klax's* 
XP Value: /2 value GP Value: % price 
Inside RAVEN'S BLUFF™, The Living City 

Glitz and Klax specialize in minor potions, magi- 
cal mixtures that have about Ko the power of full- 
strength potions. For example, a minor potion of 
growth causes the imbiber to grow about 7 inches; 
a potion of treasure finding leads the imbiber to 
dropped coins. Durations of minor potions are 
half those of full-strength varieties. 

A minor potion affects only the imbiber, so 
circus goers are not able to obtain anything like 
a potion ofhuman control or a philter of love. 
Likewise, magical oils are not available. G'Ned 
Klax is not the Realms' most organized person, 
so there is a 5% chance that any potion pur- 
chased from him is actually a full-strength 
potion. 


of Health 
XP Value: 250 GP Value: 2,000 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 
This potion cures the following afflictions (roll 
1d8): 


Roll Affliction 
1 Blindness 
2 Deafness 
3 Disease 
4 Feeblemindedness 


5 Insanity 

6 Infection and infestation 
7 Poisoning 

8 Rot 


Imbibing the whole potion cures all of the 
above afflictions suffered by the user. Half a flask 
cures any one or two of the listed ills (DM's 
choice or random). 


Heroic Action 
XP Value: 350 GP Value: 800 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 65 
This elixir grants a wizard, priest, or rogue the 
ability to perform heroically in battle for 2d4 
rounds by granting them an additional 4d6 hit 
points. The hit point bonus vanishes after the 
potion's duration expires. 


Kindness 
XP Value: 250 GP Value: 400 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 65 

This elixir grants the imbiber good manners for 
1dl0 days. The drinker has an overwhelming 
desire to be kind and polite. The character only 
says kind things to all people encountered. While 
the potion's effects do not hinder a character's 
ability to fight, a character will not fight unless 
first attacked. 


of Life 
XP Value: 250 GP Value: 2,500 
Unearthed Arcana 
This potent draught restores life to any creature, 
even if at a negative hit point level equal to up 
to 20% of total hit points. (Thus, it benefits 
even a creature at -10 hit points, so long as that 
creature has a full strength hit point total of 50 
or more.) The power of the elixir functions only 
if administered internally within five rounds of 
the occurrence of death. One turn later, the 
recipient is unconscious but at | hit point. For 
each negative hit point neutralized this way, the 
recipient must rest for one day or else receive a 
cure light wounds spell to offset the need for 
that one day of rest. A cure serious wounds 
spell counts for two days of rest, a cure critical 
wounds spell for three, and a heal spell for 
seven days. Demihumans are affected by this 
elixir. 


1548 


AGE a a © 


442 


Elixir, Quirks 


> rE 


of Luck 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 2,500 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 65 

This unusual elixir grants the drinker great luck 
for 1 d4 days, by enabling the use of nonmagical 
weapons to successfully strike creatures that are 
normally struck by +2 or better weapons. How- 
ever, the potion also has a "bad luck" side effect. 
For 1d4 days after the potion wears off, the char- 
acter is 4 on all attack rolls. 


of Madness 

GP Value: 500 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 
A single sip of this elixir causes the imbiber to go 
mad, as if affected by the 4th-level wizard spell, 
confusion, until a heal, restoration, or wish spell 
is used to remove the madness. Once any creature 
is affected by the elixir, the remaining draught 
loses all magical properties, becoming merely a 
foul tasting liquid. 


XP Value: — 


Nerve Tonic 
XP Value: 150 GP Value: 750 
DRAGON Magazine 194 

This potion allows the imbiber to take control 
of his or her own emotions, remaining calm, 
cool, and collected no matter what the current 
situation. All outside influences on the emo- 
tions are either eliminated or minimized. If 
used by an NPC, Morale checks are made at +3. 
No scare, charm, fear, or other emotion-alter- 
ing spell has any effect on the user of this 
potion, and the user also gains a +3 bonus to 
saving throws vs. any spell that indirectly 
affects a victim's emotions, such as spook or 
phantasmal killer. The potion has no effect on 
mind-controlling spells without an emotional 
component, like hypnotism or domination. All 
of these effects last for 1d4+] turns. Each bottle 
contains a single dose. 


Nodozze 
XP Value: 200 GP Value: 400 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 65 
A typical vial contains four doses. When imbib- 
ing this elixir, a character is able to remain awake 
for 24 hours—no matter how tired. However, at 
the end of that period, the person becomes 
fatigued and must rest at least eight hours. 


Obscurement 
XP Value: 300 GP Value: 700 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 65 

When found, this liquid appears to be cloudy 
water. If imbibed, it has no effect. Its power 
comes from being poured from a height of 3 or 
more feet. In this case, it creates a cloud 60 feet 
in diameter, which limits vision to 1 foot, negates 
scents, and dampens sound. Fighting within the 
cloud is at -4. The cloud lasts 1d4 turns. 


Photosynthesis 

XP Value: 400 GP Value: 2,500 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 65 
This elixir, created by an obscure druidic sect, is 
a deep green liquid that exudes an earthy smell. 
After a character quaffs this potion, he or she 
falls unconscious for 1 d4 turns. During this time, 
a massive transformation takes place. An 
imbiber's skin turns a deep green and metabolism 
is altered. The character no longer has need of 
food, existing only on water, and must now spend 
at least six hours a day in direct sunlight or suffer 
the effects of starvation. The transformation is 
permanent and can only be reversed by a wish or 
limited wish. 


Physical Enhancement 
XP Value: 300 GP Value: 800 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 65 
When this delicious elixir is quaffed, one of the 
physical attributes of a character is enhanced: A 
woman receives a pretty face, or a dwarf acquires 
a fine, lengthy beard. Only one attribute can be 
altered, including skin and hair color. The dura- 
tion of the potion is 1d4 weeks. 


Quirks of Elixirs* 
XP Value: — GP Value: — 
DRAGON Magazine 163 

The AD&D® game has one of the largest compi- 
lations of magical items in the fantasy gaming 
industry. The following tables have been created 
to add some spice and variety to existing magical 
items in the AD&D game world. A table of non- 
standard magical item abilities is offered for each 
major type of magical item in the AD&D game. 
The rationale for such quirks is simple. 

Most items are created normally, and they 
function exactly as a standard item of the same 
type in the DMG. However, sometimes there is a 


slight mishap in the creation of the device: the 
1556 


1 4 = 


43 


Elixir, Quirks 


j ee! il 


steps are not followed in the proper order, the 
astrological signs do not bode well, the item's 
creator is disturbed to begin with, the instructions 
are incomplete, or something just plain goes 
wrong. Any of these results may cause a magical 
item to behave differently from others just like it. 

Not all quirks are bad, however. Some are 
detrimental to the item or its user, some are neu- 
tral, and some are even beneficial. The possibility 
of quirks existing (and the actual number of 
quirks) is determined by using the table below to 
determine the exact quirks that a magical elixir 
possesses. 


Roll 
01-86 
87-94 
95-98 
99-00 


Roll 
01-05 


06-10 


11-15 


16-21 


22-25 


36-30 


31-34 


35-40 


41-44 


Quirks Present 
No quirks 

One quirk 

Two quirks 
Three quirks 


Elixir Quirks 
Result 
User glows (as per a light spell) a ran- 
dom color for as long as the elixir is in 
effect. 
User's skin turns a random color for 
ldl0 turns. 
User is unable to speak or cast spells 
with verbal components for 1 d4 hours 
after drinking the elixir. 
Imbiber gets extremely hungry imme- 
diately after the elixir is consumed (as 
per a chime ofhunger). 
User's senses sharpen while the elixir is 
in effect, or for a maximum of three 
turns (whichever is longer). The indi- 
vidual affected gains a +2 bonus against 
being surprised (unless he or she pos- 
sesses the alertness proficiency or is a 
ranger, in which case add a +3 bonus). 
User cannot hear anything due to ring- 
ing or buzzing in the ears for as long as 
the elixir is in effect, or for three turns 
ifno duration is given. 
Elixir is diluted and works 50% as well 
as a normal elixir of the same type. 
Both duration and effects are dimin- 
ished in power. 
Elixir becomes inert and useless if left 
unstoppered for longer than five rounds. 
Elixir's duration doubles if it is mixed 
with wine prior to consumption. 


45-50 


51-53 


54-57 
58-62 


63-66 


67-71 


72-76 


771-78 


79-83 


84—87 


88-89 


90-91 


92-95 


User becomes highly intoxicated for 
1d10 hours after the elixir is consumed. 
Only dispel magic can prematurely 
remove the effects of the drunkenness 
(effects determined by the DM). 

User gains 60' infravision for as long as 
the elixir is in effect, or for three turns 
ifno duration is given. Ifthe user nor- 
mally has infravision, it is lost for the 
same amount of time. 

Elixir has no effect upon demihumans. 

User experiences slight disorientation for 
1d6 rounds after drinking the elixir (-2 
penalty on any attack roll and +2 penalty 
on Armor Class during this time). 

User becomes drowsy; a Constitution 
check on 1d20 must be made every 
round for four rounds after the elixir is 
consumed. Ifthe roll on any check is 
higher than the user's constitution, he or 
she falls asleep for 3d6 minutes. The 
sleeping individual can be awakened 
only by taking at least 1 point damage 
from a physical or magical attack. 
Elixir is phosphorescent and glows 
(equal tofaeriefire spell) in the dark. 
Elixir is found in powdered form; water 
has to be added to the powder for the 
elixir to be effective. 

Elixir is stronger than normal; its dura- 
tion is 150% of a normal elixir of the 
same type. 

Elixir is nauseating to drink; a Constitu- 
tion check on 1d20 must be made in order 
to gulp the contents of the elixir. Ifa sav- 
ing throw vs. poison at +2 is not made 
after that, the user feels nauseated for 
2d10 turns (-1 to attack during that time). 

User loses one point of Dexterity for 
2d10 turns. 

Elixir evaporates (50%) or coagulates 
(50%) and becomes useless if left open 
to air for longer than five rounds. 
Elixir is unpredictable—it works nor- 
mally 50% of the time, does nothing 
30% of the time, and sickens the user 
for 1d4+1 days without any beneficial 
effect 20% of the time. A cure disease 
removes this illness. 

Elixir is unstable; if severely jostled or 
shaken, it bursts its container (75% 


chance) and becomes useless. 
1556 


= 444 = 


Elixir, Sunlight Resistance 


; na 


96-97 User suddenly becomes extremely ver- 
bose and talks incessantly for the dura- 
tion of the elixir, or one turn if no 
duration is given. During this time, the 
user and and party cannot gain surprise 
on any monsters. 

Ifthe elixir is mixed with anything else, 
it forms a lethal compound. (If swal- 
lowed, save vs. poison at 4 on the roll, 
or die in 1d4 rounds.) 

Elixir is addictive; a draft of it must be 
taken at least once a week after such an 
addictive liquid is imbibed. Ifthe addict 
does not drink the elixir every week, he 
or she suffers a -2 penalty on all ability 
scores until the elixir is taken or the 
affliction is removed. Only alter reality, 
limited wish, wish, or going "cold 
turkey" without the elixir for 1d3 
months cures the addiction. 


98-99 


Rainbow Bridge 
XP Value: 1,500 GP Value: 4,000 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 65 

This rare elixir appears as a swirl of scintillating 
colors. The character quaffing the elixir must 
concentrate, forming a mental picture ofa bridge. 
Within eight rounds, a bridge of rainbow colors 
appears, 5 feet wide at the base and up to 50 feet 
long. The bridge is permanent unless more than 
5,000 pounds is placed on it at any one time or 
unless a dispel magic is cast on it. 


of Reduction 
XP Value: — GP Value: 250 
DRAGON Magazine 168 
The origins of this mysterious elixir have never 
been determined. However, every sample found 
by adventurers has been a single dose in a small 
crystal flask. On each flask is engraved, in Com- 
mon: "This potion makes my enemies as nothing 
before me." Several adventurers drank the potion, 
assuming it would give them the power to defeat 
their enemies. However, it seems the potion was 
actually designed to be given to one's enemies. 
Anyone who drinks the potion is, in two rounds, 
reduced to one-tenth normal height, with a corre- 
sponding reduction in weight (one-thousandth 
normal) and strength (now negligible). Only liv- 
ing matter is affected, not material items like 
armor, rings, and the like. The potion's effects are 
permanent unless counteracted with a remove 


curse spell from a priest of at least 12th level. A 
potion designed to cause growth has a 20% 
chance to restore a victim to his or her natural 
size; rings, spells, and other objects designed to 
magically cause growth have the same chance. 


Revivication 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 2,500 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 65 

This potent elixir appears no more remarkable than 
a bottle of water—antil a character adds a few drops 
of his or her own blood to the mixture. When this 
happens, the elixir foams and turns a brilliant red. If 
the owner of the revivication elixir dies within a 
week of adding his or her blood to the mixture, the 
elixir can be administered to the body to bring him 
or her back to life. The elixir is useless one week 
after it turns red, and it has no effect when adminis- 
tered to someone other than the owner. 


Sanity 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 1,000 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 65 
This elixir cures any form of insanity, madness, 
or the effects of mind-altering spells such as 
charm, fear, and confusion. 


Skunk Water 
XP Value: 100 GP Value: 400 
DRAGON Magazine 194 . 
This elixir is not meant to be drunk, it is extremely 
distasteful (but not nonpoisonous) to human and 
demihuman palates. When added to other liquids 
it transforms them into impure, foul, undrinkable 
sludge. While it has no effect on poisons, skunk 
water automatically converts magical potions to 
poison. A single bottle of skunk water can foul 
10,000 cubic feet of fresh water or turn 10 magi- 
cal potions into poison (type G, H, or I, with full 
effects felt only ifa complete dose is ingested— 
see Table 51 in the DMG ). While the effects of 
skunk water are permanent, an equal volume of 
sweet water can restore foul water to fresh. Sweet 
water has no effect on potions made poisonous. 


Sunlight Resistance 
XP Value: 400 GP Value: 1,500 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 65 
This elixir is a boon to draw who choose to leave 
their Underdark homes. Upon consuming a draft 
of this potion, a drow can exist under bright sun- 


light without suffering any visual problems. Most 
1562 


445 


Elixir, Weakness 


De Ae a a ee Ae 


flasks contain the equivalent of three potions— 
each potion having a duration of Idl0 days. The 
potions have no effect on surface dwellers. 


Weakness 

XP Value: 50 GP Value: 250 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 65 
When this elixir is swallowed, the user's Strength 
score is reduced to 5. The unfortunate individual 
suffers all the associated penalties for a lesser 
Strength for the duration of the potion—ld12+4 
turns. 


of Youth 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 1,000 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 
Quaffing this rare and potent elixir reverses 
aging. Taking the full potion at once reduces the 
imbiber's age by 1d4+l years. Taking just a sip 
first, instead of drinking it down, reduces the 
potency of the liquid, and drinking the lower- 
potency liquid reduces age by only 1d3 years. 


Zorbo Fingers 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 800 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 65 
This potent elixir is always found in single-dose 
containers. When quaffed, the imbiber is granted 
a zorbo's ability to gain the Armor Class of what- 
ever is touched for 20 rounds. The character 
could gain an AC 7 from earth; AC 5 from wood; 
AC 3 from metal; or AC 0 from stone. 


Ema of Wishes 

XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 10,000 
DUNGEON Magazine 33 
The ema is a specially prepared plaque made 
from rare wood, with detailed art painted on its 
front. It radiates magic heavily and is quickly 
picked out from other ema by its extraordinary 
beauty. If inscribed on the back with rare, quality 
ink (minimum value 20 ch'ien) using the callig- 
raphy proficiency and then hung near a shrine of 
the appropriate spirit or god, that spirit will grant 
the request as a wish. For example, a farmer wish- 
ing for arice season free from tai-fun would leave 
his or her ema to Susano no Mikoto, Fierce Wind 
Son. 

These plaques are recognized by only shukenja 
and wujen, as they are extremely powerful items. 
Only 1d3 ema ofwishes will be found together, 
each having room for one wish to be inscribed on 


it. However, ifthe wish is of a continuous or long 
term nature, destroying or taking the ema from its 
shrine ends the wish. This is done at the risk of 
invoking the anger of the spirit or god. A wish to 
create something or restore a person to life is not 
negated by the ema's destruction. 


Epox's Iron Rations 

XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 58 
These rations are found in small, magical metal 
chests (10 by 5 by 4 inches). When a chest is 
opened, there is an edible iron ration meal inside. 
Up to three meals can be produced a day, and a 
box will function six days in a row. On the sev- 
enth day it recharges. The food produced by the 
box contains a magical syrup that acts like a 
diluted potion ofhealing. For every two meals 
eaten, 1 hit point of damage is healed. A ration 
box cannot provide beverages, and the food pro- 
duced by it does not taste better than normal iron 
rations. 


Essence of Darkness 

XP Value: 250 GP Value: 750 
The Complete Thief's Handbook 

This pure black, oily fluid must be kept in tough, 
light-proof containers, since it is destroyed after 
one turn in bright sunlight or one hour if exposed 
to daylight. Essence ofdarkness is pure, concen- 
trated, liquid darkness itself. It can be used in a 
number of ways: 
When a dose is swallowed it makes the 
imbiber's entire body, including hair, teeth, 
and even the whites of the eyes, pure matte 
black in color. This can enhance a thief's 
chance of hiding in shadows as shown below. 
Similarly, if one dose is diluted in a gallon of 
warm water, the essence creates a powerful 
black dye. A gallon of the diluted form can be 
used to dye clothes and even armor and weap- 
ons; one gallon of the dye is sufficient to treat 
the clothes and equipment of one character. 
The dye takes one turn to mix and soak into 
the items and one turn to dry. This process 
also affects the chances for successful hiding 
in shadows. 


Body only (wearing normal clothing) +5% 
Body only (wearing no clothing) +25% 
Clothing only +20% 
Both body and clothing +40% 


1568 


A 446 < 


~ Explosive Devices, Ellister's Dimensional Mine g- 


These bonuses only apply when the thief is try- 
ing to hide in darkened areas or attempting to hide 
in shadows. Detection resistance operates on a 
thief using essence ofdarkness to hide in this way. 
Essence ofdarkness is unstable and if a vial is 
struck by a crushing blow it explodes into dark- 
ness 15' radius. A single dose of the magical 
essence creates a darkness 5' radius if struck. 


This property was exploited by making small - 


glass or ceramic globes filled with the liquid, 

which are then thrown forcefully onto hard sur- 

faces to create darkness bombs. At the DM's 

option, a thief who has ingested the essence or 

applied it to his or her clothing might similarly 
become the center of a darkness 5' radius effect 
if struck a severe blow with a blunt weapon 

(50% ofremaining hit points, with a 12 hit point 

minimum for the effect to operate). 

The effects of essence ofdarkness last for six 
hours plus 1d6 turns, if used externally; if 
ingested, it has the same duration as a standard 
potion. Each bottle or vial of the essence found 
usually contains sufficient fluid for 1d4+4 doses. 


Eternal Peanut 
XP Value: 300 GP Value: 1,500 
DRAGON Magazine 30 
The eternal peanut can be opened repeatedly to 
provide up to a quarter pound of peanuts per 
hour. This is enough to supply rations for two 
medium-sized individuals. 


Everclean Towel 
XP Value: 400 GP Value: 2,00 
DRAGON Magazine 30 

The everclean towel was developed when Fran's 
nephew visited and left a small mountain of dirty 
towels and stained carpets. This 1-foot-square 
cloth cannot be stained or dirtied in any way. It 
can be torn or burned. — 


Everdamp Sponge 

XP Value: 100 GP Value: 500 
DRAGON Magazine 30 
The everdamp sponge is a 2-inch square sponge 
that can be dampened for one week with a single 
drop of water. The sponge, with a single drop of 
water, can clean anything it conies into contact 
with, as though soap, water, and elbow grease 
were being used. No matter what the sponge 
cleans up or wipes off, the sponge's surface is 
always clean. 


Explosive Devices 


Explosive devices can range from bombs to 
mines. Generally, a triggering device or condition 
must be met in order for the device to explode. 


Dimensional Mine 
XP Value: 600 GP Value: 6,000 
Infinity Sphere 

Dimensional mines are large magical devices that 
are catapulted or jettisoned in the general direction 
of a Mariner ship. If the dimensional mine enters 
the same hex as a Mariner, the mine detonates, 
causing 2d6 points of hull damage. Those on a 
wrecked mariner and stuck in the ethereal must be 
rescued, unless they possess devices to send them 
home through the planes. (See the PLANESCAPE™ 
boxed set for more information on planar travel.) 


Dimensional Mine II 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 2,000 
Tome of Magic 
This nasty device can take the form of any small 
item, but most often appears as a small figure 
carved ofjet or other black stone, similar to a fig- 
urine of wondrous power. As soon as the mine is 
taken into extradimensional space, such as that cre- 
ated by a rope trick or a bag ofholding, it ruptures 
the space. Everything in the space, including the 
mine itself, is spewed into the Astral Plane and lost 
unless someone can retrieve it. If the extradimen- 
sional space was created by a magical item, such as 
a bag of holding, that item is destroyed. 
In Ravenloft: Living creatures in extradimen- 
sional space when the mine explodes are killed. 


Ellister's Dimensional Mine 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 2,000 
1992 Fantasy Collector Card 392 
The wizard/assassin Ellister experimented with 
traditional dimensional mines until he came up 
with this nasty device. Once Ellister's dimen- 
sional mine is set, merely touching it sends every- 
thing within a 3-foot-radius into the Astral Plane. 
The plane shift is so sudden that anything outside 
the radial area of effect is left behind, including 
parts of a victim's body. Needless to say, the 
strain of existing on two planes at the same time 
is painfully fatal. Ellister likes to shape his mines 
like common objects that a victim would nor- 
mally pick up and handle chess pieces or 


wooden spoons, even gold coins. 
1574 


a 447 ms 


Explosive Devices, Helm Bomb 


Dee SS ——— ee 


Helm Bomb 
GP Value: 40,000 


XP Value: — 

Lost Ships 
The arcane sell very few helm bombs. These 
large, not-easily-concealed devices are simply 
normal-looking helms that can somehow "turn 
on" within the spelljamming field of another 
magical power source. In this rare instance, 
operating multiple power sources would result 
in the ship upon which the helm bomb was 
placed being torn apart. This occurs even if the 
controller of the original power source attempts 
to exactly match the direction and intensity of 
the thrusts. 

The devices' warring power fields force them 
apart, destroying the ship and firing the two 
sources away from each other in random direc- 
tions and speeds. They continue to operate until 
power is removed or exhausted. In the case of 
the original power source, that may be within a 
round. If it is a helm, the spelljammer suffers 
2d4 points of damage while the helm smashes 
its way out of the ship, and must save against 
death magic or go into spelljammer shock 
(detailed in the SPELLJAMMER® boxed set). If this 
knocks the spelljammer out, the helm ceases to 
spelljam, although it will probably be well away 
from its parent ship by then and moving fast. 


The helm bomb rushes on through space, a 
dwindling but dangerous space missile (taking 
the ship, or a piece of the ship with it), consum- 
ing its own material for power. It cannot be 
stopped or salvaged. 

The bomb typically consumes itself in 50 days 
minus the ship's tonnage (a shipless bomb weighs 
ton). Ships over 50 tons use up the bomb in 1d4 
turns. A helm bomb must be brought onto a ship 
(though it need not be fastened down or even 
taken into an interior area). If it is turned on when 
no other magical power source is "on," it does 
nothing except act as a self-powered helm that 
eats itself up and then collapses, doing 1d6 hull 
points of damage (and 1 d6 points of damage per 
round to anyone sitting upon it as it operates). Its 
bomb effects occur only when another power 
source is operating. Ifthe bomb is already "on," a 
second source cannot be activated, and no ship 
breakup occurs. This way, it can be used as a one- 
shot hijack power source, to prevent control by 
the ship's legitimate helm. 

Activating a helm bomb as a power source 
requires that a living being sit in the helm. The 
being need not have magical or spelljamming 
ability, but must sit there to will the helm into 
action. Such a being can get up as soon as she 
sets a course direction, and thereby avoid any 
damage as the helm bomb consumes itself. How- 
ever, ifused as a bomb, the activator is on it when 
it flies apart and suffers the same 2d4 points of 
damage as a helmsman aboard the legitimate 
helm. An adroit activator can hurl clear an instant 
after engaging the bomb, to avoid being pulled 
out of the ship, but cannot avoid suffering dam- 
age. Note that this provides a kamikaze (or at the 
least, very dangerous) method for intruders to 
damage, destroy, or steal enemy ships in close 
quarter combat. 


Spelljamming Mine 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 5,000 
Greyspace 

This is a techno-magical creation, a sphere of 
brass about 1-foot in diameter and weighing 55 
pounds—about the right size to be fired from a 
typical, heavy catapult. It radiates an aura of evo- 
cation magic. 

The spelljamming mine is a combination of 
mechanical engineering and wizardry. It is actu- 
ally a sophisticated form of homing weapon, with 


a large explosive charge of smoke powder. It is 
1576 


: 


I4ton). Shins over 50 tons use up the bomb in 144 


4 


4 


8 


ee ee eS 


enchanted in such a way that it detects the pres- 
ence of a spelljamming helm within 1,000 feet, 
and moves toward the helm's "energy signature" 
at a speed of 3,000 yards per round—the same 
speed as a ship with SR 6 traveling at tactical 
speed. The mine has Maneuverability Class A. 
When it strikes the ship it is pursuing, the smoke 
powder charge detonates. This inflicts 3-18 
points of damage to unprotected crew within 70 
feet of the impact point (saving throw applicable) 
and 2-5 points of Hull Damage to the vessel hit, 
which must then save vs. fire or suffer an addi- 
tional 14 points of fire damage per round. A 
spelljamming mine can only move for a total of 
four rounds. If it has not yet reached its target 
within that time, it detonates. 

Before it can be used, a spelljamming mine 
must be armed. This is done by pressing a series 
of tiny studs on the mine's outer surface in a par- 
ticular sequence. The device has a kind of "anti- 
tamper" system—if the wrong arming code is 
entered three times in a row, the mine detonates. 
So complex is the code that even a character 
who knows it has a chance of making a mistake. 
To successfully enter the code, the character 
must roll equal to or less than his or her Intelli- 
gence on 3d6. After the mine is successfully 
armed, it remains dormant for 2d8 rounds— 
hopefully long enough for the users to catapult it 
off their vessel and get more than 1,000 feet 
away. At the end of this dormancy period, it 
becomes active, and homes in on the first spell- 
jamming vessel to approach it. Obviously, 
because of the variability of the dormancy 
period and the unpredictability of space combat, 
a spelljamming mine is a dangerous weapon to 
use in ship-to-ship dogfights. 

Nobody knows exactly who created the spell- 

jamming mines, although many people suspect 

the arcane. It is rumored that the humanoids of 
Borka have emplaced a number of mines around 
their space-dock called "the Egg," leaving a safe 
channel open for their own ships, of course, as an 
unpleasant surprise for unwelcome visitors. This 
has yet to be confirmed or disproved, however. 
The arcane sometimes sell spelljamming mines 
for the princely sum of 10,000 gp each. However, 
not all of them have access to these items, or are 
willing to sell them. Sometimes mines can be 
picked up on the "open market" but then there is 
always arisk—who knows if the arming code is 
actually what the seller claims it is? 


Extradimensional Safe 


Wethilion's Time Bomb 
XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 15,000 
1992 Fantasy Collector Card 383 
Wethilion convinced a wizard to imbue this hour 
glass with a time stop spell, replacing its fireball 
spell and setting it with a five-round "detonator." 
Never content to leave well enough alone, Wethil- 
ion tampered with the contraption and acciden- 
tally got it to "blow up time." When the sand runs 
out, the last three rounds of time are obliterated 
and the hourglass begins to run out again. In 
effect, it has become a "snooze alarm" clock. 
Now, when Wethilion attempts a robbery and 
something goes wrong, he can keep trying again 
until he gets it right! The time bomb may be deac- 
tivated by turning it on its side. 


Extradimensional Safe 
XP Value: 4,450 GP Value: 44,500 
The Book of Wondrous Inventions 

Jon McSpereson was a wizard who was extraor- 
dinarily fond of making puzzle-boxes—plain, 
nonmagical puzzle-boxes. Generally, he just gave 
them away to friends and family, curious to see 
how long each box took to solve. He became 
known (perhaps rather infamously) for the intri- 
cate and devious nature of his puzzles. 

Thus, it seemed almost natural when a prover- 
bial tall, dark stranger appeared at McSpereson's 
door one day. With a flourish, he set a purse on 
the table and said, "There's fifty grand in cut 
stones here. It's yours with a catch. Design a safe 
I can't break into and you can keep the bag, old 
man. Build your safe well, ‘cause I'll be back in a 
year. Then we'll see if it can keep your stones 
safe." With that audacious challenge, he strode 
out the door. 

Fifty grand in untraceable gems was no small 
amount of money and McSpereson was deter- 
mined to keep it. Finally, after several sleepless 
weeks, he hit upon a plan. 

The safe is a decorative block of wood, the size 
of a small jewelry box. There is no apparent hinge 
or lid. On the top of the cube there is an inlaid 
rainbow, the different arcs formed in different 
colors. Below this arc is an inlaid metal disk, half 
black and half white. 

Construction: 44,500 gp, 30 days. The extra- 
dimensional safe is composed of two parts—the 
door and the vault. The door is the wooden block 
described above. This is normally found in the 


dwelling of the owner. The vault is a 10-cubic-foot 
1578 


ge ee L G 


449 


Extradimensional Safe 


> Ge ee 


lead box with no openings of any kind. 

The door is actually a trigger device. Con- 
tained inside the wooden case are a clockwork 
mechanism and an ethereal transporter (this is 
simply an amulet of the planes). In addition, 
McSpereson was required to research several spe- 
cial spells. The first spell was the magical reset- 
ting trigger (a modified version of the 
contingency spell), and a permanent blanket of 
mystery (a modified nondetection spell). The 
magical resetting trigger, a 7th-level spell, 
uttered a single command word whenever a cer- 
tain condition was met, while the blanket ofmys- 
tery, a Sth-level spell, allowed a single object to 
be hidden from all types of detection spells. The 
cost of producing the door is 40,000 gp. 

Comparatively speaking, the vault is cheap to 
build. The lead sheeting (1-inch thick), even 
allowing for the welding and construction, only 
costs 1,000 gp. Enclosing it in a permanent wall 
of force shell costs another 3,000 gp. Moving it to 
the Ethereal Plane costs another 500 gp. All other 
materials required for the vault (paints and a con- 
tinual light spell for the interior) are minor 
expenses. 

Statistics: The door weighs approximately five 
pounds and is 8 by 5 by 4 inches in size. The vault 
is a 10-foot cube and weighs thousands of pounds. 
The weight itself discourages any attempts to 
steal it. It can contain up to 1,000 cubic feet of 
material. 

The extradimensional safe operates by a com- 
bination of mechanical and magical principles. 
The safe is opened by activating the door. The 
first step is to spin the black and white disk (that 
turns in its mounting) counterclockwise. While 
this disk is spinning, every other arc of the rain- 
bow (starting with the top one) must be pressed. 
Its internal mechanism activated, the rainbow 
design rises out of the top of the box. Now those 
arcs that were skipped before are pressed. This 
sequence triggers the magical resetting trigger 
(or the permanent contingency spell), which 
utters the command word for the ethereal trans- 
porter (or amulet ofthe planes). 

At the instant the command word is uttered, 
the owner must visualize the inside of the vault 
on the Ethereal Plane. To aid in the visualiza- 
tion, a particular painting is limned on one of 
the inside walls of the vault. Thus, the owner 
need only think about the painting to reach the 
proper location. If the owner does not visualize 


the desired location, he or she is sent to a ran- 
dom plane. Wherever the owner is sent, the door 
makes the trip as well. In designing the extradi- 
mensional safe, McSpereson's great goal was to 
thwart any attempts to get at the materials 
inside. Thus, he took precautions against the fol- 
lowing methods. 

Finding the Door: Unless a thief knows about 
the door and what it looks like, he or she will 
have a very hard time finding it. First, there is no 
reason to suspect an innocent piece of decorative 
wood. Secondly, the blanket ofmystery on the 
door hides its magical nature, making it impossi- 
ble to find by detection spells. 

Lockpicking: The vault of the safe cannot be 
picked since it has no apparant door. The door 
cannot be picked since it has no lock. The door is 
a puzzle, therefore lockpicking is of no use. 

Cutting into the Vault: The vault itself is pro- 
tected by a wall offorce. This does not have a 
great effect on the Ethereal Plane, but comes into 
full effect ifthe vault is moved elsewhere. 

Ethereal and Astral Visitors: The vault is 
made of lead, preventing access in these forms. 

Commune and Contact Higher Plane: Each 
element of the door has been carefully conse- 
crated to a different god, goddess, or Immortal 
Being. Thus, each tends to jealously guard the 
information. No single being knows the full oper- 
ation of the door. Theoretically, the secret could 
be pried from those denizens of the outer planes, 
but each step would take careful investigation and 
spellcasting. 

Bashing the Door: Breaking or destroying the 
door serves no purpose, except to make the safe 
unusable until it is fixed. 

The obvious and most persistent hazard of the 
safe is that the owner may incorrectly visualize 
the plane on which it is located. If this is done, 
the owner may find him or herself in a dangerous 
and unpleasant situation, for the door always goes 
to the vault (a function of the contingency spell). 
A would-be thief may become stranded in a very 
hostile environment. 

The second great risk is that the owner might 
lose count of the number of times the door has 
been used. This particular amulet has a limited 
number of charges and when the last charge is 
used, it crumbles to dust. Ifa person is inside the 
vault, he or she is stranded there unless some 
other means of escape can be found. 


1578 


> i i aaa 


4 


5 


0 


Eye , All-Knowing of Yasmin Sira 


ee a 


Eye 

Some eyes are ovoid spheres carved from stone, 
crystal, metal, or bone. They usually must be 
worn or carried in a certain way to make them 
work. Other eyes are pairs of crystal lenses that 
fit over the user's; eyes; their magic is activated 
when the user gazes through them. Yet other eyes 
are actually dislodged from unfortunate crea- 
tures; their magic is activated when they are 
placed in the empty eye socket of the user. 

Mixing eye types is certain to cause immediate 
insanity for 2d4 turns. Once this time has passed 
the character can (and should) remove one of the 
magical lenses. 


of Accuracy 

XP Value: 200 GP Value: 500 
The Ruins of Undermountain 
This flat, coin-sized piece of polished human 
bone is shaped like a staring eye. Its back bears a 
single word inscription, a command word (typi- 
cally "Larth"). If this is spoken as the eye is 
touched to any one weapon, and the weapon is 
then thrown or fired at a target, it strikes at +4 to 
its attack roll. Used in this way, the weapon 
counts as a +4 magical weapon for determining 
what it can hit. Damage is augmented by a +2 
bonus. 

The eye vanishes with one use, but the weapon 
it enchants continues to have both of its combat 
bonuses for two rounds. Of course, a thrown 
sword can well be used against its original 
wielder! This does not mean that magical weap- 
ons can temporarily augment existing powers; 
the enchantments cancel each other out, render- 
ing affected magical weapons normal for 1 d4 
rounds. 


All-Knowing 
Eye of Yasmin Sira 
XP Value: — GP Value: — 
Book of Artifacts 
The all-knowing eye of Yasmin Sira is a large, 
opalescent strip of fabric decorated with signs of 
truth, vision, and prophecy. It is always cool and 
silky to the touch. It is a veil when worn by a 
woman, a keffiyah when worn by a man. It is 
found only in Zakhara, the Land of Fate. 
Legends of the jann and Al-Badia say that the 
eye was made by Sahin Sira, the Sheikh of the 
Great Ghuls, as a gift for his stolen bride, a mor- 


tal hakima named Yasmin. He hoped that when 
she surveyed all the desert and peaks he ruled, he 
would win her heart. 

In fact, Yasmin hated her husband and her 
duties. Eager to hide herself from him, she 
imbued the veil with all the power she could, 
binding the spirits of dying ghuls to it to protect 
her. But as is the way of ghul magic, the veil did 
its job too well. In time, the eye hid her from 
her husband's sight perfectly, but it also altered 
her true sight, showing her only what she 
wished to see. 

Characters may be allowed to use the item for a 
short time, but it will unbalance a campaign. Any 
adventure built around it should require that the 
PCs uncover some great secret. It may be neces- 
sary to find a caliph's kidnaped son, to avert a 
war, or to properly interpret mysterious omens 
that warn of some coming doom. The item's curse 
will complicate these tasks. 

The ghuls will do all they can to recover the 
Eye. This will lead to constant attacks and 
intrigues against the PCs. 

Constant Powers: The veil provides the wearer 
the benefits of avert evil eye, nondetection, and 
true seeing spells at will. The last of these is sub- 
ject to the curse. 

Invoked Powers: The owner gains the use of 
the shapechange (1 per day) and alter self(2 per 
day) spells. The owner also benefits from the 
effects of the invisibility spell, but is invisible 
only to ghuls. 

Random Powers: four from Table 1-06: Div- 
ination, four from Table 1-05: Detection. 

Curse: The veil gradually responds to the 
owner by providing visions that match that crea- 
ture's temperament, desires, and fears. The 
process takes 1d3 months, starting with small 
changes or additions and gradually building to a 
world of complete unreality. Once the halfway 
point of the process is reached, the owner refuses 
to remove the veil, even wearing it while eating 
and sleeping. The words of friends and relatives 
are no longer heard unless these match the char- 
acter's dream world. When the owner dies, the 
ghuls arrive to claim their treasure once more. 

Suggested Means of Destruction: 

e The eye must be worn by a blind god. 

e Jt must be carried to the heart of a black cloud 
ofvengeance by a willing hakima. 

e It must be cast into the Negative Material 


Plane while wrapped in a cloak ofshadows 
1580 


j 451 ii 


Eye of Arik 


SAS ee a Ee 


of Arik 
XP Value: 7,500 GP Value: 37,500 
Palace of the Silver Princess 
The disaster that struck Haven was caused by a 
ruby that the dwarves found. The ruby is magical. 
While it was called my lady's heart by the people 
of Haven, its true name is the eye ofArik. 

Arik is an ancient, evil being of great power. 
He is also known as Arik of the Hundred Eyes, 
and is sometimes worshiped as a god. For his 
many crimes, Arik was banished to a special 
dimension centuries ago to be imprisoned there 
for all eternity. 

Arik has been seeking to escape from the 
prison dimension through the ages. And he 
desires to take over Haven and enslave all its 
people. He has at last managed to send one of his 
eyes across the dimensional barriers into the 
heart of the mountains. There, the dwarves found 
Arik's ruby eye and brought it to the palace, not 
knowing the evil they were bringing to their 
beloved kingdom. The ruby, though larger than 
most gems, looks like any other ruby and though 
the Protectors would have sensed the evil, by the 
time they saw the ruby it was too late. Arik had 
already struck. 

The ruby is linked to Arik. It has allowed him 
to channel some of his evil magical power past 


the dimensional barriers into Haven, and the 
power of the ruby attracts evil, chaotic monsters. 
Arik hopes to use the ruby "eye," when the time 
is right, to open the way and cross the dimen- 
sional border to rule Haven. 

The power of the ruby has killed crops and 
brought disease to animals. It has drawn orc, gob- 
lin, and hobgoblin hordes into Haven to fight for 
its master. It has even teleported the evil priest 
Catharandamus into the palace, to prepare the 
ceremony that will allow Arik to cross the dimen- 
sional barriers. The ruby has turned many of the 
palace inhabitants to stone and trapped the 
princess and the mysterious stranger inside the 
ruby. Finally, the ruby has created a magical force 
field around the palace to prevent help from 
arriving and stopping Catharandamus. 

The Protectors will open a way through the 
ruby glow, and will also open a safe passage out, 
ifthe party chooses to leave the palace to rest and 
recover spells and hit points. They will, however, 
state that it is a drain of their power and they can 
only manage to open the way a few times. 


Assassin's 

GP Value: 2,500 
DRAGON Magazine 5 
These enchanted eyes are obtained from humans 
killed by dreadful and horrible practices. In 
flight, they move 30 feet per round and perform 
all the functions ofa wizard's eye, but at any dis- 
tance (in the same plane) and with no time 
restrictions. 

The eyes are normally invisible and immater- 
ial, allowing them to penetrate any solid barri- 
ers. If a Spellcaster wants to teleport an 
assassin's eye to another place, the eye must be 
visible and tangible. 

Assassins’ eyes must become visible (mater- 
ial) to attack. When visible, they are highly vul- 
nerable to attack (AC 10, 10 hp, saves as 
8th-level wizard). To attack, they hover in front 
of their chosen victim, and anyone (only one 
victim at a time) meeting their dreadful gaze 
may not look away and cannot take any actions 
for 1d4 rounds unless a save vs. petrification is 
made. The eyes may then use any spell of the 
Spellcaster's choosing. If the victim is still able 
to attack once the Spellcaster has worked tragic 
spells on the victim, the victim has one round to 
try to destroy the eye before it turns immaterial 
and returns to the Spellcaster. 


XP Value: 500 


1582 


. a ae a aa aie 


4 


5 


2 


~ Eye of Donoagi y~ 


Beady 
XP Value: 150 GP Value: 1,500 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 23 

This is apparently a normal bead, often part of a 
piece of jewelry. When separated from its 
mounting, a beady eye becomes a small eyeball 
on command. The user may see through this eye 
as long as it remains within 60 feet. Ifthe eye is 
rolled, the user must make a saving throw vs. 
spell or become dizzy and confused, completely 
stunned until the bead is destroyed. If crushed 
while in use (by an offended subject being spied 
upon, for example), the user must make a sav- 
ing throw vs. spell or be blinded. Although the 
user may have any number of extra eyes by the 
use of beady eyes, note that the eyes cannot be 
closed, and the user cannot avoid looking 
through them. If any monster with a gaze attack 
looks at the eye in use, the user must make the 
appropriate saving throw (possibly each round), 
and may not "look away." If not destroyed, each 
bead remains an eye for three hours before 
deactivating. 


Black Opal 

GP Value: 20,000 
Black Opal Eye 
The black opal is a stone of great magical power, 
usable only by those who know its secret. Three 
evil wizards drew power from it and a vile reign 
of terror followed. These three evil women were 
often referred to as the Platinum Sisters, even 
though the magic they wielded was corrupt and 
dark, and they were not related. 

The opal eye allows its user to cast 4th- through 
9th-level spells as though they were three levels 
lower, allowing lower level wizards to cast spells 
far beyond their normal capabilities. In other 
words, if a wizard using the opal eye was able to 
use Ist-level spells, he or she could wield 4th- 
level spells. 

Fortunately, the black opal eye has a limit. The 
eye only allows access to a specific number of 
higher level spells. This is defined, simply, by the 
user's Intelligence score. The eye will allow up to 
the character's Intelligence score in spell levels. 
In other words, if a character with a 14 Intelli- 
gence uses the eye, that individual has access to 
14 spell levels of high-level spells. If the same 
individual casts a wish (9th-level spell), he or she 
has used nine of the 14 spell levels, and only five 
remain. 


XP Value: 3,000 


Black Opal II . 
XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 20,000 
Rahasia 

The black opal eye is a stone of great magical 
power, and may be used only by those who know 
its secret. When the command word is used to 
activate the device, the user (if a Spellcaster) is 
able to cast double the number of 1st-, 2nd-, and 
3rd-level spells normally allotted to his or her 
current level. 


Cegilune's Hag 
XP Value: 1,500 GP Value: 7,500 
Monster Mythology 
The avatar always carries hag eyes in a small 
beaded bag, 2d10 of them. These are the shriv- 
eled eyes of her victims, which are magically 
treated to enable the avatar to see through them as 
she wills, up to 10 miles away. The avatar may 
place these around any area to spy about the 
perimeter, but she is careful to conceal them, 
because each, if destroyed, causes 1dl2 points of 
damage to the avatar. 


of Charming 
XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 24,000 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 

This item consists of a pair of crystal lenses that 
fit over the user's eyes. When in place, the wearer 
is able to charm persons merely by meeting their 
gaze. Those failing a saving throw vs. spell are 
charmed as per the spell. The user can look at and 
charm one person per round. Saving throws suf- 
fer a -2 penalty if the wearer has both lenses, or a 
+2 bonus ifhe or she wears only one of a pair of 
eyes of charming. 


of Donoagi 
XP Value: 1,200 GP Value: 6,000 
Van Richten's Guide to the Lich 
Donoagi is a fabled, ancient evil dragon made of 
stone. Legend states that she has been long 
asleep, awaiting the time when her faithful stone 
priests construct for her an elaborate temple, cast 
a succession of powerful spells to reawaken her, 
and grant her return to the world. 

The eye ofdonoagi is a 3-inch-diameter amulet 
that resembles a large tiger's eye. It has three func- 
tions. First, the eye allows the wearer to meld 
directly into stone and re-emerge at another point up 
to 100 feet distant, three rounds after the melding. 


While the wearer remains within the stone, he or she 
1588 


ee ee ee 


453 


Eye, Dragon's 


hy C 


is invulnerable to all forms of attack, both mental 
and physical. For all practical purposes, the wearer 
ceases to exist for a short period oftime. However, a 
stone shape spell cast within one round upon the 
surface where the owner disappeared inflicts 3d6 
points of damage on the wearer. Second, the eye 
also allows the wearer to phase through stone up to 
2 feet thick at will. Finally, the eye will automati- 
cally transform any stone statue into a stone golem 
under the control ofthe owner (once per day). 

A lich who forges the amulet is automatically 
able to manipulate it. Others must eat a stone 
before the amulet works for them. It can be used 
up to five times a day. 


Dragon's 
XP Value GP Value 
Black: 3,000 20,000 
Blue: 3,000 20,000 
Brass: 3,000 20,000 
Bronze: 3,000 20,000 
Copper: 3,000 20,000 
Gold: 3,000 20,000 
Green: 3,000 20,000 
Red: 3,000 20,000 
Silver: 3,000 20,000 


DRAGON Magazine 91 
A dragon's eye appears to be a small multicolored 
gemstone, perfectly spherical in shape and about 2 
inch in diameter. No jeweler is able to estimate its 
worth—it seems to be made ofno known mineral or 
substance. When held up to the light and closely 
examined, some specimens ofa dragon's eye may be 
seen to have a design within the stone that resembles 
the silhouette of a dragon in flight (this fact may be 
imparted as a clue to how the item functions). 

When cast into the air at the same time the com- 
mand word is spoken, a dragon's eye will vanish in 
a puff of smoke. In 1d3 rounds, a young adult 
dragon of random color (without spellcasting abili- 
ties) will be summoned, appearing 10 feet away 
from where the character who cast the dragon's eye 
is standing. The dragon, initially, is well disposed to 
the summoner, and obeys any reasonable com- 
mands of the summoner, spoken in Common. 
However, the dragon will only remain for a certain 
period of time before it vanishes forever. The 
greater the difference between the summoner's 
alignment and the alignment of the dragon sum- 
moned, the less time the dragon remains. The fol- 
lowing table gives the different types of dragons 
that are randomly summoned by this device: 


Roll Dragon color Alignment 
1-2 gold lawful good 
3-4 silver neutral good 
5-6 copper chaotic good 
7-8 brass chaotic neutral 
9-10 red chaotic evil 
11-12 black neutral evil 
13-14 blue lawful evil 
15-16 bronze lawful neutral 
17-20 green true neutral 


Any dragon summoned by a dragon's eye will 
remain with the summoner for six turns if the 
alignment of the summoner and the dragon are 
identical. For every step between the summoner's 
alignment and that ofthe dragon, the duration of 
the eye's effect is reduced by one turn. Use the 
table below to determine the alignment step. 


Alignment Step Differences 


LG NG CG LN N CN LE NE CE 
EGè 405 J eo 7. Moe eS as Stead 
NGS ole COE des, 2 odes e 3e 2 a 
CGR 25 ol WO 68-2) A. SA eB: 42 
INe ahs 2° 3.0". 2. 2B. o3y 2 33 
Ns 2 212 #2 21 #0 21 2 =421 2 
CN: 3: 2°  -2. -2, 0. g oe 1 
LES 23 3. Ay 3p. 2 Be ODD 
NB? 3) el Bo de ae k oa 
CES 4 3 2 53. 2p ad. 2 oo 


Thus, a lawful evil summoner who received a 
red dragon after casting the eye would have its 
services for only two turns. The summoned 
dragon will generally behave in a manner con- 
sistent with its alignment, unless commanded to 
do otherwise by the character controlling it. All 
of these dragons are of average size and have 4 
hit points per Hit Die. They can use breath 
weapons, claws, and bite attacks in combat. 
None of them will have the fear aura that 
dragons gain upon reaching adulthood. Each 
can detect hidden or invisible creatures within a 
40-foot radius. None of these dragons, because 
of the special nature of their summoning, can 
be subdued in battle. If commanded to do so, a 
dragon will fight to the death on behalf of the 
summoner. 

A dragon's eye can only be used once. It is 
90% likely that only one will be found in any 


treasure hoard; otherwise, two will be discovered. 
1589 


“ 454 ~ 


~ Eye of Leviathan g- 


of the Eagle 
XP Value: 3,500 GP Value: 18,000 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 

Eyes ofthe eagle are made of special crystal and fit 
over the eyes ofthe wearer. They increase vision 
100 times more than normal at distances 1-foot or 
more (the wearer can see at 2,000 feet what would 
normally be seen at 20 feet). Wearing only one of 
the pair causes a character to become dizzy and, in 
effect, stunned, for one round. After that, one eye 
must always be covered to avoid vertigo. 


Humbaba's Glaring 

XP Value: 14,000 GP Value: 70,000 

DUNGEONS & DRAGONS Master Set 
Long ago, the huge, one-eyed monster Humbaba 
fought a great hero named Gilgamesh. Its eye was 
taken after its defeat, and was made into an arti- 
fact by Ninsun, a powerful Immortal. It eventu- 
ally caused Gilgamesh to seek immortality above 
all else, but he failed, and was eventually 
destroyed. Humbaba's glaring eye remains, a 
famed symbol of death and destruction. The eye 
is said to provide the powers ofthe original mon- 
ster, including breath and gaze weapons. 

It appears to be a mummified monstrous eye- 
ball, 4 inches in diameter. It is reddish white in 
color, with a black iris, bulging red arteries, and 
blue veins. 

The eye is active when found, but it is difficult 
to gain knowledge of the powers. The user must 
employ ESP or clairvoyance, and look through 
the eye into a reflecting surface (a mirror or 
water, for example). In the reflection ofthe center 
ofthe eye, the user may read the name of one 
effect and its command word, if the language can 
be understood (thus requiring a read language at 
the same time). The information changes each 
midnight, to that of a randomly determined 
power; thus, many readings may be required 
before all the powers are revealed. 

The eye does not grant powers to its user, but 
produces the effects itself it may be accurately 
aimed with very little practice. 

Suggested Powers: (All abilities are cast at 
20th level.) Cause disease, fire breath (effect 
30x10 feet; damage equal to the user's current hit 
points; saving throw applicable), Flesh to stone, 
summon weather 

Suggested Handicap: The user becomes 
obsessed with immortality. Every 10 days, a sav- 
ing throw vs. spell is made, the first with a -1 


penalty, the second with -2, the third with -3, etc. 
A failed saving throw forces the user to choose 
and begin to actively pursue one ofthe routes to 
immortality forsaking all other activities. 
Suggested Penalties: Body part change, the user's 
head enlarges to four times normal size-large 
enough to accommodate Humbaba's glaring eye, if 
the user lacks one. This effect is not cumulative. 
Age, the user becomes 10d4 years older. No sav- 
ing throw applies, but the effect may be dispelled. 


of the Immortals 
XP Value: 1,500 GP Value: 15,000 
Kingdom of Nithia 
Many sarcophagi and burial boxes have a pair of 
eyes painted upon them near one end. The belief 
is that the entombed can see through the eyes 
from within, like a window, in order to watch for 
signs of the time of rebirth. 

In the lands of the living, some of these eyes 
are magical paintings that allow the user to "keep 
an eye" on intruders. They work like permanent 
wizard eye spells. 


of Infravision 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 5,000 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 47 
These magical lenses enable the wearer to see like 
an elf or dwarf with infravision to 60 feet. Ifthe 
owner already has infravision, or a device simulat- 
ing it, then the lenses increase the range by 60 feet. 


of Leviathan 

XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 12,500 

POLYHEDRON Newszine 87 
Created by Istishia the Waterlord, and Silvanus 
the God of Nature, the eye grants its owners sev- 
eral powers: 
e Functions as a rod of rulership three times a day. 
e Mammal control at will. 
Constant invulnerability, as the potion. 
Summon and control water elementals, three 
times a day as a bowl ofcommanding water 
elementals. 
Hold monster three times a day. 
Control weather, as the priest spell, once a day. 
Water breathing at will. 
The eye emits a psionic distress call whenever 
in the hands of one who is evilly aligned. 
Inflicts a shock equivalent to a 12th-level 
shocking grasp spell when activated by those 
of evil alignment. 


1594 


a a a ear 


455 


~ Eye of the Leviathan 3 


If the Eye spends more than one month out of 
the water, it loses all of its magical properties. 


of the Leviathan 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 12,500 
Swords of the Undercity 
This orb is a potent magical item that has been 
plucked live from the face of the mighty sea crea- 
ture. Although no special steps to preserve it have 
been taken, the eye shows no sign of decay. About 
the size of a man’s skull, it glistens with a natural 
coat of slime. A deep black pupil stares from one 
side of the eye. 

After one day out of the leviathan's socket, the 
artifact produces a powerful illusion that causes it 
to look and feel like a large diamond, however, it 
oozes a light gooey slime. It is inoffensive but 
somehow disgusting. The people who know what 
this diamond is, or those who cast a dispel magic 
(or similar spell) on it see the diamond for what it 
really is—a large, slimy eye. 

Despite its flesh origin, the eye is a solid item. 
The older it is, the harder it becomes. The one 
kept in Urgaan of Angarngi's treasure house is 
several centuries old, and is now as hard as a 
sphere of steel. Urgaan bestowed several more 
powers on the eye, however, they only function in 
his house. As soon as the eye is out of the build- 


ing, it only retains the normal powers of the eye 
of the leviathan. 

The eye is a highly evil source of magic. It 
spreads an aura to a radius of 360 feet, although 
the aura does not penetrate solid earth. Creatures 
within this aura are susceptible to the eye's perva- 
sive influence. 

Any normal human remaining within the aura 
of the eye for three consecutive days must make a 
saving throw vs. spell (plus one every subsequent 
day of exposure) until the character starts show- 
ing some signs of contamination (pale grayish 
skin, slightly fishy smell, low rumbling voice, 
heavy sweating in sunlight). Those symptoms 
disappear when the victim stays out of the eye's 
aura for at least a week. 

After one full month within the eye's aura, a 
contaminated victim becomes a Stage I shree- 
kah. Ifthe human leaves the aura, even momen- 
tarily, the procedure must begin again. 

Upon this first stage of degeneration, all skills, 
knowledge, and values held by the person are 
lost. They are replaced by the primitive hunger of 
the shree-kah. The shree-kah need not spend its 
entire life in the aura of the eye; however, after it 
has been there for 1d6 months, the next degenera- 
tive stage is entered and another Hit Die added. 
The degeneracy continues until the shree-kah 


¢ 

6 
$. 

Æ 

$ 


4 


Eye, Magical 


b Ee 


reaches the seventh stage. Only one shree-kah of 
that stage will be found in a lair. If another shree- 
kah reaches that level, the older one disappears 
into the water to follow some mysterious calling. 
Although the creature swims out to sea, it contin- 
ues to develop during 1dl0 years to finally 
become a leviathan. 

Although the progression of the shree-kah is 
described as a series of well-defined stages for 
game purposes, the actual degeneration is a grad- 
ual process. As soon as a contaminated human in 
the aura ofthe eye fails the saving throw, the skin 
slowly begins to take on a scaly appearance, teeth 
and fingernails gradually lengthen into fangs and 
claws, while memory of the world of humans 
falls rapidly away. 

Magical Abilities: After one century of exis- 
tence, the eye develops its own form of evil intel- 
ligence (Intelligence 17). The one found in 
Urgaan of Angarngi's treasure house is one of this 
kind. It cannot do anything physical, but it can 
cast spells as a 3rd-level wizard. 

e Level 1: charm person, darkness (x2), unseen 
servant. 

Level 2: audible glamer, ESP. 

Level 3: suggestion. 

Its spellcasting does not require spell compo- 
nents and is silent. The eye never casts a spell that 
would betray its powers and intelligence. When it 
casts a spell, it is to increase its chance of return- 
ing to the closest shree-kah lair. It cannot use 
unseen servant to move itself, but only to move 
light objects. 

Within the aura of the eye, all shree-kah have 
magic resistance equal to 10% per Hit Die. 
Thus, a stage V shree-kah is 50% magic resis- 
tant within the aura of the eye. The eye has a 
secondary magical effect as well. When a bottle 
of wine is placed within 10 feet of the eye, and 
remains there for a week, the wine becomes 
transformed into a potion ofwater breathing. 
The eye can perform this function on up to six 
bottles at once. 

Origins of the Eye: Although not unique, this 
type of artifact is extremely rare. When an eye is 
plucked out of a leviathan, the monster must still 
be alive. Furthermore, the eye at that moment is 
excessively fragile (90% chance of ripping it or 
puncturing it) and may easily be soiled. Plucking 
one eye out ofa leviathan kills it (so its second 
eye is unusable). 

If two different lairs of shree-kah were to exist 


within the same city or sewer system, they would 
stage a bloody war against each other, until one 
clan or the other is destroyed and its eye artifact 
captured. This could lead to the construction of 
barricades within the sewers, causing the city 
above to be partially flooded and epidemics to 
spread among the population. More shree-kah 
would be sent into the streets to seek "converts" 
in order to increase their troops. 


Magical 
XP Value GP Value 
Bowl-lid: 250 500 
Buckler: 200 400 
Saucer: 150 300 
Trade-token: 100 200 
Coin: 50 100 


The Ruins of Undermountain 

This clear, circular sheet of polished crystal is 
covered with runes. When magical writing is 
viewed through it, it allows any intelligent being 
to understand the subject of the writing. The eye 
functioning as a read magic spell, command 
words, glyphs, and the like can be clearly dis- 
cerned. With each use, the eye dwindles in size, 
until it vanishes altogether. Each page counts as 
one use, but a being must read through the eye 
for it to be activated. Merely laying it upon a 
page does not unintentionally drain charges. 
Coded or cryptic inscriptions of a nonmagical 
nature do not activate the eye, and therefore do 
not use charges. 

Nonspellcasters can identify (but not use) 
scroll spells by use of this item. Low-level spell- 
casters can infallibly cast or copy spells normally 
beyond their abilities by use of an eye, and 
thieves employing an eye to read a scroll are only 
15% likely to incorrectly cast a spell from the 
scroll. 

Wizards employing an eye to study an unfa- 
miliar spell with the aim of adding it to their 
permanent repertoire (as opposed to merely 
copying it for later study, or casting it on the 
spot without full knowledge of its specifics) 
gain a "chance to learn spell" bonus of +15%. A 
magic eye does not shield a reader from written 
curses, nor will it penetrate a secret page. It 
does, however, reveal an existing secret page 
spell. The eye makes its saving throws as rock 
crystal, but it gains a+1 saving throw bonus due 
to its magical nature. 


1596 


pe a 


457 


Eye, Mellifleur's Gem 


> ee 


2d8 Size Uses Left 

02 — Bowlid (Full) 5 
03-04 Buckler 4 
05-07 Saucer (Half) 3 
08-11 Trade-token 2 
12-16 Coin 1 

Mellifleur's Gem 

XP Value GP Value 
Left: 1,200 6,000 
Right: 1,400 7,000 


Monster Mythology 
The avatar's eyes are gems. The left one can pro- 
ject a cone ofcold twice per day and the right one 
can project a symbol of insanity twice per day, 
both effects at the 25th level. 


of Minute Seeing 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 12,500 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 
In appearance, eyes of minute seeing are much 
like other magical lenses, but they enable the 
wearer to see 100 times better at distances of 1 
foot or less. Thus, tiny seams, minute marks, even 
the impression left from writing can be seen. 
Secret compartments and hidden joints can be 
noted and the information acted upon. The effect 
of wearing just one of these crystals is the same 
as that given for eyes ofthe eagle. 


of Night 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
The Milenian Empire 
An eye ofnight is an enchanted black pearl that 
grants its possessor infravision. The infravision is 
exactly the same as that of dwarves and elves, 
except that the range is 90 feet. 


of Petrification 
XP Value: 2,500 GP Value: 13,000 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 
Totally indistinguishable from any other magical 
lenses, the effect of donning eyes of petrification 
is dramatic—the wearer is instantly turned to 
stone. Note that 25% of these devices work as the 
gaze ofa basilisk does, including reflection of the 
eyes turning the gazer to stone. 


Queen's 


XP Value: — GP Value: — 
These 11 eyes aréVilRSPAGEMiving relics of the 
These 11 eyes are the surviving relics of the 
Sazaur Mother who led her nation in glorious 
genocide of other beholder nations. The eyes 
innate powers have grown enormously in their 
800 years within the Hive. 

The Sazaur queen, evidently a mutation, was 
enormous even by beholder standards. The size of 
the eyes alone reflects this—the central eye mea- 
sures 3 feet across, and the smaller ones are the 
size of soccer balls. All are leathery in texture 
like mummy skin, tan in color like aged parch- 
ment, and wrinkled with thick, ropy veins. The 
irises of the eyes are faded red. 

All of the queen's eyes together compose a sin- 
gle, powerful item on the verge of true artifact 
status. Until it achieves that status, the eyes can 
be destroyed like any magical item. 

When the user of the primary eye wills, the 10 
smaller eyes teleport to its location. The smaller 
eyes orbit rapidly around the central eye. The 
more power the item exerts, the faster they 
revolve. 

The wielder can summon some eyes and not 
others. The small eyes teleport back to their pre- 


vious locations when the wielder desires. No 
1601 


, i i ae a 


458 


~ Eye of Traldar g” 


small eye can summon the other eyes. 

In their special rooms in the Hive, the smaller 
eyes have developed self-aware incarnations and 
unique powers. But when summoned, they tem- 
porarily lose their consciousness and revert to 
ordinary items with the powers listed below. 

Minor Powers: The effects of the 10 small 
eyes can be used as often as the wielder desires, 
except that only one power per round can be used. 
The wielder can do nothing else while using the 
power. These powers work only when the small 
eyes are orbiting the primary eye. 

When the wielder's spellcasting level becomes 
important, treat the spell as if it were cast by a 
20th-level wizard. All powers have a maximum 
range of 100 yards: 

1 Charm person: This eye casts mass 
charm. The spell works only against tar- 
gets allowed by a charm person spell. 
Charm monster: This eye casts mass 
charm, but works against any living, non- 
human creature. 

Sleep: This eye generates a symbol of 
sleep. This symbol, and the others below, 
appears on some body part of the poten- 
tial victim(s). 

Telekinesis: This eye projects Otiluke's 
telekinetic sphere. 
Flesh to stone ray, disintegrate ray: As 
the beholder powers, but the target must 
save at a -2 penalty. 

Fear: Generates a symbol of fear. 

Slow: Works like the beholder power, but 
the target must save at a -2 penalty. 
Cause serious wounds: Works like the 
beholder power, but this eye can inflict 
3d6 points of damage on the target. 
Death ray: This eye generates a symbol 
of death. 


5/6 


10 


Major Powers: The antimagic ray ofthe central 
eye affects the entire area for one mile around, in 
all directions. The direction of the eye's pupil is 
irrelevant. However, it works only as well as a 
minor globe ofinvulnerability. Only 6 inches of 
lead or several feet of stone can block this effect. 

The ray is active all the time, unless the wielder 
specifically wills it to deactivate. Ifthe wielder loses 
consciousness or control of the eye, it reactivates. 

The item's powers inflict especially great 
destruction against beholders. Beholders receive 


no saving throws against any of the minor powers 
above. This makes the queen s eyes all the more 
fearsome and desirable to the beholder nations. 

Dangers—Alignment change: The wielder 
becomes lawful evil as soon as one of the central 
eye's major powers is used. The wielder attempts 
to conceal the alignment change (if any) until all 
who knew his or her former alignment are dead. 
The wielder happily expedites this. 

Fragility: A wielder using the powers risks 
"shorting out" the relic. Until they achieve true 
artifact status, the queen's eyes remain fragile, 
especially outside the Hive. One of the smaller 
eyes could malfunction as the wielder tries to use 
it. The eye burns away into ash, destroyed by the 
powerful energy coursing through it. Thereafter, 
each of the other small eyes disintegrates at an 
appropriate time. 

Transformation: Every time a nonbeholder 
wielder uses any power, the DM makes a secret 
saving throw vs. spell for the character. The first 
time, the roll is unmodified. Each subsequent 
time, the wielder incurs a cumulative -1 penalty 
to the saving throw. If and when the wielder fails 
a saving throw, he or she is permanently polymor- 
phed into a beholder. 


of Traldar 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 10,000 
Eye of Traldar 
The eye ofTraldar is a yellow-orange gem, the size 
of a large hen's egg, mounted in a dragon's-claw 
setting fashioned from hardened gold. It is a pow- 
erful divination device, and one that is also capable 
of exerting control over minds. Its powers can only 
be utilized by a character capable of using wizard 
spells. The powers that can be used usually depend 
on the experience level of the person using the eye. 
At basic levels, a wizard of levels 1 to 3 can call 
forth the following powers from the eye: 
Ist level: detect magic and detect evil, three times 
per day each. 
2nd level: detect invisibility and ESP, twice per 
day each. : 
3rd level: locate object (range five miles per 
level) once per day. 

The eye certainly possesses other powers 
usable by higher level Spellcasters, but those can 
be devised by a DM. The eye gains the use of two 
detection spells twice per day, each equivalent to 
spells of one-half the user's level, if the DM 


chooses to customize them in this manner. 
1602 


a ee EN 


459 


Eye of Vecna 


b See 


of Vecna 
XP Value: 14,000 GP Value: 70,000 
Eldritch Wizardry 
It is said, though not in the hearing of strangers, 
that when the mighty lich, Vecna, finally met his 
doom, one of his eyes survived along with his 
hand. The eye may or may not have originally 
belonged to Vecna—it is said to glitter much the 
same as a cat's eye. If the eye is pressed in the 
empty socket of a living human head, it grafts 
itselfto the head of the user and produces remark- 
able powers. Once placed, the eye cannot be 
removed—and it turns the user unalterably 
chaotic. The effects of the eye on the user cannot 
be altered in any manner, even by wishes. 
The eye has one primary power that, when 

used, causes the user to suffer these effects: 
e User granted one wish per week. 

There is an increasing chance that the power 
confined in the object will break free, take 
over the wielder of the item by destroying this 
individual's soul, and then (masquerading as 
the person) kill all the hirelings and associates 
of the victim. The chance should range from 
1% to 4%, cumulative, per use of the item. 
The eye has three secondary powers that may 
be used with no adverse effects to the user: 

e Immunity to disease. 
Clairaudience 

Water breathing 

Paralyzation with -3 on saving throw three 
times a day. 


of Veena II 
XP Value: — GP Value: — 
Book of Artifacts 
The eye of Vecna is little more than a shriveled 
clot or small pebble, blood red in color. Like the 
hand of Vecna, it must be affixed to the owner's 
body (in an empty eye socket) before it can be 
used. Once in place, it changes appearance to that 
ofa golden, slitted eye, much like a cat's. 

Once affixed, the eye is permanently attached 
until the owner dies or it is forcibly removed. The 
eye radiates powerful magical auras that cannot 
be determined. 

In his time perhaps the mightiest of all wiz- 
ards, Vecna was master of a kingdom now lost in 
the depths of the Flanaess's prehistory. Lord 
Vecna's rule was not kind and just, for he was 
filled with malevolence that, if known, would 
make even the feared luz the Evil tremble. So 


great a wizard was Vecna that none within his 
realm dared oppose him. 

And so great was Vecna's power that when his 
time to die came, he escaped even that and 
became an archlich more horrible than ever 
before, allowing him to continue his reign of ter- 
ror over the land. In the end, though, his own lieu- 
tenant, Kas (see Sword, ofKas), treacherously 
attacked the lich and in the ensuing battle both 
were utterly destroyed—except for the archlich's 
eye and hand. These dismembered parts have sur- 
vived the millennia since Vecna's passing, retain- 
ing in themselves a small portion of Vecna's great 
power. 

Each time one of these artifacts has surfaced, 
disaster and ruin have followed. The eye was 
instrumental in the extermination of the house 
of Hyeric, once the ruling dynasty in Nyrond, 
and Miro the paladin-king was corrupted by the 
power of the hand. Each time, the hand and eye 
have failed their owners at some crucial 
moment. 

Over the years, a cult of worshipers has arisen 
to venerate the vile Lord Vecna and work to pave 
the way for his return. For this cult, the eye and 
the hand are powerful relics worth obtaining at 
any cost. Their servants are always watchful for 


any reappearance of the eye or hand, eager to 
1604 


i ee 


4 


60 


Eye, Winking 


a E E 


track down and snatch them up from whoever 
possesses them. 

The most recent of these reappearances 
occurred only a few years past, just prior to the 
great wars that engulfed the Flanaess, when both 
the eye and hand fell into the clutches ofthe cult. 
This event was scarred with foreboding— failures 
of magic and evil omens spread across the land. 
Fortunately by all accounts, the eye and hand 
were cast through the dimensional portal of 
Tovag Baragu on the Dry Steppes and lost in 
some unrecorded void ofthe Outer Planes. 

Both the eye and hand of Vecna are so evil that 
PCs should gain little good from either artifact, 
the DM should fill their heads with tales of the 
tragic deaths and the dire fates of those foolish 
enough to presume upon Vecna's power. 

The most obvious goal is to keep these arti- 
facts from falling into the clutches of the Cult of 
Vecna. Both groups, PCs and cultists, are in a 
race to follow a path ofrumors and legends to the 
end. Even ifthe characters succeed, they are still 
left with the problem of what to do with the arti- 
facts. The cultists will not rest until the items are 
theirs. A variation on this is that the characters 
"accidentally" find the eye or hand and must 
destroy or hide the artifacts before the cultists do 
them in. 

An intriguing puzzle for the characters would 
be to prevent a good NPC from using the arti- 
facts, since this would doom the poor soul and 
perhaps many others. The NPC, probably a petty 
king or an emperor, is in great danger of being 
overwhelmed by evil forces. Vecna's artifacts 
might have the power to destroy these enemies— 
but only by creating a worse evil. The players 
have to find a way to prevent this and still save 
the empire. Worse still, the ruler's advisor is urg- 
ing the NPC to take up the artifacts and smite the 
kingdom's enemies. He or she may even be a 
secret cultist of Vecna or of the same beliefs as 
the PCs. 

A greater challenge is that the player charac- 
ters must defeat a foe already using the artifacts, 
perhaps a depraved ruler within the borders of the 
former Great Kingdom. Note that the player char- 
acters cannot simply steal the devices—the 
enemy must be confronted and defeated before 
all is right again. 

The eye and hand of Vecna can function sepa- 
rately or together. Both share the same curse, 
which is intensified if both items are possessed. 


Constant Powers: The user gains the abilities 
of a true seeing spell. 

Invoked Powers: The user can cast eyebite 
(3/day) and domination (I/day) spells. 

Random Powers: Three from Artifact Table 
1-06: Divination. 
Suggested Means of Destruction: 
Vecna the demigod must be permanently and 
irrevocably destroyed. 
It must be cast into the heart of Oerth's sun. 
Every shade of Vecna's victims must be sent 
to a peaceful rest. 


Winking 

XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 35,000 
The Ruins of Undermountain 
These rare items appear as flat, coin-sized pieces 
of polished bone shaped like staring eyes and 
plated with everbright silver. They are pierced, to 
be worn on neck chains or (with a pin) as cloak 
brooches. On the back, the eyes bear a single 
word inscription—a command word, typically 
"Phaera." 

An eye ofwinking protects any being wearing 
it against ESP and know alignment attempts, 
causing them to simply fail. It reflects charm, 
suggestion, and sleep attacks of all origins back 
at the originator. The eye wearer is immune to 
such effects. All ofthe above powers operate con- 
tinuously and automatically, even ifthe wearer is 
unconscious, asleep, or disabled. 

An eye will visibly wink in the same round in 
which the wearer or holder utters the command 
word; this power can be used up to three times a 
month. This power releases a pulse of white light. 
In the round in which the wink occurs (only), it 
protects the wearer or holder from all damage and 
effects caused by any magic. This protection 
includes resistance to spells, magical item effects, 
or even the physical strike of an enchanted 
weapon. The wink effectively makes the wearer 
immune to all magical effects for one round. 

An eye can be commanded, by uttering the 
command word in three successive rounds, to 
wink in three consecutive rounds. (If used in this 
manner, the eye crumbles to dust immediately 
after the third round, its magic drained and 
destroyed.) Even ifmore than one being is touch- 
ing it, only one being is protected by it during a 
wink round. Precedence is given to the wearer, as 
opposed to someone merely touching the item. 


Protection is also granted to living beings as 
1605 


a aa a a CT aia 


4 


61 


~~ Eyeglasses of Arcanist = 


opposed to the dead. In all other cases, the being 
who owns the eye, or has had a long period of 
contact with it, is the one protected. 


Eyeglasses 
Eyeglasses are lenses or pairs of lenses sur- 
rounded by a metal or bone frame. The frame 
rests on the bridge of the wearer's nose. Some 
eyeglasses have bars (temples) that hook behind 
the ears and hold the frame in place, others just 
sit on the wearer's nose. Creatures who do not 
possess humanlike heads cannot wear eyeglasses. 


Roll Eyeglasses Type 
01-30 Bridge-supported 
31-60 Dual lenses 

61-90 Ear-supported 

91-00 Single (cycloptic) lens 


i 


\ 
a || 
ay 


of Arcanist 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 10,000 
DRAGONLANCE* Adventures 

These magical lenses are set in solid platinum 
frames. The frames are so narrow that the glasses 
only fit on a kender or an elf. 

The glasses of Arcanist were designed by the 
wizard Arcanist several centuries before the Cata- 
clysm. They enable the wearer to read all writ- 


ings, rendering a perfect translation of any topic 
in any language. Magical scrolls and spellbooks 
can also be read using these glasses. 

The glasses do not enable a nonspellcaster to 
cast spells. However, they do enable a low-level 
caster to cast higher-level spells from scrolls with 
no chance of failure. 


of Arcanist II 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 10,000 
Tales of the Lance 
These magical rose-tinted lenses have narrow 
platinum frames, best suited for the smaller heads 
of elves and kender. Created by the wizard Arcan- 
ist centuries before the Cataclysm, these glasses 
have been lost through the ages. For a time, Dala- 
mar had possession of them. 

These spectacles allow wearers true seeing on 
anything within 2 feet. The glasses enable the 
wearer to read and comprehend all writings no 
matter what the language, but do not guarantee 
understanding of the topic. Magical scrolls and 
books may be read, but the glasses do not auto- 
matically enable nonspellcasters to cast spells. 
Rogues and fighters have a 5% chance to use a 
magical scroll, but have a 25% chance of revers- 
ing the spell. Low-level Spellcasters can cast 
high-level spells without error. 

The wearer may also use the glasses to detect 
forgeries, find hidden items, see through mun- 
dane magical illusions, and see invisible objects 
or creatures in range. The DM rolls 1d20. On a 
one, the user misinterprets what is seen or sees an 
illusory image. 


of Arcanist II 
XP Value: 2,200 GP Value: 11,000 
Dragons of Ice 
These magical lenses are set in solid platinum 
frames. The frames are so narrow that the glasses 
will only fit on a halfling or an elf. 

The glasses of Arcanist were designed by the 
wizard Arcanist several centuries before the Cata- 
clysm and have lain unused in the secret library 
for nearly 200 years. 

The glasses enable their wearer to read all writ- 
ings, rendering a perfect translation of any topic 
in any language. Magical scrolls and spellbooks 
can also be read using these glasses. 

Unfortunately, some concepts are impossible 
for the reader to grasp despite the glasses’ perfect 


translation. Therefore, the DM should make an 
1608 


eS ee -o aA 


462 


Eyepatch of Tenh 


a a ee AE a ee en Nn eR eT nae nny 


Intelligence Check for each paragraph or section 
of writing that is read using the glasses. If the 
check is successful, the message is understood. If 
the check fails, the message is garbled such that, 
for each number between success and the failed 
roll, a word is significantly changed. 

Thus, ifa character with an Intelligence of 12 
receives a 17 result on the DM's check, five 
words are garbled. The message, "The hobgob- 
lin army assembles before Pax Thatkas at 
dawn—prepare an ambush to meet them a mile 
down the valley" might become, "The elephant 
army assembles before Pax Thatkas last year— 
prepare a banquet to meet them a mile down the 
ocean." 


of Enhanced Vision 

XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 7,500 
DRAGON Magazine 73 
Two circles of glass, in the same plane, con- 
nected by an oddly shaped piece of metal with 
projections; from opposite sides of each glass 
circle, perpendicular to the plane of the glass 
but parallel to each other, extend thick metal 
wires that hook at the end. This contraption 
(obviously a pair of spectacles— to characters 
in worlds where spectacles are known to exist) 
enables the wearer to see at night twice as well 
as would be expected. (This is enhanced vision, 
not infravision.) 


of Sight 
XP Value: 3,500 GP Value: 15,000 
DUNGEON Magazine 11 
These delicate, crystal lenses are fitted into a 
gold wire frame worth 550 gp. The crystals them- 
selves are worth 100 gp each. 

Looking through the lenses allows the wearer 
to see all objects and creatures masked by invisi- 
bility spells and common illusions. The wearer 
is immune to phantasmal forces and similar 
visual illusions, and the effects of color spray, 
continual light, and eyebite spells. The wearer is 
not susceptible to the effects of mirror image or 
blur spells, though cause blindness and power 
word blind spells have normal effect. The wearer 
of the spectacles ofsight can read magic (as the 
spell). 

Spells that affect the mind (hold, charm, and 

feeblemind, to name a few) have normal effects 
on the wearer. A shatter spell cast upon the 
spectacles while worn destroys the lenses and 


inflicts 2d6 hit points damage on the wearer, 
with an 85% chance of becoming permanently 
blind (until removed by a cure blindness, heal, 
or wish spell). 


of True Seeing 

XP Value: 1,300 GP Value: 13,000 
Realmspace 
These spectacles are round lens glasses with ties 
that fit around the ears for stability. When they 
are worn, they allow a person to see everything as 
it really is. The command word allows the item to 
work for one turn, once per day. The spectacles 
see through disguises and illusions cast by non- 
deities, and they also allow the character to view 
shapechanged and werecreatures for what they 
really are. 


Eyepatch of Tenh 

XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 15,000 
GREYHAWK® Adventures 

This black patch is often found in the possession 
of priests and judges because of its power to dis- 
cover truth. When it is worn over an undamaged 
eye, the wearer can see all invisible, astral, and 
ethereal creatures within normal visual range. 
Also, illusions and polymorphed creatures and 
objects can be seen for what they really are. The 
eyepatch gives a-5 modifier to rolls for disbe- 
lieving a phantasmal killer spell. The patch can- 
not be used more than one turn at a time, or more 
than three times per day without causing perma- 
nent damage to the eye. In this case, the user also 
suffers headaches and other complaints. 


1612 


ne ae ew ee eG 


4 


6 


3 


nA % 
7 š AARS, 
X ) ; NRN 


nA 


TR 
amut 


N 
S 


D 
‘4 
7 
2 


IMEEM pope 


Poe 


Faithful Knot 


XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
DRAGON Magazine 30 

Thefaithful knot is actually a foot-long cord 

that, once tied in a knot, cannot be untied by 

anyone else. The cord can be cut by a stroke of 

a blade. 


Fan 
Magical fans are usually small items made of 
wood and paper, painted with ornate designs. 
They are easily damaged, especially by fire. If 
damaged, fans lose all magical powers. 


of Charming 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

When the user waves this fan at any living crea- 
ture within 60 feet, the fan produces a charm 
monster effect; the victim must make a saving 
throw vs. spell or be charmed (as the spell). It 
functions once a day. 


Fan of Fanning 


Club 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 2,500 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

The clubfan appears identical to afan ofcharm- 
ing but has no magical spell power. If used as a 
weapon, it functions as a club +2 in all respects. 
It cannot be harmed by blows but is easily 
destroyed by fire. 


Cooling 

GP Value: 3,000 
DRAGON Magazine 73 
A mechanism of gears, a projecting lever, and 
three broad wooden "leaves" emanating from a 
hub, a little like a clover but with each “leaf” 
tilted out of line with the next (like a modern 
electric fan). When someone turns or pedals the 
lever's handle, the fan pushes forth air which is 
magically cooled to a temperature 20 degrees 
lower than the surrounding environment. 


XP Value: 600 


of Dancing 
XP Value: 1,200 GP Value: 6,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

This fan functions as a club fan in all respects 
until it hits any one victim a second time. The 
user then begins to dance (no saving throw) and 
cannot attack while dancing. The dancing victim 
suffers a -2 penalty to Armor Class and to all sav- 
ing throws. The magical dance lasts for one turn 
or until a remove curse is applied. 


Fanfare 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 2,500 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

This fan is a special clubfan and functions as one 
in all respects. However, every time a hit is suc- 
cessful, the fan creates a loud trumpeting noise, 
which attracts the attention ofall creatures within 
120 feet. Those within 30 feet of the fanfare are 
also deafened for one turn, which does not inter- 
fere with spell casting but does make communi- 
cation difficult. Deafened victims are also 
surprised more easily (-1 penalty to surprise 
rolls) and do not surprise others often (-1 bonus 
to opponents’ surprise rolls). 


of Fanning 
GP Value: 1,000 
DRAGON Magazine 73 
A lady's fan. At a command word, the fan will 


continue to move in the same pattern (if any) it 
1619 


XP Value: 200 


465 


Fan, Five Fire 


SR ee ee j 


was moving injust before the word was spoken; 
typically, to continue to fan the lady while she 
attends to other things. 


Five Fire 
(Seven Feather Fan of Defending) 
XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 15,000 
Gods, Demigods, & Heroes 
This device acts as ajade scepter of defending 
(see Scepter) and negates all spells cast against 
the user. 


Wind 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 2,500 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide, Ist Edition 

A windfan appears to be nothing more than a 
wood and papyrus or cloth instrument used to 
create a cooling breeze. The possessor can, how- 
ever, by uttering the correct command word, 
cause the fan to generate air movement duplicat- 
ing a gust ofwind spell as if cast by a Sth-level 
wizard. The fan can be used once a day at no risk. 
If it is used more frequently, there is a cumulative 
20% chance per usage that the fan tears into use- 
less, nonmagical tatters. 


Feather 


Feathers are often used in making of arrows and 
crossbow bolts, but are rarely used for anything 
else other than the creation of feather bonnets, 
charms, and tokens. 


Feathertoken 

GP Value: 1,500 
Maztica Campaign Set 
This is a powerful charm of magic resistance and 
protection. It conveys a bonus of +3 to the AC of 
the wearer, and has an inherent magic resistance 
of 90%. The area of protection extends for 10feet 
from the wearer. In addition, th feathertoken can 
effect afeatherfallspell once per day. The spell 
can benefit the wearer of the token, and anyone 
touching that person. 


XP Value: 300 


Lapland 
XP Value: 800 GP Value: 4,000 
Gods, Demigods, & Heroes 
These magical feathers function the same way 
Lapland wool does except that they produce 12d4 
birds of the player's choice, birds that willingly 
serve the user for 1d4 weeks. 


Plumalitter 
XP Value: 3,250 GP Value: 17,500 
Maztica Campaign Set 

The plumalitter is a work of featherweaving that 
is the only Maztican equivalent of a wagon. It is a 
rectangle of thick, fluffy plumage some 6 feet 
wide, 10 feet long, and 1 foot thick. It can carry 
up to 750 pounds. It requires a command word, 
but not an elevate spell, to activate. It follows the 
one who commands it, matching his or her speed 
at a movement rate up to 18. It can rise or lower at 
arate of 30 feet per round. 


Quaal's Feather Tokens 


XP Value GP Value 
Anchor: 500 2,000 
Arbor: 1,000 5,000 
Bind: 1,000 6,000 
Bird: 600 3,000 
Bridge: 500 5,000 
Chest: 1,000 5,000 
Crown: 1,000 2,000 
Eye: 1,000 7,000 
Fan: 700 4,000 
Finger: 500 1,000 
Flame: 500 2,000 
Jug (holy): 1,000 4,000 
Jug (normal): 500 2,000 
Jug (unholy): 1,000 4,000 
Key: 500 7,000 
Spoon: 500 2,000 
Stone (Avalanche): 1,600 5,500 
Stone (Type I): 200 1,250 
Stone (Type II): 300 1,500 
Stone (Type III): 400 1,750 
Stone (Type IV): 500 2,000 
Stone (Type V): 600 2,250 
Stone (Type VI): 700 2,500 
Stone (Type VII): 800 2,750 
Swan Boat: 800 5,000 
Sword: 1,000 6,000 
Tree: 900 6,000 
Whip: 1,000 7,000 
Wing: 1,000 6,000 


DRAGON Magazine 54 
Feather tokens are small, magical devices that 
take various forms to suit special needs. The 
types of tokens are listed below. Other tokens can 
be created as needed. Each token is usable once. 
To find the type of feather token discovered, con- 
sult the following table. 


1624 


466 


Quaal's Feather Token, Crown p 


Roll Feather Token Type 
01-05 Anchor 
06-10 Arbor 
11-15 Bind 
16-20 Bird 
21-25 Bridge 
26-30 Chest 
31-35 Crown 
36-40 Eye 
41—45 Fan 
46-50 Finger 
51-55 Flame 
56-60 Jug 
61-65 Key 
66-70 Spoon 
71-75 Stone 
76-80 Swan Boat 
81-85 Sword 
86-90 Tree 
91-95 Whip 
96-00 Wing 


Anchor: A token useful to moor a craft in 
water so as to render it immobile for up to one 
full day. 

Arbor: This token, activated by grinding it 
underfoot, allows the user to take the form of a 
tree, rooted to the ground at that spot. The tree 
blends perfectly with surrounding trees with 
regard to type and size, and it seems like a normal 
tree to any examination short of a wish or limited 
wish. However, when struck with a weapon, the 
resulting wound bleeds as the user would nor- 
mally. Unlike the druid tree spell, anyone assum- 
ing a tree form by the use of this token loses 
awareness of self and surroundings, lapsing into a 
dreamlike state. He or she will remain so until 
7d12 days have elapsed, or until cumulative dam- 
age of more than half ofthe owner's hit points (at 
the time of the token suse) has been suffered. 
Awakening from the trance and returning to nor- 
mal shape takes one round. All clothing, accou- 
terments, and equipment changes shape with the 
user, and are hidden by the token's magic—locate 
object or detect magic (in the case of magical 
items) and similar magic cannot reveal them. 

Bind: This token, placed against a door, 
adheres to it and when commanded, closes and 
seals the door with a wizard lock of power as if it 
had been cast by a 7th-level wizard. Placed in an 
archway or open portal (not more than 6 feet 
wide), and upon command, it webs the passage- 


way closed, providing firm anchor points exist. If 
thrown upon or touched to (successful attack roll 
required) any one being or monster, it acts as a 
hold spell for nine rounds. Creatures touched can 
make a saving throw vs. spell to counter the 
effects. Creatures existing on more than one 
plane gain +3 on their saving throws. Undead 
cannot be held by this token. Flying creatures 
held by it hang motionless in midair and do not 
fall. A bind token may also be placed on, or just 
under, a horizontal surface (ground, stone floor, 
step, etc.), the first being to step or pass exactly 
over it is slowed for nine rounds. 

Bird: A token that can be used to drive off hos- 
tile avian creatures or as a vehicle of transporta- 
tion equal to a roc of the largest size (one-day 
duration). 

Bridge: This token forms a magical bridge of 


force (like the spell wall offorce), spanning any gap 


less than 70 feet wide. The token lasts for one day 
(or less upon command of the user of the token). 

Chest: Upon command, this token forms a con- 
tainer that appears to be a silvery chest about 1- 
foot square. Any volume of material can be placed 
in the chest, so long as it can pass through the 
chest's top (1 square foot in area) and does not 
exceed 600 pounds in weight. The chest, which 
will last for one day, is watertight and airtight 
(unless the person using the token wishes other- 
wise) and always seems to weigh about five 
pounds, even when filled to its weight capacity. If 
the chest is dropped or thrown, it will drift very 
slowly through the air and come to rest gently. Liv- 
ing things may be placed in the chest, but only one 
living thing may be in it at a time, regardless of 
weight. Anyone inside the chest can see out of it as 
though the chest were transparent, and can control 
the supply of air and water, despite the wishes of 
those outside the chest—even the person using the 
token. The chest is in no way a prison, although it 
may only be opened from the outside by someone 
who touches the token while uttering the command 
word. From within, the chest may be opened at any 
time and left. This ability applies to anything hav- 
ing full awareness and any degree of locomotion, 
no matter how feeble. Thus, intelligent dancing 
swords, for example, could leave such a chest at 
will. When a chest vanishes at the end ofa day, all 
items inside of it vanish with it. 

Crown: This token causes the holder to appear 
richly garbed, lordly, and wise. The illusion lasts 


for one full day, less than that if the token leaves 
1631 


Bo a ew 


467 


Quaal's Feather Token, Eye 


> a E a 


the user's hand. Other beings view the holder of 
the token as a great personage, a leader or ruler, 
and respect him or her. They may also, of course, 
decide to seize or attack such a rich prize. 

Eye: When this token is fitted over one eye, the 
object instantly confers upon the user the power of 
true seeing (as the spell), save that the aura (and 
thus, the nature) of a creature is not visible. The 
token vanishes when its powers are transmitted, and 
all ofthe token's effects last for two turns. Crea- 
tures of less than 8 HD employing the eye may look 
upon a prismatic sphere without harm. Symbols are 
clearly visible, and will not be triggered by the gaze 
of the token user, although they are in no way 
negated and will take effect upon the touch or gaze 
of others (as a symbol spell). Similarly, the user is 
immune to the confusion effects ofa creature's gaze 
(like umber hulks). Alternatively, this token can be 
used to cure blindness in any one eye, merely by 
placing it upon the afflicted orb. 

Fan: A token that forms a huge flapping fan 
that can cause a strong breeze in an area large 
enough to propel one ship. This wind is not 
cumulative with existing wind speeds—ifthere is 
already a strong breeze blowing, this cannot be 
added to it to create a gale. It can, however, be 
used against it to create an area of relative calm 
or lesser winds (though this does not affect wave 
size in a storm, of course). The fan can be used up 
to eight hours a day. It does not function on land. 

Finger: When this token is pointed at any visible 
location and the word "There!" is spoken, the user 
will be teleported instantly to the location desired. 
This one-shot teleportation is limited in range by 
direct visibility, and has no chance of error. The 
user may choose any location—midair, a window, a 
treetop or minaret—and will safely arrive, along 
with all that he or she is wearing and holding. 

Flame: When a command word is spoken, and 
this token is thrown, it creates a burst of flame on 
impact. Ifused as a weapon, the fireburst causes 
2d4 points of damage to each creature or character 
in a 10-foot,radial area around the blast. The flame 
can ignite flammable materials (such as cloth or 
wood) even in high winds, or when the material is 
wet, frozen, or otherwise fire-resistant. Such a fire, 
unless quenched by magical means, lasts for one 
full day (less if so commanded by the user), regard- 
less of the amount of material. A sudden, hard 
impact upon the token (such as that caused by a 
blow or fall) within one round after the command 
word has been uttered will set thefireburst off. 


Jug: On command, this token metamorphoses 
into a pitcher from which clean, drinkable water 
pours for eight rounds, enough to fill a volume of 
4 cubic feet. Once begun, the stream is unstop- 
pable until it finishes, and the jug will dissolve 
into water droplets, joining the last of the flow. 


Roll Token Type 

01-90 Type I: A normal jug. 

91-95 Type II: This token pours holy water, 
but only when used by those of good or 
alignment. The jug simply produces 
normal water when used by an owner of 
an improper alignment. 

96-00 Type HI: This token gives forth unholy 


water, but only when used by those of 
evil alignment. The jug simply pro- 
duces normal water when used by an 
owner of an improper alignment. 


Key: This token, when touched to a wall, 
gate, or door, permits passage through walls. 
The token opens a passage 4 feet wide by 6 feet 
high by 10 feet deep (as a passwall spell). The 
key will eat (like acid) an opening, 4 feet in 
diameter, with the lower edge touching the floor, 
so that one may crawl through gates. The token 
will unlock, unspike, unbar, and unchain any 
door, negating all traps placed on it and also 
negating spells such as wizard lock and hold 
portal. The key does not negate or trigger a 
glyph ofwarding or a symbol, but reveals its 
presence, causing the rune or inscription to 
glow. In all three cases, the key takes one round 
to make an opening, and the opening is perma- 
nent until physically repaired. 

Spoon: This token metamorphoses into a plate 
of a familiar, hearty food. The plate replenishes 
itself until 4d4 medium-sized beings are fed. The 
food stays warm and palatable, and can be cov- 
ered and carried for long periods or distances 
without spoiling. The plate is edible, as well. A 
single bite of it neutralizes all poison in the 
eater's body, dissolves rot grubs harmlessly, and 
cures the rotting disease of a mummy (the only 
disease it affects). 

Stone: This token can be a stone of any small 
size, although typically a round, white pebble. 
When thrown, it becomes a large rock and strikes 
as a +2 weapon. Feather stone tokens are of the 
following diameters: 


1639 


A | S 


468 


~ Figurehead of Blessing y- 


Roll Type Diameter Damage 
01-05 I 4 inches 1d4 
06-15 Il 8 inches 2d4 
16-30 Ul 12 inches 3d4 
31-70 IV 16 inches 3d6 
71-85 V 20 inches 4d6 
86-95 VI 24 inches 4d8 
96-00 VI 28 inches 5d8 


Creatures struck are entitled to saving throws, 
and, ifthe save is made, damage is halved (a 
glancing blow). The size of the missile produced 
by this token is not usually known until the token 

is thrown, the missile shatters upon impact, and 
the shards vaporize immediately. 

Ten percent of these tokens are a special form: 
the avalanche. These tokens cause a rock slide if 
thrown against a rocky slope or mountainside. The 
area affected and the resulting damages are not 
under the direct control of the user. If thrown as a 
normal weapon, it strikes at +2, but splits in midair, 
forming a hail of 2d12 4-inch-diameter stones, 
each of which does 1d4 points of damage. (If the 
attack roll is successful, all missiles hit the target.) 

Swan boat: A token that forms a huge swanlike 
boat capable of swimming at a rate of 24, and car- 
rying eight horses and gear or 32 adventurers or 
any equivalent combination (one-day duration). 

Sword: A token that grows from a miniature 
blade into a full-sized steel weapon, enabling the 
owner of the token to smuggle a blade into a for- 
bidden area. The full-sized sword will last for 4 
turns, then it vanishes. This token is highly prized 
by assassins. 

Tree: A token that causes a great oak to spring 
into being (6-foot-diameter trunk, 60-foot height, 
40-foot branch-diameter). 

Whip: A token that causes a huge leather whip 
to appear and be wielded against any opponent 
desired (+1 weapon, 9th-level fighters’ attack 
roll, 1d6+1 points damage plus a saving throw vs. 
spell or be bound fast for 1d6H rounds) for up to 
six turns. 

Wing: This token causes miniature wings to 
appear on all solid objects (including living crea- 
tures) in a 20-foot radial sphere about its point of 
activation. These act asfeatherfallspells. Beings so 
affected cannot maneuver in the air, however, with- 
out other means (telekinesis and the like), but merely 
fall slowly, straight down. The wings disappear from 
each affected object as it touches the ground or is 
grabbed out of the air by a character or creature. 


In a DRAGONLANCE Campaign: Quaal’s 
feather tokens are called Habbakuk's blessed 
tokens on Ansalon. 


Quaal's Mystical Feather Token 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 7,000 
1992 Fantasy Collector Card 30 

Whenever this token is even slightly wet, it turns 

into a boat. When the boat dries out completely, it 

turns back intofeather token form. This can be 

especially troublesome if the owner of the token 

is caught in the rain without sufficient protection 

from moisture. The boat can carry up to 32 
adventurers and their gear. This token was sup- 
posed to be usable only once, but it appears to 
have had permanency successfully cast upon it. 


Figurehead 

Figureheads are wooden ornaments placed on the 
bows of sailing ships or spelljamming craft. A 
figurehead usually is carved from one or more 
pieces of wood; common designs include the 
shapes of women, men, avian creatures, or other 
totems. Figureheads are generally used to quell 
the fears and superstitions of fainthearted crews. 


of Blessing 

XP Value: 400 GP Value: 4,000 
Moonshae 
This device is most commonly employed by the 
Northmen to guard the longship ofa king or other 
important individual. A vessel with this figure- 
head can go 3 MV points faster than the usual top 
speed for that type of vessel, regardless of 
whether it is under oar or sail power. Whenever 
the steersman or captain makes an Intelligence 
check to avoid or detect hazards, a +2 bonus 
applies to the character's Intelligence score. The 
figurehead increases the hull value by 10% 
(round fractions up). , 

Perhaps its most important function is to grant 
the ship a partial immunity to turbulent seas. A 
ship with this figurehead treats any types of rough 
weather as the next calmest weather type, as shown 
of the Wind Direction and Force Table of the 
DMG. Thus a hurricane is as a storm to this ship, a 
storm is treated as a strong gale, and so on. 

Finally, ifa fire strikes the vessel, the degree 
of damage is modified to the next more favor- 
able class, as also shown in the DMG. Heavy 
Damage becomes Moderate to Heavy Damage, 


and the like. 
1646 


Dn a? 


469 


PERL ALP LE EEP A EPE BEL LS NR I ee MF 


a a a a ey 


~. 


470 


Figurehead of Protection II 


j ee ee a a ie 


Cursed Figurehead 
XP Value: — GP Value: 1,200 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

This figurehead looks like and functions like a 
figurehead of protection, but a horrible curse 
takes effect when the ship ventures more than 
100 miles from land. At that point, the captain, 
pilots, and navigators of the vessel are all struck 
with a disease, incurable except by a wish; all 
other living creatures aboard except humans, 
demihumans, rats, and bats are also affected. 
When the victims die one to four days later, the 
ship is utterly doomed; all upon her are unable 
to leave except by magical flight, and all remain- 
ing start to turn into undead monsters—skele- 
tons, zombies, ghouls, wights, wraiths, and 
spectres (no saving throws). PCs may make a 
saving throw vs. spell with a -8 penalty to the 
roll to resist this effect. The saving throw must 
be repeated each morning until it fails. The 
process of changing takes one full week, and 
anyone slain while changing is simply dead— 
not doomed to rise and serve as a member of the 
undead crew. 

After all living crew members have turned into 
undead, the ship itself starts to fade, becoming 
ethereal in another week's time, but doomed to 
remain at sea. Moonlight causes the ship and 
crew to rematerialize. The remainder of the curse 
causes all rats and bats aboard to survive without 
food or water and also prevents the ship from 
ever coming within 10 miles of land. 

The curse can be removed only by a series of 
spells, all of which must be cast on the figure- 
head within one turn by a 36th-level caster and 
without the aid of devices of any sort—all spells 
must be gained through meditation: animate 
object, to awaken the cursed figurehead; holy 
word, which stuns the thing; and dispel evil, 
which destroys it and the curse. This cure works 
only if applied before the ship becomes ethereal. 
After that time, no known power can save the ves- 
sel. The undead crew can be slain and released 
from their imprisonment if the ship is found in 
moonlight, boarded, and the undead engaged in 
normal combat. All lving boarders suffer a —4 
penalty to saving throws and attack rolls and a -4 
penalty to Armor Class until all the undead are 
slain. Upon the destruction ofthe crew, the vessel 
sinks beneath the waves within one turn, never to 
rise again. 


of Protection 

XP Value: 800 GP Value: 8,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
This powerful wooden statue is a carved figure of 
a beautiful, androgynous human, curved and 
shaped for mounting on the bow ofa boat. It can 
be mounted on any vessel 50 or more feet in 
length. While the figurehead is in place, the ves- 
sel cannot be harmed by any magical attack 
except a wish. This protection applies only to 
damage to the hull of the vessel, not the masts, 
sails, cargo, or occupants. Normal attacks are not 
affected. 


of Protection IT 


XP Value GP Value 
Armless: 1,600 8,000 

Armored +1: 900 4,500 
Armored +2: 1,800 9,000 
Armored +3: 3,600 8,000 
Eyes-closed:4,000 20,000 
Full-bodied:300 1,500 
Headgear: 1,200 6,000 
Side-glancing: 1,600 8,000 

Smiling —1: 800 4,000 
Smiling —2: 1,600 8,000 
Smiling -3: 3,200 16,000 
Composite: Add Add 


War Captain's Companion 

Figureheads are used primarily as decorations on 
the bow ofa ship. The figureheads listed here are 
not for use as rams, and if one bears the brunt ofa 
collision, it must save as thick wood vs. crushing 
blow or be destroyed. Only one figurehead can 
function on a ship at one time. If more than one is 
mounted, the power of the lesser one is used, and 
the greater one is dormant. 

Below, several types of figureheads are listed. 
Rarely, the effect of one can be combined with 
others in order to create a more powerful figure- 
head of protection. 

Smiling figureheads improve the encounter 
reactions of ship crews (see Table 59 in the 
DMG). The bonus modifies the reaction roll. 

Figureheads with headgear allow the owner to 
reroll a single ship-related die roll once in any 
gaming session. This type includes figurehead 
with any type of headgear: a helmet, hat, bonnet, 
flower wreath or similar designs. 

Armless figureheads protect their ship against 
ram attacks. Such attacks are at -2 against the 
ship. 

1649 


GOO Oe sew 8 we eee Ree 


471 


Figurehead of Wondrous Power 


p Sn ee 


f) 
KN i 


Armored figureheads increase the AR of the 
ship against large missile weapons. 

Full-bodiedfigureheads (as opposed to the 
bust or half-bodied figureheads) regenerate and 
purify air. The figurehead purifies 1d12 man- 
days of air every day. A full-bodiedfigurehead 
has a 1,500 gp value (and 300 XP value) per man- 
day that it purifies. 

Eyes-closedfigureheads protect a ship against 
magical location and scrying. 

Sideways glancingfigureheads give the crew a 
1 bonus to morale checks. 

When creating stronger figureheads, the DM 
should add the values of all the segments to deter- 
mine the total value. For example, a sideways- 
glancing and armoredfigurehead +2 has a gp 
value of 17,000 an is worth 3,400 XP. Roll on the 
following table to randomly determine the powers 
of a discovered or captured figurehead. 


Roll Figurehead Enchantments 
01-10 Armless 

11-20 Armored +1! 

21-30 Eyes closed 

31-40 Full-bodied 

41-50 Headgear-wearing 

51-60  Side-glancing 

61-70 Smiling —1? 


472 


71-00 Roll again, gaining an additional 
enchantment’ 

'To a maximum of +3 

*To a maximum of -3 

`The first time this result is rolled, the figure- 
head gets two enchantments. If this is rolled twice, 


the figurehead has three enchantments, etc. 


of Wondrous Power 


XP Value GP Value 
of Attacks: 5,000 54,000 
of Disguise: 2,500 27,000 
of Speed: 3,000 36,000 


DRAGON Magazine 159 

This sort of carved statue, usually a simple decora- 
tion for the prow ofa seafaring ship, has been mag- 
ically endowed with a variety of powers to benefit a 
spelljamming ship. The magic resides in the carv- 
ing process and the wood itself. Few wizards know 
woodcraft well enough to make them alone, and 
even fewer woodcarvers know the wizardcraft nec- 
essary to power these impressive items. 

Each of the three known types of figureheads 
of wondrous power is carved from a different 
wood and bears a different gemstone. The figure- 
head taps into the spelljamming energies of a 
ship, allowing its 
powers to become activated. It only operates 
under the command of a spelljamming wizard of 
1 Oth level or higher, and the ship must have a 
major helm for the item to fully function. 

A figurehead of attacks is carved from ash 
wood and has a ruby embedded in its brow. When 
used with a major helm, a figurehead of attacks 
allows a spelljamming wizard mobility while 
seated on the helm. Usually a spelljamming wiz- 
ard "senses" the ship, but this item allows the 
wizard to propel the ship and simultaneously 
focus his or her senses through the figurehead, as 
if the wizard's spirit inhabited its body. The fig- 
urehead is animated by the wizard, and as long as 
the wizard maintains 
concentration, the figurehead remains mobile. 
(Many owners of this item simply place it on 
deck and fully use its powers.) A figurehead of 
attacks even allows a wizard to engage in combat 
while he or she is on the helm. The figurehead 
attacks as a warrior with a level equal to the 
ship's rating. Its hardwood fists each do 1d4 
points bludgeoning damage. Ifa wizard's concen- 
tration is broken by a critical hit on the ship, diffi- 


cult maneuvering situation, or other distraction, 
1650 


ae Figurine, Amber Monkeys y- 


the figurehead becomes motionless and is no 
longer under the wizard's control. A figurehead of 
attacks can be animated for up to 20 consecutive 
rounds once a week. 

The figurehead of disguise is carved from cherry 
wood and has a large black onyx set in its forehead. 
While otherfigureheads ofwondrous power are 
usually carved in human form, this figurehead is 
generally carved to resemble a couatl, tail stretch- 
ing beneath the prow and wings embracing the 
sides ofthe ship. When a spelljamming wizard acti- 
vates this item's power, the ship's image wavers for 
around until the illusion is set. Each figurehead of 
this type is keyed for a different but flawless illu- 
sion that alters the ship's appearance. The figure- 
head can erect an illusion of additional armaments, 
manned and ready; it can project illusory top sails 
or armor plating, making the ship appear to be 
impregnable. The figurehead creates only one spe- 
cific illusion that lasts until contact with the illu- 
sion dispels it. Many pirates would hesitate to 
attack a ship loaded to the gills with bombards and 
crack crews manning the ropes! The illusions are 
not effective in battle, and they last only until dis- 
pelled or until the wizard loses concentration on the 
illusion. These illusions can be summoned no more 
than once per day. 

As its name suggests, the figurehead ofspeed 
boosts the ship's rating. Carved from beech, and 
boasting emerald eyes, this figurehead adds two 
effective levels to a spelljamming wizard for 
determining the ship's rating. Thus, a 12th-level 
wizard seated on a major helm and using afig- 
urehead of speed acts as a 14th-level wizard, 
effectively moving the ship at SR 7 instead of the 
normal SR 6. The figurehead is active only at tac- 
tical speeds. However, this additional speed 
makes it more difficult to maneuver; the ship 
loses one maneuverability rank due to increased 
speed and abnormal control of the ship. The 
speed does not affect true travel times, since it 
doesn't operate at spelljamming speed. Thefig- 
urehead ofspeed can be used for one hour per 
week; after one hour of enhanced speed in a 
week, the figurehead remains inoperable for 144 
days, recharging its magic. 


Figurine 
Note that in statuette form, each figurine saves as 
crystal +4. If destroyed in statuette form, a fig- 
urine is forever useless, though if "killed" 
(reduced to 0 hit points) in animated form it 


merely becomes a statuette again, ready for later 
use. Unless otherwise noted, dispel magic causes 
an animated figurine to return to statuette form. 


Alabaster Griffon 

XP Value: 1,300 GP Value: 6,500 
The Book of Lairs II 
When invoked by the command word (engraved 
on the figurine), these figurines become adult 
male griffons: AC 3; MV 12, Fl 30; HD 7; hp 40; 
AT 3; Dmg 1d4 (each claw)/2d8 (bite); THACO 
13; MR 50%; AL N. Griffons have air maneuver- 
ability class D when mounted (class E when car- 
rying two riders). Each figurine can be used once 
per week for up to 12hours. If slain in combat, 
they cannot be brought back from statuette form 
for three weeks. 


Amber Monkeys 
XP Value GP Value 
Cursed-Blinding: — 1,500 
Normal-Blinding:500 2,500 
Cursed-Deafening:— 1,500 
Normal-Deafening:500 2,500 
Cursed-Muting:— 1,500 
Normal Muting: 800 4,000 


DRAGON Magazine 196 
Each of this trio of long-tailed monkey figures 
stands 3 inches high. The monkeys may be found 
individually or in a set, and each comes to life 
and activates a special attack power when a given 
command word is spoken. 

A monkey in either animated or statuette form 
can be hit only by magical weapons; it has AC 8 
and 1 HD when animated. Nonmagical weapons 
pass through the monkey, and strike its victim 
instead during combat. Unless the victim holds 
absolutely still, 50% of hits with magical weap- 
ons strike the victim rather than the monkey. 

An animated monkey may attack three times 
per round for 1d2 points of damage per attack, if 
so commanded. All monkeys have a movement 
rate of 12, swinging through trees as quickly as 
they run on the ground. They obey simple com- 
mands once animated (one command at a time, 
up to eight words), but they have other abilities, 
as follows. Each monkey may be used once per 
day for up to one turn per activation. At the end of 
this time, the monkey reverts to statuette form 
and, if the owner is within 30 feet, blinks back to 
its owner. An amber monkey follows the orders of 


the person who activated it, but rumor says that a 
1652 


473 


Figurine, Cat of Felkovic 


"Sesser iii el Cell aca” 


few (15%) are cursed to attack the user. 

Monkey of Blinding: This monkey is carved 
with its hands covering its eyes. When the proper 
command word is spoken, the monkey grows to 
the size of a chimpanzee and becomes active. If 
the item's owner points to an intended target up to 
30 feet away and utters a second command word, 
the monkey blinks away and reappears on top of 
the target's shoulders with its hands clasped 
firmly over the target's eyes (the arms lengthen 
magically to cover a giant's or dragon's eyes). 
Blindness puts the target at -4 on its attack rolls. 
While the victim has a monkey on his or her 
back, the creature's weight and position adds a 
further -2 penalty to all the victim's attacks, for a 
total of-6. Additionally, the victim must make a 
saving throw vs. spell (with a 2 penalty due to 
the power of the enchantment) or else be perma- 
nently, magically blinded—unlesshealed by a 
cure blindness or dispel magic spell. 

There are three ways to remove an active mon- 
key from its victim, "killing" it with magical 
weapons is the most hazardous and dispel magic is 
the least. A successful bend bars/lift gates roll also 
breaks the monkey's grasp, but the monkey covers 
its victim's eyes again on the following round. 

Monkey of Deafening: This monkey is carved 
with its hands covering its ears and operates simi- 
larly to the monkey ofblinding. When the monkey 
lands on its target, it clasps its hands over the tar- 
get's ears. The target must make a successful saving 
throw vs. spell at -2 or be permanently deafened 
until dispel magic or cure deafness is cast on the 
victim. Even ifthe saving throw is made, the victim 
cannot hear unless the monkey's hands are 
removed. While mounted, the monkey gives its vic- 
tim a -2 penalty to attack, due to its weight and 
position. The monkey ofdeafening is removed by 
the same methods used on the monkey ofblinding. 

Monkey of Muting: This monkey is carved 
with its hands covering its mouth. When a com- 
mand word is spoken, the monkey grows to the 
size of a capuchin monkey (about 2 feet high). 
Once a target has been indicated, the monkey 
blinks up to 30 feet away, reappearing with its tail 
wrapped about the target's neck, allowing the vic- 
tim to breathe but stopping all vocalizations. The 
victim must make a saving throw vs. spell (with a 
-2 penalty) or become permanently mute. The 
monkey ofmuting may be removed in the same 
ways as the other monkeys, but it is light enough 
not to cause any attack penalties for its victim. 


If the owner wishes, a second command word 
can be spoken, causing the monkey to use its tail 
in a strangling attack. This attack automatically 
hits and causes 1d6 points strangulation damage 
per round. 

While attacking, the monkey may be removed 
in the same three ways as a monkey ofblindness, 
but it is AC O during the attack because its skin is 
as hard as amber. If the monkey succeeds in 
killing its opponent, it immediately crumbles into 
dust, useless. 


Cat of Felkovic 

XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
RAVENLOFT® Campaign Set 
This delicate jade statuette stands barely 1-inch 
high. It is a small, domestic cat with a contented 
expression, sitting on ajade base. The statuette 
closely resembles afigurine of wondrous power, 
though it is not one of the forms normally listed 
for that item. 

When someone tosses the figurine to the 
ground and utters a command word, the cat 
becomes a smilodon. (A smilodon is a sabre-tooth 
tiger—see Cat in the MONSTROUS MANUAL™ 
accessory.) The cat obeys whoever commands it. 

The cat is harmless as long as it's fed. Like 


many predators, it needs food once a day. If it is 
1653 


Te ee 


474 


Figurine, Emerald Frog 


ee eS EN 


recalled before it has finished eating, the kill (or 
corpse) becomes part of the figurine, appearing 
in miniature beneath the cat's paw on the base. 
Later, the owner may notice that the carrion has 
vanished. 

Each day the cat goes hungry, it becomes ani- 
mate on its own, and hunts for food. It transforms 
itself at night, and attempts to do so when no one 
is watching. When it makes its first transforma- 
tion under a new owner, it becomes only a house 
cat, satisfied by a bird or mouse. Each day that 
hunger triggers a subsequent transformation, it 
becomes a larger, more ferocious cat. It hunts and 
kills the easiest and most appropriate prey— 
which eventually may even be its owner. 

When hunger has animated the cat, the owner 
cannot control it. In fact, it is completely immune 
to all spells and spell effects. Only magical weap- 
ons can harm it. 


CatType Hit Dice 
House cat 1 

Giant lynx 2+2 
Cheetah, mountain lion, or leopard 3, 3+1, or 3+2 
Jaguar 4+1 
Lion or tiger 5+2 or 5+5 
Spotted lion 6+2 
Smilodon 7+2 

Coral Dragon 
XP Value: 1,500 GP Value: 


DRAGON Magazine 196 

This is a delicate, multicolor carving of an Ori- 
ental dragon, approximately 1 foot long. When 
its command word is spoken, the dragon ani- 
mates and grows to about 3 feet long. Once ani- 
mated, it remains so for four hours or until 
“killed,” a dispel magic spell is cast on it, or the 
command word is spoken again. The dragon 
may be used once each week for scouting, com- 
bat, or conversation. 

These figurines are especially rare and usually 
quite old. They often accumulate much wisdom 
over the course of their long lives and can act as 
advisors to the people who activate them. Though 
specific knowledge is left to the Dungeon Master 
to decide, coral dragons often know about philos- 
ophy, religion, and history; the latter gives them a 
25% chance to identify the general purpose and 
function of any magical item. 

The coral dragon has 8 HD, AC 3, and Intelli- 
gence and Wisdom of 15. The dragon has MV 12 


on the ground, 24 FI and 36 Sw. Most have a neu- 
tral alignment, though some have tendencies 
toward law, chaos, good, or evil. A coral dragon 
may attack with two claws and one bite each 
round, with successful hits causing 1d10 damage 
per claw and 2d6 damage per bite. 

A coral dragon follows the orders of the per- 
son who activated it, though those dragons with 
alignments opposed to that of the activator try to 
find loopholes in the orders. Once per activation, 
a coral dragon can cast gust ofwind, airy water, 
and create water. 


Dori's Obsidian Steed 

of Wondrous Power 
XP Value: 100 GP Value: 500 
1992 Fantasy Collector Card 31 
Its creator is unknown, but this magical item 
was discovered in its animated form, by the bar- 
barian Dori of Wattand. Unlike most obsidian 
steeds of wondrous power, this one retains a 
clear and beautiful shape in its dormant form. It 
is usable for a maximum of 48 hours per week 
and only responds to neutrally aligned charac- 
ters. The steed acts as a heavy war horse with 
50 hit points (renewed with every use), flies at 
MR 12 (D), can enter the Ethereal and Astral 
Planes (with rider and gear), and can talk (Int 
10), which is how Dori learned its animation 
command word. If treated well, it will stay and 
defend a fallen master, though neither Dori nor 
the steed will look kindly on the thief who 
steals it. 


Emerald Frog 
XP Value: 700 GP Value: 3,500 
DRAGON Magazine 196 

This tiny carving, less than 1 inch long, animates 
into a frog of the same size when the command 
word is spoken. While animated, the frog main- 
tains a mental link with the person who activated 
it; this allows the activator to see through the 
frog's eyes with 270° vision as long as the frog 
remains within 100 yards. 

The frog has 1 hp and AC 0. Because of power- 
ful enchantments, it is immune to all attacks by 
insects and arachnids, including their poisons, or 
those creatures with insect or arachnid compo- 
nents (such as driders and ettercaps, but not 
drow). It attacks insect and arachnid creatures of 
all kinds on command, attacking once each round 


with a THACO of 10, its tongue lashing out as far 
1666 


Z 475 ~ 


Figurine, Jade Snakes 


ee a eee ee! a 


as 5 feet. Ifthe frog successfully hits, the victim 
shrinks drastically in size. The frog swallows its 
shrunken targets whole, killing them; this 
includes even giant insects and spiders. An indi- 
vidual with an Intelligence greater than 1 or hav- 
ing more than 6 HD gets a saving throw vs. death 
magic to break free from the frog's tongue before 
being captured, shrunk, and swallowed. The 
emerald frog a the usual vulnerabilities of these 
figurines. 


Jade Snakes 


XP Value GP Value 
Soothing: 900 4,500 
Striking: 800 4,000 


DraGoN Magazine 196 

These two figurines are always found together, 
each of the pair twined about the other. One, the 
snake of striking, is carved from green jade, 
while the other, the snake ofsoothing, is carved 
from white jade. The figurines are 2 inches long 
and may be worn as a pendent suspended from a 
chain. 

If both snakes are animated at the same time, 
the snake ofstriking immediately attacks the 
snake ofsoothing to destroy it. If either snake is 
destroyed, the other snake crumbles into jade 
dust, because neither snake can be sustained 


476 


without its opposite. 

Snake of Striking: When its command word 
is spoken, this green snake uncoils from its mate, 
transforms into a 12-foot-longanaconda, and 
attacks the nearest creature. This transformation 
takes a full round, during which the item's pos- 
sessor can hurl the snake at the desired target. If 
the activator of the snake misses with the throw, 
the snake attacks the nearest living target (use 
the grenade-like missile rules in the DMG, to 
resolve missed attacks). The snake has 50 hp, 
THACO 13,and AC 5. It bites for 1d4 points of 
damage or constricts for 2d6 points of damage, 
attacking as a 10-Hit-Die monster. The snake 
attacks until reduced to 0 hit points, dispel magic 
is cast on it, or the command word is spoken 
again; any of these occurrences causes the snake 
to revert to figurine form. The snake may be 
used once per day. 

Snake of Soothing: When its command word 
is spoken, this white snake uncoils from its fel- 
low snake, transforms into a 6-foot-long python, 
and coils around the nearest living creature. The 
transformation takes a full round, during which 
the snake's activator can place the snake on an 
individual. It never coils about a resistant tar- 
get, instead reverting to figurine form, wasting 
that use. 

Once the snake has wrapped itself around a tar- 
get, it begins to vibrate. When the snake's tongue 
touches the subject's wounds, the wounds close 
and heal. The snake may perform one cure seri- 
ous wounds, one neutralize poison, and one cure 
disease on its subject, casting any and all that a 
subject needs. Being "killed," having dispel 
magic cast upon it, or pronunciation of the com- 
mand word causes the snake to revert to figurine 
form. The snake has 50 hp and AC 5, but will nei- 
ther attack nor heal its own wounds. It may be 
used once per day. 


Moonstone Rabbit 
XP Value: 300 GP Value: 1,500 
DRAGON Magazine 196 
When commanded, this 2-inch figurine grows to 
the size of anormal rabbit, with 1 HD and AC 8. 
Once transformed, the rabbit burrows into earth 
of any sort, as a dig spell cast by a 12th-level 
wizard. The rabbit burrows until commanded to 
stop or the spell duration runs out, then reverts 
to figurine form. If commanded, the rabbit can 


also dig through stone at the same rate. How- 
1668 


Figurine, Tourmaline Turtle 


p E E f” 


ever, after three such uses against stone, the rab- 


bit loses its magical abilities forever. The rabbit. 


may be used once a day. 


Onyx Panther 
XP Value: 1,600 GP Value: 8,000 
Menzoberranzan Campaign Set 
Drizzt's most prized item (some say his best 
friend) is afigurine ofwondrous power, an onyx 
panther with which the drow can call upon 
Guenhwyvar. 


Guenhwyvar: AC 4; HD 6+6; hp 45; MV 15; AT 
3; Dmg 1d4/1d4/1d12,plus rear claw rake for 
2d4/2d4 if both paws score a hit; SA Move 
Silently and hide in shadows at 95%; SD Never 
surprised. The figurine can be used for 12hours 
every other day. 


Opal Cats 
XP Value GP Value 
Kitten of Caterwauling: 300 1,500 
Kitten-of-Contemplation:300 1,500 
Mother Cat: 400 2,000 


DRAGON Magazine 196 
There are three of these figurines, two kittens and 
a mother cat. They are normally found in a com- 
plete set of three. 

Mother Cat: This inch-tall cat is made from a 
black opal. When commanded, the cat grows into 
a slightly shimmering black panther with the 
same statistics as a mountain lion (AC 6; MV 12; 
HD 3+1; hp 25; THACO 17; AT 3; Dmg 
1d3/ld3/ld6; AL N; SA rear claws 1d4 each; SD 
surprised only on a 1; ML 10). It has the usual 
vulnerabilities of these figurines. 

Kitten of Caterwauling: This half-inch- 
high kitten is carved from a fire opal. When 
commanded, the figurine transforms into a 
scruffy kitten with orange-yellow fur. The 
round after the kitten transforms, it begins a 
piercing wail. This cry creates a cone of sound 
120 feet long and 30 feet wide at the base. All 
within the area of effect must make a success- 
ful saving throw vs. spell or take 2d6 points of 
damage, be stunned and unable to act for two 
rounds, and be deafened for four rounds. Those 
who make a successful saving throw are 
stunned for one round and deafened for two. 
This kitten has 1 HD and is AC 8. It may be 
used once per week and has the usual vulnera- 
bilities of these figurines. 


Kitten of Contemplation: This kitten, carved 
from a white opal, also stands but half an inch 
high. When the command word is spoken, the 
figurine becomes a fluffy white kitten, appar- 
ently only a few weeks old. The kitten immedi- 
ately sits on the lap of its activator and begins 
purring. Due to the soothing and hypnotic 
nature of the kitten's purr, a Spellcaster in con- 
tact with the kitten needs only half the normal 
time to memorize spells. 

The kitten may be used only by the individual 
who commanded its transformation. The kitten's 
purr also permanently breaks the effects of a con- 

fusion spell. This figurine may be used once per 
day and stays in animated form for up to eight 
hours before automatically reverting to a stat- 
uette. It has 1 HD and is AC 8, and has the usual 
vulnerabilities of these figurines. 


Silver Carp 

XP Value: 400 GP Value: 2,000 
DRAGON Magazine 196 
When its command word is spoken, this 4-inch 
carp animates and grows to a length of2 feet. The 
animated carp has beautiful, scintillating scales 
of many colors. If placed in water, the carp puri- 
fies up to 100 gallons. Ifheld in the air, the carp 
produces a stream of fresh water from its mouth, 
pouring one gallon per round. Ifa second com- 
mand word is spoken, the carp writhes, whether 
held, on the ground, or in the water. Unless the 
carp is in total darkness when this occurs, light 
then reflects brilliantly from its scales. Any 
sighted creature within 10 feet of the carp must 
make a saving throw vs. spell or be blinded for 
2d4 rounds (a successful saving throw indicates 
that the individual turned away or was not look- 
ing). While animated, the carp has 1 HD and AC 
5, and has the usual vulnerabilities of these fig- 
urines. The carp may be used for up to one hour 
once per day. 


Tourmaline Turtle 
XP Value GP Value 
Normal: 1,100 5,500 
Special: 1,600 8,000 


DRAGON Magazine 196 
This elegant stone carving, approximately 6 
inches long, looks much like a normal sea turtle 
but has a concave, bowl-like back. When the tur- 
tle is placed in water and the command word is 


spoken, it transforms into a giant, animated tur- 
1674 


477 


Figurine of Wondrous Power 


>) ee 


wy 


tle nearly 20 feet long. It follows the commands 
of the being who activated it and remains ani- 
mated for up to 12hours. It can carry as many as 
eight human-sized creatures through water at 
MV 36 (or MV 3 on land). Though dispel magic 
causes the turtle to stop moving, only repetition 
of the command word or reduction of the turtle 
to O hit points causes it to revert to statuette 
form. The turtle has AC 0, 60 hp, and a THACO 
of 13; it can bite once per round for 4d12 points 
of damage (damaging even creatures that can be 
struck only by magical weapons of + 1 or +2 
enchantment), acting at the command of its user. 
The tourmaline turtle can be used once per 
week. 

Some 10% of these turtles are enchanted with 
another ability. With the pronunciation of a sec- 
ond command word, a tourmaline turtle can sub- 
merge to any depth. Its passenger compartment is 
enchanted with an airy water effect. 


4 


7 


of Wondrous Power 


XP Value GP Value 
Ebony Fly: 400 4,000 

Golden-Lions:500 5,000 
Ivory-Goats(Terror):800 8,000 
Ivory Goats (Travail): 1,600 16,000 
Ivory-Goats(Traveling):400 4,000 
Marble-Elephant(A frican): 1,100 11,000 
Marble Elephant (Asiatic): 1,000 10,000 
Marble-Elephant(Mammoth): 1,300 13,000 
Marble-Elephant(Mastodon):1,200 12,000 

Obsidian-Steed:600 6,000 
Onyx-Dog:200 2,000 
Serpentine Owl: 400 4,000 


DUNGEON MASTER Guide, 1 stEdition 

There are several kinds of figurines of wondrous 
power. Each appears to be a tiny statuette of an 
animal an inch or so high. When the figurine is 
thrown down and a command word spoken, it 
becomes a living animal of normal size (except 
where noted below). The animal obeys and serves 
its owner. 

Ifafigurine of wondrous power is broken or 
destroyed in its statuette form, it is forever ruined, 
all magic is lost—it has no power. If slain in ani- 
mal form, the figurine simply reverts to a stat- 
uette and can be used again at a later time. 

When a figurine is first found, roll percentile 
dice and consult the table below to determine the 
type of animal the figurine becomes: 


Roll Figurine Type 
01-15 Ebony fly 

16-30 Golden lions (pair) 
31-40 Ivory goats (trio) 
41-55 Marble elephant 
56-65 Obsidian steed 
66-85 Onyx dog 

86-00 Serpentine owl 


Ebony Fly: At a word, this small, carved fly 
comes to life and grows to the size of a pony. 
The ebony fly is Armor Class 4, has 4+4 Hit 
Dice, and Maneuverability Class C. It flies at a 
movement rate of 48 without a rider, 36 carrying 
up to 210 pounds of weight, and 24 carrying 
from 211 to 350 pounds weight. It can be used 
up to three times a week, for 12 hours a day. 
When 12 hours have passed or when the com- 
mand word is spoken, the ebony fly again 
becomes a tiny statuette. 


1675 


Figurine of Wondrous Power, Onyx Dog 


j cise i ce 


Golden Lions: These come in pairs. They 
become normal adult male lions (Armor Class 
5/6, 5+2 Hit Dice, and normal attack modes). If 
slain in combat, the lions cannot be brought back 
from statuette form for one full week; otherwise, 
they can be used once every day. They enlarge or 
revert to statuettes upon speaking the command 
word. 

Ivory Goat: These always come in threes. 
Each goat of this trio looks slightly different from 
the others, and each has a different function: 

The Goat of Traveling: This statuette provides 
a speedy and enduring mount of Armor Class 6, 
with 24 hit points and two attacks (horns) for 1d8 
each (consider as a 4-Hit Die monster). Its move- 
ment rate is 48, bearing 280 pounds or less. Its 
movement is reduced by one for every additional 
14 pounds of weight carried. The goat can travel a 
maximum of one day each week—continuously or 
in any combination of periods totaling 24 hours. At 
this point, or when the command word is uttered, it 
returns to its small form for not less than one day 
before it can again be used. After three uses, the 
goat loses its magical abilities forever. 

The Goat of Travail: When commanded, this 
statuette becomes an enormous creature, larger 
than a bull, with sharp hooves (2d4+2/2d4+2), a 
vicious bite (2d4), and a pair of wicked horns of 
exceptional size (2d6/2d6). If it is charging to 
attack, it may only use its horns, but +6 damage is 
added to each hit on that round (2d6+6 hit points 
damage per horn). It is Armor Class 0, has 96 hit 
points, and attacks as a 16-HitDie monster. It can 
be called to life just once a month up to 12 hours 
at a time. Its movement rate is 24. After three 
uses, the goat loses its magical abilities forever. 

The Goat of Terror: When called upon with 
the proper command word, this statuette becomes 
like a destrier, movement rate 36, Armor Class 2, 
48 hit points, and no attacks. However, its rider 
can employ the goat's horns as weapons (one 
horn as a spear +3, the other as a sword +6). 
When ridden against an opponent, the goat ofter- 
ror radiates terror in a 30-foot radius, and any 
opponent in this radius must roll a successful sav- 
ing throw vs. spell or lose 50% of strength and 
suffer at least a -3 penalty to attack rolls, all due 
to weakness caused by terror. When all opponents 
are slain, or upon the proper command, the goat 
returns to its statuette form. It can be used once 
every two weeks. After three uses, the goat loses 
its magical abilities forever. 


Marble Elephant: This is the largest of the fig- 
urines, the statuette is about the size of a human 
hand. Upon utterance of the command word, a 
marble elephant grows to the size and specifica- 
tions of a true elephant. The animal created from 
the statuette is fully obedient to the figurine's 
owner, serving as a beast of burden, mount, or 
combatant. The type of marble elephant obtained 
is determined by rolling percentile dice and con- 
sulting the table below: 


Roll Elephant Type 
01-90 African 
46-90 Asiatic 

91-00 Mammoth 
96-00 Mastodon 


Details for each type of creature can be found 
in the MONSTROUS MANUAL accessory. The stat- 
uette can be used a maximum of 24 hours at a 
time, four times per month. 

Obsidian Steed: An obsidian steed appears to 
be a small, nearly shapeless lump of black stone. 
Only careful inspection reveals that it vaguely 
resembles some form of quadruped, and of 
course, if detect magic is used, the figurineradi- 
ates magic. Upon speaking the command word, 
the near formless piece of obsidian becomes a 
fantastic mount. Treat it as a heavy war horse 
with the following additional powers: fly (at nor- 
mal movement speed), go ethereal, go astral. It 
allows itselfto be ridden, but if the rider is of 
good alignment, it is 10% likely per use to carry 
its "master" to the floor ofthe first layer of the 
Gray Waste and then return to its statuette form. 
The statuette can be used for a 24-hour period, 
once per week. Note that when the obsidian steed 
becomes astral or ethereal, its rider and gear fol- 
low suit. Thus, travel to other planes can be 
accomplished by means of this item. 

Onyx Dog: When commanded, this statuette 
changes into a creature with the same properties 
as a war dog, except that it is endowed with Intel- 
ligence of 8—10, can communicate in Common, 
and has exceptional olfactory and visual abilities. 
The olfactory power enables the onyx dog to 
scent the trail of a known creature 100% of the 
time if the trail is one hour old or less, -10% per 
hour after that. The dog is subject to being thrown 
off by false trails, breaks, water, and masking or 
blocking substances or scents. The visual power 


enables the onyx dog to use infravision (90-foot 
1683 


ee eee 


479 


Finger of Commanding 


SR a S E ee a Ne! G 


range), spotting hidden (such as in shadows) 
things 80% of the time, normally invisible things 
65% of the time, and noting astral, ethereal, and 
out-of-phase things 50% of the time. For details, 
see Dog, War in the MONSTROUS MANUAL acces- 
sory. An onyx dog can be used for up to six con- 
tinuous hours, once per week. It obeys only its 
owner. 

Serpentine Owl: A serpentine owl becomes a 
normal-sized homed owl (AC 7; MV 24; 2d2 hit 
points; 1d2/ld2 points of damage when attack- 
ing) if its possessor commands, or it can become 
a giant owl if the owner requires it. The maxi- 
mum duration of the transformation is eight 
hours in either case. (However, after three trans- 
formations into giant owl form, the statuette loses 
all of its magical properties.) The normal size, 
magical statuette moves with 95% silence, has 
infravision to 90 feet, can see in normal, above- 
ground darkness as if it were full light, and twice 
as well as a human. Its hearing is so keen it can 
detect a mouse moving up to 60 feet away. Any- 
one or anything trying to move silently has its 
chances reduced 50% against the serpentine owl 
in smaller form. Furthermore, the owl communi- 
cates with its owner by telepathy, informing him 
or her of all it sees and hears within the limita- 
tions of its intelligence. If commanded to giant- 
size, a serpentine owl is in all respects the same 
as a giant owl. For information see Owl, Giant, 
in the MONSTROUS MANUAL accessory. As with 
most otherfigurines of wondrous power, this one 
readily obeys all commands of its owner. 


Finger 
These are uncoupled digits from a once-living 
hand. Often the flesh and muscle are mummified, 
but occasionally, the skin and flesh decompose, 
leaving only the bone and ligaments behind. 


of Commanding 
XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 15,000 
Forbidden Lore 

This item looks like a simple finger bone with 
jeweled knuckles, though it radiates an aura of 
summoning. When the proper command word is 
spoken, it enables the holder to raise and com- 
mand up to 6 Hit Dice of zombies or skeletons. 
The bodies must be normal corpses. This item 
does not usurp control over existing zombies or 
skeletons. The effect lasts for one hour. It can 
only be used once a day. 


In Ravenloft: Using this magical item is call 
for a Ravenloft powers check. 


ofthe Master Thief 
XP Value GP Value 
Finger: 4,000 20,000 
Thumb: 8,000 40,000 


Wonders of LANKHMAR 

This magical item is actually a combination of 
five single pieces. Each piece is a single digit 
from one hand of a formerly great thief. His life 
remains in cloaked mystery, but some believe that 
he once tried to overthrow the thieves’ guild of a 
major city and claim it as his own. A great battle 
ensued, and during this battle, he lost the fingers 
of his left hand. The people who believe this also 
think that he had gained much of his thieving 
ability through some arcane magic now lost, and 
that magic still is imbedded in the fingers them- 
selves. Thus, this magic aids a thief in thieving 
abilities. The abilities rise in accordance with the 
number of digits possessed by a thief. 

Each ofthe fingers grants a thiefa +2% (cumu- 
lative) on all thieving abilities whenever 
attempted. The thumb, however, has a different 
effect that increases a thief’s effective ability by 
two levels. This includes all attributes associated 
with the level, attack ratings, and all thieving 
abilities. 

The fingers do not function ifheld in a magical 
containment device, such as a bag ofholding. 
Magical containment prevents the digits from 
affecting the possessor. 

It is also said that if one should lose his or her 
own fingers, these fingers can be grafted onto the 
stumps, but that cannot be substantiated, since no 
one has been foolhardy enough to try. Ifa charac- 
ter should try this, the side effect is that thefin- 
gers of the master thiefattempt to possess the 
owner, who must make a saving throw vs. death 
magic at a -1 penalty per finger grafted. If the 
saving throw fails, the fingers transpose the char- 
acter's essence for that of the master thief (cur- 
rently in an unknown outer plane) and he again 
lives. This possession attempt can only be made 
once per owner. 


1686 


ig a a eee Se ee 


480 


Fire Gyregam 


«cesses aioe 


Fingernail of Rending 


XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 8,000 
Van Richten's Guide to the Lich 

These are prosthetic, 3-inch long fingernails 
found in sets of five or ten. The nails are con- 
cealed within 1⁄2 inch tubes into which the tips of 
the fingers are placed, whereupon they bind 
themselves to the wearer forever—the wearer's 
fingers may be cut off to remove them, but the 
nails cannot otherwise be obtained. For a lich, 
this is not of great consequence or pain. For a 
living person, however, a horror check is 
required—failure results in unconsciousness for 
1d20 minutes, in addition to the effects 
described in the rules book of the RAVENLOFT 
boxed set. Also, the pain is extreme, requiring 
the wearer to roll his or her Constitution score or 
less, or permanently losel point of that attribute. 
(A restoration spell returns the affected charac- 
ter's Constitution score to normal.) The pain 
only lasts for a few minutes, but bonding is 
instantaneous—tegardless of the outcome of the 
horror and pain checks, the nails replace the per- 
son's natural fingernails. 

The nails afford the wearer an additional 1d6 
points of damage in barehanded melee attacks. In 
addition, when the nails strike armor, they have a 


chance to rend it, reducing the Armor Class bene- 
fit of that piece of armor by 1. Magical armor is 
entitled to a saving throw vs. lightning to avoid 
the effects. 

After the nails are worn for a few days, the 
wearer's hands, ifthey are not so already, become 
shriveled and grotesque, appearing dead. Even 
the application of but one nail invokes this 
effect. 

There is no method, short of employing a wish 
spell, to remove the nails once they are applied. If 
a wish is used to remove the nails, the wearer's 
hands remain shriveled unless a restoration spell 
is cast upon them. This restores the hands to their 
proper appearance. The ends of the nails are 
made of metal, but they are as sensitive as the fin- 
gers to which they are attached. Liches and other 
undead are immune to the pain of bonding and 
have no sensation from the nails. 


Fire 
Magical fire is altered in some way, but always 
retains fire's basic form and energy. 


Cold Fire 

XP Value: 500 GP Value: 2,500 
The Complete Wizard's Handbook 
This type of fire looks like a normal fire, but it 
generates no heat. Coldfire is useful in a torch in 
cramped quarters, and as a safe light source for 
homes, since there is no danger of an accidental 
fire. 


Dark Fire 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 2,500 
The Complete Wizard's Handbook 

The antithesis of coldfire, darkfire generates 
heat like a normal fire, but it produces no light. 
With flames as black as shadows, dark fire is use- 
ful in making campfires for soldiers and other 
travelers who do not wish their presence to be 
revealed by bright flames. 


Fire Gyregam 
XP Value: 900 GP Value: 9,500 
The Magister 
The origin of these magical devices is now 
forgotten, but they were as plentiful in the past as 
they are rare today. Gyregams are fist-sized 
spheres of a silvery, mirror-finished, nonferrous 
metal that does not corrode and is unmarked by 


physical blows. 
1690 


E 481 £ 


Fishing Lure 


p ea a 


When a command word is spoken, the gyregam 
begins to spin, and hangs in midair wherever it is 
released. Within one round, it is glowing, 
becomes a blinding white, spinning faster than 
the eye can follow. It can then be activated on the 
spot by speaking a second command word, or it 
can be tossed at a target. The person speaking the 
first command word (who must also speak the 
second) tosses the gyregam by simultaneously 
speaking the second word and pointing at any 
visible target within 140 feet. The gyregam, 
untouched by its commander, teleports instantly 
to the location desired. In the instant following its 
arrival, it discharges a 6d6 lightning bolt (as the 
wizard spell) at the nearest concentration of 
metal. It remains in place, spinning and casting 
one bolt per round, until it is destroyed or six 
bolts have been fired (whereupon it sinks to the 
ground—an ashy, worthless shell). If it is acti- 
vated on the spot and not directed at a target, the 
first bolt is discharged immediately after the 
utterance of the second command word. 

While spinning, a gyregam is AC 5, and drains 
all magical weapons that strike it, save for arti- 
facts and relics. These are not drained; their con- 
tact causes the gyregam to explode instantly, 
doing 3d12 blast damage to all within 10 feet, 
3d8 damage to all 11 to 20 feet distant, 2d10 
damage to all creatures 21 to 30 feet distant, 1dl2 
damage to all within 31 to 40 feet and 1d4 dam- 
age to all within 41 to 50 feet. It is said that the 
artificer Leifand has recently devised a similar 
weapon, Leifand's girandole. 


Fishing Lure 

XP Value: 160 GP Value: 800 
Port of RAVEN'S BLUFF 
These small, silver, gem-studded minnow repli- 
cas are magically enchanted to attract fish. For 
characters with the fishing proficiency, they give 
a bonus of +4 to proficiency checks; otherwise, 
the lures, in effect, grant the basic proficiency. 
They are reusable. 


Fishing Pole 
Fishing poles are 10-foot wooden poles. When a 
pole is held and a command word is spoken, a 
string appears, complete with a bare fishhook, 
fastened to one end of the pole. When a second 
command word is spoken, the fishhook silently 
flies through the air and the line magically 
lengthens. The hook continues toward its target 


j 482 T y 


to a maximum range of 360 feet, and the hook 
flies at 120 feet per round. Ifthe hook finds its 
goal, it tugs sharply on the line (easily noticed 
by the user); if the goal is not found, it returns 
within one turn. A third command word causes 
the line to shorten, either by breaking or pulling 
something along with it, caught on the hook. 
The hook normally does not damage the crea- 
ture or item retrieved, as it magically sticks to it. 
If desired, the user may proceed toward a stuck 
hook—the line automatically shortens as the 
distance does. 

If a magical hook is ever lost, it can be 
replaced only by a wish or recreated by a wizard 
of the 26th level, who must also have experience 
with making such items. The magical line can- 
not be broken by force or normal weapons but 
can easily be cut by any magical edged weapon 
(no die roll needed). The line is not shortened by 
this kind of damage and still appears on com- 
mand; however, the hook is needed to extend the 
line's length. 

Fishing poles are immune to all attacks except 
flame attacks, dragons’ breath, or magical fire, 
and are immediately destroyed when touched by 
them. 


of Angling 
XP Value: 400 GP Value: 2,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

This pole may be used to catch fish of nearly any 
size. It functions only when cast into salt or fresh 
water and only if the intended victim is within 
one mile. The user must name a type of aquatic 
creature before casting the hook. The hook can 
capture any normal fish or water animal, and 
most fantastic aquatic creatures of 11 Hit Dice or 
less—including giant crabs, sea dragons, nixies, 
and so forth. The pole cannot affect undead, and 
any victim of 3 or more Hit Dice may make a sav- 
ing throw vs. spell to avoid the hook. Any victim 
of normal intelligence or better gains a +2 bonus 
to the saving throw. The hook comes loose upon 
contact with air. The anglingpole may be used up 
to three times per day, regardless of success. 


of Exaggeration 
XP Value: 1,500 GP Value: 6,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
This pole appears to be and functions as either a 
pole of angling or a pole of monster fishing. How- 
ever, when hooked, the victim is magically enlarged 
1693 


| 


~ Flagon of Dragons g” 


to double normal size. (Simply double the Hit Dice, 
hit points, damage per attack, movement rate, etc.) 
The creature is angry about being hooked (-4 to 
reaction rolls), and remains enlarged for one turn 
after the hook is released or until a dispel magic 
spell is applied (treat as 30th-level magic). 


of Levitation 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 15,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

Unlike other poles, this one's hook cannot be sent 
to any range. Instead, it is attached to some secure 
part of the user (any part will do—boot, belt, 
pack). When commanded, the pole lifts the user 
upward with an effect identical to the levitate 
spell. The pole cannot cause horizontal move- 
ment. Levitation continues for up to one hour; the 
user may rise to any height at the rate of 20 feet 
per round and descend at the same rate, simply by 
concentration. The user cannot be suddenly 
dropped unless dispel magic is successfully cast 
at the pole (treat as 30th level). The pole of levita- 
tion functions up to three times a day for up to 
one hour per use. 


of Monster Fishing 
XP Value: 1,500 GP Value: 6,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
This pole's hook may be commanded to search 
for one creature in the direction cast. The hook 
can find most creatures of 7 HD or less but can- 
not find lesser aquatic creatures nor undead. If 
the monster type is within range and hooked, the 
tugging signal is given normally; however, when 
the user tries to shorten the line, the results are 
determined by the creature's Hit Dice. Ifthe user 
has more levels (or Hit Dice) than the victim, the 
monster is pulled in at its normal movement rate. 
Ifthe numbers are equal, nothing happens—the 
line cannot be shortened. If the victim is ofa 
higher level (or has more Hit Dice) than the user, 
the line breaks immediately, returning without the 
hook. The hook releases its victim when it comes 
within 30 feet of the user. The pole ofmonster 
fishing can be used once per turn. 


of Rescue 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
This pole is used to pull some other creature 
upward toward the user. The hook is sent down to a 
maximum of 120 feet. Any creature to be hooked 


and raised may speak a command word that causes 
the hook to attach itself. The user may also com- 
mand the hook to attach, but unwilling or sur- 
prised creatures cannot be hooked. When the user 
commands the line to shorten, a total weight of 
500 pounds or less can be raised. The hook releases 
when ordered by either the recipient or the user 
and requires no special command word, but no 
other creature can cause the hook to come loose. 
The pole ofrescue can be used once per turn. 


of Treasure Fishing 
XP Value: 6,000 GP Value: 20,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

This pole's hook may be commanded to search for 
treasure in the direction cast. It cannot pass 
through a solid barrier, such as a door. If the hook 
cannot find treasure, it returns to the user in one 
turn. Ifit does reach its goal, it sticks to one piece 
of the least valuable treasure (usually a coin), and 
signals with the familiar tug. Ifa monster guards 
the treasure, the monster may notice the theft. The 
chance is 5 in 6 for an awake, watchful monster; 3 
in 6 for an awake but unsuspicious creature; and 1 
in 6 for a sleeping monster, including dragons. If 
the monster grabs the line or the treasure, the mon- 
ster also becomes hooked; the resulting tug-of-war 
is handled as described under pole of monster fish- 
ing. The pole oftreasure fishing can be used once 
per hour (six turns) at most. 


Flagon 
Flagons are large containers used for storing and 
serving wine and other beverages. They are usu- 
ally made from pottery or metal. Every flagon 
has a handle and a spout; they often have covers 
as well. Expensive and enchanted flagons have 
richly sculpted handles and covers. 


of Dragons 

GP Value: 40,000 

The Magister 

This large, silver vessel never tarnishes, and bears 
no device (scratches and painted or chalked 
marks fade and disappear in 2d4 turns). A stop- 
pered flagon is always heavy, and if shaken, a liq- 
uid sloshing noise is heard from within. When it 
is opened, a single dragon breath weapon attack is 
expelled from its neck—acid stream, bolt ofelec- 
tricity, cone of gas or vapor, cone of fire or cold. 
The attacks are random and not at the choice of 
the flagon owner: ' 


XP Value: 6,000 


1698 


oe 


483 


Flagon of Dimunition 


}, es 


Roll Dragon Breath Effect 
1 Black dragon acid: does 36 points of 
damage. 
2 Blue dragon bolt: causes 48 points of 
damage. 
Brass dragon sleep orfear gas 
Bronze dragon repulsion gas. 
Copper dragon slow gas. 
Green dragon chlorine gas: 48 points of 
damage. 
7 Red dragon cone offire: 56 points of 
damage. 
8 Silver dragon paralyzing gas 
9 White dragon cone ofcold: 36 points of 
damage. 
10 Gold dragon fire: 64 points of damage. 


Nn KW 


These attacks have the range of the breath 
weapons they duplicate. Once a flagon of 
dragons has been unstopped, an attack is 
launched immediately, regardless of the flagon 
bearer's wishes, and after the attack has 
occurred, directed outward from the flagon's 
throat whether targets are present or not, nothing 
more occurs until the flagon is stoppered and 
unstopped again. Stoppering and unstopping 
each take one round. 

The flagon appears to be empty; nothing amiss 
occurs if weapons or objects are poked into it. It 
can even carry liquids without harm; but if it is 
stoppered, the liquid vanishes and a breath 
weapon attack emerges when the flagon is next 
opened. 


of Dimunition 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 2,500 
Dungeonland 
The flagon bears strange runes. Read magic 
reveals the phrase "Drink Me." Anyone who sips 
from the flagon shrinks to % normal size, perma- 
nently, until a piece of the salver of growth is 


eaten or dispel magic is cast. 


Zagyg’s Flowing 
XP Value: 750 GP Value: 3,500 
l Unearthed Arcana 
This magical drinking vessel appears to be 
nothing more than a rather well-made figure, 
usually of nickel-silver, with a fair amount of 
engraving and bas-relief sculptures depicting 
grapes, vines, wine cellars, and drinking scenes. 
Somewhere on the vessel is a line of magical 


writing—the words of a toast. The first individ- 
ual to pick up the flagon is able to read what is 
written, but no other can do so, normally or 
magically, until they become the owner of the 
vessel. The toast phrase is read to activate the 
flagon—and each time it is activated, the phrase 
changes. Recitation of the magical toasting 
words causes the flagon to fill with good-tast- 
ing, but rather weak, wine. Each time the flagon 
is drained after that, it refills itself with a better 
tasting liquid. The weak wine initially therein is 
of about 7% alcohol content. The next is about 
10% alcohol, the third draft of wine is 13%, the 
fourth is port and about 20%, the fifth is a near- 
liquor of some 40% alcoholic content, and the 
sixth and last draft is a brandy of nearly 80% 
alcohol. 

The typical flagon contains about one pint of 
liquid (16 ounces). It is 90% unlikely that any 
creature partaking of the first draft notices the 
increase in alcohol of the second, third, and so 
on. Thus, unsuspecting drinkers are quickly 
and easily made intoxicated and possibly 
brought to a stupor by the contents of the 
flagon. The container is usable a maximum of 
three times per day. 


Flail of the Desert Kings 


> eA G 


Flail Weapons 

Flails are agricultural tools used to thresh grain. 
A flail (generally) has a long, wooden handle 
with a free-swinging bar attached to one end. 
Since the earliest days of war, farmers recruited 
to fight in battle have used this item as a weapon, 
and armorers have designed variations intended 
solely for fighting. Most magical flails are weap- 
ons, but some aid agricultural endeavors. Roll on 
the table below for flail variations. 


Roll Item 
01-04 = Alhulak 
05-08 Bolas 
09-12 Cahulak 
13-16 Chain 
17-20 Chain Flail 
21-24 Chatkcha 
25-28 Crusher 
29-32 Flail 
33-36 Flindbar 
37—40 Footman’s Flail 
41-44 Grain Flail 
45-48 Horseman's Flail 
49-52 Jung Meh 
53-56 Kau-Sn-Ke 
57-60 Kawanaga 
61-64 Kusari-Gama 
65-68 Kyoketsu-Shogi 
69-72 Manriki-Gusari 
73-76  Manriki-Gusari w/ Hook 
77-80 Morning Star 
81-84 Nunchaku 
85-88 Soris 
89-92 Three-Piece Rod 
93-96 Three-Section staff 
97—00 =Tonkk 
Bael's Morning Star 
XP Value: 2,500 GP Value: 20,000 
Monster Manual II 


This horrid weapon is a morning star +2 witha 
long bronze handle that telescopes magically 
from 4 to 8 feet in length as Bael desires. Twice 
per day, he can automatically strike any opponent, 
regardless of their location. 


Bargrivyek’s 
XP Value: 1,800 GP Value: 16,000 
Monster Mythology 
The avatar’sflail +3 will stun any opponent 
struck for 1d6 rounds unless a successful saving 
throw vs. spell is made. 


Battle Star 
GP Value: 35,000 

Lost Ships 
This mighty, magical dwarven version of the 
morning star is highly prized, especially by giff 
and certain barbarian spacefaring tribes. Dwarves 
do not willingly part with them—it is death to 
own one if you meet most spacefaring dwarves. 
The battle star of the dwarves is a +4 weapon 
(1d6+5 Dmg to L-sized creatures). It can be 
wielded by S-sized creatures without penalty, and 
is no heavier than a nonmagical morning star. 

When it hits, the battle star flashes with 
“starfire.” This bright radiance blurs the vision of 
any not expecting it, causing them to attack at -1 
penalty during the following round. The radiance 
also causes all magical or enchanted items within 
a 10-foot-radius to glow momentarily, in sympa- 
thy. A battle star can be thrown for normal dam- 
age, but does not return to the thrower. It causes 
double damage against golems, other magically 
animated (not summoned or controlled) crea- 
tures, guardians, and giants. The touch of a battle 
star causes all magical glyphs, symbols, wards, 
and runes to glow briefly (without discharging 
them), thus revealing magical traps. The touch of 
a battle star also destroys magical holds and 
locks on both creatures and objects. The bearer 
cannot be held, and receives a +4 bonus on all 
saving throws against charm spells and other 
forms of magical control. 


XP Value: 3,500 


of the Desert Kings 
XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 20,000 
DUNGEON Magazine 40 

This potent magical weapon, the creation ofa 
southern wizard in ancient times, is a foot-long 
rod of gold wrapped with inlaid bands of lapis 
lazuli, ending in three loosely swinging, 6-inch 
bars of ivory tipped with turquoise. It appears to 
be a nonmagical artifact of superb craftsmanship 
and great value but radiates a faint dweomer of 
magic if detection spells are cast on it. 

Originally a pharaoh's symbol of rulership, a 


wizard later enchanted it to bolster a young, 
1704 


z 485 = 


~ Flail of the Desert Kings a 


unproven pharaoh's leadership when his kingdom 
teetered on the brink of collapse. The resourceful 
wizard gave the item powers that could be acti- 
vated only by an individual wearing the circlet of 
the adder. The young ruler used the items to rally 
his subjects to a frenzy of devotion, and his power 
grew extraordinarily. 

The flail and circlet were passed from pharaoh 
to pharaoh through the ages until Khamsa, the 
warlike leader of the neighboring kingdom of 
Raurin, slew the current pharaoh in battle and 
claimed the artifacts for his own. As he lay dying, 
the conquered pharaoh, a priest of considerable 
power, cast a bane spell on the circlet so that any- 
one using it to activate the flail's powers would 
suffer a troubled fate. 

As a fulfillment of the curse, Khamsa was 
seized with delusional insanity (DMG, 1 st Edi- 
tion) that intensified each time the item was used. 
Eventually convinced he was a deity, Khamsa 
challenged the gods and was turned to stone by 
their vengeance. The circlet was frozen in place 
on Khamsa’s brow, and the flail was eventually 
borne away from the haunted halls of the south, 
forgotten except in scribbled legends in aged 
tomes. 

The flail passed through the lives of a succes- 
sion of owners over the centuries, and misfortune 


Herne. 


YZ 


cR 
< 


lorseman’s Flail Morning Star 


Footman’s Flail 


Tit. 


AN so 


universally befell those unfortunate enough to 
come in contact with it. This may be mere coinci- 
dence, for the flail itselfis not actually cursed and 
in fact can be used as aflail +2. However, the 
flail’s owner is sometimes faced with a strange 
desire to find the object that belongs with theflail 
of the desert kings; few owners of the weapon 
ever learned precisely what they were looking for, 
and this mysterious quest proved agonizing. 

When wielded by an individual wearing the 
circlet ofthe adder (see Circlet), the flail is sim- 
ilar to a rod oflordly might. Usable by a fighter 
or priest, it grants the wielder the following 
powers: 

Stormvoice: This southern, magical spell 
enables the caster to speak with the voice ofa 
storm, which causes the speaker to be heard at 10 
times the normal distance. All creatures within 20 
feet of the caster must roll saving throws vs. spell 
or be knocked to their feet and deafened for 14 
rounds. This expends one charge. 

Drain: This ability takes an additional 2d4 hp 
from opponents struck by the flail and bestows 
them on the wielder (up to the wielder's maxi- 
mum). It uses one charge. 

Worship: This southern magical spell raises 
the effective Charisma of the flail's wielder to 22. 
Creatures of 3 HD (or levels) or less and in clear 


Ñ Manriki-Gusari 


with hook 


us Dao Ge 
1 


aaa 


oam 
A 


PEALI 


Z JA 


a ey we 
Wii UG 


Y 


Taar IN 


= 


A d 


486 


~ Flail, Fleeting J, 


view of the caster, automatically fall to their 
knees and praise the wielder. Creatures of 4—6 
HD (or levels) are entitled to a saving throw, and 
those above 6 HD are unaffected. Unwilling vic- 
tims must roll a reaction check (with a +8 penalty) 
when the spell is finished. This ability uses two 
charges. 

Unlike a rod oflordly might, the flail does not 
have mundane powers. It can be recharged, but 
only by a wizard proficient in southern magic, 
someone virtually impossible to find outside of 
the Raurin desert region. The flail can have as 
many as 30 charges. 


Dragonflail 
XP Value: 1,200 GP Value: 7,200 
Dragon Keep 
Like the dragonlances after which they are mod- 
eled, dragonflailswere created near the end of the 
early Dragon Wars to be used against evil 
dragons. Only a few are thought to exist. 

A dragonflailhas a 2-foot-diameter sphere 
attached to a chain 8 feet long. The sphere is stud- 
ded with fine, razor-sharp barbs. A dragonflail is 
made of the same silvery metal as a dragonlance 
and gives offa strong, silver light. It inflicts 2d4 
points of damage against all opponents other than 
dragons. Against dragons, it inflicts damage 


227 
72> 


NY: 


=D 


Ars 
PD 


G SNS gym 
i.e 


3 S 
S 
Ce 
F as 
7 
q 


Alhulak V 
Q 


equal to half the sum ofthe hit points of the 
wielder plus those ofhis or her mount, rounded 
up. The dragonflail gains a +1 bonus to attack 
rolls against dragons. 


Fleeting 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 4,000 
DRAGON Magazine 188 

Thisflail +4 bears a special, limited-use enchant- 
ment. In any round in which a successful attack 
roll is made with it, the flail strikes before all 
other weapons and does its full possible damage. 
The first time it strikes, four rolling peals of an 
unseen bell are heard; the second time it hits, 
three peals are audible; the third time the flail 
strikes, two peals are heard; and the fourth time it 
strikes, a bell tolls once. After that, the weapon 
exhibits no magical properties until it is wielded 
by a new being, whereupon the cycle of four 
magically assisted strikes occurs again. No being 
(even if regaining a particularfleeting flail many 
years after first wielding it) can ever gain a sec- 
ond four-strike cycle. 

A wielder who loses possession ofthe flail 
before exhausting its magic, but later regains use 
ofthe same weapon, picks up at the point reached 
earlier in the flail's descending cycle of magic. 


Flindbar 


SES ASO IS 
SSO 


S 
Se 


ep 


a 4 SOMTEMTATLEHATNMLSSSA AAS. 


UMLUEUTEVOLLLLE PLL ATC RAEI nm 
RES 


~ Flail, Morning Star of Detection r 


Morning Star of Detection 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 
1991 Collector Card 287 

This +3 magical weapon has an Intelligence of 
14. It has the ability to speak both Common and 
Dwarf. Its two primary abilities allow it to detect 
precious metals in a 20-foot radius, determining 
the types and amounts found, and also to detect 
magic in a 10-foot radius. This morning star has 
an ego of 7 and an alignment of lawful neutral. 


Multiple Rod of Dancing 

XP Value: 4,500 GP Value: 25,000 
DRAGON Magazine 126 
Upon first glance, the rod appears to be a normal 
three-piece rod. However, it is +1 on both damage 
and attack rolls. The rod may also be used as a 
dancing weapon, but it always functions in this 
capacity as ifit were owned by an 8th-level monk 
who specializes in martial-arts weapons. Upon 
the utterance of the appropriate command words, 
the chain links of the rod may, at the will of the 
owner, become any of the following things: three 
dancing jo sticks, a dancingjo stick and nun- 
chaku, or one or two jo sticks and a dancing nun- 
chaku. Other weapons may be wielded by the 
user of dancing weapons. As before, the dancing 
weapons fight for five rounds at a time (or until 
recalled by the owner) as if wielded by an 8th- 
level monk. When the command word is spoken, 
the weapons are fully responsive to the will ofthe 
owner. When the rod dances in several pieces, it 
can engage up to three opponents at a time; the 
pieces may also concentrate on just one or two 
foes. When the command word of recall is spo- 
ken or when the time limit for dancing is used up, 
the detached pieces reunite and fly back to the 
owner's grasp. All detached dancing pieces are 
+1 weapons. 


Osiris's Royal 
XP Value: 3,100 GP Value: 29,500 
Legends & Lore 
Osiris's avatar wields his royalflail in combat. 
This flail +3 has the same powers as a mace of 
disruption. 


Pharaoh's 
XP Value: 4,500 GP Value: 22,500 
Kingdom of Nithia 
Throughout the ages, the Pharaohs of Nithia have 
passed down a crook (See Pharaoh's Crook) and 


flail from ruler to ruler. Every pharaoh's tomb 
depicts an image of the pharaoh holding the 
crook and flail across his or her chest in the sym- 
bolic form so well known by the populace. These 
artifacts contain immense power. 

Pharaoh's flail appears to be a small nonfunc- 
tional weapon of a decorative nature. In fact, this 
ancient artifact conveys all the skills of a fighter 
for one sleep upon the pharaoh (the pharaoh is 
generally either a priest or wizard). The fighting 
ability gained is at the same level as the pharaoh's 
current level. The flail also bestows upon the 
wielder an Armor Class of 0 or a +5 AC bonus 
(whichever is greater). The first successful attack 
on the flail's wielder causes all applicable dam- 
age to be reflected upon the attacker. Further 
attacks are resolved normally. Finally, the flail 
transforms into a mace/axe +5 upon command, 
causing a base of 1d10 damage. 


Flask 


Flasks are metal, ceramic, or glass bottles with 
small, narrow necks and flat bases. Most flasks 
have caps, and many are contoured so they can be 
easily carried on the hip; such flasks usually hold 
beverages. Others are designed for alchemical 
use. Nevertheless, most enchanted flasks contain 
things not usually found in bottles or jars—any- 
thing from a terrible curse to an enraged extrapla- 
nar being that attacks when a character unstops a 
magical flask. (For more details and magical 
options, see Beaker and Bottle.) 


Copper 
GP Value: 1,000 
Black Courser 
This copper flask provides up to 10 gallons of 
water per day. The water is green and foul- 
smelling but otherwise untainted. 


XP Value: 100 


of Curses 
XP Value: — GP Value: 1,000 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide, Ist Edition 
This item looks like any ordinary beaker, bottle, 
container, decanter, flask, or jug. It has magical 
properties, but detection cannot reveal the nature 
of aflask ofcurses. It may contain a liquid or it 
may emit smoke. When the flask is first opened, a 
curse of some sort is visited upon the person or 
persons nearby. After that, it is harmless. The 
type of curse is up to the DM. Suggestions 


include the reverse of the priests' bless spell. Typ- 
1712 


a a a i aa 


488 


Flask of Tuerny the Merciless II, Iron 


b Ee 


ical curses found on scrolls are recommended for 
use here as well. Or perhaps a monster could 
appear and attack all creatures in sight. 

In Ravenloft: This flask can confer more horrid 
curses on a person who opens it. Consult the fol- 
lowing table to determine the strength of the curse. 
Chapter VI ofthe rulebook in the RAVENLOFT Cam- 
paign Setting will help flesh out the details. 


Roll Strength of the Curse 

13 Embarrassing 
4-5 Frustrating 
6-7 Troublesome 
8-9 Dangerous 

10 Lethal 

Iron 

XP Value: — GP Value: 2,000 


DUNGEON MASTER Guide, 1st Edition 

These special containers are typically inlaid with 
runes of silver and stoppered by a brass plug 
bearing a seal set all around with Sigils, glyphs, 
and special symbols. When the user speaks a 
command, any creature can be forced from 
another plane into the container, if the creature 
fails a saving throw vs. spell—after magic resis- 
tance, if any, is checked. Range is 60 feet. Only 
one creature at a time can be so contained. Loos- 
ening the stopper frees the captured creature. 

If an individual freeing the captured creature 
knows the command word, it can be forced to 
serve for one turn (or to perform a minor service 
that takes up to one hour). If freed without com- 
mand knowledge, roll for the creature's reaction. 
Any attempt to force the same creature into the 
flask a second time allows it +2 on its saving 
throw and it becomes very angry and totally hos- 
tile. A discovered bottle might contain: 


Roll Contents 

01-50 Empty 

51-54 Air elemental 

55-65 Djinni 

66-69 Earth elemental 

70-72 Ffreeti 

73-76 Fire elemental 

77-86 Invisible stalker 

87-89 Rakshasa 

90-93 Salamander 

94-97 Water elemental 

98-99 Wind walker 
00 Xorn 


Iron Flask of Tuerny the Merciless 
XP Value: 10,000 GP Value: 50,000 
Eldritch Wizardry 
This heavy metal urn is small enough to be car- 
ried easily despite its weight. It has a turnip- 
shaped stopper covered with mighty runes, for it 
contains a groaning spirit. This is a fiend of some 
small power, it can be loosed and sent forth to 
perform evil deeds. The one who possesses the 
artifact must know the word of command that 
opens the stopper; the spell that commands the 
slave of the flask, and the word of closure which 
ensures that the creature cannot escape until 
called forth. This artifact has the following abili- 

ties and penalties: 

e Teleport twice per day. 

Stone-flesh twice per day. 

The item destroys from 50% to 100% of the 
treasure of its owner by consuming it in order 
to sustain its own power. 

User may restore one lost level (as in restora- 
tion spell) once per week (perhaps one drained 
from a nearby friendly PC). 


Iron Flask of Tuerny the Merciless IT 
XP Value: — GP Value: — 
Book of Artifacts 
The iron flask ofTuerny the Merciless is a heavy 
urn stopped with a turnip-shaped plug. It is small 
enough to be carried in the palm of a hand. The 
urn itself is plain, but the stopper is engraved and 

embossed with runes of power. 

In all human history, one man has epitomized 
the true essence of pure evil, Tuerny the Merci- 
less. Tuerny was a powerful wizard who served as 
counselor to the king of a small country. Feeling 
that the king was a weak and foolish ruler, Tuerny 
and his agents murdered the royal family as they 
slept and he seized the crown for himself. Using 
his vast magical powers, Tuerny charmed or 
enslaved most of the armies. He was able to sum- 
mon foul tanar'ri and set them loose on the help- 
less people, but had little control over them, so 
Tuerny began expending vast amounts of energy 
to craft a device capable of bending them to his 
will. With all in readiness, he summoned a great 
tanar'ri, took control over the beast, and impris- 
oned it in the flask. 

Meanwhile, news of Tuerny's atrocities reached 
neighboring kingdoms. They raised great armies 
to crush Tuerny and his foul minions. These dev- 


astating wars lasted years but resolved nothing. 
1715 


pe ee ee 


489 


Flask, Vapor 


SSS ane 


Finally Tuerny opened the bottle—a bloodcur- 
dling scream filled the air as Tuerny transformed 
into a hideous monster and vanished, along with 
the flask and the creature. 

The power of the flask is such that inexperi- 
enced PCs quickly find themselves overwhelmed. 
A better approach is to have the PCs either seek 
out the item, or prevent others from getting it. 
Perhaps they must find a way to prevent an other- 
wise good ruler from using the power of the flask 
to change the tide of a desperate war. 

Invoked Powers: The user of the flask draws 
upon the power of one of the following tanar'ri 
imprisoned inside it; a nabassu, glabrezu, 
marilith, or nalfeshnee (see the PLANESCAPE™ 
Appendix of the MONSTROUS COMPENDIUM®). The 
actual tanar'ri contained in the flask can be deter- 
mined randomly or selected by the DM. It can be 
released to wreak havoc upon any selected targets 
for up to 8 hours. Ifit is killed, it instantly returns 
to the artifact. The fiend must otherwise be com- 
manded to kill at least once before it can be 
ordered back into the flask. If this is not done 
before 8 hours expire, the curse is instantly acti- 
vated (I/day). 

Random Powers: 2 from Artifact Table 1-18: 
Offensive Powers 

Curse: There is a cumulative 5% chance each 


time the flask is used that the tanar'ri will turn 
against the user. When this happens, the user is 
taken to the tanar'ri's home plane to serve as a 
dretch. The artifact also afflicts the user with 
artifact transformation, changing the user's 
alignment to chaotic evil and instilling the 
desire to utterly conquer and destroy all known 
creation. 

Suggested Means of Destruction: 

The user must imprison 99 other greater 
tanar'ri in the flask. 

It must be filled with the tears of 1,000 
orphaned children, which melts it. 

The flask must be filled with earth from every 
battlefield on which Tuerny fought. 


Vapor 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
Pirates of the Fallen Stars 

This looks like a simple, stoppered, brass flask, 
similar to an efreeti bottle or an eversmoking bot- 
tle. When opened, fog pours out until the flask is 
sealed once more. The flask creates a disk offog 
that is 100 feet across and 10 feet high. Once that 
volume is filled, the flask stops emitting fog, but 
if wind or magic clears the mist away, the flask 
again pours out vapor until the volume is 
obscured. 


Folding Moat 
XP Value: 8,000 GP Value: 40,000 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 58 
A. folding moat appears to be a large loop of 
cloth. When placed on the ground, however, it 
expands to become a 30-foot wide, 10-foot deep 
trench, enclosing a 500- by 300-foot area. If the 
command word is spoken, the moat fills with 
water, which remains until a second command 
word is spoken. 


Flying Rockinghorse 

XP Value: 10,000 GP Value: 50,000 
DUNGEONS & DRAGONS Master Set 
Clavileno, an enchanted wooden rocking horse 
described in Cervantes's "Don Quixote," could 
fly and carry an armed rider. It was guided by a 
pin in its forehead. In game terms, the flying 
rockinghorse funtions as a carpet of flying except 
that its Movement is 45 and it can carry only one 
person. 


1718 


gee a e 


490 


Fork, Planar 


ON ia 


Forge of Metal Protection 
XP Value: 10,000 GP Value: 50,000 
Tome of Magic 
The first of these 1,000-pound forges was created 
countless centuries ago. Because of the specific 
magical properties involved, it is believed that a 
wizard, assisted by a number of dwarves (all of 
whom were interested in planar research), con- 
structed this device. Although the secret of the 
construction has since spread, the forge is an 

extremely rare, magical item. . 

The forge is a furnace made of enchanted 
rock and held together with a network of steel 
rods. When metal armor and weapons are placed 
within the furnace and heated until glowing red, 
the armor becomes immune to the effects of 
heat on the Inner Planes. All metal items tem- 
pered in this manner suffer no ill effects from 
heat on any of the Inner Planes, but do suffer 
normal heat effects on the Prime Material 
Plane. 

The effect of the magical protection lasts 
2d10+10 days. Magical armor and weapons 
that are placed in the forge take on protection 
from heat, but temporarily lose all other magi- 
cal properties. Thus, a sword +2 placed in the 
forge does not melt on the Plane of Fire, but it 
ceases to function as a sword +2 until the 
enchantment wears off. A weapon with an ego 
retains its ego, but loses all other magical 
properties. 


Fork 


(For Military Fork see Polearm) 
(For Table Fork see Utensil) 


Planar 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 10,000 
DRAGON Magazine 120 

Planarforks are magical tuning forks used in 
plane-spanning spells, which determine the final 
destination of the traveler. Two factors determine 
the final terminus when using one of these forks: 
material and pitch. Material is the substance of 
which the fork is made. Pitch is the note that 
guides the spell to a particular plane when the 
fork is struck. 

The Ethereal Plane may be reached by aplane 
shift using a B-fork made of glass. The body is 
transformed into the ethereal state to make the 
transfer into that plane. The glassfork is shattered 


when it is struck. Those cast into the Ethereal 

Plane are sent deeply into it, away from any cur- 

tains that lead to other planes. 

The Inner Planes may be reached by forks of 
different materials, set to A and the notes G and B 
adjacent to it. The pitch and material required are 
shown in the tables below. 

A tuning fork, made of quartz and set to B is 
used to reach the Astral Plane. There is a 50% 
chance per use that the quartz will crack and 
become unusable. Planar travelers entering the 
Astral in this fashion are physically moved deep 
into the plane, far from any color pools. 

A single fork of the correct material and pitch 
will take a caster ofa plane shift (and gear) to the 
topmost layer of any Outer Plane. A major chord 
of three notes (forks) will take the traveler to the 
second layer (if there is one). Any of the minor 
chords of the same note will take the traveler to 
the third layer (ifthere is one). Other chords may 
take the traveler to deeper layers, fail entirely, or 
take the traveler to another area (see Experiment- 
ing, below). 

Reaching the Prime Material Plane requires a 
steel C-fork. The spell will transport travelers to 
the world in the Prime Material where the metal 
was manufactured. Trace elements and impurities 
guide the fork to the specific place of manufac- 
ture. Such forks are normally used by those inter- 
planar travelers who wish to return to their native 
plane. 

The plane shift spell also notes that travelers 
using theseforks may be returned to their plane of 
origin, however they may only be returned under 
the following circumstances: 

1. They are still alive on the other plane. 

2. They are still on that plane or planar layer (if 
they travel to another plane or planar layer 
they may not be returned.) 

3. The same fork is used to return them. This 
means that, in all cases of the glass fork in 
the Ethereal Plane and 50% of the time with 
the crystalfork in the Astral, the trip is one- 
way. 


Experimenting with forks: Many of the forks 
required to reach other planar layers are listed as 
"unknown." Chords do exist for these layers, but 
they differ from game campaign to game cam- 
paign. Further, they do not follow the standard 
rules for reaching the other layers. Just because 


the first three levels of Baator are in iron, in 
1720 


“ 491 = 


~ Fork, Planar r 


chords in F, F major, and F minor chords, doesn't 
mean that the fourth layer of Baator needs an iron 
fork or that it will be related to the key of F. In 
part, this is because the natives ofthe lower layers 
take a dim view of interplanar trespassers, and 
they deliberately alter the frequencies of the 
required chords. 

If the travelers use the plane shift spell with 
different forks and other types of chords, the DM 
may either choose a result or roll on Table 6 to 
send the PCs to an unimaginable location. 

The DM is not committed to the table and is 
free to modify them to fit the campaign at hand. 
For example, a DM who does not want easy 
access to the Inner Planes may change the notes 
to variations on G as opposed to A, without 
telling the PCs (until a few of them stumble into 
Lolth’s lair by mistake). 


Roll Plane (Fork Required) 
Conduit Planes 

01-02 Astral (Quartz, B) 

03-04 Ethereal (Glass, B) 

05-06 Prime Material (Steel, C) 
Elemental Planes 

07-08 Air (Tin, A) 


09-10 Earth (Zinc, A) 
11-12 Fire (Copper, A) 
13-14 Water (Lead, A) 


Paraelemental Planes 
05-16 Ice (Pewter, A) 
17-18 Magma (Brass, A) 
19-20 Ooze (Zinc/lead mix, A) 
21-22 Smoke (Bronze, A) 
Quasielemental Planes 


23 Ash (Copper, A-flat) 

24 Dust (Zinc, A-flat) 

25 Lightning (Tin, A-sharp) 
26 Minerals (Zinc, A-sharp) 
27 Radiance (Copper, A-sharp) 
28 Salt (Lead, A-flat) 

29 Steam (Lead, A-sharp) 

30 Vacuum, (Tin A-flat) 


Energy Planes 
Negative Material (None known) 
Positive Material (None known) 
Outer Planes 
Abyss” 
Layer 1 (Iron, D) 
Other layers (Unknown) 


31 


Acheron 

32 Layer 1 (Iron, G) 

33 Layer 2 (Iron, G major) 

34 Layer 3 (Iron, G minor) 
Layer 4 (Unknown) 

Arborea 


35-36 Layer 1 (Gold, F-sharp) 

37-38 Layer 2 (Gold, F-sharp major) 

39-40 Layer 3 (Gold, F-sharp minor) 
Arcadia 

41-42 Layer 1 (Gold, C-sharp) 

43-44 Layer 2 (Gold, C-sharp major) 

45—46 Layer 3 (Gold, C-sharp minor) 
Baator 


47 Layer 1 (Iron, F-sharp) 
48 Layer 2 (Iron, F-sharp major) 
49 Layer 3 (Iron, F-sharp minor) 
Other layers (Unknown) 
Beastlands 
50-51 Layer 1 (Gold, F) 
52-53 Layer 2 (Gold, F major) 


54-55 Layer 3 (Gold, F minor) 

56-57 The Outlands (Platinum C) 
Elysium 

58-59 Layer 1 (Gold, E) 


6061 Layer 2 (Gold, E major) 
62-63 Layer 3 (Gold, E minor) 
Layer 4 (Unknown) 
Gehenna 
64 Layer 1 (Iron, F) 
65 Layer 2 (Iron, F major) 
66 Layer 3 (Iron, F minor) 


Layer 4 (Unknown) 
Ysgard 
67-68 Layer 1 (Gold, G) 
69-70 Layer 2 (Gold, G major) 
71-72 Layer 3 (Gold, G minor) 
The Grey Waste 
73-74 Layer 1 (Iron E) 
75-76 Layer 2 (Iron, E major) 
71-18 Layer 3 (Iron, E minor) 
Limbo' 
79-80 Layers 1-5 (Nickel C) 
81 Mechanus (Silver, C) 
Pandemonium 
82-83 Layer 1 (Iron, C-sharp) 
84-85 Layer 2 (Iron, C-sharp major) 
86-87 Layer 3 (Iron, C-sharp minor) 
Layer 4 (Unknown) 


1722 


Bo 


492 


~ Fountain, Lasko's Magical. 


Arcadia 
88-89 Layer 1 (Gold, D) 
90-91 Layer 2 (Gold, D major) 
93-93 Layer 3 (Gold, D minor) 


Other layers (Unknown) 
Carceri 
94 Layer 1 (Iron, E-flat) 
95 Layer 2 (Iron, E-flat major) 
96 Layer 3 (Iron, E-flat minor) 
Other layers (Unknown) 
Bytopia 


97-98 Layer 1 (Gold, E-flat) 

99-00 Layer 2 (Gold, E-flat major) 

'Limbo's layers tend to overlap and ooze between 
each other, so that precise determination of the 
destination layer is random. 

The lower layers of the Abyss may be reached by 
random chords (see Experimenting, with forks). 


Random Planar Destinations 

Roll Destination 

Ol-11 Transported to intended destination. 

12-50 Nothing happens. 

51-80 Transported to random layer of the 
Abyss. 

81-90 Transported to the demiplane of DM's 
choice. 

91-00 Transported to alternate crystal sphere 
on Prime Material Plane. 

of Travel 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 10,000 


The Book of Marvelous Magic 

This copper-colored fork may be placed at any 
intersection, and it points (on command) toward 
either the most dangerous, safest, shortest, or 
longest route, as desired by the user. It may be 
used three times per day. For answers about dis- 
tance, the destination must be known and 
named. 


Fountain 
A fountain is a small, bubbling torrent of water 
that gushes from a niche in a floor or wall. The 
waters appear to come from underground or from 
thin air. Magical fountains generally bestow their 
curses or benefits upon charact€r> Who-4rmE Or 
bathe in their waters. A save vs.Gpell sonia 
negates a fountain's baneful effec&s3 1 -O2 


Lasko's Magical 
XP Value: 10,000 GP Value: 100,000 
DRAGON Magazine 34 
A small band of adventurers, tired, thirsty, and 
hungry from their previous adventures, comes to 
yet another unfamiliar door. The thief quickly 
informs them, "I hear water splashing!" After a 
few moments of quiet discussion, the party 
decides to enter. The only thing they see is a gen- 
tly gurgling fountain. 

Having run out of water a long time ago, they 
cast spells to find the quality of the water—it 
appears to be safe. Finally, after more conversa- 
tion, the thief walks up and takes a sip, rises, gri- 
maces, and falls over dead! The party picks up its 
fallen comrade and leaves quickly. The above 
scene should evoke memories and smiles from 
some of the more masochistic DMs in the world; 
yet, not every fountain need be poisonous. In 
most campaigns, fountains that are magical in 
nature can cause discussion between players for 
hours (real time) or great feats of bravado (the 
powers protect the bold!) when encountered. 

Lasko's magicalfountains do not emit magical 
auras nor do they detect as magical, poisonous, or 
evil (except by limited wishes). It does not matter 
how small a sip is taken, the full effects do affect 
a drinker. After the rolled number of drinks is 
taken, the fountain becomes ordinary and non- 
magical for one full month. If any water is taken 
from the fountain to be used later, it will not have 
any magical effects. This is due to the fact that 
the magic is in the fountain, and not in the water. 

To use the tables below, roll as indicated from 
Tables 1 to 5, rolling on subtables as necessary. 
Table 1 limits the amount of magic in a fountain 
by limiting the number of drinks that have an 
effect. Tables 2 and 3 measure the potency and 
beneficence of the magic. When rolling for the 
effects, roll for all benefits (if any) first, then for 
all detriments. The effects listed before the slash 
(/) are benefits while the number after the slash 
are detrimental. All rolls are made with percentile 
(1dlOO) dice. 


Table 1: Number of Drinks per fountain 


Roll Number of Drinks 
1 
2 
3 
93-99 4 
00 5 


1724 


œ Fountain, Lasko's Magical 


Table 2: Number of Effects per Drink 
Roll Number of Effects 


01-60 1 
61-85 2 
86-99 3 

00 4 


Table 3: Number of Beneficial/Detrimental 
Effects Per Drink 
Roll 1 2 3 4 
01-10 1/0 2/0 3/0 4/0 
11-30 1/0 2/0 2/1 3/1 
31-60 1/0 1/1 2/1 2/2 
61-90 0/1 0/2 12 13 
91-00 0/1 0/2 0/3 0/4 


Table 4: Effects Summary Table 
Roll Type 

01-30 General (Table 4a) 

31-55 Characteristic (Table 4b) 
56-75 Magical (Table 4c) 
76-85 Monetary (Table 4d) 
86-95 Special (Table 4e) 

96-00 Experience (Table 4f) 


Table 4a: General Effects Subtable 
RA Effieety/cowardice 

01-04 Bravery/cowardice 

05-08 Clairaudience' 

09-12 Clairvoyance' 

13-16 Commune' 

17-19 Detection (Table 4al)' 
20-23 ESP' 

24-26 Flight/Encumbrance f 
27-30 Halve/double damage taken 
31-34 Haste/slow 

35-38 Healing/harming (Table 4a2) 
39-41 — Resistance/poison (Table 4a3) 
42-44 Infravision/blindness 

45-48  Invisibility/glow in dark 
49-52 Invulnerability/Death 

53-56 Knowledge/Forgetfulness (Table 424) 
57-60 Love/Hatred 

61-64 Paralysis’ 

65-68 Polymorph (Table 4a5)’ 
69-72 Quest (Table 4a6)’ 

73-16 Sleep’ 

71-80 Speaking (Table 4a7)' 

81-84 Stone” 

85-88 Stun (Table 4a2) 

89-92 Teleportatior? 

93-95 True sight/blindness 


1724 


A 494 `~ 


~ Fountain, Lasko's Magical r 


96-98 Immunity/Disease (Table 4a8) 

99-00 Two effects (Roll twice ignoring 99-00) 
‘If detrimental, power gives information. 

“If beneficial, power gives protection from rolled 
occurrence. 

“If beneficial, power teleports drinker home (with 
full shares). If detrimental, power acts as a ran- 
dom teleporter. 


Table 4al: Detection Subsubtable 


Roll Detects 
01-20 Magic 
21-35 Traps 
36-50 Evil 

51-65 Good 
66-75 Invisibility 
76-85 Disease 
86-95 Poison 
96-00 Phase 


Table 4a2: Healing or Harming and Stunning 
Subsubtable 


Roll Dice 
01-50 1 
51-75 2 
76-90 3 
91-99 4 

00 5 


Table 4a3: Poison Saving Throw Adjustment 
Subsubtable (+/-) 


Roll Adjust" 

01-40 1 

41-70 2 

71-90 3 
Find/Lose way out of dungeon 

31-55 Gain/lose one weapon proficiency 

56-75 Know next effect of fountain/lose one 
spell level* 

76-90  Gain/lose expertise in one weapon (+/-1) 

91-00 Gain knowledge of nearest 
treasure/amnesia 

*if applicable 

Table 4a5: Polymorph Subsubtable 

(Detriment Only) 

Roll Polymorph into 

01-30 Animal 

31-50 1 HD monster 


51-65 2 HD monster 
66-80 3 HD monster 
81-837 4 HD monster 


88-93 Look-alike of party member 
94-00 Partially polymorphed (roll again ignor- 
ing 94-00) 


Table 4a6: Guest Subsubtable 


Roll Drinker seeks 
01-30 Largest monster on level, in order to 
kill it. 
31-55 DM chooses magic item on level. 
56-75 DM chooses nonplayer character. 
76-90 A nonplayer character stronger than the 
drinker, in order to get into a fight. 

91-00 Random (something foolish). 
Table 4a7: Speaking Subsubtable 

Roll Speak 

01-20 with plants 

21-45 with animals 

46-49 with monster* 

70-80 with dead 

81-90 dragons 

91-00 with monster* 

*Random or chosen by DM 

Table 4a8: Disease Subsubtable 
(Detriment Only) 

Roll Disease 

01-30 Grippe 

31-55 Dysentery 

56-70 Cholera 

71-77 Yellow Fever 

78-85 Typhus 

86-92 Typhoid Fever 

93-96 Smallpox 

97-99 Spotted Fever 

00 Tuberculosis 

Table 4b: Characteristic Effects Subtable— 
Also Roll on Table 4bl 

Roll Affects 

01-06 Strength 

07-12 Intelligence 

13-18 Wisdom 

19-24 Constitution 

25-30 Dexterity 

31-36 Charisma 

37^2 Size 

43^8 Speed 

49-54 Beauty 

55-60 Gender* 

61-66 Handedness* 

67-73 Prime requisite 


1724 


495 


~ Fountain, Lasko's Magical = 


74-80 Highest 

81-87 Lowest 

88-98 Affects closest to median 
99-00 Affects two (roll twice) 
*If beneficial, no effect 


Table 4bl: Number of Points Changed (+/-) 
Subsubtable 
Range of Points 

Roll 1-10 or 1-12 3-18 or 1-20 
O1-Ss0 
51-60 
o1-7O 
71-30 
3 1 -29O 
91-95 
96-99 

00 


lė 


NNNNR Be 


3 
3 


EE 


APAUULUNNNN=e 


Table 4c: Magical Effects Subtable 


Roll Effect 

01-15 Ist-level spell! 

1630  2nd-level spell’ 

31-40 3rd-level spell’ 

41-47 4th-level spell! 

48-53 Sth-level spell! 

54-60  6th-level spell! 

61-70 Enchant next weapon touched 
(see Table 4cl) 

71-77 1 extra spell level” 

78-83 2 extra spell levels” 

84-88 3 extra spell levels” 

89-92 4 extra spell levels” 

93-99 Enchant next object touched 
(Table 4cl) 

00 Two effects (Roll twice, ignoring 00) 


"Roll a random spell until an applicable 
benefit/detriment appears. 
“If drinker cannot use spells, no effect. 


Table 4cl: Magical Enchantment Subsubtable 


Roll 4/- 
01-70 1 
71-955 2 
96-99 3 
00 4 


Table 4d: Monetary Effect Subtable 
(Roll also on Table 4dl) 


Roll Effect 
01-30 Gold 
31-65 Gems 


66-80 Jewelry 

81-90 Platinum 

91-99 Double/halve treasure! 
00 Roll on Table 4f 

‘Do not roll on Table 4d] 


Table 4dl: Monetary Gain and 


Loss Subsubtable 
Roll Gold Gems Jewelry Platinum 

O1-SO 50 1 1 10 
51-65 100 2 1 10 
66-75 175 2 2 25 
76-85 250 3 2 25 
86-95 400 3 2 50 
96-99 500 3 3 50 

00 1,000 4 3 100 


Table 4e: Special Effects Subtable 


Roll Effect 
01-25 Resistance/Susceptibility (Table 4e1) 
26-45 +/-1 on saving throw (Table 4e2) 
46-50 +1-2 on saving throw (Table 4e2) 

51 +/-3 on saving throw (Table 4e2) 
52-62 Friendship/Hatred (Table 4e3) 
63-70 Mental block (Table 4e6) 
71-75 Switch two characteristics’ 
76-84 Indifference/Greed (Table 4e5) 
85-91 — Ability/Inability to determine direction 
92-94 — Blessing/Curse from the powers (or DM) 
95-97 Flesh tastes bad/good to monsters 
98-00 Sexually aggressive/Timid 


"Roll twice on Table 4b ignoring 88-00. If benefi- 
cial, and rolls become detrimental, no effect. 


Table 4el: Resistance/Susceptibility 
Subsubtable (also roll on Table 4a3) 


Roll Occurrence 
01-20 Lesser undead! 
21-35 Greater undead! 
36-45 Poison 
46-52 Disintegration 
53-61 Druidic spells 
62-69 Priestly spells 
70-76 Electricity 
71-84 Crushing blows 
83-93 Acid 
94-00 Possession 


‘If beneficial, drinker resists energy drains and 
paralyzation. If detrimental, drinker takes double 
drain, no save. Drinker is not initially aware of 
such detriment until undead attack. 


1724 


A na, 


496 


~ Fountain, Lasko's Magical g 


Table 4e2: Saving Throw Determination and traps will still be sprung all the time because 
Subsubtable the drinker does not realize they are there. 
Roll Save vs. 
01-10 Cold Table 4e5: Indifference/Greed Subsubtable 
11-20 Fire Roll Indifferent/Greedy Tendency 
21-35 Death 01-34 Money 
36-47 Magic spells 35-40 Clothing 
48-60 Wands 41-55 Magical items 
61-70 Staves 56-67 Gems 
71-75 Dragon breath 68-75 Weaponry (even ifhe or she can't use 
76-82 Stoning it!) 
83-99 Lightning 76-82 Junk and broken artifacts 
00 All saving throws 83-95 Armor or protection 

96-00 Random or chosen by DM (for exam- 
Table 4e3: Friendship/Hatred Subsubtable ple, feathers, pine cones, bags, blades 
Roll  Likes/Hates of grass, etc.) 
01-10 Elves Note: Indifference does not mean the drinker will 
11-20 Dwarves no longer use them, merely that he or she doesn't 
21-27 Humans care about their upkeep or quantity. 
28-36 Dragons 
37-42 = Tanar'ni Table 4f: Experience Effects Subtable 
43-48 Wizards (Ignore Table 5) 
49-54 Priests Roll Effect 
55-59 Halflings 01-50 1d6 x 100 experience points 
60-66 All other races 51-70 1dl2 x 100 experience points 
67-71 | Undead 71-79 1d20 x 200 experience points 
72-77  Fiends - 80-87 3dlO x 500 experience points 
78-83 Efreeti 88-91 1dlO x 1,000 experience points 
84-90  Treants 92-95 +5% experience bonus 
91-95 Unicorns 96-98 +10% experience bonus 
96-99 Powers 99 +/-1 levels’ 

00 Anything 00 Roll again and double effect 

Tf detrimental, reduce drinker's level by one. If 
Table 4e4: Mental Block Subsubtable beneficial, increase level by one. 
Roll Block 
01-15 Umber hulks/pits Table 5: Duration of Effects 
16-28 Beholders/traps Previous Subtable Rolled: 
29-39 Nymphs/priests Roll da 4b 4c 4d 4e 4f 
40-50 Liches/druids OWO IWk IWk IWk — IWk — 
50-60 Space distortion/random monster class 41-55 IWk IMnth IWk — 2Wk — 
61-69 Medusae, basilisks, etc./friends 56-65 IMnth IMnth 2Wk — IMnth — 
70-78 Phantasmals and illusions/armor 66-75 2Mnth lYr = IMnth — 2Mnth — 
79-86 Symbols/hometown 76-85 Perm Perm 1Mnth — 4Mnth — 
87-95 Psionic attackers/dungeon exit 86-95 Pem Rm Pem — Perm — 
96-00 Any two above/one above plus one on 96-00 Perm Perm Perm — Perm — 

Table 4e3 

Explanation: Mental blocks are placed in the Variations: Have the fountains alignment ori- 
mind in such a way that the drinker does not real- ented in such a way that certain alignments 
ize the block is there. That is, phantasmals will always gain benefits and others always get detri- 
not do any harm, and neither will gaze attacks. ments (have the alignments change from time to 


However, monsters mentally blocked away can time also). Have various high-level monsters 


still attack (the exception being psionic attackers) guarding them (water weirds or water elementals) 
1724 


A awe a 


497 


~ Fountain of Time r 


so the party will conclude that the fountain is 
very beneficial. Have one large fountain that only 
allows one magical drink per mission, but does so 
indefinitely. The tables can be applied to other 
artifacts, thus making the character an unwilling 
victim when he or she comes into proximity with 
or touches such an object. 


of Time 
XP Value: — GP Value: — 
Old Empires 
This powerful artifact is located somewhere in 
eastern Mulhorand. Little is known about it, 
except for the few words in the Unique Wiz- 
ardries, a book of spells belonging to the wizard 
Nezram: 

"Ofall the artifacts created by the ancients, the 
most Marvelous and terrifying was Great Font. 
This was a pearl-white pool, contained in a crystal 
the color ofmilk, which appeared in a mirage in 
the eastern wastes. The waters were too bitter to 
drink. But ifone looked into thefont in the light of 
afull moon, one could see scenesfrom the antiq- 
uity ofMulhorand that one would swear were 
real—and indeed, they are. For if one concentrates 
on that image... Ishall say no more, in hope that 
none shall follow where I have traveled." 

No knowledge exists about the origin of the 
font, except in the archives of Thoth. The font of 
time enables any who look into it during a full 
moon, to see images of Mulhorand in the days of 
its original empire. It is possible to possess the 
body of an individual from that image, and thus 
experience life in Mulhorand at the height of its 
power. To return home, one must find one's way 
to the font at the time ofthe new moon, when it is 
possible to look back at oneself, and return to 
one's own form, 


of Tomorrow 
XP Value: — GP Value: — 
The Milenian Empire 
This lesser artifact has 240 Power Points and 
recharges at the rate of 10 per turn. 

The fountain was created by Peua as a gift for 
the Milenians. Its purpose is to help these people 
avoid the mistakes of their ancestors, and to guide 
them toward a prosperous future. 

When the Milenians first arrived in the Hollow 
World, they discovered the fountain nearby. Great 
praise was given to both Petra and Halav, and a 
temple was built near the fountain in their honor. 


Around the temple grew a city named Corisa, 
which would become the capital of the Empire 
and the seat of its power. 

The fountain still bubbles merrily in front of 
this grand temple, and is one of the most visited 
and sacred places in the Empire. Milenians from 
all corners of the nation make pilgrimage to the 
Fountain of Tomorrow. For a small donation (5 gp 
or the equivalent in goods), the priests of Petra 
give out small, blue glass vials of the fountain's 
precious water. Though the water remains 
enchanted, it does not retain its full potency. A 
single vial can be used to cure blindness, cure 
disease, or to damage undead monsters, and acts 
like normal holy water. 

The fountain is exquisitely beautiful and made 
of multicolor marble. The ornate bowl is sup- 
ported by the likenesses of Halav and Peua, 
whose arms are clasped around the rim. A stream 
of shimmering water reaches 2 feet into the air 
and cascades down into the bowl. The water orig- 
inates from thin air, and does not spill out of the 
fountain. The artifact stands 4 feet tall. 

Powers: Mortals who have been chosen by 
their Immortals to become oracles may drink 
from the fountain and receive its powers. 
Although it was created by Petra, the followers of 
any Immortal can become oracles by sipping 
from the fountain. Oracles gain the following per- 
manent powers: 

Create Icon (50 PP), the ability to fashion a 
vessel for an Immortal's power. 

Divination (80 PP), the power to "see" the 
future. 

Immunity to disease (20 PP) 

Immunity to poison (40 PP) 

SlowedAging (50 PP): Oracles age at V™ the 
rate of normal mortals. 
When an oracle drinks from the fountain, he or 
she becomes permanently blind. An oracle then 
feels immediately compelled to fashion an icon in 
honor of his or her Immortal, and to seek out that 
Immortal's shrine. An oracle must do nothing else 
until these tasks are complete. 

Oracles suffer no penalties. However, any mor- 
tal who drinks and was not chosen to become an 
oracle is cursed, becoming blind (no saving 
throw), though a remove curse spell negates the 
effect. Those who drink also suffer a -2 penalty 
to all attack rolls and a -4 penalty to all saving 
throws for 1d6 days. 


Note: The fountain oftomorrow cannot be 
1726 


A a a 


498 


Fur of Warmth, Zambi's 


ee ee oi 


moved by mortal hands or transported by mortal 
magic. It can be destroyed if the heart ofentropy 
is thrown into its waters. 


Four-Leaf Clover 

XP Value: 100 GP Value: 1,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
If worn visibly on outer clothing or armor, this 
item gives the user a bonus of +1 on all saving 
throws. However, any sprites, pixies, nixies, or 
other intelligent woodland beings seeing the user 
may become irritated (-2 penalty to reaction 
rolls) and either steal the item (70%) or attack 
(30%). 


Fur 
Furs are the hides of various mammals, cured and 
salted in order to prevent rotting. In some cul- 
tures, wearing the skins of dead animals is a sign 
of wealth and status, in others it marks a person 
of cruelty and boastful sadism, while in still 
others, furs are a necessity of life. 


Anagakok 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 10,000 
The Great Glacier 

Her fur gives her total immunity to the effects of 
cold. She need not wear clothing designed for 
arctic weather, in fact most anagakok wear loose 
leather tunics. However, she suffers normal dam- 
age from cold-based spells and other magically 
generated cold effects (such as a white dragon's 
breath weapon). 


of Elsewhere 
XP Value: 7,000 GP Value: 35,000 
New Item 
Furs ofelsewhere are made from displacer beast 
hides. To manufacture afur of elsewhere, the 
entire hide ofa freshly killed displacer beast must 
be used within one round of its death. The hide 
must be skinned in one fell stroke with an obsid- 
ian knife, and a permanency spell is then cast on 
the pelt. 

Furs ofelswhere allow a wearer to appear to be 
3 feet away from where he or she actually is—so 
any attackers suffer a -1 penalty on attack rolls, 
and the first attack always misses the wearer. 

To determine the true position of the wearer, 
roll 1d10. On a 1-5 the wearer is in front of the 
attacker; on 6 or 7, to the attacker's left; on 8-9 
the right; and on 10 the user is behind the attacker. 


Of course, displacer beasts know instinc- 
tively where a character wearing one of these 
furs is located and what is being worn. Their 
nature is to attack anyone wearing the pelt ofa 
former cousin. 

These furs can be rendered nonmagical by a 
dispel magic spell from an 8th-level caster or by 
the application of nonorganic material on the hide 
(sewing it with a metal needle and fabric thread, 
using buttons, pins, or similar accouterments). 
No other magical items may be used while wear- 
ing afur ofelsewhere. 


of Warmth 

GP Value: 25,000 
Tome of Magic 
These large, white furs (5 by 8 feet) are report- 
edly taken from the skins of creatures native to 
the Paraelemental Plane of Ice. A person wearing 
the fur still feels cold in a cold environment (such 
as the Paraelemental Plane of Ice), but does not 
suffer damage from exposure. 

Anyone wrapped in the fur is immune to the 
natural effects of cold, including the environ- 
ments of the Inner Planes. The wearer takes half- 
damage from cold-based attacks, and need not be 
covered completely by the fur to receive the 
enchanted protection; the fur must simply be 
draped over the shoulders like a cape. Ifthe fur is 
cut into more than one piece, it loses its magical 
property. 

Ifthe fur is worn in pleasant or hot weather, it 
affects the wearer as any other large fur would. 


XP Value: 5,000 


Zambi's Fur of Warmth 

XP Value: 8,000 GP Value: 40,000 
1992 Fantasy Collector Card 513 
Zambi is a hierophant druid who has been travel- 
ing the Elemental Planes for years, now. Recently, 
she found her way into the Paraelemental Plane 
of Ice, where she charmed a native beast and then 
sacrificed it amidst many charm incantations. As 
a result, the pelt she took from the beast not only 
functions as afur ofwarmth, protecting her from 
natural cold damage and halving damage from 
cold-based attacks, but with it she can summon 
and control water and ice elementals (22nd level) 
once per day. Unhappily, creatures from the Ele- 
mental Planes of Fire and Magma are attracted to 
the fur and gain +2 bonuses to their attack rolls 
against its wearer. 


1731 


g 499 > 


Ulta’ 


ie) 


N 


AK wy} 
ry 
A | 
X 
Sï 


wy : 


` , 4 $ 

G VEN ] 
N N N QR 

RN S. 


| 
Sf 


UR 


\ 
L 
\ 


w . 
\ as Aca 
Ñ h ~C 
N 


i 
\ 
j 


N 


WN 


500 


Gaff 


A gaffis a 10- to 20-foot pole that ends in ° 
a metal hook. Sailors use gaffs to pull their craft 
to a dock or, occasionally, to another ship. Gaffs 
can also be used to bring men or cargo to safety if 
they fall overboard. Fishers use gaffs with sharp 
hooks to help land fish. Another type of gaff is a 
kind of overhead spar used to support a quadrilat- 
eral sail. 


of Docking 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

This item is a 15-foot-long wooden pole with a 
metal hook on one end. It is used by sailors to 
pull a ship toward a dock or, occasionally, 
another ship. When used in either manner, the 
gaff magically causes the ship to smoothly 
approach and softly touch the dock or other 
vessel in one round, regardless of the ship's ton- 
nage or cargo. 


of Gaffes 

XP Value: — GP Value: 2,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
This gaff is identical to a gaffofdocking but 
causes the ship to collide with the dock or another 
ship, causing 1d6 points of damage to the hull of 
the user's vessel. The gaff then becomes nonmag- 
ical, but curses the affected ship, causing it to col- 
lide in like manner whenever it approaches 
another ship or is docked. A remove curse spell 
applied by a caster of at least 15th level removes 
the curse. 


Gas of Dreadful Sleep 


XP Value: 200 GP Value: 800 
The Hidden Shrine of Tamoachan 

A save vs. poison must be made every round a 

character is exposed to this gas or the victim falls 

asleep for 5,000 years, or until the gas (a poison) 

is neutralized. It forms a cloud of green swirling 

vapors in a 40-foot, cubic area. 


Gate 


Gates are temporary or permanent portals to 
other planes of existence or to other worlds on the 
same plane. Most gates are quite ordinary in 
appearance, indistinguishable from mundane 
items of similar construction. Some gates can 
create portals to more than one location, although 


Gate, Alternate World: Lute, 


} usually only one such portal can be 
opened at any given time. (See the Planar 
Fork entry under Fork for another method 
of planar travel.) 


Alternate World 
XP Value GP Value 
Blackjack: 5,000 15,000 
Laser Pistol: 5,000 15,000 
Lute: 5,000 15,000 
Pocket Tool: 5,000 15,000 
Star: 5,000 15,000 
Violin Case: 5,000 15,000 


The Book of Marvelous Magic 

A collection of odd, unfamiliar items, when 

these strange gates are touched, each summons a 

being from an alternate world, who appears 

within one turn. At that time, a door appears 

near the item (even if in midair), and a being 

steps through the door, grabs the gate before the 

characters can react (even if it is apparently 

secured, stored, or held) and steps back through 

the doorway. Ifthe characters react quickly, the 

DM may allow them to step through the door 

and arrive in the alternate world. Once in such a 

world, the characters must locate a gem of 
returning to go back to their own world. The 

characters might not remain human after pass- 

ing through the gate, depending on the alternate 
world they visit. The DM and the players should 
discuss the change at that time—severe changes 
should be optional, not forced. 

Alternate world gates should be selected, not 
randomly decided. The various items and beings 
linked to them are: 

Blackjack: This small, heavy cudgel is made 
of leather wrapped about a strip of steel. It sum- 
mons an agent from the TOP SECRET* game: a 
short, wiry, blond human wearing a black woolen 
outfit. The agent might stop and eye the charac- 
ters suspiciously but does not speak. 

Laser Pistol: This is a plastic and chrome 
cylinder with a grip on one end. It cannot be 
fired without the user first spending 1d4+1 
turns experimenting. The pistol summons a 
security robot from the GAMMA WORLD® cam- 
paign setting—a metallic humanoid with two 
arms and two tentacles, each about 33 inches 
long. The robot may mutter something about 
"restricted areas" but does not attack or other- 
wise converse. 


Lute: This musical instrument is 2 feet long. A 
1738 


Fe a ee ee a 


501 


Gate of Symmetry 


OR 


long, thin neck makes up one half, and a round, 
flat-topped ornate box the other. Strings of 
unknown material are attached to each end. The 
lute summons a bard from anywhere, a normal, 
well-armed but unarmored human. He is clad in 
green and carrying a flute. He may mutter some- 
thing about incompatibility, but does not other- 
wise converse. 

Pocket Tool: This odd device is 3 inches long 
and may be unfolded to reveal a knife, corkscrew, 
and various other utensils of fine metal manufac- 
ture. The tool summons a Yazirian from the STAR 
FRONTIERS® adventure setting—a human-sized, 
monkey-like being with membranes between its 
arms and body. The creature may bare its teeth 
and snarl at the characters but does not otherwise 
converse. 

Star: This silver five-pointed item is appar- 
ently a brooch. The star summons a sheriff from 
the BOOT HILL* game—a normal man clad in fine 
but thin black leather who wears lumps of metal 
strapped to his hips. He pins the star to his vest 
and might draw one of his metallic hip devices, 
twirls it with one finger, and replaces it. He then 
winks solemnly at the characters and departs. 

Violin Case: This strangely shaped box has 
three hasps; if opened, a golden, furry lining is 
seen but the box is empty. Both the lining and the 
material of the box are unfamiliar. The case sum- 
mons a thug from the GANGBUSTERS™ game—a 
human clad entirely in black, wearing a cloth hat, 
and carrying an odd, metal tube with two handles 
and a large, rounded middle. He may wave the 
device about threateningly but does not attack 
and cannot speak intelligently. 

In Ravenloft: This device does not function in 
the demiplane. 


of Symmetry 

XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 35,000 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 69 
Long before humans recorded history in the 
land of Kara-Tur, a powerful nature spirit resid- 
ing in the depths of a volcano locat'ed some- 
where off the coast of what is now the country 
of Wa began constructing these items to allow 
him quick passage between his island and the 
rest of Kara-Tur. 

Each gateway consists of a bowl and a ring, 
each about a foot across, made of mithral (which 
is very rare in the eastern lands). A gateway of 
symmetry's power is dependent on measurements 


more precise than mortals can make. Even the 
original nature spirit had to laboriously copy each 
gateway from the original, which still lies hidden 
in the volcano, protected by a permanent fime 
stop spell. All attempts to pattern new gateways 
from existing copies fail unless a wish is used to 
make the measurements perfect—even the best 
copies change a little over time. 

The most effective method of creating a gate- 
way ofsymmetry requires the 8th-level wizard 
spell gateway. A gateway spell used in this man- 
ner lasts one week, plus one week per level of the 
caster and always has a 100% chance of success. 

Another method to activate a gateway of 
symmetry is to place a magical item into the bowl. 
This destroys the item completely, reducing it to a 
sparkling dust that blows away at the first breeze. 
The bowl does not function with artifacts, relics 
or holy symbols of any kind. When activated in 
this manner, a gateway remains open one round 
for each "plus," each dose of a potion, or for each 
charge left in a magical item. 

Each end of an active gateway of symmetry is a 
vertical, disc-shaped field about 12 feet across. 
The two fields can connect any two points on the 
Prime Material Plane regardless of the distance 
between them, but each half of the gateway must 
be physically placed by the user. Unlike the gate- 
way spell, a portal created by a gateway ofsym- 
metry allows nonliving matter to pass freely 
through it. 

Gateways of symmetry can also be linked into a 
network which allows creatures with the proper 
command words to enter at any point and travel 
to any location in the network. Each location has 
its own command word. Once opened with the 
proper command word, the gateway remains 
open, allowing nonliving matter and creatures 
who don't know the command word to follow the 
same path, in either direction, followed by the 
user who spoke the command word. A separate 
command word closes the gateway. 

Using a magical item requires no command 
word, only a very clear thought of the destination 
gate. Ifthe user does not know where the other 
end of the gateway lies, it cannot be used, though 
the magical item is still destroyed. Once the gate- 
way is opened and used, anyone or anything can 
follow the user, and the gateway can be kept open 
by placing more magic in the bowl. Currently 
there are between 50 and 100 gateways of symme- 


try in the Prime Material Plane. 
1742 


FE ee a 


5 


2 


Gauntlets of Dexterity II 


SS A 


Gauntlet 


Gauntlets are armored gloves. They can be made 
of leather, metal plates, or chain mail. Every suit 
of armor is assumed to include gauntlets of an 
appropriate type. Magical gauntlets tend to be 
finer, lighter, and more easily worn than normal 
varieties. They automatically enlarge or shrink to 
fit any wearer from pixie- to giant-size. 


Roll Gauntlet Type 
01-08 Bagh Nakh 
09-17 Cestus 
18-25 Claw 
26-33 Clawrazor 
34-42 Gauntlet 
43-47 Hora 
48-52  Ioratsume 
53-58 Nagodarika 
59-67 Nekode 
68-75  Punch-cutter* 
76-83 Talatra 
84-92 Punch-cutter* 
93-00 Tiger's claws 
Claw of the Bear 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 5,000 


DRAGON Magazine 187 

This minor magical item consists of a set of sup- 
ple gauntlets which, upon mental command, 
extrude sharp, enchanted bear claws (the 
gauntlets save vs. attacks as soft metal). A druid 
wearing these gauntlets has two attacks per round 
in melee combat. The gloves are +1 weapons, and 
each inflicts 1d3+2 points of damage per strike. 
Additionally, a druid using these claws may climb 
trees with no chance of falling and may climb 
irregular stone surfaces such as mountains and 
mortared walls as a thief with a base 75% success 
rate, modified by race and dexterity. 


Clawed 

GP Value: 12,000 
luz the Evil 
These iron gauntlets are usable by priests and 
warriors. They appear as strong, tough, but 
unusually flexible, steel gauntlets. When a com- 
mand word is spoken, the fingers of the gauntlets 
sprout viciously curved, talons, several inches in 
length. The gauntlets may then be used as weap- 
ons in melee combat. A successful melee hit from 
a gauntlet inflicts 1d4+4 points of damage on an 


XP Value: 2,000 


opponent, and on a successful attack roll of 18+, 
a paralyzing venom is injected into the victim. 
The struck creature is allowed a saving throw vs. 
poison. If this is successful, the creature is unaf- 
fected, but ifthe throw fails, it must make a Con- 
stitution check each subsequent round (for four 
rounds), or become paralyzed for 2d10 turns. 

Clawed gauntlets are not usable as melee 
weapons if the creature employing them holds a 
weapon. Clawed gauntlets are usually found in 
pairs, although they may be used singly. For 
instance, a fighter could employ a clawed gaunt- 
let in one hand and a shield in the other. How- 
ever, if a combatant wears only one clawed 
gauntlet with a different gauntlet (or nothing) on 
the other hand, a-1 penalty is imposed on all 
attack rolls due to imbalance. Finally, a priest 
wearing clawed gauntlets cannot cast spells with 
a somatic component when the gauntlets' claws 
are unsheathed. 


Climbing Claws 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 8,000 
Rage of the Rakasta 

This is a special type of toratsume that has been 
modified to make them useful as climbing 
devices. Any thief character who uses climbing 
claws when attempting to scale a wall or other 
surface will gain a +10% bonus to his or her abil- 
ity. The claws will also fit an elf or any of the 
other human character classes. In these cases, 
they give the wearer a flat 10% chance to climb 
walls as if the character were a thief. Rakasta 
characters can use the climbing claws in combat 
just as they would an ordinary pair of toratsume. 
Any other type of character using the claws to 
fight will be able to strike only once with them in 
any combat round, doing 1d4 points of damage 
on a successful hit. 


of Dexterity 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 10,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
These gloves raise the user's Dexterity score to 18 
when worn. The user gains all bonuses derived by 
that. 


of Dexterity I 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 10,000 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 
A pair of these gloves appears to be nothing more 


than lightweight leather hand-wear of the every- 
1747 


ye ee 


503 


Gauntlets of Entrapment 


) i i 


day sort. Naturally, they radiate magic if detect 
magic is cast. They size themselves magically to 
fit any hand, from that of a huge human to that of 
a small halfling. Gauntlets ofdexterity increase 
overall Dexterity by four points if the wearer's 
Dexterity is 6 or less, by two points if at 7 to 13, 
and by one point if Dexterity is 14 or higher. Fur- 
thermore, wearing these gloves enables a nonthief 
to pick pockets (95% chance) or open locks (37% 
chance) as ifhe or she were a 4th-level thief. If 
worn by a thief, they increase these two abilities 
by 10%. 


of Entrapment 

XP Value: — GP Value: 1,200 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
These gauntlets appear to be and may even 
function as gauntlets of ogre power. However, 
there is a 50% chance per use that they will 
cause the wearer to drop any items held; the 
gloves then clasp themselves together, prevent- 
ing their use. Once clasped, the gauntlets cannot 
be unfastened and the entrapped hands cannot 
be pulled loose from them until a remove curse 
spell is applied. They may be used as often as 
desired, and the remove curse does not destroy 
their powers. 


Fire Claws 
XP Value: 9,000 GP Value: 50,000 
IMAGINE Magazine 29 

These two clawed gauntlets of red metal scales 
are gem-encrusted and act as gauntlets ofdefense 
AC 0. Each acts as a short sword +5 in combat 
and as the functional equivalent of a ring of fire 
resistance. Because they are unwieldy, it is 
impossible to wearfire claws and use any other 
hand held item. 


Fjalar's 
GP Value: 10,000 
Legends & Lore 
Fjalar wears a pair of magic gauntlets +3 that 
allow him to strike for 2dlO damage. 


XP Value: 2,000 


of Fumbling 

GP Value: 1,000 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 
These gauntlets may be of supple leather or any 
heavy, protective material suitable for use with 
armor (rings, scale, chain). In the former instance, 
they appear to be gauntlets ofdexterity; in the lat- 
ter case, the gauntlets look like gauntlets ofogre 
power. They perform according to every test as if 
they are gauntlets ofdexterity or ogre power until 
the wearer is under attack or in a life-or-death sit- 


XP Value: — 


. 
J 
o] 
4 
s; 


O 
+, 
NI 


% 


A 
A 


VS, il eS 
LOREAL OR 


Gauntlet, Hand of Remote Action 


j eee a 


uation. At that time, the curse is activated, and the 
wearer becomes very clumsy, with a 50% chance 
each round of dropping anything held in either 
hand. The gauntlets also lower overall Dexterity 
by 2 points. Once the curse is activated, the 
gloves can be removed only by means of a remove 
curse spell or a wish. 


Glim-Gauntlet 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 4,000 
The Ruins of Undermountain 

The method of making these single gauntlets is 
largely forgotten. They were once the most common 
magical item in Waterdeep. Woven of metallic 
fibers, they magically alter size to fit the wearer. 
They can handle sharp objects and pass through 
flame and heat without damage to the wearer's hand. 

A glim-gauntlet is named for its power to glow 
with a soft yellow radiance akin to faerie fire 
upon the mental command of the wearer. The 
light can be varied from bright (not blinding) to a 
dim glow, and can last without limit, so long as 
the glove is worn by a living being. A glim-gaunt- 
let can also cause magical dweomers (the auras of 
enchanted items, not living things) to glow faintly 
when touched by the gauntlet. The strength of 
such auras roughly corresponds to the power of 
the magical item touched. 


NGO, ONO 
Sew 


ORO oe 


Hand of Remote Action 
XP Value: 1,400 GP Value: 16,500 
DRAGON Magazine 99 

Also known as a wonderful hand, this unusual 
creation is actually two devices—a gauntlet of 
steel that changes size to fit the hand of any 
wearer (halfling through human), and a "hand" of 
solid steel, identical to the gauntlet in size and 
appearance. The two items are magically 
linked, so that the hand mimics all actions of the 
gauntlet from a distance of 10 feet per point of 
Wisdom possessed by the wearer. Thus, the 
wearer of the hand ofremote action may grasp at 
empty air and the hand, some distance away, 
grasps at an enemy. The positioning and move- 
ment of the hand are under the complete control 
of the gauntlet wearer as long as the hand is 
within the maximum allowable distance and 
remains within the sight of the wearer. 

All attacks made by the hand are at -1, due to 
the difficulty of accurately judging distances 
from afar. 

The hand may transport weapons, but it cannot 
be used to wield them or hurl them; its chief use 
is to manipulate dangerous items and to disarm 
traps and locks from a distance. It is particularly 
suited for use by thieves, although any class may 
employ the item. 


BS. 
iN 


Wg NY 


PARRA 


Gauntlets of Heat 


Dene ee ee SE ee ie 


The hand, unless its speed is markedly 
increased (by telekinesis or similar means), does 
1d8 points of damage per blow. For purposes of 
bending bars, opening doors, and similar 
actions, it has the same effective Strength as the 
gauntlet wearer. It cannot be destroyed by physi- 
cal attacks, but it becomes inert if it takes blows 
amounting to 20 points of damage. It can be 
"recharged," negating all damage, by bringing it 
into contact with the gauntlet before the 20 point 
limit is reached. If it falls inert, either from 
damage or by moving out of sight of the gaunt- 
let wearer, it must be "replenished" by keeping 
it within the maximum distance for a period of 
one day for each day (or fraction of it) that it 
was inert; so even a momentary loss of control 
over the hand causes it to become useless for 
one day. The gauntlet and hand cannot be 
employed in conjunction with any other form of 
magical gauntlets. The hand cannot be con- 
trolled when the wearer is being attacked psioni- 
cally, or is the target of some form of 
mind-control magic; however, it will remain 
functional, and can be used again as soon as the 
wearer is no longer under mental attack. 

The hand ofremote action cannot be damaged 
by fire, heat, cold, or electricity, but if it is hit by 
a magical force of one of these sorts, the spell 
effect is transmitted at half-strength to the gaunt- 
let wearer. For instance, if the hand is hit by a 

fireball of 8d6 strength, the gauntlet wearer takes 
4d6 of damage, or 2d6 if a saving throw is made. 
Neither the gauntlet nor the hand is subject to any 
form of rust or corrosion, including attacks by 
rust monsters. 


of Heat 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 10,000 
DRAGON Magazine 91 
These gloves are capable of generating heat and 
fire on the mental command of the wearer. A set 
of gauntlets ofheat is capable of producing the 
following powers—the wearer can produce flame 
and heat metal six times per day per gauntlet, and 
use burning hands three times per day. The 
gauntlets can also be used to ignite up to 12 
arrows or crossbow bolts a day, like the spell 
‘flame arrow. All spell effects are at the 12th level 
of ability. 


of Holding 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 10,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

The wearer of these gloves may hold onto any 
other item or creature without letting go. When 
used in hand-to-hand combat, a normal attack roll 
must first be successful, but the wearer may hold 
onto the victim after that, squeezing if desired for 
1 d4 points of damage per round (plus Strength 
bonus). The wearer's Dexterity bonus to Armor 
Class (ifany) does not apply while holding onto a 
stationary object or creature. 


Iron Gauntlet of Urnst 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 12,000 
GREYHAWK Adventures 

This item was created by an iron-fisted wizard 
who wanted a magical item to symbolize his phi- 
losophy of life. It is a leather gauntlet covered 
with flat iron plates on the upper surface. When 
used in melee combat, the wearer has one attack 
per round with a +2 to the attack. Damage 
inflicted is determined on the following table: 


Roll Result 
01-12 Glancing blow: 1d6 points 
13-16 Solid punch: 2d6 points 
17-19 Hard punch: 3d6 points and opponent 
is stunned next round 
20 Crushing blow: 4d6 points and oppo- 


nent is stunned for next three rounds 


Add +4 to the next attack, and result rolls 
against a stunned opponent instead of +2. 


of Might 
GP Value: 70,000 
Twilight Calling 
The gauntlets of might allow the wearer to do 
double damage (as a girdle ofgiant strength) 
three times a day, and have the power of regener- 
ation (as the ring). 


XP Value: 8,000 


of Meander 
XP Value: 2,500 GP Value: 15,000 
Curse of the Azure Bonds 
The gauntlets of Moander are a set of bulky, mag- 
ical gloves forged by priests of Moander long 
ago, in the years before their god was banished 
and imprisoned. They were originally designed to 
destroy the pool ofradiance, the home of Tyran- 


thraxus. The mere threat of these gloves was suf- 
1758 


AA E a a, 


506 


~ Gauntlets of Super Strength y- 


ficient to cause Tyranthraxus to flee Yulash. 

The gauntlets have the image of an open mouth 
in each palm. In the presence of the pool ofradi- 
ance, the mouths activate, and beams of light 
arch out, linking with the pool itself. In five 
rounds it will suck the energy dry from the pool, 
sealing it forever. The gauntlets then fall dormant, 
losing all magical abilities, until a new pool of 
radiance is opened. 

The gauntlets have a number of beneficial 
effects: 

Give the wearer AC 2. 

Function as gauntlets ofogre power. 

e Provide +2 on saving throws vs. spell. 

e Allow the wearer to communicate with (but 
not command) all plant life. 

The wearer is also more susceptible to the 
effects of Meander's own magic, saving at 4. 


of Ogre Power 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 15,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
These gauntlets give the wearer 18 Strength and the 
bonuses gained by that. The wearer may choose not 
to use a weapon, striking instead with one fist each 
round and gaining a +3 bonus to the attack roll, 
inflicting 1d4 points of damage per hit (no bonus). 


of Ogre Power II 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 10,000 

DUNGEON MASTER Guide 
These appear the same as typical handgear for 
armor. The wearer of these gloves, however is 
imbued with 18/00 Strength in his or her hands, 
arms, and shoulders. When striking with the hand 
or with a weapon hurled or held, the gauntlets add 
a+3 bonus to attack rolls and a +6 bonus to dam- 
age inflicted when a hit is successful. These 
gauntlets are particularly desirable when com- 
bined with a girdle of giant strength and a hurled 
weapon. They grow or shrink to fit any creature 
from human to halfling. 


of Polishing 

XP Value: 370 GP Value: 3,750 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 43 
While wearing these gauntlets, an individual is 
able to thoroughly clean and polish any object 
made of metal in Moth the time normally needed. 
These gauntlets are highly prized by metal smiths 
and invaluable for cleaning and drying armor 
before it rusts. 


of Proficiency 

GP Value: 5,000 
DRAGON Magazine 181 
Rumors tell of magical gauntlets that impart pro- 
ficiency with any weapon when worn. Gauntlets 
of proficiency would certainly be valuable, partic- 
ularly to someone with a large arsenal of magical 
weapons. Ifthe DM is very stingy with such 
weapons, gauntlets of proficiency may be intro- 
duced to the party. 


XP Value: 500 


Razor Claws of Chakyik 

XP Value: 1,500 GP Value: 12,000 
GREYHAWK Adventures 
These were created by a wizard loyal to the Tiger 
Lord of the northwest. Always appearing in 
pairs, each razor claw of the set consists of four 
curved daggers attached to a leather gauntlet. 
The weapon gives +2 attack and 1d6+2 damage, 
and requires no special proficiency for use. 
When both claws are used at once, a PC has two 
attacks per round ifhis or her class level does not 
already allow it. 


of Specialization 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 10,000 
DRAGON Magazine 181 
Rumors tell of magical gauntlets that impart spe- 
cialization with any weapon when worn. 
Gauntlets ofspecialization would certainly be 
valuable, particularly to someone with a large 
arsenal of magical weapons. Gauntlets of special- 
ization, however, can well cost the DM the cam- 
paign unless extreme care is used. 


of Sticking 

XP Value: 100 GP Value: 1,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
These gloves are identical to gauntlets ofholding, 
but the user is unable to remove them. Each 
gauntlet adheres to any item it touches, to a maxi- 
mum of three. Ifany item weighs more than 300 
pounds, the wearer can pull loose in six rounds. 
The items cannot otherwise be removed until 
remove curse is applied by a caster of at least 
15th level. 


of Super Strength 
XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 30,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
This pair of gloves appears to be and functions as 


gauntlets ofogre power, but when commanded, 
1766 


a te ae aay ne TN 


507 


Gauntlets of Swimming and Climbing 


they raise the wearer's Strength even further. The 
wearer is then able to carry 200 pounds of addi- 
tional weight and gains a +5 bonus to both attack 
and damage rolls. This effect lasts only one turn 
and may be used only once per day. However, 
immediately after the effect ends, the user must 
stop and eat a full meal or suffer a -4 penalty to 
Strength, Dexterity, and Constitution scores and a 
-4 penalty to all saving throws. Ifa delay of more 
than one turn occurs before dining, these penal- 
ties apply for at least eight hours or until two full 
meals and a good night's rest have been obtained. 


of Swimming and Climbing 

XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 10,000 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 
A pair of these gloves looks normal, like light- 
weight hand wear, but they radiate magic if detec- 
tion is attempted. The wearer can have hands of 
large (human) or small (halfling) size, but gains 
the ability to swim as fast as a triton (MV 15) 
underwater, and as fast as a merman (MV 18) on 
the surface. The gauntlets do not grant the ability 
to breathe in water. 

The gloves give the wearer a very strong grip- 
ping ability with respect to climbing. He or she 
can climb vertical or nearly vertical surfaces, up 
or down, with a 95% chance of success. If the 
wearer is a thief, the gauntlets increase success 
probability to 99%. 


ofTamus 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 10,000 
DRAGON Magazine 159 

This heavy steel gauntlet's origin is unknown, 
despite any number of people who claim to know 
the "truth of such matters." This device, made of 
light chain mail and sheathed with metal plate, 
has become a highly prized tool for the giff—an 
item so great in power and danger that it would 
suit no other race. The gauntlet of famus received 
its name in an isolated skirmish during the Unhu- 
man Wars. A giff mercenary found the gauntlet in 
a cave on an asteroid in the Calotian system. 
Wearing it into battle against some very surprised 
elves, Tamus found the gauntlet's power of gener- 
ating explosions of tremendous force much to his 
liking. Though he soon succumbed to excessive 
damage in battle (mostly caused by the gauntlet), 
Tamus secured a place for himself in giff folk- 
lore. 

As any giff will tell you, the gauntlet's correct 


name is the mighty gauntlet of Colonel Tamus 
Ewdun, field commander and subadmiral of the 

fleet. The gauntlet can create an explosion three 
times per day, not unlike afireball but without 
flames, that does 5d8 points of damage to any 
opponent within 5 feet of it. The blast is centered 
on the gauntlet, subjecting the wearer to half dam- 
age. Nonetheless, it fills the bill for the perfect giff 
weapon—it looks impressive with one's uniform, 
does tremendous amounts of damage, and the 
explosions are fantastic displays of thunder and 
fury. It matters not at all that the wearer is subject to 
damage as well; any true giff would smile in the 
heart of such an explosion—tt is the mark ofa great 
warrior. The gauntlet's explosion can, if used 
against ships, do 1d4 hull points damage. 

Another liability of this item, the main reason 
why the giffhave kept it to themselves, is that the 
gauntlet shrinks to fit the hand it is placed on and 
never comes off! Its magic seems tied to the 
wearer's life force, since the gauntlet comes loose 
only upon the wearer's death. There are many 
sages of the mysteries who would love some 
answers about this item; quite frankly, though, 
there are few that wish to get close enough to its 
current wielder to ask about it. 

The gauntlet of Tamus is currently worn by 
General Saerlg Tomojak, diplomatic envoy for 
the giffto the Rock of Bral. His violent temper, 
undiminished even after years of military disci- 
pline, makes him a poor diplomat; nevertheless, 
people consider what Saerlg's angry fist can do 
and concede to his wishes. As such, the giff have 
received many "favors" from Prince Andru in 
return for keeping Bral's landscape intact. 


The Gauntlet 
XP Value: — GP Value: — 
The Gauntlet 
The gauntlet is made of tough black leather. It 
appears to have been made for a large human left 
hand but is actually capable of fitting any left 
hand. It has iron studs along the fingers and four 
rough gray-green gems set in the palm. 

The gauntlet has a personality and purpose. 
They should be treated in a manner similar to 
those of intelligent swords. It has an Intelligence 
of 15 and an Ego of 18, and thus a personality of 
33. Its alignment is neutral evil and it will attempt 
to dominate its bearer as soon as it is put on. If 
the victim succumbs, he or she becomes a slave 


to the gauntlet's commands. The gauntlet does 
1769 


a 508 `~ 


ATEA SZ URI 
NUTONE SASS. NO ES AS 
RRN OER EERE, SS X 

285 - a 2%. es SS 


{ # 
npag 5 
mi i) y 
fr Ne 
i ay aheg 


Ui 
eyni 


~ Gauntlets of the Valorous r 


not allow the use of any ofits powers by creatures 
it does not control. Any character of nonevil 
alignment who puts on the gauntlet suffers 1d8 
points of damage each round that it is worn. The 
gauntlet only attempts to control nonevil crea- 
tures under exceptional circumstances, in which 
case it leaves the creature with 1 hit point. 

Ifa PC dons the gauntlet and becomes dominated 
by it, the DM should immediately take control of 
the character from the player and direct its actions 
according to the desires of the gauntlet. Control of 
the character can only be restored to the player if the 
gauntlet is removed. Removal requires the applica- 
tion ofan exorcize spell cast at the 20th level. Crea- 
tures wearing the gauntlet who are not under its 
control are able to remove it without difficulty. 

The original purpose of the gauntlet was the 
destruction of the Keep at Adlerweg, but during 
the years it lay dormant it became dissatisfied 
and planned to capture and control the Keep, 
rather than destroy it. 

The gauntlet fears the Sentinel greatly since, if 
they are brought together, the gauntlet will be 
destroyed. 

Powers: There are two kinds of magical abilities 
that the gauntlet can employ—those that are per- 
manent and may be used at will, and those which 
may only be used for a limited period. These pow- 
ers are only available to a PC who has been com- 
pletely taken over by the personality of the gauntlet. 
Permanent Powers: 

The wearer gains a number of Hit Dice or levels 
(as appropriate). The number gained depends on 
the original level and Hit Dice ofthe wearer: 


Original level Levels/Hit 
/Hit Dice Dice gained 
less than 1 5 

1-3 4 

4-6 3 

7-9 2 
11-12 1 
more than 12 0 


The wearer gains all hit points, THACO, saving 
throw and magic resistance benefits of the 
acquired level, but no extra spell casting or spe- 
cial abilities. 

e The wearer regenerates 5 points of damage 
per round, even when reduced below 0. 

The wearer is protected by the equivalent of a 
permanent protectionfrom normal missiles spell. 


The wearer has a permanent shocking grasp 
ability that adds 1d6+1 hit points of electrical 
damage to any hit scored with the hand wear- 
ing the gauntlet. This damage does not apply 
ifa weapon is used. 

The wearer has an equivalent Charisma of 18 
when dealing with creatures of evil alignment. 
This is due to the emanations of power from 
the gauntlet and if it is destroyed, all creatures 
previously subject to its influence are affected 
by the equivalent of afear spell. 

The wearer is no more than an automaton under 
the control of the gauntlet, and is immune to 
charm, command, confusion, ESP, fear, feeble- 
mind, forget, friends, geas, holdperson, quest, 
scare, sleep, and suggestion spells. 
Limited Use Powers: 

The gauntlet may become the equivalent of a 
maul of the titans (duration five rounds; see 
Hammer) three times each day. It may be 
automatically wielded by its wearer (regard- 
less of size or strength) but it can only be used 
for damaging structures and not as a weapon. 
The wearer may cast a.fear spell once per day 
(duration six rounds). 

The wearer may cast a know alignment spell 
three times per day. 


of the Valorous 
XP Value: 10,000 GP Value: 45,000 
The Ruins of Myth Drannor 

Made for the heroes of Myth Drannor, these magi- 
cal gloves vary in appearance from massive, sil- 
very, elbow length, war gauntlets to delicate open 
versions consisting of five knuckle-rings linked to 
wrist bracelets by fine chains, along which can be 
found various ornamentation (sometimes including 
storage lockets for powders, scent, gems, or coins). 

Ifa single gauntlet is worn, the wearer can punch 
with it in battle for 1d4+l damage, making all 
attack rolls at +3. It is supple enough to permit the 
wearer to cast spells while wearing it, and causes the 
wearer's spells to have the maximum possible 
effects (overriding all the magic-affecting powers of 
the mythal, but not any victim-saving throws). The 
wearer also gains a +1 bonus on all saving throws. 

If any two gauntlets ofthe valorous are worn, 
the pair together has all the powers and properties 
of a single gauntlet, plus 1d3 of the following 
powers (find randomly with a 1dl2 roll; these 
powers are mentally revealed to the wearer once 


both gloves are donned, and are not changeable): 
1770 


ye ase ee ee 


510 


Gauntlets of the Valorous 


i SSS 4 


Roll Extra Power 

01 Regenerate (as the 7th-level priest spell) by 
gauntlet-touch, twice/day. 

02 Resurrection (as the 7th-level priest spell, 
cast by a 20th-level priest) by gauntlet 
touch, once/day. 

03 Chain lightning (as the 6th-level wizard 
spell, first arc of bolt dealing 12d6 damage) 
from pointed gauntlet, three times per day. 

04 Stone toflesh or its reverse (as the 6th-level 
wizard spell) of up to 180 cubic feet total 
volume, by gauntlet touch, once per day 
(one act of eitherflesh to stone or stone to 

flesh, not once each). 

05 Telekinesis as the 5th-level wizard spell— 
the single round version that hurls objects 
away—as if cast by a 12th-level wizard: 
objects of up to 300 pounds total can be 
hurled, suffering 12 points of damage if 
they strike solid objects in flight, affecting 
objects and beings touched by a gauntlet 
within a single round. Multiple objects can 
be touched and willed to fly away, and this 
goes on until the weight limit is exceeded. 
The object that is "over" won't be affected. 
This power is usable twice a day. 

06 Four times per day, the wearer of the gaunt- 
let can unleash a power blow when a suc- 
cessful attack is landed. The attack does 
normal damage, plus 3d6 points of smiting 
damage (and the victim must save vs. spell 
or be knocked down, its hold on weapons, 
ladders, railings, captives, masts, and the 
like automatically broken). 

07 Either one of the gauntlets can emit a name 
blade (as the 2nd-level priest spell, dealing 
1d4+4 points of damage plus 2 more if the 
victim is undead or especially vulnerable to 
fire, and -2 if it is protected against fire); 
this power can be evoked a total of twice per 
day, regardless of which glove is used. 

08 By touch, a gauntlet can heal (as the 6th- 
level priest spell), once a day. 

09 Each gauntlet can emit repulsion (as the 6th- 
level wizard spell) once/day: undead caught 
in this special repulsion effect must save vs. 
spell at -2 or boil away, suffering 2d4 points 
of damage to their unlife. 

10 A gauntlet can polymorph other (as the 4th- 
level wizard spell) once/day, by touch; vic- 
tim is allowed a normal saving throw, and is 
not required to make a system shock sur- 


vival roll for the transformation (but unless 
naturally a shapeshifting creature, any later 
change back to normal form involves a sys- 
tem shock survival roll). 

11 A gauntlet can hold monster once per day, 
by touch (as the S5th-level wizard spell, but 
only one creature can be affected—save vs. 
spell at -3 to escape the spell effects). 

12 Both gauntlets can, upon command, emit 
electrical discharges that they conduct 
directly to foes with punch attacks, or that 
is added to the damage done by any weapon 
wielded by either gauntlet; the damages 
done are an additional 2d4 points; this 
power can be used once per turn, and last 
one round each time—but can affect both 
gauntlets if desired, so that a high-level 
fighter employing two weapons, one in 
either hand, during the same round would 
gain 2d4 extra damage on both. (Weapons 
and struck items normally requiring an 
item saving throw vs. lightning are forced 
to make such throws, so that the gauntlet 
wearer can easily destroy his or her own 
weapon unintentionally.) 


When a matched pair of gauntlets ofthe valor- 
ous is used in a certain way (say, to swing a mag- 
ical sword) or to do a certain thing (to slay a 
baatezu or a dragon), they attain fulfillment. This 
purpose, set when they were created, is rarely 
known to the wearer, and cannot be divined by 
magical means. 

Upon fulfillment, the gloves blaze with light 
and vanish, healing their wearer, and removing all 
afflictions as would an elixir ofhealth. The 
wearer also gains 1 d4 permanent hit points, a 
one-point gain on any ability score (randomly 
chosen, not player's choice), and another perma- 
nent ability. (Choose randomly from the follow- 
ing table, rolling 1d8 and rerolling if it's an ability 
the being already possessed.) 


Roll Permanent Ability 

Ol JInfravision (as the spell), whenever concen- 
trated. 

02 Being gains +40% to base success rate for 
climbing (see the PHB). 

03 Being gains a bonus of +1 on all attack rolls 
with a particular type of weapon (specific, 
such as a long sword, but not a broader cate- 


gory such as "sword"). 
1770 


g 511 = 


~ Gauze of Appearance E 


04 Being gains a 40% chance to notice traps 
(as a thief finds traps), even when not con- 
centrating (a being already having this abil- 
ity gains a +40% bonus). 

Being gains the same chances to detect 
depth and grade as a dwarf has (see the 
PHB); note that the dwarven miners’ apti- 
tudes for detecting new construction, slid- 
ing or shifting areas or traps are not gained. 
Being gains a base chance of 40% to move 
silently (as a thief; a being already having 
this ability gains a +40% bonus). 

Being gains the ability to dimension door 
(as a 7th-level wizard does, but without any 
spell). 

Being can pass without trace once per day 
(as the Ist-level priest spell—but no magi- 
cal trail is left). 


05 


06 
07 


08 


Note that these fulfillment benefits are perma- 
nent, and do not depend on alignment, behavior, 
presence ofthe mythal, or proximity to where the 
gloves vanished. 


Wonderful Hand 


See Hand of Remote Action, above. 


Gauze of Appearance 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 9,000 
Draconomicon 

Although this item was created by dragons and is 
still crafted almost exclusively by them, it can be 
used by intelligent creatures of any race or class. It 
takes the form ofa small sheet of the thinnest, most 
filmy material imaginable. It's effectively invisible 
unless a creature is actively looking for it, and even 
then the chance of noticing it is only 60%. 

To be effective, the gauze needs to be draped 
around the top of a doorway or portal so that any- 
one trying to pass through the portal must brush the 
gauze. The gauze immediately makes any invisible 
creature that touches it visible again. In addition, 
the creature who touched the gauze is totally con- 
vinced he or she is still invisible, and unwilling to 
believe anyone who tries to claim otherwise. 

Gauze ofappearance also dissipates any illu- 
sions that pass through it, and strips away the 
effects of minor spells like change self: Even the 
effects of a hat ofdisguise or a similar item is 
reversed by the gauze. 

Dragons frequently drape lengths of gauze 
around their treasure hoards. Although they can 


usually detect invisible intruders, any animal 
guards they may be using might not be so lucky. 


Gavel 


A gavel is a small wooden mallet, a noisemaker, 
used by rapping it sharply against a piece of wood. 
Gavels are used by auctioneers to get attention, and 
by magistrates to call courts to order, conclude sen- 
tencing, or quiet outbursts during court. 


of Auctions 
XP Value: 400 GP Value: 2,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

This small wooden mallet is used by rapping it 
sharply on a piece of wood. It has no effect unless 
three or more creatures are within 30 feet when it 
is used. At that time, the user of the gavel must 
offer to the highest bidder all magical items car- 
ried. Any bid will suffice, and the wielder of the 
gavel must hand over each item sold and collect 
the payment. If everyone refuses to bid, the item 
passes; the victim keeps the item and instead suf- 
fers a -1 penalty to attack rolls, damage rolls, and 
saving throws. These penalties are cumulative 
with each item passed, to a maximum penalty of 
-8 each. The auction continues until all magical 
items are sold or passed, or until the gavel is 
destroyed. All items sold at auction are legally the 
property of those buying them, but the original 
owner may withhold command words, if known. 
The original owner must announce this fact when 
the item is sold. The items may be returned later, 
of course, at the discretion of the new owners. A 
remove curse spell from a caster of at least 15th 
level stops the auction by destroying the gavel. A 
remove curse from any level caster removes the 
accrued penalties. 


of Authority 
XP Value: 600 GP Value: 3,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
This item, rapped on any hardwood, raises the 
user's Charisma to 18. However, the effect lasts 
for only one hour, and the gavel functions only 
once a day. 


of Order 
XP Value: 800 GP Value: 4,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
This gavel appears to be a gavel ofauctions but 
causes every living creature within 30 feet to 


make a saving throw vs. spell or be charmed by 
1774 


= 512 ~ 


the user. This limited charm lasts for only one 
hour and is easily removed by a dispel magic 
spell. The gavel may be used only once a day. 


Gem 

A few definitions concerning gemstones are in 
order. Most minerals (and gems are usually min- 
erals) are of two types—crystalline, occurring as 
single stones or clusters of stones, each having a 
definite structure that is regularly repeated 
throughout crystals of the same sort; or massive, 
occurring as continuous masses of the same min- 
eral, having no regular structure that is readily 
discernible. (Technically, massive minerals are 
actually composed of a great number of micro- 
scopic crystals in most cases.) 

Crystalline stones are oftenfaceted, a process by 
which they are flaked or ground into a series of flat 
surfaces that together usually form one of several 
customary cuts, in the shape of symmetrical but 
irregular polyhedra. Both crystalline and massive 
stones may be smooth cut, which is the act of form- 
ing them into regular shapes with flat surfaces suit- 
able for engraving (those often found in rings). 
They may be made into cabochons, oval or dome- 
shaped, with one flat side for mounting. They may 
also be carved into beads, figurines, symbols, and 
other shapes, or simply polished in the natural 
shape of the stone. Massive stones are sometimes 
found in large enough masses to be shaped like one 
would shape wood or stone; sections may be sawn 
offa large stone and used decoratively as slabs; or 
they may be carved (or even turned on lathes) into 
jars, bowls, and other functional shapes. 

Inclusions are any of the specks of other materi- 
als, bubbles, tiny flaws, impurities, and the like 
which affect the appearance of a stone by their 
presence. Cat's-eyes, found among many mineral 
families, are caused by certain patterns of inclu- 
sions which, when a stone is shaped properly, 
appear similar to the slit-shaped pupil ofa cat's eye. 
Star gems have analogous patterns creating the illu- 
sion of a pale, six-rayed star. Both cat's-eyes and 
stars must usually be cut as cabochons to display 
the effects (known by the terms chatoyancy and 
asterism respectively). The value of a given stone 
will depend on its size, color, relative freedom from 
flaws, and the skill with which it has been cut. 

Those mystical properties associated with the 
various gems are to be associated with the "clas- 
sical" forms; thus, while topaz exists in blue, col- 
orless, and pink varieties, the mystical properties 


5 


1 


3 


Gem 


Gem 


jo See eer E ee 


associated with the various gems are to be associ- 
ated with the "classical" forms; thus, while topaz 
exists in blue, colorless, and pink varieties, the 
mystical properties with which topaz is credited 
are linked only to the traditional honey-yellow 
stone (and the similarly colored "oriental topaz"). 
When stones normally occur in a number of dif- 
ferent colors, such as with agate, jade, jasper, and 
spinel (to name a few), this restriction does not 
apply. In the following text, each type of gem 
mentioned in the DMG is referenced by at least 
one of its popular names. The information on 
gem category (ornamental, fancy, etc.) and base 
value in gold pieces is taken from the DMG. 

Reputed magical properties of gems: The 
Dungeon Master can use this list in a number of 
ways. The DM may choose gems with appropri- 
ate magical properties as needed material for the 
creation of a magical diagram or as part of the 
material components for the spells listed in the 
Fiendomicon of Iggwilv (see Spellbook). The 
gems marked with an asterisk may also be used to 
refuel Daoud's wondrous lanthorn. 


Gem Type Effects or Uses 

Agate Restful and safe sleep 

Alexandrite Good omens 

Amber Wards off disease 

Amethyst Protects against drunkenness or 
drugging 

Beryl Wards off enemies 

Bloodstone Weather control 

Carbuncle Powers of dragons’ sight 

Carnelian Protection from evil 

Cat's-eye agate Protection from spirits 

Chalcedony Wards against undead 

Chrysoberyl Protection from possession 

Chrysolite Wards off spells 

Chrysoprase Invisibility 

Coral Calms weather, ensures safety in 
river crossings, cures madness, 
halts bleeding 

Diamond Invulnerability vs. undead 

Hematite Aids fighters, heals wounds 

Jacinth Luck for travelers, wards off 
plague, protection from fire 

Jade Skill with music and musical 
instruments 

Jasper Protection from venom 

Jet Soul object material 

Lapis Lazuli Raises morale and courage 

Malachite Protection from falling 


Malachite 
Sunstone 


Moonstone 
Olivine 
Onyx 
Peridot 
Ruby 
Sapphire 


Sapphire 
Sard 
Serpentine 
Topaz 
Turquoise 


Gem Color 
Black 

Blue 

Clear 
Green 


Red 
White 
Yellow 


Wards off spells, evil spirits, and 
poisons 

Wards off spells, evil spirits, and 
poisons 

Causes lycanthropy 

Protection from spells 

Causes discord among enemies 
Wards against enchantments 
Gives good luck 

Aids understanding of problems, 
kills spiders, boosts magical abili- 
ties 

Star Protection from magic 
Benefits wisdom 

Adds to wile and cunning 

Wards off evil spirits 

Aids horses in all ways (but the 
stone shatters when it operates) 


Meaning or Significance 

The Earth, darkness, negation. 
The heavens, truth, spirituality. 
The sun, luck. 

Venus, reproduction, resurrec- 
tion, sight. 

Control of hemorrhaging, heat. 
The Moon, enigmas. 

Secrecy, homeopathy, jaundice. 


Find the value of each gem or group of gems 
on the table below, and check for gem variations: 


Roll Class Base Value 
01-25 Ornamental Stones 10 gp 
26-50 Semiprecious Stones 50 gp 
51-65 Fancy Stones 100 gp 
66-80 Precious Stones 500 gp 
81-90 Hardstones Varies 

91 Shells Varies 
92-99 Gems 1.000gp 
00 Jewels 5,000 gp 


Ten percent of these gems are worth more or 


less than their base value, either because of 
imperfections or a particularly splendid cut. Use 
the Gem Variation Table. 


Roll Result 
1 Stone increases to the next higher value; 
roll again, ignoring a result of 1. 
2 Stone is double base value. 


3 Stone is 10-60% above base value. 
1774 


A E EE Oe S a EN 


514 


78 


Stone is 10-40% below base value. 

Stone is halfbase value. 

Stone is decreased to next lower base 
value; roll 1d6 again, ignoring a result of 6. 
Stone is uncut and in rough form (if pos- 
sible). Value is 10% of that listed until 
polished and cut by someone with jew- 
elry proficiency. At that time, roll again 
on this chart with 1d6. 


Ifthe specific type of stone is desired, go to the 
appropriate table below and roll the stone type. 
Note that some gems have both economic value 
and commodity value if they can be used in creat- 
ing magical items or magical spells. 


Roll 
01-02 
03-04 
05-06 
07-08 
09-10 

11-12 

13-14 

15-16 

17-18 

19-20 
21-22 
23-24 
25-26 
27-28 
29-30 
31-32 
33-34 
35-36 
37-38 
39-40 
41-42 
43-44 
45-46 
47-48 
49-50 
51-52 
53-54 
55-56 
57-58 
59-60 
61-62 
63-64 
65-66 
67-68 
69-70 


Ornamental Stone Type 
Agni Mani 
Algae 
Augelite 
Azurite 
Banded Agate 
Blue Quartz 
Bluestone 
Chrysocolla 
Corstal 
Crown of Silver 
Disthene 
Epidote 
Eye Agate 
Fire Agate 
Fluorspar 
Frost Agate 
Goldline 
Greenstone 
Hematite 
Hyaline 
Lapis Lazuli 
Lynx Eye 
Malachite 
Microcline 
Moss Agate 
Nelvine 
Nune 
Obsidian 
Oolite 
Ophealine 
Rhodochrosite 
Rosaline 
Sagenite 
Sanidine 
Sarbossa 


71-72 

73-74 
75-76 
711-18 
79-80 
81-82 

83-84 
85-86 
87-88 
89-90 
91-92 
93-94 
95-96 
97-98 
99-00 


Roll 
01-02 
03-04 
05-06 
07-08 
09-10 

11-12 

13-15 

16-18 

19-21 
22-24 
25-26 
27-28 
29-30 
31-32 
33-34 
35-36 
37-38 
39-40 
41-43 
44-45 
46-47 
48-49 
50-51 
52-54 
55-56 
57-58 
59-62 
63-64 
65-66 
67-68 
69-72 


Gem 


Satin Spar 
Sharpstone 
Sheen 
Silkstone 
Snowflake Obsidian 
Sunstone 
Thuparlial 
Tiger Eye Agate 
Turquoise 
Variscite 
Violane 
Webstone 
Wonderstone 
Woodtine 
Zarbrina 


Semiprecious Stone Type 
Agate 
Alestone 
Andar 
Aventurine 
Bloodstone 
Boakhar 
Carnelian 
Chalcedony 
Chrysoprase 
Citrine 
Clelophane 
Datchas 
Dioptase 
Gold Sheen 
Hambergyle 
Hydrophane 
Hypersthene 
lol 
Irtios 
Jasper 
Luriyl 
Malacon 
Mellochrysos 
Moonstone 
Mykaro 
Mynteer 
Onyx 
Orprase 
Phenalope 
Rainbow Obsidian 
Rock Crystal 
Samarskite 
Sardonyx 
Serpentine 
Skydrop 


1774 


515 


> Se EY 


83-86 Smoky Quartz 
87-88 | Spodumene 
89-91 Star Rose Quartz 
92-93 Tabasheer 

94.95 Tchazar 

96-97 Witherite 

98-00 Zircon 


RoU Fancy Stone Type 
01-03 Alexandrite 
04-06 Amber 
07-10 Amethyst 
11-13 Angel's Skin 
14-16 Brandeen 
17-20 Cairngorm 
21-23  Chrysobery1l 
24-26 Chrysolite 
27-30 Coral 
31-33 Golden Sapphire 
34-36 Green Sapphire 
37-40 Heliotrope 
4143 Hyacinth 


44-46 Jade 
471-50 Jargoon 
51-53 Jet 


54-56 Kornerupine 
57-60 Laeral's Tears 
61-63 Mocca Stone 
64-66 Octel 

67-70 Precious cat's-eye 
71-73  Scapra 

74-76 Shandon 
77-80 Sinhalite 
81-83 StarDiopside 
84-86 Tourmaline 
87-90 Tremair 
91-93 Ulvaen 
94-96 Waterstar 
97-00  Ziose 


Roll Precious Stone Type 
01-07 Aquamarine 
08-14  Euclase 
15-21 Flamedance 
22-29 Garnet 
30-37 Heliodor 
38-44 Horn Coral 
45-51 Orbaline 
52-59 Pearl 

60-67 Peridot 
68-75 Raindrop 
76-81 Rusteen 


Sphene 
Spinel 
Topaz 


Gem Stone Type 
Black Opal 

Fire Opal 

Jasmal 

Moonbar 

Opal 

Orange Sapphire 
Orblen 

Orl 

Purple Sapphire 
Ravenar 

Red Tears 
Rhodolite 
Sapphire 

Sard 

Shou Lung Topaz 
Shou Lung Amethyst 
Tomb Jade 
Water Opal 
Zendalure 


Jewel Type 
Amaratha 
Beljuril 

Black Sapphire 

Diamond 
Emerald 
Jacinth 

King's Tears 
Rogue Stone 
Ruby 

Shou Lung Emerald 
Star Ruby 

Star Sapphire 


Hardstone Type 

Alabaster (5 sp) 

Archon(2gp) 

Hornbill Ivory (7 sp) 

Iris Agate (2 gp) 
Ivory (1-5 gp, depending on quality) 
Lumachella (26 sp) 

Luspeel (3 gp) 

Marble (3 gp) 
Meerschaum (2 gp) 

Pipestone (1 gp) 

Psaedros (6 sp) 


Serpentine Stone (3 gp) 
1774 


516 


Gem, Bupu's Emerald 


h EY 


73-78 Soapstone ( sp) 
79 Star Metal (10,000 gp) 
80-85 Sulabra (7 sp) 
86-91 Tempskya (1 gp) 
92-95 Turritella (8 sp) 
96-00 Xylopal (22 sp) 
RoU Shell Type 
01-05 Abalone, Red (10 gp) 
06-07 Abalone, Green (25 gp) 
08-14 Black Helmet (45 gp) 
15-21 Conch (10 gp) 
21-28 Cowrie, Tiger (10 gp) 
29-33 Cowrie, Pearl (20 gp) 
34-36 Cowrie, Opal (100 gp) 
37 Cowrie, Purple Star (4,000 gp) 
3844 Flame Helmet (50 gp) 
45-51 Horned Helmet (50 gp) 
52-58 Mother of Pearl (5 sp for one pound) 
59-65 Nacre (1 gp for one pound) 
66-72 Nautilus (5 gp) 
73-79 Red Helmet (20 gp) 
80-85 Sardonyx Helmet (40 gp) 
86-90 | Shambos (1-5 gp per shell plate) 
91-94 Trochus (4 gp) 
95-98 Turbo (2 gp) 
99-00 Unio (1 gp) 
of Atonement 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 4,000 
IMAGINE Magazine 20 


This white diamond allows the bearer to cast the 
5th-level atonement spell once per day. 


Bimbomushi 

XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 20,000 
DRAGON Magazine 40 
This item comes in two slightly different forms, 
appearing either as a magical gem or like a magi- 
cal stone. In either form, the bimbomushi acts 
like a ring ofprotection +3 for its carrier when in 
battle with a creature of higher Hit Dice than the 
bearer, as long as the enemy is conscious and in 
battle. 


of Brightness 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 17,500 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 
This crystal appears to be a long, rough prism. 
With the proper command words, however, it 
emits bright light, which may be used in three dif- 
ferent ways. 


a 


One command word causes the gem to shed a 
pale light in a 10-foot long cone, emanating from 
the gem to a radius of 214 feet at the end of the 
beam. This does not discharge any of the energy 
of the device. 

Another command causes the gem ofbright- 
ness to send out a very bright ray 1 foot in diame- 
ter and 50 feet long. Any creature struck in the 
eyes by the beam is dazzled and unable to see for 
1d4 rounds. The target creature is entitled to a 
saving throw vs. spell to determine whether or 
not its eyes were shut or averted in time. This use 
of the gem expends one energy charge. 

The third manner in which the item may be 
used is to cause it to flare in a blinding flash of 
light, in a cone 30 feet long with a 5-foot radius 
at its end. Although this glare lasts but a 
moment, all creatures within the area must save 
vs. spell or be blinded for 1d4 rounds and there- 
after suffer a penalty of -1 to -4 on attack rolls 
due to permanent eye damage. This use expends 
five charges. 

Dazzling or blindness effects can be reversed 
by a cure blindness spell; eye damage can be 
cured only by a heal spell. The gem ofbrightness 
has 50 charges and cannot be recharged. A dark- 
ness spell cast at the gem's owner drains one 
charge from a gem ofbrightness, or makes it use- 
less for one round, at the option of the gem 
owner. A continual darkness spell causes it to be 
useless for one day, or to expend five charges, at 
the option of the owner. 


Bupu's Emerald 
XP Value: GP Value: 
Tales of the Lance 
A gully dwarf named Bupu bestowed this emer- 
ald upon Raistlin as they wandered the ruins of 
Xak Tsaroth. She hoped it would heal his infirmi- 
ties. It did not. But neither did it strike him dead, 
as it has done to others since. Although some 
adamantly claim that Raistlin imbued the stone 
with its killing power, others say the emerald was 
enchanted before Raistlin got it. Regardless, after 
Raistlin's death, the emerald somehow appeared 
in the pocket of a gully dwarf who was cornered 
by draconians. The miserable creature offered the 
emerald to his tormentors as a bribe for his life. 
They accepted, intending to slay the wretch any- 
way. The stone killed the draconians and the gully 
dwarf escaped. 


Bupu's Emerald works only for gully dwarfs, 
1778 


517 


~~ Gem, Cindergem 


gnomes, and kender. When they offer the gem as 
a bribe in a life-threatening situation, it evokes an 
insane fascination and possessiveness in the 
attackers. The attackers must roll a save vs. spell 
to avoid this effect. Ifthe roll fails, the attackers 
must do everything in their power to clasp the 
emerald. The stone wounds or kills them on con- 
tact. Those who touch the emerald must roll a 
save vs. death magic. Success causes 2d20 points 
of damage; failure causes death. Draconians call 
this lethal fascination "Bupu's Revenge.” At any 
time, the owner of the gem may touch it harm- 
lessly. Outside of a life-threatening situation, the 
gem remains inert, having the normal value of 
any emerald its size. 


Cindergem 
XP Value GP Value 
Blue: 1,000 5,000 
Green: 1,200 6,000 
Indigo: 1,300 6,500 
Orange: 1,000 5,000 
Violet: 1,500 7,500 
Yellow: 600 3,000 

Dragon's Rest 


Each gem grants one set of powers to one PC, 
received when the PC touches the gem. When a 
PC approaches a gem, he or she must squint or 
otherwise shield the eyes from the dazzling light; 
otherwise blindness occurs and lasts for 1d4 
rounds (the PC still receives the powers). After a 
PC touches a gem, the powers detailed below are 
bestowed; the gem dims slightly, showing that it 
can't be touched again. Once a PC has received a 
set of powers, he or she cannot receive powers 
from another gem until those powers have 
expired. Dragons cannot receive powers from 
cindergems. 

The powers are temporary, magical abilities. 
The individual who receives these powers also 
gains full knowledge of how to use them; the 
powers last for two hours. The specific powers 
associated with each are as follows: 

e Orange cindergem: The PC gains the AC and 
flying abilities of a great wyrm silver dragon: 
AC -11, FI 30 (©) 

Yellow cindergem: The PC gains two light- 
associated abilities. The character can flash a 
beam of white light at the eyes of an oppo- 
nent up to 100 feet away; ifthe attack is suc- 
cessful (make a normal attack roll), the 
victim is blinded for 1d4 rounds, fighting 


with a -4 penalty to the attack roll during 
that time. Alternatively, the PC can flash a 
beam of golden light at an opponent up to 50 
feet away; ifthe attack is successful, the vic- 
tim suffers 2d6 points of damage. Either abil- 
ity can be used at will in place of a normal 
attack. 

Green cindergem: The PC gains several tem- 
perature-related abilities. He or she can blast 
either a narrow cone ofextreme cold or a cone 
ofextreme heat at a target up to 50 feet away 
(make a normal attack roll); in either case, the 
victim suffers 2d4+10 points of damage. 
Either temperature blast can be used in place 
ofa normal attack, but a blast can be attempted 
only once every other round. Additionally, the 
PC gains complete immunity to all cold- 
based, heat-based, ice or fire attacks (magical, 
natural, or manufactured). 

Blue cindergem: The ghostly image of a 4- 
foot-diameter human skull with sharp fangs 
appears beside the PC, hovering near the char- 
acter's shoulders. The PC can mentally com- 
mand the skull image to move in any direction 
within a 100-foot radius. The user can also 
command the skull to attack victims with its 
fangs (this is in addition to any attacks nor- 
mally allowed the user). If the skull is 
destroyed, it disappears, but a new skull takes 
its place five rounds later. 


Skull: AC 0; MV FI 30 (C); HD 5; hp 40; THACO 
15; #AT 1; Dmg 2d6; SA can be hit only by 
spells, magical weapons, or dragon's breath; 
ALN. 


e Indigo cindergem: The PC gains several abili- 
ties associated with spectres and ghosts. The 
character's AC is 0, he or she can fly at a rate 
of 30 (B); becomes immune to all sleep, 
charm, hold, and cold-based attacks, as well 
as poison and paralyzation attacks; and the 
PC's touch inflicts 1d8 points of damage and 
drains two life energy levels. All other normal 
abilities are retained, including hit points, and 
all normal attacks can still be made; the char- 
acter does not become immaterial, but retains 
normal form. 

Violet cindergem: The PC gains several abili- 
ties associated with the mightiest of warriors. 
Any weapon attack always inflicts two points 


beyond its maximum damage (for instance, a 
179 


SS ee 


518 


Gem of Detection 


i EY 


short sword that normally inflicts 1d6 points 
of damage now inflicts 8 points of damage 
with every successful blow). In addition, two 
attacks may now be made each round. Finally, 
the character acquires 10d6 temporary hit 
points; damage sustained is taken first from 
these temporary points. 


Curing 
XP Value: 600 GP Value: 5,000 
IMAGINE Magazine 20 
This ruby allows the bearer to cast cure blindness, 


cure disease, or cure serious -wounds once a day. 


of Delusion 
XP Value: — GP Value: 5,000 
Bestiary of Dragons and Giants 

The gem ofdelusion is concealed in an invisible, 
locked wooden box beneath Edwina's seat in her 
horse-litter. The key to the box is around her 
neck. Efforts to pick the invisible lock have a 
-30% penalty to the roll. The concealed box 
should be difficult for searchers to locate; the 
DM should apply appropriate modifiers for its 
invisibility and hiding place. 

The gem ofdelusion is wrapped in black velvet 
in the box. This large, perfect sapphire stone glows 
with a light of its own. When the command word 
inscribed in one facet is said aloud, it radiates a bril- 
liant burst of light. All within a 20-foot radius must 
save vs. spell (except the wielder of the gem), or be 
affected by the delusion effect as detailed below. 
Squeezing eyes shut against the burst of light gives 
+2 to the saving throw; check against Dexterity to 
see if the eyes closed in time. Victims are stunned 
for 1d4 rounds, then are mentally vacant and for- 
getful (as thefeeblemind spell) for 1d6 turns. Those 
who made their save suffer no further ill effects. At 
the end of that time, victims who did not save are 
affected by a form of insanity or delusion, as deter- 
mined on the table below. 


RoU Delusion 

12 Victim believes he or she is someone else 
known to the character (a good friend or 
party member), and is compelled to 
behave as that person in all things, includ- 
ing dress and professional skills. (A 
fighter tries to cast spells, or a wizard 
picks up a sword.) The victim answers 
only to the "new" name, "remembers" 
personal background that doesn't exist, 


and has no memory of ever having been 
his or her original self. 

Victim becomes paranoid, certain that 
everyone is out to get him or her. The 
character will go to violent extremes to 
guarantee personal safety and prevent 
"them" from doing harm. A victim under 
this delusion acknowledges no friends, 
trusts no one, and is touchy and defensive 
in all things. 

Victim becomes a kleptomaniac, compelled 
to steal one object once a day (randomly 
determined by the DM). Even the victim's 
friends are not safe from the PC's impulses. 
Ifthe kleptomaniac is not a thief already, 
there is no thief skills gain with this compul- 
sion. Objects should be relatively easy to 
steal (portable, easy to conceal), and gener- 
ally in plain sight (a belt-knife, an item on a 
store shelf, and the like). 


3-4 


56 


The effect of the gem is permanent. It can only 
be removed by a wish, or by another use of the 
gem. The deluded creature must save again vs. 
spell; ifthe save fails, the delusion is canceled. A 
victim is affected by only one delusion at a time. 


of Detection 
XP Value GP Value 
Clear Spindle: 150 500 
Deep Red Sphere: 150 500 
Pale Blue Rhomboid: 150 500 
Pale Green Prism: 150 500 
Pale Lavender Ellipsoid: 150 500 
Pearly White Spindle: 150 500 
Pink and Green Sphere: 150 500 
Pink Rhomboid: 150 500 
Scarlet and Blue Sphere: 150 500 
Vibrant Purple Prism: 150 500 


DRAGON Magazine 145 

Gems ofdetection appear to be highly polished, 
miniature ioun stones. They are discovered either 
already embedded and functioning (as explained 
below), or dormant. To activate a dormant gem of 
detection, it must be set into the armrest ofa sturdy 
chair or throne by the hands ofa skilled jeweler, 
andfaerie fire must be cast upon it. If an activated 
gem ofdetection is pried from an armrest in order 
to be transferred to another, it goes dormant. 

To use this magical item, a character sits in the 
chair and touches the activated gem ofdetection 


and receives a power (that lasts as long as he or 
1782 


Ge Ee ee ee 


519 


Gem, Elvenstar 


SSS si 


she remains seated, in contact with the gem). 
Only one gem may be touched each round. 

Gems of detection are not quite as sturdy as 
ioun stones. They may be destroyed (AC -2, 5 
hp), and make saving throws as hard metal with a 
+1 bonus. The various gems ofdetection are as 
follows: 


Color & Shape Use Range 
Pale blue rhombus Detect evil 120) 
Scarlet & blue sphere Detect good 120! 
Deep red sphere Detect lie 30' 
Pink rhomboid Detectinvisibility 60' 
Pink & green sphere Detect enemies 60' 
Pale green prism Detect life 120' 
Clear spindle Detect undead 240! 
Pearly white spindle Detect charm 60' 
Pale lavender ellipse Know alignment 30' 


Vibrant purple prism Detect psionics/ 
psionic creatures 240' 
of Drusion 
XP Value: 600 GP Value: 6,000 


The Book of Marvelous Magic 

This gem is identical to a gem ofincome but, 
when planted, causes a curse to strike the charac- 
ter using it; the gem disintegrates at this time. If 
some other plants the gem at the owner's direc- 
tion, the owner is struck along with the servant. 
The curse slowly turns the victims into trees. 
Each loses 1 point of Dexterity and Charisma a 
day, and moves 10 feet less per turn each day. The 
skin stiffens, reaching a natural Armor Class of 4; 
branches and leaves start to grow from the torso 
and may not be removed without damaging the 
victim. (Curing spells cause regrowth.) When 
movement reaches zero, the victim dies unless 
placed in soil within 24 hours. When planted in 
soil, the victim quickly grows large roots, becom- 
ing firmly imbedded in one hour. Note, however, 
that the victim's Wisdom and Intelligence are 
unchanged, and speech is still possible, although 
spell casting is not. A remove curse spell cast by a 
26th-level caster before rooting occurs restores 
the victim to normal form. Once the victim is 
rooted, a 36th-level caster is needed. 


Elvenstar 
XP Value: 20,000 GP Value: 100,000 
Saga of the Shadow King 
The origins of the Elvenstar are veiled in the 
mists of time. The gemstone is however, a very 


520 


powerful magical item, initially bestowed upon 
Lord Gylharen by the Sage Bensarian. It was 
Bensarian who named the stone but offered no 
account of its history. 

Upon receiving the star, Gylharen was given a 
special tome of incantations. By invoking special 
spells, the wizard-king was able to cast spells 
through the star itself. The gem acted as a ful- 
crum or transformer, effectively amplifying the 
wizard's spells 10 to 50 times normal (range, area 
of effect, damage). In addition, some spells 
would have a duration of up to a year. Several 
protections from evil, 5,000-foot radius, cast 
around the city, have been more than effective. At 
other times amplified versions of dispel magic, 
ice storm, cloudkill, or gust ofwind were capable 
of routing an invading army. Some of the proce- 
dures were decisive in the first Wizards’ War. 

Elvenstar also acted as a sentinel, like a crystal 
ball, alerting the wizard-king to the presence or 
encroachment of evil. In effect, the star func- 
tioned as an early warning system, accurately 
detecting and identifying an evil incursion within 
the bounds of Wendar. (Unfortunately, the star 
did not discover the evil intentions of Camla who 
effectively masked his true aims from everyone. 
In the end the evil agent substituted a worthless 
blue stone for the fist-sized, magical sapphire.) 

At the outset Gylharen was fully aware of the 
importance of Elvenstar's Incantations, and he 
guarded them so well that Landryn Teriak had no 
clue as to how they might be obtained. Without 
access to the special spells, Landryn Teriak had 
little success with his efforts to make the star 
function. The Shadow Lord has succeeded (acci- 
dentally) in amplifying a few spells through the 
star. Thirty years after the Wizard's War, the 
Elvenstar has been stolen by the Shadow Lord's 
agent in order to eliminate Wendar's defensive 
capability. 

Once a month, the Elvenstar can heal up to two 
characters in mortal danger; however, only a law- 
ful good character can use Elvenstar in this way. 
Healed characters’ hit points are fully restored. 
As an option, the DM may instead restore one 
lost experience level to one or two characters 
under the same conditions of mortal danger. 

It is harmful to remain in physical contact with 
the gem (skin unprotected) for a prolonged 
period. After one turn of exposure, the bearer 
feels a slight pain in the heart and gains 5 hit 


points over normal maximum. Each subsequent 
1784 


Gem of Income 


turn, the bearer gains another 5 hit points. When 
the new hit points total equals the character's pre- 
vious maximum, the character dies. If the bearer 
interrupts the contact before this happens, the 
"new" hit points are immediately lost. Each sub- 
sequent day, the character permanently loses one 
hit point, up to the previous total of "new" hit 
points. The process can only be interrupted with a 
remove curse spell, cast at 10th level. Perma- 
nently lost hit points cannot be restored. 


XP Value: 4,000 
Gods, Demigods, & Heroes 

This hand-sized gem fires a jet of flame for 50 

yards, the flame is worth 6dlO points of damage. 


GP Value: 25,000 


The fie gem may be used once per turn. 
of Foresight 
XP Value: 3,000 _ GP Value: 30,000 
Wonders of LANKHMAR 

This gem allows the user to view the future of all 
who are within 10 feet except the user. The pic- 
tures portrayed in the vision supplied by the gem 
are so vivid that the user experiences every sensa- 
tion in its entirety, except death. The visions are 
merely one possible future, and not necessarily 
the path taken by the subjects. Someone's future 


can be changed by a decision as simple as choos- 
ing to walk on the left side ofthe street as opposed 
to the right. 

There are side effects to the use of this item. 
Every time the gem is used, there is a cumulative 
1 % chance that the character is driven into an 
extreme depression. The reason for this is the 
eventual path of every living being leading to the 
black shroud of death. If the DM chooses, the 
character could fall victim to delusions that the 
shrouds of death are following him or her, even- 
tually causing the character to believe that in 
everyone is the death that stalks us all. 

If the gem offoresight is placed inside the 
urn ofhindsight, a true artifact is created. When 
these two items are used in tandem, the charac- 
ter sees the complete past and the complete 
future as well as all ofthe alternate paths of that 
person's life. 


Gamalon's Gem 

of Infravision and Detect Magic 
XP Value: 2,500 GP Value: 12,500 
1992 Fantasy Collector Card 76 
This huge emerald is a variation of a gem ofsee- 
ing. It functions as if a permanent infravision 
spell has been cast, and allows Gamalon to see 
in darkness. It also functions as a permanent 
detect magic spell. Gamalon lost his left eye 
when he was young but magically replaced it 
with this special gem. He now wears it all the 
time in his left eye socket. This obviously makes 
him very memorable and somewhat fearsome in 
countenance. 


ofldeas 
XP Value: 900 GP Value: 4,500 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

This meager gem is only worth 10 gp. When the 
command word is spoken while the gem is held, 
the gem inspires its user with an excellent idea 
(provided by the DM) appropriate to the situation 
at hand, such as which way to go, how to slay a 
monster, where to find clues, or the like. The gem 
has 14 uses, after that it crumbles to dust. 


of Income 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
This greenish-brown soapstone is worth 50 gp. 
If planted in fertile soil with plenty of sunlight 


and water, it grows into a money tree in one 
1789 


Ls. <= . a sO 


521 


a Gem of Insight 


week's time. The trunk and leaves of the tree are 
a distinctive gold color, and it grows 1d10+10 
gold pieces per week upon its branches. If 
touched by lightning or fire, the tree burns 
instantly and cannot be saved. Any other dam- 
age causes the tree to wither, and a heal spell is 
needed within one day to restore it to its former 
health; otherwise it dies. Any other enchant- 
ment of any kind placed on or affecting it 
(including a wish) kills it immediately. The tree 
is unrecoverable. 


of Insight 

XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 30,000 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 
This jewel appears to be a finely cut stone of not 
less than 5,000 gp value. [fdetect magic is used, 
the gem radiates a faint aura of enchantment. If 
any character possesses the item, he or she begins 
to feel its power after one week. At the end of two 
weeks, the individual discovers that he or she is 
able to understand things more easily, has better 
insight, memory, recall—in fact, possession of 
the gem on a continuous basis (three or more 
months) raises the Intelligence and Wisdom of 
the character by 1 point each. If for some reason 
the gem is not kept beyond the three-month 
period, the additional Intelligence remains, but 
the added Wisdom is lost. A gem ofinsight func- 
tions once every 50 years. Ifa character finds a 
second gem, the second is of no effect, even if 
Wisdom was not permanently affected by the 
first gem. 


Ionian 
XP Value GP Value 
Master Gem: 2,000 10,000 
Normal Gem: 2,700 13,500 


The Emirates of Ylaruam 

The 3rd-Century Thyatian wizard Macrodorus 
gave to each of his six most trusted retainers an 
enchanted gem. These gems have the following 
powers—healing and ESP (as the spells), and 
spell turning (as with the magic ring). Those who 
possess the gems can also speak telepathically 
with other gem holders at will (range: 1,000 
miles). 

Macrodorus owned the master gem with simi- 
lar powers, and a further ability to charm the 
bearers of the other gems, thereby ensuring their 
loyalty. 

Three of Macrodorus's retainers perished in the 


defense of the Thyatian colonies eight centuries 
ago and their gems were lost. Macrodorus was 
executed for treason in the fourth century; his 
effects were confiscated by the emperor for the 
national treasury. The three surviving retainers 
disappeared to avoid being connected with 
Macrodorus's treason. 

Recently Macrodorus's master gem was traced 
by Polybius, one of the emperor's ministers of 
sorcery, and stolen from the treasury. Polybius is 
experimenting with the master gem, and hopes to 


reassert the gem's power over the bearers of the 


other gems. 


Jewel of Attacks 

GP Value: 1,000 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 
This gleaming gem radiates magic and appears to 
be a valuable item. It is cursed, however, and dou- 
bles the likelihood of encountering wandering 
monsters and the likelihood of pursuit when mon- 
sters are encountered, and the party seeks to 
evade them by flight. Once picked up, the jewel 
ofattacks always magically returns to its finder 
(secreting itself in pouch, bag, pack, or pocket) 
until remove curse or atonement is cast on the 
victim. 


XP Value: — 


Jewel of Attacks Upon the Owner 
XP Value: — GP Value: 1,000 
GREYHAWK 
Any person possessing this gem doubles the 
chances for monsters, and if a monster comes it 

has a 50% greater probability of pursuit. 


Jewel of Flawlessness 

XP Value: 100/facet GP Value: 1,000/facet 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 
This magical gem appears to be a very fine stone 
of some sort, but if detect magic is used, its mag- 
ical aura is noted. When ajewel offlawlessness 
is placed with other gems, it doubles the likeli- 
hood of their being more valuable (the chance 
for each stone going up in value increases from 
10% to 20%). The jewel has from 10d10 facets, 
and whenever a gem increases in value because 
of the magic of the jewel of flawlessness (a roll 
of 2 on 1d10), one of the facets disappears. 
When all are gone, the jewel is a spherical stone 
that has no value. 


1794 


A E a. © 


5 


2 


2 


~ Gem, Jewel of Obsession r 


Jewel of Neverwinter 


XP Value GP Value 
Amethyst: 10,000 18,000 
Cornelian: 10,000 18,000 
Diamond: 10,000 18,000 
Emerald: 10,000 18,000 
Fire-Opal: 10,000 18,000 
Onyx: 10,000 18,000 
Ruby: 10,000 18,000 
Sapphire: 10,000 18,000 
Topaz: 10,000 18,000 
Volo's Guide to the North 


These nine gemstones are the size ofa fist and 
cabochon-cut (rounded, polished, with no facets). 
There are nine stones, each ofa different type and 
hue. They were enchanted long ago by a cabal of 
wizards who sought to rule Neverwinter as lords 
and ladies. The stones were soon used against 
each other, and they were then hidden by the sur- 
viving owners. 

All ofthe gems are AC 1 and have 70 hp—they 
shatter if reduced to 0 hp. They make all item- 
saving throws as if they were leather, except that 
their save vs. disintegration is 10. A jewel ran- 
domly loses one of its powers for every 10 points 
of current damage. Lost powers return as the 
jewel regains hit points. Each regenerates one hit 
point per day; this is the only known method by 
which they are "cured" of damage; healing spells 
don't affect them. Each jewel has a tiny secret 
word engraved on one side. 

If this word is spoken by a being touching the 
stone, enough hit points are instantly drained 
from the stone to exhaust it entirely or to com- 
pletely heal the being—whichever occurs first. A 
totally drained stone crumbles into dust, gone 
forever. A being using this power can't control the 
drain so as to leave just a few hit points in ajewel. 

The nine enchanted gems share some common 
powers. They create food and water (once per 
day), and they have the ability to featherfall 
(automatically, whenever needed by stone or 
bearer). Each can teleport one being touching or 
wearing it per day, between power points. The 
power points are specific spots, usually chambers 
deep within old keeps or important buildings in 
the following cities: Ascore (now a ruin), Hell- 
gate Keep, Karse (now a ruin on the eastern 
fringes of the High Forest), the ruins of Illusk in 
Luskan, Mirabar, Neverwinter, Silverymoon, and 
Sundabar. Agents of Hellgate Keep eagerly seek 
these gems because of this power, and their own- 


ers keep them secret for the same reason. Each 
gem can also emit water breathing once per day, 
for up to nine hours at a time, when grasped and 
ordered. Each can allow its bearer the power of 
water walking for the same frequency and dura- 
tion. Each stone allows the bearer to make one 
attack per day at +5. (Players should announce 
the use and then make the attack roll.) This power 
functions only once in 24 hours, regardless of 
how many bearers a gem may technically have 
during that time. 

A jewel can also emit a specific spell twice a 
day (but only once per round). It can also block a 
specific spell. Blocked spells are deflected to a 
target chosen by the silent will of the deflector. If 
the stone bearer chooses no target, blocked spells 
are reflected back 100% at the source. Only the 
specific spells (and identical magical item dis- 
charges) chosen by the DM are affected. Where 
applicable, emitted magic functions as if wielded 
by a caster of 20th level. 


Roll Jewel Type (Powers) 

01-11 Amethyst (Purple): emits ray ofenfee- 
blement; blocks chain lightning. 

12-22 Cornelian (red-brown): Emits blade 
barrier, blocks wall offire. 

23-33 Diamond (clear): Emits magic missiles 
(five missiles per spell); block magic 
missile. 

34-44 Emerald (green): Emits color spray, 
blocks lightning bolt. 

45-55 Fire Opal (fiery red): Emits flame 
strike; blocks cone ofcold. 

56-66 Onyx (White): Emits chain lightning; 
blocks blade barrier. 

67-77. Ruby (deep red): Emits fireball; blocks 
wall ofice. 

78-88 Sapphire (blue): Emits cone ofcold; 
blocks fireball. 

89-00 Topaz (yellow): Emits flaming sphere; 
blocksflame strike. 

Jewel of Obsession 
XP Value: — GP Value: 2,500 


Dragon Dawn 
This cursed item is used as a trap to protect the 
hulderfolk's treasure hoard. The jewel is a large, 
green gemstone, glowing with enchantment. Per- 
sons looking at the stone must save vs. spell or be 
struck with an obsession to take sole possession 


ofthe gem. (Anyone who makes the save is free 
1796 


"e a 


523 


s Gem, Karathoth's Jewel r 


of further entrapment by the curse.) A person 
afflicted fights to the death with anyone who 
attempts to take the stone, or even to move it out 
of sight. The accursed victim is not able to stay 
away from the stone. He or she stares at it lov- 
ingly for hours, unwilling to sully its shine with 
the mere touch of mortal hands. The obsessed 
will move the stone from its resting place only 
with great reluctance, and then only if compelled. 
This unnatural concern can be terminated by 
casting remove curse on the victim or dispel 
magic on the stone. That is sufficient to break the 
curse for whoever is in the vicinity, but the stone 
regains its power after five rounds. 


Karathoth's Jewel 

XP Value: 5,000 GP Value: 25,000 
Old Empires 
This powerful item, one of the greatest creations 
of the incarnations of Thoth, is ajewel with 
1d3+4 facets. Activating this jewel creates an 
exact duplicate of the activating character, which 
is under the character's complete control. The 
duplicate fights, casts spells, and uses magical 
items as the user wills; lasts for 1d4+3 turns, then 
vanishes. 

Once a duplicate is killed, or disappears, one 
facet of the jewel cracks and cannot be used 
again. Once all facets are cracked, the gem is 
useless. Only one character can be summoned 
out of the jewel at a time; a new duplicate can- 
not be summoned for 48 hours. When a dupli- 
cate disappears or is killed, all of its magical 
items disappear. 

The effects of all spells cast by the duplicate 
disappear with the duplicate, excluding spells 
with instantaneous effects. (The effects ofa 
duplicate's fireball spell do not disappear, but the 
effects of a haste spell do.) A duplicate is forbid- 
den to use creation magic, including wish spells. 

The jewel is typically a valuable gemstone (no 
specific variety is needed), and when one glances 
into it, the faint impression of an ibis, Thoth's 
symbol may be seen. 


Karma 
XP Value: 700 GP Value: 6,000 
IMAGINE Magazine 20 
This emerald allows the user to cast one spell at 
four levels above his or her own (with respect to 


range and duration), once per day. 


of Life 
XP Value: 5,000 GP Value: 50,000 
Wonders of LANKHMAR 

This gem is a very powerful magical item that can- 
not be dealt with lightly. The gem is about 3 inches 
in diameter, and gives off an eerie, pale blue light. 
If touched to a dead body, the gem restores the 
soul to the body, and heals 25% ofthe character's 
total hit points. A normal system shock roll is 
needed for the character to be resurrected. 

If the gem is broken, perhaps by greed from 
characters who wish to make rings ofresurrec- 
tion for everyone, several things can happen. Roll 
1d6 to find the effect: 


Effect 

The gem oflife explodes, sending parti- 
cles everywhere in a 100-foot area. All 
within the area of effect take 10d6 points 
of damage. 
The character who broke the gem finds 
that some of the gem chips have imbed- 
ded in his or her skin. After a week, 
whenever the character strikes at an 
enemy and hits successfully, the oppo- 
nent is healed by the amount of points 
equal to the damage normally caused. 
This effect can only be removed by a 
wish. 
Nothing happens. The gem loses its 
potency, and its abilities are lost forever. 
The character who broke the gem finds 
that his or her body is changing—bones 
and muscles enlarging, deforming, body 
bulging, knuckles rupturing into cauli- 
flower protrusions. Eventually, the char- 
acter looks something like a Fomorian 
giant. This is healing out of control—the 
gem's power simply adds too much flesh 
and bone to one body. This can only be 
removed with a wish. 
The gem shatters and completely annihi- 
lates itself. All characters and all other 
things within 100 feet are coated in per- 
manent/faerie fire. This can only be 
removed with a wish. 
The character must make a saving throw 
vs. spell. If the roll fails, that character 
cannot gain any more hit points. The cur- 
rent total becomes the PC's maximum, no 
matter what level is reached after that. 


This can only be removed with a wish. 
1799 


Roll 
1 


524 


~ Gem, Nightjewel ø- 


of Magic Missile Protection 

XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 7,500 
The Endless Stair 

This clear, faceted gem lasts for 66 uses and then 
crumbles into dust. Each use is one contact with a 
magic missile striking the stone. (Regardless of 
where the stone is on the bearer's body in relation 
to the direction of an approaching magic missile, 
the stone intercepts it.) The bearer is protected 
from the missile's damage, for the gem causes 
one of the following effects (if the bearer is 
unconscious, mentally controlled or confused, or 
dead, the first effect always, occurs automati- 
cally), as the bearer chooses. 
e Reflection: The magic missile flashes back at 
its caster instantly, with full effect (unless the 
caster has a defense that prevents this). 
Redirection: The missile is redirected at 
another target creature of the gem bearer's 
choice, with full effect (unless the target's 
defenses, if any, prevent its damage). 
Absorption: The missile's energy is magi- 
cally converted to heal the bearer. (The dam- 
age the missile would have dealt is gained by 
the bearer to offset any lost hp; ifthe bearer is 
uninjured or excess hit points remain, these 
are retained by the bearer as extra "phantom" 
hit points for 4d4 rounds, and any damage suf- 
fered by the bearer during this time is taken 
first from these extra hit points.) 
If the caster of the original magic missile (see 
first effect) or secondary target creatures (see 
second effect) bear a gem ofmagic missile pro- 
tection, the magic missile effect flashes back 
and forth between the two gems for 144 rounds 
(not draining any additional uses from either 
gem, only the initial one from each), and then 
bursts in midair between them, in a blaze of 
white light. If any creature happens to be mid- 
way between the two gems, the creature suffers 
the damage of the magic missile (no saving 
throw) when the explosion occurs. (Ifthe crea- 
ture had a gem ofmagic missile protection, a tri- 
angle is set up between the three gems by the 
path of the rebounding missile, and explodes in 
the middle of the triangle after 1d4 further 
rounds. The presence of other intervening crea- 
tures with such gems causes the missile to travel 
in a square path, and so on,) 


of Musing 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 7,500 
Vale of the Mage 

This item is usable by wizards only. By contem- 
plating the gem for one hour, a wizard can regain 
one spell of Ist through 4th level that was cast 
previously during the day. The gem can be used 
up to three times a day. A gem ofmusing appears 
to be a flawed, precious stone, usually an emerald 
or sapphire. The gem radiates faintly if a detect 
magic spell is cast upon it. 


Nightjewel 

GP Value: 15,000 
Tales of the Lance 
Black as an evil dragon's blood, this jewel pro- 
tects any who enter the Shoikan Grove as long as 
they have the courage and the will to use it. The 
nightjewel helps to alleviate the fear generated by 
the grove, though it does not cancel it completely. 
The nightjewel can be used in defense against the 
undead who stalk the grove, but the person using 
it must have the courage to touch the undead with 
the jewel ifthey attack. No other weapon can be 
used with the nightjewel. 

The nightjewel is black, unlovely to look at, 
and cold to the touch. It can hang about the neck 
on a silver chain, but must be held in the hand, 
high in the air, when entering the grove. A char- 
acter who uses the jewel must remove helm and 
hood so that the light of the jewel shines on his or 
her face and eyes. This light can be seen only by 
the undead. To all others, the jewel looks as black 
and ugly as a lump of coal. 

When a party of adventurers enters the grove, 
the nightjewel must be held high by the leader of 
the party. It modifies the fear roll for everyone in 
the group so long as no weapon is drawn or spell 
is cast. Once a weapon is drawn or a spell is cast, 
the nightjewel instantly loses all power, leaving 
the adventuring party at the mercy of the Shoikan 
Grove. Those properly presenting the nightjewel 
may ignore the -10 penalty to saving throws 
while in the grove. Characters must still roll their 
normal saves. Ifthe character fails, the benefit of 
the nightjewel is lost until a successful, subse- 
quent saving throw (with the -10 penalty) is 
rolled. The wielder of the nightjewel may turn ` 
undead as a 14th-level priest by touching the 
undead. 


XP Value: 3,000 


1802 


525 


Gem, Opal of Olfactory Illusion 


) SOS e a 


Opal of Olfactory Illusion 

XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 10,000 
Falcon's Revenge 
The Falcon maintains an illusion through magical 
means, fooling her followers by polymorphing 
herself out of her spirit naga form. However, her 
ruse would not be complete without masking 
another of her supernatural characteristics—the 
stench of rotting flesh that follows her every- 
where. 

The Falcon uses perfumes to keep her aroma 
under control and bathes herself daily in exotic 
oils. But she determined that these were not suffi- 
cient. She wanted some magical means to cover 
her nauseating odor. She felt that it would be 
impractical to hire a wizard to enchant an item 
specifically for her purposes, since a wizard 
would likely see through her disguise. She opted 
to purchase a suitable item plundered from the 
ruins of the "Mad Archmage's" castle northeast 
of Greyhawk, discovered by a nefarious thief and 
offered for sale by his executor. 

The opal of olfactory illusion was simply 
another of Zagyg's experiments, a magical item 
of limited utility. It forms an orb, 40 feet in diam- 


eter, around its user. All odors within that sphere 
are completely under the user's control. The user 
may alter, edit, or ignore any odors within the 
sphere at will—instantaneously. 

The Falcon uses the opal to edit her surround- 
ings. She removes her own stench from the area, 
but leaves all other aromas in place. Of course, 
when she moves, her smell trails behind her. 
Once her odors pass out of the sphere of effect, 
they are once again noticeable. This tends to con- 
fuse those in her wake, but never leads to her dis- 
covery. l 

The opal can also be used to create illusory 
odors that may deter enemies due to nausea. 
When the Falcon uses the orb to exude a scent 
that is repulsive to her victims, creatures who 
enter the area of its effect must save vs. poison or 
be incapacitated due to nausea for 1d4 rounds. 
Those who make their saves successfully suffer 
no ill effects from the odors. 

The opal itselfis an unobtrusive gem of good 
cut, which, aside from its magical properties, is 
indistinguishable from other similar stones. The 
Falcon has had it set, along with several rubies, 
into an anklet she wears constantly. 


Gem of Scroll Reading 


ee a a ae ee ES (i 


of Protection 
XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 35,000 
DRAGON Magazine 132 
By staring at this magnificent gem and entering a 
trance, the user is able to create a projection of 
him or herself. It is otherwise identical to the 
dreamer power, and may be used once per week. 


Purple Gem of the Vesve Forest 

XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 35,000 
GREYHAWK Adventures 

Set in a silver bracelet, this magical gemstone has 

occasionally been used by the elven wizards who 

created it. However, the King of Furyondy refuses 

to admit the gem's existence because he prefers 

that elven warriors join his own infantry, not 

form troops outside his command. 

The gem allows a sylvan or high elf to sum- 
mon an elven army for a single declared purpose. 
The user can raise a number of elves equal to his 
or her age. This army takes a week to gather and 
can be kept together only as long as the stated 
goal is still in effect. In addition to the lesser 
members of the army, the summoner gains seven 
aides—two wizards, two priests, and three rangers 
1d3 levels lower than the user's level. 


Retaliation 
GP Value: 10,000 

Tome of Magic 
The holder ofthis gem gains a special protection 
against evocation spells. The owner of the gem 
gains a +4 bonus to any saving throw made 
against such a spell, and acquires a base save of 
18 (but not the +4 bonus) against any evocation 
spell that normally does not allow a saving throw 
(such as ice storm). All standard modifiers (ring 
ofprotection, Dexterity, and any others) apply. 

Additionally, if the saving throw is successful, 
the incoming spell is converted into outgoing 
magic missiles. The number of missiles is equal 
to one-half the level of the spell negated, round- 
ing fractions up. The magic missiles streak back 
to strike the person or creature who cast the spell. 
Maximum range for this strike is 160 yards. 

Effects created by magical items are not 
affected by a gem ofretaliation (thus, a wand of 
magic missiles functions normally against some- 
one using this gem). 

An individual holding a gem ofretaliation who 
comes under attack by an area spell (fireball, ice 
storm, and similar spells) gains the advantages 


XP Value: 2,000 


described above. Others in the area of effect suffer 
all effects normally. Even ifthe gem's owner saves 
successfully, the area-effect evocation is not trans- 
formed into magic missiles as described previously. 


of Returning 

XP Value: 1,500 GP Value: 7,500 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
This small diamond can be found only in worlds 
of alternate realities (see Gate, Alternate World 
Gate). When a character gazes into it, the charac- 
ter vanishes and reappears in the realm where it 
originated. The gem itself cannot cross the 
boundaries between the worlds. Any number of 
characters can gaze into the gem at the same 
time. 


of Scroll Reading 
XP Value: 3,500 GP Value: 17,000 
DRAGON Magazine 99 

This small, white, translucent gem holds strong 
power for spell casters. The gem has a flat top and 
bottom with faceted sides, and if one side is 
placed against printed material, the gem automat- 
ically makes the writing as legible as if compre- 
hend languages and read magic spells were both 
in effect. More importantly, the reader (who must 
be a wizard, specialist wizard, priest, or druid) 
will be able to decipher spell scrolls usable only 
by other spellcasting classes. If an entire scroll is 
read through using a gem ofscroll reading, the 
reader may cast the spell normally, even if the 
spell was intended for another character class. 
However, the reading, casting time, and initiative 
modifier for the scroll spell is doubled; thus, a 
druid trying to cast a.fireball from a scroll would 
receive an initiative penalty of 6 to cast it using 
the gem ofscroll reading. In addition, there is a 
1 % chance per level of the spell that the reader 
will be blinded (as if by cause blindness). 

The reader may not use the gem to actually 
acquire a spell not normally usable by his class, 
and any attempts to copy spells read through this 
device using a write spell will fail. So, wizards 
cannot learn druid spells, priests cannot gain illu- 
sionist spells. If the spell cast is of a level greater 
than that the caster could normally use (if a 3rd- 
level druid tries to cast a cone ofcold), there is a 
50% chance that the spell will either backfire 
(01-20) or simply fail (21-50). A backfiring spell 
never benefits the caster. It harms the caster or 


works in the caster's worst interest. 
1808 


a eee 


527 


Gem of Seeing 


> a ee 


It must be noted that if a cursed or trapped 
scroll is read using this device, the gem will not 
help the reader recognize the curse or trap before 
it is activated. 


of Seeing 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 25,000 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 
These finely cut and polished stones are indistin- 
guishable from ordinary jewels, although detect 
magic will reveal their enchantment. When gazed 
through, the gem ofseeing enables the user to 
detect all hidden, illusory, invisible, astral, ethereal, 
or out-of-phase objects within viewing range. 

Peering through the crystal is time consuming 
and tedious. The viewing range of the gem is 300 
feet for a cursory scan if only large, obvious 
objects are being sought; 100 feet if only small 
things are to be seen. It requires one round to 
scan a 200-square-foot area in a cursory manner, 
two rounds to view a 100-square-foot area in a 
careful way. There is a 5% chance each time the 
gem is used that the viewer sees a hallucination, 
something that is not there, or possibly, some real 
obeject as ifit were an illusion. 

In Ravenloft: Ifa gem ofseeing is used in the 
demiplane, consult the true seeing spell in Chap- 
ter VI: Spells in Ravenloft in the Realm ofTerror 
rules book of the RAVENLOFT Campaign Settling 
boxed set—the same changes apply. 


of Shielding 
XP Value GP Value 
Pale violet: 450 7,000 
Pale green: 300 5,000 
Pale orange: 300 5,000 
Pale yellow: 300 5,000 
Pale blue: 300 5,000 
Clear: 500 8,000 


DRAGON Magazine 99 
This object is a small, magical gemstone that has 
the power to bestow upon its user complete 
immunity against certain psionic attacks. Each of 
these gems has a clear, pale color and initially 
seems to be of 10 gp value, though of an uniden- 
tifiable sort of gem. 

A gem ofshielding is pressed to the user's fore- 
head, where it seems to melt into the skin and 
become invisible. No command word is necessary 
for this to occur. After that, the gem performs its 
protective functions automatically. The gem may be 
removed by placing one's fingers against the fore- 


head and mentally commanding the gem to reap- 
pear. It is possible for more than one gem to be 
embedded in a character; however, there is a 20% 
cumulative chance per extra gem implanted that a 
resonance field will be set up between the stones. 
The resonance field continues to protect against the 
attack forms the gems were designed to stop, but 
they suppress all other psionic defenses the subject 
may possess. A person who is using gems to shield 
against attack forms C, D, and E would thus have 
no defense at all against attack forms A or B ifthis 
occurred. The affected person will not be able to 
sense his own vulnerability. 

Additionally, the resonance field alerts all 
psionic creatures within a one-mile radius of the 
gem-user as to his location, ruining any attempt 
at surprise. It is also possible for a psionic crea- 
ture to track the gem user because of the reso- 
nance field. Only 1d2 gems ofshielding are 
usually found. When one or more are discovered, 
the types of gems found may be randomly deter- 
mined using the following table. 


Roll Protects vs. 

1dlą2 Gem Color Gem Type Attack Mode 
13 Pale violet Nerve Shield A 

4-5 Pale green Mind Shield B 

6-7 Pale orange Ego Shield C 

8-9 Pale yellow 1d Shield D 

10-11 Pale blue Psyche Shield E 
12 Clear Brain Shield Special 


The brain shield gem gifts its wearer with a 
universal defense against all five psionic attack 
modes, reducing the psionic strength ofall such 
attacks against the wearer by 50 points. Thus, 
an attacker using a 110-point Psionic Blast 
against the wearer of such a gem would only 
make a 60-point attack against the wearer, 
though everyone around the victim would be 
struck at full strength. Additionally, the brain 
shield gem puts up a screen that keeps away 
cerebral parasites, effective to a 60-foot radius. 
Characters without innate psionic powers may 
not employ these gems in any fashion, but they 
may sell them if so desired. 


Soul 
XP Value: 40,000 GP Value: 200,000 
Ghost Tower of Inverness 
The soul gem floats in the air, slowly rotating. 


The gem emits a dazzling white ray that com- 
1811 


ey I ee 


528 


Gem, Star 


Q 


W 


pletely fills a room for one second. It attacks in a 
random direction each time, choosing from eight 
different directions radiating from its current 
location. 

After that, the blasts occur once per round at 
the end of the round into a randomly determined 
sector. Since the players should not be aware (at 


first) that the blasts are random, it is suggested — 


that the number of rolls be made secretly before 
the party encounters the gem, and the sectors 
affected can be determined from the list. (The 
series of sectors used in the tournament module 
Ghost Tower of Inverness are: 6,7, 1, 4, 7, 6, 2, 2, 
8, 6, 5, 1, 2, 3, 4, and then random, if more are 
needed.) 

When the gem's ray blasts a character, the 
affected person must make a saving throw vs. pet- 
rification (include only Wisdom adjustments). If 
the saving throw is successful, the character's 
skin, clothes, and possessions are all bleached 
ghostly white, and all magical items are drained 
completely of magic. If a character fails the sav- 
ing throw vs. petrification, however, the other 
characters see the following: 

When the white light strikes the victim, he or 
she screams horribly—a long, drawn-out, wailing 
scream. As vision clears, an image of the charac- 
ter, pale and ghostly, streams out of the body and 


toward the soul gem, becoming smaller the closer 
it gets. As the image shrinks in size, the volume 
of its screams diminishes. When it reaches the 
gem, there is a burst of radiance, and the image is 
gone. The character's form lies motionless on the 
floor; the body is dead white, as are all the char- 
acter's possessions. 

The victim's essence was sucked out of his or 
her body by the ray of the gem. The image the 
players see is the ectoplasmic form of the soul of 
that being drawn into the gem—the body is life- 
less as it slumps to the floor. 

The gem is surrounded by a 2-foot-diameter, 
invisible force sphere. Although the sphere has 
only 20 hit points, it can only be hit by hand- 
held weapons or hand attacks—spells have no 
effect on it. An adjusted roll of 10 or better is 
necessary for a character to hit the sphere, and 
up to eight characters can strike at the sphere in 
any given round. For each point of damage a 
character inflicts on the sphere, the character 
sustains one point of damage. This is true even 
if the sphere is "overkilled" in one round (for 
example, if25 points are inflicted on the sphere, 
25 points must be sustained by those doing the 
damage). When 20 or more points have been 
delivered to the sphere, it becomes visible, frac- 
tures, and falls to the floor in glassy, splintered 
shards. 

Once the force sphere is destroyed, the gem 
may be seized. After the gem is grasped by a 
character, it cannot fire any more rays. The gem 
is destroyed by rolling a natural 20 with a magical 
weapon, but if this is done the gem shatters and 
releases the hundreds of souls trapped inside, 
who insanely slay all living creatures within 100 
yards. Once the gem is destroyed, anyone killed 
by the gem can be resurrected or raised normally. 


Star 
XP Value GP Value 
Khan-Pelar: 1,000 10,000 
Mo-Pelar: 1,000 10,000 
Shah-Pelar: 1,000 10,000 


Oasis of the White Palm 
These three gems were given by Martek to the 
pharaohs and sheiks of the land in the time of the 
ancients. They are each named and each has a 
distinctive, epic description. 
The Star ofMo-pelar was given to the Pharaoh 
of Bakar and was lost into his cursed and theft- 


proof tomb. The gem was an opal, 5 inches in 
1812 


Zo ee 


529 


~, Gem of Wishes 


diameter. This star is a gem oftrue seeing. 

The Star ofShah-pelar was a red star gem that 
was stolen by Badr Al-Mosak. It is rumored to 
rest in his tomb. The gem has the power to cure 
serious wounds three times per day. 

The Star ofKhan-pelar is a clear crystal gem 
that has the unique quality of magical invigora- 
tion. A wizard who meditates with it is able to 
rememorize one level of spell per turn of medita- 
tion. The wizard must be motionless during this 
time. The crystal has since passed out of living 
memory although it was once rumored to be in 
the area of the White Palm. 


of Wishes 

XP Value: 2,200 GP Value: 11,000 
Oriental Adventures 
This large gem looks like any other fine gem- 
stone. However, it reveals itself as a magical 
item if a detect magic spell is used. It has the 
power to grant 1d4 -wishes. Once all wishes have 
been granted, the gem loses all magical proper- 
ties. The gem itself has a value of 1d10x100 
ch'ien. 


Gemcutters's Tools of Sunndi 
XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 25,000 
GREYHAWK Adventures 
This magical set of vises, hammers, blades, and 
chisels was enchanted by the mountain dwarves 
who work the gemstone mines in the County of 
Sunndi. They help any character with a gem-cut- 
ting proficiency to increase the value of his or her 
work. For individual stones, the cutter can make a 
proficiency check to gain a modifier to the Gem 
Base Value Table found in the DMG. The DM 

rolls 1d8 to find the modifier: 


Roll Modifier 
1-6 -1 
6-7 -2 
8 -3 


The tools are also useful for finishing stones in 
a mine; the cutter can add 20-50% to the final 
average value listed on Table 34: Gemstone Qual- 
ity in the Dungeoneer 's Survival Guide. A gem 
cutter with these tools can demand up to four 
times the normal fees for services. 


Ginzani's Riding 
‘Tack of Flight 


XP Value: 7,000 GP Value: 35,000 
Top Ballista 

These excellent bridles, bits, reins, and saddles 
can be used with a pegasus or pegataur mount. If 
the owner of the bridle can get the mount to 
accept it (usually by trickery or subterfuge), the 
creature must save vs. spell. If this fails, the 
mount accepts the person who placed the bridle 
on it as its master (it is effectively charmed) fora 
year and a day (after that time the creature cannot 
be forced to accept the bridle again). Creatures 
which make successful saving throws, or were 
previously charmed in this way, have a strong 
enmity for any owner of this bridle. Riders using 
this bridal gain +2 to all ability checks needed to 
remain flying. 


Girdle 


Girdles are generally similar to belts. Unlike 
belts, girdles are not used to hold up pants and 
dungarees, but to carry pouches, scabbards, and 
the like. It is possible to wear both a magical belt 
and a magical girdle at the same time. However, 
if the two items have similar functions, only the 
most powerful grants the wearer any benefits. 


Roll Girdle Type 
01-10 Back Brace 
11-20 Cestus 
21-30 Cincture 
31-40 Cordon 
41-50 Corset 
51-60 Girdle 
61-70 Obi 
71-80 Surcingle (for a horse) 
81-90 Truss 
91-00 Waistband 
of Armida 

XP Value: — GP Value: — 


DUNGEONS & DRAGONS Guide Master Set 
Armida was once a famous sorceress in a far 
land. To help her achieve the greatest heights in 
her craft, her immortal uncle Idraote gave her this 
Girdle. However, she used it to tempt and confuse 
paladins, generally bringing confusion and dis- 
cord to others. Having fallen into a petty abuse of 
her powers, Armida did not reach her Immortal 


goal; but the girdle remains, to tempt (and possi- 
1816 


a N 


530 


oes ely 


IERA Oe Wa À 


PAA 


mre 


VERE RE EP 


wR? 


PFE LIT 


~ Girdle, Black Defense 


bly aid) other wizards to become Paragons. It is 
supposedly watched over by Idraote to this day. 
This is a simple, human-sized leather girdle 
(though it will shrink or enlarge to fit any user). It 
is ornately tooled with arcane symbols that 
describe its powers and command words. How- 
ever, this ancient language of magic can only be 
deciphered by a read magic spell cast by a wizard 
of at least 20th level. 
The girdle is active when found, its powers are 
activated by command words tooled on the girdle. 
Suggested Powers: (All abilities are cast at 
20th level.) 
e Charm monster 
Confusion 
Change odors (Affects a 30-foot radius; user 
can alter any smells within this area.) 
Memorize (Can memorize three additional 
spells per level.) 
Suggested Handicap: When first used; extra 
damage. Whenever the user is struck by any natural 
weapon (claw, bite, hooves), he or she takes 1dlO 
points of extra damage. This becomes 1 less point 
of damage for each 10 days that pass after the arti- 
fact is no longer owned, vanishing in 100 days. 
Suggested Penalties: 
Whenever either attack (charm or confusion) 
is cast at a lawfully or neutrally aligned crea- 
ture, hold person is cast at the user; saving 
throw applies. 
At standard chances: Size change, the user 
gains or loses (equal chances) 50% of current 
height. 


Back Defense 
XP Value: 1,200 GP Value: 6,000 
DRAGON Magazine 179 
This girdle causes the wearer to become aware of 
attacks from behind, negating any attack bonus an 
enemy might gain otherwise. It spoils surprise 
attacks ifthe attacker can be seen. 


of De ‘Rah 
XP Value: 7,000 GP Value: 35,000 
Revenge of Alphaks 

In its true form, this artifact appears to be a belt 
constructed of small platinum links, intertwined 
with strands from a unicorn's beard. The buckle is 
constructed of three oval plates of lustrous blue- 
gray metal. When a mortal looks into the surface 
of the plates, the viewer's reflection is repeated an 
infinite number of times. 


Currently, however, the girdle appears as a 
well-made but worn belt of bluish, gray leather. 
In this form it does not radiate magic, but its 
eldritch nature is apparent to anyone who handles 
it and casts detect magic. The origins of the girdle 
are lost, but its legendary owner, the priest De 
‘Rah, is said to have been a breathtakingly beauti- 
ful woman who could see through any deception 
or cure any malady. 

Suggested powers: lie detection, ESP“, true- 
seeing, cure disease z neutralize poison , heal, 
mind barrier. 

Activation: In its present form the girdle is 
partially active. All powers with an asterisk are 
usable, making this a minor artifact. The girdle 
can be fully reactivated only by finding the last 
mortal remains of De 'Rah herself—her mummi- 
fied feet. 

The first method of reactivation requires the 
user to sever his or her own feet and attach the 
relics to the leg stumps, where they automatically 
graft themselves in place. Although the feet are 
nearly indestructible, the user is unable to walk 
without assistance. A second method of reactiva- 
tion requires the proper reburial of the relics and 
a sacrifice of at least 300,000 gp to an immortal 
of the Sphere of Time. The time and place of the 


burial are left to the discretion of the DM. 
1818 


532 p 


Girdle of Freshness 


Ne a 


Use of Powers: All active poe are telepathi- 
cally apparent to the user. 

Suggested Handicap: Three to 30 days after 
the mind barrier power is used for the second 
time, doom strikes the user. His or her body and 
all equipment disappear, recoverable only at the 
DM's option. The girdle teleports to a random 
location. 

Suggested Penalties: For one week out of 
four, all members of the same race and of the 
opposite sex become irresistibly attracted to the 
user. The first onset of this penalty occurs exactly 
three weeks after the girdle is fully begun. After 
that, it is unpredictable within a three-week time- 
frame. A 1d8 determines the timing of further 
occurrences: 


Occurrences _ 
Three days early. 
Two days early. 
One day early. 
On time. 

On time. 

One day later. 
Two days later. 
Three days later. 


Roll 
1 


ONTDAAN 


While the penalty is in effect, any member of 
the opposite sex who spends a round within 30 
feet of the user must roll his or her combined 
Wisdom and Intelligence or less on 2d20 or 
become infatuated with the user for duration of 
the current incidence. Ifthe user appears in pub- 
lic while the penalty is in effect, the PC is mobbed 
by pawing admirers. Mobbed PCs can do nothing 
except try to escape. 

When the penalty becomes inactive, each vic- 
tim should roll on the reaction chart. A neutral 
reaction simply indicates the end of the infatua- 
tion. The victim is free to go about his or her 
business. A positive reaction indicates a basic 
desire to continue the infatuation, but the victim 
is no longer under a magical compulsion and can 
be dissuaded. A negative reaction indicates hos- 
tility toward the user making the victim feel 
injured or insulted. The PC may attack the user, 
but because the victim is not under a magical 
compulsion, he or she can be mollified in a num- 
ber of ways. Note: The last penalty requires a 
good deal of role-playing. 

When the girdle is fully activated, the user suf- 
fers damage feedback, taking 1 point of damage 


per die of healing bestowed on others. A heal 
spell inflicts 1 point for every 5 points restored. 
This penalty tests the mettle ofthe user. While it 
is possible to avoid ill effects simply by not cur- 
ing others, the Immortals of Time frown upon 
such use and may punish priests who refuse to 
heal others. 


of Dwarvenkind 
XP Value: 3,500 GP Value: 20,000 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 

This girdle lowers the user's Charisma score by 
one point with respect to nondwarves. The girdle 
causes 

the wearer to gain 1 point of Charisma with 
respect to halflings of the stout order and with 
respect to all gnomes as well. Dwarves regard the 
wearer as ifhe or she has a Charisma two points 
higher than before. The girdle enables the wearer 
to understand, speak, and read dwarvish lan- 
guages. The wearer also gains the racial benefits 
of dwarvenkind (+1 Constitution, saving throw 
bonuses on total Constitution, 60-foot infravi- 
sion, and detection/ determination of approxi- 
mate depth underground as described in the 
PHB). All bonuses and penalties apply only as 
long as the individual actually wears the girdle. 
Benefits such as additional languages and com- 
bat bonuses against giant opponents never apply. 


of Femininity/Masculinity 


XP Value GP Value 
Changing: — 1,000 
Neutering: — 1,500 


DUNGEON MASTER Guide 

This broad leather band seems to be a normal 
belt, but when worn, it immediately changes the 
sex of the wearer to the opposite gender. It then 
loses all power. There is no sure way to restore 
the character's original sex, though there is a 50% 
chance a wish might, and a powerful being could 
alter the situation. Of these girdles, 10% actually 
neuter a wearer. 


of Freshness 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
Top Ballista 
This embroidered, silk-covered leather girdle pro- 
tects the wearer against all radiant stench effects 
from creatures—the smell of troglodytes, and the 
tabi rotting blight, for example. It gives no pro- 


tection against smells created by natural processes 
1821 


533 


Girdle of Gender Alteration 


such as marsh gas, stagnant water, and the like. 
The wearer also adds a +4 bonus to all saving 
throws made for items against the corruption 
ability of a nagpa (see Nagpa in the MYSTARA 
Appendix of the MONSTROUS COMPENDIUM). 


of Gender Alteration 

XP Value: — GP Value: 1,000 
Black Courser 

When a character puts this girdle on, nothing hap- 
pens. When it is removed, however, he or she has 
become a member of the opposite sex, although 
this fact is apparent only to observers and not to the 
wearer. The girdle functions only once. 


of Giant Strength 


XP Value GP Value 
Hill: 2000 20,000 
Stone: 2500 25,000 
Frost: 3000 30,000 
Fire: 3500 35,000 
Cloud: 4000 40,000 
Storm: 4500 45,000 


DUNGEON MASTER Guide 
This belt looks similar to ordinary belts, but it is 
imbued with very powerful magic. When worn, it 
increases the physical prowess ofits wearer, giv- 


wearer to grow to giant size, however.) To deter- 
mine how strong the wearer becomes and the 
bonuses acquired, roll percentile dice and consult 
the table below. 


Giant Str Attack Open 
Roll Equiv Rating Bonus Dmg _ Doors* 

01-30 Hill 19 +3 +7 16(8) 
31-50 Stone 20 +3 +8 1710) 
51-70 Frost 21 +4 +9  17(12) 
71-85 Fire 22 +4 +0 1814 
86-95 Cloud 23 +5 +11 1816) 
96-00 Storm 24 +6 +12 1917) 


*The number in parentheses is the number of 
chances on a 1d20 for the character to be able to 
force open a locked, barred, magically held, or 
wizard locked door. Only one attempt can be 
made per door. 


The wearer of the girdle is able to hurl rocks 
and bend bars as ifhe or she has imbibed a potion 
of giant strength. These abilities are: 


Rock BendBars/ 
Lift Gates 


Giant Weight Base 
Equiv Allow. Range Dmg Wt* 


Hill 485 8yds 1d 140 50% 
loyds 1d2 198 60% 
l0yds 18 156 70% 


Stone 535 
Frost 635 


Girdle of Priestly Might 


h ee a 


Fire 785 12yds 1d8 170 80% 
Cloud 935 14yds IdlO 184 90% 
Storm 1,235 16yds 1d2 212 95% 


* Approximate average missile weight in pounds. 

The strength gained is not cumulative with 
normal or magical Strength bonuses except in 
combination with gauntlets ofogre power and 
magical warhammers. 

In a DRAGONLANCE Campaign: Girdles of 
giant strength are called girdles ofstrength on 
Ansalon. 


Golden Girdle of Urnst 

XP Value: 500 GP Value: 3,000 
GREYHAWK Adventures 
Created to protect a powerful wizard against 
malevolent warriors, this magical garment is 
made ofred silk strewn with golden flakes. It is 
enchanted to give a +3 Armor Class bonus against 
swords of any type, though other weapons are 
unaffected. 


Kerisis's Girdle of Femininity 
XP Value: — GP Value: 1,000 
1992 Fantasy Collector Card 146 

Kerisis has been attempting to remove this gir- 
dle for some time, but no remove curse or wish 
spell has yet worked. Her rage at this inconve- 
nience has even sent her into the Demiplane of 
Ravenloft for a time, but the warping of magic 
there has not helped her cause. She has looked 
to Bilkon for an answer, but his magic was inef- 
fective. Kerisis even attempted to enlist the help 
of the evil Mazrikoth, but he only attempted to 
seduce her—a thoroughly revolting idea even if 
she really was a woman! Kerisis may just have 
to get used to the idea of being female, but she 
hasn't given up yet. Meanwhile, Kerisis has 
been going by the alias Kerisa. 


of the Lions 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 8,000 
DRAGON Magazine 91 
This broad belt appears to be like any other magi- 
cal girdle when first encountered. When it is put 
on, the wearer gains several special abilities. 
Wearing a girdle ofthe lions enables one to speak 
with felines (as per the spell speak with mon- 
sters). The felines, from house cats to saber-tooth 
tigers, view the wearer as a being with a Cha- 
risma of 18 (for purposes of reaction checks). 
Often, the cats give advice or aid to the wearer 


and may obey reasonable commands. 

The wearer also gains the ability to land after 
a fall in such a way as to minimize physical 
damage—subtract 3 points from every die of 
damage incurred from falling, to a minimum of 
1 point of damage per die. The girdle enables 
the wearer to move silently as per a thief's abil- 
ity, with a minimum 50% chance of success. If 
the wearer is a thief, monk, or another who has 
the ability to move silently, then the chance of 
success is adjusted upward by +50%, to a maxi- 
mum of 99%. 

Finally, the girdle confers a sort of night vision 
similar to that possessed by cats. If any light 
source is within view of the wearer, he can see in 
the dark as clearly as ifhe were in broad daylight. 
Note that this power is not related to infravision; 
the girdle does not allow someone to see in pitch 
darkness. 


of Many Pouches 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 10,000 

DUNGEON MASTER Guide 
This broad waist-belt seems to be nothing more 
than a finely made article of clothing. However, if 
detect magic is cast, the item radiates strong 
enchantment along with a fainter aura of alter- 
ation. Examination reveals that the girdle has 
eight small pouches on its inner front surface. In 
fact, there is a total of 64 magical pouches in the 
girdle, eight others "behind" each of the eight 
apparent ones. Each of these pouches is similar to 
a miniature bag ofholding, able to contain up to 1 
cubic foot of material weighing as much as 10 
pounds. The girdle responds to the thoughts of its 
wearer by providing a full or an empty pouch, as 
needed. This item is greatly prized by Spellcast- 
ers, for it can hold components for many spells 
and make them readily available. 


of Priestly Might 
XP Value GP Value 
Priestly Might: 3,000 15,000 
Priestly Warding: 4,000 20,000 
Holy Might: 5,000 25,000 


The Shining South 
This girdle first appeared after the Time of Trou- 
bles. Priests of Mystra took it to be a sign that the 
goddess had regained her power. This item is one 
of the reasons that Azuth has not gained more 
supporters in Halruaa. 


These girdles actually come in three versions. 
1828 


ee 


535 


Glass, Enlarging 


The basic girdle, the girdle of priestly might, 
allows the wearer an 18/99 Strength and a +2 
Armor Class bonus. The second type, called a 
girdle of priestly warding, grants the above pow- 
ers, plus protection from evil (or good). The third 
girdle, the girdle ofholy might, grants the preced- 
ing powers, plus the ability to use a word of recall 
spell once per month. 


Roll Type of Girdle Found 
01-70 Priestly Might 

71-95 Priestly Warding 
96-00 Holy Might 


The girdle bears the symbol of its bonded 
power on the front. However, any priest or priest 
of the same alignment as the power whose sym- 
bol appears on a girdle may use it. (One need not 
be a priest of that power, only of the same align- 
ment.) 

The girdles are not aligned with respect to 
chaos or law, being vessels either of good, neu- 
trality, or evil. A priest who tries on a girdle of an 
opposing alignment is cursed, and receives no 
spells above 2nd level until he or she receives an 
atonement spell. A quest of the power's choosing 
may be necessary. A neutral priest who tries on 
either a good or an evil girdle suffers the same 
effect. 

It is not known exactly how many other girdles 
have appeared in, the Realms. Given the new, 
more active stance that powers have been forced 
to take in the Realms, it is thought that there may 
be more than a few of these items. It is highly 
unlikely that these are to be found in treasure 
hoards. The girdles that are known to exist are all 
carefully guarded. It is doubtful that such a girdle 
can be found on anyone who has not been a high 
priest for quite some time. 

The priests of Mystra are known to have at 
least one of each type in the temple fortress at 
Mount Talath. There are also rumors that the 
secret of constructing more of these items has 
been discovered. If so, it is sure to be a long and 
expensive process. 


Glass 


A glass is a magical lens that is secured to an ivory 
or wooden handle with a metal band. Peering 


through most lenses makes illegible writings and — 


insignias readable. Many magical lenses also 
enlarge items whose detail is too fine for legibility. 


Enlarging 

XP Value: 1,500 GP Value: 7,500 
DRAGON Magazine 30 
An enlarging glass is a magical magnifying glass 
that is approximately 2 inches in diameter and 5x 
power. If two of these glasses are formed into a 
set of crossbow sights, they alter the ranges and 
penalties of the weapon. When installed, long 
range becomes medium range, and medium short 
range. Short range receives the bonuses of point- 
blank range. Maximum range, however, remains 
the same. 


of Distant Vision 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 10,000 
Greyspace 
The glass resembles a standard brass telescope 
about 18 inches long, and tapering from a 3-inch- 
diameter at one end to 1 inch at the other. It 
weighs about five pounds. The glass radiates a 
very faint aura of magic. 

The glass seems to be a normal telescope, of 
about 8x power. That is, any object viewed 
through the glass seems to be eight times closer 
than it actually is. When the magic word is spo- 
ken, however, the power of the telescope 
increases to 80x—making an object 80 miles 
away look as though it were only one mile dis- 
tant. While the glass is operating in this mode, 
the user can increase its magnification still fur- 
ther by turning a narrow ring that surrounds the 
eyepiece. Turned all the way counterclockwise, 
the glass has a magnification of 80x—its nor- 
mal setting. Turned all the way clockwise, how- 
ever, the glass has a magnification of 250x. 
Repeating the trigger word returns the glass to 
nonmagical operation. Each glass has its own 
trigger word. 

At extreme magnification, any telescope has 
a very small field of view, and it is extremely 
difficult to keep steady. The glass ofdistant 
vision counteracts this problem. It seems to be 
magically stabilized in some way, so that it 
remains trained on a particular target until the 
viewer actively decides to move it. This stabi- 
lization does not work when the glass is in 8x 
mode. The glass ofdistant vision is based on 
magical technology developed by the silver 
dragons of Skyhaven on Edill. The devices were 
actually constructed by a human wizard named 
Revorian, however, since the dragons had no 


desire to put their theoretical breakthrough into 
1830 


536 : 


Globe, Battleshroud Gas 


Dean Se ee REY 


practice. Before his untimely death, Revorian 
constructed perhaps two dozen of these devices. 
Currently, nobody knows how to recreate his 
works. A glass ofdistant vision costs at least 
5,000 gp on the open market—if the buyer can 
find someone willing to sell—and often much 
more. 


Joal's Glass of Preserved Words 

XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 10,000 
1992 Fantasy Collector Card 504 
Joal is an archeologist and rogue who adventures 
solely for the purpose of discovering ancient civi- 
lizations. He has recovered a few artifacts and 
numerous magical items in his many quests. His 
glass of preserved words makes illegible, written 
text readable. He has also paid a wizard to 
enchant the glass with a permanent comprehend 
languages spell so that he can translate any cryp- 
tic scrawl he discovers in his explorations. Joal's 
glass has aided him in many treasure hunts and is 
well worth the 10,000 gp he invested in its 
enchantment. 


Loupe of Cormac 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 25,000 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 61 
The loupe of Cormac is a jeweler's eyepiece that 
acts like a gem oftrue seeing, but functions only 
on gem stones. Using it, a person with an apprais- 
ing skill can determine the exact quality and 
value of a gem, plus the nature of any inherent 
magic—including curses. 


of Preserved Words 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 10,000 
Tome of Magic 

This magical magnifying glass has a band of sil- 
ver around the lens and an ivory handle. The 
glass has the ability to make illegible written 
words readable. Words that were carved into 
stone but worn away by time, inked letters, 
blurred due to moisture, messages clouded by 
magic, and magical and normal writings all 
become clear when read through the glass. 

The actual words remain illegible; they are not 
altered in any way. Only a character looking at 
them through the glass can read them clearly. The 
glass does not protect the reader from any harm- 
ful effects as a result of a cursed scroll or trapped 
writings, nor does it make cryptically worded or 
coded messages understandable. 


Glitterlode's Blessed 
Skyhooks 


XP Value GP Value 
+1: 700 -OOO 
+2: 1,400 4,000 
+3:2,100 1,000 
+4:2,800 8,000 
Top Ballista 


These magical skyhooks are believed to have 
been created by servants of the Immortal Garal 
Glitterlode, and placed as rewards for his follow- 
ers among the gnomish peoples. The skyhooks 
automatically fit the hands of the gnome who 
finds them, and may be of +1 to +4 enchantment, 
each plus adding an extra +1 to the machine 
building skill and subtracting 5% from the time 
and cost ofall machine constructions. A 1d20 roll 
finds the enchantment. 


1d20 Enchantment 
- 01-12 +1 
13-16 +2 
17-19 +3 
20 +4 


Globe 


Globes are small, hollow, spherical vessels 
formed from clear glass. They usually contain 
sparkling liquids and shifting colors. When a 
globe is dropped or thrown, it automatically shat- 
ters, releasing a cloud of colored gas. Some 
globes, however, function as scrying devices (see 
Crystal Ball for details). 


Battleshroud Gas 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 7,500 
The Ruins of Undermountain 

This purplish, expanding smoke is a rare and 
deadly fighting-aid devised by a wizard of 
Nimbral and several priests of Lantan. It is 
known as battleshroud, and has three important 
properties. 

The smoke fills a spherical area and expands 
it by 20 feet each round to a maximum radius 
of 40 feet (lasting for 1d4+12 rounds) before 
it thins out and dissipates. While the smoke 
lasts, the area is filled with a thick magical 
smoke screen which confounds normal vision, 
infravision, and true seeing. Scrying and 
locating, by magical items or spells, is pre- 
vented by the battleshroud. The smoke screen 

1835 


537 


~ Globe of Cirulon r 


is equal in effect to total darkness, so all char- 

acters' attack rolls suffer -4 penalties while 

within the battleshroud's confines; likewise, 

Armor Classes have a +4 penalty while within 

the magical smoke. Blindfighting proficiency 

effects (but not animals' night vision) modify 
these penalties. 

e Any creatures struck by the globe or within 2 
feet of the impact area must save vs. breath 
weapon or have a battleshroud of 10-foot 
radius move with them, independent of the 
cloud's standard effects, for the duration of the 
smoke cloud (1d4+12 rounds). This effect is 
due to the smoke reacting with and clinging to 
the moisture inherent in a creature's skin or 
garments, and is not magical. 

e All creatures in contact with the smoke must 
save vs. spell or be slowed (effects as the 
wizard spell) while the smoke lasts. Even if 
the creatures subsequently leave the vicinity 
(or even the plane) of the smoke, the slow 
effects continue for 1d8 rounds. This is a 
temporary biological property of the bat- 
tleshroud, not a magical effect. Neutralize 
poison and slow poison spells neutralize this 
effect if the target is outside the boundaries 
of the cloud. 

Battleshroud is found only in clear glass 
spheres, some of which bear identifying inscrip- 
tions. All known types of dragonkind are 
immune to the effects of this substance, and 
some sages believe all reptiles are immune or at 
least highly resistant to battleshroud smoke. 
Battleshroud is too rare to have seen much bat- 
tlefield use, although the island realms of Lan- 
tan and Nimbral benefit from its presence in 
their defensive armories. The cloud it creates 
cannot be negated by dispel magic or similar 
means. 


of Cirulon 

GP Value: 3,000 
Dragon Keep 
This is a clear, crystal sphere about 4 inches in 
diameter, imbedded with chips of gold, copper, 
silver, brass, and bronze. Each globe rests on a 
small pillow of clouds. Once per day, the owner 
can touch the globe and be affected as if he or she 
consumed a. potion ofhealing. A. globe of Cirulon 
functions only for the owner. 


XP Value: 750 


Glowing 
XP Value GP Value 
Controllable: 120 240 
Uncontrollable: 100 200 
DRAGON Magazine 41 


A luminous globe that floats always above and 
just behind the shoulder of the person who first 
touched it. Its brightness is under the owner's 
mental control—from dark to blinding (a brief 
flash; effects last for 1d6 rounds). Typically, such 
a globe can be removed from the owner only by a 
limited wish, wish, or a remove curse, whereon 
the next person to touch the globe will inherit it. 
One type of globe (30% of all globes) remains 
brightly lit (equivalent to a continual light) at all 
times; the brightness cannot be controlled. The 
glowing globe does not radiate any heat, and can- 
not be rendered invisible except by wishes. 


Glowing H 
XP Value: 100 GP Value: 200 
The Magister 
These globes are often found in ancient dwellings 
and ruins. Their origin is unknown, although it is 
rumored among magic-users that a globe ofcon- 
trollable brightness can be made by using 
Nchaser's glowing globe, a spell of the 4th level. 
This is said to require a normal glass globe of the 
finest quality. The wizard Nchaser has not been 
seen for nearly 20 years. 

A luminous globe, it floats always above and 
just behind the shoulder of the person who first 
touched it. Its brightness is under the owner's 
mental control, from dark to blinding (brief flash; 
effects last for 1d6 rounds). Typically, such a 
globe can be removed from an owner by a limited 
wish, wish, or remove cwrse, whereon the next 
person to touch the globe inherits it. One type of 
globe remains brightly lit (equivalent to continual 
light) at all times; the brightness cannot be con- 
trolled. The glowing globe does not radiate any 
heat, and cannot be rendered invisible save by 
wishes. It is affected by changes in its owner's 
states and drops to the ground, weightless, if its 
owner is killed, petrified, goes ethereal or astral, 
or travels to some other plane in a manner that 
prohibits to globe from going along. 

Owners attempting to use the globe as a carry- 
ing device (by rigging a harness) have found that 
it can carry 200 gp. However, any weight above 
25 gp slows it down to a lingering walk, and the 


owner must match the globe's pace. Ifthe carried 
1838 


538 


Globe of Serenity 


p a a 


weight is more than 200 gp, the globe settles to 
the ground and does not move until its load is 
relieved. Savvy orcs and other darkseers have 
used the tactic of weighted nets on such globes to 
separate careless human adventurers from their 
light sources. 


Mervic's Gaseous 
XP Value: 50 GP Value: 150 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 47 
These small, hollow globes are formed of clear 
glass and contain a shifting, colored liquid. When 
a globe is dropped, it automatically shatters, 
releasing a 10- by 10- by 10-foot cloud of colored 
gas with one of the following effects: 


Roll Color Power 
01l-11 Black Anti-magic (as anti-magic 
shell for 1d6 rounds). 
12-22 Blue Fog cloud (obscures vision 
1d6 rounds). 
23-33 Gray Poison. 
01-50 Normal. 
51-75 Weak (+2 to saving throws). 
76-00 Strong (-2 to saving throws). 
3444 Green Acid (1d4 damage to crea- 


tures, all items must save vs. 
acid at +3 or be destroyed). 


45-55 Mottled Confusion (1d6 rounds). 

56-66 Purple Sleep (1d6 rounds). 

67-77 Red Incendiary (1d4 damage to 
creatures, all items must save 
vs. fireball at +3 or be 
destroyed). 

78-88 White Slow (as spell, 1d6 rounds). 

89-00 Yellow Paralysis (1d6 rounds). 


The gas clouds last for three rounds, creatures 
within the clouds are affected as long as they 
remain within the cloud and for the cited duration 
once they leave. The globes can be thrown 30 
feet, and are found of caches of 1dlO. 


of Purification 

GP Value: 2,500 

Tome of Magic 

These enchanted glass spheres, 6 inches in 
diameter, contain the swirling blue-gray 
essence of a cloud of purification spell. When 
the globe is broken, the cloud billows forth, 
acting exactly as ifthe spell had been cast by a 
12th-level priest. These devices are often given 
to a city's sanitation crews, who descend upon 
the streets and sewers during the wee hours of 
the morning. 


XP Value: 500 


Samzinna's Globe of Putrification 
XP Value: 1,00 GP Value: 5,000 
1992 Fantasy Collector Card 391 
Samzinna loves any spell that involves gases or 
the Element of Air. He thought the globe of 
purification was a great idea, but it needed an 
effect with a better kick: Hence, he made his own 
globe of purification. Samzinna's globe is a 6- 
inch glass sphere that contains a stinking cloud 
spell. When the globe is broken, the spell goes 
off, making an extremely effective grenade. With 
some trial and error, Samzinna is trying to perfect 
a system of carrying many globes, without break- 

ing them, on his person. 


of Serenity 

GP Value: 2,500 
Tome of Magic 
These glass orbs look very much like crystal 
balls. However, a globe of serenity emits a contin- 
uous, inaudible tone that affects all living crea- 
tures within 50 feet that fail a saving throw vs. 
spell. While in the area of effect, affected crea- 


tures feel the utmost serenity and self-control. 
1842 


XP Value: 500 


Spr ae ar a eg ee, 


539 


Globe, Vision 


cesta a 


Strong emotions such as joy, love, and hatred are 
totally subdued. 

Creatures affected by the globe gain a +3 sav- 
ing throw bonus to resist spells and special 
attacks that affect emotions (such as charm, fear, 
or emotion). At the same time, they suffer a -2 on 
all Intelligence checks, the spark of insight is also 
repressed. 

The globe also affects Morale, raising the spir- 
its of some while quelling the fires of fanaticism 
in others. All affected creatures have Morale of 
10, regardless of their training or skill. Ifa 
Morale check is called for and failed, the effected 
creature does not rout or flee, but stays in place, 
taking no action until rallied. 

Globes ofserenity are best suited for lawful 
communities where open displays of emotion are 
frowned upon. Although crime and violence 
would be greatly reduced in these communities, 
citizens would also lack a sense of spirit. The 
people would go about their daily routines like 
emotionless automatons. 

In Ravenloft: The bonuses of this globe are 
applied to fear and horror checks. Furthermore, 
the globe can nullify the effects ofa failed fear 
check. If used on a person who failed a horror 
check, the PC gets a new check to attempt to 
recover from the horror. 


Vision 
XP Value: 750 GP Value: 3,000 
DRAGON Magazine 91 
This object appears to be a crystal sphere 6 
inches in diameter that radiates magic. It can only 
be used by a psionic character who has one or 
more of the disciplines listed below. The charac- 
ter can project mental pictures received while 
using one of the disciplines from his or her mind 
into the globe, so that the images are visible to 
anyone who looks into the globe. The required 
disciplines include: Animal Telepathy, Clairvoy- 
ance, ESP, Object Reading, Sensitivity to Psychic 
Impressions, and Telepathy. 

Any mental pictures that are received from the 
mind of a contacted being, or images that show 
what a location looks like, are depicted in the 
vision globe whenever a psionic character holds 
the globe in both hands and employs one of the 
above disciplines. The globe remains inert if it is 
held by a character who cannot use it, or if held 
by a "legal" user who cannot presently employ 
any of the permitted disciplines due to a lack of 


PSPs. The vision globe can be used as often as 
desired by any character able to harness its power. 

The vision globe will not transmit sound or 
speech, but can depict words ifthey come through 
as mental images (for example, if someone men- 
tally pictures the image of a "dog," instead of 
thinking the word "dog" as a label to identify a 
mental image). 


vovo ny aT A 


N 
À 
N 

` 


1843 


Ae a T SO 


5 


4 


0 


Glove, Black Hand 


SS ee ee 


OfWisdom 

XP Value: 300 GP Value: 1,500 
New Item 
These rare globes contain a swirling, purple gas. 
When a globe of wisdom is smashed and its 
fumes are inhaled, a character who breathes in the 
gas receives a +3 bonus to his or her Wisdom for 
1d2 rounds. 

The bonus can only be applied to a single char- 
acter, no matter how many PCs breathe the 
fumes. 


Glove 


Magical gloves usually are made from thick 
leather. Most gloves are sewn to tightly fit the 
hand and allow a firm grip on a weapon. Gloves 
used in combat usually do not have decorative 
jewels or embroidery, although exceptions like 
gloves oflightning do exist. 


Roll Glove Type 
01-11 Cestus 
12-22 Gage 
23-33 Gauntlet 
3445 Glove 
46-56 Mitt 
57-67 Mitten 
68-78 Muff 
79-89 Punch-cutter* 
90-00 Shipwalkers 
Black Hand 
XP Value: 4,500 GP Value: 50,000 


Halls of the High King 

The making of these fell items remains a secret of 
the priesthood of Bane, who have used them for 
over a century. A scant few black hands have 
fallen into the clutches of outsiders as booty, but 
no one outside the dark clergy ever admitted a 
successful duplication of such a weapon. Such an 
admission would almost certainly spell the doom 
of the claimant at the hands of Banites the Realms 
over, but the clergy of Talos and Tempus are 
known to have attempted the creation of such 
gloves for their own priesthoods—so far without 
SUCCESS. 

Worn by high-ranking priests of Bane, black 
hands are slip-on, elbow length gloves crafted of 
flexible, black metal mesh or very fine chainmail; 
they glow with an eerie, dark radiance. They are 
usually left-hand gloves, and only one black hand 
is ever worn (never on both hands). A wearer can 


therefore wield a weapon as well as the glove, 
although a successful attack roll is required to 
deliver any ofthe hand's touch effects. 

A black hand absorbs all spells (and the equiv- 
alent natural powers of monsters and the effects 
of magic items) of 3rd level or below, regardless 
of class or origin. Such attacks simply do not 
affect the wearer or any items carried or worn, 
regardless ofthe wearer's actions (or even if dead 
or unconscious). Area effect spells are not negated 
or diverted; they simply do not affect the glove 
wearer. Additional beings and their gear cannot 
be protected by the touch of a hand, nor does its 
protection extend to a being who is merely carry- 
ing it—it must be worn, in contact with the skin, 
to function at all. Its passive protection has no 
known "absorption capacity" limit. 

A black hand can also'be used actively. Its 
touch can drain magic items of 14 charges, per 
touch or round of continuous contact, if the 
wearer wills. Each grasped magic item gains a 
saving throw against magical fire to avoid being 
drained and must save anew for each contact. 
Magic items that do not use charges are rendered 
dormant and useless for 1d4 rounds. 

Magic item powers are not known to harm 
hands. A black hand has an Armor Class of 4 and 
22 hit points. Its mesh resists piercing or cutting 
by even the keenest blades. 

If the wearer wills, a black hand's touch can 
paralyze living beings, who are allowed normal 
saving throws to successfully resist. If failed, they 
are paralyzed for 1d4+1 turns. Any attack on a 
paralyzed creature automatically hits, but it 
breaks the paralysis instantly. 

Undead can also be paralyzed by the hand's 
touch. Hand wearers roll turning attempts, as 
priests ifthe same level, if not themselves 
priests. Ifthe result is a "T," 1d4+l turn paraly- 
sis occurs. If the result is "D," the paralysis is 
permanent—until an attack ends it, or magic is 
used to dispel it. 

Black hands can be directed to release absorbed 
magical energy through a touch attack. The elec- 
trical energy discharge affects only the being 
touched (penetrating armor and conducting along 
weapons and the like, but not harming nearby 
beings). A saving throw vs. poison is allowed. If 
successful, a victim suffers 2d6 damage; if failed, 
1d4 hit points of the damage of each hand contact 
are permanent, at the DM's option. No saving 


throw allows all damage to be avoided. This 
1845 


541 


Glove, Claws of Raking 


Dp i E N 


power can be used only four times in any day. Ifa 
touch attempt misses, the energy is not dis- 
charged and is wasted; a discharge occurs only if 
an attack succeeds. 


Claws of Raking 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 2,500 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

This pair of apparently ordinary gloves grows 
claws on command. The wearer may use them as 
edged weapons, striking twice (once each glove) 
per round for 1d4 points of damage per hit plus 
Strength bonus. The gloves can affect creatures 
immune to normal weapons. When used with 
cleats of gripping, the wearer may climb sheer 
surfaces as a 4th-level thief (but at half normal 
chances ifmetal armor is worn). 


Cosmetology 
XP Value: 100 GP Value: 500 
DRAGON Magazine 73 
This is a large leather glove. When a person puts 
it on, the fingernails of the inserted hand are 
painted and polished to a color that most suits the 
character's present attire. (A matched pair is 
needed to do both hands.) 


of Evasion 

XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 10,000 

The Complete Thief's Handbook 
These gloves are made of exceptionally supple, 
thin calfskin, and when worn they blend with the 
skin and become virtually undetectable (and are 
detection resistant). A thief wearing them gains a 
+10% bonus to open locks and can undo almost 
any knot automatically in one round. Any charac- 
ter wearing the gloves is able to manipulate his or 
her hands in order to escape from manacles, 
chains, irons, or similar restraints if a Dexterity 
check (with a +2 bonus ifthe character is a thief) 
is successful. 


of the Feline 


XP Value GP Value 
Lawful Good: 2,000 10,000 
Lawful Neutral: 2,000 10,000 
Lawful Evil: 2,000 0,000 
Neutral Good: 2,000 10,000 
Neutral: 2,000 10,000 
Neutral Evil: 2,000 10,000 
Chaotic Good: 2,000 10,000 
Chaotic Neutral: 2,000 10,000 
Chaotic Evil: 2,000 10,000 


POLYHEDRON Newszine 82 
These leather gloves are embossed in gold with 
an image of a type of cat. Common images 
include panthers and tigers. The gloves are 
aligned, usually neutral good or chaotic good, and 
will not function for an individual whose align- 
ment does not match the gloves’. The gloves pro- 
vide the following abilities if worn by an 
individual of matching alignment: 
The wearer gains the thief climb walls ability 
at 80%. 
If the wearer falls, he or she always lands 
standing up and suffering minimum damage. 
In unarmed combat, the wearer can cause 
claws to spring forth from the gloves’ finger- 
tips, and can attack with both gloves ina 
round; a successful hit causes 1d4 points of 
damage. 
The wearer canjump, as the wizard spell, once 
per day. 


Fist 
XP Value: 900 GP Value: 9,000 
Dwarves Deep 
These prized items are traditionally used only by 
dwarven priests, but without regard to faith. 
Dwarves frown on beings of other races using 
them, and seek any excuse to challenge or attack 
the owners to gain them. Fists magically alter in 
size to fit any hand brought into contact with 
them, and can even be worn and used by dragons, 
giants, and other gargantuan creatures! 

Afist is an adamantite chain mail glove with 
pointed knuckles of solid metal. They are used 
like brass knuckles, but augment the power of the 
wearer's blows. 

Afist adds 1 point of damage to the wearer's 
barehanded damage in normal use, and also pro- 
tects the hand against weapon attacks. It can be 
commanded to deliver a pile-driving blow. Each 


blow drains the wearer of 1d2 hit points—it is the 
1850 


Ze Se ee, aaa 


542 


Gloves of Lightning 


user's life energy that powers the extra impact. A 
pile-driving blow can be used, as the name sug- 
gests, to drive piles, or shatter doors, armor, 
weapons, shields, and the like. 

If the target is mobile, a successful attack roll 

is required. Ifa blow occurs, the target must save 
vs. crushing blow at -6. (If directed against walls 
and the like, consider the fist a "giant fist" on the 
Structural Saving Throws table in the DMG, to 
which the -6 penalty to the save applies.) 
Against creatures, a pile-driving blow does 2d12 
points of damage, automatically stuns for the fol- 
lowing round, and knocks the target down. To 
avoid being knocked down, allow a Strength 
check at -3 penalty (-2 ifthe target is large, -1 if 
huge, no penalty if gargantuan). A saving throw 
vs. spell avoids stunning; otherwise, the struck 
being can make no voluntary action on the fol- 
lowing round. 

Fists are unaffected by heat metal and similar 
attacks directed at them. If struck by any spell 
effect of 7th level or above or any magical item 
effect dealing more than 7 dice of damage, they 
fly off, landing at random. Damaging a. fist 
requires concentrated, deliberate magical attacks, 
or disintegration—normal combat attacks, even 
severe ones, simply won't affect afist. A fist nei- 
ther has nor uses charges. 


Golden 
XP Value: — GP Value: 1,000 
Black Courser 
When worn, these gloves slowly constrict, crush- 
ing the wearer's hands into useless, mangled 
stumps if not removed by a remove curse spell 


cast within two rounds. 


Helping Hand 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
IMAGINE Magazine 24 
The helping hand appears to be an iron glove 
with unusually long fingers, and an iron ring (to 
tie it to a rope) at the wrist. When given the com- 
mand word, it grabs whatever next comes into 
contact with its palm and holds on until told to 
release it. If attached to a rope, it can be used as a 
grappling hook that lands silently 85% of the 
time. 

If thrown at an opponent and a successful 
attack roll is made, the helping hand grabs its 
victim's throat, causing | hit point of damage in 
the first round, two points in the second, four 
points in the third, and so on. A strangulating 
helping hand can only be removed with a suc- 
cessful Strength ability check with a -2 penalty. 


of Interception 
XP Value: 1,500 GP Value: 10,000 

DRAGON Magazine 179 
The wearer can catch any hurled or fired missile 
aimed at his or her frontside, provided that sur- 
prise is not a factor and that the missile is not 
from a siege engine or firearm. Any missile tar- 
geted or passing within the wearer's reach (3 
feet) may be intercepted whether the attack is 
aimed at the wearer or another character. The 
wearer must make a Dexterity check on 1 d20 to 
succeed and cannot have anything in the receiv- 
ing hand while performing this function. Magi- 
cal arrows, bolts, stones, and sling bullets have 
their attack bonuses applied as negative modi- 
fiers to the Dexterity check. 


of Lightning 
GP Value: 20,000 
Old Empires 
These ornate, magical gloves, usable by all 
classes, are powerful weapons. Once every three 
rounds (up to three times a day), the wearer may 
point at a single target and fire a strong burst of 


electricity that automatically strikes. This burst 
1854 


XP Value: 2,000 


543 


Gloves of Missile Snaring 


Do eee eee ee SS re a 


inflicts 8d6 points of damage (a successful saving 
throw vs. wand cuts this in half). Gloves oflight- 
ning cannot be worn with gauntlets; both gloves 
are necessary to fire the lightning. 


of Missile Snaring 
XP Value: 1,800 GP Value: 10,000 

DUNGEON MASTER Guide 
These gloves radiate a slight aura of enchantment 
and alteration ifdetect magic is used. Once 
snugly worn, they seem to meld with the hands, 
becoming almost invisible (undetectable unless 
within 5 feet of the wearer). With either or both 
hands clad, and if not already holding something, 
the gloves may be used to pick many sorts of mis- 
siles out of the air, thus preventing possible harm, 
and enabling the wearer to return hand-thrown 
missiles to their sender as an attack in a subse- 
quent round. 

All forms of small, hand-hurled or weapon- 
propelled missiles (arrows, bolts, darts, bullets, 
javelins, axes, hammers, spears, and the like) may 
be caught. Ifthe weapon magically returns to the 
attacker, then catching it simply prevents damage, 
and returning the weapon does not result in an 
attack. 


of the Octopus 
XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 20,000 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 58 
These dark gloves function only when worn. 
When commanded, the fingers (not the thumbs) 
grow into 10-foot long tentacles. They can grab 
objects, open doors, attack, and entangle oppo- 
nents. Each finger has a Strength of 18/50, and 
each attack by a finger causes 1d6 points of dam- 
age. An attack roll must be made for each finger. 
When commanded to entangle, the victim must 
make a saving throw vs. death magic to avoid 
being held. This saving throw is modified by -1 
for each finger involved. For example, if the 
wearer is using one hand (four fingers) to entan- 
gle, the victim makes the saving throw at -4. The 
elongated hand can also wield any weapons nor- 
mally used by the wearer, based on the wearer's 
combat table. The fingers cannot employ magical 
items. The gloves' Armor Class is 8, and each fin- 
ger can withstand 10 points of damage before 
becoming useless. Damaged fingers regenerate at 
arate of 1 hit point per week. When all the fin- 
gers of a glove are cut off, the glove becomes 
nonmagical. Damaging the fingers does not 


cause damage to the wearer. While using the 
gloves, the wearer cannot cast spells or use magi- 
cal items that require concentration. 


Reglar's Gloves of Freedom 

XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 15,000 
Tome of Magic 
These gloves appear to be thick, leather, combat 
gloves. Silvered pearls are sewn along the stitch- 
ing. A character under the influence of a charm 
spell or similar enchantment can be freed of the 
enchantment by shaking hands with the wearer of 
the gloves. This item frees only characters who 
are enchanted against their will. Those who have 
willingly submitted to a charm (such as a quest) 
are not affected by the gloves. The former victim 
retains all memories of his enchantment. The 
gloves do not protect or release the wearer from 
such spells. 


Reglar's Gloves of Freedom 
From Magic 
XP Value: 5,000 GP Value: 25,000 
1992 Fantasy Collector Card 512 
Through further research and experimentation 
with magic, Reglar created a pair of gloves that 
improves upon the principles of his original 
gloves offreedom—the gloves offreedom from 
magic operate as a dispel magic spell (12th level). 
By rolling a successful hit against unwilling 
opponents or merely touching willing ones, the 
gloves' power is released. The wearer must 
specifically name the effect the character is 
attempting to negate. The gloves can be used 
three times per day. They give no protection from 
spells directed against the wearer. 


The Sentinel 
XP Value: — GP Value: — 
The Sentinel 
The Sentinel is a magical artifact made of pale 
kid leather that never becomes dirty or stained. 
Incorporated into the index finger is a ring set 
with a rounded blue stone. The glove fits any 
humanoid's right hand. 

The Sentinel has a personality and purpose that 
should be treated similarly to unusual swords. It 
has an Intelligence of 17 and an Ego of 21, and so 
has a personality of 38. The purposes of the Sen- 
tinel are the defence of the Keep at Adlerweg and 
the destruction of the Gauntlet—should an 


opportunity arise (see Gauntlet, The Gauntlet). It 
1859 


ee ee 


544 


Gloves , Thor's Magical, of Power 


DS A 


has remained true to these despite the passing of 
the years. Once the Sentinel has been found by 
the adventurers, it insists that they help it to 
destroy the Gauntlet. 

The personality of the Sentinel is very strong. 
In keeping with its neutral good alignment, 
however, it does not automatically attempt to 
dominate and control its wearer. Rather, it uses 
advice and persuasion in the first instance, fol- 
lowed by total withdrawal of the use of its pow- 
ers, and only attempts to dominate as a last 
resort if the bearer's actions run seriously con- 
trary to its purposes. 

The Sentinel was constructed in great haste, 
incorporating other magical items. Its powers are 
not, relatively speaking, very great but it alone 
has the power to destroy the Gauntlet. 

There are two kinds of power that the Sentinel 
can make available to its wearer; those which are 
permanent or may be used at will, and those 
which may only be used at a limited rate. Some of 
the powers are usable only by a wizard or illu- 
sionist. 

The Sentinel has a suggestion ability that it can 
use to persuade creatures to don it or perform 
other actions. This power is not available to the 
wielder. 


Permanent Powers 

e The wearer may automatically open any magi- 
cally locked doors. 

e The Sentinel has the effect of a permanent 
protection from evil 10' radius cast upon the 
wearer. 

e The wearer has a total resistance to all magi- 
cally induced/ear. All allies of the wearer 
within 10 feet have a +2 bonus on saving 
throws against magical year. 

e The wearer is protected as ifby a permanent 
shield spell (mages/illusionists only). 

Limited Use Powers 

e The wearer may cast & protection from normal 
missiles spell once per day (duration five 
turns; mages/illusionists only). 

e The wearer may cast a hold portal spell (as if 
cast by a wizard of 10th level) twice per day 
(mages/illusionists only). 

e The wearer may cast a know alignment spell 
twice per day (mages/illusionists only). 
Destruction of the Sentinel and the Gaunt- 

let: The Sentinel and the Gauntlet are both arti- 
facts, and there is only one way in which they 
may be destroyed. The moment they come into 
contact with one another, both will be instantly 
vaporized. 


of Thievery 

GP Value: 5,000 
Unearthed Arcana 
This seemingly normal handwear radiates a faint 
aura of enchantment and alteration. When placed 
snugly upon the hands, these gloves cannot be 
seen, except by means of magical sight or detec- 
tion. Wearing them allows the possessor to open 
locks as a 7th-level thief and pick pockets as a 
5th-level thief. If actually worn by a thief, the 
gloves enable him or her to gain 5% in both cate- 
gories if already equal to or above the stated lev- 
els due to advancement. Otherwise, they operate 
the same for a thief as for any other wearer. 


XP Value: 1,000 


Thor's Magical Gloves of Power 
XP Value: 2,500 GP Value: 25,000 
Gods, Demigods, & Heroes 
These gloves, worn separately from Meging- 
jarder, give Thor's avatar the power of a stone 
giant. When the gloves are worn together with 
Megingjarder, his strength is increased to that of 
storm giant. 


1861 


545 


Gnomewrecker 


a a eee A 


N 
N 
NN 
NY 

ANNI 


XP Value: 20,000 GP Value: 200,000 
Krynspace 

There are only a dozen such devices known to 
exist—all of them are considered priceless and 

are in great demand (especially in Krynnspace). 

Gnomewreckers were created nearly three 
decades ago by a stoic human wizard who was 

frustrated at his gnomish neighbors’ creations 

and machinations. The wizard, who has since 
died, was said to have created 12 ofthese prized 
magical items, each one with 60 charges. A 

gnomewrecker appears to be an ornately carved 

walking stick capped with a metallic head of a 
scowling gargoyle. By pointing the gargoyle's 
head at a gnomish device and speaking the 

command word "stop!" the stick causes the 

gnomish device to cease functioning. No lights 

blink, no dials twirl, no more bleeps issue from 

the machine's recesses. The device is rendered 

inoperable, and no amount of effort on the 

craftiest gnome's part can get it to work again— 
ever. Wizards are reported to be working fer- 

vently to duplicate the gnomewreckers, as the 

ones created 30 years ago are very difficult to 

recharge. 


ow a ee A 


546 


Gnomish Sweeper 


XP Value GP Value 
+1:800 8,000 
+2:1,600 16,000 
+3:3,200 32,000 


Realmspace 

Gnomish sweepers are nothing more than a pair 
of light ballistas with a common mount so that 
they can both be fired at the same time. The two 
bolts are linked with a heavy chain, and used as 
an antipersonnel weapon against enemy crews. 
Every target within 10 square feet must make a 
Dexterity check to remain standing. 

These weapons require a three-man crew and 
have a base THACO of 16. They have been magi- 
cally enchanted to allow their users to gain a 
bonus on attack rolls. While gnomish sweepers 
do not inflict hull damage, but can be used as 
light ballistas in a pinch. 


Goblet 


Goblets are ornamental cups. They may be con- 
structed from glass, crystal, metal, or even wood. 
Goblets do not have handles, instead, they have 
rather long stems ending in circular bases. Gob- 
lets are commonly used to sip after-dinner wines 


and cordials. (See also Cup and Chalice.) 


Roll Goblet Type 
Ol-11 Beaker 
12-22 Chalice 
23-33 Cup 
3444 Glass 
45-56 Goblet 
57-67 Rummer 
68-78 Tass 
79-89 Tumbler 
90-00  Wineglass 
of Glory 


XP Value: 1,250 GP Value: 12,000 
DRAGON Magazine 91 
This magical container appears to be a heavy gob- 
let of worked gold, and is similar to a beaker of 
plentiful potions. Although it always seems to be 
empty, the goblet dispenses a clear, glowing liquid 
when brought to the holder's lips and tilted. Drain- 
ing the goblet takes one round; all of the liquid 
must be consumed for it to take effect. During the 
following round, the liquid affects the drinker as 


follows—any damage the drinker may have suf- 
1864 


~ Goggles, Troppenribb's g- 


fered is restored, up to 1d4 hit points. If the 
drinker is 12th level or below, there is immediate 
physical growth (like a. potion of growth), but lim- 
ited to 6 feet in height. (The user temporarily 
gains energy levels in the manner of a potion of 
super heroism.) A member of any character class 
may receive this last benefit, but the increase in 
level applies only to Hit Dice and physical com- 
bat; thieves do not gain improved thieving skills, 
Spellcasters do not gain spell knowledge or com- 
prehension, and priests do not receive the level 
benefit when attempting to turn undead. A charac- 
ter ofthe 13th or higher level who drinks from the 
goblet also has 1d4 hit points restored, but does 
not receive the other benefits—and is drained of 
one level of experience. 

The growth and level gains (or losses) 
bestowed by the goblet of glory will last for 4d4 
rounds. The goblet dispenses only one dose of the 
liquid per day, and each typically contains 3d4 
drafts. When the last of these doses is drunk, the 
goblet crumbles into dust. The liquid cannot be 
spilled or removed from the goblet except by 
drinking. Ifa drinker is hit by a physical or magi- 
cal attack, or is otherwise interrupted during the 
round in which the liquid is being consumed, that 
dose is wasted and the goblet cannot be used 
again until the following day. 


of the Great Kingdom 
XP Value: 1,200 GP Value: 8,000 
GREYHAWK Adventures 
Created for use by the tyrants of Aerdy (who had 
good reason to fear assassination), this magical 
goblet appears to be a normal drinking vessel 
made of polished oak. However, the goblet auto- 
matically neutralizes all venoms and poisonous 
liquids that are stored in it for at least one round. 


Leomund's 

GP Value: 1,200 
DRAGON Magazine 28 
These goblets are made of silver, gold, or plat- 
inum and are delicately engraved. The value of 
the engraved metal is not visible until the cup is 
commanded to function. When told to fill itself, it 
produces a fine beer or wine. The goblet can 
function seven times a day. It must be cleaned 
with sweet water or holy water at least once a 
week or it never functions again. Cleaning is not 
necessary if the goblet has not been used during 
any given week. 


XP Value: 120 


Manas 
XP Value GP Value 
of Sleep: — 2,000 
of Death: — 1,200 
of Fixation: — 1,000 


Gods, Demigods, & Heroes 

Any liquid poured into these goblets produces a 
poison corresponding to the goblet's function: 
Goblet ofsleep: Uninterrupted sleep for 1d4 
days. 

Goblet ofdeath: A potent poison. (-2 on sav- 
ing throws). 

Goblet affixation: Paralysis. 


Goggles 

Goggles are large spectacles that wrap tightly 
against the head. They completely enclose the 
eyes, protecting them from wind, insects, and 
other airborne or flying hazards. Goggles can be 
fitted with convex or concave lenses, allowing 
nearsighted or farsighted wearers to see clearly. 
Generally, the lenses are made from glass and the 
wrap is cut from leather or cloth. Magical gog- 
gles are enchanted so that anyone with a human- 
like skull, overall size apart, can wear them. For 
saving throsw, goggles are treated as glass or 
leather, whichever is less. 


of Underwater Sight 
XP Value: 700 GP Value: 1,400 
DRAGON Magazine 73 


. Two black, flexible oval objects, each about two 


inches long, connected by 7⁄2 inch-long, flexible 
white strap and, from opposite sides of the ovals, 
by another strap about 10 inches long. (In other 
words, like a pair of swimming goggles.) When 
the ovals are placed over the eyes and held on by 
the straps, a wearer can see under water twice as 
well as expected, and no water touches the eyes. 


Troppenribb's 

GP Value: 3,500 

Top Ballista 

These flying goggles enable the wearer to see up 
to 2,400 feet away regardless of hindrances such 
as clouds, mist, a hail of frogs, a spell such as 
obscurement, or any other similar obstacle (but 
not through solid objects). Beyond that point, 
normal vision takes over. The wearer of these 
goggles gains a+1 bonus to Charisma in any 
encounters with members of the Top Ballista fly- 
ing school. 


XP Value: 750 


1869 


Go OE ee 


547 


Goldbug 


XP Value: 600 GP Value: 3,000 
DRAGON Magazine 30 

The goldbug was developed by Orlow for 
unknown, and probably unsavory, purposes. One 
story claims it was developed because, to Orlow, 
plants were important and gold was plentiful. 
Another tale tells of his greedy brother-in-law 
who used to show up for prolonged visits, until 
one day he discovered his gold had disappeared. 
The goldbug eats gold. It takes one gold piece per 
day to feed an active goldbug. (When not near 
gold, the bug hibernates.) After consuming 20 
gold pieces, the goldbug lays 1d4 eggs that hatch 
in one day to produce additional goldbugs with 
the same voracious appetites as their parent. The 
possession of goldbugs is illegal in most king- 
doms. Goldbugs have an Armor Class of 2 and 1 
hit point each. 


Golden Floor 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 2,500 
Dragon Magic 
The floor is an unmarked, solid gold platform, 
about 50 feet square. Anyone who steps on the 
platform feels a tingle ripple through his or her 
body. Ifthe character remains on the platform for 
two rounds, a Constitution check must be made. 


If it fails, the victim loses 1d4 points of damage. 
If he or she remains on the platform for an addi- 
tional two rounds, a second Constitution check is 
made, and the character loses another 1d4 points 
if it fails. 

The platform is a learning aid used by the 
dragons to temporarily enhance their comprehen- 
sion by tapping into the collective consciousness 
of the spirits of dead scholars. Ifa PC remains on 
the platform for the full four rounds, make an 
Intelligence check. If it succeeds, his or her Intel- 
ligence and Wisdom check penalty for compre- 
hending draconian art is -9 (rather than -12) for 
the next 1d6 hours. 


Gown 
These elaborate dresses are generally very expen- 
sive and lavishly decorated. Gowns are intended 
to be worn to important events. They are elabo- 
rately made, dyed with fine colors, and orna- 
mented with flowers, feathers, and handcrafted 
trinkets. A DM who wishes additional magical 
possibilities should refer to Robe and Cloak for 
more magical effects that can be added to gowns. 


Loriell's 
XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 30,000 
POLYHEDRON Magazine 19 

This item seems to be a simple blue and white 
peasant dress. It acts as a cloak of protection +2 
for any wearer. Ifthe user is a female humanoid, 
this magical gown shrinks or enlarges to a perfect 
fit. Detect invisibility or a similar magical detec- 
tion spell can find the seven command words 
sewn into the hem in gold thread. Each command 
causes the dress to change to a different form, as 
given below. Each command word may be used 
once per day. Each change produces fresh and 
immaculate clothing with matching footwear. The 
command word only takes effect when spoken by 
the wearer of the gown. If removed, the gown 
reverts to its original form. (The removal or loss 
of footwear has no effect; the outfit is always 
complete with each change.) The command 
words and forms follow: 


De: Short, black suede tunic with black 
breeches, soft black boots, and a long 
black cape. 

Ki: Full-length dark green gown of layered 


silk, with a high neckline and matching 


sandals. 
1872 


° 8 7 


54 


Grappling Iron 


eS E 


Li: Original form (blue and white peasant 
dress) and matching shoes. 

Qi: Close-fitting, full-length, red silk dress, 
with bell sleeves, V-neckline, and matching 


sandals. Og me aM 

Se: Full-length white dress with open, gos- Ee _ HAE of 
samer sleeves, oval neckline, and white 2 i KLT IA N 
sandals. ; 


Ti: Full-length blue silk dress with square 
neckline, long square sleeves, and match- 
ing sandals. 

Ve: Long soft gray dress with open sleeves, 
square neckline, and soft gray suede boots. 


Sehanine's 
XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 17,500 
Monster Mythology 
Sehanine's avatar wears a gown that functions 
like a cloak ofdisplacement. 


% 


+ 
Zz 
2 


` 
wal 


Grains of Discomfort 

XP Value: 600 GP Value: 1,800 
DUNGEON Magazine 16 
This material is found in pouches and should be 
handled with gloves. Some say it is a residue 
from the dwarven mines. If a handful of this 
granular substance is hurled at an opponent (treat 
as a missile weapon), the grains work into the 
inner layer of clothing against the skin. They 
cause such discomfort in 1d4 rounds as to render 
the opponent incapable of continued action 
unless all garments are removed and shaken. This 
substance is greatly prized by dwarves who 
delight in playing practical jokes on their com- 
panions. 


Grappling Iron 

A grappling iron is a hook used to secure a rope 
for climbing. It normally has two, three, or four feo” WT Ns. F 
curved tines that radiate from a central shank. l EEN i vii JUANN “ igs 
Deluxe grappling hooks with folding tines some- yy 
times are available. The irons can be folded flat 

for easy transport. Magical grappling irons cost ; is 
twice the price of ordinary grappling hooks. BAIT À X : aN ows 


Roll Grappling Iron Type 
01-25 Folding tines* 

26-50 Four-tined 

51-75 Two-tined 

76-00 Three-lined 


~ Grappling Iron, Enchanted r 


Enchanted 
XP Value: 1,200 GP Value: 3,600 
Thieves of LANKHMAR 

Apart from a faint aura of magic, this grappling 
iron is indistinguishable from any other and can be 
used by any character class. When thrown with a 
rope attached, there's a 75% chance (modified by 
the bonuses or penalties the user normally receives) 
that the iron hooks onto something solid. Once the 
iron has hooked, it gives a 5% climbing bonus to 
anyone attempting to climb the rope. 


Gargoyle 
XP Value: 700 GP Value: 3,000 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 79 

This appears to be a simple iron grappling hook 
affixed to a strong, thin cord. When thrown, the 
hook turns into a miniature iron gargoyle that 
flaps its way unerringly to any target within 100 
feet. The gargoyle wraps its arms and legs about 
the mark, holding the rope fast and enabling the 
thrower to climb it. The gargoyle grappling hook 
and its attached magical rope can hold up to 
1,000 pounds. Treat the rope as AC 0 with 60 hit 
points. Speaking a command word turns it back 
into a grappling hook. 


Griffon's Claw 

GP Value: 450 for two 
DRAGON Magazine 159 
This elaborately carved grappling hook resem- 
bles a giant raptor's claw. When a command word 
is spoken, the hook levitates up and flies toward 
its target (pointed out by the controlling charac- 
ter) up to 200 feet away. The claw has a THACO 
of 12 and digs into the wood of the target ship. 
The claw cannot be removed from the wood, but 
the wood may be cut and the claw will remain in 
it. Only a second command word can release the 


claw's grip. 


XP Value: 50 


of Luckless Returning 
XP Value: — GP Value: 1,000 
New Item 

This iron appears to be a bargain. It radiates a 
faint, magical aura, and may be an enchanted 
grappling hook. Unfortunately, the iron is cursed. 
There is a 75% chance that, when thrown, the 
hook returns, hitting the user on the head and 
doing 1d4 damage to the hapless character. Even 
if it hooks, its use entails a -5% penalty to a 
user's climbing abilities. 


Guardian Tail 


XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 10,000 
Kingdom of Nithia 

Guardian tails appear to be normal animal tails 

from native creatures such as the desert fox, 

hyena, or caracul. A thong is attached to one end 

so that the tail can be attached to a chest, bow 

case, or quiver. 

Once attached, the guardian tail protects the 
container's contents. The tail instantly knows who 
the owner of the container is, and protects its con- 
tents from being rifled by any except the user. 

If the contents are molested, the guardian tail 
causes the container to polymorph into an animal 
of the tail's type (the tail now being the tail of the 
animal). It then runs away or fights if necessary, 
generally choosing the former over the latter. If it 
escapes or scares off the intruder, the "animated" 
container will run and find its owner, at which 
point the tail and the container revert to original 
form. 

Guardian tails have the following statistics 
regardless of form: AC 5; HD 2; MV 15; #AT 1; 
Dmg 1d4; ALN. If slain, the guardian tail and 
container revert to normal and the tail becomes 
nonfunctional for one full day. If the tail is ever 
cut in two, its magical properties are destroyed. 


Gravitic Stabilizer 
XP Value: 55,000 GP Value: 550,000 


War Captain's Companion 

This 1-ton object looks like a standard keel 
mount for a 10-ton ship. Originally designed for 
yachts, it has appeared in a few other 10-ton ships 
as well. A product of arcane magic, a gravitic sta- 
bilizer rotates a ship to automatically realign with 
the body of greater mass whenever the ship is 
subjected to the effects of another gravity plane. 
In other words, if a yacht is rammed by a ham- 
mership, the yacht rotates at the beginning of the 
next round so its orientation matches that of the 
hammership. This is a luxury item that delivers 
maximum comfort for the crew, thus its extraor- 
dinarily high cost. 

The gravitic stabilizer can be used only on 10- 
ton ships matching, at least approximately, the 
keel size of a yacht. It cannot function on larger 
ships. 


1881 


P E aaa ae ae a2 


550 


Hammer 

The term "hammer" describes several dif- 
ferent types of weapons, including lucern ham- 
mers (a type of polearm), and warhammers. The 
warhammer takes its simple structure from the 
basic tool of carpentry. The head is made of steel 
or iron, with a metal or wooden handle. Some 
hammers are fitted with a spike that can be used 
as a thrusting weapon that causes 1d3 points of 
damage or backed with an axe blade that causes 
normal hand axe damage. 


Roll Hammer Type 

01-08 Axe-backed* 

09-17 Dwarven hammer 

18-25 Footman’s pick 

26-33 Hammer 

34-42 Horseman's pick 

43-50 Lucern hammer 

51-58 = Mallet 

59-67 Maul 

68-75 Sledge hammer 

76-83 Spike-backed* 

84-92 Warhammer 

93-00 Zaghnal 
Aegis-Fang 

XP Value: 8,000 GP Value: 40,000 


Hall of Heroes 

Aegis-fang is possibly the mightiest weapon to be 
forged in the modern day Realms, a throwback to 
the times when the greatest dwarven smiths 
crafted weapons for the gods themselves. An off- 
spring of the hammer of thunderbolts, Bruenor 
crafted Aegis-fang especially for Wulfgar. So 
wonderful was the result, an effort of the dwarf's 
considerable skill and his deep love for the boy, 
that Bruenor knew he had reached the ultimate 
achievement of his trade, and would never again 
fire up a forge. 

The war hammer is fully +5 and scores double 
damage (2d4+2, 2d4) on a hit, gaining full attack 
and damage bonuses, including Wulfgar's 
Strength bonus, even when thrown. Furthermore, 
Aegis-fang unerringly reappears in Wulfgar's 
hand (and only in Wulfgar's hand) whenever he 
desires it, even if it has to disappear from some- 
one else's hand to get there. 

The war hammer's magic and power are tuned 
perfectly to Wulfgar alone, designed especially to 
match his great size and strength. In the hands of 


Hammer, Colgomere's, of Thunderbolts 


another, Aegis-fang is only +3, loses its 
special throwing bonuses, and does not 
score double damage. 


Air 
XP Value: 600 GP Value: 1,800 
Dwarves Deep 
These nondescript, stone hammers are marked 
with a certain dwarven rune—two circles, one 
inside the other. They are found throughout dwar- 
ven delves, lying on ledges and wedged in rock 
fissures, as though discarded. 

They are actually emergency aids. If an air 
hammer is broken, or the rune upon it struck 
sharply (that is, if it used to strike a blow), it acti- 
vates. A loud, repetitive knocking noise is heard, 
and the air hammer begins to vibrate rapidly, 
swinging back and forth, as it diminishes in size. 
The stone hammer is actually the stopper or por- 
tal valve to an extradimensional space, filled with 
pressurized oxygen from the Elemental Plane of 
Air. When it is activated, the extradimensional 
space rapidly collapses, pumping its contents into 
the surrounding atmosphere. 

Dwarves use this to escape underground 
smoke, poisonous gases (including cloudkill 
effects), or floods (air hammers create a bubble 
of air). The oxygen forcibly drives out existing 
atmosphere, providing clean air in a globe with a 
30-foot radius around the activation point. There 
is enough air to last eight human-sized creatures 
(or twelve dwarves) for one turn, given normal 
exertion (the air lasts half that time if combat 
occurs). 

This clean air cannot be moved as an intact 
globe, once released, and it is highly dangerous if 
brought into contact with open flames—creating 
an instant 30-foot, 5d6 ball of fire. Magical fire- 
balls that contact an air hammer's oxygen globe 
instantly double in radius, and gain 6d6 addi- 
tional damage power. 


Colgomere's Hammer of Thunderbolts 
XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 15,000 
1992 Fantasy Collector Card 240 
Golgomere's magical hammer is a variation of a 
typical hammer of thunderbolts. It is a +3 
weapon when wielded by any dwarf with a 
Strength score of at least 18/01. When used in 
conjunction with a girdle ofgiant strength and 
gauntlets of ogre power, the hammer is a +5 


weapon that inflicts double damage and kills 
1884 


, A E E y 


551 


Hammer, Delzoun's Fist 


> 1 


any giant that it strikes. When hurled, on a suc- 
cessful hit, a full-fledged thunderstorm breaks 
out (not just a thunderclap) in a 90-foot radius. 
The storm includes thunder, rain, and lightning 
that lasts five rounds. 


Delzoun's Fist 

XP Value: 10,000 GP Value: 50,000 
The Savage Frontier 
This minor artifact, a magical warhammer +5, 
was created by Delzoun, the legendary founder of 
the ancient dwarven Northkingdom that bore his 
name. His it was until his sudden and horrible 
death (though he is rumored to have immediately 
risen as an undead thing). The throwing power 
works for any fighter (not just dwarves) and it 
imbues the wearer with hill giant Strength (as gir- 
dle of giant strength) and acts as a ring of spell 
turning. The fist also has one major and two 
minor malevolent effects that the DM should 
choose from Artifact Table 1-15: Major Pow- 
ers, and Table 1-16: Minor Powers—see Volume 
I. The minor malevolent effects occur within 1d3 
weeks of ownership. The major malevolent effect 
occurs the first time the hammer is used against a 
nonevil being. 


ORR 
RRR 


S 


wa 


S] 


Dwarf Thrower 

GP Value: 1,800 
DRAGON Magazine 156 
When wielded by anyone but a dwarf, this ham- 
mer acts as a normal war hammer. Whenever a 
dwarf tries to wield this hammer in combat, how- 
ever, it picks up and hurls the dwarf bodily at the 
opponent, at +3 to attack and 1d12+3 points of 
damage (to the dwarf—the opponent takes only 
1d4 points of damage); the range is 60 feet. Ifthe 
dwarf misses the opponent, the dwarf takes dou- 
ble the above damage; ifthe opponent has time to 
"set" or "ground" a weapon such as a spear or a 
military fork—well, it's not a pretty picture. Inci- 
dentally, this hammer is an unusually handsome 
weapon, featuring the finest work of the elven 
master smiths. 


XP Value: — 


Dwarven Thrower II 
XP Value: 1,500 GP Value: 15,000 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 
This appears to be a standard hammer +2. In 
the hands of a dwarven fighter who knows the 
appropriate command word, its full potential is 
realized—a +3 bonus and the following charac- 
teristics—the hammer has a 180-foot range and 
returns to its wielder's hand like a boomerang. 
It has a +3 bonus to attack and damage rolls. 


NK GAUETAN VENA PANU MERAR YY 084.089 
WY, N Q Ne SR 
N X K 
` 


oe 


Lucern Hammer 


orseman’s Pick 


552 


x Hammer of Gesen r 


When hurled, the hammer inflicts double dam- 
age against all opponents except giants (includ- 
ing ogres, ogre magi, trolls, and ettin). Against 
giants it causes triple damage (plus the bonus 
of +3). 


Flandal Steelskin's 

XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 30,000 
Monster Mythology 

His axe-backed hammer +4 shoots a 6-Hit-Die 
fireball six times day and does double damage to 
all cold-using and cold-dwelling creatures; it can 
speak the languages ofall fire-using creatures 
(red dragons, chimerae, and the like). 


Gaerdal Ironhand's 
XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 30,000 
Monster Mythology 
The avatar carries a hammer +4 that, when it 
strikes, issues a loud, ringing sound (all creatures 
within 10 feet must save vs. spell or be deafened 
for 1d4 rounds) 


of Gesen 
XP Value: — GP Value: — 
Book of Artifacts 
The hammer of Gesen is a remarkably ordinary 


looking device—a large, round-headed hammer, 


0 


Ky 
RS N 
DKO AN 


RAS 


NS 
RS AN Mallet 


\ 
2 


much like a common carpenter's mallet. Its only 
noteworthy feature is that it is made entirely 
from coal-black iron. Even the handle is cast 
iron, patterned to imitate the grain of wood that 
would normally be used. The hammer is quite 
heavy and seems overbalanced, but once held it 
is quickly apparent that it can be handled with 
ease and grace. 

The hammer is one of the two great weapons 
of the ancient barbarian hero, Gesen Khan, (the 
other is the iron bow of Gesen). Descended 
from the gods, he tamed the first horse, taught 
the nomads how to ride, made the first spell, 
and shot the first bow. Gesen won the hammer 
by defeating a manggus of the earth who slew 
travelers with her iron weapon. Since neither 
hammer nor blade could harm the manggus, the 
two wrestled for three days, until Gesen tore the 
other in half. Following the advice of Grandfa- 
ther Sky, Gesen bathed the hammer in the crea- 
ture's blood, when it acquired magical powers. 
When the hero finally died, the weapon van- 
ished with him. Since that time many have 
claimed to have found it, but these are the tales 
of rogues in the marketplace who seek to pass 
off crude forgeries. 

The hammer of Gesen is a good reward for 
warrior PCs and one that can be allowed with- 


553 


Hammer, Goibhm'u's War 


j a a  o 


out too much risk of game imbalance. The 
weapon's curse adds role-playing difficulties 
for characters that should more than offset any 
advantages. 

Constant Powers: When gripping the ham- 
mer, the character's Strength equals a cloud 
giant's. (Str 23, +5 attack, +11 damage, throw 
boulders 140 yards for 1dl0 damage, bend 
bars/lift gates 90%). The weapon adds no magical 
bonuses to attack rolls, but can strike any crea- 
ture, even those that can only be hit by magical 
weapons. 

Invoked Powers: By commanding the ham- 
mer's might, the owner can cast power word, kill 
(1/week) upon any one creature struck by the 
weapon. 

Curse: The hammer can be used by any class 
or alignment, but over time the user transforms 
into a fighter of chaotic good alignment. Once a 
week a saving throw vs. polymorph is rolled, and 
if it fails, the character loses one class-related 
ability and acquires one that applies to fighters. 
Once the transformation is complete, the charac- 
ter is subject to artifact possession, becoming 
unable to resist any adventure or good cause. 
Powers lost cannot be regained. The character 
may continue as is or change to a new character 
class (like a dual-class human). 

Suggested Means of Destruction: 

The manggus blood must be squeezed from 
the iron. 

It must be ground into a powder in the mill of 
a fearless miller. 

It must be returned to the spirit of the mang- 
gus who once owned it. 


Goibhniu's Warhammer 
XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 25,000 
Legends & Lore 
Once per turn, Goibhniu's avatar may automati- 
cally slay any living creature that he hits with this 
+5 weapon, no saving throw allowed. 


Hephaestus's 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 9,000 
Legends & Lore 
Any being struck by the hammer of Hephaestus's 
avatar must save vs. paralyzation or be knocked 
unconscious for 1d10 rounds. 


of Kharas 
XP Value: 7,700 GP Value: 70,000 
Tales of the Lance 

The hammer ofKharas is a mighty artifact. Only 
with the hammer can true dragonlances be 
formed. The hammer is twice the size of a normal 
warhammer. Its name comes from the great dwar- 
ven hero Kharas, (meaning "knight") who fought 
in the Dwarfgate Wars after the Cataclysm. Kha- 
ras is most remembered, however, for the heroic 
deeds he performed prior to that time. The ham- 
mer was given to him by the Kayolin dwarves in 
recognition for his deeds on their behalf. 

Kharas' legend began in the Shadow Years, 
which followed the Cataclysm. He was ashamed 
when his lord, King Derkin, shut the gates of the 
great realm of Thorbardin, barring the starving 
hill dwarves and men who came for aid. When 
famine deepened across the lands, the dispos- 
sessed dwarves and men united under the dark 
wizard Fistandantilus, and attacked Thorbardin. 
Brother slew brother, many died. Kharas carried 
the slain sons of Derkin back to their father, the 
king. The great devastation of Fistandantilus 
occurred as he was gone, laying waste to the 
Plains of Dergoth. 

Overcome with grief at the sight of his sons, 
Derkin sealed the gates for all time and fell into 
eternal despair. Knowing that Derkin was dying 
and no heirs remained, the thanes each plotted to 
become king. Many came to Kharas to solicit his 
support. Kharas was angry with the Thanes and 
left to wander Ansalon. He returned, just before 
Derkin's death and proclaimed, "Too late our lord 
found that we must live together in this world or 
perish apart. It will be many years before we our- 
selves shall learn this hard lesson, if we learn it at 
all. I am leaving, and the hammer leaves with me. 
The world has abandoned honor. The hammer 
will be hidden for generations to come. Only 
when a Good and honorable dwarf comes to unite 
the nations shall the hammer ofKharas return. It 
will then be his badge of righteousness." Kharas 
left the mountain—he was never seen again. 

The hammer of Kharas has a +2 bonus on 
attack and damage rolls. It inflicts 2d4+2 points 
of damage on a normal hit. It cannot be lifted by a 
character with Strength below 12, and anyone 
with a Strength below 18/50 suffers a -2 penalty 
attacking with it (cancels out the +2 bonus). 

The hammer acts as a mace of disruption 


against undead and creatures from the Abyss. It 
1893 


> i i EE 


554 


~~ Hammer, Kostchtchie's r 


turns undead as a 12th-level priest. The hammer 
is intelligent (Int 11, Ego 11) and can control 
anyone who touches it ifthe person's combined 
Intelligence and Wisdom are less than 22. The 
hammer seeks to preserve the security of the 
dwarven race and further the cause of Good. It 
chooses when to activate its powers, although a 
wielder with enough Intelligence and Wisdom 
can resist the hammer's will and, in turn, com- 
mand it. The hammer of Kharas has the following 
special abilities, at the 20th level of magic use: 

e Detects evil as a paladin. 

Gives wielder immunity to fear, both normal 
and magical. 

Protects wielder from 1 st- through 4th-level 
spells. 

Casts prayer once per day. 

Provides protection from normal missiles 
once per day. 

Acts as a. potion of fire giant strength once per 
day. 

Cures serious wounds once per day. 

Inspires awe in all dwarves and derro, pre- 
venting them from taking action against the ham- 
mer or its wielder. 


Kostchtchie's 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 15,000 
Monster Mythology 
A strike from the avatar's hammer +3 stuns vic- 
tims who fail a saving throw vs. spell for two 
rounds. 


Kostchtchie's H 
XP Value: 1,800 GP Value: 10,000 
The Lost Caverns of Tsojcanth 

Kostchtchie's weapon is a huge, cold iron ham- 
mer, inlaid with nickel and silver. It causes 2d6 
points of damage. Those struck must save vs. 
paralysis or are stunned for the remainder of that 
round and the next round. 


of Life 
XP Value: 3,600 GP Value: 18,000 
Death's Ride 
This magical item was produced by a great priest 
many centuries ago. It is an iron hammer with a 
head, haft, and pommel that can be separated by a 
dispel magic spell vs. 18th-level magic. No chaotic 
creature can touch the hammer when it's assembled; 
the creature's hand just passes through it. In the 
hands of a neutral character, it is a war hammer +1. 


In the hands of a lawful character, the hammer 
is a +2 weapon that has the ability to cast one 
heal spell per day. Magical runes that explain this 
function appear on the haft when a detect magic 
spell is cast on the hammer. 


Mallet of Luck 
XP Value: 1,500 GP Value: 15,000 

Oriental Adventures 
This item appears to be a common, wooden mal- 
let. Devised by a particularly warped imagina- 
tion, the mallet bestows a bonus of +2 on all 
attack rolls and saving throws. This bonus lasts 
for six turns. However, it is necessary to strike the 
recipient forcibly with the mallet to bestow the 
bonus. Unfortunately, the blow causes 2d6 points 
of damage. Multiple blows do not have a cumula- 
tive effect, although the specified amount of 
damage is still done. Note that this item can be 
used in combat, if the wielder does not mind giv- 
ing an opponent the bonus. 


yt 


a 


Maul of the Titans 
XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 12,000 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 
This huge mallet is 8 feet long and weighs over 
150 pounds. Any giant-sized creature with 


Strength of21 or greater can employ it to drive 
1898 


> Ze O an. 


556 


~ Hammer of Penetration pe 


piles ofup to 2 feet in diameter into normal earth 
at 4 feet per blow—two blows per round. The 
maul will smash to flinders an oaken door of up 
to 10 feet high, by 4 
feet wide, by 2 inches thick in one blow—two if 
the door is heavily bound with iron. Ifused as a 
weapon, it has a +2 bonus to attack rolls and 
inflicts 4d10 points of damage, exclusive of 
Strength bonuses. 

Ifused against any ship, this inflicts 1 point of 
hull damage for every 10 points of damage rolled 
(drop fractions). 


Mjolnir 

XP Value: 10,500 GP Value: 85,000 

DEITIES & DEMIGODS™ Cyclopedia 
Thor's avatar wields a magic hammer +5 that has 
the following abilities: 
e Itdoes 10d10 points of damage with each hit. 
It can be thrown up to 200 yards, and it never 
misses when thrown. It returns to the avatar's 
hand automatically. If Thor throws Mjolnir, 
that is his only attack that round. 
It can cast lightning bolt at any target within 
sight, and up to a total of 100 dice of lightning 
bolts per day. The base 100 dice can be broken 
up into lightning bolts of any size Thor 
desires—twenty-five 4-HD bolts, or ten 3-HD 
bolts and one 70-HD bolt, and so on. 
It is so heavy that only beings with a Strength 
of 25 can lift it, and it requires more than a 25 
Strength to wield it as a weapon. 
When Thor throws Mjolnir, it trails a light- 
ning bolt behind it, and when it hits, there is 
a large clap of thunder that affects all beings 
within 30 feet as & power word, stun (save 
vs. spell). 


Mjolnir H 
XP Value: 9,000 GP Value: 50,000 
Gods, Demigods, & Heroes 
The magical hammer of Thor's avatar. This ham- 
mer, wielded by the Thunder God's avatar, slays 
any giant it hits, and it never misses. Commonly, 
the hammer is thrown and returns to Thor's 
avatar. Its range is not restricted and as long as 
there is a target in sight the hammer hits. When 
used in any other capacity besides the slaying of 
giants, thehammercauses 10d10 points ofdam- 
age. Another property of Mjolnir is that of 
throwing a bolt oflightning, up to sighting dis- 
tance, with a varying strength of 2d12 eight- 


sided damage dice. The intensity of the bolt is 
controlled by Thor's avatar himself. Lastly, the 
hammer shines with a pale blue light, warning 
Thor's avatar of any imminent danger within 
10d6 yards of himself. 

Only beings with a strength equal to a frost 
giant may pick up and carry this item of power, 
and that at half speed—only Thor's avatar himself 
may use Mjolnir. 


of Nailing 

GP Value: 3,000 
DRAGON Magazine 30 
The hammer ofnailing looks like a dwarven 
hammer, but is really a carpentry tool. Use of this 
hammer allows the construction of wooden items 
in 50% of the normal time. It always drives a nail 
into any wood in one blow, and with little effort 
from the carpenter. When used in combat, the 
hammer causes 1d4 points of damage. 


XP Value: 300 


Nai No Kami's 
XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 20,000 
Legends & Lore 
Any being hit by the avatar's hammer must save 
vs. petrification or be knocked to the ground 15 
feet from where he or she was standing. When 
struck upon the ground, the hammer causes an 
earthquake (as the spell). 


of Penetration 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 10,000 
DRAGON Magazine 99 

This hammer is sometimes described as a smaller 
version of a maul of the titans. It is a large- 
headed hammer with a 2-foot handle. The ham- 
mer's head slopes down to a point on one side, 
and the hammer is not balanced for throwing. 

The hammer of penetration may be used one- 
handed in combat, causing double normal ham- 
mer damage (2d4+2/2d4) with a +3 bonus to 
attack and damage. When used two-handed on 
walls and doors up to 2 feet thick, the hammer 
has a chance of smashing through a hole in the 
door or wall equal to double the wielder's chances 
to bend bars or lift gates. The hole will be large 
enough to allow a human-sized being to crawl 
through it without trouble. Only the pointed end 
of the hammer can be used to smash through 
wooden barriers 


1903 


© a i oa aa. 


557 


Hammer, Rune 


>) ee 


Runehammer 
XP Value: 2,500 GP Value: 25,000 
Dwarves Deep 

These rare, darksteel warhammers do normal 
damage in combat. Each bears a rune of power, 
inscribed upon its head. If the elder dwarven 
name of the rune ofpower on the hammer is spo- 
ken aloud as the hammer is hurled or swung, the 
effect of the rune is delivered on any target struck 
in the same round. 

The various rune ofpower effects are 
detailed under the description of the spell in 
Dwarves Deep. A runehammer only unleashes 
the power of its rune six times in a day. How- 
ever, they may be used in six consecutive 
rounds. Runehammers neither have nor use 
charges, but each time the rune power is used, 
there is a 7% chance (not cumulative) that it 
vanishes, shifted away to another plane by the 
will of Moradin. (Beings wielding the rune- 
hammer at the time may or may not be carried 
along with it; the DM should decide—ran- 
domly or by the situation.) 


of Silence 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 2,500 
DRAGON Magazine 181 

Thieves everywhere consider these items to be 
lifesavers. Unlike the usual hammer that makes 
Thor's own racket when used on a wall, these 
items operate in absolute silence. The hammer 
makes no noise, even if employed to pound 
spikes into rock. 


Storm 
XP Value: 400 GP Value: 3,000 
DRAGON QUEST* Game 
This is an ancient and magical weapon was 
crafted by dwarves in forgotten caverns. When 
used in combat, the hammer booms like thunder 
as it strikes an enemy. The holder of this weapon 
adds a +1 bonus to attack and damage rolls. 


Stronmaus's Hammer 
of Thunderbolts 
XP Value: 3,500 GP Value: 35,000 
Monster Mythology 
The avatar carries a hammer of thunderbolts with 
all special powers (+5, strikes any evil giant dead 
on a successful hit, no save). The avatar has a 
base THACO of 2, but hits any AC on a roll of 8+. 


of Thunderbolts 
XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 30,000 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 
This appears to be a large, extra-heavy hammer. 
A character less than 6 feet tall and with Strength 
less than 18/01 will find it too unbalanced to 
wield properly in combat. However, a character 
of sufficient Strength and size finds that the ham- 
mer functions with a +3 bonus and gains double 
damage on any hit. 

If the wielder wears a girdle of giant strength 
and gauntlets ofogre power and knows the ham- 
mer's true name, the weapon can be used to full 
effect: When swung or hurled it gains a +5 bonus, 
double damage, all girdle and gauntlet bonuses, 
and it strikes dead any giant it hits. (Depending 
on the campaign, the DM might wish to limit the 
effect to exclude storm giants and include ogres, 
ogre magi, trolls, ettins, and clay, flesh, and stone 
golems.) 

When hurled and successfully striking, a great 
noise, like a clap of thunder, stuns all creatures 
within 90 feet for one round. Throwing range is 
180 feet. (Thor would throw the hammer about 
double the above range.) A hammer of thunder- 
bolts is difficult to hurl, so only one throw every 
other round can be made. After five throws 
within the space of any two turn period, the 
wielder must rest for one turn. Hammers can be 
hurled as hand axes. 


ofVengence 

GP Value: 15,000 

Moonshae 

This is a mighty, avenging war hammer that 
requires a Strength of at least 18 to wield. It func- 
tions as a lucern hammer +2 in most combat situ- 
ations. When the hammer of vengeance is wielded 
against an opponent wearing metal armor, includ- 
ing chain mail, the hammer's special ability can 
be employed. On any hit upon a metal-armored 
individual with a roll of 18 to 20, the metal armor 
is smashed and rendered useless. The shards fall 
immediately to the ground, leaving the victim 
unprotected for all subsequent attacks. 


XP Value: 2,000 


ofVitroin 
XP Value: 8,000 GP Value: 40,000 
Thunderdelve Mountain 
This is a warhammer +1/+3 vs. wyrms, with an 
Intelligence of 9, an Ego of 12, and an alignment 


of chaotic good. This device is designed to com- 
1910 


£ 558 Sa 


Hammer, Winged 


l. 


bat the creatures that are the particular enemies of 


dwarves—dragons, wyrms, and giant snakes of | 


any sort. When confronting monsters of this 
nature, the hammer's special powers manifest. 
The wielder must make a control check ifhe or 
she refuses to attack a wyrm. The wielder gains 
+2 on all saving throws during battle. The ham- 
mer can cure light wounds (1d6+1 points of dam- 
age) up to three times daily. The hammer is 
firmly connected to the Clanhome of Thun- 
derdelve and vehemently resists being taken from 
the halls unless for the purpose of fighting a 
nearby wyrm. Ifthe wielder tries to take it for any 
different purpose, the following are manifested: 
It can ESP the wielder to determine true pur- 
pose. 

It can cast a wall ofstone spell (six times per 
day in Thunderdelve, once per day outside) to 
block the exit from Thunderdelve. 

The hammer forces a control check. 

The hammer can also use its stone-creating 
powers to repair any damage to the actual 
structure of Thunderdelve itself. 


Whelm 
XP Value: 5,000 GP Value: 35,000 
White Plume Mountain 

Whelm is a lawful neutral hammer +3 (+5 for 
dwarves). It has an Intelligence of 15, an Ego of 
18, and a special purpose to kill all trolls, giants, 
and goblinkin (including bugbears and hobgob- 
lins). It can be thrown and will return from up to 
150 feet thrice per day (dwarves only). It also acts 
as a hammer of stunning once per day. When 
struck upon the ground it transmits a shock wave 
that stuns up to 45 hit points of enemies up to a 
distance of 60 feet for 1d4 rounds unless a save 
vs. spell is successful. ° 

Whelm also detects gold, gems, and the pres- 
ence of goblins. A drawback is that the bearer of 
this weapon suffers the influence of a severe case 
of agoraphobia (fear of wide-open places) and 
fights at —2 when not inside a building, at night, 
or (best of all) underground. Whelm is obviously 
a dwarven weapon. 


Winged 
XP Value: 2,400 GP Value: 24,000 
Dwarves Deep 
This double-ended stone warhammer is more fre- 
quently spoken of in tales than it is actually seen 
today. Once a favorite weapon of northern 


dwarves, its use has dwindled with the passing of 
the Lost Kingdoms. 

A winged hammer functions as a normal 
warhammer. However, if thrown, it follows a 
moving target with its wings (MV 21, Class A), 
striking at +2 to attack and then returning to the 
hand of the being who launched it. If grasped or 
prevented from returning by barriers, it simply 
blinks into an extra-dimensional space for three 
rounds, and then appears in the hand of the one 
who launched it at the end of that time. 

Upon verbal command (by use of a secret 
word, which must be uttered by a being touch- 
ing the hammer), a winged hammer will dart 
away to fight by itself, selecting victims accord- 
ing to the will of the being who sent it. If its 
sender is slain or rendered unconscious, the 
hammer simply attacks the nearest living crea- 
ture until that creature falls, and then returns to 
the sender, even if the sender is in no condition 
to do anything with it after that. If the hammer 
is grasped by one other than its owner, it blinks 
as described earlier. 

A winged hammer can fight by itself, switch- 
ing opponents as often as its sender wills, for up 
to one turn. It will then automatically return to 
the sender, and cannot be sent away to fight again 


(or thrown, 
1912 


ge Ge ee a 


559 


Hammock of Entrapment 


h Ce 


for a flying return) for one full turn. A winged 
hammer cannot be sent off to fight by itself more 
than three times a day. 

Its sender can be bound or otherwise helpless, 
or can be casting other spells or wielding other 
weapons, without hindering the winged hammer's 
activity. A returning -winged hammer never spoils 
spellcasting, but floats just out of the way until 
the casting is complete, and then (if possible) 
smacks neatly into the sender's hand. A winged 
hammer cannot follow a sender onto another 
plane, unless carried there directly; if abandoned, 
it will simply fall to the floor until reactivated 
later, by the same or another being. The "wings" 
of a winged hammer are self-regenerating magi- 
cal constructs; it cannot be grounded by destroy- 
ing them, even for a round. 

A winged hammer is AC 4 when stationary, AC 
-1 when in flight, and will suffer 45 points of 
damage before shattering. When destroyed, its 
magic is forever lost, but there is no harmful 
explosion or magical side-effect. 


Hammock 

A hammock is a hanging bed that must be stretched 
between two sturdy objects. They are most often 
constructed of canvas, leather, netted cord, or rope. 
A hammock generally spreads around its occupant 
and holds him or her securely in place. The ties that 
hold the hammock above ground can easily be 
unfastened to move the hammock. 


of Entrapment 
XP Value: — GP Value: 1,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

This hammock appears to be a hammock of pro- 
tection, but when touched by a creature hostile to 
the user, it wraps around the user (+4 penalty to 
Armor Class, no hand-to-hand combat). It per- 
mits the victim to escape if a saving throw vs. 
spell is made. This hammock is subject to the 
same attack forms as a hammock ofprotection. 


Layne's 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 43 
This item folds down to fit into a small pouch. 
When removed from the pouch, it may be tossed 
into the air with the command "anchor." This causes 
the hammock to expand and anchor itselfin air, pro- 
viding a comfortable bed for one. While a person is 
in the hammock, the air surrounding the hammock 


will be comfortable for sleeping or relaxing, no mat- 
ter what the surrounding temperature. Once a per- 
son gets out of the hammock, it collapses and folds 
itself, ready to be replaced in the pouch. 


of Protection 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 10,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

To function, this hammock must be strung 
between two upright supports 8 to 15 feet apart. 
When used for sleeping, the hammock protects 
the user; if any living creature touches the ham- 
mock, the user is dumped to the ground, but the 
creature is drawn into the hammock and entan- 
gled, suffering a +4 penalty to Armor Class and 
unable to attack in hand-to-hand combat. The vic- 
tim may make a saving throw vs. spell on the sec- 
ond and each following round of entrapment. If 
successful, the creature is thrown out of the ham- 
mock in any direction away from the owner. Fire 
destroys it instantly; bladed weapons may be used 
to cut it (treat as AC 5; 20 hp). 


Hand 


"Hand" describes a multitude of objects. Some 
magical hands actually are pairs of gloves; others 
are sets of extremely powerful gauntlets that 
cover the wearer's knuckles and the back of the 
hand. Other hands are relics cleaved from the 
bodies of powerful villains, heroes, or effigies. 
(See also Glove and Gauntlet.) 


Balacer's 

XP Value: 2,500 GP Value: 12,000 

DRAGON Magazine 196 
First known in ancient Cormanthor, in the city 
that was later known as Myth Drannor, this 
metallic item takes the shape of a human hand 
about 4 inches long. When touched to the hilt of 
any blade weapon, it can be willed to function in 
several ways: 
At a cost of one charge, a Balacer 's hand can 
hone a blade to a razor edge and remove all 
rust from it in one round. 
At a cost of two charges, it can straighten a 
bent blade in one round. 
At a cost of two charges, it can fill in all nicks 
and notches in a blade in two rounds. 
At a cost of four charges, it can restore miss- 
ing metal to a blade that is severely rusted or 
corroded (by acid, for example), and stop any 
ongoing corrosion, in four rounds. 


1916 


, i a O E aan © 


560 


~ Hand of Harrowing y~ 


At a cost of six charges, it can permanently 
mend a broken (snapped off) blade in six 
rounds (however, it can't restore any lost mag- 
ical powers to a broken magical weapon). 

At a cost of 10 charges, Balacer's hand can 
temporarily make any blade a +1 magical 
weapon. This augmentation takes only one 
round and lasts 1d4+1 rounds after that (the 
randomly determined time is never known to 
the wielder). 

At a cost of 20 charges, it can temporarily 
make a blade a +2 weapon (the details are the 
same as fora +1 augmentation). 

At a cost of 25 charges, Balacer's hand will 
temporarily give a blade weapon +1 to attack, 
except that the blade deals its full, normal dam- 
age at each strike. Thus, a short sword would 
have a +1 attack bonus and would do 6 points 
of damage, plus any Strength bonuses of its 
user, with each attack until the effect fades. 
All of these powers may be used on the same 
weapon at different times, and all except the three 
magically augmented powers are cumulative (a 
bent, broken, and rusted blade can be made like 
new by expending 11 charges, then augmented in 
one of the three ways). None ofthe augmentation 
powers of Balacer's hand work on functioning 
magical weapons. Some 10% of such items have 
a tiny storage compartment (usually containing 
written instructions and messages, but sometimes 
holding lockpicks or jewelry) released by bend- 
ing back the hand's little finger. 

A Balacer's hand typically has 1d12+40 
charges when found. It can be recharged by hav- 
ing a priest cast heat metal with the verbal com- 
ponent uttered backwards, and in the round 
immediately after a wizard must cast lightning 
bolt or chain lightning into the item. This restores 
1d4+1 charges. In the open under a stormy sky, a 
priest or can recharge a Balacer 's handby casting 
two heat metal spells with the prayers read back- 
wards in successive rounds, then in the turn 
immediately following using call lightning to 
bring down electricity into the item. If one priest 
maintains the concentration necessary for call 
lightning, those bolts can restore charges to a 
hand; for each bolt to work, two heat metal spells 
must first be cast on the hand by other priests. 
These methods, too, will restore 1d4+1 charges. 

A wizard acting alone can recharge a hand by 
casting the spells glitterdust, mending, and either 
lightning bolt or chain lightning on it in three succes- 


sive rounds. The wording of the mending doesn't 
matter; it causes the hand to absorb the whirling glit- 
ter cloud, so the caster can see it to hurl lightning. 

Each attempt to restore the charges has the 
usual chance of accidentally destroying the item, 
which must save vs. spell at -1 using the best 
spell saving throw of all casters involved as a 
base. Failure means the Balacer's hand crumbles 
to dust. A Balacer s hand can never rust or cor- 
rode, and metallic weapons can't harm it (it is AC 
-2 and has 100 hp). 


of Harrowing 
XP Value GP Value 
Evil-Aligned: 2,000 25,000 
Good-Aligned: 2,000 25,000 


Lords of Darkness 
This magical item is the severed hand ofa human, 


.rendered steel-hard and inflexible (AC 0, 16 hp 


damage to shatter) by its enchantment. When 
released by a living creature, it lies or /evitates in 
midair, in exactly the spot in which it was 
released, until it is touched by a living creature 
again. Hands of harrowing are typically used to 
guard tombs against plundering by hungry ghouls 
or magic-seeking liches. 

Evilly aligned creatures suffer 1d3 points of 
damage per round of contact with a hand (or per 
blow, if one is used against them), but may place 
or wield such hands if they wish. No other crea- 
tures are affected by a hand ofharrowing, except 
as anormal clubbing weapon, doing 1 d2 points 
of damage. Hands are typically mounted on rods 
for ease of use. 

Its touch does 3d4 points of damage to undead 
creatures, and stuns them for 1d4 rounds. When 
placed on or against a door, archway, or threshold 
(a windowsill or a drain opening), undead seek- 
ing to pass the guarded area in any direction or 
manner (including a ghost's ethereal means) suf- 
fer wracking pain. Undead creatures within 30 
feet of a hand ofharrowing are slowed to a move- 
ment rate of 3 feet per round, no saving throw 
allowed. Each round they are within active range 
of a hand, undead must save vs. death magic or be 
forced 10 feet away from the hand. In addition, 
during each round they are within active range, 
all undead suffer 2d4 damage (1d4 if they save 
vs. breath weapon). 

Ten percent of all hands of harrowing are 
evilly aligned, and affect good-aligned creatures 


instead of undead. 
1917 


A eS eg O OA 


561 


~ Hand, Helping = 


Helping 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 2,500 
DRAGON Magazine 196 

This old, rare item of Krynn is also found on 
other planes. It is a life-sized, lifelike disembod- 
ied human hand fashioned of an iron alloy. A 
helping hand's enchantment makes it move and 
flex fluidly, and it flies about at the direction of 
its wielder, who is the last being to speak a secret 
binding word while touching it. 

A helping hand resists rust and all magic (sav- 
ing as metal but with a +4 bonus on saving 
throws), is AC 0, can withstand 29 points of dam- 
age before shattering (natural and magical electri- 
cal discharges heal it on a 1 hp to 1 hp basis), and 
flies about at MV 15 (A) at the wielder's bidding. 
It can't travel more than 600 feet from the wielder 
or control is lost; if it gets out of range, it falls to 
the ground, inert. 

Unless another being takes control of a helping 
hand by touching it and uttering its command 
word, control over a hand that's passed out of 
range can be restored whenever the wielder 
moves into range again. A wielder who concen- 
trates on a helping hand whose control hasn't 
passed to someone else will have a vague idea of 
how far away the hand is and in what direction. 
(A rare few helping hands can be located by any 
being who has ever controlled them.) A being can 
only control one helping hand at a time. 

A helping hand can't carry anything or make 
spellcasting gestures, but it can point, hold open 
books, push small objects up to dagger size along 
a fairly smooth surface, tug at knots, and so on. A 
hand can fly at beings, attacking at THACO 11 for 
1d2 points damage. Its strike can break eggs, 
glass, pottery, or other fragile objects, or spoil the 
aim of anyone readying a spell or missile weapon, 
as the DM chooses. Helping hands are often used 
to punch or slap warning gongs and sometimes to 
trigger traps (overturning a lit candle or lamp into 
a pool of oil, for example, or pulling the trigger- 
cord ofa cocked, loaded, and mounted crossbow). 

The wielder of a helping hand can "see" from 
the hand within a spherical, 20-foot range, and 
can use this ability to spy, watch strategic areas, 
or use the hand to signal directions and inten- 
tions. Operating a helping hand requires mental 
concentration that precludes spellcasting in the 
same round but allows normal physical activity. If 
a hand wielder is climbing, swimming, or balanc- 
ing precariously while operating the hand, all 


Dexterity checks are made at a -1 penalty; if 
engaged in combat, all hand-wielder attack rolls 
are at -1. A helping hand can be commanded to 
"go on as it was before" when concentration 
ceases; if no instructions are given, it hangs (or 
lies on a surface) motionless. 


Holy Hand of Bane 
XP Value: 8,000 GP Value: 80,000 
Halls of the High King 
Only a few of these deadly items exist, guarding 
the innermost altars of evil temples dedicated to 
the god Bane. Fashioned of obsidian, holy hands 
are immense, standing 6 feet high when upright. 

A holy hand floats motionless, levitating, 
unless a good-aligned being enters the chamber it 
guards. Then it turns slowly to point at the nearest 
good-aligned character, attacking if any such 
being advances to within 60 feet of the guarded 
altar. A holy hand can sense the alignment and 
whereabouts of all beings in its temple precisely 
and pursues intruders throughout the temple if 
activated by their intrusion into its guarded area. 

A holy hand is AC 1, MV 15 (A), THACO 11, 
HD 9, and always has 66 hit points. It can be 
struck by all sorts of physical weapons and suf- 
fers normal damage. Fire and electricity cannot 
affect a hand, nor can it be mentally influenced or 
controlled. A holy hand attacks once per round, 
smiting for 4d6 damage or grasping and crushing 
for 2d6 damage, plus 5d6 per round after that. 
(Determine the attack form randomly.) 

A holy hand is animated, constructed, and 
powered by magic. All magical items, weapons, 
and spell discharges or magic item effects com- 
ing into contact with it are utterly absorbed. Mag- 
ical attacks dealing a hand over 40 points of 
damage in a single round actually heal any dam- 
age to it, by the amount of the excess points over 
40 (the rest of the energy is stored by the hand for 
motive power). When a hand is destroyed, the 
magical energy escapes harmlessly, not in an 
explosion or in any form that can be tapped or fed 
upon by others. 

Magic items contacting a hand are completely 
drained of magic, unrestorable by any means 
short of a wish. Artifacts are plane shifted away at 
random, leaving their bearers behind (unless the 
DM decides to drag the poor hero along). A dis- 
pel magic directed against a hand is absorbed 
without damaging the hand or lessening its levita- 


tion abilities, but it is slowed for one round. 
1919 


Oe a a a 


562 


Hand of Vecna 


ee of 


Hand of Remote Action 
See Wonderful Hand, below. 


Tomorast's 
XP Value GP Value 
Left: 200 20,000 
Right: 3000 30,000 


Mordenkainen's Fantastic Adventure 

Eli's original hands have undergone a grisly 
experiment, involving their removal and replace- 
ment by the strange appendages described below. 
These were grafted onto him, presumably by the 
same netherworld creature that supplied them. 
When striking in melee, the spikes (12 per hand) 
cause one point of damage per spike contacting 
the target. Roll 1dl2 (or 2d12 ifboth hands hit) to 
determine the number of spikes connecting and 
damage subsequently caused. There are many 
other inherent abilities in these hands. 

Left Hand: This hand can improve the user's 
Dexterity by 2 points (maximum of 18). To use 
the power, which lasts for 2d6 rounds, the user 
needs only to touch thumb to index finger. No 
spellcasting is possible during that round. 

Right Hand: This hand automatically 
improves the user's chance to attack by +3 while 
wielding weapons in the right hand. When used 
in combination with other spells or items, the 
total attack bonus may not exceed +6 due to the 
restraining nature of this hand. 

Both Hands In Attack: When both unoccu- 
pied hands strike the same opponent simultane- 
ously, two things occur: 

e The victim must make a saving throw vs. par- 
alyzation or be immobile for 2d6 rounds. 

e The victim must make a saving throw vs. spell 
or lose one level of experience (as if struck by 
a wight). 

Both Hands In Defense: When both hands are 
clasped in prayer, the user accrues three benefits. 
When the hands are removed from this clasped 
position, all benefits immediately cease. The user 
may not cast spells nor carry on any other com- 
bative measures that require the use of the hands 
while maintaining this defensive posture. He or 
she may move, but only at a movement rate 
penalty of-3. Damage sustained while in a 
defensive mode comes first from additional 
points gained. Defensive posture can be taken as 
often as desired. 

e Flitting, noncorporeal black shadows hover 
between the user and all opponents, giving the 


user a -5 bonus to Armor Class. 

e The user immediately gains a temporary 
increase of 4d6 hit points. 

e The user gains a +3 bonus to saving throws vs. 
spell, and a +2 bonus on all other saving 
throws. 


of Vecna 
XP Value: 18,000 GP Value: 180,000 
Eldritch Wizardry 

The hand of Vecna is a dried, shriveled, and black- 
ened hand. The hand (and, it is rumored in dark 
passageways, an eye) is the sole remaining part of 
an ancient lich who was so powerful that he was 
able to imbue his hand with wonderful and horri- 
ble powers, and to enable it to survive even after 
his long-undead body had ceased to exist. 

If the hand is pressed against the stump of an 
arm, the "wearer" is able to use its various pow- 
ers, although they must be determined by trial 
and error. The hand causes the user to become 
totally evil, but even a detect evil spell does not 
reveal this. Once the hand is pressed to the stump 
of an arm, it affixes itself to the arm, and can only 
be removed under certain conditions. Until one of 
the primary powers listed below is used, the hand 
may be removed at will (of course, the user is still 
minus one normal hand). With each use of a pri- 
mary power, the chance of removing the hand is 
reduced from 100% by 10%. After 10 uses, the 
hand can never be removed. 

Secondary powers may be used as often as 
desired, without the drastic effects of use of pri- 
mary powers. Each time a primary power is used 
successfully, the user is subject to one of the 
penalties listed below. None of the effects of the 
hand may be altered in any way, even wishes and 
acts of the gods are useless in this regard. 

Primary Powers: The primary powers are 
used by extending the fingers of the hand in dif- 
ferent combinations. There are 16 combinations 
(clenched fist, index finger extended, all fingers 
extended, and so on) and six (DM's choice) do 
nothing. 

e Sleep (also affects up to one creature of any 
level), 3 times per day. 

e Generate a double effect slow spell twice a 
day. 

e Finger ofdeath with 4 on saving throw once 
per day. 

e Regenerate up to one half of all points lost in 


combat. 
1921 


a 563 = 


~ Hand of Vecna II = 


Teleport twice per day. 

Monster summoning once per day. 

e X-ray vision as a ring of x-ray vision. 
Spell Turning. 

Death spell twice per day. 

Locates treasure as follows (select one): 


12 silver, gold, etc. within 90 feet 

3-4 gems within 60 feet 

5-6 magic within 10 feet 
User of this artifact always receives a premo- 
nition of danger, just before the event occurs. 
It does not reveal what the danger is, just that 
there is a threat in the area. 


Secondary Powers: 
Levitation. 
° Fly. 

Infravision. 

Detect traps and secret doors. 

Use of this artifact causes the user to eventually 
become ethereal every time he or she is under 
stress. Each time it is used, the user has a 2% 
chance (cumulative) of going ethereal when 
under stress—after 10 uses the character has a 
20% chance of becoming ethereal under stress. 
Being under stress is defined as any situation 
where the user faces a monster, trap, place or 
person that the user is uncertain that he or she 


can conquer. After 50 uses, the user becomes 
ethereal with every stressful situation. The 
ethereal state lasts until the stress is removed. 
The touch of the Hand of Vecna has the follow- 
ing effect: 
Touch turns opponent's bones to jelly, usable 
once per day. 


of Vecna II 
XP Value: — GP Value: — 
Book of Artifacts 
The hand of Vecna appears to be a mummified 
left hand, black and claw-like. To be used, it must 
be placed on the stump ofa left arm, where it will 
instantly graft into place. Once in place, it can be 
used as a normal hand, but always retains its hor- 
rid appearance. Like the eye of Vecna (see Eye), 
once affixed, the hand is permanently attached 
until the owner dies or it is forcibly removed. The 
hand radiates powerful magical auras that cannot 
be determined. 

In his time perhaps the mightiest of all wiz- 
ards, Vecna was master of a kingdom now lost in 
the depths of the Flanaess's prehistory. Lord 
Vecna's rule was not kind and just, for he was 
filled with malevolence that, if known, would 
make even the dread luz the Evil tremble. So 
great a wizard was Vecna that none within his 
realm dared oppose him. 

And so great was Vecna's power that when his 
time to die came, he escaped even that and became 
an archlich more horrible than ever before, allow- 
ing him to continue his reign of terror over the 
land. In the end, though, his own lieutenant, Kas 
(see Sword, ofKas), treacherously attacked the 
lich and in the resulting battle both were utterly 
destroyed—except for the archlich's hand and eye. 
These dismembered parts have survived the mil- 
lennia since Vecna’'s passing, retaining in them- 
selves a small portion of Vecna's great power. 

Each time one of these artifacts has surfaced, 
disaster and ruin have followed. Miro the paladin- 
king was corrupted by the power of the hand. 
Paddin the Vain used the hand to start the Insur- 
rection of the Yaheetes, a rebellion the Emperor 
of the Malachite Throne later crushed. With the 
hand's power, the so-called Vecna II held 
monstrous sway overTyrus for 100 years. The 
hand and eye have always failed their owners at 
some crucial moment. 

Over the years, a cult of worshipers has arisen 


to venerate the vile Lord Vecna and work to pave 
1922 


ee 


564 


~ Hand, Wonderful r 


the way for his return. To the cult, the hand and 
the eye are relics to be obtained at any cost. Their 
servants watch for any reappearance ofthe eye or 
hand, eager to track them down and snatch them. 

The most recent of these reappearances 
occurred only a few years' past, just prior to the 
great wars that engulfed the Flanaess, when both 
the hand and eye fell into the clutches ofthe cult. 
This event was scarred with foreboding—failures 
of magic and evil omens spread across the land. 
Fortunately, by all accounts, the hand and eye 
were cast through the dimensional portal of 
Tovag Baragu on the Dry Steppes and lost in 
some unrecorded void of the Outer Planes. 

Both the hand and eye of Vecna are so evil that 
PCs should gain little good from either artifact. 
Fill their minds with tales of the tragic deaths and 
the dire fates of those foolish enough to presume 
upon Vecna's power. 

The most obvious goal is to keep these arti- 
facts from falling into the clutches of the Cult of 
Vecna. Both groups, PCs and cultists, are in a 
race to follow a path of rumors and legend to the 
end. Even if the characters succeed, they are still 
left with the problem of what to do with the arti- 
facts. The cultists will not rest until the items are 
theirs. A variation on this is that the characters 
"accidentally" find the eye or hand and must 
destroy or hide the artifacts before the cultists do 
them in. 

An intriguing puzzle for the characters would 
be to prevent a good NPC from using the arti- 
facts, since this would doom the poor soul and 
perhaps many others. The NPC, probably a petty 
king or an emperor, is in great danger of being 
overwhelmed by evil forces. Vecna's artifacts 
might have the power to destroy these enemies— 
but only by creating a worse evil. The players 
have to find a way to prevent this and still save 
the empire. Worse still, the ruler's advisor is urg- 
ing him to take up the artifacts and smite the 
kingdom's enemies. He may be a secret cultist or 
he may believe the same of the PCs. 

A greater challenge is that the player charac- 
ters must defeat a foe already using the artifacts, 
perhaps a depraved ruler within the borders of the 
former Great Kingdom. Note that the PCs cannot 
simply steal the devices—the enemy must be 
confronted and defeated before all is right again. 

The hand and eye can function separately or 
together. Both share the same curse, which inten- 
sifies if both items are in the PCs' possession. 


Constant Powers: The user gains a 19 
Strength, immunity to magic missiles, and inflicts 
2d6 points of damage to plant-based creatures by 
touch. 

Invoked Powers: The user gains an instant 
death touch (no saving throw, 1 per day). 

Random Powers: Eight from Artifact Table 
1-16: Minor Powers, seven from Table 1-15: 
Major Powers; There is a unique gesture for each 
power. 

Resonating Powers: When joined with the eye 
of Vecna, the user gains six random abilities (two 
from Artifact Table 1-05: Detection, two from 
Table 1-3: Protection, and two from Table 1-00: 
Abjuration) and 70% magic resistance. 

Curse: As these were once the living tissue of 
Vecna, every use requires a saving throw vs. spell 
(-6 penalty if both hand and eye are owned) to 
avoid artifact domination. The artifacts’ goals are 
to gain more magical power, establish an empire, 
destroy the sword ofKas, and summon Vecna to 
Oerth. 

Suggested Means of Destruction: 

Vecna must be irrevocably destroyed. 

It must be cast into the heart of Oerth's sun. 
Every shade of Vecna's victims must be sent 
to a peaceful rest. 


Wonderful 
GP Value: 16,500 
The Magister 
Also known as a hand ofremote action, this 
unusual creation is actually two devices—a 
gauntlet of steel that changes size to fit the hand 
of any wearer (halfling through human), and a 
"hand" of solid steel which is identical to the 
gauntlet in size and appearance. The two items 
are magically linked, so that the hand mimics all 
actions of the gauntlet from a distance of 10 feet 
per point of Wisdom possessed by the wearer. 
Thus, the wearer of the gauntlet may grasp at 
empty air and the hand, some distance away, will 
grasp at an enemy. The positioning and move- 
ment of the hand are under the complete control 
of the gauntlet wearer as long as the hand is 
within the maximum allowable distance and 
within sight of the wearer. Otherwise, it falls to 
the ground until both conditions are fulfilled 
again. 
All attacks made by the hand are at -1 to attack 
due to the difficulty of accurately judging dis- 


tances from afar. The hand may transport weap- 
1923 


XP Value: 1,400 


Zoe 


565 


Handkerchief of Flirting 


ons, but cannot be used to wield them or hurl 
them; its chiefuse is in the manipulation of traps 
and locks from a distance. As such, it is particu- 
larly suited for use by thieves, although members 
of all classes may use this item. 

The hand, unless its speed is markedly 
increased (by telekinesis or other means), does 
1d8 points of damage per blow. For purposes of 
bending bars, opening doors, etc., it has the 
same effective strength as the gauntlet wearer. It 
cannot be destroyed by physical attacks, but 
becomes inert if it takes cumulative blows 
amounting to 20 points of damage. It can be 
"recharged," negating all damage it may have 
suffered, by bringing it into contact with the 
gauntlet before the 20-point limit is reached. If 
it falls inert, either from damage or by moving 
out of sight of or too far away from the gauntlet 
wearer, it must be "replenished" by keeping it 
within the maximum distance for a period of 
one day for each day (or fraction thereof) it was 
inert; thus even a momentary loss of control 
over the hand causes it to be useless for one day 
after that. The gauntlet and hand cannot be 
employed with any other magical gauntlets. The 
hand cannot be controlled when the bearer is 
being psionically attacked, or is the target of 
some form of mind control magic; however, it 
remains functional, and can be used again as 
soon as the wearer is no longer under mental 
attack. 

The hand cannot be damaged by fire, heat, 
cold, or electricity, but if it is hit by a magical 
force of one of these sorts, the spell effect is 
transmitted at half-strength to the wearer. For 
instance, if the hand is hit by afireball of 8d6 
strength, the gauntlet wearer takes 4d6 of dam- 
age, or 2d6 ifa saving throw is made. The gaunt- 
let and the hand are not subject to any form of 
rust or corrosion, including such forces as the 
attack of a rust monster. 


Handkerchief 

Magical handkerchiefs are simple squares of silk 
cloth. Their power is activated when they are 
dropped, held to the nostrils, passed over the eyes, 
or pulled from the pocket. Often, a command 
word must be spoken as well. If exposed to nor- 
mal or magical fire, the hankerchiefs save with a 
+2 bonus. 


of Flirting 

XP Value: 400 GP Value: 2,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
When this simple silken scarf is dropped within 
30 feet of any creature of the opposite sex and 
the command word spoken, the chosen victim 
becomes enamored of the user (no saving 
throw) for one to four rounds, plus one round 
per point of the user's Charisma score. The user 
must respond (or find excuses not to) or the 
effect is dispelled; a few simple kisses maintain 
the effect. Creatures of dubious gender are not 
affected. 


of Length 
XP Value: 600 GP Value: 3,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

This simple silk hanky is worth 3,000 gp if sold, 

but it can have far more value when properly 

used. Anyone able to detect invisible things can, 
upon careful examination, find a word woven into 
the design. Ifthe handkerchief is placed in any 
pocket and the word spoken, the user can then 

pull out a 50-foot-long, multicolored, silk rope, 

which can be used in the same way as a normal 

rope. The rope rewinds automatically when 

stuffed back into a pocket and becomes the hand- 
kerchief again. The item has an encumbrance of 
only 0.1 pounds in handkerchief form and 2.5 
pounds (half normal) in rope form. 


of Sneezing 
XP Value: — GP Value: 1,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

This item looks like and functions as a handker- 
chief of length. However, while pulling it from the 
pocket, a user starts to sneeze. Ifthe user stops 
and uses the handkerchief for two rounds, there 
are no further ill effects, and the item may be 
used in rope form. If the handkerchief is not 
immediately used to stop sneezing, a victim con- 
tinues to sneeze for one turn, is unable to cast 
spells or attack, and suffers a +2 penalty to Armor 
Class. The victim may then make a saving throw 
vs. spell to stop sneezing—failure indicates 
another turn of sneezing. Thereafter, the victim 
may make another saving throw after each turn of 
sneezing. Remove curse, cast by a 15th or higher 
level caster, stops the sneezing, but also destroys 
the handkerchief. 


1926 


z 566 = 


4 i Harness, Spider y- 


Harness 


A harness is a combination of straps, bands, 
collars, and other components commonly used 
to hitch teams of draft animals to carts, wagons, 
and plows. Some magical harnesses are 
designed to aid humanoid creatures to preform 
certain tasks. 


of Seker 

XP Value: 500 GP Value: 2,500 
Oasis of the White Palm 
This magical item, a gift from the god Seker, is 
granted in times of great need. It is shaped like 
a glove with holes for fingers and a harness that 
extends down the wrist and forearm. The har- 
ness is of neutral good alignment and anyone 
not of good alignment takes 1d4 points of dam- 
age per round that the harness is worn. It only 
obeys the commands of good-aligned priests. 
The palm of the harness bears the symbol of 
Seker. 

The harness vibrates when undead creatures 
are near. Ifa priest extends his or her arm, the 
harness will detect all undead in the direction the 
arm is pointed, to a range of 30 feet. 

The harness can discharge a 30-foot bolt that 
causes 40 points of damage, no saving throw, to 
any undead creature. The wearer simply points an 
arm at an undead creature within sight and range 
and says the word "Seker." Each bolt uses one 
charge. 

The harness is given by Seker to help good 
priests destroy the undead. The gift requires the 
temporary sacrifice of a magical item on an altar 
of Seker. The sacrifice must be a magical rod, 
staff, wand, or weapon. The sacrifice disappears 
when placed on Seker's altar, and the harness 
appears. The harness has a number of charges 
equal to the number of charges in the rod, staff, or 
wand, or equal to the highest plus of the magical 
weapon. However, the harness of Seker never has 
more than five charges. 

When all of the charges have been used, the 
magical weapon or item sacrificed reappears in 
the hand of the person who sacrificed the item. 
The item is in the same condition as when it was 
offered. When the sacrifice is returned, the har- 
ness disappears. No one can receive a harness of 
Seker more than once. 


SOS 
ee ERS 


. 
= 
= 
= 
= 
-_ 


sf 


‘3 


XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 10,000 
New Item 

An invaluable tool for thieves and housebreakers, 
the spider harness appears to be an ordinary black 
harness with bands to fasten it on the wearer. How- 
ever, its leather interior is carved with mystic runes 
and circles, and eight straight lines protrude from its 
center. The harness is best worn over any clothing, 
for when the command word is spoken, the harness 
instantly sprouts four black, hairy spider legs ofa 
size that approximately matches those of the wearer. 
The legs tear through any clothing or armor, no mat- 
ter the material, to reach full extension. 

The legs function as directed by the wearer of 
the spider harness, though they take some getting 
used to. It takes 20 rounds, minus the user's Dex- 
terity to master the harness. Though the legs are 
ugly, they provide a useful function. They allow 
the user to spider climb for two turns every two 
hours, after which time the legs retract back into 
the harness. The user can also voluntarily retract 
the legs, and use the remaining time later. 

The legs are AC 4, and take 15 hp each before 
being destroyed. As long as the harness has at 
least one leg left, the magic of the item still func- 
tions. Once all the legs are destroyed, the harness 


becomes inert, and is forever destroyed. 
1928 


5 


6 


T 


~~ Harpoon, Howling = 


Harpoon 


The harpoon is a hunting tool that in times of 
duress may be used for defense. It was devel- 
oped for hunting marine mammals and large 
fish. The first harpoons were merely pointed 
sticks. Later they became sticks with heads of 
bone or stone. The heads have hooked barbs to 
increase damage and to hold the harpoon fast in 
the target's flesh. 


Roll Harpoon Type 
01-50 One-handed 
51-00 Two-handed 


ro 


OEE 


ez 
DF wet 


vet 


NN 
N 


N 
: 
MA 


N 
\ 
y 


n 
` 
vs 


in 


Howling 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
Otherlands 
This weapon is enchanted with a +3 bonus. When 
hurled, it creates a horrifying howl that emanates 
in a cone-shaped configuration, 40 feet long and 
30 feet wide at its far end. All victims in the cone 
must roll successful saving throws vs. paralyza- 
tion or run as far as possible from the harpoon's 
thrower for 2d6 turns. The harpoon wails for 1d4 
rounds. Any victims who stay in the cone of noise 
must roll saving throws each round. Ifthe har- 
poon hits its intended target but does not kill it, 


the target gets no saving throw and must immedi- 
ately flee. The harpoon remains in the victim, 
which sometimes results in the unwilling creature 
driving away its comrades as well as itself! The 
howling harpoon works well against large groups 
of enemies. 


Magical 
XP Value GP Value 
+1: 400 2,000 
+2:800 4,000 
+3:1,600 8,000 
Cursed-1: 


1,000 
War Captain's Companion d 
Magical harpoons are large, barbed spears shot 
by ballistae to impale or grapple another vessel or 
creature. They can have magical bonuses from +1 
to +3. A 100- to 600-foot rope is attached to an 
eye at the end of the harpoon, so that the target 
can be pulled in after it has been hit. Barbs at the 
front end of the harpoon render it very difficult to 
remove. 

Against spelljamming ships, a magical har- 
poon causes no damage, and is used mainly asa ` 
grappling weapon. Against creatures and crews, — 
however, the harpoon becomes a very lethal 
weapon. It causes 1dl0 points of damage to its 
target (plus bonus), and another 1d10 when it is 
removed. If more than one harpoon per 5 Hit 
Dice is wedged into a creature, the creature can- 
not escape without outside assistance. The har- 
poon is the preferred weapon of those who hunt 
kindori and krajen. 


Hasp 


A hasp is a small metallic object used as a clasp 
to secure a door or the lid of a chest. Usually 
made of brass, hasps often have hoops that allow 
owners to secure them with padlocks, nails, or 
other appropriate devices to hinder easy access. 
Hasps are commonly found on treasure chests, 
curio boxes, bedside strongboxes, and wardrobes. 


of Locking 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 2,500 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
When placed on any door (normal or secret, con- 
cealed or magical), this hasp wizard locks it at a 
level of magic equal to the user's level. It unlocks 
on command. 


1931 


A ie O N 


568 


Hat, Cyclocone 


(ee! 4 


of Reloading 

XP Value: 650 GP Value: 2,750 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
When placed on a bow or crossbow, this hasp 
attaches itself on command; a second command 
releases it. Ifa missile is shot from the device 
while the hasp is in place, it causes another arrow 
or quarrel to disappear from the user's quiver and 
reappear in the weapon, nocked and ready to fire. 
When used on a crossbow, the hasp cocks it so 
the user need only pull the trigger to fire. The 
hasp does not load magic missiles and can load 
only those missiles carried by the user of the bow 
or crossbow. 


Hat 


Magical hats may actually be almost any type of 
headgear. They shrink or expand to fit any size 
head. To use a hat, the user must have a head of 
some sort. In this case, a "head" is any appendage 
that houses organs for at least half of the standard 
senses or contains at least half of a creature's 
thought processing center. 


Roll Hat 

01-06 Cap 

07-12 Caul 

13-18 Chapeau 

19-24 Coif 

25-29 Cone 

30-35 Derby 

36-41 Fez 

42-47 Hat 

48-53 Helmet 

54-59 Hood 

60-65 Jester's cap 

66-71 — Jingasa 

72-716 Keffiyeh 

77-82 Liripipe 

83-88 Miter 

89-94 Skullcap 

95-00 Turban 

of Command 

XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 


Dungeonland 
A wearer of this hat is self-assured and possesses 
an overwhelming desire to take charge. (A DM 
should simply begin directing questions to the 
individual, urging the player to give the other 
players the benefit of his or her thinking, com- 
ment favorably on whatever is said, or make a 


pronouncement.) Encourage the assumption of 
leadership by character, especially where it is 
obviously going to cause the party to act in an 
unfavorable manner. At the same time, the char- 
acter's Intelligence and Wisdom drop by four 
points each, and Charisma becomes 18. Any loss 
of spells is temporary, and the drop does not 
affect class and profession. The hat can be 
removed in one round by any other character; 
when it is taken off, the wearer returns to his or 
her prior statistics. 


Conical 
XP Value: — GP Value: 2,000 
Black Courser 
This conical hat is made of iron pyrite (fool's 
gold). Any person putting it on loses 1d6 points 


of Intelligence permanently. 


Cyclocone 

GP Value: 15,000 
Unearthed Arcana 
Appearing as an ordinary, pointed hat, this magical 
device radiates a dim dweomer of evocation. Any 
wizard who owns this item can cause its power to 
function by pointing the small end of the cone 
toward the ground and then tossing the cyclocone 
forward with a spinning motion imparted by oppo- 
site movement of the palms of the hands. When 
thus set in motion, the cone begins to rotate at blur- 
ring speed and grows into a miniature but excep- 
tionally powerful whirlwind. The whirlwind is 5 
feet wide at its base, 15 feet wide at its top, and as 
much as 45 feet high (depending upon ceiling 
height or some other limiting factor). It appears at 
the beginning of the next round after the cyclocone 
is cast forth. It sweeps ahead in a straight line at a 
movement rate of 18, proceeding for one full 
round or until a solid, sturdy object destroys it—a 
stone wall or a very thick, large wooden mass 


XPValue: 3,000 


` causes it to break up. (Note that a living thing that 


serves to break up the whirlwind in this fashion 
takes the damage described below.) Any creatures 
of less than 2+1 Hit Dice caught within the whirl- 
wind when it forms or touched by it along its 
movement path are killed instantly by the force 
and carried along by the whirlwind. Other crea- 
tures caught within the whirlwind or touched by it 
take 4d4 points of damage, and those within 5 feet 
of its outer edge when it forms take 2d4 points of 
damage. The cyclocone is not reusable; the item is 


destroyed when the whirlwind dissipates. 
1935 


569 


~ Hat of Difference r 


of Difference 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 8,000 

Unearthed Arcana 
When this magical chapeau is worn, the wearer 
is able to assume the role of a character of any 
class other than that he or she actually practices. 
This magical headgear only empowers assump- 
tion of Ist level, but as long as it is worn, the 
possessor is able to act as a member of the 
named class. Any experience gained is in the 
assumed role only, but it is cumulative, so if in 
several wearings the individual actually goes to 
2nd level, then he or she retains that level when- 
ever the hat is worn and the new class is assumed. 
Such progress may continue indefinitely, but if 
the hat is discarded, lost or stolen, or not within a 
one-mile radius of its owner for any 24-hour 
period, then all experience in the different class 
is lost. The hit points of the character are always 
those actually possessed, just as all ability scores 
are those of the actual character. 


of Disguise 

XP Value: 500 GP Value: 2,500 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
When this hat is worn and the command word 
spoken, the hat ofdisguise alters the wearer's 
facial features into any desired likeness It cannot 
bestow special abilities other than appearance 
change. 


of Disguise II 
XP Value: 600 GP Value: 5,000 
Dungeonland 
When tossed by the wearer, this head cover 
matches that of the opponent, or else it turns 
itself into some small item that will be unnotice- 
able 90% of the time. On the following round it 
begins to function under its own power, making 
the wearer appear to be something or someone 
else. Thus, a character may appear to be a hatter, 
another character, a duchess, a cook, and so on (a 
DM's cleverness here can [and should] cause 
massive confusion). The hat may be removed by 
anyone, but the wearer always sees himself or 
herself naturally, and is unlikely to remove the 
unnoticed headgear. If and when the hat is 
removed, it remains in hat form until it is unob- 
served, then changes to a comb, ribbon, or any 
similar item. 


of Disguise III . 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 7,500 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 
This normal looking chapeau contains a powerful 
enchantment that allows its wearer to alter his or 
her appearance as follows: 


¢ Height: +25% of actual height. 

e Weight: +50% of actual weight. 
e Sex: Male or female. 

e Hair: Any color. 

e Eyes: Any color. 

e Complexion: Any color. 

e Facial Features: Highly mutable. 


Thus, the wearer could appear as a comely 
woman, a half-orc, or possibly even a gnome. If 
the hat is removed, the dweomer is instantly dis- 
pelled as far as the disguise is concerned. Note 
that the hat can be changed to appear as a comb, 
ribbon, head band, fillet, cap, coif, hood, helmet, 
or similar item. 


Fez of Disguise 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 7,500 
A Dozen and One Adventures 
This fez operates as a hat of disguise (DM's 
choice). 


of Fools 
XP Value: — GP Value: 1,000 
Dungeonland 
This item takes the form of a hat or cap worn by 
clowns, jesters, jugglers, and the like. The wearer 
immediately begins to caper and prance, almost 
as if he or she were affected by an Otto's irre- 
sistible dance spell. All other characters in the 
party must save vs. paralysis or fall into fits of 
helpless mirth for 1d4 rounds. Only one such roll 
is necessary, however, and any character who suc- 
ceeds in resisting the dweomer can, as his or her 
other action for the next round, remove the head- 
gear. This breaks the spell and ends the mirth 
immediately. 


Gnaash's Hat of Stupidity 
XP Value: — GP Value: 1,000 
1993 Collector Card 355 
Gnaash's hat of stupidity is different from the 
more typical magical item because the level of 
the wearer's Intelligence fluctuates rather than 


simply drops. The wearer of the hat still believes 
1942 


a ee 


570 


~ Hat, Imprisonment p- 


that the hat is a beneficial magical item, but the 
Intelligence score ofthat individual either drops 
(90% chance) or rises (10% chance) by 2d4 
points (18 maximum, 3 minimum). Each situa- 
tion lasts for 24 hours and then a new score is 
determined, calculated from the wearer's original 
Intelligence score. 


of Hairiness 

XP Value: 500 GP Value: 3,500 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
This hat is identical to a hat ofdisguise but, 
when commanded to function, it makes the 
wearer's hair grow profusely. The wearer thinks 
the disguise is working nevertheless. The extra 
hair provides the wearer with a +2 bonus to all 
saving throws against cold, lightning, and most 
other physical effects except fire—against 
which the user's saving throws are penalized by 
-2. Ifthe excess hair is cut off within a week, 
no ill effects occur; but if left for more than that 
time, all the hair falls out, leaving the user com- 
pletely bald. The hair grows back within 3d6 
months. 


of Hairlessness 

XP Value: 500 GP Value: 2,500 

The Book of Marvelous Magic 
This hat is identical to a hat ofdisguise, but when 
commanded to function, it makes all of the user's 
hair fall out, including beard, leg and arm hair, 
etc. The hat is easily removed, but the victim's 
hair takes 3d6 months to return in full. 


of Headlessness 

XP Value: 500 GP Value: 2,500 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
This hat appears to be a hat ofdisguise but, 
when commanded to function, it causes the 
user's head to disappear. The wearer thinks the 
disguise is working nevertheless. This hat has 
some real value, however, in that the wearer 
gains a +4 bonus on all saving throws against 
gaze effects. 


571 


of Holding 
XP Value GP Value 
501bs.: 1,000 5,000 
100 Ibs.: 2,000 10,000 
150 Ibs.: 3,000 15,000 
200 Ibs.: 4,000 20,000 
250 Ibs.: 5,000 25,000 
500 Ibs.: 7,500 37,500 
1,000 Ibs.: 10,000 50,000 
1,500 Ibs.: 12,500 65,200 
2,000 Ibs.: 15,000 70,000 

Dungeonland 


In appearance, this is a typical, common hat. 
The hat ofholding, however, allows its owner to 
hold items as though it were a bag ofholding. 
The hat opens into a extra-dimensional space, 
and inside it is larger than outside. No matter 
what is put into it, the hat always weighs the 
same amount. This weight, the hat's weight 
limit for contents, and the volume limits are 
determined by a percentile roll and consulting 
the table below: 


Roll Weight Weight Limit 
01-28 % lb. 50 Ibs. 
28-43 IIb. 100 Ibs. 
44-57 Ib. 150 lbs. 
58-69 IIb. 200 Ibs. 
70-79 IIb. 250 lbs. 
80-87 Ib. 500 Ibs. 
88-93 2 lbs. 1,000 lbs. 
94-97 3 lbs. 1,500 lbs. 
98-00 5 lbs. 2,000 Ibs. 


If overloaded, or if sharp objects pierce it 
(from inside or outside), the hat can rupture and 
become useless. The contents are then lost for- 
ever in the vortices ofnilspace. The user ofa hat 
ofholding can wear the hat while using it's hold- 
ing capabilities. 


Imprisonment 

XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
Dungeonland 
This hat enlarges to cover the target character 
completely. It cannot be removed on the round, 
but after that the trapped character has the same 
chance for removing it as he or she has of open- 
ing doors. Note that associates can aid a trapped 
individual. 


1947 


~ Hat, Occupation = 


Occupation 
GP Value: 10,000 
Dungeonland 
This type of headgear causes the wearer to 
believe that he or she is ofthe class indicated by 
the hat (note that this might not contradict the 
actual class ofthe player). Hat types are: 


XP Value: 2,000 


Roll Hat Type 
1 Miter of Clericalism 
2 Helmet of Fighting 
3 Cone of Dweomercraft 
4 Hood ofThievery 


Classes and subclasses not covered (druids, 
rangers, paladins, illusionists, assassins, monks, 
bards) are affected adversely, though the degree 
of effect varies. The hat may be removed only 
after one round, only by another character, and 
without any cooperation from the wearer. 


of Stupidity 

GP Value: 1,000 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 
This hat is indistinguishable from any other mag- 
ical hat, even when gone over most carefully 
using magical detection methods. Only by plac- 
ing it upon one's head can its powers be deter- 
mined. Of course, once on the head, a wearer 
believes that the hat is a beneficial item, for he or 
she is overcome by stupidity. Intelligence is low- 
ered to 7, or by -1 ifthe wearer has a 7 or lower 
Intelligence normally. The wearer always wants 
the hat on—especially when engaging in any 
activity that requires thinking, spellcasting, or 
mental concentration. Without the benefit of a 
remove curse spell or similar magic, the wearer 
can never be free ofthe magic ofthe hat. If 
released, the wearer's Intelligence returns to its 
normal level. 


XP Value: — 


Headband 


Headbands are simple constructs that are wrapped 
around the forehead and tied securely in the back 
or on the side ofthe head. They can be made from 
fur, cloth, or woven plant fibers. Headbands usu- 
ally are used as decorations or to keep sweat and 
stray hair out of the wearer's eyes. 


of the Corusk Mountains 
XP Value: 1,800 GP Value: 18,000 
GREYHAWK Adventures 

Carved from the skull of an ancient white dragon, 
this headband was enchanted by a powerful wiz- 
ard who sought to drive the mountain dwarves 
from their homes and rich mines. Though the 
wizard died in a cloud of throwing axes launched 
by a dwarven army, the item was never recovered, 
and remains lost (or possibly in someone's pos- 
session) in the Corusk Mountains. The headband 
allows the wearer to affect white dragons as a 
potion ofwhite dragon control, and also grants 
the airborne riding proficiency with white 
dragons at a -2 die roll modifier. The wearer is 
totally resistant to white dragon breath and all 
effects of cold attacks (from spells, abilities, and 
natural weather conditions). 


of the Jotens 

GP Value: 4,500 
GREYHAWK Adventures 
This strip of elk fur was enchanted to insure the 
safety of travelers in the Jotens Mountains. When 
worn around a character's head, the item allows 
its wearer to understand the psychology of hill 
giants. Ifthe wearer can communicate with hill 
giants, he or she receives any reaction modifier 
desired, down to -60% or up to 26%. Once per 
day the character can inspire one of the following 
emotions in a group of hill giants: 
e Courage: +4 morale bonus. 
e Fear: +20% morale penalty. 
e Anger: -8 reaction modifier, +2 to attack and 

+2 damage against the object of anger. 

These emotions can be inspired in any group 
of 12 or fewer hill giants, including friendly ones. 
The emotions last 2d8 turns and must affect a sin- 
gle group within sight of the wearer. 


Headdress of 


Peaceful Contact 
XP Value: 750 GP Value: 3,750 
DRAGON Magazine 189 
This elaborate headdress, made of feathers, teeth, 
beadwork, and leather, gives the savage priest who 
wears it several benefits when speaking to intelli- 
gent sylvan creatures. Faerie races (brownies, pix- 
ies, sylphs), unicorns, centaurs, and dryads, are 
automatically friendly to the wearer, as though 
they were under an animalfriendship spell. A 


wearer is able to converse in a creature's language 
1952 


XP Value: 800 


ga ee ee 


572 


Heat of Kazgaroth 


De eT 


AY 
N wy 


and is not subject to a creature's voluntary or invol- 
untary harmful effects. Thus, the wearer would not 
have to make a saving throw ifa nymph is seen, 
nor would a dryad try to charm him. Up to 2 HD of 
beings per level of the wearer are affected; others 
are initially disinclined to harm the wearer, though 
they aren't under the headdress’ effect. 

Should the wearer ever try to abuse the power 
of the headdress, its power will be destroyed, and 
the wearer cursed so that any sylvan creature now 
has a hostile reaction. 


Heart 


A magical heart is usually a small piece of gold 
jewelry, % to 1-inch across, and is ordinarily 
found mounted on a thin, decorative chain; 
although the heart may be of any material, even 
stone. It must be worn and a command word spo- 
ken by the wearer to begin any magical effect. 


Beating 
XP Value: 400 GP Value: 2,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
On command, this heart stores the life essence of 
the wearer. This causes the loss of 1 hit point 
immediately, which is transferred into the heart; 
the item then glows a soft red, flashing in time 
with the user's heartbeat. The user is then immune 


to possession (including magic jar spells) and all 
forms of level draining; if reduced to 0 hit points 
or less, the user can be revived with the 1 hit 
point contained in the heart by use of any cure 
wounds spell. A second cure wounds negates the 
effect, returning the hit point to the user. The 
heart offers no protection against death from poi- 
son, however. If the heart is damaged while con- 
taining the life essence, the victim dies, suddenly 
reduced to 0 hit points. The heart may be used 
only once a day, for up to one turn per use. 


Chicken 
XP Value: 200 GP Value: 1,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

This heart is identical to most other magical 
hearts, especially the lion heart. However, 
although the wearer feels courageous, any saving 
throw againstfear automatically fails. When the 
command word is spoken, the victim becomes 
very nervous, fainthearted, and fearful, running 
from any opponent, no matter how harmless or 
friendly, for at least 1d4+ rounds. 


of Hearing 
XP Value: 600 GP Value: 3,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
This heart enables the wearer to hear noise as a 
16th-level thief. However, there is one chance in six 
that it may malfunction; if so, the wearer hears the 
snoring ofa sleeping giant or dragon. The heart of 
hearing functions continuously when worn. 


Tron 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
The Complete Wizard's Handbook 
This is a mechanical heart, magically powered and 
capable of replacing a damaged or aging human 
heart. No surgery is required; the mechanical heart 
is merely placed on the recipient's chest and is 
absorbed into the body. This heart should increase 
the owner's endurance and resistance to disease. 


of Kazgaroth 

GP Value: 10,000 

Hall of Heroes 

When Hobarth came to Corwell, he was drawn 
to the heart of Kazgaroth. This is the stony, 
black heart of the avatar—all that is left after 
Tristan slew him. The heart of Kazgaroth acts as 
a direct channel to Bhaal. It confers no further 


spells on its wielder, who must be a priest of 
1957 


XP Value: 2,000 


aS a 


573 


~ Heart, Lion r 


Bhaal, but it allows the priest to use any spell 
without forgetting it. 

The stone calls appropriate priests to itself if it 
is not in the right hands. All plant and small ani- 
mal life within 15 feet of the stone withers and 
dies within a day. If Bhaal wishes to give specific 
commands to his priest, the stone implants 
images of the command in the priest's mind. 


Lion 
XP Value: 1,200 GP Value: 6,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

When commanded, this heart gives the wearer 
courage. The user gains a +6 bonus to all saving 
throws vs. fear and may make a normal saving 
throw against fear when usually there is none. 
The lion heart functions three times per day for 
one turn per use. If worn by an NPC, the charac- 
ter's base morale score immediately becomes 20. 


Royal 

XP Value: 2,500 GP Value: 12,000 

The Book of Marvelous Magic 
This heart functions as a lion heart in all respects. In 
addition, it enables the wearer to perform certain 
acts as if of royal birth, such as using a throne of 
power. Furthermore, while talking with any castle 
owner, the wearer is effective as though he or she 
had a Charisma of 18. These "royal" effects are con- 
tinuous and apply whenever the royal heart is worn; 
the bonus against fear can be used three times a day 
for one turn per use, as with a lion heart. 


Shekinester's Crystalline 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 7,500 
Monster Mythology 
Shekinester's avatar has a crystalline heart that, if 
taken from her body, allows the user to cast div- 
ination once per week and legend lore onee per 
day—but the user is 1% likely each day to suffer 
an alignment change to chaotic evil, 2% if the 
user is male. 
of Stone 
XP Value: 800 GP Value: 6,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

This heart appears to be and functions as a beat- 
ing heart. However, when the user activates this 
heart, a saving throw vs. turn to stone must be 
made; if it fails, the user and all items carried turn 
into a stone statue. A stone to flesh spell revives 
the victim along with all equipment, including 
the heart of stone. 


Heel of Reunion 


XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 

POLYHEDRON Introductory Issue 
This matched pair of heels can be affixed to any 
footwear. When both heels are used, the wearer 
infallibly knows direction. However, the heels 
are more powerful if separated. If one heel is 
worn by another person, and the other by a sec- 
ond person, the two individuals are always able 
to find each other. They do not know where the 
other is, but the heel points both individuals in 
the right direction 


Helm 


The chief method for moving through space is 
spelljamming, a process that converts magical 
energy into motive force. Spelljamming helms 
are the easiest way to get a ship moving, but not 
the only way. Most helms and magical "engines" 
have a limitation on how large or how small a 
mass they are able move. This sets the limits on 
the size of most space vessels. (For headgear see 
Helmet.) 


Alarm Beacon 


XP Value GP Value 
Helm: n/a 300,000 
Ring: n/a 60,000 


Lost Ships 
Sold by the arcane, this special, major spelljam- 
ming helm is fitted with silent, unlimited range 
alarms. When the helm is in use—and only at 
such times—its direction and (very roughly) its 
distance is apparent to any being holding or wear- 
ing a specialized ring. 

The rings must be fashioned together with the 
helm in question, and cannot be linked to an 
existing helm. Fashioned of adamantite, each is 
fitted with a single, large blue carbuncle. Ifthe 
stone is shattered (AC 4 and has 7 hp) or removed 
from the ring, that ring is forever ruined as an 
alarm beacon. Alarm beacons are silent, but can 
be felt by the wearer, and the stones in them flash 
and pulse visibly when the alarm is "on." At such 
times, any spellcasting attempts by a ring wearer 
are unsuccessful. Material components won't be 
consumed or spells lost to memory, and no spell 
effect will occur. Beacon rings do not block the 
functioning of imbibed potions, spells read from 
scrolls, or the activation of magical items. 


The wearer of multiple beacon rings can dis- 
1963 


ee ee 


574 


Helm, Cloaking 


nN 


cern between one and three different helms; the 
wearing of more than three beacon rings cause all 
such rings to cease functioning until at least one 
is removed. These rings can be worn next to the 
skin any where on the body, and will still function 
normally. 

The arcane do not release the secrets of mak- 
ing alarm beacon helms or rings to anyone, and 
no beacon helm specimens fashioned by neogi or 
others have yet been observed. An alarm beacon 
helm typically costs 300,000 gp with a single 
beacon ring included, plus 60,000 gp per addi- 
tional beacon ring when purchased from the 
arcane. Resale prices tend to be 40,000 gp or 
more, for each component—and of course, with 
any one or two ring and helm combinations, one 
can never be sure that there isn't a third ring out 
there somewhere, worn by someone or something 
dangerous or at least unfriendly. 


Artifurnace 

XP Value: — GP Value: — 
SPELLJAMMER* Campaign Set 
An artifurnace is the ultimate stage of develop- 
ment of the furnace—a magically powered, 
spelljamming device that draws its power from a 
magical artifact. Each is a custom made device 
tailored to contain and siphon energy from a 
specific artifact. Because an artifact is practi- 
cally eternal, the power derived from it is equally 
permanent. 

Once installed, an artifurnace provides SR 5 
for as long as needed. Neither an artifurnace nor 
an artifact can be damaged as long as they remain 
together (though the ship can be destroyed). The 
artifurnace can be destroyed if the artifact is ever 
removed. 

Artifurnaces are extremely rare, on a level with 
artifacts themselves. They have the additional 
problem of attracting the attention of those pow- 
ers tied to the artifact being used. Should an arti- 
furnace be hooked up to the eye of Vecna, 
Greyhawk's immortal lich will likely come look- 
ing for it (or send friends to the various spheres 
the ship visits in order to recover it). No more 
than a double handful of artifurnaces is recorded, 
and almost all of them are destroyed or hidden. 
Where they have appeared, they created insurrec- 
tions, as every captain in the area attempted to 
seize them. 


Bardic 
XP Value: — GP Value: 200,000 
War Captain's Companion 

Found primarily on Iambus ships, vessels used by 
traveling bards, this helm has a musical instrument 
attached to it. As long as a bard is strumming, or 
making music, the ship has the motive power nec- 
essary to propel the vessel as a major helm. Any 
bard character, or a character with a musical profi- 
ciency in the instrument attached to a particular 
bardic helm, can propel the ship. Often, Iambus 
ships have strange and exotic instruments attached 
to their helms in an attempt to prevent theft. 


Cloaking 

GP Value: 350,000 
DRAGON Magazine 159 
Developed by a team of arcane and wizards of no 
small measure, the cloaking helm has once again 
expanded the levels of spelljamming technology. 
Developed ostensibly for the Seekers to aid them 
in their surreptitious information gathering, the 
cloaking helm came into high demand with mili- 
taristic movements across the stars. As word 
leaked out ofthese new helms, assassins appeared 
virtually overnight, slaying many of the wizards 
involved in their creation. Those few who sur- 
vived are scattered about the stars, reclusive as 
many wizards are. 

The cloaking helms are sold through the arcane 
now, but they are making space a treacherous 
place in which to travel. The cloaking helm 
allows a spelljamming wizard to divert power 
from moving the ship to wrapping an illusion of 
empty space about the ship. This prevents the 
ship from being seen from afar. The cloak doesn't 
inhibit a spelljamming wizard from seeing the 
surroundings of the ship, although those on deck 
can see only 300 feet in any direction. 

The only way to detect a cloaked ship, with- 
out ESP, detection, or scrying spells, is by notic- 
ing a refractive effect the cloaked ship has on 
bright light. Ifa cloaked ship passes closer than 
1,000 yards to another ship, the space covered 
by the cloak appears blurry, and light coming 
from behind and through the cloaked ship 
changes colors, creating a slight rainbow effect 
around the edges of the cloaked ship. The effect 
is hard to see at a distance of 1,000 yards, but it 
can be spotted by lookouts expecting trouble 
(give a base 10% chance to spot a cloak, and 


modify according to situations). The cloak can 
1966 


XP Value: — 


a an <n a 


575 


Helm, Death 


> ee 


be maintained for a maximum of three turns a 
day and can be active only when the ship is 
below spelljamming speed. Standard invisibility 
rules apply; ifa cloaked ship attacks using a ram 
or missiles, contact with the illusion causes it to 
dissipate. A cloaked ship cannot attack while 
cloaked (but it gains a +4 on surprise rolls if it 
enters battle cloaked, dispelling the illusion by 
ramming an enemy!). 


Death 
XP Value: — GP Value: 50,000 
Lost Ships 
This rare spelljamming helm appears identical to 
all sorts of helms—that is, it may be a seat of any 
design or style. A death helm drains the lifeforce 
of the being using it to spelljam, precisely as a 
lifejammer does (draining 2d6 hit pints per day of 
operation). 

It has one horrible refinement, however. 
Any intelligent being sitting in the helm must 
save vs. Spell at -3, or be charmed (as the first 
level wizard spell charm person.) The power- 
ful charm makes them intensely enjoy the feel- 
ing of spelljamming and regard the helm as a 
place of comfort and safety. Charmed helms- 
men act normally in all respects, except that 
they resist attempts to remove them from the 
helm. Its magic prevents them from feeling 
any weakness or other ill effects as they waste 
away. Spelljammers in a death helm have been 
known to fight comrades trying to remove 
them—soldiering on at the helm until they 
suddenly crumple and die as the last of their 
lifeforce is taken. 

Any being who successfully saves against the 
initial charm of a death helm senses something 
is wrong or dangerous about the seat, and will 
ever after mistrust it (+2 on all future saves 
against that particular helm's charm, not -3). A 
death helm's charm does not extend beyond the 
seat itself, and is not detectable separate from 
the spelljamming power of the helm itself. In 
spelljamming performance, it is identical to a 
lifejammer, except that it can move spacecraft as 
a major helm. The secrets of making death 
helms are not openly acknowledged by any indi- 
vidual or spacefaring race, but too many of 
these fell devices are found in modern ships for 
this to be a lost art. 


Forge 
GP Value: 500,000 
+100,000 per year 
SPELLJAMMER Campaign Set 
Dwarves are, by nature, nonmagical, yet they 
have large asteroid ships greater than those used 
by humans, elves, or gnomes, powered by magi- 
cal engines they call forges. These are huge 
foundry rooms at the base of the ship where 
dwarves work around the clock, building, carv- 
ing, creating, and forging. 

The basic idea of the forge is the same as the 
spelljammer helm: the conversion of energy into 
movement. In the dwarves' case, the energy is not 
magical as much as it is creative. By building 
items with the forges, the dwarves themselves 
generate the energy necessary to literally move 
mountains across the sky. 

A. forge requires at least 200 cubic yards (2 
tons) for every 50 dwarves involved. For every 
100 dwarves at work, the ship has an SR of 1. The 
fastest dwarven ships, therefore, are the ones that 
give up the most space to theirforges. 

The minimum size of a dwarven ship is 100 
tons, with a maximum size of 700 tons (though 
these are rare). Attempts to transplant forge- 
based technology into human ships have failed 
miserably. The best that can be accomplished is 
that humans can command a dwarven moun- 
tainship with a full crew of dwarves. Both 
mountain and hill dwarves can be found in 
space. Apparently, no other race produces this 
type of energy. 

A side effect of this industry is a large amount 
of trade goods, as the dwarves mine their own 
home to produce new energy and items. These 
range from small metal handicrafts andjewelry to 
swords, armor, and other weapons. A dwarven 
ship almost always has a well stocked armory and 
is very well defended. For every month spent in 
space, the dwarves produce enough goods, metal, 
coins, and swords to bring in 10,000 gp at the 
next landfall. 

A negative side effect is that dwarven ships 
often become "finished," with no new things to 
mine, chip, form, or shape. At that point, the 
colony abandons the mountainship and sets up 
home in a new asteroid, stripping the forge in the 
process. Such abandoned mountainships often 
become the lairs of monsters. 


XP Value: — 


1968 


Do ee 


576 


Helm, Grand 


AY 


Furnace 


XP Value: — GP Value: 100,000 

SPELLJAMMER Campaign Set 
An early and primitive form of spell'jamming 
helm still used in some areas, furnaces take their 
power not from living spell energy but from mag- 
ical items. The items are fed into the furnace (and 
destroyed) to power the ship. Items that cannot be 
destroyed by fire are unaffected and retain all 
spells and powers. 

As arule of thumb, for every 1,000 XP of an 
item, the furnace functions for one week at SR 2. 
On long voyages this can become an expensive 
proposition. The SR can be boosted to 3 by sacri- 
ficing more than one item simultaneously, but 
there is a 25% chance that the furnace explodes 
andcauses 10d10 points ofdamage ina 30-foot 
radius. 

Furnaces are old devices, found mostly on 
ghost ships and crashed hulks. They are thought 
to be earlier versions developed by the arcane, 
then abandoned. They are limited solely to travel 
within a crystal sphere, as exposure to phlogiston 
causes an immediate explosion (20d10 points of 
damage, 45-foot-radius). A chill fire spell reduces 
this to normal devastation. 


« 


Gnomish 
XP Value: — GP Value: 50,000 
SPELLJAMMER Campaign Set 
Gnomish helms should not function. That is, their 
very construction seems to defy the nature of thau- 
maturgical law. In fact, they are impossible. Of 
course, being gnomish, they work anyway. Like 
most of the products of gnomish minds, they 
include a large number of bells and whistles, and 
very little substance. Those that work usually have a 
minor helm contained within, always hidden away, 
disguised to appear to be innocuous and unessential. 

Gnomish helms are large, gaudy, and ornate. 
They occupy at least 1 ton of space, and SR (for 
those that work) is determined solely by the level 
of the priest or wizard at the helm. 

Only about 60% of gnomish helms work 
(because they've had a real spelljammer helm built 
into them somewhere). The remaining 40% are so 
much bunk and hokum. Let the buyer beware. 

Anyone foolish enough to purchase a gnomish 
helm that works should also hire two to eight 
gnomes to serve as technicians. There is a 20% 
chance at any time (usually when you need it 
most) that the helm malfunctions and becomes 
inoperative for 2d4 turns. 

Gnomish helms are treated with well-deserved 
derision among the spacefaring community, and 
are often unloaded on unsuspecting newcomers. 


Grand 
XP Value: — GP Value: 1,000,000 
War Captain's Companion 

The grand helm allows up to four wizards or 
priests to sit and concentrate their magical ener- 
gies to move a ship. The levels of the wizards are 
added together and divided by four, rounding all 
fractions up. This number is the SR of the vessel. 
For example, if four wizards, levels 15, 10, 6, and 
5 were all sitting on the grand helm, the ship 
would have an SR of 9. 

When a ship reaches spelljamming speeds, a 
grand helm turns the ship partially ethereal. This 
allows the ship to travel at double spelljamming 
speeds. At the same time, gravity from a body 
greater than or equal to 200 tons can pull the craft 
out of spelljamming speeds into tactical speeds. 
Since ships smaller than 200 tons cannot be pulled 
out of spelljamming speeds by a ship with this 
helm, the ships might pass near, or even through, 
one another without their crews' knowledge. 


Because of the phasing capabilities of the 
1971 


ge ee ee ge 


577 


Helm, Ki-Helm 


SES oer ee 


grand helm, a ship possessing one can never enter 
the phlogiston. It must be physically carried by 
another, more standard-helmed, spelljamming 
vessel if it is to be transferred to another crystal 
sphere. Because of this limitation, grand helms 
are extremely rare outside Realmspace. 

The grand helm is a very rare version of helm 
that, oddly enough, was never manufactured by the 
arcane. (When asked why they never created a 
similar helm, the arcane, as usual, had no com- 
ment.) The Quad of Thay, a new spelljamming ship 
type, uses the grand helm exclusively. See the Ship 
Recognition Manual in the War Captain's Com- 
panion boxed set for more information. 


Ki-Helm 
XP Value: — GP Value: 800,000 
War Captain's Companion 
The ki-helm can be manned by up to eight ki- 
empowered beings. The helm appears as a large 
onyx circle with the yin-yang symbol inside of it. 
In the middle of the circle, a crystalline octagon 
absorbs the ki energy of those who sit at the helm. 

Around the crystal are eight circles engraved 
into the onyx material ofthe helm. The As-endowed 
helmsmen sit in the circles. Together, the eight 
helmsmen concentrate their inner strength, while a 
ninth person, sitting on the crystalline octagon, 
focuses this power into movement and maneuver- 
ability. Without the focal person, the power of the ki 
is wasted and the ship stands idle. 

For every 20 combined points of ki the helms- 
men put into the helm, the ship's SR increases by 
one point. Anything below the required 10 ki, 
means the ship fails to move. A minimum of 10 ki 
points is necessary to propel the craft (9 points 
are insufficient to allow SR 1, and 19 ki points 
only supplies the ship with an SR of 1). The table 
shows the number of ki points any given oriental 
character at any level can expend into the ki- 
helm. Remember that some of the character 
classes have level limits. 

A character who spends one day on the ki-helm 
must rest one full day before returning, or his or 
her contribution to the total ki is cut in half 
(rounded down). This penalty continues until the 
full day of rest is taken. 

A character can operate the ki-helm for 12 hours, 
or a number of hours equal to the total ki strength 
the character possesses, using the chart below 
(whichever is the lesser). After that, the ki strength is 
completely exhausted for the remainder ofthe day. 


Class Ki Points Possessed 
Barbarian None 
Bushi 1 point only 
Kensai 1 point at 1 st level 
2 points at 2nd level 
2 points per level thereafter 
Monk 5 points per level 
Ninja 3 points per level 
Samurai 1 point per two levels 
Shukenja 2 points only 
Sohei O points at levels 1-2 
1 point at levels 3-4 
2 points at levels 5+ 
Wujen 1 point at levels 1-3 
2 points at levels 2+ 
Yakuza 1 point per level 


Editor's note: For a detailed explanation of fa' and 
of Oriental character classes, see the Oriental 
Adventures rule book. 


Lifejammer 

XP Value: — GP Value: 80,000 
SPELLJAMMER Campaign Set 
A lifejammer is a very specialized, evil type of 
spelljamming helm which feeds off the life 
energy of any individual placed inside. The life- 
jammer can function on any creature with hit 
points, but drains the life out of a creature placed 
inside of it. 

For every day of operation, the lifejammer 
sucks 1d8 hit points from the target. The hit 
points cannot be regained through healing while 
the individual is within the lifejammer. In addi- 
tion, for every day of operation (or fraction 
thereof), the lifejammer's victim must save vs. 
death magic or perish. An individual with good 
hit points and saving throws is preferred, but 
weak characters can be just as useful. 

A lifejammer engine gives a ship an SR as if 
the creature placed within was a wizard using a 
minor helm. A lifejammer drawing energy from 
an 8th-level fighter, for example, operates as ifan 
8th-level wizard was at the helm. 

Lifejammers are believed to be the invention of 
the neogi, who use multiple lifejammers to power 
their mindspider ships. Other evil races, includ- 
ing undead, have been known to use lifejammers 
as well. Good races and characters are very reluc- 
tant to use a lifejammer except in emergencies, 
and then are careful to remove the character from 
the device before his or her life is endangered. 


1973 


z 78 ` 


5 


„5 Helm, Radiant va 


Orbus 
XP Value: — GP Value: 300,000 
SPELLJAMMER Campaign Set 
An orbus is a living being that functions much 
like a series helm on beholder tyrant ships. For 
each living orbus (maximum of five for the typi- 
cal tyrant ship), the ship has an SR of 1. 

Orbi appear as blind beholders, with milky skin 
over all of their eyes. They are pale and practically 
helpless on their own. They have been bred by the 
spacefaring beholder factions to serve and serve 
well—they have almost no wills oftheir own. 

Orbi are usually found near the center of a 
beholder ship, surrounding the Great Mother or 
Hive leader of the ship. If an orbus is slain, the 
SR is diminished by 1, and if all orbi are lost, 
then the ship loses all power. 

A single orbus can create spelljamming energy 
for 20 tons of ship, two to a limit of 40 tons, and 
three or more to a limit of 60 tons. If insufficient 
orbi exist, then the SR ofthe ship is 1. 

Given the simplicity of beholder ships, it 
seems possible that humanoid races could make 
use of the orbus as well, either as a primary or 
backup system. The beholders guard their orbi 
carefully, and would rather disintegrate them than 
see them turned over to other races. The price 
above is what an arcane or beholder of another 
faction would pay for an orbi. 


Pool 
XP Value: — GP Value: 500,000 
SPELLJAMMER Campaign Set 

A recent development of the illithid collective 
mind, apool helm uses the natural life-pool ofthe 
mind flayers to power the ships, as opposed to 
illithids themselves. Such ships have an auto- 
matic SR of 5 and are used primarily as trans- 
ports for illithid Great Old Ones. The pool counts 
as two crew members. Several nautiloid ships 
have been equipped with pool helms and there are 
rumors of larger mind flayer ships, as the pool 
allows larger ships to be powered. Current rumors 
place the maximum size of such a ship at 200 
tons, but this is hearsay and speculation. 


Pump 
XP Value: — GP Value: 600,000 
War Captain's Companion 
The pump is a spelljamming helm that must be fed 
material in order to create SR. The type of material 
placed in apump helm determines the SR this spell- 


jamming engine generates (see the table below). 

Simply stated, one pound of material (10 coins 
or gems) can move a spelljamming ship of up to 
100 tons for one hour. After that, absolutely noth- 
ing is left of the material placed in the helm. (If 
the fuel is flesh, there is nothing left to resurrect.) 
The pump helm cannot digest magical items. 
Spell books, enchanted swords, and artifacts 
placed in the pump are never metabolized. They 
are ejected from the ship after being in the helm 
for over 24 hours. 

A particularly gruesome contraption, the pump 
helm is a creation of nonhumans; basically for gob- 
lins and the goblinkin races. Since the latest Unhu- 
man Wars began, the pump has increased in potency 
as well as popularity. Now, every captain in the 
goblin fleets wants one. The goblinkin's favorite 
fuel is slaves taken in raids throughout wildspace. 


SR 
1 


Material 

Cloth, liquids, paper, plant products, 
rope, stone, wood 

Copper, glass, greek fire, metal 
Bone, ivory, silver 

Crystal, electrum, flesh, leather 
Ceramics, gold, ornamental gems 
Platinum, semiprecious gems 
Fancy gems, precious gems, gems 
Jewels, mithral silver! 
Adamantite? 

' One ounce of mithral lasts one turn. 

? One ounce of adamantite lasts one round. 


CMmAAIDMNF WN 


Radiant 
XP Value: — GP Value: 900,000 
War Captain's Companion 
This helm is used only on ships built by the drow. 
It looks like a crown constructed from the legs of 
a large, poisonous spider, and radiates an aura 
that can be seen only by those possessing excep- 
tional (120-foot) infravision. 

The radiant helm functions as a major helm in all 
important respects. The level (or Hit Dice) of the 
drow helmsman determines the SR the helm gener- 
ates. The helm can be used only on drow ships 
because its construction and operation are inti- 
mately related to the unusual radiation associated 
with the drow homeland. The helm uses the drow's 
natural magical abilities, supplemented by a radia- 
tion source within the craft. Only a drow or another 
innately magical creature can use a radiant helm. 


By using the helm, the helmsman loses all innate 
1977 


, i. ii. 


579 


~ Helm, Series r 


magical abilities until a full sleep period is taken. 

It is believed that all drow ships carry some of 
the cystlike ore found in the cavernous realms of 
the Underdark. The radiation of this ore would 
allow drow items retain their special powers. 
Drow adamantite drills, however, are the designed 
to operate in the light of fireworlds, and are not 
restricted to using either the radiation of the 
Underdark or the power of the radiant helm. 


Series 
XP Value: — GP Value: 75,000 
per linked helm 
SPELLJAMMER Campaign Set 


Series helms are the invention of the illithids 
(mind flayers), but the idea has been adapted for a 
number of races with magical abilities and no 
levels of experience. Series helms look like ordi- 
nary major or minor helms, running from simple 
to complex, but, unlike the spelljamming helms, 
series helms can be linked together, one to 
another, to increase power. 

For each helm in a series manned by a mind 
flayer (or whatever creature the helm is designed 
for), the ship has an SR of 1. Ifthere are three in a 
series, then the ship has an SR of 3. In general, 
mind flayer ships have between two and five series 
helms, though they may not all be occupied. Empty 
helms in a series are ignored in figuring SR. 

Ifa mind flayer in a series helm is slain, then the 
series is broken for one round and the ship loses all 
power and movement. Further, all mind flayers in 
the series must save vs. spell or be slam. 

Series helms vary from species to species, but 
in general they are inferior to spelljammer helms, 
at best able to move 50 tons, on par with a minor 
spelljammer helm. Their lower limitation is a 5- 
ton ship—they cannot move anything smaller. 

Series helms save against all damage on a 3; they 
are not quite as tough as spelljammer helms, but 
nearly. Spelljammer helms cannot work on the same 
ship with operating series helms and vice versa, but 
a spelljammer helm can be installed on a ship that 
previously used a series helm without problem (as 
long as the two do not coexist on the same ship, at 
the same time. Ifthey do, neither function). 

Series helms were developed either by the 
illithids or by the arcane with the illithids in mind 
(accounts vary according to the situation). There 
are other series helms for those social creatures 
with magical abilities, except for the beholders, 
who have found their own solution. 


580 


Spelljammer 
XP Value GP Value 
Major helm: — 250,000 
Minor helm: — 100,000 
SPELLJAMMER Campaign Set 


Each minor and major spelljammer helm allows 
an individual seated upon it to move a large mass 
through space by means of channeling spell 
energy directly into a motive force. The energy is 
somewhat useful for maneuvering a ship, but, pri- 
marily, it provides the push that makes a ship 
move forward (or backward). Maneuvering is 
accomplished through the use ofa ship's sails and 
oars. 

The power of the force is known as the ship's 
rating. A minor helm converts energy at a rate of 
one point of SR for each three levels of experi- 
ence. A major helm converts at a rate of 1 SR for 
every two levels of experience. 

At low levels, the difference between using a 
minor and major helm is small. A 3rd-level wiz- 
ard gives a ship an SR of 1, regardless of whether 
a minor or major helm is used. At higher levels of 
magic use, the decision is much more important. 
A 10th-level wizard, for example, can give a ship 
an SR of 5 with a major helm, but only an SR of 3 
with a minor helm. A quick summary of levels is 
included below. 


Level of 
Wizard Major 
or Priest Helm 

1 


Minor 
Helm 


Smt AMN BR WN 


Seemann iadanranmubR BwWWNNeP Ee 
DANDNAUMUNBRBRWWWNHNNRR REE 


1979 


Helm, Ultimate 


Se a EE E A E A 


Using a helm prohibits any spell use by the 
helmsman within the 24-hour period. As soon as 
a wizard or priest sits in the helm and becomes 
aware of the ship, no spells of any kind may be 
cast until after the wizard has had a chance to rest 
and regain spells. In effect, the helm "drains" the 
helmsman ofall spells the moment it is activated. 

(In fact, this is not precisely what happens. The 
helm attunes itself to the brain patterns of the 
wizard who activated it. Once in synch, the helm 
siphons away any magical energy the moment it 
begins taking shape, not all at once. But until the 
character can rest, thereby breaking the link, the 
energy invested in any spell he or she tries to cast 
is immediately drawn away by the spelljamming 
helm. This effect occurs regardless of range. 
Oddly, the helm can use the energy only if the 
character is seated in the helm. Why the helm can 
draw power from any range, yet gains benefit 
only from a helmsman actually in contact with it, 
is one of the foremost unsolved mysteries of 
spelljamming magic.) 

An individual can use either type of helm for 12 
hours without tiring. For each hour afterward, the 
SR drops by 1, to a minimum of 1. After 24 hours, 
the individual using the helm passes out and is not 
able to use the helm again until fully rested. 

An individual seated on a helm can speak and 
act normally. The sensation of using the helm is 
akin to being immersed in warm water. As a 
result of the magical nature of the helm, a spell- 
jamming wizard or priest using the helm can see 
things around the ship as if standing on the deck. 
The ship becomes an extension of the helmmas- 
ter's body, and responds to his or her control. The 
maneuverability of any vessel is a product of both 
a spelljamming wizard's ability and the maneu- 
verability class of the ship. 

A minor helm can move a ship of up to 50 tons. 
A major helm can move a ship ofup to 100 tons. In 
reality, most ship designers keep their craft under 
the 50-ton range, though there are large men-o-war 
and juggernauts that are larger than 50 tons. 

Only one helm may be in service at a time, 
though often a minor helm is kept as a backup, 
should something happen to the major helm. 

Helms draw their magical energies directly 
from the user, and the speeds they can attain are 
determined by the level (or HD) of the individual. 
All helm-equipped ships travel at the same rate of 
speed over long distances, but their differences 
are apparent at the tactical level. In general, given 


two similar helms, a ship with the more powerful 
spelljamming wizard or priest is a faster ship. 

Helms can be easily installed in any ship, pri- 
marily by lugging them aboard and bolting them 
to the deck. The minimum hull size required for a 
helm is one ton. 

If an individual is slain while using the helm, 
the ship loses all power until a new spelljamming 
wizard or priest takes command. The ship drifts 
at tactical speed in a straight line until someone 
else takes the helm or the ship hits something. 

Major and minor helms are nearly (but not 
completely) indestructible. Their saving throws 
against all attacks are 2. Unfortunately, this pro- 
tection does not extend to the individual seated in 
the helm. Diligent and crafty characters may find 
ways to destroy helms, but the process is not easy 
or quick. 


Ultimate 
XP Value: — GP Value: 500,000 
The Legend of the Spelljammer 

Ultimate helms begin as seeds. Developed at the 
same time as smalljammers, the seeds are kernels 
of magical energy that can endow items with the 
ability to become devices for controlling the 
Spelliammer. (These are the ultimate helms 
hinted at in the original SPELLJAMMER boxed set.) 

The seeds themselves are invisible and almost 
impossible to destroy. At the time of the Flight of 
the Smalljammers, they too were released, to find 


_ their way over time to any number of planets and 


asteroids. 

The seeds ignore living, organic material, but 
stop upon striking suitable, inanimate objects, 
investing them with the power to become ultimate 
helms. As a general guideline, anything that 
becomes an ultimate helm should be fairly com- 
mon, usable by most adventurers (for instance, a 
20-ton stone idol that became an ultimate helm 
would be amusing, but it would certainly pose 
serious problems to an adventurer trying to carry 
it into space to find the Spelljammer). 

The item radiates magic and may gain magical 
abilities according to its type (a sword might 
become +1, or a set of previously ordinary boots 
might become boots ofstriding and leaping). In 
addition, the item grants its user 1 to 10 addi- 
tional magical abilities at the level or Hit Die of 
the user. The abilities may be chosen from stan- 
dard spell listings or rolled randomly. The addi- 


tional abilities are not revealed to the user, but 
1980 


ia i ia ai aia. 


581 


~ Helm, Ultimate r 


instead are discovered through trial and error. The 
appearance and abilities of an item are left to the 
DM, or they may be rolled on the tables below. 

The object that becomes an ultimate helm radi- 
ates a strong, pure magical field, easily detected, so 
much so that it overwhelms nearby detectable 
magic. For instance, the holder of the helm (in the 
form of a sword) can have a cloak of protection, 
but the cloak does not register as magic because it 
is overwhelmed by the sword's magical field. The 
range of domination of nearby magic is 10 feet. 

Regardless ofits other powers, an ultimate 
helm provides a +1 to initiative, but only for the 
user, allies and partners do not gain this ability. 
The helm does not have any sentience per se; 
helms operate on their own agenda much like the 
Spelljammer itself. Strange fortunes tend to enve- 
lope the holder of a helm, and sudden incidences 
occur that cause the helm bearer to travel into 
space—either willingly or unwillingly. Since 
"strange fortunes" are the bread and butter of 
most adventurers, PCs may not even notice the 
change. The DM may want to pitch particular 
events in the players' way to show that the 
enchanted item is more than it seems and that its 
fate is tied to the Spelljammer s own. 

The downside of an ultimate helm ,is that, once 
grasped, worn, or carried, it cannot be removed. 
Much like a cursed item, the user cannot discard 
it—if attempts are made, the character finds that 
it is bound to the chosen user. A remove curse 
does not remove the item, for it is not truly a 
curse—it has more positive benefits than nega- 
tive. Dispel magic works, but any attempt to dis- 
pel the enchantment must be made at twice the 
holder's level or Hit Die. A successful dispel 
causes the helm to merely drop away, and then it 
will lay in wait for another candidate. A wish or 
limited -wish spell used to remove an ultimate 
helm will destroy it. Finally, of course, killing the 
user also allows an ultimate helm to be removed. 

An ultimate helm does not need to be of the 
same generation as the Spelljammer, and, in fact, 
it could have been lying in wait for generations 
before joining with the Spelljammer. 

Random Ultimate Helm Generation: DMs 
are encouraged to flex their creativity in regard to 
ultimate helms, but as a source of ideas (and for 
those who are experiencing a sense of despair), 
this table can be used to generate items for use as 
ultimate helms. The listing here includes 20 typi- 
cal items that may be used as ultimate helms. This 


is not a complete list, only starting place. Adja- 
cent to each item is the "base power" an 
enchanted item should have. 


Roll Item Base power 

1 Slippers of Spider Climbing 
2 Boots of Elvenkind 

3 Hat of Disguise 

4 Gloves of Missile Snaring 
5 Cloak of Displacement 

6 Jewelry of Shielding 

7 Ring of Protection+1 

8 Wand of Metal Detection 
9 Staff Serpent 

10 Stone Luckstone 

11 Statuette Figurine of Wondrous 

Power 

12 Eye Cusps Eyes ofthe Eagle 
13 Wings of Flying 

14 Dagger Dagger +3 

15 Sword Sword+1 

16 Warhammer War Hammer +2 

17 Armor Leather +1 

18 Armor Plate Mail +1 

19 Armor Elven Chain Mail 
20 Helm Helm of Comprehending 


Language and Reading 
Magic 


As you can see, the item used as an ultimate 
helm is never a "charged" device that must be 
recharged when all its powers are drained. Keep 
this in mind when developing ultimate helms. 

In addition to the listed (and detectable) pow- 
ers above, an ultimate helm can have up to 1d10 
extra powers. These are not readily detectable ini- 
tially, but rather appear over time—frequently 
during a crisis situation. (In fact, the DM may 
choose to have the extra powers appear to save a 
character's hide.) The first usually appears 2d10 
days after the initial bonding, and each extra 
power 2d10 days after that. 

Roll 1d10 to determine the number of addi- 
tional powers, then roll on the table below. Roll 
1dlO for each power, adding the previous sum of 
all numbers rolled. That is, if three powers are 
called for and the first roll is a 5, the second a 6, 
and the third a 10, the item would have powers 5, 
11 (5+6), and 21 (11+10). The more powerful 
abilities are at the high end of the scale and only 
available to those helms that already have a num- 


ber of abilities. 
1980 


Ci a ae a aaa a 


582 


Helm, Ultimate 


ne ee ee 


If their normal spell equivalents are lost upon 44 Protection from Normal Missiles 
entering the Spelljammer (no summoning earth (I/day) 
elementals there, for example), then the powers 45 Slow (1/day) 
of the ultimate helm are lost as well. Remember, 46 Tongues (2/day) 
the ultimate helm is destroyed when the player 47 Water Breathing (2/day) 
using it finally bonds with the Spelljammer. 48 Wraithform (1/day) 
Items in bold are reversible. 49 Confusion (1/day) 
50 Detect Scrying (2/day) 
Roll Additional Power 51 Dimension Door (1/day) 
1 Affect Normal Fires (2/day) 52 Fear (1/day) 
2 Burning Hands (2/day) 53 Fire Shield (1/day) 
3 Change Self (3/day) 54 Fumble (2/day) 
4 Charm Person (1/day) 55 Ice Storm (1/day) 
5 Chill Touch (2/day) 56 Improved Invisibility (I/day) 
6 Detect Magic (3/day) 57 Minor Globe of Invulnerability (1/day) 
7 Feather Fall (2/day) 58 Polymorph Self (1/day) 
8 Friends (2/day) 59 Rainbow Pattern (1/day) 
9 Gaze Reflection (2/day) 60 Shout (1/day) 
10 Hold Portal (2/day) 61 Solid Fog (1/day) 
11 Jump (2/day) 62 Stoneskin (1/day) 
12 Light (3/day) 63 Wall of Fire (1/day) 
13 Magic missile (1 /day) 64 Wall of Ice (1/day) 
14 Protection from Evil (I/day) 65 Wizard Eye (1/day) 
15 Read Magic (3/day) 66 Airy Water (2/day) 
16 Shield (2/day) 67 Animate Dead (1/day) 
17 Spider Climb (2/day) 68 Cloudkill (1/day) 
18 Sleep (1/day) 69 Cone of Cold (1/day) 
19 Wall of Fog (1/day) 70 Conjure Elemental (1/day) 
20 Alter Self (1/day) 71 Fabricate (2/day) 
21 Blindness (1/day) 72 Feeblemind(I/day) 
22 Detect Invisibility (3/day) 73 Hold Monster (1/day) 
23 Flaming Sphere (1/day) 74 Passwall (1/day) 
24 Invisibility (1/day) 75 Stone Shape (1/day) 
25 Knock (3/day) 76 Wall of Iron (1/day) 
26 Mirror Image (2/day) 77 Wall of Stone (1/day) 
27 Misdirection (2/day) 78 Antimagic Shell (1/week) 
28 Scare (1/day) 79 Conjure Animals (1/week) 
29 Shatter (1/day) 80 Death Spell (1/week) 
30 Strength (2/day) 81 Disintegrate (1/week) 
31 Web (1/day) 82 Globe of Invulnerability (1/day) 
32 Whispering Wind (2/day) 83 Invisible Stalker (1/day) 
33 Wizard Lock (2/day) 84 Move Earth (I/day) 
34 Blink (I/day) 85 Part Water (1/day) 
35 Delude (I/day) 86 Stone to Flesh (1/day) 
36 Feign Death (I/day) 87 Charm Plants (1/day) 
37 Fireball (I/day) l 88 Delayed Blast Fireball (1/day) 
38 Fly (I/day) 89 Duo-Dimension (1/day) 
39 Gust of Wind (2/day) 90 Phase Door (1/day) 
40 Haste (1/day) 91 Power Word, Stun (1 /day) 
41 Infravision (3/day) 92 Reverse Gravity (1/week) 
42 Lightning Bolt (1 /day) 93 Statue (1/week) 
43 Nondetection (1/day) 94 Teleport Without Error (1/week) 


1980 


583 


~ Helmet of Alignment Change es 


95 Vanish (1/week) 

96 Antipathy/Sympathy (1/week) 

97 Maze (1/week) 

98 Prismatic Wall (1/week) 

99 Symbol (1/week) 

00 Power Word, Kill (1/day) (Also, send 


out for pizza to celebrate, because you 
have just rolled 11 tens in a row ona 
10-sided die. Perhaps you should 
replace that die....) 


Helmet 


Helmets, or helms, are parts of a warrior's basic 
protection. Failure to use proper headgear leaves 
the character open to called shots by opponents or 
to disadvantages at the DM's option. Most helms 
must be removed when making rolls for hearing 
sounds. Optionally, great helms and closed-face 
helmets, when worn with plate armor, grant a +2 
bonus against breath weapons and spells affecting 
the eyes. 


Roll Helmet Type 

01-06 Armet 
07-13 Bassinet 

14-19 Cap 
20-25 Closed-Face Helmet 
26-31 Coif 

32-38 Gladiator Helmet 

39-44 Great Helm 
45-50  Hanburi 

51-56 Helmet 

57-63  Jingasa 

6469 Kabuto 

70-75 Legionary Helmet 

76-81 | Open-Face Helmet 

82-88 Sallet 

89-94 with bevor 

95-00 with removable visor 

of Alignment Change 

XP Value: — GP Value: 1,200 


DUNGEONS & DRAGONS Rules Cyclopedia 
This item looks like a fancy helmet. When the helm 
is put on, it immediately changes the wearer's 
alignment (the DM should determine the new 
alignment randomly). This device can only be taken 
off by using a remove curse spell, but the wearer 
will resist its removal. Once the helm is removed, 
the wearer's original alignment returns. As an 
option, the DM may allow the character to remove 
the helm by performing a special task or adventure. 


Wate 
willis 


Sasa 
A ies 
rams | 


-Aft a" 
Me 


. 
“ 


ks 
Aile 


ER 
te 


R 
a 


eu es i ai 
Ea lee 
Armet by Wayland 
XP Value: — GP Value: — 


DUNGEONS & DRAGONS Master Set 
This is a tightly fitting helmet with bevor (chin 
piece) and movable visor, crafted by the leg- 
endary Immortal armorer Wayland Smith. Some 
claim that it makes the wearer invulnerable to all 
attacks. 

The armet is not active when acquired. It is 
activated if the user wears it while slaying any 
large or huge dragon. The user may be aided in 
the battle, but must either inflict at least 1A the 
damage needed to kill the monster or personally 
deliver the blow that slays the beast. 

The user may acquire the knowledge of powers 
from a previous user or by experimenting. Powers 
are activated by moving visor, bevor, and other 
pieces, while saying "Wayland aid me." 


Suggested Powers: (All abilities are cast at 
20th level.) 
Fly 
Invisibility 
Immunity (Duration 40 turns; Effect com- 
pletely blocks 1st- to 3rd-level spells; receives 
one-half damage from weapons of less than 
+3 enchantment.) 
-8 AC bonus 


1982 


584 


Helmet of Cirulon 


ee a S A 


Suggested Handicaps: 

The user takes double damage from all fire 
attacks (fire having elemental dominance over 
earth) as long as artifact is owned. 

After the third time the immunity power is 
used, the user's alignment shifts one point 
toward lawful good (no saving throw). 
Suggested Penalties: 

Casts a random Combat spell (from Artifact 
Table 12) at the user. 

Suffer a -4 permanent penalty to Intelligence. 
All missiles used fall to half normal range. 


Athena's 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 10,000 
Legends & Lore 
Athena's avatar is armed with several special 
items. The most important of these is a helm that 
creates an antimagic shell within 10 feet of her. 


of Blonding 

GP Value: 2,500 
DRAGON Magazine 30 
Proof that some things have not changed is the 
helm of blending. When this helm is placed on 
the user's head, it turns his or her hair blond for a 
week. This has no effect, other than the fact that 
some acquaintances may not recognize the char- 
acter immediately. It is probably safe to surmise 
that the helm was created at Fran's request, since 
Orlow the Indolent was said to be bald. 


XP Value: 500 


of Brilliance 

XP Value: 2,500 GP Value: 60,000 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 

When discovered, a helm ofbrilliance appears to 
be nothing more than an ordinary piece of armor 
for head protection—a helmet, basinet, sallet, of 
iron or steel. When worn, it functions only upon 
utterance of a special command word. When so 
empowered, the true nature of the helm is visible 
to all. The helm is actually armor +2. It is made 
of brilliant silver and polished steel, and set with 
10 diamonds, 20 rubies, 30 fire opals, and 40 
opals—each stone is of large size and each is 
magical. When struck by bright light, the helm 
scintillates and sends forth reflective rays in all 
directions from the gem-tipped spikes of its 
crown. The jewels' functions are: 


Diamond: Prismatic spray (as the 7th-level 
wizard spell). 

Ruby: Wall of fire (as the 5th-level priest 
spell). 

Fire Opal: Fireball (as the 3rd-level wizard 
spell). 

Opal: Light (as the Ist-level priest spell). 


Each gem can perform its ability just once, but 
the helm may be used once per round. The level 
of the spell is doubled to obtain the level of the 
spell with respect to range, duration, and other 
considerations. Until all ofits jewels are magi- 
cally expended, a helm ofbrilliance also has the 
following magical properties when activated: 

e It glows with a bluish light when undead are 
within 30 feet. The light causes pain and 1d6 
points of damage to all such creatures except 
skeletons and zombies. 

The wearer may command any sword he or 
she wields to become a sword of flame. This is 
in addition to any other special properties it 
may have. This takes one round to take effect. 
The wearer may produceflame like a 5th-level 
druid. 

The wearer is protected as if a double-strength 
fire resistance ring were worn, but this protec- 
tion cannot be augmented by further magical 
means. 

Once all of its jewels have lost their magic, the 
helm loses all of its powers, and the gems turn to 
worthless powder. Removing a jewel destroys 
it—they may not be recharged. 

If a creature wearing the helm is attacked by 
magical fire and fails to save vs. magical fire, 
another saving throw for the helmet must be 
attempted, without magical additions. Ifthis fails, 
the remaining gems on the helm overload and 
detonate, inflicting on the wearer whatever accu- 
mulated effects the gems normally have. 


of Cirulon 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 10,000 
Dragon Keep 
This helm is the same color as the dragon that 
presented it and only functions for its owner. The 
helm enables the wearer to communicate by 
telepathy with the dragon that bestowed it. This 
form of telepathy has an unlimited range, but 
does notfunction ifthe wearer and the dragon are 
in different planes of existence. 


1986 


, a a a 


585 


Helmet of Comprehending Languages and Reading Magic 


pp, Cee ance ee EE Ce aa 


of Comprehending Languages 
and Reading Magic 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 12,500 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 

Appearing as a normal helmet, a helm ofcompre- 
hending languages and reading magic enables its 
wearer to understand 90% of strange tongues and 
writing and 80% ofall magical writings. (Note that 
the percentage figure applies even if the character 
does not know the language or if the writing is 
unintelligible. Understanding does not necessarily 
imply spell ability.) This device is equal to a normal 
helmet ofthe type accompanying Armor Class 5. 

When worn by a bard, this helm grants the 
ability to understand 95% of strange writings and 
90% of magical writings. Ifthe bard is 10th level 
or higher, the chance to understand magical script 
rises to 95%. 


of Creation 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 10,000 
DRAGON Magazine 40 
The wearer of this helm is capable of creating 
illusionary stone, wood and iron constructions 
such as walls and floors (area-limit, 10 square 
feet for each), furniture, doors, and traps. 
Although doors and traps are seen as illusions, 
they will not function. Unlike the other helms, the 
illusions generated by this helm can only affect 
1d8+4 beings, but those who fail a saving throw 
respond to the illusion as if it was real (walls or 
doors stop them, floors or furniture support their 
weight). All such illusions will last for 1d4 turns. 


of Darkness 

GP Value: 45,000 

The Magister 

A helm ofdarkness, or nighthelm, appears as an 
ancient, battered iron helm (even when newly 
enchanted), with a great black sapphire of no less 
than 10,000 gp value set in the brow, and 12 black 
opals set around the lower edge of the helm. The 
helm radiates a strong dweomer. 

Donning the helm instantly informs the wearer 
of its powers (it may be worn by all classes and 
alignments), which are as follows—darkness 15' 
radius may be called forth 99 times from the great 
gem (the darkness lasts nine turns and cannot be 
banished earlier by the wearer's will). Each of the 
opals, whenever the wearer fails a saving throw, 
automatically protects him or her once against the 
following attack forms (the gem is consumed in the 


XP Value: 2,500 


process)—death spells (including rays such as 
those of the beholder and catoblepas), disintegrate, 
magicjar, and all energy drain, petrification and 
polymorph attacks. Removal from the helm 
destroys the opals. The great gem cannot be 
recharged, and explodes if any attempt is made to 
remove or destroy it, disintegrating (as in the spell, 
save at +1) everything in a 40-foot radius. 

The helm crumbles into dust when all of its 
gems are gone, but until that time the wearer 
commands the following powers—the ability to 
see in darkness (including the magical sort) as 
though normal daylight prevails; immunity to 

fear and related spells, the aging of ghosts and 
the "awe" power of dragon auras; the ability to 
pass without trace during the night (from twilight 
to twilight). This latter ability is not usable under- 
ground. The helm also grants the ability to build a 
curtain of blackness, which can veil the sight 
against vision-related enchantment and charm 
attacks such as the gaze of a vampire, dire charm, 
and similar spells; speak with the dead, usable by 
the wearer once a day, as a 9th-level priest (if dif- 
ferent beings don the helm within a 24-hour 
period, this power can be used only once, not 
once for each wearer); chill metal, three times a 
day, lasting seven rounds, and affecting up to 900 
gp weight of metal and four separate targets; 
lower temperature in a 15-foot radius, lasting 
four turns, from 10 to 40°; protection causing all 
cold-based attacks to do half or (if save made) no 
damage, even including magical cold and such 
unusual forms as the chilling touch of a lich. 


of Disguises 

GP Value: 2,500 
DRAGON Magazine 40 
This helm allows the user to form an illusionary 
disguise, altering his or her garb, height, weight, 
and facial features. Changes of height and weight 
are limited to no more than 4 inches and 20 
pounds, respectively. After conjuring the illusion, 
the user is able to move and participate in melee 
but cannot cast spells or otherwise engage in 
deep concentration. The duration is 1d6 half-hour 
periods. 


XP Value: 500 


of Dragons 
XP Value: 2,500 GP Value: 25,000 
Curse of the Azure Bonds 
The helm ofdragons was forged by the elves of 
Myth Drannor, long ago when that city was in 


Sp Nae E E 


586 


~ Helmet, Dragonhelm os 


>| 
r] 
` 
=~ 


yy 


full flower. It was intended first as a weapon 

against Tyranthraxus, pointing out his secret 

base, but has proved to have other powers as 
well. 

The helm is in reality a golden circlet with a 
green gem at the center. The gem contains the 
image ofa dragon rearing on its hind legs. Upon 
placing the helm on one's forehead, the wearer 
knows the abilities of the device. 

The helm ofdragons provides the following 
abilities: 

e Locates, within a range of 500 miles, the site 
of the Pool ofRadiance (currently in Tyran- 
thraxus's temple in Myth Drannor). 

e Provides the wearer with +2 to all saving 
throws involving Tyranthraxus. 

e Allows the wearer to communicate with all 
dragons in their native tongues. 

e Makes the wearer immune to any and all 
attacks by living dragons (but not dracol- 
iches). 

e Provides AC 2 to the wearer. 

The device functions only when Tyranthraxus 
is in the Realms. If he is slain or banished, the 
device goes dormant until the threat returns. 


Dragonhelm 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 25,000 
DRAGON Magazine 86 
Dragonhelms were created for warriors who 
wished to have some of the special aura and pow- 
ers of dragonkind. All such helms appear to be 
normal, metal helmets until they are worn, when 
they take on their true form of steel, inlaid with 
precious metals and gemstones. Some of these 
helms have dragonlike features or engravings 
upon them. All fighters, priests (but not druids), 
and bards are able to wear dragonhelms. When 
worn, a dragonhelm confers infravision on the 
wearer to a range of 60 feet, and the wearer's 
senses are so heightened by the helm's powers 
that invisible, ethereal, astral, out-of-phase, and 
hidden objects become detectable at a range of 10 
feet per the user's level (if multi-classed or dual- 
classed, the user's highest level as a fighter or 
priest is considered). The wearer may also radiate 
fear once per day at will. The aura causes all 
beings (even allies) within 120 feet to save vs. 
spell, with Wisdom bonus applicable, or flee 
from the wearer in terror for 3d4 rounds. This 
fear aura has no effect on beings with 6 or more 
Hit Dice or levels. 

The helm counts as armor +3 against all head 
attacks (such as those made by vorpal weapons), 
and saves as hard metal with a +3 bonus to the die 
roll. It does, however, have certain disadvantages. 
Because certain items like dragon scales and 
bones are incorporated into the helm's manufac- 
ture and the helm draws power from them, certain 
elements of a dragon's personality will begin 
showing up in the wearer. After keeping it in con- 
tinuous use for one month (putting it on every 
day, even if for only a moment), a wearer begins 
to hoard money and valuables, refusing to part 
with even the smallest copper piece unless 
absolutely necessary. A wearer begins to spend 
less and less money on equipment, food, and 
clothing. Instead, a wearer will try to get other 
people to purchase such items, or may turn to 
theft and robbery ifthe character is neutral or 
evil. A wearer is also less likely to respect or even 
listen to the opinions of others, grows increas- 
ingly egotistical, and tends to want to lead rather 
than to follow. After a wearer uses the helm con- 
tinuously for two months or longer, a saving 
throw vs. spell must be made each time the drag- 
onhelm is worn or the wearer becomes perma- 


nently afflicted with megalomania. 
1992 


gt pee ee 


588 


~ Helmet, Harrowhelm J, 


If the wearer comes within 120 yards of a true 
dragon (excluding wyverns and chimera, but 
including oriental dragons, faerie dragons, and 
the like), the wearer will find such a creature irre- 
sistible and obeys the dragon's commands as if 
charmed. This effect usually ends immediately if 
the helm is removed, but if the wearer has used 
the helm continuously for more than a month, the 
charm effect lasts for 1d4 days even after the 
helm is removed. If the wearer has megalomania, 
the charm is permanent. Dragons generally know 
all about dragonhelms, and sometimes leave them 
lying about in their hoards for unwary adventur- 
ers to find. 


Enlil's 

XP Value: 8,000 GP Value: 65,000 
DEITIES & DEMIGODS Cyclopedia 
In battle, this avatar wears a war helm that is not 
affected by anything. When Enlil is wearing it, he 
doesn't feel any shock from objects hitting it, nor 
is he ever injured by a blow striking the helm. In 
melee, when attacked by only one weapon, that 
weapon is forced to hit the helm (no saving 
throw). 


Golo's Helm of Telepathy 

XP Value: 3,500 GP Value: 45,000 
1993 Collector Card 356 
Golo's version of the helm oftelepathy duplicates 
certain psionic powers without expending PSPs. 
With this helm, Golo can establish contact, 
Mindlink. ESP, Empathy, and False Sensory Input 
without a power check. Golo must still concen- 
trate his effort into using the helmet, which pre- 
cludes him from taking any other action in the 
round. 


Griffon Mane 

XP Value: 2,500 GP Value: 45,000 
DRAGONLANCE Adventures 
Discovered in the ruins of Xak Tsaroth, the helm 
was given to Flint Fireforge by his friend Tassle- 
hoff. The helm is of dwarven manufacture and is 
decorated with a horse's mane. Having always 
claimed he was allergic to horses, Flint refused 
to admit that the long white tassel had ever 
belonged to a horse. To his dying day, he insisted 
that it was from the mane ofa griffon, and so the 
helm received its name. The helm fits only 
dwarves, and improves the AC of any dwarf 
wearing it by 1. 


of Halav 
XP Value: — 
The Milenian Empire 
This greater artifact has 265 Power Points and 
recharges at the rate of 20 per turn. 

The helm was created by Halav. Five circles 
past, it miraculously appeared on the head of 
Dagos during the ceremony in which he was 
named Lord High Priest of Milenia. It was cre- 
ated as a weapon to be used to defeat the schemes 
of the Immortal Vanya, who plots the destruction 
of the Empire. 

This finely crafted helm is made of gold and 
completely covers the wearer's head. The visor 
looks like the face of Halav. A crest of bright red 
feathers adorns it. 

Powers: The wearer gains the following 
powers: 

Detect Lie (50 PP): The wearer knows when 
someone is lying. 

Mind Barrier (80 PP) 

Sunfire (85 PP): Golden light bursts from the 
helm, affecting everyone within 120 feet as if 
a power word blind spell were cast. 

Teleport (50 PP): Operates in spite of spell of 
preservation. 
The wearer of the helm ofHalav is filled with 
hatred for beastmen, gnolls, goblins, ogres, orcs, 
and trolls. The user interprets their actions in the 
worst possible light and attacks these creatures 
upon the slightest provocation. Also, for every 
100 PP used, the wearer ages one circle. 

The wearer suffers an extra 1d6 damage and a 

2 on saving throws vs. cold-based attacks. 
Whenever the sunfire power is used, the wearer 
has a 75% chance of suffering 1d10 points of 
damage. 


GP Value: — 


Harrowhelm 
XP Value GP Value 
Type I: 2,000 17,500 
Type II: 2,500 20,000 
Type III: 3,000 22,500 
Type IV: 3,000 22,500 
DRAGON Magazine 91 


When first found, this helm appears to be a nor- 
mal steel helmet; it radiates magic, however, and 


* faint runes may be seen on the inside rim. The 


consecutive casting of read magic and compre- 
hend languages spells will inform the reader of 
the general nature of the helm, but not its disad- 


vantages. A legend lore ability or spells such as 
1997 


Bye mee ee 


589 


Helmet of the Insect 


identify, wish, and the like will also work in this 
fashion. 

Any nonpsionic character who is allowed to 
wear metal armor can use this device. The wearer 
gains the ability to generate a psionic blast (attack 
strength 101 points) up to three times per day, but 
only once in any single round. The wearer will 
also find that the helm grants the use of certain 
psionic disciplines for as long as it is worn. The 
disciplines granted vary from one harrowhelm to 
another: 


Roll Type Psionics Power and Abilities 
Granted 

01-50 Type I One devotion, usable with 15 
strength points a day. 

51-85 Type II Two devotions, usable with 30 
strength points a day. 

86-98 Type III Three devotions, usable with 
45 strength points a day. 

99-00 TypeIV Two devotions and one sci- 


ence, usable with 45 strength 
points a day. 


The specific psionic disciplines for a helm may 
be randomly determined or assigned by the DM. 
The level of mastery at which these powers oper- 
ate equals one-half the current wearer's level (or 
one-half the highest level, if multi-classed), 
rounding down. Thus, a Ist-level character cannot 
make any use of this helm beyond psionic blast 
generation until 2nd level is attained. The wearer 
of a harrowhelm is also immune to all psionic 
attacks except for psionic blast, but the helm 
grants a +6 bonus to saving throws against this 
attack form. 

The harrowhelm has two disadvantages. First, 
it attracts the attention of all psionic creatures 
within a half-mile radius as soon as it is put on 
(whether or not any of its powers are immediately 
used). Though it does not necessarily anger such 
creatures, it will be easy for these beings to locate 
and track the helm wearer as long as they stay 
within this range; they need only concentrate 
mentally to do this. The second disadvantage 
manifests itself when a psionic character puts on 
the helm. The unfortunate wearer is immediately 
attacked by a 100-point-strength mind thrust. The 
helm's magic also neutralizes any psionic defense 
that the attacked character has, so some form of 
psionic disability may result from the attack. The 
attack will be repeated at the start of every subse- 


quent round, though the wearer may remove the 
helm at any time to prevent more than one attack. 


of Horror 
See Circlet, Diadem of Doom 


of the Insect 


XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 82 
This helm is a shimmering green, eyeless hood 
with holes for the nose and mouth. It is made of 
a thin but surprisingly strong fabric, and is held 
in place by an intricate clasp in the form of 
interlocking mantis heads. To use the helm, it 
must be placed over the head of a human or 
demihuman and secured with the clasp. One 
round later, two hideous bug eyes appear on 
either side of the hood and two vicious looking 
mandibles extend from either side of the 
wearer's mouth. The helm gives a character 
360° vision and grants a +1 bonus to surprise 
rolls. Wearing the helm also allows the wearer 
to understand the speech of insects, although it 
does not impart the ability to speak with them. 
Once a day, the wearer can cast summon swarm 
as if a 9th-level wizard. Finally, a character 
wearing the helm can bite with the mandibles 


for Id4 points of damage. 
1998 


E 590 ` 


Helmet of Petra 


> SS E i 


Joukahainen's Golden 
XP Value: 1,250 GP Value: 12,500 
Gods, Demigods, & Heroes 
This helm's intrinsic value is 12,500 in gold and it 
warns the user of magic being performed upon 
him or her by throbbing against the forehead. 


of Liaison 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 10,000 
War Captain's Companion 
These helmets can be purchased for both the 
antennae of triangulation and the spelljammer 
detector magical items. For more information on 
the helmet's purpose, please see those descrip- 
tions. Without either of the companion pieces, the 
helmet ofliaison is useless. 


of Light Seeing 
XP Value: 80 GP Value: 400 

DUNGEON Magazine 45 
The arcane have sold the drow countless helmets 
with solid metal visors equipped with specially 
tinted glassteel. Inside their ships, the drow can 
remove their helmets or lift their visors. On deck, 
with the visors down, drow have normal (human) 
vision (although wearing the helmets with the 
visor down gives everything a yellow or amber 
appearance) and are completely unhampered by 
normal or magical light. Drow crews outfitted 
with these helmets don't need crystal domes over 
the top decks and weapon emplacements of their 
ships. 

These visored helmets were given the inoffen- 
sive name of helmets of light seeing by the 
arcane, who sell them to any interested buyers for 
400 gp each. The helmets’ relatively low price 
can be attributed to their dirt-cheap method of 
manufacture. The visors are the only part of the 
helmet that is magical; these are prepared 50 at a 
time and later attached to normal helmets. The 
arcane are happy to buy "used" helmets from PCs 
and others for a fair price of 125 gp each. Smart 
PCs should realize that used helmets will be 
cleaned up and resold by the arcane to drow in 
other spheres. 


of Opposite Alignment 
XP Value: — GP Value: 1,000 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 
This metal hat looks like a typical helmet. If 
detect magic is used, the emanations are indeter- 
minate. Once placed upon the head, however, its 


curse immediately takes effect, and the alignment 
of the wearer is radically altered—good to evil, 
neutral to an absolute commitment (LE, LG, CE, 
CG) as radically different from the former align- 
ment as possible. Alteration in alignment is men- 
tal and, once effected, is desired by the individual 
changed by the magic. 

Only a wish or alter reality spell, can restore 
the former alignment, and the affected individual 
will not make any attempt to return to it. A pal- 
adin must undergo a special quest and atone, if 
the curse is to be obliterated. Note that once a 
helm of opposite alignment has functioned, it 
loses all of its magical properties. 


of Petra 
XP Value: — GP Value: — 
The Milenian Empire 

This greater artifact has 300 Power Points with a 

recharge rate of 20 per turn. The artifact was cre- 
ated by Petra to help defeat the plots of Vanya, 

who means to cause the dissolution of the Milen- 
ian Empire. A few circles ago, the helm miracu- 
lously appeared on the head of Helentia during 
the ceremony in which she was named Lady High 

Priestess of Milenia. 

The helm is made of purest silver, and totally 
conceals the head of its wearer. The visor looks 
like the face of Petra. 

Powers: The wearer gains the following powers: 
Detect Charm (20 PP): The wearer knows if 
anyone within 120 feet is under the influence 
of a charm person spell or similar magical 
effect, including hypnotize. 

Detect Danger (40 PP) 
Detect Lie (50 PP): The wearer knows when 
someone is lying to her. 

Mind Barrier (SO PP) 

Moonstrike (60 PP): Silver light bursts from 
the helm, affecting everyone within 120 feet, 
as ifa power word stun spell were cast. 
Teleport (50 PP): Operates in spite of the spell 
of preservation. 

The wearer is very short tempered with any 

who show cowardice. Ifthe wearer fails a save vs. 

spell, he or she attacks them for one round in 
order to "punish" them. Also, for every 100 PP 
used, the wearer ages one year. 

The wearer suffers an extra 1 d6 damage and a 
-2 penalty to saving throws vs. fire-based attacks. 
Whenever the moonstrike power is used, the 
wearer has a 50% chance of being stunned. 


2003 


Sp a eee 


591 


Helmet of Reading 


ee ee” 


of Reading 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 10,000 
DUNGEONS & DRAGONS Rules Cyclopedia 

The wearer is able to read any writing, regardless 
of the language or the magical properties of the 
script. This does not allow characters to use spell 
scrolls unless they can do so normally. The helm 
is fragile, however, and is destroyed if the wearer 
is killed. Any hit on the wearer could (10% 
chance) destroy the helm. 


of Seabreathing 
XP Value: 800 GP Value: 8,000 
Moonshae 
This is a limited version of the helm ofunderwa- 
ter action. It allows the wearer to breathe under- 
water, at any depth, but does not enhance 
movement or vision. 


RAS 


© NY 


sw ~ x 


of Selnor 
XP Value: 1,200 GP Value: 12,000 
Treasures of GREYHAWK 
This helmet can only be used by warriors with a 
Charisma greater than 15. It gives its wearer a +1 
AC bonus and the ability to cast a special charm 
spell once per day. When this power is used, the 
victim receives a save vs. spell. Failure means the 
charm can be broken only by dispel magic or a 


limited wish. A charmed character can be recog- 
nized by purple eyes, and a distinctive personal- 
ity, which has become that ofa northern barbarian 
(living for battle, drinking heavily, bragging of 
past glorious victories, and generally behaving in 
an boisterous manner). 

Charmed characters follow the orders of the 
helm wearer without question and with no 
thought of their former life. A charmed victim 
uses all normal abilities, and does not receive 
additional saving throws if forced to act against 
his or her previous alignment. 

The helm is made of sculpted bronze, has a 
large amethyst set above the brow, and stag horns. 
The gem flashes purple when the charm is cast. 
The helm was forged long ago, before the Rain of 
Colorless Fire. It was worn by Selnor, a barbarian 
chieftain, during raids on civilized outposts. He 
used the helm to recruit new raiders to his cause 
and to unite the feuding barbarian leaders. When 
his raids became too troublesome, an army was 
raised to crush him. He was defeated at the Battle 
of Tremnos, and his barbarian horde was scat- 
tered. The helm was taken as a trophy and kept 
unused until the Invoked Devastation, when it 
was lost in the Sea of Dust. 


of Sensory Protection 

XP Value: 2,500 GP Value: 21,000 
DRAGON Magazine 179 
This full helmet protects the wearer with a +4 
saving throw bonus vs. light, gaze, and sound 
attacks, and gas attacks that require inhalation. It 
is of no help against poisons other than gaseous 
ones. 


Shukenja 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 13,000 
DRAGON Magazine 126 

This helm may be of any oriental type (kabuto, 
hanburi, or jingasa), and may be worn by any 
character permitted a helmet. When worn, it 
gives the protection afforded by the shukenja 
spell mental strength. In addition, the wearer of 
the helm may meditate for two hours a day 
(double if the character can already meditate). 
In combat, the helm gives the wearer's head AC 
-2, and, if the wearer is striking to subdue 
instead of kill, a+1 advantage on both attack 
and damage rolls. 


2008 


a a a E EAE 


592 


Skull of Death 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 10,000 
DRAGON Magazine 5 
This is a huge, charred, and bejewelled dragon 
skull that is worn like a helmet. The wearer may 
mentally control any undead characters (up to 3 
Hit Dice in number) at a range of 30 feet. Other 
powers granted the wearer are the finger ofdeath 
and animate dead spells, and only one of these 
two powers can be used in a 10-round time span. 
The wearer regenerates damage at the rate of 5 
hit points per day, even if killed. 

Ifthe wearer is killed, he or she continues to 
regenerate 5 hit points each day until the total 
number of hit points reaches 1. At that instant, the 
wearer "comes to life." If beheaded, or if the skull 
of death is removed during the process, the user is 
dead, and cannot be raised through the use of the 
skull of death. 


of Subterranean Sagacity 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 10,000 
DRAGON Magazine 58 

This magical helmet, also known as the dwarven 

detector, comes in only one size and fits any 
dwarf's head tightly but comfortably. It appears 
much like a normal great helm, and has some of 
the same basic characteristics (gives AC 2 protec- 
tion to the head, but allows vision in only a 60° 

arc to the wearer's front). When worn by a dwarf, 

it bestows upon the wearer the following bene- 
fits: 

Quickness and efficiency in detecting facts 
about an underground setting are improved, so 
that a dwarf need only spend one round (at most) 
concentrating on detection of some fact, instead 
of as much as one turn. Any attempts to detect 
specific facts are made with a bonus of +1 to the 
die roll. The chance of detecting "grade or slope 
in passage" increases to 100%, as does the chance 
of detecting "new construction, passage, or tun- 
nel." The chance of detecting "sliding or shifting 
walls or rooms” is raised to 5 in 6, and the chance 
of detecting "traps involving pits, falling blocks, 
and other stonework" and of determining approx- 
imate depth underground are 4 in 6 (use 1d6, not 
1d4, for these rolls). 

It is possible for a gnome, halfling, or other 
small humanoid to wear the helmet. But because 
it doesn't fit as tightly on nondwarves, the magi- 
cally enhanced impressions are not transmitted 
accurately. Gnomes, halflings, and other similar 


Helmet of Telepathy . 


creatures attempting to use the helmet must sub- 
tract 2 from die rolls to determine success. Thus, 
a gnome wearing the helmet has the chance of 
successful detection reduced to 60%, 50%, 40% 
and 30% respectively (use 1d10 forall determi- 
nations). A halfling wearing the helmet has only 
a 25% chance of success at determining an up 
grade or down grade (1 in 4 instead of 3 in 4), 
and a 30% chance (use 1d10) of determining 
direction. 

The dwarven detector acts as a normal helmet 
at all times when its subterranean detection pow- 
ers are not being used. 


of Telepathy 

XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 35,000 

DUNGEON MASTER Guide i 
This sturdy metal helmet appears to be a normal 
piece of headgear, although it radiates magic if 
detect magic is used. The wearer of a helm of 
telepathy is able to determine the thoughts of 
creatures within a 60-foot range. There are two 
limitations to this power—the wearer must know 
the language used by such creatures (the racial 
tongue is used in thoughts in preference to Com- 
mon); and there cannot be more than 3 feet of 
solid stone, '4-foot of iron, or any solid sheeting 
of lead or gold between the wearer and the crea- 
tures. 

The thought pickup is directional. Conscious 
effort must be made to pick up thoughts. The 
wearer can communicate by language with any 
creature within range if there is a mutually known 
speech, or emotions may be transmitted (empa- 
thy) so that the creature receives the emotional 
message of the wearer. 

If the wearer of the helm wants to implant a 
suggestion (as the 3rd-level wizard spell), that 
may be attempted as follows—the creature 
receiving the suggestion gains a saving throw vs. 
spell with a -1 penalty for every two points of 
Intelligence lower than the telepathist, but a +1 
for every point of Intelligence higher than the 
wearer of the helm. If Intelligence is equal, no 
adjustment is made when the saving throw is 
rolled. 

In Ravenloft: Undead with a low Intelligence 
or better can deliberately project thoughts, which 
a mind reading character can detect. Usually, the 
creatures send false, reassuring messages. 
Undead cannot project thoughts when surprised 


or caught unawares. 
2011 


593 


~ Helmet of Teleportation os 


of Teleportation 
XP Value: 2,500 GP Value: 30,000 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 
This is another helmet of normal appearance that 
gives off a magical aura if detected. Any charac- 
ter wearing this device may teleport once per day, 
exactly as a wizard—the destination must be 
known, and a risk is involved. If the wearer is a 
wizard, the helm's full power can be employed, 
for the wearer can then memorize a teleportation 
spell, and use the helm to refresh his or her mem- 
ory so the spell can be repeated up to three times 
upon objects or characters and the wizard is still 
able to personally teleport by means of the helm. 
As long as the wizard retains a teleportation spell 
uncast, he or she can personally teleport up to six 
times before the memory of the spell is lost, and 
even then a usage of the helm remains. 


of Underwater Action 

XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 10,000 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 
When this helm is viewed, it is indistinguishable 
from a normal helmet. However, detection reveals 
it to be magical, and its possessor is able to see 
and breathe underwater. Visual properties of the 
helm are activated when small lenses are drawn 
across the device from compartments on either 
side. These allow the wearer to see five times far- 
ther than water and light conditions allow for nor- 
mal human vision. (Note that weeds and 
obstructions block vision in the usual manner.) If 
the command word is spoken, a helm ofunderwa- 
ter action creates a globe of air around the 
wearer's head, and maintains it until the com- 
mand word is spoken. Thus, the wearer can 
breathe freely. 


of Underwater Vision 
XP Value: 700 GP Value: 3,500 
BLACKMOOR* 
This helm allows the wearer to clearly see to a 
distance of one quarter mile in any water, as long 
as the view is not blocked by rocks, reefs, plants, 
or other physical obstructions. 


of Valor 
XP Value: 4,200 GP Value: 45,000 
The Complete Book of Elves 
This item appears as a typical elven winged helm, 
but radiates enchantment/charm if a detect magic 
spell is used on it. Originally inspired by those 


battle leaders who walked unflinching through 
hails of enemy arrow fire, a helm ofvalor enables 
its wearer to ignore missile fire. However, in 
order to do so, the users of these helms must have 
implicit trust in both themselves and the helm. 

When a wearer first tries to use a particular 
helm, he or she must make a successful Wisdom 
check to attune with it. Ifthe check is unsuccess- 
ful, the helm does not function for the user until 
the individual's Wisdom score has changed for 
better or worse, allowing another check. 

A user who rolls a successful Wisdom check 
may attempt to harness the helm's powers. The 
next time someone successfully attacks the 
wearer with a missile weapon, he or she may 
make another Wisdom check to avoid all but one 
point of damage, no matter what the usual dam- 
age of the missile. 

If this second Wisdom check fails, the wearer 
suffers the maximum damage the missile can 
inflict. The check is made for every missile fired 
at a wearer during combat, and the modifiers 
listed below do not apply until the next combat. 

If the second Wisdom check is successful, the 
wearer gains a +1 to the Wisdom check for the 
next combat. Note: This applies only to the next 
combat in which enemies attempt to harm the 
user. The helm does not work during sparring 
practice or training. A user who fails a Wisdom 
check picks up a -1 penalty for the next three 
combats, while learning to trust in the powers of 
the helm again. No matter how often the user suc- 
ceeds in the Wisdom check, the bonus can never 
exceed 19; a roll of 20 always fails. 

Helms of valor provide no defense against 
melee weapons (although hurled daggers, axes, 
and other propelled melee weapons count as mis- 
sile weapons), nor do they offer any protection 
against spells such as magic missile. Magic mis- 
siles, including enchanted arrows, affect the Wis- 
dom check by -1 per +1 of the enchantment. 

The helm is usable by warriors, priests, and 
psionically empowered individuals. As with most 
helms, it is not usable by either wizards or thieves 
who wish to practice their craft. 


ofWaterdeep 
XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 15,000 
FORGOTTEN REALMS Campaign Set 
The helms of the Lords of Waterdeep have an 
undetectable magical enchantment upon them 


that prevents the use of divination spells (includ- 
2016 


ee ee ee 


594 


Helmet, Wyrmhelm 


ee ef 


ing ESP and detect lie) on the wearer while they 
are in use. It is impossible to determine the 
wearer's thoughts, alignment, or identity while 
she or he is wearing this helm. Rumors float that 
the helms are tied to a powerful illusion that also 
distorts the height and weight of the wearer and 
his or her voice in a random fashion. Thus, 
attempts to discern Larissa's curves or Mirt's 
massive form, are all for naught. One halfling 
rogue has even claimed to be a secret Lord of 
Waterdeep, however, his immediate disappear- 
ance has made it difficult to prove or disprove 
that claim. In addition, many of the powerful of 
the City of Splendors wear their own additional 
protection to keep the curious and indiscreet 
Spellcasters at bay. 


of 40 Watt Brilliance 
XP Value: 250 GP Value: 400 
DRAGON Magazine 156 
This sturdy iron helmet is surmounted by a crys- 
tal bulb with a metal filament inside. Its magical 
powers can be used only by a warrior with an 
Intelligence score of less than 6. The helm func- 
tions primarily when the DM becomes fed up 
watching PCs with Intelligence scores in the 
upper teens ignore the painfully oblivious. For 
example, when the party has spent an hour and a 


half trying unsuccessfully to damage a monster 
that has made no attempt to fight back, the 
wearer of the helm might suddenly be inspired to 
say, "D-uh, hey fellas, maybe it's ah illoozhun!" 
Whenever the helm is used, a dim light flickers, 
briefly, in the bulb on top. 


of Weaponry 
XP Value GP Value 
Type I: 2,000 10,000 
Type II: 1,000 5,000 
Type IM: 1,500 7,500 
DRAGON Magazine 40 


Any nonmagical, hand held weapon may be cre- 
ated with this helm. After one round of concen- 
tration, and if the intended victim fails the 
saving throw, the illusionary weapon can be 
wielded as if it existed, causing regular damage 
with normal hit probability. Note that weapon 
restrictions that apply to certain character 
classes still apply—a wizard cannot conjure up 
an illusionary sword. 


Roll Helm Type 

01—50 Type I helms ofweaponry are usable to 
transform an existing weapon into a 
larger, more effective weapon of the 
same general type; a dagger can be 
turned into a short sword, a short sword 
into a long sword, a long sword into a 
two-handed sword. The duration of the 
illusion is 3d4 rounds. 

Type II helms of weaponry enable the 
user to create a small, one-handed 
weapon such as a dagger or hand axe. 
The duration of this illusion is Id8+1 
rounds. 

Type III helms ofweaponry enable the 
user to create a larger hand held weapon 
such as a sword or battle axe. The dura- 
tion of this illusion is Id4+1 rounds. 


51-80 


81-00 


Wyrmhelm 
XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 20,000 
IMAGINE Magazine 29 
This helm is cast in the form of a snarling drag- 
onhead, so elaborate and stylized as to be utterly 
useless as armor. However, its wearer can under- 
stand the tongues of all dragonkind and cast 
charm monster on any dragon once a week, and 
command dragons three times per day. 


2019 


a 595 7 


~ Helmseeker = 


Helmseeker 
XP Value GP Value 
Accelerator: 100 1,000 
Ballista, Heavy: 50 500 
Ballista, Light: 25 250 
Ballista, Medium: 35 350 
Bombard, Iron: 90 900 
Bombard, Stone: 60 600 
Catapult, Heavy: 60 600 
Catapult, Light: 30 300 
Catapult, Medium: 45 450 
Great Bombard, Iron: 270 2,700 
Great Bombard, Stone: 180 1,800 
Greek Fire: 150 1,500 
Jettison, Heavy: 70 700 
Jettison, Light: 35 350 
Jettison, Medium: 55 550 


War Captain's Companion 
The helmseeker is a specially enchanted missile 
fired from a large, ship-mounted weapon. Any 
large ship-mounted weapon with a range greater 
than 1 can use helmseeker rounds. 

Helmseekers are unlike normal missiles in 
that they lock onto and move toward spelljam- 
ming ships. The missile moves at SR 6 and MC 
A, just like a ship, and in the missile movement 
part of the combat round. When fired, the mis- 
sile moves toward its target. After moving three 
hexes, the helmseeker begins tracking. Once 
within three hexes of a helm in its forward arc, it 
locks onto the helm's magical emanations. It 
moves directly toward the target, making any 
turns necessary to take the shortest route. Ifit 
enters the hex of a ship it makes an attack using 
the weapon's base THACO. If it hits, the ship 
takes damage and the helmseeker is expended. If 
it misses, in each following missile movement 
step it immediately targets on the nearest helm 
in its forward arc. Ifno target appears, the mis- 
sile moves in a straight line. Since it tracks on 
helm magic, it is unaffected by screening, such 
as fog, gas, or smoke. 

Helmseeker greekfire rounds are possible and 
can be created for a catapult or a ballista. The 
greekfire moves at the helmseeker speed, but 
causes greekfire damage. 

A favorite tactic for captains targeted by a 
helmseeker is to move behind another, slower 
ship, in order to make the helmseeker lock in on 
the slower craft, or to hide behind a debris field. 


Hinge 

Hinges are simple devices that allow doors and 
windows to swing open while remaining attached 
to a supporting wall. They commonly are made 
from brass, leather, or iron. Hinges molded from 
precious metals are almost nonexistent. Magical 
hinges can either replace present hinges, or be 
placed over the hinges already in place. 


of Opening 

XP Value: 700 GP Value: 3,500 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

This handy item is an average dungeon hinge. If 
placed over an existing hinge on any door, the 
door can then be opened easily by anyone (no 
check required). Any locks upon the door unlock 
automatically when the door is opened. However, 
opening a door that has a hinge ofopening trig- 
gers most door traps unless they are removed by 
other means. Once applied, the hinge ofopening 
cannot be removed except by a knock spell. 


of Shrieking 

XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
This hinge appears to be and functions as a hinge 
ofopening but with one additional effect. When 
the door is opened, the hinge squeaks loudly, 
attracting the attention of any monsters within 
120 feet, plus one additional wandering monster, 
which arrives within one turn. Once attached, the 
hinge cannot be removed except with a remove 
curse. 


Hold of Holding 


XP Value GP Value 
10'x10'x10': 4,500 50,000 
20'x10'x10': 5,000 100,000 
20'x25'x10': 5500 150,000 
40'x25'x10': 6500 250,000 
50'x30'x10': 7,500 350,000 
50'x40'x10' 10,000 500,000 
50'x50'x10' 15,000 750,000 


War Captain's Companion 
The hold ofholding is actually a knocker that one 
bolts on the door of the cargo bay. When this item 
is placed on a door inside a ship, it creates a por- 
tal to an interdimensional space. The number of 
knocks and the command word must be known in 
order to enter this special interdimensional space. 


The room inside appears as the rated size, but 
2023 


> nas a a aa 


596 


~ Symbols, Prismal's Holy g 


from outside, the room and the walls appear to be 
the size the room was before the knocker was 
attached. This is due to the interdimensional 
space created within the room. Beings can inhabit 
both the interdimensional space and the actual 
room without danger of suffocation. 

Those within the actual room cannot leave the 
room as long as the door to the interdimensional 
space is open. (The door becomes impassable.) 
Those within the interdimensional space can 
leave provided the knocker is still attached to a 
door and the door is not currently open (exposing 
the original room). 

Because of its nature, this magical item ceases 
to function in the phlogiston, rendering the mate- 
rial in the interdimensional space unavailable 
until the ship again enters a crystal sphere. Each 
hold ofholding is irrevocably tied to a specific, 
interdimensional place. So, when someone's hold 
of holding is stolen, the contents are also 
acquired. 


Roll Size Volume 
01-20 10'x10'x10' 1 ton 

21-40 20'x10'x10' 2 tons 
41-60 20'x25'x10' 5 tons 
61-70 40'x25'x10' 10 tons 
71-80 50'x30'x10' 15 tons 
81-90 50'x40'x10' 20 tons 
91-00 50'x50'x10' 25 tons 


Holy Symbol 


Most faiths have a holy symbol, a sign that serves 
as a representation of the god and the faith. This 
symbol is usually duplicated in wood, glass, or 
precious metals and carried by priests of the god. 
Ordinary followers of the god may also carry the 
holy symbol. 

Every priest character should know what his or 
her holy symbol looks like. The DM can either 
decide, or let the player of the priest design it, 
subject to the DM's approval. 

In a temple ofa god, three priests, second level 
or higher, stand over an empty water basin and 
perform a ritual of prayer. They pray for the god's 
blessing and protection for an entire hour. At the 
end of that time, they each cast a spell, and do so 
simultaneously—one casts sanctuary, the second 
casts protection from evil, and the third casts 
purify food and drink, which requires a material 
component—some object with the god's symbol. 


of Greyhawk 
XP Value: 300 GP Value: 3,000 
GREYHAWK Adventures 
Hung from a gold chain, this golden symbol was 
enchanted to symbolize the power of its home 
city. The symbol gives a wearer the combined 
effects of bless and protection from evil spells, 
which can be called upon once a day. 


Larmacian 

GP Value: 3,000 
DRAGON Magazine 39 
This special holy symbol is composed of an alloy 
first discovered by the priest Larmac. The symbol 
allows priests to become more attuned to their 
deities, allowing them to receive two additional 
Ist-level spells per day. Also, any lawful-aligned 
priest gains two additional questions for a com- 
mune spell and has his or her base chance for suc- 
cess ofa divination spell increased by 10%. The 
symbol may be used by all priests, but for charac- 
ters of 3rd-level or lower, there is a 40% chance, 
each use, that the priest goes insane. 


XP Value: 300 


Prismal's 
XP Value GP Value 
Celestian: 1,000 5,000 
Fharlanghn: 1,000 5,000 
Lathander: 1,000 5,000 
Paladine: 1,000 5,000 
Silvanus: 1,000 5,000 


New Item 

After an in-depth investigation of the geometry of 
holy symbols, Prismal discovered that most holy 
symbols had shapes that varied (often signifi- 
cantly) from their original designs. If the geome- 
try of the holy symbol is properly attuned to the 
deities' specific superfluid wave patterns, the 
priest is able to use a small portion of the deity's 
power to perform simple functions without hav- 
ing to petition the deity for power. 

After his study, Prismal found five followers of 
five different deities who were willing to test his 
theory. The symbols he was able to perform tests 
on were those of the deities Celestian and Fhar- 
langhn (of Oerth), Lathander and Silvanus (of 
Toril), and Paladine (of Krynn). 

When used by a priest of the appropriate faith, 
Prismal's holy symbols allow priests to perform 
the following: 

e Turn undead as though he or she were four 


levels higher. 
2026 


> i ait a iia ae 


597 


Holy Symbol of Ravenkind 


e Increases the effectiveness of bless/curse, 
chant, and prayer spells by +1. 

e The priest gains maximum hit points from an 
aid spell. 

e Augury and abjure accuracy increases by 
15%. 

e Cast speak with dead as though four levels 
higher. 

e The DM has more leeway with a commune 
spell, possibly offering complete sentences to 
answer a character's question, or allowing an 
additional question. 

e Saving throws against quest spells suffer a -6 
penalty and are treated as though cast by a 
priest four levels higher. 

e Raise dead and resurrection spells allow the 
recipient two resurrection survival rolls if 
applicable. 


of Ravenkind 
XP Value: 300 GP Value: 3,000 
RAVENLOFT 
The holy symbol ofRavenkind is an ancient, plat- 
inum medallion that was once worn by the High 
Priest of Ravenloft. It is a powerful, lawful good 
symbol. 

The holy symbol is shaped like the sun, with a 
large crystal embedded in its center. Around the 
crystal are many holy symbols of light and truth. 
When presented forcefully to any undead crea- 
ture, the medallion adds +2 to a priest's turn 
undead roll. When presented against vampires, 
however, it flares with the light ofthe sun for 
1d10rounds.Rememberthatvampiresare 
destroyed by exposure to direct sunlight for 10 
rounds. Vampires cannot move or attack while the 
medallion flares. Other creatures are not affected 
by the medallion, which can only be used once 
per week. 


of Ravenkind II 
XP Value: 300 GP Value: 3,000 
RAVENLOFT Campaign Set 
This ancient platinum medallion was once worn 
by the high priest of Castle Ravenloft in Barovia. 
The priest lived (and died) before Strahd made 
his pact with darkness and cursed the entire land. 
The medallion is a powerful holy symbol for law- 
ful good. The holy symbol is shaped like the sun, 
with a large crystal embedded in the center. Sym- 
bols of light and truth surround the crystal. When 
forcefully presented toward any undead creature, 


z 598 > 


the medallion adds +2 to the priest's die roll to 
turn the creature. When presented against vam- 
pires, itflares with the lightofthesun for 1d10 
rounds. The medallion can only give off a burst of 
sunlight once a week. 


Holy Terror Hockey Stick 
XP Value: 5,000 GP Value: 45,000 
DRAGON Magazine 72 
In the hands of any character other than a jock, 
this weapon performs only as a hockey stick +2. 
In the hands of ajock, however, it is a +5 weapon 
that knocks out 1d6 of the opponent's teeth on a 
natural roll of 19 or 20. This occurrence reduces a 
character's Charisma by one point, or reduces a 

monster's biting damage by one point. 


Hood of Servitude 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
Secrets of the Lamp 
When placed on any flying creature, this falcon's 
hood charms the creature into serving the owner 
of the hood. It grows or shrinks to fit any flying 
creature from a sparrowhawk to a roc, and it is 
not limited to avians. Intelligent creatures can 
make a saving throw vs. spell to avoid the effect. 


2030 


Horn, Ngona 


Hook of Adherence 


XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
DRAGON Magazine 73 

A hook ofadherence is a hemisphere (circumfer- 
ence about 10 inches) of hard but flexible mater- 
ial similar to tire rubber. A steel hook is 
embedded in the round side. When the flat side is 
placed against a fairly flat, smooth surface, and 
the command "adhere" is spoken, the object 
sticks to the surface with a strength equal to a 
wizard's lock. The command "dishere" causes it 
to release. Smaller versions are often found. This 
item has obvious uses in a kitchen or closet, but 
could also be useful to a thief. It does not work in 
extreme heat or cold, however. 


Hoop of the Roller Hoopers 
XP Value: 6,000 GP Value: 30,000 
DRAGON Magazine 134 
Once this hoop is set in motion, it can only be 
stopped by the person using it. The hoop cannot 
be grasped, and has AC -2 and 35 hp if it is 
attacked by an opponent of the jester using the 
hoop. It unerringly deflects incoming missiles as 
if the user had a protection from normal missiles 
spell cast upon him or herself. Additionally, the 
hoop blocks 10 hp of magic missiles cast against 
the user per round, and reduces all damage from 


giant-hurled boulders and siege-engine missiles 
by half, if they strike the user. Damage-causing 
spells with areas of effect (like fireballs) can pen- 
etrate the hoop's defenses to harm the jester, but 
even that damage is reduced by 1 hp per die of 
damage. Harmful gases are dispelled within 5 
feet of the user. When the hoop performs these 
functions, it moves so fast it becomes a blur. In 
addition to these powers, the hoop deflects oppo- 
nents' hand held weapons to such a degree that it 
is equal to bracers ofdefense AC 2. 

If both the skates ofthe Roller Hoopers and the 
hoop are owned, the combined effect of using 
these two objects is to add another +1 to the 
user's initiative die roll. 


Horn 
Horns are the calcified protrusions on many her- 
bivorous animals found throughout the world. 
When hollowed out, they can be used to hold 
water, smoke powder, food, or spell components. 
(For musical horns, see Wind Instrument.) 


Cornucopia 

GP Value: 5,000 
DRAGON Magazine 39 
This item appears to be a giant ram's horn that 
has been hollowed out. When the proper word is 
spoken, fresh vegetables and fruit tumble from 
the horn, in quantities sufficient to feed 10 
people for one day. By the use of another com- 
mand word, wine, water, or ale gush forth to 
quench the thirsts of up to 10 people for one day. 
The item is usable once per day. There is a 10% 
chance for each use that the food or drink is 
spoiled and therefore inedible. Characters who 
eat the spoiled substance must save vs. poison or 
be incapacitated for 1d4 days and suffer a 1d3 
point drop in Constitution and Dexterity for an 
additional 1d2 days. 


XP Value: 350 


Ngona 
XP Value GP Value 
Fire Resistance: 1,000 5,000 
Silent Moving: 1,000 5,000 
Underwater Breathing: 1,000 5,000 


DRAGON Magazine 189 
This is a short piece of antelope horn that has 
one of a variety of powers. While the powers are 
determined by the DM, they often imitate those 
of minor, miscellaneous magical items. Some 


horns allow the bearer to breathe underwater, 
2034 


a 599 . 


_ Horseshoe of Fleetness 


allow silent movement as boots ofelvenkind, or 
confer the benefit of fire resistance, as the ring 
of the same name. Each horn has only one 
power, and the power is never destructive or 
overwhelming. 


Horseshoe 

In the wild, horses wear down their hooves as 
fast as they grow. Domestic horses, on the other 
hand, saddled with the weight of riders and 
equipment, wear hooves more quickly. Without 
protection, a horse could rapidly become lame. 
A horseshoe is nothing more than an iron bar, 
flattened, hammered into a "U" shape, and 
nailed tightly to the bottom of each hoof. As 
long as nails of the proper length are used, the 
nails cause no discomfort to the animal. With 
horseshoes, a mounted animal can travel far- 
ther, faster, and longer. 


of Fleetness 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 3,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
When worn by any horse, these items allow the 
steed to move at double normal rate when com- 
manded by the rider. 


of Flying 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 2,500 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
When worn by any horse, these items allow the 
steed to fly at the rate of 18 per round. There are 
four horseshoes, usually found as a set, but some- 
times they are scattered. 


of the Gray Waste 
XP Value: 1,500 GP Value: 3,000 
DRAGON Magazine 47 
These four horseshoes are found in sets and 
appear to be normal, iron shoes. They emanate 
dimly ifdetect magic is used. When the first of 
the shoes are physically moved (by means of 
physical contact or a spell), the shoe turns jet 
black in color and then appears to be made of 
some foreign, unknown material. (If all four 
shoes are moved simultaneously, the black shoe is 
determined randomly.) If a sage is consulted, or 
legend lore or a similar sort of spell is cast on the 
single shoe, there is a slim chance of it being 
identified as an object native to the middle lower 
plane called the Gray Waste. The black horseshoe 
emits a strong aura of magic and a dim aura of 


evil, if those qualities are detected, but the other 
three shoes remain as before. 

When all four of these shoes are attached to the 
hooves of a normal horse of any type (but not a 
mule or donkey), the horse is magically trans- 
formed into a nightmare (see the MONSTROUS 
MANUAL accessory) with 33 hit points. This crea- 
ture surprises on a 1-5 (1d6) and in combat 
attacks all material life within a 30-foot radius. If 
it slays the life within that space, it disappears 
into the Astral Plane, horseshoes and all, presum- 
ably to return the horseshoes to the Gray Waste. If 
it is slain, the corpse assumes the form of the 
original horse, wearing three normal horse- 
shoes—the black one disappears. 

If a character is sitting on the horse's back 
when the final shoe is attached to a hoof, he or 
she is thrown by the nightmare immediately after 
the transformation and suffers 3d6 points of dam- 
age from the fall. When the nightmare first 
appears, it breathes smoke, with the effects as 
outlined in the MONSTROUS MANUAL accessory, 
before attempting to attack with fangs and 
hooves. 


of Luck 

XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
Escape from Thunder Rift 
This iron shoe appears identical to any other 
well-made horseshoe. A horseshoe ofLuck, how- 
ever, never rusts, it always appears to be in excel- 
lent condition. It faintly radiates magic if a 
Spellcaster uses detect magic on it. Anyone bear- 
ing this horseshoe gains a +1 to all saving throws. 
A horse shod with one of these shoes can never 
go lame. 


Obsidian 
XP Value: 50 GP Value: 500 
Black Courser 
Made from obsidian, when this pair of black 
horseshoes is placed on any horse, the beast 
becomes totally black and completely invisible 
during nighttime hours. However, if the creature 
ever takes so much as 1 point of damage, the 
shoes shatter like glass. 


of Petrification 
XP Value: — GP Value: 900 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
When a horse is shod with these items, there is 


no immediate effect. However, as soon as the 
2040 


I ee 


600 


Hourglass, Brindletople's Time Bomb 


SS ee LE SY 


steed is mounted, the horse, rider, and all 
equipment immediately turns into a stone 
statue (no saving throw). The horseshoes then 
become nonmagical. A stone to flesh spell 
turns either horse or rider back to flesh, but not 
both at once. 


of Speed 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 10,000 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 

These iron shoes come in sets of four, like any 
ordinary horseshoes, but they are magical and 
never wear out. When affixed to a horse's hooves, 
they double the animal's speed. There is a 1% 
chance per 20 miles traveled that a shoe will drop 
off, and, if unnoticed, the horse's speed drops to 
150% normal rate. If two or more are lost, speed 
returns to normal. 


LS gpm ais 


of a Zephyr 
XP Value: 1,500 GP Value: 7,500 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 
These iron shoes can be affixed like normal 
horseshoes, but they allow a horse to travel 
without actually touching the ground. Among 
other things, this means water can be crossed— 
passed over without effort—and movement is 
possible without leaving tracks on the ground. 


The horse is able to move at normal speeds, and 
it does not tire for as long as 12 hours' continu- 
ous riding per day when wearing these magical 
horseshoes. 


Hourglass 

An hourglass is an instrument used to measure 
the passage of time. It consists of two bulbous 
glass globes connected by a narrow passage. 
Sand passes from the topmost bulb, through the 
narrow section, into the lower globe. These 
globes are held together by a wooden frame that 
is itself held together by twine and screws, or nuts 
and bolts. 


Auquhol's 
XP Value GP Value 
Type I: 750 10,000 
Typell:950 10,000 
Type III: 1,150 40,000 


IMAGINE Magazine 12 
These magical items are named after their origi- 
nal creator. The hourglasses come in three types 
and are traditionally shaped, constructed of lead 
crystal andjade. The sands are actually the pow- 
dered bones of nilbogs (See the FIEND FOLIO 
Tome). 

A wizard who wants to create one of these use- 
ful items must cast an enchant an item on both 
the powdered bones and the structure of the hour- 
glass itself. A scroll is then created that bears one 
of the extension spells and then this is burnt in a 
new silver tureen. Once the ashes are cold, they 
are mixed with the powder and sealed in the hour- 
glass. Finally, a permanency is cast over the 
whole assembly. 

Once constructed, each hourglass will act, once 
per day, as an extension spell of the type used in 
the construction. 

The components of an extension I hourglass 
cost 1,500 gp, an extension IT hourglass cost 
3,000 gp, an extension II hourglass cost 6,000 
gp. They require the bones of one, two, and three 
nilbogs respectively. 


Brindletople's Time Bomb 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 10,000 
1993 Collector Card 353 
This magical item is in the form of an hourglass. 
When Brindletople places a certain amount of 
sand in the hourglass and then flips it over, he 


activates its magic. The hourglass can hold from 
2041 


601 


~~, Hourglass of Fire and Ice Se 


one minute's to one hour's worth of sand. When 
the sand runs out, the time bomb detonates. How- 
ever, unlike a typical time bomb, Brindletople's 
version automatically triggers a wild surge rather 
than a 5Sth-level fireball. This version of the time 
bomb is reusable. 


of Fire and Ice 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 10,000 
Tome of Magic 
This small, wooden-framed hourglass looks quite 
ordinary, but radiates invocation/evocation magic 
if detected. Half these hourglasses contain red 
sand and half enclose blue sand. 

An hourglass containing red sand in the lower 
portion enables a Spellcaster to cast fire-based 
spells with increased potency: +1 per die of dam- 
age. Further, victims suffer a -1 penalty to all 
saves against such spells, and even saving throws 
against illusions of fire are made at -1. 

When the hourglass is tilted, the red sand flows 
slowly through the aperture, turning blue as it 
does so. The hourglass takes six turns to fill with 
blue sand. When the blue sand has filled it, all 
cold-based spells cast by the owner of the hour- 
glass have +1 per die of damage. Victims also 
suffer a -1 penalty to saving throws against cold- 
based spells, including saves vs. illusions ofcold. 

The hourglass may be inverted to recreate the 
red sand, with a corresponding flip in the effects 
after six turns. The hourglass may be inverted up to 
three times per day. However, with every inversion 
ofthe hourglass there is a 1% chance that it breaks, 
spilling its sands and losing its magic forever. 


Obedient 
XP Value: 1,500 GP Value: 7,500 
DRAGON Magazine 30 
The obedient hourglass was developed by Orlow 
to flow at any rate he desired. It will complete its 
cycle in as little as 10 seconds or as long as 10 
days to drain. If it receives no orders, it acts as a 
normal hourglass, passing its sand from top to 
bottom in exactly one hour. 


of Seeing 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 10,000 
Saga of the Shadow King 
Somewhat similar to a crystal ball, this glass 
offers visions of the past when the red sand is 
allowed to run through. Unlike a crystal ball, this 
item always reveals the same vision—in this case, 


a pictorial history of Landryn Teriak himself. 
When the glass is turned after a vision sequence 
the sand glows with a green color as it falls. This 
procedure recharges the glass for another display 
(with a red hue about the sand). 

A wizard of 11th level or higher can charge the 
item with new visions by casting an ESP spell for 
each new vision. 


Timeglass of the Wizard 
XP Value: 5,000 GP Value: 50,000 
GREYHAWK Adventures 

Appearing to be a 1-foot-tall hour glass, this 
magical item made its sudden appearance in the 
hands of an adventurer who had forced his way 
into the Valley of the Wizard. He returned with 
only the timeglass and the scars of many danger- 
ous encounters. Since then, the timeglass has 
been sought by many Spellcasters because of its 
reputed powers, which are rumored to be: 

e Vanish time: Time itself bypasses a 30-foot 
cubic area for each hour of charge expended. 
Subjective time does not pass for those within 
the area, and they simply appear to vanish for 
the intervening time. They reappear at the end 
of the duration set by the number of charges 
expended. 

e Ageless casting: Ifthe timeglass is held while 
casting a spell that would normally age the 
caster (such as gate or wish), the spell instead 
drains one charge from the timeglass for each 
year the caster would have aged. 

e Restore youth: Youth can be restored to the 
wielder or any creature of his or her choice 
upon command. The process drains one charge 
from the timeglass and one level from the 
wielder, and restores two years of youth to the 
subject creature. The level given up cannot be 
restored, (doing so cancels the reversal); the 
level must be earned anew. 

Secondary power: Once per 24 hour period, the 
owner can invert the timeglass and command one 
of the following spell effects to occur: time stop, 
haste, slow, or part water. Each use ages the 
wielder one year, except time stop, which ages 
the wielder two years. 

The timeglass has up to 25 charges and is not 
rechargeable. When the last charge is expended, it 
shatters into useless fragments. 

Note: It is rumored that this device is of extra- 
planar origin and cannot be constructed on the 


Prime Material Plane. 
2045 


602 


Hourglass, Timekeeping 


SE Ae ne Soe eS rE 


Timekeeping 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
DRAGON Magazine 73 
This is a large hourglass made of wood and glass 
and filled with yellow particles. It records a cycle 
of eight hours, after which a deep chime rings out 
10 times. 


Verthandi's Invincible 
XP Value: — GP Value: — 
DUNGEONS & DRAGONS Master Set 
Verthandi, a very powerful Immortal of Time, 
gave mortals the ability to control Time itself 
through this marvellous creation. Its powers are 
said to be unlimited—in scope and danger. 

This item is a 3-foot-tall construction of glass 
and wood, identical to normal hourglasses except 
in size. 

The hourglass is active when found. Its powers 
are automatically and magically revealed to the 
user over time and never otherwise. One power is 
revealed during sleep at each full moon (every 28 
days). One additional power may (25% chance) 
be revealed ifthe user is affected by a haste spell 
or a potion of speed. 

Any power is activated by inverting the hour- 
glass and concentrating on the specific power 
desired while watching the flowing sand. The 
power is granted to the user after watching for 
1d10 rounds. If concentration is broken before 
the power is acquired, no power is gained. 

Suggested Powers: (All magical abilities are 
cast at 20th level.) 

e Sleep 

Slow 

Timekeeping (The user can keep exact time) 

Timestop 

Wish 
Suggested Handicaps: 

When first used: A 10-foot, cubic white mist 
issues from the hourglass, collecting around 
the user. The user is immune to the mist's 
effects. Any victim within the gas must make 
a saving throw vs. spell, with a —4 penalty, or 
age 10d4 years. 

When either of the last two powers are used, 
forgetfulness occurs. After memorizing spells, 
the user forgets 1d4 randomly selected spells. 
These are immediately revealed. If the user 
memorizes them again, to fill the loss, another 

14 randomly selected spells vanish in the 
same way. 


Suggested Penalties: (10% chance of occur- 
rence whenever either of the last two powers are 
used; equal chances for each): 

e Aging: The user ages 1d6 years; no saving 
throw. 

Disintegrate: The user must make a saving 
throw vs. spell or suffer a variation of the 
normal spell effect, appearing to wither, 
age extremely rapidly, and crumble to dust. 
The body may be recovered by a wish, and 
the user restored to normal by applying res- 
urrection. 

Ability score penalty: The user loses 1d6+5 
points of Strength, to a minimum Strength 
of3. 


Hut 


A hut is a small building, usually made of long 
grasses or reeds supported by a frame constructed 
from twine and wood. These buildings are usually 
found in tropical or semi-tropical locations where 
extreme cold is rarely encountered. 


Baba Yaga’s 

XP Value: 12,000 GP Value: 120,000 
Eldritch Wizardry 
Somewhere there reportedly exists a relic of the 
greatest wizardress of all time—Baba Yaga. Her 
hut is a small hovel, about 10 to 15 feet in 
diameter, and it stands on just two strange stilts. 
The interior of the hut, however, is 10 times the 
outer diameter and filled with rich furnishings 
and minor magical items—its walls are equal to 
stone 5 feet thick. Furthermore, the stilts it 
stands upon are actually gigantic, bird-like legs 
that can carry the hut over any sort of terrain— 
at a Movement rate of 36 in wet places, 24 on 
normal terrain, 12 through forests, over rough 
and rocky ground, or up and down mountainous 
trails. The legs of the hut are able to deliver 
mighty blows to any intruder rash enough to 
come near without invitation. Each melee 
round, the hut's legs are able to strike once with 
a 30% hit probability, causing 3d8 points of 
damage. 


Baba Yaga’s II 
XP Value: — GP Value: — 
Book of Artifacts 
Baba Yaga sHut looks like a small, hexagonal hut 
with a thatched roof. It is no more than 12 feet 


high and 10 feet across. A rickety chimney juts 
2049 


6 


0: 


4 


Hut, Baba Yaga’s H 


splice ae elf | 


from the roof. At a distance it seems to be 
mounted on stilts, though closer inspection 
reveals that the stilts are giant chicken legs, fully 
another 12 feet long. It has a single door and two 
windows. The hut is almost always found in the 
deep woods, surrounded by a picket fence topped 
with skulls. 

It is seldom still and is often seen spinning or 
capering about. Even when not dancing, the hut 
bobs up and down, sways from side-to-side, or 
swivels about as if looking at things. 

Baba Yaga and her hut are unique among all 
artifacts because there are two histories for each 
of them. The first tale of Baba Yaga the fearsome 
ogress comes straight from Slavic folklore. The 
second presents a fantasy Baba Yaga for those 
DM's who prefer not to have the "real world" 
intrude upon their game. 

In folklore, Baba Yaga was a fearsome ogress 
(a hideous greater-than-human creature, not the 
AD&D game ogre). Not only was she strong, but 
Baba Yaga also possessed great magical power. 
She cooked children, caused storms, and tra- 
versed the country with Death at her side. Her 
appearance was horrid, with wild hair, a bony 
body, fangs, and claws and teeth of stone. 
According to some, she protected the waters of 
life, while according to others she was a spirit of 
the forest. 

Equally amazing were Baba Yaga's magical 
items. It is said that the ogress flew through the 
sky in a mortar of iron, poling it with the pestle. 
Some say that thunder was the clamor of the mor- 
tar and pestle as she flew. At her hand she always 
had a great club that could turn men to stone. 
Without a doubt, though, the greatest of her trea- 
sures was her hut. 

For those who wish to maintain a pure fantasy 
explanation for this artifact, Baba Yaga was an 
evil sorceress of great skill, perhaps the greatest 
female wizard who ever lived. More ruthless, far- 
sighted, and determined than most of her counter- 
parts, male or female, Baba Yaga spent a good 
number of her last years in a single-minded effort 
to create the hut. Although many wizards of the 
time derided her as obsessed, Baba Yaga did not 
relent and eventually finished her finest creation. 
Although she seemed ancient beyond belief, the 
sorceress lived for a good number of years after 
this, traveling the countryside in her strange con- 
veyance. Although she grew aged, Baba Yaga 
hinted that she had found a way to survive. Then, 


one day, she entered her hut and never returned. 
Capering and dancing, the hut disappeared, van- 
ishing from the realm. 

Since that ancient time, the hut has been seen 
only a few times, always dancing. The reports of 
those who tried to enter it only reveal what most 
already know—that Baba Yaga's hut is an item of 
great power. 

Whether based on the real folklore or a fantasy 
background, there is no reason Baba Yaga shut or 
even Baba Yaga herself cannot appear in a cam- 
paign. In either guise, Baba Yaga can inspire the 
peasants of the countryside with great terror at 
the mere mention of her name, for even though 
she has long been absent, the memory of Baba 
Yaga and her hut still linger on. 

Baba Yaga’shut is more than just an artifact 
waiting to be used. It is almost a living thing, a 
monster of sorts. It can move about, fight, and 
do other things ofits own accord, thus making it 
one of the most difficultartifacts to control and 
use. 

Generally, the player characters should only 
discover the hut if the DM is willing to introduce 
Baba Yaga into the campaign. The player charac- 
ters should always feel like trespassers onto her 
property, so it is important to keep players guess- 
ing as to whether Baba Yaga is alive, dead, or 
undead. If they do encounter her, the DM should 
prepare a suitable foe—certainly no less powerful 
than a lich. 

The hut can be the source of several related 
adventures. First there is the task of finding the 
artifact. This can be both easy and hard. Local 
farmers might report sightings and attacks, but 
the characters still have to hunt down the roam- 
ing device. Once found, the characters have to 
enter and explore the hut, since it is much larger 
on the inside than it should be. The hut—being 
quasi-alive—will do what it can to hamper and 
resist the characters. It may even have guardians 
living inside it. Whether or not the characters 
gain control of the artifact, a final adventure 
would center around the return of Baba Yaga. 
She is certainly going to take a dim view of 
others stealing her hut! 

Constant Powers: The inside of Baba Yaga's 
hut is a palace far larger than the outside. 
Enclosed within the walls are over 30 rooms, 
including indoor gardens, kitchens, a library, 
laboratory, armory, bedrooms, and even an 


observatory. Many of the rooms have windows, 
2049 


a ee 


605 


~ Hut, Spirit r 


but they all give the same view; that of the two 
front windows of the hut. Within the hut, only 
the master can use summoning, interdimen- 
sional travel, or teleportation spells. This master 
functions at two levels greater than normal 
(including extra hit points, spells, etc.) and gains 
a 20% magic resistance. In addition, the hut has 
full senses ofits surroundings (hearing and 
sight, including infravision) shared telepathi- 
cally with its master. 

Invoked Powers: Before any of the hut's 
invoked powers can be used, the character must 
use a key phrase establishing control over the hut, 
which only recognizes one master at a time. After 
that the hut can be commanded to run across any 
surface including water (MV 48), come when 
called (up to 7 miles distant), hop up to 500 yards 
in a single bound, or kick at any target within 10 
feet (HAT 2, THACO 9, Dmg 4d6, and pin to the 
ground on aroll of 18 or greater and causing 
4d10 points the next round). Each leg can only be 
hit by +2 weapons or better, has an AC of —2, 48 
hit points, and regenerates 1 hit point per round. 
When a leg loses all hit points, the hut settles to 
the ground, totally regenerated. 

Random Powers: The master gains two abili- 
ties from Artifact Table 1-15: Major Powers. 

Curse: The curse ofBaba Yaga's hut is Baba 
Yaga herself. Sooner or later she will come to get 
it back. Since it is her home, it is likely to have 
secrets known only to her. 

Suggested Means of Destruction: 

The interior pocket dimension must be swal- 
lowed into another one. 

The hut's hidden inner brain must be found 
and destroyed. 


Spirit 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 15,000 
DRAGON Magazine 189 
On rare occasions, the native deities of Africa 
will grant their priests a special place of wor- 
ship that focuses their power. This boon is rare; 
spirit huts are found in one village in a thou- 
sand. The hut looks like any other hut from the 
outside, but the interior is decorated with sacred 
symbols and items appropriate to the deity. 
Only the village priest can enter the hut safely. 
All others must save vs. spell or be stricken 
withfear and flee for 1d4+] turns. Inside the 
hut, the priest is never surprised, has a 25% 
magic resistance, and is immune tofear and 


confusion spells. The priest may also cast spells 
at two levels higher than his or her actual level. 
All these benefits are lost if the priest steps out 
of the hut. The hut is immobile. 


ALU OO) 
KONNY 
eget 


v 


tt ti 


ON 


k- 


sefii 


ea a ot ae Pe 


reeet 
ooo 


1 two 


AG Be 


Ichor of Intoxication 


XP Value: 500 GP Value: 900 
The Temple of Elemental Evil 

This substance is a colorless syrup found in half- 
ounce vials. It can be mixed with liquids, applied 
to food, or simply ingested straight. The ichor 
dries when exposed to air, hardening in one turn. 

When a vial of the fluid is consumed, the user 
becomes highly intoxicated within one round. If 
more is then consumed, the user becomes 
comatose from excess. A half-vial produces mild 
intoxication, but lesser doses have little or no 
effect. One vial of ichor can be used to treat one 
apple-sized foodstuff (about 10 square inches of 
area) or any beverage. 

Effects of intoxication are summarized below. 
Note that all modifiers are penalties except for 
those affecting NPC bravery and morale. Recov- 
ery from intoxication simply requires time, and 
(if a comatose condition results) sleep. The times 
needed are 1d3+] hours for mild, 2d3 hours for 
great, and 1d4+6 hours for comatose. 


Affected Statistic Mild Great 
Attack rolls -1 -5 
Bravery +2 +4 
Charisma -1 —4 
Constitution = — 
Dexterity 2 -5 
Intelligence -3 -6 
Morale +2 +3 
Saving Throws +1 +5 
Strength — — 
Wisdom -4 -1 
Icon 


Icons are small, carved items that resemble some- 
thing larger. These are sometimes placed on 
charm bracelets. Examples of icons include 
chairs, books, holy symbols, people, angelic fig- 
ures, etc. They all have ajewel of some sort 
imbedded in them that radiates a faint magical 
aura (ifthe icon is magical). Icons can be used 
once per day unless otherwise specified. 


of Chemosh 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
DUNGEON Magazine 22 
The icon of Chemosh is a powerful holy item 
created by the god of the undead from the 
essences of dead black dragons. It does not 


Icon of Halav 


Y 
radiate magic. The icon can act as a life 
force container such as the one required 
for a magic jar spell, but this is the least 
of its powers. Ifthe icon is empty and in contact 
with a dying creature, it absorbs the life force 
of that creature; the body ofthe creature decom- 
poses into black ash. Ifthe icon is brought into 
contact with the body of another dead creature 
of the same general race and alignment as that 
of the contained essence, the icon transfers the 
life force into the body, raising it from the dead 
and healing it of all wounds. The essence now 
has all the physical characteristics of the new 
body, as if the original creature had shape 
changed. Once a life force has been transferred 
by the icon, that essence is forever in contact 
with the icon. The next time the body of the 
essence dies, the life force is sucked through 
the icon into the Abyss. If an exact duplicate of 
the essence's original body is constructed from 
black jade, the life force may animate the dupli- 
cate and transform it from jade to flesh. 

All who have ever had their life forces within 
the icon can sense its presence within 50 miles. 
This sensing ability tells only that the icon is 
near, not its exact location. However, ifthe icon is 
held by a good-aligned creature, those linked 
with it are able to sense the direction in which the 
icon lies, though not the distance. 

The icon is an indestructible artifact. It is 6 
inches long and resembles the physical body of 
the last creature whose essence it has absorbed. 
Currently, the icon is in the form of a small black 
dragon. The icon can hold only one life force at a 
time. Other essences attempting to transfer into 
the icon are either sucked into the Abyss (if evil) 
or repelled by the icon (if good or neutral). 


of Halav 
GP Value: — 
The Milenian Scepter 
The icon has 310 Power Points and a recharge 
rate of 20 per turn. 

An icon is a special type of artifact that is 
made by the hands ofan oracle and enchanted by 
an Immortal. The icon of Halav was crafted by 
the ancient oracle Phaistos over 500 circles 
(years) ago. It stands at the Shrine of Glory. 

The icon is made of red clay and stands 2 feet 
tall. It is fashioned in the shape of a warrior 
(Halav) wearing Milenian cuir-boulli armor. The 


icon is painted to appear lifelike. It does not look 
2053 


XP Value: — 


i 07 À 


6 


Icon of Petra 


a a ee A 


exceptional or magical. 

The icon's powers can only be used while it 
remains in its shrine. Removing the icon causes it 
to cease functioning (though it still radiates 
magic) until it is returned to the sacred ground. 
Icons do not have to be handled to be used. As 


long as the user remains within the boundaries of 
the shrine, the icon's powers may be called upon 
by speaking command phrases. Only the oracle 
knows these commands. 
The icon of Halav has the following powers, all 

of which are cast at 40th level: 

Animate Dead (50 PP). 

Create Food (35 PP). 

Create Water (20 PP). 

Cure Critical Wounds (35 PP). 

Magic Missile (15 PP), same as 1st level mag- 
ical spell; each use fires five missiles that 
inflict 1d6+1 points of damage each. 

Meteor Swarm (100 PP). 

Protectionfrom Evil 10' radius (25 PP). 
Dispel Magic (55 PP). 
The oracle suffers no ill effects from using 
the icon. Others who take possession of the 
icon without the consent of either the oracle or 
Halav automatically shrink to the size of the 
icon—2 feet tall. Those who have taken the 
icon also lose 1d6 points from each of their 


ability scores. Finally, the possessors of the 
artifact suffer a -3 penalty to all saving throws. 
Even if the characters "throw away" the icon, 
these three handicaps continue to plague them, 
and cannot be negated until the artifact is 
returned to its shrine. 

The oracle suffers no penalties when using the 
icon. Others who attempt to use the icon must 
first succeed at a saving throw vs. spell or be con- 


fused for 12 rounds. When trying to use the icon's 


dispel magic power, there is a 45% chance it 

affects the user. If attempting to use its magic 
missile power, there is a 5% chance the missiles 
strike the user. When the meteor swarm power is 
used, there is a 90% chance that all magical items 

touched by the user (except the artifact) become 
permanently nonmagical. 


of Petra 
XP Value: — 
The Milenian Empire 
This greater artifact has 405 Power Points with a 
recharge rate of 20 per turn. 

An icon is a special type of artifact that is 
made by the hands of an oracle and enchanted by 
an Immortal. The icon of Petra was crafted by the 
very first Milenian oracle over 1,000 circles ago. 
The artifact still rests at the Shrine of Whisper 
Winds. 

The icon is made of red clay and stands 2 feet 
tall. It is crudely fashioned in the shape ofa 
woman (Petra). For an artifact, it does not look 
exceptional or magical. 

Powers: The icon's powers can only be used 
while it remains in its shrine. Removing the icon 
causes it to cease functioning (although it still 
radiates magic) until it is returned to the sacred 
ground. The icon does not have to be handled to 
be used. As long as the user remains within the 
boundaries of the shrine, the icon's powers may 
be called upon by speaking command phrases. 
The icon of Petra has the following powers: 
Create Food (35 PP) 

Create Water (20 PP) 

Lightning Bolt (60 PP) 

Meteor Swarm ( 100 PP) 

Protectionfrom Evil 10' radius (25 PP) 
Raise Dead Fully (85 PP): Automatically 
raises the oracle ifhe or she has been slain and 
the body is within the boundaries of the 
shrine. 

Weather Control (80 PP) 


GP Value: — 


2054 


2 \. 


608 


Icon of Truth II 


The oracle suffers no ill effects from using the 
icon. Others who take possession of the icon 
without the consent of the oracle or Petra suffer 
the effects of a permanent slow spell (no saving 
throw). Those who have taken the icon also 
attract hostile monsters, roll twice as often for 
random encounters, which always attack. Finally, 
the possessors of the artifact suffer a -3 penalty 
to all saving throws. Even if the characters throw 
away the icon, these three handicaps continue to 
plague them until the artifact is returned to its 
shrine. . 

The oracle suffers no penalties when using the 
icon. Others who attempt to use the icon must 
first succeed at a saving throw vs. spell or be con- 
fused for 12 rounds. If trying to use the icon's 
raise dead power, there is a 75% chance it fails 
and the user's hit points are reduced to 0. If 
attempting to use its lightning bolt power, there is 
a 50% chance the bolt strikes the user. When the 
meteor swarm power is used, there is a 90% 
chance that all magical items touched by the user 
(except the artifact) become permanently non- 
magical. 

Notes: The icon can be utterly destroyed if 
Petra's love for Halav is brought to an end. 


of the Raven 

GP Value: 19,000 
1993 Collector Card 351 
This icon is a powerful symbol of good possessed 
by Patron Arabel. Once per day it can cure seri- 
ous wounds, purifyfood and drink, and bless. It 
also acts as a detection device, informing Father 
Arabel whenever any undead approach to within 
50 feet. Several times in the recent past, Castellan 
Pietor, the Duke of Castle Bloodmere, has 
attempted to steal the icon from Father Arabel, 
but he has thus far been unsuccessful. 


XP Value: — 


of Truth 
XP Value: 7,000 GP Value: 35,000 
Dragons of Dreams 

This icon appears as a white marble rectangle 
carved into the shape of a book. It is jewel 
encrusted and has a magical aura, measuring 6- 
by 4- by 1-inch. The icon is the Tobril, the book 
held by the god Gilean, symbolizing all knowl- 
edge held by all of the gods. It represents the 
means by which the truth may be discovered. 

The icon oftruth has the following powers: 
once per day, the icon can cast dispel illusion at 


21st level in a 30-foot radius. Within this area, 
dreamcreatures and illusions cannot exist. The 
spell must be cast on a fixed location and cannot 
be moved about. Any wizard or priest who 
touches the icon instantly understands this func- 
tion and how to operate it. To activate the spell, 
the PC must present the icon in a forceful man- 
ner, speaking the word "Tobril" firmly. Any per- 
son who carries this object negates any negative 
adjustments for disbelieving illusions due to the 
level of the dream. 


of Truth II 
GP Value: 35,000 
Tales of the Lance 
This item is ajewel-encrusted white marble rec- 
tangle carved into the shape ofa book. It radiates 
magic. The icon represents the Tobril, the book 
that Gilean holds, which contains all the knowl- 
edge ofthe gods. In the days ofthe kingpriest, the 
icon of truth was used to verify the truth in a per- 
son's words and oaths in the courts of the land. 
The questioned person would place a hand on the 
icon and swear that his or her words were the 
truth. 
The icon oftruth can detect lie up to six times 
a day by pulsing white when the truth is spoken 


and glowing red (and invoking pain) when a lie is 
2057 


XP Value: 7,000 


i 609 j 


Idol, Carnelian 


Sa EE E a 


spoken. Three times per day, a priest with the 
Icon of Truth can cast true seeing. A priest also 
can utter the command word “Tobril” to generate 
a field that dispels all illusions in a 30-foot 
radius. 


Idol 


Idols are statues or statuettes, made from a vari- 
ety of materials, and carved in the likeness of a 
deity's avatar. 


Carnelian 

XP Value: 2,400 GP Value: 24,000 
The Emirates of Ylaruam 
This magical idol is a small griffin carved from a 
red gemstone. When touched, the victim's mind is 
filled with murmuring voices that compel it to 
march off into the wilderness in search of its 
master. 

Its master is a long-dead wizard of a long- 
dead civilization. The idol leads the victim to a 
ruined dwelling or city where other treasures 
may be found, But the victim cannot resist the 
impulse to go immediately. This treasure is often 
found in the hands of a corpse that marched 
immediately out into the desert without proper 
preparations, or glittering in the sands where it 
was dropped by its last victim, who is now a col- 
lection of bleached and scattered bones covered 
by the dunes. 


of Lolth 
XP Value: 20,000 GP Value: 200,000 
Vault ofthe Drow 

Far back in the place is the treasure she guards, 
a golden idol made in the likeness of the baatezu 
Lolth. This gold statue radiates both magic and 
evil. It is only about 1 foot long and about as 
wide where the legs project. It weighs 10 
pounds and is obviously hollow. The idol has 
six spider legs, but the foremost set of legs is 
that of a human or elf, complete with hands. 
More gruesome still, there appears to be a 
drow's face peering from a position between the 
great staring sets of spider eyes on the head. 
(There are six spider eyes and two drow eyes 
made of black sapphires set into the gold; these 
gems are worth: 2x10,000, 2x5,000, 2x2,000, 
2x1,000 gp.) On the bulging abdomen of the 
spider statue are four spinnerets. 

Holding this idol imparts knowledge that the 
possessor can command any of the following 


4 | ` 


610 


powers: send the equivalent ofa web spell up to 
40 feet distant from the spinnerets simply by 
pointing them at the target and thinking of the 
result, immunity to all webs, the power to travel 
along webs as a giant spider would, and the 
ability to cause fear in large and huge spiders 
or command giant spiders to obedience for 
3-12 rounds. Possessing the idol has two great 
dangers. 

The foremost danger is that of passionate 
desire for the object. The character picking it up 
must make a saving throw vs. poison (-2 
penalty) or be overwhelmed by the conviction 
that he or she alone can withstand the danger of 
the idol, so no one else must ever touch it. Each 
person handling the idol must so save, and those 
failing to save are convinced that all others han- 
dling it are becoming evil. (Only a remove curse 
can dispel this conviction.) Thus, desire is 
masked in altruism and the certain knowledge 
that the character is acting in the best interests 
of the party by retaining the idol and attacking 
any member who subsequently may have han- 
dled it and been subjected to the evil that he or 
she alone can withstand. 

The second and more insidious danger lies in 
the slow metamorphosis that the possessor of 
the statue undergoes. For six days nothing hap- 
pens, except that a careful examination of the 
character's limbs reveals that he or she has black 
and bristly hairs peeking forth. Ifthe idol is 
removed from the possessor prior to the end of 
the sixth day, the hair growth slowly disappears. 
After the sixth day through the 66th day of pos- 
session, a slow but inexorable series of changes 
take place—four vestigial legs gradually emerge 
and grow into those of a giant spider, while the 
legs ofthe victim change to become the same as 
a spider's; the characters abdomen swells and 
rounds; mandibles begin to grow from the vic- 
tim's mouth, and as the head enlarges, the buds 
of new, multi-lensed eyes can be seen. On the 
67th day the transformation is complete and 
totally irreversible—the victim has the mind ofa 
giant spider and nothing can ever bring back the 
original form. Ifa cure disease, remove curse, 
and atonement are placed upon the character 
prior to the 60th day, there is a 99% certainty 
that the process can be reversed, but this chance 
drops by 13% every day from the 60th day on to 
the 66th day. 


2059 


~ Incense of Obsession y- 


QA 
CC 


acta TT 


Quentin's 

XP Value: — GP Value: 400,000 
The Legend of the SPELLJAMMER 
The idol, which dominates the stern of Quentin's 
Libraria (a spelljamming craft), is a variant of the 
major spelljammer helm. It functions as a spell- 
Jamming helm in all respects, but in addition it 
can attain greater maneuverability classes through 
offerings burned in its mouth, primarily paper 
and books. 

The normal maneuverability class of the ship 
is MC E. Depending upon the types of knowl- 
edge fed into the flaming mouth, the MC can be 
improved. Normal papers, including nonmagical 
books and scrolls, increase the maneuver class 
to D. The increased maneuverability lasts one 
round for each book or scroll fed into the idol. 
For every priestly or magical scroll fed into the 
idol's maw, the maneuver class increases to C 
for four rounds. The number of spells on the 
scroll does not matter for the purposes of power- 
ing the ship, only that a magical or priestly 
scroll is fed to the flames. 

For every spellbook fed into the maw of the 
idol, maneuver class increases to B for six rounds. 
For every magical book (such as a Libram of Sil- 
ver Magic) fed into the maw, the maneuver class 
increases to A for the next 10 rounds. All books 


and scrolls fed to the idol are utterly consumed by 
the flames. 

The idol is a harsh master, and constantly 
roaring, demanding to be fed. Failure to feed the 
idol results in louder and louder imploring, then 
the idol's maw belches forth billows of poiso- 
nous gas, causing the atmosphere to become 
tainted in five rounds and forcing all aboard to 
save vs. poison or perish. In addition, the idol 
has the power to cast one flaming sphere per 
turn, but cannot use its spelljamming abilities 
when doing so. This power is used as a defense 
when on the ground. 


Incense 

Incense consists of herbs and flower petals, pow- 
dered or broken down into small pieces. Often 
mixed with water, alcohol, or some other fluid, 
incense is burned to release its fragrance or 
boiled in a small censer by a candle. Magical 
incense releases its magic when the fragrance is 
liberated. 


of Meditation 

XP Value: 500 GP Value: 2,500 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 
The small rectangular blocks of sweet smelling 
incense of meditation are indistinguishable from 
nonmagical incense until one is lit. When burn- 
ing, the special fragrance and pearly smoke of 
this special incense are recognizable by any priest 
above 5th level. 

When a priest lights a block of the incense of 
meditation and spends eight hours praying and 
meditating nearby, the incense enables the priest 
to gain maximum spell.effects. Thus, cure wounds 
spells are always maximum, spell effects are of 
the broadest area possible, and saving throws 
against their effects suffer -1 penalties, and when 
the dead are brought back to life, their chance of 
not surviving is reduced by one-half (rounded 
down). 

When this item is discovered, there are 2d4 
blocks of incense. Each piece burns for eight 
hours; the effects remain for 24 hours. 


of Obsession 
GP Value: 1,000 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 
These strange blocks of incense exactly resem- 
ble incense ofmeditation. If meditation and 


prayer are conducted while lit incense ofobses- 
2062 


XP Value: — 


ea 


611 


~ Incense, Shahpesh's, of Obsession r 


sion is nearby, its odor and smoke cause the 
priest to become totally confident that his or her 
spell ability is superior due to the magical 
incense. The priest is determined to use spells at 
every opportunity, even when not needed or 
when useless. Nonetheless, the priest remains 
obsessed with his or her abilities and spells until 
all are cast or 24 hours have elapsed. There are 
2d4 pieces of this incense normally, each burns 
for one hour. 


Shahpesh's Incense of Obsession 
XP Value: — GP Value: 1,200 
1993 Collector Card 463 

When Shahpesh burns her magical incense, she is 
driven to believe that her spells are of the utmost 
worthiness and potency, and she thinks that her 
spells are an appropriate response to any situa- 
tion. This incense is so powerful that it has con- 
vinced Shahpesh that she is capable of casting a 
spell one level higher than she is allowed. When 
she attempts to do this, she believes the spell has 
worked, but in reality nothing has happened. The 
effects of this incense last for 24 hours or until all 
spells have been exhausted. 


Inkwell 


An inkwell is a small bottle made of glass or 
crystal and having a cork or wooden stopper. It is 
usually designed with a narrow neck so that a 
quill may be left standing in the ink. Magical 
inkwells contain magical inks. If an inkwell is 
broken or completely emptied, it becomes non- 
magical—and so does the ink used from it, even 
if already used to write. This sudden change in 
the ink renders magical scrolls made with that ink 
(if applicable) useless. 


of Concealment 

XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 

The Book of Marvelous Magic 
This inkwell appears to be and functions as an 
everfull inkwell, but writing made with its ink 
becomes invisible after one hour. The writing 
remains, however, and may be seen by using a 
detect invisible spell or similar effect. 


Everfull 
XP Value: 800 GP Value: 4,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
This inkwell is used to fill quills for nonmagical 
writing, When used properly, it cannot be emp- 


tied. The everfull inkwell is not usable for making 
protection or spell scrolls but may be used in 
some magical quills. 


of Scrollmaking 
XP Value: 1,200 GP Value: 6,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

This inkwell is empty when found, and becomes 
nonmagical if ink is poured into it. It can pro- 
duce magical ink suitable for making magic 
scrolls if gems worth a total of 10,000 gp are 
dropped inside and the command word spoken. 
This creates enough ink for six Ist-level spells, 
or three 2nd-level spells, or two 3rd-level 
spells, or one spell of 4th, 5th, or 6th level. If 
20,000 gp in gems are used, a 7th-level spell 
may be written; if 40,000 gp in gems are used 
an 8th-level spell and if 80,000 gp in gems are 
used, a scroll of one 9th-level spell may be cre- 
ated. The ink may be used for either priest or 
wizard spells, but any one scroll may contain 
only one type, not both. Any scroll of wizard 
spells may only be created by copying from a 
spellbook; priestly spells must be written from 
memory, after meditating. 

The inkwell ofscrollmaking may also be used 
to make one protection scroll if 10,000 gp in 
gems are used, along with a part of the creature 
to be affected. Note that dust from undead 
destroyed by a priest's turning is not sufficient; 
the undead must be slain normally, and a part 
thus obtained. 


Internal Conjuration Engine 


XP Value GP Value 
+1: 3,000 0,000 
+2: 6,000 120,000 
+3: 9,000 180,000 
+4: 12,000 240,000 
+5: 15,000 300,000 


Champions of MYSTARA 
This magical device converts potions offlying 
into Motive Power for flying vessels. It functions 
much like a dynamo offlying, but provides no 
effect other than fly. It's often aesthetically 
shaped—a statue, large vase, or similar decora- 
tive item—but always has at least one opening for 
potions offlying as fuel. Some have storage tanks 
that can hold up to 50 potions; others must be 
regularly fueled. The user directs the vessel's 
flight by concentrating, while keeping one hand 


on the internal conjuration engine. 
2067 


ew Ne 


612 


N loun Stone, Batian's Yellow g 


Engines come in five sizes. The smallest, an 
internal conjuration engine +1, converts apotion 
offlying into one day of flight (24 hours usage). 
An internal conjuration engine +2 gives two days 
of flight per potion; an engine +5 gives five days 
of flight per potion. 

One internal conjuration engine can provide a 
Lift Capacity of 100 tons. Each additional 100 
tons of Lift Capacity (or fraction thereof) requires 
another engine—or an additional potion offlying 
as fuel. Air Speed is 36 (modified by any Ton- 
nage in excess ofthe Lift Capacity). 

Some internal conjuration engines can convert 
other potions into spell effects as well. These rare 
engines have two openings—one for fuel (such as 
potions offlying) and the other for potions to add 
more effects. These secondary effects function 
only while the vessel is flying under the engine's 
power. Possible effects include: 

e A potion ofagility improves the vessel's 
Maneuverability by one level. 

e A potion ofblending provides the vessel with 
camouflage (only 10% chance of being seen 
with normal vision) or colorful decoration for 
1d6+6 turns. 

e A potion of defense improves the vessel's 
Armor Class by 1 for one turn. 

e A potion ofspeed doubles the vessel's Air 
Speed for 1d6+6 turns. The DM may require a 
Quality Rating check to avoid damage to the 
vessel. 

The DM decides which potions the engine can 
consume and what the actual effects are (if differ- 
ent from above). All other potions will damage 
the engine, making it inoperative for 2d12 days. 
Pouring anything but apotion offlying into the 
main fuel intake valve of the engine causes it to 
malfunction. 

Spellcasters creating an internal conjuration 
engine must enchant it with spell turning, but do 
not need to enchant the engine withfly or any 
other spell. Cost to enchant is 1,000 gp times five 
(the level of spell turning) times the number of 
days of flight each potion offlying grants. For 
each potion other than a potion offlying that the 
engine is capable of consuming, the cost to 
enchant increases by 1,000 gp times five times 
the spell level of the effect created by the potion. 
For example, an internal conjuration engine +1, 
capable of one day of flight per potion, with the 
ability to use potions ofspeed to double the ves- 
sel's Air Speed would cost 20,000 gp (5,000 for 


flying and 15,000 for the 3rd-level haste effect 
from the potion ofspeed). Making it permanent 
(internal conjuration engines cannot be 
enchanted with charges or uses per day) costs an 
additional 100,000 gp (5 x initial enchantment 
cost), for a grand total of 120,000 gp. Time to 
enchant: 127 days. 

High level Spellcasters may make potions of 
flying to replenish their fuel stocks. Chance of 
success is the same as for any magical item. Cost 
to create one potion offlying is the same as any 

magical item with one charge. 


loun Stone 
loun stones have become such a popular item that 
no one who uses them seems to know where they 
came from. After speaking with Prismal about 
ioun stones and their origin, he was kind enough 
to shed some light on the subject. 

Toun stones, Prismal stated, were the first mag- 
ical protection devices created. Early in the field 
of magocracy, wizards and priests believed that 
large objects (like suits of armor or body shields) 
could not be enchanted due to their size. Instead, 
modest, small stones and gems were enchanted 
with simple bless spells and antiquated shield 
spells to protect warriors from the blades and 
maces of their enemies. The first such wizard to 
create such a stone was the long-forgotten wizard, 
Congenio Ioun, and so the stones were named for 
him. It is not known how long ago he lived, but 
Prismal believes Congenio lived about three mil- 
lennia ago. 

oun stones trail and circle their owner. They 
can be grasped or netted so as to separate them 
from their owner. If they are more than 3 feet 
from their owner, they no longer function. To 
function, they must be free to trail and circle. It is 
recommended that, in any campaign, these items 
be very rare and difficult to obtain. 


Balian’sYellow 
XP Value: 300 GP Value: 5,000 
1992 Fantasy Collector Card 26 
Balian Rocksmith found this stone on the floor 
while working as a guard for a wizard's conven- 
tion. This version of a typical ioun stone can be 
used once each day, but after 12hours it falls to 
the ground and must be stored for 12 hours. Each 
time the stone is used, it will add one point to one 
randomly determined ability score (maximum of 


18). It can be removed prior to the 12-hour limit, 
2068 


, ee a? S 


613 


~ Toun Stone, Blue-Green Spindle r 


but it will still have to be stored for 12 hours 
before being used again. An ioun stone has an 
effective Armor Class of—4and 10hit points. 


Roll Ability Score 

1 Charisma 

2 Constitution 

3 Dexterity 

4 Intelligence 

5 Strength 

6 Wisdom 

Blue-Green Spindle 

XP Value GP Value 
Cursed: — 2,500 
Normal: 300 5,000 
Supercharged: 600 10,000 


DRAGON Magazine 174 
This ioun stone bestows airy water in a 10-foot 
sphere at will. The cursed version functions nor- 
mally 1d4 times, and fails 1d4+5 rounds after 
activation the next time it is used. The super- 
charged version has a 20-foot, radial area of 
effect. 


Brass Lozenge 


XP Value GP Value 
Cursed: — 2,500 
Normal: 300 5,000 
Supercharged: 600 10,000 


DRAGON Magazine 174 

This ioun stone bestows 2d4+2 hp on its user on 
command, usable once per day. The hit points are 
held until used or until 24 hours pass. The super- 
charged version allows the user to use it twice. 
Both versions have 2d10 charges, then turn gray 
and lifeless. The cursed version removes 2d4+2 
hit points until a remove curse is cast upon the 
character. 


Bright Silver Cylinder 


XP Value GP Value 
Normal: 300 5,000 
Supercharged: 600 10,000 


DRAGON Magazine 174 

With this ioun stone, the user and 200 pounds of 
possessions can go ethereal for one hour's dura- 
tion. The supercharged version allows ethereal 
travel for two hours. Each stone has 2d10 charges, 
then turns gray and lifeless. With the cursed ver- 
sion, the character cannot reassume corporeal 
form until a remove curse is cast. 


Bright White Rectangle 


XP Value GP Value 
Cursed: — 2,500 
Normal: 300 5,000 
Supercharged: 600 10,000 


DRAGON Magazine 174 
This ioun stone adds +1 to all saving throws vs. 
acids. The supercharged version grants a +2 
bonus. The cursed version penalizes the saving 
throws by -1 until remove curse is cast. 


Brown Rhomboid 


XP Value GP Value 
Cursed: — 2,500 
Normal: 300 5,000 
Supercharged: 600 10,000 


DRAGON Magazine 174 

The user of this ioun stone and 200 Ibs. of posses- 
sions can assume gaseous form for one hour's 
duration. The supercharged version allows the 
character to assume gaseous form for two hours. 
The stone has 2d10 charges, then turns gray and 
lifeless. With the cursed version, the character 
cannot reassume corporeal form until a remove 
curse is cast. 


Cerulean Blue Rhomboid 
XP Value: 300 GP Value: 5,000 
DRAGON Magazine 174 
This ioun stone bestows free action on user, like 
the ring. 


Clear Pink Sphere 
XP Value GP Value 
Cursed: — 2,500 
Normal: 300 5,000 


DRAGON Magazine 174 

This ioun stone, also known as "spirit storage," 
has no apparent benefit until the user receives a 
death blow in combat. The user's essence is trans- 
ferred into the ioun stone, where it can be easily 
returned to the body through the power of a 
restoration spell (body will have 1 hp, however). 
The cursed version makes it impossible to ever 
raise the dead character, except through the use of 
a wish spell. 


Clear Prism 
XP Value: 300 GP Value: 5,000 
STRATEGIC REVIEW Magazine 4 
This ioun stone stores 2d6 spell levels, usable at 


any time the Spellcaster chooses to use them. The 
2076 


> a G 


614 


Ioun Stone, Light Blue Prism 


Ene eT 


ioun stone must be in use at the time in order to 
access the spells. 


Clear Sphere 
XP Value GP Value 
Cursed: — 2,500 
Normal: 300 5,000 


DRAGON Magazine 174 
This ioun stone grants 5% magic resistance (25% 
maximum from the use of five such stones). The 
cursed version makes the character automatically fail 
all saving throws until a remove curse spell is cast. 


Copper Rectangle 
XP Value GP Value 
Cursed: — 2,500 
Normal: 300 5,000 


DRAGON Magazine 174 
This ioun stone allows user to read magic at will. 
With the use of the cursed version, the character 
is under the effect of a reversed true seeing spell 
until remove curse is cast. 


Deep Black Sphere 
XP Value GP Value 
Cursed: — 2,500 
Normal: 300 5,000 


DRAGON Magazine 174 
This ioun stone allows user to see in magical 
darkness (30-foot range). The cursed stone blinds 
the character until remove curse is cast. 


Deep Purple Prism 
XP Value: 300 GP Value: 5,000 
DRAGON Magazine 174 
This ioun stone grants infravision capabilities 
(60-foot range), or doubles existing infravision 
range. 


Deep Red Sphere 
XP Value: 300 GP Value: 5,000 
STRATEGICREVIEW Magaziné 
This ioun stone adds one to Strength while in use. 


Flickering White Snowflake 


XP Value GP Value 
Cursed: — 2,500 
Normal: 300 5,000 
Supercharged: 600 10,000 


DRAGON Magazine 174 
This ioun stone adds +1 to all saving throws vs. 
cold-based attacks. The supercharged version 


grants a +2 bonus. The cursed version penalizes 
the saving throws by -1 until a remove curse is 
cast. 


Gold Ellipsoid 
XP Value GP Value 
Cursed: — 2,500 
Normal: 300 5,000 
Supercharged: 600 10,000 


DRAGON Magazine 174 

This ioun stone allows the user and 200 pounds 
of possessions to go astral for one hour's dura- 
tion. Stone has 2d10 charges, then turns gray 
and lifeless. The supercharged version allows 
astral travel for two hours. Each stone has 2d10 
charges, then turns gray and lifeless. With the 
cursed version, the character cannot return to 
the Prime Material Plane until remove curse is 
cast. 


Green Sphere 
XP Value GP Value 
Cursed: — 2,500 
Normal: 300 5,000 
Supercharged: 600 10,000 


DRAGON Magazine 174 
This ioun stone adds +1 to all saving throws 
vs. gas-based attacks. The supercharged ver- 
sion grants a +2 bonus. The cursed version 
penalizes saving throws by -1 until remove 
curse is cast. 


Incandescent Blue Sphere 
XP Value: 300 GP Value: 5,000 
STRATEGIC REVIEW Magazine 4 
This ioun stone adds one level to spell ability 
until removed. 


Light Blue Prism 
XP Value GP Value 
Cursed: — 2,500 
Normal: 300 5,000 


DRAGON Magazine 174 
This ioun stone allows the user to understand all 
spoken languages. The cursed version makes it 
impossible for the user to understand any lan- 
guage (including what comes out of his mouth 
until remove curse is cast). 


2086 


ee 


615 


~ Joun Stone, Maroon Star 


Maroon Star 
XP Value GP Value 
Cursed: — 2,500 
Normal: 300 5,000 


DRAGON Magazine 174 
The user of this ioun stone can be harmed only by 
magical weapons and spells (then taking full 
damage). The cursed version makes the character 
take full damage from all weapons until remove 
curse is cast. l 


Orange Cube 
XP Value GP Value 
Cursed: — 2,500 
Normal: 300 5,000 
Supercharged: 600 10,000 


DRAGON Magazine 174 
This ioun stone grants resistance to mind-affect- 
ing spells as if the user had a Wisdom of 20. The 
cursed version makes the character automatically 
susceptible to all mind-affecting spells until 
remove curse is cast. 


Pale Green Ellipsoid 
XP Value 300 GP Value 5,000 
STRATEGIC REVIEW Magazine 4 
This ioun stone absorbs spells of 5th to 8th level. 
After absorbing 20d4 spell levels the stone burns 
out and turns a lusterless gray. Pale green ellip- 
soids can never be restored. 


Pale Lavender Spindle 
XP Value: 300 GP Value: 5,000 
STRATEGIC REVIEW Magazine 4 
This ioun stone sustains the user without food 
and water while in use. 


Pale Yellow Lozenge 


XP Value GP Value 
Cursed: — 2,500 
Normal: 300 5,000 
Supercharged: 600 10,000 


DRAGON Magazine 174 
This ioun stone bestows water walk ability at 
will. The cursed version functions normally 1d4 
times, and fails 1d4+5 rounds after activation the 
next time it is used. The supercharged version has 
a 10-footradial area of effect. 


616 


Pearly White Prism 
XP Value: 300 GP Value: 5,000 
STRATEGIC REVIEW Magazine 4 
This ioun stone repairs 1 point of damage per 
turn while in orbit. 


Pink Ellipsoid 
XP Value: 300 GP Value: 5,000 
STRATEGIC REVIEW Magazine 4 
This ioun stone adds one to Constitution while in 
the user's possession. 


Pink & Green Ellipsoid 
XP Value: 300 GP Value: 5,000 
STRATEGIC REVIEW Magazine 4 
This ioun stone absorbs spells up to 4th level. 
After absorbing from 10d4 spell levels, the stone 
burns out and turns a lusterless gray, never to be 
restored. 


Puce Cube 
XP Value GP Value 
Cursed: — 2,500 
Normal: 300 5,000 
Supercharged: 600 


10,000 

DRAGON Magazine 174 5 
This ioun stone bestows ESP ability at will. The 
user can scan surface thoughts of one person 
per round within a range of 30 feet. The super- 
charged version grants this ability to anyone 
within 10 feet ofthe user. The cursed version 
allows everyone within 50 feet to hear every 
thought that the user is thinking until a remove 
curse spell is cast. 


Pulsing Red Star 
XP Value GP Value 
Cursed: — 2,500 
Normal: 300 5,000 
Supercharged: 600 10,000 


DRAGON Magazine 174 
This ioun stone Adds +1 to all saving throws 
vs. fire-based attacks. The supercharged ver- 
sion grants a +2 bonus. The cursed version 
penalizes saving throws by -1 until remove 
curse is cast. 


2096 


we 
ts 


Aural 


Toun Stone, Pure White Octahedron 


jh Se 


Pure White Octahedron 
XP Value GP Value 
Cursed: — 2,500 
Normal: 300 5,000 
Supercharged: 600 10,000 


DRAGON Magazine 174 
This joun stone adds a +1 bonus to Charisma vs. 
beings of the same race. The supercharged ver- 
sion grants a +2 bonus. The cursed version penal- 
izes the Charisma by -4 until remove curse is 
cast. 


Rainbow Ellipsoid 
XP Value: GP Value: 
Cursed: — 2,500 
Normal: 300 5,000 
Supercharged: 600 10,000 


DRAGON Magazine 174 
With this ioun stone, the user can levitate at will. 
The cursed version functions normally 1d4 times, 
and fails 1d4+5 rounds after activation the next 
time it is used. The supercharged version has a 
20-foot radial area of effect. 


Rainbow Spindle 


XP Value GP Value 
Cursed: — 2,500 
Normal: 300 5,000 
Supercharged: 600 10,000 


DRAGON Magazine 174 

This ioun stone allows the user and 200 pounds 
of possessions to polymorph selffor one hour. 
The supercharged version allows a two-hour 
change. Each stone has 2d10 charges, then turns 
gray and lifeless. With the cursed version, the 
character cannot reassume his form until a 
remove curse spell is cast. 


Scarlet & Blue Sphere 
XP Value: 300 GP Value: 5,000 
STRATEGIC REVIEW Magazine 4 
This ioun stone adds 1 to Intelligence while 
orbiting. 


Silver Rod 
XP Value GP Value 
Cursed: — 2,500 
Normal: 300 5,000 
Supercharged: 600 10,000 


DRAGON Magazine 174 
This ioun stone adds +1 to all saving throws vs. 
electrical attacks. Tht supercharged version 


grants a +2 bonus. The cursed version penalizes 
saving throws by -1 until remove curse is cast. 


Silver Sphere 
XP Value GP Value 
Cursed: — 2,500 
Normal: 300 5,000 
Supercharged: 600 10,000 


DRAGON Magazine 174 
This ioun stone negates rear-attack bonuses 
against the user from any source. The cursed ver- 
sion doubles the bonuses until a remove curse 
spell is cast. 


Silvery Mirror Cube 


XP Value GP Value 
Cursed: — 2,500 
Normal: 300 5,000 
Supercharged: 600 10,000 


DRAGON Magazine 174 
This ioun stone Adds +1 on saves vs. petrifica- 
tion gaze attacks (medusa, basilisk, etc.). The 
supercharged version grants a +2 bonus. The 
cursed version penalizes saving throws by -1 
until remove curse is cast. 


Soft Black Rectangle 


XP Value GP Value 
Cursed: — 2,500 
Normal: 300 5,000 
Supercharged: 600 10,000 


DRAGON Magazine 174 
This ioun stone protects vs. life-level (Hit Dice) 
draining attacks (vampire, spectre, energy drain, 
etc.), granting a +1 to saving throws. The super- 
charged version grants a +2 bonus. The cursed 
version penalizes the saving throws by -1 until a 
remove curse is cast. 


` 


Yellow Sphere 
XP Value GP Value 
Cursed: — 2,500 
Normal: 300 5,000 
Supercharged: 600 10,000 


DRAGON Magazine 174 
This ioun stone sheds continual light on com- 
mand. The supercharged version will produce 
either continual light or continual darkness upon 
command. 


2105 


Go a a a a ETN 


618 


Irons of Opening 


fe n r 
Ki 


Ipsissimo's aa Goose 


XP Value: 8,000 GP Value: 40,000 

DRAGON Magazine 178 
A bizarre but cunning wizard, Ipsissimo, built 
this marvel to guard the camp of his friend and 
patron, Cosimo the Dark. Built of some strange 
black metal, this construct is shaped like a 4-foot 
tall goose. During the day it is completely immo- 
bile and very heavy (200 pounds). At sunset, it 
whirs to "life" and begins patrolling the outskirts 
of a camp, house, or another dwelling or area of 
less than 10,000 square feet, as directed by its 
owner. 

If it comes across someone within 60 feet bear- 
ing ill will toward those it is protecting, it 
launches itselfto the attack, clacking and squawk- 
ing at the top of its mechanical voice. In combat, 
it has MV 15, AC 0, 40 hp, THACO 13, and 
attacks once per round with its beak for 2d4 
points of damage; it is able to hit all normal tar- 
gets, as well as ethereal ones and those suscepti- 
ble only to magical weapons. Its attack causes 
NPCs to make a morale check, and it is immune 
to all forms ofsleep, charm, fear, death magic, 
mind-control spells and psionics, as well as illu- 
sion/phantasms. When down to 5 hp, it gives one 
last, deafening clack, then falls over. The black 
goose detects its targets by true sight. During the 


day, it regenerates 5 points of damage per hour so 
long as it is not below 0 hp. Ifthe goose is 
brought below 0 hp, it will permanently cease to 
function. 


Iron Pin of the Icy Sea 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 4,500 
GREYHAWK Adventures 

Set in a circular container of transparent crystal, 
this pin was originally used by the barbarian 
hunters and raiders sailing the Icy Sea in foggy 
summer. One command word makes the pin point 
always eastward. A second command can make it 
point to the desired destination. Furthermore, if 
outside magical or supernatural forces affecting 
navigation are active, the crystal glows. 

Like a lodestone, however, this item is subject 
to strong magnetic forces, and offers no protec- 
tion against natural navigational hazards, such as 
the gigantic icebergs that loom in the northern 
fog. 


Irons 

A set of irons includes manacles (for the wrists) 
and shackles (for the ankles). Manacles are some- 
times chained together, but shackles are often 
chained to hobble the victim (1/3 normal move- 
ment rate). Both sets of items, however, may sim- 
ply be chained to iron loops set into a wall. 
Magical irons are usually found in a complete set 
of four pieces, mostly with chains. 


of Imprisonment 

XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 10,000 

The Book of Marvelous Magic 
Once locked, these irons do not open unless the 
proper command word is spoken within 30 feet. 
They are immune to normal force, all spells 
except a wish, and all weapon attacks except from 
a weapon of +4 or better enchantment, 


of Opening 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 2,500 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
These irons appear to be and function as irons of 
imprisonment but can be opened by any victim of 
lawful alignment, simply by saying the word 
"release" in any language. 


2109 


F 619 = 


Irons of Steam 


of Steam 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 2,500 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

These irons look like and function as irons of 
imprisonment but can also be commanded to pro- 
duce jets of hot steam once per turn. The steam 
affects only the victim, who takes 2 to 8 points of 
heat damage (no saving throw). Any victim 
immune to or protected against heat or fire takes 
no damage. The irons ofsteam are not immune to 
any spells, and all four can be opened by a knock 
spell. The chains can be broken by magical weap- 
ons—in three rounds with edged weapons, two 
rounds with blunt. 


Throwing 
XP Value: 900 GP Value: 1,800 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

These irons may be thrown as far as 60 feet. The 
user can throw one pair at a time (either manacles 
or shackles, each pair chained together). The vic- 
tim of the throwing irons must make a saving 
throw vs. spell or be entrapped. Any creature of 
giant strength can easily break the chain by force 
in one round. Each manacle and shackle has a 
normal lock, which may be picked if that skill is 
successfully used. The throwingirons can be used 
as often as desired. 


of Transference 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

These irons appear to be and function as irons of 
imprisonment in all respects. However, any vic- 

tim held by the irons for one week or more gains 
a special power. If the victim concentrates on 

any creature seen within 60 feet, the creature 

must then make a saving throw vs. spell to avoid 

the magic. Ifthe throw fails, the imprisoned vic- 

tim and the creature exchange places and clothes 

(including all equipment carried). This effect 

requires no command word and may be 
attempted once per round until the victim is 

freed of the irons. 


Jacinth of Inestimable 
Beauty 
XP Value: 20,000 GP Value: 100,000 
Eldritch Wizardry 

This indescribably lovely gem is huge sized and 
exquisitely cut. It is rumored that it was once the 
property of the fabled Shah Cham’ Ponee. Its 
glowing orange luster immediately causes all 
who view it to make a saving throw vs. charm. It 
also is rumored to have other magical properties 
of unusual nature. The jewel must be held forth in 
order for its powers to operate. It has the follow- 
ing abilities and penalties: 

e User protected against attacks as if wearing 
armor +1. 

* Detect traps and secret doors. 

e Generate a 20-HD lightning bolt once per day. 

e Paralyzation with -3 on saving throw three 
times a day. 

e Death spell twice per day. 

e Each time artifact is used, user has a 25% 
chance to lose 1 hit point permanently. 

e The item causes greed and desire in any per- 
son viewing it. There is a 10% cumulative 
chance that each time any person sees the item 
he or she attacks the owner, slay the victim 
and taking the jacinth. 

e User becomes permanently lawful. 


Jacinth of Inestimable Beauty II 
XP Value: — GP Value: — 
Book of Artifacts 

Thejacinth ofinestimable beauty is a crystalline, 
fist-sized flower made from orange corundum 
facets and sewn together with strands of gold. 

Tribal legends tell of a most exquisite corun- 
dum gem that was found by the firstdwarves in 
the mountain ranges of their birth. The gem was 
of such unique beauty that their gods sent a 
vision to Jojonek, the First Craftsman. So 
inspired, he labored for weeks cutting flawless 
facets from the fiery orange corundum gem. 
Minute holes were drilled at the base of each 
crystal petal and Jojonek carefully linked them 
together with fine gold chains. The result of his 
labors was a flawless, palm-sized crystal jacinth 
blossom. Delighted with the creation, the gods 
gifted Jojonek with four tiny bottles of scented 
floral oils. Taking each bottle in turn, he thor- 
oughly oiled the blossoms until all of the scented 
oil was used. 


Jacinth of Inestimable Beauty II 


Wy 


Ñ 


ASE 


Jojonek soon found patrons coming to his shop 
to admire his work, and he began to brag to all 
who would listen that it was his artistic ability 
that had enabled him to craft such a fine piece of 
work. Of course, the gods were listening, and 
were not pleased. 

Within weeks Jojonek's family began to worry 
about him. He had become irritable, and all ofhis 
work of late was flawed. Jojonek had begun to 
believe his visitors were trying to steal his great- 
est creation. Finally, Jojonek fled the dwarven 
home with the jacinth, muttering, "Stay back! It's 
mine, mine... .” 

The Jacinth ofInestimable Beauty is a good 
artifact for any level campaign—it is not too 
powerful, and the side effects deter characters. 
One adventure can have a PC infatuated with 
someone using the flower, possibly disappearing 
with that person. Alternatively, the characters 
must find out why a local ruler has recently 
begun acting strangely. 

Constant Powers: Contact with the flower 
adds 5 points to the user's Charisma (maximum 
of21). 


Invoked Powers: The player character speci- 
2114 


= 621 


Jar, Borieflin's, of Steam 


”\ nl 


fies a floral scent while holding and smelling 
deeply of the crystalline jacinth. This releases the 
fragrance along with the appropriate power. Ifa 
scent is named that the gem does not have or no 
fragrance is specified, a random scent is released. 
The scents are as follows: 


Flower Power 

Violet Charm person (2/day) 

Lavender Suggestion (3/day, cast at 20th level) 

Rose 1 from Artifact Table 1-15: Major 
Powers 

Jacinth 1 from Artifact Table 1-12: Fate 
and Fortune 


Curse: The character suffers the effects of 
chaotic sleep (no saving throw) for as long as the 
jacinth is possessed. When the ratio of sleepless- 
ness to sleep reaches 2 to 1, the PC becomes 
incoherent and sluggish (all attributes reduced by 
1 point). Upon reaching 3 to 1, the character 
becomes paranoid (reaction rolls are required for 
each encounter with —6 penalties). 

Suggested Means of Destruction: 

e The jacinth must be bathed in a mixture of 
pollen from every kind of blossom. 

e It must be consumed by someone with no 
sense of smell. 


Jar 
Jars are pieces of glassware made to hold liquid 
and solid material. Most jars are cylindrical and 
equipped with a glass, leather, or metal lid that is 
held in place either by screwing, clamps, or by 
the lid's sheer weight. 


Borieflin’s Jar of Steam 
XP Value: 50 GP Value: 200 
DUNGEON Magazine 11 

Borieflin was a powerful wizard, a peaceful man 
whose only purpose in life was to serve his king, 
Lugthru III. Lugthru was a stern king, but just 
and fair. To relax from the burdens of his posi- 
tion, he loved to take long baths. He would take 
baths at all hours of the day, and some of his 
kingdom's laws were made in the bathtub. But 
Lugthru was annoyed that he always had to wait 
for his bath water to be heated—and he liked his 
baths hot! 

As a birthday present, Borieflin gave him a 
magical jar ofsteam that would heat his bath in 
seconds and that could be used over and over. 


= 622 x 


Borieflin created only three more ofthese jars, all 
made of crystal with twist-off lids. When the lid 
of such ajar is removed, hot steam pours forth to 
fill a 20- by 20-foot area in 30 seconds. Ifthe 
steam is not contained in an area, it dissipates in 
two rounds. The steam heats the room and any 
exposed water in it to almost 100(DM)F. Visibil- 
ity is limited, and all attacks in a steam-filled 
room are at -2. Simply replacing the lid brings all 
the steam rushing back into the jar before it can 


` be sealed. 
of Comprehension 
XP Value GP Value 
Animal: 200 2,000 
Human: 300 3,000 


DRAGON Magazine 189 
This waterjar holds special powers for those who 
wash their hands in it. One variety (75%) allows 
communication in any human language for two 
turns. The second variety (25%) gives the same 
ability with animals. The jar may be filled with 
any water. 


Roll Jar Type 
01-75 Human language 
76-00 Animal language 


of Preserving 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 2,500 
Tome of Magic 
This piece of magical glassware is able to hold 
up to 1 cubic foot of material. The round jar is 
equipped with a glass lid that screws into 
place. 

Any animal or vegetable matter placed in ajar 
of preserving enters a form of suspended anima- 
tion. A rosebud never wilts, for example, and a 
small animal never ages and does not require 
food, water, or air. Spell components placed in 
the jar never lose potency. 


Javelins 
Javelins are light spears, suitable for missile com- 
bat and usable from a mount or on foot. The 
weapon has been around since man's earliest 
days. The javelin's head is not very large, and is 
usually leaf- or laurel-shaped. Javelin heads may 
be barbed. They are often used as ceremonial 
weapons by bodyguards in civilized nations. 
Unless otherwise specified, the tip is metal, leaf- 


shaped, and nonbarbed. 
2117 


Javelin of Lightning g- 


Roll Javelin Types 
01-05 = Atl-Atl* and javelin/spear 
06-10 Barbed head* 
11-15 Laurel-shaped head* 
16-41 One-handed javelin 
42-49 Stone head* 
50-75. Tlacochtli with line 
76-00 Two-handed javelin 
Cursed 
XP Value: — GP Value: 1,200 
Land of Fate 


When hurled, this javelin returns against the user, 


automatically hitting for double damage. Roll 
randomly each time a new javelin is thrown to see 
if it is the cursedjavelin. 


of Distance 
GP Value: 3,200 
Gods, Demigods, & Heroes 


Range of this weapon is 90 feet with a +3 chance 
to hit. 


XP Value: 1,000 


2 
v; 
CNA 


PARR: 
arts MM" A 


HMMM: 


itl) 


ï 
N 
N 
~ 
N 
N 
N 
N 
N 
Şa 
x 


Vif 


Sen iHU 
MHL 


Hruggek's Javelins of Lightning 
XP Value: 250 GP Value: 3,000 
Monster Mythology 
The avatar carries 1d4javelins oflightning that 


affect any creature struck as a thunderclap (as for 
a staffofthunder and lightning). 


Huitzilopochtli's 
XP Value: 300 GP Value: 3,500 


Legends & Lore 
When Huitzilopochtli's avatar hurls this javelin, 
it becomes a stroke of lightning and inflicts 
5d10 points of damage if it hits. The javelin 


returns to his hand instantly after hitting or 
missing its target. 


of Lightning 

GP Value: 3,000 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 
A javelin oflightning is considered equal to a +2 
magical weapon, although it has neither attack 
nor damage bonuses. It has a range of 90 feet and, 


XP Value: 250 


x SSO Metter, 
SOT 


a 


Ke 
Š 


z 
FEZ 


Tlacochtli 
with Line 


ü GT A 


X% 
RSS 


~ Javelin of Piercing pa 


whenever it strikes, the javelin becomes the 
head of a 5-foot-wide, 30-foot-long stroke of 
lightning. Any creature hit by the javelin suffers 
1d6 points of damage, plus 20 points of electri- 
cal damage. Any other creatures in the path of 
the stroke take either 10 or 20 points of dam- 
age, based on whether their saving throws are 
successful or not. Usually, 1d4+1 javelins will 
be found. The javelin is consumed in the light- 
ning discharge. 


of Piercing 
XP Value: 250 GP Value: 3,000 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 

This weapon is not actually hurled—when a com- 
mand word is spoken, the javelin of piercing 
launches itself. Range is 180 feet, all distances 
considered as short range. The javelin has a +6 
bonus to attack rolls and inflicts 1d6+6 points of 
damage. (Note this missile flies horizontally, ver- 
tically, or any combination to the full extent of its 
range.) Around 2d4 ofthese weapons are found at 
one time. The magic ofthe javelin of piercing is 
good for only one throw, after that it becomes a 
normaljavelin. 


Sunbolt 

XP Value: 400 GP Value: 4,500 
The Milenian Empire 
These rare weapons are made by the priests of 
Halav, who are renowned warriors and weapon- 
smiths. They have created a new, iron alloy that is 
very light and exceedingly strong. This metal is 
called sunfire because of its golden hue. Due to 
the expense and difficulty in making sunfire, it is 
only used to fashion sunboltjavelins at this time. 
In the future, sunfire will likely be used for armor 
and other weapons. 

A sunboltjavelin causes 1d8 points of damage. 
It can be thrown twice as far as a normal javelin. 
Sunboltjavelins cannot be bought. They can only 
be owned by priests of Halav, unless presented to 
other characters as special gifts or as rewards for 
special services. 


Jettison 
A jettison is a large device for hurling masses of 
stone, trash, debris, iron spikes, and garbage. It is 
used as an antipersonnel weapon to clear an 
enemy spelljamming ship's decks. Like other 
large magical weapons, enchanted jettisons are a 
highly prized and desirable addition to any ship. 


Magical 
XP Value GP Value 
Light +1: 400 4,000 
Light +2: 800 8,000 
Light +3: 1,600 16,000 
Medium +1: 600 6,000 
Medium +2: 1,200 12,000 
Medium +3: 2,400 24,000 
Heavy +1: 800 8,000 
Heavy +2: 1,600 16,000 
Heavy +3: 3,200 32,000 

Realmspace 


These weapons are magically enchanted to allow 
their users to gain a bonus to the attack roll. 


Magical II 
XP Value GP Value 
Light +1: 800 4,000 
Light +2: 1,600 8,000 
Light +3: 3,200 16,000 
Medium +1: 1,200 6,000 
Medium +2: 2,400 12,000 
Medium +3: 4,800 24,000 
Heavy +1: 1,600 8,000 
Heavy +2: 3,200 16,000 
Heavy +3: 6,400 32,000 


War Captain's Companion 
Much like other magical ship-mounted weapons, 
magicaljettisons are highly desirable additions to 
any ship. Sixty-five percent of the weapons gain a 
bonus to attack and damage rolls. Thirty-five per- 
cent of the bonuses listed in the chart apply toward 
the range (or speed) of the missile being fired. The 
price, regardless of enhancement, is still the same. 


Jug 
A jug is a deep vessel used to hold fluids. Jugs 
customarily are made of earthenware, pottery, 
metal, or glass. Jugs usually have a handle and a 
spout or lip to accommodate accurate pouring. 
Their narrow necks are sometimes sealed with a 
lid or cork. 


Alchemy 
XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 12,000 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 

This magical device can pour forth various liq- 
uids upon command. The quantity of each liquid 
is dependent upon the liquid itself. The jug can 
pour only one kind of liquid on any given day, 
seven pourings maximum. The liquids pourable 
and quantity per pouring are: 

2127 


a a i e a ae. 


624 


EATON AIN DIPOPIE 


L IDIILIBIE ILBES IIIN LED SUV BLIVVE® 


WTAE 


7 


t 
eed 


v 
“i 
> 
` 
i 


625 


Jug, Amorpha 


D Se G 


Salt water 16 gallons 
Fresh water 8 gallons 
Beer/Ale 4 gallons 
Vinegar 2 gallons 
Wine 1 gallon 
Ammonia 1 quart 
Oil 1 pint 
Aqua regia 2 gills (8 oz.) 
Alcohol 1 gill (4 oz.) 
Chlorine 8 drams (1 oz.) 
Cyanide 4 drams (% oz.) 


The jug can only pour two gallons per round, 
so it requires eight rounds to complete a pouring 
of salt water. 


Amorpha 
GP Value: 10,000 
Legends & Lore 
This jug can pour out any liquid that the user 
needs at the time. It is not intended as a weapon 
and is almost always used to help suffering souls 
that might be in the area. 


XP Value: 2,000 


of Dyeing 
XP Value GP Value 
Red: 600 2,400 
Blue: 600 2,400 
DRAGON Magazine 30 


Thejug ofdyeing, red or blue, dyes any object 
placed within it—permanently. Prismal knows of 
one adventurer who accidentally put his hand in a 
blue jg ofdyeing and quickly acquired a new 
nickname. 


of Jade 

XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 5,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

This jug appears to be identical to ajug of jesting 
and produces a green gas cloud of the same size, 
but which lasts for only one round. Each victim 
must make a saving throw vs. turn to stone or be 
turned into ajade statue. The statue's value is 1 
gp per '/\) pound weight; an unequipped human or 
dwarf weighs 130-180 pounds and equipment 
encumbrance is added to that figure. An elf 
weighs 50 pounds less. and a halfling is one-half 
human size. A stone toflesh spell may restore the 
victim in the usual way, but there is a 25% chance 
of failure; the attempt, however, may be repeated. 


of Jesting 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 3,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic i 

This 2-foot high earthenware jug (50 pounds 
encumbrance) has a cork stopper firmly set into 
its neck. If opened, a cloud of green gas is 
released. The cloud measures 20 square feet 
and centers itself on the jug. Each victim within 
the cloud must make a saving throw vs. poison 
or laugh uncontrollably for 2d4 rounds. Those 
affected may not speak, attack, or cast spells 
and they gain a +4 bonus to reaction rolls (if 
applicable). Even those making the saving 
throw will chuckle a bit, gaining a +2 bonus to 
reaction rolls. The green gas remains in place 
for one turn after the jug is opened and affects 
all creatures entering the area in the same way. 
If the stopper is firmly replaced, the jug fills 
with gas in six turns (one hour) and may be 
reused after that time; if opened before the hour 
passes, however, no gas escapes and refilling 
must begin again. 


Louie Dulama's Alchemy 

XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 10,000 
1992 Fantasy Collector Card 145 
Louie's jug doesn't exactly work right—at least 
it's not working the way most wizards would 
expect it to, but Louie thinks that it works just 
fine. This particular jug makes only one kind of 
liquid: beer. Even better (in Louie’s opinion), it 
creates 8 gallons of beer per day, rather than the 
4-gallon maximum that properly working 
alchemy jugs make. The jug is a bit heavy to 
carry on the campaign trail, but Louie makes a 
point of finding room for it. Wherever he goes, 
Louie's the life of the party, and he loves that dis- 
tinction almost as much as the beer that makes 
him so. 


2132 


6 


2 


6 


Kaylan's Wooden Tray É 
XP Value: 300 GP Value: 1,500 ™ 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 43 
Upon command, this 8%by 11 inch tray will burn 
as anormal small campfire for eight hours per 
day, capable of being used for cooking or warmth. 
It extinguishes on command and can be used 
indefinitely. 


Kettle 
A kettle is a simple container that is used to boil 
water or cook food. Kettles are generally cast or 
forged from iron, steel, or copper. Most magical 
kettles require the user to place water in them 
before they can perform their magic. 


of Breathing 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 43 
When invoked, this spouted, copper kettle will 
begin to emit a stream of steam that negates the 
effects of poisonous clouds within a 30-foot 
radius. 


of Drumming 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 2,500 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

This kettle appears to be and functions like a 
cauldron ofheating, but in addition, if an animal 
skin of sufficient size is dried, scraped, and tied 
to the kettle, it may be used as a drum. When 
beaten, the drum creates an impressive thrum- 
ming sound in an area 20 yards square and up to 
60 yards away (as determined by the user). All 
within that area must make a saving throw vs. 
spell or run infear for 2d6 turns. The kettle 
functions only outdoors. 


Everbountiful Soup Kettle 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
Tome of Magic 

When this two-gallon iron kettle is filled with 
water, the liquid is transformed into steaming, 
nutritious vegetable soup. One full kettle is suffi- 
cient to provide a single meal for up to six normal 
appetites. No ingredients are required for the 
soup, nor is heat necessary. Any nonmagical, 
nonpoisonous liquid can be used in place of 
water. The everbountifiil soup kettle can be used 
once per day. 


Kettle, Mithryl's Everbountiful Soup 


í 
« 


iy 
i 


rae” 
( ratty 


of Fish 

XP Value: 1,000 . GP Value: 3,000 

The Book of Marvelous Magic 
This kettle is also identical to a cauldron of heating 
but, when a liquid is placed within and com- 
manded to heat, it fills with 20 vicious flying fish 
(AC 4; HD 2; MV 24; #AT 1; Dmg 2d6; immune 
to fire, immune to nonmagical weapons) that 
swarm out and attack everyone in the area. The 
fish fight to the death, disappearing when they are 
slain. Some kettles are deceptively enchanted and 
heat normally for a few uses before creating fish; 
however, once the kettle's perversity is revealed, it 
creates fish during every use after that. 


Mithryl's Everbountiful Soup 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 10,000 
1992 Fantasy Collector Card 505 
Mithryl remains in such excellent standing with 
her god that a delicious bowl of chicken soup 
from her magical kettle actually has the power of 
a cure serious wounds spell (2d8+1 hp). If 
Mithryl prays for grace over the soup, there is a 
50% chance that it will act as a cure disease spell 


as well. Any lawfully good-aligned character may 
2138 


+ 627 ze 


Key, Courier 


> a 


use the 2-gallon kettle with similar results, but 
the DM must judge whether or not the character 
is in particularly good standing with his or her 
god (or the kettle's special powers won't work). 


Key 
Keys are long, skinny metallic instruments that 
contain teeth and slipguards used to open specific 
locks. 
Courier 
XP Value: 1,000/set GP Value: 10,000/set 
DRAGON Magazine 200 

These keys are created in pairs, although only 
rarely are both keys of a set be found together. 
With one of these keys, a message of up to 100 
words can be "locked" (implanted) into an 
intelligent creature's mind—the message is 
forgotten by the recipient and inaccessible by 
means of ESP, hypnotism, and the like. Only by 
the use of either of the two keys in the set can 
the message be "unlocked" and revealed by its 
carrier. Courier keys are most often used to 
send messages so secret that there can be no 
risk of interception. Only one message may be 
planted into a particular mind at a time. Both 
locking and unlocking the message is done by 
touching the key to the messenger's forehead 
and turning it. The PCs may encounter these 
keys, or even have a message” locked” into one 
of the PC's minds, in the course of service to 
their leader, ruler, or patron. 


Dowsing 

XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
DRAGON Magazine 200 

When placed into the ground and turned, this key 
will "unlock" any underground water present at 
that location. The amount of water provided is 
dependant on local conditions and the DM, but 
ranges from about one pint in the desert, to four 
gallons under optimal conditions. A dowsing key 
can be used three times a day. 


of Entrance 
' XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 20,000 
Menzoberranzan Campaign Set 

This device can be used to open any door made of 
stone when the key is placed against the door and 
a command word is spoken. It works on doors 
weighing up to 800 pounds; it cannot, however, 
swing open a huge fortress gate (nor the gates to 
Blindingstone, for that matter). The key over- 


comes all magical and mundane locks; however, 
it has a total of 25 charges and after they are used 
it becomes useless. 


Grave 
XP Value: 6,000 GP Value: 30,000 
DRAGON Magazine 200 

This key has two powers, and is valued by dif- 
ferent characters for different reasons. Ifa 
grave key is inserted into the dirt of a burial site 
and turned, the remains buried there rise out of 
the grave and obey the wielder of the key (one 
zombie or skeleton, depending on the state of 
decomposition—DM’s determination). Note 
that using the grave key in this fashion is an evil 
act, and may affect the PC's alignment and class 
standing. This power can be used once in a 24- 
hour period. 

Despite the above, a grave key can be useful to 
nonevil characters, as it opens sealed coffins, 
crypts, tombs, and the like (provided there is no 
magic involved in the sealing—it has no effect on 
a wizard locked coffin, for example). This can be 
a useful device in the hands ofa vampire hunter, 
or those seeking to hunt down and destroy other 
forms of undead. 


of Inquiry 
GP Value: 2,500 


DRAGON Magazine 200 

This key is used to "unlock" the resistance of a 
person who is resisting questioning, forcing the 
subject to give truthful answers to three ques- 
tions. It is used by holding it up to the subject's 
forehead and making a one-quarter turn to the 
right. The subject does not have to be willing to 
undergo the interrogation, but must be unable to 
avoid the key's touch (bound or otherwise 
restrained by the interrogators; the key cannot be 
used in melee). No saving throw is allowed; the 
subject must truthfully answer the next three 
questions. The key can be used only once a day 
and affects a given subject one time only. Note 
that the key does not provide understanding or 
translation if the subject responds in a language 
or manner that is unintelligible to the question- 
ers. Law enforcement authorities such as consta- 
bles, magistrates, and judges value these keys 
very highly. 


XP Value: 500 


2143 


5 628 > 


Keys of Reunion 


5, Ee 


Map 
XP Value: 1,500 GP Value: 7,500 
DRAGON Magazine 200 
A map key can be used to gain new information 
from a map. The key must be held to the map in 
question and turned. At the DM's discretion, one 
previously hidden feature appears on the map— 
perhaps the location ofa hidden room, a secret 
door, or the fact that a hallway is trapped. In any 
case, the key's wielder has no control over what is 
revealed. Only a feature known to the maker of the 
map is revealed—that is, ifthe adventurers are fol- 
lowing a map drawn by the dwarves who dug the 
tunnel system they are in, any one feature known 
by the dwarves could appear. On the other hand, if 
the map key is applied to the map that the party is 
drawing up as they explore a newly discovered 
cave network, nothing new is revealed, as the party 
members themselves do not know any hidden fea- 
tures about the caves. A map key can be used only 
once on any given map. Such a key would be very 
useful when the PCs are questing for a hidden 
location. A map key could be the object ofa quest. 


of Opening 
XP Value: 1,200 GP Value: 6,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
When this apparently ordinary key is touched to a 
lock, say on a door or a chest, there is a 75% 
chance the lock will open. The key has 2d10 
charges when found. and one charge is used for 
each lock successfully opened. 


of Quinarost 
XP Value: 5,000 GP Value: 25,000 
Dragons of Dreams 
This key is magically linked to the life force of 
the designated user. The key appears to be an 
ordinary key with extraordinarily delicate work- 
manship. It is made of fused fine crystal twined 
with strands of platinum. It is about 6 inches 
long, the handle is 1 inch wide and tapers down 
to a 4-inch shaft. 

The key acts like an automatic magic jar spell. 
Once the owner dies of unnatural causes (battle, 
magical diseases or afflictions, etc.) the key 
absorbs the user's life essences and preserves them 
until the body can be restored or until a new body 
can be provided for the essence. While entrapped 
in the key, the user is in a complete state of stasis 
and unable to decide how much time has past since 
the last time he or she breathed. 


of Quinarost II 
XP Value: 5,000 GP Value: 25,000 
Tales of the Lance 
These 6-inch long keys are made of finecrystal 
twined with strands of platinum. They are of 
elven origin, and attuned to the life forces of the 
owners. 

The keys of Quinarost have the power to open 
the tower at the center of the city of Silvanost. 
The keys can be reattuned to the life of a new 
owner as long as the old owner is alive and volun- 
tarily makes the change. These keys are highly 
sought after by the Silvanesti elves, who will pay 
25,000 stl for the safe return of one key. 


of Quinarost ITI 
XP Value: 5,000 GP Value: 25,000 
DRAGONLANCE Adventures 

Created for the royal family of Silvanost, these 
ancient keys provided the only known way to 
enter the tower at the center of the city. Each of 
the members of that household had a key. At the 
time of the Cataclysm, several members of the 
royal household disappeared. Their fates, and 
those of their keys, are unknown. 

These are elven keys, magically linked to the 
life forces of their designated users. Each key 
appears to be an ordinary key with extraordinar- 
ily delicate workmanship. It is made of fine crys- 
tal entwined with strands of platinum. It is about 
6 inches long and the handle is 1 inch wide 
extending down to a 1-inch-wide shaft. 

The key can be reset to another person if the 
current owner wills it reassigned. The original 
owner must still be alive, however, to do this. 
Keys whose owners have died cannot be reset and 
cannot open the tower doors. However, these arti- 
facts are highly prized by the royal family (they 
mainly prove the demise of lost relatives) and 
those who return a key of Quinarost earn rich 
rewards. 


of Reunion 
XP Value: 5,000/set GP Value: 25,000/set 
DRAGON Magazine 200 
Made only in pairs, either of these keys will point 
in the direction in which the other key lies when 
held in the hand. Keys ofreunion can be useful if 
a party splits up in the course of an adventure, 
enabling the PCs to find each other again. Simi- 
larly, one key can be left at home and one carried 


by the adventurers, providing an easy means of 
2149 


g 629 è; 


~ bee Keys of Sirdan s- 


finding the way back home. The keys cease to 
work if they are on different planes of existence. 
The PCs may be hired by the owner of one key of 
a set to find the bearer of the other key. That 
bearer could be a lost love, a missing relative, or a 
rival who stole some of the patron's property, tak- 
ing the key without knowing its purpose. 


Rogue's 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
DRAGON Magazine 200 

A rogue's key, when touched to a lock, causes the 
outer casing of the lock to become transparent. This 
greatly aids the rogue in performing lockpicking 
skills, adding a 15% bonus to the chances of suc- 
cess (subject to a maximum chance of 99%). Note 
that this key only works on locks; it cannot turn an 
entire chest transparent in order to see what's inside 
it. A rogue's key is usable only by a rogue character. 


Saddle 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 2,500 
DRAGON Magazine 200 
By means of this key, which must be touched to 
the saddle and turned to activate or deactivate its 
power, the wearer can "lock" him or herself onto a 
saddle. This power may be used when riding a 
mount of any kind. While "locked in," any situa- 
tion that normally might cause the rider to fall 
from the saddle (being hit in combat, striking a 
tree limb, a bucking mount) fails to do so. This key 
would be a godsend for a character who just can't 
master riding, or one who rides a difficult or 
unusual mount (such as a mount capable of flight). 


Shapeshifter 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 10,000 
DRAGON Magazine 200 
This key can be used to "lock" a shapeshifter 
into its present form, preventing it from chang- 
ing shape for 12 hours, subject to a saving 
throw vs. polymorph. To creatures such as 
dopplegangers and true lycanthropes, this is a 
nuisance, but to those afflicted with the disease 
of lycanthropy (who change shape involuntar- 
ily), being prevented from changing causes 
great pain—and the loss of 10 to 40% of their 
current hit points each night the change is pre- 
vented. The key is used by touching the 
shapeshifter with its tip and turning it, but it 
cannot be used on oneself; thus, a paladin 
cursed to become a werewolf on the night of a 


full moon must have an ally willing to use the 
key. Note that the key does not cure the disease, 
it only prevents the shapechanging. A dispel 
magic spell can cancel the effects of a 
shapeshifter key. The effects of the key are 
treated as if cast by a 6th-level wizard. Lycan- 
thrope or doppleganger hunters would find this 
key most helpful in preventing their quarry 
from changing shape in order to escape. 


of Silence 
XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 20,000 
DRAGON Magazine 200 

A key of silence "locks" the vocal organs of one 
creature, subject to a saving throw vs. paralyza- 
tion. The key must strike the victim, as in com- 
bat, with a normal attack roll being made. Once 
the victim has been silenced, it cannot work 
again until the victim's voice has been 
"unlocked." This can be done only with the key, 
or by using a dispel magic spell cast against the 
key's 6th-level magic. (Note that if a wizard's 
voice is locked, another Spellcaster has to cast 
the spell). A key ofsilence can affect only one 
victim at a time. This key is of obvious useful- 
ness against Spellcasters. 


Silver Key of Portals 
XP Value: 1,200 GP Value: 6,000 
Mordenkainen's Fantastic Adventure 

This item appears to be a regular-sized silver skele- 
ton key (silver content equals 33 gp). It is, in fact, a 
minor artifact that was found in an abandoned 
chapel to Dalt, the lesser god of portals and enclo- 
sures. (It is conjectured by Mordenkainen that this 
forgotten god led him to find the key, for he has 
learned that Dalt is ofa chaotic good alignment and 
gives generously to those whom he favors). When 
the key is touched to any portal, be it magical or 
any other, the portal slowly swings open. This key 
may be used to open four portals per day. 


of Sirdan 
XP Value: 1,400 GP Value: 7,000 
DRAGON Magazine 39 
The keys ofSirdan, a legendary thief, consist of 
39 keys held together by a mithral ring. No keys 
can be removed from or added to the ring. There 
is a base 20% chance that for any lock a character 
encounters, the key to the lock can be found on 
the ring. Every point of Intelligence and Wisdom 


possessed by a character adds 1% to the base 
2155 


j 631 


Key, Skeleton 


2 SS eee A 


chance. The item is usable by all classes, but 
thieves receive an additional bonus of 20% per 
chance. It takes one melee round to check the 
ring, and only one attempt may be made for each 
lock encountered. 


Skeleton 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
POLYHEDRON Magazine 19 

This is a large normal key that radiates a faint 
magical aura. When touched to any lock, it may 
(50% chance) open it. (Note that this may trig- 
ger unremoved traps.) If it does not function, it 
cannot affect that lock. The key may also be 
used to negate a wizard lock or holdportal spell 
effect (50% chance of success) if a command 
word is spoken while the user touches the 
locked portal. 

An unusual side effect may also occur. With 
each touch, the key may create a skeleton on the 
opposite side of the portal affected. The chance of 
this occurrence is 3%, cumulative with each use; 
thus, the DM and player should keep track of the 
number of times the key has been used. The 


skeleton thus created cannot be turned by a priest; - 


it is a magical construct, not a true skeleton. In 
addition, the skeleton will be that of the race most 
commonly found within 120 feet of the key at the 


time of use; for example, in a bugbear lair, a bug- 
bear skeleton will appear. When first found, the 
key has a 0% chance of creating a skeleton. If 
sold, the item retains its current percentage. 
When the chance reaches 99%, the next use 
causes the key to teleport to a random location. 


Skeleton I 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 10,000 
Thieves of LANKHMAR 

This powerful item is carved from the thigh bone 
of a dead master thief; it can be used by any char- 
acter class. It normally appears as a small ivory 
key with a complicated design engraved on it. 
When inserted into any keyhole, the skeleton key 
changes in size and shape until it fits the lock. 
This process takes one round. The key then has 
an 85% chance of opening the lock, but it can be 
used three times per day. The key is highly magi- 
cal and strongly evil; it inflicts 1d6 points of 
damage on anyone of a nonevil alignment who 
touches it. Also, each time it is used there is a 5% 
(noncumulative) chance that the spirit of the thief 
whose thigh bone was used in crafting the key 
takes notice. If this occurs, the spirit emerges 
from the key as a haunt. 


Haunt: AC 0 or as victim's; MV 6; or as pos- 
sessed victim; HD 5; hp 30 or victim's hp; #AT 
1—as 5 HD monster; Dmg special or by victim's 
weapon type; SA possession, Dexterity loss; SD 
in natural form, hit only by silver or magical 
weapons or by fire; AL NE. 


The haunt will try to possess the character who 
is using the key. Ifthe possession is successful, 
the haunt (in the victim's body) makes all efforts 
to hunt down and kill the wizard who originally 
made the key. Once the haunt has emerged from 
the key, it becomes nonmagical. 


Spider 
XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 15,000 
DRAGON Magazine 200 
When held in the hand, this key allows safe passage 
through webs both natural or magical. (The strands 
of the web part and reform as the key's wielder 
passes through them.) Further, ifthe key is touched 
to a person suffering from the poison ofa spider and 


. turned, the poison damage is "locked out" until it 


can be dealt with (by means of a neutralize poison 


spell, or similar magic). The poisoned creature must 
2159 


ee E E T 


6 


3 


2 


Kite of Reconnaissance 


hal lia A 


have the key's power applied within one turn of 
being bitten. While the spider key is being used 
to"lock out" poison damage, it cannot be used to 
pass through webs. This key would be in high 
demand in those areas where many dangerous spi- 
ders live (the Underdark, for example). 


of Storage 
XP Value: 5,000 GP Value: 25,000 
DRAGON Magazine 200 

When held and turned this key creates a shim- 
mering door the size of a school or sports locker, 
which in turn opens to reveal an extradimen- 
sional space 5 feet tall, 2 feet wide, and 2 feet 
deep. This space can be used to store extra 
armor, weapons, treasure, and the like. However, 
other items of an extradimensional nature 
(portable holes, bags ofholding, and the like) 
cannot be placed inside the storage area, due to 
the physical laws inherent in the space accessed 
by the key. The space is closed by shutting the 
door and removing the key. The storage space 
can be accessed regardless of location; that is, 
the storage space is attuned to the key, not the 
location where the key was last used. 


of Translation 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
DRAGON Magazine 200 

This key can be used to "unlock" a language bar- 
rier. It must be worn around the neck in order to be 
effective. The key has the ability to translate one 
language being spoken into one understandable by 
the wearer. When created, the key is not attuned to 
any particular language; rather, it is activated at 
will by the wearer when hearing a language being 
spoken that he or she doesn't understand. Once 
activated, the key translates only that one language. 
The key does not grant its wearer the ability to 
speak, read, or write the language it is translating. 


of Unlocking 

XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
This key appears to be and functions as a key of 
opening (see above) in all respects. However, if 
the key fails to open the intended lock, it instead 
opens every clasp, buckle, hasp, and other fasten- 
ing on the user's clothing and equipment, causing 
nearly everything worn or carried to fall to the 
ground. A full turn is needed to repack all items 
and equipment. 


Wizard's 
XP Value: 5,000 GP Value: 25,000 
DRAGON Magazine 200 

This key, worn on a chain around the neck, can be 
used only by members of the wizard class. It 
grants a bonus of+10% to a wizard's chance of 
learning a new spell (see Table 4 in the PHB). 
The key must be worn for one full month before 
its power manifests. 


Kite 

A kite consists of a lightweight wooden skeleton 
with paper, parchment, or very light cloth 
stretched over the wood. A tail made of thick 
cloth is often required to give the kite balance as 
it is flown in the wind. A string, cord, or light 
rope is used to keep the kite from sailing away. 
It also allows the user to control the kite's 
motion. 


of Lightning 

XP Value: — GP Value: 5,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
This miniature kite is identical to a kite ofrecon- 
naissance except that it attracts thunderstorms. 
The storm strikes the user with small lightning 
bolts, one per turn, for three hours (18 bolts in 
all) and each bolt inflicts 2d6 points of damage. 
The victim may make a saving throw vs. wands 
for each hit, taking half damage if successful. 
Other than weather and storm control, there is 
no way to stop these attacks; they penetrate 
buildings of all kinds and will even follow the 
victim underground. However, magical curing 
may be applied easily, since the bolts occur but 
once per turn. The kite is destroyed during the 
thunderstorm. 


of Reconnaissance 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 10,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

This tiny, 3-inch-long kite, on command, flies 
into the air to any distance up to one mile above 
the user. After that it informs the user of any fly- 
ing creatures within one mile. It can detect invis- 
ible creatures but ignores anything of the size ofa 
normal bird. The kite functions only outdoors and 
only for one hour per use, three uses per day. 


2165 


ye ee a T 


633 


~ Kite of Signaling = 


of Signaling 
XP Value: 1,500 GP Value: 7,500 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

This miniature kite becomes invisible on com- 
mand. It also flies up to one mile high at a second 
command. Anyone within five miles of the flying 
kite or within the range of normal vision who 
speaks a third command word is able to see the 
kite. A fourth command word causes the kite to 
return to the user and become visible once again. 
The kite can be flown three times per day for one 
hour per use but can be made invisible or visible 
as often as desired. 


Kulver-Tam's 

Fruit of Extra Healing 
XP Value: 400 GP Value: 2,000 
1992 Fantasy Collector Card 245 
The pieces of fruit in Kulver-Tam's satchel each 
function as a potion ofextra-healing. However, 
two of the pieces of fruit have been infected by a 
magical worm. Ifthe worm is bitten while the 
potion fruit is being eaten, the entire fruit 
explodes, inflicting 2d4 points of damage upon 
the person eating the fruit. Only by carefully 
breaking open the fruit and removing the worm 
can this be avoided. 


Kura, the Darkness 
XP Value: 5,000 GP Value: 35,000 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 82 

This unique onyx shard can be worn around the 
neck on a chain or at the belt as a netsuke. It is 
smooth and curves slightly, looking almost like a 
miniature katana. If none of the shard's special 
powers are being used, the onyx radiates an aura 
of abjuration magic. The magic detected is the 
spell that locks Kura, an intelligent being from 
the Negative Material Plane, into the stone. Kura 
was tricked into the stone centuries ago by a 
ninja/wu jen. Kura has two goals—to free itself 
and to assist anyone who makes use of the power 
of darkness. 

Kura has an affinity with ninja, and will badger 
any wearer into becoming a ninja. The stone will 
not willingly serve nonrogues. Kura is by nature 
temperamental and devious. Over the centuries 
that Kura has spent trapped in the shard (most of 
the time serving ninja) the creature has developed 
a strong distrust of humans. 

Kura is chaotic neutral and is treated as a 
weapon with an Intelligence of 14, an Ego of 10, 


AT 
(Lr 
n Mis á 
dH 


and a personality of24. Kura speaks to its wielder 
by telepathy and has the following abilities, func- 
tioning as if cast by an 8th-level wu jen and 
usable once a day: detect invisibility, darkness 15' 
radius, andfly. In addition, it can generate a blade 
of negative planar energy in the shape of any 
medium or small melee weapon. The blade is 
pitch black, effectively invisible in the dark, and 
has a+3 bonus on attack and damage rolls against 
all targets except undead. When used against 
undead, the item suffers a -1 penalty on attack 
and damage rolls. 


2168 


, E a O 


634 


Ladder 


Ladders consist of two long parallel poles ™ 
connected by shorter rungs. The rungs are spaced 
evenly along the length of the parallel poles. 
When placed against a wall, the rungs can be 
used as steps to gain a higher or lower vantage 
point. A siege ladder is a large, sturdy version of 
the common ladder. Ladders can also be used as 
makeshift bridges, but the ladder's parallel poles 
gain their greatest strength when they are used in 
a near-vertical position. 


of Balance 
XP Value: 1,200 GP Value: 6,000 
POLYHEDRON Magazine 57 

This is a magical extension ladder. Two 15-foot- 
long sections are connected to each other by steel 
hinges. The properties of the ladder are that no 
matter which way the ladder is tipped, spun, or 
rocked, it will not fall down, the sections can be 
set up and unlocked manually or by command. 
By continuously giving commands to set and 
unlock the ladder, the user can cause the ladder to 
lie down slowly enough so that no harm will 
come to anyone on it. 


Benhi's Express 

XP Value: 5,000 GP Value: 25,000 
1992 Fantasy Collector Card 42 
Benhi's express ladder is the prized possession 
of the investigator rogue Benhi the Leech. He 
keeps it in his bag ofholding until he needs to 
sneak into the upper levels of a building. The 
ladder's rungs are made of an unknown material 
that vibrates harmonically as they are climbed 
creating a plane shift effect that sends Benhi 
into the Ethereal Plane. Once there, Benhi 
draws the ladder into the alternate plane behind 
him and continues to climb it until he reaches 
his destination. Then he puts his ladder back 
into his bag ofholding and reenters the Prime 
Material Plane one round after the rungs cease 
vibrating. 


of Climbing 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 10,000 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 43 
When this small (3-inch) platinum ladder is car- 
ried, an individual's chance of climbing any sur- 
face increases by 50%. 


Ladle of Duplication 


of Inestimable Length 
XP Value: 1,400 GP Value: 8,000 
DRAGON Magazine 73 
This wooden ladder is 10 feet long. The user may 
cause it to expand to a maximum of 50 feet in 
length, at will; it will retain the same strength it 
had at the 10-foot length. 


Ladle 


Ladles are used to serve or measure liquids. They 
are usually made of metal or wood and consist of 
a handle from 3 inches to 2 feet long with a large 
spoon-like cup at one end. 


of Candlemaking 

XP Value: 500 GP Value: 2,500 

The Book of Marvelous Magic 
When commanded, this item fills with wax that 
may be poured out to create one magical candle, 
complete with wick. Any candle thus created can- 
not be blown out by any means, but it is easily 
snuffed with a candle snuffer or the fingers. The 
magical candle sheds light to 15 feet in all direc- 
tions and burns for one hour. The ladle ofcandle- 
making can create one candle per day. 


of Curing 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 10,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
When this ladle is used as a dipper for ordinary 
broth, it enchants the contents. The magical broth 
will cure any disease except lycanthropy. The 
ladle can produce one such cure per day. 


of Drinking 
XP Value: 800 GP Value: 4,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
When this ladle is used to pick up any consumable, 
nonmagical liquid (water, ale, beer, wine) and then 
commanded to function, it magically pours up to 
10 times the amount of the liquid used. For exam- 
ple, one full waterskin may be ladled into 10 others 
and fill them all. The ladle functions once a day. 


of Duplication 
XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 15,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
When a magical potion is poured into this ladle and 
a command word is spoken, the potion may then be 
poured out into two potion bottles, for a duplicate of 
the original potion has been created. The ladle can 


function once a week, but does not duplicate poison. 
2176 


ee e 


635 


~ Lamp, Bashal's Tendrilight va 


Lamp 


A magical lamp may be of any type. Most adven- 

turers’ lamps are made of metal with a lower com- 
partment for oil (filled through a scalable hole), a 
handle of some sort, and shutters that protect the 
flame from the wind. Some lamps may be simple 

containers for oil, open or enclosed, with a cloth or 
string stuck in them for a wick. Such lamps may be 
made of clay, bone, wood, or any other material. 


Roll Lamp Type 
01-20 Beacon Lantern 
21-40 — Bull's-Eye Lantern 
41-60 | Hooded Lantern 
61-80 Lamp 
81-00 — Lanthorn 
Bashal's Tendrilight 


XP Value: 8,000 GP Value: 40,000 
DRAGON Magazine 179 
The fendrilight is a rectangular lantern with a 6- by 
6-inch base. Two shutters rest on opposite sides of 
the lantern, with a vertical column of five 
adjustable knobs along one nonshuttered side. 
When one of the shutters is opened, a quivering 
black membrane is revealed. The membrane is 
warm to the touch and has a very rubbery texture. 
If seen from behind (through the other open shut- 
ter), the membrane is not visible; instead, there 
appears a metal plate with a row of five horizontal 
vents corresponding to the five knobs on the side. 
When each of the knobs is turned clockwise, it 
opens a corresponding vent. When light from the 
lantern strikes the membrane, it causes the mem- 
brane to animate and stretch forth from the open 
shutter like a long black tendril. With each addi- 
tional vent opened, the tendril becomes longer. 


Tendril: AC 1; HD 2-6 (as per number of vents 
opened); THACO 13 (see text); #AT 1; Dmg 
1d8+1; SA stunning, constriction; MR 5%; 
SZ 10-30'(5'perHD). 


The tendril attacks as an 8-HD monster, lash- 
ing out like a whip. Those struck by the tendril 
must save vs. paralyzation or fall stunned for two 
rounds, unable to move, attack, defend, or use 
spells or psionics. Ifthe attack roll is two over the 
score needed to hit, the tendril encircles its victim 
and squeezes. This constriction does 1dl0 points 
of damage per round to any small- or human- 


á ty 


ae See 


ź 


IN 


sized creature until the tendril is destroyed or 
commanded to release. A captured victim need 
not make further saving throws vs. paralysis after 
the first one. The tendril functions for 2d6 rounds 
ifnot dispelled or destroyed. 

The tendril is very rubbery. Subsequently, non- 
magical blunt weapons have no effect on it. Non- 
magical edged or pointed weapons do 1 point of 
damage per strike, and magical weapons ofany sort 
do normal damage. The tendril gains 1 HD for 
every shutter open (from 2 HD for one shutter to 6 
HD for all five). The membrane is destroyed if it is 
reduced to 0 hit points; the tendrilight then becomes 
anormal lantern. The process required to create new 
membranes is contained within Bashal's Spell Book, 
but this text has been missing for many years. 

The tendrilight was the last creation of the wizard 
Bashal of Amn. Bashal was a member of the Cowled 
Wizards, and it was with their resources that he was 
able to create his masterwork. Unfortunately, he fell 
quite ill after its creation and died soon afterward. 
The lantern went into the hands of the order, who 
sold it to the head of a large merchant family in 
return for certain services rendered. From the mer- 
chant house, the lantern changed hands a number of 
times before it came into the possession ofa warrior 
of the Order of the Blue Boar named Crosess 
Whitedove. He carried the lantern with him until his 


death nearly 50 years ago. After his death, it fell into 
2177 


Ga a 


636 


x Lamp, Daoud's Wondrous ar 


the hands of one of Crosess' young students, Helrik 

Redsash. Helrik, at last report, had joined a group of 
adventurers and journeyed with them into the 
Snowflake Mountains. They have not been heard 
from since. Many treasure-seekers have gone into 

the mountains to look for them, but none have been 
successful to date. 


Byubo's Lamp of Audacity 
XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 20,000 
Storm Riders 

Only followers of the Padhran faith may carry this 
lamp. All others lose 1d6 points of Wisdom if they 
touch it, even for a second. When filled with oil, lit, 
and used as a focus for meditation, this lamp 
bestows one of the following 7th-level priest spells: 
Roll Spell Granted 
Creeping doom 
Confusion 
Regenerate 

Chariot ofSustarre 
Conjure earth elemental 
Earthquake 
Fire storm 

Wind walk 
Resurrection 
Control-weather 


SeCOKaDUKRWNHHE 


The user must meditate for three hours before 
receiving the spell. Determine the spell received by 
rolling a 10-sided die. The lamp bestows only one 
spell per day, no matter how many hours the user 
spends meditating, or how many disciples attempt 
to use it. Ifthe spell is not used within 24 hours, it 
fades away. In order to gain another spell, the user 
must spend another three hours meditating. Any 
character class may use spells provided by the lamp. 


of Continual Light 
XP Value GP Value 
Normal: 30 300 
Shuttered: 30 310 


War Captain's Companion 
These items are popular, especially in the phlogis- 
ton. They illuminate the interiors of ships with a 
constant light source without heat. The lantern's 
glass is tinted to dim the continual light spell held 
within it. A hood allows the lantern to be covered at 
will. The item has 300 gp value. For an extra 10 gp, 
the lantern ofcontinual light can have a shutter 
installed to signal to ships as far as five miles away. 


Daoud's Wondrous 
XP Value GP Value 
without prisms: 7,000 70,000 
with 1 prism: 7,000 100,000 
with 2 prisms: 7,000 130,000 
with 3 prisms: 7,000 160,000 
with 4 prisms: 7,000 200,000 
with 5 prisms: 7,000 240,000 
with 6 prisms: 7,000 280,000 
with 7 prisms: 7,000 320,000 


The Lost Caverns of Tsojcanth 

This artifact is wrought from the finest yellow 
gold, bearing four faces, one on each side. Its 
beautifully crafted framework is set with huge 
jewels and crystal lenses. An unwavering, pure 
flame burns within. The faces are normally fitted 
with the crystal lenses, but the jewels are actually 
additional lenses, fashioned to fit the four faces 
of the lanthorn. The lanthorn's magical powers 
change, depending upon which of the gem lenses 
are fitted to it, as well as upon the continued 
burning of the lanthorn's magical flame. The 
lenses and their powers are described below. 

The flame of Daoud's wondrous lanthorn can- 
not be extinguished by any known means, other 
than by exhausting its supply of fuel. The lamp is 
fueled by crushed, transparent gems, contained in a 
small compartment in the base. The lanthorn can 
be refueled with the following amounts of gems: 
Crushed diamonds, total value 10,000 gp. 
Crushed oriental topazes, rubies, sapphires, 
total of 4,000 gp for each type. 
Miscellaneous crushed, transparent gems of 
seven different colors, valued at 15,000 gp. 
Each gem must be worth at least 500 gp. 

The lanthorn is always burning when found, and 
fully fueled. If fuel is placed in an extinguished 
lanthorn, it will magically light itself. [fused as 
anormal lanthorn, it will burn for 100 years. The 
use of its magical powers burns fuel at a faster rate. 
Ifthe flame of the lanthorn goes out for any rea- 
son, the possessor of the lanthorn dies instantly. 

The four faces of the lanthorn can be shuttered 
so that no light shines through, but infravision 

will note it as a glowing object. Ifall four open- 
ings of the lanthorn are fitted with the crystal 
lenses, anyone exposed to the lanthorn's glow for 
four consecutive hours does not need food, drink, 
or sleep for a further 12 hours. Twenty-four con- 
secutive hours of exposure to the light will cure 
1d4+4 points of damage and temporarily halt the 


effects of disease or poison. Seven continuous 
2180 


we. ee 


637 


i 
4 
g 
e 
3 
i 
k 


À > > 
miei ST ~P” SF 


~ Lamp, Daoud's Wondrous g 


days of exposure will destroy all disease or poi- 
son in the person basking in the light. 

Dungeon Master Note: Seven gem lenses 
were made for the lanthorn, as listed below. When 
the lanthorn is found, it will have the following 
lenses with it: ruby, topaz, emerald, diamond, and 
the four crystal lenses. The three remaining gem 
prisms are elsewhere—possibly the objects of a 
quest by player characters. 

Should any of the gem prisms be broken during 

use, replacement lenses can be made. This requires 
a single huge gemstone worth at least 10,000 gp, 
of the same type as the one that was broken. The 
new lens must be prepared by a gemcutter of 
superb skill, and the gemcutter must be given one 
ofthe other lenses to use as a guide. A wizard must 
then cast enchant an item on the lens, followed by 
the spell that matches the original lens's power. A 
permanency spell must then be cast on the lens. 
Due to the nature of the lanthorn's magical flame, 
only lenses that duplicate the listed ones will func- 
tion—no original lenses can be made. The possi- 
bility of making new lenses for the lanthorn should 
be a secret that the PCs discover only after time- 
consuming and expensive research. 

The magical effects of the lanthorn have a 
range of 30 feet. The power of the artifact is such 
that, at ranges of 10 feet or less, there is no saving 
throw against the lanthorn's magic, nor will 
magic resistance protect against it. 

When three openings of the lanthorn are shut- 
tered and a gem prism inserted in the remaining 
opening, a beam of colored light shines forth to a 
distance of 30 feet. However, the magical power of 
the lens does not take effect until the possessor of 
the lanthorn commands it. The magical power of a 
single prism affects only a single target. Gem lenses 
can also be combined to produce different effects. 
The gem lenses, their effects, and fuel costs, are: 


Prism Type Effect Cost 
Ruby holdperson or monster 5 years 
Oriental 

Emerald haste 5 years 
Diamond color spray 5 years 
Sapphire fear 5 years 
Oriental 

Amethyst emotion (rage) 5 years 
Jacinth flame strike 5 years 
Special confusion 10 years 
Special prismatic spray 50 years 
Special prismatic sphere 50 years 


The effect of each single prism is like that of the 
appropriate spell. The magical power ofa single 
prism affects only one victim per use. The listed 
fuel is burned each time the given spell effect is 
used. An effect cannot be used if there is not 
enough fuel left in the lanthorn to "pay" for it. The 
confusion, prismatic spray, and prismatic sphere 
effects require combinations of several prisms. 

All spell effects are equal to 19th-level spell use, 
except that the prismatic sphere and prismatic 
spray effects have a duration of one turn per use. 

Ifa gem lens is placed in each opening of the 
lanthorn, and the lanthorn is then spun, all within 
30 feet of the lanthorn, except its possessor, will 
be confused, as the spell. Victims within 10 feet 
of the lanthorn receive no saving throw. This 
effect operates at the command of the lanthorn's 
possessor, as do all other effects. Any combina- 
tion of four gem lenses will produce this effect. 

If all seven prisms are controlled, and the owner 
of the lanthorn mounts all seven, one behind 
another, to an unshuttered opening, & prismatic 
spray is produced. Each use of the prismatic spray 
has a 10% chance of shattering 1d4 prisms. The 
seven lenses can be arranged in any order. 

Ifthe seven prisms are arranged so as to have two 
lenses in three of the openings and the diamond lens 
in the fourth, a prismatic sphere is created. The 
proper sequence is ruby and jacinth; topaz and 
emerald; sapphire and amethyst; diamond. 

A full round is needed to open or close all the 
shutters of the lanthorn. Placing or removing a 
lens from one of the openings requires one round. 
Thus, two rounds are needed to exchange one 
gem lens for a different one. In a melee or other 
confused situation where the lanthorn's owner is 
in danger, there is a 10% chance (rolled secretly 
by the DM) that the wrong prism has been acci- 
dentally inserted. However, since the magical 
effects operate on command, the owner can avoid 
unwanted results by examining the lanthorn 
before its powers are used. 

Legend states that the wrong combinations of 
gem fuel will cause the lanthorn to malfunction. 
Possible mishaps include: totally different magi- 
cal powers; powers that affect the lanthorn's 
owner as well as the intended target; deluding the 
owner as to the actual powers of the lanthorn; 
becoming nonmagical. 

Anyone who owns Daoud's wondrous lanthorn 
will become increasingly possessive of it, suspi- 


cious of those who look at the lanthorn, and 
2180 


° 639 


Lamp of Darkness 


p eee d 


increasingly secretive about it. 

This obsession with the lanthorn will become a 
form of paranoia as the owner becomes con- 
vinced that "they" want to kill him or her and 
steal the lanthorn. 

Daoud's wondrous lanthorn is an artifact of 
great power and worth a vast sum if sold. It is 
known that an offer of 160,000 gp was made for 
the device, but with just four of the seven prisms 
available. One can only speculate what the price 
would be ifall seven gem lenses were included. 


of Darkness 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
The Book ofMarvelous Magic 
This lamp appears and functions as a lamp oflong 
burning in all respects. However, when its light 
falls upon any creature ofan alignment opposite 
that ofthe user, the light turns into a continual 
darkness spell effect that is centered on the lamp. 


Dragon 
XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 12,000 
DRAGON Magazine 126 
This hooded lantern is shaped like the head ofa 
dragon. When the handle is manipulated to reveal 
the light, the dragon'sjaws are opened. This special 
lantern secretes dragon fat, that most brilliant of illu- 
minating agents, producing enough so that the 
lantern may be used up to 20 turns a day. (Inciden- 
tally, regular dragon fat may be burned in ordinary 
lanterns; the amount needed to fill a lantern once is 
worth 3,000 gp.) The light from this lantern bril- 
liantly illuminates an area equal to that covered by an 
ordinary lantern's light, but in this case the lighted 
area is equivalent to broad daylight. In addition, the 
light can be seen from a great distance, until the 
point the lantern is at is hidden by the curvature of 
the earth (thus, the dragon lantern may also be used 
as a Signaling beacon). Any creature who looks 
directly into the dragon jaws (equivalent to the 
chance of being caught by the gaze ofa basilisk) is 


blinded for 10 turns unless treated by cure blindness. 


Floor 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 2,500 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
When this lamp is held and commanded to stand, it 
extends a magically created iron rod from its base 
that stretches to the floor (maximum length 10 
feet). This stand disappears if the lamp is moved 
even slightly, but otherwise remains until com- 


manded to vanish. When the lamp is held over a pit 
or floor trap, it can be commanded to create a floor 
of up to 400 square feet covering the dangerous 
area. The magical flooring appears as stone, but has 
no real existence and cannot move in any way. The 
floor may be crossed safely and then it disappears 
in one turn. The floor lamp creates its rod as often 
as desired, but can create a floor only once per day. 


of the Four Winds 
XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 15,000 
Assassin Mountain 

Once every three days, this lamp can be used to 
summon 1d3 wind walkers, which must obey the 
owner of the lamp for three days or until the task 
assigned by their master has been completed, 
whichever comes first. 


of the Genies 
XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 15,000 
1992 Fantasy Collector Card 748 

This brass lamp is a form of a genie prison—a 
device that entraps and binds a genie to servitude. 
The captured creature may only be released from 
the lamp under specific circumstances or to per- 
form particular tasks, as defined by the maker of 
the lamp. Such genie prisons may be used to entrap 
djinn, dao, efreet, or marids. and some lamps are 
even used among genies themselves to punish their 
opponents. There is a legend that a lamp was used 
by a rival genie to entrap the djinni Jamaliyah, on 
condition that she may be released only to serve the 
holder ofthe lamp, and then for 1,001 days. 


Goldmane's Dazzler 
XP Value: 5,000 GP Value: 25,000 
DRAGON Magazine 179 

The dazzler is one of the most beautifully crafted 
items ever built. It appears as an intricately carved 
lion's head with large, green gemstone eyes, set on a 
gold cylinder. The materials themselves cost thou- 
sands of gold pieces. Issuing from the lion's ears is a 
golden handle with an ivory grip. The jaws of the 
lion open, and the light is revealed. An odd quality 
of the lantern is that it does not seem to burn any 
fuel to produce its light. Whenever the jaws are 
opened there is light, and it cannot be extinguished. 
Carved on the back of the cylinder are two words, 
written incommon: "Dazzle" and "Roar." 

When the jaws are open and the command "Daz- 
zle" is spoken, a beam of dazzling light shoots from 


the lion's mouth. This beam has the same effects as 
2186 


ee 


640 


Lamp ofIgnition 


De TE Se 


the wizard's spell confusion, lasting for 1d4 rounds. 
If the creature struck makes a saving throw vs. 
spell, the duration of confusion is cut to one round. 
This power is ineffective against creatures that can- 
not see; it can be used once every 24 hours. 

When the command "Roar" is spoken and the 
jaws open, a number of things occur. First, the light 
dims and the lion's eyes glow brightly. Then, there is 
a great inrush of air. The movement of the air extin- 


guishes all torches within a 20-foot radius. Immedi-. 


ately after that (but still during the same round in 
which the command word was spoken), the lion's 
head gives forth a mighty roar that deafens all crea- 
tures in a 20-foot radius and creates a cone of force 
120 feet long and 30 feet wide at the end. Any crea- 

` ture within the cone receives 2d10 points of damage 
and is knocked offits feet ifit fails a save vs. wands. 
The cone offorce destroys doors and light wooden 
structures less than 1 foot thick, and does 1d4 struc- 
tural points of damage to stone or earth structures. If 
the lantern is used underground, it may very well 
bring the roof down. This power of the lantern can 
only be used once per week. 

This item was made in the city of Myth Drannor 
during its cultural height. It was crafted by a dwar- 
ven goldsmith and enchanted by the wizard Gold- 
mane, made to be a thing of beauty as well as a 
potent item of magic. When Myth Drannor fell, it 
was taken by the elves toward Evermeet by an elf 
wizard named Silverhair. His party was attacked 
by a band of orcs who, using surprise and greater 
numbers, managed to overtake the elves and force 
them into slavery. The lantern remained in the hall 
of the orc chieftain until 20 years ago when a band 
of halfling thieves known as Swifthand, Inc., infil- 
trated the lair and made off with a large amount of 
treasure, including the lantern. 

The band sold it to a trader on the Wyvernwa- 
ter, who in turn sold it to a rich merchant from 
Arabel. He held it for a few years until he died. In 
his will, he left the lantern to a favorite nephew in 
Scornubel. Unfortunately, the caravan that was 
carrying the lantern to the nephew was set upon 
by a group of bandits just west of High Horn. This 
occurred last year, and the merchant's nephew has 
offered a substantial reward for its return. 


of Greyhawk 
XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 25,000 
GREYHA WK Adventures 
This hooded lantern was found by looters in the 
abandoned castle of Zagig Yragerne, the Mad 


Archmage. Exactly why he used it remains a 
mystery, though many people suspect that it 
served as a guard against the supernatural crea- 
tures with which he dealt. Once per day, the 
lantern can shine a magical light for one turn. The 
light renders visible all invisible, out-of-phase, 
and ethereal creatures in a 50-foot radius. The 
ethereal creatures are then visible as transparent, ` 
ghost-like entities. The light automatically turns 
undead as a 15th-level priest. 


of Honesty 
XP Value: 400 GP Value: 2,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

This lamp may be shuttered to shine in a single 
direction for a range of 5 feet. When so used, any 
creature upon whom the light shines must make a 
saving throw vs. spell or tell the whole truth in 
response to any question. The lamp has no effect 
if the saving throw is successful; otherwise, the 
effect lasts for one turn. The lamp may be used 
three times per day at most. 


Hurricane 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 10,000 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 23 

This item appears to be and functions as a lamp 
oflong burning in all respects, but only after its 
storm has passed. The lamp is always closed 
when found. When its shutters are opened, vio- 
lent gusts of wind and rain come from the lamp, 
dousing the holder and all others within 30 feet. 
This "hurricane" lasts for three rounds; each vic- 
tim must make a saving throw vs. spell, and those 
who fail are knocked over by the winds. If this 
occurs, every carried item (except for body cloth- 
ing and/or armor, but including caps, gloves, trea- 
sure, etc.) is blown about, landing and scattered 
within 60 feet. A successful saving throw indi- 
cates that the victim has fallen to the ground in 
time, tightly grasping all carried items. The hurri- 
cane lamp may thereafter be used as a lamp of 
long burning for the remainder of the day. It 
resets its hurricane every 24 hours, which must 
again be triggered before the lamp can be of use. 


of Ignition 
GP Value: 2,500 
DRAGON Magazine 73 
This oil lamp automatically ignites whenever any 
person approaches within 10 feet of it, turning 


itself offagain when no one is within 10 feet. 
2190 


XP Value: 500 


Oe aa 


6 


4 


1 


Lamp, Illag's Abominable Beacon 


ccna a A 


Illag's Abominable Beacon 


XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 20,000 
DRAGON Magazine 179 

This magical light source is a creation of evil. The 
beacon is a 2-foot-tall, 1-foot-wide cylinder with 
one set of shutters and is made ofthe blackest iron. 
It appears to be partially melted, but this is a delib- 
erate decoration. On top of the cylinder is a large 
skull with two black onyx gems in the eye sockets. 
The handle, which projects through the skull top, is 
made of human bone. It weighs about 20 pounds. 

Any character of good alignment who touches 
this evil item takes 1dl0 points of damage; neu- 
tral characters who handle it take 1 d6 points of 
damage. If an evil character grasps the beacon, it 
forces the character to save vs. spell (Wisdom 
bonuses applicable) or be possessed in such a 
way that the character is unable to let go of the 
beacon and will fight to keep it, even at the risk 
of life and limb. This effect is permanent, 
removed only by a limited wish or wish spell. 

The beacon's enchantments are twofold. The first 
is the ability to create a cone of darkness, 20 feet 
long and 20 feet wide at its widest, that lasts as long 
as the bearer continues to concentrate. The darkness 
is the same as the 2nd-level wizard spell darkness 
15' radius in other respects. The second function of 
the item gives the lantern its name. On mental com- 
mand, it acts as a beacon to any undead in the area. 


When this power is activated, the stones in the eye 
sockets of the skull pulse with a black light. One to 
four rounds later, all undead within 100 yards of the 
lantern are summoned by the pulses. The undead 
are controlled by the lantern holder as if by an evil 
priest of the same level as the user; undead that are 
not controlled will attack the lantern holder. If the 
character is dual or multiclassed, use the character's 
lowest level. The summons will not work if the 
lantern holder is in an area the undead are unable to 
reach. For example, a group of skeletons would be 
unable to reach the party through a locked door. 
Summoned undead move at their normal rate. 

This abomination is the creation of the Void 
Mage Illag, with the help of the priests of Bane. In 
fact, he sold it to the temple in Thay in exchange 
for divine assistance. The lantern remained in the 
temple until approximately 50 years ago, when it 
was stolen by a young Zhentarim priest, Zanepar, 
and taken to Zhentil Keep. He used this evil item 
many times in his brotherhood's battles for control 
of the Moonsea area. However, when Zanepar was 
told to give up control of the lantern to his superi- 
ors, he fled with it into the Thunder Peaks. It was 
not seen again until three years ago, when it was 
used by an orc shaman on a raid. Many agents 
from Zhentil Keep have gone into the mountains in 
hope of finding the artifact and getting it back. 
None so far have been successful. The lair of the 
orcs is rumored to lie somewhere northeast of the 
Spiderhaunt Woods, but no one has been able to 
locate it. l 


of Infinite Burning 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
DRAGON Magazine 73 
This ordinary oil lamp needs no oil and burns 
indefinitely. 


Krillus's Blazer 
XP Value: 6,000 GP Value: 30,000 
DRAGON Magazine 179 
Krillus's blazer is a very plain brass lantern, 
square, with shutters on one side. The brass fix- 
tures ofthe lantern always look newly polished. 
Suspended by magical means above the oil recep- 
tacle is a brass ball, unattached in any way to the 
lantern. Anyone touching the ball receives an 
electric shock for 1dl0 points of damage. The 
person must also make a saving throw vs. para- 
lyzation or be knocked unconscious for 1d4 


rounds. The oil receptacle holds enough oil to last 
2193 


’ nn e ee E 


642 


x Lamp, Magic s- 


two hours. The lantern need not be lit for the 
magic to function. When the lantern is grasped by 
any character, it communicates its powers to him 
telepathically but is unable to pass on any other 
information. The lantern has two functions, both 
having to do with electricity. 

The first is to release a stunning wave of elec- 
tricity. The wave has a 180° arc of effect, affect- 
ing every creature within 20 feet of the lantern 
with powers like that of a limited power word 
stun. This stun power follows the description of 
the spell exactly except that it lasts for only half 
the normal duration (round up fractions). This 
power of the lantern can be used once per day. 

The second function is its ability to create up to 
10 lightning bolts, as per the wizard spell, with a 
combined power of 10 HD. The power of each bolt 
is decided by the user. For example, if the bearer 
faced a powerful creature, one bolt could be firedto 
deliver 10 HD of damage; ifthe user met a party of 
orcs, up to ten 1-HDbolts, one per round could be 
fired. A bolt can strike only one creature or object. 
If all the charges are not used within one hour of 
firing the first bolt, the remaining charges are lost. 
This power can be used once per day. 

The wizard, Krillus of Westgate, lived almost 
100 years ago. During his lifetime, he was partic- 
ularly fascinated by the marvels of electricity and 
performed many experiments involving lightning 
and magnetism (he is responsible for the creation 
of more than one wand of lightning and ring of 
shocking grasp). This lantern, however, was his 
greatest creation. When he retired to his tower, he 
gave blazer to a favorite apprentice named Jelline 
Lightouch. She took the lantern when she left to 
seek her fortune. Krillus s blazer saved her life 
and the lives of her companions more than once. 
After a time, she grew in power and settled down, 
establishing a tower and training aspiring young 
wizards in the Art. Once, while Jelline was away, 
one of her students took some items (including 
the lantern) and fled. It was not long before he 
was caught, but he had time enough to sell the 
lantern to a rival of Jelline who spotted him leav- 
ing the tower. The person lucky enough to get the 
lantern was a wizard named Krosset Blackhand. 
Blackhand promptly disappeared, and the fate of 
the lantern was unknown for a time. 

Krillus’s blazer reappeared 30 years after its 
disappearance in the hands of a man found float- 
ing on aruined ship just west of Waterdeep. He 
could remember nothing of what happened to 


him or how he came into possession of the 
lantern. Soon after his discovery, both he and the 
lantern disappeared, vanishing without a trace. A 
variety of methods, including magical ones, were 
used in efforts to locate him, but all attempts have 
thus far failed. Many believe that powerful magic 
wasusedtotakehim,althoughnoclaimshave 
been made for the action. A substantial reward is 
offered by the Lords of Waterdeep for any infor- 
mation regarding this mystery. 


of Lighting 
GP Value: 1,000 
DRAGON Magazine 73 
An ordinary lamp which ignites when the proper 
command ("let-there-be") is spoken within 15 
feet of it. 


XP Value: 200 


of Long Burning 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 2,500 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
When this lamp is filled with oil and lighted as a 
normal lantern, it burns and sheds light without 
using oil. Ifthe flame is doused by water, the 
lamp becomes nonmagical. 


of Long Burning II 

XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
DUNGEONS & DRAGONS Rules Cyclopedia 
This item is identical to a normal adventurer’s 
lantern. It is made of metal, with a lower com- 
partment for oil, a handle, and shutters around the 
body to protect the flame from wind. When filled 
with oil and lit as a normal lantern, it burns and 
sheds light without using oil. If the flame is ever 
doused by water, the lamp of long burning 
becomes nonmagical. 


Magic 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 15,000 
The Emirates of Ylaruam 
Rubbing these lamps summon an efreet. The DM 
secretly makes a saving throw vs. spell for the 
summoning character. If the save fails, the efreet 
is free to ignore or attack the summoner, the 
efreet may pretend to serve and then, betraying its 
unwary "master," spirit the lamp away to prevent 
further unwanted summons. However, if the sum- 
moner's request suits the efreet's purposes or 
sense of humor, the efreet may serve regardless of 
the save result. Ifthe save succeeds, the efreet is 


forced to perform one service for the summoner. 
2197 


3 NN 


643 


~ Lamp, Malthrox's Shadowcaster m 


Malthrox's Shadowcaster 
XP Value: 6,500 GP Value: 32,500 
DRAGON Magazine 179 

Malthrox 's Shadowcaster appears to be a normal 
oil lantern made of bluish metal, with shutters on 
all four sides and a wooden handle with a bone 
grip. Upon two ofthe shutters are carved single 
words in a script legible only with a read magic 
spell. In the hands of anyone other than a wizard, 
the Shadowcaster acts as a normal lantern. How- 
ever, in the hands of a wizard, its powers are com- 
municated telepathically. 

The runes carved on the outside of the shutters 
read "Bizzait" and “Missathac.” When only the 
shutter marked "Bizzait" is opened and that word 
is spoken, the narrow beam of light produced has 
the power to dispel magic as per the wizard spell, 
cast at the 8th level. This power can be used three 
times per day. The area of effect is the first 30- 
foot-square area the light falls upon, with a range 
of 10-120 yards. Oddly, the light beam is the 
same diameter beyond the 10-yardrange, though 
it is roughly conical before then. 

When "Missathac" is uttered and that shutter is 
opened, a 1-foot-wide, bright beam of light 
flashes forward and strikes the closest object, out 
to a range of 60 feet. If the beam hits a living 
creature, a shadowclone is produced. 


Shadowclone: INT non-; AL N; AC as original; 
MV as original; HD special; hp 30; THACO 15; 
#AT 1;Dmg 1% or by weapon type; SD see fol- 
lowing; MR 10%; SZ as original, ML special; XP 
variable. 


The shadowclone is a shadow copy of the crea- 
ture caught in the lantern's beam. The "clone" acts 
in most ways like its original, having the same size, 
speed, and weapons held—however, there are dif- 
ferences. First, a shadowclone cannot cast spells or 
use psionics, and clones of magical items have no 
magical properties of their own. Second, the clone 
can be struck only by +1 weapons or better, but can 
be affected by spells ifthey are not negated by the 
clone's magic resistance. Third, no matter what sort 
of creature is cloned, it always attacks as a 6th-level 
fighter. The clone created is under the complete 
control of the lantern bearer, being immobile with- 
out direction. To maintain control, the bearer must 
concentrate on the clone. Ifthe concentration is 
broken by a successful attack or by other means, 
the clone is dispelled. The shadowclone exists for 


3d8+2 rounds otherwise. This power is usable only 
once per week. If other shutters are open when the 
command is spoken, nothing will happen. 

The original creator of the Shadowcaster and the 
date of its creation are lost to time. The lantern 
derives its name from the illusionist who discovered 
it at the bottom of an ancient, dwarven mine. Most 
sages who have studied this artifact over the years 
generally agree that it is of gnomish origin, though a 
human wizard is thought to have enchanted it. 
Malthrox carried this lantern with him throughout 


~ his career and eventually passed it on to a favorite 


apprentice, Fronthal. Fronthal took his master's gift 
and used it extensively on various quests in the west 
with a group of adventuring friends. He and his 
band were last seen 10 winters past as they were 
preparing for an extensive campaign into the High 
Moors. None returned from this excursion, and the 
fate of the party and the lantern is unknown. It has 
been rumored that the lantern has fallen into the 
hands of a bugbear chieftain. 


Messakk's Eye 
XP Value: 5,500 GP Value: 27,500 
DRAGON Magazine 179 

The eye appears to be a large red ruby (worth 
about 5,000 gp) with a black pearl set into its 
side, giving it the appearance of a large red eye. 
It sits upon an unadorned column of gold: The 
gem and the pillar are encased in a glass cylin- 
der that has had a glassteel spell cast upon it. 
The cylinder is capped at both ends, and the 
caps are covered with runes of inlaid ivory. On 
the top is a simple iron handle with a wooden 
grip. Although the lantern is made up of a num- 
ber of heavy materials, this item weighs only 
one pound. The writing around the brass sec- 
tions is in a strange alphabet created by the wiz- 
ard, and therefore requires magical means to be 
understood. If a comprehend languages spell is 
cast, the runes across the top are seen to read, 
"To have the eye brighten thy way, speak the 
word Alight, then shall it obey." The runes along 
the bottom read, "To halt thine enemy in his 
path, point the eye and call Krisak.” 

When the command "Alight" is spoken aloud 
by the bearer of the lantern, the eye will glow as 
if a continual light spell was cast upon it. The 
light has a reddish tint to it and shines in a full 
360° circumference. The continual light spell is 
identical to the 3rd-level priest spell except that it 


cannot be used to blind a creature. When the 
2199 


e a 


Lamp of Spying 


b a ey oe 


lantern's bearer no longer wants the light, he 
needs only to speak aloud the command "Extin- 
guish." Unfortunately, Messakk forgot to include 
this bit of information in his instructions. 

When the command “Krisak” is voiced, 1d4 crea- 
tures in front of the lantern are affected by a hold 
person spell (saving throws allowed). This power 
only affects those within 15 feet of the lantern and 
lasts for 1d4+2 rounds. This power ofthe item can 
be used only twice per day, requiring six hours to 
recharge after each use. Use ofholdperson cancels 
the continual light power, and when the holdperson 
spell runs out, the lantern will be dark. 

The eye was created by the wizard Messakk of 
Amn well over 100years ago. The lantern was his 
greatest creation, and he devoted his life (and 
some even claim his own eye) to its making. He 
carried it with him until his death. The lantern 
was rediscovered by the Band in Red, an adven- 
turing company operating out of Baldur's Gate, 
when they located and successfully raided his 
tower. The eye was then carried by a warrior of 
the band named Florn Scarhand, who used it on 
many of his quests until he finally retired and 
passed it on to his son. With his father's gift, Din- 
las Scarhand soon joined a group bound for 
Shadowdale, where the lantern was used on expe- 
ditions into the Underdark. It was on one of these 
trips that the party encountered a beholder. The 
creature accepted the lantern as ransom, and 
allowed the party to escape. This was in the Year 
of the Spear—none have returned. 


of Multichromaticism 
XP Value: 200 GP Value: 1,000 
DRAGON Magazine 73 
Each sideof this eight-sided lantern shines with a 
different color, and the colors periodically rotate 
from face to face at intervals of 10 seconds to 5 
minutes. This phenomenon is believed to be 
caused by the wild magic that powers the item. 


of Plant Growth 
XP Value: 600 GP Value: 3,000 
DRAGON Magazine 73 
A lamp ofplant growth is a large oil lamp. 
Although it appears to be nothing more than an 
ordinary flame, the light of this lamp is equiva- 
lent to sunlight of ordinary strength for purposes 
of growing plants indoors. Without the special oil 
or without the lamp itself, there is no magic. Gen- 
erally, the lamp will be placed in the center of an 


array of plants. The wick and oil extend far up a 
slender cylinder in order to be above the plants to 
shed light down on them. 


Shadow 

XP Value: 750 GP Value: 6,000 

Unearthed Arcana 
This mundane light radiates a faint, evil dweomer. 
If it is fueled by oil rendered from fat of human 
corpses, its beam generates 1d4+4 shadows who 
serve the possessor of the device for as long as it 
burns. When the oil is consumed, the shadows 
disappear. Typical burning time is one hour. Note: 
Characters of good alignment lose experience 
points equal to the value of these items if they do 
not destroy them on recognition. 


of Spying 
XP Value: 1,600 GP Value: 8,000 
War Captain's Companion 
The lantern ofspying look and functions like a 
lantern ofcontinual light. It is, however, even 
more popular with paranoid ship captains. The 
lantern allows the individual using it to hear the 
voices of every person on the ship with clarity, 
even if they are all talking at once. Whispers and 
distorted yells can be clearly understood. The 
user, however, must be fluent in the languages in 
order to understand them. The lantern does not 


interpret. By twisting the wick wheel, a knob-like 
2203 


7 645 


~~ Lamp of Summoning r 


projection at the base ofthe lantern, the user is 
able to increase or decrease the volume. 

If there is more than one lantern ofspying on a 
single ship, the owners hear only high pitched 
and irritating whines whenever the wick wheel is 
turned to increase the lantern's volume. No spy- 
ing can be done when more than one lantern is on 
the same ship. Any magic that defeats Clairaudi- 
ence foils the lantern. , 

of Summoning 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

This lamp looks like and functions as a lamp of 
long burning in all respects. However, if the user 
speaks the proper command word while rubbing it, 
it summons a (lesser) djinni from the Elemental 

Plane of Air. The djinni serves the user for one day, 

is very friendly, and requires no concentration, 
control, or threats. The lamp may be used once per 
week, but the djinni appears a total of only 20 
times. Ten percent of these lamps are cursed; the 
djinni will attack or imprison the user. The cursed 
lamp automatically dispels all protection from evil 
effects within 60 feet when the djinni appears and 
prevents their creation until the djinni is slain. 


Thessall's Wayguider 
XP Value: 5,600 GP Value: 28,000 
DRAGON Magazine 179 

Thessalls wayguider is a square lantern 1 foot high 
with a 6- by 6-inch base. It is styled with four brass 
pillars, one at each comer. Two opposite sides of 
the lantern have bronze shutters. The handle on top 
is made of ivory inlaid with gold bands. In the cen- 
ter of the lantern is room for one large candle. The 
wayguider has two words inscribed at the base in 
an alien script. _Ifexamined with a read magic spell, 
the words read "Bezzam" and “Tekkar.” This 
device will function as a normal lantern unless one 
of the command words is spoken. 

When the command "Bezzam" is spoken 
aloud, the light from the lantern takes on a blue 
tint and the range of the light is reduced to 40 
feet. This light has the power to reveal secret and 
magically hidden doors as well as disguised trap 
doors. When the light shines upon any such por- 
tal, its outline glows with a bright blue sheen. The 
opening mechanism of the door is not revealed, 
however. This power of the lantern can be used 
only four times a day, needing six hours after 
each use to recharge. The magic lasts for only one 


turn before the light returns to normal. 

When the second command, "Tekkar," is uttered, 
the lantern casts a reddish light. The glow of the 
lantern is reduced to a range of 20 feet. This beam 
has the ability of true seeing as per the 5th-level 
priest spell ofthe same name. This power affects all 
creatures in the light's 180° area of effect even ifthe 
bearer doesn't intend it. For example, a party of 
adventurers comes across a group of robed goblins 
claiming to be monks on a pilgrimage. When the 
party first spots the robed figures, the thiefuses a 
ring to become invisible and get behind the new- 
comers. Ifthe beam is used to reveal the true nature 
of the mysterious robed figures, it also reveals the 
thief to the goblins, and he can be attacked. The 
light burns the candle at four times the normal rate 
(equal to two turns in the time of five rounds). This 
power can only be used once per day. 

The final power of the lantern is that it can 
communicate with the holder telepathically and 
give directions to find the path from which it 
came. This power also negates the effects of the 
th-level wizard spell maze. It can be used once 
per day. In order for the magical properties of the 
-wayguider to function, a special candle must be 
used. The candle must be made from the wax pro- 
duced by the giant honey bee and must have an 
enchant an item spell cast upon it. 

The wayguider was created by the wizard Thes- 
sall of Port Llast over 200 winters past. It was 
made for his lover, a ranger named Andreana 
Longstep, to bring her safely back to him after her 
long journeys in the High Forest. Sadly, it seems 
that the enchantment was not enough, for on one 
trip Andreana did not return. Thessall went into 
the forest to look for her, and neither of them has 
been seen since. It is rumored that rival wizards 
kidnaped her to lure Thessall into the forest and 
into a trap, but this has never been verified. 

The lantern was last seen in the possession ofa 
merchant named Druekin Dustycoat, who was 
trying to sell the lantern quickly in Waterdeep. He 
fled mysteriously one night with the lantern, leav- 
ing all of his goods behind. The present fate of 
the lantern and its owner is not known. Druekin 
was said to have been last seen traveling east. 


of Timed Lighting 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 2,500 
DRAGON Magazine 73 
This is an ordinary oil lamp, at least in appearance, 


which, by use of the proper command words, may 
2206 


A e i a ii iat © 


646 


Lance of Fire 


A e E 


be programmed to light and extinguish itself at a 
specific time each day (with a variable of up to half 
an hour per day). It is used to convince outside 
observers that someone is present in a room. The 
command words become visible when a little wine 
is placed inside the otherwise empty lamp. 


Lance 

The term lance originally referred to spear 
wielded by footmen and cavalry. It now refers 
only to cavalry spears. Lance designs vary 
between cultures and eras. Generally, a lance is a 
long shaft of tough wood, usually ash, with an 
iron head in the shape ofa laurel or willow leaf, 
with cutting edges and a sharp point meant to 
penetrate armor. Lances are built to be gripped 
close to the bottom, putting a great distance 
between the wielder and the target. As a rule, the 
lance is aimed diagonally above the horse's neck. 
Two opposing lancers would face each other with 
their right sides facing. 


Roll Lance Type 

01-20 Flight lance 

2140 Heavy horsemen’s lance 
41-60 Jousting lance 

61-80 Light horsemen's lance 
81-00 Medium horsemen's lance 


Anhur's 
XP Value: 25,000 GP Value: 125,000 
Legends & Lore 
The lance that Anhur's avatar employs in combat 
is a powerful weapon. In addition to being a lance 
+5, it has the abilities of a ring offire resistance, 
a ring of protection, an amulet of the planes, and 
a talisman ofpure good. 


Copper 
XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 15,000 
Kara-Tur 
The porcelain warrior, detailed under the Crys- 
tal Warrior entry, carries a magical copper lance 
+2 that can shine like the sun, causing blindness 
in all creatures within 50 feet who fail a saving 


throw vs. spell. 


Death 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
Descent into the Depths of the Earth 
The death lance is a 10-foot-long spear that dis- 
charges a negative force when it hits. This force 


causes 3d4 points of damage in addition to the 
normal damage of the weapon, and any opponent 
struck must save vs. poison or lose 1d4 levels. 
The lance has a maximum of six charges. Roll 
1d6 to find the charges left. Once the charges are 
used, it becomes a nonmagical weapon. 


Dragonlance 
XP Value GP Value 
Footman: 1,000 6,000 
Mounted: 1,200 7,200 


Dragons of Light 
The dragonlance is an ancient artifact created at 
the close of the early Dragon Wars and used to 
defeat the evil dragons. There are 20 surviving 
dragonlances hidden inside the Stone Dragon of 
Ergoth, 10 ofeach type. In addition, more can be 
constructed for future adventures. 

There are two types ofdragonlances: mounted 
and footman's. Each type is made of the same sil- 
very metal, and gives off a healthy, silver glow. 
The head is sharpened to a fine edge, and small 
barbs protrude from the sides. 

The footman's lance is 8 feet long, while the 
mounted lance is 16 feet long. The footman's 
lance can be cast as a spear at -2 to attack rolls. 
The mounted lance is heavier and often has a 
shield guard attached. 

A footman's lance causes 1d6 points of dam- 
age vs. normal foes and 1d8 against larger than 
human-sized targets. Against any dragon it 
inflicts damage equal to the hit points of the 
wielder. A fighter with 14 hit points will inflict 
14 points of damage. The weapon is always +1 to 
attack (unless thrown). 

A mounted dragonlance does 2d4+1 points of 
damage vs. normal foes and 3d6 vs. larger than 
human-sized creatures. Against any dragon it 
inflicts a number of hit points equal to those of 
the wielder and the mount. A 15hp fighteron a 
40 hp dragon inflicts 55 points of damage. The 
weapon is +2 to attack. 


_of Fire 
GP Value: 10,000 
Legends & Lore 
Wind's avatar carries a lance offire that does 
1d10 points of damage. If a mortal touches the 
weapon, he or she suffers 1dl0 points of fire 
damage per round—even if magically protected. 


XP Value: 2,000 


2211 


om 647 


Lance, Hastsezini's, of Fire 


De eee eee a 


Hastsezini's Lance of Fire 
XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 15,000 
DEITIES & DEMIGODS Cyclopedia 
Hastsezini's lance offire does 3d10 points of 
damage (he never throws this weapon). 


Izanagi's 
GP Value: 12,500 
Legends & Lore 
Victims hit by /zanagi 's lance must save vs. death 
magic or their blood coagulates in their veins and 
kills them. 


XP Value: 2,000 


Lesser Dragonlance 


XP Value GP Value 
Footman's: 800 4,000 
Mounted: 900 4,500 


Tales of the Lance 
These beautiful weapons come in two types: Foot- 
men's lances and mounted lances. Each is made of 
a silvery metal that gives off a healthy, powerful 
glow of silver. The head is sharpened to a fine 
edge, with small barbs protruding from the sides. 

How well the lance was made and under what 
conditions it was forged determines the lance's 
performance in battle. The forging of a true drag- 
onlance requires two artifacts: the silver arm of 
Ergoth, and the hammer ofKharas. Legend says 
that only dragonlances forged by these two arti- 
facts can work properly. 

A dragonlance forged with only one of these 
two artifacts receives only a +2 enchantment to 
attack and damage rolls. A lance forged by both 
artifacts gains a +4 enchantment. Dragonlances 
were first created at the end of the early Dragon 
Wars, and they brought about the downfall of the 
Evil dragons. Twenty dragonlances survived 
inside the Stone Dragon of Ergoth—10 footman 
and 10 mounted lances. Others lie in sunken Istar. 

More lances were forged during the War of the 
Lance. With the end of the War, the Knights of 
Solamnia have overseen the production and distribu- 
tion of the lances. Dragonlances are never sold, nor 
distributed lightly. Characters who are not demonstra- 
bly good cannot use the lances. (The lance burns the 
hand or mount of nongood characters for 4d6 points 
of damage per round held.) The Knights keep close 
track of the actions of those who are given a lance. 

Footman's Dragonlance: This lance is 6 feet 
long. It can be thrown as a spear, although with a -2 
to attack. The lance causes 1d6 points of damage on 
human-sized or smaller opponents, and 1d8 points 


against larger than human-sized opponents. Against 
any dragon, the dragonlance inflicts damage equal to 
the total remaining hit points ofits wielder. 
Mounted Dragonlance: The mounted lance is 
12 feet long and is most effective when mounted 
on a good dragon. The weapon is buttressed by a 
harness mount that enables the wielder to bring 
the weapon's point to bear at any arc around its 
balance point. The mounted lance does 2d4+1 
points of damage against foes that are human- 
sized or smaller, and 3d6 points against larger 
than human-sized opponents. Against a dragon, 
the lance inflicts damage equal to the total 
remaining hit points of the wielder and mount. If 
the lance is not mounted on a dragon, the weapon 
causes normal lance damage, with the magical 
enchantment bonus to attack and damage rolls. 


Ortnit's Lance of Doom 
XP Value: — GP Value: — 
DUNGEONS & DRAGONS Master Set 
It is not known how the hero Ortnit (or Hartnit) 
acquired this powerful weapon. The device's origin 
is also a mystery. Ortnit defeated many giants with 
it, so it may have great powers against them; but he 
was later slain ignominiously by a small white 
dragon, which is odd considering his legendary 
power. The weapon remains but is often shunned, 
for it is rumored to bring death to any user. 

This ornately scribed lance, entirely sheathed 
in light metal, can only be used when riding a 
mount (base damage 2d6). 

The hold monster power is activated whenever 
the lance first strikes a creature. At that time, the 
user discovers that he or she feels capable of dodg- 
ing missiles (the other power), and can discover the 
use (but not the cost) ofthat power through practice. 

Knowledge of the existence of the hold power 
can be deduced by observing results, but it is never 
explained. The lance has the ability to allow its user 
to comprehend languages as well; the user simply 
understands, somehow, all languages heard as long 
as the lance is held. The dodge power is activated as 
soon as the user tries to dodge a missile. 

Suggested Powers: (All abilities are cast at 
20th level.) 

Lance +5/+10 vs. giants 
Comprehend languages 
Hold monster 
Dodge any missile (Ifuser saves vs. wands. Mis- 
sile is automatically dodged—includes magical 


arrows and bolts, as well as magic missiles.) 
2215 


rr 


48 


Lance, True Dragonlance 


eee 


Suggested Handicap: The user loses of all 
treasure carried each time he or she uses the lance 
to slay a creature. 

Suggested Penalty: This takes effect when any 
creature is struck with the lance, but may not 
become apparent until much later. The user takes 
double normal damage from all blows or breaths 
from any dragon for one full day. The user may 
make the usual saving throw vs. dragon's breath, 
taking full normal damage ifthe attempt succeeds. 


of Piercing 

GP Value: 2,500 

Top Ballista 

In the hands of anyone other than a pegataur, this 
vicious fighting weapon acts as a lance +1. If 
carried by a pegataur, the lance becomes a full 
lance +5, and on a natural attack roll of 19 (if it 
strikes the target) or 20, the lance causes triple 
normal damage (3d10+5 for the weapon, and any 
appropriate Strength or other bonuses). 


XP Value: 500 


Puchan's Golden 
XP Value: 10,000 GP Value: 50,000 


Legends & Lore 
Puchan's avatar's golden lance always hits its tar- 
get, and returns to his hand on the same round if 
he throws it. 


Tribal 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 10,000 
DUNGEON Magazine 32 

These ancient lances number about 20. There is 
one for each tribe of the Rovers (Gray Lynx, Red 
Horse, and the rest), although some have been lost 
to enemies over the years. In most hands, the lance 
is only a lance +1. But in the hands of a Rover 
warrior, the lance gains several powers. First, it 
does damage as a heavy horse lance +3, although 
it is as light and handy as a spear. In addition, any 
opponent who faces a Rover intending to fight 
must save vs. spell or be struck with a type offear. 
The character stricken cannot bear to look at or 
attack the lance wielder in any way; and cannot 
cast spells or use weapons against the Rover. 

The lances are all made of hornwood with iron 
heads and decorated with feathers and tufts of 
hair. Tribal lances are carried by Rovers champi- 
ons, who belong to the Wardog Society. 


True Dragonlance 
XP Value: 20,000 GP Value: 100,000 
Tales of the Lance 

True dragonlances are very rare. Their creation 
must include all the elements common in any 
dragonlance creation—the silver arm ofErgoth, 
the hammer of Kharas,and pure dragonmetal. 
Beyond that, the forging of a true dragonlance 
must be overseen by the Master of the White 
Robes and the Chosen Prophet of Paladine. Fur- 
thermore, the lance must be completed on a night 
of the Grand Conjunction of the moons. As the 
molten dragonmetal solidifies, the Master of the 
White Robes imbues it with awesome spell power 
and the Chosen Prophet evokes Paladine. If the 
workmanship is worthy, and the lance is truly 
needed, Paladine appears in avatar form and lays 
his hands on the white-hot metal. In a flash, he is 
gone, but a true dragonlance has been created. 

A true dragonlance uses the lance mount and 
saddle to draw the dragon's power and essence into 
the weapon. Upon a command word uttered by the 
rider, the tip of a true dragonlance unleashes the 
dragon's breath weapon at double its usual range 
and damage and half the usual THACO. The dragon 
can also use its breath weapon simultaneously, with 
its original range, damage, and THACO. 

Unfortunately, because the dragon's essence is 
drawn upon so heavily, a true dragonlance (if 
used incautiously) may destroy a dragon. No 
dragon can withstand more than 1d4+10uses ofa 


~~, Lance, Venom ` pe 


true dragonlance per day, and every use requires 
the dragon to rest one day to recover to full 
strength. After five uses, the breath weapon's 
range and damage are halved and the THACO is 
doubled. After the total number of uses (11-14), 
the dragon drops, dead on the ground. 

A rider who has destroyed a good dragon 
through incautious use of a true dragonlance is 
hunted down by the Master of the White Robes 
and the Chosen Prophet of Paladine and slain. 
Nothing can save such a one. 


Venom 
XP Value: 1,750 GP Value: 9,000 
IMAGINE Magazine 29 

This evil lance can be wielded as a spear +4 by a 
foot soldier or as a heavy horse lance +4 by an 
equestrian. Creatures struck by the weapon must 
save vs. poison at -4 or take an additional 3d6 
points of damage for 1d4 rounds. The venom lance 
can detect good, cause fear once per day, and com- 
municates telepathicallywith its wielder. The 
lance has an Intelligence of 13 and an Ego of 13. 


Wind's 
GP Value: 20,000 
Legends & Lore 
Wind's avatar wields a lance that causes 1dl0 
points of damage and requires a Strength of 
18/00 to wield. The lance also fires a 2d10 light- 
ning bolt once per round. 


Lapland Wool 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 2,500 
Gods, Demigods, & Heroes 
If adventurers to Lapland contact the right people 
(DM's option), they may have bestowed upon 
them some wool, which if rubbed produces a 
flock of sheep. This could solve problems with 
provisioning people, and even armies, depending 
on how much wool one procured. 


Larder of Holding 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 17,000 
Castle GREYHAWK 
The larder ofholding has a human-sized door that 
gives access to an area 30 feet square, stocked with 
prepared food. It holds prepared food in a perfect 
state of preservation, but rejects any other sub- 
stance (except the material of the storage shelves 
and bins inside). If an inappropriate substance is 
placed within, it reappears outside as the door is 


XP Value: 4,000 


closed. Some dead bodies might be considered 
“prepared,” such as flash-fried dragon victims, and 
the cupboard could be used to preserve them until 
they can be brought to a priest capable of casting a 
raise dead spell, but mostly the cupboard is only 
useful for carrying food. It has all the bulk and 
normal weight of an empty 6-foot by 3-foot by 30- 
inch wooden cupboard. 


Larynx of Deafening 
XP Value: 250 GP Value: 1,250 
DRAGON Magazine 134 

This item appears as a small patch of leathery mater- 
ial, approximately 2 by 4 inches. When placed 
against the throat ofa jester, it adheres to his skin and 
magically blends so as to be indistinguishable from 
the user's throat. A character with this magical lar- 
ynx attached is able to yell at incredible volume. Fur- 
thermore, the yell is both audible and understandable 
at up to three miles' distance. Anyone within an 
enclosed space 100 feet across or less who hears the 
shout (with no solid interposing barriers) must save 
vs. spell or be deafened for 3d10 turns; the user is 
immune to this effect. The larynx is removable. 


Leaf 


A magical leaf is a type of brooch shaped like a 
small leaf of almost any type of tree. They are 
usually made of metal and have a pin or clasp for 
attachment to garments. 


Book 
XP Value: 400 GP Value: 2,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

This leaf turns into a normal wizard's spell book, 
large enough to contain up to 60 spells of any lev- 
els, on command. The book is empty when found, 
though spells may be inscribed by the usual 
methods. In leaf form, the spellbook can be dam- 
aged only by magical spell effects and is immune 
to all spells of 3rd level or less. Against more 
powerful magic, it is treated as having 50 hit 
points and takes half damage from spells if the 
wearer makes the appropriate saving throw. 


of Colors 
XP Value: 600 GP Value: 3,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
This leaf may be commanded to magically sense 
the presence of any race of creature. When it comes 
within 120 feet ofthe creature specified, the leafof 


colors turns yellow; it turns red when within 90 
2219 


650 


Fees 


~ Leaf of Crumbling ao 


feet, and brown within 60 feet. The leaf resumes its 
normal color on command. A race of creatures can 
be specified (such as dragons, elves, and invisible 
stalkers), but not individuals, class names, or other 
professional terms (sage, fighter, spy). The leaf can 
be used as often as desired but can sense only three 
different races of creatures per day. 


of Crumbling 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 2,500 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

This leaf looks exactly like a leafoffalling. How- 
ever, the wearer gains no protection against a fall 
and must also make a saving throw vs. petrifica- 
tion with a -2 penalty to the roll. [fit fails, the vic- 
tim tums into a stone statue, just before impact and 
might shatter upon hitting the ground. A shattered 
statue can be reassembled by a skilled stoneworker 
(resulting in a total loss of 14 points of Dexterity 
and Constitution scores—7 each—when returned 
to the flesh), by a wish (which causes no penal- 
ties), or perhaps by some other means. 


Enchanted 
XP Value GP Value 
ofConvik Tree: 1,750 4,000 
of His Tree: 2,500 8,000 
ofKemis Tree: 1,000 2,500 
of Mis Tree: 2,000 4,000 
ofPajon Tree: 500 2,500 


POLYHEDRON Newszine 90 

Several versions of this magical item have been 
documented, each is valuable and useful. All 
magical leaves are pieces of fine cloth, cut in the 
shape of an oak, cherry, or walnut leaf and 
imbued with magic. The leaves vary in size from 
3 inches to nearly 1 footin length, and can be 
found in practically any color. 

LeafofHis Tree: This leaf reveals an object's 
history. The history appears, written on the leaf 
when the leaf is placed upon the object. Ifthe leaf 
is placed on a magical item, any command words 
are revealed. The writing is always in a language 
the user can understand, but the user must be able 
to read to use the leaf. A leafofhis tree can be 
used once a day by wizards or priests. Ifthe entire 
history is too long to fit on the leaf, only the por- 
tion that fits is revealed. The user can get the 
remaining history by placing the leaf on the 
object again the next day. If more than one day 
passes, or ifthe leafis used on another object, the 
user must start the process over again. 


bs Be 
Rn ae 
PAC reset" 


Sex SN yt 


Leaf of Pajon Tree: This leaf can become any 
article of clothing desired. For example, it can 
transform into peasant rags, warm fur boots, or a 
bejewelled velvet cloak. Such a leaf can be used 
only once, and it retains its form as the chosen 
article of clothing until destroyed. These leaves 
can be used by any class. 

Leaf of Convik Tree: This leaf creates a 10- 
foot-square cage that only can be opened and 
closed by the holder of the leaf. The leaf can be 
used once a day, and retains its cage shape for one 
hour. It can be used by priests and thieves. 

LeafofKemes Tree: This leaf, usable only by 
wizards, can transform into any potion named by 
the holder. Such a leaf can be used only once. 

Leaf of Mis tree: When torn into pieces, mixed 
with water, and consumed, this leafhas a random 
effect on the imbiber. Roll 1d8 and consult the 
following list: 


Roll Effect 

1 Bestows infravision up to 120 feet for one 
hour. 

2 Heals 1d10 points of damage. 

3 Acts as a neutralize poison spell. 

4 Allows imbiber to levitate as per the wizard 
spell for one hour. 

5 Grants an augury spell, as ifthe imbiber 


were a priest. 
2229 


652 ~ 


Lens of Charming 


> a ee ae 


6 Improves the imbiber's Armor Class by 2 
for 24 hours. 

7 Allows the imbiber to walk on water as if 
he were wearing a ring ofwater walking for 
one hour. 

8 Allows the imbiber to speak with animals and 
plants, as per the priest spells for three hours. 

of Falling 
XP Value: 300 GP Value: 1,500 


Champions of MysTARA 

When worn, this small brooch shaped like a leaf 
protects the wearer from falls. Whenever the wearer 
approaches any hard surface fast enough to cause 
damage on impact, the leaf automatically takes 
effect, slowing the wearer to a slow fall (like a leaf). 
No falling damage is sustained in falls of 60 feet or 
less, and only 1 point for each 10 feet of falling 
thereafter (maximum 20 points of damage regard- 
less of height). The leafoffalling has 3d10 charges 
when found, and each use costs one charge. 


New 
XP Value: 100 GP Value: 500 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
This leaf can be used to negate one curse. It has 
no effect until removed, held over the head, and 
then turned over. The leaf then produces a remove 
curse spell as if cast by a 36th-level priest that 
affects the user. The new leaf disappearsafteruse. 


of Warmth 
XP Value: 1,200 GP Value: 6,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
This leafis identical to a leafofcolors (see above) 
and senses creatures in an identical manner. It does 
not change colors, but instead changes temperature. 
Any creature with infravision can easily see the 
shift from blue to red as the named creature comes 
closer or is approached. This leaf is normally cool 
and seen as light blue with infravision. The leafof 
warmth can be used as often as needed but can 
sense only three different races of creatures per day. 


Lens 

A lens is a ground piece of glass made nearly flat 
but having curved surfaces on both sides. Seen 
from the edge, lenses are either concave or con- 
vex. Lenses in medieval settings is usually of 
poor quality and often crudely made; a good lens 
is the product of rare, pure materials and weeks 
of careful polishing, measuring, and testing. 


Magical lenses appear to be identical to normal 
ones and are often found in small leather cases or 
fur-lined, wooden boxes. Every lens has at least 
one command word. The user need only speak the 
command while looking carefully through the 
lens with one eye. 

Mixing lens types is certain to cause immedi- 
ate insanity for 2d4 turns. Once the period of 
madness has passed, the character can (and 
should) remove one of the magical lenses. 


of Activity Detection 

XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 10,000 

Dragon Keep 
This 1-foot, circular lens made of translucent 
blue crystal was especially made for Artha by a 
renegade Black Robe wizard. Artha intended to 
use the lens ofactivity detection to help her locate 
the secret portal to the Plane ofthe Astral Dragon, 
but ultimately never needed it. 

The lens ofactivity detection detects the pres- 
ence of life or pseudolife within an area of one 
square mile; the lens cannot pinpoint the source 
of detected activity. 

The lens is useful in determining whether or 
not life exists in areas that appear devoid of life, 
such as deserts or barren islands. To a user peer- 
ing through the lens, areas of one square mile that 
contain life appear to have a bluish glow. The area 
being observed must be no farther than one mile 
distant for the lens to work. 


of Blinding 
XP Value: — GP Value: 1,200 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

This concave lens appears and functions as a lens 
ofseeing, but there is a 50% chance it will mal- 
function. The possibility is checked when any 
invisible object or creature is first seen and for 
each invisible item or person. Ifthe malfunction 
occurs, the user of the lens is immediately blinded 
in both eyes, having gained only a brief glimpse of 
the goal. The blindness may be removed in the 
usual ways, such as by a cure blindness spell. The 
lens of blinding can be used three times per day 
for one turn per use and has a 120-foot range. 


of Charming 
XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 20,000 
Dungeon MASTER Guide 
This item consists of a pair of crystal lenses that fit 


over the user's eyes. When in place, the wearer is 
2235 


eS eee 


653 


Lens of Detection 


(Se nS 


able to charm persons merely by meeting their gaze. 
Those who fail a saving throw vs. spell are charmed 
as per the spell. The user can look at and charm one 
person per round. Saving throws suffer a -2 penalty 
ifthe wearer has both lenses, or a +2 bonus if wear- 
ing only one of a pair lenses of charming. 


of Detection 
XP Value: 250 GP Value: 2,500 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 

This circular prism enables its user to detect 
minute things at 50% ofthe ability of eyes of 
minute seeing, but it also enables the possessor to 

look through the lens and track as a 5th-level 
ranger. The lens ofdetection is about 6 inches in 

diameter. It must be set in a frame with a handle 

in order to be properly used. 


of the Eagle 
XP Value: 3,500 GP Value: 18,000 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 

These items are made of special crystal and fit over 
the eyes of the wearer. They give the wearer a visual 
range 100 times greater than normal at farther dis- 
tances (minimum 10 feet away). Wearing only one 
of the pair causes a character to become dizzy and, 
in effect, stunned, for one round. After that, one eye 
must always be covered to avoid vertigo. 


Evelyn's Lens of Speedreading 
XP Value: 800 GP Value: 4,000 
1992 Fantasy Collector Card 503 

This lens performs the same function as any other 
lens ofspeedreading—ittriples reading speed. 
However, Evelyn has imbued her lens with 
another power—it contains a built-in comprehend 
languages spell that can be invoked once per day. 
The lens will not read magic without the accom- 
panying spell, but it will decipher codes and 
improve illegible writing. The lens will also 
detect explosive runes, but if the reader passes 
over them at triple speed, they will explode unless 
reading stops as soon as the runes are detected. 


of Far Seeing 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 10,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
This convex lens enhances sight, both normal and 
infravisual. While using the lens, a sign can be 
clearly read at 120 feet, assuming it is readable in the 
first place (because of language or lighting). Infravi- 
sion, both normal and magical, can be extended to 


double normal range (120 feet). Outdoors, creatures 
and objects can be seen at double normal range. A 
monster encountered in clear terrain might be seen at 
double the usual distance, but this is not common 
and requires the lens to be in use at the time. The lens 
may be used three times per day for one turn per use. 


of Lighting 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 4,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

This convex lens can focus certain rays of light 
and create flame with their energy. It can focus 
light from the sun, moon, or even light or contin- 
ual light spells. When held between such a light 
source and combustible material (wood, tinder, or 
cloth), and at a distance ofexactly 1-footfrom the 
object to be burned, a small flame appears on the 
material when the command word is spoken. It 
grows and spreads unless quickly quenched. The 
lens oflighting functions three times per day. 


of Minute Seeing 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 10,000 

DUNGEON MASTER Guide 
In appearance, eyes ofminute seeing are much 
like other magical lenses, but they enable the 
wearer to see 100times better at distances of 1 
foot or less—tiny seams, minute marks, even the 
impressions left on a pad after the top sheet has 
been written on, can be seen. Secret compart- 
ments and hidden joints can be noted and the 
information acted upon immediately. The effect 
of wearing just one of these crystals is the same 
as that given for lenses ofthe eagle. 


of Petrification 

GP Value: 1,800 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 
Totally indistinguishable from any other magical 
lenses, the effect of donning lenses of petrifica- 
tion is dramatic—the wearer is instantly turned to 
stone. Note that 25% of these devices work as the 
gaze of a basilisk does, including reflection of the 
eyes turning the gazer to stone. 


XP Value: — 


of Petrification II 
XP Value: — GP Value: 2,200 
Dragon Keep 
These are a pair of convex crystal lenses that fit 
over the user's eyes. The instant they are fitted to 
the user, he or she immediately turns to stone. The 


effect of these special lenses can be avoided if the 
2243 


eo ee EE 


654 


Lens of Subtitles 


| EEE 


user rolls a successful saving throw vs. petrifica- 
tion, or it can be canceled ifa companion casts dis- 
pel magic or a similar spell. Otherwise, 
petrification wears off in 2d10+10 rounds. Once 
thepetrification is dispelled or wears off, the user's 
vision is blurred for the next 1d4 hours, causing 
attack rolls to be made with a penalty of —2. 


of Reflection 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 2,500 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

This concave lens may be placed on any part of the 
face and commanded to stay. It then remains in place 
until commanded to release. Ifthe wearer of the lens 
becomes the target of a light or continual light spell 
(or of either reversed version), the spell is automati- 
cally reflected back upon the caster, regardless of 
range. The lens of reflection has no effect if the spell 
is cast from behind the user, but it does affect spells 
cast from the side or the front. Any spell reflected 
appears around the caster, but does not move or 
cause blindness. The reflected spell has its normal 
effect and duration. The lens ofreflection can be 
worn for as long as desired. It contains 2d10 charges 
when found; each reflection uses one charge. 


of Remote Viewing 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
The Complete Thief’s Handbook 

These small, clear gems (the term "lens" is a slight 
misnomer here) appear to be worthless quartz, but 
in fact possess a powerful dweomer. An owner who 
attunes to a lens ofremote viewing (a process that 
takes four hours of meditation) can then see through 
the lens whatever is happening in front of the lens 
and within its field of vision, wherever the lens hap- 
pens to be later. There is no range limit, save that 
perception across the planes is not possible. No 
auditory information is detected through the lens, 
and no spells can be cast through it. A lens of remote 
viewing is also detection resistant. At any one time, 
any thief may be attuned with a number of such 
lenses not exceeding “the Intelligence score (round 
fractions down). These items are usually found 
singly, and are of obvious value in espionage. 


of Seeing 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 10,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
This concave lens enables the user to see invisible 
creatures and objects within 120 feet. The lens ofsee- 
ing works three times per day for one turn per use. 


of Speed Reading 

XP Value: 500 GP Value: 2,500 
Tome of Magic 

While looking through this lens, the user can read 
any book, document, or other written material 
three times normal speed with full comprehen- 
sion. When used in conjunction with read magic, 
the lens of speed reading enables the user to 
quickly scan scrolls and magical works to learn 
their contents, but it has no effect on the time 
required to cast spells. The lens cannot decipher 
codes, improve illegible writing, or allow magic 
to be read without the proper spells. 


of Subtitles 
XP Value: 2,800 GP Value: 14,000 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 58 

These two glass lenses, held together by woven 
gold and silver wires, act as a translation device. 
Each pair of lenses is usually set to translate 1d4 
specific languages into another language. For 
example, one pair might translate the languages 
of elves, dwarves, and orcs into Common, while 
another might translate Dwarf and Gnome into 
Elf. The translation is in writing, with the words 
running across the inside of the lenses. The words 
are invisible to all but the wearer, and as long as 
the wearer can read the language, he can take 
advantage of the lenses' power. While the words 
move across the lenses, they obscure the vision of 
the wearer. In a combat situation, this imparts a 
—4 penalty on all attack rolls and saving throws 
made by the wearer. A character must disengage 
from combat for an entire round to take off the 
lenses. The lenses are enchanted to stay on the 
wearer's face until the user removes them. There- 
fore, the lenses cannot fall off during combat or 
falls. The DM may choose to use the tables below 
to find the languages the lens can translate. 


Roll Language Roll Language 
01 Brownie 45-49 Halfling 
02-03 Bugbear 50-51 Hobgoblin 
04 Centaur 52-54 Kobold 
05 Dragon, Black 55 Lammasu 
06 Dragon, Blue 56-58 Lizard Man 
07 Dragon, Brass 59 Manticore 
08 Dragon, Bronze 60 Medusa 
09 Dragon, Copper 61 Minotaur 
10 Dragon, Gold -62 Naga, 
Guardian 
11 Dragon, Green 63 Naga, Spirit 


2248 


AO OTE a e e OTEA 


655 


~~ Lens of Transformation = 


12 Dragon, Red 64 Naga, Water 
13 Dragon, Silver 65 Nixie 
14 Dragon, White 66 Nymph 
15 Dryad 67-70 Ogre 
16-20 Dwarf 71 Ogre Mage 
21-25 Elf 72-76 Orc 
26 Ettin TA: Pixie 
27 Gargoyle 78 Salamander 
28 Giant, Cloud 79 Satyr 
29 Giant, Fire 80 Shedu 
30 Giant, Frost 81 Sprite 
31-33 Giant, Hill 82 Sylph 
34 Giant, Stone 83 Titan 
35 Giant, Storm 84 Troll 
36-39 Goblin 85 Xorn 
40 Gnoll 86-90 Human Foreign 
41-44 Gnome 91-00 Other 


of Transformation 


XP Value: — GP Value: 22,500 
The Temple of Elemental Evil 

This device is a sheet of cloudy crystal, 7 feet 

broad and tall and 3 inches thick. It was created 

by luz, who placed it in the dungeon for his own 

evil purposes. 

The crystal sheet appears cloudy on one side, 
but clear on the other. No detect spell works 
within 20 feet of it, except for detect magic, 
which reveals that a powerful dweomer is upon 


the crystal sheet, and (ifthe lens is activated) that 
a lesser magic affects the area within 20 feet of it. 

The lens is activated whenever any life force 
(living or undead) approaches within 3 feet of the 
clear side. The cloudy side ofthe lens begins to 
brighten, its radiance producing a continual light 
effect within one round. Viewed from the cloudy 
side, the users (those on the clear side) appear as 
the purest opposites of their actual forms. A pal- 
adin would appear fiendish or diabolical; a 
chaotic evil monster might appear as a paladin, or 
as a deva, planetar, or solar. Additional visual 
effects (flames and smoke, sky and fluffy clouds) 
are automatically produced as a background set- 
ting appropriate to the false visual form. Subtle 
feelings of fear or peace are likewise projected to 
the viewers of the illusion, allowing no saving 
throw (though innate, total immunity to ESP 
negates the emotional effects). The cloudy side of 
the lens quickly darkens when the users back 
away from the clear side. 

The lens functions as often as desired. It is pro- 
tected by a powerful and permanentforce field, 
and is impervious to harm by anything less than a 
demigod. Even passwall and glassee are useless 
against its mighty dweomer. Once mounted, as it 
is here, it cannot be removed by a power lesser 
than luz's, except for a wish—and even that may 
cause the lens to shatter in the attempt (a 25% 
chance). A final dweomer lets Iuz know if the 
lens is destroyed—and who did it. 


of Ultravision' 
GP Value: 5,000 
Unearthed Arcana 

This circular, faceted prism is fashioned from a 
perfect crystal of pale aquamarine. When held 
before the eye, it enables the user to sense radia- 
tion in the ultraviolet spectrum. In effect, the user 
is able to see in total darkness as if in bright 
moonlight. General outlines can be distinguished 
from up to 240 feet away, and details can be seen 
clearly for 120 feet distance. Of course, the 
device must be held so as to be able to look 
through it. A lens ofultravision is about 1% 
inches in diameter. 

‘Note: Ultravision is no longer a part of the AD&D 
game system. This entry is included for historical refer- 
ence only—We told you this would be complete. Ed. 


XP Value: 750 


2250 


656 


Libram ofthe Black Heart 


Na 


of Valuation 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
The Complete Thief’s Handbook 
This highly prized item consists of a lens some 3 
inches in diameter with a handle some 6 inches 
long. The lens allows the viewer to estimate the 
true worth of any nonmagical object to within a 
tolerance of 5%, if studied for at least five 
rounds. Of course, this is an average price, and 
special conditions of supply or demand may 
make such a valuation wildly inaccurate. Mer- 
chants usually go to considerable lengths to pre- 
vent any lens ofvaluation from being used on 
their goods! In the thieving community, this item 
is most sought after by fences, who can widen 
their operations by leaps if they possess this item. 


Leomund's Labile Locker 
XP Value: 5,000 GP Value: 25,000 
The Temple of Elemental Evil 
This copper-bound box is 2 feet wide and tall, and 3 
feet long. Invisible runes are scribed upon its front; 
these reveal four command words. The first shrinks 
the box to a twelfth ofits normal size, with all con- 
tents likewise becoming minute. The weight of the 
shrunken chest, empty or filled, is 30 pounds. The 
second word causes the chest (if of normal size) to 
unction as one upon which a Leomund's secret chest 
spell has been placed (but with no smaller replica 
necessary). The third word causes the box to return 
to full size or normal place, as applicable. The fourth 
word causes growth to quadruple dimensions, with 
sides, top, and bottom of 1-footthickness, huge cop- 

per bands, and a weight of 1,200 pounds. 


Libram 
Books, Librams, Manuals, 
Spellbooks, and Tomes 
In the AD&D game system, each of these terms 
has a unique definition: 
Books may used only by priests and sometimes 
raise a specific character statistic. 
Librams are books used only by wizards, and 
occasionally boost stats. 
Manuals may be used by bothfighters and 
thieves, and some include boosts to stats. 
Spellbooks contain spells and occasional sur- 
prises. Most are restricted to priests and wizards, 
but a few may be used by any class. 
Tomes may be used by all classes and some grant 
boosts to stats. 


All magical books, librams, manuals, spell- 
books and tomes appear to be normal works of 
arcane lore. Each is indistinguishable from others 
by visual examination or by magical detection. 

A wish spell can identify or classify a magical 
work. Other spells, notably alter reality, com- 
mune, contact higher planes, limited wish, and 
true seeing, are useless. A wish reveals the gen- 
eral contents of a book, telling what classes or 
characteristics are most affected (not necessarily 
benefited) by the work. A second wish is required 
to learn the book's exact contents. 

After being studied by a character, most magical 
works vanish forever. However, one that is not ben- 
eficial to the reader may become attached to the 
character, and he or she is unable to get rid of it. If 
the work benefits another character alignment, the 
owner is geased to conceal and guard it. As DM, 
you should use your judgment and imagination as 
to exactly how these items are to be treated, using 
the rules in this section as parameters. 

A libram is a large book with a heavy wood and 
leather cover, high-quality pages of heavy parch- 
ment, and ornate decorations on both cover and 
pages. Magical librams may be of any size, from a 
mere 2 feet square to 20 feet across. The larger 
types require assistants for proper use and may be 
suspended by a heavy chain in a large room. 


Analect of Magic 
XP Value: 8,000 GP Value: 80,000 
Legends & Lore 

This book allows a wizard (or wu-jen, if you are 
using the Oriental Adventures supplement) to 
memorize any spell no matter what level. Reading 
the Analect of Magic requires 72 hours of uninter- 
rupted study, and after using the ability gained from 
it, the reader forgets everything he read. Only a 
wizard (or wu-jen) of 18 Constitution and 18 Intel- 
ligence may read this tome and they must lose one 
point of Constitution when they do so. 

Any being who attempts to use this book while 
lacking the proper Constitution or Intelligence 
loses 1d6 points of Constitution. When used in 
conjunction with the Canon of Changes II (see 
Tome) this book has other special powers. 


of the Black Heart 
XP Value: 5,000 GP Value: 45,000 
Mordenkainen's Fantastic Adventure 
This book was written by several evil wizards, 


whose time of existence upon Oerth is not 
2254 


657 


Libram of the Black Heart 


a ee 


recorded, save that they dwelt near the Valley of 
the Mage. The tome was lost during those years 
when the Mage of the Valley brought down a 
great ruin upon these evil ones. The tome slipped 
from the ways of dread for a time, only to be 
located by tomorast in a curio shop in the City of 
Greyhawk. The legends do not tell how it came to 
be there, but it was truly lucky for Tomorast that 
he found it, for it contained what he had always 
sought: power and arcane knowledge to procure 
still more power. He has read extensively from 
this book, although he is forced to offer a sacri- 
fice to Kerzit every time he peruses its worm- 
eaten pages. 

Through the use of the tome and his own bale- 
ful spells, Tomorast has created and brought to 
life many of the objects that reside on the dungeon 
levels beneath Maure Castle. His greatest artific- 
ing was performed, using the knowledge imparted 
by the tome, in the creation of the iron golem. 

Through the use of the tome, he has summoned 
many evil and knowledgeable spirits to guide him 
in acquiring knowledge of the Outer Planes of 
existence, and how to traverse this realm while 
remaining in his physical body. Tomorast has yet 
to use all of the tome's powers and secrets, for his 
servants have of late become suspicious of him 
and his so-called "service" to the elder gods. 
Thus, Tomorast has had to stop sacrificing his 
followers, and now resorts to using hired assas- 
sins to find offerings for Kerzit. 

The Powers of the Tome: The Tome of the 
Black Heart is written in magical script, and 
comprises many and varied powers and summon- 
ings. Each area covered is listed hereafter. 

Pages 1-12: These pages describe the sum- 
moning of the guardian Kerzit, and those words 
of power that may dismiss it. This summoning 
requires an evil wizard ofthe 12th level or higher, 
10,000 gp in crushed black opals, a sacrifice, and 
two weeks of preparation and meditation. Appro- 
priate vestments must be acquired and worn, and 
the words, "Kerzit the Mighty, Kerzit the Strong, 
Kerzit the Guardian, Kerzit! Kerzit!! Kerzit!!!” 
must be chanted. This chant protects the sum- 
moner from Kerzit's attack. Every time the tome 
is used, a sacrifice must be offered to the 
guardian, and the precise ritual must be repeated. 

Pages 13-50: This is the history of the tome as 
recorded by its unknown authors. Tomorast's 
scrawl can be identified, as he keeps updating the 
tome as he learns from it. 


Pages 51-120: These pages describe the mak- 
ing of a special iron golem. The crafting of this 
golem requires six months of time, 150,000 gp, 
and the following: 

e A fireball spell must be cast on this creature 
once complete. This imparts its fiery breath. 

e A levitate spell must be cast on the creature, mak- 
ing this form of movement possible. The spell 
must be cast while the golem is still inanimate. 

Pages 121-200: These pages describe the 
making of an item known as the dagger obelisk. 
This requires a wizard of the 12th or higher level, 
three months of preparation time and magical 
investigation, and a 30,000 gp sacrifice to the 
lesser gods Fharlanghn (horizons, distance, 
travel) and Celestian (stars, space, wanderers). 
The following elements are also needed: 

e Three pounds of hornblende. 

A teleport spell, cast by a wizard of at least 

12th level. 

An extension HI spell. 

e A plant growth spell. 

e One 95%-flawless sapphire. 

The hornblende must be shaped into a normal 
dagger by a lapidary. The spells are then cast into 
the dagger in this order: plant growth, teleport, 
and extension III. The sapphire is finally set in 
the pommel to boost the dagger's magical powers. 
The sacrifice to Fharlanghn and Celestian may be 
made at any time, but must be performed at a 
temple of those who profess neutral alignment. 
The last passage in the tome about this dagger 
instructs the creator in its use. Once having cre- 
ated and enchanted the dagger, the wizard must 
thrust it into the ground up to its hilt. This done, a 
rumbling will be heard and the ground will begin 
to part, making way for a green, spiraling, 30- 
foot by 18-inch plant stalk that will push up out 
of the ground and stop in front of the character. A 
grotto near the front of this stalk will appear to be 
a passageway. This is, in fact, a transportation 
device to the Lost City of the Elders. 

Pages 201-268: These pages cover several 
names of spirits that can provide information 
about the other Planes of Existence, if conjured 
or summoned: 

Rar-tum, Spirit of the Elemental Planes. 

Kesh-gurh, Spirit of the Paraelemental Planes. 

Sha-duan, Spirit of the Demiplane of Shadow. 

Mezzik, Spirit of the Demiplane of Knowl- 

edge concerning the layers of the Abyss and 

the Layers of Tarterus. 


2254 


i a cs a aa 


658 


Libram, Codex of the Infinite Planes 


N 


The last entity can only be summoned 50% of 
the time. If successfully gated, it will appear as a 
lesser baatezu with bright red and light green color- 
ings (feathers). It is actually an imp with a minor 
shape change ability, which allows it to appear as 
and fight as this fiend for six turns only. This crea- 
ture will lie to those of any alignment save chaotic 
evil, and will leave of its own volition after only 
3d4 rounds spent on the Prime Material Plane. 

General Notes: To question these spirits, the 
character must first gate them in by spell or 
magic item. They may be asked direct questions, 
but will usually refuse to converse unless threat- 
ened by spiritwrack or similar magical means. 
Under such pressure, they will inform the ques- 
tioner of all they know concerning the particular 
plane from which they were summoned 
(2d418/10% veracity on all answers if the ques- 
tions are detailed enough). They will answer as 
many questions as the questioner can pose during 
a 24-hour period. After this time they merely 
"pop" out of this plane back to where they came 
from, cursing their summoner with many vile 
words and derisive comments. 

Description: Rar-tum appears as an admixture 
of earth, air, fire, and water. Kesh-gurh appears as 
flowing dust particles filled with ice, heat and 
vapor. Sha-duan appears as a 10-foot-high 
shadow, and talks in low sonorous tones when 
addressing its summoner. 


Boccob's Blessed Book 
XP Value: 4,500 GP Value: 35,000 
Dunceon MASTER Guide 

These well-made books are always of small size. 
One will typically be no more than 12inches tall, 
6 inches wide, and 1 inch thick—some are a mere 
6 inches in height. All such books are durable, 
waterproof, iron- and silver-bound, and locked. 
Copies ofBoccob 's Blessed Book gain a +3 bonus 
on their saving throws (as leather or book). 

The pages of such a book accept magic spells 
scribed upon them, and any book may contain up 
to 45 spells of any level. The book is thus highly 
prized by wizards of all sorts as a traveling spell 
book. It is unlikely that such a libram will ever be 
discovered (randomly) with spells already 
inscribed—inscribed or partially inscribed works 
of this nature are kept carefully by their owners. 

In a DRAGONLANCE Campaign: Boccob's 
Blessed Book is called Spellmaster ‘sBlessing on 
Ansalon. 


Codex of the Infinite Planes 
XP Value: 6,250 GP Value: 62,500 
Eldritch Wizardry 
Long ago, the wizard-priest who ruled the Isles of 
Woe, lost in the Lake of Unknown Depths, used 
this work to gain knowledge of great power. It is 
said that this arcane wisdom is what eventually 
brought the downfall of the wizard-priest and 
caused the waters to swallow his domain. In any 
event, the Codex ofthe Infinite Planes somehow 
survived the cataclysm. The Wizard Tzoonk, 
before his disappearance, recorded the following: 


“and thereupon the voice belled forth in tones 
ofhollow iron and spoke of the Coming of the 
City ofthe Gods. Suchfuture events interested me 
not, so I gave the command: ‘Answerin th... ' 
(here the fragment becomes entirely illegible) . . . 
so knowing both the secret and the spell that 
would unlock the Way to this horde of the Fiend 
Prince Nql. . . (another break in the writing 
unfortunately occurs here) . . . gathered the nine 
as required and proceeded forth. With me in addi- 
tion were the dyoph servants necessary to trans- 
port the Code, for I would not leave it behind on 
even so perilous ajourney as this ... “ (Here the 
entire fragment ends.) 


From this, and vague rumors, it would seem 
that the Codex is of unusually large size for even 
so magical a tome as it is, and that it is difficult to 
transport. To open the book is to court instant 
death and total annihilation, for it is 99% certain 
to destroy those who dare to seek instant mastery 
of its contents. If any person under 10th level 
dare to even touch its cover it will slay him just as 
surely. It has the following abilities/penalties: 
Clairvoyance 
Read magic 
Speak with plants 
Monster summoning once per day 
After a set number of uses, the user of this 
relic is transformed into either a very minor 
fiend or a very minor godling. He is thence- 
forth at the complete beck and call of a certain 
major fiend/godling, and may as well start a 
new character. 

Each day that the owner of this relic wishes to 
make use of its powers, he must first sacrifice a 
human being to the relic (possibly a player char- 
acter). The relic will then function normally for 


24 hours. After that another sacrifice must be 
2256 


ee ess eae ee sR 


659 


Libram of Constructs 


i a 


made or the relic will cease to function. 

e User may raise dead fully once per day. 

e User becomes super charismatic. Any creature of 
the same alignment who can communicate with 
the user will willingly serve the user (without 
compensation) for 1d6 turns. After that time the 
enchantment wears off and they will no longer 
serve in any case and may become hostile. 


Codex of the Infinite Planes IT 
XP Value: — GP Value: — 
Book of Artifacts 

The Codex is a massive tome, far larger than any 
book has a right to be. It is said that two strong 
men can barely lift the volume. The covers are 
made of flawless black obsidian and the pages 
therein are sheets of lead hammered so thin that 
they flex like paper. These are illuminated with 
strange writings in languages unknown and illus- 
trations both beautiful and horrific. No matter how 
many pages are turned, there is always one more. 

No one knows the origin of the Codex or what 
its original purpose might have been except that it 
also known as Yagrax 's Tome. The firstmention of 
the Codex ties it to an unnamed wizard-priest who 
tyrannically ruled ancient lands now sunk beneath 
the waves. The source of his power, the book was 
also the force that sank his empire beneath the 
waves. Only the Codex survived; the secrets of its 
use were apparently lost with the wizard-priest, for 
now it is notorious for madness and death. 

After a life of study, the archmage Tzunk actu- 
ally found the artifact shortly before he vanished 
from the world. Of his extensive writings only 
fragments survive, and most of these are ravings 
about a beast and how Tzunk came to rule the 
City of Brass. 

The Codex is a powerful and dangerous device 
and should only be introduced into high level cam- 
paigns when the DM is willing to use the outer 
planes. Because of its terrible curse, it is not an 
item characters should have for any length of time. 

The Codex could be introduced through a 
series of strange catastrophes—unnatural events 
of other-planar origin. A wizard, driven mad by 
the secrets of the Codex, has breached a barrier 
veil in the outer planes, unbinding a great horror. 
The characters must find and safely use the codex 
to send the creature back, perhaps even battling it 
in its own realm. 

Invoked Powers: All powers of the Codex are 
triggered by reading, if one knows where to look. 


The Codex can open a portal to any plane, demi- 
plane, or prime material world at any location. 
The book, however, has no index or table of con- 
tents. The only other known power is to summon 
a greater fiend to serve for 24 hours (1/month). 
Random Powers: Four from Artifact Table 1- 
16: Minor Powers, four from Table 1-15: Major 
Powers. 
Curse: Every page read, whether useful or not, 
has a 1% cumulative chance of triggering an 
awful fate (by accidentally opening the wrong 
portal)—irreversible madness, the arrival ofa 
greater tanar'ri, 10-mile radius clouds of deadly 
poison (no saving throw), or worse. Reading the 
hundredth page brings certain doom. 
Suggested Means of Destruction: 

It cannot be destroyed, only safely hidden 
where it can cause no harm. 

Every page of its infinite pages must be read. 
One page of the book opens a portal upon the 
book itself, wiping it out of existence. 


of Constructs 
XP Value: 8,000 GP Value: 40,000 
DUNGEON Magazine 14 

The Libram of Constructs is a magical work giving 
full instructions for the manufacture of a range of 
golemlike constructs. The book radiates an evil 
aura, but may be used by any alignment except 
good. A wizard of the 12thlevel or higher may 
manufacture any of the puppets detailed below 
(except the ventriloquist puppet, which requires a 

14th-level wizard to create). The manufacture of 
any such puppet requires a minimum of six weeks' 

magical research and construction, using materials 
and spells as the DM rules appropriate (see the fol- 
lowing for an example). However, without a limited 
wish spell, there is a 1%chance per day the wizard 

is not able to control the puppet, which then attacks 

everything in sight. Without a permanency spell, 

there is a 1% chance per day that the puppet simply 
falls apart and is useless. Only an evil wizard has 

control over his creations using this book; all others 

who build constructs with the book are immedi- 

ately attacked by their creations, which gain a +4 to 
attack against good-aligned wizards. 

Only an evil wizard of the 18th level or higher 
can use the libram to build the single greater con- 
struct detailed in the work: a black golem. This 
entails three months' research and enchantments, 
and requires a perfectly crafted iron figure topped 


with the skull ofa lich. Enchant an item, wish, and 
2258 


Be 


660 


~ Libram of Constructs J 


permanency spells are required for the manufacture 
ofthe golem. Special powers are instilled by the use 
of further spells. Gate and permanency spells are 
combined to create the open channel to the Nega- 
tive Material Plane that gives the construct its abil- 
ity to drain energy (one level) by touch. Two gems 
ofseeing are fitted into its eye sockets, giving the 
golem the ability to see hidden, invisible, out of 
phase, astral, and ethereal objects and creatures. A 
protectionfrom normal missiles spell and a limited 
wish are employed to give the creature immunity to 
all nonmagical weapons. Use ofboth versions of 
thefire shield spell gives the creature resistance to 
both fire and cold attacks. Finally, a combination of 
darkness 15' radius, phantasmalforce, and slow 
spells give the golem its terrifying appearance, 
shrouded in a dark, shadowy penumbra in which 
wraiths and spectres appear to flit about (it is pos- 
sible to see the golem, but indistinctly). 

Any creature approaching within 15 feet of the 
golem must save vs. spell or be slowed for 22 
rounds. Attacks against it are made at -2 to attack 
in addition to other penalties. Armed with a huge 
two-handed sword that does fearful damage in 
addition to the energy drain, the black golem is a 
powerful guard for any evil wizard's lair. While it 
is technically unintelligent, the black golem can 
follow quite complex instructions from its creator, 
making it a dreadful nemesis if so commanded. 


661 


It is whispered that a wizard of 21st level or 
above with a minimum Intelligence score of 19 
can use the Libram of Constructs to create a still 
more powerful form of the black golem, a semi- 
sentient construct that can create juju zombies 
and other undead, commanding them in the ser- 
vice of the wizard who created it. This nightmar- 
ish creation can charm person by gaze and has 
other powers that hardly bear contemplation. 

The DM should detail or modify the powers of 
this item as appropriate to his campaign. Use ofthis 
item by PCs is not recommended as it may damage 
campaign balance. If this item is allowed to reach 
Baator, it will then reappear in the hands of the 
most powerful lawful-evil wizard in the campaign 
world, as a reward for his services to his alignment. 

Black golem: AC —1; MV 9; HD 12; #AT 1; 
Dmg 2-20; SA energy drain, slowing; SD magi- 
cal weapons attack, saves at +2 against fire- and 
cold-based attacks (taking half or no damage), 
detects hidden/invisible/out-of-phase objects and 
creatures, immune to mind-influencing spells, -2 
to be hit; AL NE. 

Conjurer Puppet: AC 5; MV 9; HD 7+7; #AT 
1; Dmg 2d6 (electrical wand) and special; SA 
hats or wand; SD immune to mind-affecting 
spells, electrical attacks, poisons, paralysis, and 
gas attacks, surprised one on 1 in 12; AL N. The 
conjurer puppet can throw one hat per round, with 


Libram of Destruction 


> Se a 


a maximum range of 30 feet, to a maximum of 
six hats per day. Ifa hat lands on a victim's head, 
-2 THACO penalty, roll 1d4 for the effect. The 
effect lasts for 1d4+1 rounds, with the hat. disap- 
pearing after the effect, or after it is removed. 


Roll Effect 
1 Victim is blinded. 
2 Victim stares off in mute stupefaction. 
3 Victim collapses in helpless laughter. 
4 Victim attacks nearest companion. 


Stun Puppet: AC 2; MV 9; HD 6+6; #AT 1; 
Dmg 1d10+1/1d!0+1;SA stunning; SD immune 
to mind-affecting spells, electrical attacks, poi- 
sons, paralysis, and gas attacks; AL N. Blows 
from the puppet that hit on a natural 19 or 20 stun 
the victim (-4 THACO penalty, -2 damage, +4 
AC penalty, movement rate halved, and inability 
to cast spells) for 1d6+1 rounds. 

Ventriloquist Puppet: AC 3; MV 15; HD 5+5; 
#AT 2; Dmg 1d6/ld6 (fists); SA +1 on initiative 
rolls, spell use, drumming; SD spell use, immune to 
mind-affecting spells, electrical attacks, poisons, 
paralysis, and gas attacks, saves as 16th-level wiz- 
ard; MR 15%;AL LE. The puppet can cast ventrilo- 
quism six times per day and the following spells 
once per day each: command, hypnotism, improved 
invisibility, and suggestion. It is armed with two 
rods of wood and metal that it can use to beat out a 
tattoo on any solid surface. After three rounds of lis- 
tening to the drumming, victims must save vs. spell 
or be confused as per the 4th-level wizard spell for 
the duration of the drumming and for 1d4+1 rounds 
after that. The puppet can engage in melee and cast 
spells all in the same round, but while drumming, it 
cannot undertake any other action. 


of Destruction 
XP Value: 8,000 GP Value: 30,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
This book appears to be and functions as a Libram 
of1dentification until 1d4 items have been identi- 
fied. It continues to function thereafter until com- 
manded to identify a permanent magical item, but 
it then disappears along with the item. 


of Evaluation 
XP Value: 6,000 GP Value: 30,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
This book functions similarly to a Libram of 1den- 
tification but works only for nonmagical gems and 


jewelry. It evaluates as often as desired. The item is 
placed on its pages, and the correct value appears 
on the page when the item is lifted off. 


of Gainful Conjuration 
XP Value: 8,000 GP Value: 40,000 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 

This mystic book contains much arcane knowledge 
for wizards of neutral, chaotic neutral, and lawful 
neutral alignments. If a character of this class and 
alignment spends a full week cloistered and undis- 
turbed, pondering its contents, he gains experience 
points sufficient to place him exactly at the midpoint 
of the next higher level. When this occurs, the libram 
disappears—totally gone—and that character can 
never benefit again from reading such a work. 

Any non-neutral wizard reading so much as a 
line of the libram suffers 5d4 points of damage 
falls unconscious for a like number of turns, and 
must seek a priest in order to atone and regain the 
ability to progress in experience (until doing so, 
no further experience is gained). 

Any nonwizard perusing the work must roll a 
saving throw vs. spell in order to avoid insanity. 
Characters who go insane can be healed only by a 
remove curse and rest for one month or by having 
a priest heal them. 


of Golems 
XP Value GP Value 
Cursed: — 20,000 
Normal: 3,000 30,000 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 


This compilation is a treatise on the construction 
and animation of golems. It contains all of the 
information and incantations necessary to make 
one ¢ the four sorts of golems. 

The construction and animation ofa golem takes 
a considerable amount of time and costs quite a bit 
as well. During the construction/animation process, 
a single wizard or priest must have the manual at 
hand to study, and he must not be interrupted. The 
type of manual found is determined by rolling 1d20 
and consulting the table below: 


Type of Construct GP 
Roll Golem Creator! Time Cost 
01-04 Amber W13 2months 15,000 
05-09 Ash W16 3months 2,000 
10-13 Bone W18 2months 35,000 
14-17 Bronze W17 4months 200,000 
18-22 Caryatid W16 4months 100,000 
2262 


7 662 = 


Libram of Keeping 


p ay a 


23-26 Chitin D17 5months 2,500 
27-30 Flesh W14 2months 50,000 
31-35 Furnace W18 4months 100,000 
36-39 Glass W14 6months 125,000 
40-43 Guardian W14 1month 20,000 
4-48 Ice W13 4months 25,000 
49-52 Iron W18 4months 100,000 
53-57 Jade W18 5months 300,000 
58-61 Juggernaut W16 3months 80,000 
62-66 Lightning W18 4months 150,000 
67-710 Necrophidius W14 10 days 8,000 
71-74 Obsidian D18 6 months 3,000 
75-78 Radiant W20 18 months 125,000 
79-83 Rock D16 4 months 2,000 
84-87 Sand W15 = 3 months 1,500 
88-91 Silver W18 4months 250,000 
92-96 Stone W16 3months 80,000 
97-00 Tin W17 4months 90,000 


'D— Defiler, W— Wizard 
Tor stone guardian add 50% to stone golem. 


Once the golem is finished, the writing fades 
and the book is consumed in flames. When the 
ashes of the manual are sprinkled upon the golem, 
the figure becomes fully animated. It is assumed 
that the user of the manual is of 10th or higher 
level. For every level of experience under 10th, 
there is a cumulative 10% chance that the golem 
will fall to pieces within one turn of completion 
due to the maker's imperfect understanding. 

Ifa priest reads a work for wizards, he will lose 
1d6(x10,000) experience points. A wizard read- 
ing a priestly work will lose one level of experi- 
ence. The DM must decide in advance which it is 
meant for. Any other class of character will suffer 
6d6 points of damage from opening the work. 

Cursed Libram of the Golem: Same types in 
the tables, but note that the completed golem will 
go berserk at the end of the second round of its 
first melee. 

In Kara-Tur: This magical book is not found 
in Oriental lands. This result should be re-rolled. 


Gollum Construckzion 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 20,000 
DRAGON Magazine 35 
Not until the character using this book has 
expended the requisite time, money, and effort will 
it be discovered that the construct is not a golem at 
all, but a gollum—a simpering, whining, cowardly 
creature that only travels at night and will rob its 
master blind at the first opportunity. 


Grimoire of Archaic Alchemy 

XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 40,000 
DRAGON Magazine 2 
This libram adds one experience level to 
alchemists and 10,000 experience points to wiz- 
ards. Priests lose 7,000 experience points and suf- 
fer 5d6 points of damage from reading this 
libram. 


of Identification 
XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 25,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

This valuable book can identify nearly any magical 
item and gives one command word for the item's 
proper functioning. Many items have multiple 
command words, but the libram identifies only 
one for each use. However, it gives a different 
command word if applicable, for each repeated use 
on an item. When the item is placed on the book 
and the command word spoken, the results appear 
on the book's pages when the item is removed. The 
book mistakenly identifies cursed items as useful 
(as noted in the item descriptions). 


of Ineffable Damnation 
XP Value: 8,000 GP Value: 40,000 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 
This work is exactly like the libram of gainful 
conjuration except that it benefits evil wizards. 
Nonevil characters of that class lose one level of 
experience merely by looking inside its brass- 
bound covers, in addition to the other ill effects of 
perusing as little as one line of its contents. 


of Keeping 
XP Value: 12,000 GP Value: 120,000 
Outer Planes MC Appendix 

Because yugoloths are servants and mercenaries 
by nature, they are naturally prone to summoning 
and conjuration by Spellcasters on the Prime 
Material Plane. Any time a wizard attempts to 
summon a lower planar being, he is 40% likely to 
summon a yugoloth, although more likely to 
summon a gehreleth. 

However, there is a work that details the 
processes of summoning yugoloths, both greater 
and lesser. This ancient tome was penned by some 
unknown hand and relates much regarding the 
magical summoning and control of the yugoloth. 
This manual even goes so far as to give personal 
names of some of the greater yugoloths. Of course, 


any Spellcaster foolish enough to utter one of these 
2267 


663 


~~ Libram, Book of Legends a 


lower planar designations of power had better have 
strong protection or the creature named will surely 
smite the summoner and devour his life force. 
There are at least four known copies of the Book of 
Keeping, but the exact location of these tomes of 
power is unknown. 

The only class that can make use of one of 
these books is the conjurer. But be wary, however, 
for the greater yugoloth are powerful and venge- 
ful. Even a mighty conjurer will have trouble 
binding one and the lowerplanar creatures’ mem- 
ories are immortal. 


of Legends 
XP Value GP Value 
Lawful Good: 2,000 18,000 
Lawful Neutral: 2,000 18,000 
Lawful Evil: 2,000 18,000 
Neutral Good: 2,000 18,000 
Neutral: 2,000 18,000 
Neutral Evil: 2,000 18,000 
Chaotic Good: 2,000 18,000 
Chaotic Neutral: 2,000 18,000 
Chaotic Evil: 2,000 18,000 


The Book of Marvelous Magic 

There are nine types of this large book, one for 
each alignment. The book's alignment cannot be 
discerned except by reading the work. When the 
reader studies it carefully for one hour or more, it 
becomes apparent that the libram is a collection of 
biographies—the stories of several great and pow- 
erful wizards (of the same alignment as the book). 
If the reader is of the same alignment, a saving 
throw vs. spell with a -4 penalty to the roll must be 
made. If failed, the victim is sucked into the book; 
the body and all items carried vanish, and a new 
chapter is magically added to the work-—the story 
of the victim's life! A saving throw must also be 
made if the reader and book are of opposite align- 
ment, but if failed, the victim is disintegrated and 
becomes a bit of dust contained between the pages. 
Ifthe libram is burned, all the wizards described 
therein (not including those turned to dust) are 
released; however, if anyone spends one month or 
more as a chapter in the book, complete insanity 
sets in (no saving throw). Those released by the 
burning remember a full selection of spells and 
can cast them with no special problems. The wiz- 
ards scatter, if possible, and teleport to far places to 
pursue their own insane goals. A heal spell restores 
the sanity of one wizard, but the mad victim will 
resist the application. 


of the Planes 
XP Value: 6,500 GP Value: 45,000 
Tales of the Outer Planes 

As with all magical writings of this nature, the 
metal-bound Book ofthe Planes appears to be an 
arcane, rare, but nonmagical book. It will radiate 
a magical aura if a detect magic spell is cast on it. 
Any single wizard or priest can read one chapter 
at a time (taking 1d12 months to assimilate the 
information) in total isolation to gain knowledge 
about a particular plane. Characters who have 
read a chapter as described above gain the ability 
to travel freely to and from that plane. Once a 
chapter has been read, there is a 5% chance the 
book will disappear. This chance is cumulative, 
so that after three chapters have been studied, the 
chance of the book disappearing is 15%. Any 
nonwizards or nonpriests attempting to read the 
manual must save vs. spell or go insane. 


Mhzentul's Runes 

XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 24,000 
DRAGON Magazine 62 

This tome is thin but heavy, comprising twelve 
sheets of vellum sewn to a binding of silk and pre- 
served with wax. It is said that the reddish hue of the 
wax is due to dragons’ blood, and this preserves the 
binding. The truth ofthis rumor and the effectiveness 
of the ingredient is unknown. The binding is secured 
by silken cords to two pieces of oiled wood that have 
been covered entirely with stretched wyvern hide, 
held in place by small triangular wedges of silver. 
Thus far, the wood has not warped or broken, 
although curious, finger-shaped scorch marks on the 
hide attest to the heat the volume has endured. The 
book is not locked or bound, and has no known trap. 
It is signed with the sigil ofMhzentul: 


Mhzentul was a powerful, respected wizard. 
His end, men say, came at the battle of the River 
Rising, where he became a pillar of living flame 
and burned his way across the field, doing great 
harm to the hosts of his army, and blazed straight 
away out into the sea, where his flame was lost to 
view far out on the waves. Mhzentul is remem- 
bered among wizards for his works, the Seven 
Lost Rings ofMhzentul and the book that has 


come to be known as Mhzentul's Runes. 
2270 


664 


Libram of Ravenloft Golems 


0 ey 


After Mhzentul’s death, a party oftreasure seekers, 
with utmost care and at great risk to themselves, 
overcame the traps and magic of Mhzentul's moun- 
tain abode and penetrated its innermost rooms, but 
found neither the rings nor the book on the premises. 
Rumors of the location of these treasures surfaced, 
citing such a profusion of sources and alleged where- 
abouts that the items became legendary, but their true 
resting place remains a mystery. Some six winters 
after the battle of the River Rising, the book is known 
to have come into the grasp of the adventurer Uth- 
mang, a half-orc thief. He was immediately slain by 
the Red Wizard Alail Thong, who in turn was 
defeated at Greenstone Keep by the priests of that 
place. It is not known what happened to the book 
then, but some two winters later it is said to have 
passed into the hands ofLhegrand the Sage, and it is 
from his catalogue we obtain the detailed description 
aforementioned. Lhegrand held the book only briefly 
before he was waylaid and enslaved by orcs out of 
Darkhold, and here we lose track of both book and 
rings for some seven winters, throughout which the 
treasures presumably remained in evil hands. The 
evil wizard Whisper is known to have found the 
rings, and is suspected to have had the book also, or 
at least access to it, but the whereabouts ofboth since 
his rumored death are not known. 

The first four leaves of the book contain a 
detailed, exacting, and correct description—as 
attested to by the sage Lhegrand, an expert on the 
storage of spells within physical objects and sub- 
stances—of the process of creating a ring ofspell 
storing. It is known that at least four of the seven 
lost rings were of this type. 

The five leaves that follow describe the process 
involved in creating rings that would, upon com- 
mand, become guardian creatures under the control 
of the creator, but Lhegrand believes that some por- 
tions of the process have been (deliberately?) omit- 
ted. "I have not the skill nor the necessary 
components to enact the process," Lhegrand writes, 
"but herein I see no manner nor means for imbuing 
the creature with any animation, nor can I find any 
dweomercraft written for controlling the creature." 
Even if this section of the work is indeed incom- 
plete, it is still of immeasurable value, and would 
bring a high price from most wizards. 

The third and final section of the work is more 
informal than the other two, consisting of Mhzen- 
tul's notes on his research in fire magic. Lhegrand 
reports that many runes, glyphs, and symbols are 
written in special inks upon these pages, and a wiz- 


ard of sufficient level could with diligence glean 
the complete spellsfireball, fire shield,fire trap, 
and delayed blastfireball from Mhzentul's notes. 
The scope and thoroughness of Mhzentul's under- 
standing of magic concerned with fire, however, 
are such that careful study ofthe book will decrease 
the time needed to research any fire-relatedspell by 
as much as two weeks, Lhegrand estimates. 


of Ravenloft Golems 


XP Value GP Value 
Bone: 18,000 90,000 
Clay: 5,000 25,000 
Doll: 7,000 35,000 
Flesh: 5,000 25,000 
Gargoyle: 16,000 80,000 
Glass: 5,000 25,000 
Tron: 13,000 65,000 
Mechanical: 15,000 75,000 
Stone: —8,000 40,000 
Zombie: 17,000 85,000 


RAVENLOFT MC Appendix 

According to rumor, there are magical volumes 
that detail the procedures used in the creation of 
Ravenloft golems. Like the traditional golem man- 
uals found in other realms, each of these books 
describes how to fashion and animate one type of 
golem. In addition, the Dark Powers of Ravenloft 
favor the creation of these golems over their more 
mundane cousins, so that any Manual of Golems 
brought into Ravenloft has a 75% chance of trans- 
forming into a Libram ofRavenloft Golems when 
it enters the demiplane. Such books do not revert 
to normal when removed from the demiplane, but 
the creation of the golems they describe is not pos- 
sible outside of that domain, making these tomes 
all but worthless in other lands. 

When a Libram of Golems is found in 
Ravenloft, roll percentile dice on the following 
table to find the type of golem it can create: 


Type of Construct GP 
Roll Golem Creator' Time Cost 
01-14 Bone W18 2months 35,000 
15-29 Flesh W14 2months 50,000 
30-43 Glass W14 6months 125,000 
44-57 Iron W18 4months 100,000 
58-71 Mechanical Any 18 months 125,000 
72-86 Stone W16 3months 80,000 
87-00 Zombie W16 2months 60,000 
! W—Wizard. 


Tor stone guardian add 50% to stone golem. 
2271 


A a 


665 


~, Libram of Ravenloft Golems a 


The creation of any kind of Ravenloft golem is a 
dark and dangerous process for the creator. The crea- 
ture must be created with loving care and special 
magical spells woven over the body to bring it to life. 

Like traditional golems, those fashioned with 
the aid of the Dark Powers of Ravenloft have a 
great hatred for all living things. They are kept in 
check only by the will of their creators, who face 
death at their hands if they ever escape and 
become free-willed creatures. While the spells 
used to create a golem usually enslave it so that it 
cannot refuse to obey its creator, there is a 10% 
chance that any Ravenloft golem will break free 
ofthat control. After that, it devotes all ofits time 
and energy to the destruction ofits creator. Once 
a golem is created, it is entitled to a saving throw 
vs. spell once per month (on the full moon). Fail- 
ure indicates that it must serve for another month, 
while success says that it has become free-willed. 

The rituals to animate the body (once it has been 
built) require one full month (from full moon to full 
-moon) and cannot be interrupted in any way or the 
entire enchantment process must start anew. In all 
cases, the spells used may come from any source 
(including devices or scrolls). Ifa spell is cast on 
behalf of the golem's creator by a second individual, 
that spell must contain special alterations to make it 
sympathetic to the creature's would-be master. 
There is no additional cost for these alterations. 

Bone Golem: Only powerful wizards (of at least 
18thlevel) can create these evil creatures. The 
body of a bone golem is assembled wholly from 
the bones of animated skeletons who have been 
defeated in combat. Any type of skeletal undead 
will do, from traditional skeletons to Strahd skele- 
tons, but all must have been created and slain in 
Ravenloft. Only 10% of the bones from any given 
skeleton can be used, so the final product is a com- 
pilation of bones from many creatures. Often, 
there are animal, monster, and human bones in the 
same golem, giving the creature a nightmarish 
appearance. Various spell components, costing a 
total of roughly 25,000 gp, must be acquired and 
are consumed by the assembly process. The fol- 
lowing spells are woven over the body: animate 
dead, symbol offear, binding, and wish. 

Glass Golem: Fashioned by either priests or wiz- 
ards of at least 14th level, the glass golem is com- 
posed entirely of stained glass. Perhaps the most 
artistic of all known Ravenloft golems, its creation 
takes three months and requires an outlay of 100,000 
gp. In addition to the materials required, the follow- 


ing spells must be used: glassteel, animate object, 
prismatic spray, rainbow, and wish. Because of the 
mixture of spells, this type of golem is usually built 
by multi- or dual-classed characters or with the aid 
of a powerful assistant. While the origins of some 
types of Ravenloft golems are firmly established, 
the first appearance of glass golems is not recorded 
with certainty in any known record. It is believed 
that they were created by a spell caster who fancied 
himself an artist (hence their eerie beauty), but the 
identity of that sorry individual cannot be guessed. 
Some say it was the lord ofa small domain (one of 
the so-called Islands of Terror) who died at the 
hands ofa brave band of adventurers. 

Mechanical Golem: A nightmare of technology 
and magic, the mechanical golem is an intricate 
device that depends on both magic and machinery to 
operate. It is the only known manner of golem that 
can be built by any class of character, even those 
without spellcasting abilities, if they meet the 
requirements listed below. Construction of the body 
requires a full year of work (with no more than two 
interruptions, each no longer than 30 days, peffnit- 
ted) and an outlay of 125,000 gp. Almost half of that 
money (60,000 gp) is spent on the creation ofa prop- 
erly equipped laboratory, and additional golems may 
be built for only 65,000 gp using this existing equip- 
ment. The person building the body must have an 
Intelligence score ofnot less than 16and either expe- 
rience with fine craftsmanship (trained as a watch- 
maker) or a Dexterity score of not less than 17. The 
animation of the golem requires the following spells: 
animate object, fabricate, grease, chain lightning, 
and either major creation or wish. The first of these 
horrors was created at the order of Easan the Mad, 
Lord of Vechor. A twisted man who has always been 
fascinated by technological devices, Easan is said to 
have foreseen the elements ofthis creature in a study 
of a falling star. While most doubt that this is any- 
thing but more proof of Easan's dementia, few can 
challenge the obvious conclusion that these evil 
creatures are a mix of magic and technology that 
must surely have come from the mind ofa lunatic. 

Zombie Golem: One of Azalin's two original 
Ravenloft zombies, these dark creatures can be cre- 
ated only by wizards of at least 16thlevel. They are 
fashioned from the body parts of animated corpses 
(zombies, animal zombies, Strahd zombies, and the 
like) that have fallen in combat. They are quite sim- 
ilar to bone golems. Like them, only 10% of any 
individual zombie's body is suitable for reanima- 
tion, so a zombie golem is often composed of parts 


A a E a e 


666 


~ Libram, Book of Recording . > 


from many types of zombies, making the construc- 
tion look awkward and alien. Sewing together the 
parts of the body requires a full month and an out- 
lay of 50,000 gp (all ofwhich is spent on items that 
are consumed in the animation process). The spells 
needed are wish, polymorph any object, strength, 
control undead, and stinking cloud. 


of Recording 

GP Value: 25,000 
Vale of the Mage 
A book such as this can be any size, although 
most are usually thick, bound with leather, and 
decorated with gold or silver embossing. When a 
command word is spoken, the book records—in 
one of several languages ofthe user's choice— 
anything spoken within a 20-foot radius of the 
book. A second command word causes the book 
to stop recording. A third command erases the 
writing on any indicated page. 

Books such as these are prized by scholars and 
wizards who use them to record idle thoughts that 
can be crucial to their research. The books are 
also prized as spying objects, as carefully-placed 
books can record the conversations of alleged 
conspirators, rival wizards, or any others. Each 
book can record in 1d6 languages. 


XP Value: 5,000 


of Silver Magic 
XP Value: 8,000 GP Value: 40,000 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 
This mystic text is the reverse of the Libram of 
Ineffable Damnation. It is greatly beneficial to 
good wizards, most baneful to nongood ones. 
Like all magical works ofthis sort, it vanishes 
after one week of study, and the character having 
benefited from it can never be so aided again. 


of Study 
XP Value GP Value 
Charisma: 2,000 18,000 
Constitution: 2,000 18,000 
Dexterity: 2,000 18,000 
Intelligence: 2,000 18,000 
Strength: 2,000 18,000 
Wisdom: 2,000 18,000 


The Book of Marvelous Magic 
There are six versions of the Libram ofStudy, one for 
each ability score. Ifthe user spends one full month 
studying the libram and following the exercises, 
lessons, or other information therein, the ability 
score affectedcan be raised by 1 point (to a maxi- 


mum score of 18). The study must be continuous, 
with no breaks for adventure; meals must be deliv- 
ered, and six hours of sleep per day is the only relief 
permitted. The libram vanishes when the month of 
study is complete or if any interruption occurs. 


of Tedium 
XP Value: — GP Value: 9,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

This item appears identical to a Tome ofTransla- 
tion but is quite dangerous. It functions as a nor- 
mal tome until the language transcribed is that of a 
monster of 6 or more Hit Dice. At that time, the 
reader of the treatise stares at the pages, sighs, and 
falls asleep. The book then crumbles to dust and is 
unrecoverable. The sleep can be dispelled only by 
a dispel evil from a caster of at least 26th level. 


Teleportation Arches 
XP Value: 7,500 GP Value: 35,000 
DRAGON Magazine 145 

Similar to a Manual of Golems, a Libram offele- 
portation Arches is a treatise on the construction of 
a pair of magical arches connected by teleportation. 
The archways are 10 feet tall, 3 feet wide at the 
base, and each takes 1d4+4 weeks to build. The cost 
in fine stone and craftsmanship comes to 40,000 gp. 
Any creature stepping through one arch is instanta- 
neously teleported to the other. The distance 
between the arches is not a factor, but both arches 
must be constructed on the same plane. During the 
time required to build an archway, the wizard must 
not be away from the construction site for any 
appreciable amount of time except to eat or sleep. 

When the archways are completed, the libram 
must be burned and its ashes must be sprinkled over 
both constructions. Teleportation through these 
devices is without error, though if one archway is 
severely damaged, both cease functioning forever. 


of Thoth 

GP Value: 25,000 
Old Empires 
This is not one of the three famed tomes of the 
god Thoth, but rather a tome written by his incar- 
nation. It is a large and worn, leather-bound, 
brown volume without a title, fixed with a lock in 
the shape ofa baboon's head. Once per day, it can 
perform a legend lore spell on any item that is 
placed on its cover; when this occurs, the book 
opens and turns to a page where the legend of the 


item is described. The book closes once the entry 
2277 


XP Value: 3,000 


M i) aaa. 


668 


~ Libram, Book of Zargos g- 


is read and locks itself. Should the book be forced 
open, the caster finds that all pages are blank, and 
the book is never useful again. 


of Translation 
XP Value: 7,000 GP Value: 42,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

This valuable book will, on command, listen to any 
one language spoken within 60 feet of it, regardless 
of intervening walls, or doors. A translation of the 
spoken words appears on its pages along with the 
name of the language spoken. The user, however, 

must be able to hear the spoken words (possibly by 

Clairaudience) before the tome will function. The 
tome translates only one language per day but can 
translate that language as often as desired and for 
any length of time. If more than one creature 
speaks at the same time, however, the words 
appearing in the book are hopelessly garbled. 


of Twelve Seals 
XP Value: 2,200 GP Value: 22,000 
The Savage Frontier 
This thick book, its cover made of red dragon 
underbelly hide, contains 12 pages of thick, black 
leather. Each page contains a single rune- 
inscribed metal disk, like a seal of some kind. 
Seven of the seals are shiny gold, five are of dull, 
charred, tarnished lead. 

The runes on the seals are command words that 
activate the magic ofthe seal. When activated, the 
scroll summons a magical entity that the wielder 
can command for 3d6 turns. Each of the seven 
(gold) remaining seals summons a different being 
(the proper element need not be available for ele- 
mental beings). 

Page one: 16-HD air elemental. 
Page two: 8-HD fire elemental. 
Page four: 12-HDearth elemental. 
Page five: Dragon horse. 

Page eight: Gibbering mouther. 
Page nine: Fann. 

Page ten: Marid. 

Activating a seal causes it to become lead in a 
blinding flash. 


of Zargos 
XP Value: — GP Value: — 
The Milenian Empire 
As a greater artifact, the Book ofZargos has 320 
Power Points and recharges at the rate of 20 
points per turn. 


This powerful artifact was created a century 
ago by the Entropic Immortal named Nyx while 
in her mortal form as a Milenian wizard named 
Zargos. With the "death" of Zargos, the book was 
left to his followers, the Zargosians, who have yet 
to unlock all of its powers. Nyx created the book 
in the hope that mortals would one day use it to 
destroy the sun, and plunge the Hollow World 
into eternal darkness. 

The Book of Zargos is currently in the hands of 
the Zargosians, and is kept upon an altar in the 
Tower of Night. The Zargosians use it to control 
the weather around the tower, to create undead 
creatures and other monsters, and to develop new 
magical spells. , 

The covers ofthe book are made of a black, 
leathery substance, rather like the skin of a bat's 
wings. Fixed to the front cover is the horned skull 
of some diabolical creature. Its eye sockets are 
filled with obsidian, and glow with ebony fire. 
The pages of the book appear to be made of thin 
sheets of bone. A coded language of strange 
glyphs and Sigils covers the pages, and seems to 
have been etched with a claw or sharp instrument. 
Weapon Characteristics: None. 

Armor Characteristics: None. 

Constant Powers: The following two powers 
are permanent effects and cannot be used for any 
purpose other than that described: 
Phantasmalforce (50 PP), makes the Tower of 
Night appear as a huge, gnarled tree. Anyone 
touching the "tree" sees it as it really is—a 
strange, obsidian tower. 

Weather control (80 PP), keeps thick clouds 
and fog around the Tower of Night, bathing it 
and 240 yards of terrain in all directions in 
deep shadow. 
Other Powers: Through a secret ritual, priests 
and wizards of Zargos become "attuned" to the 
book. This allows them to draw upon any of the 
following powers, but only while they are within 
420 feet ofthe artifact: 

Animate dead (50 PP). 

Causefear (10 PP). 

Create poison, reverse of neutralize poison 
(30 PP). 

Infravision (20 PP). 

Speak with monsters (60 PP). 
The following powers are actually spells writ- 
ten in the book. Because of the coded language in 
which these spells were written, not all of them 


have been deciphered by the Zargosians. Those 
2280 


es ee ee 


669 


Lighthouse 


p a 


marked by an * may be used by Zargosian wiz- 
ards, and may be found in their individual spell 
books. The others have not been deciphered, and 
cannot be used . . . yet. 

Animate dead* 

Close gate. This is a special version of the 
reverse of the gate spell, in that range is 
extended to line-of-sight. Thus, it could be 
cast upon the Hollow World sun. The sun is 
actually the energy released from a permanent 
gate to the Sphere of Energy. Ifthe "sungate" 
is closed, the Hollow World will be plunged 
into absolute darkness. 

Cloudkill 

Lightning bolt* 

Power word blind 

Shield* 

Weather control* 
Everyone attuned to the book becomes suscep- 
tible to the sun's rays, suffering 1 point of damage 
per round of exposure. The damage can be healed 
by spells and rest as normal. Those attuned to the 
Book ofZargos slowly change over time; their 
skin pales from lack of sunlight, their eyes 
become sunken, and their lips pull back from 
their teeth. The overall effect makes them look 
like undead creatures, though they do not truly 
become the undead. Affected characters lose 
Charisma at the rate of 1 point per month, until a 
minimum Charisma of 4 is reached. 

Each use of the book's powers (but not spells 
learned from it) drains 1 hit point from the user. 
The damage cannot be healed by the use of 
spells; only by rest, and at the rate of 1 hit point 
per day. Ifa character's hit points drop to O as the 
result of using a power, death follows. 

When using the artifact’s animate dead power, 
there is a 40% chance the character's alignment 
changes to Chaotic, ifhe or she is not already 
Chaotic. 

Users of the book become obsessed with pro- 
tecting it from harm. 

Notes: A detect evil spell will reveal the book's 
evil nature. It can be utterly destroyed only by 
being burned in the fiery heart of the Hollow 
World's sun. 


Lighthouse 
XP Value: 300 GP Value: 3,000 
War Captain's Companion 
Magical lighthouses are small, spherical objects that 
are normally placed on small asteroids and ships. 


r 


They magically broadcast their location (via telepa- 
thy) to a particular imprinted owner. This allows the 
owner to know in which direction the lighthouse lies. 

It takes three weeks of constant close contact 
for an item to imprint upon its owner. After this 
21-day period, the lighthouse loses any previous 
imprint, and melds with the new owner (until it is 
owned by another for the same period). 


Liquid Iron 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 10,000 
The Complete Wizard's Handbook 
When kept inside a container, this substance 
remains liquid. When poured from the container, 
the liquid turns into iron. Before the iron hardens, 
it can be formed into any number of useful items. 


Liquid Road 

XP Value: 500 GP Value: 900 
Tome of Magic 
When sprinkled on water, swampland, quicksand, 
or a similar surface, liquid road causes the terrain 
to harden to the density of granite, enabling easy 
passage. Liquid road is also effective in negating 
the effects of spells such as transmute rock to 
mud. The liquid road stays hard for one hour, 
after which the terrain returns to its original state. 
One flask of liquid road can harden a 5- by 5-foot 
surface (for example, a path 25 feet long and 1 
foot wide). 


Lithocentric Pendulum 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 10,000 
Secrets of the Lamp 

This simple device is a plain stone on the end of a 
string. When held up and set in motion anywhere 
on the Plane of Elemental Earth, the stone circles 
briefly and then points to the Sevenfold Maze- 
work. It allows the user to dispense with the need 
for a native guide. Once within the Sevenfold 
Mazework, it ceases to function. 


Lizardskin Bed 
XP Value: — GP Value: — 
The Emirates of Ylaruam 
This bed is made from sewn lizardskin stretched 
over an ancient wooden frame and inscribed with 
curious runic engravings and glyphs. Crafted by a 
lizardman priest of an ancient lizardman tribe, 
this item is buried in the sacred tomb beneath the 
waters of the Well of the Faithful Prophet in 


Kirkuk. 
2285 


TS a ee 


670 


Locator, Planetary 


> Ye 


Meee: 
~a 


it 


z 
IE, 


EA i 


wr 
K 


Through this device, the lizardman priesthood 
displayed its alliance against the assaults of 
Death, establishing its divine prerogatives while 
maintaining control over the rulers of the lizard- 
man empire. 

This device is considered a minor artifact with 
the following abilities: cure disease, cure serious 
wounds, raise dead, and charm person. 

Activation: To activate, the blood of a reptile 
must be poured on the bed. 

Use of Powers: Once activated, the bed will 
automatically cure a diseased being, heal the 
injured, or raise the dead. The being is also auto- 
matically charmed and subjected to the will of 
the owner of the bed. 

Handicaps: 

e Those cured, healed, or raised by the bed 
begin a transformation into lizardman, which 
lasts three months. The process is gradual, and 
can be arrested by remove curse, and removed 
by dispel magic (cast at 20th level). 

e The owner of the bed begins to become a 
lizardman when the bed is first used. Memory 
of the present begins to fade and the character 
begins to assume the identity of the lizardman 
wizard who originally created the artifact. 
This process may be arrested or removed as 
above, but the owner saves vs. the remove 
curse and dispel magic as a 20th-level wizard. 


The owner does not want the transformation 
halted or removed, and resists any such 
attempts with all his abilities. 

Penalties: The owner cannot recall human 
speech or use spellcasting or combat abilities 
during trances. Trances last 1d6 turns and are 
triggered by any hit point loss. To resist the 
trance, the owner may save vs. spell in the first 
month of transformation, with a -4 penalty in the 
second month, and a -8 penalty in the third 
month. 


Locator 

Locators are devices created by the arcane, a rare 
species of blue-skinned giants that have almost 
exclusive control of the market for spelljamming 
equipment and ships. Often, one of these items is 
included free of charge when the arcane sell a 
ship to a groundling. The locators can be of any 
size and shape, though many look like crystal 
balls. 


Portal 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
SPELLJAMMER Campaign Set 
Another device of the arcane, this one mimics the 
wizard spell locate portal. The device is fairly 
reliable (90% accurate in pointing a direction to 
the portal) and is often "thrown in" by arcane 
sales agents as a giveaway. 


Planetary 

XP Value: 400 GP Value: 2,000 
SPELLJAMMER Campaign Set 
An arcane device often tossed in as a bonus to 
purchasers of an arcane hull, this desk-sized 
device contains a map similar to a System Dis- 
play. When a ship carrying a locator enters a 
crystal shell, the device immediately tracks the 
major celestial bodies in that sphere and displays 
them. 

Theplanetary locator does not track planets or 
celestial bodies smaller than size B, but should 
these be encountered the information can is 
entered manually and then displayed. 

A planetary locator also shows asteroid bases 
that choose to be located (in other words, those 
who bought a device from the arcane that causes 
them to appear on locators). Some of these 
devices have been stolen and are used by neogi, 
pirates, and other marauders to trap unwary trav- 


elers. 
2286 


“ 671 


Lock, Nolte's Locks and Bolts 


- 

Finally, planetary locators cannot show with 
accuracy those planetary systems that do not fol- 
low the common pattern of planetary bodies 
orbiting a larger body—normally a star. Chaotic, 
strange, or other types of systems cause the loca- 
tor board to turn a single solid color, or fade to 
black. 

The planetary locator does not operate in the 
phlogiston. The recommended use ofplanetary 
locators (according to Volo 's Big Book ofSpace) 
is to find landmarks in a system that can be used 
to guide a traveler to a civilized area where reli- 
able star charts may be purchased. 


Lock 


Locks are designed for one purpose and one pur- 
pose only: to keep belongings safe from outside 
forces. 


Nolte's Locks and Bolts 
XP Value: 1,500 GP Value: 7,500 
1992 Fantasy Collector Card 395 
Like Skie ’s locks and bolts, this device looks 
like a small, ornate lock with a tiny silver key. 
Like the original, when the key on this device is 
turned clockwise, all portals within 50 feet slam 
shut and become wizard locked (12th level). 
When the key is twisted counterclockwise, the 
effect is reversed. Nolte added another feature, 
though—when the device is twisted counter- 
clockwise within 6 inches of a nonmagical lock, 
there is a 70% possibility that the lock just pops 
open. Nonmagical traps can be similarly 
bypassed. 


Skie’s Locks and Bolts 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
Tome of Magic 
This device looks like a small, ornate lock with a 
tiny silver key. When the key is turned clockwise, 
all doors, windows and other portals within 50 
feet of the item slam shut and become wizard 
locked. For purposes of opening them, the wizard 
locks are the equivalent of those cast by a Nth- 
level wizard. The effect lasts until the key is 
twisted counterclockwise or the device is trans- 
ported more than 50 feet away. 
Skie s locks and bolts are sometimes found in 
the homes of wealthy merchants and secretive 
wizards. 


Locket 


A locket is a small piece ofjewelry, hollow in the 
center with a hinged cover and commonly hung 
from a chain. Lockets open to reveal a keep- 
sake—a picture, a lock of hair, or other memento. 


of the Great Kingdom 
XP Value: 3,500 GP Value: 25,000 
GREYHAWK Adventures 

This item was created by a wizard who greatly 
feared death. It has since been used by two or 
three other Spellcasters, though usually at the 
expense of another living creature. Under stress 
the locket makes saving throws as a hard metal. 

When the command word is spoken, the locket 
draws in the wizard's life-force (psyche) and 
holds it safe. Ifthe character later dies, his or her 
life force travels to the locket (as the magic jar 
spell). Ifthe owner is on a different plane than the 
locket, his life force has seven days to return to 
the locket or the psyche departs to the outer plane 
of the character's alignment. Once the life force is 
in the locket, it is aware of events that occur in a 
50-foot radius, though it cannot communicate 
with creatures that are not telepathic or have 
appropriate spell abilities. If the locket is 
destroyed while containing a psyche but no life 
force, the psyche is utterly and irrevocably anni- 
hilated; but if it is destroyed while containing the 
life force, the psyche travels to the outer plane of 
the character's alignment, allowing resurrection. 

The locket allows the life force three magical 
abilities, each usable once per day: animate dead (a 
single skeleton or body only), magicjar (as the wiz- 
ard's spell), ancfeeblemind, at the user's own level. 
Note that an animated body (zombie) or skeleton 
has all the characteristics ofthe monster, but has the 
user's Intelligence. Also, a zombie that is animated 
for more than 60 days must save vs. death magic 
each additional day or turn into a skeleton. 


of Love 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
DRAGON Magazine 5 
Any male humanoid coming within 15 feet of a 
female wearing a locket oflove immediately falls 
under a spell of love (saving throw vs. spell 
applicable). The victim will do anything to please 
the wearer, even to the extent of offering her all 
his possessions and risking his life. The male love 


locket functions identically to that for females. 
2290 


L 672 è 


Loupe of Cormac 


j Rn ie 


of Natasha 
XP Value: 3,200 GP Value: 18,000 
DRAGON Magazine Issue 5 

Found only in the possession of evil witches, the 
locket ofNatasha is usable by any humanoids 
except those of good alignments. The wearer may 
command any three evilly-aligned creatures within 
its 7-foot range, regardless of intervening sub- 
stances. No saving throws against it are allowed. If 
the wearer concentrates the power against a char- 
acter of good alignment for two turns, there is a 
15% chance that character will become corrupted 
and turn permanently evil. The locket has no effect 
upon clerics, priests, rangers, or paladins. 


Log 
Magical logs appear identical to ordinary ones 
and are usually 24 feet long and 3d4 inches in 
diameter. 


of Burning 

XP Value: 600 GP Value: 3,000 

The Book of Marvelous Magic 
This log can be set ablaze with a spark and does 
not require the usual tinder. It burns as would a 
normal log but is not consumed by the flames. 
The log of burning may be used as often as 
desired and burns forever unless doused by water. 
Any magical cold destroys its powers. 


Combination 
XP Value: 800 GP Value: 4,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
This log combines the effects of any two other 
magical logs. The combination log operates in an 
identical manner to each type in all respects. 


of Floating 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 2,500 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
This log floats in any liquid and cannot be harmed 
by acid. It can support one human-sized creature 
plus 500 pounds of additional weight without 
sinking. The log provides a steady footing, even 
in rough waters. If the proper command words 
are known, the log can be ordered about by its 
rider, moving at 30 feet per round in smooth 
water and 10 feet per round amidst the roughest 
of waves. The direction of travel is set or changed 
simply by concentrating for one round. A log of 
floating can be used as often as desired and for 
any length of time. 


of Ramming 
XP Value: 600 GP Value: 3,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

This log can be used to break open any nonmagi- 
cal door. even if locked, and succeeds on a roll of 
3-6 (on 1d6, adding Strength-related THACO 
adjustments normally). It does not affect wizard 
locked or otherwise enchanted portals. A log of 
ramming, however, creates a loud noise when 
used, easily heard by all within 120 feet. 


of Repetitive Burning 
XP Value: 800 GP Value: 4,000 
DRAGON Magazine 73 
A wooden log about 8 inches in diameter and 2 
feet long. Regardless of how often the log is 
burned, it remains whole and ready to bum again 
the next day. 

It does burn out as a normal log would, but 
leaves a large husk rather than a pile of ashes. It 
then regenerates over the course of the following 
18 hours. As a bonus, it is very easy to ignite. 


of Rolling 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 2,500 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
This log appears and functions as a log offloating 
in all respects. However, when any aquatic crea- 
ture larger than a normal fish comes within 30 
feet of it, there is a 50% chance per creature it 
will start to roll, dumping its rider into the water. 


of Snoring 

XP Value: 250 GP Value: 750 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
This log will, on command, snore as loudly as a 
sleeping giant. It may cause those unaware of its 
powers to believe that a giant is indeed nearby. It 
stops snoring on command. The log ofsnoring 
functions as often as desired and for any length of 
time. 


Loupe of Cormac 

XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 25,000 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 61 
The loupe of Cormac is ajeweler's eyeglass that 
acts like a gem oftrue seeing, but only for gem 
stones. Using it, a person with an appraising skill 
can learn the exact quality and value of a gem, 
plus the nature of any inherent magic—including 
curses. 


2299 


A E i aia. 


673 


or Wane 
Ct 


N 


il 


—_~ 


SE en 


g fi 


N \ 


Sy . yi 
- VO SS 


4 
+f 


Mace 


The mace is a direct descendant of the 
basic club, being nothing more than a wooden 
shaft fitted with a stone or metal head. Some 
armorers also build all-metal, one-piece maces. 
The head design varies—-some are smooth, others 
are flanged, and still others are knobbed or 
spiked. The first maces were made to give a club- 
wielder more striking power. Many nonwarriors 
favor maces because they are compact and simple 
to use. Roll on the following table to find the type 
of item found. 


Roll Mace Type 


01-13 Flange Mace 
14-25 Footman's Mace 
26-38 Great Mace 
39-50 Horsemen's Mace 
51-63 Mace 
64-75  Mace-Axe 
76-88 Morning Star 
89-00 Warstar 
Astral Deva 
XP Value: 2,500 GP Value: 24,000 


Outer Planes MC Appendix 

The Astral Deva carries a macelike weapon that 
has a +3 magical bonus on all attack and damage 
rolls. It causes a devastating 3d6 points of dam- 
age per successful attack. Any creatures struck 
twice in the same round by the weapon must 
make a saving throw vs. spell or be knocked 
senseless for 1d12 melee rounds. The weapon 
also has all the special abilities of a mace ofdis- 
ruption. 


Bael's Morning Star 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 20,000 
Monster Manual II 

This horrid weapon is a morning star +2 with a 
long bronze handle that telescopes magically 
from 4 to 8 feet in length as Bael desires. Twice a 
day, he can automatically strike any opponent, 
regardless of its location. 


Mace of Darkness 


Berronar Truesilver's 

4 XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 40,000 
AJ) Monster Mythology 
The avatar employs a mace +4 that kills all evil 
thieves and those engaged in killing for a living 
(assassins, mercenaries, and the like) unless they 
save vs. death magic at -4. 


Black 
XP Value: 2,500 GP Value: 20,000 
Black Courser 
This mace +5 renders the wielder invisible to 
undead and spirits. The wielder does not become 
visible to undead upon attacking. In addition, a 
successful hit is treated as a turn undead attempt 
as if by a l0th-level priest. 


of Crushing 
XP Value: 1,500 GP Value: 15,000 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 47 
Forged of heavy, black steel and mithral, this mace 
strikes for 1d12+3 points of damage, plus the 
wielder's strength bonus. The mace can crush inan- 
imate objects weighing less than 60 pounds (save 
vs. crushing blow negates). If the weapon hits with 
a natural 20, the saving throw is made at -5. 


of Darkness 

XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 9,000 
Halls of the High King 
These weapons are used by many evil priests and 
warriors in the Realms. Always aligned (a priest 
of Bane, for example, would wield a lawful evil 
mace), these all-metal, fearsomely spiked +2 
weapons deal 1 d8 points of damage to creatures 
ofall sizes. 

The bearer of a mace ofdarkness can cause it, 
when grasped and so ordered, to create darkness 
15' radius for one or two rounds, as desired. This 
darkness is centered on, and moves with, the 
mace head. Once ended, it cannot be re-invoked 
until two rounds have passed. 

A mace ofdarkness will emit a snarling noise 
whenever it strikes a good-aligned creature (it 
cannot be magically confused as to the align- 
ment). If beings of any alignment other than the 
mace’s own attempt to wield it or grasp it, they 
suffer 2d4 points of electrical damage per contact 
or round of contact. 


3005 


ad 675 5 


~~ Mace, Diamond a 


Diamond 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 10,000 
Oriental Adventures 

This magical item is a small iron rod topped with 
a large diamond—it is too small to be used effec- 
tively as a weapon. Upon uttering the command 
word, a 12d6 lightning bolt discharges from the 
gem. Each use requires one charge and the dia- 
mond mace has 3d10 charges. When all charges 
are spent, the diamond can be sold. It is worth 
1,000 ch'ien. 


of Disruption 
XP Value: 1,750 GP Value: 17,500 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 

This appears to be a mace +1, but it has a neutral 
good alignment, and any evil character touching 
it receives 5d4 points of damage due to the pow- 
erful enchantments laid upon the weapon. Ifa 
mace of disruption strikes any undead creature or 
an evil creature from one of the lower planes, it 
may utterly destroy the creature. Skeletons, zom- 
bies, ghouls, shadows, wights, and ghasts, if hit, 
are instantly blasted out of existence. Other crea- 
tures roll saving throws as follows. 


RRO IO 


j 


Creatures Save 
Wraith 5% 
Mummies 20% 
Spectre 35% 
Vampires 50% 
Ghosts 65% 
Liches 80% 
Other affected evil creatures 95% 


Even if their saving throws are effective, the 
mace ofdisruption scores double damage on 
opponents of this sort, and twice the damage 
bonus. 


Driver 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 20,000 
DRAGON Magazine 16 
This mace has a +3 attack bonus when used and 
does 3d6 points of damage. 


Expeller 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 20,000 
DRAGON Magazine 16 
The expeller has a +3 attack bonus when used 
and causes 3d6 points of damage. 


Horseman’s 


X Mace 
CGN 
A } 


Mace, Nebelun's 


OE a 


Great Golden Mace of the North 
XP Value: 1,500 GP Value: 15,000 
Adventures in BLACKMOOR 
The great golden mace ofthe north is amace +2 
that increases the bearer's Strength and Intelli- 
gence by 6 and 7, respectively. It also has the 
ability to detect magic, detect gems, see invisible, 
find secret doors, andfind traps in the same man- 
ner as a magic sword. Since it is as well known in 
the North as its reputed twin, the great holy mace 
icon, its reputation also tends to benefit the 
bearer, causing all enemies within 50 feet to 

check morale. 


Great Holy Mace Icon 
XP Value: 1,200 GP Value: 12,000 
City ofthe Gods 

Brother Richard, the Flying Monk, carries a 
mace +2, known far and wide as the great holy 
mace icon, a weapon that has the ability to 
detect evil and see invisible in the same manner 
as a magic sword. Since this mace is well known 
by both appearance and reputation throughout 
the Northlands, it has a pronounced effect on 
friend and foe, alike. Any enemies within 100 
feet must make an immediate morale check at 
-1 whenever it is first drawn. In addition, 
friendly troops making a morale check while 
within 100 feet of the weapon add +1 to their 
morale. The mace has the curious property of 
increasing the bearer's Strength and Intelligence 
by 4 and 2, respectively. 


Hruggek's Morning Star 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 20,000 
Monster Mythology 
Hruggek's avatar's huge morning star +4 is fully 
7 feet long and is used two-handed. 


Ironstar Mace 
XP Value: 800 GP Value: 8,000 
Dwarves Deep 
These all-metal weapons are fashioned by the 
fabled Ironstar dwarven clan, and are both rare 
and costly. Always ofthe "footman's” variety, and 
always made ofa single piece of darksteel, iron- 
Star maces are said to be able to shatter armor at a 
blow. 
What they actually do is deal double damage 
(2d6+2 vs. small and human-sized, 2d6 vs. large), 
seem almost weightless (weighing less than one 


pound) and unbreakable, and have a special 


power: the shattering strike. 

A shattering strike can only be called upon 
successfully once in every two-turn period. If an 
intended strike misses, the power is not wasted, 
and can be used on a subsequent attack. A shat- 
tering strike causes a dull, rolling booming, like 
distant thunder. 

A struck target suffers 2d12 points of damage 
and must save vs. spell or be stunned (unable to 
make any voluntary action) for 2d8 rounds. Even 
if the save is successful, the struck being is 
stunned for the round following the strike. 

Ifa target is wearing field or full plate (rigid) 
armor, the damage taken by the target is halved, 
but the armor must save (metal vs. crushing blow 
with a —4 penalty) or shatter and fall off. If armor 
has resisted an earlier shattering strike success- 
fully, its penalty is -5. If multiple strikes have 
been saved against (note that this requires a pas- 
sage of considerable time), the armor's saving 
throw penalty is cumulative. 


Mace-Wand 
XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 40,000 
Egg of the Phoenix 
This is a special combination weapon. The wand 
(handle) can be recharged. Once the wand uses its 
last charge, the whole weapon loses its magical +4 
abilities. The DM should roll on the wand table to 
determine the type of wand this mace is, adding 
the GP and XP values to the above numbers. 


Memnor's Morning Star 
XP Value: 1,500 GP Value: 15,000 
Monster Mythology 
The avatar's morning star +3 strikes with afee- 
blemind effect three times day, as the avatar 
chooses. 


Muamman Duathal's 
XP Value: 1,700 GP Value: 17,000 
Monster Mythology 
Muamman carries a mace +4 that casts light as 
he wishes, from a soft glow to a 20-foot-radius. 


Nebelun's 
XP Value: 1,200 GP Value: 12,000 
Monster Mythology 
Nebelun's avatar owns a mace +3 that stuns any- 
one struck for 1d4 rounds (save vs. spell to 
negate), and it also doubles as a wand ofwonder. 


3017 


677 


~~ Mace, Nightbringer r 


Nightbringer 

GP Value: 65,000 
Tales of the Lance 
Nightbringer was forged in the Tower of Ergoth. 
It was there that the power of the Black Robe 
wizards forged many evil weapons in the days 
when their kind was hunted by the corrupt Church 
of Istar. After the Cataclysm; nightbringer fell 
into the possession of Verminaard, who received 
it from the evil priests. 

Nightbringer is afootman's mace +3. It is a 
powerful tool of evil. When the mace strikes a 
victim and the command word is uttered, the vic- 
tim must make a saving throw vs. spell or become 
blind for 2d6 turns. The mace also inflicts its nor- 
mal damage. If a character of Good alignment 
tries to pick up nightbringer, that character must 
roll a successful saving throw vs. spell with a -2 
penalty to the roll. Failure means that the charac- 
ter is blinded until a cure blindness spell is cast 
on him or her. 


XP Value: 6,500 


of Pain 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 7,000 
_DRAGON Magazine 54 

This is a mace +2 that has a 5% chance per attack 
(cumulative over consecutive rounds) of causing 
an opponent to fight at —4 to attack rolls due to 
the extreme pain caused by the blows of the 
mace. The 5% chance accumulates in each round 
the mace is used, as long as at least one attack is 
made in each round and all consecutive attacks 
are made against the same adversary. Thus, a 
mace of pain that is being used in the fifth con- 
secutive round against the same opponent has a 
25% chance of bringing its "pain power" to bear 
upon the foe if a successful hit is scored in that 
round. The "pain percentage" accumulates 
whether or not a hit is actually scored, as long as 
an attack is attempted by the wielder. 

Damage done by the mace heals at half the 
normal rate. If used to subdue, the mace causes 
90% subduing damage and 10% actual damage. 
Creatures that do not feel pain cause the mace to 
be treated as anormal mace +2. 


Raiden's 
GP Value: 35,000 
Legends & Lore 
Any being hit by the avatar's mace suffers 3d10 
points of lightning damage (save for half). 


XP Value: 3,500 


Shadowcaster 
XP Value: 2,500 GP Value: 25,000 
Dragon's Rest 
This mace +2 is engraved with a symbol of Hith. 
It can create darkness in a 15-footradius once per 
day, affecting everyone in the area except the 
wielder. 


Skull 
XP Value: 1,450 GP Value: 14,500 
DRAGON Magazine 54 
The skull mace is a magical weapon, initially 
indistinguishable from any other magical mace. It 
can only be fully used by an evil priest. In the 
hands of any other character, it performs as a 
mace +2. A paladin or good-aligned priest who 
grasps the mace receives 2d6 points of damage 
each round it is held. Neutral priests take 1d6 
points of damage per round spent holding it. Any 
character can carry and transport the mace if 
desired, and is not damaged as long as the mace is 
not held or touched with the hands. The skull 
mace radiates an aura of evil if detection is used. 

When held by an evil priest, the enchantments 
concealing its true appearance are dispelled. The 
mace head is transformed into a caricature ofa 
human skull, which remains until the evil priest 
releases the mace, whereupon it returns to its nor- 
mal appearance. 

A skull mace may cast continual darkness 
twice per day as the owner of the mace wills. 
When it is used in combat against a human, 
humanoid, or demihuman opponent and the 
wielder scores a natural (unmodified) 20, the 
opponent takes double damage from the blow and 
must also make a saving throw vs. death magic at 
-2 or be slain immediately. 

The wielder may also cast an animate dead 
spell once per day on any human, demihuman, or 
humanoid body or skeleton. Zombies and skele- 
tons so animated follow the directions of the 
bearer of the mace, but remain in undead form 
for only one week. Thus, an evil priest cannot 
control more than seven undead with this device 
at any one time. 


of Spellwarding 

XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 20,000 
Tantras 

This +1 magical weapon is a finely made mace 

wrought of one piece of blued, oiled steel. In bat- 


tle, it functions normally. Ifit touches any item or 
3023 


a D E ETET 


678 


Mace of St. Cuthbert II 


| Ee AA 


solid, nonliving surface that bears a dweomer, the 
mace will glow with a magenta-hued radiance, 
the intensity of the light increasing with the 
strength of dweomers contacted. 

The force of any spell, magical item, or artifact 
discharge directed at the bearer of a mace of spell- 
warding, or activated so that its area of effect 
includes the mace or its bearer, will be sucked into 
the mace, instantly and harmlessly. This effect is 
audible and visible, and entirely protects the bearer 
(even from such specifically aimed magic as 
magic missile, charm magic, and the like). Absorp- 
tion is involuntary, not selectively controllable. 

For each level of spell absorbed (treat item 
functions as the level of the lowest equivalent 
spell), a mace of spellwarding gains an additional 
+1 bonus, lasting six turns. Bonuses apply to both 
damage and attack rolls, and are cumulative. 

Upon exceeding a maximum of bonuses (which 
varies from mace to mace; most were designed to 
handle no more than 12 spell levels), a mace of 
spellwarding expends its excess energy in a ran- 
dom teleport. It always travels to a safe place 
(one neither high nor low for M-sized wielders) 
somewhere on the same plane, but its destination 
cannot be foreseen or influenced in any way. 

Ifno one is holding or carrying the mace when 
it overloads, it will simply vanish in a burst of 
magenta-and-white radiance. Anyone holding (or 
touching a holder of) a mace ofspellwarding is 
taken along on the teleport (to a maximum of one 
creature per "plus" held by the mace at the time 
of overload, including the "extra" pluses the 
weapon could not handle). 

A mace ofspellwarding functions as a normal 
weapon only (exhibiting no magical powers at 
all) for one day after teleporting, and after that 
regains its +1 status and ability to spellward 
again. 


of St. Cuthbert 

XP Value: 3,750 GP Value: 37,500 
Eldritch Wizardry 

The mace ofSt. Cuthbert is a very holy relic of 
the times of St. Cuthbert. Usable only by good 
priests, its power is largely unknown (+5 on 
attack and damage rolls) and it is hard to use. It 
also has the following abilities and penalties: 
° Levitation 
Fire resistance 
Dispel magic four times per day 
Death spell twice per day 


This artifact (which appears as some type of 
weapon) has no power whatever until it is used to 
kill a certain, predetermined type of monster 
(example: a vampire). Once the specified crea- 
ture is killed with the relic, it immediately gains 
all of its powers. However, whenever another cer- 
tain, predetermined type of monster is sighted 
(example: a troll), the artifact compels the user to 
attack and slay the monster, and when this is 
completed, the artifact loses all of its powers until 
another monster of the same type as first men- 
tioned (the vampire) is killed. 


of St. Cuthbert II 
XP Value: 4,750 GP Value: 47,500 
The Temple of Elemental Evil 

This is a mace ofdisruption +5 with other pow- 
ers. If the attack roll is a natural 20, the victim 
loses 1 point of Intelligence (no saving throw, no 
magic resistance). The mace of St. Cuthbert has 
the following additional powers: bless (by tap- 
ping touch), know alignment (once per day), 
tongues, exorcise (once per month), and remove 
curse (seven per week). 


of St. Cuthbert III 
XP Value: 4,200 GP Value: 42,000 
DRAGON Magazine 100 
The mace ofSaint Cuthbert, like all of the arti- 
facts and relics in the AD&D game system, is a 
customizable magic item with powers and side 
effects chosen by the individual DM. 

The mace of St. Cuthbert is a lawful good relic, 
being a mace that is + 5 on attack and damage, 
with the disruption effects of a mace ofdisrup- 
tion. Only a lawful good priest with a strength of 
18 can use the additional powers inherent in the 
mace. 

The mace has three minor benevolent powers. 
It detects evil continuously when held, casts light, 
as the priest spell, seven times a week, and ren- 
ders the possessor of the mace immune to all 
forms of magical fear when kept on one's person. 
The mace has two major benevolent powers, 
allowing the user to heal, once per day, by touch- 
ing the mace to the injured person, and the pos- 
sessor can causefear with his or her gaze, at will. 
However, if the user is not lawful good in align- 
ment, alignment immediately changes to lawful 
good upon touching the mace. This change can- 
not be reversed by any means. 


3026 


Wo eS 


679 


Mace of St. CuthbertIV 


>, i a A 


lt A 
W M 


Ve M 
y NS 


of St. Cuthbert IV 


XP Value: — GP Value: — 
Book of Artifacts 

The mace ofSt. Cuthbert is a short, gnarled piece 
of bronzewood in the shape of a club. 

Saint Cuthbert is a lesser god bent on main- 
taining law and order, but his greatest passion 
comes from testing the faith of his flock. Follow- 
ers of Saint Cuthbert believe he travels regularly 
through the countryside in human form. Those 
who were lacking in faith tell how their faith was 
miraculously restored after a stranger hit them on 
the head with a club. 

In dire instances, Cuthbert has been known to 
grant the use of his sacred club to a follower of 
the purest faith, that it may be used to spread the 
faith against all opposition. Followers of Saint 
Cuthbert consider it a relic. 

The mace ofSt. Cuthbert is the actual weapon 
of Saint Cuthbert of the Cudgel. As such, the 
likelihood of any PC obtaining or using it while 
Saint Cuthbert is alive and well is rare. Should 
this happen, it is a formidable weapon—even if 
there are no priests of Saint Cuthbert within the 
party. The cudgel can act as a balance of power, 
allowing lower-level characters to do battle 
beyond their abilities. 

A possible adventure might begin with the 


priests of Saint Cuthbert losing their spells. Wor- 
ried that something may be seriously wrong with 
their deity's welfare, they seek to discover the 
cause and restore their god and their spells. The 
PCs are hired or volunteer to aid in this quest, 
with any of a number of leads to be tracked down. 
In the end, the club has fallen into the wrong 
hands and must be restored to Cuthbert. Perhaps 
a particularly strong priest of Cuthbert has 
acquired it, but has grown insubordinate with the 
new-found power. Rather than retaking the club 
himself, Cuthbert waits to see ifhis followers can 
restore it to him themselves, thus restoring his 
faith in them. 

Constant Powers: Any intelligent mortal 
struck on the head instantly becomes an enthusi- 
astic follower of Saint Cuthbert for a period of 1 
day. The cudgel functions as a mace ofdisruption 
with +5 bonuses to attack and damage rolls. Vic- 
tims attacked with a natural 20 lose 1 point of 
Intelligence with no magic resistance or saving 
throw allowed. 

Invoked Powers: Any priest of Saint Cuthbert 
can cast call uponfaith (3/day) and detect undead 
(at will). Cloak ofbravery can also be cast 
(1/day), with the following modifications; a +3 
saving throw bonus for all types of saves is 
granted to up to four creatures for an 8-hour 
period, regardless of the number of rolls. 

Curse: The wielder of the cudgel becomes a 
lawful good follower of Saint Cuthbert and an 
extreme zealot, trying to convert everyone. No 
one is faithful enough. As a result, the zealot's 
Charisma is reduced to 4 due to obnoxious behav- 
ior for as long as the mace is possessed. 
Suggested Means of Destruction: 

luz the Old must be polymorphedinto a giant 
beaver and the mace fed to him. 

It must be covered by the natural formation of 
a stalagmite, which then receives a transmute 
rock to mud spell. 

The bronzewood tree that the club came from 
must be prevented from ever growing. 


3027 


"a an aa 


6 


8 


0 


Mace, Undeadbane II 


h ee Ne a 


Staff-Mace 
XP Value GP Value 
Great Mace: 1,500 7,500 
Mace: 1,500 7,500 
Quarterstaff: 1,500 7,500 


The Land Beyond the Magic Mirror 
This priestly weapon appears as nothing more 
than a normal wooden staff one might use while 
trekking in the wilderness. It gives off a very 
faint dweomer of alteration magic. Upon com- 
mand it will take one of the following three 
forms: 


Roll Type Effect 

01-33  Quarterstaff +3 iron shod quarterstaff 
34-67 Great Mace +1 iron footman's mace 
68-00 Mace +2 iron horseman's mace 


The weapon is made typically of bronzewood 
and is banded and tipped with iron. 


Storm Star 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 1,500 
Volo's Guide to the North 

This magical weapon is a morning star of ancient 
design, thought to have been devised in Netheril. 
Various specimens exist in the North; most of 
them are electrum-plated steel. They tend to be as 
long and heavy as the biggest morning stars. 
They are +1, +2, or +3 weapons, and they crackle 
with spectacular, though harmless, arcs of light- 
ning when they are wielded. 

Once per turn, the wielder of a storm star can 
unleash a battle bolt oflightning. This is chain 
lightning that strikes for 8d6 points of damage in 
addition to the purely physical weapon damage. 
Of course, a successful attack roll is required for 
the physical weapon damage to be inflicted. After 
the chain lightning strikes the first target, it then 
arcs up to 70 feet away in a direction chosen by 
the weapon wielder. It can even arc toward a 
moving target. Beings endangered by this first 
"hop" must save vs. spell or take 6d6 points of 
damage. Success means they take no damage at 
all; the bolt missed them. After the first hop, the 
bolt hops three more times, arcing up to 20 feet at 
a time toward the nearest concentration of metal. 
Ifno metal is present, it seeks the largest concen- 
tration of life and movement. The bolt does 4d6 
points of damage on the first of these three hops, 
3d6 on the next, and 2d6 on the last. In all cases, 
there is no damage if a save is made. If the 


weapon misses striking its first intended target, 
the target takes no physical damage but must still 
save vs. spell or suffer the full 8d6 points of light- 
ning damage. The magic of this weapon can 
never harm its wielder, though the bolt can hop 
back to that person and then away again. A storm 
star does 2d4+1 to 2d4+3 physical damage per 
strike, depending on the strength of its enchant- 
ment. 


Tadrond's 

XP Value: 2,500 GP Value: 25,000 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 43 
Tadrond, a follower of Solarus the sun-god, 
crafted this mace to help him in his personal 
quest to rid the world of undead. The mace is 
large, heavy, and cast of purest silver. It has 
strong magical connections to the Positive Mater- 
ial Plane. 

In the hands of any lawful good creature, it 
functions as a +3 mace, +4 against all evil- 
aligned beings, doing double damage to undead 
creatures and creatures of the Negative Material 
Planes. Three times per day, the mace can glow 
with a shimmering light, destroying all undead of 
less than mummy class within a 30-foot radius, 
and doing 4d6 points of damage to mummies, 
2d6 to vampires, and 1d6 to liches. 

Evil characters touching the mace are automat- 
ically put under a quest to give the mace to the 
very next lawful good person they find. Part of 
the quest enchantment is the ability to recognize 
the truly pure-hearted person the wielder encoun- 
ters. 


Undeadbane 

XP Value: 400 GP Value: 2,000 
DRAGON Magazine 179 
These weapons may be used against all forms of 
undead, whether conjured or occurring naturally, 
including creatures such as the great ghuls. The 
weapon gains an additional +1 vs. all undead 
creatures. 


Undeadbane II 
XP Value: 600 GP Value: 3,000 
DRAGON Magazine 179 
These weapons may be used against all forms of 
undead, whether conjured or occurring naturally, 
including creatures such as the great ghuls. The 
weapon gains an additional +2 vs. all undead 


creatures. 
3032 


geen ee 


681 


Mace, Varuna's 


(ey A 


Varuna’s 
GP Value: 11,000 
Legends & Lore 
Any being struck by this avatar's mace loses 1 d4 
points of karma (if that optional rule is being 
used). 


XP Value: 1,100 


Warstar of the Manticore 
XP Value: 1,500 GP Value: 15,000 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 58 

Several of these morning stars +1 are believed to 
exist. However, scholars believe most owners of 
these weapons do not realize that they have more 
than a melee weapon. Upon command, a warstar 
ofthe manticore releases 1d6 spikes at any one 
target. The spikes have the range ofa light cross- 
bow and instantly replace themselves. The 
wielder must make one attack roll, adjusted for 
range, for the volley of spikes. The wielder gains 
the warstar's +1 attack bonus and any normal 
bonus for high Dexterity (the warstar 5 enchant- 
ment negates Dexterity penalties). The spikes can 
be released up to four times a day. 


Machine of Lum the Mad 
XP Value: 7,250 GP Value: 72,500 
Eldritch Wizardry 
This gigantic piece of intricate machinery is far 
too heavy and bulky to move by hand. It may be 
teleported or dimension doored, but other means 
of transportation probably just results in the 
destruction of the machine's delicate works. Ifthe 
machine is dropped after a teleport, or suffers a 
similar mishap, it loses at least one function and, 
ifit falls far enough, it is destroyed. It is much too 
complex to be repaired—the machine has 70 
levers and 30 dials. It also has a type of booth 
large enough for four people to stand inside. Ifa 
person or item is inside the booth and a lever is 
pulled or a dial turned, there may be an effect on 
the person or object inside. Of the 70 levers and 
30 dials, 20 are no longer functioning due to the 
extreme age of the machine. Since the item is so 
complex and has a large number of magical prop- 
erties available, a random chart has been devised 

to make the DM's job a bit easier. 


dl 

Roll Magical Effect 
Ol Levitation 
02 ESP 
03 Speak with dead 


04 
05 


40 


User immune to disease 
User has no need to eat or drink 
Detect magic 
Read magic 
Light 

Detect invisible objects 

Invisibility 
Detect evil (or good if evil, or both if 
neutral) 

Fly 

Clairvoyance 

Clairaudience 

Infravision 
Move at double speed 

User protected against attacks as if wear- 
ing +1 armor 

Water breathing 

Wizard eye 

Telekinesis 
Cure light wounds once per day 

Detect traps and secret doors 

Speak with animals 
Fire resistance 
Adds 1d3 points to one ability while 
using artifact 

Charm monster with -3 on saving throw 
twice a day 
Sleep (also affects up to one creature of 
any level), 3 times per day 

Generate a 20-Hit-Diefireball once per 
day 

Generate a double effect slow spell twice 
a day 

Polymorph any object with -2 on saving 
throw 
Fear with -2 on saving throw twice per 
day 

Serious wound of double effect twice a 
day 

Shape change once per day 

Cold ray of 10 dice effect three times a 
day 
Finger ofdeath with —4 on saving throw 
once per day 

Regenerate up to one half of all points 
lost in combat 

Paralyzation with -3 on saving throw 
three times a day 

Dispel magic four times per day 
Generate a 20-Hit-Die lightning bolt 
once per day 


Teleport twice per day 
3035 


5 682 : 


Machine of Lum the Mad 


h Sr ey a 


41 Conjure one elemental, djinn, efreet, or 
invisible stalker once per day 

42  Stone-flesh twice per day 

43 Monster summoning once per day 

44 User may become ethereal twice per day 

45 X-ray vision 

46 Spell turning 

471 Death spell twice per day 

48 Power word stun once per day 

49 Touch turns opponent's bones to jelly, 
usable once per day 

50 Has the power of a gem ofseeing when 
held by the owner 

51 Each time an artifact or relic is used, user 
loses 1 point on one ability permanently, 
and the affected ability may never be 
increased. 

52 Relic gives off a gas that renders all 
within 30 feet unconscious for two hours 
(use saving throw for poison). 

53 This artifact contains the spirit of another 
person. After a set number of uses, the 
spirit is released, and the spirit of the user 
is drawn into the artifact until another 
person is thus drawn in. 

54 After a set number of uses, the user of 
this relic is transformed into either a very 
minor fiend or a very minor godling. 
Thenceforth, the character is at the com- 
plete beck and call of a certain major 
fiend or godling, and might as well roll 
up a new character. 

55 This artifact compels the user to go on a 
holy quest. As soon as the user fulfills the 
quest, he or she is immediately sent on 
yet another quest. 

56 Each time this artifact is used, there is a 
10% chance that a part of the user's body 
will rot away and fall off. This effect is 
permanent, and may not be reversed or 
restored. Start with each ofthe user's toes 
in turn, then the fingers, ears, nose, 
hands, feet, arms, legs and finally the 
head, in that order. 

57 As long as the user possesses this item, 
Charisma is reduced to -10. The charac- 
ter is totally repulsive in appearance, and 
all followers, hirelings and associates 
now have the lowest loyalty rating when 
with the possessor. 

58 There is an increasing chance that the 
power confined in the object breaks free, 


SNe 


Machine of Lum the Mad II 


p a a G 


59 


67 


68 


69 


70 


takes over the wielder of the item by 
destroying this individual’s life-force, and 
then (masquerading as the person) kills all 
of the hirelings and associates of the per- 
son. The chance should range from 1% to 
4%, cumulative, per use of the item. 

The item causes greed and desire in any 
person viewing it. There is a 10% cumu- 
lative chance that each time any person 
sees the item the character attacks and 
slays the owner, and takes it. 

User loses one level of experience. 

As long as user has artifact on his or her 
person, the user acts as a magic drainer. 
Any magic directed at the user has no 
effect, nor can the user use any magic, 
and any magic item that touches any part 
of the character's body permanently loses 
its magical ability. 

User becomes permanently lawful. 

User becomes permanently chaotic. 

User becomes permanently good. 

User becomes permanently evil. 

User becomes fantastically strong but 
clumsy. Treat as a 18/00 Strength, except 
that instead of receiving a +4 to attack 
rolls, the user receives a -5 and is equally 
clumsy in casting spells, is prone to drop 
items, damaging breakable ones with his 
or her incredible strength. 

User has a poison touch. Anyone touch- 
ing the user must make a saving throw 
against poison. 

User cannot touch or be touched by any 
type of metal; it simply passes through 
the body with no effect. 

This artifact (which appears to be some 
type of weapon) has no power whatever 
until it is used to kill a certain, predeter- 
mined type of monster (example: a vam- 
pire). Once this specified monster is killed 
with the relic, the relic immediately 
regains all of its powers. However, when- 
ever another certain, predetermined type 
of monster is sighted (example: a troll), 
the artifact compels the user to attack and 
slay that monster. When this is completed, 
the artifact loses all of its powers until 
another monster of the same type as first 
mentioned (another vampire) is killed. 
Use of this artifact causes the user to even- 
tually become ethereal every time he or 


she is under stress. Each time it is used, 
the user has a 2% chance (cumulative) of 
going ethereal when under stress—after 
10 uses there is a 20% chance of becom- 
ing ethereal while under stress. Being 
under stress is defined as any situation 
where the user faces any monster, trap, 
place, or person that the user is uncertain 
of conquering. After 50 uses, the user 
always becomes ethereal every time that 
he or she is under stress. The ethereal state 
lasts until the stress is removed. 

User may summon a fiend once per day. 
The fiend serves the user for 2d12 turns. 
Time stop once per day. 

User granted one wish per week. 

User has limited omniscience. The char- 
acter may ask the DM any question once 
per day. and if the judge actually knows 
the answer he or she may answer all or 
part of the question—at the DM's discre- 
tion, of course. 

Power word kill once per day. 

User may raise dead fully once per day. 
User becomes super charismatic. Any 
creature of same alignment who can 
communicate with user willingly serves 
user (without compensation) for 1d6 
turns. After that time the enchantment 
wears offand they no longer serve in any 
case and may become hostile. 

Finger ofdeath with no saving throw 
twice per day. 

Disintegrate three times per day. 

All ofuser's abilities are raised to scores 
of 18 (18/00 for Strength), as long as user 
owns the relic. 
81-00 No effect (broken lever or dial). 


78 


79 
80 


Machine of Lum the Mad II 
XP Value: — GP Value: — 
Book of Artifacts 

Those few who have seen the machine of Lum the 
Mad describe it as a black metal horseshoe- 
shaped nightmarish contraption of immense size. 
The control surfaces of the machine are sloped 
and adorned with no fewer than 60 levers, 40 
dials, and a switchboard of sockets, plugs, and 
wires. The controls are of assorted colors and 
sizes, most obviously broken. 

In the center of the Machine is a crystal box 4 


feet wide by 5 feet deep and 7 feet tall. As many 
3036 


684 : 


Machine of Lum the Mad II 


b ——— a 


as four human-sized creatures can stand in this 
enclosure fairly comfortably. 

The entire assembly weighs roughly 2% tons 
(4,500 pounds) and fills a good-sized chamber. 
While appearing quite solid, the many broken bits 
testify that it is really very delicate. Indeed, past 
owners ofthe machine have damaged it such that no 
more than half ofits original powers still function. 

The machine ofLum the Mad dates back to an 
age before recorded history. Its design and work- 
manship are quite singular, making it impossible to 
guess at its origins. There is strong evidence con- 
necting the origins of this device with the mighty 
servant of Leuk-o, but this may be apocryphal. 

The recorded history of the device begins long 
ago with the infamous tyrant from whom it takes its 
name, Baron Lum. Lum was a power-hungry gen- 
eral who happened upon the device during one of 
his conquests. Prior to his acquisition of the thing, 
Lum was a petty warlord whose legacy would cer- 
tainly have been lost. With the aid of the machine, 
however, he wrote himself a bloody chapter of wars 
and brutality into mankind's history. 

By all accounts, Lum was something of an arti- 
ficer himself. While the creation of the machine 
was certainly beyond his skills, he was apparently 
able to learn more about its functioning than even 
the wisest sage might hope to. It may be that the 
study of the basic workings of the machine drove 
Lum to madness; the machine combines magic 
and technology in ways the two were never meant 
to be merged, by techniques and secrets long (and 
best) forgotten. It is said that Lum unleashed no 
fewer than 50 new species of monsters on the 
world in his quest to master the machine. At one 
point, it is said, Lum used the settings of the 
machine to call down a barrage of fire that deci- 
mated an army besieging his stronghold. In so 
doing, of course, he annihilated a large number of 
his own troops. However, he carried the day and, 
as such, he judged the event a great victory. 

Lum's chapter in the history of the machine 
ends with both the warlord and his device being 
consumed in a cloud of vapor that billowed forth 
from nothing and left nothing when it faded. It 
would be easy to assume that the machine was 
forever destroyed, were it not for persistent 
(though garbled) reports of its existence in a dis- 
tant and dreadful land. 

The machine ofLum the Mad is a complex 
device whose inner workings are impossible to dis- 


cern. The nearly infinite combination of settings 
3036 


a ES See 


685 


Machine of Lum the Mad II 


bo a a 


possible with the levers, dials, and switches set into 
the machine makes the analysis ofits operations an 
insurmountable task. Indeed, the creative DM 
might make an entire adventure out ofan attempt to 
learn what one particular setting might do. 

Unlike many other artifacts, the machine is 
neither good nor evil. It is utterly neutral and the 
morality of its use is based wholly upon the 
actions of its current owner. 

Players who come into possession of the 
machine must be very careful with it. While the 
thing is not evil, it has an unfortunate side- 
effect—it drives its users insane. If the PCs 
encounter the device in the hands of another, that 
person will almost certainly be well beyond rea- 
son. An encounter with such people might be 
very dangerous, indeed. 

Operating the machine is a risky proposition at 
best. Whenever a dial is turned, a lever is pulled, 
or a switch is thrown, it is possible that a magical 
effect will be triggered. When the machine was 
new and in good repair, each and every setting 
produced such a result. Now the majority of the 
controls are broken, leaving only a few powers 
that can still be triggered. 

The machine itself has two types of powers; 
internal and external. The former affect those 
within the crystal chamber, leaving those outside 
of the machine utterly safe, while the latter alter 
the world around the machine and leave those 
within the crystal box safe. Anyone standing 
within the crystal chamber at the heart of the 
machine is protected from all outside forces of a 
physical, gaseous, magical, or psionic nature. 
However, those individuals are utterly vulnerable 
to all powers of the machine, forfeiting any saving 
throws that they might normally be entitled to. 

Twenty of the internal functions remain opera- 
tional. All of these have the effect of changing the 
occupants of the crystal box in some way. Of the 
external powers, only 15 remain functional. 
When triggered, these great powers cause terrible 
devastation and make drastic changes in the 
world around the machine. Of course, anyone 
inside the crystal chamber is unharmed. 

With all its levers, dials, and plugs, the 
machine ofLum the Mad is a complicated piece 
of machinery. Each effect should require a 
unique setting, thereby making all the controls 
potentially meaningful. 

The DM could, of course, draw a diagram for 
each result. Easier and more convenient, however, 


is for the DM to create a unique, written combi- 
nation for each power, using the method below. 

The machine has three different types of con- 
trols—levers, which are either on or off, dials that 
must be set to the correct position, and a switch- 
board that relies on correct pairs. Each control 
has a different code in the combination. By not- 
ing the needed codes for each control panel, the 
combination is created. 

Levers. Of the machine's 60 levers, only 10 
still work, all others are obviously broken. These 
10 levers are labeled in order, 0-9. When a lever 
is in the on position, its number is part of the 
combination; when it is in the off position, the 
lever and its number are ignored. Thus, if a set- 
ting required levers 0, 6, and 7 to be on, this part 
of the combination would be noted as 067. 

Dials. Of the 40 dials on the machine, only 20 
still work, and the rest are clearly broken. Each 
dial (labeled A through T) has settings from 0 
(off) to 6. Dials set to the off (0) position are 
ignored, while other dials are noted as letter/num- 
ber pairs. If dial G is set to 1, dial M to 4, and dial 
R to 3, the combination for this control panel 
would read G1/M4/R3. 

Switchboard. This part of the control panel is 
similar to an old telephone switchboard, with 
plugs on wires and sockets for each. There are 
26 plugs and 26 sockets, and both sets are 
labeled A through Z. Here, the combination is 
formed by matching the correct plug to the cor- 
rect socket. If plug A is connected to socket W, 
this is noted as AW (plug/socket). Again, only 
those plugs and sockets actually used need to be 
noted for the combination. Ifthe setting requires 
plugs C, F, O, S, and W to be connected to sock- 
ets B, H, M, T, and Q the combination would 
read CB/FH/OM/ST/WQ. 

Using these combination methods, the DM can 
easily create a unique setting for each power— 
and have ample combinations left for explosions, 
useless noises, and bad things. After all, there are 
over 8,500,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000, 
000,000,000,000,000,000,000 (8.5x10*) possible 
settings! 

Clearly, with this many combinations the 
chance of any character randomly choosing a 
working combination is a little less than slim and 
barely better than nonexistent. This means that 
any adventure involving the machine is about 
more than just finding and using it. It should also 


include smaller adventures to gather the pieces of 
3036 


a ae 


6 


8 


6 


Magic Missile Device 


See ee 


one or more useful combinations. For example, 
on one scroll the characters find a combination 
for the levers, in another those for the dials, and 
in a third (and separate adventure) the settings for 
the switchboard. They now have a complete com- 
bination—if all three parts are for the same 
power! 

After each use of the machine, there is a 70% 
chance that some reaction within the mechanism 
alters the settings required to duplicate a given 
effect. If this happens, the combination of settings 
scrambles itself, seemingly at random. Users of 
the machine receive no indication that this has 
occurred. Since incorrect settings could trigger 
side effects or cause explosions, duplicating a pre- 
viously achieved effect is a risky business. 

Because of the random nature of the machine 
and the large number of powers, there is no 
absolute list of what Lum’s machine can or 
should do. The DM is encouraged, therefore, to 
tailor the possible powers to suit the campaign. 

Curse: There are several risks inherent in using 
the machine. The first of these is the need for accu- 
racy. Any time the machine is started without a 
correct combination entered on the control panels, 
the DM should roll for a result on the Machine 
Failure Table, below, and apply the result. 


Machine Failure Table 


Roll Results 


01-50 Nothing happens 

51-65 Sparks and noise, nothing happens 

66-70 One control breaks 

71-75 Internal explosion, 1d4 + 1 controls 
break 

76-80 Random power triggered in crystal 
chamber 

81-85 Random power triggered in room 

86-90 Random result from Artifact Table 
1-04: Curse 

91-95 Large explosion, all within 20 feet of 
machine suffer 2d10 points of damage 

96-00 Machine vanishes > 


Second, every time an effect is triggered, the 
operator of the machine must roll a saving throw 
vs. spell. If it fails, the character's Intelligence 
score increases 1 point, but Wisdom drops by 1 
point at the same time. With each transfer, the 
character's cranium increases in diameter by 


10%. 


Suggested Means of Destruction: 

e The machine is quite delicate and can be 
destroyed with repeated blows, each ruining 
1d4 controls. Each blow has an 80% chance of 
causing an explosion, inflicting 2d12 points of 
damage on the attacker. 

e Every 100 years, the machine loses 1d4 ofits 
powers through natural entropy. 


Magestar 

XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 20,000 

Haunted Halls ofEveningstar 
These devices appear as many-spined, silvery 
metal globes. When touched, they glow and levi- 
tate, floating beside the creature touching them, 
looking very much like will o wisps. Spells cast at 
a magestar are absorbed and give the device 1 hp 
per spell level (afireball sucked into a magestar 
gives it 3 hp and negates the effect of the fireball). 
All known spells cast at a magestar (including area 
effect spells) are absorbed, but active magic is not 
canceled if a magestar enters the area. 

At the owner's mental bidding (or automati- 
cally if he or she collapses or falls unconscious), 
the device moves to touch the user and passes 
absorbed hit points to the character as healing 
energy. Ifnot "charged" with spells, it gives only 
1 d4 hp. Ifany creature able to cast spells or pos- 
sessing natural magical powers touches a mages- 
tar, "ownership" of the device passes to that 
creature. Only creatures with such powers can use 
a magestar. Ownership can change once per 
round if a magestar is touched repeatedly. A crea- 
ture can "own" only one magestar at a time. 

Magestars have energy limits that vary unpre- 
dictably from one to another. A starved one 
shrinks, grows dim, then vanishes; an overloaded 
one explodes (4d6 points of blast damage to all 
within 20 feet; save for half damage). 


Magic Missile Device 
XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 20,000 
Crystal Spheres 

The Hummingbird is a unique ship built by the 
engineers of Thesalys in Greatspace. It is used as 
a court ship, typically used for carrying visiting 
dignitaries. It is also used quite often by Bruin 
Shambrath to visit his secret safe-house on the 
moon of Thesalys. 

The ship's primary weapon is equally as amaz- 
ing as its propulsion. The long beak of the Hum- 


mingbird, as well as serving as a piercing ram, 
3038 


+ 687 


~ Manual, Grim Grimoire r 


houses a magical, ship-to-ship combat weapon. In 
the forward part of the ship is a magic missile 
device. A wizard with the magic missile spell 
memorized more than once is necessary to make 
use of the weapon. The wizard simply casts the 
spell at a large crystal mounted on a pedestal. The 
crystal absorbs the energy of the magic missile 
spell, amplifies it, and launches a greater form of 
the spell out the end of the beak. The crystal will 
launch only a single missile dealing 1 hull point of 
damage plus one hull point per missile that is 
stored in it. For example, ifa 7th-level wizard casts 
magic missile into the crystal, this missile would 
inflict 5 hull points of damage on a successful hit. 

Since magic missiles do not involve heat, this 
weapon does not cause fire on ships or explo- 
sions in the phlogiston. The crystal will not 
accept energy from more than one spell at one 
time. Therefore, if more than one wizard casts a 
magic missile spell into the crystal, only the high- 
est level caster's spell will be accepted, the others 
are simply wasted. The crystal will not accept any 
spells other than magic missile. 


Manual 
Books, Librams, Manuals, 
Spellbooks, and Tomes. 
In the AD&D game system, each of these terms 
has a unique definition: 
Books may used only by priests and sometimes 
raise a specific character statistic. 
Librams are books used only by wizards, and 
occasionally boost stats. 
Manuals may be used by bothfighters and 
thieves, and some include boosts to stats. 
Spellbooks contain spells and surprises. Most are 
restricted to priests and wizards, but a few may be 
used by any class. 
Tomes may be used by all classes and some grant 
boosts to stats. 


All magical books, librams, manuals, and 
tomes appear to be normal works of arcane lore. 
Each is indistinguishable from others by visual 
examination or by magical detection. 

A wish spell can identify or classify a magical 
work. Other spells, notably alter reality, com- 
mune, contact higher planes, limited wish, and 
true seeing are useless. A wish reveals the general 
contents ofa book, telling what classes or charac- 
teristics are most affected (not necessarily bene- 
fitted) by the work. A second wish is required to 


find the book's exact contents. 

After being studied by a character, most magi- 
cal works vanish forever. However, one that is not 
beneficial to the reader may become attached to 
the character, and he or she is unable to get rid of 
it. Ifthe work benefits another character align- 
ment, the owner is geased to conceal and guard it. 
As DM, you should use your judgment and imag- 
ination as to exactly how these items are to be 
treated, use the rules in this section as parameters. 


Grim Grimoire 
XP Value: 7,000 GP Value: 35,000 
Shrine of the Kuo-Toa 
The grim grimoire is a nonesuch work that causes 
the loss of 20,000 experience points for any 
reader except a rogue or assassin. A thief gains or 
loses nothing, but an assassin will gain one level 
of experience from reading and pondering its 
contents for one month. 


of Puissant Skill at Arms 

XP Value: 8,000 GP Value: 40,000 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 
This scholarly study contains expert advice and 
instruction regarding weapon use and various 
attack and defense modes. Any single bard or 
fighter (but not a paladin or ranger) who reads the 
manual and practices the skills described therein 
for one month goes up to the midpoint of the next 
higher level. The book disappears after it is read, 
and the knowledge therein will be forgotten 
within three months, so it must be acted upon rea- 
sonably quickly. 

The fighter cannot articulate what he or she 
has read, nor can it be recorded in any fashion. 
Paladins and rangers will understand the work 
but cannot benefit from reading it. Priests and 
thieves cannot understand the Manual of Puissant 
Skill atArms. If a wizard so much as scans a few 
of its letters, he or she is stunned for 1d6 turns 
and loses 1d6(x10,000) experience points. A 
character can benefit from reading a Manual of 
Puissant Skill atArms only one time. 


of Stealthy Pilfering 
XP Value: 8,000 GP Value: 40,000 
` DUNGEON MASTER Guide 
This is a guide to expertise at thievery. It is so 
effective that any thief or bard who reads it and 
then spends one month practicing the skills therein 


will gain enough experience points to move to the 
3041 


"a ee NS 


688 


= Manual of Stratagems r 


midpoint ofthe next higher level. The text disap- 
pears after reading, but knowledge is retained for 
three months. As with other magical texts of this 
sort, however, the knowledge cannot be recorded 
or repeated to others. Any additional reading ofa 
similar manual is ofno benefit to the character. 

Fighters and wizards are unable to comprehend 
the work. Priests, rangers, and paladins who read 
even a word ofthe book suffer 5d4 points of dam- 
age, are stunned for a like number of rounds, and, 
if a saving throw vs. spell is failed, they lose 
5d4(x1,000) experience points as well. In addi- 
tion, such characters must atone within one day 
or lose 1 point of Wisdom. 


of Stratagems 
XP Value: 6,500 GP Value: 59,500 
DRAGON Magazine 178 
This is a medium-sized book, bound in seasoned 


leather for durability. A fighter, ranger, or paladin 


may consult it at any time to try to find a cunning 
ploy in any situation, with a chance of success 
equal to 80% minus 1d10% per use. Once the 
chance of success reaches zero, the book is use- 
less to that reader. The book covers purely mili- 
tary tactics, not limited-scope adventurers' 
methods. It is meant for generals and captains 
and will only be ofrelevance in situations with at 
least 20 combatants on each side. Its effects can 
be simulated by allowing the commander to 
change one set of orders, or movements, retroac- 
tively during a battle—he or she knows what will 
happen within one turn (10 minutes) after making 
a certain move, and can make the move over 
again to correct for any mistake or to take advan- 
tage of any opportunity. Therefore, a commander 
could thwart an ambush by retracting orders to 
move into a trap, but not to decide that an order 
for an unsuccessful attack wasn't given, several 
hours into the battle. If a character of any class 
other than a fighter uses this book, the character 
gains nothing but must save vs. spell at -2 or else 
become deluded for 14 hours into thinking he is 
a fighter, acting in all ways as a front-line com- 
batant and refusing to use any spells. 


Map 


All maps appear to be similar at first glance, but 
careful examination reveals that the inscriptions, 
designs, and handwriting are unique in each of 
them. Each of the original maps is made from 
ancient parchment that remains in superb condi- 


tion. The left side of each parchment is attached 
to an old, ornately carved, round wooden stick. 
Each end of the stick is embedded with one gem 
of roughly 1,000 gp in value. Replicas are simi- 
larly decorated; they have become a tradition in 
the creation of these maps. 

The symbol of Madd is imprinted on the origi- 
nal maps, and some of the originals have been 
destroyed. Most of the first-generation replicas 
bear Dane's symbol, and other replicas made by 
Dane's disciples either bear other symbols or 
have no symbols. 

The maps have several common properties, 
other than their individual functions (including 
the duplicates made by Dane). The first common 
aspect is that the maps cannot be cut, burnt by 
normal fires, or destroyed by any common 
method. A rod ofcancellation, Mordenkainens 
disjunction, magical fires (of any sort), powerful 
magical items like artifacts, wishes, and the spe- 
cial methods noted below are the only means of 
their destruction. A saving throw as parchment +6 
vs. magical fire is applicable if a map is subjected 
to magical flame. If this saving throw fails, the 
whole map is burnt to ashes. The ashes have no 
special properties. 

The second common attribute of the maps is 
that no runes, words, or inscriptions (magical or 
not) can be written on a map. Ifa wish spell or 
any other powerful magic, such as from an arti- 
fact, is used to write upon a map, a magical fire 
springs into existence, destroying the map. No 
saving throws are allowed. Other spells cannot 
harm the map. 

Most of these maps have a limited number of 
magical charges placed into them during their cre- 
ation. In order to use such a map, the map reader 
(any class or race) holds the map, looks at the sur- 
roundings, and utters a command word expending 
one charge. Each time a charge is used, a new dia- 
gram is created on the map's surface, erasing any 
previous map diagram. None ofthe charges can be 
replaced. When all the charges of a map are spent, 
the map disintegrates into powder. Every two days, 
the map erases itself. Erasure can also be voluntar- 
ily performed by the user before the two-day limit, 
using the command word. 

The final property of the maps is that, when- 
ever one a map is activated, the user (and only the 
user) must make a saving throw vs. death magic 
or be stunned for 1dlO rounds. During this 
period, the user stares vacantly at the map, unable 


Qo ae ee a 


689 


~ Map, Dane's Version ee 


to perform any other actions. Only remove curse, 
dispel magic, negation, limited wish, or wish can 
bring the user's state of mind back to normal dur- 
ing that time. A charge is used, however, and the 
map functions normally. (Optionally, the DM 
may have a charge spent but no map diagram 
appear in order to control the use of the maps.) 

Magical maps are special enough to require 
careful preparation and use by the DM. Maps 
should rarely be given out randomly—the DM 
must have a suitable map prepared in advance. 
There is no table to govern the nature of maps— 
all hint at or imply the existence of great treasures 
to be found while giving only a vague idea of the 
risks to be overcome. Some may be genuine, 
others fake, and still others cursed. Because of 
the wide range of possibilities, the DM should 
use magical maps as the springboard for new and 
exciting adventures. 


Dane's Version 
XP Value: 9,500 GP Value: 57,000 
DRAGON Magazine 125 

This map was created by Dane through the use of 
the various techniques taught to him by Madd. 
The map has 20d6 charges. For the most part, the 
map works as a map ofmagic and illusions, as 
noted above. Additionally, Dane ï version has the 
ability to cast one permanent illusion or one pro- 
grammed illusion per day, and one veil per week, 
as a 16th-level illusionist. Each spell drains one 
charge from the map. The illusions last until dis- 
pelled or until the time limit expires, as given for 
the spells. Any attempts to disbelieve illusions 
created by the map are made at -2. The map is 
one of the rarest, as the services of an extremely 
powerful illusionist are required by the wizard 
creating it (Dane, himself, was both). When all 
charges have been used, the map bursts into flame 
like afireball from a 12th-level wizard. Saving 
throws vs. spell are allowed for all within 20 feet 
for half damage, except for the user, who takes 
maximum damage without a saving throw. All 
items carried by the user take a -6 on their saving 
throws vs. spell if this occurs. 


of Distortion 
GP Value: 500 
DRAGON Magazine 125 
This map exhibits all the properties of a map of 
mapping when examined. There is a 1% chance 
per level of the wizard identifying the map to dis- 


XP Value: — 


cover its true nature. The map's ill effects are not 
noticed by the user or any other person under its 
spell. Anyone looking at the map or so much as 
catching a glimpse of the diagram it displays, 
must make a saving throw vs. spell or fall under 
the map’s power. No saving throw is allowed to 
the user. This map has no charges as such. As 
with the map of misleading, it is thought that 
errors in the creation of a map ofmapping results 
in a map ofdistortion. 

The distances shown on the map differ from the 
actual distances to landmarks by 10-80%(1d8x10) 
in any direction. All those under the spell of the 
map see the actual distance as being the distance 
shown on the map, even ifthey previously knew the 
true distances to mapped landmarks. The user and 
all others who are affectedperceive no inconsisten- 
cies between what the map shows and what the 
world shows them; ifthe user walks eight miles to 
get to a hill the map shows as four miles away, the 
user believes he has walked four miles. The effects 
from a single use of this map last for two days, at 
which time the map erases itself (unless it has 
already been erased). Erasing the map before two 
days are up has no effect on the duration of the 
user's or onlooker's confusion. However, if the user 
activates this map more than once, he must make a 
saving throw vs. death magic (as is normally done 
for each use of one of these maps) or else befeeble- 
minded as per the spell. No onlookers are affected 
in any way by this second activation. Ifthe person 
using this map has activated it only once, that per- 
son (and all others affected by the map) suffer other 
visual distortions as well during the two days that 
the map's effects occur, even ifthe mapped area is 
left behind. If attacking, those affected by this map 
roll attacks at —4 and can be hit at +4. The players 
should not know of this adjustment. 

To get rid of the ill effects, each person must be 
cured individually. A remove curse followed by a 
dispel magic spell, both being cast on only one 
person at a time, must be employed. Anyone 
under afeeblemind can be cured by a heal or wish 
spell. Throwing these spells on the map itselfhas 
no effect at all. Only after all these steps are taken 
will the map lose its control over the minds of 
those affected. Destroying the map is of utmost 
importance, as failing to do so causes anyone 
who was once feebleminded by the map to 
becomefeebleminded again within 2d4 days. If 
the map is destroyed, all of its victims are cured 


of whatever afflictions the map gave them. 
3042 


690 


a rise PF i 
— Mii sae TITY 


-r 


Map of Illusions 


of Illusions 
XP Value: 6,000 GP Value: 36,000 
DRAGON Magazine 125 

This map also functions as a map ofmapping, 
although it can also detect any form of illusion or 
phantasm spell within range. The map contains 
20d4 charges; the expenditure per usage (which 
includes the mapping and detection functions 
simultaneously) is one charge. Magical (but not 
psionic) invisibility can be detected by this type of 
map, but only one function of the map may be 
used at any one time, either detecting for illusions 
or invisibility. It is possible to dispel invisibility on 
a certain object or being by using an additional 
charge. A saving throw vs. spell is allowed if the 
target is a living being and is unwilling to have its 
invisibility dispelled. This latter use does not erase 
the existing diagram on the map, but it cannot be 
used unless the map itselfhas detected the invisible 
target. The range of this device is 120 feet indoors 
or underground, and 120 yards outdoors, for pur- 
poses of detecting illusions; the map still diagrams 
areas to the limits of a map of mapping. 


of Illusions and Secret Doors 
XP Value: 8,750 GP Value: 52,500 
DRAGON Magazine 125 

This map functions as a combination of a map of 
illusions and a map ofsecret doors, with a single 
charge either detecting illusions, invisibility, or 
secret doors, or dispelling invisibility on an object 
or being. This particular map has 10d4+10 
charges. When all the charges have been 
expended, the map explodes, causing 1d12+10 
points of damage to each person within a 10-foot 
radius (save vs. spell for half damage, except for 
the user who takes full damage with no saving 

throw). 


of Illusions and Traps 

XP Value: 8,750 GP Value: 52,500 
DRAGON Magazine 125 
This map has 10d4+10 charges and functions as 
both of the map types named. A single charge 
will either detect illusions, traps, or invisible 
objects, and charges can be used to dispel invisi- 
bility on objects or persons. When all charges 
have been used, the map explodes, doing 2d6+4 
points of damage to all within 15 feet, with a sav- 
ing throw vs. spell for half damage. The user, of 
course, gains no saving throw and always takes 
maximum damage. 


of Magic 
XP Value: 5,000 GP Value: 30,000 
DRAGON Magazine 125 

This map functions as a map ofmapping in every 
way except that it can also detect magical 
dweomers and auras (which are highlighted on 
the map in pulsating red). The exact sort of 
dweomer is not shown on the map or made known 
to its user. The map ofmagic contains 20d4 
charges; each use for mapping (which includes 
the detection and location of magic) drains one 
charge. Magical items carried on living beings 
can be detected and located; invisible objects can 
be detected as well. Area-effect spells like mass 
invisibility, certain illusions, or stinking cloud 
that are still in effect can be seen on the map as 
zones of red. Only areas that can be seen within 
120 feet indoors (or 120 yards outdoors) can be 
examined for such dweomers and auras, though 
the map will faithfully record areas much larger, 
out to the limits of a map ofmapping. 

Magic that is a permanent characteristic of a 
living creature (such as the magical resistance of 
a dragon or a wizard's ability to cast spells) can- 
not be detected. Magical items or areas hidden 
from view cannot be mapped. 


of Magic and Illusions 

XP Value: 7,500 GP Value: 45,000 
DRAGON Magazine 125 
This map functions as a combination of the two 
types of both named maps. Contained within the 
map are 10d4+10 charges. Each charge can be 
used to detect either magic, illusions, or invisible 
objects, with all of the range penalties and abili- 
ties noted for the two map types of which this 
map is composed. Additionally, charges may be 
used to render invisible objects visible as per the 
map ofillusions. The map explodes when all of 
the charges are used up, causing 1d10+10points 
of damage per person in a 10-foot radius. A save 
vs. spell applies for half damage; however, the 
user gains no save and always takes maximum 
damage. 


of Magic and Secret Doors 
XP Value: 8,000 GP Value: 48,000 
DRAGON Magazine 125 
This map has all of the functions of map of 
magic and a map of secret doors. A single charge 
may be used to either detect magic or secret 


doors, but not both at once. Like the map of 
3049 


i 692 ` 


Map of Mapping and Secret Doors 


screenees 


magic and illusions, this map has 10d4+10 
charges. Upon expiration of the charges, the map 
explodes, causing 1d12+8 points of damage to 
every person within a 10-foot radius. A saving 
throw vs. spell is allowed, though the user gains 
no save and takes maximum damage. 


of Magic and Traps 

XP Value: 8,000 GP Value: 48,000 

DRAGON Magazine 125 
This map is also similar in description to the map 
ofmagic—the added advantage being all of the 
abilities listed in the map oftraps. This map also 
has 10d4+10 charges, each of which may be used 
to detect either magic or traps and to negate them. 
When the charges are expended, the map 
explodes, causing 2d4+4 points of damage to all 
within 15 feet. A saving throw vs. spell is applica- 
ble for half damage, though the user takes maxi- 
mum damage with no saving throw. 


of Mapping 
XP Value: 3,500 GP Value: 21,000 
DRAGON Magazine 125 

In a dungeon, this map records whatever the user 
is able to see, given normal illumination and no 
upper sighting limit. Upon command, the map 
changes its scale to a suitable size and is therefore 
able to map features over a large area. Everything 
is mapped the way the user sees it. For example, 
the illusion of a door is mapped as a door. Ifthe 
illusion is discovered as such or dispelled, the 
map ofmapping will not record it again for that 
user. Traps, hidden or invisible items, and living 
beings do not appear on the map. A concealed or 
secret door appears on the map only if located. To 
simulate this item's effect, the DM should sketch 
out an accurate (but limited) map for the players 
as they progress through an underground or inte- 
rior environment, creating a new map with each 
charge expended (see below). Some maps of this 
sort may have more limited indoor mapping 
ranges (generally 120 feet or so). Given the lim- 
ited sighting ranges of most underground envi- 
ronments, this map is usually of limited use in 
dungeons and caves. 

In the wilderness, the map ofmapping records 
the area in a 10-mile radius, taking the spot the 
user is standing on as the center. Again, illusions 
and concealed elements, such as hallucinatory 
terrain, are mapped as they appear. These "errors" 
disappear once the illusion is dispelled or discov- 


ered. The map only shows terrain features like 
forests, deserts, roads, tracks, cities, towns or vil- 
lages, not living beings, vehicles, snares, or traps 
are mapped out. Additionally, only features that 
are immediately visible to the user are mapped 
(thus, the map is of limited use in a valley). This 
item has 30d4 charges. 


of Mapping and Illusions 
XP Value: 6,500 GP Value: 39,000 
DRAGON Magazine 125 

This map functions at first as a map ofillusions. 
After 20d4 charges have been used, the map has 
an 80% chance to change into a map ofmapping 
(with 10d4 charges) and a 20% chance that it 
explodes, causing 2d8+2 points of damage to 
everyone within a 10’ radius of the blast (save vs. 
spell for half damage). 


Roll Effect 

01-80 Reverts to a map ofmapping with 10d4 
charges. 

81-00 Explodes for 2d8+2 points of damage. 


of Mapping and Magic 

XP Value: 6,000 GP Value: 36,000 
DRAGON Magazine 125 
This map initially functions in all ways as a map 
ofmagic. After 20d4 charges have been used, 
however, the map has an 85% chance of becom- 
ing a map ofmapping (with 10d4charges) and a 
15% chance of exploding in magical flame, caus- 
ing everyone within 10 feet of the explosion to 
take 2d4+2 points of damage (save vs. spell for 
half damage). 


Roll Effect 
01-85 Reverts to a map ofmapping with 20d4 
charges. 


86-00 Explodes for 2d4+2 points of damage. 


of Mapping and Secret Doors 
XP Value: 6,250 GP Value: 37,500 
DRAGON Magazine 125 

This map works like a map ofsecret doors with 

20d4 charges. When the charges are gone, there is 

an 85% chance that the map becomes a map of 
mapping (10d4 charges) and a 15% chance that 
the map explodes, inflicting 2d4+2 points dam- 

age to each person within a 10-footradius (save 
vs. spell for half damage). 


3054 


ii 693 


Map of Mapping and Traps 


j ee fe 


Roll Effect 


01-85 Reverts to a map ofmapping with 20d4 
charges. 
86-00 Explodes for 2d4+2 points of damage. 


of Mapping and Traps 
XP Value: 6,250 GP Value: 37,500 
DRAGON Magazine 125 

At first, this map functions as a map oftraps with 
20d4 charges. With the expiration of the charges, 
this map has a 70% chance of becoming a map of 
mapping (10d4 charges) and a 30% chance of 
being destroyed, inflicting 2d4+8 points of dam- 
age to every person within a 10-footradius (save 
vs. spell for half damage). 


Roll Effect 


01-70  Reverts to a map ofmapping with 20d4 
charges. 
71-00 Explodes for 2d4+8 points of damage. 
Master Plan 
XP Value: — GP Value: — 


Kingdom of Nithia 

The Master Plan is an ancient set of magical 
maps written on papyrus scrolls. Strangely, they 
do not age, and the papyrus remains pliable and 
resilient, not drying into brittle sheets or yellow- 
ing as one would expect. Each map can be 
unrolled so that it is half a pace high and five 
paces long. There are reported to be six in all and 
when unrolled together they cover the entire Hol- 
low World. 

On certain nights of the circle (year), when the 
floating continents align properly, the maps can 
be assembled to form an indestructible, glyph- 
covered cube. Ifthe glyphs are read properly (2% 
chance per reader's level), the cube turns inside- 
out and expands to form a four-dimensional map 
of the Hollow World showing everything as it is 
at that moment. A number of small points of light 
shine on various areas of the map, showing points 
of power. 5 

The Master Plan is actually an artifact of 
chaos built by Thanatos and Ranivorus to bring 
about the ultimate destruction of the Hollow 
World. Those who activate the Master Plan are 
immediately subject to the complete mental con- 
trol ofboth Sekhaba's and Soth's "towers." The 
victim becomes a hollow shell, a conduit for con- 
tact between the evil agents of Entropy and the 
sleeping burrowers. In game terms, those who 


SS 


N 

ZRS 
Aes 
(AROS 


NS 


Ly 


> 
Sas 


SS 
LESS 


puzzle out this artifact must make a saving throw 
vs. spell at —4. Ifthe saving throw fails, the victim 
is "burnt out" and becomes a pawn of the DM. 
The Master Plan shows the positions of all bur- 
rowers paralyzed by the spell of preservation. 
Touching the points of light brings each individ- 
ual burrower into mental contact with Sekhaba 
and Soth and synchronizes their dreams with 
those of the Towers. 

The theory behind the Master Plan goes like 
this: If all burrowers dream of escape in synchro- 
nization, the resultant magical energy may be 
enough to break the spell of preservation, allow- 
ing the forces of Entropy to once again run ram- 
pant throughout the Known World, bringing an 
age of fear and suffering unlike any experienced 
by its civilizations. 


of Misleading 

GP Value: 500 
DRAGON Magazine 125 
This map appears to be exactly the same as a map 
ofmapping until it is used, but the map records 
many terrain features falsely. There is a 1% chance 
per level of any wizard using an identify spell for 
the true nature of the map to be detected. Unless 
the user makes a saving throw vs. spell upon using 


a charge, he believes the map is entirely accurate, 
3057 


XP Value: — 


694 7 


Map of Traps 


Dennen ey 


despite whatever sort of terrain he actually sees (the 
user believes the actual terrain to be an illusion or 
hallucination). Anyone besides the user who looks 
at the map is required to make a saving throw as 
above at +2 or fall under the map's spell. The map's 
user, of course, believes nothing contrary to his 
own delusions. Though the user does not resist hav- 
ing the map taken from him, the loss or destruction 
of the map does not cure delusions, seeing doors 
that don't exist, walls in open spaces, and similar 
fancies. After a week, the user will not be able to 
function. Onlookers are similarly affected. 

A remove curse followed by a dispel magic are 
required to ward off these ill effects. The remove 
curse should be cast on the person currently 
using the map. It affects everyone else under the 
map's spell if this is done; otherwise, only one 
onlooker is freed from the map's power. The dis- 
pel magic spell then entirely removes the map s ill 
effects from any one victim (or from all at once if 
cast upon the map's user). If only the remove 
curse spell is cast on the victim, the former delu- 
sions return unless dispel magic is cast within a 
day. Dispel magic alone is useless. It is believed 
that the improper creation of a map ofmapping 
results in the production of a map ofmisleading. 
These maps have no charges as such. 


of Navigation 
XP Value: 5,000 GP Value: 30,000 
DRAGON Magazine 125 

This map can be used to record nearby areas on 
land or at sea. On land, the map shows a 20-mile 
radius around the user, recording only normal ter- 
rain features (forests, cities, villages, roads, trails, 
etc.) as per a map ofmapping. However, this map 
was actually designed by Madd and Ztxar to work 
only on bodies of water. Somehow, the two made 
a mistake in the enchantment of this map, which 
led to the map's ability to work on land as well. 
The map is more potent when used from a water- 
borne ship. Usually, it has 30d4 charges. 

The map ofnavigation has a 30-mile radius of 
effect when used from a ship. In this event, how- 
ever, it will map no land features beyond a 20-mile 
radius. Thus, an island 22 miles away would be 
missed, as would features on a shoreline 27 miles 
away. A lake only two miles beyond the shoreline 
mentioned above would not appear, either. 

Other information, like sea currents, ocean 
depths, ice floes, and so forth, may be gained 
from casting legend lore while using the map of 


navigation. The DM may add other useful or 
interesting navigational information as desired in 
this event. Additionally, ships within a 30-mile 
range are displayed on the map when legend lore 
is cast, and sea creatures over 20 feet in length 
and avian creatures over 25 feet long are shown 
as well. Each major feature appears in pictorial 
form with its own distinctive shape and col- 
oration. The'user automatically understands how 
to read the map and knows what each symbol 
means, though onlookers cannot see them. 


of Secret Doors 
XP Value: 5,500 GP Value: 33,000 

DRAGON Magazine 125 
The functions of a map ofmapping are also found 
in a map of secret doors. As its name implies, this 
map has the ability to locate secret doors, which 
are shown as bright yellow dots on the map. The 
map contains a total of 20d4 charges. Each use to 
map an area and locate secret doors uses one 
charge. Traps of any sort cannot be detected, but 
concealed doors are revealed. The ranges of the 
detection functions ofthis map are 60 feet indoors 
and 60 yards outdoors; other mapping limits are 
as per a map ofmapping. 


of Secret Doors and Traps 
XP Value: 8,250 GP Value: 49,500 
DRAGON Magazine 125 

This map works as both a map of secret doors and 
a map of traps and has 10d4+10 charges. One 
charge may be used to detect either secret doors 
or traps, or charges may be used to disarm traps 
like the map oftraps. When all charges have been 
used, the resulting explosion does 3d4+4 points 
of damage to all within 10 feet, with a saving 
throw for half damage. The user takes maximum 
damage and gains no save against it. 


of Traps 
XP Value: 5,500 GP Value: 33,000 
DRAGON Magazine 125 
The map oftraps has the ability to detect traps 
within the range of sight, 60 feet indoors or 60 
yards outdoors. This map contains a total of 20d4 
charges. One use to detect traps drains a charge. 
Traps that have already been detected by the use 
of the map can be disarmed by draining one or 
two charges from the map. The person using the 
map must make a saving throw vs. death magic to 


disarm or deactivate a trap. The saving throw is at 
3061 


s 695 ` 


~ Marble, Cat's Eye oe 


-2 ifthe trap is of a magical nature. 

Nonmagical traps are permanently deactivated 
or disarmed using one charge of this map (cross- 
bow traps jam, poison is neutralized, pits are cov- 
ered over by a wooden lid). Magical traps like 
explosive runes can be detected, but two charges 
are required to deactivate them permanently. If 
only one charge is available or used on a magical 
trap, then the trap is only deactivated for 2d4 
turns. Only one trap of the user's choice may be 
deactivated per charge. 


Marble 


Marbles are small spheres made from colored 
glass, clay, metal, or stone. Enchanted marbles 
usually are no larger than a human eye—big 
enough to handle but small enough to easily be 
hidden in a pocket or sleeve. Using an enchanted 
marble without attracting unwanted attention 
generally is not difficult. 


Cat's Eye 

XP Value: 400 GP Value: 2,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

This small sphere is made of colored glass in the 
pattern ofa feline eye. When carried and com- 
manded to function, the marble gives infravision 
to 60 feet that lasts for eight hours. The cat's eye 
marble functions once per day. 


Cleanliness 

GP Value: 2,500 
DRAGON Magazine 73 
A white stone ofa material resembling marble. It 
is about the size and appearance of a stone in the 
game of "Go." When it is thrown against a hard 
object inside a room, it "explodes," and all dirt 
and dust in the room (nonliving matter only) dis- 
appear. The command word "clean" must be spo- 
ken as the stone is thrown. Found in lots of 
10d10, packed 12 to a box in wooden boxes simi- 
lar to large match boxes. ` 


XP Value: 500 


Granite 
XP Value: 600 GP Value: 3,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
This marble appears and functions as a cat's eye 
marble. However, if the user sees a feline of any 
kind while using the infravision, a saving throw vs. 
petrification must be made. If it fails, the user and 
all items turn into a granite statue. The granite 
marble becomes nonmagical if turned to stone. 


of Quarry 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

This appears to be a cat's eye marble but gives no 
apparent benefit. When carried in a pouch or 
some other container, the marble becomes ethe- 
real but remains attached to the character carry- 
ing it. The marble then leaves a trace scent, easily 
detected by any feline. To felines, even house 
cats, the person carrying the marble smells like a 
tasty bird, and they attack. When the victim looks 
for it, the marble cannot be found except on the 
Ethereal Plane; the victim may become ethereal 
and then search all possessions for the item or 
someone else on the Ethereal Plane can easily 
pluck the marble loose while the victim remains 
on the Prime Material Plane. If remove curse is 
applied by a caster of 26th or higher level, the 
ethereal marble is destroyed. 


Warp 
GP Value: 25,000 
Tome of Magic 
This item is a small (4-inch-diameter) sphere of 
fine crystal, often appearing with a rich blue or 
aquamarine tint. Each marble has three words of 
command associated with it. 

The first command triggers the marble to cre- 
ate an extradimensional space large enough to 
contain a single large-sized creature. When this 
word is spoken, the closest creature to the marble 
is instantly transported to and imprisoned within 
this space. Similar to the seclusion spell, the 
inhabitant of this space can see and hear events in 
the "real world" but can do nothing to affect any- 
thing outside the prison. Spellcasting and the use 
of psionics are impossible inside the prison. Ifthe 
prison is already occupied, this first word of com- 
mand has no effect. 

The second command word releases the occu- 
pant of the extradimensional space. The occupant 
is immediately returned to the "real world," 
appearing within 3 feet of the marble (wherever it 
might be). Note that this word of release can be 
spoken and is effective from within the prison. 
Thus, the possessor of the marble can use it as a 
sanctuary to escape from harm. 

The third word of command sets the marble as 
a trap. After this word is spoken, the first creature 
of large size or smaller to touch the marble is 
immediately imprisoned within the extradimen- 


sional space. Ifthe first creature to touch the mar- 
3066 


XP Value: 5,000 


696 ` 


Mask of Bachraeus 


a S A 


ble is larger than size L, the magic is not trig- 
gered; ifa size L or smaller creature subsequently 
touches the item; the magic takes effect. 

‘Once one creature has been imprisoned, other 
creatures can touch the marble with no adverse 
effects. A creature trapped in this method can be 
freed only through the use of the word of release 
from outside the marble. 

A marble trapped in this manner can be thrown 
at another creature in an attempt to trap the crea- 
ture. Ifan attack roll is successful, the target crea- 
ture is allowed a saving throw vs. spell. Success 
indicates that the creature suffers no effect. Failure 
says that the creature is trapped in the warp marble. 

Ifa marble is taken into an extradimensional 
space (such as within aportable hole), ifit is tele- 
ported, gated, or transported via dimensional 

folding or any analogous method, or if it is shifted 

to another plane of existence, any occupant of the 
extradimensional space is immediately expelled 
into the Astral Plane. 


Mask 


A mask is a covering for the face. It may be a 
simple piece of cloth with holes open only for the 
eyes, or an elaborate wooden or metal construc- 
tion that covers most of the head (similar to an 
ornamental helm). Magical masks may be of any 
size and shape. 


Air 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 2,500 
Champions of MYSTARA 

This is a helmet or mask enchanted with a create 
air spell. It allows the wearer to breathe normally 
underwater, in thin atmosphere, or in an airless 
void. When airtight, fitted tightly around the 
wearer's head, it protects against poison gas as 
well. Flying monsters must have air masks made 
for their head shapes—a human's air mask does 
not fit a griffon. Air masks enchanted with 
charges provide 12 hours of fresh air for one crea- 
ture per charge. 


of Attractiveness 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 10,000 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 72 
These are half-masks, covering only the eyes and 
nose of the wearer. They are usually found in 
bright colors, and are often edged with pearls or 
rhinestones. When the command word is spoken, 
a character who wears a mask ofattractiveness 


gains a +3 to his or her Charisma score with 
respect to the opposite sex. The mask functions 
once per day, granting the increased Charisma 
score for 1dl2 hours. l 


MEET Ni 
gm, 0 


MUME 


NY 


of Bachraeus 
XP Value: 13,000 GP Value: 65,000 
DUNGEONS & DRAGONS Rules Cyclopedia 

This mask was made by Bachraeus, an Immortal 
who became the patron ofthe medusae. The mask 
was to be worn by the high priest ofa secret cult 
that grew within the Milenian Empire and formed 
a dangerous alliance with the medusae. With the 
fall of that empire and the destruction of the cult, 
the mask was lost. 

This is a smooth, blue mask ofa strange 
ceramic material; the features are stylized, possi- 
bly those of a female or of an elf. A wig of long, 
dark leathery strips is attached at the top and 
back. The mask ofBachraeus possesses the fol- 
lowing powers: 

e Flesh to stone, 120 feet range, one creature 
(gaze attack). 

Charm person, 120 feet range, one creature 
(gaze attack). 

Detect magic, 60 feet range. 

Passwall, 60 feet range, six-turn duration, 5 


feet opening up to 10 feet deep. 
3069 


= 697 


~ Mask of Combat r 


Wearer is immune to turn to stone and charm 
attacks, except the user's own reflected gaze. 
Wearer is immune to poisons from living 
creatures. 

When the mask is put on, the wearer's Cha- 
risma is reduced to 4. The mask cannot be 
removed or disguised while the wearer lives. 

Successful use of detect magic or stone toflesh 
reduces the wearer's own Strength by 1 point for 
one hour. The successful use of any other power 
reduces the wearer's own Strength by 2 points. If 
the wearer's own Strength is reduced to 0, the 
wearer dies. 

This artifact is evilly enchanted and can be 
detected as such. The wearer loses 1 point of 
Charisma immediately when the mask is put on, 
then more at the rate of 1 point per week until a 
Charisma of 4 is reached. The mask, meanwhile, 
becomes progressively uglier and more evil look- 
ing. The use of any power by the wearer is volun- 
tary. If the wearer dies, both the wearer and any 
equipment turn to stone, with the exception of the 
artifact itself. The artifact shatters irrevocably if 
its gaze is ever reflected in the golden mirror of 
Ka. The wearer of the mask who encounters the 
mirror artifact is stunned for a full turn and 
remembers nothing that happened while wearing 
the mask, but is otherwise unharmed. 


of Combat 
XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 33,000 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 72 

These masks carry the images of warriors. The 
faces are scarred and weathered. Fighters don- 
ning a mask ofcombat receive a +2 bonus to their 
THACOs and saving throws. They do not gain 
increased hit points or proficiencies. Characters 
of other classes wearing such a mask gain the 
THACO ofa fighter of their level instead of the 
THACO of their class. Each day the mask func- 
tions once for as many turns as the character has 
levels. For example, a 6th-level character can use 
the mask for six turns. 


of Comedy 
XP Value: 200 GP Value: 1,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
This mask bears the likeness of a smiling face. 
The wearer may, by uttering a command word, 
cast an unusual laughter spell effect on any one 
creature within 60 feet. The spell can even affect 
creatures immune to some or all spells, and can 


be used against undead. The victim must make a 
saving throw vs. spell with a -2 penalty to the roll 
or stop and laugh heartily. A laughing victim can- 
not attack or cast spells. A new saving throw must 
be made each round (though without penalty), 
and the victim continues to laugh until success- 
ful. Ifan undead is forced to laugh, it automati- 
cally flees (as ifturned) when it stops laughing. 
This spell effect may be used only once per day, 
regardless of success. 


Death 
XP Value: — GP Value: 1,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

This mask appears to be and functions as a mask 
of protection in all respects. However, when first 
worn, it starts to radiate its terrible power. The 
user is not affected. but all others within 30 feet 
of the mask from then on (whether worn or not) 
must make a saving throw vs. poison or become 
diseased. This saving throw must be made for 
each turn or part of a turn of exposure, although 
the victims notice nothing odd at first. A diseased 
victim gains no benefits from cure wounds spells 
and loses 1 point of Constitution per day. A cure 
disease spell or effect stops the disease only if 
cast by a priest of at least 15th level. Points of 
Constitution lost can be regained at the rate of 1 
point per week only by complete rest and only 
after the disease is cured. If Constitution is 
reduced to 0, death occurs, and the victim cannot 
even be raised unless a wish is used. The mask 
must be burned to stop the spread of the disease. 


Death Mask of Ptah 

XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 10,000 
Treasure Maps 
This mask is used to whisk the life essence of a 
dead individual to the plane ofthe deceased's pre- 
ferred alignment. Ifa living character puts the 
mask on, he or she must roll a saving throw vs. 
death magic or have his or her essence transferred 
to an Outer Plane—that is, the character dies and 
his or her spirit passes on to its final resting 
place. 


of Disguise 
XP Value: 3,500 GP Value: 15,000 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 72 


This mask is prized by thieves and spies. When 


the command word is spoken, the wearer can 


change his appearance. However, height and 
3074 


a ee ee 


698 


~ Mask, Greenmask r 


weight cannot be altered. A change can be as 
minute as switching the color ofthe eyes or 
lengthening the nose. Or, it can encompass a 
change in hair color, voice quality, facial struc- 
ture, and even makes the wearer appear as some- 
one ofthe opposite sex. 

A mask ofdisguise usually is found with 10d4 
charges. Each change, no matter how simple or 
complex, expends one charge. The new visage 
lasts until another charge is expended to return 
the wearer to his original appearance. These 
masks can be recharged. (The wearer must return 
to his or her original appearance before assuming 
a new one.) 


of Disguise II 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 7,500 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

On command, this mask changes the wearer's face 
into any likeness desired. In addition, the user's 
voice sounds identical to the creature imitated. 
Any race may be imitated, and a specific individ- 
ual can be successfully imitated if the user is very 
familiar with that individual's appearance and 
mannerisms. The mask does not increase the size 
of the face or head by more than a small amount 
(creating a snout or beard, for example), and no 
special abilities are bestowed other than disguise. 


Faceless 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 2,500 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

This mask appears to be a mask of protection, 
but when worn, it disappears, causing the 
wearer's face to disappear as well. Only the nose 
remains; the eyes, mouth, facial hair, and all dis- 
tinctive features vanish, leaving a smooth skin 
surface. The victim is blind and cannot speak. 
The mask and all its effects can be removed by a 
remove curse spell applied by a caster of at least 
15th level. Once removed, the mask becomes 
nonmagical. 


Fanged 
XP Value: 700 GP Value: 3,000 
DRAGON Magazine 117 
The bottom of this mask is cut in the shape of 
downward pointing fangs, like those of some 
great cat. When worn, the wearer can bite in com- 
bat for 1d4 points of damage. If the wearer's bite 
already does appreciable damage (if the wearer is 
a creature like a norker), the normal damage is 


increased by 1d4 points. The bite affects even tar- 
gets that are Astral, Ethereal, or from the Lower 
Planes (those that can normally be hit only by 
magical weapons). The bite stuns a victim for the 
round following its striking home if a save vs. 
spell fails, but it does not augment any blood 
draining abilities the wearer may already possess. 
Such attacks must be delivered normally; the 
wearer must come into close contact with oppo- 
nents and is not protected from their attacks or 
abilities by the mask. 


Greenmask 
XP Value GP Value 
+1 Protection: 1,500 7,500 
+2 Protection: 2,500 12,500 
+3 Protection: 3,500 17,500 
Eyes of Charming: 4,500 26,500 
Eyes ofthe Eagle: 4,000 20,500 
Gaze Reflection: 4,200 28,500 
Normal: 500 2,500 


Tree Lords 

Since the lands of the Silvanesti have been 
warped and befouled as well as overrun by nox- 
ious green dragons, the kirath are required to take 
extra precautions in securing. an untainted air sup- 
ply. Greenmasks are a tool which, while they do 
not solve the entire problem, at least give the 
scouts a fighting chance. 

Greenmasks are made of wood cut from living 
trees, therefore their name—the trees are still 
alive and bearing green leaves. The masks cover 
the entire face, and are secured with a strong 
cord. The eyeholes are covered with fine crystal 
lenses. Greenmasks are treated with the elathas 
extract, heatbane. This renders the face (includ- 
ing the eyes) invisible to infravision. The mask is 
often worn with afirebane cloak and applications 
of heatbane. 

The exterior features on the greenmask resem- 
ble normal, elven facial characteristics. Even the 
ears have little points on their tips, mimicking 
elven ears. 

The eyepieces are bifocal in nature, with the 
upper halves of the lenses increasing vision dis- 
tance by 50%. The lower halves give normal 
vision. The lenses are ground in such a way that 
the eyes of the scout cannot be seen unless the 
viewer is practically eye-to-eye with the elf. 

These masks have no nose or mouth holes, and 
the ears are partially covered. As a result, masked 


scouts conduct listening checks at a -10% 
3078 


699 


Mask, Greenmask f 


Gy 
s 


Re S ; 

PANN 

Y Eea AN N 
Lg 


penalty. In addition, the field of vision is 
restricted, as if the scout wore an open-faced hel- 
met (-1 penalty on vision checks—see page 108 
of the Complete Fighter's Handbook). 

The most important feature of a greenmask is 
the small batch of exotic herbs placed in the 
mask's interior, under the wearer's nose, and at 
both sides of the mouth. These herbs offer protec- 
tion against the chlorine gas weapon of green 
dragons, "ordinary" poison gases, nausea-induc- 
ing gases, and odors such as swamp gas or putres- 
cent stenches. 

When wearing a greenmask, a PC gains a +4 to 
saving throws against those gas attacks. Addition- 
ally, gases that cause physical harm do so at -1 
hit point per die of damage. It must be stressed 
‘that this defense does not confer a fresh air sup- 
ply to the wearer. The herbs merely cleanse the 
tainted air somewhat. A scout in a vacuum or 
underwater would suffocate or drown in the same 
way as an unmasked victim. The herbs last for a 
total of 10 hours. 

The herbs used are relatively common, but the 
combination required is a closely guarded secret 
among the Silvanesti kirath herbalists. It is not 
unusual for kirath in the field to carry up to four 
"refills" in their pouches, each individually 
wrapped. Only a kirath with the herbalism profi- 


ciency may attempt to collect and prepare the 
mixture, a process that takes a total of four hours 
followed by a successful proficiency check. Truly 
nasty DMs may elect to secretly roll the check 
and not announce the results, forcing the PCs to 
find out the results by testing the mask in actual 
conditions. Failing the proficiency check means 
that mixture was either not made properly, or the 
plants were not fresh enough. 

Carving a greenmask takes 15 days, and no 
proficiency is needed, since there is no "right" 
way to make one. 

Greenmasks are not assigned indiscriminately. 
The masks are always given to patrols that will be 
operating in areas known for having corrupted air 
or harboring large numbers of green dragons. 
Experienced kirath (above 3rd level) who have 
the herbalism proficiency and a woodcraft skill 
of 10 make their own masks. Though such masks 
are often decorated to reflect the unique tastes of 
the owner, the scout is not as attached to his 
greenmask as to his or her soris. Masks are not 
used to identify a kirath as much as a soris. Nev- 
ertheless, ownership of someone else's personal- 
‘ized greenmask is a good way of attracting the 
wrong sort of attention ("Why are you wearing 
Tulah the Brave’s personal mask, stranger, and 
how did you manage to get it from her?”). 

Still, elaborate adornments are not uncommon 
greenmask features. Some scouts choose a mask 
expression that reflects their most common 
mood. A short-tempered Silvanesti may have a 
mask face pinched in a deep frown, while a very 
jovial scout may have a laughing-face mask. 
Other adornments include small gemstones, pre- 
cious metal filigree, and dabs of paint. A few 
very high level and very dangerous kirath are 
reputed to have placed a solid steel sheath on 
their mask's face. 

Placing or removing a mask takes but a few 
seconds, and gives the scout ample time to do 
another action. The mask saves as wood, thick. 
Some rare individuals have been known to cus- 
tomize their greenmasks by adding certain 
enchantments. The most common are: +1 or +2 
protection/AC bonus, gaze reflection on the eye 
lenses, or fitting eyes ofthe eagle or eyes of 
charming in place of the normal lenses. 

Some kirath have observed that the masks give 
them a psychological edge when facing intelli- 
gent opponents. It is unnerving to some folk not 


to see the face of the one who confronts them. To 
3078 


700 g 


Mask, Johydee's IT 


ji ee E 


reflect this in game terms, the DM should feel 
free to assign a +2 reaction bonus when a masked 
PC or NPC confronts someone and adopts either 
threatening or hostile behavior. 

This masking of emotions suits the Silvanesti 
fine, who dislike being open with other races, and 
value their privacy. Even so, the masks are not 
worn in normal social settings—they are scouting 
tools, nothing more. 

It is also considered improper behavior to use 
someone's greenmask to pass oneself off as the 
mask's owner. Furthermore, the mask makers 
never use any other features other than elven ones 
for their masks. The masks are not meant for 
deception. 

Since greenmasks have no mouth holes, verbal 
communication is difficult. Speech is considered 
unintelligible farther than 20 feet from the 
masked speaker. 

Kirath have overcome the speech disadvantage 
by adopting a sign language. The loss of speech is 
not a big concern to the scouts, who value silence 
as a tool just as necessary as any of the weapons 
or equipment they carry. Greenmasks are never 
sold to non-Silvanesti. 


Horned 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 10,000 
DRAGON Magazine 117 

So-called because it sports two horns curving up 
from its upper edges, this mask allows the wearer 
augmented vision: 90-foot infravision, the ability 
to clearly see ethereal creatures, shadows (see the 
MONSTROUS MANUAL accessory), and all crea- 
tures that can hide in shadows (including thieves). 
The mask also gives its wearer the ability to see 
through flames, mist, fog, smoke, and other 
opaque vapors or conflagrations (these obstruc- 
tions appear only as faint outlines or distur- 
bances). The wearer is protected against 
blindness, however caused, while wearing the 
mask, and cannot be dazzled, charmed, hypno- 
tized, or stunned by light displays, even if these 
are very intense or magical. The wearer of the 
mask cannot confer any of the mask's powers on 
anyone else, and the mask does not enable its 
wearer to detect illusions or disguises, nor to see 
invisible creatures. The wearer can track as a 1st- 
level ranger (unless such tracking abilities are 
already possessed, in which case the mask 
increases them by one level of ranger-tracking 
ability while worn). 


of Jealousy 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 10,000 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 72 

When the command word is spoken, this mask 
also gives the wearer a +3 Charisma score bonus 
with respect to characters of the opposite sex. 
However, the wearer's Charisma score is lowered 
by 4 to characters of the same sex. The mask 
functions once per day, granting the altered Cha- 
risma scores for 1d6 hours. 


Johydee's 

XP Value: 8,000 GP Value: 40,000 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide, 1st Edition 
The high priestess Johydee supposedly tricked 
the powers of evil into making this strange arti- 
fact and then wisely used it to overthrow their 
hold upon her nation. The mask completely cov- 
ers the wearer's face and enables him or her to 
assume the likeness of any human or humanlike 
creature. It also prevents all forms of mind con- 
tact detection, or attack. Johydee 'smask is 
rumored to give the wearer total immunity to all 
gaze attacks (basilisk, catoblepas, medusa, and 
any others). 


Johydee's II 
XP Value: — GP Value: — 
Book of Artifacts 
Johydee's mask is a full-face mask made of an 
unknown opaque material shaded gray. 

In a frontier region on the border of the Seven 
Kingdoms, a well-organized band of thieves took 
up residence to plunder the trade routes to the 
east. To prevent word from reaching the viscount, 
the thieves threatened the local villagers. Anyone 
defying the guild was found dead or disappeared 
altogether. 

All seemed hopeless until Johydee, a high 
priestess, came to tend the spiritual needs of the 
village. Serving a goddess of truth and justice, 
she was horrified by the great injustices the vil- 
lagers had been forced to endure, and set about 
freeing them from this tyranny. Johydee heard of 
an old hermit, said to have once been a great illu- 
sionist, living in the hills nearby. She went to him 
and convinced the hermit to help save the vil- 
lagers. For a full month he labored, finally deliv- 
ering a mask to the high priestess. 

After much prayer, Johydee put on the mask, 
assuming the guise of the leader of the band of 


thieves. She infiltrated them and discovered that 
3082 


a nn ae, 


701 


~ Mask of Light r 


COXE 


XX 
ERR 
O 


KA y 
pace 
x A 


two rival factions existed. Playing upon their 
innate suspicions, Johydee rekindled the old 
hatreds. Soon the thieves were fighting among 
themselves and disbanded, leaving the village in 
peace. Johydee and the mask disappeared. 

Johydee's mask is another nice artifact for low- 
level campaigns. While of particular interest to 
thieves, it can be used by any character class. One 
possible alternative to simply allowing the PCs to 
use the mask might have the party hired to locate 
a group responsible for a rash of recent thefts. In 
reality, the thefts have been perpetrated by a sin- 
gular, very powerful master thief using the mask. 
At the end of the adventure the mask can allow 
the thiefto elude the party and finally disappear 
without trace. 

Constant Powers: The wearer of the mask is 
totally immune to all forms of gaze attacks (from 
basilisk to catoblepas and medusae). 

Invoked Powers: The PC can assume the guise 
of a humanoid being, from gnome to hill giant in 
size, by concentrating for one full round. If the 
PC has seen or heard the subject, the disguise is 
complete, including voice, mannerisms, clothing, 
and equipment. It is 100% accurate to casual 
acquaintances, but there is a 5% chance per hour 
that close friends and family will detect discrep- 
ancies. This power can be used once per day but 


the disguise itself can be held for no longer than 
12 hours, after which it fails and the wearer's vis- 
age returns. 

Random Powers: One from Artifact Table 1- 
17: Movement, one from Table 1-11: Enchant- 
ment/Charm. 

Curse: There is a 2% cumulative chance per 
hour spent in impersonation that the wearer 
comes to believe that the identity of the subject is 
actually the wearer's own. Only a wish spell can 
restore the wearer to normal. 

Suggested Means of Destruction: 
The mask must be eaten by a mimic. 
It must be worn by one with no mind. 
It must be merged with its reflection. 


of Knowledge 
XP Value: 5,000 GP Value: 50,000 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 72 

Similar to a mask of trickery, a mask ofknowl- 
edge bestows spells from a particular magical 
school—other than the school of illusion. 
Because of this, a character might seek to have 
several masks ofknowledge. The masks grant a 
number of spells a day equal to the level of the 
character wearing the mask. The spells available 
are determined by the DM, and all spells are cast 
as if the character were a 6th-level wizard. 


Kyrie's Mask of Disguise 
XP Value: 750 GP Value: 3,750 
1992 Fantasy Collector Card 246 

Kyrie's magical mask functions much like a hat 
ofdisguises, except that it becomes a piece of 
facial jewelry as part of the disguise (an ear or 
nose ring or a monocle). When worn, the mask 
allows Kyrie to alter her height and weight by up 
to 50%, and her eyes, hair, and complexion com- 
pletely. There is a 5% chance each time it is used 
that the mask will create a horribly deformed vis- 
age that cannot be undone for one day. The face 
has loathsome and misproportioned features, 
snaggled teeth, scars, and so forth. 


of Light 
XP Value: 1,500 GP Value: 3,600 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 72 
This priestly mask is carved in the likeness ofa 
man or woman with very fine features and a con- 
tented expression. When the correct command is 
given, the mask's eyes shoot 20-foot-long beams 


of bright light that inflict 3d4 points of damage to 
3085 


702 


s Mask of Memory 


creatures of neutral alignment. The beams, which 
are 1 inch in diameter, cause 6d4 points of dam- 
age to evil creatures, and cause no damage to 
good creatures. The beams can be used five times 
a day, once a round; they automatically hit any 
single creature. In addition to its destructive 
power, the mask bestows infravision of 60 feet 
and acts as a gem of seeing five times a day, each 
use lasting three rounds. 

The mask is lawful good, and any character 
donning it must save vs. spell or immediately 
convert to the mask's alignment. The mask func- 
tions best when worn by priests. Nonpriests using 
the mask only gain the infravision ability. 


of Lycanthus 

XP Value: 3,500 GP Value: 15,000 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 72 
Although multiple masks of the other various 
types are known to exist. There is only one mask 
of Lycanthus. When worn, the mask becomes 
invisible, so the wearer's true face is seen. The 
mask turns the wearer into a werebear, and fully 
able to control the changes between the natural 
and bear forms. 

The mask ofLycanthus permits the wearer to 
change shape six times per day. Returning to the 
wearer's original form counts as a change. The 
mask can be removed by speaking a second com- 
mand word. 


Magemask 
XP Value: 700 GP Value: 3,500 
The Magister 

A magemask is a halfmask of leather with crys- 
tal lenses; through these, a wearer views sur- 
roundings as if using detect magic, and can see 
concealed glyphs, runes, and inscriptions. If 
these are magically concealed or not yet acti- 
vated, the mask wearer sees only the outlines of 
the areas covered. The mask's lenses also confer 
infravision upon the wearer, enable anyone who 
wears them to read magic (although a nonspell- 
caster will not understand anything more than 
the general nature and intent ofa spell), and 
allows clear and easy reading (of Spellbooks, 
scrolls, maps, inscriptions, and nonmagical 
writing) in near darkness. Such a mask cannot 
be used in conjunction with other magical lenses 
or spectacles. 


of Magic 
XP Value: 200 GP Value: 400 
The Ruins of Myth Drannor 
This sort of mask is always perfectly circular. 
While it is worn, the wearer has continual, invol- 
untary magical sight—magical dweomers and 
auras emit a clear glow. 

The intensity of the radiance gives clues as to 
how recent or powerful the magic is, but the 
mask's sight otherwise only reveals the location 
and precise outline of magical objects (even sur- 
faces or areas bearing symbols, glyphs, and the 
like). The mask does not allow its wearer to read 
magic. 


Magical 
XP Value: GP Value: 
DRAGON Magazine 117 
This mask always appears perfectly circular. The 
wearer can see magical dweomers and auras 
(including those of surfaces or areas bearing sym- 
bols, glyphs, inscriptions, and the like), although 
such things cannot be read or closely examined. 
Only the location, outline, and relative intensity 
of magical power can be discerned. This magical 
sight is continuous and involuntary while the 


mask is worn. 


of Memory 
XP Value: 3,500 GP Value: 35,000 
The Astromundi Cluster 

There are a wide variety of masks ofmemory in 
existence. All of them share some similar charac- 
teristics, but they all have some unique powers as 
well. A mask ofmemory is always golden-red, as 
a reflection of the flames of Firefall. It has no vis- 
ible eye holes, though there are always two fire 
opals located where the eye holes are normally 
found. The mask has no house or ranking mark- 
ings, leaving the wearer's identity a mystery. 

The mask wearer incurs no penalties for the 
lack of eye holes; the mask allows normal vision 
and even grants its wearer magical infravision 
(60-foot range). The mask also provides protec- 
tion against intense bursts of light that would oth- 
erwise blind the character. Twenty percent of all 
masks ofmemory also provide the ability to see 
through magical illusions created by 1st- through 
3rd-level spells. 

Each mask has a variable number of gems pre- 
sent on its face, usually a mixture of fire opals, 


diamonds, and other various precious gems. 
3090 


a 703 


Mask, Mirror 


pe a i 


Masks may have up to 25 large gems or 100 
smaller gems on them; the fire opals are always 
configured to be the most prominent gems in the 
design of the mask. 

The number of fire opals is equal to the num- 
ber of extra spells the wearer may memorize each 
day. These extra spells are of Istto 5th level; the 
contained magic does not allow extra access to 
higher level spells. Masks ofmemory always have 
from two to twelve fire opals in them, their rarity 
increases with the number of opals. They never 
have more than 12 fire opals per mask, as the 
magics involved are too powerful to contain more 
than that number. 

In recent memory, masks ofmemory have been 
used only by the Sun Mages, though they can be 
used by any wizard (the Sun Mages do not wish 
this to become common knowledge). Possession 
of one of these masks by lower class Antilans is a 
crime punishable by death. Ifa mask is found in 
the hands of non-Antilans, the Sun Mages do 
whatever is necessary to retrieve it, offering as 
much as 100,000 gold bars for its return (though 
they are more likely to destroy offenders for their 
presumption). 


Mirror 
XP Value: 300 GP Value: 800 
DRAGON Magazine 117 

This mask appears as a circle with dark lines 
radiating outward from a central focus around 
the wearer's nose. Anyone gazing at the wearer 
does not see the mask, but sees instead the 
viewer's own head, perfectly depicted. Creatures 
not looking directly at the mask see the mask. 
The mask reflects all gaze attacks back upon the 
gazer, and the wearer can meet the gaze of any 
being without being affected by awe, fear, hor- 
ror, hypnotic gaze effects, petrification, charms, 
suggestions, etc. 


Monster 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 12,500 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 72 
These masks are carved to represent the faces of 
humanoid monsters. For example, some masks 
bear the visages of gnolls, orcs, hobgoblins, 
lizardmen, and the like. By wearing the mask 
and speaking the command word, a character is 
transformed into that monster—gaining the 
monster's Armor Class, Hit Dice, hit points, and 
other abilities. The character cannot access his 


or her own abilities or proficiencies, but does 
retain a personal identity. A monster mask can 
be used by any class. It functions once a day for 
14 turns. 


of Night 
XP Value: 1,500 GP Value: 36,000 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 72 

This priest's mask has the visage of a beautiful 
person whose features are marred with a baleful 

expression. When commanded, the eyes emit 

beams of purest ebony that are 20 feet long and 

1 inch in diameter. The beams inflict 3d4 points 
of damage to neutral and evil creatures, and 6d4 

points of damage to good creatures. The beams 

can be used five times a day, once per round. 
They automatically hit any single target. The 
mask is lawful evil, and any character donning it 
must save vs. spell or convert to the mask's 
alignment. The mask also grants its wearer 
infravision to 60 feet and acts as a gem ofseeing 

five times a day, each use lasts three rounds. 
Nonpriests wearing the mask gain only the 
infravision ability. 


of Protection 
XP Value: 2,500 GP Value: 12,500 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
Upon command, this mask gives the wearer a +2 
bonus to saving throws against gaze attacks of all 
sorts. It functions three times per day for one turn 
per use. 


of Scowling 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 5,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

This mask appears to be and functions as a mask 
ofdisguise, but the wearer always seems to be 
frowning. All those spoken to by the wearer of the 
mask are inclined to respond in a hostile manner 
(-2 penalty to reaction rolls). The wearer, how- 
ever, remains unaware of the effect, believing the 
mask to work normally. 


of Silence 
XP Value: 300 GP Value: 1,000 
The Ruins of Myth Drannor 
This mask has a trailing veil that flows down to 
cover a wearer's mouth, moving by itself to 
always cover the lips (thus, it must be removed 
for the wearer to eat or drink). 


At will, every fourth round of continuous wear, 
3096 


ge 704 l ~ 


Mask, Skull II 


ie nay a 


the wearer can magically silence one being within 
50 yards per round. This silence lasts one round, 
and the target gets a save vs. breath weapon to 
escape the effect. 

Ifthe save is successful, the target is unaf- 
fected, but the mask's power has still been used, 
and the wearer can't try to use the silence power 
again until three rounds of wearing the mask have 
elapsed. 

If the save fails, the silence prevents all noise 
from the victim (movements and sounds caused 
by body weight or actions, not just speech, 
shouts, and spellcasting). The mask wearer can 
use silence on him or herself, but must make a 
saving throw against the mask's magic regardless 
of personal wishes. 


of Silence II 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
DRAGON Magazine 117 

This mask covers the area around the eyes of the 
wearer, and has a trailing veil that flows down to 

cover the wearer's mouth, moving always to 
cover the lips (the mask must be removed to eat 
or drink). At will, the wearer can magically 
silence one creature within its 45-foot range per 
round. The victim gets a save vs. breath weapon 

to avoid these effects. The silence lasts one 
round and is usable every fourth round. Ifa tar- 

get successfully saves against a silence attempt, 
the mask's power has still been used, and the 
wearer cannot attempt to affect another target 
until three intervening rounds have elapsed. If 
successful, the silence prevents all noise from 
the victim, not just vocal sounds, and can be 
used by the mask wearer on himself (although 
the wearer gets a saving throw to avoid the 
mask's effects, too, regardless of his or her own 
wishes). The silence prevents spellcasting (with 
vocal components), shouted warnings, death- 
cries, and the like. 


Skull 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 2,000 
The Ruins of Myth Drannor 
This mask covers the entire face, and transforms 
it while worn to resemble a skull: the teeth and 
gums are bared, and dark sockets appear around 
the eyes and nose. The wearer of the mask is 
immune tofear, all diseases, and paralysis, and 
can instantly recognize any beings seen as dead, 
undead, alive (including petrified or in suspended 


NWS 


animation), or never living (even the most lifelike 
stone statue can be distinguished from someone 
using magic to appear as a stone statue). 

Undead are drawn to such a mask, attacking its 
wearer in preference to all other creatures. The 
mask gives its wearer immunity to undead chill- 
ing, life energy draining, aging, and strength 
draining undead attacks—but not to poisonous or 
purely physical attacks. It does not give the 
wearer any control or influence over undead. 


Skull II 
XP Value: 700 GP Value: 2,800 
DRAGON Magazine 117 

This mask always gives the wearer's face the 
appearance ofa skull, with dark sockets about the 
eyes and nose, and bared teeth. While worn, it 
confers immunity to fear of any sort and to the 
life level draining, strength draining, or aging 
attacks of all undead or other creatures. Diseases 
and paralysis of all sorts are also prevented, as is 
chilling damage from undead attacks—but the 
mask gives the wearer no control or influence 
over undead, and no protection against the physi- 
cal attacks of undead (or any poisonous aspects 
of such attacks). 

Undead are drawn toward the mask wearer, 


attacking him or her in preference to other crea- 
3099 


705 


Mask of Smiling 


>, Ce 


tures. The wearer of this mask can instantly rec- 
ognize any beings seen as dead, living (including 
beings petrified or in suspended animation), 
undead, or never living (a stone statue). 


of Smiling 
XP Value: 800 GP Value: 8,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

This mask appears to be and functions as a mask 
ofdisguise, but the user always appears to be 
smiling. This is not apparent to the user, however; 
the mask seems to be working perfectly. The 
mask also affects reaction rolls—lawfully- 
aligned creatures seeing the smile are inclined to 
be friendly (+1 bonus); those of chaotic align- 
ments are slightly irritated (-1 penalty) by the 
smile. Neutral creatures may be affected either 
way (determined randomly). 


Spirit 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
DRAGON Magazine 189 

Many tribal sacred ceremonies involve the wear- 
ing of wooden masks that depict stylized men or 
animals. The masks serve to focus power, and 
enchanted masks actually focus magical energy 
into the priests wearing them. With the mask, a 
priest achieves the maximum result in spellcast- 
ing. Thus, healing spells always heal the maxi- 
mum amount, and other spells will last for the 
maximum possible duration. Spirit masks will 
function only for a priest of the deity who 
enchanted it, and work only within the bound- 
aries ofa single village. 


of Stealth 
XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 33,000 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 72 

These masks bear the features of shifty individu- 
als. They are often missing an eye, have an eye 
patch, or have broken teeth. Thieves who wear a 
mask of stealth raise their abilities by 10% (maxi- 
mum 99%). Characters of other classes gain the 
average abilities (see the DMG) ofa thief of their 
own level. For example, a 4th-level priest who 
uses the mask also is treated as a 4th-level thief. 
A mask ofstealth operates for as many hours per 
week as the character has levels. 


706 


of Stealth II 

XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 22,000 
DRAGON Magazine 189 
This carved wooden mask is employed by savage 
priests when they are trying to free their fellows 
from captivity. When activated, the mask gives 
the wearer 70% success in lock-picking abilities. 
In addition, anyone seeing the wearer must make 
a saving throw vs. spell or else feel that the priest 
belongs in the area somehow, and not feel the 
need to bother the priest or to raise an alarm. The 
mask does not benefit anyone accompanying the 
priest. Ifthe priest attempts to use the mask for 
thievery, the mask will curse him. The mask itself 
disappears, and the priest is transformed into a 
1st-level thief. 


of Tragedy 
XP Value: 400 GP Value: 4,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
This mask looks something like a mask ofcom- 
edy but displays a sad frown. The wearer may cast 
an unusual scrying spell effect at any one creature 
with 60 feet. This can even affect creatures 
immune to some or all spells, including undead. 
The victim must make a saving throw vs. spell 
with a —2 penalty to the roll or stop and cry. A 
crying victim cannot attack or cast spells. A new 
saving throw must be made each round (though 
without penalty), and the victim continues to cry 
until successful. If an undead is forced to cry, it 
gains a +2 bonus to all attack rolls once it stops 
crying. This spell effect may be used only once 
per day, regardless of success. 


of Trickery 

XP Value: 5,000 GP Value: 50,000 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 72 
These masks are carved to resemble studious 
scholars. When a command word is uttered, they 
allow a character of any class to cast spells from 
the School of Illusion. The number of spells that 
can be cast each day is equal to the level of the 
character wearing the mask. Illusionists who 
don the mask are given no special abilities; how- 
ever, they gain the additional spells. The spells 
available are determined by the DM, and all 
spells are cast as ifthe character were a 6th-level 
illusionist. 


3105 


~ Mask, Winged y- 


of Twilight 

XP Value: 1,500 GP Value: 36,000 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 72 
The face represented on this priestly mask 
appears stoic and aloof. When commanded, the 
eyes send forth gray beams of that are 24 feet 
long and 1 inch in diameter. The beams can 
strike only one creature of any alignment each 
round, inflicting 3d4+2 points of damage; they 
hit automatically. The beams can be used five 
times a day. 

The mask is lawful neutral, and any character 
wearing it must save vs. spell or convert to the 
mask's alignment. The mask also grants infravi- 
sion to 60 feet. It can function as a gem ofseeing 
up to 10 times a day; each use lasts three rounds. 
Nonpriests wearing the mask gain only the infrav- 
ision ability. 


Veil 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 5,000 
DraGoN Magazine 117 

Named for both its appearance and its function, 
this mask completely covers all of the wearer's 
face in an impassive expanse; only the wearer's 
eyes can communicate any expression. While 
worn, it completely hides and protects the wearer 
from any mind-reading or mind-influencing 
spells (like charm, sleep, and ESP) and any div- 
ination or similar spells involving the wearer 
(including detect lie, alignment-aura reading, 
and the like). It also causes offensive attacks of 
these sorts (psionics, enchantment, and charm 
spells) to be reflected back upon the caster. If 
reflection is impossible due to the nature of the 
attack, the spell is merely negated. The mask 
does not confer actual or psionic invisibility upon 
the wearer. 


of Winds 
XP Value: 350 GP Value: 700 
The Ruins of Myth Drannor 
This mask is shaped like a bellows, point-down- 
ward. It allows the wearer to influence the 
movements of gases and vapors within 60 feet, 
by silent act of will. Once every six rounds, 
wind can be woven strongly enough to create the 
equivalent of a gust of wind or wall ofwind 
spell. The mask's power is strong enough to 
break up such spells, when used against the 
mask wearer, and the mask can also turn aside 
gale-force winds, smoke, convection currents, 


poisonous gas, beings in gaseous form, and 
scent-laden breezes. Temperature effects that are 
due to air movement (for example, hypothermia 
caused by winter winds) can be lessened or 
avoided, and fires can be dampened (but only 
small ones put out) by use of the mask: it cannot 
steal enough oxygen to asphyxiate beings or 
cause a vacuum. 


of Winds II 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
DRAGON Magazine 117 

Appearing as a bellows, point downwards, this 
mask allows the wearer to influence the move- 
ments of gases and vapors within a 60-foot 
sphere at will. Thus, the wearer can negate or turn 
aside gale force winds (including magical gusts 
of wind), turn back convection currents, smoke, 
gaseous-form creatures, poison gas, and even 
scent carrying breezes. The wearer can rob fires 
of fresh oxygen by stilling air movements (large 
fires, such as those of burning structures, are not 
easily extinguished solely by use of such a mask), 
but cannot cause a vacuum nor asphyxiate oppo- 
nents. The wearer can create gusts ofwind or 
wind walls, as the spells, once each every six 
rounds. Heat or cold effects from air movements 
(for example, hypothermia from arctic winds) 
can be reduced or negated. 


Winged 
XP Value: 750 GP Value: 7,500 
The Ruins of Myth Drannor 
The edges of this mask are cut to resemble rows 
of feathers. The wearer can fly at will, without tir- 
ing, as often and as far as desired, at MV FI 24 
(A). The mask wearer can cast spells in flight 
(and write or perform other intricate tasks), fly 
upright, hover or stop in midair, or back up with- 
out turning—but always glows with a soft white 


faerie fire while in flight (regardless of the user's 


desires). 

Up to 50 pounds of nonliving material can be 
carried (the weight of the mask itself is not con- 
sidered, but all other clothing and items on the 
wearer's person are, and if the weight limit is 
exceeded, random items in excess of the limit are 
left behind in flight, regardless of physical ties, 
packaging, or connections). 

The mask's magic never carries more than one 
living being in flight, no matter how small or 


light the entities involved. If another creature 
3110 


yer I E A O E ERN, 


707 


~ Mask, Winged II r 


w ENN 


REPOR 
tt (ants Nu Kes 


WSK duo oy © 
eae = Ss 


Aà 
N XŞ 

as E AN 5 4 
A RS S 


AW 


si ANN 


touches, grapples with, or is carried by the flying 
wearer of a winged mask, the wearer falls (30 feet 
per round: the mask protects its wearer with 
featherfall, but a second being won't be pro- 
tected, even if clinging to the mask wearer's 
back). 


Winged II 
XP Value: 1,200 GP Value: 12,000 
DRAGON Magazine 117 

The edges of this mask are cut so as to resemble 
rows of feathers. The wearer canfly at will, with- 
out tiring, as often as desired and for as long as 
desired, but cannot carry any other living creature 
while doing so. Nonliving material (such as the 
wearer's clothing, not including the weight of the 
mask itself) up to a weight limit of 50 pounds 
may also be carried. This is not much, and any 
material in excess of the weight limit negates the 
mask’sflying abilities. 

Whileflying, the wearer of a winged mask has 
a Maneuverability Class rating of A, can remain 
upright if desired, and has great stability, allow- 
ing the user to cast spells, write, and perform 
other intricate tasks. Movement is at any speed up 
to 260 feet per round as desired, and the wearer 
can hover or fly backwards without turning. 
While the mask’s powers offlight are activated, 


the wearer glows with a soft, white, faerie fire 
radiance, regardless of the wearer's wishes. If 
another living creature touches, grapples with, or 
is carried by the wearer of a winged mask while 
the latter isflying, the wearer falls; the mask con- 
fers the protection of afeatherfall spell on the 
mask wearer, only. 


of the Wraith 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 12,500 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 72 
This particularly horrible monster mask grants 
the wearer the abilities of a wraith. This includes 
Armor Class and chilling touch that inflicts 1d6 
points of damage and drains one level. Wearers 
retain their original hit points and only can be hit 
by silver or magical weapons. A mask ofthe 
wraith typically has 10d4charges, with each 
charge giving the wearer the abilities of a wraith 
for 4d4 rounds. These masks cannot be recharged. 


Mast 


Masts are thick, straight poles that carry the 
weight of the rigging and sails on a ship or spell- 
jamming vessel. The number and height ofa 
ship's masts depend upon the ship's length. The 
longer the ship, the more masts it holds, the more 
masts a ship has, the more sail it carries; the more 
sail it carries, the faster it travels. Masts are 
named according to their placement. On a three- 
masted ship (from fore to aft), they are commonly 
called the foremast, the mainmast, and the 
mizzenmast. 


Half 
XP Value: 1,200 GP Value: 6,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

This mast appears to be and functions as a 
portable mast in all respects. However, in any 
moderate breeze or stronger wind, the device may 
malfunction (50% chance; checked hourly). If so, 
the lines disappear, and the mast and boom 
shorten to half their current length; furthermore, 
they jam in that position, refusing to obey any 
command words at all for one hour. The sails 
remain full size. and are virtually useless. After 
an hour's delay, the mast and boom return to nor- 
mal height, and the lines reappear but must be 
rerigged for proper use. If the wind is still blow- 
ing, the chance of malfunction must be checked 
after another turn. 


3113 


Be ee 


708 


~ Mattock, Dumathion's J 


Portable 

XP Value: 1,600 GP Value: 16,000 

The Book of Marvelous Magic 
This mast appears identical to a magical 10-foot 
pole. It has eight command words and is not very 
useful unless the owner knows how to sail. 
Ifthe mast is held vertically upon any wooden 
surface and the first command word is spo- 
ken, the mast becomes firmly attached. No 
other commands work until the mast is first 
set in this way. 
A second command causes it to grow longer, 
adding 10 feet per round, to a maximum of 40 
feet total length; its growth may be stopped at 
any time with a third command word. 
A fourth command causes a boom to grow 
from the mast; the boom is a pole of the 
same size, 4 the length, that grows out 3 feet 
above the base of the mast and perpendicular 
to it. 
A fifth command causes a triangular mainsail, 
complete with rigging lines, to grow out 
between the mast and the boom. 
A sixth command causes ajib sail and rigging 
to grow from the other side of the mast oppo- 
site the mainsail. 
A seventh command word, if the wood upon 
which the mast rests is 6 inches thick or less, 
causes a keel to grow from the bottom, directly 
below the mast. 
The eighth command causes all the sails, 
lines, and extra length to disappear, leaving 
the 10-footpole in its original form, and 
releases it from the wooden base. 
The lines created by the mast cannot be cut, 
and the whole device is immune to all attacks 
except normal or magical fire. Any fire damage 
at all destroys the magic, causing all the sails and 
lines to appear (if applicable), and causing the 
mast to expand to its full 40-foot length (with 
boom). 


Masthead of Durability 
XP Value: 1,800 GP Value: 18,000 
Realmspace 
This item is actually nothing more than the 
lower support for a mast. It physically bolts the 
mast to the deck, rendering the mast completely 
indestructible from all damage except fire. If a 
ship attempts to shear the mast off by flying 
over it, the mast actually tears into the attacking 
ship, causing 1d2 hull points per 10 tons of 


ship. In other words, if a 40-ton ship were try- 
ing to shear off a mast bolted to a masthead of 
durability, the attacking ship would merely 
cause itself 4d2 points of hull damage. If the 
mast is subjected to fire damage, it is allowed 
the appropriate saving throw. Ifthis fails, the 
mast burns as normal wood. The masthead still 
functions, but is useless until the burned mast is 
replaced with a new one. 


Match 


Matches are small wooden sticks tipped with a sul- 

furous mixture that burns when struck against 

flint. Ifa match is doused with water or exposed to 
high humidity, it will not work. Matches are rare 
items and are not available in every campaign. 


Magical 
XP Value: 600 GP Value: 3,000 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 58 

A magic match appears to be a simple copper 
rod 3 inches long. Upon uttering a command 
word, a small flame erupts on one end of the 
rod. Ifused as a weapon, the flame causes only 1 
point of damage. The flame lasts for one minute 
and cannot be extinguished by any normal 
means. Even strong winds and immersion in 
water will not put it out. The match is handy for 
setting fire to flammable materials. Each magi- 
cal match is good for only one use, but they are 
usually found in lots of 2d20 contained in small, 
engraved wooden boxes. 


of Many Lights 

GP Value: 2,500 
DRAGON Magazine 30 
The match ofmany lights was created to save 
Orlow, a wizard, from having to search for a 
match to light his pipe. It has a maximum of 100 
lights. Ifused as a weapon, the match causes 1 
point of damage every other round. 


Mattock 


A mattock is a large digging tool with the blade 
set at a right angle from the handle. 


XP Value: 500 


Dumathoin's 
XP Value: 3,500 GP Value: 27,500 
Monster Mythology 
Dumathoin's avatar uses a huge mattock +5 made 
of solidified magma. 


3118 


709 


~ Mattock ofthe Titans r 


ofthe Titans 
XP Value: 3,500 GP Value: 14,000 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 

This huge digging tool is 10 feet long and weighs 
over 100 pounds. Any giant-sized creature with a 
Strength of 20 or more can use it to loosen earth 
‘and earthen ramparts in a 100-cubic-footarea in 
one turn. It smashes rock in a 20-cubic-foot area 
in the same amount of time. Ifused as a weapon, 
it has a +3 bonus to attack rolls and inflicts 5d6 
points of damage, exclusive of Strength bonuses 

(see Girdle, of giant strength). 
Ifused against ships made of wood, ceramic, 
or stone, this item inflicts 1 point of hull damage 

for every 10 points of damage. 


Medallion 


A medallion is a piece of ornamental Jewelry, 
usually circular or oval, most often found sus- 
pended from a chain as neckwear. 


of the Arctic 

GP Value: 2,000 
Wonders of LANKHMAR 
The medallion awards all creatures and characters 
in alliance with the owner a +1 on all saving 
throws. It also protects the wearer against all 
cold-based attacks 35% of the time. In other 
words, ifthe character is attacked by a cold-based 


XP Value: 400 


spell, there is a 35% chance that there is no effect. 


Ifthe percentile fails, the character still receives a 
normal saving throw. The medallion gives off a 
faint magical glow. 

It is designed to be worn around the neck. The 
chain is usually made of roughly twisted links, 
often fashioned of discarded chain mail. The 
medallion is decorated with an engraving ofa 
beautiful woman with her arms outstretched at 
her sides, and snow piled in each hand. A large 
bear stands in profile behind her. 


of Defense 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
This item has two command words: to grow, and 
to shrink. Upon command, it turns into a normal- 
sized shield +1. The second command returns it 
to medallion form. 


of Empathy 
XP Value: 1,500 GP Value: 15,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic l 

This item allows the user to sense the basic emo- 
tions (hostility, rage, hunger, greed. concern, or 
fear) of creatures within 30 feet. It is used simi- 
larly to a medallion ofESP but functions even if 
the creatures have little or no surface thoughts; it 
senses their inner desires. 


Equus 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 8,000 
DUNGEON Magazine 22 

An equus is a magical piece of jewelry that, upon 
command, polymorphs into some form of a beast 
of burden. The word "equus" (plural "equi") 
comes from an ancient language and has no lit- 
eral translation in the common tongue. The clos- 
est translation is "beast of burden" or "horse," but 
the word can be applied to anything that is used 
like a horse. Thus, an actual horse, mule, worg, 
camel, dog-sled team, nightmare, or any other 
creature that can be ridden, used to pull a load, or 
carry goods can be termed an equus. Equi come 
in many different varieties, with the most com- 
mon listed below. While 80% of equi are either 
good or neutrally aligned, 20% polymorph into 
evilcreatures such as nightmares, worgs, and 
giant spiders. It is said Shan Nikkoleth, a death 

knight, once possessed an equus that polymor- 
phed into gorgon form. 

The medallions are invariably made of silver, 
one side engraved with the image of the creature 
it will become and the reverse etched with the 
command word. 


Creature List 

The DM may choose form of the creature into 
which the equus polymorphs from the following 
table. The jewelry form polymorphs into one type 
of creature only. A DM who prefers to roll ran- 
domly should add the roll of 1d8 to that of 1di2 
and consult the table below. The DM should use 
only those creatures he or she feels comfortable 
with and is sure will not give the PCs an unfair 
advantage in the campaign. Types of creatures 
can be added to or deleted from the list as the DM 
sees fit. Any ofthe following creatures that do 
not appear on Table 49 in the PHB should be 
considered equal to a heavy horse in movement 
rate and encumbrance. 


If the equus is slain (reduced to O hit points or 
3123 


SE ae a ee 


710 


Medallion of ESP 


SSS a 


less) in creature form, the creature immediately 
reverts to jewelry form and cannot change into 
creature form again. Damage to the creature form 
of the equus can be healed magically by cure 
wounds spells. Ifthe creature is allowed food and 
rest, it heals naturally at the rate of 1 hit point per 
day. However, the equus can neither heal itself 
nor be healed while in jewelry form. 


Roll 
02 


Animal Type/information: 

Unicorn: AC 2; MV 24; HD 4+4; hp 28; 

THACO 15;#AT 3 (hooves and horn); 
Dmg 1d6/ld6/ld12; SA charge, +2 to 
attack when attacking with horn, -6 
penalty to opponents’ surprise rolls; SD 
teleport, immune to poison, charm, hold, 
and death spells; can sense approach of 
enemy at 240 yards distance; makes all 
saving throws as 1 Ith-level wizard; ML 
14; AL CG. The unicorn's Intelligence is 
8-10 (1d4+8). It can be ridden only by 
female characters; if a male character 
rolls the unicorn, use the ultraheavy war 
horse (#20) instead. 
Giant stag: AC 7; MV 21; HD 5; hp 
30; THACO 15; #AT 1 (antlers) or 2 
(hooves); Dmg 4d4 or 1d4/ld4; ML 14; 
ALN. This creature's Intelligence is 
4-7 (1d4+3). 

Bull: AC 7; MV 15; HD 4; hp 24; 
THACO 15; #AT 2 (horns); Dmg 
1d6/ld6; SA charge; ML 15; ALN. The 
bull has an Intelligence of 4—7 (1d4+3). 

Superheavy war horse: AC 6; MV 15; 
HD 4+4; hp 28; THACO 15; #AT 3 
(hooves and bite); Dmg 1d8/ld8/ld4; 
SD 30! infravision, immunity to all hold 
and charm spells; ML 16; AL NG. This 
horse has an Intelligence of 7-12 
(1d6+6). 

Heavy war horse: AC 7; MV 15; HD 

4+4; hp 21; THACO 17; #AT 3 (hooves 
and bite); Dmg 1d8/ld8/ld4; ML 15; 
ALN. This horse has an Intelligence of 
5-8 (1d4+4). 
Superheavy war horse (special): Same 
as above (roll of 6-8), though it has MV 
18,a 40-lb. bonus on its carrying capac- 
ity load limits, and no infravision. 

Camel: AC 7 MV 21; HD 3; hp 18; 
THACO 17; #AT 1 (bite); Dmg 1d4; SA 
spitting; ML 14; ALN. This camel is of 


03 


04-05 


06-08 


14-16 


17-18 


a more mellow disposition than its 
meaner cousins and has an Intelligence 
of 4-7 (1d4+3). 
Water buffalo: AC 7; MV 15; HD 5; 
hp 30; THACO 15; #AT 2 (horns); Dmg 
1d8/ld8; ML 16; AL N. This water buf- 
falo has an Intelligence of 4—7 (1d4+3). 
Ultraheavy war horse: AC 5; MV 24; 
HD 5+5; hp 35; THACO 15; #AT 3 
(hooves and bite); Dmg 1d8/ld8/ld4; 
SD 60’ infravision, immunity to poison 
and all hold and charm spells; ML 18; 
AL LG. This special horse can under- 
stand but not speak the common tongue 
and is able to use animalfriendship and 
pass without trace spells three times per 
day each, locate animals or plants once 
per day, and water walk once per week. 
This horse has an Intelligence of 9-16 
(1d8+8). 


19 


20 


of ESP 

XP Value 
30’ range: 1,000 
30’ w/Empathy: 1,500 
60’ range: 2,000 
90’ range: 3,000 

DUNGEON MASTER Guide 
This is a normal appearing pendant disk, hung 
from a neck chain. It is usually fashioned from 
bronze, copper, or nickel-silver. The device 
enables the wearer to concentrate and pick up 
thought in a path 1 foot wide at the medallion and 
broadening 2 feet for every 10 feet of distance 
from the device the magic reaches, up to an 11- 
foot maximum width at 50 feet. Note that the 
wearer cannot send thought through a medallion 
of ESP. 

Use of the medallion requires a full round. It is 
prevented from functioning by stone over 3 feet 
thick, metals over 1/6 inch thick, or any continu- 
ous sheet of lead, gold, or platinum of any thick- 
ness greater than a layer of paint. The medallion 
malfunctions (with no result) on a roll of 6 on a 
1d6, and the device must be checked every time it 
is used. 

The character using the medallion can pick up 
only the surface thoughts of creatures in the ESP 
path. The general distance can be determined, but 
any thoughts are understandable only ifthe user 
knows the language of the thinkers. Ifthe target 


creatures use no language, only their prevailing 
3124 


GP Value 
10,000 
15,000 

20,000 
30,000 


Se ee 


711 


Medallion of EST 


> oe A 


emotions can be read. Note that undead and 
golems have neither thoughts nor emotions. The 
type of medallion found is found by consulting 
the following chart: 


Roll Medallion 


01-15 30 range 
16-18 30’range with empathy 
19 60’ range 
20 90’ range 
of EST 
XP Value: 400 GP Value: 2,000 


DRAGON Magazine 156 

Wearing this silver-plated medallion enables a 
character to fully experience inner oneness, take 
responsibility for personal space, and pontificate 
at length to fellow party members about how they 
must recontextualize adverse life events (such as 
an arrow in the eye), so as to remove their nega- 
tive energy. Coincidentally, it also lowers the 
wearer's Charisma by 6 points. 


of Faith 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 10,000 
Tales of the Lance 
The medallion offaith is a good priest’s holy 
symbol. This relic is essential to invoking the 


Medallion 
of Murder 


Medallion 
of Defense 


| 


Arctic 


miracles of one's god and to mark the devout. 

Without a medallion, a priest is cut off from his 

god, and at best can only evoke spells from the 

Ist through 3rd levels of discipline. These silver 

medallions bear the symbol and mystic signs of 

one's god. (See also Holy Symbol.) 

A priest of 5th level and above, the medallion 
can create other medallions for converts to the 
true gods. 

In addition, a medallion in the hand ofa priest 
of 9th level or higher allows the priest to detect 
evil—the medallion glows a pale blue and chimes 
when touched by an evil thing. Once per day, the 
following powers may also be used: 

e Bless: Add +1 to attack and morale rolls of all 
allies within 60 yards for six rounds. 

e Protection vs. Evil, 10’ radius: All allies 
within 10 feet of priest cannot be touched by an 
evil or enchanted creature as long as the priest 
does not attack. This effect improves the priest's 
AC by —2, and gives a +2 bonus to all saving 
throws for as long as the caster concentrates. 

e Slow poison: As long as a poison victim wears 
the medallion, there are no ill effects from the 
poison for up to one day. 


Star of 
Celene 


Medallion 


Searcher II 


Medallion 
of Steadiness 


712 


Equus 
Medallion 


Soulsearcher 


3126 


~ Medallion of Projection g 


Holy Medallion of Almor 
XP Value: 1,200 GP Value: 9,000 
GREYHAWK Adventures 

This golden medallion was created while Almor 
was under the Great Kingdom's rule. The priests 
of Almor foresaw great evil coming to Flanaess, 
so they enchanted this item to help keep peace. 
Once per day the medallion's powers can be used 
on one human, demihuman, or humanoid within 
a 30-yard range. The affected creature must save 
vs. spell or become extremely nauseated by vio- 
lence. The mere sight of violence causes the 
affected creature to save vs. poison or become 
helpless and unable to take action for 1d4+1 
rounds. Ifthe creature attempts to physically 
harm another living creature, it must save vs. poi- 
son at -5 or suffer the same effect as above. Also, 
the creature suffers the penalties of —3 attack and 
damage, and an affected PC or NPC has Strength, 
Wisdom, and Dexterity scores halved while he or 
she continues to act violently. Certain spells 
(such as strength) can help the victim, but only 
remove curse completely frees a creature. The 
medallion's effects last for 24 hours. 


Locke's Medallion 

of Thought Projection 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 

1992 Fantasy Collector Card 154 
Locke can't help broadcasting his thoughts 90 
feet straight in front of him because of this medal. 
Happily, he has learned to control exactly who 
picks up his thoughts—everyone else in range 
only receives vague impressions. Now he makes 
a living as an entertainer and confidence artist, 
making people believe that they are psychic. To 
bolster this act. he has paid a wizard to cast per- 
manent suggestion on the medallion. Now he can 
cast the spell mentally and put it into the mind of 
his choice. Even though Locke is not very good 
looking, his success with ladies is legendary. 


of Malog 

XP Value: 1,500 GP Value: 7,500 
GREYHAWK Adventures 
Hung on a golden necklace, this medallion was 
created in the evil temples of the capital of the 
Horned Society. It allows any wizard with a mini- 
mum of 12 Intelligence anda 10 Wisdom score to 
perform a monster summoning V spell once per 
week. 


of the Mirror 

XP Value: 400 GP Value: 4,000 
The Revenge of Rusak 
This magical medallion appears to be a small, sil- 
ver mirror set in a frame of cheap gemstones. 
When worn, it reverses the result of any detection 
spell cast upon the wearer or itself. Thus, if worn 
by an evil creature, a detect evil shows the crea- 
ture to be good; when worn by an invisible char- 
acter, that character is undetectable to a detect 
invisible spell. The medallion uses a charge each 
time a detection spell is cast against it. When 
found it has 1d6+1 charges. When all the charges 
are spent and another detection spell is cast 
against it or the wearer, the medallion shatters. 
This medallion is an extremely rare item since it 
is almost impossible to identify as a magical 
item; if detect magic is cast upon it, it reads as a 
nonmagical item. 


of Missile Attraction 
XP Value: — GP Value: 1,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
This item appears and functions as a medallion of 
ESP (30-foot range). However, all missiles fired 
at the wearer gain a +2 bonus to attack rolls and 
always inflict at least 2 points of damage each 
(treat a damage roll of 1 as 2). 


Pax's Medallion of Spell Exchange 
XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 15,000 
1992 Fantasy Collector Card 623 
Pax is a scholarly wizard who studied under Mor- 
denkainen and couldn't resist tampering with 
every spell he learned. His medallion is one of his 
triumphs. Pax manipulated Mordenkainen's 
lucubration until he got it to allow an even spell- 
for-spell trade and then he imbued a medallion 
with the unique ability. For instance, if Pax is car- 
rying afireball spell and he decides that he'd 
rather have a lightning bolt, then he activates his 
medallion and makes the exchange. He can do so 
once per day, with spells of 1st, 2nd, or 3rd level. 


of Projection 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 5,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
This item appears to be and functions as a medal- 
lion ofESP (30-foot range). However, the user's 
true thoughts are broadcast with every use. 


3133 


aa a aaa 


713 


Medallion, Soulsearcher 


e i ey 


Soulsearcher 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 20,000 
The House of Gryphon Hill 

The Soulsearcher is a small crystal orb mounted 
in a pendant on a plain silver chain that enables 
the bearer to look into the true soul of a creature. 
When the medallion is held and concentrated on, 
the crystal grows to a size about 2 feet in diame- 
ter. Its weight and size after becoming so enlarged 
are such that anyone with less than a Strength of 
16 is required to use both hands to hold the globe 
aloft. Note that the user is not be able to wield 
any weapons or cast any spells requiring somatics 
while holding the globe. When concentration is 
broken, the orb immediately reverts to its normal 
1 inch size and weighs about three ounces. 

When gazed into, the globe swirls with motes 
of light swirl for 1d4 -1 rounds. After this time 
the globe clears. If less than one round is indi- 
cated, then the globe clears instantly. The PC 
must designate the creature he or she is examin- 
ing through the device. Once clear, the device 
shows the user an image of the true soul inhabit- 
ing the creature. In the case of those who have 
been transpossessed, it shows the image of the 
Spirit trapped inside the new form. The converted 
would therefore appear as monsters, while the 
transpossessed would appear as frightened towns- 
folk. 

Additionally, it shows the true selfofany poly- 
morphed or massmorphed creatures that it is used 
on. The crystal itselfis very delicate and can eas- 
ily break. Anytime the person carrying the object 
rolls a natural 1 on any attack roll or a natural 20 
on any Dexterity check, falls or suffers a crushing 
blow, the item must make a save vs. crushing 
blow at +4 or shatter and become useless. If the 
person carrying the object safeguards it by wrap- 
ping it securely in layers of cushioning cloth this 
check can be ignored—however, this does make 
it impossible for the carrier to pull it out of such 
containment without taking 1d3 rounds to mini- 
mize the risk of breakage. 


Soulsearcher II 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 20,000 
RAVENLOFT Campaign Set 
The medallion is actually a small crystal orb, that 
hangs from a plain silver chain like a pendant. 
The crystal enables the bearer to perceive the true 
psyche ofa creature. When the bearer holds the 
medallion, and steadily concentrates upon it, the 


crystal expands until it is 2 feet in diameter. A 
character whose Strength is less than 16 must use 
both hands to hold the enlarged crystal aloft. The 
bearer can take no other actions while using the 
orb. If concentration is broken, the orb returns to 
its original size and weight. 

When the bearer gazes into the orb, motes of 
light swirl within it for 1d4 rounds. Then the orb 
clears. At this point, the bearer concentrates on 
examining any single individual within 60 feet. 
The device shows the user an image of the true 
nature of that creature. The orb acts as a true see- 
ing spell, unhindered by the effects of the Demi- 
plane of Ravenloft. It reveals the true alignment, 
as well as any charms or curses, possessions, 
polymorphs, orillusions. The bearer learns the 
complete truth. This does not mean that he or she 
discovers the target's combat numbers or forms of 
attack. Rather, the medallion strips away all lies 
or misinformation the creature projects. 

The pendant is very fragile. Any fall requires a 
save as if against a crushing blow. Ifthe bearer 
wears it in combat, it might be damaged. Ifhis 
opponent rolls a natural 20 against him, the soul 
searcher medallion must make a save vs. crushing 
blow. Ifit is put into a protective container, it is 
not subject to these dangers. 


Species Enemy 

XP Value: 750 GP Value: 7,500 
The Complete Ranger's Handbook 
A character wears this copper disk on a chain 
around the neck and under his or her clothing so 
that the metal touches the chest. When the char- 
acter comes within 100 yards ofhis or her species 
enemy, the medallion becomes warm, alerting the 
wearer to the enemy's presence. The intensity of 
the warmth varies according to the number and 
proximity of the enemy. The medallion doesn't 
get hot enough to cause damage, nor does it 
reveal the exact location or number of enemies in 
the vicinity. 


of Spell Exchange 
XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 15,000 
Tome of Magic 
This medallion allows the Spellcaster to exchange 
one memorized spell of up to 6th level for others 
of lower levels, rather in the manner of Mor- 
denkainen 's lucubration. The wizard loses the 
sacrificed spell and recalls one or more spells 


from those memorized and cast within the past 24 
3137 


2 


7 


1 


4 


Medallion, Tusmit's Battle Crescent 


a Ce ET 


hours. The total level of spells must be one less in 
sum than the spell sacrificed. For example, by 
sacrificing a 5th-level spell, a wizard could recall 
one Ist-and one 3rd-level spell, two 2nd-level 
spells, four st-level spells, and so on. The 
medallion can function only once per day. The 
wizard must have available any spell components 
required for exchanged spells. 


Star of Celene 

XP Value: 500 GP Value: 2,000 
GREYHAWK Adventures 
Set on a silver necklace, this golden medallion 
was given as a gift to a halfling thief who per- 
formed great services for high elves in Celene. 
The item was intended for use by the halfling and 
his family and friends, though no one knows who 
has itnow. 

The star gives a good-aligned wearer a +20% 
reaction bonus from NPC elves. This bonus is 
halved for elves above 4th level, and negated for 
elves above 8th level. The star causes an evil- 
aligned wearer 1 point of electrical damage per 
touch and will not function. 


of Steadiness 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 10,000 
The Complete Wizard’s Handbook 
This is a silver medallion of a horse's head. While 
wearing it, a character can never be thrown from 
a mount, whether a horse, a dragon, or any other 
creature suitable for riding. 


of Thought Projection 

XP Value: — GP Value: 1,000 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 
This device is like a medallion ofESP in every 
respect, even as to the range at which it functions. 
However, in addition to picking up the thoughts 
of creatures, it broadcasts the thoughts of the user 
to the creatures in the path of the beam, thus 
alerting them. To prevent projecting thoughts, the 
user rolls 1d6. On a roll of 6, the thoughts remain 
secret. 

In Ravenloft: Undead with a low Intelligence 
or better can deliberately project thoughts, that a 
mind reading character can detect. Usually, the 
creatures send false, reassuring messages. 
Undead cannot project thoughts when surprised 
or caught unaware. 


XP Value: 500 


GP Value: 5,000 


Lost Tomb of Martek 

This medallion gives the person who wears it the 
power to change the timeframe of anything to his 
or her own timeframe. This means that the person 
wearing this medallion can release anything that 
is timetrapped—evenpeople. The medallion can 
only release one thing at a time and only works 
three times each week. Everything that is released 
by the medallion is released forever. 


Tusmit's Battle Crescent 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 18,000 
GREYHAWK Adventures 

Set in a golden necklace studded with gems, this 
medallion is a prized possession among the rulers 
of the northwest. Warlords gladly pay full price 
for it, though a treacherous lord might send 
thieves and assassins to retrieve the payment. 

Once in every 24-hour period, the character 
can receive a +2 (or 10%) bonus on any single 
combat-related die roll. The decision to take the 
bonus must be made before the die is rolled. 

The crescent also protects the wearer from all 
normal missiles, and all weapons striking the 
wearer are at -1 to attack and damage. 


3142 


j 715 


Medicine Bundle 


ee ee en ae 


Medicine Bundle 


XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 2,500 

The Atruaghin Clans 
The Children of the Horse believe that all crea- 
tures, good and evil, great and small, are imbued 
by the Immortals with magical power. In some 
this power is weak, leaving the individual unable 
to harness the supernatural powers of the uni- 
verse. In others it is great, and the spiritual 
forces of the world obey their commands. The 
former type of person follows a career that 
requires little or no contact with the supernat- 
ural, becoming a fighter or thief. The latter class 
of person seeks out the unknown and embraces 
it by becoming a wizard, priest, druid, or even 
shamani. 

Those without great access to supernatural 
power do not forsake that which they cannot 
wield, however. To do so would be folly. Rather, 
they seek the guidance of the tribe's shamani and 
ask his help in the crafting of a makaki or medi- 
cine bundle. 

The making of a makaki begins with a hunt in 
which the character must seek out his or her own 
totem animal without the aid of a shamani's mag- 
ical power. Once the animal is found, it is killed 
- and the heart cut from the body. The heart is 


cured in such a way that it can be fashioned into a 
tough, leathery pouch. The rest of the carcass is 
burned in a special fire built by the shamani, and 
a handful of the ashes are placed in the makaki. 
They lay the spiritual foundation for the coming 
enchantments. 

Once the makaki is fashioned and the ashes 
have been gathered in it, the character begins to 
gather items associated with his totem spirit. For 
example, ifthe character's totem animal is an elk, 
the character might gather a number of wild flow- 
ers that are known to be a popular food for the 
animal, or some of its dung from a game trail that 
it frequents. As soon as six of these items have 
been gathered, the character takes them and the 
bundle back to the shamani. 

In a ritual that must be held under the light ofa 
full moon, the shamani calls upon the Immortals 
to bless the makaki. Each ceremony allows the 
shamani to enchant one bundle per level of expe- 
rience, on each of the three nights of the full 
moon. Thus, a 5th-level shamani could enchant as 
many as 15 makaki per month, although he would 
seldom be called upon to undertake such a mas- 
sive ceremony. 

The ritual ends with the coming of the dawn 
as the character holds out his left arm to the 
shamani. With a slender bone knife, the shamani 
cuts the supplicant's flesh and allows the blood 
to drip onto the ingredients assembled in the 
bundle. Enough blood is drained to deprive the 
character of 1d4 hit points before the enchant- 
ment is complete. 

With the makaki now fully empowered, the 
character lashes it to his waist in the same way 
that citizens of other lands might carry a coin 
purse. Whenever a character with a makaki is 
called upon to make a saving throw or ability 
check while wearing his makaki, he gains a +1 
bonus. 

Further, the character can call upon his totem 
spirit for protection in the event that the save or 
check fails. If he or she chooses to do this, the 
die roll for the saving throw or ability check is 
ignored and the character is assumed to have 
successfully overcome the hazard. Whatever 
caused the character to attempt the saving throw 
or ability check will destroy the makaki, how- 
ever, forcing the character to fashion a new one 
in order to regain the +1 saving throw and abil- 
ity check bonus. 


3143 


i 716 z 


Merty's Miraculous Mistmaker 


p SSS ay 


Merty's Marvelous 

Marketplace 
Merty the mad mummer made many marvelous 
magical masterpieces. We magnificently massed 
Merty's myriad, manifold manufactures with 
alphabetical methodological meticulousness. 
Make merry with Merty's marvelous magical 
madcap merchandise. 


Magical Markers 
XP Value: 150 GP Value: 1,500 

DraGon Magazine 168 
Do you constantly get lost in endless dungeon 
corridors? Do you hate trying to read maps by 
flickering torchlight? If so, then Merty s magical 
markers are for you! These colorful metal chips 
will save time and effort fruitlessly spent on try- 
ing to read a faintly inscribed map in the dark. 
The chips stick to any solid surface, and can be 
seen only with the use ofMerty's magical mem- 
brane, which we provide with every set. (The 
markers glow up to 120 feet away when seen 
through the membrane—no illumination neces- 
sary!) A perfect gift for the illiterate barbarian in 
your group! 


Magnificent Mattress 
XP Value: 350 GP Value: 3,500 
DRAGON Magazine 168 

Do you have trouble falling asleep in musty, 
roach-infested inns frequented by thieves and 
murderers? Does the fear of wandering monsters 
keep you awake on long dungeon expeditions? 
Well, no more! Just sit or lie on this comfortable 
3- by 7-foot mattress with new COMFY-FILL 
padding, and you will gently enter the land of 
Nod through the effects of a sleep spell (saving 
throws are applicable; roll once every round). 
When someone rolls you off the mat, you get up, 
roll it up, and carry it off—itweighs only 10 
pounds. Pleasant dreams! (Caution: All restric- 
tions of the sleep spell apply.) 


Marvelous Marble 
XP Value: 300 GP Value: 3,000 
DRAGON Magazine 168 
These colorful spheres of polished stone come in 
their own leather bag, with an advanced STRING- 
TECH closure system at the top. Just dump the 
marbles onto any dungeon floor over a 100- 
square-foot area, and watch as your enemies slip 


and slide into helplessness. Anyone who tries to 
walk across the marbles must make a successful 
Dexterity check against 4d6 or stumble and fall. 
Anyone running must save at -2, and anyone try- 
ing to attack must save at —4. And with your very 
own Personalized Recall Word, all the marbles 
will instantly return to the bag. No more will 
party members have to wait around while you 
pick up 1,000 marbles. The bag magically weighs 
only one pound. A must for any adventurer who 
is often pursued. 

(Manufacturers' note: There is a 5% chance per 
day that the marbles will spring free of the bag 
and roll about under the feet of the user. Use all 
appropriate caution with this item.) 


Masculine Macho-Musk 
XP Value: 120 GP Value: 1,200 
DRAGON Magazine 168 

A healthy application of this rugged, manly scent 
will turn any weakling adventurer into a hulking 
monstrosity with 18/00 strength. Furthermore, 
the scent acts as afriends spell on anyone within 
20 feet. Not a scent to be used lightly! Twelve 
applications per vial. 

(Manufacturers' note: For some reason, female 
beings are repelled by this odor and will attack 
the wearer with intent to kill him if they fail sav- 
ing throws vs. spell. The Strength-enhancement 
effect lasts 1d4+1 rounds; the enragement effect 
lasts 5d4 rounds.) 


Masterful Muffler 

XP Value: 200 GP Value: 2,000 
DRAGON Magazine 168 
These color-safe, wash & wear earmuffs are guar- 
anteed to protect you from the sounds of sirens, 
harpies, annoying bards, and even the pestering 
ofa spouse or loved one. Simply put them on, and 
no sound can reach your ears until you take them 
off. (They come in stylish four stylish colors— 
red, blue, brown, or black. Please specify color 
when ordering.) 


Miraculous Mistmaker 
XP Value: 180 GP Value: 1,800 
DRAGON Magazine 168 
This item appears to be a hand held, crystal vial 
with a decorative triple “M” design on the front. 
When the crystal stopper is removed, the vial pro- 
duces a 30-foot radius cloud of thick mist that no 


sight or infravision can penetrate. The effect lasts 
3149 


a 717 ~ 


Merty’s Mud Masque 


p ee a E EE A 


for 3d6 rounds but can be dispelled instantly with 
a gust of wind spell. To recharge the item, simply 
fill the vial with normal drinking water and allow 
it to sit for 24 hours. (Warning: Do not allow the 
crystal vial to break, or the bearer will be 
immersed in his or her own cloud. The vial makes 
all saving throws as glass.) 


Mud Masque 
XP Value: 80 GP Value: 800 
DRAGON Magazine 168 

One jar of this pasty cosmetic has you looking 
just the way you want to in no time. Simply cover 
your face with the contents of the jar, and in five 
rounds your face takes on the shape of any visage 
you desire, straight from your own mind. Imitate 
ruling lords, famous wizards, or even your own 
friends. Merty's mud masque even alters hair 
color and ear shape, for those occasions when 
you need to look like an elf. A perfect gift for that 
special thief in your life. 

(Warning: The effects last for only 20 rounds 
and do not affect voice, body shape, or clothing.) 
One application per bottle. 


Multiplanar Mushrooms 
XP Value: 1,125 GP Value: 11,250 
DRAGON Magazine 168 

After dining on one of these fresh and tasty treats, 
you will find yourself instantly transported to the 
Ethereal Plane. You can stay as long as you like; 
you need only pop another mushroom in your 
mouth to return safely to the Prime Material Plane. 
Merty's mushrooms come in sets of three, pack- 
aged in their own PAISLEY-TECH decorated jade 
box. It's a great conversation starter at parties! 
(Warning: Encounters in the Ethereal Plane are 
doubled when these mushrooms are used.) 


Munificent Match 
XP Value: 250 GP Value: 2,500 
DRAGON Magazine 168 
These items appear to be nothing more than small 
wooden sticks. When they are struck against the 
Flame-O-Matic strip on the side, they begin to 
burn. Quickly throw one at an attacking opponent 
within 20 feet (a Dexterity check on 3d6 is 
required to hit the ground at the feet of the target; 
otherwise, the thrower drops the match at his or 
her own feet). On impact, the stick produces a 10- 
foot diameter cloud of flame and smoke. Anyone 
caught in the cloud takes 1 d6 points of damage 


and begins to choke and cough for the remainder 
of the round, attacking and defending at -2 on all 
rolls (save vs. spell negates damage and choking). 
This device also makes a great practical joke to 
pull on your henchmen. 


Musical Menagerie 
XP Value: 200 GP Value: 2,000 
DRAGON Magazine 168 
Buried inside this magical, five pound leather bag 
are all the instruments that any bard could ever 
want! By simply reaching inside, you can pro- 
duce any of the following (roll 1d10): 


Roll Result 
1 a lute 
2 a harp 
3 a mandolin 
4 a harmonica 
5 a horn 
6 a drum 
7 a tuba 
8 bagpipes 
9 a fiddle 
0 an angry giant rat (4 hp) 


While none ofthe instruments are specially 
powered, the musical menagerie allows the min- 
strel to have the proper sound for every occasion. 


Mysterious Mug 

GP Value: 800 
DRAGON Magazine 168 
A great practical joke for all occasions! This item 
appears to be an ordinary tankard. However, 
when the mug is filled, given to a friend or foe, 
and the magic word (that only you know) spoken, 
one of the following things happen (roll 1d4): 


XP Value: 80 


1 The liquid inside turns into a vapor that will 
choke the drinker for two rounds (a save vs. 
spell negates). 

2 The liquid becomes intoxicating, causing all 
the effects of a confusion spell for 3d12 hours 
(no saving throw). 

3 The liquid turns so sour that the drinker can 
neither speak nor cast spells with verbal com- 
ponents for 2d12 hours (a save vs. spell is 
allowed). 

4 The liquid secretly dyes the mouth and tongue 
of the drinker black. A guaranteed party 


starter! 
3154 


- 718 z 


Mice, Amazing 


Dp VE Mystic Mustard 
N WON Y XP Value: 300 GP Value: 3,000 


DRAGON Magazine 168 

Besides being a spicy zest for any meal, one serv- 
ing of this condiment enables you to actually 
BREATHE FLAME. Yes, once per round for 
three rounds after partaking of this mustard, you 
are able to breathe a 40-foot long jet of flame that 
does 3d6 points of damage to anything it hits 
(save vs. breath weapon for half damage). Each 
clay jar contains enough for eight servings and 
comes in one of two flavors—Regular or Extra 
Tangy. (Warning: You must be careful to inhale 
slowly during this time, requiring a Constitution 
check at the start of each round, or else you will 
toast yourself for 18 points of damage with no 
saving throw.) 


sa DN Mythic Muskmelon 

aM ANS AAYA ; XP Value GP Value 

N ref Be k Cursed: — 500 
Š ; Normal: 50 500 


DRAGON Magazine 168 

Each ofthese large fruits provides a nutritious meal 
for one person. Each is also imbued with special 
magic that allows them to stay fresh and delicious 
indefinitely. Furthermore, if you plant the seeds of 
one melon and give them sufficient water, each 
sprouts into a new melon plant injust six hours (no 
sunlight needed). Each plant sprouts 1d2 melons 
just like the original (75% chance for one, 25% 
chance for two). Up to six generations can be 
grown, not including the original melon. These 
beige melons come in cantaloupe, watermelon, and 
banana flavors; specify when ordering, please. 
(Warning: There is a 5% chance that any one melon 
could unfortunately cause some internal discomfort 
for 1d4 hours with no saving throw, during which 
time the eater's Constitution drops to 1.) 


e 
Mice 
Magical mice come in several colors, however, 
none of them are very nice mice. 


Amazing 

XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 18,000 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 82 
This wondrous item appears as a small sealed 
wooden box that rattles when shaken. Ifthe lid is 
pried off, four brightly colored, stone mice spill 
out. However, opening the box destroys the magic 
item. 


3157 


= 719 Š 


~~, Mice, Magic r 


Ifthe command word is spoken while the box 
has its original seal, it enlarges to become a 2- 
foot square maze with a transparent top, con- 
taining four brightly colored mice: yellow, blue, 
green and red. The mice race for the exit, taking 
14 rounds. The first mouse to exit the maze 
will become available for use (see below). The 
maze and the other three mice will revert to their 
original form. Roll 1d20 to see which mouse 
wins the race. Each mouse has a different magi- 
cal ability: 


Roll Mouse 

01-10 Yellow: Immediately casts a light spell 
on itself that will last for one turn. 

11-14 Blue: Immediately casts a magic mis- 
sile spell (three missiles) at a target 
indicated by the user's pointing finger. 

17-18 | Green: This mouse casts a cure light 
wounds spell when placed upon a 
wounded being. 

19-20 Red: Casts a 4-Hit-Die fireball spell 


when the user points at the location and 
speaks the desired range. 


After a mouse's magical ability has been used, 
it is teleported back inside the box for later use. 
The maze can be used once a day. 


Magic 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 8,000 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 82 

Magic mice are half-inch figurines of mice 
carved from brightly colored stone. They are usu- 
ally found in sets of 2-8, contained in a small 
leather pouch. When the command word is spo- 
ken, the figurines become real mice, retaining 
their bright colors. Magic mice can burrow 
through earth at a movement rate of 10, or bur- 
row/chew through wood or a similar material at a 
movement rate of 5. They can climb almost any 
surface at a movement rate of 10 (very smooth, 
slippery, or very smooth, slightly slippery sur- 
faces at a rate of 5). The mice also can follow 
simple instructions and answer "yes" and "no" 
questions with a shake of their heads. This 
enables the mice's owner to learn about things the 
mice have seen or heard. 

The mice remain animate for up to three turns, 
or until they are slain or ordered back inside their 
pouch. Magic mice can be used once a day. 


Mighty Servant of Leuk-o 


XP Value: 37,000 GP Value: 185,000 
Eldritch Wizardry 

This relic of a visiting race of space travelers is a 
towering automaton of metal, crystal and some 
fibrous material of unknown origins. Given the 
proper commands it can perform as a fighting 
machine, mode of transportation or method of 
magical attack. It is 9 feet tall, 6 feet wide and 4 
feet thick, making it readily apparent to any 
viewer and causing intelligent creatures to make a 
saving throw vs. spell for fear (the viewer gets a 
+2 on his die roll however). It is reportedly 
Armor Class -5 and can repair itself at 2 points 
per turn even while otherwise occupied. 

It can withstand up to 50 points of damage and 
is totally magic resistant. Heat, cold, acid and vari- 
ous other conditions have no effecton it, but light- 
ning does one point of damage per die that the bolt 
is worth. Weapons (even of magical nature) do 
only half of their normal damage to the servant. It 
is very slow and moves at MV 3 and strikes but 
once per turn. It has only a 15% chance to hit an 
opponent (only 5% ifthe opponent has a Dexterity 
of 15 or more), but if it hits, the opponent suffers 
10d10 points of damage. It only obeys those who 
find the secret method to automate it, and it can 
only function for 24 hours before it must spend 
two hours recharging. The Servant also has the fol- 
lowing abilities and penalties: 

e Levitation. 

Light. 

Sleep (also affects up to one creature of any 
level), 3 times per day. 

This artifact compels the user to go on a holy 
quest. As soon as the user fulfills the quest, he 
or she is immediately sent on another quest. 
User becomes permanently chaotic. 


Mighty Servant of Leuk-o II 
XP Value: — GP Value: — 
Book of Artifacts 

The mighty servant ofLeuk-o is a towering automa- 
ton of jet black metal, shadowy crystal, and several 
mysterious, fibrous materials. The device stands 
over 9 feet tall, nearly 5 feet wide, and some 6 feet 
deep. It is rounded, reminding one ofa cross 
between an overly stout (if gigantic) dwarfand a 
lumbering beetle. The servant has two stocky legs, 
on which it walks with a curious swaying motion, 
and a pair of dangling arms. 

3160 


720 


Mighty Servant of Leuk-o II 


> er a EE a 


An internal compartment is configured to seat 
two human-sized creatures comfortably. Exter- 
nally, as many as five others might perch safely 
upon the servant when it is in motion. As might 
be expected, this dreadful thing is quite heavy, 
weighing nearly two tons, and is hideously noisy 
when in operation. 

The mighty servant ofLeuk-o is believed to be 
a construct of the same ancient and mysterious 
race that built the dreaded machine ofLum the 
Mad. The workmanship and materials shown in 
the mighty servant are unlike any found in the 
recorded histories of men, making it impossible 
to state just what their nature might have been. 
Some sages, citing the technical virtuosity and 
appearance of the thing, speculate that it is the 
handiwork of a now-extinct branch of the 
dwarves. Dwarf sages note (with some reluc- 
tance, it must be said) that never in their race's 
extensive histories has anyone ever found a refer- 
ence to this machine. 

All accounts of the mighty servant begin with 
its discovery by the infamous General Leuk-o. 
Leuk-o was a follower of the warlord Lum, but 
turned against his master when he came into pos- 
session of this instrument of destruction. 

With the power of the mighty servant to back 
him, Leuk-o forged an army that rivaled even 
Lum's. The two forces clashed many times, 
always ending in stalemate. At last, the two forces 
met in a final battle. Lum and Leuk-o faced each 
other, their mighty artifacts unleashing powers 
greater than any since harnessed. It is said that 
their battle laid waste to a great kingdom and left 
a scorched desert in its wake. 

The mighty servant is believed by many to 
have been destroyed in this final battle, although 
others believe it plunged through a dimensional 
rift opened in that great conflict. 

The mighty servant of Leuk-o is a great 
weapon. With this automaton at its head, any 
army might be almost invincible. Player charac- 
ters who encounter the device may find them- 
selves facing an enemy who is using it to destroy 
the forces of good. Raising an army strong 
enough to battle the mighty servant and its fol- 
lowers would be a task worthy of any adventurer. 

Because any person using the weapon must 
eventually become a chaotic warlord, it should 
not be allowed to remain in the hands of player 
characters. 

Because operation of the mighty servant 


NS 


requires knowledge of numerous magical com- 
mand phrases, adventurers may find themselves 
exploring the most ancient and deadly of ruins in 
search of lore that might reveal one or more of 
the machine's secrets. 

Constant Powers: The mighty servant has an 
Armor Class of-6 and 60 hit points. It can only 
be struck by +2 weapons or better. Bludgeoning 
weapons inflict only 1 point of damage, while 
edged weapons cause half their normal damage 
(rounded down). It has a 90% magic resistance 
and is utterly immune to acid, cold, heat, normal 
fire, vacuum, and water. Lightning, electricity, 
and magical fire will inflict only 20% of their 
normal damage (rounded down)—but only if its 
magic resistance fails. Even if it is damaged, the 
mighty servant regenerates 2 hit points per round. 
Anyone riding within the servant is fully pro- 
tected by its shell. 

Invoked Powers: The mighty servant is inert 
until someone controls the device from its inte- 
rior control compartment. Ifthe proper command 
words are known, the mighty servant can be com- 
manded to open the hatch in its backside. Once 
inside, the characters are faced with a daunting 
array of pedals, switches, levers, and wheels, and 
things that control the beast's operation. Control- 


ling the mighty servant can be learned by trial 
3160 


ee 


721 


Mill of Sampo 


jy a 


and error (with appropriate random destruction) 
or through information gleaned from libraries 
and sages. The DM is encouraged to make the 
process difficult and dangerous to bystanders. 
The automaton has a movement rate of 3, mak- 
ing it a slow and clumsy thing. Furthermore, after 
12 hours of operation it must cease all activity for 
1 hour while it gathers anew the magical energy 
that powers it. 
In combat, the mighty servant can strike with its 
great arms once per round. It strikes as a 10-Hit- 
Die creature. Each blow landed by the automaton 
inflicts 10-60 (1d6x10) points of damage. 
The power of this weapon is so great that it can 
be used to destroy castles and shatter fortifica- 
tions—see Combat (Unusual Combat Situa- 
tions) in the DMG. Ifused as a siege weapon, a 
blow from the mighty servant does the same dam- 
age as a screw or ram. Ifused in a BATTLESYSTEM 
game, the mighty servant can be assumed to have 
the following statistics: AD 1d12+ld8, AR 4, HD 
10, Hits 5, MV 3. In addition, many ofits power- 
ful special abilities can be employed with great 
effectiveness in battle. 
Random Powers: As one of the greatest weap- 
ons ever to appear in the world, the mighty ser- 
vant has six abilities from Artifact Table 1-18: 
Offensive Powers and 6 additional from Table 1- 
15: Major Powers. The mighty servant also has 
two abilities from Artifact Table 1-13: Healing 
that apply to any one creature in the interior con- 
trol compartment. Again, the operation of any 
given ability requires knowledge of which con- 
trols must be pulled, switched, pushed, or cranked. 
Each of these abilities drains magical energy 
from the mighty servant equal to 1 hour's worth 
of continuous operation. 
Curse: The mighty servant hungers endlessly 
for combat and bloodshed. With each use of the 
servant's powers, the operator must roll a success- 
ful saving throw vs. spell or become filled with 
battle fury for 24 hours. During that time, the 
artifact is used in a rampage of destruction to any 
and all within reach. 
In addition, the mighty servant places the char- 
acter at risk of artifact transformation. Those 
affected by this power gradually have their align- 
ment shifted to chaotic neutral. 
Suggested Means of Destruction: 

It is possible to destroy the mighty servant by 
simple physical attack, assuming that enough 
damage can be inflicted. 


There might be a command phrase that even 
Leuk-o never knew, which causes the mighty 
servant to explode. The radius of this fireball 
and the damage that it might inflict is 
unknown, but it must certainly be terrible 
since it involves the release of all of the mag- 
ical energies of the servant in one single 
surge. 

Ancient writings speak of a means of destroy- 
ing the mighty servant with the dreadful 
machine ofLum the Mad. Lum himself is said 
to have believed that there was a setting on his 
machine that would utterly destroy the 
automaton, but ifhe found such a setting he 
never used it. 


Mill of Sampo 
XP Value: 20,000 GP Value: 100,000 
DUNGEONS & DRAGONS Master Set 
A magic mill in the Finnish "Kalevala" called the 
Sampo could grind out meal, salt, or gold from 
straw on command. In game terms, up to 100 gp 
per day can be ground from this mill. 


Minyan 

XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 6,500 

Oriental Adventures 
This large item (10 to 20 feet in length), is a 
portable shrine devoted to a particular deity. It 
is carried like a palanquin, (by poles supported 
by bearers), and requires 20 men to move it 
about. Many monasteries and temples have a 
minyan and they are often carried into battle by 
a squad of sohei. A minyan has the following 
powers: 
e Cause fear: The minyan forces any being of a 
different ethos from that represented by the 
minyan to make a successful saving throw vs. 
spell or flee in panic for one turn. This power 
has a radius of 30 feet and is constantly in 
effect. 
Remove curse: Three times per day the 
minyan can be used to cast remove curse as if 
cast by a 20th-level Spellcaster. 
Presence: When used on the battlefield, the 
sight of the minyan improves the morale of 
friendly sohei by +2. 
Ancient curse: Once per month the minyan 
can be used to cast an ancient curse. 
Heal: Once per week the minyan can be used 
to cast a heal spell. 


As noted above, minyan are most commonly 
3162 


722 7 


Mirror, Barlithian's Mystical 


aan i me E msl 


held by monasteries or temples and are placed in 
the charge of the abbot or a person designated 
by the abbot. Since the power of a minyan is 
derived from the deity it represents, it must be 
properly cared for to be effective. Appropriate 
offerings to the deity and incense must be 
placed daily before the minyan and services 
must be said by a shukenja of the same religion. 
Those charged with the care of the minyan and 
those who seek its aid must be of the proper 
ethos or alignment. On holy days of the deity, 
the minyan must be paraded through the streets 
and shown to the population, so that they may 
see and respect the deity represented. Should 
any of these duties be neglected, the minyan per- 
manently loses all its power. 


Mirror 

A magical mirror may be of any size and shape 
but is usually large (some are 10-foot-square), 
framed, and hung on a wall or other support. 
Some are ornate, and some are quite plain. All are 
expensive to construct, requiring a wish, a pow- 
dered gem of 25,000 gp value or more, and one or 
more additional spells. Most mirrors either can- 
not be moved or lose their enchantment when 
movement is forced. 


Baltron's Hand 
GP Value: 2,500 
Baltron's Beacon 
This hand mirror radiates magic. The mirror 
shows any cerebral parasites infesting the person 
who uses it. 


XP Value: 500 


Barlithian's Mystical 
XP Value: — GP Value: 120,000 
DRAGON Magazine 50 
There have been but few who could excel in each 
of the seven deadly sins as well as the "great" 
illusionist Barlithian. Although he was an excel- 
lent craftsman, no illusionist alone could create 
such a magical mirror, no matter what his level. 
Upon completion of the so-far unmagical mirror, 
pride typically swelled within Barlithian's head. 
He bragged that not even the powers themselves 
could meet his mirror's perfection. At first the 
deities ignored the obnoxious Barlithian, but 
when he was still spouting his glories for a year 
after the mirror's creation, two deities joined 
forces to teach him a lesson. One evening the 
beautiful Egyptian goddess Isis and the hand- 


some Greek god Hermes came before Barlithian 
and told him that they would turn his wondrous 
mirror into a great magical item. Barlithian was 
overjoyed and the mirror was rendered magical. 
Later, Barlithian realized the problems and frus- 
trations of owning such an artifact. (In roughly 
translated Greek, the mischievous Hermes' final 
words were, "He wanted it, now he can choke on 
it!") Because of his lusty love for femmes fatale, 
Barlithian had three wives—each oblivious to the 
others’ existence. He wasted the magnificent 
magic mirror by using it to keep tabs on his 
wives’ faithfulness. 

His trigamy ultimately led to Barlithian's 
demise. Upon discovering his indiscretions and 
each others’ identities, the three wives joined 
forces and, after binding and gagging him, had 
him dropped into an active volcano. Since then 
the mirror has had several owners. 

Physically, the mirror and its frame stand 7 feet 
tall, 5 feet wide and 8 inches thick; it weighs 
1,000 pounds. The mirror's 3- by 5-foot glass 
center surface is surrounded by a massive, 
ornately carved, 1-foot-wide mahogany frame. In 
each of the four corners of the frame there is a 
fist-sized 250 gp tigereye stone. On the front and 
sides of the frame there is also decorative gold 
leaf worth 80 gp. The mirror's nondetachable 
back is one unadorned, flat piece of mahogany. 
Finally, on the upper front portion of the frame 
there is an inscription, boldly carved in the com- 
mon tongue "BARLITHIAN," evidence of its 
creator's ego. 

Barlithian's mirror has three permanent magi- 
cal powers, but only the first two are generally 
known. The first two powers are known to 50% of 
all illusionists, 25% of all wizards and 10% ofall 
members of other classes, while the third power is 
known to only 5% ofall illusionists, 2% of all 
wizards and 1% ofall other classes. Any charac- 
ter who happens to know of the third power will 
also automatically know the first two powers. 
When seeing the word "Barlithian" at the top of 
the mirror, any character who knows about any or 
all of Barlithian's mirror powers will immedi- 
ately recognize the artifact and remember the leg- 
end of Barlithian. (Of course, a character does 
not have to tell the others what he or she knows.) 
Barlithian's mirror is of true neutral alignment, 
so detect evil or detect good show nothing—but if 
a detect magic spell is used, Barlithian's mirror 


glass glows with a rainbow of colors that blinds 
3164 


j 723 x 


Mirror, Barlithian's Mystical 


bp i no 


it, 


aM Mood 


all beings within 30feet of the mirror for 14 
turns if they fail their saving throws vs. spell, and 
blinds those within 10 feet for 1d6 turns with no 
saving throw. Characters behind the mirror (on its 
flat, unadorned side) will not be affected. This 
detect magic idiosyncrasy has never been men- 
tioned in any legend, so characters will not know 
about it before it happens to them. 

The first "known" magical power is always in 
operation except when the second power is being 
used. The first power is that the mirror will 
reflect images as a spell of true seeing, with some 
additional abilities: Characters cursed with lycan- 
thropy will see their alter-egos; a medusa can 
view her reflection without turning into stone; 
those that normally fear mirrors (such as vam- 
pires) can see themselves with no ill effects. The 
greatest added ability of this nature is that any 
character that is not a deity and has any form of 
charm ability inadvertently charms himself or 
herself (no saving throw) and acts as if under a 

friends spell for 24 hours toward the mirror's 
owner or, if the owner is not present, the first 
seen member of the owner's family. If neither the 
owner nor his or her family is present, or if the 
mirror has no owner, the charmed character 
returns or tries to return to its home or lair and 
sleep for the duration of the spell. While charmed, 


characters never jeopardize their alignments nor, 
upon the spell's end, remember anything that hap- 
pened while charmed. All charmed characters, 
once recovered, are ever afterward immune to this 
effect of the mirror. 

Once the location of Barlithian's mirror is 
known publicly, there is a 1 in 20 chance per day 
that 1d4 monsters of average Intelligence or 
higher will stop by for a good look at themselves. 
The DM decides which unwelcome visitors will 
appear. Thankfully, Isis cajoled Hermes into soft- 
ening the mirror's monster-attracting practical 
joke so that when a monster is viewing its reflec- 
tion, the monster does not attack unless an attack 
is attempted on it. The monster will be at its 
friendliest (or as friendly as it can become). This 
feeling of good will lasts 1d20 rounds, after 
which the monster becomes immune to the mir- 
ror's "taming" effect for a year. 

There is a legend that Alkee Frinde, an under- 
nourished sage of mosses and ferns, was awak- 
ened in his bedchamber one night by some noises 
coming from his front room. Upon investigating, 
he discovered a wraith, a titan, and a night hag, 
each vainly admiring his/her/its own reflection. 
Being a man of action, Frinde took action. He 
fainted on the spot. The next morning when he 
awoke on the floor, he was surprised to find him- 
self alive and in one piece. He didn't find out why 
the three visitors of different alignments had not 
tried to kill each other—or him. What Frinde did 
find was 10 gp, 15 ep and a small carpet of flying, 
apparently the way the "customers" showed their 
appreciation for the mirror. That day Alkee 
Frinde sold the mirror and moved. 

The second power of Barlithian's mirror is its 
ability to give a 100% accurate viewing of a par- 
ticular person or creature. Any character class can 
operate it and get a visual response, but only an 
illusionist or wizard can get an audio response as 
well (a 50% chance for illusionists, 25% for wiz- 
ards). To operate the power, the user must mix 
even amounts of any type of oil with any type of 
ash, add a drop ofhis or her blood and write with 
this fluid at the bottom of the glass the name of 
the subject to be seen. The name must be written 
in Common. For one minute, a vision of the 
requested subject will appear on the glass. When 
the power's duration is over, the image and the 
written name vanishes. 

There are stringent limitations to this second 


power: 
3164 


5 724 ~ 


Mirror, Barlithian's Mystical 


i immer 


It can be used only once a week. 

If this second power is called upon more 
often, nothing will happen. 

The viewer must use the subject's full name. 
Although middle names and family names are 
not always needed, pet names, nicknames, 
aliases, first or last names alone, will not 
work. If the user does not know the subject's 
full name, the power cannot be employed. 
The subject must be at least partially in the 
same plane of existence as the mirror, and 
only that part ofthe subject in the plane can be 
seen. The subject is seen in the light or lack of 
light of his or her surroundings. 
The viewer cannot cause light to be created in 
any way near the subject. Infravision cannot be 
used to enhance what is shown in the mirror. If 
the subject is in complete darkness, the mirror 
will be black. If audio is possible, the viewer 
hears only what the subject can hear and nothing 
more. Ifthe words are garbled or faint, there is 
nothing the listener can do. 

There is almost no way to determine precisely 
where the subject is in relation to the viewer. The 
vision will be just as clear if the subject is in the 
next room or on another planet. The vision is 
focused on a close picture of the subject only, not 
a full picture of the setting. Unless objects or 
other characters are very near or touching the 
subject, they will not be seen. As for background, 
such as the scenery over the subject's shoulders, 
the farther away it is the blurrier it becomes. 

The subject never becomes aware of the view- 
ing, even if a detect magic spell is being used. 
Conversely, the viewer cannot communicate with 
the subject. This includes magical communica- 
tion and nonphysical contact. Spells cannot be 
stored in the mirror, nor transmitted through it. 
Psionic abilities will not function through the 
mirror. 

Only beings can be the prime focal point of the 
vision, never objects. (Example: The Sword of 
Jusiana cannot be seen; it is a magic weapon with 
a full name, but it is still only an object.) 

Beings are seen as they are at the moment of 
viewing, no matter what condition they are in or 
what they are doing. The vision seen and perhaps 
heard is always happening in the immediate pre- 
sent, never in the past or future. 

The third power ofthe mirror is not widely 
known—because the knowledge of it can often 
cost the discoverer his or her life. Barlithian's 


mirror can differentiate between normal usage 
and vandalism. Under normal usage, the mirror 
will allow pegs, nails, screws, spikes, drill bits or 
whatever to be used in order to hang it on a wall, 
hinge it on one side to become a secret door, put 
it on a floor base, etc. An observant character will 
be amazed to discover that the mirror is always in 
mint condition, because old screw holes and nail 
holes heal and tiny chips and cracks mend them- 
selves. When the glass is cleaned or the frame is 
polished, a contented "thrum" will emanate from 
the mirror as if it has a life of its own. 

Any being that harms Barlithian's mirror 
deliberately or accidentally reaps the terrible ven- 
geance of the third magical power. At first, the 
mirror absorbs the actual damage, but once the 
damage has been done, within 1d6+3 turns the 
mirror magically heals itself and causes certain 
types of damage to whoever harmed it. (If 2% or 
less damage is accidentally done to the mirror 
during a 24-hour period, the mirror considers it 
normal daily wear and heals itself and takes no 
retribution.) If more than one character causes 
damage to the mirror, each one receives an equal 
share of damage regardless of the degree of par- 
ticipation. An exception to the equal-injury rule 
occurs when an unwilling character is forced by 
another to damage the mirror. In this case the 
innocents are spared and the guilty party receives 
all damage. Any removed parts, such as the tiger- 
eye stones or the gold leaf, teleport back to their 
settings on the mirror. There is no saving throw 
against magic allowed for characters or creatures 
who are damaged after harming the mirror. 

If the damage is quickly repaired before Bar- 
lithian's mirror has time to retaliate (within 
1d6+3 turns), nothing happens to those who 
harmed it. Depending on the amount of damage, 
any spell that repairs nonmagical items or cures 
beings will help repair the mirror—because it 
wants to be repaired. Any spell so employed will 
be effective up to the limits of its power. For 
example: A mending spell is powerful enough to 
reset a tigereye stone but not strong enough to 
repair the shattered glass. 

Barlithian's mirror always takes the same 
actions against those who would cause it injury: 
Anyone removing the tigereye stones loses one 
eye for the first stone, two eyes for the second, 
two eyes and one ear if three are taken, and two 
eyes and two ears for the theft of all four stones. 


Carving out hunks of the wood results in the 
3164 


j 725 jä 


Mirror, Black 


j Eee ne rN 


carver losing an equal volume amount of fingers, 
toes, nose, hands, feet. 

Anyone who carves names, initials, words, 
numbers, symbols, pictures, or marks on Bar- 
lithian's mirror will find them magically appear- 
ing on the cutter's chest in the same size and 
depth of cut as they were inscribed. 

Removing the gold leaf will result in an equal 
percentage of the taker's hide painfully removed. 
If 15% or more ofa character's skin is removed, a 
saving throw vs. death magic must be made or the 
victim dies. Ifuncared for, a character bleeding to 
death loses 5% of his or her hit points per round 
until, after 20 rounds, no hit points are left and 
the character is dead. If a character loses 30% or 
less of his or her hide, a cure serious wounds 
spell will heal him or her, but if 31% or more 
skin/hide is lost, a cure critical wounds spell (or 
better) must be used. All skin lost and left 
untreated permanently scars. For every 20% a 
character's hide that becomes scarred, the charac- 
ter loses one Charisma point. 

Burning Barlithian's mirror will cause the 
arsonist to suffer equal damage from fire: flam- 
ing torch for flaming torch, fireball forfireball. 
Heat, electricity, or warp wood spells are treated 
similarly, with the latter causing the caster's 
bones to become misshapen and the loss of 1 
point of Dexterity. 

Barlithian's mirror is immune to all forms of 
gas, water, ice, cold, acid, or dispelling of its 
magic. Nothing happens to a character who 
attempts such an attack on the mirror, because 
nothing happens to the mirror. 

Ifthe mirror's glass is shattered by a character, 
the punishment is death, countered by a save vs. 
death magic at a -6. (Note: If more than one char- 
acter shatters it, each will suffer this fate.) 


Black 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 10,000 
The Hidden Shrine of Tamoachan 
When a character looks into this mirror, his or her 
image will blur and then appear in ancient Olman 
garb as if reflecting a previous incarnation. The 
image will say in Olman, "Command me and I 
shall answer." Actually this is the image ofa long 
dead native superimposed on the character's reflec- 
tion. Priests may use a command spell to cause the 
spirit to answer three yes/no questions. The com- 
mand is "Answer!") The spirit will answer only 
questions it understands, those spoken in Olman, 


and nods or shakes its head. If anyone touches this 
mirror, the character must save vs. petrification or 
else all valuable metals and gems on his or her per- 
son will be turned into lead and glass. 


Blue 
XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 15,000 
The Hidden Shrine of Tamoachan 

This mirror opens onto a pool of water. The water 
is held back by a magical wall offorce. If any 
character touches the surface of the mirror, he or 
she must save vs. rods or be drawn into the pool 
of water. A character in the water begins to drown 
and takes 1d4 points of damage for each round he 
or she is in the water. Weapons may be used to 
break the wall of force (AC 4; hp!9). Ifthe wall is 
destroyed, both the waters in the pool and the 
character spill out into the room. The pool of 
water leads nowhere. 


Crystal 
XP Value: 5,000 GP Value: 25,000 
DRAGON Magazine 5 

Usable by all characters, this beautiful silvery 
gem serves as protection against several spells. 
When held, put in clothing, or mounted on 
shields, swords, rings, wands, necklaces, helms, 
etc. it provides the user with the saving throws of 
a 12th-level wizard against charm monster, 
charm person, curses, hold monster, holdperson, 
paralyzation, sleep, and all control agents 
(potions, rings, staves, and spells). This is a magi- 
cal item designed to be outgrown (and traded or 
sold) by characters lucky enough to live long and 
fruitful lives. 


of Curing 

XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 20,000 
Oriental Adventures 
Looking like a normal mirror, this item has spe- 
cial therapeutic properties. When the command 
word is spoken, any creature viewing the mirror 
receives the benefit of a heal spell. This requires 
the use of one charge and the mirror has 2d4 
charges. When all charges are spent, the mirror 
shatters. 


of Duplication 
XP Value:— GP Value: 700 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
This mirror creates a physical duplicate of any 


creature looking into it; the duplicate is of neutral 
3169 


: 726 = 


Mirror, Evem's, of Enviable Image 


> a EES 


alignment and quite dangerous—being immune to 
charm, fear, hold, paralysis, poison, and normal 
weapons. All spells known by the original charac- 
ter are also known and usable by the duplicate, as 
are all items both normal and magical. The dupli- 
cate steps out ofthe mirror and attacks the original 
immediately; the victim's surprise roll is penalized 
by -2. When either the duplicate or the victim dies, 
the duplicate disappears, along with all items cre- 
ated by the mirror. The mirror can create dupli- 
cates of up to three creatures per hour. 


Emperor's 

GP Value: 12,000 
Legends & Lore 
The holder of this golden mirror can hear and see 
into any room he or she has ever been in. It allows 
the character to examine the entire room at once, 
or to inspect even the smallest items in close 
detail. Ifthe holder wishes, speech with the occu- 
pants of the room is even possible, or the eaves- 
dropping may remain secret. All of these powers 
function at will. Once per week, the holder may 
teleport any living being visible in the mirror to 
his or her own location. The victim is allowed a 
saving throw to negate this effect, but it may be 
done against the person's will. When anyone but a 
legitimate member of the Imperial family uses 
the mirror, there is a 5% chance that Amaterasu 
sends her avatar through the mirror to punish the 
individual. 


XP Value: 3,500 


of Enlightenment 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 6,000 
Oriental Adventures 

This looks like a normal, round mirror. However, 
when the command word is spoken the reflection 
of any creature in front of the mirror is sur- 
rounded by a colored aura only visible to the per- 
son who speaks the command word. This aura 
reveals the nature of the person reflected, acting 
as a detect evil or good, detect motivation, and 
know alignment spell. Only one person can be 
reflected and studied per round. 


Evem's Mirror of Enviable Image 
XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 24,000 
The Book of Wondrous Inventions 
Event's mirror was the accidental development of 
Cragwig Evem, Assistant Artificer for the rep- 
utable firm of Carruthers and Three-Toe. Intend- 
ing to invent a mirror of glimmering truth, Evem's 


enthusiasm for making things really shiny created 
an entirely new type of mirror. Originally thought 
a disaster, Evem was demoted to pedicurist to 
Three-Toe. When wealthy clients liked what they 
saw and wished to buy the mirrors, Carruthers 
promoted Evem to Chief Assistant Artificer. 

The mirrors come in many sizes, the most pop- 
ular being the full length model. The mirrors are 
dazzling, reflecting images in sharp detail and 
brilliant color. The frames are intricately shaped 
from strips of different woods. 

Construction: 24,000 gp; 31 days. The 
enchantment requires ESP and phantasmal force 
spells. In addition, the mirror must be backed 
with three layers of purest silver. The silver must 
be polished with seven kinds of cloth; of each 
kind there must be seven, one for each color of 
the rainbow. 

Statistics: Size: 2 feet wide, 6 feet long. 
Weight: 40 pounds. Permanently enchanted. 

The mirror bears a specially tailored ESP spell 
that probes up to three people at once. The spell 
looks for "problem spots," parts of the viewer's 
appearance that worry the viewer. The mirror 
then touches up the image with its illusionary 
ability. Viewers see themselves a bit trimmer, 
having a chin of slightly greater character, or hav- 
ing immaculately arranged hair—in short, an 
image that supports life's vanities and eases inse- 
curities about their appearance. Since the illusion 
is cast on the silver, which is protected by glass, 
the illusion is not dispelled if the mirror is 
touched. 

If the viewing character fails a save vs. spell, 
roll 1d20. 


Roll Effect 

01-09 The mirror functions normally. 

10-11 The mirror overdoes it. The viewing 
character appears to have become much 
more handsome, dashing, and charis- 
matic than all but the most foolish or 
vainglorious character could ever 
believe. 

The mirror exaggerates the very traits 
the viewer fears most: extra weight, 
gray hairs, increased wrinkles, what- 
ever bothers the character most about 
his or her appearance. 

Some other image is projected by the 
mirror: how the viewer really sees other 
characters. 


12-13 


14-15 


3172 


i 727 z 


~~ Mirror of Fear 7 


Roll Effect 

16-17 The mirror does not reflect the viewer 
at all, just as ifthe character were invis- 
ible—or a vampire. 

18-19 The viewer has tapped into the power of 


the mirror. For 3d6 rounds he or she 
may change the mirror image of other 
characters in any way. A viewer also 
taps into the mirror on a 20. In addition 
to the change image ability, the viewer 
may use the mirror's ESP spell to probe 
the minds of other viewers of the mir- 
ror, even if not normally able to use 
spells. 


of Fear 
XP Value: 1,200 GP Value: 12,000 
Oriental Adventures 

This is identical to the mirror of enlightenment. 
Any creature looking into the mirror sees a 
hideous and distorted reflection of his or her own 
image. The viewer must make a saving throw vs. 
spell or run in panic for 1d6 rounds. Ifthe charac- 
ter is unable to flee, he or she collapses in a quiv- 
ering heap for the duration of the effect. 


Flaming Mirror of Tenh 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 8,000 
GREYHAWK Adventures 

This mirror is a silver oval, 6 feet tall and 3 feet 
wide, set in an oak stand. It was enchanted by a 
plane-traveling wizard who sought easy access to 
her favorite plane, that of Elemental Fire. Few 
other wizards have shared her enthusiasm for that 
dangerous place, though some have found uses for 
the mirror. The command word causes the mirror 
to open a gate to the Elemental Plane of Fire. The 
plane can be observed, entered, or exited through 
the mirror. Each round the gate remains open, 
there is a 10% chance that a fire elemental leaps 
through the mirror and into the Prime Material 
Plane, seeking to kill and burn everything in sight. 
The mirror has a maximum of 30 charges, though 
it can be recharged. One charge is spent for each 
round that the gate is open. When all charges are 
drained, the mirror shatters. 


of Flattery 
XP Value: 20 GP Value: 100 
Black Courser 
This is a small, hand held mirror that shows the 


holder any scene desired. Unfortunately, it always 


attempts to please its holder by showing things in 
the best possible light. For example, if the PCs 
were looking for Ambuchar Devayam, it might 
show him snoozing in a throne when he is actu- 
ally preparing an ambush. 


Hsssthak's Mirror of Sight and Sound 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 10,000 
Lords of Darkness 
This mirror acts exactly like a crystal ball with 

Clairaudience. 


of Images 
XP Value: 200 GP Value: 2,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

This mirror can trap victims as mere images. 
Any creature looking into the mirror must make 
a saving throw vs. spell. If successful, the mirror 
cannot affect the creature for 24 hours. If it fails, 
however, the victim and all items carried van- 
ish—but the reflection remains and may con- 
verse with those in the "normal world." If the 
mirror is broken, the victim dies, reappearing in 
normal form. Sadly, this causes all magical 
items carried to disappear. The mirror can 
entrap any number of images. One victim may 
be removed safely, with all items, if a remove 
curse is applied by a caster of at least 26th level. 
When found, the mirror might (25% chance) 
already contain 1d4 other creatures’ images (of 
any type, NPC or monster). The images cannot 
affect each other at all. 


of Improved Travel 
XP Value: 8,000 GP Value: 50,000 
DRAGON Magazine 145 

Although indistinguishable from a mirror of 
travel, an improved mirror of travel is a vastly 
superior magical item that requires an Intelli- 
gence score of at least 18 to operate. Teleporta- 
tion through this device is without error, and the 
mirror's activator may take any number of charac- 
ters along, as long as their hands are linked at the 
time of departure. The destination's image in the 
mirror disappears instantly after teleportation. 
This mirror is just as fragile as its lesser cousin 
and is activated in the same way. 

Additionally, an improved mirror of travel can 
function as a crystal ball with twice the usual 
viewing time and frequency, and it accrues no 
penalty when viewing into planes that are one 


removed from that which contains the mirror. It 
3178 


728 


Mirror, Malto's, of Retention 


= calming 


allows travel to once-removed planes as well, 
provided the mirror's activator has previously 
"seen casually" the place to which he or she 
wishes to teleport. This item must be set into a 
sturdy wall, or it cannot function. It may only be 
used by wizards. 


of Lakes 
XP Value: GP Value: 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 43 
Usually found in groups of three to eight (1d6+2), 
these first appear as ordinary round or oval, 5- 
inch silver mirrors, suitable for vanity or cos- 
metic purposes. However, upon speaking the 
command word and flinging a mirror away, a 
small puddle of water appears where the mirror 
lands and expands until it fills a 20-foot-diameter 
area with a pool of water 20 feet deep. (If the 
available space will not hold this volume of 
water, no pond forms.) The water is fit for drink- 
ing, bathing, drowning, retaining an aquatic cap- 
tive—anything that would be done in normal 
water. The mirrors may be used singly or as a 
connected chain to form a waterway. To end the 
enchantment, one must dive into the pond's cen- 
ter and pick up the mirror. Within one round the 
water will then dry up. Ifthe mirror is left alone, 
the water will remain for up to seven years before 
the magic in the mirror fades and the pond dries 
up on its own. If this happens, the mirror never 
can be used again. 


of Life Saving 
XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 30,000 
Death's Ride 
This massive (but fragile) mirror is capable of 
storing the life energy of its owner. Its dimen- 
sions are 5 by 4 feet. 

Ifthe mirror's owner is killed within 60 feet of 
the mirror, the character can choose to place his 
or her life force in it. While a life force is in the 
mirror, a detect magic spell reveals the owner's 
image in the mirror. 

If any fragment of the owner's body is brought 
within range and a dispel magic spell (effective 
against 20th-level magic) is cast on the mirror, 
the owner's body is completely restored and its 
life force returns. A life force in the mirror can 
also be released by smashing the mirror (as long 
as a fragment of the owner's body is nearby). 


of Life Trapping 
XP Value: 2,500 GP Value: 25,000 

DUNGEON MASTER Guide 
This crystal device is usually about 4 square feet in 
area, framed in metal and wood. It is usable only by 
wizards, although it can be affixed to a surface to 
operate alone by giving a command word. A mirror 
has from 13 to 18 nonspatial, extradimensional 
compartments within it. Any creature coming 
within 30 feet of the device and looking at its reflec- 
tion must successfully save vs. spell or be trapped 
within the mirror in one of the cells. A creature not 
aware of the nature of the device always sees its 
reflection, the probability dropping to 50% if the 
creature actively avoids doing so, and to 20% if the 
creature is aware that the mirror traps life. 

When a creature is trapped, it is taken bodily 
into the mirror. Size is not a factor, but automatons 
and nonliving matter (including golems but 
excluding intelligent undead) are not trapped. The 
possessor of the mirror can call the reflection of 
any creature that is trapped within to the surface of 
the mirror, and the powerless creature can be 
engaged in conversation. If mirror capacity is 
exceeded, one victim (determined randomly) is set 
free in order to accommodate the latest addition. 

Ifthe mirror is broken, all victims are freed 
(usually to then attack the possessor of the 
device). Note that the possessor of a mirror oflife 
trapping can speak a command word to free a 
trapped creature, but the creature's cell must be 
known. Example: "In the name of Zagig the 
Great, I command the occupant of the third cell to 
come forth." 

In Ravenloft: The use of this item to trap a life 
requires a Ravenloft powers check. Freeing a 
trapped individual does not require a check. 


Malto's Mirror of Retention 
XP Value: 1,700 GP Value: 8,500 
1992 Fantasy Collector Card 502 
Malto inherited this magical mirror from his father. 
The mirror records all events of the past 24 hours 
that occurred in the room where it hangs, after its 
command word is spoken. By rotating the mirror 
clockwise, Malto can "fast-forward" the recording, 
a counter-clockwise twist "rewinds" it, and a hori- 
zontal tip "pauses" the recording. Furthermore, by 
placing a piece of parchment over a still-shot of the 
recording and initiating the Clairsentient Science, 
Object Reading, Malto can transfer a copy of the 


image in the mirror onto the parchment. 
3182 


A eee e a a ae EE 


7 


2 


9 


~ Mirror of Mental Prowess va 


of Mental Prowess 
XP Value: 5,000 GP Value: 50,000 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 

This magical mirrorresembles an ordinary one, it 

is 5 feet long and 2 feet wide. The possessor who 

knows the proper commands can cause it to per- 
form as follows: 

e Read the thoughts of any creature reflected 
therein, even though these thoughts are in an 
unknown language. 

e Scry with it as ifit were a crystal ball with 
Clairaudience, even being able to view into 
other planes ifthe viewer is sufficiently famil- 
iar with them. 

e Use it as aportal to visit other places (possi- 
bly other planes, as well, at the DM's option) 
by first scrying them and then stepping 
through to the place imaged—an invisible 
area remains on the "other side," and those 
using the portal can return if the correct spot 
can be found. (Note that creatures being 
scryed can step through if the place is found 
by them.) 

e Once per week can answer one short question 
regarding a creature whose image is shown 
upon its surface. 


Murky 

GP Value: 40,000 
Legends & Lore 
The murky mirror is small disc of polished silver 
that can be used in three different ways. When a 
normal man or woman holds it, he or she makes a 
Charisma check. If the check fails, the murky 
mirror functions as a normal mirror. Ifthe check 
is successful, the image in the mirror reflects the 
individual as others see them. A beautiful woman 
who considers herselfugly, for example, would 
see a ravishing image of herself. A bullying 
fighter would see in his face the image ofa feared 
and hated ogre. 

When a military leader of any rank looks into 
the mirror, the most threatening enemy he or she 
has ever faced stares back. The image always 
shows the size and nature of the enemy's forces. 
Leaders making a successful Intelligence check 
can often interpret the enemy's location from 
landscape appearing in the,image. No sound 
accompanies the image, and it cannot be con- 
trolled to focus in upon a desired area. 

When a priest looks into the mirror, it issues a 
silverish smoke that engulfs the priest's head and 


XP Value: 4,000 


hides what he or she sees from the view of any- 
one nearby. Ifthe priest does not withdraw a 
vision of the future is seen by the priest. How far 
in the future depends upon level, as does the 
scope of the vision: 


Level Distance Scope of Vision 
13 1 day/level Self 
46 1 week/level Self 


7-9 1 month/level Party 
10 1 year Party 
11 2 years Party 
12 3 years Party 

13-15 1 year/level Country 

16-20 5 years/level Country 

21+ 10 years/level World 


The vision always shows the future at the pre- 
cise time listed for a priest of that level and can- 
not be changed. The scene it shows is what will 
come to pass if events continue along their cur- 
rent courses and the priest does nothing to change 
them. At the lowest levels, the priest sees only a 
personal future. At the middle levels, the priest 
sees the future of one to ten ofhis or her closest 
friends (the adventuring party, in the case of 
PCs), as well as a personal future. When the 
priest reaches 13th level or above, the future of 
the political unit to which he or she owes alle- 
giance, such as a kingdom or city-state, is seen. 
At the highest levels, the vision extends to all 
humans. 

After being used, the murky mirror leaps out of 
the holder's hands and flies into the sky, where it 
becomes a brightly shining star. Characters 
attempting to hold onto the mirror have a5% 
chance per level (maximum 95%) of doing so, 
but the mirror attempts to fly into the sky after 
each use. 


Not-So-Funny Funhouse 
XP Value: — GP Value: 4,000 
Castle GREYHAWK 


This is just another one of those nasty mirrors of 
opposition characters love so dearly, except that it 
was made some time ago by a rather chaotic old 
soul who put a little twist in it. 

Characters will meet their doubles as usual, 
except that they will be randomly distorted some 
way. They might be twice as tall and skinny, or 
short and fat. A long neck or legs are also humor- 


ous. In addition, the party member is equally 
3185 


730 zs 


i 


Ei 


ame Cv a 


it. 


~ Mirror, Nura D'Agor's, of Life Trapping a 


mutated for the duration ofthe battle. In any case, 
there is no change on the effects of combat on the 
participants. 

When the character wins against the double, 
award full experience and return him or her to 
normal. Ifthe mirror is inspected, an inscription 
that reads "Always Be Yourself" is engraved 
along the top. 


Nura D'Agor's Mirror of 
Life Trapping 
XP Value: 3,500 GP Value: 17,500 
1992 Fantasy Collector Card 142 

Nura keeps this device in her home in Calimport. 
It is hidden behind a tapestry that can be tied off 
to the side with a cord. Nura keeps it hidden 
because she is selective about who she traps 
within the mirror's 16 extradimensional prison 
cells. When a seduced, rival wizard comes to call, 
she uncovers it and lures him within 30 feet of it, 
whereupon he is trapped (90% chance). Nura can 
look into the mirror without being trapped. Fur- 
thermore, she can permanently banish any pris- 
oner to extradimensional limbo with a word. She 
uses this threat to extract spells and other infor- 
mation from her victims. 


of Opposition 

GP Value: 2,000 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 
This item exactly resembles a normal mirror. If a 
creature is reflected in its surface, an exact dupli- 
cate ofthe creature comes into being, and the 
opposite creature immediately attacks the crea- 
ture reflected. Note that the duplicate has all 
items and powers ofthe original (including 
magic), but upon the defeat or destruction of 
either, the duplicate and the items disappear com- 
pletely. 


XP Value: — 


ofthe Past 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
The Hidden Shrine of Tamoachan 
This is a mirror of platinum. It allows the user to 
concentrate on a specific item or person and then 
be shown something of its past for three rounds. 
The mirror may show details of the past out of 
order and events both recent or long ago, ran- 
domly. The viewer has no way of knowing when 
an event took place. This device is only usable 
once a week and the vision is usually somewhat 


cryptic. 


fi 


MMMM cH! 
See 


Te 


of Portals 

GP Value: 10,000 
Mists of Krynn 
The origin ofthese mirrors remains lost in the 
distant past. Some savants believe a single wizard 
with a passion for interdimensional travel con- 
structed a number of these devices as gates to 
those worlds that were of interest to him. Still, 
others assert independent creation of the mirrors 
on various planes, believing it unintentional that 
each appears linked to others of like kind. What- 
ever the case, it is a fact that there has been no 
report oftwo similar mirrors on the same plane. 

All mirrors ofportals stand about 7 feet tall 
and 5 feet wide. The frames holding the glass are 
always decorated with reliefs of various creatures 
(dragons, ki-rin, others). The frames are usually 
constructed of ebony or teak. 

Each mirror has a carving of a horned creature 
with a missing horn. Ifa crystal horn with a phase 
door spell is placed in the empty socket, the mirror 
becomes active. A wizard familiar with the mirror's 
operations may then manipulate the reliefs on the 
frame, tuning the mirror in on various others of its 
sort, and getting a picture in the glass of the other 
mitror's surroundings as viewed out its face. 

When the mirror is activated (to a maximum 


duration of three rounds), up to 10 human-sized 
3189 


XP Value: 1,000 


732 a 


~ Mirror of Reversal, 


characters may then step through, exiting from 
the receiving mirror (although doing so com- 
pletely drain the sending mirror's crystal of 
power). This is possible even ifthe receiving mir- 
ror is not activated. 

The mirror may also be used as a means to open 
a gate to a known place on its home plane. A wiz- 
ard not in possession of instructions on the mir- 
ror's use, however, has but a 15% chance of doing 
this successfully. (It is possible to research the mir- 
ror's mode of operation at a cost of 2d4(x 1,000) gp 
and 2d6 months of time.) This does not drain the 
crystal of its power, although the mirror may be 
used in this manner but once per week. (Note that 
should the wizard choose not to step through the 
mirror, it thus could be used as a scrying device, 
but only of places known to the user.) 


Reading 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 5,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
This mirror may be used to read otherwise unin- 
telligible writings. When any written message or 
spell is held before the mirror and the command 
word spoken, a clear, nondangerous translation of 
the text appears as its reflection. This mirror 
functions only three times a day at most. 


of Recall 
XP Value: 5,000 GP Value: 50,000 
The Complete Wizard's Handbook 
Staring into this device enables the user to recall 
with precise detail any book read, sight seen, or 
conversation he or she has ever experienced. 


Red 
XP Value: — GP Value: 1,000 
The Hidden Shrine of Tamoachan 

Ifa character looks into this mirror, he or she sees 
a ghostly white form next to his or her reflection. 

The mirror falsely predicts the death of the char- 
acter and what will kill him or her. The ghostly 
image takes the form of a monster or some trap 

that will strike and kill the character's reflection. 

The DM should choose what shape the image 
takes from possible monsters within 20 miles of 
the character's current location. After the charac- 
ter sees this vision, the mirror blurs and only his 

or her normal reflection remains. The mirror only 

functions once per character. If anyone touches 
the mirror he or she takes 1 d2 points of damage 
from burns. 


of Reflecting 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
Forbidden Lore 

This magical mirror shows the true appearance of 
anything reflected in it. It parts the veils of illusion 
and invisibility, but it does not otherwise reveal 
magical effects. It radiates an aura of alteration. 
The mirror can be of any size, but is usually about 
3 feet by 5 feet. Strahd is particularly fond of this 
magical item because it shows his reflection, even 
though he is a vampire. It does not reveal his 
undead nature and would not reveal the existence 
of any magical spells that might be affecting him. 


of Retention 
XP Value: 1,200 GP Value: 6,000 
Tome of Magic 

This appears to be an ordinary round silver mirror, 
about 12 inches in diameter. When the mirror of 
retention is hung in a 50- by 50-foot or smaller room 
and the command word is spoken, the mirror records 
all events occurring in the room for 24 hours. During 
this time, the mirror of retention appears normal. 

When the command word is spoken again, the 
mirror replays all the events it recorded. The 
events appear as a series of silent images in the 
surface of the mirror. By rotating the mirror 
clockwise, the images can be accelerated, appear- 
ing as much as 10 times as fast as they occurred. 
Rotating the mirror counterclockwise causes the 
images to appear in reverse. If the mirror is held 
parallel to the floor, the image freezes. Thus, by 
rotating the mirror and freezing the images, the 
user can scan for events, review previously viewed 
images, or freeze selected images for closer study. 

When the command word is spoken a third 
time, the mirror ofretention is cleared of all 
images and is ready to record new images for 
another 24 hours. 


of Reversal 
XP Value: 1,200 GP Value: 12,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
This mirror is a portal. Any living creature that 
crawls through its spongy surface arrives in a 
"reversed" world, where inanimate objects can 
speak, monsters give away treasure, and many 
strange reversals abound. Only the room in which 
the mirror is found is duplicated in reverse; all 
other areas are far different from the normal 
world. (This item should be used only after 


designing a bizarre "reversed" area.) 
3195 


aa 


733 


~ Mirror of Seeing r 


of Seeing 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 10,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

This mirror allows the viewer, on command, to 
see the reflected area truly, as if using a true see- 
ing spell. No distant areas can be examined, only 
those reflected in the mirror. It functions three 
times per day. 


of Sending 
XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 30,000 
Master of the Desert Nomads 

The mirror ofsending shows any scene known 
to the user. Objects, but not living creatures, 
may be passed through it; spells, however, can- 
not pass through. Each turn in which the mirror 
operates exhausts one of its charges, and has 
5d20 charges. 


of Simple Order 

GP Value: 3,000 

Tome of Magic 

When a character steps in front of this mirror, a 
strangely distorted image of the person is 
reflected back. The reflection moves as the char- 
acter does, but the face reflected in the mirror is 
the image ofan ordinary face. There are eyes, a 
mouth, and a nose, but all lack personality. 
Although the figure moves as the character does, 
it is shorter or taller, adjusted in whatever direc- 
tion approaches the average height of the charac- 
ter's race. Clothing is altered as well, bright 
colors are muted, appearing as shades of grey. 
Any ornamental work on armor, weapons, or 
clothing is gone. 

Ifthe character stands in front of the mirror for 
more than two rounds, he or she is instantly poly- 
morphed into the image in the mirror. The poly- 
morphed character must succeed on a system 
shock roll to survive the change. 

Like the polymorph other spell, there is a 
chance that the subject's personality and mental 
outlook change into that of the new form. In this 
case, each of the ability scores becomes 11 and 
hit points are now average for the character's Hit 
Dice at the old level—level and class are retained, 
but exceptionality is lost. The character is bland 
and boring, alignment changes to lawful neutral, 
and now has little interest in anything else other 
than setting order to the world and wiping out 
chaos wherever it may be found. 

All effects of the mirror can be removed 


XP Value: — 


through a dispel magic spell. Until the effects are 
removed, however, the character is unaware that 
any change has occurred. 


of Sophistication 

GP Value: 500 
DRAGON Magazine 168 
This wall mirror was the product of years of effort 
on the part ofthe archmage Hoovilian. He created it 
as a gift for his lover, Earthcul, and placed the fol- 
lowing message on the back in the Common tongue. 
"Any woman who views herself in this mirror shall 
have her hair arranged for her best appearance." 
What is no longer widely known is that Earthcul 
was a dwarven princess. Any female human, demi- 
human, or humanoid who looks directly into the 
mirror will, in a single round, grow a thick luxurious 
dwarven beard, ready to be braided and decorated. 
After this first spurt of growth, the beard will grow 
at a rate normal for a female dwarf. Ifthe woman 
chooses to shave, as an elven or human woman 
almost certainly will, the beard will grow back nor- 
mally. The effects of the mirror will wear off in 
1d6x100 days. It may be removed by a dispel magic 
spell as ifthe mirror's effect were a spell cast by a 
7th-level wizard. The mirror ofsophistication is 
considered an almost priceless treasure among 
dwarven women who are unhappy with their beards’ 
growth; they might pay up to 2,000 gp for it. 


XP Value: 50 


Spell 
XP Value: 5,000 GP Value: 18,000 
DRAGON Magazine 196 

This hand-sized oval of polished glass is attuned 
to a specific spell when made. While carried any- 
where on the person (living, dead, or undead), it 
deflects that one specific type of attack away 
from the being in a random direction (from 45° to 
the left ofthe attack arrival path, to 45° right of it; 
roll 2d4 to determine which angle occurs, with 
the attack's arrival path being skipped over), and 
to the same distance that it traveled to reach the 
mirror bearer, unless it encounters obstacles. 


Angle of Deflection 
45° to the left 
30° to the left 
15° to the left 
Straight ahead 
10° to the right 
30° to the right 
45° to the right 


BE AG 
= 


3200 


A a aa: s 


734 


Mirror of Vanity 


ey 


This item only guards against a specific magi- 
cal effect, which can never be changed once set. 
For example, a spell mirror might protect against 
a lightning bolt coming from both spells and 
magical items, but not chain lightning or other 
electrical discharge effects; or against & fireball 
hurled by spell or an item, but not any other fiery 
magic. 

Functioning even at the bottom of a backpack 
or strapped inside armor, a spell mirror protects 
its bearer from all effects of the specific magic it 
is attuned to, even ifthe bearer wasn't the pri- 
mary target of such attacks (a chain lightning 
spell that struck another being first, then arced to 
strike others, would bypass a mirror bearer, if that 
were the magic against which the mirror 
defended). 

This item's protection against the chosen 
magic is automatic and can never be turned off, 
regardless of the bearer's wishes, but other 
magic, even if similar to the attack protected 
against, doesn't make the mirror function. Each 
time the mirror's use is triggered, there is a 1 in 
12 chance of breakage. Magical attacks never 
affect a spell mirror directly; even fireball 
blasts or blows from a ring ofthe ram won't 
force item saving throws on a spell mirror. 
However, it is fragile and can be shattered if 
dropped, if its bearer falls, or the mirror is 
struck by a solid object. 

Breaking a spell mirror ends its magic, does 
1d4+] points of damage to all within 3 feet of it 
(the mirror turns to dust, not shards), and 
releases the entrapped creature that empowered 
the item's magic. The creature is violently 
expelled from an interdimensional space, 
appearing within 10 feet of where the mirror 
was when it broke, and will be hostile to all 
nearby beings. It is always a creature that uses 
or manipulates energy, such as a firestar, will o 
wisp, volt, or similar creature. 


of Spirit Seeing 
XP Value: 1,500 GP Value: 15,000 
Oriental Adventures 
This round mirror (approximately 1 foot in 
diameter) looks like all other mirrors. However, 
all spirit creatures passing in front of it are 
revealed. The mirror penetrates invisibility, dis- 
guise, illusions, polymorphs, and shapechanges, 
revealing the true form of the creature. The 
power of the mirror is constantly in effect. It is 


favored by prudent homeowners who often place 
it in a prominent position to observe a door or 
entry, hopeful of protection from the arrival of 
evil spirits. 


of Travel 
XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 15,000 
DRAGON Magazine 145 
All mirrors of travel are large, obviously valu- 
able, highly reflective silver mirrors bordered in 
gem-encrusted gold. These magical items each 
function only when set into a sturdy wall. 

Any character knowing the proper command 
word need only place his hand upon such a mir- 
ror, speak the word, and envision any place pre- 
viously "seen casually" (as per the spell 
teleport). An image of that place appears in the 
mirror, and the character is teleported there, 
arriving as if the place had been "studied care- 
fully" (again, as per the teleport spell). The 
image stays in the mirror for three rounds after 
the character departs, and during this time any- 
one touching the mirror similarly teleports to 
the area it presents. This device is quite fragile 
and breaks (becoming useless) if it fails a saving 
throw against any attack form. A mirror oftravel 
can reveal and send its viewer to places only 
within its own plane of existence. 


of Truth 

XP Value: 900 GP Value: 9,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
This mirror, on command, causes a ghastly face 
to appear within it. The face answers any one 
question truthfully, as long as the correct answer 
may be read in the mind of some living creature 
within 1,000 miles. The mirror functions once per 
week. 


of Vanity 
XP Value: 100 GP Value: 1,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

This mirror causes each creature looking into it to 
make a saving throw vs. spell or pause, admiring 
the reflection, for one hour. A remove curse 
breaks the enchantment, but the mirror can be 
broken only by a wish. 


3204 


735 


Mirror, Yefar's Magic 


i A S a 


Yefar's Magic 
XP Value GP Value 
Allseeing: 900 3.800 
Confusion: 450 1,900 
Great: 1,700 4,600 
Memory: 800 3,200 
Speed: 300 800 


DRAGON Magazine 37 

Yefar, a wizard of some renown a few ages past, 
had a small problem with burglars and thieves. 
He didn't mind them that much, since his treasure 
was well guarded, but since he was ofthe chaotic 
persuasion he liked to point out the error of the 
thieves' ways by creating petty inconveniences at 
the most inopportune times. In order for Yefar to 
do this, he had to know the identity of the foot- 
pads, so he created an innocent looking mirror 
that recorded anything that passed before it. 

To replay what has been recorded, the mirror 
must be physically held in both hands. It erases 
anything it replays, and begins to record again 
when released, erasing anything that was not 
replayed. A. forget spell will cancel the last 24 
hours of memory, making the field blank. All 
mirrors except the great mirror need some light 
to function properly, and replay with the same 
illumination in which the subject was recorded. 

The mirror does not record when something 
took place, merely what took place, and replays 
events in the order things were recorded. So, 
unless the user knows when the mirror was put 
down, he or she does not know when the images 
took place. Haste and slow spells allow the user 
to speed up or slow what is shown, but all images 
will be shown in the order they were recorded 
(unless otherwise specified). 

It is said that Yefar died before creating the per- 
fect mirror ofmemory, and that he discarded 
many of the imperfect ones. But a legend tells 
that the last mirror he made caused his death, for 
the mirror needed a very great mnemonic capa- 
bility, and Yefar, being quite senile in his old age, 
contributed his own memory. 

To determine the type of mirror found, use the 
following table (all mirrors appear identical): 


Roll 
01^1-0 


Mirror Type 

Mirror ofspeed: This mirror has a 60° 
field of vision, and plays back all that 
passes before it at ten times normal 
speed. The picture is blurred and hard 
to interpret. 


41-75 Mirror ofconfusion: This mirror has a 
60° field of vision, and plays back all 
that passes before it at two times nor- 
mal speed, but plays it backwards, start- 
ing from the most recent event and 
going back in time. 

Mirror ofmemory: This mirror has a 
60° field of vision, and plays back all 
that passes before it at two times nor- 
mal speed. 

Mirror ofallseeing: This mirror has the 
powers of a Type III mirror with a 120° 
field of vision. 

Yefar's great mirror: This mirror has all 
the powers ofa Type IV mirror, but also 
records in total darkness and can record 
invisible objects. 


76-90 


91-99 


00 


Yin-Yang 
XP Value: 3,500 GP Value: 35,000 
Gods, Demigods, & Heroes 
This mirror paralyzes all beings of lawful or evil 
alignment that look into it for even a moment. 
Duration of paralysis is one year. 


Mist of Rapture 
XP Value: 200 GP Value: 9,000 
DRAGON Magazine 39 

The art of making this rose-colored gas is lost in 
antiquity. Usually found in fragile glass globes or 
small metal vials, the mist wafts out when 
released to form a spherical cloud. The diameter 
of the cloud varies from 15 to 45 feet depending 
upon the amount of gas. The vapors are heavy, 
and remain in this volume for 1d4 days in dead 
air; they will drift very slowly with any air cur- 
rents (typically 5 feet per round). The vapors are 
damp and cling to clothing and skin. 

Any human breathing the mist writhes in plea- 
sure for 1d6 rounds (1d3 rounds if saving throw 
vs. breath weapon is made), oblivious to all sur- 
roundings. Affected persons blissfully ignore 
danger, and even physical attack does not rouse 
them. The mist closes minds to all other stimuli, 
and thus rapture confers a temporary immunity 
to magical attacks involving force of will (such as 
charm, magicjar, suggestion, etc.). Unless 
restrained, those affected drop everything they 
carry and sink to the floor, twisting and shudder- 
ing. Anyone in telepathic contact (or even psionic 
combat) with a person breathing the mist also 


becomes affected for the same duration. How- 
3206 


, e ae © 


736 


Monkey Fist of Ha'chao 


ee a 


ever, nonhumans are immune to the vapors. Dur- 
ing the round after rapture has ended, movement 
is slow (half speed) and clumsy (no Dexterity 
bonuses apply); such characters never win initia- 
tive over more alert creatures, and are easily (8 or 
less, 1d10) surprised. 


Mobile 


A mobile is a sculpture consisting of freely mov- 
ing parts that gently swing and sway in response 
to wind, machinery, or magical forces. 


Diamond and Silver 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
Dragon Magic 

Anyone who stands within 10 feet of the mobile 
feels a tingle ripple through his or her body. Ifthe 

character remains for two minutes, a Constitution 
Check must be made. If it fails, the character 
takes 1 d4 points of of damage. Remaining for an 
additional two minutes is cause to make a second 

Constitution Check, losing another 1d4 points if 
it fails. Ifthe character remains for four minutes, 

an Intelligence Check is made. If successful, the 
Intelligence and Wisdom Check penalty for com- 

prehending draconian art is -6 (rather than -12) 
for the next 1d6 hours. 


Onyx and Steel 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 6,000 
Dragon Magic 
The main components of this huge mobile are 
onyx clusters and steel webs. Anyone who studies 
the mobile for 1d6 minutes must save vs. spell or 
sufferfear for the next 2d6 minutes. 


Ruby, Turquoise, and Emerald 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 4,000 
Dragon Magic 

The huge mobile is primarily made up of clus- 
tered patterns of rubies, turquoise, and emeralds. 
The slightest touch causes the mobile to sway for 
2d6 rounds, and that displaces light waves. All 
those within 20 feet see everyone else as appear- 
ing to be 1d2 feet from their actual position. All 
attacks are made at -2 while the mobile sways. 
The displacement effect cannot be countered by a 
saving throw. 


AN N 
AS 
N A 


we 
AA & 
ql 


ists 


N 
N zA i 
M NN hey 


Monkey Fist of Ha'chao 
XP Value: 1,350 GP Value: 12,500 
Kara-Tur 
Dark and ratty, this relic appears to be a tightly 
clenched monkey fist severed at the wrist. It is 
dried and a silver cuff attaches it to a long silver 
chain. Its hairs are black and wiry, and it seems to 
be holding something, but the fingers cannot be 
forced open. It has no odor, but if detect magic is 
cast on it, the object shines with a bright white 

light. 

Long before humanity was visited by the 
Nine, Fa Kuan, the god ofjustice, was directing 
the Lords of Karma in the ways of the Eternal 
Change when one of these spirits was dis- 
tracted by a passing Jade Lady. As a punish- 
ment for wandering attention, Fa Kuan turned 
the spirit creature into a monkey to illustrate 
change, and the embarrassed spirit hid his face 
among his peers. 

After a few years of sulking, the spirit returned 
to Fa Kuan and, once again, began his studies. A 
century passed and the monkey-spirit became 
restless. When would his master return him to his 
true form? After a few more years, he approached 
Fa Kuan and begged mercy. The god told the 
spirit creature that it must approach the Celestial 
Emperor. 


3210 


pT ee 


737 


Monocle of Bagthalos 


San ee, d 


The Emperor knew the monkey-spirit would 
come to him as he knew the outcome of their 
meeting. When the silly creature appeared to beg 
forgiveness in all humility, the Celestial Emperor 
placed a grape in his mouth and then took it out 
and held it up for the monkey-spirit to see. The 
grape sparkled with saliva. "This will return you 
to your former shape," the god began, "but, once 
you eat it, you will lose your immortality and 
soon fade from our existence. It is yours to 
decide." And the Celestial Emperor handed the 
grape to the spirit creature. 

The monkey looked at the pale green grape, 
and rolled it in his hand. "And what happens if I 
crush this fruit?" the spirit asked and squeezed 
the grape until it popped! A great fire of incredi- 
ble light engulfed the foolish monkey, and it 
stumbled about the court for a moment. The little 
ape quickly leaped to Chan Ching, the god of 
heroes, and grabbed his long dagger. Grasping 
the blade with his left hand, the spirit chopped off 
his hand with a swift stroke. The monkey's paw 
fell out of heaven, still flaming with white fire, 
and the spirit was restored to his true form, less 
his lost hand. 

The paw fell into the Fenghsintzu River where 
its flames were cooled and it washed on the banks 
where the city of Kichai now stands. The first to 
find the magic paw started its cult of worshipers, 
who were dispersed by the Shou invasion of 
about 415. The monkey's fist then passed into the 
hands of the great wujen, Ha'chao. 

Ha'chao learned its many powers and wielded 
them in many parts of the Empire, spreading his 
fame and gathering wealth. The wu jen retired to 
his secret fortress in Canung Marsh and that was 
the last the magical paw was seen for 1,200 
years. In 1689, Wang Di Uno, the hero of 
Rochung, located the lost fortress and recovered 
the monkeyfist. His son used the magic in the 
battle of Kao 2, 1723, when southern jungle bar- 
barians were routed along the border near 
Hodo'ung Cha garrison. For five generations, 
this relic increased the power and honor of the 
Wang clan, but it was finally stolen by a daring 
thief, and has been lost since 1974. Nothing 
more is known about the relic, but legends and 
myths abound, and many adventurers have 
searched for it in vain. 

The fist is useless to all except a wu jen of 8th 
level or higher. To these it bestows the following 
spells and abilities: 


Allows the wielder to shapechange into a 
monkey at will. 

Increases the wielder's ability to climb walls 
by 50%. 

The following spells can be cast at will: accu- 
racy, hypnotism, read magic, shield, wizard 
mark, invisibility, hypnotic pattern, and haste. 
Animal growth once/day, permanent illusion 
once per week, elemental servant once a 
month, permanency once every year, and pla- 
nar call. 

The user can summon spirit only once, but 
there is a 45% chance that the Lord of Karma, 
without a hand, is summoned. (The Lord of 
Karma is the original owner of the fist.) 


Monocle 
A monocle is a single lens that is worn in front of 
one eye, held in place by forcing the eyebrow 
down or by raising the cheek. A delicate chain 
generally extends from the monocle that can be 
connected to a pocket or a necklace to keep the 
lens from dropping to the ground. 


of Bagthalos 
XP Value: — GP Value: — 
Book of Artifacts 
This circular clear crystal lens has an adamantine 
frame studded with six small loops on the outer 
rim. Colorful ribbons run through these loops to 
hold the monocle over one's eye quite securely, so 
that even mighty blows or jarring won't shift it 
free. This item originated on Toril in the 
FORGOTTENREALMS setting. 

This unusual item was crafted in Zazesspur 
over two centuries ago by Bagthalos Deszhum- 
mer, who was then the Archpriest of Helm, the 
guardian god. His temple was plagued by many 
thefts that he suspected were the work of local 
thieves employing magical invisibility. To counter 
them, Bagthalos set to work creating a detection 
aid for the temple guards. 

Alas for Bagthalos, Divine Helm, his lord, dis- 
approved of any attempt to substitute magical aid 
for vigilance, and warned Bagthalos of the price 
such vain research would demand—the life of a 
being dedicated to the worship of Helm. Helm 
never expressly forbade Bagthalos from continu- 
ing his research, he only set the cost of such an 
effort. In this the deity was implacable. Perhaps it 
was Bagthalos's years of faithful service that pre- 


vented the deity from stripping his Archpriest of 
3211 


J N 


738 


Monocle of Bagthalos 


j CE cy a 


PNG) 
SR $ \ 


N 


NLA 


, 


ities 


‘x DK 


all powers for even presuming to undertake the 
task. Perhaps it was Helm's way of testing his 
faithful servant—who can say the way of the 
gods? 

The archpriest was a good man, but obsessed. 
By day and night he dreamed of completing his 
creation. With every step he took forward in his 
researches, though, he remembered Helm's price 
and found himself unable to progress at the cost 
of another. Days passed into weeks and then 
months of agonized torment. The archpriest's ser- 
mons fell off and his duties lay forgotten as 
Bagthalos let himself waste away and die. 

Little did the archpriest realize that it was his 
own death Helm had predicted, for in the final 
puffs of his failing breath, Bagthalos uttered the 
last prayers needed for his grand creation. Some 
say Helm mercifully fulfilled his faithful priest's 
desire; others tell how Bagthalos's spirit passed 
into the monocle, the final key to its making. 
However it came to be, the monocle ofBagthalos 
was complete. 

Unfortunately, Bagthalos also carried the 
secret of his monocle to the grave with him. As 
was customary, his quarters were cleaned and 
fumigated and his goods placed in the temple 
treasury. Fate being what it is, thieves struck once 
more sometime later and one of the treasures they 


Ma 


carried off was the monocle ofBagthalos. Did 
they know what they had taken? Probably not, for 
nothing was heard of it for a decade or more. 

Then, for a brief span of several years, the 
monocle circulated in the whisper markets of 
Athkatla (in Amn) and Ithmong (in Tethyr). 
There the sinister merchants offered it for sale at 
the paltry sum of 45,000 gp. Apparently these 
black marketeers did not grasp the scope of its 
powers. Still, no buyer was willing to pay that 
price for a little-known object of no repute, and 
the shadowy brotherhood of thieves who were 
thought to be selling the item, the Skeletal Fin- 
ger, was destroyed by the venerable blue dragon, 
Iryklathagra (Sharpfangs). The dragon slaugh- 
tered the thieves in their mountain stronghold, 
hidden somewhere in the peaks of The Small 
Teeth (which mark the border between Tethyr 
and Amn). Their hideout cleared, the dragon took 
up residence there. The monocle may still lie 
somewhere in the stronghold or may be some- 
where else. 

Because of its relatively low power and poten- 
tially harmful side effects, the monocle is not a 
tremendously unbalancing artifact to have fall 
into the player characters' hands. The DM should 
still be cautious of giving it out, however, since 
its broadly useful true seeing power could 
unhinge the key secret of an adventure. 

Most likely, the monocle could be introduced 
as an aid and asset to another adventure involv- 
ing a different artifact, such as Johydee's mask 
or Queen Ehlissa's marvelous nightingale. In 
general, the adventure should involve a large 
amount of polymorphed, shapechanged, 
charmed, or otherwise enchanted encounters, as 
befits the power of the monocle. To this end, 
Sharpfangs is a ready-made adventure hook to 
get things started. Any dragon powerful enough 
to eradicate an entire den of high-level thieves is 
not one to be taken lightly. The characters may 
be hired to eliminate the beast and then discover 
the monocle without realizing the DM's special 
purpose. 

This a good artifact for the trial-and-error 
process of learning. Its powers are not over- 
whelming (if one is prepared), nor is its curse 
devastating. In fact, the curse gives clever DMs a 
wonderful opportunity to create amusing adven- 
tures. Imagine sending the PC off to track down 
and apologize to a long-lost childhood sweetheart 


for some petty slight as a youth. What injustices 
3211 


eS Ce ee 


739 


Monocle, Fire-Eye 


Sc ne ey 


has the PC done to kobolds in the name of adven- 
turing? The potentials are nearly endless. 
Of course, few DMs will want the group to 
have a permanent (though risky) source of true 
seeing, SO it is best to eventually remove the item 
from the campaign. With luck, a few rounds of 
atonement may be enough to convince the char- 
acter to give it up, but ifthat fails, some surviving 
members of the Skeletal Finger might want their 
property back. 
Constant Powers. Looking through the mono- 
cle gives the wearer the power of a true seeing 
spell. Furthermore, the wearer is immune to all 
gaze attacks and to effects or menaces, magical 
or psionic, that employ hypnotism, bright lights, 
shimmering colors, mesmerizing patterns or eye 
contact. 
Invoked Powers: Three times per day, the 
monocle can fire a bright orange ray (range 60 
yards, duration instantaneous) that immediately 
drains 1d8 hp from the wearer but deals 4d8 
points of damage to everything in its path. The 
beam penetrates all materials but lead. Targets the 
wearer can see are automatically hit, while those 
in the path but concealed by solid objects are 
allowed to roll a saving throw vs. death magic (+4 
bonus) to avoid the beam. 
Random Powers: Two from Artifact Table 
1-05: Detection. 
Curse: Part of Bagthalos's spirit is indeed 
trapped within the monocle—all the sorrows and 
regrets of his being. When worn, the artifact 
whispers these feelings into the mind's eye of its 
owner. Each hour (or fraction of it) spent wearing 
the monocle, the user must roll a saving throw vs. 
spell. If failed, the character remembers intensely 
every error, misstep, and fault and feels com- 
pelled to make amends as best as possible. The 
DM should choose an incident from the charac- 
ter's past adventures that must be corrected. The 
character becomes obsessed with this quest (as 
per a geas spell, only the effect cannot be dis- 
pelled) and the monocle ceases to function until 
things have been set right. 
Suggested Means of Destruction: 

All of the pieces of Bagthalos's spirit must be 
found on the outer planes and reunited. 

It must be frozen at the heart of the Abyss. 


Fire-Eye 
XP Value: 7,500 GP Value: 75,000 
DRAGON Magazine 123 

Avissar Fire-Eye derived his name from a power- 
ful and unique magical item of his own devising. 
The fire-eye is a monocle fabricated by the arch- 
mage and endowed with unique powers. Its lens is 
smooth and transparent, and measures one inch in 
diameter; it is reputed to be a gemstone of 
unearthly origin, dug from the crater of a mete- 
orite. This lens is enclosed in a circle of mithral 
and the whole is hung on a mithral chain of the 
finest craftsmanship. The gem and chain alone 
are worth 7,500 gp if sold, but if the monocle's 
magical properties are known it can be sold for 
up to 75,000 gp. 

The eight magical functions of the fire-eye are 
detailed below. Unless otherwise noted, all spell 
powers are performed at the 18th level of ability. 

e Mere possession of the monocle confers 
immunity to the harmful effects of normal fire 
and gives the possessor a +3 bonus to all sav- 
ing throws vs. magical fire attacks. 

When the monocle is worn over the right eye, 
the wearer gains the use of infravision and 
detect invisibility, as per the wizard spells of 
the same names at the 18th level of ability. 


The next three powers may be used at will, one 
at a time, but only when the monocle is worn over 
the left eye. 

e Twice per day, the fire-eye can emit a 9-HD 
fireball with a 45-foot range. 
Five times per day, the monocle can emit a ray 
of fire which ignites any nonliving, com- 
bustible material it contacts (save vs. magical 
fire applicable). The range ofa ray of fire is 60 
feet; duration is instantaneous. 
Three times per day, thefire-eye can emit a 
ray ofmelting. The range of the ray is 45 feet, 
and it persists for one-halfround. It can melt 
four cubic feet of normal ice, or two cubic feet 
of magical ice during that time. 
If the fire-eye is held by the end of its chain 
and slowly rocked back and forth, it hums softly 
and glows. If it is then held before the eyes of any 
single creature, that creature must save vs. spell 
at -4 or become hypnotized, remaining motion- 
less and staring at the monocle for one full turn. 
During this time, the victim is subject to a single 
suggestion (as per the spell hypnosis) from the 


monocle's wielder, with no saving throw applica- 
3212 


740 


ble for the suggestion itself. This enchantment is 
so powerful, however, that it is possible for the 

fire-eye's wielder to become entranced as well. 
Whenever this power is used, the possessor must 
save vs. spell at +3. If it fails, the owner is 
entranced for one turn and is therefore unable to 
make any suggestion to the victim; if the save is 
successful, the user is unaffected. 

When clutched and the command word is 
uttered, the monocle can teleport its possessor 
once per week as per the wizard spell of the same 
name. There is no chance of error, and up to 
1,000 pounds of weight may be teleported along 
with the possessor of the monocle. 

The monocle generates a magical field which 
nullifies the power of all other magical items held 
by its possessor. Such items regain their former 
powers after being outside the monocle's field of 
influence for one full day. This last function 
seems to be an innate power of the alien gem- 
stone which forms the lens of the fire-eye, as 
Avissar would certainly not have desired such a 
baneful power himself. 


of Magic 
XP Value: 5000 GP Value: 6,000 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 82 

This single glass lens only reveals its magical 
property ifit is used by a wizard or by a thiefof at 
least 10th level. When worn, the monocle gives 
these characters the ability to read magic any 
time they desire, up to three hours a day. After 
three hours, the monocle blackens to recharge 
itself. A character can perform no other action 
while he is reading magic. 


Mortar and Pestle 

Mortar and pestles are tools used to grind coarse 
materials into powders. Generally they are used 
to grind substances like grain, spices, spell com- 
ponents and other soft materials. Magical ver- 
sions allow the user to grind harder materials 
such as rock, granite, metals, gemstones, and 
magical items (although magical items receive a 
saving throw vs. disintegration). Magical mortars 
and pestles must be used together. 


Mortar and Pestle, Lorloveim's Obsidian 


Everproducing Rice 


XP Value GP Value 
Common: 600 6,000 
Extraordinary: 700 7,000 


Oriental Adventures 

This magical item appears to be a normal rice 
mortar and pestle. There is an 80% chance the 
rice mortar is of the common type and a 20% 
chance that it is extraordinary. In either case, the 
magic of the everproducing rice mortar and pes- 
tle is activated by turning the pestle in the mortar 
one direction and deactivated by turning it in the 
other direction. 

Once per day the common rice mortar can be 
activated to produce any type of food or drink for 
1d100 people, as desired. The food spews from 
the mortar hot and fresh—trice, buns, sake, can- 
dies, tea, salt, etc. The food is normal in all 
respects. The everproducing rice mortar and pes- 
tle have all the powers of the common rice mortar 
and pestle. In addition, it can also be used to 
grant 1d4 wishes. Once all the wishes have been 
granted, the everproducing rice mortar becomes 
a common version. 


Lorloveim's Obsidian 
XP Value: 600 GP Value: 6,000 
Tome of Magic 

This magical tool allows the wielder to grind 
even the hardest materials into a fine powder. 
Rocks, metals, and even gemstones of all types 
may be ground to dust in as little as 1d4 rounds. 

Magical items pounded beneath the pestle are 
allowed a saving throw vs. disintegration. Ifthe 
save is successful, the enchanted item cannot be 
destroyed in this fashion. Ifthe saving throw 
fails, the item is reduced to nonmagical powder. 

The obsidian mortar and pestle are commonly 
used by wizards in the preparation of spell com- 
ponents and ingredients for magical items. Nei- 
ther the mortar nor the pestle is effective without 
the other. 


Moto Moto Rod 


These magical rods are a specialty of Karimari 
enchanters. They can be used by any character 
class, but are tailored to their wielders and do not 
work for anyone else. A moto moto rod is 3 feet 
long and usually looks like a straight wooden 
stick with the bark peeled off. Moto moto rods are 
permanent items and do not require charges when 


used. 
3215 


ae ee 


741 


Moto Moto Rod of Beguiling 


SNE eT 


Some moto moto rods are enchanted along the 
lines of normal rods such as rods of parrying, 
rods ofweaponry, or rods ofthe wyrm. Others are 
unique to Karimari. Nearly every Karimari war- 
rior has a moto moto rod. 


of Beguiling 
XP Value: 900 GP Value: 4,500 
Champions of MYSTARA 
This rod enables the wielder to befriend any crea- 
ture with Intelligence 2 or greater. With the 
appropriate command words, the rod can produce 
each of the following spell effects once per day: 
charm person, charm monster, and charm plant. 


of Concealment 
XP Value: 1,700 GP Value: 8,500 
Champions of MYSTARA 
This rod allows its Karimari wielder to disappear 
into the surrounding jungle without a trace. With 
the appropriate command words, the rod can pro- 
duce each of the following magical effects once 
per day. 

Vanish: The wielder vanishes and instantly 
reappears in another place up to 120 feet from the 
spot where he vanished. Control is precise, with 
no chance of appearing in midair or inside solid 
objects. 

Camouflage: The wielder and all equipment 
take on camouflage coloring (mottled greens and 
browns in the jungle). Whenever the wielder 
remains motionless, he or she is nearly invisible 
(roll 1d6; seen only on a 1). The effect lasts for 
six turns. 

Softfoot: The wielder may move with nearly 
complete silence (roll 1d10; heard only on a 1). 
The effect lasts for 6 turns. 

Hide Trail: All signs of the wielder's passage 
through the jungle (footprints, broken plants, 
scents, etc.) disappear without a trace within 100 
yards. 

Plant Path: As the druid spell plant door, this 
opens a path through growth, no matter how 
dense. The path closes behind the wielder. 


of Strength 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 10,000 
Champions of MYSTARA 
When activated with a command word, this rod +2 
adds +2 to the wielder's Strength bonus. The effect 
lasts for one turn, and may be activated three times 
per day. During this time, the rod may be used as a 


melee weapon, inflicting 1d8+2, plus or minus any 
adjusted Strength bonuses or penalties. Whenever 
the Strength effect is not activated, the rod may be 
used as a simple club +2. Although Karimari of any 
character class may wield a moto moto ofstrength, 
Karimari fighters most often use them. 


of Thundering Compliance 

XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 15,000 
Champions of MYSTARA 

Once per day, the wielder of this rod may sum- 
mon all elephants and triceratops within three 
miles. The summoned animals run at their top 
speed to reach the summoner. The sound of these 
enormous beasts crashing through the jungle 
should be enough to send all but the bravest 
opponents running. Once the animals arrive, they 
understand and obey the rod's wielder. Each ani- 
mal remains under the wielder's control for 4d6 
turns, or until it fails a Morale check. In the jun- 
gle, the rod will summon 2d6 elephants and 1d4 
triceratops which arrive in 1d6x10 rounds. 


Mug 
Mugs are large cups fashioned from ceramics, 
metal, bone, shell, or glass. Most have handles. 
Mugs tend to be thick and heavy; they are often 
used to drink hot or warm beverages such as soup 
or tea. Tall mugs, often called flagons or steins, 
are used to hold ale for drinking. 


Leomund's 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
DRAGON Magazine 28 

These devices appear in many forms. Sometimes 
they are platters, sometimes plates, sometimes 
mugs, sometimes goblets; but in any case they are 
made of silver, gold or platinum and are engraved. 
The value of their metal and the engraving is not 
visible until the mug is commanded to function. 
When told to fill, the item produces an excellent 
wine or beer. The mug can function five times per 
day. The item must be cleaned with sweet water 
or holy water at least once per week or it will 
never function again. The cleaning is not neces- 
sary ifit has not been used during a given week. 


of Plenty 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
Moonshae 
This device is a large, clay beer mug. When a 


command word is spoken, it immediately fills 
3221 


ee ee 


742 


Muzzle of Training 


a a a ea Ne ONE 


with light or dark ale or thick mead, as the user 
wishes. When drained, the command word 
causes it to fill again. While not particularly 
useful on adventures (although you never know) 
this is perhaps the most popular magical item 
among the isles. 


of Warming 
GP Value: 2,000 
DRAGON Magazine 30 
The mug ofwarming was originally designed for 
Orlow's favorite drink, mulled wine. It keeps up 
to one pint of any liquid warm indefinitely. Cold 
liquids poured into it are heated in 1d6+1 rounds. 


XP Value: 400 


Music Box 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 4,500 
DRAGON Magazine 73 
This 9- by 5- by 3-inch box contains several 
miniature metal figures playing instruments. 
When the command word is spoken, the figures 
emerge from the box and play simple popular 
tunes for five minutes, then return unless the 
magical word is spoken again. The music is about 
as loud as a person speaking normally. 


Muzzle 

This item is made from leather straps and metal 
buckles. A muzzle can be fastened over the 
mouth of any animal or monster to keep it from 
biting. Magical muzzles automatically expand or 
contract to fit any creature. The muzzled creature 
can breathe, but it cannot open its mouth to bite, 
eat, pant, or release a breath weapon. 


of Lycanthrope Control 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
Night Howlers 

This item, like a muzzle oftraining, has leather 
straps with metal buckles and may be fastened 
over the mouth of any lycanthrope in wereform. It 
locks in place with a command word (treat as a 
wizard lock by a 15th-level caster) and it unlocks 
and falls off with a second command. While 
wearing the muzzle, a werecreature cannot bite, 
talk, or transform. 


of Mauling 
XP Value: — GP Value: 800 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
This item appears as a muzzle of training How- 
ever, when placed on a creature, the creature is 


enraged. The beast can easily shake off the muz- 
zle and attacks the user immediately, gaining a +4 
bonus to all attack rolls for one turn. The crea- 
ture's mood settles down after that time. The 
muzzle is not destroyed by this tussle, and may be 
recovered and reused if desired. 


of Training 

XP Value: 800 GP Value: 4,000 
DUNGEONS & DRAGONS Rules Cyclopedia 

This item is a device of leather straps with metal 
buckles and may be fastened over the mouth of 
any animal or monster that has a bite attack. It 
magically expands or contracts to fit the creature, 
and the beast can breathe but cannot bite (or talk) 
while wearing the muzzle. The muzzle locks in 
place with a command word (treat as a wizard 
lock by a 15th-level caster) and unlocks and falls 
off with a second command. The muzzle can be 
commanded as often as desired. 


3227 


PT Re A ee ae 


743 


ROX 
t 


2" 


steer 


à 


s; 
s 
SS 


2 
a 
% 
z 


pi a 


Mare = > 
Auu 


Foa 


ergted Aa 
a 


s 


O 


À 


x 


: 


Wy 


Nail 
The common iron nail of medieval car- 
pentry is from 1 to 4 inches long and very crudely 
made. Magical nails are nearly identical, although 
a bit higher in quality and they are often painted. 
They may be overlooked if found with other con- 
struction materials. 


) 


= 


Roll Nail Type ` 
01-50 Nail 
51-00 Spike 


Blast Spike 

GP Value: 10,000 
Dwarves Deep 
These dwarven mining tools are used to split or 
shatter rock in specific, dangerous situations, 
such as removing blockages from underground 
cascades or rivers. They can also serve as weap- 
ons. Blast spikes are simple metal spikes, about 
as long as an adult human's hand. They are 
three-sided, pointed wedges of fine steel, with 
wide, circular heads for hammering, like giant 
tacks. 

They can be dropped any distance, used as 
weapons (1d4 damage), or hammered into rocks, 
stone walls, or even trees or wooden walls with- 
out incident. Many have served as climbing holds 
in deep dwarven caverns for years. A blast spike 
can only be activated by striking it with another 
blast spike. Upon contact, both spikes explode 
violently, causing a total of 5d4 shrapnel damage 
to all within 30 feet (save vs. spell allowed for 
half damage, except for any creatures touching 
either spike at the time of explosion). Obviously, 
if one wishes to avoid damage, the second spike 
must be thrown or rammed with a very long pole; 
a successful attack roll (with nonproficiency 
penalties) is required. 

Anyone holding onto a spike when it is struck, 
or attached to it via a line or other means, must 
make a successful Dexterity check and a success- 
ful Strength check to avoid falling (with attendant 
damage). If both checks fail, the unfortunate 
being does not merely fall: he or she is flung vio- 
lently away from the location of the two spikes, 
possibly striking other beings or obstacles, and in 
any case incurring an extra 1d8 impact damage in 
the process. 


XP Value: 1,000 


SF 


PT 
os 


id 


. 


AN 


z 


G) 


Nail of Pointing 


wy 


TOD 


A 


y ~~ 


É of Building 

í XP Value: 1,500 GP Value: 15,000 

The Book of Marvelous Magic 

If this nail is the first nail used in building a 
wooden structure made entirely of ordinary wood 
and nails, the magic nail may be removed after 
the structure is complete. The removal causes the 
entire structure to disappear. The nail can then be 
easily carried about, and when the user wishes to 
recreate the structure at any given location, one 
command word causes it to reappear. The nail 
then becomes nonmagical. 


Death 
XP Value: 400 GP Value: 4,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

This nail appears and functions as a nail of point- 
ing in all respects. However, if commanded to 
function while within 120 feet of any undead 
creature, the finger ofbones created turns into an 
undead spirit, a druj (hand), which immediately 
splits and attacks (see the D&D Companion Set 
for more details on the spirit druj). 


Finger 
XP Value: 100 GP Value: 1,000 
DUNGEONS & DRAGONS Rules Cyclopedia 

This item appears identical to the common iron 
nail of medieval carpentry, 1 to 4 inches long and 
crudely made. It may easily be overlooked if 
found with other construction materials unless a 
detect magic spell is used. 

If mistaken for a nail of pointing and com- 
manded to function, the nail disappears. When 
the user next tries to avoid the attention of an 
enemy (by hiding, invisibility, or other means), 
the nail reappears as a large glowing finger, 
pointing at the character for 1d6 rounds. The fin- 
ger nail may reappear during each similar attempt 
after that (25% chance for each), but a remove 
curse causes it to vanish forever. 


of Pointing 
XP Value: 700 GP Value: 7,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
The user may command this nail to point at any- 
thing nonmagical (a door, stairway, gold piece, 
etc.); the nail then turns into &finger ofbones and 
points toward the closest item of the type named. 
It continues to point at the item for one turn and 
then returns to nail form. There is no limit to the 


range of the nail's detection, but it cannot detect 
3232 


aaa a Es 


745 


~~, Nail of Securing - 


living or undead creatures of any type or any 
magical item or spell effect. The nail can function 
once per day. 


of Securing 
XP Value: 400 GP Value: 4,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

When this nail is touched to any portal, chest, or 
other solid item capable of being opened and the 
command word uttered, it creates a wizard lock 
spell effect as if cast by a 15th-level wizard. The 
nail sticks to the locked item; the nail and the 
enchantment may be removed only by the touch 
of the person who locked it. The nail functions up 
to three times per day. 


of Silence 

XP Value: 100 

DRAGON Magazine 181 
Thieves everywhere consider these items to be 
lifesavers. Unlike the usual hammers and spikes 
that make Thor's own racket when used on a wall, 
these items operate in absolute silence. The 
spikes (found in lots of 1d8) make no noise no 
matter what is being used to pound them in. 


GP Value: 500 


Ten-Penny 

XP Value: — GP Value: 300 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
This nail appears identical to a nail ofsecuring 
However, when commanded to function, it turns 
upon the user, changing 10 valuables carried into 
copper pieces. Jewelry and gems are changed 
first and then platinum, gold, electrum, and silver 
pieces. Ifthe total of 10 is not met after all such 
items carried have been changed, potions and 
other temporary items are affected, and then per- 
manent magical items. Ordinary items are 
affected last. If, by any chance, the user is carry- 
ing less than 10 items altogether, other items 
owned but not carried are then affected. After 
changing 10 items into copper pieces, the nail 
vanishes. 


Necklace 


A necklace is a piece of ornamental metal jewelry 
usually made of silver, gold, platinum, or other 
precious metal, and adorned with gems. A neck- 
lace is always worn on the neck and can be of any 
length. 


Roll Necklace Type 
01-14 Agal (Securing cord for Agal [turban]) 
15-29 Anklet 
30-43 Chain 
44-57 Ferronniere (Headlace) 
58-71 Gorget (Cloth Necklace) 
72-86 Necklace 
87-00 Ruff 
of Adaptation 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 10,000 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 


This chain necklace resembles a medallion. The 
wearer can ignore all sorts of gases that affect 
creatures through respiration, and can also 
breathe underwater or even exist in airless space 
for up to seven days. 


of Air Breathing 

GP Value: 500 
DRAGON Magazine 48 
Useless or dangerous to most types of creatures, 
this device is sometimes seen employed by 
Locathah and other creatures of the deep who 
cannot normally breathe air. Creatures that nor- 
mally breathe air, upon donning the necklace, 
find their lungs immediately filling up with 
water. Ifa save vs. spell is not made, the victim 
fights at -1 to attack rolls in the first round fol- 
lowing the donning of the necklace, and at an 
additional -1 in each round after that, to a maxi- 
mum penalty of -4 in the fourth round. After four 
rounds, the victim becomes unconscious and dies 
of drowning two rounds later unless preventive 
measures are applied to the victim. There is an 
80% chance of saving the victim's life. If the vic- 
tim is unconscious before the necklace is 
removed, the chance for survival (after lifesaving 
measures are taken) drops to 50%. 


XP Value: — 


of Almor 
GP Value: 2,000 
GREYHAWK Adventures 
Appearing as a rusted, worthless piece ofjewelry, 
this item was enchanted by a spiteful wizard who 
wore it all of his life. Ironically, his peaceful 
death did not activate its vengeful powers. Other 
wearers have since used it. 
The item is cursed; it cannot be removed once 
it is put on except with the aid of a remove curse 
spell. Its magic takes effect only if an intelligent 


creature causes the wearer's violent death. Nine 
3238 


XP Value: — 


746 


Necklace of Alteration 


b E G a 


days after death, the wearer rises as a walking 
corpse, whose single goal is to destroy those 
responsible for its death. It ignores all except 
those who interfere with it, and then only until the 
interference ends. 

The power ofthe item animates the body, 
allowing it to regenerate damage as a troll (3 
points per round), or to animate a fresh body 
nearby if the original body was destroyed. The 
animated corpse is immune to priestly turns, holy 
water and other holy items; the only sure way to 
destroy the body is to burn it to ashes. 

For purposes of combat, the animated corpse 
has 8 Hit Dice, and attack by strangling for 2d8 
points of damage, which is continuous once the 
initial attack succeeds. It single mindedly attacks 
the creature responsible for its death. Although 
all damage is eventually regenerated (or another 
body taken), the corpse shows an irreversible 
process of decay. After 15 days, during which the 
wearer tries to take revenge, the character's psy- 
che can no longer remain and departs forever 
from the Prime Material Plane; neither reincar- 
nation nor resurrection is possible once this 
occurs. 

There is a 50% chance that the wearer transfers 
his or her vengeance to someone other than the 
creature responsible for its death, under the fol- 
lowing conditions: 

The others were with the primary subject 
when the wearer was killed, 

aided the primary subject and were present 
when the primary subject was slain, and 

slew the primary subject, frustrating the 
wearer's desire for revenge. Otherwise, the 
wearer departs when the vengeance quest is 
completed or time runs out. 


of Alteration 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
DRAGON Magazine 86 

This mystical item appears to be a cheap neck- 
lace, like any other sort of magical necklace, until 
it is worn. It then turns into a chain of silver with 

12 small globes of unidentifiable material sus- 
pended from it. Each globe appears to be identi- 
cal to the others, but ifa globe is pulled free of 
the necklace (which may be done in one round), it 
turns into a particular type of material and the 
wearer's body takes on the appearance and Armor 
Class of that substance. Though an identify spell, 

wish, or similar magical effect will reveal some- 


thing of the nature of the necklace, no magic is 
able to divine which globe ofthe necklace has 
what effect. 

Each of the 12 globes has a different effect. 
Once removed, a globe cannot be replaced on the 
necklace; its effects last for 2d4 turns and cannot 
be dispelled. Only after one globe's effect is 
ended can another globe be removed from the 
necklace. The necklace cannot be removed while 
its wearer is under the effect of one of the globes, 
except by casting remove curse or wish, in which 
case the entire necklace vanishes—but the effect 
currently taking place still runs its course. The 
necklace can be taken off, exchanged, and put on 
at will as long as one of the globes is not acti- 
vated at the time. Anything being worn or carried 
by the user of the necklace, which normally 
affects Armor Class, is overridden by the effect of 
a globe for as long as that effect lasts. 

When a globe is pulled from the necklace, the 
DM should roll 1dl2 and consult the following 
table to learn the composition of the globe and 
the Armor Class bestowed on the wearer of the 
necklace, as well as the wearer's temporary skin 
and hair color. Reroll to prevent duplicate results, 
perhaps using a smaller die (1d8 or 1d6) when 
several of the globes become used up. 


3239 


ey on 


747 


~ Necklace of Bad Taste r 


Roll Material & Color AC 
1 Sandstone; light brown 8 
2 Mithral; blue-silver 0 
3 Gold; gold 6 
4 Iron; dull grey 3 
5 Platinum; silver 4 
6 Granite; dull gray & red 3 
7 Coal; dull black 9 
8 Salt; dull white 10 
9 Bronze; bronze 2 

10 Adamantite; green-silver -1 

11 Lead; dark gray 5 

12 Wood; brown 7 


The necklace ofalteration can be worn and used 
by a member ofany character class or any human- 
oid of S- or M-size. Once used, the globes are 
worthless, except as curios. The globes of gold, 
platinum, mithral, and adamantite have values of 
1, 5, 20, and 50 gp respectively. 


of Bad Taste 
XP Value GP Value 
Cursed: — 1,000 
Normal: 500 1,000 
DRAGON Magazine 91 


Though sages argue that this item is more cor- 
rectly called a necklace oftasting bad, the com- 
mon name has stuck. This appears to be a magical 
necklace of unspecified nature until it is fastened 
around someone's neck. Immediately, the neck- 
lace causes a terrible odor to issue from the 
wearer's skin. All characters and most monsters 
within a 10-foot radius of the wearer become so 
uncomfortable with the smell that they must save 
vs. poison at -2 or become nauseated and unable 
to attack or defend themselves for 1d4 rounds. 
Even if the save is made, those within the 10-foot 
radius will suffer a -2 penalty on all attack rolls 
for as long as they remain in the area. 

The real value of owning such a necklace 
becomes apparent when one is attacked by a 
monster that bites its prey. The necklace affects 
any living creature that is native to the Prime 
Material Plane. Ifa monster meeting that descrip- 
tion bites the wearer of a necklace ofbad taste, 
the monster immediately suffers an attack of nau- 
sea (no saving throw) and is unable to attack 
again for 1d4+] rounds (though the creature can 
flee at half normal speed). That monster will not 
again bite the person wearing the necklace, but 
claw, tail, or missile attacks may be used if the 


creature is able to use them. One out of every four 
of these necklaces is cursed so that they cannot be 
unlocked from the wearer's neck once fastened in 
place. Only a wish will remove a cursed necklace 
ofbad taste. 


Cosette's 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 25,000 
DUNGEON Magazine 45 

Cosette's necklace is, in reality, a talisman of 
extraordinary power and breathtaking beauty— 
platinum, web-like strands weave together 21 tiny 
orbs. The filaments are each composed of tiny, 
individual links, barely visible to the eye. For its 
excellence alone, the original necklace is worth 
over 25,000 gp. It radiates very strong alteration 
magic. The necklace has all the powers of a talis- 
man of the spheres. 

To grasp its significance, one must first under- 
stand that the main mode of transport for reigar is a 
large, plant-like living being called an esthetic. 
Esthetics are capable of spelljamming, and one such 
creature can comfortably house a reigar and a com- 
plement of 10-20 lakshu and helots as bodyguards 
(see the MONSTROUS COMPENDIUM, SPELLJAMMER* 
Appendix for more details about esthetics). 

The esthetics’ main disadvantage is that they can- 
not travel in the phlogiston. The ether causes esthet- 
ics to enter a deep hibernation cycle, from which 
they emerge only in wildspace. As a result, all reigar 
are effectively trapped within crystal spheres. 

Over the centuries, many reigar have devised 
ingenious ways for circumventing their dilemma. 
One way a reigar can travel between the spheres 
is to secure a powerful spelljamming vessel to 
tow the esthetic from sphere to sphere. Since this 
is arather undignified way to travel (reigar are all 
violently independent), one reigar invented the 
talisman ofthe spheres. 

Inside each of the 21 hollow platinum spheres 
of the necklace, the reigar creator inscribed a 
transport rune. When the runes are pronounced 
with proper inflection and in the correct sequence, 
they open a large magical portal to any crystal 
sphere visualized by the talisman's user. The gate 
is large enough to navigate an esthetic through, 
without the need to travel through the Flow. For a 
reigar, the invocation takes about half an hour to 
complete; the gate to the desired destination 
opens a few hours later. The talisman must be 
within 10,000,000 miles of the inside of a crystal 


sphere to function. It can be used once per week. 
3241 


We a a N 


748 


Necklace of Lilith 


> SS ane” a 


Use of the talisman is very difficult for non- 
reigar and can be performed only by a wizard of 
greater than 7th level. First, the wizard must dis- 
cover the name of each rune hidden within the 
tiny hollow platinum spheres. Typically, it takes 
60 successful questions of an identify spell 
(minus one question per point of the wizard's 
Intelligence) to discover the names of the runes 
and their proper order in the portal incantation. 
Even then, nonreigar need four hours to pro- 
nounce the runes that open the gate, as naming 
each rune without the reigar's perfect inflection 
results in a considerable delay. 

The gate first appears as a tiny whirlpool of 
blue light in wildspace; its diameter grows at a 
rate of 1 d4 feet per hour. It would take several 
days to open a gate large enough to admit a ship 
of considerable size (like an elven man-o-war, for 
instance). For a nonreigar, & portal can be opened 
only within 100 miles of the inside of a crystal 
sphere, once a month. 

Like almost all reigar magical items, the power 
of the talisman is sublime and does not detract 
from the awesome beauty of the necklace. 


Elegance 
GP Value: 3,000 
DRAGON Magazine 73 
Any woman wearing this necklace of polished, 
nonprecious stones appears to be attired in ele- 
gant, expensive clothes appropriate to the place 
and time of day. 


XP Value: 600 


Frigga's Black Opal 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 10,000 
Legends & Lore 
Frigga's avatar wears a necklace of black opals 
that charms all within sight of it (save vs. spell to 
negate). 


Glittering 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 2,500 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
This necklace, on command, emits a ray of bril- 
liant light. The ray may be aimed at one creature 
within 30 feet; the victim must make a saving 
throw vs. spell or be partially blinded, suffering a 
—4 penalty on all attack rolls. The effect lasts for 
six rounds. The glittering necklace has no effect 
on undead, however, or upon any creature without 
eyes (such as a gelatinous cube). Ifused against a 
creature with a gaze attack, such as a basilisk, the 


_ XP Value: 9,000 


victim cannot use the gaze for one round even if 
the saving throw is successful. If used underwa- 
ter, the necklace has a 10-foot range. It may be 
used once per turn. 


of Greed 
XP Value: — GP Value: 1,200 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

This necklace appears to be and functions as a 
necklace ofprotection +7 in all respects. However, 
any thief seeing the item covets it and attempts to 
steal it (no saving throw) within 24 hours. Check as 
if for Pick Pockets, but with a -30% penalty to the 
roll in addition to the standard 5% modifier for 
each level difference between the thief and the vic- 
tim (added to chances of success if the thief is of a 
higher level, subtracted otherwise). The item is 
quite troublesome if worn in a town. 


of Harmonia 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,500 
DUNGEONS & DRAGONS Master Set 

Harmonia, daughter of the Greek gods Ares and 
Aphrodite, was given a magical necklace when 
she married Cadmus. Though relatively unre- 
markable at the time, the necklace brought disas- 
ter to all subsequent owners. In game terms, the 
DM should roll on Artifact Table 1-01: Cata- 
clysm every five days. The necklace cannot be 
removed short of a carefully worded wish. 


of Lilith 
GP Value: 82,500 
IMAGINE Magazine 20 

The necklace of Lilith is made of engraved gold, 
and set with many glittering gems. A gold and sil- 
ver amulet is suspended from the center and set in 
it is a dazzling sapphire. Anyone staring into the 
sapphire sees the image of a white falcon deep’ 
within. Those of evil alignments take 3d 10 points 
of damage from touching the stone. 

There are three other magical stones on the 
necklace: a diamond, a ruby, and an emerald. 
e The diamond, a gem ofatonement, allows the 
bearer to cast this 5th-level priest spell once 
per day. 
The ruby, a gem ofcuring, allows the bearer to 
either cure blindness, cure disease, or cure 
serious wounds once per day. 
e The emerald, a gem of karma, allows the bearer 

to cast one spell as if four levels higher (with 


respect to range, duration, etc.) once per day. 
3247 


A aa 


749 


Necklace, Marv's, of Memory Displacement 


Cea ae ee ee” A 


Marv's Necklace of 

Memory Displacement 
XP Value: — GP Value: 1,200 

1992 Fantasy Collector Card 622 
If magically identified, this brass necklace will 
appear to be a necklace of memory enhancement. In 
fact, it is a cursed object. When Marv's necklace is 
worn, all events of the last seven days apparently 
come back to the wearer with remarkable clarity, 
but they are colored by the wearer's subconscious 
desires, The memory ofan event that took place on 
the previous day will be altered only slightly, but by 
the seventh day, the memory is radically inaccurate. 
The wearer, however, recalls the event as if it had 
just happened, and remains absolutely certain that 
the memory's accurate. 


of Memory Enhancement 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
Tome of Magic 
The wearer of this brass necklace is immune to 
all memory loss, from both natural and magical 
causes (such as a. forget spell). The necklace has 
no effect on a wizard's spell memorization. 

In addition, the wearer can recall with absolute 
clarity any sight or conversation experienced or any 
book read within the previous seven days. Memo- 
ries prior to seven days ago are recalled with only 
normal clarity. The necklace affects only events that 
occurred while the necklace was worn by the user. 

In Ravenloft: There is a vicious effect on anyone 
who rolls a horror check while wearing the necklace. 
The owner gets no bonuses to horror checks for the 
passage of time. The effects of any failed horror 
checks never leave. Prolonged use of the necklace 
(more than a week) under the weight ofa failed hor- 
ror check forces the wearer to roll a madness check. 
In Ravenloft, many things are best forgotten. 


of Missiles 
XP Value GP Value 
Type I: 550 2,200 
Type II: 800 3,200 
Type IM: 1,150 4,600 
Type IV: 1,800 7,200 
Type V: 1,950 7,800 
Type VI: 2,300 9,200 
Type VII: 2,950 11,800 


DUNGEON MASTER Guide 
This device appears to be nothing but a cheap 
medallion or piece of valueless jewelry. Ifa char- 
acter places it about his or her neck, however, the 


necklace appears as it really is—it is actually a 
golden chain from which depend a number of 
golden missile globes. The spheres are detachable 
only by the wearer, who can easily hurl them up 
to 70 feet distance. When they arrive at the end of 
their trajectory, they burst as a magical fireball. 
The number of missiles, and their respective Hit 
Dice of fireball damage, are found by rolling 
1d20 and consulting the table below. 


Number of Missiles and Power 


Roll 11 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 
01-04 1 2 
05-08 1 2 2 
09-12 1 2 4 
13-16 1 2 2 4 
17-18 1 2 2 2 

19 1 2 2 4 

20 1 2 2 2 2 


For example, on a roll of 9-12, the necklace 
possesses seven missiles: one 7-HD, two 5-HD, 
and four 3-HDfireballs. The size shows that there 
is a difference in power between globes, but the 
number of dice and damage each causes cannot 
generally be known. 

Ifthe necklace is being worn or carried by a 
character who fails his saving throw vs. a magical 

fire attack, the item must undergo a saving throw 
as well. Ifit fails to save, all remaining missiles 
detonate simultaneously. 


of Mystic Eidolons 
XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 15,000 
Haunted Halls of Eveningstar 

These necklaces vary in appearance, but to the 
wearer, they always appear as plain metal chains 
adorned with Id8+1 pyramid-shaped, points- 
down rock pendants. If one pendant is twisted off 
and touched with a drop ofthe user's blood, a pro- 
jected image ofthe user is created, and 1 hit point 
is instantly lost. The loss is permanent. 

The user can see through the eyes of the image 
and move it at will. It moves in the same manner 
and rate as the user (ifa user can't fly, neither can 
his image). 

A wizard can cast one spell through the image (it 
becomes the spell's source). The image then van- 
ishes as the spell takes effect. The link between user 
and image penetrates all known physical and magi- 
cal barriers (an imprisoned wizard can attack or 
charm ajailor on the other side ofa barrier). 


Ifno blood touches a detached pendant within 
3250 


ARE E a an 


750 


Necklace of Protection 


Se ere ee ee en iM 


one turn, it dwindles away and is lost. Pendants 
vanish when used, and can never be recharged. 


of Night Seeing 
XP Value: 400 GP Value: 2,000 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 43 
This lovely artifact of elven manufacture is worth- 
while as an ornament due to its beauty and intri- 
cate workmanship, but when worn it bestows elven 
night seeing ability (infravision) on those not nor- 
mally able to see in the dark. Even a blind person 
could detect heat while wearing this necklace. 


Noj's Necklace of Not-so-Smart Missiles 
XP Value: — GP Value: 1,000 
1992 Fantasy Collector Card 153 
Noj cannot remove this necklace until all six mis- 
siles (10d6 points of damage, each) have been 
expended. The missiles are cursed with a 
boomerang effect, so they return to the thrower and 
explode. Prone to trouble, Noj sometimes finds 
himself a captured prisoner, and that's where he 
makes this item pay off: he taunts his captors, say- 
ing "IfI could get a hand free, I'd blast you with 
this necklace" When his captors find that they can- 
not remove the necklace, they usually resort to 

detaching a globe and casting it at Noj ... 


of Petrification 
XP Value: — GP Value: 2,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

This necklace appears and functions as a necklace 
ofglittering in most respects. However, if used 
against any creature with a petrifying gaze attack, 
the ray does not affect the monster at all and 
reflects back at the wearer instead. The victim 
must make a saving throw vs. petrification with a 
—4 penalty to the roll or suffer the effect of the 
gaze. The necklace becomes nonmagical if the 
wearer fails such a saving throw and is petrified. 


of Prayer Beads 
XP Value GP Value 
Atonement: 500 3,000 
Blessing: 500 3,000 
Curing: 500 3,000 
Karma: 500 3,000 
Summons: 500 3,000 
Wind Walking: 500 3,000 


DUNGEONMASTER Guide 
A magical necklace of this sort appears to be a 
normal piece of nonvaluable jewelry until it is 


placed about a character's neck. Even then, the 
true nature of the item is revealed only if the 
wearer is a priest (excluding druids and charac- 
ters otherwise able to use spells of a priestly or 
druidic nature such as paladins and rangers). The 
necklace of prayer beads consists of 1d6+24 
semiprecious (60%) and fancy (40%) stones. The 
wearer will be 25% more likely to successfully 
petition his or her deity to grant desired spells. 
There are also 1d4+2 special beads (precious 
stones, gems of 1,000 gp base value) of the fol- 
lowing sort (roll 1d20 for each bead): 


Roll 
1-05 


Results 

Bead of atonement: as the 5th-level 
spell ofthe same name. 

Bead of blessing: as the Ist-level spell 
of the same name 

Bead of curing: cures blindness, dis- 
ease, or serious wounds (as the appro- 
priate spells). 

Bead of karma: allows the priest to 
cast spells as ifhe or she were four lev- 
els higher (with respect to range, dura- 
tion, etc.). 

Bead of summons: calls the priest's 
deity (90% probability) to come in 
material form (but it had better be for a 
good reason). The bead ofsummons 
brings the priest's deity in avatar form 
on Ansalon. 

Bead of wind walking: as the 7th-level 
spell of the same name. 


06-10 


I-15 


16*17 


18 


19-20 


Each special bead can be used once per day. If 
the priest summons a deity frivolously, the deity, 
at the very least, takes the necklace as punish- 
ment. The function of each bead is known only 
when the bead is grasped and a commune spell 
used. All powers of the special beads are lost if 
they are removed from the necklace. 


of Protection 
XP Value GP Value 
+1:1,000 5,000 
+2:2,000 10,000 


The Book of Marvelous Magic 
When worn about the neck, this necklace adds a 
+1 bonus to the wearer's saving throws and 
Armor Class in a way similar to other protective 
devices. Its effect may be added to other bonuses 


gained through magical armor, shield, cloak, ring, 
3255 


, e G E 


751 


Necklace of Protection Against Charm 


pS Sa ee” i 


buckle, or earring. A necklace may not normally 
be enchanted further, although 50,000 gp worth 
of added gems might make it suitable for one 
additional enchantment, to a total of +2. 


of Protection Against Charm 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 10,000 
Old Empires 

This beautiful item is worn by the Precepts of 
Mulhorand. It is a golden collar that hangs down 
to the chest, studded with gems. It provides a +4 
bonus to all saving throws against charm/enchant- 
ment magic. Furthermore, by looking into the 
gems of this necklace, the wearer is aware of the 
identity and location of the Spellcaster. Protec- 
tions against scrying prevent this effect. 


Snake 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,600 
DRAGON Magazine 40 

Made of golden snakes twisted together, this 
necklace makes the user immune to attack from 
serpents of any size (meaning snakes only, not 
dragons, crocodiles, or other relatives). However, 
there is a 10% chance that each apparent snake 
necklace is in fact a necklace of strangulation 
fashioned to look like the real thing. 


of Strangling 
XP Value: — GP Value: 1,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

This necklace appears to be a necklace of protec- 
tion but, when worn, it starts to strangle its vic- 
tim. The wearer dies in one turn unless a remove 
curse 1s applied within that time; this remedy 
causes the necklace to disintegrate. Any victim 
strangled for three rounds or more is unable talk 
for 1d4 days or until a heal spell is applied. 


of Strangulation 

GP Value: 1,000 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 
A necklace of strangulation can be identified 
only when placed around a character's neck. The 
necklace immediately constricts and cannot be 
removed by any means short of an alter reality, 
limited wish, or wish spell. The wearer suffers 6 
points of strangulation damage per round until 
dead. The necklace remains clasped around the 
character's throat until he or she is a dry skeleton. 
It can be reused. 


XP Value: — 


Syranita's Opal 

XP Value: 2,400 GP Value: 12,000 
Monster Mythology 
Syranita'’s avatar wears a magical opal necklace 
that acts as a ring of protection +4 with all func- 
tions of a ring ofshooting stars, and it radiates 
protection from evil, 20-foot-radius when she 
wishes it. 


of Ugliness 
XP Value: — GP Value: 1,200 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

This necklace appears to be and functions as a 
necklace of protection in all respects. However, 
the wearer's Charisma suffers a —4 penalty, to a 
minimum score of 3, with the corresponding loss 
of retainer morale and possible penalties to the 
reactions of others as applicable. The necklace 
may not be removed until a remove curse is 
applied, but this does not harm it. 


N 
N 
TERA 
NA 


RAU q 


Dewey SER 


of Ulutiu 
GP Value: 40,000 
The Great Glacier 
In the beginning, there was the ocean. A millen- 
nium ago, when the Realms were barren, a vast 
ocean filled the area now known as the Great 
Glacier, spilling south to the lands that would 


eventually become Vaasa, Damara, and Narfell. 
3262 


XP Value: 4,000 


SSS Se 


752 


~ Needle of Lively Tatoos J, 


The ocean was still and uninviting; even if seafar- 
ing vessels had existed then, explorers would 
have found little of interest in its icy waters. 

Ulutiu, however, found the ocean irresistible. It 
isn't known if it was the solitude that attracted him, 
or if its bitter temperatures invigorated him. Per- 
haps he felt an affinity with the aquatic creatures 
that thrived in its depths. Whatever the reason, once 
Ulutiu discovered the ocean, he never left it. 

As for Ulutiu himself, he remains a mystery. 
From the writings he left behind, it's clear that he 
wasn't human, at least not in the accepted sense. 
He may have been an avatar of the gods, or an 
entity from another world seeking refuge in the 
Realms for reasons unknown. In any case, he 
wielded powerful magic—stronger, perhaps, than 
any magic wielded by the most skilled wizards of 
the realm before or since. 

By all accounts, Ulutiu enjoyed a life of peace- 
ful reflection, avoiding involvement in the affairs 
of men or gods. He spent his days in a magically 
constructed barge ofice, endlessly drifting in the 
waters he adored. 

When the end of his life approached, it was no 
surprise that Ulutiu chose the ocean as his final 
resting place. To prepare for his death, he fash- 
ioned a necklace of enchanted ice, a delicate 
chain of glistening blue crystals that would 
ensure a peaceful afterlife on the ocean floor. 

On his last day, Ulutiu lay down on his barge 
and donned the necklace, activating its magic. As 
life ebbed from his body, the necklace began to 
glow, covering Ulutiu in a frosty glaze that 
expanded and grew, encasing the entire barge in a 
tomb of magical ice. The barge sank under the 
weight of the ice, coming to rest on the ocean 
floor thousands of feet below. 

Unfortunately, the magic of the necklace 
worked too well. The ice tomb continued to grow, 
chilling the waters around it, creating huge 
mountains of ice that towered above the harden- 
ing surface to pierce the clouds. Many years later, 
when the magic had reached its limit, the vast 
ocean was no more. In its place was a sprawling 
arctic wasteland. The Great Glacier was born. 

Beneath it all, buried below tons of ice and 
snow, lay the corpse of Ulutiu, the glowing neck- 
lace still draped around his neck. He lies there 
today, undisturbed, forgotten. For the sake of the 
peoples of the Great Glacier, as well as those in 
the lands to the south, it is hoped that his rest con- 
tinues. If the necklace of Ulutiu were removed, 


the enchantment would be broken, and the Great 
Glacier would surely begin to melt. 


Vergadain's 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 10,000 
Monster Mythology 
The avatar's magical necklace allows him to vary 
his size between 1-foot and 15 feet in height 
(with his possessions changing accordingly). 


of Water Breathing 
XP Value: 800 GP Value: 8,000 
BLACKMOOR 
Allows one to breathe water for 2/4 days (then 
requires a half-day rest after the 2!4 days constant 
use). 


Needle 


Common needles are mainly used in garment 
work and come in several shapes and sizes for 
sewing, darning, knitting, and crocheting. 
Although hardly an effective weapon, adventurers 
(ninjas in particular) occasionally carry needles 
to help surprise or create diversions. These tend 
to be longer than common needles and often are 
coated with poison. 


of Death 
XP Value: 400 GP Value: 2,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

This needle appears to be a needle of repair but, 
when commanded to function, burrows into the 
user instead. The needle inflicts 2 points of dam- 
age per round and cannot be removed by any 
means. It can be destroyed ifa remove curse spell 
is cast upon the victim. 


of Lively Tattoos 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
Inside RAVEN'S BLUFF, The Living City 
This long, thin adamantite needle has an ivory 
handle and finger grips. It allows any PC with an 
artistic proficiency to inscribe beautiful tattoos 
on living creatures with a successful proficiency 
check. If the check fails, the tattoo still is 
inscribed, but is obviously flawed in some way. 

If the user has a tattooing proficiency, tattoos are 
inscribed with a +2 bonus to the proficiency num- 
ber, and any roll of 5 or more less than the base 
number for success results in a true work of art. 

A skilled tattooist also can attempt a magical, 


living tattoo once a day. If the proficiency check 
3266 


ee ee a N 


753 


~ Needle, Magical Darning = 


fails, the tattoo looks fine, but has no special prop- 
erties. Successful magical tattoos become ani- 
mated, generally behaving just like small, 
permanent programmed illusions. Although a 
magical tattoo cannot leave the area of the body it 
was inscribed on, it can move around or perform 
various preordained functions on that area. Chang- 
ing designs are done by overlaying a series of ani- 
mated tattoos and require a separate proficiency 
roll for each layer. If one layer fails, the entire tat- 
too becomes nonmagical. Ifthe wielder also has an 
artistic ability proficiency, +1 may be added to the 
proficiency number, and ifthe inks used in the tat- 
too are magical or especially fine (costing at least 
100 gp an ounce), the tattooist can add +2 to the 
proficiency number. Both bonuses are cumulative. 


Magical Darning 
XP Value: 200 GP Value: 1,000 
DRAGON Magazine 73 
A pair of wooden knitting needles that enable the 
user to knit at double normal speed. 


of Repair 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 2,500 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
Upon command, this needle magically repairs 
any normal clothing, sack, armor, or other torn or 
damaged cloth, leather, or metal item in one turn. 
It cannot affect magical items. 


of Sewing 

GP Value: 1,500 
DRAGON Magazine 30 
The needle ofsewing allows its user to effort- 
lessly sew through up to one half-inch of leather. 
It cannot penetrate the skin of any living crea- 
ture, so the user can never be injured by it, nor or 
use it as a weapon. 


XP Value: 300 


of Sewing IT 
GP Value: 1,000 
DRAGON Magazine 73 
This appears to be an ordinary needle. To use the 
needle magically, a person says "sew," and it con- 
tinues to sew a Stitch on a straight line until 
ordered to "stop." 


XP Value: 200 


Nefraclilia's Identifier 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
Tome of Magic 

This highly valued item is a magical test kit used 
to identify potions, powders, and other alchemi- 
cal substances. It consists of a wooden box (typi- 
cally measuring 1 by 1 by 3 feet) containing an 
assortment of vials, flasks, and beakers in small, 
padded compartments. Also, in the box is a copy 
of a text called Nefradina's Codex. This book 
instructs the owner on how to use the test kit. 

When the owner wishes to identify a potion, 
powder, oil, perfume, or similar liquid or powdered 
magical item, he or she looks up the substance's 
characteristics (odor, color, consistency, and so on) 
in the codex and follows the directions given to cre- 
ate a test mixture by combining a number of ingre- 
dients found in the kit. A drop of the test mixture is 
then added to the substance being investigated. The 
resulting effects (changes in color, sparks, smoke, 
bizarre odors, small explosions, and so forth) are 
researched in the codex and the substance is identi- 
fied through a process of elimination. 

The DM secretly rolls 1d100 to find the actual 
results: 


Roll Results 

01-20 The test kit is missing a vital chemical 
and can never identify that particular 
substance. 

21-50 The user comes to a false conclusion 
and believes the substance to be some- 
thing it is not (DM's choice). 

51-00 The user successfully identifies the 


substance. 
3271 


= ee ee 


754 


Net, Ashley's, of Entrapment 


> RMT 


The DM should modify the roll by +2% per 
level of experience of the character using the test 
kit. The time required to perform a single test is 
1d4+ turns. A typical kit may be used 1d10+40 
times before it becomes useless. 


Nefradina's Improved 
Identifier 

XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 10,000 

1992 Fantasy Collector Card 509 
This magic identification kit has been upgraded 
to eliminate some of the inaccuracy of the origi- 
nal. There is no longer a chance that the sub- 
stance to be identified is mistaken for something 
it is not: the magical component either is or is not 
perceived. The drawback is that the kit is able to 
successfully identify less often. Rolling 1d100, a 
result of 01-70 indicates that a vital chemical 
needed to make the identification is missing from 
the kit. The DM should modify the roll by +2% 
per level of experience of the character using the 
kit. A typical kit can be used 1d10+40 times. A 
single test requires 1d4+ turns. 


Nemean Lion Skin 
XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 20,000 
Legends & Lore 
Heracles wears the Nemean lion skin which can- 
not be pierced by anything. Thus, piercing weap- 
ons do only 1 point of damage and slashing 
weapons do only half damage. 


Nest 
A nest, also known as a crow's nest, is a small 
basket-shaped loft that is built onto the top of the 
mainmast. It is used mainly as a guardpost to 
watch for approaching land or ships. 


of Eyes 

GP Value: 8,000 
Krynnspace 
The creator of this device is unknown. However, 
other powerful wizards have discovered ways to 
duplicate the object. Like the other nests, a nest 
of eyes must be placed on the mast of a spelljam- 
ming or seagoing ship to function. The occupant 
of the nest speaks the command word and is 
given the ability to see up to 500 miles away. The 
viewer decides, in increments of 10 miles, how 
far he or she wants to view. Each vision lasts 4d4 
turns, and each nest begins with 30 charges. 
These nests are rechargeable. 


XP Value: 2,500 


of Invulnerability 
XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 10,000 
Krynnspace 
Also a creation of the Stellar Islands gnomes, 
these crows' nests protect the individual or indi- 
viduals inside them as ifa. globe ofinvulnerability 
were cast upon them. When found, a nest has 
4d10 charges. Each charge protects the nest's 
occupants for 12 rounds. 


of Life 

XP Value: 15,000 

Krynnspace 
These magical crows' nests were created by the 
gnomish priests and wizards ofthe Stellar Islands. 
To function, they must be affixed to the mast of a 
spelljammer and attuned to that ship. This attun- 
ing process takes 1d4 days. After that time, if a 
crew member is injured or killed on the ship and 
is placed in the nest of life, he is restored to full 
hit points. This process takes 1d4 hours and ages 
the crew member 1d4 years. The nest does not 
function on someone who was killed or injured 
while off the ship. Each nest works 12 times 
before being rendered nonmagical. 


Net 


Ordinary nets, commonly used by fishers, are 
large, open mesh affairs made of rope or cord. 
Magical nets are much smaller, square or rectan- 
gular (1 to 12 inches long on each side), and usu- 
ally made of fine metal threads that are intricately 
woven and often adorned by gems. 


GP Value: 75,000 


Roll Net Type 

01-25  Iaculum 

26-50 Net 

51-75 Throwing net, hooked 


76-00 Throwing net, weighted 


Ashley's Net of Entrapment 
XP Value: 1,500 GP Value: 10,000 
1992 Fantasy Collector Card 186 
Ashley's net is the same in most respects as a 
common net ofentrapment. However, her net is 
slightly stronger (resisting a Strength of 24), and 
also acts as a \veb spell while it ensnares a victim. 
Anyone else touching the net without uttering 
Ashley's command word immediately becomes 
stuck to the net as well, unable to break free with 
less than a 24 Strength. Unlike normal webs, the 


net is not flammable. 
3277 


A E a E a a 


755 


Net, Drag 


i, Ee ee Se ee ee 


AO 


ADA 


XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

This net can be commanded to search an area for 
a specifically named object. The user must name 
the object (such as treasure or traps) and place or 
throw the net over some part of the area to be 
searched, while speaking the proper command 
word. The net then drags itself around the area; if 
it encounters the object ofits search, it stops at 
that point. A second command word, if spoken 
within 60 feet ofthe net, causes it to fly back to 
the user. The net cannot find creatures or magical 
effects of any kind and functions only on rela- 
tively smooth surfaces. It searches 100 square 
feet (a 10x10-foot area) in one turn but does not 
venture more than 60 feet from the person com- 
manding it. The net may be used three times a 
day, searching up to 1,000 square feet per use. 


of Entrapment 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 7,500 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 
This magical rope net is strong enough to defy 
Strength under 20 and is equal to AC -10 with 
respect to blows aimed at cutting it. (Normal saw- 
ing attempts to cut it with dagger or sword will 
not succeed; to sever a strand ofthe mesh, a char- 
acter must hack at it until he does five points of 


damage on a strand.) 

Each net is 10 feet square and has three-inch 
square mesh. It can be thrown 20 feet so as to cover 
and close upon opponents; each creature in range 
must roll a successful saving throw vs. dragon 
breath to avoid being entrapped. It can be suspended 
from a ceiling (or generally overhead) and drop 
upon a command word. It can be laid upon the floor 
and close upward upon command. The net stretches 
so as to close over an area up to 5 cubic feet. It can 
be loosened by its possessor on command. 


of Fishing 
XP Value: 800 GP Value: 4,000 
War Captain's Companion 

This net is used to fish in the wide-open seas on 
several worlds. It can operate in the phlogiston, 
an almost unheard of practice, in a manner simi- 
lar to that of standard ocean fishing. The mini- 
mum size fish that a net of fishing can catch is 24 
inches long, and the maximum size is 100 feet 
long. If the net is used to capture anything larger 
than 100 feet long, the net must save vs. acid or 
break from the strain (treat the net as a rope). A 
total of 1,000 pounds offish can be scooped and 
brought aboard without any difficulty. Whether 
there are fish to be caught is up to the DM. 

When the net of fishing has captured a school 
of fish, the weight of the catch for purposes of 
drawing in the net is 1/100th of its actual weight. 
The net measures 120 by 160 feet; a total of 
19,200 square feet of surface area. 


Hare 
XP Value: 150 GP Value: 1,500 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

This net appears and functions as a net ofworth in 
all respects. However, when used on any gem of 
1,000 gp value or more, it has a 50% chance ofmal- 

functioning. If so, the gem is turned into a small, 
ordinary rabbit of no value. The change is perma- 

nent. The net may be used once a day at most. 


Hiatea's 
XP Value GP Value 
Weakness: 1,500 7,500 
Feeblemind: 1,000 5,000 
Petrification: 2,000 10,000 


Monster Mythology 
The avatar carries magical nets that can be 
thrown up to 120 feet. Victims caught within a 


net must make a successful saving throw vs. spell 
3282 


ae a ee ene) 


756 


~ Net, Safety g- 


at -4 or be affected by the magic of the net (typi- 
cally, she has nets of feeblemind, weakness 
(reverse of strength), and petrification). 


of Landing 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 4,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

This net protects the user from damage from 
falling. No special changes occur as the victim 
falls; the impact is apparently the same as if 
unprotected. However, the net absorbs some or all 
of the damage inflicted by the fall. The net can 
absorb a total of 200 points of damage when first 
made (ld100+100 when found). Damage is sim- 
ply applied to the net instead of the victim. The 
net functions automatically and has no command 
word. It becomes nonmagical once its charges are 
used up, and it cannot be recharged. 


Loyal Net of Restraint 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 6,000 
Otherlands 
The Dargonesti do not enjoy violence, which is 
why this net was created. When a command word 
is uttered, the net unravels and hurls itself at the 
first target it encounters within its 30-foot range. 
The net leaps in the direction the owner points to 
when uttering the command word. 

When unfurled, the net covers a circle 20 feet 
in diameter. It is ineffective against any creature 
of large or greater size. All who are trapped in the 
net must roll saving throws vs. spell, with a -2 
penalty. Any who fail the saving throw become 
placid and motionless, unable and unwilling to 
take any action. Furthermore, each victim who 
fails the saving throw can be asked three ques- 
tions, which must be answered truthfully. Those 
who succeed with their saving throws are merely 
entangled until they can escape. 

The net has an effective Armor Class of-3, 50 
hit points, and a Strength of 18/00. It has a Speed 
Factor of 1. Any Dargonesti wizard with a weaving 
nonweapon proficiency can repair a damaged net. 

Another command word causes the net to 
release its captives and curl back into its compact 
shape, hooking itself back onto its owner's belt. 
Some Dargonesti give their nets names, as one 
would do for a pet. 

The net responds only to its owner's com- 
mands. The would-be owner must keep the net in 
his or her dwelling for nine days, giving the net 
the chance to attune itself to its owner. 


of Plenty 

GP Value: 7,500 
Secrets of the Lamp 
This net always catches enough fish to feed the 
user and 1 to 3 others when cast into fresh or salt 
water. In addition, the net can be used as a defen- 
sive weapon—once per week, ifthe owner opens 
and shakes the net, it can release a rush of cold 
water equal to 500 gallons. This water causes 3d6 
points of damage to fire-dwelling creatures and 
can douse even large or magical bonfires. 


XP Value: 750 


of Profit 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 10,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
If any nonmagical object is placed in this net, the 
command word spoken, and the object then car- 
ried in the net to a place where it can be sold, the 
user can sell the item for 1 to 20% (1d20) more 
than its original value (no saving throw for the 
buyer). The net can be used once per day at most. 


Safety 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
Inside RAVEN'S BLUFF, The Living City 
These magical ropes are woven from giant spider or 
ettercap silk. Safety nets are usually found in lengths 
of 50, 100, or 200 feet. When tied into loops, they 
create semi-permanentfeatherfall effects. These can 
be placed over openings or suspended in the air. 

A safety net can operate vertically, horizon- 
tally, or at an angle, eliminating inertia directed 
perpendicular to it. Thus, a vertical net would 
eliminate the horizontal (forward) inertia of an 
oncoming missile, but the missile would still fall 
downward at the normal rate. 

An object's inertia is eliminated when any part 
of the object touches the area of effect of the net 
as long as the object's weight does not exceed 200 
pounds plus a number of pounds equal to twice 
the rope's length in feet. For example, a 100-foot 
safety net can stop objects weighing up to 400 
pounds. The net's area of effect is as long and 
wide as the loop. The area is centered within the 
loop and is as deep as the loop's shortest dimen- 
sion. For example, a 100-foot net could be formed 
into a 20- by 30-foot rectangle which would have 
an area of effect 20 by 30 by 20 feet. The same 
net could form a cylindrical area about 30 feet 
wide and 30 feet deep. Loops with total circum- 
ferences less than the net's length can be formed 


with no ill effects. Two or more nets can be tied 
3287 


757 


Net of Snaring 


ME a a ee er” 


together to form larger loops with no ill effects, 
but such combination nets have weight limits 
based on the shortest net in use. 


of Snaring 

XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 7,000 

The Book of Marvelous Magic 
This net may be thrown at any one creature within 
120 feet. The victim must make a saving throw vs. 
spell or be ensnared by the net, suffering a -2 penalty 
to all attack and damage rolls and able to move at 
only ‘A normal rate. (Minimum damage is one point 
per die rolled.) Ifthe victim has wings, the net entan- 
gles them, reducing flying speed to ‘A normal, 
although other methods of flying (such as magic) are 
not affected. Any creature of dragon size or larger 
may destroy the net by force in only one round. The 
snaring effect lasts for one turn at most or until the 
user commands the net to release its victim. The net 
of snaring can be used three times a day. 


of Snaring II 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 6,000 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 
This net looks just like a net ofentrapment, but it 
functions only underwater. There, it can be com- 
manded to shoot forth up to 30 feet to trap a creature. 
It is otherwise the same as the net of entrapment. 


of Sneering 
XP Value: 40 GP Value: 400 
DRAGON Magazine 156 
This sturdy rope net is imbued with the power of 
speech. Wizards have searched in vain for a way 
to imbue it with the power to shut up. As it is, it is 
impossible to get rid of the net once it is claimed, 
so it remains with its owner and provides a run- 
ning sarcastic commentary on all his actions. 
("Planning to open that door? Good idea—let me 
know where to send the flowers. Say, that was a 
pretty impressive sword thrust, but I think you'd 
have done more damage with a giant Q-tip.") No 
known form of attack can damage this net; all 
have been tried, and all have failed. 


of Spirit Snaring 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 10,000 
Oriental Adventures 
This magical net looks like a common fishing net. 
When used on normal creatures, the net has no 
more effect than a normal net would. However, 
when cast upon a spirit creature, the net freezes the 


creature in place and prevents the use of any of its 
attacks or magical abilities. Furthermore, the spirit 
cannot remove the net itself. The creature is still 
able to converse and may bargain for its release. 


Webnet 
XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 15,000 
Dragons of Triumph 
This item is only useful to a wizard, though any 
character can wear it as an attractive hair ornament. 

When worn by a wizard who knows the com- 
mand word, the webnet can be cast to the ground 
before a foe, or directly at a foe. It instantly grows 
to a 10-foot-diameter size and acts as a net of 
entrapment. 

Alternately, the net may be spun in a glittering 
circle, affecting up to 12-Hit Die of creatures as if 
a hypnotize spell had been cast upon them, 
although the targeted creatures have the opportu- 
nity to save vs. spell. 


Webnet II 

GP Value: 15,000 
Tales of the Lance 
These delicate and beautiful hair ornaments are 
spun by Dimernesti sea wizards and are treasured 
by wealthy ladies ofthe land. In the hands of a wiz- 
ard who knows the command word, webnets are 
clever weapons. When spun before the eyes ofup to 
12 Hit Dice of intelligent creatures, webnets cause 
the creatures to save vs. spell or be hypnotized. A 
hypnotized subject obeys reasonable, verbal sug- 
gestions only, either responding immediately or 
according to a trigger ("When you hear a clap, stab 
Amos"). Ifthe subject is hostile or wary, the DM 
should add +1 to +3 to the subject's saving throw. 
This power may be used three times per day. 

With a second command word, the user may 
throw the webnet at a foe. It grows into a 10-foot- 
round net of entrapment (treat as AC -10; 5 points 
of damage are needed to cut a single strand). The 
net can only be ripped by a person with a Strength 
of 20. Upon command the net shrinks again. This 
power may be used 6 times per day. 


XP Value: 3,000 


of Worth 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
This net can be used to alter the value of gems. 
When wrapped around any one nonmagical gem and 
the command word spoken, it may change the gem 


into some other type. Roll 144 to find the result: 
3294 


ye ee ne ee 


758 


Nithian Monolith 


a a ee 


Roll Result 
1 Next lower value 
2 Same value 

3-4 Next higher value 


The net ofworth can be used once per day at 
most and becomes nonmagical ifused on a magi- 
cal gem of any kind. 


SY 


POCO \\\ NaS 


eee erett y 


-$ 


`A 
S NARA 


AW \ A 


NS 


Nithian Monolith 
XP Value: 24,000 GP Value: 120,000 
Kingdom of Nithia 

Scattered among the great deserts of Nithia are 
monoliths and obelisks. These towering stone 
structures are enigmas to those not initiated into 
their mysteries. However, everyone senses a pow- 
erful purpose about them. 

Most Nithians know the monoliths are magical 
in nature, but few know their actual purpose. 
Their true purpose is to relay and enhance the 
tremendous pyramid energy network that criss- 
crosses Nithia. Because ofthis, the stone edifices 
radiate unnatural energy ifa detect magic spell is 
used. 

Nearly all monoliths are built under the care- 
fully guided instruction of a montoth (a specialty 
wizard). This society of adepts predates Nithian 
history. As each member is inducted into the 


organization, they are sworn to secrecy, carrying 
their arcane knowledge with them to the grave 
and beyond. "Be as silent as the stones," reads a 
famous montoth motto. 

To create the monoliths and obelisks of the 
pyramid energy network, each structure is 
empowered with a secret magical function. 
Although this power is secret, the concentration 
of magic is so great within them that odd side 
effects or "magical eddies" occur nearby. 

A few ofthe monolithic powers (or side effects) 
are listed below. These are only suggestions and 
others may be created at the DM's option. 


Roll Monolith Powers 


1 No plants grow within 10 miles. 

2 All spells within one mile have a 50% 
chance of backfiring. 

3 A fresh water spring always flows near the 
base. 

4 All sound is silenced within 300 paces. 

5 Gold brought within two miles turns to lead. 

6 Touching it gives a+1 bonus to attack dice 
for one day. 

7 Anyone looking at it must save vs. poison 
or fall asleep. 

8 Those touching it strike the nearest person 
once (no saving throw). 

9 Drinking water in sight of it quenches 
thirst for 30 days. 

10 Experience gained in the last week is dou- 
bled once. 

11 Pyramid power is doubled within one mile. 

12 Anyone resting within one mile does not 


wake for 24 hours unless they save vs. spell. 


One interesting aspect of monoliths is that they 
can't be abused. Those that produce beneficial 
effects are so remote that only the bravest of 
heroes can reach them. 

Occasionally, the monoliths' powers change (at 
the DM's option), especially if it is likely that they 
will be abused. And, as with all montoth magic, 
their powers are concealed from the populace at 
large. Rumors abound in the knowledgeable citi- 
zenry that some of the monoliths are hollow and 
can be entered through magically guarded secret 
doors. It is believed that within the monoliths, 
secret montoth chambers control the monoliths’ 
powers and perform other fantastic feats. 

As always, the montoth society is secretive 


about this and does not speak about it. However, 
3295 


, a a a i aS, 


759 


Nithian Standard 


Sn ee ET Ae 


the society does build some of them hollow, stock- 
ing them with food and water to serve as secret 
oases for other montoths. There is a 1 in 10 chance 
that any monolith is an oasis. The montoth do not 
tell others of this, as the store of supplies would be 
depleted instantly by desert travelers. 

One thing all monoliths have in common is 
their durability. They weather the blasting of 
sand, the constant heat, and the passage of time as 
if these forces did not exist. Foreigners occasion- 
ally try to chip offa piece of statue or monolith as 
a souvenir of their travels. Unfortunately, all they 
receive for their troubles is a blunt tool or weapon. 


Nithian Standard 


XP Value GP Value 
Camel: 1,500 7,500 
Fox: 1,500 7,500 
Hawk: 1,500 7,500 
Hyena: 1,500 7,500 
Ibis: 1,500 7,500 
Ostrich: 1,500 7,500 
Panther: 1,500 7,500 
Phoenix: 1,500 7,500 
Viper: 1,500 7,500 


Kingdom of Nithia 

Magical Nithian standards are elaborately carved 
representations of animals used for troop identifi- 
cation in battle. Nithian standards usually resem- 
ble native animals or monsters. They are mounted 
atop long, lance-like staves and carried into battle. 

Each standard has its own special power that is 
indicated by its form. Standards are extremely pow- 
erful, rare magical items that convey their power to 
all within view of the standard who wear a corre- 
sponding charm. For example, in battle, an ibis 
standard affects all within easy view who wear an 
ibis symbol or have and ibis statue upon their per- 
sons. Effective range is limited to those who could 
identify the standard's form if they looked in its 
direction (being able to distinguish an ibis from an 
owl). Thus, the standard's size indicates its range of 
influence. A few standard examples follow. 


Roll Standard Effects 

01-02 Camel Half normal water intake 
required. 

03-05 Fox Troops move as silently as 
a Ist-level thief. 

06-07 Hawk Javelins gain+1 attack and 
damage bonuses. 

08-10 Hyena War cries cause enemies to 


save vs. spell or run in fear. 


11-12 Ibis Death isn't reached until 
hit points are at -10. 

13-14 Ostrich Prevents heat exhaustion 
due to running. 

15-16 Panther +2 morale bonus. 

17-18 Phoenix Fatal blows are avoided on 
a successful saving throw 
vs. death magic. 

19-20 Viper Victim must save vs. poi- 


son or die automatically 
on a natural 20 attack roll. 


Only one standard can affect an individual at any 
given time. Those who are affected can switch 
between eligible standards once per round at will. 


Noisesome Spirit Chasers 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
Oriental Adventures 
These magical items come in strings of 100 and 
look like modern day firecrackers. When lit and 
cast to the ground, they magically explode with 
a loud bang. Spirits canno^ tolerate the noise. 
Lesser spirits automatically flee for 1d4+1 
rounds. Greater spirits must make a saving 
throw vs. spell to remain in the area, otherwise 
they flee as described above. The explosions 
cause no damage nor do they affect any other 


type of creature. 
3297 


SS eee Ge eg 


760 


Oar 


Oars are used to propel or steer water 
craft. An oar consists of a long wooden shaft with 
a blade at one end and a short tapered grip at the 
other, a metal or leather bracket or sleeve may be 
fitted somewhere near the center. 


Ether 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

This oar appears to be and functions as an oar of 
rowing in all respects. However, if a vessel is 
propelled entirely by oars of this kind, a special 
command word opens a gate into the Ethereal 
Plane directly ahead of the vessel; the gate 
appears as a silvery glowing mist. The gate stays 
open for a maximum of six rounds; it closes after 
the vessel propelled by the oars has passed 
through, and the mist disappears. Note that other 
vessels and creatures may also enter the gate. 
The oars can continue to propel the vessel in the 
Ethereal Plane at the normal rate. Another com- 
mand opens a similar gate back to the Prime 
Material Plane. An ether oar can enter the Ether 
and return once a day. 


. of Rowing 
XP Value: 600 GP Value: 3,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

This oar is identical to a magical, 10-foot-pole. 
One command causes it to lengthen by 10 feet per 
round to a maximum of 40 feet total length; a 
second command causes one-fifth of its length to 
flatten and widen, as a normal oar. If properly 
mounted in a boat's oar-lock, the oar may be 
commanded to row by itself, having the force of 
10 rowers. Note that two such oars are needed if 
no living rowers are used, because both sides of 
the vessel must receive equal propulsion or the 
boat goes around in circles. A third command 
word causes the oar to return to its original 10- 
foot form. The oar ofrowing may be commanded 
as often as needed and functions for up to 12 
hours per day. 


Obsidian Man of Urik 


Obsidian Man of Urik 
XP Value: — GP Value: — 
Book of Artifacts 
Standing fully 12 feet high, the obsidian man is a 
perfectly carved statue of volcanic glass. Its limbs 
and features show no signs of chiseling; the man's 
skin is as smooth as human flesh. The statue is 
perfectly proportioned, with none of the exagger- 
ations that might be expected of a being of its 
height. 

The obsidian man wears a nobleman's kilt and 
baldric. Its clothes are made of the same glossy 
black stone as its body, and they appear to be one 
homogeneous piece. However, the kilt has been 
observed to flex and rustle when the obsidian 
man animates. The obsidian man originated in 
the DARK SUN* setting. 

Eighty-five years ago, in the year of Wind's 
Reverence, obsidian miners in the Smoking 
Crown made a startling discovery: Entombed in a 
vein of solid black glass was the titanic figure of 
aman! The miners chiseled away the surrounding 
stone, and on orders of the templar leader, the 
obsidian man was laid in a sledge and prepared 
for transport to Urik. 

The next morning, the mining camp was horri- 
fied to discover that 13 people had been grue- 
somely crushed during the night. The templars 
wanted to investigate, but they realized that 
Hamanu would brook no delay in the delivery of 
their find, so the caravan bearing the obsidian 
man set out for Urik. 

Each night along the way, more men were mur- 
dered. The templars naturally suspected the 
obsidian statue, but each morning the statue was 
found reposing lifelessly in its sledge, its guards 
among the slain. The caravan finally reached 
Urik, but not before dozens of people were killed. 

The obsidian man was then brought before the 
sorcerer-king Hamanu, who examined the figure 
with intense interest and was angered by his 
inability to learn anything about it. Soon, he set 
20 half-giants to guard it and retired to his library 
to research the matter. 

In the middle of the night, the sorcerer-king 
was disturbed from his studies by the sounds of 
battle in his palace. He rushed to the scene, only 
to find half of his guards dead and others barely 
clinging to life. The obsidian man was gone, 
leaving a trail of rubble through the fortress as it 


smashed its way out. Hamanu caught up with it in 
3301 


ee ee 


761 


~~, Obsidian Man of Urik 


the main square of Urik. There, he labored with 
all the terrible magic at his command to master 
the creature. At last, bloodied and battered, the 
warrior-king defeated the obsidian man and 
bound it to his service with a golden circlet 
around its brow. 

Hamanu eventually discovered that the man 
possessed several marvelous powers and strange 
abilities. He used the titan's strength and prowess 
for years. The only limitation he could find was 
that the obsidian man could not abide the touch 
of daylight. When the sun rose, the statue returned 
to the place it had risen from that night and 
became inert. 

Some seven years ago, a young templar in 
Hamanu's service made an awful mistake: He 
removed the golden circlet from the titan's brow. 
No one will ever know why he did so, for he was 
the first victim of the obsidian man. The statue 
walked out into the desert and vanished from the 
knowledge of mortal men. 

Two years ago, the golden circlet that con- 
trolled the obsidian man was stolen from 
Hamanu's palace. The thief was never caught and 
the circlet has still not surfaced, despite the tow- 
ering rage of the sorcerer-king. 

The obsidian man of Urik can be used as a 
rampaging, unstoppable force for the heroes to 


oppose. As it wanders, the obsidian man is capa- 
ble of destroying whole villages or small armies. 
If used as a random force of destruction in this 
manner, a good adventure could be built out of 
finding the golden circlet that will command the 
colossus, then tracking the man down. 

Alternatively, the heroes could find themselves 
in a situation where they require the legendary 
strength of the obsidian man. Again, finding the 
statue in its hidden retreat and discovering a way 
to control the thing are adventures in and of 
themselves. 

If the heroes gain control of the circlet and the 
obsidian man, they find that their prized posses- 
sion is also sought by Hamanu of Urik. An inter- 
esting adventure could also be built around the 
exploration of the obsidian man's origins and 
purpose. 

Heroes who try to retain control of the obsid- 
ian man will find that the statue has an unnatural 
tendency to become separated from its control- 
ling circlet. When you are ready to remove the 
Man from the campaign, an assassin or thief 
could steal the golden circlet, or an occurrence 
such as a sandstorm or an ambush may acciden- 
tally separate them. 

Constant Powers: By day, the statue is com- 
pletely motionless. It cannot be damaged by any 
amount of physical force or any kind of magical 
or psionic abilities. By night, the statue animates. 
It has 150 hit points and an Armor Class of-5, 
attacking twice per round with a THACO of 5 for 
5d12 damage per hit. The obsidian man can move 
at arate of 15 and has an effective Strength score 
of 25 for purposes of throwing, breaking, or car- 
rying things. While active, the statue can be dam- 
aged only by metal weapons of +3 or better 
enchantment. It is completely immune to all 
psionics except those of the psychokinetic disci- 
pline. The obsidian man is immune to all magic 
except the spells cone of cold, stone shape (which 
inflict 1 point of damage per level of caster), and 
stone toflesh (which reduces the man's AC to 10 
for one round.) It makes all saving throws as a 
20th level fighter. 

Whenever the obsidian man suffers enough 
damage to destroy it, it returns to its dormant 
stage. It will animate again the following night, 
with all its damage repaired. 

Invoked Powers: Once per day, the obsidian 
man canfly (as the spell) for up to one hour. It 


can easily carry several human-sized creatures if 
3301 


762 


Oil, Anger 


naan ee 


so ordered. It may create a wall offire once per 
day that lasts up to one hour. By touch, it can 
stone shape or passwall. 

The obsidian man may fire a thin beam of 
black fire once per turn inflicting 25 points of 
damage upon targets within a 60-yard range (sav- 
ing throw for half damage applies). Once per 
week, it can be ordered to invoke afinger of 
death (as the 7th level priest spell). 

Curse: Unless controlled, the obsidian man is 
a mindless force possessing only a desire to slay 
the living. It can be controlled only through the 
use of the golden circlet, a psionic device that 
establishes a link between the wearer and the arti- 
fact when worn. Even then, the evil force of the 
artifact demands blood. Each night, it must be 
allowed to slay a sentient being or it will turn on 
the owner of the circlet. Further, each time the 
controller orders it to use an invoked power, the 
Obsidian Man permanently drains 1 hit point. 
Suggested Means of Destruction: 

Expose the man to 24 hours of continuous 
sunlight. 

Cut out its heart with a weapon of +5 enchant- 
ment, then throw the heart into the lava of the 
Smoking Crown. 


Oil 

Oil is a general term for a large number of sub- 
stances. Oils include lotions and salves that are 
rubbed on the body for medicinal purposes. Oils 
also include lubricants that reduce friction. Many 
enchanted oils are herbal distillates or infusions. 
They tend to be nonflammable. Lamp oil is used for 
lamps and lanterns; it is not particularly explosive 
although it can be used to feed an existing blaze. 


Absinthe 
XP Value: 100 GP Value: 500 
DRAGON Magazine 33 
When this oil is applied to another person, that 
person will take twice the damage given to others 
for 24 hours or until dispelled. 


of Acid Resistance 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 1,000 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide, 1st Edition 
When this oil is applied to skin, cloth, or any 
other material, it confers virtual invulnerability 
against acid. The oil wears off, but slowly—one 
application lasts for a whole day (1,440 rounds). 
Each time the protected material is exposed to 


acid, the duration of the oil is reduced by as many 
rounds as hit points of damage the acid would 
have caused to exposed flesh. Thus, if a black 
dragon breathes for 64 points of acid damage, a 
person protected by this oil would lose 1 hour and 
4 minutes of protection (64 rounds—32 if a sav- 
ing throw vs. breath weapon was successful). 
Each flask contains sufficient oil to protect one 
human-sized creature (and equipment) for 24 
hours; to protect 24 human-sized creatures for 
one hour; or to protect any combination of crea- 
tures and duration between these extremes. 


African Ju Ju 
XP Value: 100 GP Value: 500 
DRAGON Magazine 33 
This oil increases the wearer's Charisma by 2. It 
also grants a +2 bonus to all saving throws for 24 
hours. 


of Agelessness 
XP Value: 800 GP Value: 4,000 
Old Empires 
This oil is made from the nectar of roses from the 
gardens of Ishtar in Unther. When one vial of this 
oil is applied to the body of a human or demihu- 
man, the normal aging process halts for six months. 
Continued applications, therefore, can keep one 
young indefinitely. The secret of this oil is known 
only to the priestesses of Ishtar. It is one ofthe most 
eagerly sought secrets of southern magic. 


Allspice 
XP Value: 150 GP Value: 750 
DRAGON Magazine 33 
This potent oil adds 1 point to Strength for 24 
hours when rubbed into the skin on the arms and 
legs. 


Allspice II 
XP Value: 250 GP Value: 650 
DRAGON Magazine 33 
The version of allspice oil adds a +4 bonus to all 
saving throws vs. spell for 24 hours. 


Anger 
XP Value: 300 GP Value: 900 
DRAGON Magazine 33 
When used before combat, any warrior or 
werecreature can be calmed to the point where 
they do not enter a berserker rage or enter were- 


form. One application of oil ofanger can even 
3308 


Se ee 


763 


Oil, Animation 


i Ae 


keep a werecreature from suffering the alterations 
of his or her lycanthropic disease during times of 
full moons or other environmental triggers. The 
effects of this oil last for 24 hours. 


Animation 
XP Value: 200 GP Value: 800 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 65 

Normally discovered in small, crystal or stone bot- 
tles, this rare oil is prized because it can animate 
living or dead vegetable matter. A single vial cov- 
ers 2 square feet of surface area. When applied, the 
object becomes subservient to the user's com- 
mands—provided those commands consist of five 
words or less. If the object has legs, it can walk; 
arms, it can fight or grasp. Harps and lutes can 
play themselves, etc. The duration is 1d6+6 turns. 


Anise 
XP Value: 100 GP Value: 400 
DRAGON Magazine 33 
Anise oil doubles the range and effect (enabling 
the user to see infrared and ultraviolet) of clair- 
voyance spells for 24 hours. 


Aphrodisia 

XP Value: 200 GP Value: 550 
DRAGON Magazine 33 

This oil raises the user's Charisma by 3 points (to 
a maximum of 18) for 24 bom's. The oil causes all 
members of the opposite sex to make a saving 
throw vs. spell or fall under the effects of a charm 
spell for the duration of the oil. 


Arabian Nights 

GP Value: 1,500 
DRAGON Magazine 33 
This oil raises the user's Charisma by 2 points for 
24 hours. 


XP Value: 300 


of Aries 
XP Value: 150 GP Value: 750 
DRAGON Magazine 33 
Oil of Aries doubles the range and effect of clair- 
voyance spells (enabling the user to see infrared 
and ultraviolet) for 24 hours. 


of Armor 
XP Value: 400 GP Value: 2,000 
Old Empires 
This thin, nearly invisible oil is applied to skin to 


give it the toughness of armor. Each application 


lasts 1d6+6 hours. Its base AC is 4, modified by 
Dexterity and rings of protection. There are no 
cumulative effects with armor. Oil ofarmor is 
used in Unther, where certain priesthoods forbid 
the wearing of armor. 


of Armor II 

XP Value: 500 GP Value: 1,800 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 65 
Oil of Armor gives a temporary Armor Class 
bonus of +4 to creatures not wearing armor. A 
vial typically contains enough oil to cover four 
human-sized creatures, one dose lasting 1d6 
hours. 


Attraction 
XP Value: 200 GP Value: 700 
DRAGON Magazine 33 
This oil raises the user's Charisma by 3 points for 
24 hours. 


Attractiveness 

GP Value: 1,500 
DRAGON Magazine 179 
By means of this slick unguent, the user may 
coat his or her face and gain 1 point of Cha- 
risma, to a maximum of 19. The effect lasts for 
24 hours minus the original charisma of the user 
(for an individual with a Charisma of 18 it 
would last for but six hours). If the oil is not 
removed by then, it acts as oil ofhorridness for 
the next 24 hours. 


XP Value: 500 


Bard's Aphrodisiac Inspiration 

XP Value: 200 GP Value: 600 
1992 Fantasy Collector Card 633 
This aromatic oil is a derivative of Starella's 
aphrodisiac. Lady Elorelei managed to lure a 
high-level wizard into engineering this special 
formula for her, which she wears as a perfume to 
certain social functions. When creatures of simi- 
lar race and opposite sex inhale the oil and fail a 
saving throw vs. spell, they begin to spout love 
poetry, making up verses if they don't know any 
by heart. By doing so, they are making a public 
declaration of love for the wearer, although they 
are not necessarily affected as if by a charm 
spell. (Elorelei's motives are those of political 
blackmail.) 


3318 


ic 764 ~ 


Oil of Buoyancy 


j CO ee ee 


Bats' Blood 
XP Value: 250 GP Value: 750 
DRAGON Magazine 33 
This toxic oil causes 2d4 points of damage when 
sprinkled on characters of good alignment. This 
cursed oil often is misread as a random beneficial 
oil. 


of Beauty 
XP Value: 400 GP Value: 1,200 
Old Empires 
This oil, a mixture of olive oil, crushed pearl, and 
ash from the Purple Plains, is used by the priest- 
esses of Ishtar. When rubbed into their bodies, 
their Charisma increases by 1d4 points for 1d3+1 
turns. This does not ensure that those who view 
them will fall madly in love with them, but it does 


enable them to make a good impression. 


Bendover's 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 3,000 
DRAGON Magazine 33 
This oil grants a bonus of +5 to saving throw vs. 
death magic for 24 hours. 


Bergamot's 
GP Value: 1,800 
DRAGON Magazine 33 
Bergamot's oil grants a +3 to saving throw vs. 
spell for 24 hours. 


XP Value: 600 


of the Black Arts 
XP Value: 700 GP Value: 2,100 
DRAGON Magazine 33 

When applied to the forehead and sprinkled in an 
"X" over where a victim will step, the victim 
must make a saving throw vs. death magic or 
instant death results. Only characters of evil 
alignment can use this oil. The oil's effect lasts 
for 24 hours or until one victim passes over the 
"X." Whether the victim dies or not, the oil loses 
its potency after one use. 


Bottom #20 
XP Value: 100 GP Value: 300 
DRAGON Magazine 33 
When applied to the doorknob of the victim's 
house, the victim must make a saving throw vs. 
spell at -3 or receive 3d6 points of damage when 
he or she tries to leave home. The oil maintains its 
potency for 24 hours. 


Bruno's Curse 
XP Value: — GP Value: 400 
DRAGON Magazine 33 
This oil grunts protection from evil as the spell. 
The effect lasts for 24 hours 


Buddha 
XP Value GP Value 
Type I: 300 900 
Type II: 600 1,800 
Type III: 900 2,700 


DRAGON Magazine 33 
This oil increases the user's chance to learn 
priests’ spells. There are three different potencies 
of the oil that currently exist. The oil functions 
for 24 hours. Usually, priests anoint themselves in 
this oil when they return to the temple to learn 
more spells. 


Type Learn Spell Bonus 
I +5% 
Ti+ 10% 
Weis co 


of Bug Repellence 

XP Value: 300 GP Value: 550 
DUNGEONS & DRAGONS Rules Cyclopedia 
"Bug" includes any form of arachnid (spider, 
tick, scorpion), insect (ant, beetle, fly), or chilo- 
pod (centipede, millipede). After using this oil, 
the user cannot be touched by any normal bug, 
and a giant-sized bug will ignore the user unless 
the bug makes a saving throw vs. spell. Ifthe sav- 
ing throw is successful, the oil does not affect the 
giant bug. The potion adds a +4 bonus to any sav- 
ing throws allowed against magically summoned 
or controlled bugs. 


Bull's 
XP Value: 100 GP Value: 300 
DRAGON Magazine 33 
This oil increases Strength to 18 for one turn, 
then subtracts 2 points from the user's original 
Strength for six turns. 


of Buoyancy 
XP Value: 250 GP Value: 700 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 65 
Coating a person or object with this oil prevents 
sinking in water for 1d4+4 hours. There is enough 
oil per vial to coat one human-sized creature— 


about 25 square feet. 
3329 


ee Se 


765 


Oil, Caloric Shield 


pe ee en 


Caloric Shield 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 5,000 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 47 
The caloric shield is a highly prized oil made 
from the essence of salamanders. When applied 
over one's body, it confers fire resistance (as the 
spell) for a period of 1d6+6 turns. One jar con- 
tains a single application. 


Carnation 

XP Value: 150 GP Value: 450 
DRAGON Magazine 33 
This powerful oil cures all nonmagical diseases 
the user may be suffering from. For the 24-hour 
duration of the oil, the user is immune to all non- 
magical and magical diseases, including lycan- 
thropy. 


Chocolate 
XP Value: 100 GP Value: 300 
DRAGON Magazine 33. 
Chocolate oil makes all wandering monsters 
friendly for one day if saving throw vs. spell fails. 
Ifthe monsters make their saving throws, they go 
into frenzy. 


Cintronella 
XP Value: 125 GP Value: 625 
DRAGON Magazine 33 
Citronella adds +3 to Charisma for 24 hours. 


Civit 
XP Value: 100 GP Value: 300 
DRAGON Magazine 33 
This oil grants the user protection from good (as 
the reversed priests’ spell protectionfrom evil) for 
24 hours. 


Cleo May 
XP Value: 100 GP Value: 300 
DRAGON Magazine 33 

Known variously as Cleopatra's oil, or Comet 
Ome's oil, this oil raises the user's Charisma by 4 
points for 24 hours. If the user's Charisma 
increases past 18, the oil causes all members of 
the opposite sex to make a saving throw vs. spell 
or fall under the effects of a charm spell for the 
duration of the oil. 


of Cloaking 

GP Value: 2,250 
DRAGON Magazine 179 
Oil ofcloaking may be smeared over an item to 
hide its magical nature for up to 24 hours. The 
item must be no larger than the size of a man and 
cannot be alive. Applying the oil to one item uses 
the entire contents of the bottle, regardless of 
size. Divination spells such as detect magic do 
not work on an item cloaked in this fashion, 
though spells that do not reveal magical nature 
(such as legend lore or detect evil) function nor- 
mally. At the end ofthe 24 hours, the oil wears off 
without ill effect. 


XP Value: 750 


of Commanding 
XP Value: 300 GP Value: 900 
DRAGON Magazine 33 
This oil acts as a command spell when touched to 
another for 24 hours. 


of Concentration 
XP Value: 400 GP Value: 1,200 
DRAGON Magazine 33 
Oil ofconcentration causes silence in a 30-foot 
radius for 24 hours. The oil can be rubbed on an 
individual or onto an object. 


of Confusion 
GP Value: 2,700 
DRAGON Magazine 33 
This oil causes confusion, as the spell, when 
thrown or applied to another for 24 hours. Saving 
throw vs. spell are applicable. 


XP Value: 900 


of Conquering Glory 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 1,500 
DRAGON Magazine 33 
The oil ofconquering glory adds +1 to the user's 
THACO when applied to a weapon (magical or 
otherwise) for one turn. 


Controlling 
XP Value: 600 GP Value: 1,800 
DRAGON Magazine Issue 33 

This oil charms its victim, as the charm person 
spell, when applied to another or thrown in com- 
bat. Can also charm monster, adding a+1 bonus 
to the monster's saving throw for each Hit Die 
above one for 24 hours. 


3341 


A ee ae ae ea ae aa a 


766 


Oil, Doas Isay's 


> ee! i 


Crab Apple 

XP Value: 100 GP Value: 300 
DRAGON Magazine 33 
When applied to another, the oil causes the indi- 
vidual to be well disposed toward the user for 24 
hours. The oil can be applied, thrown onto the 
victim, or mixed into food or drink. The victim is 
granted a saving throw vs. spell to counter the 
effects. 


of Crossing 

GP Value: 1,800 
DRAGON Magazine 33 
When sprinkled in the victim's path, this oil 
causes the victim to sustain 3d6 points of dam- 
age. The victim's Strength and Constitution are 
lowered by 3 points for the day if a saving throw 
vs. spell fails. Only evilly-aligned characters can 
use this oil without alignment difficulties. 


XP Value: 600 


Cumin Seed 
XP Value: 100 GP Value: 300 
DRAGON Magazine 33 
When sprinkled in the doorway of one's dwelling, 
the building is protected from evil as the spell 
protectionform evil 10' radius for 24 hours 


Cypress Seed 
XP Value: 100 GP Value: 300 
DRAGON Magazine 33 
Cypress seed oil increases probability of a 
friendly reaction (granting a +5 Reaction Adjust- 
ment bonus) from devotees of chaotic gods for 24 
hours unless a saving throw vs. spell is success- 
ful. If successful, the followers are more apt to be 
unfriendly toward the user (suffering a -7 Reac- 
tion Adjustment penalty). 


of Damnation 
XP Value: 300 GP Value: 900 
DRAGON Magazine 33 
When sprinkled on another, the victim must make 
a saving throw vs. poison or die. If the victim 
dies, a Wisdom check must be rolled. Ifthe check 
fails, the victim is trapped in the Prime Material 
Plane as a ghost or poltergeist (50% chance for 
either). The apparition will appear 1d4 weeks 
after death from this oil. 


Dendan 

XP Value: 400 GP Value: 900 
The Emirates of Ylaruam 

The dendan is a great fish that lives in the sea off 
the Emirates' coast. Legend says that this fish 
may be slain by a shout from a human. The leg- 
end is false. The oil of this fish is as a potion of 
ewater breathing, and is a treasure much-valued 
by those who would emulate Al-Kalim's pilgrim- 
age to the Old Man of the Sea. 


Desir Erne's 

GP Value: 1,500 
DRAGON Magazine 33 
When applied, this oil makes the next being 
(regardless of the species) of the opposite sex fall 
madly in love with the user for 24 hours. No sav- 
ing throw is allowed unless the being has an Intel- 
ligence of 5 or greater. 


XP Value: 500 


of Dexterity 

XP Value: 500 GP Value: 1,500 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 65 
An individual who is coated with this substance 
increases Dexterity to 19 for 1d4+4 turns. Fur- 
ther, thieves who use this oil increase their pick 
pockets and open locks scores by 30 percentage 
points each. 


of Disenchantment 

XP Value: 750 GP Value: 1,500 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide, Ist Edition 
This oil enables the removal of all enchantments 
and charms placed upon living things, and the 
suppression of such effects on objects. Ifthe oil is 
rubbed on a creature, all enchantments and 
charms on it are immediately removed. Ifrubbed 
onto objects bearing an enchantment, the magic 
will be lost for 1d 10+20 turns. After this time, the 
oil loses potency and the item regains its enchant- 
ment. The oil does not radiate magic once it is 
applied, and masks the enchantment of whatever 
it coats, so that an item so coated will not show 
any enchantment for as long as the oil remains 
effective. 


Doas Isay's 
XP Value: 300 GP Value: 900 
DRAGON Magazine 33 
Doas Isay's oil gives the user the power to detect 
illusion and detect charm for 24 hours. 


3351 


> 767 


Oil, Double Cross 


pp SESO a 


Double Cross 
GP Value: 1,800 
DRAGON Magazine 33 
When sprinkled on an enemy, it confuses the vic- 
tim as the spell ofthe same name. Also, when 
applied to oneself, it causes anyone with an Intel- 
ligence of 10 or less to believe whatever the 
wearer says (no saving throw). The oil lasts for 
one turn. 


XP Value: 600 


of Dragon's Blood 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 1,500 
DRAGON Magazine 33 
This potent oil will remove curse, cure disease, 
dispel charm, and cure 3d6 points of damage. For 
the next 24 hours, the user is immune to all 
curses and charms. 


of Dream 
GP Value: 1,800 
DRAGON Magazine 33 
This oil causes sleep when sprinkled on a victim. 
The effect lasts for 24 hours and cannot be 
removed unless a dispel magic, wish or similar 
spell is used. 


XP Value: 600 


of the Dryad 

XP Value: 250 GP Value: 750 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 65 
When a character is anointed with this pale green 
oil, he or she is able to pass through vegetation 
like a druid and enter trees as per & plant door 
spell. Once applied, the oil remains magical for 
1d4+4 turns. 


of Elasticity 

XP Value: 250 GP Value: 750 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 65 

A character who pours this oil over his or her 
body transforms into a humanoid, gelatin mass. 
In this form, the character can stretch appendages 
to immense lengths and minute thinness. For 
example, one limb could be stretched to 300 per- 
cent of its normal length. Once applied, the oil 
remains magical for 1d4+4 turns. 


of Elemental Invulnerability 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 1,000 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide, 1st Edition 
This precious substance gives total invulnerabil- 
ity to one type of normal elemental force on the 
Prime Material Plane wind storms, fires, earth 


slides, floods, and so forth. There is a 10% 
chance that each such flask will also be effective 
on the appropriate Elemental Plane—this allows 
the protected individual to operate freely and 
without danger from elemental forces. Attacks 
by elemental creatures are still effective, but 
with a -1 penalty per die of damage. A flask 
contains enough oil to coat one human-sized 
creature for eight days or eight individuals for 
one day. The element protected against is deter- 
mined randomly. 


Roll Element 
1 Air 
2 Earth 
3 Fire 
4 Water 
of Enchantment 
XP Value: 900 GP Value: 2,700 


DRAGON Magazine 33 
This oil adds a bonus of+2 to the user's Charisma 
for 24 hours. 


of Enchantment II 
XP Value: 300 GP Value: 900 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 65 
When poured over a weapon or armor, this liquid 
infuses the object with a temporary +1 enchant- 
ment. It takes one dose to cover each of the fol- 
lowing: a shield, a suit of armor, two melee 
weapons, six daggers, 20 arrows, or 20 bolts. The 
duration of the oil is 24 hours. 


of Eternal Fire 

GP Value: 500 
DRAGON Magazine 145 
This rather dramatically dubbed oil is typically 
found in two or four doses. When a bit of this oil 
is poured over a torch or other small flame, it 
causes the fire to stay lit for a full 24-hour period. 
One dose of this oil is enough to treat six torches 
or keep an oil lamp burning for 72 hours. Oil of 
eternalfire does not explode, nor does it affect 
large or magical flames. 


XP Value: 300 


of Etherealness 
XP Value: 600 GP Value: 1,200 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide, Ist Edition 
This is a light oil that is applied externally to 
clothes and exposed flesh, conferring ethereal- 


ness In the ethereal state, the individual can pass 
3361 


> a: i i nis. < 


768 


Oil of Fire Stilling 


b ey a 


through solid objects in any direction—sideways, 
upward, downward'sor to different planes. The 
individual cannot touch nonethereal objects The 
oil takes effect three rounds after application, and 
it lasts for 4+1d4 turns unless removed with a 
weak acidic solution prior to the expiration of its 
normal effective duration. It can be applied to 
objects as well as creatures. One potion is suffi- 
cient to anoint a normal human and such gear as 
he typically carries (two or three weapons, gar- 
ments, armor, shield, and miscellaneous gear). 
Ethereal individuals are invisible. 

In Ravenloft: This oil makes the wearer insub- 
stantial. In no case, however, can a character just 
walk into the Ethereal Plane and escape. 


Eucalyptus 
XP Value: 200 
DRAGON Magazine 33 
When rubbed into wounds, this oil cures 2d6 
points of damage. 


GP Value: 600 


of Eve 
XP Value: 300 GP Value: 900 
DRAGON Magazine 33 
When used by a female, it has the ability to 
charm men for 24 hours. 


of the Evil Eye 

GP Value: 600 
DRAGON Magazine 33 
This oil grants the user protectionfrom evil for 24 
hours. 


XP Value: 200 


Excisement 
XP Value: 300 GP Value: 750 
DRAGON Magazine 33 


Excisement oil acts as a remove curse spell. 


of Exodus 
XP Value: 200 GP Value: 600 
DRAGON Magazine 33 
When thrown on another, the victim flees from 
the thrower for one full turn. 


of the Feasts 
XP Value: 250 GP Value: 500 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 65 
When poured into a pot, kettle, or other cooking 
device, this oil becomes very hot. Any food item 
placed in the oil cooks until it is done, then floats 
to the top. The oil is valued by adventurers who 


do not want to announce their presence by build- 
ing cooking fires. A flask typically contains 
enough oil to cook 10 one-person meals. 


of Feather Falling 
XP Value: 700 GP Value: 2,100 
DARK SUN Campaign Set 
Rubbing this oil on one's feet gives a character all 
of the abilities of the wizard's spell feather fall, 
but for a duration of exactly 10 hours. The char- 
acter can carry up to 250 pounds of equipment 
besides normal clothing and weapons. Oils of 
feather falling are most often used to travel across 
the Silt Sea—a feather weight person can float 
easily on the surface of the silt and walk at a nor- 
mal rate of movement. Multiple applications can 
last long enough to cross an estuary of the Silt 
Sea, or even to reach one ofits many islands from 
shore. 


of Fiery Burning 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 1,000 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide, 1st Edition 

When this oil is exposed to air, it immediately 
bursts into flame, inflicting 5d6 points of damage 
to any creature directly exposed to the substance 
(save vs. spell for half damage). If hurled, the 
flask will always break. Any creature within 10 
feet of the point of impact (up to a maximum of 
six creatures) will be affected. The oil can, for 
instance, be used to consume the bodies of as 
many as six regenerating creatures, such as trolls. 
If the flask is opened, the creature holding it 
immediately suffers 1d4 points of damage, unless 
a roll equal to or less than the creature's Dexterity 
is made on 2d10, the flask cannot be restoppered 
in time to prevent the oil from exploding, with 
effects as described above. 


of Fire Stilling 
XP Value: 180 GP Value: 540 
DRAGON Magazine 159 
This magical oil is purchased in five gallon casks, 
and each cask holds enough oil to treat a galleon's 
main deck and masts. When applied to wooden 
planks, the oil's magic permeates the wood, giv- 
ing it flame resistance. Freshly treated wood 
gains a +2 vs. fire for 5d10 days. If the wood 
comes in contact with flame, it contains the 
flame, not allowing it to spread. However, the oil 
dries out the wood, reducing its effectiveness to 


4d10 days on subsequent applications. This oil 
3370 


me ee we 


769 


Oil, Five Finger Grass 


ip, RE ALTA ee eee Se! 


has become quite popular with ship crews sailing 
the Flow, lessening the dangers of critically dam- 
aging a ship while sailing the flammable Sea of 
Space. The cost given above is for each five gal- 
lon cask. 


Five Finger Grass 
XP Value: 250 GP Value: 750 
DRAGON Magazine 33 
This oil grants the userprotectionfrom good and 
increases Dexterity by 2 points (maximum of 18) 
for 24 hours. 


Frangi Pani 
XP Value: 200 GP Value: 600 
DRAGON Magazine 33 
When applied, all those around the user will trust 
him or her and reveal secrets and indiscretions for 
one turn. A saving throw vs. spell at a -3 penalty 
is applicable. 


of Fumbling 
XP Value: — GP Value: 650 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide, Ist Edition 

This oil seems to be of a useful type—acid resis- 
tance or slipperiness —until the wearer is under 
stress in an actual melee situation. At that point, 
there is a 50% chance each round to fumble and 
drop whatever is held—weapon, shield, spell 
components, and so forth. Only a thorough bath 
of some solvent (such as alcohol) will remove the 
oil before it wears off. 


Galangale's 

XP Value: 100 GP Value: 400 
DRAGON Magazine 33 
When Galangale's oil is applied before going to 
court or before the constabulary approach to 
investigate ill doings, the judge or the constables 
will always find in favor of the user (unless a sav- 
ing throw vs. spell is made). This oil lasts for one 
turn. 


Gardenia 
XP Value: 200 GP Value: 600 
DRAGON Magazine 33 
When sprinkled on an opponent, the victim suf- 
fers the effects of a holdperson spell for one turn 
unless a saving throw vs. spell is successful. 


Getaway's 
XP Value: 300 GP Value: 900 
DRAGON Magazine 33 
This oil protects a dwelling from evil (as the 
spell) for 24 hours. 


Grape 
XP Value: 100 GP Value: 500 
DRAGON Magazine 33 
When this oil is poured onto the ground, 100 gold 
pieces appear. If poured onto any other surface, 
nothing happens and the magic is wasted. 


of Great Devotion 

XP Value: 750 GP Value: 2,250 
DRAGON Magazine 179 
This holy unguent is only usable by priests, 
though of any kit or alignment. The priest's level 
increases by three levels if 5th level or lower, and 
by two levels if of 6th to 10th level. It has no 
effect on priests of 11th level or higher. The priest 
receiving this boon fights, casts spells, turns 
undead, and otherwise performs as ifthat number 
of levels higher for the next 12 hours. This oil 
does not allow additional spells to be gained, nor 
does it allow for the priest to learn spells that 
could not be learned at the earlier level. Special 
priestly abilities that are tied to level (such as 
kahin or hakima abilities, explained in Arabian 
Adventures) may be temporarily added in this 
fashion. 


of Hair Replacement 

XP Value: 150 GP Value: 450 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 65 
This magical oil was developed by a self-con- 
scious wizard who was worried about his hair 
loss. Two hours after the oil is rubbed into the 
scalp, hair begins to grow at a rate of one-quar- 
ter inch a day for 10 days. The hair is always 
bright orange. Care must be taken when han- 
dling this oil; if it is spilled on hands, arms, or 
other flesh, hair will grow there at the same rate. 
The hair growth is permanent and only can be 
banished by a remove curse or a razor. (Luckily, 
it can be dyed.) 


of High Conquering 
XP Value: 600 GP Value: 1,800 
DRAGON Magazine 33 
This oil adds a +2 bonus to the user's THACO for 


24 hours when applied to a weapon. 
3380 


770 


Oil, Jamaica 


>) Re 


of High John the Conqueror 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 1,500 
DRAGON Magazine 33 
This oil gives its user a +3 THACO bonus when a 
weapon is anointed. The effect lasts for 24 hours. 


Hindu Grass 
GP Value: 750 
DRAGON Magazine 33 
This oil adds a +3 to the user's Wisdom for 24 
hours. 


XP Value: 250 


Honeysuckle 
XP Value: 100 GP Value: 300 
DRAGON Magazine 33 
When this oil is rubbed in the eyes, the user's 
range of sight is doubled and infravision is 
obtained for 24 hours. 


of Horridness 
XP Value: 200 GP Value: 600 
DRAGON Magazine 179 
By smearing this oil on the face, one's Charisma 
is immediately reduced to 3 for the next 24 hours. 
The oil temporarily renders the user's visage so 
horrid that only ghuls and night hags would be 
comfortable around him. This oil is never labeled 
correctly, as it is often the result of spoiled oil of 
attractiveness. 


Hypnotic 
XP Value: 300 GP Value: 900 
DRAGON Magazine 33 
Hypnotic oil has a relaxing effect on the user that 
lasts 24 hours. While under the effect, the user is 
immune to all charm, hold, andfear spells. 


Hysspo 
XP Value: 200 GP Value: 600 
DRAGON Magazine 33 
This oil, when sprinkled on an opponent, placed 
in food or drink, or in clothing or bedding, causes 
1d6 points of damage ifthe opponent is of evil 
alignment. Once placed in food or on an item, the 
oil will last 24 hours before it loses potency. 


of Immovability 
XP Value:350 GP Value: 1,050 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 65 
This highly magical mixture keeps things from 
moving. When the thick, honey-smelling oil is 
applied to the hinges ofa door, the legs of a chair, 


or other moveable object, it locks them into place 
against whatever they were sitting upon or resting 
against for 1d4+4 hours. Only dispel magic neu- 
tralizes the oil earlier. A door could still be 
opened, a chair picked up, etc., if the item was 
broken. The hinges would remain affixed to the 
wall, the chair legs to the floor. Each application 
covers a 1-foot-square surface area, and there are 
typically 2d12 applications per flask. 


of Impact 
XP Value: 750 GP Value: 1,500 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide, 1st Edition 

This oil has beneficial effects on blunt weapons 
and missiles, both magical and nonmagical. 

When applied to a blunt weapon such as a club, 
hammer, or mace, it bestows a +3 bonus to attack 

rolls and a +6 bonus to damage. The effect lasts 
1d4+8 rounds per application. One application 
will treat one weapon. When applied to a blunt 
missile, such as a hurled hammer, hurled club, 
sling stone, or bullet, it bestows a +3 bonus to 

attack rolls and a +3 bonus to damage. The effect 
lasts until the missile is used once. One applica- 
tion will treat 1d2+3 sling stones or two larger 
weapons. A flask of oil of impact holds 1d3+2 

applications. 


Invisibility 

GP Value: 1,200 
DRAGON Magazine 179 
This oil is similar in its effects to the potion of the 
same name. The oil, though, last for 1d6+6 turns 
or until dispelled. Oil ofinvisibility does have a 
distinctive scent that dogs or other creatures may 
track. 


XP Value: 400 


of Invulnerability 
XP Value: 400 GP Value: 1,200 
DRAGON Magazine 179 
Similar to the potion of the same name, the 
effects of this oil last for 1 d6+6 turns unless dis- 
pelled. The oil has an aroma like burnt almonds. 


Jamaica 
XP Value: 200 GP Value: 600 
DRAGON Magazine 33 
When rubbed onto wounds, this oil heals 2d4 
points of damage. 


3391 


aaa <a a a aa: 


771 


~ Oil, Jannis's Aroma of Nightmares = 


Jannis's Aroma of Nightmares 
XP Value: 300 GP Value: 900 
1992 Fantasy Collector Card 630 

All creatures who come within 5 feet of the 
wearer are put to sleep for 1d4+4 rounds. While 
sleeping, the victims experience lifelike night- 
mares about being violently slain by the wearer of 
the oil. Upon waking, the victims must roll suc- 
cessful saving throws vs. paralyzation or act as if 
affected by afear spell at the sight of the wearer. 
Even if the saving throw is successful, the victim 
is still frightened, so he fights with a -2 penalty 
to attack and a +2 bonus to damage, due to the 
surging adrenaline in his or her system. One 
application of the oil lasts for 3d4 rounds. 


Jazper's Oil 

of Permanent Etherealness 
XP Value: — GP Value: 600 
1992 Fantasy Collector Card 274 
This oil works exactly the same as oil ofethere- 
alness, except that its effects are permanent— 
only the spell plane shift or an oil ofmaterialism 
potion (which Jazper is still working on) will 
return a coated character from the Ethereal 
Plane. Of course, a wish spell can alter the cir- 
cumstances as well. Those victims of Jazper's 
oil of permanent etherealness who are not prop- 
erly prepared for a return trip may be forced to 
take up residence in the Ethereal Plane until 
they either find help or meet an Ethereal mon- 
ster who will send them to yet another plane of 
existence. 


Jezebel 
XP Value: 300 GP Value: 900 
DRAGON Magazine 33 
When used by a female, it has the ability to 
charm men for 24 hours. 


of Jinx Removing 
XP Value: 200 GP Value: 600 
DRAGON Magazine 33 
After three days continued use of this oil, it 
removes any curse or geas placed on a character. 


Jo's Liquid Road 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 3,000 
1992 Fantasy Collector Card 389 
When sprinkled on water, swampland, quicksand, 
or a similar surface, Jo's liquid road hardens to 
the density of granite, enabling easy passage. It 


stays hard for one hour. One flask can harden a 5- 
by 5-foot surface (a path 25 feet long and 1-foot- 
wide). Jo's fluid has another special quality, 
though, it has had permanent invisibility cast 
upon it, so no one can see where it is. Jo inter- 
sperses his liquid road so that he must make a 
short hop from stepping stone to stepping stone. 
Those who attempt to follow him are often forced 
to swim at least part of the way. Of course, this 
can be troublesome in quicksand. 


Kludde 
XP Value: 300 GP Value: 900 
DRAGON Magazine 33 
This oil allows its user to speak with animals as 
the priest spell for 24 hours. 


Lavender 
XP Value: 100 GP Value: 300 
DRAGON Magazine 33 
Oil oflavender increases both Wisdom and Dex- 
terity by 2 (Maximum of 18) for 24 hours. 


of Life 
XP Value: 250 GP Value: 750 
DRAGON Magazine 33 
When this oil is liberally applied to the skin, the 
user gains the benefit of a cure disease. This oil 
even has a 25% chance to cure lycanthropy. 


of Lighting 
XP Value: 250 GP Value: 750 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 65 
This oil is stored in a dark container. When it is 
unstoppered, the magic is released, and the oil 
glows like a beacon or light spell for 6d6 turns. 
The oil can be poured onto objects, setting them 
aglow. The oil works under water. 


of Lightning Bolts 
XP Value: — GP Value: 500 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 65 
Characters who spread this oil on their bodies 
attract lightning bolts for 1d4 hours. If there is 
calm weather, clouds quickly gather, heavy rains 
begin, and lightning fills the sky—and strikes the 
character. Each hour 1dl2 lightning bolts auto- 
matically strike the character, doing 2d10 points 
of damage. This oil is treasured by farmers who 
pour it on the ground near their fields so their 
crops will be watered. 


3401 


ee ee a O E T 


772 


Oil of Metal Fatigue 


ee oe 


Lily of the Valley 

XP Value: 200 GP Value: 600 
DRAGON Magazine 33 
This oil must be kept pure, meaning that it can 
only be contained in gold containers, or contain- 
ers that are gold-lined. When splashed on a crea- 
ture not of good alignment, it causes 2d6 points 
of damage. 


of Lorn 
XP Value: 250 GP Value: 600 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 65 

Sir Lorn, a famed paladin, commissioned a spe- 
cial oil to be created for him. Lorn was always 
concerned about his appearance and presence, 
and the oil named after him is a magical men's 
cologne. It makes the wearer smell so good that 
his Charisma is raised by 1 for 1d6 hours. A vial 
typically contains enough cologne for 10 applica- 
tions. Women using the cologne gain no benefit. 


of Luminescence 
XP Value: 300 GP Value: 600 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 65 
This oil is usually found in a slender flask. If the 
oil is quaffed, the drinker suffers 1d10 points of 
damage. If, however, part of the oil is poured over 
an object, such as a torch, its true power is 
released. The object glows with the equivalent of 
a light spell for 1d6+6 turns. The object gives off 
no heat and can be used under water. There are 
typically eight doses per flask. 


Magnolia 

GP Value: 450 
DRAGON Magazine 33 
This rare oil doubles a character's existing PSPs 
for three turns. If Rubbed into the hair of a nonp- 
sionic character, the magic in the oil is ineffec- 
tual; it does not have the power to instill psionic 
ability. 


XP Value: 150 


Mage's Vision 
See Oil ofScrying 


of Manpower 
GP Value: 1,200 
DRAGON Magazine 33 
Oil ofmanpower increases the user's Strength by 
2 (to a maximum of 18) for 24 hours. Ifa fighter 
already has 18 Strength, add 20 to his or her 
exceptional Strength score. 


XP Value: 400 


Maybel's Insect Charm 
XP Value: 400 GP Value: 1,200 

1992 Fantasy Collector Card 632 
Maybel, a druid, mixed honey and a few other 
natural sugars with Murdoch's insect ward, and 
she came up with an oil that repels and attracts 
insects at the same time. Insects may not come 
within 5 feet of the wearer during its 1d3+1 
hour duration of effect, but they will seek its 
wearer out from miles around and then circle, 
just outside the warding perimeter. This allows 
Maybel to cast various control spells and it also 
acts as a combat barrier—the insects attack 
anyone who attempts to cross it. Insect crea- 
tures with Intelligences of 5 (including thri- 
kreen) or more are allowed a saving throw vs. 
spell to ignore the effect. 


of Mercury 
XP Value: 100 GP Value: 300 
DRAGON Magazine 33 
When users anoint themselves with this oil, they 
are able to contact a vassal of one of the deities, 
ask the being a question that will be truthfully 
answered with a short phrase or word. If this oil is 
used more than once in a year's time, it causes the 
vassal to demand payment of one sort or another. 
The table below may be used by the DM as a 


guide. 


Alignment 

of Contact Payment 

Good Geas. The quest forced upon the 
character cannot be removed short 
of the use of two wishes. The quest 
will be sacred in nature and impor- 
tant to the deity questioned. 

Neutral Loss. The user loses either a point 
from a prime requisite statistic or 
two levels (DM's choice). 

Evil Death (save vs. death magic applic- 


able at a -6 penalty). This forces 
the user to serve the deity as a vas- 
sal for 1,000 years. 


of Metal Fatigue 
XP Value: 400 GP Value: 1,200 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 65 
This oil is usually stored in a glass flask, with 
four applications per flask. When the oil comes in 
contact with metal, the mixture causes the metal 


to rust and fall apart within 1 d4 rounds. Magical 
3409 


773 


Oil, Majo 


> a a | 


metal receives a saving throw vs. disintegration, 
oil thrown at iron golems and other metal-based 
creatures causes 2d10 points of damage. One 
application covers a 2-foot square, 2-inch deep 
metal surface. 


Mojo 
XP Value: 100 GP Value: 500 
DRAGON Magazine 33 
This oil has the power to grant one wish. 


of Monster Repulsion 
XP Value: 250 GP Value: 750 
DRAGON Magazine 194 

Like many other oils, this liquid is meant to be 
applied to a single person's clothing and skin 
rather than taken internally. It quickly soaks in 
and works continuously for 12 hours (unless 
removed by a strong solvent). Once applied, this 
oil releases a scent that is odorless to all crea- 
tures except the one type of animal or monster 
(lion, tiger, troll, blue dragon, goblin, at the dis- 
cretion of the maker) that it was formulated to 
affect. That type of creature smells an odor so 
disgusting that it will not willingly approach 
within 80 feet of the offending person. An intel- 
ligent creature can overcome is revulsion and 
force itself forward, but as it gets closer the 
odor increases so that each halving of the 80- 
foot distance gives the affected monster a 
cumulative -1 on all combat rolls (such as 
attack, damage, and saving throw rolls); -1 at 
40 feet, -2 at 20 feet, -3 at 10 feet, and 4 at 5 
feet or closer. This oil can also be painted on 
inanimate objects such as fence posts to create 
a large zone of exclusion that no member of the 
target species can enter. One dose of oil can 
coat up to 10 objects this way. 


Moon 
XP Value: 200 GP Value: 600 
DRAGON Magazine 33 
With the use of this oil, the user can teleport 
without error as the spell (only once). 


Musk 
XP Value: 100 GP Value: 400 
DRAGON Magazine 33 
Musk oil adds 1 point to Strength for 24 hours. 


Narcissus 
XP Value: 200 GP Value: 600 
DRAGON Magazine 33 
This oil causes sleep when thrown on another. 
The effect lasts for 24 hours. 


of Neutral Scent 
XP Value: 300 GP Value: 900 
DRAGON Magazine 194 
This magical oil's volume and duration resemble 
the oil ofmonster repulsion, but unlike that oil it 
doesn't make the user emit a special scent. 
Rather, it neutralizes all scents that the wearer 
and his coated equipment emit, making him 
effectively odorless. While this could have some 
bad effects (for instance, the user's pet dog may 
not recognize him), it is generally helpful, pre- 
venting the wearer from being sniffed out by 
giant ants, carrion crawlers, griffons, minotaurs, 
rust monsters, wolves, snakes, and other creatures 
dependant on scent to hunt or track. Even if such 
a monster blunders upon the wearer accidentally, 
the lack of a scent is likely to make it hesitate in 
combat (-2 on initiative rolls). Unless the user 
can bathe a monster's entire body in oil of neutral 
scent, this oil is useless against the crippling 
scent attack of troglodytes and other smell-emit- 
ting monsters. When the effects wear off, the 
wearer is instantly assailed with his or her own 
normal scent. It takes 1 d4 turns before he or she 
is again so used to his scent as to be unaware ofit. 


of New life 
XP Value: 200 GP Value: 600 
DRAGON Magazine 33 
When splashed on an opponent, a saving throw 
vs. spell is required. If the save fails, the victim 
suffers the effects ofaforget spell that lasts for 24 
hours. 


Nine Mystery 
XP Value: 300 GP Value: 900 
DRAGON Magazine 33 
This handy oil, when massaged into the face and 
neck acts as a locate object spell. The effect lasts 
24 hours. 


Obeah 
XP Value: 400 GP Value: 1,200 
DRAGON Magazine 33 
This oil acts as a remove curse spell. It cannot 


cure lycanthropy or magical diseases or afflic- 
3418 


, a) as: 


774 


Oil of the Pickpocket 


TY ee 


tions. It does, however, make the user com- 
pletely immune to the effects of curses for 24 
hours. 


of Obedience 

GP Value: 2,250 
DRAGON Magazine 179 
This pasty unguent is smeared on the forehead of 
a sleeping or unconscious creature; upon awak- 
ing, the being comes under the control of the 
individual who placed the oil there. The control is 
complete, and the obedient one is little more than 
a zombie. The obedient one does not think inde- 
pendently except in the most basic fashion 
(breathing, not walking into walls) and cannot 
use spells (although magical abilities may be 
used). The one who placed the oil must give 
orders for the affected individual to move; inabil- 
ity to follow the orders causes the individual to 
not act at all. This oil's effects last for 24 -1d6 
hours. Self-destructive acts may be ordered, but 
the affected individual gains a saving throw vs. 
spell to resist. The oil has no effect on someone 
already awake. 


XP Value: 750 


Olibanum 
XP Value: 200 GP Value: 600 
DRAGON Magazine 33 
For the 24-hour duration of this oil, all damage 
inflicted upon the user is halved for 24 hours. 


of Permanent Disenchantment 

XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 3,000 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 65 
These very rare unguents work the same way as 
oil of disenchantment as described, except that 
the effects are permanent when used on an item. 
If the potion is ingested, the drinker suffers 2d12 
points of damage. 


of Petrification 

XP Value: 500 GP Value: 1,500 
DUNGEON Magazine 40 

Hallam invented the formula for this oil after a 


fortunate (for him) encounter with a basilisk. 


Seeing the possibility of incapacitating foes with- 
out harming them, Hallam devised this recipe. 
The oil has the effects of a basilisk gaze on one 
person. When a full dose touches flesh, a save vs. 
petrification must be made. If failed, the victim is 
turned to stone; a successful save results in no 
adverse effects. The oil is typically sealed in a 


breakable ceramic flask and thrown as a grenade, 
though the bottle must be a direct hit to have any 
chance of being effective; splashes have no 
effect. 

A successful dispel magic spell against 12th- 
level magic negates the oil's effect. However, a 
successful system shock roll must be made to 
survive the transition back to flesh. 

A victim affected by this oil radiates magic under 
a detect magic or similar spell. 


of Phosphorescence 
XP Value: — GP Value: 100 
DRAGON Magazine 91 

A slight application of this oil causes the user 
to believe that it is some other form of magical 
oil, generally oil of slipperiness. However, 
when fully applied to a living being's body, the 
user's skin suddenly starts to glow as if it were 
aflame. This bioluminescence is permanent, 
and can only be negated by a limited wish, 
wish, or remove curse spell cast by a priest of 
at least 9th level. The glow emitted from the 
body is usually a yellow-green color, and the 
affected individual is highly visible at night 
and against dark surroundings. All attempts to 
hide, short of covering oneself completely in 
blankets, hiding in another room, or going 
invisible, are doomed to fail. 


of Phosphorus 
XP Value: 350 GP Value: 800 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 65 

This potent oil comes in a leather flask with a 
small hole in the stopper. By squeezing the flask, 
the oil is forced out through the hole. The oil sets 
fire to anything combustible—except leather. If 
squirted on a character's clothing, the resulting 
fire causes 1 d6 points of damage per round until 
it is extinguished. Uses include starting fires, 
igniting arrows, lighting a torch, etc. A typical 
flask includes enough oil for 20 squirts. 


of the Pickpocket 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 1,500 
DRAGON Magazine 179 
This oil, rubbed over the hands, allows a char- 
acter without the pickpocketing ability to pick 
pockets as a Ist-level thief. If used by a thief, 
it raises the percentage chance of picking 
pockets by +10. The oil lasts for six hours 


before evaporating. 
3425 


É 75 


7 


Oil of Power 


ee ie 


of Power 
GP Value: 2,250 
DRAGON Magazine 33 
This oil removes charm spells placed upon 
another or oneself. It also grants full immunity to 
all charm spells and magical abilities for 24 
hours. 


XP Value: 750 


of Preservation 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 1,500 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 65 

Drow who travel above ground find this oil valu- 
able because it prevents drow armor and weapons 
from losing their magic in sunlight. One vial con- 
tains enough oil to coat a drow suit of armor, or a 
cloak, set of clothing, or 3-7 weapons depending 
upon size. One application preserves an item for 
six months above the tunnels of the Underdark. 


Primrose 
XP Value: 200 GP Value: 600 
DRAGON Magazine 33 
When added to food or drink, this oil draws the 
truth from a liar (no saving throw allowed). The 
victim loses all inhibitions, saying whatever 
comes to mind, telling the truth and a lot more 
that may or may not pertain to the question. The 
effect lasts one turn. 


Reptilla's Curdled Death 
XP Value: 750 GP Value: 2,250 
1992 Fantasy Collector Card 631 

Reptilla needs live subjects for her experiments, 
so she magically diluted her curdled death so that 
it would only cause a victim who failed a saving 
throw vs. spell to fall into a catatonic state for 
2d10 rounds, rather than die. The evil wizard also 
changed the oil's formula so that it can be applied 
to rock faces along the path near her home. When 
the sun shines on the stone and warms its surface, 
the oil's effects are activated (the air temperature 
must be at least 70°). Because of its less potent 
form, Reptilla's curdled death lasts for 1d3 turns. 
It affects all creatures who pass within 5 feet. 


of Reversibility 

GP Value: 1,500 
DRAGON Magazine 33 
This oil reverses any spell put on the user or object. 
In many cases, this property acts as a limited effect 
dispel magic, rendering the object or person immune 
to all spell and magical abilities for 24 hours. 


XP Value: 500 


of Romance 
XP Value: 750 GP Value: 2,250 
DRAGON Magazine 179 

This oil smells of rancid fish, yet has a powerful 
effect when poured on the ground, usually across 
a doorway or window. At that time, the name of 
the desired victim is spoken aloud. Ifthe individ- 
ual called crosses the threshold or patch of oil, he 
or she suffers the effects of a charm person spell 
at -4 to the saving throw. Failing the saving throw 
results in the victim becoming devoted to the oil- 
user, seeking to protect and follow the other's 
orders (excluding outright self-destructive acts). 
The enchantment worked by this magic does not 
wear off over time (unlike the charm person 
spell) and can only be removed by a dispel magic 
or a limited wish. 


Rosemary 

XP Value: 200 

DRAGON Magazine 33 
When worn on the temples, wrists, and ankles, 
this oil has the following attributes: it cures 2d4 
points of damage, protects the wearer from evil, 
and grants a +3 bonus to all saving throws vs. 
offensive magic 


GP Value: 600 


Rue 
XP Value: 100 GP Value: 300 
DRAGON Magazine 33 
Rue oil instantly cures insanity if used for three 
consecutive days. 


of Rust Proofing 
XP Value: 400 GP Value: 1,200 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 65 
This oil protects metal from water, oxidation, rust 
monsters, and oil ofmetalfatigue attacks. One 
flask contains enough oil to cover a suit of armor, 
one large shield, and two weapons. Once applied, 
the oil remains magical for 1d]2+12 hours. 


Sandalwood 
XP Value: 300 GP Value: 900 
DRAGON Magazine 33 
Oil ofsandalwood cures 2d8 points of damage 
sustained from blunt weapons. If the character 
suffers from slashing or puncture wounds, the oil 
cannot aid the character in any way. 


3435 


a a ae. 


776 


Oil, Spikenard 


(ee 1 


of Scents 
XP Value: — GP Value: 250 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 65 
When the vial is uncorked, this oil, created as a 
practical joke, smells like the finest perfume. 
However, when a character applies the oil, he or 
she takes on the stench of skunk spray. The smell 
remains for 1d8 hours. It can be removed earlier 
with a dispel magic or by bathing many, many 
times. 


of Scribes 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 1,500 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 65 

When applied to written text, this mystical oil 
acts as a comprehend languages spell, translating 
the written word into a language the user can 
understand. On magical writings it simulates a 
read magic spell. The oil also reveals invisible 
wizard mark script, secret page writings, and illu- 
sionary script. One vial of oil ofscribes contains 
enough fluid for 10 sheets of parchment. 


of Scrying 
XP Value: 250 GP Value: 750 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 65 
Also known as mage's vision, this syrupy oil has 
no function unless poured into a bowl. By 
swirling the liquid and concentrating on a place 
or individual, the user can use the bowl as a crys- 
tal ball for 1d4+6 turns. The individual or place 
must be well known. Any class may use this oil. 


of Sharpness 
XP Value GP Value 
+1:400 4,000 
+2: 800 8,000 
+3: 1,200 2,000 
+4: 1,600 6,000 
+5: 2,000 20,000 
+6: 2,400 24,000 

Unearthed Arcana 


This magical substance resembles the fine oil 
used to clean and protect metal armor and weap- 
ons. If it is carefully rubbed on the blade of any 
edged or pointed weapon, the oil will have the 
effect of making it equivalent to a magic weapon. 
One such application will last for 1d8+4 rounds. 
A flask of the substance will contain from 1d3+2 
applications. The dweomer of the oil of sharpness 
is determined by die roll: 


Roll Dweomer Effect 
01—02 +1 to attack and damage 
03-05 +2 to attack and damage 
06-11 +3 to attack and damage 
12-16 +4 to attack and damage 
17-19 +5 to attack and damage 
20 +6 to attack and damage 


of Slipperiness 
XP Value: 400 GP Value: 800 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide, Ist Edition 

Similar to the oil ofetherealness, this liquid is to 
be applied externally. This application makes it 
impossible for the individual to be grabbed, 
grasped, or hugged by any opponent, or con- 
stricted by snakes or tentacles. (Note that a roper 
could still inflict weakness, but that the monster's 
tentacles could not entwine the opponent coated 
with oil ofslipperiness.) 

In addition, such obstructions as webs, magical 
or otherwise, will not affect an anointed individ- 
ual. Bonds such as ropes, manacles, and chains 
can be slipped free. Magical ropes and the like 
are not effective against this oil. If poured on a 
floor or on steps, there is a 95% chance/round 
that creatures standing on the surface will slip 
and fall. The oil requires eight hours to wear off 
normally, or it can be wiped off with an alcohol 
solution. 


Snake 
XP Value: 250 GP Value: 750 
DRAGON Magazine 33 

When a green candle is anointed with this oil 
and burned, it will cure disease as the spell. Up 
to four individuals can be healed with one use. 
The oil cannot cure magical afflictions (like 
lycanthropy). 


Solomon's 
XP Value: 300 GP Value: 900 
DRAGON Magazine 33 
This oil increases the user's Wisdom score by 3 
for 24 hours. 


Spikenard 
XP Value: 300 GP Value: 900 
DRAGON Magazine 33 
This oil cures 1d8 points of damage when used 
on characters of good alignment, but causes 1d8 
points of damage to characters of evil alignment. 


3443 


aa L O E 


777 


~ Oil, Spirit p. 


Spirit 
XP Value: 300 GP Value: 900 
DRAGON Magazine 33 
This oil allows the user to speak with dead, as the 


spell, for two turns. 


of Stillness 

XP Value: 600 GP Value: 1,800 

Pirates ofthe Fallen Stars 
When this enchanted oil is poured onto water, it 
stops violent seas and reduces wave action 
around one ship to the equivalent of calm water 
for one hour. This effect applies to normal waves 
as well as magically agitated water. During this 
time, the ship need not make seaworthiness 
checks due to weather (although checks required 
for other reasons are still required). 


of Stone Passage 

XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 4,000 
Menzoberranzan Campaign Set 
This oily paste allows passage through stone, 
much the way that a potion of gaseous form 
allows a solid being to enter the realm of air. An 
object coated with this oil can be literally pushed 
into an area of solid stone, with no more diffi- 
culty than it could be pushed into water, for 
example. A living being coated with the oil can 
move freely through stone at a speed equal to half 
its swimming or flying speed (whichever it 
chooses). On a living creature, the oil will last for 
3d6 turns; on an inanimate object it is permanent. 
An individual who senses the oil beginning to 
lose its potency (after the 3d6 turns are up) has 
3d6 rounds to emerge from the stone. Ifhe can- 
not, he perishes, and is treated as if slain by a dis- 
integrate spell. 


of Sulfur 
XP Value: 150 GP Value: 350 
Secrets ofthe Lamp 
This magical oil seems to be an enchanted oil like 
oil ofslipperiness, oil ofetherealness, or perhaps 
an oil ofelemental invulnerability. However, 
when put to the test in a dangerous situation, the 
oil bursts into flame shortly after being applied 
(1-3 turns). This causes 4d6 points of fire dam- 
age. Oil ofsulfur is a common substitution for 
valuable oils by genies who seek to get rid of 
their masters, or a gift from genies who seek 
revenge for mistreatment. The efreet, however, 
consider it a delightful massage oil. 


of Time 
XP Value: 600 GP Value: 1,800 
DRAGON Magazine 33 
When this oil is thrown into the air, an effect 


identical to a time stop spell occurs for one round. 


of Timelessness 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 1,000 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide, Ist Edition 

When this oil is applied to any matter that was 
once alive (leather, leaves, paper, wood, or dead 
flesh), it allows that substance to resist the pas- 
sage of time. Each year of actual time affects the 
substance as if only a day had passed. The coated 
object has a +1 bonus on all saving throws. The 
oil never wears off, although it can be magically 
removed. One flask contains enough oil to coat 
eight human-sized objects, or an equivalent area. 


Trinity 

GP Value: 2,700 
DRAGON Magazine 33 
This oil raises three statistics of a PC by one point 
each (no maximum) for 24 hours, depending 
upon character class. The table below depicts the 
chances of any particular statistics being tem- 
porarily increased, using a Idl0 die roll. Any- 
thing marked with an X is automatically 
increased. To use this chart, find the character 
class (not the kit), and roll 1d10 dice. The statistic 
rolled and all those marked with an X are raised 
by 1 point for 24 hours. Please note that some 
character classes do not have random rolls. 


XP Value: 900 


Class Str Dex Con Int Wis Cha 
Fighter X X 14 — 50 — 
Paladin 15 — 60 — X X 
Ranger 1-5 X 60 — X — 
Wizard — 13 X X 48 9-0 
Specialist Wizard: 
Abjurer — 14 58 X X 90 
Conjurer 16 — X X 70 — 
Diviner — — 12 X X 30 
Enchanter — — 14 X 50 X 
Illusionist — X 12 X 36 7-0 
Invoker 1 25 X xX 60 — 
Necromancer 13 — 40 X X — 
. Transmuter 1-2 X 3-7 X 80 — 
Priest — — — WM X 50 
Druid — 14 5 60 X X 
Thief — X — 12 36 7-0 
Bard — X — X — X 
3450 


778 


Oil, Zula Zula 


b qe 


of Unlocking 
XP Value: 300 GP Value: 800 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 65 

This oil is usually found in a tiny, stoppered vial. 
The stopper is a dropper for inserting measured 
doses into locks. One dropper of oil opens any 
normally-locked door or chest. There is only a 
30% chance the oil will open a magical lock. The 
oil is not effective against magically held doors. 
One vial usually contains eight doses. 


Verbena 
XP Value: 400 GP Value: 1,200 
DRAGON Magazine 33 
Verbena oil completely protects the user against 


curses and geas for 24 hours. 


of Vibration 
XP Value: 300 GP Value: 900 
DRAGON Magazine 33 
When this oil is applied to the user and one vic- 
tim, the victim will be under the user's charm for 
24 hours. The user must be the first to apply the 
oil, otherwise, the "victim" becomes the charmer. 


Virgin Olive 
XP Value: 100 GP Value: 300 
DRAGON Magazine 33 
When applied to a priest's holy symbol, it adds +4 
to a priest's roll to turn undead. It also causes 2d8 
points of damage to undead if a saving throw vs. 
spell fails. The effect lasts 24 hours. 


of Vision 
GP Value: 1,800 
DRAGON Magazine 33 
This oil, when rubbed onto the face, gives the 
power to see invisible and ultraviolet for six turns. 


XP Value: 900 


of Voodoo 
XP Value: 200 GP Value: 600 
DRAGON Magazine 33 
When thrown at an enemy, this oil reduces the 
victim's Strength to 3 ifa save vs. spell fails. 


of Will Power 
GP Value: 1,500 
DRAGON Magazine 33 
When applied, this oil raises the user's Strength by 
3 (to a maximum of 18). In addition, for the next 24 
hours, the user gains a +3 to all petrification, poly- 
morph, paralyzation, and poison saving throws. 


XP Value: 500 


Wintergreen 
XP Value: 100 GP Value: 300 
DRAGON Magazine 33 
This oil cures 1d6 points of damage and adds a 
bonus of +5 to all saving throws vs. disease and 
disease-mimicking effects (excluding lycan- 
thropy) for 24 hours. 


of Wishing 
GP Value: 2,700 
DRAGON Magazine 33 
When this oil is put on a candle and burned, one 
can write a wish on a piece of parchment and it 
will come true. 


XP Value: 900 


Witch's 
XP Value: 600 GP Value: 1,800 
DRAGON Magazine 33 
When a piece of an enemy's hair is soaked in this 
oil, the victim must make a saving throw vs. poi- 
son or die eight days later. Only evil characters 


can use this oil without an alignment penalty. 


Xyz 
XP Value: 300 GP Value: 900 
DRAGON Magazine 33 

This oil makes the user 10 years younger. Unfor- 
tunately, a system shock roll is required. If the 
roll fails, the user dies. If resurrected following 
death by this oil, the user is 10 years younger than 
before death. 


Ylang Ylang 
XP Value: 300 GP Value: 900 
DRAGON Magazine 33 
Ylang Ylang oil increases the user's Charisma by 
2 points for 24 hours. 


Zodiac 
XP Value: 100 GP Value: 300 
DRAGON Magazine 33 
This oil usually brings a favorable reaction (add 
+2 to all reaction rolls) when speaking with fol- 
lowers of lawful deities. 


Zula Zula l 
XP Value: 250 GP Value: 750 
DRAGON Magazine 33 
When sprinkled on an enemy, this oil either 
kills (if saving throw vs. death magic fails) or 
causes 3d6 points of damage (if the saving 


throw succeeds). 
3464 


A l N 


7 


7 


9 


Ointment of Blessing 


p en 


Ointment 


These creamy salves are usually found in small, 
wooden boxes, normally with cotton applicators. 
If the entire contents of the box are rubbed on any 
part of the skin, a magical effect is produced. 
Most ointments and salves look, smell, and taste 
the same. 


of Blessing 
XP Value: 100 GP Value: 300 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
This salve gives the recipient a -2 bonus to armor 
class and a +2 bonus to all saving throws for one 
turn. 


Courtesan's Cream 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 750 

POLYHEDRON Newszine 82 
This magical ointment is applied to the wearer's 
body and has an exotic, pleasant smell. Each 
application of the cream lasts for 2d6 hours 
and enhances the wearer's Charisma. The 
amount of Charisma gained depends on the 
wearer's normal Charisma, as noted in the chart 
below. The cream will not work together with 
magical spells, although it will function simul- 
taneously with items such as a rod of splendor. 
One jar contains enough cream for three appli- 
cations. Only one dose of cream may be worn 
at a time. 


Natural Maximum 
Charisma Bonus Score 
03-11 +2d4 16 
12-15 +1d6 19 
16-18 +1d4 21 
of Far Seeing 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 


Tome of Magic 

These salves allow characters who put a drop of 
the salve into each eye to see as well as they 
would on a brightly lit day on the Prime Material 
Plane. The proper salve also serves as a protec- 
tion against blindness on planes where protection 
is necessary. Several types of salves exist for the 
different Elemental, Paraelemental, and Quasi- 
elemental Planes. The salves do not affect normal 
or magical blindness. 

The salves are found in small metal containers 
made of precious metals. A container contains 


4d12 drops of salve. One drop in each eye 
bestows the magical property for one day. A drop 
must be placed in every usable eye for the magic 
to work. 

A different salve exists for each plane where 
these salves are required, and each has a distinct 
look and feel. The following table lists the planes 
that limit sight and the color and texture of each 
respective salve. The salves function only on their 
respective planes. 


Plane Color Texture 
Water Blue Smooth 
Earth Black Grainy, Thick 
Positive White Opaque Liquid 
Negative Clear Liquid 
Smoke Ashen Liquid 
Ice Bluish-White Thick 
Ooze Gray Rubbery 
Magma Copper Thick 
Steam Gray Liquid 
Salt White Grainy 
Radiance Golden Smooth 
Ash Gray Grainy 
Minerals Silver Grainy 
Dust Black Dry 

of Flying 


XP Value: 300 GP Value: 750 
DRAGON Magazine 43 
This ointment allows an individual tofly (like the 
fly spell); the duration is 1d4+5 turns. The oint- 
ment must be smeared over the recipient's naked 
body to work. 


of Healing 
XP Value: 200 GP Value: 400 
Gods, Demigods, & Heroes 
This salve is very important, for it is one of the 
methods used to heal wounds. One application 
treats and heals all wounds. 


of Healing II 
XP Value: 600 GP Value: 1,800 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
A salve ofhealing cures 4d4 points of damage. 


Keoghtom's 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 10,000 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide, Ist Edition 
This sovereign salve is useful for drawing poison, 


curing disease, or healing wounds. A jar of the 
3471 


SE ——— aaa a 


780 


Ointment of Second Sight 


Ee 


unguent is small—perhaps 3 inches in diameter 
and one inch deep—but contains five applica- 
tions. Placed upon a poisoned wound (or swal- 
lowed), it detoxifies any poison or disease. 
Rubbed on the body, the ointment heals 1d4+8 
points of damage. Generally, 1d3 jars will be 
found. 

Ina DRAGONLANCE Campaign: Keoghtom's 
Ointment is called Mishakal's healing balm on 
Ansalon. 


of Mage Smelling 
XP Value: 250 GP Value: 750 

DRAGON Magazine 189 
The secret formula for this herbal lotion has 
never been committed to writing, but passed 
down orally from master to initiate for genera- 
tions. When rubbed on the nose of a mage, it 
bestows the ability to detect the exact number of 
spells held within another Spellcaster's mind. A 
nonsavage mage must practice five times with the 
ointment before being able to use it properly. 
Only savage mages, because of their years of 
experience using this ointment, can use it to its 
fullest potential. 

The user senses the magical force stored when 
a mage has memorized a spell. It doesn't detect 
devices, spells stored because of a ring of wiz- 
ardry or spell storing, items like a Book of Infi- 
nite Spells, or innate magical abilities. It also 
cannot distinguish between types of spells, 
although a savage mage can decide the number of 
spell levels the smelled character has, within a 
range of 2d4. For instance, a civilized mage with 
one 4th-level, two 3rd-level, three 2nd-level, and 
four Ist-level spells (a total of 20 spell levels) 
will be sniffed out by a savage mage as having 
15+2d4 levels (20 being the center point of the 
2d4 range, reached by adding 15 to 5, the mean of 
a 2d4 roll). If the snuffed out character is a wild 
mage, the savage mage must guess spell levels 
within a range of 2d6 instead (note that wild 
mages, like all specialist wizards, have extra 
spells per level). A minimum of 1 spell level is 
always detected. 

The ointment detects only current stored 
spells. A 12th-level mage who has cast all but 
three Ist-level spells shows up as a weak Spell- 
caster. 

Ointment of mage smelling is found in small 
gourds. Iftasted, it acts as a mild poison (save at 
+4 or be nauseated and unable to attack or defend 


for one round). A savage mage recognizes it at 
once if allowed to sniff the substance. Enough is 
usually found (if in a treasure hoard) for 5+1d20 
applications. Each application lasts for six turns. 
It takes one full turn to detect a mage using this 
method, and the user must get within 5 feet of the 
mage to smell anything. 


Poison 
XP Value: — GP Value: 600 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
This salve seems to be ointment ofblessing but 
instead forces the recipient to make a saving 
throw vs. poison (with a -2 penalty to the roll) or 
die. 


of Recovery 
XP Value: 300 GP Value: 650 
CARDMASTER* Adventure Design Deck 
Roll 1d6 and restore that number of hit points. 


of Scar Removal 
XP Value: 400 GP Value: 1,200 

DRAGON Magazine 73 
A thick, creamy concoction, oily to the touch, 
this salve may be found in virtually any type of 
container. If a quantity is used to cover a scar, 
within a few days the scar sloughs off and the 
skin appears to be exactly like the skin around 
it. This ointment is much sought after by the 
vain "upper crust," and is fairly common, 
because it is difficult to avoid getting scars 
from childhood diseases or from the blades of 
armed adversaries. 


of Scarring 
XP Value: — GP Value: 400 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
This salve seems to be ointment ofhealing but 
instead inflicts 2d6 points of severe burn damage 
that can only be repaired by ointment ofsoothing, 
a heal spell, or a wish. 


of Second Sight 
XP Value: 900 GP Value: 2,700 
Tall Tales of the Wee Folk 
Only the powerful and wise of the daoine sidhe 
know the secret of how to manufacture this pre- 
cious ointment. If applied to a mortal eye, the eye 
permanently gains the power of second sight—it 
is able to perceive invisible or shapechanged 


fairiekind in their true form. 
3477 


, nn oa ais. 


781 


~ Ointment of Soothing r 


Note that fairies do not wish many mortals to 
gain this precious power; the ointment is gener- 
ally made only for a specific purpose, such as 
rewarding a truly exceptional mortal for out- 
standing service to fairiekind. It is always used 
on human changelings, of course, for otherwise 
those persons would be unable to join fairy 
society. 


of Soothing 
XP Value: 200 GP Value: 600 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
This salve cures the recipient of all burn damage, 
whatever the amount. 


Tanning 
XP Value: 100 GP Value: 300 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
This salve causes the recipient's skin to turn a 
bright color determined randomly. The effect can- 
not be removed but gradually wears offin 1 d4 
months. 


Roll Color 
1 Blue 
2 Brown 
3 Green 
4 Orange 
5 Red 
6 Yellow 


Omelet of the Planes 

XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
DRAGON Magazine 156 
This white styrofoam carton is embossed with the 
logo of a prominent airline. When opened, it is 
always found to contain an old, cold, tough, and 
unappetizing omelet and a wax-coated bag. If left 
alone, the omelet will continue to become older, 
colder, tougher, and less appetizing as time goes 
by. Ifa character attempts to eat the omelet, he or 
she must save vs. putrefaction or discover what 
the paper bag is used for. If the omelet is success- 
fully eaten, it will be replaced the next day with 
an identical omelet. As is universal with airline 
food, no matter how many omelets are eaten, they 
never get any better. 


Onion 


Minionions of Set 

XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
DRAGON Magazine 35 
A favorite recurring typo, these small vegetables 
are utterly and inherently evil, and a good charac- 
ter taking so much as a nibble will sustain 10d4 
points of damage and lose 100,000 experience 
points. Neutral characters must save vs. a spell or 
instantly convert to evil. It makes no difference 
what form the onions are in: on pizza, in soup, in 
a salad, or raw. 


Sweet 
XP Value: 5 GP Value: 25 
DRAGON Magazine 30 
Being unable to bear his wife's tears, the Magician 
Orlow developed sweet onion (seed) that grows an 


onion that tastes normal, but smells like a rose. 


Oracle of Greyhawk 


XP Value * GP Value 
Blue: 2,000 12,000 
Brown: 2,000 12,000 
Green: 2,000 12,000 
Orange: 2,000 12,000 
Red: 2,000 12,000 
Violet: 2,000 12,000 
Yellow: 2,000 12,000 


GREYHAWK Adventures 

Appearing to be crystal balls with slight tinges of 
color, the oracles were created many years ago 
for the then Lord Mayor. However, no one is sure 
how many oracles are still in the government's 
possession, and how many have been lost or 
stolen. The oracles can be aske'd one question per 
day, as ifthe wizard was consulting a sage. There 
are seven known oracles: 


Color Area of Knowledge 
Red Horned Society 
Orange Wild Coast 

Yellow Kingdom of Furyondy 
Green Gnarley Forest 

Blue Shield Lands 

Violet City of Greyhawk 
Brown Cairn Hills 


Possible questions might include populations 


of humans and demihumans, numbers and types 
3483 


aa aaa a, 


782 


Orb, Crystal 


(Ye 


of troops, types of monsters, and special knowl- 
edge categories (see the DMG, 1st Edition) 
listed under Humankind, Demihumankind, 
Fauna, and Flora. Each question may be consid- 
ered to be in the oracle's major field unless the 
question pertains to a different geographical 
area or to a field of study not listed above. Due 
to the alignment of the items' creator, the chance 
of knowing an answer is also affected by the 
questioner's alignment (these modifiers are 
cumulative): 


Alignment Modifier 
Chaotic -10% 
Evil -15% 
Good +10% 
Lawful +10% 
Neutral +25% 


Orb 


Orbs look much like crystal balls; they are spher- 
ical objects that usually are placed in elaborate 
stands to keep them from rolling or breaking. 
Many of the most powerful artifacts in existence 
are orbs. 


of Alignment 

XP Value: 900 GP Value: 4,500 
Terrible Trouble at Tragidore 
This globe takes on a light-colored glow if 
touched by good characters and darkens when 
touched by someone evil. If more than one indi- 
vidual touches the orb, the light (or darkness) 
aspect of the orb averages the total alignment of 
the group. 


of the Black Swamp 

XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 15,000 
The Knight of Newts 
This orb was created by an unknown wizard in 
an unknown land for goblins. When it was 
placed in Castle Kraal, it caused the castle to 
fall into the Black Swamp, killing most of the 
castle's inhabitants in the process. The rest were 
killed by the encroaching newts. When the orb 
fell to a depth of 12 feet below the water table, it 
expended all of its magic, and is now inert. The 
orb cannot be used to bring the castle out of the 
swamp. 


“aaah 


EN 


RNY 
7 


y 
SN 7 


TA 


Crystal 
XP Value: 10,000 GP Value: 50,000 
The Shining South 

This orb is thought to have been crafted by the 
great wizard Halruaa himself. The reigning wiz- 
ard-kings have had this orb for as long as Halruaa 
has existed. It has the unique power of being able 
to contact up to 500 beings at once. Zalathorm 
(or another wizard using it) may contact as many 
beings as he wants. It takes but one round to acti- 
vate the orb. In order for the orb to function, how- 
ever, it must be attuned to those it will be used to 
contact. This is as simple as having the owner 
speak a command word while touching the 
intended recipient. Having used the same com- 
mand word for each wizard, Zalathorm can con- 
tact every Elder wizard by speaking a single 
command word. Wizards may refuse the contact. 
If the intended contact is deep in concentration 
(casting a spell or enchanting a magical item), 
she does not feel the contact until she relaxes her 
concentration. 

The orb also has the property of highlighting in 
the orb, and in the minds ofall in the group con- 
tact, the image of whoever is speaking. It has the 
additional advantage of only allowing one person 
to "speak" at a time. It thus acts as a sort of 


"meeting organizer" for the tumultuous wizards 
3486 


, a ri i iain < 


783 


Orb, Diamond, of Tyche 


i, A Oe ee A 


who form the Elders of Halruaa. Zalathorm can 
break in at any time by touching the orb, giving 
the wizard-king complete control of all meetings 
of the Council of Elders. 

The only known orb of this type is stored in a 
special room in Zalathorm’'s tower. It is thought to 
be one of the most heavily guarded magical items 
in all of the Realms. Among other protections, 
Zalathorm has cast a variant of a contingency 
spell on the orb, that should it be stolen or taken 
out of the room by someone who is not attuned to 
it, it immediately teleports to the hands of the 
high priestess of Mystra, in Mount Talath. 


Diamond Orb of Tyche 
XP Value: — GP Value: — 
DUNGEONS & DRAGONS Master Set 
This item appears to be a crystal ball, but is 
somewhat larger (about 18 inches across) and 
glows softly with white light filled with sparkling 
colors. It was crafted by the powerful Immortal, 
Tyche, who is said to control chance and the for- 
tunes of mankind. It is a powerful artifact of 
chaos, but not necessarily evil. It brings good for- 
tune to the user, for a time. 

The artifact is active when found. The user gets 
a feeling of inspiration, gazing into the orb. The 
artifact grants the knowledge of one power when 
one consecutive hour is spent gazing (one power 
per day maximum), given in order of PP cost. 

By gazing into the orb and concentrating on a 
power, the user acquires that power after 1d3 
rounds. 

Suggested Powers: (All magical abilities are 
cast at 20th level.) 

Pickpockets (100% chance.) 
X-ray vision (Range 30'; Duration one turn.) 
Gaseous form 
Container (4,000 pounds; Duration six hours.) 
Remove traps (75% chance.) 
Confuse alignment 
Hide in shadow (70% chance.) 
Suggested Handicaps: 
When first used: Magical error. The user has 
a 10% chance of failure whenever attempting 
to cast a spell or use any magical item requir- 
ing a command word. 
When pick pockets is first used: Alignment 
changed to chaotic. 
If, as a container, the artifact is ever com- 
pletely filled—no other powers can be used 
until emptied. 


Suggested Penalties: Totally random adverse 
effects from Artifact Table 1-11: Enchant- 
ment/Charm or 1-14: Immunity. 


of Distant Viewing 

XP Value: — GP Value: 400 
DRAGON Magazine 168 
This is a small crystal that may be held in one 
hand. It was created by the mysterious dimen- 
sional traveler called Herman. All one has to do is 
warm the crystal in one's hands (or paws, tenta- 
cles, or teeth), and it will (or so Herman bragged) 
allow you to view his mysterious alien home- 
world. Many scholars and wizards seek the orb to 
study it and its fabled view. Herman, however, 
was homesick for his favorite entertainment when 
he created the orb. All the orb can actually "tune 
in" is the dwelling of a Cuban minstrel married to 
a red-headed woman with a talent for misadven- 
tures that some find humorous. Anyone viewing 
this scene will immediately be struck by Tasha's 
uncontrollable hideous laughter for 10d10 
rounds. 


of Draconic Influence 
XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 15,000 
Draconomicon 

This is a sphere of deep-green, volcanic glass 
(obsidian) upon which an intricate geometric pat- 
tern has been etched, and then delicately filled 
with gold. By concentrating on the orb, a dragon 
can alter the behavior of all dragons within a 
range of 10 miles. 

This alteration is very subtle (as a guideline for 
DMs, the user should be able to describe the 
desired alteration in one word "friendly," "angry," 
"attack"), and is the same for every dragon in 
range. The DM must adjudicate the use of this 
item carefully. In general, the orb can shift a 
dragon's reaction by up to five points in either 
direction on Table 59 in the DMG. 

The orb has other powers as well. Any draco- 
form that might wish to attack the bearer of the 
orb must roll a successful saving throw vs. staves 
to do so. In addition, the bearer cannot be scried 
upon by any means. 

There are a few sages who believe that an orb 
of draconic influence or something similar is 
responsible for the phenomenon of Dragonflight. 
(And many more sages there are who ridicule this 
position.) 


3489 


ore e O N 


784 


Orb of Dragonkind 


i a ET 


aN 


eN 
NA 


VEN 


FAT N * 

ON et Q: 

ANNS sN: 
x 


. WSS ` 


\ Art y 
A A n 
Aon wt? 

: a 

Ş 4 


ue 


Dragon 
XP Value: 1,800 GP Value: 9,000 
DRAGONLANCEMC Appendix 
Magical items known as dragon orbs can also 
induce mindspin spells. Dragon orbs are etched 
crystal globes, 20 inches in diameter when in use. 
When not in use, the orbs shrink to 10 inch 
spheres. They expand when the command words, 
carved into the surface, are spoken. 

Dragon orbs contain the essences of drag- 
onkind, which serve as the source of the orbs’ 
power. A wizard attempting to use an orb to sum- 
mon evil dragons (its primary use) must gaze into 
it and speak the command words. Ifthe character 
fails a saving throw vs. spell, he or she is charmed 
by the essence of the orb and succumbs to a 
mindspin spell with the effects described in the 
DRAGONLANCE Appendix of the MONSTROUS 
COMPENDIUM. (Ifthe wizard's saving throw suc- 
ceeds, any dragon within 1d4xl0 miles is sum- 
moned to the orb and attacks any nonevil 
creatures it finds nearby.) 

Each orb can cast cure serious wounds three 
times per day, and can cast continual light, and 
detect magic at will. Any character who gazes 

.into an orb and speaks the command words 
knows these functions. Whenever any of these 
abilities are used, the using character must roll a 


saving throw to avoid the orb's charm effect. If 
the saving throw is successful, the check must 
be made to see if any evil dragons arrive. Detect 
magic and detect evil spells show a positive 
result if cast upon an orb or a character charmed 
by an orb. For purposes of dispelling, treat the 
charm effect as if it had been cast by an 11th- 
level wizard. 


of Dragonkind 
XP Value GP Value 
Orb of the Hatchling: 2,000 10,000 
Orb of the Dragonette: 6,000 30,000 
Orb of the Dragon: 8,000 40,000 
Great Firedrake's Orb: 10,000 50,000 
Orb of the Eldest Worm: 16,000 80,000 


Eldritch Wizardry 

These crystalline artifacts are about the size ofa 
human head and have the imprisoned essence of a 
dragon. The material from which the orb is made 
has a diamond hardness and any attempts used to 
discover whether the object has magical proper- 
ties will always fail. There are five different orbs, 
as follows: 

The Orb of the Hatchling: This orb, as all of 
the others, has intelligence, but this orb must 
obey any person who speaks the language of 
dragons. 

User has no need to eat or drink. 

Detect evil (or good if evil, or both if neutral). 
The Orb of the Dragonette: This orb, as all of 
the others, has intelligence, but this orb must 
obey any person who speaks the language of 
dragons. 

e Clairvoyance. 

Fear with -2 on saving throw twice per day. 

User cannot touch or be touched by any type 
of metal, it simply passes through him with no 

effect. 

The Orb ofthe Dragon: This orb, as all ofthe 
others, has intelligence, but this orb must obey 
any person who speaks the language of dragons. 

Speak with dead. 

User protected against attacks as if wearing +1 
armor. 

Generate a 20-Hit Diefireball once per day. 

Monster summoning III once per day. 

This artifact compels the user to go on a holy 
quest. As soon as the user fulfills the quest, he 
or she is immediately sent on another. 

The Great Firedrake's Orb: This orb differs 


from the first two in that it has an Intelligence 
3495 


A a T 


785 


~~ Orb of Dragonkind IT ar 


and Ego rating which are used in the same man- 

ner as a magic sword's ratings. The owner only 

controls the orb if the user's Strength and Intelli- 
gence ratings combined (as modified for wounds) 
are greater than the Intelligence and Ego of the 

orb combined. The orb has an Intelligence of 12 

and an Ego of 12. If the orb is able to control its 

user, it will try to control or destroy those around 
it (through its user) as it is extremely evil. 

e Levitation 

e User immune to disease 

e Charm monster with -3 on saving throw twice 
a day 

e After a set number of uses, the user of this 
relic is transformed into either a very minor 
fiend or a very minor godling. He or she is 
thenceforth at the complete beck and call ofa 
certain major fiend or godling, and may as 
well start a new character. 

e User has limited omniscience and may ask the 
DM any question once per day. If the DM 
knows the answer, all or part of the question at 
may be answered (DM's discretion). 

The Orb of the Eldest Wyrm: This orb acts as 
the firedrake's orb except that its Intelligence is 
16 and its Ego is 16. 

e Adds 1d3 points to one ability while using 
artifact. 

e Move at double speed. 

e Death spell twice per day. 

e Conjure one elemental, djinn, efreet, or invis- 
ible stalker once per day. 

e The item causes greed and desire in any per- 
son viewing it. There is a 10% cumulative 
chance that each time any person sees the item 
he or she will attack, kill the user and take it. 

e Artifact will legend lore and commune upon 
command by the user. 


of Dragonkind II 
XP Value: — GP Value: — 
Book of Artifacts 
The orbs ofdragonkind, said to be 12 in number, 
are all similar in appearance. The major differ- 
ence between them is in the relative size of each. 
Unless the orbs are compared, it is nearly impos- 
sible to know which is which. 

Each orb appears as a sphere of the finest crys- 
tal, perfectly smooth and lustrous. A close exami- 
nation of each shows faint lines of writing etched 
onto the surface. The language is ancient, no 
longer known by any speaker alive. The writing 


on each orb is different. 

The orbs are usually found mounted on three- 
armed stands. Each stand is different for each 
orb, but since the stands are not part of the arti- 
facts, they are of no help in identification. The 
stands are normally of precious metal and elabo- 
rately done, although at least one looks like 
crudely wrought steel. 

When an orb is used, it glows with an internal 
fire that matches the color ofits dragon type. 

The history of the orbs delves deeply into 
the beginnings of the worlds, so deeply, in fact, 
that the origin of these great artifacts is a matter 
of great mystery and confusion. In part, the tale 
depends on who tells it. 

Of the beginning, as with all beginnings, 
everyone agrees. The age was long ago, barely 
moments beyond the great creation—although 
how and who made the world is another story 
about which all disagree. At that time, all things 
lived in their truest form, in shapes of strength 
and power. Man had not yet been sundered into 
warrior, priest, and wizard. The leader of men 
was the mightiest in all three of these arts. The 
elves were the greatest masters of the arts and did 
not live away from others. Dwarves stood as tall 
as men and did not hide themselves beneath the 
earth. Each race was great in its own way. 

The greatest of them all were the dragons. 
There, at that moment, at the beginning of all 
things, the dragons were the majestic rulers of the 
world. They were all wise and all-knowing. Later 
that would change, they would forget their 
speech, forget their mysteries, forget the good- 
ness of their spirits, and, at last, forget their duties 
to the newly created world. But for now, they had 
not fallen. The dragons were great and ruled over 
all other things. 

This is all that the tales agree upon, though, 
here is where each race remembers the greatness 
of the past differently. Who can say which is 
right—if any are right? 

In the poems of the human bards, the tale con- 
tinues in treachery and woe, and it goes like this: 


Over the misty years, the dragons ruled worlds 
and as they did, they slowly changed. They grew 
to care lessfor the welfare of their subjects and 
more for themselves. The dragons became 
proud—some turned evil and the rest grew indif- 
ferent to the suffering they caused. 


The voices of the people cried for relief, but the 
3496 


786 


| f ` UP 


kiadi 


SDSS 
SEES 
LIS 

SSS 
COIS 


yo, A 
r g] phe 
~ 


AN 


TAL 


ui 
Ze. 
ts 


gn Mites 
aa, 


Vts. 
O 


P4 


© 
7 

7 
4. 


se, 
Cx, 


Ia : 
Lis fe ey woes = 
Hn ba ` T =a 
elles bee ttt ¢ ** 
Ty eg 7 
OM i : 

f i 


eei 4 PA : e, ) . 


D wes! 


Orb of Dragonkind II 


> SS a 


dragons heard them not. So the people turned to 
their gods and pleadedfor deliverance. The gods 
were not deafand could not bear the sorrow in 
the voices of their children. In the way of the 
gods, they called upon the least of their prog- 
eny—a swineherd in a small village at the base of 
the great mountain where the dragons dwelled. 
"Go, and teach the dragons to respect the might 
oftheir children," they told him in a dream. 

Now the swineherd was a good man, but he was 
afraid. After all, he was but a mud-splattered peas- 
ant. The dragons—well, they were dragons. What 
could he possibly do? Terrified of facing them, he 
did not go. Six times did the gods call, and six 
times did he hide himself, trembling in fear. 
Finally, the seventh time the gods revealed them- 
selves it was in anger, and the swineherd could no 
longer refuse. Quaking withfear, he began to climb 
the mountain to confront the dragon lords. 

For 12 days and 12 nights he climbed and each 
night one ofthe 12 greatpowers came to him in a 
dream. Each whispered a secret long hiddenfrom 
the dragons, a secret that gave the poor swine- 
herd power over his inhuman masters. Perhaps it 
was the secret of their true name, for in those 
days true names held power; perhaps it was the 
secrets offlattery by which he could trick the 
dragons. Here, even the human bards do not 
agree. This does not matter to the tale, however. 

Needless to say, this unnamed swineherd 
reached the mountain peak and gained an audi- 
ence with the dragon lords. There, no one knows 
what happened. For weeks he was lost to the- 
world ofhumans and his family began to despair. 
And then, one day, the swineherd returned at his 
door, as if by magic. With him he brought 12 crys- 
tal orbs. 

"The dragons have given me hostages," he told 
the people who gathered. "Hide these orbs and 
the dragons will no longer rule us." Atfirst they 
laughed and the king of the land wanted to take 
the orbs back to his treasury, until the swineherd 
commanded the least ofthe orbs to strike down 
the greedy king and his knights. Then did the 
people fear to disobey the swineherd and hid the 
orbs as he had proclaimed. 

After that, the dragons ruled humanity no 
more. The swineherd prospered and became the 
king ofhis land. No rival would challenge him for 

fear ofthe orbs, and never did the swineherd-king 
use them again. Whatever secret they contained 
passed away with him. 


Of course, that's not how the elves tell it. Their 
story goes like this: 


In that time when all creatures lived in peace one 
with the other, the noblest of the dragon-clans 
came to the court ofthe elves and said, "Shining 
elves, you are the light ofall races, spreading 
grace and beauty throughout the world. Great is 
the pleasure you bring to all things with your 
voices. It is bleak and lonely in our mountain 
Jastness, will you make for us a reminder of your 
joy so that our days will not be soforlorn? " 

And the elves, being elves, agreed and asked 

for nothing in return. After 100 years and a day, 
enough timefor a man's memory to fail in a dusty 
grave, but little to the elves and less to the 
dragons, the high folk appeared before the coun- 
cil ofthe clan andpresented their gift—12 orbs of 
perfect brilliance and beauty. Each sang with a 
voice of the lightest crystal and the music of the 
stones tore at the hearts ofthe great dragon-kin. 
The orbs sang of gliding in the purest blue sky, of 
courting flights beneath the burning silver of the 
moon, ofbattles fought and lost by the brave, and 
ofthose things that would come to pass. 

The songs wrenched at the very souls of the 
nobles and they let their bodies waste as their 
spirits soared. At last, completely enchanted, 
each surrendered, spirits were trapped by the 
orbs, where they have remained to this day. 

This is the way ofelves and the gifts they bring. 


Now the dwarves, of course, know that the 
elves and the humans have it all wrong. This is 
their tale: 


In that time, the dwarves were the greatest ofall 
crafters, even greater at the forge and the cru- 
cible than they are today, for many secrets have 
long since been lost. All other races knew ofour 
skill, but only the dragons respected our crafts- 
manship. The humans were too foolish to know 
the power ofiron and stone; the elves were too 
petty and vain, but the dragons, who dwelt in 
mountain homes, understood the might in the 
rock and the magic it could bring. 

Thus it was that an embassy of 12 dragons 
sought out the Great Council ofthe Dwarves. "O 
grand and wise shapers ofmetal," the oldest of 
the dragons spoke, "ourpeople are scattered over 
the globe. We cannot call our councils or share 


news of birth and woe. We come to youfor an 
3496 


: 788 S 


Orb of Dragonkind II 


f TY 


answer, for there are not greater artisans to be 
found on the earth or beneath it. Will you make us 
a solution?" 

"What will you pay us? " demanded the High 
Clan King ofthe council. 

"All the treasures from beneath the earth that 
lie in our hoards we will give to you," answered 
the eldest ofthe dragons. 

And the dwarves knew they could make the 
thing that the dragons wanted and the price was 
good, so they set their greatest craftsmen to fash- 
ion a set of 12 crystalline orbs for the dragon-kin. 
After 12 summers and 12 winters, the orbs, 12 in 
number, werefinished, and once more the dragons 
appeared before the Great Council. 

"Here are the treasures you asked for," said the 
High Clan King. "Give us our payment as you 
promised." 

The dragons smiled and were pleased with the 
work. Taking the orbs, they said, "Give us afort- 
night to prepare afeast. When the time is passed, 
send your strongest, bravest, and cleverest to our 
caverns and we willfeast them and honor them 
with our riches." 

At that time, dwarves still trusted dragons, who 
were the rulers ofall, and so the High King 
agreed. In afortnight, he led the finest of his 
people to the halls of the dragons. There they 

found the 12 ambassadors of that scaled race 

waiting. Looking about, the dwarves saw no 
tables, no benches, no feast-foods, no ale. The 
dragons crouched greedily upon their treasures, 
the orbs clutched between their claws. 

"Where is our payment? " demanded the High 
Clan King. 

"Here," the eldest dragon said. At that word, 
his people set upon the dwarves who, in trust, 
came with weapons sheathed. All were slain until 
only the High King of the Clans remained, 
wounded, dying. 

With his fading breath, he called out, "Hear 
your doom, treacherous beasts! The treasures you 
have stolen will take my revenge." With that he 
spoke the words of power, the magic secret the 
dwarves built into the orbs—for dwarves are ever 
a cautious lot. "From this day forward, your 
scaled hides are cursed! Your children will be less 
than you and all beings will hunt you and call 
you dangerous. Greed and hatredfor your own 
kind willfill your hearts, all until the price you 
promised is paid!" 

At that curse, the magic of the orbs seized all 


things noble from the hearts of the 12 ambas- 
sadors and pulled them into the crystal prisons. 
The body of each beast changed color and they 
feared each other. Screeching in rage, the now- 
savage dragons fled. 

So dragons have remained ever since, crouched 
on their hoards, keeping these treasures from 
their true owners—the dwarves. 


Any one of these stories might be true, or per- 
haps none of them. However they were made, 
since that time the orbs have surfaced time and 
again throughout the world. Sometimes they have 
made kingdoms powerful, sometimes they have 
brought them down. Always dragons appear 
wherever the orbs are to be found. The orbs are 
rumored to grant great powers, but always at a 
terrible price. 

It is unclear just how many orbs were made or 
remain. The legends say a dozen were fashioned, 
and there are tales of the destruction of three or 
more of the orbs—tales of great heroism and dan- 
ger. Orbs supposedly destroyed appear in later 
tales, so it is hard to be certain what is right. The 
researches of Alimead the Sage on this point do 
nothing to clear up the confusion, although his 
dry and scholarly work—found only in a few 
exclusive collections—is the best authority on the 
orbs themselves. 

The orbs ofdragonkind are among the more 
unique artifacts of those described here. There- 
fore, special considerations must be given to 
these items. 

First, there is their number. Twelve orbs are 
more than just a single item. It is unlikely that 
most campaigns can survive having all 12 orbs in 
play at the same time. Certainly, the PCs should 
never have all 12 (or even half that number!) in 
their possession at one time. 

Second, dragons are (and should be) unique to 
a campaign. Since the dragon orbs contain the 
trapped personalities of long dead dragons, the 
DM should take the time to create dragon person- 
alities that fit the campaign. Twelve suggested 
personalities are given here, but these are not the 
only possibilities. 

Finally, there is the matter of the powers them- 
selves. The orbs are perhaps more variable than 
any other set of items. In addition to a different 
personality for each orb (which will affect how 
the powers manifest themselves), the orbs also 


differ from each other by age level and color. 
3496 


A ee 


789 


Orb of Dragonkind II 


> ee 


There is one orb for every dragon age category, 
and each age category represents a different color 
of dragon. The DM must match these three fac- 
tors—age, color, and personality—to create a 
mix of powers that best suits the campaign. 

When dealing with the number problem, the orbs 
ofdragonkind will most commonly be used as indi- 
vidual items. Let the PCs find one, maybe two of 
the orbs, but no more. This is the easiest solution. 
The DM builds a major adventure that climaxes in 
the discovery, use, and/or destruction of an orb. The 
existence of other orbs may be hinted at, but do not 
build an adventure around them. For the adventure, 
the DM should carefully select the orb to be used— 
both for the powers the orb grants to the character 
and for the personality of the orb itself. 

A number of story lines are useful for a small 
number of orbs. An orb may be needed to defeat a 
powerful dragon marauding the land, to give the 
noble but outnumbered forces of a good kingdom 
the edge they need to overcome an orc invasion, 
or to perform a special spell needed to lift the 
curse that has befallen a PC or NPC. 

A more difficult approach is to build a series 
of adventures that eventually uses all 12 orbs. 
The PCs might discover one orb, only to have it 
stolen by an evil foe. In order to overcome this 
enemy, the PCs must locate an orb of even 
greater power. They track down and uncover a 
number of different orbs, starting with the least 
and rising in power, until the group at last finds 
the one they need. Of course, the task is never 
that easy, since their enemy, already in posses- 
sion of one orb, has a head start on them and 
additional power, to boot. 

The difficulty here is that almost every adven- 
ture must be greater than the last. Finding and 
using each orb becomes more and more difficult 
and heroic—although allowances can be made to 
slow the pacing at points. Some orbs may be 
monstrously guarded, others cleverly hidden, and 
still others may require the players to use wits and 
role-playing instead of muscle. Unless the DM 
creates adventures with a great deal of variety, the 
players may quickly suffer from sequel-itis— 
"Oh, look; yet another orb ofdragonkind." 

For DMs willing to go to extremes, all 12 orbs 
could be introduced by a truly unique method. In 
this case the DM creates a special campaign 
world—from the ground up—that centers around 
eight or so powerful kingdoms of various races. 
Each kingdom has as its power center one of the 


orbs ofdragonkind. The logic of the world—the 
armies, diplomacy, the relative strengths and 
weaknesses of each land—revolve around the 
orbs. Kingdoms possessing lesser orbs may con- 
stantly have to struggle to hold off their more 
powerful neighbors or band together into 
alliances. Those with the most powerful orbs may 
be empires to which the lesser kingdoms swear 
obedience. The possessors of the orbs may all be 
evil or may be a mix of good and evil rulers. The 
DM will have to define all of this background 
before beginning the new campaign. 

Once these details are decided, the DM can 
center the action around the remaining orbs. 
Recovering any of the four that are lost will upset 
the careful balance of power in the campaign. 
Naturally, each king or emperor wants to claim 
the lost orbs while denying the others their goal. 
Warfare, diplomacy, intrigue, and adventure can 
all be played out against this background. The 
PCs may never find an orb ofdragonkind during 
the course of the entire campaign, but the items 
always have an influence over events. 

However the DM chooses to use the orbs, PCs 
should not be allowed to retain these items. Per- 
haps the best solution is to construct the adven- 
ture so that the PCs must recover the orb and 
place it in the hands ofthe king, for the protection 
of all. This gives the characters the satisfaction of 
success and removes the item from their control 
at the same time. 

Alternatively, dragons will naturally have a 
great interest in the orbs and may insist that the 
characters surrender any that they find. The char- 
acters may have to destroy an orb for safety's sake. 
Finally, there are always thieves on whom to rely. 

As noted above, the orbs ofdragonkind consist 
of three separate elements—color, age, and per- 
sonality. Color will determine the choice of pow- 
ers for each orb; age sets the level of strength for 
those powers; and personality dictates how those 
powers are revealed and used. Personality also 
affects the exact nature of each orb's curse. 

In addition to the powers that vary by age and 
color, the orbs all have certain features in com- 
mon, a natural result of being powerful magical 
items. Like all artifact powers, these powers can 
be constant or invoked. 

Constant Powers: Anyone within 10 feet of 
the orb has the THACO, Armor Class, and saving 
throws of the dragon trapped within. This is cal- 


culated according to the age and color of the 
3496 


i 790 a 


Orb of Dragonkind II 


ee G 


trapped dragon. These individuals are also 
immune to breath weapon attacks by dragons of 
the same type as the orb. 

The personalities of all of the orbs are tele- 
pathic to any creature within a 60-foot visual 
range. The trapped personalities also possess full 
awareness of their surroundings, able even to 
detect invisible or otherwise concealed creatures 
as would a normal dragon of their size. Whether 
or not this information is communicated to the 
owner depends upon the orb's personality. 

Invoked Powers: Each orb functions as a crys- 
tal ball to any other orb ofdragonkind, provided 
the identity of the other orb's owner is known. 

Invoking the correct command while touching 
the orb allows the owner of the item to invoke any 
of the following powers, all figured by the 
dragon's age and color: use the dragon's breath 
weapon (3 per day), radiate dragon fear (3 per 
day), and cast any spells (including special pow- 
ers) known by the dragon. 

Finally, every orb allows the owner to use a dom- 
ination spell against any dragon of the same color 
within 100 yards. The target creature is allowed a 
saving throw vs. spell. However, instead of a -2 
penalty and Wisdom adjustments as per the spell, 
the roll needed is increased or decreased by the age 
difference between the orb's personality and the tar- 
get dragon. The older the trapped personality, the 
greater the chance of success. Ifthe orb contains an 
old red dragon (age category 8) and the target is a 
juvenile red dragon (age category 4), the saving 
throw roll would have a -4 penalty. Were it the 
other way around, the roll would have a +4 bonus. 

The owner of the orb can dominate any number 
of dragons within range, but can only make one 
domination attempt per round. There is no limit to 
the number of times per day this power can be used. 

Curse: The orbs have only the simplest of 
curses, but they are woefully dangerous. Since 
each is possessed of a dragon's spirit, those who 
touch the orbs ofdragonkind are immediately 
exposed to the risks of artifact possession and 
artifact transformation. In every case, the orbs 
seek to remake their masters into dragons of their 
own color while at the same time gaining posses- 
sion of the bodies. If successful, the trapped 
dragon is freed, while the spirit of its master is 
lost to the void forever. 

Color Powers: Trapped within each orb is a 
dragon of a different color. The choices are: 
black, blue, brass, bronze, cloud, copper, gold, 


green, red, shadow, silver, and white. All color 
powers must be invoked and are usable according 
to the limitations in the description. 

For convenience, the base Hit Dice of each 
dragon color is noted in parentheses below. 

Black: (12 HD) Upon command, the owner 
can create an acid storm with a radius of 100 
feet. The storm lasts a number of rounds equal 
to the dragon's Hit Dice and inflicts 1d4 points 
of damage for the first 3 rounds, 1d6 through 
the 6th round, and 1d8 every round after that. 
The acid storm can only be conjured once per 
month, however. 

Blue: (14 HD) The owner can breathe a bolt that 
leaps from target to target, striking several crea- 
tures in the same manner as a chain lightning spell. 
A number of targets equal to the dragon's Hit Dice 
can be struck. However, unlike the spell, the num- 
ber of dice of damage inflicted remains constant 
throughout. This power can be used once per day. 

Brass: (12 HD) Upon uttering the command, 
the owner triggers a circle ofsunmotes spell from 
the orb. The power is usable only once per month. 

Bronze: (14 HD) The owner of this orb can 
use image interrogation once per month. How- 
ever, no matter what being is contacted, this 
power can never be used to gain more informa- 
tion about the locations or powers of any other 
artifact. 

Cloud: (14 HD) By touching this orb, the 
owner is able to summon a storm of vengeance 
spell. Unlike the spell, invoking this power only 
requires 1 round. The power is usable once per 
month. 

Copper: (13 HD) As befits the copper dragon's 
impish nature, invoking the orb's power triggers a 
powerful version of the mass suggestion spell. 
The power centers on the orb and has a radius of 
30 feet. Anyone other than the owner of the orb 
within the area of effect, with fewer Hit Dice or 
levels than the trapped dragon spirit, is automati- 
cally subject. No saving throw is allowed. Those 
of greater level or Hit Dice are unaffected by the 
power. The suggestion must follow all the normal 
rules for the spell of that name—it must be 
understandable and reasonable to those who lis- 
ten for it to have effect. This power can be used 
once a week. 

Gold: (16 HD) The orb ofthe gold dragon has 
the power of command over others of its kind, in this 
case, all dragons. It can only be invoked once per 


year. Upon uttering the command, the orb summons 
3503 


a a 


791 


~ Orb of Dragonkind II = 


a number of dragons equal to its Hit Dice + 1d6 
additional dragons. These dragons are the same age 

as the possessed gold dragon and can be of any type 
determined by the DM. All must be summoned at 
the same time. The summoned dragons will serve 
the owner of the orb faithfully for 3d6 days. They 
carry out the user's instructions to the best of their 
ability. However, the creatures will refuse any order 

that is clearly futile, suicidal, or hostile to dragons of 
their own color. The dragons could be summoned to 
fight at the side of an outnumbered army (since the 
creatures themselves might turn the tide), but will 

not slay each other upon command (just to reduce 
the number of dragons in the world). A red dragon 

cannot be ordered to attack or harm another red 

dragon, but would have no qualms about tearing 
into a blue dragon. 

At the end of the period of service, the dragons 
are released from servitude. Unlike other sum- 
monings, those creatures called by the orb do not 
seek revenge upon the owner. To their mind, who- 
ever possesses the orb has the right to place this 
duty upon them. However, should the being that 
called them ever fall into their clutches, little 
mercy will be offered. Evil dragons will most 
likely kill the offender outright, while good ones 
will impose some service equal to what was 
required of them. 

Green: (13 HD) The power of this orb is only 
effective in a forest or wooded area. Upon com- 
mand, a vile, green ray shoots forth, up to 100 
yards, to strike a number of trees equal to the 
dragon's Hit Dice. The trees touched are instantly 
polymorphed into shambling mounds, uncontrol- 
lable by anyone. The shambling mounds remain 
for 24 hours or until slain. This power is usable 
only once per month. 

Red: (15 HD) The power of the red dragon's 
orb is the most devastating of all the orbs ofdrag- 
onkind and is only usable once per year. Upon 
uttering the proper command, the orb lances out a 
beam of energy, straight down, that penetrates 
into the very heart of the earth. Within 2d12 
hours, the earth heaves and splits with the force 
of an earthquake spell. As the tremors grow, a 
volcano arises from the point where the magical 
beam struck. The volcano spews lava and ash, 
gradually rising into a mountainous cone over a 
process of weeks. The radius of the destruction is 
equal to the Hit Dice of the trapped red dragon. 
All normal constructions within the area, towns, 
roads, castles—all constructions, should be con- 


sidered ruined. Magical structures, should any 
exist, are allowed a saving throw vs. crushing 
blow to avoid annihilation. All temples are 
allowed a saving throw vs. magical fire to avoid 
ruin. Those buildings that survive become small 
islands of near-stability. A temple at the heart of 
the cone, for example, might be raised with the 
crater's rim and stranded on a pinnacle of rock. 
Further away, it might avoid destruction if the 
lava flows part around it naturally. 

Shadow: (12 HD) The power of the shadow 
dragon is to draw upon the very essence of the 
Plane of Shadow, a sinister Demiplane of the 
Ethereal. Once per year the owner of the orb can 
cast a place on the Prime Material Plane into the 
Plane of Shadow. The area of effect is a diameter 
equal to the trapped dragon's Hit Dice x 100 
yards, with the orb at the center. When the com- 
mand is given, orb, owner, and the surrounding 
area are whisked into the Plane of Shadow. The 
transported area remains there for 1 year and at 
the end of that time is instantly returned to its 
proper place. While on the Plane of Shadow, all 
transported things are subject to the normal risks 
present on that plane—shadow dragons, slow 
shadows, shadow mastiffs, and worse. Beings can 
move from the Prime Material to the Plane of 
Shadow by all normal means of planar travel— 
most often by passing through the ethereal. 

On the Prime Material Plane, the area trans- 
ported is replaced by an equal area of the Plane of 
Shadow—shifting veils of darkness that fill the 
area of effect. Just as Prime Material inhabitants 
and creatures are carried away, shadow beings 
can arrive as part of the transfer, perhaps to 
maraud surrounding lands. 

Silver: (15 HD) The orb of the silver dragon 
has great healing powers. Once per year it can be 
used to resurrect 2d10 x 10 bodies within 100 
yards. All bodies to be resurrected must be pre- 
sent at the same time. When attempting to resur- 
rect special characters (PCs and the like), make 
normal resurrection survival rolls; for low-level 
NPCs and common soldiers, assume that the 
attempt is automatically successful. Furthermore, 
the power distinguishes between friend and foe, 
making this orb particularly useful for restoring 
fallen battlefield units. 

White: (11 HD) Upon invoking the power of 
this orb, all allies of the owner within 100 yards 
are seized by a savage war-frenzy. They fight 


with a blood-lust that causes them to disregard 
3508 


ee 


792 


Orb of Dragonkind II 


> ee 


their own peril and wounds in their savage 
attempts to slay the enemy. The frenzied gain an 
additional 2 dice of hit points, and +2 bonuses to 
THACO, Damage, and all saving throw rolls, and 
are immune to fear, charms, and illusions of all 
types. While perhaps not much for PCs, this 
power can render a battlefield unit into a terrify- 
ing force. This is usable once a month. 

Age Powers: In addition to color, the powers of 
the orbs vary according to the age of the dragon 
spirit trapped in them. Most of the results of age 
are calculated into the other powers of the orb— 
amount of damage done by a breath weapon, 
spells and number known, even area of effect for 
special color powers. However, age also grants 
ever-increasing numbers of random powers. 

The age listings on the next page give the 
appropriate power tables to use and the age modi- 
fier needed to calculate other effects of the 
dragon orb. 

Orb Personalities: Trapped within each orb of 
dragonkind is a distinct dragon. Over the millen- 
nia, each has reacted to its imprisonment differ- 
ently. While it is best if the DM devises a 
personality appropriate for the age and color of 
the trapped dragon, 12 suggested personalities 
are given here. 

The personality ofthe trapped dragon is impor- 
tant to create. Unlike many artifacts, the orbs do 
not simply work upon command; instead, it is 
best if the players discover that their characters 
must interact with the trapped dragons—cajoling, 
promising, threatening, and bribing the dragon 
spirits to obtain their aid. The personalities also 
affect the nature of the artifact possession the 
owner might undergo. 

Naive: This dragon believes in the better 
nature of beings even against all the things that 
have happened to it over the centuries. It has 
never lost hope that someone will rescue it from 
its prison. Indeed, it naturally assumes that its 
owner wants to free it, and uses this rationale as a 
justification for the artifact possession it causes. 

Sullen: Trapped so long within its orb, this 
dragon knows better than to believe the lies of its 
masters. It is stubborn and recalcitrant, refusing 
to yield its powers whenever possible. No one 
deserves its aid, since no one ever intends to free 
it. Threats and trickery offer the best hope of 
invoking this orb's powers, although it will freely 
act if it believes the power commanded might 
actually cause its master woe. 


Tricky: The dragon spirit is full of guile, con- 
stantly seeking a way to escape its prison. It will 
freely resort to lies and deceptions in order to 
obtain its goal of release. It cannot, however, lie if 
an answer is compelled of it—if the master 
demands to know if any invisible creatures are at 
hand, the orb must answer truthfully. It can, and 
does, invent powers for itself—often claiming to 
know things it does not in hopes of gaining release. 

Patient: This dragon has taken the long view, 
biding its time for the day it knows will come. Until 
then, it slumbers and thinks, creating elaborate 
philosophies and mental theorems. Ifnot actively in 
use, it sleeps, caring nothing for the world around 
it. When in use, it cannot be hurried and insists on 
using its powers at its own pace. It does take a cer- 
tain delight in rousing a little panic in its masters. 

Impatient: This dragon wants out now! It has 
long since tired of its confinement and will do 
nothing unless convinced the act will somehow 
move it closer to freedom. Its impatience surfaces 
even in areas having nothing to do with its free- 
dom and it constantly urges its master to stop 
waiting and act. 

Curious: This dragon relieves the boredom of 
imprisonment by seeking knowledge. It will want 
to know everything, especially when its powers 
are called upon. Its master must often explain the 
reason for its use, which may in turn lead to other 
explanations. Worse still, explanations remind it 
of other things it has learned, leading it into long 
digressions. 

Bored: Sealed inside its orb, never dying, this 
dragon feels as though it has seen everything. 
Little that happens to its master is of interest, and 
it cares not what happens to those who possess it. 
The orb does not respond to pleas of urgency or 
need, cares little for good or evil, and would wel- 
come any grotesque event as a new experience to 
relieve its boredom. Getting this orb to use its 
powers requires trickery more than threats. 

Hate-filled: The dragon inside rages against 
those who trapped it, those who have used it over 
the centuries, and indeed everyone on the outside. 
It is hostile to all free things, but in particular the 
master who forces it to act. Whenever possible, 
the spirit will seek to bring harm to its master by 
perverting the intention of his words or luring 
him into danger with bad advice. Like all of the 
orbs, it cannot directly lie about what it knows, 
but even so, it can convince the foolish to get 


themselves killed. 
3508 


88 SS SSS 


793 


Orb of Dragonkind II 


D a a 


Despairing: This dragon has given up. It 
knows it can never escape from its prison and 
there is no point in trying. Promises, rewards, and 
threats mean nothing to it. All action is pointless 
and there is even the thought that through inac- 
tion it might gain release. Those wishing to use 
many ofits major powers must actually convince 
the spirit that the outcome will have meaning, 
either to make the world a better or worse place. 

Stoic: This dragon spirit is resigned to its fate, 
but has not given up. Instead, it tries to make the 
best of things while searching for an escape. 
Unable to help itself, it seeks to help its kin by 
demanding payment for its services or considera- 
tions for others ofits species. 

Mad: Time has taken its toll on this dragon and 
its out-of-body confinement has driven it insane. 
There is no predicting how it will react to any 
given situation. Sometimes it is bright and cooper- 
ative, while at other times it raves about nonexis- 
tent enemies. It will debate simply to debate and 
generally makes life difficult for its master. 

Desperate: This dragon is in a state of near 
panic at the hope of ever gaining its freedom. It is 
willing to attempt anything, no matter how danger- 
ous to itself or its master, ifthe deed holds out the 
promise of freedom. It will slip from its master's 
grasp to fall from great heights, attempt to roll into 
acid pools, or leave itself exposed to powerful 
magical blasts, all in the hopes of shattering its orb. 


Orb ofthe Hatchling. (Hatchling, -6 HD) 
1 from Artifact Table 1-02: Combat 
Orb ofthe Wyrmkin. (Very Young, -4 HD) 
1 from Artifact Table 1-02: Combat 

1 from Artifact Table 1-07: Elemental Air 
Orb ofthe Scaled. (Young, -2 HD) 

2 from Artifact Table 1-02: Combat 

1 from Artifact Table 1-07: Elemental Air 
Orb ofthe Dragonette. (Juvenile, +0 HD) 

2 from Artifact Table 1-02: Combat 

2 from Artifact Table 1-00: Abjuration 
Orb ofthe Drake. (Young Adult, +1) 

2 from Artifact Table 1-05: Detection 

2 from Artifact Table 1-02: Combat 

1 from Artifact Table 1-00: Abjuration 
Orb ofthe Serpent. (Adult, +2) 

2 from Artifact Table 1-02: Combat 

1 from Artifact Table 1-12: Fate and Fortune 

2 from Artifact Table 1-00: Abjuration 
Orb ofthe Dragon. (Mature adult, +3) 

2 from Artifact Table 1-02: Combat 


1 from Artifact Table 1-08: Elemental Fire 
1 from Artifact Table 1-12: Fate and 
Fortune 
1 from Artifact Table 1-05: Detection 
Orb of the Gold-Hoarder. (Old, +4) 
3 from Artifact Table 1-02: Combat 
1 from Artifact Table 1-13: Healing 
1 from Artifact Table 1-14: Immunity 
Orb ofthe Great Serpent. (Very Old) 
3 from Artifact Table 1-02: Combat 
2 from Artifact Table 1-00: Abjuration 
1 from Artifact Table 1-13: Healing 
1 from Artifact Table 1-17: Movement 
Orb ofthe Firedrake. (Venerable) 
3 from Artifact Table 1-02: Combat 
2 from Artifact Table 1—00: Abjuration 
1 from Artifact Table 1-13: Healing 
1 from Artifact Table 1-17: Movement 
1 from Artifact Table 1-14: Immunity 
Orb ofthe Elder Wyrm. (Wyrm) 
3 from Artifact Table 1-02: Combat 
2 from Artifact Table 1—14: Immunity 
1 from Artifact Table 1-17: Movement 
1 from Artifact Table 1-21: Personal 
Enhancement 
1 from Artifact Table 1-08: Elemental Fire 
Orb ofthe Eternal Dragon. (Great Wyrm) 
4 from Artifact Table 1-02: Combat 
3 from Artifact Table 1-14: Immunity 
2 from Artifact Table 1-21: Personal 
Enhancements 
1 from Artifact Table 1-17; Movement 
1 from Artifact Table 1-08: Elemental Fire 
1 from Artifact Table 1-12: Fate and 
Fortune. 


Use the table below, rolling twice to determine 
the color of the dragonorb and the age. 


Orb Age Roll Orb Color 
Hatchling 1 Black 
Wyrmkin 2 Blue 
Scaled 3 Brass 
Dragonette 4 Bronze 
Drake 5 Cloud 
Serpent 6 Copper 
Dragon 7 Gold 
Gold-Hoarder 8 Green 
Great Serpent 9 Red 
Firedrake 10 Shadow 
Elder Wyrm 11 Silver 
Eternal Dragon 12 White 


3508 


M E a 


794 


Orb of Golden Death 


p EY 


Suggested Means of Destruction: 

The dragon can be released by sacrificing 
oneself with a magic jar spell, to be trapped 
within the orb. 

All 12 must be ground simultaneously under 
the great millstone ofthe gods. 

The original makers of the orbs must be found 
at the beginning of time, and the secret of the 
orbs' destruction must be learned from them. 
Ina DRAGONLANCE Campaign: These orbs of 
dragonkind are not the same as those found on 
Ansalon. Those orbs are unique to that world. 


of Golden Death 
XP Value: — GP Value: 75,000 
The Temple of Elemental Evil 

This item (also known as yellowskull, golden- 
skull, or the death orb) is a powerful magic item 
created by Zuggtmoy and luz. Because of its 
nature and aura, no paladin will touch it willingly, 
nor will any good priest; they feel its immense 
innate evil. 

The death orb is a gold sphere three inches in 
diameter, shaped to resemble a human skull sans 
lower jaw. Atop the crown is a raised diadem with 
depressions, the latter designed to accept four large 
gems, one representing each element. The orb has 
only limited powers without these gems. Its posses- 
sor can, at will, detect lie, know alignment, and poi- 
son (as the reverse of a neutralize poison spell). 

The possessor learns directly from the orb full 
details of usable powers, but no information 
about Charisma effects (explained below), poten- 
tial powers (such as those gained by addition of 
gems), unfavorable effects, nor the orb's follow- 
ing protection ability. Neither Zuggtmoy nor luz 
can harm the possessor of goldenskull, nor can 
either be the agent employing another to cause 
the user harm. 

If the possessor gazes upon the great throne in 
the Temple of Elemental Evil he or she immedi- 
ately knows how to operate it. The Throne can be 
caused to raise and lower itself, with the user, 
between the upper Temple works and dungeon 
level three. 

The user's Charisma with respect to Chaotic 
Evil creatures is raised to 20, or to -3 when 
angry. The corresponding effects apply: 

e Charisma 20: +48% reaction adjustment, 
maximum 25 henchmen (all chaotic evil), 
60% loyalty base, awe power affecting up to 2 
Hit Dice or Levels. 


Charisma -3: -50% reaction adjustment, 
horror affecting up to 4 Hit Dice or levels 
(again, only of chaotic evil creatures) 
Those affected by awe or horror are stunned 
into inaction by the mere sight of the possessor 
(no saving throw), and cannot initiate any action 
other than physical defense. 

Ill Effects: No good ever results from the 
employment of the death orb's powers, except on 
a very short-term or temporary basis. Thus, ifevil 
can result from any use of the orb, that occurs 
along with whatever was actually done. For 
example, an elemental conjured to fight against 
some evil creatures will do so, but in such a way 
as to allow them to harm the conjurer's associates 
to a maximum extent. Also, each time the awe 
power is brought forth, the user actually loses 1 
point of Charisma (but only with respect to those 
not chaotic evil). 

Both Zuggtmoy and luz know the identity and 
exact location of any person in possession of yel- 
lowskull (their detection ability overpowering any 
and all protection magical or mundane). The pro- 
tection of the death orb aside, Zuggtmoy or luz 
can attempt to persuade or coerce the possessor 
to hand over the orb (though they cannot take it 
by force). However, the possessor is forced to 
react to these evil beings in a somewhat coopera- 
tive manner, the degree corresponding to Cha- 
risma loss (from the use of the awe power)—a 
10% chance of persuasion existing for each point 
so lost. In play, if the character does not naturally 
cooperate, roll percentile dice to check the cor- 
rect current chance, and privately inform the 
player if persuasion has occurred. 

Any character who actually gives the death orb 
to either Zuggtmoy or luz becomes the hopeless 
thrall of the appropriate Evil being ever after- 
wards. (This permanently removes the character 
from play.) 

Elemental Power Gems: The gems of the orb, 
and additional powers they bestow, are as shown 
on the table below. The four gems of the correct 
size and shape to fit the diadem of the orb are 
hidden in the Elemental Nodes connected to the 
Temple of Elemental Evil. 

Each gem radiates a strong enchantment. 
When touched, a loose gem immediately trans- 
ports all creatures within 50 feet to the corre- 
sponding Elemental Node. No saving throw 
applies, and the victims arrive in the center of the 


node. The gem travels with the victims. No other 
3509 


ye rE eee 


795 


Orb of Holiness 


j a —— 


effect occurs, and no powers are bestowed. No 
effect occurs ifa gem is touched while in its cor- 
responding node, but remember that the transport 
effect occurs elsewhere whenever the loose gem 
is touched. Repeat trips may thus occur before 
the possessor realizes that a container (ideally the 
orb) must be used to prevent involuntary travel. 
When one ofthese gems is placed within its dia- 

dem mounting, the possessor gains the following 
abilities, and immediately realizes (and magically 
understands the process of) each ofthe effects. 

¢ The noted spell power, usable once per week. 
Travel to and from the corresponding Elemen- 
tal Plane at will (as if by using the teleport 
without error spell, but with no chance of 
error). 

Comfortable existence in the corresponding 
element or Elemental Plane, taking no envi- 
ronmental damage. 

Conjure elemental once per week, summoning 
from the appropriate Plane; however, no men- 
tal control is needed as long as the orb is held 
(producing an effect much like the priest 
spells). The elemental is of small size (8 HD) 
but maximum hit points (64). (Note, however, 
that such summoning is NOT possible while 
on the same Elemental Plane.) 

Summon and control a fiend of the type noted 
up to three times per day, but never more fre- 
quently than once per hour (six turns). 
Destroying the Orb: The death orb can only 
be destroyed ifall of its gems are properly inset. 
It must then be subjected to the following effects, 
in quick succession and in the proper order: a 
wind of 50 or more mph force; the strike of a 
maul made from a solid piece of granite; a very 
hot flame (1,000° F); and immersion in very cold 
water (32° F). The procedure causes the Orb to 
shatter, which causes the Elemental Nodes and 
the Greater Temple to collapse, and the dungeon 
levels above as well. Zuggtmoy takes 111 points 
of physical damage, is unable to use any powers 
for four days, and cannot leave her own Abyssal 
Plane for 40 years. luz, having less invested in the 
Death Orb, merely loses the services of evil ele- 
mental creatures for four years. 


Element Gem Spell Fiend 
Air Smoky quartz Wind walk Babau 
Earth Carnelian Earthquake Vrock 
Fire Garnet Flame strike Hezrov 
Water Aquamarine Wall ofice Glabrezv 


of Holiness 
XP Value GP Value 
Evil: 7,500 90,000 
Good: 7,500 90,000 
Neutral: 7,500 90,000 
The Magister 


These rare items are usually found at the heart of a 
temple, grove, or other holy place sacred to the 
worshipers ofa particular deity. Fashioned by pow- 
erful divine servants or magically skilled human 
worshipers of great power, such orbs are carefully 
guarded by high priests and other powerful devout 
beings, and are seemingly indestructible. Each orb 
has an ethical alignment corresponding to that of 
the deity whose holy symbol is always inscribed on 
these orbs. Orbs are unbreakable spheres of an 
unknown glossy white crystalline substance, 
smooth and spherical, and about 6 inches in diam- 
eter. Ifan Orb is found unguarded, determine its 
alignment as follows (roll 1d20): 


Roll Alignment 
01-06 Evil 

07-14 Good 

15-20 Neutral 


Ifa character of a particular ethos (lawful and 
chaotic considerations are ignored) touches an 
orb of a different ethos, a saving throw vs. magic 
must be made; if it is failed, the being instantly 
suffers 4d6 points of damage and is feeble- 
minded. Ifthe save is made, the being is merely 
stunned for 1d4 rounds and takes 2d6 points of 
damage. Any being of the same ethos as an orb 
can wield without harm the following powers: 

By immersion and command, the orb can 
purify water or drink once per day (24 hours), 
to a maximum volume of 22 cubic feet. 

By touch and command, the orb can cause 
sleep in any one creature (saving throw 
negates). Ifthe target creature is a true wor- 
shiper of the deity the orb is dedicated to, the 
saving throw is always made unless the crea- 
ture is willing to be made to sleep. Any being 
of the same specific alignment as a particular 
orb, or who truly worships the deity a particu- 
lar orb is dedicated to, can wield two addi- 
tional powers of the orb: 

Cure serious wounds three times per day (24 
hours), by touch and command (cured crea- 
ture may be of any alignment), the orb cannot 
cause serious wounds. 


3510 


go eo 


796 


Orb of Radiance. 


Ni 


Regenerate once per day; the orb cannot 
wither. 

Such an orb also has constant, involuntary 
powers that operate continually. All such orbs 
glow with a white continual light (bright light, 
but not blinding, in a 40-foot radius), which dims 
in the presence of strong evil (creature or place), 
and can be temporarily negated up to a maximum 
of nine rounds by darkness or by casting dispel 
magic on the orb. 

No other powers of the orb can be affected by a 
dispel magic. The touch of an orb does 5d6 points 
of damage to any undead. The orb acts as a con- 
stant, 60-foot, radial prayer (as the 3rd-level priest 
spell) with regard to all beings ofthe same specific 
alignment as the orb, or who truly worship the 
deity the orb is dedicated to. The presence of an 
orb calms all creatures of Intelligence 4 or less 
within 60 feet in 1d2 rounds, ending fear, anger, 
and all combat. On creatures with an Intelligence 
of 5 or more, an orb only removes fear. 


of Law 
XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 30,000 
DUNGEON Magazine 8 

The powers of the orb oflaw are usable only by a 
lawfully aligned creature with an Intelligence of 9 
or higher. Any chaotic creature touching the orb 
sustains 6d6 points of cold-based damage and is 
paralyzed for 6d6 rounds (no saving throw). Neu- 
tral creatures take half damage and half duration 
paralysis from touching the orb (no saving throw, 
as above). 

A lawfully aligned wielder of the orb has an 
effective Charisma of 18 when dealing with law- 
ful creatures and receives the benefits of a -2 
Armor Class bonus and a +2 bonus to all saving 
throws against attacks from chaotic opponents. 

No creatures native to the Outer Planes and of 
Chaotic alignments (Arborea, Limbo, the Abyss, 
for example) can approach within 10 feet of the 
orb's wielder. No saving throw is granted here, 
but magic resistance does apply. 

The orb's user can attempt to dispel any ele- 
mental within 60 feet, up to a maximum of four 
elementals per day. The elemental is permitted a 
saving throw vs. wands to avoid returning at once 
to its native plane. Only one such attempt can be 
made on any one creature. It is this power, magni- 
fied and extended by special enchantments 
placed around the orb that makes it so potently 
protective. 


The following powers are available to the user 
(once per day each, one per round): beguiling and 
rulership (as the rods, effective on nonchaotic 
creatures only), fear, and paralyzation (as the 
wands, effective on chaotic creatures only). All 
creatures affected by these powers can save vs. 
rods/staves/wands at a -2 penalty. 

The orb can communicate by empathy within a 
60-foot range, but only with lawfully aligned crea- 
tures. The orb also possesses undefined powers 
that allow it to counteract the forces of Chaos in all 
its forms. Rather than specify what the powers are, 
the DM should be prepared to improvise their use 
and appearance, as appropriate within the cam- 
paign. For instance, a PC holding the orb in the 
direction of a chaotic-evil wizard might suddenly 
see the wizard struck by a burst of magic missiles, 
or the power of one of the wizard's favorite evil 
devices neutralized. This "undefined" power is 
what protects the area surrounding the orb from 
the chaotic beings that roam the planes. 


of Radiance 

XP Value: 8,000 GP Value: 32,000 

Menzoberranzan Campaign Set 
These hand-sized globes of polished white quartz 
are among the most valued items of drow wizards, 
who use them to defend themselves against drow 
attack (or to sufficiently impress other drow, par- 
ticularly hostile priestesses, so that attacks can be 
avoided). Any being who knows the command 
words can use an orb of radiance, as long as some 
part of their skin is in direct contact with it. While 
they hold it or carry it on their person, they make 
all saving throws against any sort of magic at -1. 
When directed, an orb of radiance can emit a: 
e Sunray (once every other round, to a maxi- 
mum of four times per day): as the spell, com- 
mand words: "Delather myarra heth!" 
Light spell (once every other round, remains 
in globe where cast, not moving with orb, and 
unless dispelled by other means, lasts exactly 
one day from casting), command word: "Aum- 
rae!" 
Ruby ray (once per day): effects as the ruby 
ray ofreversal with the following effects: 
Melts away one patch of web or viscid glob 
Springs all magical and mechanical traps 
touched (normal effects, if targets in reach). 
Unties all knots and opens all locks, breaks all 
bars, chains, straps, manacles, and opens even 


wizard locks and held portals. 
3512 


a _— — = — 


797 


Orb of Remote Action 


Sai i 


Ends the effects of all entangling or imprison- 
ing spells, magical effects, or devices—except 
walls of force and forcecages, which it opens 
a one-foot-wide hole. 

Dispels all touched illusions. 

Reverses effects of a magicjar spell. 

Returns a petrified or polymorphed being to 
original form (system shock rolls, if any, still 
apply). 
Each time the ruby ray power is activated, it 
drains 1d4+ hit points from the orb-user; such 
lost hit points can be regained by normal healing 
means. The command word for this power is: 
"Raspral" 

It is whispered that these rare items were first 
fashioned with the aid of surface-world priests of 
other faiths. In Menzoberranzan, such items are 
carried only by wizards of Sorcere, or perhaps as 
hidden treasures by nobles of one or more of the 
most powerful noble Houses. 


of Remote Action 
XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 15,000 
Lost Ships 
This rare and useful magical, spacefaring device 
consists of a metal sphere bristling with telescop- 
ing, flexible metal legs mounted on swivel joints 
so that each can turn freely. 

The legs are control arms. Each is magically 
linked to an oval metal disc, which may be worn, 
swallowed, or otherwise affixed to any object, liv- 
ing or not. The manner of attachment does not 
affect the function of the device in any way, but 
each control arm can have one, and only one, spe- 
cific disc linked to it when the item is created. If 
a disc is destroyed, its matching control arm is 
rendered useless. 

An orb ofremote action has 1dl2 arms. Each 
can manipulate floating objects in wildspace, 
atmospheres or phlogiston by means of their link- 
age with the discs affixed to the objects. Pulling a 
rod out to its greatest extent (about 2 feet) moves 
a disc away from the control orb; pushing it in 
flush with the orb brings it within an actual foot 
of the control sphere. Bending a rod, or moving it 
in one direction or another, causes a correspond- 
ing movement of the distant disc. 

Control rods can become entangled all too eas- 
ily, and there is a limit to the orb's effective range. 
A disc that drifts or is carried beyond 2,000 feet 
away from an orb ceases to be controlled until it 
reenters the orb's range. Dispel magic cast on a 


disc causes it to drop out of the orb's control for 
1d4+1 rounds. 


The orb cannot push a disc in opposition to a 
concerted effort against it, nor can it cause disc- 
linked objects to pass through ship bulkheads, 
or strike obstacles with enough force to cause 
damage. 

The device is normally used to help free-float- 
ing crew members easily repair or manipulate 
sails and rigging in deep space, or to retrieve lost 
and drifting objects. A ship can even be painted, 
or contact-weapons (such as heated metal 
spheres) brought against flow barnacles or other 
monsters on or near a ship's hull. 

The device is not affected by the presence of 
magic or spellcasting, but the discs and the 
objects they move are subject to all physical and 
magical attacks in the normal way. A disc can 
move any object, regardless of shape or size, up 
to a Movement Rate of 26, but whenever the 
object comes within 2 feet of any other solid 
object, it slows to a Movement Rate of 12 (akin to 
the slowing of a spelljammer). This appears to be 
a natural space phenomenon, and occurs despite 
the wishes of the orb's operator. 

An orb's control links can pass through any 
known physical or magical barriers, except a 


crystal sphere. That does not mean an operator is 
3513 


798 


Orb of the Silver Dragon 


DS ee 


able to know what is happening to manipulated 
objects (the user must be able to see the discs), 
nor does it mean that those objects can freely pass 
through such barriers. 

The device can be used to create sparks or 
flames (by striking flint and steel, for example) at 
a distance in phlogiston, the only safe method 
known. 

The control orb saves as metal, with a +4 
bonus due its inherent magic. Each disc saves as 
metal, with a+ 1 bonus. 

To activate it, an intelligent individual (that is, 
any being with an intelligence of 5 or more who 
can manipulate the control arms) touches the orb 
and releases it. The orb then levitates in the posi- 
tion in which it was released. If moved later, its 
movement affects all of the discs it controls. 

An orb may operate for 1 d20+5 turns, once 
every 100 turns (the operation range represents a 
mysterious variance in the power of the device). 
When exhausted, its control links simply fail, and 
the orb slowly sinks, coming to rest on any sur- 
face (if within a gravitational field). 

The orbs are thought to have been fashioned by 
an ancient, now vanished, spacefaring race. They 
are few, and highly prized—not even the arcane 
can construct or repair them. 

An orb ofremote action can have a great effect 
on close-quarters melee combat. Take care that its 
use does not overbalance play, by limiting its 
functioning or reliability whenever a PC (or 
NPC) seems to be misusing its powers, or when 
its use renders opponents helpless under the 
rules. 


of the Silver Dragon 
XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 20,000 
Dragons of Ice 

This powerful artifact is a fragile, etched crystal 
globe that is approximately 10 inches in diameter 
when not in use. When the command words (see 
below) are spoken, the globe expands to 20 
inches in diameter. Imprisoned within the orb is a 
red dragon; this is the source of the orb's power. 

This orb, and two others with similar powers, 
were employed long before the Cataclysm for the 
purpose of destroying evil dragons—at least, this 
is the legend that has trickled down through the 
centuries. This is all the PCs know about the 
dragon orbs. They have no idea how the orbs 
function. The orbs' actual primary function is to 
summon evil dragons. Powerful magic of old 


N ` A 


would summon serpents with the orbs and then 
destroy them with other magic. 

Any character attempting to use the orb must 
gaze into it and speak the command words 
(Argentum Commandates) inscribed on the orb's 
surface. The character must make a saving throw 
vs. magic or be charmed by the dragon in the orb. 
The DM should secretly roll the saving throw for 
the character, not informing the players of what is 
going on. 

Ifthe character saves against the charm, any 
evil dragons within 1d4(xl0) miles hasten to the 
orb. These dragons attack any nonevil creatures 
they find near the orb. If the campaign situation 
does not specify the location of nearby dragons, 
there is a 33% (1 or 2 on 1d6) chance that 1d3 
dragons show up. Each dragon arrives separately, 
1d6 turns after the previous one. Randomly deter- 
mine the ages, sizes, and colors of the summoned 
dragons unless campaign considerations dictate a 
certain result (white dragons while the party is on 
the glacier, for example). 

If the character fails the saving throw, no 
dragons are summoned, but the character is 
charmed by the evil dragon within the orb. Inform 
the player (when you can speak alone without 
being obvious) that the character is charmed and 


will act normally unless told otherwise. 
3514 


= 799 7 


Orrery of the Inner Planes 


p Sa I 


Although the dragon knows nothing about the 
current state of affairs in Krynn, it will steer the 
controlled character so as to aid the cause of evil. 
This is done subtly so that the other PCs suspect 
nothing, until a critical point is reached (for 
example, ifthe PCs are attacked by evil creatures 
who stand a good chance of killing or capturing 
the party). Then the charmed character will turn 
against the party ifit appears that doing so will 
swing the battle over to the side of evil. 

The orb has the secondary abilities of cure 
serious wounds three times per day, cast contin- 
ual light at will, and detect magic at will. When- 
ever it is used for any of these functions, the 
character must save vs. spell, and a check is made 
to see ifthe orb has attracted any evil dragons. 

Any character who gazes into the orb and 
speaks the command words knows of the orb's 
secondary functions and will inform the party of 
them, even if the character is charmed. No one 
who activates the orb knows of its primary func- 
tion (to summon dragons) or of the charm effect. 
Detect magic and detect evil spells show posi- 
tive results if cast on the orb or any charmed 
character. 

For purposes of dispelling, treat the charm 
effect as a spell cast by an 11th-level wizard. 


Orrery of the Inner Planes 
XP Value: 8,000 GP Value: 40,000 
Secrets of the Lamp 
This enchanted mechanical device has been 
incorporated into a clock. It shows the relative 
position ofthe planets, moons, the stars, and the 
junctions of the Inner Planes. It is believed to 
be a toy of the marid, though others attribute its 
manufacture to the dao and marid working 
together (an unlikely event). It allows a compe- 
tent navigator to guide a vessel so that it can 
travel between the Inner Planes: the Elemental 
Planes of Earth, Air, Water, and Fire; the Ethe- 
real Plane; and the Prime Material Plane. The 
device also empowers the ship it is on to move 
through the elements: gliding through elemen- 
tal stone, sailing underneath elemental water, 
flying the elemental winds, and sailing 
unscathed through lakes of fire. The orrery 
wards the ship and passengers against all dam- 
age from the elements. It helps a ship catch 
ethereal winds, and it can levitate a normal ship 
on the Prime Material Plane, allowing it to fly 

on normal winds. 


This magical item requires a ship on which to 
mount the orrery and a successful navigation 
check to use. If the proficiency check fails, the 
orrery sends the ship and its passengers through 
the Ethereal Plane to a random location on an 


Inner Plane of the DM's choice. 


Oven of Heating 


XP Value: GP Value: 
Defective: — 3,000 
Normal: 1,000 5,000 


DRAGON Magazine 73 

This appears to be an ordinary stone oven. There 
is no place for feeding the fire, however, the oven 
is heated via a connection with the Elemental 
Plane of Fire. A small number (10%) of these 
ovens are defective, so that a creature from the 
fire plane may come "through" the connection 
(5% chance per month, noncumulative, for any 
defective oven). 


Roll Oven Type 
01-10 Defective 
11-00 Normal 


3516 


he ee RE 


800 


Paddleboard 


Paddleboards are fashioned from single 
pieces of thin wood about a foot long. They have 
rounded, fan-shaped paddles and a narrow han- 
dle. An elastic string is attached to the center of 
the paddle, and a ball is attached to the other end 
of the string. A magical paddleboard is quite sus- 
ceptible to fire damage but nearly immune to 
impact damage. Paddleboards can be used to bat- 
ter opponents with the same rate of fire as thrown 
darts, whether using the paddle or the ball. Each 
hit causes 1 point of damage plus the magical 
bonus of the board. 


Magical 
XP Value GP Value 
+1 (5'):50 250 
+2(10'): 100 500 
+3 (15'): 150 750 
+4 (20'): 200 1,000 
+5 (20'): 275 1,375 
+5 (25'): 290 1,450 
+6 (30'): 300 1,500 


DRAGON Magazine 134 

Although magical paddleboards come in a variety 
of types, all look like normal paddleboards. Such 
a paddle is 1 -foot-long and made of wood, thus 
being quite susceptible to fire damage but never 
from impact damage (such as from falling, or 
from normal or crushing blows). The string 
appears to be made from interwoven sinews, and 
the paddleball is usually an opaque crystal that is 
resilient and nearly indestructible. 

When a magical paddleboard is found, roll on 
the table below to determine its powers. Magical 
paddleboards can be used to batter opponents up 
to three times per round, using either the paddle 
or the ball. The damage caused per hit equals 1 
hit point plus the magical bonus of the paddle- 
board and the user's Strength bonus, if any. These 
items can become quite deadly in the right hands! 
Once per round, a user can attempt to stun a foe 
with the paddleboard. The base chance for suc- 
cess ifa hit is made is 5%, modified by +2% for 
every magical plus of the weapon and +1% per 2 
points of Strength. 

The sinew thongs are normally 1 -foot-long, 
lengthening magically to their full range during 
use. The range given for each paddleboard cannot 
be exceeded by any means, and paddleboard 
strings are impossible to cut. 


T WY s 


FO VTE 


\ 


Paddleboard of Wondrous Transformation 


Roll Paddleboard Range 
01-60 +1 5' 
61-75 +2 10' 
76-83 +3 15' 
84-90 +4 20' 
91-95 +5 20' 
96-99 +5 25' 
00 +6 30! 


of Wondrous Transformation 
XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 15,000 
DRAGON Magazine 134 

This paddleboard appears much the same as other 
magical paddleboards, but it holds much more 
power. Sometimes it has the form ofan animal or 
monster carved on the back of the paddle. The 
paddleboard of wondrous transformation may 
strike once per round at a range of up to 15 feet, 
its sinew cord stretching in the same manner as 
other magical paddleboards. When struck, a tar- 
get creature takes no damage but must save vs. 
polymorph or else be polymorphed into a new 
being of some sort for a duration of six turns. All 
items the victim possesses are polymorphed into 
that creature as well. The affected being (if the 
new form allows) retains all spellcasting and 
fighting powers, and undergoes no change in per- 
sonality, knowledge, or intelligence. No innate 
powers of the new form are gained, except for 
those normally gained by the use of a polymorph 
self spell. This paddleboard is a dangerous 
weapon, for it is impossible to predict what shape 
the affected creature will assume. When a crea- 
ture is struck, consult the table below. 

A particular creature may be polymorphed 
only once per day. No system shock roll need be 
made by the victim. In some forms, all the vic- 
tim's previous powers are lost for the duration of 
the transformation; for instance, even a 20th- 
level wizard is nearly helpless as a rot grub—no 
hands, mouth, or components with which to cast 
spells. 

It goes without saying that the paddleboard of 
wondrous transformation is not always a wise 
weapon to use. Turning your opponent into a pur- 
ple worm during a bar fight is considered bad 
form. 


Roll Creature Roll Creature 
01-02 Piercer 49-50 Shadow 
03-04 Leucrotta 51-53 Elf 

3518 


801 


Padriac's Portable Purveyor of Parfait Potions 


Roll Creature Roll Creature 
05-06 Wight 54-55  Otyugh 
07-08 Purple worm 56-58 Halfling 
09-10 Iron golem 59-60 Hill giant 
11-12 Orc 61-62 Rust monster 
13-14 Giant centipede 63-64 Lich 
15-16 Blink dog 65-66 Giant weasel 
17-18 Hydra (eight- 67-68 Minotaur 
headed) 69-70 Troll 
19-20 Frost giant 71-72 Baatezu 
21-22 Will o wisp 73-74 Umber hulk 
23-24 Catoblepas 75-76 Vampire 
25-26 Giant fire beetle 77-78 Carrion 
27-28 Subterranean crawler 
lizard 79-80 Black pudding 
29-30 Nightmare 81-82 Rot grub 
33-34 Copper dragon 83-84 Storm giant 
31-32 Bronze dragon 85-86 Troglodyte 
35-36 Elder titan 87-88 Anhkheg 
37-38 Lizard man 89-90 Brown mold 
39-40 Gargoyle 91-92 Gorgon 
41-42 Giant poisonous 93-94 Beholder 
snake 95-96 Medusa 
43-44 Giant slug 97-98 Mind flayer 
45-46 Ki-rin 99 Skeleton 
47-48 Ogre 00 DM's choice 


Padriac's Portable Purveyor 


of Parfait Potions 

XP Value: 10,000 GP Value: 50,000 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 82 
This 6-inch cube is made of pale blue crystal 
and is divided into four rectangular compart- 
ments. Each compartment contains a different 
colored translucent liquid; one each of ruby, 
amber, emerald, and sapphire. There are four 
buttons on the bottom of the container, each 
under a compartment. The buttons, which corre- 
spond to a colored liquid, must be pressed to 
make the item work. An unbreakable beaker is 
attached to the cube. 

The purveyor manufactures one potion per day. 
By pressing three of the four buttons, in any 
sequence, the user causes liquid to be dispensed 
into the beaker. Each of the two dozen possible 
permutations yields a different result. The item 
will not function for 24 hours after it dispenses a 
potion. Consult the table below to determine pos- 
sible combinations. DMs are free to create their 
own combination charts. Abbreviations for the 
liquids are R-ruby, A-amber, E-emerald, and S- 
sapphire. 


> Ee ee 


Sequence Potion Received 
A-E-R Poison, type D 

A-E-S Oil ofpreservation 
A-R-E Potion ofvampire control 
A-R-S Oil of fumbling 

A-S-E Potion of extra-healing 
A-S-R No effect 

E-A-R Potion ofhealing 
E-A-S Potion ofESP 

E-R-A Potion ofdelusion 
E-R-S Oil of Slipperiness 
R-A-E Potion of clairvoyance 
R-A-S No effect 

R-E-A Sweet water 

R-E-S Potion ofclairvoyance 
R-S-A Oil ofdisenchantment 
R-S-E Poison, type L 

S-A-E Potion ofheroism 
S-A-R Poison, type J 

S-E-A Poison, type J 

S-E-R Philter of love 

S-R-A Poison, type O 

S-R-E Potion of invisibility 


Pan 
A pan is a shallow container used for frying or 
baking food, or for bathing. Pans used for cook- 
ing are generally cast from iron; pans used for 
bathing are usually made of ceramic, glass, or 
lightweight metals such as tin or brass. 


of Cooking 
GP Value: 500 
DRAGON Magazine 73 
This is a round, 9-inch iron frying pan with a 
runic "F" on the handle. It automatically heats 
anything placed within it to frying temperature— 
and it's nonstick. 


XP Value: 100 


of Spicing 
GP Value: 1,500 
DRAGON Magazine 73 
A 9-inch, round iron pan with the runic "S" 
embossed on the handle. Any food fried in this 
pan is magically spiced to the cook's taste—quite 
a boon in areas where spice is scarce. 


XP Value: 300 


3521 


gp ee ee 


802 


~ Parchment of Monster Holding g- 


Paper 

Paper is a high-quality writing surface made from 
pulped wood or cloth fibers. Paper can be bought 
by the roll or by the individual sheet. A roll can 
be almost any size, and very long rolls usually are 
wound onto sticks or spindles to make storage 
and transport easier. Writing and mapping paper 
is sold in flat, carefully folded sheets. 


of Forms 

GP Value: 1,000 
Oriental Adventures 
This magical colored paper can be used by those 
with the origami proficiency. To use it, the char- 
acter folds the paper into the desired shape, 
checking against his or her origami proficiency 
for success. If successful, the user then blows on 
the paper and utters the command word. The 
paper then transforms into a life-sized version of 
the origami form, having all the normal proper- 


XP Value: 200 


ties of the object created. The paper can only be © 


used to make normal creatures of animal intelli- 
gence, nonmagical fabricated objects, and natural 
objects. Thus a horse, house, or tree could be cre- 
ated but not an oni, person, or magic item. The 
transformed paper of forms is indistinguishable 
from a normal object except that it radiates a faint 
dweomer of magic. 

The paper object is highly susceptible to fire. 
Normal fire ignites it 80% of the time and magi- 
cal fires always cause the paper to catch fire. The 
paper remains in the transformed state until the 
character utters a second command word, causing 
it to revert to its origami form that can be used 
again. Once the paper has been used to make a 
particular origami shape, it can then only be used 
for that shape. If the origami shape is unfolded, 
the paper is ruined and cannot be used again. One 
sheet of paper is sufficient to make any object up 
to the size of a small house or junk. When found 
there are 1d4 sheets of paper. 


of Writing 
XP Value: 300 GP Value: 1,500 
The Complete Wizard's Handbook 
Any words that the user speaks or thinks magi- 
cally appear in writing on this paper. 


Parchment 

Parchment is similar to paper, but made from ani- 
mal skins. It tends to be of lower quality than 
paper but can be used for the same purposes. 
Parchment usually is sold in small rolls or in 
pages 1-foot square. Parchment tends to have a 
short life when compared to paper due to the 
highly acidic and corrosive fluids used to cure the 
hides from which it is made. 


of Looping 
XP Value: 600 GP Value: 3,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

This parchment is found in its own special box, 
by itself. The box is 8 inches wide, 14 inches 
long, and 2 inches deep; two knobs are located at 
each end of one side. The box and knobs are 
made of fine mahogany wood. The box has a 6- 
inch square hole in its top. The parchment can be 
seen and written upon through this hole. Turning 
the top knob winds the parchment toward the top, 
and is done when the available surface has been 
written upon; the lower knob rewinds the parch- 
ment. The parchment may be easily rewound to 
its starting point but, being magical, it has no 
other end. Unmarked, usable parchment is always 
available. The lid ofthe box may be loosened by a 
command word. If the lid is lifted off, the user 
finds one wide strip of parchment, 30 inches 
long, wound about two rollers, with a twist in it (a 
mobius strip). Opening the box erases the entire 
parchment. Ifreplaced in the box and locked by 
another command word, the parchment may be 
again used magically. 

Seven Ist-level spells may be written on the 
parchment (as if a scroll); higher-level spells burn 
out the parchment, destroying it, as does an eighth 
1st-level spell. The parchment and the box are 
immune to all attacks except fire, both are destroyed 
at the slightest touch of normal or magical flame. 


of Monster Holding 
XP Value: 150 GP Value: 1,500 
The Complete Wizard's Handbook 
This 1-foot-square piece of parchment can hold 
any monster summoned by a monster summoning 
I spell. The wizard unfolds the parchment and 
lays it out prior to casting the spell. Ifthe spell is 
successfully cast, the summoned monster is 
immediately absorbed into the parchment, 


appearing there as a colored image. The caster 
3525 


> i iia i. 


803 


Parchment of Selective Reading 


fp, CAA Ee ee ee a ee 


can then refold the parchment and carry it, hold- 
ing the summoned monster indefinitely. When 
the parchment is unfolded and laid on the ground, 
and the wizard speaks a command word, the mon- 
ster appears, remaining active for the normal 
duration of the monster summoning I spell. 

Any single parchment ofmonster holding can 
be used only once; after the monster is released, 
the parchment crumbles to dust. The parchment 
also crumbles if it is torn or defaced in any way. 


of Selective Reading 

XP Value: 1,200 GP Value: 6,000 
DRAGON Magazine 73 
This item is a blank parchment scroll. Anything 
written on it can be read only by the writer and 
those whose names are inscribed on the scroll. It 
can be reused several times, until the scraping 
required to remove the old ink has worn through 
the parchment. 


Self-Protecting 

XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
This parchment appears to be and functions as a 
parchment oflooping in all respects. However, its 
box is trapped and cannot be defused. When the 
box is opened, it explodes in a ball oflightning 10 
feet in diameter and inflicts 5d10 points of elec- 
trical damage. Each victim within the area may 
make a saving throw vs. spell to take half dam- 
age, but there is a 4 penalty to the roll if metal 
armor is worn. 


of Spell Stealing 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 5,000 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 82 

This item appears to be a normal sheet of parch- 
ment, but it is embossed with "db" in the bottom 
corner. When unrolled and left within 10 feet ofa 
bard or wizard, the first spell cast will fail and the 
formula for the spell appears in flowing script on 
the parchment. Once it has copied a spell, the 
parchment rolls itself up. Each sheet of parch- 
ment can only copy one spell. Typically 1dl2 
sheets of parchment are found together. Stolen 
spells cannot be used as scrolls, but they can be 
used to research the stolen spell. 


Pearl 
A pearl is a semiprecious "stone" formed inside 
various mollusks when an irritant is trapped 


within the shell. Ifthe animal cannot expel the 
object, it covers it with a smooth, shell-like coat- 
ing instead. Pearls are hard but delicate. They are 
valued for their color and silvery luster. 


Black 
XP Value: 500 


GP Value: 2,500 
BLACKMOOR 
This pearl allows a wizard to cast one additional 


noncombatant spell once per day of any level 
below 6th. 


Dragon 
XP Value: 10,000 GP Value: 20,000 
DRAGON Magazine 126 
These magically treated pearls are carried by 
every oriental dragon. They always glow with a 
brilliant light so penetrating that a single pearl 
can light up every room in even the largest castle. 
(Only a special carrying sack of dragon hide or 
similar special leather conceals the light.) When 
carried, a dragon pearl acts as & periapt ofhealth. 
In addition, it can increase the size or amount of 
any ordinary substance with which it comes in 
contact. People and animals grow fatter and 
healthier, crops grow larger, and piles of food 
(such as rice) increase in size. If placed in a bar- 


rel with a few drops of water, oil, or another liq- 
3530 


ee aa 


804 


Pearl of Power 


SD A 


uid, the pearl soon fills the barrel overflowing. 
However, this ability only works for ordinary 
materials; it cannot multiply a pile of coins or 
make gems increase in value. If buried, the pearl 
reveals its presence by the fact that the grass 
above it is always green and healthy, even in win- 
ter and times of drought. 


of the Ebbing Tide 

XP Value: 400 GP Value: 2,000 
Oriental Adventures 
This powerful, magical pearl causes water to 
recede. Holding the pearl in hand, a character 
utters the command word. Each round after that 
the character concentrates on the pearl, all waters 
within 60 feet recede at the rate of 5 feet per 
round. Once the concentration is ended, the 
waters instantly rush back to their normal banks 
or depths. 


of Entrancement 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 10,000 
Otherlands 

This tiny pearl gives off a gentle, white glow that 
is very soothing to look at. When placed under 
the tongue of an unconscious victim, the pearl 

extends the state of unconsciousness to 36 days. 

During this time, the pearl enables the victim to 
go without food or air. 

As its second benefit, the pearl can force the 
unconscious victim to obey the commands of the 
pearl's owner. During this function, the victim 
walks about with glazed eyes, as if in a trance. 
These pearls are used mainly on humans who are 
taken underwater by sea-dwellers and need to be 
kept a while before being returned to land. 


of Flying 

GP Value: 1,500 
DRAGON Magazine 40 
Once a day, this pearl allows the user to fly at a 
speed of 12 for 1d6 hours. Beginning 10 minutes 
before the end of the spell, the pearl sends 
impulses to user indicating the spell is about to 
end. 


XP Value: 300 


Giant Black 
XP Value: 2,400 GP Value: 12,000 
Gods, Demigods, & Heroes 
The giant black pearl negates all wind and earth 
turbulence in a one-mile radius. 


Gold 
XP Value: 400 GP Value: 2,000 
BLACKMOOR 
This pearl allows a priest to cast one additional 
noncombatant spell once per day of up to 7th 


level. 


Kathena's Pearl of Wisdom 

XP Value: 500 GP Value: 5,000 
1993 Collector Card 407 

Kathena's pearl ofwisdom differs from the stan- 
dard pearl because it increases a paladin's Wis- 
dom score, rather than a priest's. The paladin 
must possess the pearl for 30 days in order for its 
magic to operate initially, and then the paladin 
must keep the pearl or the magic is lost and the 
Wisdom score returns to its original value. 


of Power 
XP Value GP Value 
Cursed: — 1/10th value of normal 
Type I: 200 2,000 
Type II: 400 4,000 
Type III: 600 6,000 
Type IV: 800 8,000 
Type V: 1,000 10,000 
Type VI: 1,200 12,000 
Type VII: 1,400 14,000 
Type VIII: 1,600 16,000 
Type IX: 1,800 18,000 


Type X: 100/spell level 1,000/spell level 

DUNGEON MASTER Guide 
This seemingly normal pearl of average size and 
coloration is a potent aid to a wizard. Once a day, 
a pearl of power enables the possessor to recall 
any one spell as desired, even if the spell has 
already been cast. Of course, the wizard must 
have the spell to be remembered among those 
most recently memorized. The power of the pearl 
is found by rolling percentile dice and consulting 
the table below: 


Level of Spell 


Roll Type Recalled by Pearl 
01-25 Type I First 
26-45 Type II Second 


3538 


SS A | 


805 


~ Pearl of Power H ar 


Level of Spell 
Roll Type Recalled by Pearl 
46-60 Type ll Third 
61-75 Type IV Fourth 
76-85 TypeV Fifth 
86-92 Type VI Sixth 
93-96 Type VII Seventh 
` 97-98 Type VII Eighth 
99 Type IX Ninth 
00 TypeX Recalls two spells of 1st to 


6th level (Use 1d6 twice) 


Note that one in 20 of these magical pearls is 
cursed. The pearl is of opposite effect, causing a 
spell to be forgotten. These pearls can be gotten 
rid of only by means of a wish. 


VA 


> Mo 
es verene SUS), 


X 


h 
Wey 
Mia 


at one RE 
tat, tall Ais 
S 


Weg 


Reet 
{itl 


of Power II 
XP Value: 60,000 GP Value: 300,000 
The Minrothad Guilds 
When Calitha Starbrow ascended to immortality 
in Evergrun, she created as her test the pearl of 
power, a living relic that is the closely kept secret 
of the water elf clans of Minrothad. 

The original pearl was left in Evergrun when 
some of Starbrow's followers migrated with 
Ilsundal out of that land. A fragment of the pearl 
was secretly taken by Poladan Meditor, at the 


time, an assistant keeper of the relic. The original 
pearl has since become lost to history and is 
believed destroyed. 

The relic is a semi-sentient creation, growing 
over the following centuries from a fragment into 
an entire pearl ofpower. 

At first Meditor was secretive about what he 
had done. For a long time the water elves had no 
relic at all to speak of, and when the fledgling 
pearl began to develop, the new keeper and his 
assistants kept the news to themselves. When the 
power of the offshoot relic became noticeable, the 
keeper was confirmed in his office, but the elves 
kept news of their clan relic from their human 
neighbors. These old habits of secrecy die hard. 
The pearl of power is seen by few in Minrothad, 
and spoken of by fewer. 

The relic appears to be a massive iridescent 
pearl 3 feet in diameter. It glows with a gentle 
golden-pink light, illumining all within a 40- 
foot radius. It is warm and smooth to the touch, 
and rests on a giant shell lined with mother of 
pearl. The shell came from a giant oyster in local 
water, and has nothing to do with the pearl's 
powers. The relic is located in the hidden Grotto 
of the Pearl in the sea caverns beneath Seahome 
on Alfeisle. 

If a layer of the pearl is chipped off the relic, 
the scar left where the fragment was removed 
heals over during the course of one year. These 
fragments are used to craft various magical items, 
as explained below. Removing more than one 
fragment a year reduces the pearl's turning range 
by 5 feet. When the range drops below 300 feet, it 
loses one magical ability (randomly determined) 
for each 5 feet the range is further reduced. As 
with other relics, this range returns at the rate of 5 
feet per day. 

The Pearl of Power can cure blindness, cure 
disease, neutralize poison, cure serious wounds, 
identify magical items, and turn undead in the 
same way as other clan relics. The pearl is also 
used to make several magical items valued by the 
water elves. 

Pearl fragments are used to create special mag- 
ical items. A pearl fragment ground up is the pri- 
mary ingredient in apotion ofwater movement by 
the water elves. This potion allows the imbiber to 
move underwater or on the Elemental Plane of 
Water as easily as if surrounded by air. The effect 
lasts for one day. It does not, however, enable one 


to breathe under water; some other method is 
3539 


8 


06 


~ Pearl, Traveler's g 


required to gain that ability. 

A ring ofwater walking can be crafted from a 
pearl fragment. Not only can the ring's wearer 
walk on water, but so can anyone in physical con- 
tact with the user when exercising this spell 
effect. Some water elf merchant-princes are 
gifted with these rings in thanks for their services 
to the elves of Seahome. 

For special purposes, three fragments of the 
pearl are sometimes used to create a staffof air 
and water. This staff also provides the ability to 
breathe water, and its effects on the Elemental 
Plane automatically extends to a 10-foot radius. A 
staff of this type cannot be bought, but is some- 
times given to a hero to aid in a quest important 
to the water elves. 

Reproducing the Pearl: Ifa full vial of sea 
dew is used to anoint a pearl fragment freshly 
removed from the mother pearl, the fragment 
soon curls in upon itself and takes on the appear- 
ance of a normal pearl. If this pearl is bathed 
monthly in sea water and the proper rituals are 
performed, it begins to grow. After Id4 centuries, 
the pearl reaches maturity and its sentience awak- 
ens, whereon it gains the same abilities as the 
original pearl ofpower. 


of Protection from Fire 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
Oriental Adventures 
This magical pearl, when carried, has all the 
properties of a ring offire resistance. 


Red 
XP Value: 700 GP Value: 3,500 
BLACKMOOR 
The redpearl allows its user to cure 10 hit points 
a day when held to the wound. Each cure uses 


one charge, and the pearl has 2d10 charges. 


of the Rising Tide 
XP Value: 600 GP Value: 3,000 
Oriental Adventures 
This pearl is identical to the pearl ofthe ebbing 
tide, except that instead of receding, the waters in 
the area of effect will rise at the rate of 5 feet per 
round. 


Serpent Spirit 
XP Value: GP Value: 
DRAGON Magazine 40 
Once per day for Id6 hours this pearl allows the 


user to speak with animals. 


of the Sirines 

XP Value: 900 GP Value: 4,500 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 
This seems to be a normal pearl, but it radiates 
faintly of enchantment if detect magic is used. In 
any event, the stone is worth at least 1,000 gp, 
based on its beauty alone. Ifit is clasped firmly in 
hand (or to the breast) and the owner attempts 
actions related to the pearl's power areas, the 
character understands and is able to employ the 
item. 

The pearl enables its possessor to breathe in 
water the same as in clean, fresh air. Underwater 
movement rate is 24. The possessor is immune to 
ill effects from the poison touch ofa sirine. The 
pearl must be within the general area of the pos- 
sessor—less than 10 feet distant—to convey its 
powers. 


Storm Rider's 
XP Value: 7,500 GP Value: 37,500 
Secrets of the Lamp 
The Padisha of the Marid is said to have a storm 
rider's pearl with all the powers of a traveler's 
pearl, as well as the power to change the direction 
of the wind daily, to summon terrible storms at 
sea weekly, and to reverse or hold back the tides 
once a month. Unlike other pearls of its type, it is 
not consumed when used. 


Traveler's 
XP Value: 750 GP Value: 3,750 
Secrets of the Lamp 
This large, rosy pearl is a powerful item created 
by the marid to be given to mortals, who then do 
the most amusing things with them. When given 
as a gift by its owner, it appears as a normal pearl, 
though a faint radiance of alteration magic can be 
detected. Later, the old owner can speak a com- 
mand word, teleporting him or herself and a sin- 
gle companion to the pearl's current 
location—often in the new owner's treasury. If 
the pearl has been thrown away (or dropped from 
a cliff, for instance), the teleporters arrive safely 
at the point the pearl lands. In any case, the pearl 


is consumed when used. 
3546 


-a a a aS 


807 


Pearl of Ultimate Wisdom 


>, ee 


of Ultimate Wisdom 

XP Value: — GP Value: 600 
DRAGON Magazine 40 
When placed in the mouth, the outer coating dis- 
solves immediately and the pearl disgorges a 
lethal poison. Ifthe user makes a saving throw 
against poison, the character is assumed to have 
spit enough out to have survived. After one use, 
the pearl is totally consumed—whether or not the 
victim dies. 


of Wisdom 
XP Value GP Value 
Cursed: — 500 
Normal: 500 5,000 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 


Although it appears to be a normal pearl, & pearl 
of wisdom causes a priest to increase 1 point in 
Wisdom if he or she retains the pearl for one 
month. The increase happens at the end of 30 
days, but after that the priest must keep the pearl 
with on his or her person, or the 1 point gain is 
lost. 

The cursed pearl works in reverse, but once the 
point of Wisdom is lost, the pearl turns to pow- 
der; the loss is permanent barring some magical 
restoration means such as a wish or tome of 
understanding. 


Pedestal of Blyphian 


XP Value * GP Value 
Diamond: 4,000 20,000 
Gold: 2,000 10,000 


Dragon Keep 

This magical platform was created by the gold 
dragon philosopher Blyphian as a learning aid for 
his young students. It is a circular pedestal of 
solid gold, about 2 feet high and 3 feet across. By 
placing a paw or one of his feet on it, a dragon 
can temporarily enhance his or her comprehen- 
sion of complex works of art by tapping into the 
collective consciousness of the spirits of dead 
dragon scholars. 

Though intended to be used only by dragons, 
nondragons can use the pedestal as well. A char- 
acter who steps on the pedestal feels a tingle rip- 
ple through his or her body. If the character 
remains on the pedestal for two rounds, a Consti- 
tution check must be made. If it fails, the victim 
suffers Id4 points of damage. If the PC remains 
on the platform for an additional two rounds, a 
second Constitution check must be made and take 


a further Id4 points of damage if it fails. 

If the PC remains on the pedestal for the full 
four rounds, an Intelligence check is made. If 
successful, all works of art created by dragons of 
up to (and including) old age become fully com- 
prehensible. This ability lasts for the next Id6 
turns. 

Pedestals ofBlyphian made of solid diamond 
also exist. A character using a diamond pedestal 
goes through the same procedures as for a gold 
pedestal. Failed Constitution checks inflict 2d6 
points of damage, however, and successful checks 
require the loss of Id4 points of damage. If the 
character succeeds in an Intelligence check after 
four full rounds on the pedestal, all works of art 
created by any dragon of less than ancient age are 
comprehended. This ability lasts for the next Id6 
hours. 


Pegleg 

A pegleg is an artificial replacement for a lower 
leg lost to accident or misadventure. Different 
sizes are available, but they generally cost about 
the same amount of money. A pegleg's cost 
depends chiefly on the materials used in its con- 
struction and the magical dweomers (if any) 
placed on the item. Usually only characters too 
poor or weak to bargain for a priest's regeneration 
spell resort to these items. 


of Immurk the Invincible 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 10,000 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 82 

Immurk the Invincible was the first great pirate 
of the Pirate Isles in the Inner Sea of Abeir-Toril. 
Although legends of his pirating abound, many 
people do not know that Immurk was also a pow- 
erful wizard. Midway through Immurk's career, 
he lost his leg while boarding another ship. Soon 
after that he created a special pegleg to replace 
his own. Immurk and his leg were lost at sea. 
However, tales abound of the leg being passed 
from adventurer to adventurer in treasure hauls. 

When grafted onto a person's body, the pegleg 
automatically lengthens or shortens to be the 
appropriate length so the person can walk nor- 
mally. It grants the nonweapon proficiencies of 
navigation, seamanship, rope use, swimming, and 
weather sense (all with base success scores of 
18), and makes the wearer immune to seasick- 
ness. Further, Jmmurk's pegleg grants the harpoon 


weapon proficiency and allows the wearer to 
3550 


ge ee ae NS 


808 


Pen of Swift Writing 


fight as a 12th-level fighter when brandishing a 
harpoon or cutlass. The pegleg allows the wearer 
to summon a parrot familiar (even ifthe wearer is 
not a wizard), which will be bound to the sum- 
moner as a normal familiar. 

If the leg is rapped against something, a knock 
spell is released. This function can be used up to 
three times a day. The pegleg can also detect gold 
coins within a 100-foot radius. 


of Walking 

XP Value: 900 GP Value: 4,500 
War Captain's Companion 
This magical item can only be used by those who 
have lost one or both of their legs. By attaching 
the item to the stump, the peg leg conforms to the 
precise configuration required for greatest com- 
fort. The peg leg of walking allows the recipient 
to walk at a normal pace, even run, as though 
whole. 


Pellet 


A pellet is a small stone or rock. It is usually used 
in combat of some sort, either thrown at an oppo- 
nent or flung with the use ofa slingshot. 


Flash 
XP Value: 200 GP Value: 1,000 
DRAGON Magazine 2 
A small pellet that explodes on hard contact with 
an unyielding substance. If not expecting it, the 
victims have a 90% chance of being blinded for 


2d4 melee rounds. 


Flash I 
XP Value: 100 GP Value: 500 
Secret of the Slavers' Stockade 

These tiny pellets are of a black, earthy sub- 
stance. When thrown to the ground they burst 
into a blinding flash of light. All those within 20 
feet looking in the direction of the caster are 
blinded for two rounds. 


Pen 
A pen is both a writing implement and a drawing 
tool. It is used with ink or thin paint to compose 
letters, sketch drawings, and create maps. Unlike 
quills, which must be frequently dipped in small 
jars of ink, pens contain a small reservoir to hold 
the ink. 


of Excellence 

XP Value: 1,200 GP Value: 6,000 

The Complete Wizard's Handbook 
A pen of excellence grants the user the following 
abilities: 
e Write at twice normal speed (particularly 
helpful for wizards copying new spells into 
their spell books). 
Accurate pictures of anything seen can be cre- 
ated with the precision of the finest artist. 
Create a perfect forgery of any handwriting 
for which a sample is available. Any type of 
ink can be used with apen ofexcellence. 


of Swift Writing 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
New Item 
With this pen, anyone can write twice as fast as 
normal, with no loss of legibility. These pens are 
usually found in lots of Id4-1. These pens are 
appropriate for normal writing tasks, but not for 
the magical scribing of scrolls or spell books. 


3555 


S a aaa aan: 


809 


Pen of Truth 


>, eo 


of Truth 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 2,500 
DRAGON Magazine 73 
A gold-colored metal pen with a replaceable tip. 
Only statements believed to be true by the writer 


can be written with this pen. 


Pendant 


A pendant is an ornamental piece ofjewelry, 
often a precious stone in a metal setting, that is 
hung from a necklace chain of fine metal. Pen- 
dants may also be pinned to an article of clothing 
or worn as an earring. 


Equus 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 8,000 
DUNGEON Magazine 22 

An equus is a magical piece ofjewelry that, upon 
command, polymorphs into some form of a beast of 
burden. The word "equus" (plural "equi") comes 
from an ancient language and has no literal transla- 
tion in the common tongue. The closest translation 
is "beast ofburden" or "horse," but the word can be 
applied to anything that is used like a horse. Thus, 
an actual horse, mule, worg, camel, dog-sled team, 
nightmare, or any other creature that can be ridden, 
used to pull a load, or carry goods can be termed an 
equus. Equi come in many different varieties, with 
the most common listed below. While 80% of equi 
are either good or neutrally aligned, 20% poly- 
morph into evil creatures such as nightmares, 
worgs, and giant spiders. It is said that the death 
knight Shan Nikkoleth once possessed an equus 
that polymorphed into gorgon form. 

This tiny figurine of a creature hangs from a 
silver chain. The pendant must be examined care- 
fully to find the command word. When the word 
is spoken aloud, the figurine polymorphs into the 
creature depicted. 


Creature List 
The DM may choose form of the creature into 
which the equus polymorphs from the following 
table. The jewelry form polymorphs into one type 
of creature only. A DM who prefers to roll ran- 
domly should add the roll of Id8 to that of Id12 
and consult the table below. The DM should use 
only a creature he or she feels comfortable with and 
is sure will not give the PCs an unfair advantage in 
the campaign. Types of creatures can be added to or 
deleted from the list as the DM sees fit. Any of the 
following creatures that do not appear on Table 49 


in the PHB should be considered equal to a heavy 
horse in movement rate and encumbrance. 

Ifthe equus is slain (reduced to O hit points or 
less) in creature form, the creature immediately 
reverts to jewelry form and cannot change into 
creature form again. Damage to the creature form 
of the equus can be healed magically by cure 
wounds spells. If the creature is allowed food and 
rest, it heals naturally at the rate of 1 hit point per 
day. However, the equus can neither heal itself 
nor be healed while in jewelry form. 


Roll Animal Type 

02 Unicorn: AC 2; MV 24; HD 4+4; hp 28; 
THACO 15; #AT 3 (hooves and horn); 
Dmg Id6/1d6/1d12; SA charge, +2 to 
attack when attacking with horn, -6 
penalty to opponents’ surprise rolls; SD' 
teleport, immune to poison, charm, hold, 
and death spells; can sense approach of 
an enemy at 240 yards distance; makes 
all saving throws as 11th-level wizard; 
ML 14; AL CG. The unicorn's Intelli- 
gence is 8-10 (1d4+8). It can be ridden 
only by female characters; if a male char- 
acter rolls the unicorn, use the ultraheavy 
war horse (#20) instead. 

03 Giant stag: AC 7; MV 21; HD 5; hp 
30; THACO 15; #AT 1 (antlers) or 2 
(hooves); Dmg 4d4 or 1d4/1d4; ML 14; 
ALN. This creature's Intelligence is 
4-7 (1d4+3). 

Bull: AC 7; MV 15; HD 4; hp 24; 
THACO 15; #AT 2 (horns); Dmg 
Id6/1d6; SA charge; ML 15; ALN. The 
bull has an Intelligence of 4-7 (1d4+3). 

Superheavy war horse: AC 6; MV 15; 
HD 4+4; hp 28; THACO 15; #AT 3 
(hooves and bite); Dmg Id8/1d8/1d4; 
SD 30! infravision, immunity to all hold 
and charm spells; ML 16; AL NG. Intel- 
ligence: 7-12 (1d6+6). 

Heavy war horse: AC 7; MV 15; HD 
4+4; hp 21; THACO 17; #AT 3 (hooves 
and bite); Dmg Id8/1d8/1d4; ML 15; 
ALN. This horse has an Intelligence of 
5-8 (1d44+4). 

Superheavy war horse (special): Same 
as above (roll of 6-8), though it has MV 
18, a 40-Ib. bonus on its carrying capac- 
ity load limits, and no infravision. 


Camel: AC 7 MV 21; HD 3; hp 18; 
3557 


04-05 


06-08 


09-13 


14-16 


17-18 


= 810 j 


Pendant, Rahasia's 


ay 


THACO 17; #AT 1 (bite); Dmg Id4; SA 
spitting; ML 14; ALN. This camel is of 
a more mellow disposition than its 


meaner cousins and has an Intelligence 
of 4-7 (1d4+3). 


19 Water buffalo: AC 7; MV 15; HD 5; 
hp 30; THACO 15; #AT 2 (horns); Dmg 
Id8/1d8; ML 16; AL N. This water buf- 
falo has an Intelligence of 4-7 (1d4+3). 

20 Ultraheavy war horse: ACS; MV 24; 


HD 5+5; hp 35; THACO 15; #AT 3 
(hooves and bite); Dmg Id8/1d8/1d4; SD 
60' infravision, immunity to poison and 
all hold and charm spells; ML 18; AL 
LG. This special horse can understand but 
not speak the common tongue and is able 
to use animal friendship and pass without 
trace spells three times per day each, 
locate animals orplants once per day, and 
water walk once per week. This horse has 
an Intelligence of 9-16 (1d8+8). 


Rahasia's 
XP Value: 3,000 GP Value: 15,000 
Rahasia 
Generations ago, the wizard Elyas created a talis- 
man of power over evil magic. He gave it to the 
elves, who passed it from generation to genera- 
tion until it came to Rahasia's father. 

The talisman is made of two parts, a golden 
pendant and a black jade ring. A black jade stone 
is set in the pendent, which is worth 1,300 gp 
alone. There is a flat golden space with an uneven 
circular indentation the size of a ring on the back 
of the pendant. Also, these verses are inscribed on 
the back of the pendant: 


Stone ofpower, stone ofbright 
Giving men their rays oflight 
Forces dark, will thou make small 
Weak ‘ning men, ofnight's dark call 
Putting ring into the back. 
Vengeance give to those in black 


The ring exactly matches the impression in the 
pendant. When the ring is pressed into the impres- 
sion, there is a bright flash of light as the two 
become the talisman. 

When the ring and pendant are joined, the writ- 
ing on the back ofthe pendant changes to the sin- 
gle word "RAHASIA." When the holder of the 
talisman says "RAHASIA" an invisible 30-foot- 


radius circle of power is created. No evil magic 
works in this circle. Spells cast by evil beings in 
the circle automatically fail, but existing spell 
effects and permanent items used by evil beings 
still work outside the circle. The circle does not 
affect bone golems or water weirds. The circle of 
power lasts 10 rounds. It moves with the talis- 
man. The talisman will work only three times, 
after which the ring and pendant separate and 


` become nonmagical. 


Percussion Instrument 
Percussion instrument is an all-encompassing 
entry that includes all musical instruments that 
are struck to make them sound. See also Stringed 
Instruments and Wind Instruments for the 
other musical instrument categories. 


Roll Percussion Instrument Type 
01-02 Bass Drum 
03-04 Bell 
05-06 Bones 
07-08 Bongos 
09-10 Castanet 
11-12 Changgo 
13-14 Chime 
15-16 Clapper 
17-18 Claves 
19-20 Clavichord 
21-22 Clogs 
23-24 Cylinder Drum 
25-26 Cymbal 
27-28 Darbukkah 
29-30 Drum 
31-32 Elephant Drums 
33-34 Friction Drum 
35-36 Glokenspiel 
37-38 Gong 
39-40 Gong Drum 
41-42 Gourd 
43-44 Jahlah (jah-LAH) 
45-46 Kettledrum 
47-48 Metallophone 
49-50  Nakers 
51-52 Naqqarah (nah-KAR-rah) 
53-54 Qaraqib (kah-rah-KEEB) 
55-56 Qas'ah Baladi (KAH-sah bah-LAH- 
dee) 
57-58 Rattle 
59-60  Riqq (REEK) 
61-62 Sajat (sah-JAHT) 
63-64 Sansa 


3558 


"G (1 a aaa 


811 


Percussion Instrument, Bell of Alarm 


jp SC ee ee 


65-66 Scraper 
67-68 Side Drums 
69-70  Sistrum 
71-72 Slit Drum 
73-74 Snare Drum 
75-76 Stamping Stick 
77-78 Storm Bells 
79-80 Tabor 
81-82 Tabl (TAB-leh) 
83-84 Talking Drum 
85-866 Tam-Tam 
87-88 Tambourine 
89-90 Tambourine de provence 
91-92 Tom-Tom 
93-94 Triangle 
95-96 Wooden Block 
97-98 Wooden Xylophone 
99-00 Xylophone 
Bell of Alarm 
XP Value: 1,500 GP Value: 7,500 


The Book of Marvelous Magic 

This bell may be commanded to watch; it may 
also be instructed to ignore up to 10 creatures. 
When it sees any other creature, it starts to ring 
and continues until commanded to end its watch. 
The bell can see up to 60 feet but cannot see any- 
thing invisible. Its ringing can be heard by all 
within 60 feet, it wakens all within its effect 
unless they are magically asleep. 


of the Ball 

XP Value: 400 GP Value: 1,200 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

This bell has no clapper and only one use. When 
held while the command word is spoken, the bell 
ofthe ball rings loudly (audible within 60 feet) 
and shatters, creating a magical ball of any single 
type or combination (see Ball). 


of Calling 

XP Value: 650 GP Value: 3,250 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

This bell has no clapper and produces no audible 
sound. Upon command, it silently calls its owner 
if it is touched, moved, or struck. The creature 
commanding the bell ofcalling hears a soft ring 
each time the bell calls, hearing telepathically. 
The warning has unlimited range, but the effect is 
confined to the bell's plane of existence. The bell 
can be commanded not to call. 


Calvan's 

XP Value: — 

Port of RAVEN'S Bluff 
The main quay in Raven's Bluff's harbor bears a 
squat stone tower at the water's edge. A short, 
narrow flight of steps leads up to the top, where a 
platform holds a continual light enchanted bea- 
con and a large, tarnished bell. A hefty wooden 
mallet is provided for ringing the bell, along with 
a sign written in Common that reads, "Bell For 
Emergency Use Only." The beacon marks the 
quay's end and supplements the large beacon in 
the lighthouse. The bell provides an additional 
alarm in the fog, as well as a source of fear in the 
port area. The bell, known popularly as Calvan's 
Bell, is the subject of considerable local folklore. 

The most elaborate and popular story about the 
bell is that it was salvaged from the wreckage of 
the ship, Langbutis, which reputedly sank in an 
epic battle for control of the harbor. The Lord 
High Admiral Calvan, Hero of the battle, suppos- 
edly went down with his burning ship after rout- 
ing a giant fleet of pirate invaders. According to 
the legend, the solid silver bell, heavy as it was, 
washed ashore on the morning after the battle. 

Another legend also claims that the bell can 
recall Admiral Calvan and his valiant crew from 
their watery grave at the bottom of the harbor if it 
is rung during a time of need. The ghosts will 
then assist in the defense of the harbor. However, 
the bell summons Calvan's enemies ifrung at any 
time other than an emergency. Those ghosts will 
attack the bell ringer and drag him or her back 
into the sea with them. 

In truth, Lord Calvan. an ancestor of Lord 
Calvin Longbottle, Regent of the Harbor, was a 
merchant and privateer who lived in Raven's 
Bluff about 120 years ago, when the city was a 
haven for rough seamen and pirates. Honest ship 
captains stopped at the harbor only if they were 
very brave or compelled by extreme need. Calvan 
lost his ship and his life when a rival nobleman, 
not a pirate flotilla, tried to blockade him in the 
harbor (in those days, Raven's Bluff was a lawless 
place and ship captains could settle their disputes 
pretty much as they pleased, wind and tide per- 
mitting). Calvan was a proud man. He charged 
the blockade, ringing the ship's bell furiously, 
hoping to show his nemesis that he would not be 
stopped. As the blockade closed upon Langbutis, 
he commanded his helmsman to ram the flag 


ship. The ships locked together and he took his 
3562 


GP Value: — 


ne a a a 


812 


TD 


hu 


KOZ 


My 


Percussion Instrument, Choir Bell 


p, SR ee fe Ad 


rival to the bottom along with him, cursing the 
blockade and ringing the ship's bell all the way. 

Within two decades of that episode, Lord 
James DeVillars, then Chief Alderman of 
Ravens Bluff, appointed the first Regent of the 
Harbor and established law and order. A short 
time later, a group of underwater explorers dis- 
covered the wreck of the old Langbutis and 
unexpectedly recovered an ancient, enchanted 
bell from the harbor bottom nearby. This bell 
hung in the tower of Narwhal Manor until the 
new quay, lighthouse, and fortress were built, 18 
years ago, at which time it was moved to the 
lighthouse/fortress. 

Over time, local folklore linked the bell on the 
quay with the "Calvan" legend and Lord Calvan's 
heroism grew with each passing generation. (The 
Longbottle family does nothing to discourage 
this.) 

When Lord Mayor Charles Oliver O'Kane 
began his harbor improvement program, the 
ancient bell was carefully studied. Its enchant- 
ment was discovered and identified. The Mayor, 
Lady Lauren DeVillars, Lord Calvin Longbottle, 
and the small team of wizards and sages who 
conducted the research know the bell's true his- 
tory and powers, but it is carefully guarded 
knowledge. 

Ifthe proper command word is spoken as the 
bell is rung, it indeed summons the spirits of sea- 
man whose misconduct has caused the death of 
another, provided their remains lie within five 
miles of the bell. The spirits of pirates, lazy 
sailors, mutineers, and other seafaring miscreants 
appear in the form of lacedons (if their remains 
lie under water) or ghouls (if the remains lie on 
land). They function as if conjured by a monster 
summoning spell and must serve the user for one 
hour. Ifthe summoned spirits fight for a good 
cause, their misdeeds are erased and they may 
rest in peace thereafter. If, however, they are 
forced to perform evil deeds, they remain undead 
and probably attack the user when their hour of 
service expires. In either case, the bell only can 
summon a particular spirit once. Currently, the 
bell can summon 120 lacedons from the harbor 
bottom and 22 ghouls from cemeteries in the city. 
The DM is free to decide how quickly eligible 
spirits continue to accumulate, but two-to-five 
per year is recommended, given the harbor's pre- 
sent clean reputation. 


Lacedon (Ghoul): Int Low; AL CE; AC 6; MV 
Sw 9; HD 2; hp 9 each; THACO 19; #AT 3; Dmg 
1d3/1d3/1d6; SA Paralyzation; SD Special; SZ 
M; ML 11; XP 175 each. 


When Lord Mayor O'Kane learned about the 
bell's power, he ordered it placed safely in the 
new lighthouse/fortress and gave orders that it 
was to be rung only in time of dire need. The 
Lord Mayor, the Regent of the Harbor, and the 
Commander of the Lighthouse Garrison knows 
the bell's command word and have some idea 
what kind of aid that ringing it brings. However, ` 
only the Mayor, Lady DeVillars, and their magi- 
cal advisors know that after the bell is used once, 
it may be 20 or more years before it can summon 
a large force again. The bell on the quay is only a 
blackened brass replica of the original. It was 
placed there to commemorate the downfall of 
pirates and other enemies of Ravens Bluff. It has 
no magical properties, and the bracket from 
which it hangs is actually rigid (its links are 
welded together), preventing it from swaying. 
(The locals have noticed the bell never sways in 
the wind and attribute this to an enchantment.) 

The replica bell sounds loudly and clearly if 
struck and, occasionally, has been rung during 
waterfront festivals by a priest or government 
official. At other times, the bell has been used as 
an alarm: a squad of harbor guardsmen will 
quickly appear if it rings. The bell has no magical 
properties, but anyone who strikes it had better 
have a good reason for doing so, as neither the 
guardsmen nor the local courts appreciate false 
alarms. Even locals who believe the legends sur- 
rounding the bell don't bother wondering why 
High Admiral Calvan or his enemies do not 
appear after the festival ringing—ringing the bell 
to observe a holiday constitutes neither a time of 
need nor an inappropriate time. 


Choir 

XP Value:3500 GP Value: 17,500 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

This bell may be commanded to listen. If it hears 
any musical sound within 60 feet, including other 
bells, horns, drums, pipes, etc. the choir bell pro- 
duces the sound of dozens of harmonic human 
voices. The choir bell's song negates all magical 
sound effects within 60 feet. 


3563 


Sf ee 


814 


Percussion Instrument, Pavlov's Bell 


SA ee a 


Church 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

This bell has no clapper and must be struck by a 
priest using a holy symbol to create its magical 
effect. When striking the bell properly, the priest 
temporarily gains one level of experience; this 
effect lasts only one hour at most. Hit points and 
spells which would be gained are obtained imme- 
diately and require no training or meditation; 
damage taken after that is subtracted first from 
the magically gained hit points. The effect can 
also absorb one energy drain; the priest then 
merely drops back to the original level. The bell 
may be used only three times per week and only 
once in any 24-hour period. A wish merely 
extends the effect to eight hours' duration; the 
gain in level cannot be made permanent. 


Cow 
XP Value: — GP Value: 400 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

This bell appears and functions as a choir bell but 
produces bovine voices instead of human. This 
has all the effects given but in addition summons 
all cowlike creatures (cattle, bison, buffalo, gor- 
gons, oxen, and so on) within 300 yards. Gorgons 
normally attack those near the bell; other bovines 
charge at the bell, possibly trampling those in the 
area. After arriving and charging or trampling at 
least once, normal reactions apply. 


of Discord 

GP Value: 4,000 
Islands of Terror 
This bell rings with a clashing cacophony of mis- 
matched tones. Anyone within the 90-foot radius 
of effect becomes filled with hatred and must 
successfully save vs. spell with a —2 penalty or go 
berserk and attack the nearest living creature, 
including a close friend. The saving throw must 
be made each round that the bell peals. 


XP Value: 800 


of Doom 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
Islands of Terror 
This bell rings once per round when its 90-foot 
defensive perimeter is violated. For each round 
that it peals, one common oni appears (see the 
Kara-tur Appendix of the MONSTROUS 
COMPENDIUM or use ogre magi). The bell's ring 


must be audible for the oni to appear. 


of Freedom 

XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 10,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

The bell offreedom has no clapper and must be 
struck by a key or lockpick to have magical 
effect. Ifit is used properly, all normal locks and 
locked items within 30 feet unlock themselves. 
Most magical locks are not affected, except for 
magical shackles and manacles. 


Golden Bell of Blasting 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 11,000 
Needle 

This bell has a 3-inch handle and a 2-inch-tall 
cup. It is made of solid gold, with a golden clap- 
per. When rung, a small, gem-like object (appar- 
ent value 1,000 gp) falls from inside it and 
explodes three rounds later in a 6d6 fireball 
unless the bell is placed over it. This action 
merely delays the fireball until the bell is again 
picked up. 


of Lament 

GP Value: 10,000 
Islands of Terror 
A lament bell contains the trapped soul of nightin- 
gale. If any creature that is not good in alignment, 
aside from Tsien Chiang or any of her daughters, 
comes within 90 feet of this bell, it rings. Its peal 
inflicts 3d6 points of damage per round and is 
doubled against undead and creatures from the 
lower planes. This only affects neutral or evil 
aligned characters, not those of good alignment. 
If this bell is destroyed, nightingale's body 


becomes mortal and may be slain. 


XP Value: 2,000 


Pavlov's 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 3,500 
DRAGON Magazine 45 

A Pavlov s bell appears to be a small, silver hand” 
bell, but when rung it causes persons within a 30- 
foot radius to salivate uncontrollably. The rate of 
salivation is so high as to preclude talking and 
thus makes casting spells with verbal components 
impossible. In addition, there is a 20% chance 
that persons affected by the bell suddenly decide 
to have a meal, even if currently engaged in com- 
bat. There is no effect on the person who rings the 
bell, and those who successfully make a saving 
throw vs. wands also avoid the bell's effects. 


3571 


"a ee 


815 


Percussion Instrument, Bell of Protection 


> i A 


of Protection 
XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 20,000 

Oriental Adventures 
This magical item is a huge bell, like those com- 
monly found in temples. When suspended from a 
frame and rung so its tone carries clearly, the bell 
creates a fearsome barrier to spirit creatures. This 
barrier extends to the edges of the compound or 
group of buildings built and used for a single pur- 
pose (the grounds ofa temple or a cluster of her- 
mitages, for example). The maximum area that can 
be protected is a 50-yard radius. The barrier lasts one 
turn, lesser spirits cannot cross. Greater spirits must 
make a saving throw vs. death magic (with a -4 to 
the die roll) to be able to cross the barrier, and suffer 
4d10 points of damage from the painful effort. Spirit 
creatures within the area of effect when the bell is 
struck suffer 3d 10 points of damage from the painful 
noise. The bell has no effect on spirit folk. 


of Ringing 
XP Value: — GP Value: 1,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

This bell appears and functions as a bell offree- 
dom in all respects. However, it has a 20% chance 
per use of malfunctioning. If so, it continues to 
ring for one turn and cannot be stopped or muf- 
fled except with a wish. It automatically negates 
all silence spell effects within 30 feet and attracts 
the attention ofall creatures within 60 feet. Crea- 
tures attracted may be annoyed by the noise (-2 
penalty to reaction rolls). 


of Treachery 

GP Value: 10,000 
Islands of Terror 
This bell clangs with a cold, hard knell. It is 
guarded by four gaki—one jiki-ketsu-gaki, one 
jiki-niku-gaki, one shikki-gaki, and one shinen- 
gaki (see the Kara-tur Appendix of the 
MONSTROUS COMPENDIUM, otherwise, use 8-HD 
Ravenloft elementals) that magically appear 
when the bell begins to ring. At the beginning of 
each round that the bell peals, the gaki regain 10 
points of while all enemies within 90 feet of the 
bell sustain 3 points of damage. 


XP Value: 2,000 


of Warning 
XP Value: 3,500 GP Value: 17,500 
Oriental Adventures 
This small bell is about 6 inches long and 4 
inches in diameter. When it is hung from a branch 


or rafter, and the command word is spoken, the 
bell activates. While activated, the bell automati- 
cally peals if any invisible, ethereal, or astral 
creatures come within 30 feet of it. It likewise 
sounds for creatures attempting to move silently 
or hide in shadows within its radius. It continues 
to sound until the detected presence leaves the 
area or the bell is deactivated. Each activation of 
the bell requires one charge and lasts for 3d6 
hours. When found the bell has 3d10 charges. 


of Warning IT 
XP Value: 150 GP Value: 1,500 
War Captain's Companion 

The warning bell is a new arrival to the spell- 
jamming universes. It is designed to warn the 
crew when another ship approaches within 10 
hexes (5,000 yards). Whether the approaching 
ship is friend or foe, whether visible or invisible, 
whether under 1 ton or the Spelljammer itself; 
this bell rings whenever a spelljamming ship 
approaches. The ringing continues for three 
rounds. It does not react to creatures, even to 
those of gargantuan size. 


Alexander's Chime of Opening 
XP Value: 6,000 GP Value: 30,000 
1992 Fantasy Collector Card 35 

Alexander, a rogue/wizard, playfully calls this 
item his "chime ofjob opening” or his "charm 
chime." It acts as a normal chime ofopening— 
springing locks, lids, doors, valves, and portals 
(even magical ones) with its tinkling ring—but it 
has another, very special property—when he 
sounds the chime within 3 feet of any wealthy 
merchants or noblemen, they must successfully 
save vs. spell or be compelled to offer Alexander 
ajob guarding their most precious possessions. 
They immediately consider him a trusted 
employee and confidant, thrusting their valuables 
into his hands. The chime must be rung every 
turn in order to sustain the effect, however. 


Featherchimes 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 2,500 
Top Ballista 
These small, sealed glass tubes are decorated 
with featherfine etching and engraving, and res- 
onate with a very faint musical chiming sound 
when struck gently. Ifheld gently and struck with 
a slender glass rod (usually found with the 


chime), one or more windsinger songs can be cre- 
3578 


I a ee 


816 


Percussion Instrument, Sebastian's Chime of Opening 


bo a a aa ey 


ated. one per day each. Roll Id20 to determine 
which spells the featherchime produces. 


Roll Song(s) 

01-03 Song ofthe Wake. 

04—05 Harmonic Song. 

05-08 Song ofthe Wake and Harmonic Song. 
09-12 Song of Will and Iron. 


13—16 Harmonic Song and Song of Will and 
Tron. 
17-19 Song of Dispelling. 
20 All songs of levels one through four. 


Details of windsinger songs can be found in 
the section on Faenare in Top Ballista. If the 
faenare know that a creature possesses one of 
these mastersinger magical items, they will go to 
great lengths to recover it. 


of Hunger 
GP Value: 1,000 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 
The chime of hunger looks exactly like a chime of 
opening. In fact, it operates as a chime ofopening 
for several uses before its curse is put into operation. 

When the curse takes effect, at the DM's dis- 
cretion, striking the chime causes all creatures 
within 60 feet to be immediately struck with 
ravenous hunger. Characters tear unto their 
rations, ignoring everything else, even dropping 
everything they are holding in order to eat. 
Creatures without food rush to where the chime 
of hunger sounded and attack any creatures 
there in order eat. 

All creatures must eat for at least one round. 
After that, they are entitled to a saving throw vs. 
spell on each successive round until they succeed. 
At that point, hunger is satisfied. 

When struck by a bard, this chime's cursed 
powers radiate out 60 feet plus 10 feet per level of 
the bard. 


XP Value: — 


of Interruption 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 10,000 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 
This magical instrument can be struck once per 
turn. Its resonant tone lasts for three full rounds. 
While the chime is resonating, no spell requiring 
a verbal component can be cast within a 30-foot 
radius of it unless the caster is able to make a sav- 
ing throw vs. breath weapon. After its effects 
fade, the chime must be rested for at least seven 


rounds. If it is struck again before this time 
elapses, no sound issues forth, and a full turn 
must elapse from that point in time before it can 
again be sounded. 

When this is used by a bard, affected Spellcast- 
ers must roll their saving throws with a -1 penalty 
per three levels of the bard. Elven Minstrels (a 
bard kit) disrupt any spell that they can them- 
selves cast. 


of Opening 

XP Value: 3,500 GP Value: 20,000 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 

A chime of opening is a hollow mithral tube 
about 1-foot long. When it is struck, it sends forth 
magical vibrations that cause locks, lids, doors, 
valves, and portals to open. The device functions 
against normal bars, shackles, chains, and bolts. 
The chime ofopening also destroys the magic of 
a holdportal spell and even a wizard lock cast by 
a wizard of less than 15th level. 

The chime must be pointed at the area of the 
item or gate which is to be loosed or opened. It is 
then struck, a clear chiming ring sounds (that 
may attract monsters), and in one round the target 
lock is unlocked, the shackle is loosed, the secret 
door is opened, or the lid of the chest is lifted. Ifa 
chest is chained, padlocked, locked, and wizard 
locked, it takes four soundings of the chime of 
opening to get it open. A silence spell negates the 
power of the device. The chime has Id8x20 
charges before it cracks and becomes useless. 

In the SPELLJAMMER game world, this chime 
can be used to open a. portal in a crystal shell. 

Bards can attempt to destroy locks, lids, doors, 
valves, and portals with this chime (in addition to 
its normal functions). The chance to destroy is 
equal to 5% per level of the bard. Thus a 6th-level 
bard would have a 30% chance to destroy such an 
item. The maximum chance is 95%. Of course, if 
the bard doesn't want to destroy the item, he or 
she can use the chime normally. 


Sebastian's Chime of Opening 

XP Value: — GP Value: 25,000 
1992 Fantasy Collector Card 300 . 
Sebastian's version of the chime ofopening also 
causes locked, barred, wizard locked, and held 
portals to open. However, each time it is used, 
there is a 25% chance that the magical chime set 
casts afire trap spell upon whatever is to be 


opened. 
3582 


, a TETN 


817 


~ Percussion Instrument, Chime of Time _ 


of Time 
XP Value: 400 GP Value: 2,000 
DUNGEONS & Dragons Rules Cyclopedia 

This simple metal stick is 3 inches long and made 
of a silvery metal. On command, it keeps track of 
time, chiming every hour on the hour—the chime 
can be heard by all within 60 feet (regardless of 
intervening walls, rock, or other obstructions). If 
dampened by a silence, 15-foot radius spell, the 
chime dispels the silence but only in a 30-foot 
range for that turn. 

A second command causes the chime to turn 
color. It turns gold at one end, the color slowly 
spreading to the other end in an hour's time. A 
third command word causes the chime to stop 
ringing or to stop changing color—but not until 1 
turn elapses after the command. 


of Visitors 

XP Value: 200 GP Value: 1,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

The chime ofvisitors is identical to a chime of 
time. It keeps time as a chime oftime but with an 
unusual side effect. If it rings while within 60 feet 
of any ordinary or otherwise known door, all 
creatures hearing the chime must make a saving 
throw vs. spell; all victims who fail the throw 
must go to the nearest door and open it or attempt 
to do so for at least six rounds. 


of Warning 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
DRAGON Magazine 28 
This device appears like any type of chime, but if 
placed near a closure and commanded to guard it, 
it will ring if the closure is opened or tampered 
with. 

The chime may be made invisible upon com- 
mand so that it may not be seen as guarding a clo- 
sure. Its ring is clear and loud but it is also 
melodic—it transfixes intelligent creatures with 
sound. Unless a saving throw vs. spell is made, 
the charmed character continues to open and 
close the item so that he or she can hear the beau- 
tiful sound again. Restraining the individual or 
stopping the chime invokes maniacal hatred in 
the charmed victim, who will fight with a berserk 
rage to continue hearing the lovely sound. Remove 
curse negates the charm as does dispel magic. 


Cymbal of Crashing 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

This silver item is 8 inches in diameter and identi- 
cal in appearance to a dinner plate except for the 
small hole in its center. Its size belies its power, for 
when hung by a string and commanded to sound, 
the cymbal emits a tremendous crash. The noise 
can be heard 60 feet in all directions and may 
attract monsters, but its magical power is concen- 
trated in a cone which extends vertically unless 
directed otherwise by the user. The cone is 50 yards 
long but only 10 yards wide at its far end. Its power 
temporarily negates the magic of one flying item or 
spell within range {flying carpet, boots oflevita- 
tion, afly spell). The spell or item affected returns 
to normal one turn later. There is no saving throw 
against the effect, although a silence spell blocks it, 
and some magical items, such as a choir bell, 
negate it. The victims plunge earthward, usually 
without time to activate any device or cast any 
spell. (Note that under normal gravity, an object or 
creature falls 240 feet in less than four seconds, and 
upon impact a fallen creature takes Id6 points of 
damage per 10 feet fallen.) Ifa spell is cast in the 
same round that the cymbal is used, compare Id6 
rolls for each side; the loss of initiative by three or 
more means that the victim crashes before any spell 
or item can be used; otherwise, if declared without 
hesitation, one corrective measure may be taken. 


of Symbols 
XP Value: 1,200 GP Value: 6,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

This cymbal is identical to a cymbal ofcrashing 
but, when struck, causes a symbol ofstunning to 
appear on the side facing the user. The symbol 
affects any user with 150 hit points or less, stun- 
ning him or her for 2d6 turns. The user is then 
unable to attack or cast spells and suffers a -4 
penalty to all saving throws. The user sees the 
symbol immediately, and may not avoid its effect 
unless able to cast wizard spells, in which case a 
standard saving throw applies. 


Bass Drum 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 23 
This item has no magical effect unless struck 
within 30 feet ofa freshwater lake or pond. When 
properly used, it summons 2d4 giant bass, and 


possibly (20% chance) 1 d4 nixies. The fish arriv- 
3588 


i a e T AEA 


818 


a Percussion Instrument, Drums of Panic y> 


ing are neutral, and somewhat friendly toward the 
user of the bass drum. Ifthe user talks to the 
arrivals, they may offer to help if they can be of 
assistance (+3 bonus to reaction rolls). Nixies are 
shrewd bargainers, however, and must usually be 
offered something of magical value in exchange 
for their services. Giant bass can usually be 
befriended by an offering of food 


of Deafening 
XP Value: — GP Value: 500 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 
This is actually a pair of kettle drums about 1 'A 
feet in diameter, which radiate magic, if detected, 
but are otherwise unremarkable. If either is 
struck, nothing happens, but if both are hit 
together all creatures within 70 feet are perma- 
nently deafened until a heal spell or similar cure 
is used to restore shattered eardrums. Further- 
more, those within 10 feet of the drums are 
stunned by the noise for 2d4 rounds. 

Bards can invoke the magic in each drum sepa- 
rately. If the left drum is struck, it causes those 
within 10 feet to be stunned for 2d4 rounds. Ifthe 
right drum is struck, it causes all within 70 feet to 
be permanently deafened (a heal spell or similar 
magic is needed to regain hearing). Dwarven 
chanters (a bard kit) double all areas of effect. 


Lei Kung's 

GP Value: 25,000 
Legends & lore 
The avatar of Lei Kung owns a set of drums that 
act as a horn ofblasting when struck. 


XP Value: 5,000 


of Menace 
XP Value: 7,000 GP Value: 35,000 
DRAGON Magazine 189 

This magical instrument is actually a pair of large 
drums, weighing 30 pounds each. A pair of finely 
carved drumsticks are usually found (90% chance) 
with the drums, if it is part of a treasure hoard. A 
savage wizard may play the drums with sticks or 
bare hands; all other classes must use the sticks. 

When played, a quiet but distinct beat fills the 
air for 1,000 feet in all directions. All intelligent 
creatures friendly to the savage player are immune 
to the effect of the drums. All others are afflicted 
with suspicion. As long as the drums are played, 
affected listeners become paranoid. All encoun- 
ters, even with potential allies, are considered 
hostile. Morale checks receive a —6 modifier. 


Movement slows to one-third normal, as the lis- 
teners tiptoe along, stopping frequently to listen 
for ambushes and check for traps. Illusions are 
more likely to be believed (-2 on disbelief rolls). 
Despite the victim's vigilance, however, attackers 
friendly to the drummer always have surprise and 
always gain the initiative in melee. 

Beating the drums is strenuous. After one hour 
of beating, a character must make a Constitution 
check on Id20 to see ifthe drumming can be con- 
tinued. If passed, a further check must be made 
every turn, with a cumulative modifier of-1 per 
roll. Once the drumming stops, the drums cannot 
produce the menacing effect for 24 hours. 


Native 
XP Value: 100 GP Value: 1,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

This pair of crude but effective drums can be heard 
only dimly within 50 yards; they have magical 
effect only when used outdoors. When used prop- 
erly and commanded, they produce a loud, regular 
rhythm within a range of 50 to 150 yards. All those 
within the area of effect are unable to sleep while 
the native drums are playing, although they may 
get enough rest to study or meditate for spells (if 
applicable). The drums may be played for up to 
one hour without rest, and if one-turn rest breaks 
are taken each hour, they may be played for any 
length of time. Any victim spending a sleepless 
night suffers a—1 penalty on all hit, damage, and 
initiative rolls for the following day. 


of Panic 
XP Value: 6,500 GP Value: 35,000 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 

These kettle drums, hemispheres about 1 ‘A feet in 
diameter, come in pairs and are unremarkable in 
appearance. If both are sounded, all creatures 
within 120 feet (with the exception of those 
within a "safe zone" of 20-foot-radius from the 
drums) must roll a successful saving throw vs. 
spell or turn and move directly away from the 
sound for one full turn. 

Each turn thereafter, panicked creatures may 
attempt to save vs. spell again. Each failure brings 
another turn of movement away from the drums of 
panic. Movement is at the fastest possible speed 
while fleeing in panic, and three rounds of rest are 
required for each turn of fast movement after the 
saving throw is made. Creatures with Intelligence 


of 2 roll saving throws with -2 penalties, those with 
3593 


, a: aan i es. 


819 


~ Percussion Instrument, Drum of Silence = 


1 or less roll with -4 penalties. 

Ifthese drums are struck by a bard, the radius of 
the inner "safe zone" can be reduced to any desired 
measurement. Affected creatures suffer a saving 
throw penalty of-1 per three levels of the bard. 


of Silence 
XP Value: 700 GP Value: 3,500 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

A drum ofsilence produces no sound when 
struck, either normally or for magical effect. 
When struck and commanded, however, it enables 
the user to cast one 2nd-level silence 15' radius 
spell (range 180 feet, duration 12 turns). It can do 
this three times a day. 


Snare 
XP Value: 200 GP Value: 1,000 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 23 
This item appears and functions as a bass drum. 
However, there is a 100% chance of summoning 
nixies; Id4 will appear, but 10 or 20 others also 
arrive, hiding nearby. The nixies are usually hos- 
tile (-3 penalty to reaction rolls), and if so, will 
¿repeatedly attempt to charm the user of the snare 
drum, continuing until successful, until the vic- 
tim moves out ofrange (120 feet), or until nine or 
fewer nixies remain, preventing the charm attack. 


Tabele 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 10,000 
DRAGON Magazine 189 
This famous war drum (there is only one) gives 
great power to the warriors ofa single village. To be 
effective, the tabele must be set up within a village. 
If it is sounded during the sacred ceremonies that 
are performed before battle, the warriors within the 
village gain the following benefits: immunity to 
fear (no loss ofmorale); +1 to attack and damage on 
melee attacks; increase of 2 on movement base. 
These benefits last for one battle only. The tabele 
may be captured and moved to another village, 
which then gains its benefits. Currently, the tabele is 
lost, and its location unknown. Any tribe that finds it 
would gain great power and respect, as well as 
attracting the attention of others who want it. 


of Thunder 
XP Value: 1,300 GP Value: 6,500 
Oriental Adventures 
Drums of thunder are found as a small pair of 
drums adorned with tassels and a harness to fas- 


ten it to the waist. The drums have several uses 
requiring different numbers of charges. Only one 
use of the drums can be called on per round. 
When found, the drums have 2d10 charges. When 
beaten, they allow the wearer to perform one of 
the following: 

e Fly for one turn (one charge) 

e Control weather (one charge) 

e Act as drums ofpanic (two charges) 

e Cloud trapeze for one turn (three charges) 

e Cast a 20d6 lightning bolt (five charges). 


Dugal's Percussion Instruments 


XP Value GP Value 
Alter self: 300 3,000 
Blur: 300 3,000 
Change self: 250 2,500 
Comprehend languages: 250 2,500 
Continual light: 300 3,000 
Detect invisibility: 300 3,000 


Detect magic: 250 2,500 


Dispel magic: 350 3,500 

Gust of wind: 3 50 3,500 

Knock: 300 3,000 

Tongues: 350 3,500 

Whispering wind: 300 3,000 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 56 


There are as many percussion varieties of Dugal's 
percussion instruments as there are percussion 
instruments. All have a similar construction. 

Myriads of tiny runes are etched into the wood 
of these instruments. Most customers see the runes 
only as decorative additions to already finely 
crafted instruments. However, wizards who exam- 
ine them immediately notice a similarity between 
these runes and ones found on magical scrolls. 

The runes are part ofa unique process to enchant 
musical instruments without using high level 
spells. Each special instrument is endowed with 
one magical spell of 1st through 3rd level that can 
be cast up to three times a day by playing a rhythm 
to which the instrument's runes are attuned. 

The enchantments require only verbal and 
somatic components. The runes of each instru- 
ment are an inscribed version of a particular 
spell, and the rhythm is a repetitive, pulsing ren- 
dition of the verbal component. When the 
rhythm is played, which takes a full turn, the 
instrument resonates and activates the runes, 
thus serving as the somatic component and in 
effect casting the spell. 


Dugal's enchantments are limited to those 
3598 


A a i ee aera. 


8 


20 


Percussion Instrument, Gong of Fishing 


ee ee RE, a 


spells in his spell book. Of these, he uses only 
defensive or benign spells. A devout individualist 
and recent pacifist, he never uses a spell such as 
charm that infringes on the freedom of another, 
or a spell such as magic missile that causes harm 
to another. 

The spell on an enchanted percussion instru- 
ment can be invoked by any musician who plays 
the appropriate cadence. Dougal teaches the beat 
to the buyer at the time of purchase. He also 
explains that, except for casting time, the capabil- 
ities of a spell cast using one of the instruments 
are exactly as ifhe cast it himself. Thus, all spells 
are cast at 12th level. 


Roll Spell Cast 
1 Alter self 
2 Blur 
3 Change self 
4 Comprehend languages 
5 Continual light 
6 Detect invisibility 
7 Detect magic 
8 Dispel magic 
9 Gust of wind 
10 Knock 
11 Tongues 
12 Whispering wind 


Butler Summoning Gong 
XP Value: 200 GP Value: 1,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

This gong is at least 2 feet in diameter and possi- 
bly much larger. When properly struck, it sum- 
mons a hill giant who suddenly appears next to 
the gong, clad entirely in black. If so ordered by 
the summoner, the giant carries things, carefully 
putting them down when told, but does not fight 
or speak except to say, "Yes. master." The giant 
can move at the same rate as an unencumbered 
human but can carry 800 pounds more than a 
human (In D&D terms: 1,060 pounds maximum, 
using the same reductions to movement rates for 
encumbrance with a +800 pound bonus). The 
giant must remain within 60 feet of its master at 
all times; it vanishes if that range is exceeded in 
any way. The gong summons this giant once per 
day, and the giant disappears upon command, 
when slain, or after three hours of service. When 
it disappears,all items it carries at the time also 
vanish and cannot be recovered; a different giant 
is created with each use of the gong. 


Chain 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 2,500 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

This gong appears to be a gong of earthquakes 
but when struck it wraps the user in heavy, magi- 
cal chains. The victim cannot move, attack, cast 
spells, or escape until a remove curse is applied 
by a caster of 15th-level or higher, or unless able 
to change to gaseous form. Once the victim 
escapes, the chains vanish. The chain gong func- 
tions up to three times per week. 


of Dispelling 
XP Value: 1,500 GP Value: 7,500 
Oriental Adventures 
A gong ofdispelling is a large gong, 3 feet in diam- 
eter. When hung from a frame and struck, the gong 
has the effects ofa dispel evil and dispel magic on 
everything within a 30-foot radius. The spells are 
equal in potency to those cast by a 15th-level Spell- 
caster. Each time the gong is sounded one charge is 
used. The gong has 1d100 initial charges. 


of Earthquakes 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

This gong is only 3 inches in diameter. When 
struck, it causes violent shaking within 60 feet, as 
ifan earthquake were occurring; the effect lasts for 
six rounds. The effect causes no structural damage 
and affects only unsecured items and creatures; 
walls, doors, pillars, buildings, and other construc- 
tions are completely unaffected. Furniture falls 
over unless fastened in place, and mirrors and 
other wall hangings also fall; a magical mirror 
breaks upon impact 50% ofthe time. The creature 
striking the gong is unaffected and, if attacked by 
others affected by the quake, gains a -4 bonus to 
Armor Class. All others standing within the area 
fall down and cannot cast spells, use missile weap- 
ons, or even stand until the quake passes. Magical 
items and hand held weapons may still be used, but 
with a -4 penalty to all attack rolls, victims able to 
fly or levitate may escape the effects easily. Any 
creature immune to illusions cannot be affected. 
The gong may be used only once per day. 


of Fishing 
XP Value: 300 GP Value: 1,500 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
This gong has a rune inscribed in its center that 


reads "Bass." A read magic spell is needed to 
3403 


NN e are oe PS 


821 


Percussion Instrument, Ricking Gong 


jp, a a ee, 


translate it. Iftaken aboard a vessel and rung over 
any body of water that contains fish, the sound 
causes one fish weighing 1—100 pounds to leap 
out of the water and into the vessel, landing next 
to the user of the gong. After cleaning and cook- 
ing, each five pounds of live fish can be used to 
feed one person for one day. The gong can be 
used three times per day. 


Ricking 

XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
A ricking gong appears identical to a gong of 
whirlwinds. However, when struck, it causes the 
user to fall into a magical sleep lasting for 1d44 
hours; the victim cannot be awakened except by a 
wish. While asleep, the victim might dream (5% 
chance per hour of sleep, or a 25%-40% total 
chance) about something that pertains to the 
adventure in progress, a foreshadowing of things 
to come. 


of Stunning 

XP Value: 700 GP Value: 3,500 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
This gong appears identical to a gong of earth- 
quakes but affects the user instead of others (no 
saving throw). The victim cannot cast spells, use 
missile weapons, or stand up until the "quake" 
passes in six rounds, and suffers a -8 penalty to 
all attack rolls. The gong ofstunning can change 
its appearance on command, enlarging or shrink- 
ing to perfectly match any other magical gong, as 
long as the other can be seen at the time and used 
as a "model." 


of Summoning 
XP Value: 1,500 GP Value: 7,500 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

A gong ofsummoning appears identical to a gong 
ofbutler summoning, but Id3 hostile hill giants 
appear and attack the user, fighting to the death. 
They also disappear if the 60-foot range is 
exceeded, if slain, or (if applicable) after three 
hours of fighting. The hill giants carry only clubs, 
and have no treasure. 


of the Whirlwind 
XP Value: 2,000 GP Value: 10,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
This gong produces a small cyclone identical to 
that created by a djinni. The whirlwind forms 


around the gong, affecting the user and all within 
5 feet but not disturbing the gong in any way. The 
whirlwind is 10 feet wide at the base and 70 feet 
tall unless limited by ceiling height. Any victim 
of fewer than 2 Hit Dice must make a saving 
throw vs. death magic or be picked up and killed 
by the whirlwind. The buffeting inflicts 2d6 
points of damage per round to all within it. If the 
user of the gong of whirlwinds moves out of its 
cone, the wind can be ordered about, moving at 
40 feet per round. It cannot move more than 120 
feet from the gong. The whirlwind can be created 
only once per day and remains for one turn unless 
commanded to depart earlier. 


Gourd of Travel 
XP Value: 1,500 GP Value: 7,500 
The Complete Bard's Handbook 
By shaking this gourd and saying the command 
word, the bard is able to teleport him or herself 
and one other to any known place. A travel gourd 
does not allow for travel between planes. 

A travel gourd has 1d10 seeds within it, which 
produce the rattling sound that causes the gourd 
to function. Every time the gourd is used, one of 
the seeds vanishes. When the last seed is gone, 
the gourd becomes nonmagical. 


Rattle of Death 
XP Value: — GP Value: 500 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 
A bone rattle ofdeath has a black skull inscribed 
on one end. If shaken, all within 30 feet (includ- 
ing the user) must make a saving throw vs. death 
magic or die. All undead are immune to this 
effect. The rattle disintegrates after three uses. 


of Exorcism 

GP Value: 3,000 
DRAGON Magazine 189 
This item is useless except in the hands of a tribal 
priest. It is an elaborately painted gourd containing 
exotic materials that make the rattle. The device 
displays abjuration magic iftested. When used in a 
ceremonial dance of purification, the rattle can be 
used to cast a special dispel magic spell, effective 
only against spells of the Enchantment/Charm 
school, either priest or wizard. It also dispels the 
necromantic spell magic jar. The ceremonial 
dance must last one hour plus 10 minutes for every 
level of the spell's caster. Ifa pair of rattles can be 
obtained, the time is reduced by half. 


XP Value: 600 


3610 


eee a N 


822 


Perfume, Curdled Death 


> S 


of Shaking and Rolling 
XP Value: 400 GP Value: 2,000 
POLYHEDRON Newszine 23 

This simple rattle causes the user to shake, fall 
over, and roll on the ground for three rounds, wav- 
ing the rattle all the while. Each creature within 30 
feet must also make a saving throw vs. spell or 
shake, rattle, and roll along with the user. Affected 
victims are penalized by +2 to Armor Class and -2 
to saving throws for the duration of the effect. 


of Summoning 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 5,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

This simple rattle must be carefully used. It func- 
tions only once per day. If a bag ofholding (or 
other similar magical storage device) is held 
while the rattle is shaken, 14 giant rattlesnakes 
spring out of the bag, attacking as instructed by 
the user. They only attack and fight until slain. 
The user cannot stop them once they begin, but 
may instruct them to attack separate opponents. 
When one opponent is slain, a snake may be 
instructed to attack another; however, the snake 
knows if the victim is pretending to be dead. 


of Youth 
XP Value: 9,000 GP Value: 45,000 
The Book of Marvelous Magic 

This simple rattle, when shaken, removes 10 years 

of abnormal aging (such as caused by a cane of 
age) from the user. It functions once per week at 
most. However, for each use, there is a 10% 
chance that it rattles improperly and doubles the 
user's current age. For example, ifthe victim is 40 

years old, the rattle adds 40 more years of aging— 

so the younger the user, the safer the rattle. 


Riqg of the Efreet 
XP Value: 4,000 GP Value: 20,000 
DRAGON Magazine 190 

The riqq ofthe efreet is a tambourine of unbreak- 
able steel. Its cymbals are made of crushed coins 
from the ruined empires of Nog and Kadar, and 
its surface is wrapped with the hide of a white 
camel. These are forged in the heart of a volcano 
to produce the reddish rigg, and terrible runes are 
painted in the inside the tambourine's head. 

The riqq ofthe efreet allows the player to cast 
holdperson, as the second-level priest spell, by 
flashing the runes on the inside of the tambourine 
at the target. This may be done once per day, 


twice per day ifused by a bard. 

A bard also may use the riqq to "fan the flames"— 
to summon a fire elemental of 8 HD, as above, once 
per week. The elemental is under the control of the 
user for as long as the riqq is played, and ifthe music 
is stopped or interrupted, the elemental returns to the 
Plane of Elemental Fire and does not attack its for- 
mer controller. A large amount of fire (such as a 
bonfire) is required to use this ability. 


Perfume 

Perfumes, aromatic oils, are a special kind of magi- 
cal oil whose power comes from the scent released. 
All aromatic oils are inert until worn by a living 
creature. Once applied, the aromatic oil gradually 
begins to react and, after Id4 rounds have passed, 
the scent's stated effect begins. In all cases, the 
creature wearing the aromatic oil is not affected, 
but other creatures, both friends and foe within a 5- 
foot radius of the wearer, are subject to its effects. 
Note that only those creatures with a sense of smell 
can be affected by a magical fragrance. 

These precious perfumes are commonly found 
in tiny stoppered vials made of glass, clay, metal, 
or wood. Only a small amount is required per use. 
Each vial contains enough aromatic oil for 
1d10+10 applications. 


Aroma of Dreams 
XP Value: 300 GP Value: 1,500 
Tome of Magic 

All creatures who come within 5 feet of the 
wearer of this oil are put to sleep. Potential vic- 
tims are allowed a saving throw vs. spell. If suc- 
cessful, the victim suffers no effect and may 
remain near the wearer without need of further 
saving throws. Ifthe roll fails, the creature 
slumps to the ground a victim of a magical slum- 
ber that lasts 1d4+4 rounds. 

When an application of the oil is worn, the 
scent is potent for 3d4 rounds. After this time, the 
perfume evaporates and another dose must be 
applied if the wearer wishes to renew the effect. 


Curdled Death 
XP Value: 1,500 GP Value: 7,500 
Tome of Magic 
Perhaps the most powerful of all aromatic oils, 
the smell of curdled death has the ability to slay 
all living creatures of 3 or fewer Hit Dice or expe- 
rience levels who come within five feet of the 


wearer. Magical, undead, and extraplanar crea- 
3616 


823 = 


~ Perfume, Elyas > 


tures are immune to this oil, as are all creatures of 
4 or more Hit Dice or experience levels. 

Upon smelling the oil, potential victims are 
allowed a saving throw vs. spell. If successful, a 
creature suffers no effect and may remain near 
the wearer without need of further saving throws. 
Those who fail the save drop dead in their tracks. 

When a dose is worn, it remains potent enough 
to kill creatures for Id3 rounds. After this time, the 
fragrance evaporates and another dose must be 
applied ifthe wearer wishes to renew the effect. 

In Ravenloft: This aromatic oil is actually more 
powerful in Ravenloft. Its radius of effect extends 
to 10 feet instead of 5 feet. Using such an evil sub- 
stance is cause for a Ravenloft powers check. 


Elyas 
XP Value: 800 


GP Value: 4,000 
Black Opal Eye 
The vial contains a magical perfume. The Cha- 
risma of any female using this perfume is raised 
to 18 for Id6 turns. Males do not experience any 
magical effect. 


Essence of Darkness 
XP Value: 250 GP Value: 750 
The Complete Thief's Handbook 
This pure black oily fluid must be kept in tough, 
light-proof containers, since it is destroyed after 


one turn in bright sunlight or one hour exposed to 
daylight. Essence ofdarkness is pure, concen- 
trated, liquefied darkness itself. It can be used in 
a number of ways: 

When a dose is swallowed it makes the 
imbiber's entire body, including hair, teeth, 
and even the whites ofthe eyes, pure matte 
black in color. This can enhance a thief's 
chance ofhiding in shadows as shown below. 
Ifa dose is diluted in a gallon of warm water, 
the essence creates a powerful black dye. A 
gallon ofthis diluted form can be used to dye 
clothes and even armor and weapons; one gal- 
lon ofthe dye is sufficient to treat the clothes 
and equipment of one character. The dye takes 
one turn to mix and soak into the items and 
one turn to dry. This process also affects the 
chances for successful hiding in shadows. 


Body only (wearing normal clothes) +5% 

Body only (wearing no clothes) +25% 
Clothes only +20% 
Both body and clothes +40% 


These bonuses only apply when the thiefis try- 
ing to hide in darkened areas, obviously; that is, 
to "traditional" hiding in shadows. Detection 
resistance operates on a thief using essence of 
darkness to hide in this way. 

Essence ofdarkness is unstable and ifa vial is 
struck by a crushing blow it will explode into 
darkness 15' radius. A single dose of the mag- 
ical essence will create a darkness 5' radius if 
so struck. This property has been exploited by 
making small glass or ceramic globes filled 
with the liquid which are then thrown force- 
fully onto hard surfaces to create "darkness 
bombs." At the DM's option, a thief who has 
ingested the essence or applied it to his cloth- 
ing might similarly become the center of a 
darkness 5' radius effect if struck a severe 
blow with a blunt weapon (50% of remaining 
hit points, with a 12 hit point minimum for the 
effect to operate). 

The effects of essence ofdarkness last for six 
hours plus Id6 turns, if used externally; if 
ingested, it has the same duration as a standard 
potion. Each bottle or vial ofthe essence found 
usually contains sufficient fluid for 1d4+4 
doses. 


3618 


et F e a 


8 


24 


Periapt, Peaceful, of Pax 


EEN i 


Murdock's Insect Ward 
XP Value: 200 GP Value: 1,000 
Tome of Magic 

This fragrance is a boon to travelers, since it repels 
insect creatures (both normal and monstrous) that 
come within 5 feet of the wearer of this fragrance. 
Insect monsters with Intelligence scores of 5 or 
more are allowed a saving throw vs. spell. If suc- 
cessful, they suffer no effects and may remain near 
the wearer without need of further saving throws. 
Ifthe save is failed, the creature cannot approach 
within 5 feet ofthe wearer. (Note that this still may 
be close enough to cause harm.) One dose is effec- 
tive for Id3+1 hours. 


Starella's Aphrodisiac 
XP Value: 250 GP Value: 1,250 
Tome of Magic 

Any creature of a similar race and opposite sex 
who approaches within 5 feet of the wearer 
becomes thoroughly enamored with the wearer as 
if under the effect of a powerful charm. Potential 
victims are allowed a saving throw vs. spell. Ifthe 
roll is successful, the victim suffers no effects and 
may remain near the wearer without need of fur- 
ther saving throws. 

Ifthe save is failed, the creature is charmed as 
long as he or she remains within five feet of the 
wearer (as long as the aphrodisiac is still potent) 
plus 2d4 turns outside that area. An affected crea- 
ture regards the wearer as a trusted friend, ally, 
and romantic interest to be heeded and protected. 
The charmed individual does not behave as if he 
were a mindless automaton, but any word or 
action of the wearer is viewed in the most favor- 
able way. This attitude does not extend to others, 
and it is possible for the person so enamored to be 
overcome by jealousy, viewing all others (espe- 
cially other victims) as potential rivals. 

When a dose of Starella's aphrodisiac is worn, 
it remains potent for 3d4 turns. After this time, 
the perfume evaporates and another dose must be 
applied ifthe wearer wishes to renew the effect. 


Periapt 
A periapt is a large magical gemstone or jewel. 
Periapts are generally hung about the neck, but 
can be pinned to an outer garment. It is impossi- 
ble to distinguish a periapt from gems or ioun 
stones without testing. (See also Gem and loun 
Stone.) 


of Foul Rotting 

GP Value: 1,000 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 
This engraved gem appears to be a gem of little 
value. Ifany character claims it, he or she contracts a 
terrible rotting disease which can be removed only by 
application ofa remove curse spell followed by a cure 
disease and then a heal, limited wish, or wish spell. 
The rotting can also be countered by crushing & peri- 
apt of health and sprinkling its dust upon the afflicted 
character. Otherwise, the afflicted person loses 1 
point each of Dexterity, Constitution, and Charisma 
per week beginning one week after claiming the item. 
When any score reaches 0, the character is dead. 
Each point lost due to the disease is permanent 
regardless of subsequent removal ofthe affliction. 


XP Value: — 


of Health 


XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 10,000 


DUNGEON MASTER Guide 
This gem appears to be the same as a periapt of 
foul rotting, but the possessor becomes immune 
to all diseases, save that of the latter periapt, so 
long as he or she carries it. 


Sy x 6 
Rye ` 


Peaceful Periapt of Pax 
XP Value: — GP Value: — 
Talons of Night 
The legendary Immortal peacemaker Pax once 


imbued her pacifying abilities into an alabaster 
3623 


A E a e a M N 


825 


~~ Periapt of Proof Against Poison r 


dove as a passive defense against the forces of 
Entropy. A clever mortal discovered that it could 
be made into a mace head with serious damaging 
effects against mortal and immortal creatures 
aligned with the Sphere of Death. 

Because its presence is a serious threat to 
Entropy, it is rarely found and often mysteriously 
disappears before it can be put to best use. 

The periapt appears as an unbreakable alabaster 
dove, about the size of a clenched fist, threaded 
on a necklace of pearls. On one wing is a carving 
of a sun and on the other a crescent moon carv- 
ing. The dove's breast has been modified to 
accept a screwed-in shaft, such as the handle of a 
mace or a maul. It is active when found. 

This artifact has the following powers: calm 
others, cause critical wounds, cause serious 
wounds, cure critical wounds, cure serious 
wounds, legend/Nore, mass charm, and truesight. 

Any nonchaotic creature who touches it immedi- 
ately and magically knows the names, details, and 
command words ofall of its powers. The periapt 
can be removed from its necklace and mounted on 
a mace or maul handle to become a mace +3/+5 vs. 
sphere ofdeath. However, if the dove weapon is 
used against a creature of Chaos, it automatically 
uses the reverse of its cure serious wounds power 
against the creature. Ifthe weapon is used against a 
creature aligned with Death (such as an undead, a 
nightshade, or a night spider), the weapon automat- 
ically uses the reverse ofits cure critical wounds 
power. The user has no control over this. 

Artifact Handicaps: 

Alignment Change: When first used, the pos- 
sessor's alignment changes to a lawful bent; if 
already lawful, become more rigidly so and 
work more actively to defeat chaos. 

Armor Class Penalty: The Armor Class of the 
user is penalized by +5. 

Recharging Costs/Aging: When used, the 
periapt automatically begins to recharge by 
aging surrounding beings (select victims ran- 
domly from all beings within 50 feet). It drains 
one year of life to recharge each spell level ofa 
power used. 

Attitude or Behavior Change: The user 
becomes peaceful unless confronted by beings 
aligned with the Sphere of Death, in which 
case the user becomes violently aggressive. 
Artifact Penalties: 

Each time the periapt is used to strike a being 
not aligned with Death or Chaos, it loses one 


random power. If striking a foe reduces the 
periapt to no powers, it vanishes by teleporting 
to somewhere else on the same plane and ages 
its user 2d100 years. 

Damage Penalty: The user inflicts -5 points of 
damage whenever striking a being not aligned 
with Chaos or Death. 

Weak Magic: User inflicts -3 points of damage 
per die when casting damaging magic (although 
each die does a minimum of | point damage). 


of Proof Against Poison 


XP Value GP Value 
+1: 1,500 12,500 
+2:2,000 15,000 
+3:2,500 20,000 
+4:3,000 5,000 


DUNGEON MASTER Guide 

The periapt of proof against poison is indistinguish- 
able from other periapts. The character who has one 
of these magical gems is allowed saving throws vs. 
poisons that normally disallow any such opportu- 
nity. The Special Save column on the table below 
lists the saving throw for such poisons. The owner 
rolls against his or her normal score for poisons 
which are usually at a penalty, and gets a plus on all 
other poison saves. Roll Id20 and consult the table 
to find the effectiveness ofa particular periapt: 


Special Plus of 
Roll Save Periapt 
01-08 19 +1 
09-14 17 +2 
15-18 15 +3 
19-20 13 +4 

of Proof Against Sound 
XP Value GP Value 
+1:500 3,000 
+2: 1,000 6,000 
+3: 1,500 9,000 
+4:2,000 12,000 
+5:2,500 15,000 
+1:5'-radius: 1,000 6,000 


The Complete Bard's Handbook 
This small periapt is indistinguishable from other 
gems. The character who has this periapt gains 
extra resistance to any sound-based attack or 
influence. Ifa saving throw is normally allowed, 
the periapt provides an extra bonus to the saving 
throw. The level of the bonus depends upon the 


quality of the periapt, as follows: 
3625 


, a ane 


826 


Philter, Aleese's, of Overwhelming Love 


SSS a ar eS aN of 


Roll Save Bonus 
0140 +1 
41-60 +2 
61-75 +3 
76-90 +4 
91-95 +5 
96-00 +1,5'radius 


Ifno saving throw is usually allowed, the periapt 
provides a normal saving throw vs. spell against the 
sound. A periapt ofproofagainst sound affects all 
hostile sounds, including harpy singing, sirens, 
screams or shrieks that cause damage or fear, all 
musical influences (including bard abilities), spells 
that rely upon verbal communication to affect their 
victims (command, suggestion, and the like), and 
so on. However, the periapt has no effect upon 
communication, such as, "Kill that stupid bard!" 
Verbal components for spells, magical item com- 
mand words, or any other sound that does not 
directly affect the individual who has the periapt. 


of Prophecy Protection 
XP Value: 1,500 GP Value: 10,000 
DRAGON Magazine 132 

This small device renders the bearer invisible to 
attempts of prophecy: any prophecies in which 
the bearer would be involved are constructed as if 
the bearer did not exist. The periapt also prevents 
sleeper communication, sleep suggestions, sug- 
gestion, and telepathy, and makes the individual 
immune to mass suggestion. 


of Protection from Vampiric 
Ixitxachitl and Lacedons 
XP Value: 160 GP Value: 9,000 
DRAGON Magazine 48 

Made by triton priests in many shapes and colors, 
these items act as permanent wards against the vam- 
piric ixitxachitl as well as lacedons. Neither of those 
types of creatures can voluntarily get closer than 10 
feet away from the wearer. If forced inside the 10- 
foot radius, the creature fights at -2 to attack. 


of Wound Closure 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 10,000 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 
This magical stone looks exactly like the others 
of its kind. The person possessing it need never 
fear open, bleeding wounds because the periapt 
prevents them. In addition, the periapt doubles 
the normal rate of healing, or allows normal heal- 
ing of wounds that would not do so normally. 


Pharaoh's Crook 


XP Value: 9,000 GP Value: 45,000 
Kingdom of Nithia 

Throughout the ages, the Pharaohs of Nithia have 
passed the crook andflail (see Flail, of the 
Pharaohs) down from ruler to ruler. Every 
pharaoh's tomb depicts an image of the pharaoh 
holding the crook and flail across his or her chest 
in the symbolic form so well known by the popu- 
lace. These artifacts contain immense power. 

The crook ofthe Pharaohs is a potent, magical 
relic. The one who holds it performs in all ways 
as ifhis or her Wisdom score is 18. It performs as 
a ring ofhuman control, allowing the pharaoh 
(the pharaoh is usually a priest or wizard) com- 
plete control over foreigners (saving throw 
applies). Finally, the crook provides the one who 
carries it with a 50% magic resistance. 

Legends state that the crook and flail were 
given to the first Hollow World pharaoh by Pflarr 
and Rathanos as a token of love and respect for 
the people of Nithia. 


Philter 


Philters are derivatives of natural materials such as 
tree bark, berry juice, honey, dew, and so on. The 
raw materials are combined with other natural flu- 
ids and enchanted to produce a magical effect. Like 
potions and elixirs, all of a philter usually must be 
consumed to release its magic (except cursed 
philters). Unless a specific entry states otherwise, 

the duration ofa philter is 4+1d4 turns. 


Aleese's Philter of 

Overwhelming Love 
XP Value: 400 GP Value: 2,000 
1992 Fantasy Collector Card 273 
By discovering new methods of concentrating 
ingredients, Aleese was able to create an extra- 
potent version of the philter of love. When this 
philter is slipped into a drink, the imbiber 
becomes ridiculously sentimental about life, 
about his or her friends, about each and every 
subject that occurs to the user. The affected per- 
son would gratuitously flatter a medusa (and then 
turn to stone, of course), or blubber hysterically 
at the least hint of unhappiness on anyone's part. 
In short, combat becomes impossible. Only a dis- 
pel magic spell will negate the effects of this 
philter. 


3630 


a eae aa aie ae ame. 


827 


~~ Philter of Beauty = 


of Beauty 
XP Value: 250 GP Value: 1,500 
Unearthed Arcana 
When this substance is consumed, the individual 
gams +1 on Charisma (18 maximum) and +1 to +4 
on his or her comeliness score for the duration of 
the liquid's effect. All reactions pertaining to Cha- 
risma and comeliness apply, but ifthe effects wear 
off within sight of any creature that was influenced 
by the enhanced Charisma and comeliness, then 
the creature will have a hostile reaction to this turn 
ofevents and attacks the individual. 


of Drunkenness 
XP Value: — GP Value: 150 
Land of Fate 
Upon imbibing this philter, the individual immedi- 
ately becomes horribly, totally inebriated. Role- 
playing aspects ofthis situation are left to the 
player and the DM, but in game terms the individ- 
ual has a -4 penalty for all attack rolls as well as all 
proficiency checks. Spellcasting requires an Intel- 
ligence check each time a spell is cast, to deter- 
mine whether it is cast correctly (failure merely 
means the spell is lost); all spells cast have a +2 
bonus on saves. The effects last six hours, followed 
by three hours of splitting headache. 


of Drunkenness II 
XP Value: — GP Value: 250 
DRAGON Magazine 179 

Upon imbibing this potion, the individual immedi- 
ately becomes horribly, totally inebriated. Role- 
playing aspects ofthis situation are left to the 
player and the DM, but in game terms the individ- 
ual becomes -4 for all attack rolls and proficiency 
checks. An Intelligence check is required each 
time an affected Spellcaster attempts to cast a spell 
to see if it is cast correctly (failure means merely 
that the spell is lost), and all spells cast have a +2 
bonus on saves. The effects last six hours, followed 
by three hours of splitting headaches (no spellcast- 
ing allowed, -1 on attack rolls). 


Durimal's Philters 


XP Value: 2,400/set GP Value: 12,000/set 
Merry Blend: 700 3,500 
Potent Draft: 850 4,250 
Sovereign Tonic: 850 4,250 


DRAGON Magazine 178 
Characteristically, these come in a trio of small 
bottles, packed in a sturdy leather case. Each bot- 


tle's contents are magical and extremely concen- 
trated. One quarter of a bottle is enough for 20 
men, if diluted in water or other drink. If more 
than a sip is taken in concentrated form, it is very 
dangerous—treat as a Type I poison (onset 2-12 
rounds, damage 30/15). The philters all have dif- 
ferent effects. 

Durimal's merry blend: If mixed with alco- 
hol, this philter ensures that drinkers sleep well 
and awake fresh and clear-eyed, with no trace ofa 
hangover, thus allowing a commander to let his 
troops have a celebration without impairing their 
combat readiness. Actual game effects are at the 
DM's discretion; use of this potion usually 
improves morale and loyalty scores of troops for 
a short period of time. 

Durimal's potent draft: Any drinker of this 
philter feels confident and strong. All morale 
checks are successful and saves against mind- 
affecting spells are at +2 for the next 24 hours or 
until a saving throw fails, whichever comes first. 

Durimal's sovereign tonic: Those who drink 
this philter in its diluted form feel refreshed and 
alert for the next six hours; any wounds they pos- 
sess neither fester nor become infected. To simu- 
late this, double the total natural healing for the 
first day of this philter's use. In addition, a bonus 
of+2 is given to saving throws against poison and 
nonmagical attacks against a character's health, 
such as normal disease rolls. It also confers a sav- 
ing throw vs. spell against the additional damage 
from a sword ofwounding, allowing one such 
save per round after the victim has been wounded. 


of Glibness 
XP Value: 500 GP Value: 2,500 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide, Ist Edition 

This philter enables the imbiber to speak flu- 
ently—even tell lies—smoothly, believably, and 
undetectably. Magical investigation (such as the 
4th-level priest spell, detect lie) does not give the 
usual results, but reveals that some minor 
"stretching of the truth" might be happening. 

If a Charlatan (a bard kit) imbibes this philter, 
even detect lie has only a 5% chance to note any 
"stretching ofthe truth." 


of Love 
XP Value: 200 GP Value: 800 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide, 1st Edition 
This philter causes the individual drinking it to 


become charmed with the first creature seen 
3638 


M eee 


828 


Philter Quirks 


> A 


after consuming the draft. The imbiber may 
actually become enamored ifthe creature is of 
similar race and of the opposite sex. Charm 
effects wear offin 1d4+4 turns, but the enamor- 
ing effects last until a dispel magic spell is cast 
upon the individual. 


of Persuasiveness 

XP Value: 400 GP Value: 850 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide, Ist Edition 
When this philter is imbibed, the individual 
becomes more charismatic, gaining a bonus of +5 
on reaction dice rolls. The individual is also able 
to suggest (see the 3rd-level wizard spell, sugges- 
tion) once per turn to all creatures within 30 
yards. 


Philter Quirks* 

GP Value: — 
DRAGON Magazine 163 
The AD&D game has one of the largest compila- 
tions of magical items in the fantasy gaming 
industry. 

The following tables have been created to add 
some spice and variety to existing magical items 
in the AD&D game worlds. A table of nonstan- 
dard magical item abilities is offered for each 
major type of magical item in the AD&D game. 
The rationale for such quirks is simple. 

Most items are created normally, and they 
function exactly as a standard item of the same 
type in the DMG. However, sometimes there is a 
slight mishap in the creation of the device: the 
steps are not followed in the proper order, the 
astrological signs do not bode well, the item's 
creator is disturbed to begin with, the instructions 
are incomplete, or something just plain goes 
wrong. Any of these results may cause a magical 
item to behave differently from others just like it. 

Not all quirks are bad, however. Some are 
detrimental to the item or its user, some are 
neutral, and some are even beneficial. The pos- 
sibility of quirks existing (and the actual num- 
ber of quirks) is determined by using the table 
below to find the exact quirks that a magical 
philter possesses. 


XP Value: — 


Roll Quirks Present 
01-86 No quirks 
87-94 One quirk 
95-98 Two quirks 
99-00 Three quirks 


16-21 


22-25 


36-30 


31-34 


35-40 


41-44 


45-50 


51-53 


54-57 
58-62 


63-66 


Magical Philter Quirks 

Result 
User glows (as per a light spell) a ran- 
dom color for as long as the philter is in 
effect. 

User's skin turns a random color for 
1d10turns. 

User is unable to speak or cast spells 
with verbal components for Id4 hours 
after drinking the elixir. 

Imbiber gets extremely hungry imme- 
diately after the philter is consumed (as 
per a chime ofhunger). 

User's senses sharpen while the philter is 
in effect, or for a maximum of three turns 
(whichever is longer). The individual 
affected gains a +2 bonus against being 
surprised (unless he or she possesses the 
alertness nonweapon proficiency or is a 
ranger, in which case add a +3 bonus). 

User cannot hear anything due to ring- 
ing or buzzing in ears for as long as the 
philter is in effect, or for three turns if 
no duration is given. 

Philter is diluted and works 50% as well 
as a normal philter of the same type. 
Duration and effects are diminished in 
power. 

Philter becomes inert and useless if left 
unstoppered for longer than five rounds. 
Philter's duration doubles if it is mixed 
with wine prior to consumption. 

User becomes highly intoxicated for 
1d10hoursafterthephilterisconsumed. 
Only dispel magic can prematurely 
remove the effects of the drunkenness 
(effects determined by the DM). 

User gains 60' infravision for as long as 
the philter is in effect, or for three turns 
if no duration is given. Ifthe user nor- 
mally has infravision, it is lost for the 
same amount of time. 

Philter has no effect upon demihumans. 

User experiences slight disorientation 
for Id6 rounds after drinking the philter 
(-2 penalty on any attack roll and +2 
penalty on Armor Class during this 
time). 

User becomes drowsy; a Constitution 
check on Id20 must be made every 
round for four rounds after the philter is 


consumed. Ifthe roll on any check is 
3640 


ee ee 


829 


~~ Philter of Stammering and Stuttering = 


67-71 


72—16 


71-18 


79-83 


84-87 


88-89 


90-91 


92-95 


96-97 


98-99 


00 


higher than the user's constitution, he or 
she falls asleep for 3d6 minutes. The 
sleeping individual can be awakened 
only by taking at least 1 hp damage 
from a physical or magical attack. 

Philter is phosphorescent and glows 
(equal tofaeriefire spell) in the dark. 

Philter is found in powdered form; 
water has to be added to the powder for 
the philter to be effective. 

Philter is stronger than normal; its dura- 
tion is 150% of a normal philter of the 
same type. 

Philter is nauseating to drink; a Constitu- 
tion check on Id20 must be made in order 
to gulp the contents ofthe philter. Ifa sav- 
ing throw vs. poison at +2 is not made 
after that, the user feels nauseated for 
2d10 turns (-1 to attack during that time). 

User loses 1 point of Dexterity for 2d 10 
turns. 

Philter evaporates (50%) or coagulates 
(50%) and becomes useless if left open 
to air for longer than five rounds. 
Philter is unpredictable—it works nor- 
mally 50% of the time, does nothing 
30% of the time, and sickens the user 
for Id4+1 days without any beneficial 
effect 20% of the time. A cure disease 
removes this illness. 

Philter is unstable; if severely jostled or 
shaken, it bursts its container (75% 
chance) and becomes useless. 

User becomes very verbose and talks 
incessantly for the duration of the philter, 
or one turn ifno duration is given. During 
this time, the user and the party cannot 
gain surprise on encountered monsters. 

Ifthe philter is mixed with anything 
else, it forms a lethal compound (if 
swallowed, save vs. poison at -4 on the 
roll, or die in Id4 rounds). 
Philter is addictive; a draft must be 
taken at least once a week after such an 
addictive liquid is imbibed. Ifthe addict 
does not drink the philter every week, 
he or she suffers a -2 penalty on all 
ability scores until the philter is taken 
or the affliction is removed. Only alter 
reality, limited wish, wish, or going 
"cold turkey" without the philter for 
Id3 months cures the addiction. 


of Stammering and Stuttering 
XP Value: — GP Value: 1,500 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide, 1st Edition 

When this liquid is first consumed, it seems to be 
beneficial, & philter ofglibness or persuasive- 
ness, perhaps. However, whenever a meaningful 
utterance must be spoken (the verbal component 
of a spell, the text of a scroll, negotiation with a 
monster, etc.), the philter's true effect is revealed 
nothing can be said properly, and the reactions of 
all creatures hearing such nonsense are at a -5 
penalty. 

This philter functions as a philter of glibness or 
persuasiveness when imbibed by a Jester (a bard 
kit) and has no ill effects. 


Phylactery 
Phylacteries are talismans that are usually worn 
on the forehead and wrist, but are occasionally 
wrapped about the upper arm or the thigh. They 
contain small black boxes of prayers. 


of Bravery 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 9,000 
DRAGON Magazine 179 
This device is an armband made of parchment, 
inscribed with metallic inks and trimmed in gold, 
invoking the name of Najm the Brave, an enlight- 
ened god of courage. The wearer of this armband 
gains a +1 on attack rolls and makes saving throws 
against fear and other emotion affecting spells at +2. 


of Faithfulness 
XP Value: 1,000 GP Value: 7,500 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 

There are no means to learn what function this 
device performs until it is worn. The wearer of a 
phylactery offaithfulness will be aware of any 
action or item that will adversely affect his or her 
alignment and standing with his deity. This informa- 
tion is acquired prior to performing the action or 
becoming associated with such an item, ifa moment 
is taken to contemplate the action. This phylactery 
must be worn normally by a priest, of course. 


Haroistem's Phylactery of Faithfulness 
XP Value: 1,500 GP Value: 7,500 
1992 Fantasy Collector Card 152 
Haroistem has been an extremely faithful priest 
of Lathander for many years. His phylactery of 
faithfulness is a gift from that deity, sent to him 


via a flawless peacock who appeared to him in a 
3644 


Bie ys eS A a E N 


830 


Phylactery of Righteousness 


b eat a 


scarlet dawn. The phylactery allows Haroistem to 
know if any action or item will adversely affect 
his standing with Lathander, like other phylacter- 
ies of faithfulness, but it also uniquely conveys a 
continuous augury ability upon the priest. Harois- 
tem appears scatterbrained to his followers 
because part of his mind is always in the future. 


of Long Years 
XP Value GP Value 
Cursed: — 2,000 
Normal: 3,000 25,000 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 


This device slows the aging process by 25% for 
as long as the priest wears it. The reduction 
applies even to magical aging. Thus, if a priest 
dons the phylactery at age 20, he or she ages nine 
months in every 12 that pass; in 12 chronological 
years, the priest will have aged just nine years, 
and is 29 (physically) rather than 32. One in 20 of 
these devices is cursed to operate in reverse. 


of Monstrous Attention 

XP Value: ~ GP Value: 2,000 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide 
While this arm wrapping appears to be a benefi- 
cial device, it actually draws the attention of 
supernatural creatures of exactly the opposite 
alignment of the priest wearing it. This results in 
the priest being plagued by powerful and hostile 
creatures whenever he or she is in an area where 
such creatures are or can appear. Ifthe priest is of 
10th or higher level, the attention of his or her 
deity's most powerful enemy is drawn, causing 
this being to interfere directly. Once donned, a 
phylactery of monstrous attention cannot be 
removed without a wish spell and then a quest 
must be performed to reestablish the priest in his 
alignment. 

In Ravenloft: When donned by a priest in 
Ravenloft, this arm wrapping alerts the lord of 
the domain to the priest's location (within a mile). 
Only monsters native to the domain can be sum- 
moned by the phylactery. 


of Righteousness 
XP Value: 1,400 GP Value: 7,000 
Assassin Mountain 
In the Land of Fate, this collection of sacred writ- 
ings allows the wearer to strike the Unenlight- 
ened (those who reject or are ignorant of the Law 
of the Loregiver) with a +4 bonus to attacks and 


8 


3 


1 


damage, and to strike those who have offended 
the wearer's god at +2 to attack and damage. It is 
worn on the user's weapon arm. 


WANN 
N “ N i 
` AN Nh KIRG 


Nwy l 
Y \ 


SONG 
AOSAN N 
SS SSO 

WON.” 


~ 


k - NA “al he Ma "e s ` i A i 
va i Rote Ae ood l fst DF N eer ey Pry se 


ATi _ + A ar a) way 
‘a har +, Ta ie es e dut aA nt has a, ry AH P ye "OO an Maf ‘ 
Sty ale Lia erie a “at he arn dial thes yee pe A hai LI hat Pareto eorex nett Sel 


ee hea a aR tl d ù RE 7 ca CE alin’ < WAS iG Ae į et eur SA en UPA, 
ye Se » ` br ne TE HR . Sy A S paiia tga k Ler a4 Cige Fi 2 h e. "A Re ot v= Nee, « wta À i 1 
n eliza] UN Rue a o n P E SoHErty FAL veya ana ere, = 
ee Ce eats ath 4 - +4," Sales. Yo nid we eT thr wA y ~ 2 7 
Y . eats 4 Pats e) ae aa ‘ J BAR à è ~ F 
SN Pada Thy T 5 ay a pala Sgr aI Poa beg Tost Or as vari Kur A FASS paa ÀT 4 
j à BASRY a d i 2 “Pak A 
i r Re ie Se “a PR) OS. oe: 
Ae, ee PO ee yes n 


n WEE 
heat ERIA 
oe Oa L 4 EEUE i 
r ARPER 
PE ETO TAN De T 


A 


TAONA N 


CAV 
Porat 


a Obs 0. Fars 


ey ar eh: 
IREEN ahh 


wp. S y — * 
hansen. Bail 
1 j Ju ae 
A EEVT 
EO te 
« =i a weet 
p Hr * 
TRA day 
ee 
NR 
PENA 


