The 
Complete 


Wizard’s 
Handbook 


TSR, Inc. 


Advanced 
Dungeons ragons 


274 Edition Rules Supplement 


Player’s Handbook 


The 
Complete 


Wizard’s 
Handbook 


iE 


TSR, Inc. 


ir 


EREE A INg 


T pa P î — A 


Introduction 


No concept is more fundamental to 
the ADVANCED DUNGEONS & 
DRAGONS 2nd Edition® game than 
magic. And no character class better 
personifies the art of magic than its pri- 
mary practitioner, the wizard. No class 
is more challenging, few are as elegant, 
and in the hands of a creative player, 
none is as fascinating. 

The AD&D 2nd Edition Player's 
Handbook and Dungeon Master's 
Guide explained all of the basic infor- 
mation necessary for playing wizard 
characters. In this book, we'll expand 
on that information, adding more de- 
tails and options and offering a few new 
variations. 

For instance, we'll be taking a close 
look at all the schools of magic, exam- 
ining their advantages and disadvan- 
tages, their requirements and benefits, 
and the types of characters that are best 
suited for particular specializations. 
Since the schools of magic aren't limited 
to those presented in the Player's Hand- 
book, we'll show you how to create 
your own schools from scratch. 


We'll discuss ways to personalize 
your wizard characters and describe en- 
tire campaigns centered on wizardly 
concerns. If you've been bemoaning the 
lack of spells for certain specialists, 
such as diviners and necromancers, 
worry no more—we've added plenty of 
new spells just for them. 


For the Dungeon Master, we'll offer 
some tips to help fine-tune his skills as a 
referee, covering such topics as the ad- 
judication of illusions and how to es- 
tablish guidelines for magical research. 
We'll explain how spells are cast under- 
water and in other planes of existence. 
And for players and DMs alike, we'll 
take a close look at combat and how it 
relates to wizards. 


Think of this book as a smorgasbord 
of ideas. Everything here is optional. 
Pick and choose whatever's most ap- 
pealing, make changes to suit your 
campaign, and experiment with varia- 
tions of your own design. It's your 
game and your world—we're here to 


help you make it as entertaining as it 
can be. 


Throughout this book, we've used 
male pronouns as a matter of conven- 
ience. This is not intended to exclude 
ferales—in all cases, read “his” as “his 
or her,’ and “he” as “he or she.” 

For those of you using The Complete 
Wizard in conjunction with the original 
AD&D game instead of the AD&D 2nd 
Edition game, this supplement men- 
tions many page numbers from the 
Player's Handbook and the Dungeon 
Master's Guide. The page numbers 
cited refer to the AD&D 2nd Edition 
books. Those players using the old 
books will have to ignore these page 
references, but in most cases, you can 
find the relevant material by consulting 
the indexes or contents pages of the 
original books. 


Pee KL warts 
“ssi 


The Complete Wizard’s Handbook 


Introduction................... 3 


Chapter 1: Schools of Magic .6 
To Specialize or Not to Specialize? . . .6 


Ability Scores oss sasoe sansa 6 
1st-Level Bonus Spell ............ 6 
Personality and Background of 
E a icine av cin N TE, 6 
Access to Mentors. .............- 6 
Party Composition.............. 6 
Player Preference .............-. 6 
Chance to Learn Spells........... 7 
Short Adventure vs. Long 
COMPAR «6. wisn ahsen h 7 
Abotit the'Schoals -sai wsei0¢508 15:4 7 
RAEN oon A N ATERN: 8 
A A s AE TE PERSI R S) 9 
Conjuration/Summoning ....... 11 
Enchantment/Charm ........... 12 
Greater Divination ............. 14 
Weistony. coves lon A AAA T 15 
Invocation/Evocation .......... 17 
NEEN oroe sena sore wraterane 18 
Abandoning a School..........-.. 20 
n E E PARR 20 
n n AEETIS E: 20 
A Word About Minor Schools ..... 20 
Lesser Divination ...........+.- 20 
New Minor Schools ............ 21 
Chapter 2: Creating New 
GOOG at's 0555 E TE A, 22 
The Basics of Creating Schools..... 22 
Mey pe Or Ma RIC. «ors oosina aoea 22 
Priests vs. Wizards ............. 22 
Categories of Effects............ 22 
Defining the Effects of a 
PCW ee. E A. 23 
BANW.. osve roenn 23 
Name of the School ........-... 23 
Name of the Specialist .......... 23 
SUF s tere cries ny eis R EA ard 24 
PRUE ar EP E E T 24 
Adapting Existing Spells ........ 24 
Ideas for New Spells..........-- 24 
Checking for Duplication ....... 24 
Checking for Play Balance....... 24 
Determining Effects and Levels. . .26 
Celing EREB. «nee 2 crema oni S558 28 
Components „seenen i Rone 28 


Allowed (Races... osete hhee 28 
Ability Requirements ............. 28 
CINE ao ETA NAAA RA A 29 
Experience Levels and Spell 
PROSTOSSION, (5:05 o.s%cie > ose wie KAR ore 29 
FRE POIntS P AN AAA A AAE 29 
E o ANCE EA N AE 29 
Oppositional Schools............. 30 
Sn EEE T E T S 31 
Chapter 3: Wizard Kits ...... 33 
Kits and Character Creation ....... 33 
Kits and Schools of Magic......... 33 
MVCN EEEE Gubie-ott 33 
The Wizard Kite. .... «10.5, prevene eyan 33 
A Note About Reaction 
Adjustments. s s s saose s iunn 34 
WRONG eessen eak 35 
Academicial <5 ccc sisieXatinns selene 35 
Amazon Sorceress. ..........+.: 36 
PATS AKO arosa adaa aae asa ns 38 
Militant Wizard................ 39 
DAGSHOL thi cia satin sm thet N EEE, 40 
PatriGiains ices) haves AN NN E E 42 
Peasant Ward. oerrinne 43 
Savage: Wizard cii nics sciences 43 
WARE CER we AE A A N 45 
Wa Jehiaan sanpo el daaag 49 
Recording Kits on the Character 
SHEGE E E N T O 50 
Modifying the Kits ............. 50 
Creating New Kits ..............- 50 
Wizard Kit Creation Sheet......... 51 
Suggestions for New Kits.......... 51 
Chapter 4: Role-Playing ..... 52 
Wizard Personalities. ............. 52 
The ATB a isea exces 5100 sa bse 52 
The Broadets scice siooas Sros aiaia 0 53 
The Commander............4-+ 53 
PRE COunSOL s-os 55s arsana 54 
The Intimidator..............+.. 54 
The Mercenary .............+.. 55 
The Mystery Man..........-+.. 55 
The Neophyte eosi onerare 56 
Fhe Obsessive AETAT NE 56 
PROGR aE i: 4-9) 0:10 NET 57 
Changing Personality Types....... 58 
Ideas for New Personality Types . . .59 
Character Background...........- 59 


Wizardly Careets:. . eerren nenret 60 


ones EA DS PO Ey, A 60 
Aastra | 20.5 en A 60 
Aror ee ae. Seles coin 60 
WEEE Has doh cas Nas E E 61 
Physidtan 2552 saaa RRR 61 
Treasure Hunter ............... 61 
Entertainer pacaduan aaae 61 
Lecture aiik sa ninii oe aes 6i 
AURO Soet os iasa saae 61 
Forttine Teie: oa. cst aaia 61 
A CR@RIISR och A EE sis 61 
Wizard Adventures............... 62 
The Novice Wizard. ............ 62 
The Outcast Wizard............ 62 
Magic's Good Name............ 62 
Assisting the Citizenry.......... 62 
The Scholarly Quest............ 64 
Out Gf Retitement oa eoeta eead 64 
Magic in the Campaign World ..... 64 
Worlds With Excessive Amounts 
OR MBSE Soi o Beene 65 
Worlds With Typical Amounts 
OE WABI ee cin sie aiclbva ere 65 
Worlds With Low Amounts 
Ob Magis loi an8 ey ves vet ieeies 65 
Worlds With No Magic ......... 65 
Campaign Variations ...........+. 66 
The All-Wizard Campaign ...... 66 


The Single Wizard Kit Campaign .66 
The Restricted School Campaign .66 
The Restricted Level Campaign . .66 


Chapter 5: Combat and the 


WHER AGES 5s tots ssi A 68 
The Spell Arsenal ..............-+ 68 
The Wizard's Advantages ......- 68 
Spell Categories.........-.....--) 68 
Defensive Spells ............-55 69 
Offensive Spells................ 69 
Reconnaissance Spells .......... 70 
Special Spells airs ci aiitwalcccramiorerese 71 
A Mix of Spells ............-.4- 71 
Weapon Restriction .............- 71 
Chapter 6: Casting Spells in 
Unusual Conditions.......... 73 
Casting Spells Underwater. .......- 73 
Spells That Are Ineffective 
Underwater terana pcan slaves 73 
Spells That Are Modified When 
Cast Underwater............--- 73 


The Complete Wizard’s Handbook 


Casting Spells in Other Planes ... .. 75 


The Ethereal Planes ............ 75 
The Inner Planes............... 75 
The Astal Plane. raua cash. 76 
THe Outer Planes isa cisi reren: 78 
Casting Spells When the Caster is 
a o L EAEE 79 
Impaired Vision. ..............5. 79 
Impaired Hearing .............. 80 
Impaired Speech ............... 81 
Impaired Movement............ 81 
Impaired Concentration......... 81 


Chapter 7: Advanced 


PROCHONNGE noc ics cos oan 82 
Levels: Above 20th) osa 6:66 6 eats 82 
Spells Above 9th-Level.......... 82 
Spell 'COmMMGKALY: sose o ooa we sisinio 82 
a ao ENE A SERA, 83 
pa A E REN E EEE E 83 
TTR OEE S N Ei- 84 
MER T SOE ECOCIN T NT. y 84 
GRE EVOL PE OEA ENN 85 
ILO y NNP IE EA EEEE: 85 
SURGE AE N EN 85 
n ENT ENEE E OERE 85 


More About Adjudicating Illusions .88 
Complexity—Non-Living Objects 88 
Complexity—Living Objects.. ... 89 


Magical Effects and Special 
PRES iy oc aaa e a 89 
FLAWS: AETA EONA AEE 89 
Revealed Illusions. ............. 90 
Infellisence IRE OAIR 90 
The Illusion-Casting Subject ..... 90 
Summary of Modifiers.......... 90 
Spell Research '.<3. casei Wou\aawals 90 
Defining A New Spell........... 90 
Spell Components....-......... 91 
Cost of Reséarchi inis acc sie 91 
The Wizard's Library ........... 91 
Initial Preparation. ............. 92 
Research Time and Chance of 
SUCGESE i sens criersrereloiclews orale lls 92 
Example of Research............ 93 
Researching Existing Spells ........ 93 
Limiting the Success Chance ..... 94 
More About Magical Item 
REOR: iloi + \S1ocarc/eaarsrs\aeies 94 


Chapter 8: New Spells ....... 95 
Spell DescipHons . a... ss: e'sa iasi 95 
Spell Components: „. essea saree 95 

Material Components........... 95 

Verbal and Somatic Components .95 
First-Level Spello ann nrn ane 95 
Second-Level Spells ............-. 97 
Third-Level Spells................ 99 
Fourth-Level Spells .............. 101 
Fifth-Level Spells................ 102 
Sixth-Level Spells ............... 104 
Seventh-Level Spell.............. 106 
Eighth-Level Spells .............. 106 
Chapter 9: Wizardly Lists. ..108 
Twenty-five Helpful Familiars..... 108 


Five Unusual Sources for Spells . . .108 
Nine Magical Items That Have Not Yet 


Been Invented ....,,....-...-- 109 
Five Debilitating Afflictions ...... 109 
Nine Principles of Conduct for 

Academy Graduates........... 112 


Six Common Alchemical Processes 113 
Eleven Useful Additions to a Wizard's 


Laboratory, pvcvncnbea skeen cans 113 
Four Prerequisites for Admission to an 
Academy of Magic............ 114 
Nineteen Courses in a Typical 
Academy Curriculum.......... 114 
Nine Organizations for Wizards. . .116 
400 Fantastic Materials. .......... 118 
Five Incredible Locations......... 119 
Twelve New Magical Items ....... 124 
Tables 
Table 1: Minimum Spells for a New 
PREM OOM creer: sien ciate Hace moist alee 24 
Table 2: Suggested Maximum Damage 
OESHSIE BY Level anisan ana 26 
Table 3: Random Determination of 
Spell Components..,........-.- 28 
Table 4: Magic Schools and Types of 
5 a ah PRIOR EOS OCS 29 
Table 5: Ability Check Bonuses for 
Academicians ..........620005 35 
Table 6; Oppositional Schools for 
Militant Wizards............... 40 
Table 7: Savage Wizard Omen 
RReSUUES os 5 coats ek tie sale aw lal ors 45 


Table 8: Effects of Witch’s Curse. . . .47 


Table 9; Selected Oriental Weapons for 
the Wo: Jen i ea eoa 48 

Table 10: Chance of Random Effects of 
Alteration Spells in Outer 


Planes is sie disa tierce sees Sacoewn 78 
Table 11: Random Effects of Altered 
Shapes in the Outer Planes ..... . 78 
Table 12: Wizard Experience Levels 
Beyond 200K: esai cee ees 82 
Table 13: Wizard Spell Progression 
Beyond 20th Level ............- 82 


Table 14: Summary of Possible Modi- 
fiers for Saving Throws vs. Illusions 90 
Table 15: Library Values Necessary for 

Spell Rema Nh sociare coraa 91 
Table 16: Chromatic Orb Effects . . .96 
Table 17: Summoned Familiars . . . .108 


Table 18: Conjuritis Results....... 110 
Table 19: Random Generation of 
Fantastic Materials ............ 117 
Table 20: Results from the Garden of 
Jertalth Cah bors.c censors 122 
Maps and Play Aids 
School Creation Sheet ........... 126 
Wizard Kit Creation Sheet........ 127 
Figure 1: Oppositional Schools... .. 30 
Map 1: The Island of Ghothar ....121 
Map 2: The Sphere of B’naa ...... 123 
Credits: 


Design: Rick Swan 

Editing: Anne Brown 

Black and White Art: Terry Dykstra, Valerie 
Valusek 

Color Art: Clyde Caldwell, David Dorman, 
Larry Elmore 

Typography: Gaye O'Keefe 

Graphic Design: Paul Hanchette 


ADVANCED DUNGEONS & DRAGONS, 
AD&D, PRODUCTS OF YOUR 
IMAGINATION, and the TSR logo are 
trademarks owned by TSR, Inc. 


©1990 TSR, Inc. All rights reserved. 
Printed in the U.S.A. 


inc. 


TSR Ltd. 
120 Church End, Cherry Hinton 
Cambridge CB1 3LB 

United Kingdom 


2115XXX1501 


Lake Geneva 
WI 53147 U.S.A. 


ISBN 0-88038-838-2 


In this chapter, we'll take a close look 
at the various schools of magic, analyz- 
ing their strengths and weaknesses, ex- 
amining their spells, and sizing up their 
specialists. We'll also look at the minor 
schools and explore the implications of 
abandoning a school. 

The schools of magic add many inter- 
esting possibilities to a campaign. But 
not every wizard is destined to be a spe- 
cialist, and not every player wants to 
play a specialist character. So let's begin 
with a basic question. 


To Specialize or Not to 
Specialize? 


The most crucial decision a begin- 
ning wizard must make is whether to 
specialize in a school of magic or in- 
stead opt for the life of a mage. Each has 
its advantages and disadvantages. For 
instance, the mage has a chance to learn 
any new spell he encounters, but the 
specialist's opportunities are more 
limited—he cannot learn spells from 
schools that are in opposition to his 
own. The specialist has stricter racial 
and ability requirements than the 
mage, but he also has better saving 
throw bonuses. 

The choice to specialize can have 
profound effects on a wizard’s role in 
the game, and players should think 
carefully before committing their char- 
acters to a school of magic. Following 
are a few points to consider. 


Ability Scores 


A wizard must meet certain ability 
requirements to become a specialist. 
For instance, a wizard with a Dexterity 
of 15 can’t become an illusionist. But 
even if low ability scores haven't elimi- 
nated all of the specialization choices, 
the player should still look at his char- 
acter’s Intelligence score and see how it 
affects his chance of learning spells. 


Chapter 1: Schools of Magic 


An Intelligence of 9 means that the 
character will have a 50 percent chance 
to learn spells of his speciality based on 
the normal 35 percent chance to learn a 
new spell for an Intelligence of 9 (Table 
4 on page 16 of the Player's Handbook) 
plus a 15 percent bonus for being a spe- 
cialist. An Intelligence of 17 means that 
the character will have a 90 percent 
chance to learn spells of his specialty 
(the normal 75 percent chance for an In- 
telligence of 17 plus a 15 percent bonus 
for being a specialist). Notice that the 
15 percent bonus helps the character 
with the lower Intelligence more than it 
does the character with the higher Intel- 
ligence; the bonus boosts the Intelli- 
gence 9 character's chance from 35 to 
50, an increase of more than 40 percent, 
while the Intelligence 17 character's 
chance is increased from 75 to 90, 
which is a boost of only 20 percent. 

Clearly, the lower the Intelligence of 
a wizard, the more specialization helps 
to increase his chance of learning spells. 
This is somewhat offset by the special- 
ist's limitations to which spells he can 
learn (he can’t learn spells from opposi- 
tional schools), but over the course of a 
campaign, a low Intelligence wizard 
stands a good chance of learning more 
spells by specializing. 


Ist-Level Bonus Spell 


A Ist-level specialist begins with two 
spells, but a 1st-level mage begins with 
only one. This difference is inconse- 
quential over the course of a long cam- 
paign, but it can be significant if 
playing a short adventure with low- 
level characters. 


Personality and Background 
of the Player Character 


Some aspect of the player character's 
personality might suggest whether he's 
best suited for the life of a mage or that 


of a specialist. An impulsive, overeager 
character might lack the patience for 
the studious life of a specialist, Con- 
versely, a thoughtful, scholarly charac- 
ter might find the life of a mage too 
confining. A character who comes from 
a long line of mages might want to con- 
tinue the family tradition. A character 
whose brother was killed by an evil spe- 
cialist NPC might want to study the 
same school to prepare himself for a 
confrontation with the murderer. 


Access to Mentors 


Does the wizard character have easy 
access to a mentor of his preferred 
school? Is the mentor in ill health, is his 
city under siege, or is his future otherwise 
in question? Although there are ways to 
learn spells without a mentor (or magic 
academy), the wizard may want to think 
carefully before committing to a speciali- 
zation if he can’t depend on the availabil- 
ity of his mentor (or academy) for 
consultation and further training. 


Party Composition 


If the character's party already in- 
cludes one or more mages, the wizard 
might choose a specialization to give 
the party a wider variety of character 
types. If the party is small, it might be 
less risky to become a mage so that the 
character has access to spells of all the 
schools. Are there other player- 
character wizards with spell books 
they'd be willing to share? Would a spe- 
cialist or a mage have a better chance of 
learning those spells? (If one PC wizard 
is a conjurer, his spell book probably 
won't be useful to a PC wizard who 
wants to be a diviner.) 


Player Preference 


A player might want to run a wizard 
of a particular specialty just because 


Schools of Magic 


he's never tried it before, and that's as 
good a reason as any to choose a spe- 
cialist over a mage. 


Chance to Learn Spells 


Consider the opportunities that 
mages and specialists have to learn new 
spells, perhaps the most compelling dif- 
ference between them. As illustration, 
compare a mage with an Intelligence of 
9 and an illusionist with an Intelligence 
of 9. The mage has a 35 percent chance 
of learning each new spell he encoun- 
ters, regardless of its school. The illu- 
sionist has a 50 percent chance of 
learning illusionist spells, a 20 percent 
chance of learning alteration, divina- 
tion, enchantment/charm, and 
conjuration/summoning spells (this 
percentage reflects the 15 percent pen- 
alty for learning spells from other 
schools). The illusionist has no chance 
of learning spells from the schools of 
invocation/evocation, abjuration, or 
necromancy, since these schools are in 
opposition to the school of illusion. 

Assume that in a typical adventure, 
the mage and the illusionist each have 
the opportunity to learn 16 new spells 
from discovered spell books, NPC wiz- 
ards, and other sources. Also assume 
that of these 16 spells, two are from 
each of the eight schools. The mage has 
a 35 percent chance of learning each of 
these spells, meaning that he is likely to 
learn five or six of them. The illusionist 
is denied the chance to learn six of them 
(from the oppositional schools); he has 
a 50 percent chance of learning two of 
them (meaning he is likely to learn one 
of the two), and a 20 percent chance of 
learning eight of them (meaning he is 
likely to learn two spells). In this exam- 
ple, the mage learns six spells, while the 
illusionist learns only three. 

It doesn’t improve for specialists with 
higher Intelligence scores; at Intelli- 
gence 16, for instance, a mage will learn 


about 12 of the 16 spells, while the illu- 
sionist will learn approximately eight of 
them. 

Of course, the specialist receives a 
bonus spell when he advances a level, 
and the differences are less severe for 
certain specialties (diviners, for in- 
stance, are denied access to only one 
school). But over the course of a typical 
campaign, a mage will likely learn far 
more spells than a specialist. 


Short Adventure vs. Long 
Campaign 


Since there is no meaningful difference 
between a mage and a specialist in their 
abilities to cast the spells they know, 
wouldn't the wise player always choose 
to play a mage? Not necessarily. In the 
long run, the specialist's experience bo- 
nus, saving throw bonuses, and acquired 
powers (see the listings in the school de- 
scriptions below) make him a far more 
formidable opponent than the mage. Ad- 
ditionally, the limits on the number of 
spells a wizard can use and know mean 
that the specialist will eventually catch up 
to the mage in these areas. 

One guideline for deciding between a 
mage and a specialist might be to con- 
sider a mage if playing a short adven- 
ture. But for a lengthy campaign, a 
specialist is probably the best bet; not 
only will he prove to be a more effective 
party member, but a character with fo- 
cused goals and aptitudes will be more 
interesting to play. 


About the Schools 


Following are details about special- 
ists for each school of magic. Each in- 
cludes the following information: 

Description: This section explains the 
general effects created by spells from 
the school, along with how the magical 
energy is channelled. 

Specialist Name: The common name 


for a specialist of this school. 

Allowed Races: Only humans, 
gnomes, elves, and half-elves can be 
specialists, and not all races are able to 
specialize in every school. This entry 
indicates which races are eligible to spe- 
cialize in a particular school. 

Ability Requirements: Though all 
schools require a minimum Intelligence 
of 9, each has an additional minimum 
requirement in another ability and is 
listed here. 

Saving Throw Modifiers: Because of 
their familiarity with the arcane arts, 
specialists are able to resist the effects of 
certain forms of magic. Additionally, 
their opponents are less able to resist 
certain spells cast by specialists rather 
than non-specialists. These are listed 
here. 

Bonus Spells and Acquired Powers: 
These are the special abilities and extra 
spells that specialists automatically re- 
ceive when they reach high levels. (The 
use of acquired powers is an option 
only; at the DM's discretion, he can 
eliminate them from his campaign, or 
even develop others for high-level spe- 
cialists.) 

Oppositional Schools: The specialist 
is unable to learn spells from these 
schools. He is also forbidden to use 
magical items that duplicate the effects 
of schools in opposition to his own 
school. 

Spell Analysis: This section discusses 
the spells available to the school, in- 
cluding their general types and their 
overall usefulness to the wizard. For 
convenience, spells are divided into 
three categories: Low (1st-3rd level), 
Medium (4th-6th level), and High (7th- 
9th level). The most versatile and pow- 
erful spells are designated as the “Most 
Desirable” for each of these categories. 

Ethos: This section details the wiz- 
ard's relationship to society, his goals 
and values, his overall philosophy, how 
he spends his time, and his likely role in 
an adventuring party. Since certain 


Schools of Magic 


types of people tend to veer toward the 
same fields of study, some personality 
descriptions common to specialists of 
the school are also included. 

Note that these are general guidelines 
only, and any number of exceptions are 
possible, but they can be used to help 
the player shape his character's person- 
ality or help him decide which school 
seems most appropriate for the charac- 
ter he has in mind. 


Abjuration 


Description: Spells of this school fo- 
cus magical energies to provide protec- 
tion. This protection can take a number 
of forms, including warding off specific 
types of weapons or creatures and dis- 
couraging or dispelling enemies. The 
school also includes a variety of spells 
involving avoidance and repellence. 
Abjuration spells concentrate on elimi- 
nating or hindering sources of potential 
harm rather than repairing damage. 

Specialist Name: Abjurer. 

Allowed Races: Only humans can be 
abjurers. It's speculated that the natural 
magical resistance of elves, half-elves, 
and gnomes prevents them from mas- 
tering abjuration spells. 

Ability Requirements: A wizard must 
have strong intuition and exceptional 
willpower to master abjuration spells as 
reflected in a high Wisdom score. Spe- 
cialists in this school must have a mini- 
mum Wisdom of 15. 

Saving Throw Modifiers: All oppo- 
nents modify their saving throws by 
—1 when attempting to save against an 
abjuration spell cast by an abjurer. An 
abjurer adds a +1 bonus when saving 
against abjuration spells. 

Bonus Spells and Acquired Powers: 
An abjurer can memorize an extra spell 
at each spell level, providing that at least 
one of the memorized spells is from the 
school of abjuration; thus, a 1st-level 
abjurer can memorize two spells. 


When an abjurer reaches 17th level, 
he acquires immunity to all forms of 
hold spells and adds a +1 bonus when 
saving against poison, paralyzation, 
and death magic. 

When an abjurer reaches 20th level, 
his mastery of magical protective forces 
has become so powerful that his Armor 
Class is raised from 10 to 9. He is still 
forbidden to wear armor. 

Oppositional Schools: An abjurer 
cannot learn spells from the schools of 
alteration and illusion. 

Spell Analysis: The abjurer has a lim- 
ited number of spells from which to 
choose, particularly in the lower levels. 
This lack of options makes low-level 
abjurers among the weakest of begin- 
ning wizards. To compensate, he 
should acquire a few low-level spells 
from other available schools as early in 
his career as possible. Offensive 
spells—that is, spells that inflict 
damage—from the school of alteration 
are especially good choices, such as 
burning hands, shocking grasp, 
strength, and Melf's minute meteors. As 
he reaches higher levels of ability and is 
able to take advantage of the more 
powerful abjuration spells available to 
him, an abjurer should become less de- 
pendent on spells from other schools. 

There are three general types of abju- 
ration spells: protective, dispelling, and 
dismissal. Protective spells include 
those that offer protection from crea- 
tures (such as protection from evil), 
those that protect against weapons 
(such as protection from normal mis- 
siles), and those that protect against 
certain types of magic (such as minor 
globe of invulnerability). Dispelling 
spells cause the elimination of specific 
magical effects, such as dispel magic 
and remove curse. Dismissal spells 
cause the removal of certain creatures, 
such as dismissal and banishment. 

Since the most effective abjurations 
are those offering the greatest protec- 
tion, it seems that the dismissal spells 


are the most desirable—after all, they 
get rid of the attacker altogether. How- 
ever, dismissal spells are effective only 
against very specific types of attackers, 
such as banishment's dismissal of extra- 
planar creatures. Unless the wizard an- 
ticipates encountering the type of 
creature affected, a dismissal spell 
won't be helpful. Since protection spells 
usually affect only a single individual, 
the best all-purpose abjurations are the 
dispelling spells; dispel magic for in- 
stance, employed against a magic- 
wielding enemy protects not only the 
caster, but the entire party. 

The abjurer is at a disadvantage 
when attacking. There are very few ab- 
juration spells that inflict damage either 
directly or indirectly, But in terms of de- 
fensive capabilities, the abjurer is sec- 
ond to none. When a party is exploring 
potentially dangerous territory, the ab- 
jurer makes an ideal point man, placing 
him in an excellent position to create 
defenses against attackers. The abjurer, 
like all wizards, has a poor Armor 
Class, making him extremely vulnera- 
ble to damage. A comrade with a lot of 
hit points and a low AC should accom- 
pany the abjurer near the front of the 
party, ready to intercept attacks and act 
as the abjurer's bodyguard. 

Abjurers also operate well in con- 
junction with other wizards. While the 
abjurer casts magical defenses, a fellow 
wizard can concentrate on creating 
magical offenses. When traveling, ab- 
jurers make good guards for helpless 
NPCs, such as small children and el- 
derly citizens. Does the party have a 
treasure map, a valuable gem, or other 
prized possession? With his repertoire 
of protective spells, the abjurer may be 
the best person to carry them. 

Most Desirable Spells: 

Low-Level: Dispel magic is not only 
the best of the low-level abjuration 
spells, it should be a part of any wiz- 
ard's arsenal (excluding, of course, 
those specialists to whom abjuration is 


Schools of Magic 


forbidden). Dispel magic can effec- 
tively disarm many opponents, and it 
can also negate harmful or potentially 
harmful magical devices. Abjurers 
would do well to acquire this spell early 
in their careers. 

Protection from evil is another useful 
spell, considering how often a typical 
party encounters evil creatures and evil 
NPCs. Of the two 3rd-level protection 
spells, an abjurer will likely find protec- 
tion from evil, 10' radius to be more 
helpful than protection from normal 
missiles, since he will probably have 
more opportunities to use the former 
than the latter. Note that protection 
from normal missiles can be extremely 
helpful when traveling through primi- 
tive areas where the inhabitants are 
more likely to use rocks and spears than 
swords and maces, 

Medium-Level: Fire trap not only of- 
fers superb protection, it's one of the 
few abjuration spells capable of inflict- 
ing damage. Avoidance has the twin 
advantages of being reversible and per- 
manent. Anti-magic shell is generally 
preferable to globe of invulnerability; 
not only does it last longer, it’s stronger 
and takes less time to cast. 

High-Level: Spell turning and Ser- 
ten’s spell immunity are extremely pow- 
erful spells that should be useful in any 
hostile environment. In most situa- 
tions, prismatic sphere is the best high- 
level abjuration spell; it not only 
provides a variety of defenses, it is also 
capable of blinding most opponents 
and inflicting a sizeable amount of 
damage. 

Ethos: Concerned with protection, 
abjurists have a deep reverence for life 
and are attracted to philosophies stress- 
ing compassion and selflessness. Ac- 
cordingly, most abjurers are of good 
alignment. Evil-aligned abjurers are of- 
ten toadies of an intimidating evil war- 
rior or in the service of a more powerful 
wizard of another school. 

Abjurers tend to be thoughtful, or- 


derly, gentle-natured, and soft-spoken, 
going out of their way not to attract at- 
tention. 

Of all the wizards, abjurers seem to 
have the strongest family ties. Abjurers 
take comfort in the security of marriage 
and often choose their mates at an early 
age; many abjurers have ten or more 
offspring. Owing to their mastery of 
protective forces, abjurers tend to live 
to a ripe old age; it’s not unusual to find 
abjurers well into their eighties in ad- 
venturing parties. 

Abjurers make their homes any- 
where, but prefer small villages to large 
cities. Because of their kind hearts and 
generous spirits, abjurers are held in 
high esteem by society in general. Ab- 
jurers commonly earn a living as 
guides, bodyguards, merchants, and 
teachers. 


Alteration 


Description: Spells of this school en- 
able the caster to channel magical ener- 
gies to cause direct and specific change 
in an existing object, creature, or condi- 
tion. Alterations can affect a subject's 
form (polymorph other), weight 
(feather fall), abilities (strength), loca- 
tion (teleport without error), or even 
his physical well-being (death fog). 

Specialist Name: Transmuter. 

Allowed Races: Only a caster with 
human blood can channel the magical 
energies necessary for alteration spells. 
Hence, only humans and half-elves can 
become transmuters. 

Ability Requirements: Because alter- 
ation spells have somewhat more com- 
plex somatic components than spells 
from other schools, a wizard needs a 
Dexterity score of at least 15 to become 
a transmuter. 

Saving Throw Modifiers: All oppo- 
nents modify their saving throws by 
—1 when attempting to save against an 
alteration spell cast by a transmuter. A 
transmuter adds a +1 bonus when 


saving against alteration spells cast by 
others. 

Bonus Spells and Acquired Powers: 
A transmuter can memorize an extra 
spell at each spell level, providing that 
at least one of the memorized spells is 
from the school of alteration. 

When a transmuter reaches 17th 
level, he receives one extra non- 
weapon wizard proficiency of his 
choice; this is in addition to the number 
of non-weapon proficiencies he is nor- 
mally allowed. When he reaches 20th 
level, he receives another extra non- 
weapon wizard proficiency. If the wiz- 
ard already has all of the non-weapon 
wizard proficiencies available to him 
when he reaches level 17 (or level 20), 
he may take a general non-weapon pro- 
ficiency instead. 

Oppositional Schools: A transmuter 
can’t learn spells from the schools of ab- 
juration and necromancy. 

Spell Analysis: No school has a wider 

variety of spells than the school of alter- 
ation, making the transmuter the most 
versatile of all the specialists. The avail- 
able spells can be assigned to six general 
groups: 
1. Defensive Spells. This group of pro- 
tective spells offers defensive capabili- 
ties rivaling those of the abjuration 
school. This group includes spells that 
limit an opponent's ability to attack, 
such as fog cloud, solid fog, slow, and 
darkness, 15' radius, and also spells 
that provide direct protection to the 
caster and his party, such as stoneskin 
and Leomund's tiny hut. 

2. Offensive Spells, This group in- 

cludes spells such as strength and haste 
which increase the party's chance to in- 
flict damage, and spells such as Melf's 
minute meteors and death fog which in- 
flict damage directly. 
3. Mobility Spells. This group includes 
fly, blink, passwall, and teleport and 
other spells that improve the caster's 
ability to move from place to place. 


Schools of Magic 


4. Security Spells. This group enables 
the caster to protect objects and places, 
and includes spells such as wizard lock, 
guards and wards, and Leomund's se- 
cret chest. 

5. Talent Spells. This group gives the 
caster (or a person of the caster's choice) 
a temporary talent, usually one that du- 
plicates a special ability of another 
creature or race. Such spells include 
infravision, water breathing, and 
tongues. 

6. Special Spells. This group encom- 
passes a wide range of spells that don’t 
fit into into any of the previous catego- 
ries, such as magic mouth, mending, 
message, and fool's gold, 

Because of the variety of spells avail- 
able, a transmuter can assume a num- 
ber of different roles in an adventuring 
party. For instance, a transmuter who 
knows a number of offensive spells can 
battle effectively alongside a party's 
warriors. A transmuter who knows a 
few mobility spells in addition to some 


offensive spells makes an especially im- 
pressive combatant (imagine a flying 
transmuter soaring to the top of a tree, 
then casting Melf's minute meteors at 
an unsuspecting enemy). With a supply 
of defensive spells, a transmuter can as- 
sume many of the functions of an ab- 
jurer, A transmuter with spider climb, 
deeppockets, and knock is a good sub- 
stitution for a thief; add polymorph self 
and passwall, and you'd be hard- 
pressed to find a better spy. 

The transmuter always runs the risk 
of being overwhelmed by the sheer vol- 
ume of available spells and making 
haphazard or ill-informed decisions 
about which spells he learns and memo- 
rizes. Therefore, he must take care to 
balance his spell choices with the needs 
of his party. 

Most Desirable Spells: 

Low-Level: Of the 1st-level spells, 
burning hands is a nice choice for an of- 
fensive spell since it has a longer range 
than shocking grasp and does more 


damage at higher levels. Chromatic orb 
is a better choice yet. 

With its reversible option, enlarge 
gives the transmuter a wealth of op- 
tions and is particularly useful in com- 
bat since it affects damage rolls. Fog 
cloud and pyrotechnics both have two 
different forms, essentially giving the 
transmuter two spells for the price of 
one. Fly expands the transmuter’s stra- 
tegic options and is perhaps the best all- 
around low-level alteration spell. Both 
slow and haste can influence melee 
combat dramatically, since a number of 
subjects are affected at the same time. 

Medium-Level: Polymorph self and 
polymorph other can disguise friendly 
characters, intimidate enemies, and in 
the case of polymorph other, greatly en- 
hance the party's chance of combat suc- 
cess, since the subject's Armor Class 
and attack routines can be improved by 
the spell. Death fog and disintegrate are 
powerful offensive spells, and teleport 
is a first-rate mobility spell. 


Schools of Magic 


Of the medium-level spells, there are 
none better than Tenser's transforma- 
tion, assuming the transmuter has a 
dagger or staff at hand to take advan- 
tage of his increased attack effective- 
ness, and Mordenkainen’'s lucubration, 
which gives the transmuter access to 
any Ist-level through Sth-level spell 
used in the previous 24 hours. 

High-Level: Incendiary cloud is a ter- 
rific offensive spell, and shape change 
and time stop are both helpful in a vari- 
ety of situations. The most useful high- 
level spell is probably polymorph any 
object, since it can duplicate the effects 
of many other spells, including poly- 
morph other, transmute rock to mud, 
and stone to flesh. 

Ethos: Wizards drawn to the spe- 
cialty of alteration are typically curi- 
ous, sharp-minded, and deeply 
analytical. Fascinated by putting things 
together and taking them apart again, 
they are natural tinkerers, more inter- 
ested in objects than in people. 

Transmuters generally aren't prone 
to profound philosophic insights, as 
their minds are more attuned to how 
things work than how a society func- 
tions. To a transmuter, a person is es- 
sentially a complicated, difficult-to- 
understand machine. They are obses- 
sive collectors, excellent scholars, and 
clear thinkers. According to a trans- 
muter, the only constant in the universe 
is change; concepts of good and evil are 
relative, dependent on existing condi- 
tions, and seldom permanent. Forces of 
good and evil are constantly at work on 
neutrality, but since good causes less 
disruption than evil, good is preferable. 
Consequently, many transmuters are of 
good alignments. 

Eager to explore the world around 
them, transmuters are willing members 
of adventuring parties. They are loyal 
followers but reluctant leaders, since they 
have trouble making decisions based on 
instinct alone. Although loyal to their 
friends, they seldom establish close rela- 


tionships. Married transmuters are few. 

Transmuters are most comfortable in 
large cities where they have access to a 
variety of supplies, consultants, and 
other resources for their studies. Most 
societies welcome transmuters, gener- 
ally considering them to be emotionally 
distant but harmless eccentrics. Trans- 
muters commonly earn their livings as 
teachers, advisors, inventors, and man- 
ufacturers of medicines, potions, and 
other preparations. 


Conjuration/Summoning 


Description: This school includes 
two different types of magic, though 
both involve bringing in matter from 
another place. Conjuration spells pro- 
duce various forms of non-living mat- 
ter. Summoning spells entice or compel 
creatures to come to the caster, as well 
as allowing the caster to channel forces 
from other planes. Since the casting 
techniques and ability requirements are 
the same for both types of magic, con- 
juration and summoning are considered 
two parts of the same school. 

Specialist Name: Conjurer. A special- 
ist who has learned only summoning 
spells sometimes calls himself a sum- 
moner, but this is merely a matter of se- 
mantics and has no bearing on the 
specialist's abilities, restrictions, or ef- 
fectiveness. 

Allowed Races: A wizard must have 
human blood to be a conjurer. There- 
fore, humans and half-elves can spe- 
cialize in this school, but elves cannnot. 

Ability Requirements: A wizard must 
have exceptional stamina to spend a 
lifetime casting conjuration and sum- 
moning spells, since he is at times tap- 
ping into his own life force in order to 
create conjured matter or lure sum- 
moned creatures. Therefore, a wizard 
must have a Constitution score of at 
least 15 to specialize in this school. 


Saving Throw Modifiers: All oppo- 
nents modify their saving throws by 
—1 when attempting to save against a 
conjuration or summoning spell cast by 
a conjurer. A conjurer adds a +1 bonus 
when saving against conjuration spells 
or attacks from creatures or forces cre- 
ated by summoning spells. 

Bonus Spells and Acquired Powers: 
A conjurer can memorize an extra spell 
at each spell level, providing that at 
least one of the memorized spells is 
from the school of conjuration/ 
summoning. 

When a conjurer reaches 17th level, 
he no longer requires any material com- 
ponents to cast conjuration and sum- 
moning spells. 

When a conjurer reaches 20th level, 
he gains the ability to instantly dispel 
creatures conjured by an opponent who 
has used a monster summoning spell or 
its equivalent. The conjurer can dispel 
up to 10 Hit Dice worth of creatures 
with this ability; only creatures with 5 
HD or fewer are affected (therefore, the 
conjurer could dispel two 5 HD crea- 
tures or ten 1 HD creatures, but not a 6 
HD creature). The conjurer can use this 
ability up to three times per day by 
pointing at the creatures to be affected 
and concentrating. 

Oppositional Schools: A conjurer 
cannot learn spells from the schools of 
greater divination and invocation/ 
evocation. 

Spell Analysis: Although the conjurer 
doesn’t have an excessive number of 
specialty spells from which to choose, 
spells of the conjuration/summoning 
school are among the most potent of 
all, comparable only to the school of 
necromancy in sheer power. 

Though useful in a wide variety of 
situations, conjuration/summoning 
spells are particularly effective in com- 
bat, since the majority of them are ca- 
pable of inflicting damage. 

Generally, conjuration spells such as 
Melf's acid arrow inflict damage di- 


Schools of Magic 


rectly, while summoning spells, such as 
monster summoning, use an intermedi- 
ary force or monster to attack oppo- 
nents. Direct attacks have the 
advantage of immediacy; Melfs acid 
arrow, for instance, is sent directly at 
its target. Indirect attacks using an in- 
termediary have the advantage of ver- 
satility; giant rats summoned by 
monster summoning I can be directed 
to attack the stationary Opponent No. 
1, then can be ordered to run down the 
fleeing Opponent No. 2. 

Many summoning attacks require the 
continual participation of the conjurer; 
he can’t control his summoned crea- 
tures if he can’t communicate with 
them. This is especially crucial with 
spells such as conjure elemental, where 
the summoned creature will turn on the 
conjurer if the conjurer breaks his con- 
centration. 

Conjurers who learn a large number 
of spells to summon creatures are better 
in large parties; the more companions 
he has, the more protection he has 
available if a need arises for his com- 
rades to run interference, helping to en- 
sure that his concentration remains 
unbroken. When traveling, such con- 
jurers should remain in the center of the 
party, traditionally the safest spot. As 
members of smaller parties, conjurers 
are more effective knowing a variety of 
conjuration/summoning spells, partic- 
ularly those that inflict damage di- 
rectly; a conjurer with only one or two 
companions may find it difficult—and 
dangerous—to cast conjure elemental. 

Most Desirable Spells: 

Low-Level: Melfs acid arrow, sum- 
mon swarm, and flame arrow are excel- 
lent offensive spells, but monster 
summoning | is the prize—a clever con- 
jurer should find numerous uses for, 
say, eight giant rats. 

Medium-Level: The monster sum- 
moning spells are the best. Conjure ele- 
mental, Mordenkainen's faithful 
hound, and summon shadow can turn 


the tide in just about any battle with 
low or medium level opponents. 

High-Level: This group includes 
what most wizards consider to be the 
most prized spell of any school, wish. 
Limited wish is nearly as potent. 

Because DMs vary widely in how 
they handle wishes, players with con- 
jurer characters might want to discuss 
with their DM his parameters for adju- 
dicating these types of spells. (See the 
Spell Commentary section in Chapter 7 
for more about wishes.) In addition 
to wishes, high-level conjuration/ 
summoning spells offer the conjurer 
some extremely powerful offensive 
spells. The all-around best in combat 
are power word, kill; prismatic sphere; 
and the monster summoning spells. 

Ethos: Because of the great power 
they wield, most conjurers are utterly 
convinced that their specialty is supe- 
rior to all others. Illusion and divina- 
tion are trivial, alteration and 
invocation are inconsequential, abjura- 
tion and enchantment are too weak, 
and necromancy is too repulsive. 
Though tending toward smugness and 
arrogance, conjurers are also confident, 
courageous, and bright. 

Conjurers tend to rely on summoned 
creatures to perform difficult tasks for 
them; hence, many conjurers grow 
flabby as the years pass. Many consider 
conjurers to be downright lazy. 

Conjurers recognize the importance 
of keeping evil in check, and most are of 
good alignment. Evil conjurers flour- 
ish, however, particularly those who 
maintain contact with evil entities sum- 
moned from other planes of existence. 

Conjurers speak their minds freely 
and have little patience for the opinions 
of those they consider to be inferior; it 
takes a leader of proven worth and un- 
yielding strength to earn the respect of a 
conjurer. In an adventuring party, con- 
jurers tend to prefer action to discus- 
sion, and attacking to negotiating. 
Conjurers relish every opportunity for 


12 


combat in order to demonstrate their 
power. 

Since conjurers have little interest in 
associating with common people, they 
prefer to live in isolated areas of the 
countryside. Most consider children a 
nuisance, so even the few conjurers 
who marry typically remain childless 
by choice. 

Aside from magical research, conjur- 
ers shun all activities that would nor- 
mally constitute a career or occupation. 
When funds are low, conjurers can al- 
ways summon creatures to fetch trea- 
sure for them. 


Enchantment/Charm 


Description: Similar to the school of 
conjuration/summoning, this school 
encompasses two general types of 
spells. Both types imbue their subjects 
with magical energy to create specific 
effects. Charm spells induce changes or 
influence the behavior of creatures, 
usually altering their subject’s mental or 
emotional states. Enchantment spells 
invest non-living objects with magical 
powers. Neither charm nor enchant- 
ment spells have any effect on their sub- 
ject’s physical form. 

Specialist Name: Enchanter. 

Allowed Races: Humans, half-elves, 
and elves can all become enchanters. 

Ability Requirements: Since influenc- 
ing the will of others is in part a mani- 
festation of the caster’s personal charm, 
a wizard must have a Charisma of at 
least 16 to specialize as an enchanter. 

Saving Throw Modifiers: All oppo- 
nents modify their saving throws by 
—1 when attempting to save against an 
enchantment/charm spell cast by an 
enchanter. An enchanter adds a +1 bo- 
nus when saving against enchantment/ 
charm spells. 

Bonus Spells and Acquired Powers: 
An enchanter can memorize an extra 
spell at each spell level, providing that 


Schools of Magic 


at least one of the memorized spells is 
from the school of enchantment/ 
charm. 

When an enchanter reaches 17th 
level, he acquires immunity to all forms 
of charm spells. 

When an enchanter reaches 20th 
level, he gains the ability to cast a spe- 
cial free action spell once per day. The 
enchanter can cast this spell on himself 
or any creature he touches. No material 
components are required for this spell 
and the casting time is 1; the enchanter 
merely touches the subject to be af- 
fected and concentrates. When en- 
chanted with free action, the subject is 
able to move and attack normally for 
one hour, even under the influence of a 
spell that impedes movement such as 
web or slow. The spell negates the ef- 
fects of hold spells. Underwater, the 
subject moves at normal surface speed 
and inflicts full damage with weapons, 
provided that the weapon is wielded 
and not hurled. 

Oppositional Schools: An enchanter 
cannot learn spells from the schools of 
invocation/evocation and necromancy. 

Spell Analysis: The enchanter has a 
moderate number of spells from which 
to choose, most of them emphasizing 
defensive rather than offensive effects. 
Not only can this school of spells be di- 
vided into charms and enchantments, 
the spells can also be divided into those 
that affect only a single person or ob- 
ject, and those capable of affecting a 
group. 

Generally, the group-affecting spells 
are more useful to the enchanter, but he 
must consider their ranges and dura- 
tions when deciding which spells to 
learn and memorize. For instance, both 
ray of enfeeblement and Tasha's uncon- 
trollable hideous laughter are 2nd-level 
enchantment/charm spells that inflict 
penalties on the attack and damage 
rolls of opponents. Ray of enfeeble- 
ment affects only one creature, while 
Tasha's laughter affects all those within 


a 30-foot cube. But note that even 
though Tasha’s laughter inflicts a higher 
damage penalty, it lasts only a single 
round (although the effects essentially 
carry over into the next round). Ray of 
enfeeblement lasts 1 round/level; when 
cast at higher levels, this spell can be ex- 
tremely debilitating. And though the 
60-yard range of Tasha’s laughter 
makes the range of ray of enfeeblement 
look dismal by comparison (10 yards + 
5 yards/level), note that at higher 
levels, the range of ray of enfeeblement 
increases dramatically, while the range 
of Tasha's laughter stays the same. 

The shortcoming of the enchant- 
ment/charm catalog is the lack of of- 
fensive spells. Only a handful of them 
are capable of inflicting damage. This 
usually defines the enchanter’s role in 
an adventuring party as defensive. As 
with the abjurer, it should be noted that 
with his low AC, the enchanter is ex- 
tremely vulnerable to attacks. A body- 
guard with a high AC or a lot of hit 
points is more of a necessity than a lux- 
ury for an enchanter. 

Unlike an abjurer, whose defensive 
spells operate more or less automati- 
cally, the enchanter's defensive spells 
often require him to take an additional 
action after they are successfully cast. 
A hypnotized victim, for instance, 
needs to be told what to do, as does a 
subject affected by suggestion. 
Charmed creatures may simply stand 
and stare unless directed otherwise by 
the caster. Clearly, the most effective 
enchanters are those who are creative, 
quick-thinking, and vigilant. 

Most Desirable Spells: 

Low-Level: Nearly all of the low- 
level enchantment/charm spells are de- 
fensive. The best are those that allow 
the enchanter the most latitude in the 
number of creatures he can affect, such 
as hypnotism, sleep, scare, and Tasha’s 
uncontrollable hideous laughter. 
Though it affects only one creature, 
suggestion can be an extremely useful 


13 


spell in the hands of a creative caster; 
with a duration of 1 hour + 1 hour/ 
level, it's also among the longest-lasting 
low-level spells. 

Medium-Level: Enchanted weapon is 
one of the few offensive spells available 
in this school, a valuable addition to 
any enchanter’s repertoire. Charm 
monster and hold monster have the ad- 
vantage of being able to affect a variety 
of opponents. Magic mirror effectively 
substitutes for a crystal ball and other 
scrying devices. Mass suggestion and 
eyebite have the most possibilities of all 
the medium-level spells in the hands of 
a creative caster. 

High-Level: Unfortunately, few high- 
level enchantment/charm spells are 
available to the enchanter. For their va- 
riety of uses, antipathy-sympathy, 
binding, and mass charm are the best 
all-purpose spells. In lieu of a conjurer, 
demand essentially functions as a con- 
juration spell. 

Ethos: With their high Charisma, en- 
chanters tend to be the most physically 
attractive and personable of all the spe- 
cialists. They are sensitive, passionate, 
and caring. They believe in the sanctity 
of life and share the druid’s love of na- 
ture. Most enchanters see themselves as 
protectors of the helpless and advocates 
of the weak, but there are some who see 
their mastery of enchantment magic as 
evidence of their inevitable ascendance 
in the world. Notably, there are ample 
numbers of good and evil enchanters, 
but few neutral ones. 

Enchanters are commonly the voice 
of reason in adventuring parties. They 
are often able to devise options and so- 
lutions that have eluded their compan- 
ions. They are excellent team-players, 
superb negotiators, and shrewd bar- 
gainers. They enjoy fine arts and good 
conversation, and are fascinated by 
magic in all its forms. It is not unusual 
for an enchanter to acquire dozens of 
close friends. Though deeply romantic, 
enchanters often marry late in life, as 


Schools of Magic 


they are reluctant to settle down with 
just one person. 

Fond of the simple life, enchanters 
usually live in modest homes in small 
villages. They spend much of their time 
tinkering with magical potions and de- 
vices, commonly earning money as 
counselors, teachers, and farmers. 


Greater Divination 


Description: This school includes a 
variety of spells that reveal information 
that would otherwise remain hidden or 
secret. Greater divination spells reveal 
the existence of specific items, crea- 
tures, or conditions, as well as informa- 
tion about the past, present, and future. 
This school also includes spells that 
contact creatures from other planes of 
existence, but do not induce direct 
action from those creatures. 

Specialist Name: Diviner. 

Allowed Races: Elves, half-elves, and 
humans are all eligible to specialize as 
diviners. (Note that Table 22 on page 31 
of the Player's Handbook is incorrect— 
gnomes cannot be diviners.) 

Ability Requirements: A wizard must 
have a strong intuition and exceptional 
willpower to master divination spells, 
reflected in a high Wisdom score. Spe- 
cialists in this school must have a mini- 
mum Wisdom score of 16. 

Saving Throw Modifiers: All oppo- 
nents modify their saving throws by 
—1 when attempting to save against a 
divination spell cast by a diviner. A di- 
viner adds a +1 bonus when saving 
against divination spells or any magical 
devices that duplicate these effects. 

Bonus Spells and Acquired Powers: 
A diviner can memorize an extra spell 
at each spell level, providing that at 
least one of the memorized spells is 
from the school of divination. 

When a diviner reaches 17th level, he 
acquires immunity to all forms of scry- 
ing spells, such as ESP and know align- 


ment, as well as immunity against 
magical items that duplicate these ef- 
fects. An opponent using ESP on a 17th 
level diviner has no more success than if 
he were attempting to read the mind of 
a stone. An opponent using clairaudi- 
ence on an unseen 17th level diviner 
neither receives information nor be- 
comes aware of the diviner’s presence. 

When a diviner reaches 19th level, he 
receives the ability to cast a special find 
traps spell three times per day. The spell 
has an area of effect equal to a 10-foot- 
path up to a range of 30 yards. To cast 
the spell, the diviner must merely point 
in the desired direction and concen- 
trate; no verbal or material compo- 
nents are required. Similar to the 
2nd-level priest spell, find traps reveals 
the existence of all normally concealed 
magical and mechanical traps, includ- 
ing alarms, glyphs, and similar spells 
and devices. The diviner learns the gen- 
eral nature of the trap (magical or me- 
chanical) but not its exact effect or how 
to disarm it. 

When a diviner reaches 20th level, he 
receives the ability to cast a special divi- 
nation spell once per day. To cast the 
spell, the diviner must concentrate for 
one full turn; no verbal or material 
components are required. Similar to the 
4th-level priest spell, divination reveals 
a useful piece of advice concerning a 
specific goal, event, or activity that will 
occur within the next seven days. The 
revelation may take the form of an 
omen, a short phrase, or a cryptic 
verse, but it always reveals specific ad- 
vice. In all cases, the DM controls the 
type of information revealed and 
whether additional divinations will 
supply additional information. The 
base chance for a correct divination is 
80 percent, adjusted by the DM for un- 
usual circumstances or extreme re- 
quests (such as a diviner trying to learn 
the exact location of a powerful arti- 
fact). If the dice roll fails, the diviner 
knows that the spell failed, unless spe- 


14 


cific magic yielding false information is 
at work. 

Oppositional Schools: The diviner is 
denied access to the school of 
conjuration/summoning. 

Spell Analysis: The variety of spells 
available to the diviner is more re- 
stricted than any other school or spe- 
cialist. Offensive spells—that is, those 
that inflict damage on opponents either 
directly or indirectly—are nonexistent 
for this school. Defensive spells that ei- 
ther inhibit an enemy's attack ability or 
provide direct protection for the di- 
viner and his companions are likewise 
unavailable. This doesn’t mean that the 
diviner is useless on the battlefield; it 
means that his strength lies elsewhere. 

As a gatherer of information, the di- 
viner is without peer. A diviner can an- 
ticipate unexpected dangers, can 
separate the truth from lies, and is ex- 
ceptionally effective as a spy. He can 
bolster his party's defenses by alerting 
them to the presence of normally unde- 
tectable opponents. Although the rep- 
ertoire of divination spells is relatively 
small, the diviner has access to more 
schools than any other specialist. 

There are two general groups of 
greater divination spells. One group in- 
cludes spells that reveal information 
about a specific object or creature, such 
as ESP and locate object. A second 
group reveals information about any 
type of object or creature within the 
range of the spell; this group includes 
detect invisibility and clairvoyance. 

Most Desirable Spells: 

Low-Level: All ist-level through 4th- 
level divination spells are part of the 
lesser divination school, and are availa- 
ble to all schools. These are discussed in 
more detail in the Lesser Divination sec- 
tion below. However, a well-rounded 
diviner will have detect magic, read 
magic, and ESP included in his reper- 
toire; know alignment and clairvoy- 
ance are also important basic 
divination spells. 


Schools of Magic 


Medium-Level: All of the medium- 
level divination spells are strong, with 
legend lore and true seeing likely to get 
the most use. Contact other plane is a 
valuable spell if the diviner's party lacks 
a conjurer or other wizard capable of 
contacting extraplanar creatures, 

High-Level: With only a handful of 
high-level greater divination spells, the 
diviner has few choices. Note that fore- 
sight is one of the few divination spells 
that offers the diviner protection from 
harm. 

Ethos: Diviners are perhaps the wisest 
of all wizards. Their investigations into 
the world around them and their perusal 
of events of the past and the future em- 
power them with a base of knowledge 
and insight rivaled only by the most 
learned scholars. A diviner typically 
possesses a striking insight into the 
workings of men’s minds; few are better 
judges of character than diviners. 

Diviners tend to be cautious and de- 
liberate in their actions. Because their 
divinations have taught them that men 
are prone to hiding their true feelings 
and motivations, many diviners are 
suspicious and distrustful, sometimes 
to the point of cynicism. Those diviners 
who allow distrust and cynicism to 
overwhelm them tend to be of evil 
alignment. Those who accept man's 
ambiguous character as a part of the 
natural order tend to be of neutral 
alignment. Those who maintain faith in 
man’s innate goodness tend to be of 
good alignment. 

Diviners are not predisposed to the 
adventuring life, and accept such a ca- 
reer only reluctantly. They are not nat- 
ural combatants; in fact, wizards 
lacking in physical prowess are drawn 
to divination more than any other spe- 
cialty. Still, diviners make valuable ad- 
ditions to adventuring parties; their 
judgement, cunning, and plain com- 
mon sense are welcome commodities. 
A party must take care to provide pro- 
tection for diviners since they usually 


lack any significant ability to defend 
themselves. 

Diviners are loners at heart and do 
not make close friends easily. They 
rarely raise large families. Diviners of 
good alignment generally harbor no ill 
feelings against other people, and will 
usually assist them when asked. Still, 
they prefer to live alone in remote areas 
where they can conduct their research 
and investigation undisturbed. Stone 
towers on cliff sides or atop high hills 
are ideal residences for diviners. 
Though they show little interest in ma- 
terial possessions, diviners earn money 
by charging for their services as seers, 
fortune-tellers, and finders of lost ob- 
jects and persons. 


Illusion 


Description: Spells from the school 
of illusion bend reality to create appar- 
ent changes in the environment, in the 
caster, or in other persons or creatures. 
These spells do not cause real changes 
as alteration spells do, but instead alter 
the way that creatures and persons per- 
ceive reality. This school includes both 
illusion and phantasm spells (the differ- 
ences are discussed in the Spell Analysis 
section below). 

Specialist Name: Illusionist. 

Allowed Races: Humans and gnomes 
are eligible to become illusionists. It’s 
not clear why elves and half-elves are 
unable to specialize in this school, 
though some speculate that the same in- 
born magical resistance that helps make 
them immune to charm spells also lim- 
its their ability to focus the magical en- 
ergy needed to create illusions. 

Ability Requirements: The somatic 
components of most medium-level and 
high-level illusions require precise physi- 
cal manipulations. Therefore, to special- 
ize as an illusionist, a wizard must have 
a minimum Dexterity score of 16. 

Saving Throw Modifiers: Illusionists 


15 


add a +1 bonus when rolling saving 
throws against any type of illusion. Op- 
ponents suffer a —1 penalty when roll- 
ing saving throws against 
illusion/phantasm spells cast by an illu- 
sionist. These modifiers are only used 
against illusions where saving throws 
are applicable. 

Bonus Spells and Acquired Powers: 
An illusionist can memorize an extra 
spell at each spell level, providing that 
at least one of the memorized spells is 
from the school of illusion. 

When an illusionist reaches 18th 
level, he adds a +1 bonus when saving 
against illusions cast by non- 
illusionists. (Since this is in addition to 
his natural +1 modifier, his saving 
throw bonus against these attack forms 
effectively becomes +2.) 

When an illusionist reaches 20th 
level, he acquires the ability to cast a 
special dispel illusion spell three times 
per day. The spell has a range of 30 
yards and a casting time of 1. To cast 
this spell, the illusionist merely points 
at the subject and concentrates; no so- 
matic or material components are re- 
quired. This spell enables the illusionist 
to dispel any type of phantasmal force, 
including those augmented by audible 
glamer; however, dispel illusion is ef- 
fective only on phantasmal force spells 
cast by non-illusionists. 

Dispel illusion has a base chance of 
success of 50 percent. For each level of 
experience that the illusionist exceeds 
the caster of the phantasmal force, the 
chance of success is increased by 5 per- 
cent. For each level the caster exceeds 
the illusionist, the chance is reduced by 
5 percent. (For instance, if a 20th-level 
illusionist attempts to dispel a phantas- 
mal force created by a 15th-level mage, 
the illusionist’s chance of success is 75 
percent.) If an illusionist casts dispel il- 
lusion at a subject that isn’t an illusion, 
there is no effect, but the attempt 
counts against the illusionist’s daily 
limit of dispel illusion spelis. 


Schools of Magic 


Oppositional Schools: An illusionist 
cannot learn spells from the schools of 
necromancy, invocation/evocation, 
and abjuration. 

Spell Analysis: Spells of this school 
can be grouped into two general catego- 
ries: illusions and phantasms. 

Illusions are spells that simulate real- 
ity, creating artificial conditions of 
light, color, sound, and scent. Audible 
glamer is an example of an illusion that 
simulates sound. In general, the lower- 
level illusions are of limited use in com- 
bat situations, providing neither direct 
protection from damage nor the ability 
to inflict damage on opponents. 

Though most illusions create only 
the appearance of reality, some high- 
level spells tap extradimensional forces 
to create illusions with physical sub- 
stance, capable of inflicting damage 
and otherwise interacting with the real 
world. Shadow monsters is an example 
of a quasi-real illusion. These are the 
most useful types of illusion spells in 
combat, as they can create illusionary 
creatures to attack opponents and exe- 
cute an assortment of other tactical 
actions. 

Another type of illusion focuses ex- 
tradimensional forces to alter the physi- 
cal form of the caster. Wraithform is an 
example. These are especially good de- 
fensive spells, as they protect the caster 
from a variety of attack forms. 

Phantasms are the second general 
group of illusion spells. Phantasms di- 
rectly manipulate the perception of 
their victims. Phantasms do not create 
images, they induce responses. Spook 
is an example of a phantasm that in- 
duces the response of fear. Phantasms 
are also good defensive spells, more so 
than illusions that alter the caster’s 
form, since they can affect a number of 
opponents within a given range. 

Because spells from the school of illu- 
sion are mainly concerned with the cre- 
ation of images and are of limited use 
on the battlefield, many feel that illu- 


sionists are the weakest of all the spe- 
cialists. In a broad sense, however, no 
school provides a wizard with more op- 
tions, since in most cases, illusion spells 
are limited only by the caster’s 
imagination. For instance, consider the 
ist-level illusion spell phantasmal 
force. A dull-witted wizard might con- 
sider this a useless spell; after all, its il- 
lusions have only visual components. 
A silent monster might scare away a 
nervous bandit, but what else can you 
do with it? 

Plenty, answers the creative illusion- 
ist, and the effects aren't confined to the 
battlefield, Here are some examples: 

è The party is being pursued by a 
hoard of orcs. The wizard uses phantas- 
mal force to create the illusion of a wall 
of bramble bushes behind the party to 
slow down the pursuers. Alternately, he 
creates a swarm of wasps, a cloud of 
ominous green gas, or a pool of quick- 
sand to slow them down, 

e The hungry party wants to catch 
some fish for the evening meal. They 
have lines and hooks, but no bait. The 
wizard uses phantasmal force to create 
a colorful, sparkling lure. 

è The party wishes to lure an enemy 
into a cave for an ambush. The wizard 
uses phantasmal force to create the illu- 
sion of great treasure just inside the 
cave and—in goes the greedy enemy. 

© The wizard has met a beautiful dam- 
sel whom he wishes to impress. He 
takes her to a secluded woodland and 
uses phantasmal force to create the illu- 
sion of a patch of beautiful wild 
flowers. 

Most Desirable Spells: 

Low-Level: Phantasmal force, ven- 
triloquism, improved phantasmal 
force, and spectral force are the most 
versatile low- level illusionist spells 
when wielded by a creative caster. 
Spook, invisibility, wraithform, and in- 
visibility, 10' radius are excellent defen- 
sive spells. 

Medium-Level: With access to 4th- 


16 


level and higher spells, the illusionist 
becomes a strong combatant, as he can 
take advantage of powerful, quasi-real 
illusions such as phantasmal killer, 
shadow monsters, demi-shadow mon- 
sters, shadow magic, demi-shadow 
magic, and shades. The options for the 
creative illusionist also expand, with 
access to the complex creations possible 
with minor creation, advanced illusion, 
major creation, permanent illusion, 
and programmed illusion. 

High-Level: Unfortunately, the num- 
ber of spells available to the illusionist 
drops dramatically at higher levels. 
Shadow walk is invaluable if the wizard 
anticipates travel to the plane of 
shadow; in certain situations, it also 
functions as an effective banishment 
spell. Mass invisibility can mean the 
difference between victory and defeat 
in combat involving a large number of 
participants. Simulacrum has the most 
possibilities of all the creation illusions, 
while weird can be the most deadly of 
all the offensive illusion spells. 

Ethos: Illusionists tend to be flam- 
boyant, outgoing, and self-assured. Re- 
markably creative, they enjoy art, 
literature, poetry, and music, and many 
are accomplished artists in their own 
rights. Though their aptitude for schol- 
arly pursuits is as high as any other spe- 
cialist, illusionists tend to spend less 
time involved in research, preferring 
the company of people to the isolation 
of the laboratory. 

Illusionists have sharp minds, but 
they are not particularly deep thinkers. 
Pragmatic by nature, they accept the 
impermanence of all things, believing 
that any attempt at developing an all- 
encompassing philosophy to explain 
the meaning of existence is ultimately 
futile and therefore a waste of time. Il- 
lusionists tend to be of good and neutral 
alignments, since wizards inclined to- 
ward evil usually opt for a specializa- 
tion they perceive as being more 
powerful. 


Schools of Magic 


Because of their forceful personalities 
and sharp minds, illusionists make 
good leaders of an adventuring party, 
but they also make equally good lieu- 
tenants and strategists. Because low- 
level and medium-level illusionists 
usually lack defensive spells, a party 
must provide bodyguards or other pro- 
tection to keep them healthy; such illu- 
sionists are best kept in the center of the 
party when traveling. 

Illusionists enjoy the hustle and bus- 
tle of urban life, and usually maintain 
well-furnished homes in the heart of a 
city. They usually have a host of friends 
and acquaintances, and are loyal and 
loving spouses. IIlusionists earn a living 
as entertainers, artists, mercenaries, 
teachers, and shopkeepers. 


Invocation/Evocation 


Description: This school includes 
two types of spells, both of which use 
magical energy to create specific effects 
by bringing forth special forces that the 
caster shapes into constructs of energy 
or constructs of matter. Evocation 
spells use the natural magical forces of 
the planes. Invocation spells call on the 
intervention of powerful extradimen- 
sional beings. 

Specialist Name: Invoker. 

Allowed Races: Only humans are 
able to incorporate the complimentary 
energies necessary to master the spells 
of this school. Therefore, only humans 
are eligible to become invokers. 

Ability Requirements: Because of the 
powerful energies involved, a lifetime 
of casting invocation/evocation spells 
is extremely stressful to a wizard’s 
health. A minimum Constitution of 16 
is necessary to specialize as an invoker. 

Saving Throw Modifiers: All oppo- 
nents modify their saving throws by 
—1 when attempting to save against an 
invocation/evocation spell cast by an 
invoker. An invoker adds a +1 bonus 


when saving against invocation/ 
evocation spells. 

Bonus Spells and Acquired Powers: 
An invoker can memorize an extra spell 
at each spell level, providing that at 
least one of the memorized spells is 
from the school of invocation/ 
evocation. 

When an invoker reaches 17th level, 
he gains an additional +1 bonus when 
saving against invocation/evocation 
spells or against magical devices dupli- 
cating the effects of these spells. With 
his natural saving throw modifier, this 
effectively raises his bonus to +2. 

When an invoker reaches 20th level, 
he gains another +1 bonus when saving 
against invocation/evocation spells, ef- 
fectively raising his bonus to +3. 

Oppositional Schools: The invoker is 
denied access to spells from the schools 
of enchantment/charm and 
conjuration/summoning. 

Spell Analysis: This school offers the 
specialist a range of spells of staggering 
power. In fact, no school has a wider 
variety of offensive spells available at 
all levels. 

The high-level offensive evocation 
spells are nothing short of devastating; 
a single meteor swarm for instance, can 
inflict up to 160 hit points of damage. 
Accordingly, an invoker can be thought 
of as the wizardly equivalent of the 
mightiest fighter; when armed with a 
repertoire of invocation/evocation 
spells, the invoker is easily among the 
game’s most powerful characters. 

The invoker also has access to a num- 
ber of potent defensive spells. Some of 
these provide protection against specific 
types of attacks, such as shield and fire 
shield, while others offer protection by 
hindering the actions of all enemies 
within the range of the spell, such as wall 
of fog and shout. Generally, the spells 
hindering enemy actions will prove to be 
more useful than spells protecting against 
a specific type of attack, unless the in- 
voker suspects that he will be encounter- 


17 


ing specific types of monsters. For 
instance, if fire lizards roam the land, it's 
prudent to memorize fire shield. 

A wise invoker realizes that the 
strongest spells are not necessarily the 
best ones. For instance, assume that a 
10th-level invoker and his party are 
about to venture into an unknown area 
where large numbers of hostile crea- 
tures are rumored to live. Though the 
creatures are numerous, they're also ru- 
mored to be low-level, perhaps no more 
than 3 HD each. The invoker has both 
lightning bolt and Melf's minute mete- 
ors in his spell book—which of the two 
will be the most helpful? The damage 
caused by a single lightning bolt ex- 
ceeds that of minute meteors, but the 
lightning bolt can be used only once, 
while minute meteors enables the in- 
voker to make up to ten attacks. A typi- 
cal 3 HD monster has about 12 hit 
points. Undoubtedly, the lightning bolt 
will wipe out a 3 HD monster, but much 
of the lightning bolt's power is likely to 
wasted. With luck, the minute meteors 
wil] disable numerous 3 HD monsters. 

It is wise to memorize powerful 
single-shot offensive spells (such as 
lightning bolt and fireball) when the 
party expects to encounter high-level 
monsters, and to memorize multiple- 
shot spells (such as chain lightning and 
Melf's minute meteors) capable of dis- 
abling a number of opponents when 
low-level monsters are expected. 

Though the invoker wields great 
power, it’s important to remember that 
his Armor Class is no better than that of 
any other specialist. An invoker armed 
with lightning bolt, fireball, and a range 
of other formidable offensive spells is still 
vulnerable to attacks. A party who re- 
peatedly sends their invoker on danger- 
ous assignments alone or an invoker who 
consistently volunteers for such assign- 
ments is tempting fate; a single trap or 
successfully executed ambush can easily 
mean the end of his life. 

Most Desirable Spells: 


Schools of Magic 


Low-Level: Magic missile is the most 
potent Ist-level offensive spell. Fireball, 
lightning bolt, and Melfs minute mete- 
ors are killers, perhaps the best low- 
level offensive spells of any school. 
Wall of fog and web are the best low- 
level offensive spells. 

Medium-Level: There are three 
medium-level spells whose multiple 
forms make them particularly attrac- 
tive; interestingly, they all are all cold- 
based spells. These include ice storms 
(two forms), wall of ice (three forms), 
and Otiluke's freezing sphere (three 
forms). Dream is a similarly attractive 
spell, since the invoker also gains access 
to its reverse, nightmare. Shout, wall of 
iron, and Tenser’s transformation are 
all effective as both offensive and de- 
fensive spells. Cloudkill and chain 
lightning are excellent additions to any 
invoker's arsenal. 

High-Level: Limited wish is limited 
only by the imagination of the caster 
and the parameters set by the DM (see 
the discussion of wish spells in Chapter 
7 for more information). Binding, with 
its six different forms, is a terrific defen- 
sive spell. All but the mightiest of oppo- 
nents will yield to an invoker armed 
with one or more of the following: 
Bigby's clenched fist, incendiary cloud, 
Bigby's crushing hand, energy drain, 
and meteor swarm. 

Ethos: The school of evocation/ 
invocation attracts the most serious- 
minded, intense, and determined 
wizards. Most are single-mindedly de- 
voted to the mastery of their craft. In- 
vokers of good alignment devote 
themselves to using their skills to pro- 
mote goodness and eliminate evil, will- 
ing to sacrifice their lives if necessary, 
For evil-aligned invokers, the magic of 
invocation is the key to their ascend- 
ancy; to them, good is weakness and 
evil is strength. Because specialists of 
this school are men and women of ex- 
treme philosophies, invokers of neutral 
alignment are rare. 


Invokers are natural leaders: fearless, 
inspiring, and authoritative. Their 
courage on the battlefield is without 
peer, and they perform as aggressors 
alongside the most able fighters. Since 
they are introspective, soft-spoken, and 
emotionally distant, invokers seldom 
establish strong personal relationships. 

Invokers will live anywhere they can 
maintain their privacy. Common peo- 
ple willingly leave them alone, fearing 
their power and even regarding them as 
dangerous, and invokers do little to dis- 
pel this reputation. They shun material 
possessions, needing only enough funds 
to finance their research. They primar- 
ily earn money as teachers, though they 
will occasionally sign on as members of 
adventuring parties in order to find 
treasure. 


Necromancy 


Description: This powerful school in- 
volves spells dealing with death and the 
dead. These spells drain vitality from 
living creatures and restore life func- 
tions to unliving creatures. Bones, 
blood, spirits, and apparitions are all 
associated with the magical energies 
shaped and controlled by the specialists 
of this school. 

Specialist Name: Necromancer. 

Allowed Races: As in the school of 
invocation/evocation, only the spirits 
of humans incorporate the energies nec- 
essary to master the spells of necro- 
mancy. Therefore, only humans are 
eligible to become necromancers. 

Ability Requirements: Since only the 
most enlightened, strong-willed, and 
intuitive wizards can become specialists 
of this school, necromancers must have 
a minimum Wisdom of 16. 

Saving Throw Modifiers: All oppo- 
nents modify their saving throws by 
—1 when attempting to save against a 
necromancy spell cast by a necroman- 
cer, or against an attack from an un- 


18 


dead creature either created or 
controlled by a necromancer. A nec- 
romancer adds a +1 bonus when sav- 
ing against necromancy spells, or 
against any attacks made by undead 
creatures. 

Bonus Spells and Acquired Powers: 
A necromancer can memorize an extra 
spell at each spell level, providing that 
at least one of the memorized spells is 
from the school of necromancy. 

When a necromancer reaches 17th 
level, he adds another +1 bonus when 
saving against necromancy spells or 
against any attacks made by undead 
creatures. With his natural +1 bonus, 
this effectively raises his saving throw 
bonus to +2. 

When a necromancer reaches 20th 
level, he gains the ability to cast a special 
form of speak with dead once per day. To 
cast the spell, the necromancer must 
merely point to the subject and concen- 
trate for one round; no verbal or material 
components are necessary. The spell en- 
ables the necromancer to ask questions of 
a single dead creature and receive an- 
swers according to the knowledge of that 
creature. The creature can not have died 
more than 100 years ago, and the caster 
must be able to converse in a language 
that the dead creature formerly used. The 
necromancer can converse with the dead 
creature for one full turn and can ask up 
to four questions. 

Regardless of the creature's level or 
alignment, it receives no saving throw 
against this spell. However, the crea- 
ture will be as evasive as possible, tend- 
ing to give brief and sometimes cryptic 
answers. 

Additionally, the creature's knowl- 
edge is usually confined to what it knew 
in life (it cannot convey information 
about what may have happened to it af- 
ter its death). 

Oppositional Schools: The necro- 
mancer cannot learn spells from the 
schools of illusion and enchantment/ 
charm. 


Schools of Magic 


Spell Analysis: Though the school of 
necromancy has a relatively small num- 
ber of spells, they are among the most 
potent available to any of the special- 
ists. In terms of sheer power, the necro- 
mantic spells compare to those from the 
school of invocation/evocation. 

Necromantic spells can be sorted into 
three general groups. One group in- 
cludes spells that imbue the caster or a 
person of the caster’s choice with spe- 
cial abilities similar to the effects of cer- 
tain enchantment and alteration spells. 
Chill touch, enervation, death spell, 
and finger of death are examples of this 
type of spell. The majority of this group 
are extremely powerful offensive spells; 
death spell and finger of death in partic- 
ular are effective against a wide range 
of opponents. A necromancer armed 
with a repertoire of these spells bolsters 
his party's offensive capabilities consid- 
erably. Reincarnation can be consid- 
ered part of this group, since it imbues 
the subject with a special ability; 
namely, a second chance at life. 

A second group of necromancy spells 
includes those that create creatures or 
physical forces to fight on the caster's 
behalf. Spectral hand and animate dead 
are examples. Summon shadow is also 
included in this group, although in this 
case, an actual creature is summoned 
rather than created. Since these spells 
enhance the caster’s ability to inflict 
damage on opponents, they can be con- 
sidered offensive spells. 

A third group of necromancy spells 
enables the caster to affect the actions 
of other creatures, usually undead. 
Hold undead, contagion, and control 
undead are examples. Since these spells 
inhibit the attack capabilities of the af- 
fected creatures, they can be considered 
defensive spells, although in the case of 
control undead, the affected creatures 
can also be used to attack enemies. 

The majority of the necromancer’s 
spells probably won't come from just 
one of these groups. More likely, he will 


acquire a number of spells from each of 
these groups over the course of his ca- 
reer. Though all of the necromancy 
spells are extremely powerful, in most 
cases, the offensive spells are his best 
choices, since their power has no paral- 
lel in spells from other schools (for in- 
stance, it would probably take a 
9th-level wish to duplicate the effects of 
a 6th-level death spell). 

The necromancer doesn’t exhibit 
much magical strength until he reaches 
the higher levels. A low-level necro- 
mancer of 6th level or lower might con- 
tribute little to a party's defensive or 
offensive capabilities. A low-level nec- 
romancer requires extra protection 
from his companions; he must also 
adopt a realistic attitude about his ef- 
fectiveness in combat and avoid taking 
unnecessary risks. However, once the 
necromancer gains access to the 
middle-level and higher-level spells (at 
6th-level and above), his capabilities in- 
crease at a rapid rate. He needs only to 
live long enough to get there. 

Most Desirable Spells: 

Low-Level: The low-level spells are 
somewhat weak, although chill touch, 
spectral hand, and vampiric touch are 
all good offensive spells. Hold undead 
and detect undead will be invaluable if 
the wizard or his party will be ventur- 
ing into catacombs, burial grounds, or 
other places where such creatures are 
likely to be encountered. 

Medium-Level: All of the spells in 
this group are exceptionally strong. 
Magic jar and reincarnation are unique 
in their utilities, their powers compara- 
ble only to that of a wish. Death spell, 
enervation, summon shadow, animate 
dead, and contagion all have a variety 
of uses on the battlefield. 

High-Level: There are only a few 
high-level necromancy spells, but all of 
them are extremely potent. Control un- 
dead, finger of death, and energy drain 
can make the mightiest opponents 
tremble. Wizards planning to employ 


19 


clone should carefully consider the time 
it takes to use; though the casting time 
is only a single turn, it can take up to 
eight months for the clone to grow. 

Ethos: The necromancer exhibits a 
fascination with life and death that bor- 
ders on the obsessive. He is typically 
brooding, humorless, and withdrawn. 
Casual acquaintances consider him to 
be cold and hostile, but those who be- 
friend the necromancer may come to 
know him as a caring, complex individ- 
ual whose emotions run deep. The nec- 
romancer can be a valued and 
trustworthy companion, but he is also 
prone to bouts of depression so extreme 
that it becomes difficult for him to in- 
teract with others to any meaningful 
degree. 

Continual exposure to forces associ- 
ated with undead creatures can have a 
corrupting effect on wizards with even 
the slightest inclinations toward evil. 
Consequently, the number of evil- 
aligned necromancers is rumored to far 
outweigh the number of those of good 
alignment. Neutral necromancers are 
virtually non-existent; in general, a 
necromancer either has a will strong 
enough to resist the lure of darkness, or 
he submits to the corruption and de- 
votes himself to a life of evil. 

Befriending a necromancer will try 
the patience of even the most under- 
standing character. Since necromancers 
prefer solitude to companionship, and 
silence to conversation, it is little won- 
der that few of them have spouses; the 
best mate for a necromancer is another 
necromancer. 

In spite of their reticence, most good- 
aligned necromancers are unshakable 
in their determination to confront and 
extinguish evil and will join like- 
minded individuals to undertake these 
types of missions. Understandably, nec- 
romancers make poor leaders, but they 
are valuable additions to adventuring 
parties. Not only do necromancers 
wield unmatched power, their familiar- 


Schools of Magic 


ity with the world’s dark forces makes 
them virtually fearless. On the other 
hand, much to a leader's chagrin, a nec- 
romancer does not always follow or- 
ders automatically; a necromancer who 
disagrees with his party's strategy may 
simply strike out on his own. 

Necromancers live as far from civi- 
lized regions as they can, establishing 
residences in ancient castles, deep ca- 
verns, or even abandoned crypts. They 
spend most of their time engaged in ar- 
cane research, reading, studying, and 
writing. 

Necromancers seldom have careers, 
though they occasionally earn money 
as teachers and mercenaries. High-level 
necromancers simply order undead 
creatures to fetch them treasure when 
funds are low. 


Abandoning a School 


With the DM's permission, it is possi- 
ble for a wizard to abandon a specialty, 
but the restrictions and penalties for do- 
ing so are severe. 


Mages cannot abandon their careers 
to become specialists. Once a wizard 
decides to become a mage, he must re- 
main so for the duration of his career. 


Specialists 


Any specialist can abandon his 
school, but only to become a mage. A 
specialist cannot become a specialist 
from a different school. 

A specialist's decision to abandon his 
school to become a mage is 
permanent—under no circumstances 
can he again become a specialist of his 
original school. 

A specialist keeps all of the spell bo- 
nuses that he had prior to his conver- 
sion, but receives no more bonus spells 


after he abandons his school to become 
a mage. He loses all saving throw bo- 
nuses at the time of his conversion (for 
instance, he no longer receives a +1 bo- 
nus when making saving throws 
against spells of his former specialty 
that are cast by other wizards). 

Once he abandons his school, a 
former specialist's chances of learning 
new spells are affected as follows: 
© When attempting to learn a spell of 
his former specialty, he no longer re- 
ceives a bonus (e.g., an illusionist who 
abandons his school no longer receives 
a +15 percent bonus when attempting 
to learn illusion spells). 

e When attempting to learn spells from 
other schools, he still suffers a penalty 
(e.g., an illusionist who abandons his 
school still has a —15 percent penalty 
when attempting to learn spells from 
the schools of alteration, greater divi- 
nation, enchantment/charm, and 
conjuration/summoning). 

© When attempting to learn spells from 
schools in opposition to his former spe- 
cialty, his chance is computed accord- 
ing to the following formula: 


Percent chance = 1/2 (base chance to 
learn a spell —15 percent) 


For instance, a former necromancer 
with an Intelligence of 13 wants to learn 
an illusion spell. Since necromancy is 
one of the schools that was in opposi- 
tion to his former school, his chance to 
learn the spell is 1/2 (55—15), which 
equals 20 percent. 


20 


A Word About Minor 
Schools 


Lesser Divination 


The divination spells of 4th-level and 
below are collectively known as the 
school of lesser divination. Lesser divi- 
nation is considered to be a minor 
school of magic; that is, wizards can't 
become specialists in lesser divination. 

The term “minor” is used informally 
in this context, It means that specialists 
from any school are allowed to learn 
and use these spells. Many of the lesser 
divination spells, such as detect magic 
and read magic are basic to the practice 
of magic. Others, such as identify, ESP 
and know alignment are vital to the ba- 
sic repertoire of any specialist. Without 
access to the spells of lesser divination, 
a wizard’s ability to function would be 
frustratingly limited, particularly at the 
lower levels. 

At first glance, the existence of the 
school of lesser divination would seem 
to reduce the role of the diviner; after 
ali, no other school allows all specialists 
such easy access to their low-level 
spells. However, an examination of the 
requirements for all schools shows that 
only the conjurer has greater divination 
as an opposition school; every other 
specialist has access to the low-level 
divination spells. In practice, the exist- 
ence of the minor school of lesser divi- 
nation serves only to give the conjurer 
access to the low-level divination 
spells. 

Although all specialists can learn 
lesser divination spells, they cannot 
learn them any more easily or effec- 
tively than they can learn spells from 
schools other than their own. All non- 
diviners learn lesser divination spells at 
a penalty of —15 percent on the Intelli- 
gence Table (Table 4, page 16, PH); for 
instance, either a conjurer or an illu- 
sionist with an Intelligence of 15 has a 


Sch hools ¢ of M 


50 percent chance of learning any given 
lesser divination spell. 

All lesser divination spells are also 
considered to be part of the school of 
greater divination. Therefore, a diviner 
has a 15 percent bonus on the Intelli- 
gence Table to learn lesser divination 
spells; for instance, a diviner with an 
intelligence of 15 has an 80 percent 
chance of learning any lesser divination 
spell. 


New Minor Schools 


Do other minor schools of magic ex- 
ist? That's a decision for the DM. De- 
pending on the DM's style and the 
parameters of his campaign, he could 
select a small group of spells and assign 
them to a minor school. For instance, a 
minor school of lesser illusions could 
include all illusions of Ist-level 
through 3rd-level. A minor school of 
lesser abjuration/necromancy could 
include all abjuration and necromancy 
spells of Ist level. 


To add color to the campaign rule, 
the DM might want to create a histori- 
cal explanation for the existence of any 
new minor schools. It's possible, for in- 
stance, that the minor school of lesser 
illusions was created by the administra- 
tion of an academy of magic to accom- 
modate students who lacked the 
aptitude to become full-fledged illu- 
sionists. The minor school of 
abjuration/necromancy might have 
been developed by an ancient clan of 
good-aligned wizards to help protect 
them from attacks by a rival band of 
abjurers allied with a force of undead. 

All wizards, regardless of their spe- 
cialty, should have access to the spells 
of any minor school. If he wishes, the 
DM may assign bonuses and penalties 
to the various specialists’ chances of 
learning the spells of a related minor 
school. Some possibilities follow. 

è A specialist has a 15 percent (or 30 
percent) bonus, a non-specialist has a 
15 percent (or 30 percent) penalty. 


è A specialist has a 30 percent bonus, a 
non-specialist has a 30 percent penalty, 
è Both the specialist and the non- 
specialist have 15 percent (or 30 per- 
cent) bonuses. 


Careful judgement should always be 
exercised when adding new minor 
schools. Remember that the more ac- 
cess characters have to magic, the more 
powerful they become. And the more 
powerful the characters are, the harder 
it is for the DM to maintain play bal- 
ance. In general, the following two 
guidelines should apply: 

è A minor school should include only a 
handful of low-level spells, none of 
them higher than 4th-level. Four or five 
1st-level spells, two or three 2nd-level 
spells, one or two 3rd-level spells, and 
one or two 4th-level spells are suffi- 
cient. 

è A campaign should include no more 
than two minor schools. (Note than in 
almost every campaign, one of the two 
minor schools will be lesser divination.) 


By its | aiji 


anthi in we 


cc 
\ cas = 


Yi ri ge A 


ie 


ai Le A, Ss 


Chapter 2: Creating New Schools 


The Player's Handbook lists eight 
different greater schools of magic, but 
more are possible. Additional schools 
can expand a player's options, add 
color to the campaign, and allow the 
DM to put his own mark on the game. 
Designing new magic schools is one of 
the DM's toughest jobs, but it can also 
be one of the most rewarding. 

This chapter presents a step-by-step 
procedure for creating schools of magic 
from scratch. We'll demonstrate the 
process by creating a brand new school 
right before your eyes—the school of 
metamorphics. 

At the end of this book is a blank 
planning sheet. This may be copied to 
help you design your own new schools. 


The Basics of Creating 
Schools 


Before creating a school, following 
are a few general guidelines to keep in 
mind. 

New schools should be unique. A 
new magic school should not overlap 
any of the existing schools. Since the 
eight major schools cover a lot of 
ground and there are already hundreds 
of spells in the AD&D® game, this is not 
as easy as it sounds. Not only should 
the DM avoid new magic schools 
whose spells duplicate the effects of ex- 
isting spells, he should also avoid tres- 
passing on the priest's territory. For 
instance, a school of magic focusing on 
healing spells isn’t a good idea, since it 
conflicts with one of the priest's special 
areas. 

A new school shouldn't be too pow- 
erful. The existence of a school whose 
spells can destroy dragons, level cities, 
and render the caster invulnerable 
makes it extremely difficult for the DM 
to maintain play balance. It’s next to 
impossible for the DM to invent suit- 
able challenges for wizards wielding 
that much power, ultimately making 


the game boring for all. The school of 
necromancy is about as powerful as 
any school should be. 

A new school shouldn't be too weak. 
On the other hand, players won't be in- 
terested in a school that doesn’t offer 
them a measure of power comparable 
to what's available in the existing 
schools. The school of greater divina- 
tion is about as weak as any school 
should be. 

A new school must be described pre- 
cisely. Magical effects are difficult 
enough to adjudicate when their defini- 
tions are detailed and specific. When 
they're indefinite and ambiguous, it's 
nearly impossible to make consistent 
rulings and avoid frustrating players. 


Type of Magic 


The first step in designing a new 
school is to decide what type of magical 
energy will be wielded by the specialist 
and how that energy will manifest it- 
self. The type of magic must be general 
enough to encompass a variety of spells 
and effects, but it also must be specific 
enough to differentiate it from existing 
schools. 

Before examining the specifics, 
consider the differences between the 
magic of wizards and the magic of 
priests. Though some duplication 
exists—both have access to necroman- 
tic and summoning spells, for 
instance—the way they acquire spells is 
strikingly different. 


Priests vs. Wizards 


Priests are granted the use of spells by 
deities of specific mythoi. Each deity 
has authority over particular groups of 
concepts, forces, and things, and these 
groups are called spheres. A priest's al- 
legiance to his deity gives him access to 
certain spheres of magic that reflect the 
deity’s special interests. Consequently, 


22 


the magic of each sphere tends to be 
quite specific; spells from the sun 
sphere, for instance, deal primarily 
with light and darkness, while spells 
from the healing sphere deal primarily 
with curing. 

Unlike the priest, a wizard isn’t 
bound to a particular deity, and there- 
fore does not depend on a deity for his 
magical abilities. A wizard learns and 
masters his spells in much the same way 
that a professor learns and masters a 
particular science. This is why the wiz- 
ard class is a function of Intelligence. 
Wizardly schools focus on general cate- 
gories of magical energy and effects and 
encompass a wide variety of spells. 

To preserve the integrity of these dif- 
ferences between wizard magic and 
priest magic, any new wizard school 
should avoid focusing on magical ef- 
fects stemming from one particular 
condition or thing. Instead, the school 
should be concerned with the manipu- 
lation of general energies and forces. 


Categories of Effects 


Confused? Consider the following. 

Just as electrical energy or mechani- 
cal energy can be harnessed to accom- 
plish specific tasks, it is also possible to 
channel magical energy to accomplish 
specific results. But while electrical and 
mechanical energies are limited by 
physics and other natural sciences, 
magical energy knows no such mun- 
dane boundaries. Magical energies can 
be channelled to produce any of the fol- 
lowing list of effects. 

Transformation: When this type of 
effect is produced, an object or condi- 
tion is changed to give it different phys- 
ical properties or new special abilities, 

Creation: When this type of effect is 
produced, an object or condition is cre- 
ated that did not previously exist. 

Requisitioning: When this type of ef- 
fect is produced, an existing object or 


Creating New Schools 


condition is summoned from a different 
location. 

Paranaturalism: This type of effect 
involves the manipulation of forces and 
phenomena that exist beyond the con- 
fines of the material world and the laws 
governing it. (This can also be consid- 
ered a catch-all category that includes 
effects not covered in other categories.) 

All of the existing schools of magic 
can be assigned to these categories. 

The schools of alteration, enchant- 
ment/charm, and abjuration all in- 
volve Transformation. 

The schools of illusion and 
invocation/evocation involve Crea- 
tion. 

Conjuration/summoning involves 
Requisitioning. 

Divination and necromancy involve 
Paranaturalism. 


Although some overlapping occurs 
(for instance, magical energies that 
Requisition existing objects may Trans- 
form them as well), all magic schools 
channel magical energies to produce the 
effects defined in these four categories. 

What differentiates one school from 
another is the type of effects produced. 
For example, both illusion and 
invocation/evocation channel magical 
energy for Creation. However, illusions 
create unreal objects and conditions; 
invocations create objects and condi- 
tions that cause direct physical effects. 


Defining the Effects of a New 
School 


To begin the design of a new school, 
the DM must first define the type of ef- 
fects it produces. Any definition is 
likely to be vague. But at this stage, it 
should be. Unlike the intentionally spe- 
cific priestly sphere, a wizardly school 
must be general enough to accommo- 
date a large variety of spells. 

Use the steps that follow. 


1. Choose one type of channelled 
magical energy from the four categories 
described above: Transformation, Cre- 
ation, Requisitioning, or Paranatural- 
ism. If you know what type of school 
you plan to design, the choice of cate- 
gory probably will be obvious. If you 
do not yet have any ideas about ‘your 
school, pick any of the categories—it's 
a good place to start. (If your choice of 
categories seems less appropriate as 
your school develops, you can always 
pick another.) 

2. Define what specific type of effects 
these channelled energies will produce. 
If it is a Transformation school, what 
types of things or conditions will be 
transformed? If it is a Paranaturalism 
school, what type of paranatural ener- 
gies or forces will be involved? 

3. Ensure that the definition of the 
new school does not resemble the defi- 
nitions of existing schools too closely. 
Compare them with the school descrip- 
tions in Chapter 1. 


How It All Works 


To illustrate this procedure, a new 
school is created here. First, one of the 
categories of channelled energy is cho- 
sen. The school will involve changing 
one type of item into another, so the 
choice is the Transformation category. 

Next, we define the type of Transfor- 
mation effects the school will produce, 
This definition needs to be as clear as 
possible; writing down the definition in 
a sentence or two will put it on the right 
track. Our school will feature spells 
that cause an object or condition to 
change into a different but related ob- 
ject or condition. That description is 
vague, but good enough to get started. 

Is this school sufficiently different 
from existing schools? Our school 
sounds very similar to the school of al- 
teration, so it needs some adjustments. 
Since many of the alteration spells im- 


23 


bue a creature with special abilities, 
such as water breathing and fly, we can 
decide that the spells from our school 
will deal with physical transformations 
only. Further, all of our physical trans- 
formations will be permanent (subject 
to the usual limitations, such as cancel- 
lation by dispel magic). 

Throughout the remainder of this 
chapter, we'll continue to develop this 
school as a demonstration. 


Name of the School 


Once you have an idea for a school, it 
needs a name. If an obvious name 
doesn't suggest itself, as it did for the 
school of illusion, check a thesaurus for 
synonymous words or evocative 
phrases. Fantasy literature is another 
good source for names. 

Since our new school deals with 
change, we checked the thesaurus for 
synonyms and found metamorphosis, a 
word that is descriptive, has a nice 
scholarly ring to it, and even sounds a 
little mystical. Well christen it the 
school of metamorphics. 


Name of the Specialist 


Specialists usually derive their names 
from the names of their schools by 
changing the suffix. Thus, from abjura- 
tion comes the abjurer, and from illu- 
sion comes the illusionist. Most of the 
time, this technique is satisfactory. 

However, some schools simply do 
not lend themselves to wizardly- 
sounding names. For instance, the 
word alterer is clumsy, so the school of 
alteration has opted for the less awk- 
ward transmuter for the name of their 
specialist. We have a similar problem 
with our school of metamorphics— 
both metamorphist and metamorpher 
are clumsy. Returning to the thesaurus, 
we find the word transfigure. We can 
call our specialist a transfigurist. 


Creating New Schools 


Spells 


The most important part of creating 
a new school is designing new spells 
that are different enough to set it apart 
from existing schools. There must be 
enough new spells to provide the user a 
reasonable variety of options. At the 
same time, duplication of existing spells 
should be avoided. Minor variations of 
existing spells should also be avoided. 
The spell selection should be attractive 
enough so that novice wizards will con- 
sider specializing in it, but not so pow- 
erful that the school overwhelms all 
others. 


Basic Spells 


A new school does not need an exten- 
sive number of spells immediately. Be- 
ginning with a core of basic spells is 
best, adding new spells as required by 
the campaign and the players. 

An acceptable core of basic spells in- 
cludes the number of spells for each 
level given in Table 1. Note that this is 
approximately the number of spells for 
the schools of greater divination and 
necromancy given in the Player's Hand- 
book. If the DM is unable to invent this 
number of spells, he should concentrate 
on designing spells to fill the lower 
levels (levels 1-3) so his lower-level spe- 
cialists can begin their careers. 


Table 1: Minimum Spells 
for A New School 


No. of Spells 


a 
= 
BP HEHNNNNW YW 


Adapting Existing Spells 


Before attempting to design new 
spells, first look at the existing spells for 
other schools. Notice that a number of 
spells listed in the Player's Handbook 
belong to more than one school; rain- 
bow pattern, for instance, belongs to 
the schools of alteration and illusion, 
while limited wish belongs to conjur- 
ation/summoning and invocation/ 
evocation. 

Do any of the PH spells (or any of the 
new spells listed in Chapter 8 of this 
book) seem appropriate for your new 
school? The alteration spells transmute 
rock to mud and transmute water to 
dust are perfect for our school of 
metamorphics—they both cause one 
substance to change to another, they 
both cause physical changes, and in 
both cases the effects are permanent. 

There are other likely candidates 
from the PH spells for our school, but 
using an excessive number of duplicate 
spells (more than two or three) compro- 
mises the individuality of a new school. 


Ideas for New Spells 


The DM and players will need to 
brainstorm for ideas that will eventu- 
ally be developed to fill in the basic spell 
list. Although the DM makes the final 
decisions when designing spells for a 
new school, the contributions and ideas 
of the players are important. Fantasy 
literature is another good source of 
ideas, as are the abilities of magical 
monsters and functions of magical de- 
vices. The DM and his players might 
also discuss encounters or battles from 
previous adventures and decide what 
types of spells would have been useful 
for the wizards. 

The DM (with the assistance of the 
players) should then assign a spell name 


24 


to each idea and deciderthe general ef- 
fects of the potential spells. The names 
of the spells should be brief and descrip- 
tive. The effects can be approximate at 
this point—they’'Il be refined later. 

We do not have the space here to de- 
velop a full range of spells for our meta- 
morphics school, but here are three 
potential spells we'll use as examples: 

Evaporate: This spell changes liquids 
into gases. 

Blood to dust: This spell changes an 
opponent's blood to dust, instantly kill- 
ing him. 

Improved armor: This spell changes 
a companion’s armor to a better Armor 
Class. 


Checking for Duplication 


Each potential spell should be 
checked against the spells in the Player's 
Handbook to see if it already exists. 
Considering that the PH lists hundreds 
of spells, re-inventing an existing spell 
is easy. A DM need not be obsessive 
about this; a large number of existing 
spells inflict damage or add bonuses 
and penalties to saving throws. As long 
as the new spell has a unique twist of its 
own, it can be deemed acceptable. 

Of our examples, we notice that blood 
to dust is superficially similar to the 7th- 
level finger of death spell, since they 
both instantly take a victim's life. But the 
methods of achieving this effect are dis- 
tinctly different; blood to dust changes 
the victim's blood to an inert substance, 
while finger of death snuffs out the vic- 
tim’s life force. Further, blood to dust is 
only effective on victims with blood in 
their veins. Blood to dust is different 
enough to stand on its own. 


Checking for Play Balance 
After checking them against existing 


spells, all potential spells of a new 
school must be considered for play bal- 


Creating New Schools 


ance. Imagine that the wizard employs 
a particular spell every day—will con- 
stant use have any significant long-term 
effects on the balance of the game? 
Consider our potential metamorphic 
spells. Evaporate won't have any pro- 
found effects on the game, assuming it 
has reasonable limitations (for in- 
stance, evaporating an entire ocean 
should be prohibited). At best, blood to 
dust means one less opponent per day. 
But improved armor presents a prob- 
lem. Since our metamorphic spells are 
permanent, wouldn't a transfigurist im- 
mediately improve all of his party's ar- 
mor as much as he could? Is this fair? 
We can’t make the effects temporary, or 
we're violating the definition of our 
school. Let's throw out improved ar- 
mor and invent another spell later. 


Determining Effects and 
Levels 


Once the inappropriate spells have 
been discarded, we need to define and 
describe the specific effects of the re- 
maining spells, then assign them to 
levels. The description of a spell should 
cover its typical uses, but it is unneces- 
sary—and realistically, impossible—to 
deal with every possible application. 
More importantly, the description 
should cover the spell’s limitations in 
detail; not only do precise limitations 
make spells easier to adjudicate, they 
are easier to assign to levels. 

Here are some points to consider 
when assigning limitations to spells: 

How many subjects can be affected 
by the spell? Generally, the more sub- 
jects affected, the higher the level of the 
spell (compare invisibility to mass in- 
visibility, and charm person to mass 
charm), 


What type of subjects can be affected 
by the spell? Subjects can be low-level 
or high-level (or low HD and high HD). 
They can also have specific characteris- 


tics (such as the subjects of detect invisi- 
bility), or they can be general types 
with no specific characteristics (such as 
the subjects of charm monster). Usu- 
ally, higher-level spells are able to affect 
high-level (or high HD) subjects that 
have no specific characteristics—finger 
of death is a good example. 


Are victims allowed a saving throw 
to avoid the effects of the spell? Disal- 
lowing a saving throw for a spell that 
would normally have one usually 
boosts it to a higher level. For instance, 
the Sth-level cone of cold allows a sav- 
ing throw to reduce a victim's damage 
by half. If such a throw were not al- 
lowed, the spell would be significantly 
more dangerous and would belong in a 


higher level. 


If the spell causes damage, what is the 
maximum? It would be grossly inap- 
propriate for any Ist-level spell to in- 
flict 100 hit points of damage. 
Similarly, a 9th-level spell should be ca- 
pable of inflicting a significant amount 
of damage. 

Table 2 suggests the maximum 
amount of damage a spell of a particu- 
lar level should be allowed to inflict on 
a single enemy. These figures are gen- 
eral guidelines only, and can be altered 
by any number of variables. For in- 
stance, if a hypothetical 3rd-level flying 
sword spell has only a 10 percent 
chance of hitting its target, its maxi- 
mum amount of damage could be justi- 
fiably higher than 3-18 hit points. 

Remember that the inflicted damage 
of certain spells may vary according to 
the caster's level; for instance, fireball 
causes 1d6 hit points of damage per 
level of the caster. (Table 2 gives the 
damage for a spell cast at its base level; 
if our hypothetical flying sword spell is 
3rd-level, but can be cast at higher 
levels to inflict more damage, Table 2 
indicates the maximum amount of 
damage it can cause when cast at its 
lowest level.) 


26 


Table 2: Suggested Maximum 


Damage of Spells by Level 
Level Maximum Damage 
of Spell (in hp) 
Ist 2-5 (1d4 +1) 
2nd 2-8 (2d4) 
3rd 3-18 (3d6) 
4th 8-20 (4d4 +4) 
Sth 10-25 (5d4 +5) 
6th 6-36 (6d6) 
7th 10-60 (10d6) * 


8th-9th 10-80 (10d8) * 

* Spells of 7th-level through 9th- 
level are differentiated by the number 
of subjects destroyed and special re- 
strictions on death. For instance, a 7th- 
level spell might destroy only a single 
subject, while a 9th-level spell could de- 
stroy several. A 7th-level spell might al- 
low a saving throw, while a 9th-level 
spell might not. A 7th-level spell might 
allow resurrection attempts, a 9th-level 
spell might not. 


If the spell causes damage, do victims 
get a saving throw? Of the spells in the 
Player's Handbook, many of them al- 
low the victim to make a saving throw 
in order to reduce or eliminate the po- 
tential damage. Though it is unneces- 
sary to allow saving throws in every 
case, this is a good way to add balance 
to what otherwise might be an espe- 
cially dangerous spell. There are three 
options to consider. 

1. No saving throw. This option max- 
imizes a spell's lethality. 

2. Half damage. This option means 
that the character suffers half-damage if 
his saving throw is successful. This is 
less lethal than a spell with no saving 
throw, but more lethal than the follow- 
ing option. 

3. Negate. This option means that the 
character suffers no damage if his sav- 
ing throw is successful. This is the least 
lethal option of all. 


Creating New Schools 


Note that saving throws need not al- 
ways be saving throws vs. spells; con- 
sider different types of saving throws 
for spells of higher levels (in every case, 
however, only one type of saving throw 
should be allowed). A saving throw vs. 
spells is always an option, no matter 
what the level of spell, but here are 
some alternatives: 

e For spells of 3rd-level and 4th- 
level, use save vs. rods. 

© For spells of 5th-level and 6th- 
level, use save vs. paralyzation. 

© For spells of 7th-level, 8th-level, 
and 9th-level, use save vs. death. 


If the spell is defensive, does it inhibit 
the enemy's ability to attack, or does it 
offer direct protection from damage? 
Generally, spells that defend against a 
specific type of damage (such as protec- 
tion from normal missiles) are less pow- 
erful than spells that protect against a 
general category of damage (such as mi- 
nor globe of invulnerability), and spells 
that protect the caster or subjects of the 
caster’s choice (such as protection from 
evil) are less powerful than spells that 
inhibit the enemy's ability to attack 
(such as wall of fog). The highest-level 
defensive spells tend to be those that get 
rid of the attacker (such as dismissal 
and imprisonment.) 

Ifa DM has designed a defensive spell 
that he wants to modify so he can assign 
it to a higher level, he can do one or 
more of the following: 

e Increase the types of damage 
against which it protects. (To assign the 
spell to a lower level, decrease the types 
of damage.) 

e Increase the number of subjects the 
spell protects, usually by increasing the 
area of effect. (For a lower level, de- 
crease the area of effect, or have the 
spell provide protection for only the 
caster.) 

e Increase the number of opponents 
whose attack abilities are reduced. 
Again, this is usually accomplished by 


increasing the area of effect. (For a 

lower level, decrease the area of effect.) 
® Increase the power of the spell so it 

eliminates the attacker altogether. 


Does the spell increase or decrease a 
subject's saving throw modifier? Penal- 
ties and bonuses to the subject's saving 
throw alter the effectiveness of a spell. 
Consider again our hypothetical 3rd- 
level flying sword spell. Assume that it 
inflicts 1-10 hit points of damage on 
subjects when used at night, and that a 
saving throw negates the damage. If the 
subject is allowed a +2 bonus, it might 
be more appropriate to assign flying 
sword to 2nd-level. Conversely, if no 
saving throw is allowed at all, the spell 
might belong at 4th-level. 


Is the effect of the spell permanent? 
Spells whose effects are temporary are 
less powerful than those whose effects 
are permanent. (Remember that few 
spells are literally permanent, since dis- 
pel magic negates their effects in most 
cases. A limited wish or wish can negate 
almost any spell.) 


What are the spell's duration, range, 
and area of effect? Longer durations, 
ranges, and areas of effect translate into 
more powerful spells, Adjusting these 
elements is a good way to modify a spell 
to assign it to a higher or lower level. 
For instance, if flying sword persists for 
only one round/level and has a range of 
30 yards, it belongs in a lower level than 
if it persisted for one turn/level and had 
a range of 100 yards. 

There are no minimum or maximum 
requirements for durations, ranges, or 
areas of effect, as long as the DM stays 
within the bounds of reason. For in- 
stance, a range of 1 mile/level sounds 
ridiculously high for any 1st-level spell. 
A good place to start for establishing 
durations, ranges, and areas of effect is 
1 round/level (duration), 10 yards/ 
level (range), and a 10-foot cube or one 
creature/level (area of effect). Remem- 


27 


ber that these are general guidelines 
only, and are not appropriate for every 
type of spell. Many spells have an effec- 
tive range of 0, meaning they affect 
only the caster. Others affect only a 
touched subject. Those spells whose ef- 
fects are permanent until negated have 
no set duration. For some spells, such as 
extension, area of effect is irrelevant. 


When the DM has finished defining 
the effects of a new spell and has as- 
signed it to a level, the spell should be 
compared to the existing spells of that 
level. If the new spell is clearly weaker 
or excessively more powerful than 
spells from the same level, the DM 
should either assign it to a different 
level or make adjustments as suggested 
above to make it comparable. In gen- 
eral, the illusion and divination spells 
are the least powerful, and the necro- 
mancy and invocation spells are the 
most powerful; a new spell should be 
checked against these first. 


Let's return to our two new spells for 
the school of metamorphics. Evapora- 
tion causes a quantity of water or other 
inorganic liquid to instantly turn to va- 
por, just as if the sun had evaporated it. 
It will not inflict any direct damage 
(evaporating the blood or other organic 
liquids of a creature is forbidden). 
Evaporation is difficult to perceive as 
providing meaningful defense for a 
party. Evaporation is destined to be a 
low-level spell, probably ist-level. 

Range? Most 1st-level spells have a 
range of 30-60 yards; since evaporation 
is relatively weak, we will give it a 
higher range of 60 yards. 

Area of effect? Most Ist-level spells 
affect an area of 10-30 yards (or 10-30 
foot-radius, or 10-30 foot cube). In this 
case, we will give evaporation an area 
of effect of a 20-foot cube + 10-foot 
cube/level. (This makes the spell more 
powerful as the wizard increases in 
level.) 


Creating New Schools 


Checking our Ist-level evaporation 
spell against the existing 1st-level spells 
in the PH shows no major discrepan- 
cies. The definition of evaporation still 
needs more tightening. We need to de- 
termine whether it affects liquids con- 
cealed in containers, rain, quicksand, 
and lava, and other limitations it has. 


Looking at blood to dust, it belongs 
in a higher level because it causes death. 
We will decide that blood to dust causes 
all of the blood of a single victim to turn 
to dust, instantly killing it. It is cer- 
tainly not as powerful as a 9th-level 
spell (the 9th-level power word, kill can 
destroy several creatures at once); let's 
place it at 7th level and give it a range of 
60 yards (comparable to other 7th-level 
spells). 

Checking the existing 7th-level spells, 
we discover finger of death, a spell not 
unlike blood to dust. Finger of death is 
more powerful, since it can destroy any 
creature, even those without blood, but 
it also allows a saving throw. To bal- 
ance blood to dust against other 7th- 
level spells, let's say that victims of 
blood to dust are not allowed saving 
throws. Further, undead, monsters 
from other planes, and monsters with 
more than 4 HD will be immune to 
blood to dust. With further adjust- 
ments (Can the affected subject be res- 
urrected or raised? Can the corpse be 
animated to become a zombie?), we'll 
have a powerful but balanced 7th-level 
spell for the school of metamorphics. 


Casting Times 


All spells must state their casting 
times. A guideline is to make the casting 
time equal to the level of the spell (a 
7th-level spell has a casting time of 7), 
but casting times of one or more rounds 
are also common. Complex spells 
might have casting times of one or more 
turns. Avoid short casting times for 
high-level spells and excessively long 


casting times for all but the most pow- 
erful spells. 

We'll give our ist-level evaporation 
spell a casting time of 1 and our 7th- 
level blood to dust a casting time of 1 
round, 


Components 


Every spell has one or more compo- 
nents. There are two ways to determine 
the components for a new spell: 

1. Locate existing spells from the 
Player's Handbook that are similar to 
the new spell and assign similar compo- 
nents. For instance, finger of death is 
similar to our new blood to dust spell, 
so we'll decide that blood to dust has 
verbal and somatic components. 

2. Assign the components randomly. 
If this sounds too arbitrary, consider that 
the components of a particular spell 
were likely determined by the wizard 
who originally researched it. A common 
assumption is that two wizards working 
independently could discover the same 
spell; it is unlikely that they used exactly 
the same components. For our evapora- 
tion spell, we'll use verbal, somatic, and 
material components, the most common 
combination. 

Instead of choosing a specific set of 
components for a new spell, you can 
determine them randomly by rolling 
1d20 on Table 3. If you get a result that 
contradicts the conditions under which 
the spell is cast, roll again. 


Table 3: 

Random Determination 

of Spell Components 
d20 Roll Components 
1-14 V,S,M 
15-17 V, S 
18-19 V, M 
20 V 


3. Consider the level of the spell and 
assign components accordingly. Re- 


28 


quiring all three components makes a 
spell harder to cast. Reducing a spell’s 
components to make it easier to cast 
might be a reason to create a higher 
level version of a low level spell. 

4. Still can’t decide? When in doubt, 
require all three components; most ex- 
isting spells use all of them. 


As for the precise nature of these 
components, be guided by common 
sense and imagination. Material com- 
ponents should relate to the effect of the 
spell. Check existing spells for compo- 
nent ideas and comparisons. 

We'll decide our evaporation spell’s 
material component will be a drop of 
water. 


Allowed Races 


Not all races can become specialists 
of all schools. Usually, these limitations 
are due to a particular race's body 
chemistry, mental or emotional predis- 
position, magical resistance, or cultural 
restrictions. The history of the DM's 
campaign world might also suggest lim- 
itations. 

If the DM imposes racial restrictions 
on a new school, he should present jus- 
tification for them. For instance, 
gnomes are restricted from specializing 
in our school of metamorphics. The 
reason? A thousand years ago in our 
campaign world, a brotherhood of 
transfigurist gnomes accidently devel- 
oped a metamorphics spell that perma- 
nently transformed a city of gnomes 
into a field weeds. The gods were so up- 
set by this carelessness that the transfi- 
gurist specialty has been forbidden to 
gnomes ever since. 


Ability Requirements 


All characters must have an Intelli- 
gence score of at least 9 to become a 
wizard. A new school might require a 


Creating New Schools 


higher Intelligence score for specializa- 
tion, but only in the rarest circum- 
stances should it be higher than 13. 

All specializations require a mini- 
mum score in a secondary ability, This 
minimum score should be at least 12, 
but no higher than 16. Wisdom, Consti- 
tution, and Dexterity are the most com- 
mon secondary ability requirements, 
but Charisma and Strength are also 
possible. Remember that setting the 
ability requirements high will keep the 
number of specialists low, and vice 
versa. 

Because some of the somatic compo- 
nents for metamorphic spells require 
precise execution, we will set a mini- 
mum Dexterity score of 15 for special- 
ists in the school of metamorphics. 


Clothing 


Though none of the schools de- 
scribed in Chapter 1 have any specific 
dress requirements, a new school might 
require (or strongly suggest) that its 
specialists wear distinctive garb to indi- 
cate their status. 

Not all specialists of a school would 
necessarily adhere to this dress code. 
Perhaps only graduates of a particular 
academy would wear distinctive garb. 
Perhaps only Ist-level specialists would 
wear it. Perhaps it is worn only by high 
level specialists as a symbol of achieve- 
ment. All such distinctions are the deci- 
sion of the DM. Caution is advised— 
obvious identifying garb can be a red 
flag to enemies who wish to wipe out 
the members of a particular school. 

Dress requirements are not restricted 
to items of clothing. Rings, pendants, 
anklets, and bracelets are all possibili- 
ties. Likewise, certain colors might 
symbolize graduates of a school, while 
other colors might be forbidden. 

For our metamorphics school, we 
will require that Ist-level transfigurists 
wear a red arm band to identify them as 


Table 4: Magic Schools and Types of Effects 


School 

Alteration 
Enchantment/Charm 
Abjuration 

Illusion 
Invocation/Evocation 
Conjuration/Summoning 
Divination 

Necromancy 


Type of Effects 
Transformation 
Transformation 
Transformation 
Creation 
Creation 
Requisitioning 
Paranaturalism 
Paranaturalism 


beginners. When a transfigurist reaches 
10th level, he is allowed—but not 
required—to wear a red cloak to sym- 
bolize his competence. 


Experience Levels and 
Spell Progression 


All existing schools use the experi- 
ence level progression and spell pro- 
gression given on Tables 20 and 21 on 
page 30 of the Player's Handbook. New 
schools should use these, too. It is pos- 
sible to devise new tables from scratch, 
but this creates considerable work for 
the DM, adding unnecessary complica- 
tions and an increased chance of an un- 
balanced campaign. In any case, 
specialists should not be allowed to 
progress more quickly than the Plaver's 
Handbook tables allow, 


Hit Points 


All existing schools use 4-sided dice 
to determine their specialists’ hit points. 
The power wielded by a specialist, es- 
pecially in the higher levels, more than 
compensates for his relatively low 
number of hit points. If the specialist is 
too weak, consider creating more 
spells, adjusting the current spells to 
make them stronger, or giving him ac- 
cess to spells from more schools. 


29 


Languages 


All specialists use Table 4 on page 16 
of the Player's Handbook to determine 
the number of languages they can learn 
(in addition to their native tongue). 
Certain types of specialists may be able 
to exceed these limits. Eligible special- 
ists might include those with exception- 
ally strong academic backgrounds or 
those who devote a large amount of 
their spare time studying new tongues. 

The types of effects created by a par- 
ticular wizard might also suggest an ex- 
traordinary aptitude for languages; for 
example, wizards specializing in Trans- 
formation magic might not seem to 
have any particular affinity for lan- 
guages, but those specializing in Crea- 
tion might (since they're involved in 
producing conditions that didn’t previ- 
ously exist, which could include com- 
munication skills). 

If a new specialist is to have excep- 
tional language skills, keep the follow- 
ing guidelines in mind. 

è Anew specialist should not be able 
to acquire more than one language over 
the limits given in the Player's Hand- 
book. For instance, a specialist with an 
Intelligence of 9 should not be able to 
learn more than three languages. 

è The DM should consider limiting 
extra languages to high-level special- 
ists; level 15 or higher is suggested, but 
the DM has the final decision. (In other 


Creating New Schools 


words, our specialist with an Intelli- 
gence of 9 cannot learn his third lan- 
guage until he reaches level 15.) 

è Learning the extra language should 
never be automatic. The DM should 
oblige the specialist to locate a suitable 
tutor, devote several hours a day to 
studying difficult texts, or invent some 
other requirement that emphasizes role- 
playing. 

For the transfigurist, nothing about 
his specialty suggests an exceptional ap- 
titude for languages, so he'll be re- 
stricted to the language limits given in 
the Player's Handbook. 


Oppositional Schools 


Each school lies in opposition to one 
to three of the existing schools of magic. 
The specialist of the new school will be 
unable to learn spells from the schools 
that lie in opposition to his school. 

The first step in determining opposi- 
tional schools is to decide which existing 
school most closely resembles the new 
school. In some cases, this is obvious; 
for instance, our new school of meta- 
morphics is most like the school of alter- 
ation. For less obvious cases, you can 
eliminate most of the possibilities by re- 
calling which type of magic your new 
school is derived from (see the Types of 
Magic section above). A new school will 
most closely resemble an existing school 
derived from the same type of magic (see 
Table 4); for instance, if your new school 
produces Creation effects, it most 
closely resembles either the school of il- 
lusion or invocation/evocation. Once 
the choices have been narrowed to two 
or three schools, it should be easy to 
pick the school most like your new 
school. If necessary, try comparing your 
new spells to the existing spells in the 
Player's Handbook. 


When you've decided which existing 
school most closely resembles your new 
school, consult the opposition diagram 


(Diagram 1). The school that lies di- 
rectly opposite this school is the opposi- 
tional school. The school of 
metamorphics most closely resembles 
the school of alteration. The school di- 
rectly across from alteration on Dia- 
gram 1 is abjuration. Therefore, 
abjuration is the school that is in oppo- 
sition to metamorphics. 

One to three oppositional schools 
may be assigned to a new school. If the 
new school is relatively weak (the weak 
school of greater divination has only a 
single oppositional school), only one 
opposition school may be needed. If 
your new school is relatively powerful, 
it is appropriate to assign it as many as 
three oppositional schools. 

Look again at Diagram 1. The 
schools on either side of the opposi- 
tional school are also options for oppo- 
sitional schools. For instance, 
additional oppositional schools for illu- 
sion are invocation/evocation and ab- 
juration. If it's appropriate for your 


school to have three oppositional 
schools, choose these three. 

Most likely, your new school will be 
neither extremely weak nor extremely 
powerful. In this case, consider giving it 
two oppositional schools. One should 
be the initial oppositional school, and 
the other can be either of the adjacent 
schools. To decide between the adjacent 
schools, choose randomly or choose 
the one that seems less compatible with 
your new school. 

We must choose the oppositional 
schools for our new school of metamor- 
phics. Since it is neither exceptionally 
weak or powerful, we will assign it two 
oppositional schools, 

We decided previously that the 
school of metamorphics most closely 
resembles the school of alteration. Ac- 
cording to Diagram 1, the oppositional 
school of alteration is abjuration; there- 
fore, the oppositional schoo] of meta- 
morphics is also abjuration. 

According to Diagram 1, the adja- 


Diagram 1 - Oppositional Schools 


Illusion 


Greater 
Divination 


Invocation/ 
Evocation 


Enchantment/ 


Conjuration/ 
Oppositional School 
to School of Alteration 


Oppositional School 
to School of Alteration 


Oppositional School 
to School of Alteration 


30 


New Schools 


cent oppositional schools for ab- 
juration—and likewise, for meta- 
morphics—are conjuration/sum- 
moning and necromancy, We need to 
choose one of them for our other oppo- 
sitional school. Either conjuration/ 
summoning or necromancy would be 
appropriate, but since the school of al- 
teration already has abjuration and ne- 
cromancy for its oppositional schools, 
we will choose the other combination. 
Therefore, the opposition schools for 
metamorphics are abjuration and 
conjuration/summoning. 

Admittedly, the choice of the second 
and third oppositional schools is some- 
what arbitrary, but remember that we 
not only strive for balance, but also for 
schools with unique advantages and re- 
strictions. The DM always has the op- 
tion to invent a rationale for the 
existence of specific oppositional 
schools. For instance, the energies em- 
ployed by conjuration/summoning and 
abjuration magic might induce agoniz- 


ing headaches in a transfigurist, making 
it impossible for him to learn spells 
from those schools. 


Ethos 


The final step in designing a new 
school is creating a unique ethos. This 
step is optional, but it adds color to the 
school and makes it more interesting 
for the players. An ethos also serves as 
a springboard for determining the per- 
sonality of specialist characters, 

An ethos can be anything from a sim- 
ple outline to a detailed profile. Follow- 
ing are some questions to consider 
when designing an ethos for a new 
school. 

Do the specialists of the school adhere 
to any particular philosophy? Do they 
share any particular goals? Such philoso- 
phies and goals are often derived from 
the nature of the magic studied by the 
specialist. For instance, specialists from 


the school of metamorphics study spells 
dealing with change. Continual exposure 
to the transience of all things might lead 
transfigurists to be skeptical about the ex- 
istence of absolutes—a _ transfigurist, 
then, might believe that concepts such as 
“right” and “wrong” are relative to spe- 
cific situations. 

Are evil-aligned characters more 
drawn to this school than good-aligned 
characters (or vice versa)? In most 
cases, wizards of all alignments can be 
specialists in any school, but a new 
schoo] might discourage certain align- 
ments and encourage others. Likewise, 
certain magical academies might accept 
students of specific alignments only. 

If a school does not promote harm to 
any living creature, or promotes heal- 
ing, safety, comfort, or compassion, 
then it probably excludes evil align- 
ments, If it promotes cruelty or self- 
interest, the school probably excludes 
good alignments. If a school promotes 
no particular philosophy, it probably 


Creating New Schools 


includes specialists of all alignments. 

If a school advocates logical thinking 
and adherence to strict behavioral 
norms, and discourages excessive self- 
expression, it probably leans toward 
lawful alignments. If it encourages cre- 
ative thinking, freedom of expression, 
and spontaneous actions, it leans to- 
ward chaotic alignments (this is partic- 
ularly true if it also encourages defiance 
of written laws to achieve individual 
goals). If the school takes no particular 
position on the specialist's relationship 
with his culture and society, it probably 
includes lawful, neutral, and chaotic 
specialists. (The school of metamor- 
phics takes no particular positions on 
these issues, therefore it is open to spe- 
cialists of al] alignments. Note that this 
attitude about alignments is also con- 
sistent with the school’s general philos- 
ophy of skepticism about absolutes 
described above.) 

Are any particular personality types 
drawn to the study of this school? Do 
they tend to share any common eccen- 
tricities? Common likes or dislikes? 
Would anything about your new school 
tend to discourage certain types of peo- 
ple or attract others? The school of 
metamorphics attracts students with a 
natural interest in the world around 
them. Since its spells change one thing 
into another, most students will be in- 
terested in how things work and how 
things are put together—in short, meta- 
morphics students are analytical, curi- 
ous, and creative. 

What's the relationship of the special- 
ist to other members of his party? Usu- 
ally, the type of spells available to a 
specialist will suggest his role in the 
campaign. If the specialist has a lot of 
offensive spells, he will likely be on the 
front lines when the party goes to bat- 
tle. A specialist with a lot of defensive 
or reconnaissance spells might be a 
good spy or investigator. Although we 
haven't yet devised many spells for our 
transfigurists, it looks like neither of- 


fensive nor defensive spells will pre- 
dominate. Therefore, it seems likely 
that a transfigurist will leave the bulk of 
the fighting to others in his party. 

Do specialists of this school tend to 
have a lot of friends? Are they likely to 
have spouses and families? This depends 
on the specialist's philosophy, goals, and 
personality. Unless the specialist is ex- 
treme in one of these areas—for instance, 
if he is obsessive about the study of 
magic, or if his field is considered repul- 
sive or frightening (such as the school of 
necromancy)—he is likely to have an av- 
erage number of friends and an average 
chance at a successful marriage. (Since 
transfigurists have no extreme traits, we 
will assume that they have a fair number 
of friends and are as likely as anyone to 
marry and raise a family.) 

Where do these specialists prefer to 
live? As mentioned previously, certain 
schools tend to attract certain types of 
people. If a school’s specialists tend to 
be outgoing and affable, they probably 
prefer to live in an urban area. If they're 
brooding and anti-social, or if they're 
conducting potentially dangerous re- 
search, they probably live in an isolated 
area. Usually, a specific location won't 
suggest itself—specialists tend to live 
just about anywhere. We will make this 
the case with transfigurists. 

How do the specialists spend most of 
their time? Reclusive types will stay 
close to home, usually lost in research, 
reading, or writing. Curious types are 
more inclined to explore the world, ea- 
ger to meet people and experience new 
situations. In most cases, there will not 
be obvious pastimes applicable to all 
specialists of a school. This will be the 
case with transfigurists. They spend 
some of their time doing research at 
home and a fair amount of time out in 
the world exploring and socializing. 

How do the specialists typically earn 
a living? Common occupations for wiz- 
ards include teaching, counseling, re- 
searching, and advising. However, the 


32 


spells available to a particular specialist 
might suggest additional careers. The 
metamorphics spells do not suggest any 
particular occupation, so transfigurists 
probably pursue the common wizard 
occupations. 


N 


re 


In Chapter 1, we discussed at length 
the schools of magic described in the 
Player's Handbook, In Chapter 2, we 
explained how to design new schools. 
Specialization in a school is an excellent 
way to individualize a wizard charac- 
ter, but it is not the only way. 

In this chapter, we'll show you how 
to further individualize a wizard char- 
acter by choosing a wizard kit. A kit isa 
collection of skills, proficiencies, ad- 
vantages, and disadvantages used to 
help define a wizard’s personality and 
background as well as his role in the 
campaign. 


Kits and Character 
Creation 


Wizard kits are entirely optional—a 
wizard character can easily get along 
without one. But a player who wishes 
to add detail to his wizard should 
choose a kit when the character is first 
created. Only one wizard kit can be 
chosen for a character. 

It is possible to incorporate these 
rules into existing campaigns, provid- 
ing the players and the DM can agree on 
which kits are appropriate. A kit must 
be compatible with a character's past 
actions, his background, and his estab- 
lished personality traits. For instance, if 
a diviner has been played as a thought- 
ful man of reason with a history of pre- 
ferring negotiation to combat, and the 
player has made it clear that his charac- 
ter is from a sophisticated urban cul- 
ture, it doesn’t make sense to assign him 
the Savage Wizard kit. 

Once a particular kit has been as- 
signed to a character, it cannot be 
changed. However, the character can 
later abandon it if he wishes, giving up 
all benefits and hindrances. Bonus pro- 
ficiencies (see below) are not forfeited. 
Instead, such proficiencies are no 
longer considered to be bonuses. The 
former bonus proficiencies are set aside 


until the character acquires new profi- 
ciency slots; at that time, the new profi- 
ciency slots are filled by the former 
bonus proficiencies. 

When designing a new character, first 
determine the character's ability scores, 
race, specialization, and alignment. 

Once these elements have been de- 
cided, choose a kit for the new character. 
After choosing the kit and recording the 
information on the character sheet, con- 
tinue with the character's proficiencies, 
money and equipment, and other perti- 
nent information. 


Kits and Schools of 
Magic 


Kits are culturally-based. Generally, 
any kit can be assigned to a specialist 
from any school. An Amazon—one of 
several kits described below—might be 
a necromancer or an illusionist, while a 
Mystic—another type of kit—could be 
a diviner or an abjurer. 

However, there are occasional excep- 
tions. Diviners, for instance, require a 
high Wisdom score, but the Savage 
Wizard—a kit associated with the more 
primitive parts of the world—usually 
lacks the necessary intuition and insight 
to specialize in the school of greater div- 
ination. Likewise, there are also some 
schools that favor certain kits. 

All excluded schools and preferred 
schools are noted in each kit descrip- 
tion. But these are only suggestions—a 
Savage Wizard diviner is perfectly ac- 
ceptable if the DM rules that such a 
character is allowable in his campaign. 

Unless the DM determines otherwise, 
all kits are available to mages. 


DM Choices 


Before allowing players to choose 
kits for their characters, the DM should 
look at each kit and consider several 
factors. 


33 


Is this kit appropriate to the cam- 
paign? Not all kits make sense for every 
campaign. If it is established that Ama- 
zons do not exist in the DM's campaign 
world, he should not allow players to 
choose the Amazon kit. The DM 
should tell the players which kits he will 
allow and which are forbidden before 
they create their characters. 

Do the players need more informa- 
tion about a kit? The DM might want to 
furnish the players with additional 
background information about a par- 
ticular kit. For instance, he might tell 
them that in his world, the Savage Wiz- 
ards all live on the jungle peninsula of 
Blackroot and have had little—if any— 
contact with other civilizations. 

Are there any changes in the kit? The 
DM is free to make changes in the profi- 
ciencies, hindrances, and any other 
components of the kits to make them 
compatible with his campaign world. 
The players should be informed of any 
such changes before they choose kits 
for their characters. 


The Wizard Kits 


Each wizard kit consists of a variety 
of elements. 

Description: This section explains the 
cultural background, appearance, and 
manner of characters associated with 
this kit. It also lists any requirements 
necessary for characters taking the kit; 
for instance, characters taking the Am- 
azon Sorceress kit must be female. Sug- 
gestions are also given for how a 
character might abandon the kit. 

Preferred Schools: This lists which 
specialists are most appropriate to the 
kit. As explained in the Kits and 
Schools of Magic section above, there 
are many exceptions, and these should 
be considered suggestions only. 

Chapter 1 outlined an ethos for each 
school, suggesting philosophies, atti- 
tudes, and personality traits for each 


Wizard Kits 


specialist. When designing a character, 
the player should compare the person- 
ality traits and attitudes of the charac- 
ter's schoo] with those of his kit. If a 
conflict arises, the player can choose 
whichever traits and attitudes he pre- 
fers, or whichever seem to make the 
most sense for his character, For in- 
stance, according to the abjurer's ethos 
in Chapter 1, an abjurer tends to be gen- 
tle and soft-spoken. However, a player 
who chooses the Amazon Sorceress kit 
may decide that his Amazon Sorceress 
abjurer is out-going and boisterous, as 
is appropriate to the Amazonian cul- 
ture of his campaign world. With the 
DM's permission, an out-going, bois- 
terous Amazon Sorceress abjurer is per- 
fectly acceptable. 

In general, a character's cultural 
background will have more influence 
on his personality than his school. 
Therefore, if a player cannot decide be- 
tween the personality traits associated 
with his school's ethos and the traits as- 
sociated with his character's kit, he 
should give more emphasis to the kit 
traits. 

Barred Schools: This entry explains 
which schools are inappropriate for the 
kit. Though the DM is free to make ex- 
ceptions, it is usually not a good idea to 
assign a kit to a specialist from a barred 
school. 

Role: This section describes the role 
of a particular wizard in his society and 
in his campaign. For instance, an Ama- 
zon Sorceress has a different cultural 
role than a Witch, even if both are 
enchanters. 

Secondary Skills: If you're using the 
Secondary Skills rules from the 
AD&D® 2nd Edition game rules, then a 
kit may require a character to take a 
specific skill instead of choosing or roll- 
ing randomly for it. (When choosing 
kits for characters, we suggest you use 
the Weapon and Nonweapon Profi- 
ciency rules instead of the Secondary 
Skills rules.) 


Weapon Proficiencies: If you are us- 
ing the Weapon Proficiency rules from 
the AD&D 2nd Edition game, this entry 
indicates which Weapon Proficiency is 
required for characters taking this kit. 
In some cases, a specific Weapon Profi- 
ciency is required; in other cases, a 
Weapon Proficiency can be chosen 
from among a list of recommended pro- 
ficiencies. 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: If you are 
using the Nonweapon Proficiency 
rules, this entry indicates whether spe- 
cific Nonweapon Proficiencies are re- 
quired for characters taking this kit. 
However, unlike Weapon Proficiencies, 
the Nonweapon Proficiencies are bo- 
nuses. If a kit requires that the character 
must have Astrology, then the charac- 
ter gets that proficiency free, above and 
beyond the slots he is normally 
granted. Even if such proficiencies be- 
long to groups other than the Wizard or 
General groups, the character still gets 
them as bonuses at no charge. 

If the kit grants a Nonweapon Profi- 
ciency that the wizard already has be- 
cause of his specialization, the 
character receives instead one extra free 
Nonweapon Proficiency slot. He may 
spend this free slot on any specializa- 
tion of his choice. 

Some Nonweapon Proficiencies are 
recommended, not required. In such 
cases, the character is not required to 
take the proficiency if he does not want 
it. If he takes a recommended profi- 
ciency, he spends the normal number of 
his available proficiency slots. 

Table 38 on page 55 of the Player's 
Handbook lists Nonweapon Profi- 
ciency crossovers for various groups. 
The crossover groups that apply to 
mages and illusionists also apply to spe- 
cialists from all other schools; that is, 
any specialist selecting a Nonweapon 
Proficiency from the Wizard or General 
groups shown on Table 37 (page 54-55 
of the PH) spends the listed number of 
proficiency slots. When any specialist 


34 


selects a proficiency from any other cat- 
egory, he must spend one additional 
slot beyond the number listed (excep- 
tions are given in the Nonweapon Pro- 
ficiencies entries for the various kits), 

Equipment: Some wizard types tend 
to use specific equipment. Others have 
limitations or restrictions on the way 
they acquire or use equipment. This en- 
try details the equipment employed by 
characters using this kit. (In no case is a 
wizard allowed to purchase armor.) 

Special Benefits: Most kits grant spe- 
cial benefits to characters. Often, these 
benefits are defined as special reaction 
bonuses when encountering certain 
classes of society, or as special rights in 
specific cultures. 

Special Hindrances: Each kit carries 
certain disadvantages to hinder the wiz- 
ard, Often, these are reaction penalties 
or cultural restrictions. 

Wealth Options: Some wizard types 
have special rules regarding their 
wealth. Usually, these rules specify dif- 
ferences in the amount of money re- 
ceived when the character is created 
and limitations on how the money can 
be spent. 

Races: If a kit is not available to par- 
ticular races, this will be noted here. 
Unless the DM makes exceptions for his 
campaign, humans can choose any of 
the kits, 


A Note About Reaction 
Adjustments 


Several of the wizard kits receive re- 
action bonuses and penalties as part of 
their special benefits and special hin- 
drances. As noted in the Player's Hand- 
book (page 18), characters with very 
high or very low Charisma receive “re- 
action adjustments.” A character with 
high Charisma gets a bonus (expressed 
as a plus, such as +3), while a character 
with low Charisma gets a penalty (ex- 
pressed as a minus, such as —3). 


When rolling 2d10 for encounter re- 
actions (see page 103 in the Dungeon 
Master's Guide), do not add the bonus 
or subtract the penalty from the die 
roll. If the character has a Charisma of 
16, thus receiving a +5 reaction adjust- 
ment, subtract that number from the 
die roll—do not add it. Otherwise, the 
more Charisma a character has, the 
worse the reaction of the NPCs. 


The Kits 
Academician 


Description: The Academician is a 
learned scholar whose love of knowl- 
edge is matched only by his preoccupa- 
tion with research. He is fascinated by 
magic in all its forms and enjoys noth- 
ing more than poring over arcane texts 
and experimenting with exotic magical 
devices. 

The Academician spends so much 
time involved in intellectual pursuits 
that he tends to neglect his physical 
skills. He is not a particularly good 
fighter and avoids combat when he can, 
preferring negotiation and parley to vi- 
olence. Still, he recognizes the necessity 
of combat in certain instances, and will 
fight valiantly when required. 

Academicians can be found in virtu- 
ally any culture, but they are most 
likely to come from large urban areas 
that provide ready access to libraries, 
museums, laboratories, and other 
resources. 

A character must have a minimum 
Intelligence of 13 and a minimum Wis- 
dom of 11 to become an Academician. 

There are no special rules for aban- 
doning this kit. An Academician who 
becomes disillusioned with the aca- 
demic life or loses interest in intellectual 
pursuits can choose to neglect his stud- 
ies or research, but he is free to resume 
them at any time. 

Preferred Schools: The Academician 


Table 5: Ability Check Bonuses for Academicians 


Race Age 


Elf 100-175 
176-233 
234-350 
351 + 

60-100 
101-133 
134-200 
201 + 


Gnome 


Half-elf 


Human 


is intrigued by all the schools of magic, 
but is especially drawn to schools with 
a wide range of spells, including altera- 
tion, illusion, and _ invocation/ 
evocation. 

Barred Schools: There are no barred 
schools for the Academician. 

Role: In his homeland, the Academi- 
cian is a respected member of society, 
valued for his skills as a teacher and ad- 
visor as well as for his seemingly 
endless store of knowledge on a variety 
of subjects. Most likely, he will fill simi- 
lar roles in a campaign. 

In spite of his somewhat sedentary 
background, the Academician wel- 
comes the chance to join an adventur- 
ing party. For him, it is an unparalleled 
opportunity to experience new cul- 
tures, acquire new devices, and acquire 
first-hand information about people, 
places, and creatures he may have only 
read about. 

Secondary Skills: Required: Scribe. 

Weapon Proficiencies: Required (the 


35 


Intelligence Wisdom 

Check Bonus Check Bonus 
I +0 
+2 +1 
+3 +2 
+4 +3 
+1 +0 
+2 +1 
+2 EZ 
+3 +2 
+1 +0 
+2 +1 
+2 ey 
+3 +2 
= is | 0 
= di | +1 
+2 +1 
+2 +2 


player may choose from the following): 
Dagger, Dart, Knife, or Sling. 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: Bonus 
Proficiency: Reading/Writing. Recom- 
mended: (General) Artistic Ability, Eti- 
quette, Heraldry, Languages (Modern); 
(Wizard) Ancient History, Astrology, 
Herbalism, Languages (Ancient), Spell- 
craft; (Priest) Local History. 

Special Benefits: The Academician 
receives both of the following benefits: 

1. Academicians maintain an exten- 
sive correspondence with scholars 
throughout the world. Additionally, an 
Academician’s reputation as a man of 
wisdom often precedes him. When en- 
countering an NPC who is familiar with 
his reputation, who turns out to be one 
of his correspondents, who fancies him- 
self an intellectual, or who is an author, 
researcher, teacher, journalist, or fel- 
low scholar, the Academician receives a 
+3 reaction bonus. 

2. The Academician receives a bonus 
to all Intelligence Checks and Wisdom 


Checks. The DM has two options for 
assigning this bonus. He may simply 
give the Academician a flat +1 to his 
Intelligence and Wisdom Checks, or he 
can consult Table 5, which takes the Ac- 
ademician’s age and race into account; 
as the Academician ages, his bonuses 
increase. Once a method for assigning 
these bonuses is chosen, it cannot be 
changed later. 


Special Hindrances: Academicians 
lack the training and instinct to make 
good hand-to-hand fighters. When at- 
tacking with any type of melee weapon, 
the Academician always has a —1 pen- 
alty to hit on his first blow. Subsequent 
blows—when the Academician has had 
an opportunity to size up his opponent 
and adjust his attacks accordingly—are 
made without this penalty. However, if 
the Academician attacks a different op- 
ponent, his first blow against his new 
victim is also made at —1. 

Academicians tend to be know-it- 
alls, and unhesitatingly offer their opin- 
ions even on matters they know little 
about. Whenever the party needs to 
make a decision, the Academician 
should offer his opinion; for effective 
role-playing, the player should have his 
player speak his mind with unshakable 
confidence. If other player characters 
disagree, the Academician might lec- 
ture them on the error of their ways, 
welcome the opportunity for a spirited 
argument, or roll his eyes at his com- 
panion’s blatant display of ignorance. 

Wealth Options: The Academician 
receives the normal (1d4 +1) x 10 gp as 
starting money. 

Races: No restrictions. 


Amazon Sorceress 


Description: Amazons belong to ma- 
triarchal societies that thrive in a world 
otherwise dominated by males. Women 
occupy all important positions in Ama- 


zon societies—they are the rulers, arti- 
sans, soldiers, and scholars. 

Most Amazon societies have existed 
unchanged for thousands of years, liv- 
ing in relative isolation from the rest of 
the word, but others have more recent 
origins. Some were established by dis- 
gruntled women who tired of their sub- 
servient roles in male-dominated 
cultures and decided to rule themselves, 
while others were created by deities 
sympathetic to the plight of women. 

Men are second-class citizens in Am- 
azon cultures, occupying positions of 
menial servitude to their female superi- 
ors. In some societies, men are kept as 
slaves, treated only marginally better 
than domestic animals. Still others 
have eliminated men entirely. 

Amazons from totally male-free soci- 
eties make occasional forays into neigh- 
boring communities to fraternize with 
men. Others perpetuate their civiliza- 
tion by being extremely friendly with 
male adventurers passing through their 
territory; when the Amazons tire of 
their company, the adventurers are sent 
on their way or killed. 

An Amazon society may be as small 
as a single village or large enough to fill 
an entire continent. Because they are 
continually under siege from male- 
dominated civilizations, Amazons have 
mastered the art of war. Traditionally, 
Amazons are superior horse breeders 
and riders, excelling with spears, bows, 
and other weapons that can be wielded 
from horseback. 

A character must be female to be an 
Amazon. There are no other require- 
ments. 

To abandon this kit, the character 
must renounce her Amazon citizenship, 
most likely because she has grown to 
identify more closely with a different 
culture. 

Preferred Schools: Amazons with 
high Constitution tend to be drawn to 
the schools of conjuration/summoning 
and invocation/evocation; both are es- 


36 


pecially useful on the battlefield. Di- 
viners are also common, as they make 
excellent administrative advisors and 
counselors, 

Barred Schools: Amazons shun the 
dark forces associated with the school 
of necromancy. Because of its perceived 
uselessness in combat, they also avoid 
the school of illusion. 

Role: Most Amazons are warriors, 
but the few wizards among them are 
held in high regard, as is any person 
who has mastered a difficult art. Ama- 
zon Sorceresses typically serve as seers, 
advisors, counselors, and administra- 
tors. Because of their formidable 
power, Amazon  Sorceresses— 
especially invokers and conjurers—are 
always welcome on the battlefield. 

In male-dominated cultures, the Am- 
azon is regarded as a curiosity at best. 
She is stared at, whispered about, and 
sometimes openly ridiculed. Well- 
meaning women who have accepted 
subservience as a cultural norm may try 
to convince the Amazon to change her 
unnatural ways, while chauvinistic 
men, seeing her as a threat to their mas- 
culinity, may feel compelled to domi- 
nate her in any number of ways. Even 
open-minded citizens will likely be sus- 
picious of a female with such unusual 
attitudes. 

Among her peers in an adventuring 
party, the Amazon Sorceress will prove 
to be a courageous fighter and a capable 
spell caster. Although the other player- 
characters may harbor some prejudices 
of their own about the role of females, 
the DM should discourage any overt 
discrimination; once she has proven 
herself in tough situations, the Amazon 
should be accepted as an equal in all re- 
gards. 

Secondary Skills: Required: Groom. 

Weapon Proficiency: Required: 
None. Recommended: Spear or long 
bow. This is contrary to the weapons 
usually allowed wizards, but is typical 
for Amazon cultures. 


Nonweapon Proficiencies: Bonus 
Proficiencies: Riding (Land-based), An- 
imal Training. Recommended: (Gen- 
eral) Animal Handling; (Warrior) 
Animal Lore, Armorer, Bowyer/ 
Fletcher, Hunting, Running, Survival, 
Tracking. 

Equipment: When an Amazon char- 
acter is first created, she must buy her 
weapons from among the following 
choices only: bow (any type), dagger/ 
dirk, javelin, knife, spear. Once she has 
adventured elsewhere in the world, she 
may purchase other types of weapons. 

Special Benefits: Male opponents 
who have never encountered the formi- 
dable Amazon women tend to underes- 
timate them. Therefore, the first time 
such a male encounters an Amazon in 
combat, the Amazon receives a +3 bo- 
nus to hit and +3 to damage on her first 
blow only. These bonuses reflect the 
fact that the opponent is taken off 
guard by such an able female. 


This bonus is not applicable in every 
situation. The DM should consider the 
following guidelines when ruling on the 
Amazon Sorceress’s bonus. 

e The bonus does not apply to oppo- 
nents of 5th level or higher. Such oppo- 
nents are too seasoned to be surprised 
in this manner. 

© The bonus does not apply to oppo- 
nents from cultures where females are 
accepted as equals and female warriors 
are common. 

e The bonus does not apply to oppo- 
nents who have fighting females as com- 
rades, who have faced fighting women 
before, or who have seen the Amazon 
use her bonus on someone else. 

e The bonus does not always apply 
to player characters. The DM might ask 
a quick, guarded question of the player 
to learn whether his character would 
underestimate a female opponent. 


Regardless of whether the Amazon's 
first blow hits or misses her intended 


37 


WV Vino t side Sheet alll. : UL 


Wizard Kits 


victim, the victim will never be subject 
to the bonus again; the bonus can be 
used only once per victim. 

Special Hindrances: The Amazon 
suffers a —3 reaction roll adjustment 
from NPCs from male- dominated soci- 
eties. This reaction adjustment no 
longer applies once characters come to 
know and respect her. Likewise, player 
characters need not respond with hos- 
tility toward their Amazon companion 
unless they want to do so for role- 
playing purposes. 

Wealth Options: The Amazon Sor- 
ceress receives the normal (1d4 + 1) x 
10 gp as starting money. 

Races: Most Amazons are human, 
but other races are acceptable, with the 
adjustments that follow. 

e Half-elves: Substitute either short 
bow or spear for the required Weapon 
Proficiency. 

e Gnomes: Substitute throwing axe 
or short sword for the required Weapon 
Proficiency, use ponies for mounts, and 


Wizard Kits 


substitute Tracking and Survival for the 
bonus Nonweapon Proficiencies. 

© Elves: Substitute Endurance and 
Set Snares for the bonus Nonweapon 
Proficiencies. 


Anagakok 


Description: The Anagakok is a wiz- 
ard from a primitive society that occu- 
pies one of the world’s most extreme 
climates. Primarily concerned with sur- 
vival, the Anagakok uses his magical 
skills to help his fellow tribesmen locate 
food, plan for dangerous shifts in the 
weather, and protect them from hostile 
creatures and rival tribes who are in 
competition for the same limited re- 
sources. An Anagakok also brings 
good fortune to his tribe; many believe 
he is possessed by a guardian spirit 
(though there is no actual evidence of 
this). 

The Anagakok is known by a variety 
of names which depend on his society 
of origin; other names for an Anagakok 
include Magian, Phylacterist, Veroni- 
can, Scarabor, and Obeahist. 

Although an Anagakok can originate 
from any number of hostile environ- 
ments, two are considered in this dis- 
cussion. The first is the Anagakok from 
a climate where the temperature never 
rises above 0 degrees F., whom we call 
the Frigid Climate Anagakok. The sec- 
ond is the Anagakok from a climate 
where the temperature never falls be- 
low 100 degrees F., whom we call the 
Torrid Climate Anagakok. 

To be an Anagakok, a wizard must 
have a Constitution of at least 13. Fe- 
male Anagakok are as common as 
males. 

Though an Anagakok can renounce 
his heritage and sever ties with his soci- 
ety, he cannot renounce this kit; the 
traits of an Anagakok are inborn and 
permanent. 

Preferred Schools: The preferred 


schools of the Anagakok are abjura- 
tion, alteration, enchantment/charm, 
invocation/evocation, and greater 
divination. 

Barred Schools: Anagakok are 
barred from the schools of illusion and 
necromancy because of their spells’ rel- 
ative uselessness for surviving in hostile 
environments. 

Role: The Anagakok is serious- 
minded, even-tempered, and soft- 
spoken. Though unfamiliar with 
societies and cultures other than his 
own, he adapts quickly and is fasci- 
nated by technology in all its forms. 

In a campaign, an Anagakok tends to 
assume responsibility for the safety of 
his companions; their security is always 
foremost in his mind. Though the Ana- 
gakok are not natural leaders (such 
roles are usually reserved for the 
strongest warriors in their tribes) they 
are superb and fearless combatants, 
quick to volunteer for the most danger- 
ous missions. 

Secondary Skills: Required (choose 
one of the following, based on the Ana- 
gakok’s background): Fisher, Forester, 
Hunter, Navigator, Trapper/Furrier. 

Weapon Proficiency: Required 
(choose one of the following, based on 
the Anagakok’s background): Bow 
(any), dagger, harpoon, javelin, knife, 
sling, trident. 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: Bonus: 
Endurance, Survival, Weather Sense. 
Recommended: (General) Direction 
Sense, Fire-building, Riding (Land- 
based), Rope Use, Swimming; (Wizard) 
Astrology; (Warrior, all cost single 
slots) Animal Lore, Hunting, Moun- 
taineering, Running, Set Snares. 

Equipment: A beginning Anagakok 
can buy weapons only from those listed 
in the Weapon Proficiency entry above. 
He can buy only equipment that would 
normally be available in his home soci- 
ety; the DM has the right to veto any 
initial purchase. 

An Anagakok must spend all his ini- 


38 


tial money. Any money not spent is 
lost. 

Special Benefits: An Anagakok can 
find food in even the most barren of en- 
vironments. In a 24-hour period, an 
Anagakok can find enough food to feed 
himself and a number of people equal to 
his level (for instance, a 4th-level Ana- 
gakok can find enough food to feed 
himself and four others every day). 

Once per week, an Anagakok can 
cast a special good fortune spell on him- 
self and a number of people equal to his 
level; the effect of good fortune lasts for 
a number of turns equal to his level (for 
instance, a 4th-level Anagakok can cast 
good fortune on himself and four oth- 
ers, and the effect lasts for four turns). 
All opponents have a —1 penalty on 
their chance to hit when attacking those 
under the effect of good fortune. This 
ability is innate; an Anagakok is not re- 
quired to memorize good fortune, nor 
does it count against his daily spell 
limit. To cast the spell, an Anagakok 
must merely concentrate for 1 round 
and point to the subjects to be affected; 
no verbal or material components are 
required. 

Additionally, an Anagakok has natu- 
ral immunities to environmental ex- 
tremes based on his background. A 
Frigid Climate Anagakok suffers no 
penalties, damage, or other restrictions 
in environments of extreme cold. A 
Torrid Climate Anagakok suffers no 
penalties, damage, or other restrictions 
in environments of extreme heat. These 
immunities apply to natural conditions 
only; for instance, a Frigid Climate 
Anagakok suffers normal damage from 
cone of cold and other cold-based 
spells, while a Torrid Climate Anaga- 
kok suffers normal damage from fire- 
ball and other heat-based spells. 

Special Hindrances: Exposure to 
harsh climates gives the Anagakok an 
unusual appearance, such as a tough, 
leathery skin for the Torrid Climate 
Anagakok, and a head-to-toe covering 


of short, coarse hair for the Frigid Cli- 
mate Anagakok. Because of his appear- 
ance and strange manner, an Anagakok 
suffers a —2 reaction penalty from all 
NPCs unfamiliar with the Anagakok’s 
culture. 

Just as their backgrounds provide 
them with natural immunities to certain 
environmental extremes, all Anagakok 
suffer penalties when exposed to envi- 
ronments radically different from those 
in which they were born. A Frigid Cli- 
mate Anagakok suffers a —1 penalty to 
all attack rolls, damage rolls, Ability 
Checks, and saving throws in environ- 
ments with temperatures above 100 de- 
grees F. A Torrid Climate Anagakok 
suffers a —1 penalty to all attack rolls, 
damage rolls, Ability Checks, and sav- 
ing throws in environments with tem- 
peratures below 0 degrees F. 

Wealth Options: A beginning Ana- 
gakok receives only (1d4 +1) x 8 gp as 
starting money. 

Races: No restrictions. 

Notes: Players and DMs are encour- 
aged to invent their own types of Ana- 
gakok from other extreme envi- 
ronments, An Anagakok who lives in 
the bottom of an active volcano, in the 
depths of the ocean, or on an island 
continually battered by hurricane 
winds are all possibilities. Use the ex- 
amples above to develop appropriate 
bonuses and penalties for each type of 
Anagakok based on his background. 


Militant Wizard 


Description: The Militant Wizard is 
skilled in both magical and-military 
arts, making him an extremely formi- 
dable opponent. They can come from 
aggressive, warmongering cultures 
bent on the conquest of weaker nations, 
or from cultures continually under 
siege from their more warlike neigh- 
bors, making military preparedness vi- 
tal to their defense. In any case, the 


Militant Wizard considers a trained 
body as important as a trained mind, 
and prides himself on keeping his com- 
bat skills as sharp as his magical talents. 

A character must have a Strength of 
at least 13 to be a Militant Wizard. 
Though male Militant Wizards will be 
more common, female Militant Wiz- 
ards are allowable as well, unless the 
DM's world specifically forbids them, 

Abandoning this kit is difficult. A 
Militant Wizard must abstain from us- 
ing both of the weapons he has chosen 
for his Weapon Proficiencies for three 
full experience levels. Once he reaches 
the third experience level, he loses the 
use of his two Weapon Proficiencies. If 
he then renounces his citizenship from 
his home culture, he can successfully 
abandon this kit. 

For example, consider a 5th-level 
Militant Wizard with Weapon Profi- 
ciencies in short sword and long bow. If 
he abstains from using both of these 
weapons (and the corresponding 
Weapon Proficiencies), he loses his 
Weapon Proficiencies in short sword 
and long bow when he reaches 8th 
level. If he then renounces his citizen- 
ship from his home culture, he can 
abandon this kit. If he uses these weap- 
ons before reaching 8th level, he must 
begin again, abstaining for an addi- 
tional three levels of experience (for in- 
stance, if he uses his long bow Weapon 
Proficiency when at 7th level, he'll have 
to abstain until he reaches 10th level in 
order to abandon this kit.) 

Preferred Schools: Militant Wizards 
prefer schools with an excess of offen- 
sive and defensive spells, such as abju- 
ration, alteration, conjuration/sum- 
moning, invocation/evocation, and ne- 
cromancy. 

Barred Schools: Militant Wizards are 
barred from specializing in the schools 
of enchantment/charm and illusion, as 
their cultures tend to consider them rel- 
atively useless in combat. Though 
greater divination has uses on the bat- 


39 


tlefield, particularly in the area of re- 
connaissance, Militant Wizards are 
discouraged, but not barred, from divi- 
nation specialization. 

Role: Militant Wizards are among 
the most honored and respected citizens 
in their societies, since their powerful 
magic makes them exceptionally able 
soldiers. Depending on his back- 
ground, the Militant Wizard may be a 
brutal, savage killer, wallowing in the 
violence of the battlefield, or he may be 
a heroic warrior, fighting with honor 
and taking lives only when necessary. 

A Militant Wizard might have a va- 
riety of reasons for joining an adven- 
turing party. Perhaps he shares the 
party's goal of defeating a force of evil, 
or he might be seeking treasure to fi- 
nance his own army at home. He might 
wish to study the fighting techniques 
of other cultures, or he might hire on 
as a mercenary. 

Whatever his reasons, the Militant 
Wizard's fighting skills should greatly 
benefit any party. He makes an excel- 
lent leader, but he is also capable of fol- 
lowing orders to the letter, assuming 
the orders are issued by a commander 
he respects. The Militant Wizard tends 
to prefer action to inaction and combat 
to negotiation. He is skeptical of schol- 
arly and philosophic types, and is un- 
likely to form close relationships with 
such characters. 

Secondary Skills: No particular Sec- 
ondary Skill is recommended or re- 
quired. He receives his Secondary Skill 
either by choosing or rolling randomly, 
whatever method is normal for the 
campaign. 

Weapon Proficiency: Required 
(choose one from of the following): 
Battle axe, bow (any), crossbow (any), 
dagger, javelin, sling, spear, sword 
(any), warhammer. These are different 
from the weapons normally associated 
with wizards, but they are common for 
Militant Wizards. Also, see the Special 
Benefits section below. 


Nonweapon Proficiency: Bonus: 
(Warrior) Endurance. Recommended: 
(General) Animal Handling, Direction 
Sense, Riding (Land-based), Swim- 
ming;(Wizard) Languages (Ancient); 
(Warrior; these take 2 slots only) Blind- 
fighting, Tracking, (Warrior; these take 
1 slot only) Mountaineering, Running, 
Set Snares. 

Equipment: The Militant Wizard 
may buy any equipment he chooses, 
keeping whatever money he might not 
use. 

Special Benefits: The Militant Wiz- 
ard receives a bonus Weapon Profi- 
ciency free of charge; this is in addition 
to his normal Weapon Proficiency. This 
bonus Weapon Proficiency does not use 
any of the wizard’s proficiency slots, 
but he must choose it from the weapons 
listed in the Weapon Proficiency entry 
above. 

Additionally, a Militant Wizard can 
acquire any of the Warrior's Non- 
weapon Proficiencies given on Table 37 
on page 55 of the Player's Handbook at 
the listed number of slots; for instance, 
if a Militant Wizard wants the Animal 
Lore proficiency, it costs him only 1 slot 
instead of the normal 2 for a wizard. 

Special Hindrances: Because a Mili- 
tant Wizard devotes so much of his time 
and energy to the mastery of military 
skills, he is limited in his access to spells 
from various schools. Table 6 lists the 
oppositional schools for Militant Wiz- 
ards of each speciality; the Militant 
Wizard is forbidden to learn spells from 
these schools. 


Table 6: 
Oppositional Schools for 
Militant Wizards 
Specialist Oppositional 
Schools 
Abjurer Illusion 
Alteration 
Greater Divin. 
Conjurer Alteration 
Greater Divin. 
Invoc./Evoc. 
Enchanter Invoc./Evoc. 
Necromancy 
Greater Divin. 
Diviner Conj./Summ. 
Abjuration 
Invoker Illusion 
Enchant./Charm 
Conj./Summ. 
Necromancer Enchant. /Charm 
Illusion 
Alteration 
Transmuter Necromancy 
Abjuration 


Conj./Summ. 


Militant Wizard mages are likewise 
limited. The DM may decide which of 
the following limitations affects Mili- 
tant Wizard mages in his campaign 
(choose only one limitation). 


1. The Militant Wizard mage is for- 
bidden to learn 8th-level and 9th-level 
spells from any school. 

2. The Militant Wizard mage learns 
spells as if his Intelligence were two 
points lower than he actually has, as in- 
dicated on Table 4, page 16 of the Play- 
ers Handbook, This limitation also 
affects the number of languages he can 


learn, the highest level of spells he can 
cast, the maximum number of spells per 
level he can know, and his spell immu- 
nity. For instance, if this limitation is in 
effect for a Militant Wizard mage with 
an Intelligence score of 15, he can only 
know three languages, can cast spells of 
no higher than 6th-level, has a 55 per- 
cent chance to learn a new spell, and 
has a maximum of nine spells per level 
that he can know. 

3. The Militant Wizard mage can 
learn spells from only five schools. To 
determine which schools are unavail- 
able to him, roll 1d8 three times, where 
1 = abjuration, 2 = conjuration/ 
summoning, 3 = greater divination, 
4 = enchantment/charm, 5 = illusion, 
6 = invocation/evocation, 7 = necro- 
mancy, and 8 = alteration. If the same 
result occurs twice, roll again. 

Wealth Options: The Militant Wiz- 
ard receives the standard (1d4 + 1) x10 
starting money. 

Races: No restrictions. 


Mystic 


Description: Thoughtful, reserved, 
and extremely introspective, the Mystic 
is devoted to self-enlightenment and 
sees the study of magic as the key to 
spiritual awareness. The Mystic enjoys 
nothing more than spending long hours 
contemplating the mysteries of the uni- 
verse and attempting to become more 
in touch with his inner self. The Mystic 
is not necessarily a student of religion 
or philosophy; he seeks an awareness 
that can only be found intuitively. 

The Mystic is by no means a reluc- 
tant magic-user. In fact, the Mystic be- 
lieves that the casting of each spell and 
the acquisition of each new magical 
technique brings him closer to perfect 
awareness. The mental discipline neces- 
sary for the mastery of magic is the per- 
fect compliment to self-knowledge. 

The Mystic can come from any cul- 


ture, but he is usually from a society 
that places a.high value on philosophy, 
art, and scholarship. His is most likely 
to join an adventuring party for the op- 
portunity to broaden his outlook, dis- 
cover new things about himself, and 
use magic in new, enlightening ways. 

To be a Mystic, a wizard must have a 
Wisdom score of at least 13. 

There are no special rules for aban- 
donment of this kit. If the Mystic grows 
weary of the contemplative life or feels 
that he has reached a pinnacle of self- 
awareness, he can simply leave this kit 
behind. 

Preferred Schools: The Mystic pre- 
fers the schools of illusion, divination, 
and enchantment/charm. 

Barred Schools: Because the Mystic is 
predisposed against magic that harms 
other living things, he is barred from 
specializing in the schools of necro- 
mancy, invocation/evocation, and 
conjuration/summoning. He is not pre- 
vented from learning spells from these 
schools—he simply prefers to limit his 
association with them. 

Role: In many societies, the Mystic is 
considered to be little more than a 
crackpot, an eccentric with an utter 
lack of ambition who serves no useful 
purpose. In more enlightened cultures, 
the Mystic is seen as a seeker of truth, a 
sensitive soul engaged in an inspiring 
spiritual journey. 

In a campaign, the Mystic is quiet 
and non-aggressive. His very presence 
is soothing to the party, and he always 
has a word of comfort or encourage- 
ment for his companions. The Mystic 
avoids combat whenever possible, but 
courageously rises to the occasion 
when his comrades are threatened. 
Only in the most extreme circum- 
stances will the Mystic intentionally 
take a life; however, he will kill if neces- 
sary to preserve his own life or the life 
of a companion. 

Secondary Skills: The Mystic must 
take one of the following as his Second- 


ary Skill (player's choice, based on the 
Mystic’s background): Farmer, For- 
ester, Groom, Mason, Scribe, Tailor/ 
Weaver, Woodworker. 

Weapon Proficiency: Required (the 
player chooses one of the following): 
Dagger, dart, or sling. 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: Bonus: 
Astrology, Religion. Recommended: 
(General) Agriculture, Artistic Ability, 
Carpentry, Etiquette, Languages (Mod- 
ern), Leatherworking, Pottery, 
Seamstress/Tailor, Stonemasonry, 
Weaving; (Wizard) Ancient History, 
Herbalism, Languages (Ancient), 
Reading/Writing, Spellcraft. 

Equipment: The Mystic may buy 
only the weapon associated with his 
Weapon Proficiency. As his adventur- 
ing career progresses, he can buy (and 
use) only daggers, darts, knives, and 
slings. He must spend all of his starting 
money; any leftover gold is lost. 

Special Benefits: The Mystic receives 
one of the following special abilities 
from the list below. The special ability 
is chosen when the character is first cre- 
ated and can never be changed. 

1. Once per week, the Mystic can 
feign death as per the 3rd-level wizard 
spell; he can use this ability only on 
himself. The Mystic can feign death for 
up to 24 hours, awakening at any time. 
To use this ability, the Mystic must 
merely concentrate for 1 round; no 
components are necessary. 

2. Once per week, the Mystic can 
transform his consciousness into a 
ghostly spirit form, leaving his physical 
body behind. The spirit form has the 
appearance of a misty cloud in the 
shape of the caster. The spirit form can- 
not attack, speak, or cast spells, but it 
can fly at a movement rate of 24 (Ma- 
neuverability Class B) and can pass 
through the smallest opening or tiniest 
crack. The Mystic’s spirit form can 
travel an unlimited distance from his 
physical body as long as it remains in 
the same plane of existence. The spirit 


4i 


form is invulnerable to all attack forms, 
but dispel magic or a similar spell 
causes the spirit form to instantly re- 
turn to its body. 

While in spirit form, the Mystic’s 
physical body remains comatose. The 
body is subject to all regular attacks 
and suffers damage normally, The spirit 
form can remain away from the body 
for up to 24 hours, but once it returns to 
its body, the Mystic revives and cannot 
use his spirit form for another week. 

To use his spirit form, the Mystic 
must merely concentrate for 1 round; 
no components are necessary. 

3. Once per week, the Mystic can use 
a special levitate self ability for one 
hour. Once initiated, the Mystic can use 
this ability to levitate himself straight 
up in the air at a rate of 10 yards per 
round. He can stop, hover, descend, 
and ascend at will, though horizontal 
movement is not empowered by this 
ability (however, the Mystic could push 
himself along a wall to move laterally). 
While levitating, the Mystic can carry 
as much weight as he can normally, Un- 
like the levitation spell, the Mystic us- 
ing levitate self suffers no attack roll 
penalties when attempting to use mis- 
sile weapons. 

To use this ability, the Mystic must 
merely concentrate for 1 round; no 
components are required. As soon as a 
levitating Mystic touches the ground, 
his use of this ability is over; he can use 
it again in another week. 

Special Hindrances: A Mystic must 
spend two consecutive hours per day 
meditating. These two hours must al- 
ways occur at the same time of day; the 
player can decide which hours are de- 
voted to meditation, but once decided, 
the time period can never change (typi- 
cal meditation times are the first two 
hours of dawn, the first two hours after 
sunset, or from midnight to 2 a.m.). If 
the Mystic neglects to perform his med- 
itation, is unable to perform it, or is in- 
terrupted more than once (for more 


than a total of 1 minute), the following 
day he is able to cast only the number of 
spells allowed to a wizard one level 
lower than his actual level. For in- 
stance, if a 4th-level Mystic is unable to 
meditate on Day 1, on Day 2 he will be 
able to cast only as many spells as a 3rd- 
level wizard. 

Wealth Options: The Mystic receives 
only (1d4 + 1) x 5 gp as starting money. 

Races: No limitations. 


Patrician 


Description: The Patrician is a wiz- 
ard of noble birth, a member of his cul- 
ture’s aristocracy. Born into a life of 
wealth and privilege, the Patrician con- 
siders himself an arbiter of good taste 
and a connoisseur of the finer things in 
life. He looks down his nose at working 
men and women, as well as all others he 
considers to be inconsequential rabble. 
If anything, his mastery of magic makes 
him even more arrogant than other 
members of the ruling class, since he 
sees his talent as clear proof of his su- 
periority over common folk, 

The Patrician may join an adventur- 
ing party out of a sense of duty to his 
country or to promote the common 
good—in spite of their snobbery, good- 
aligned Patricians have strong moral 
codes. A Patrician might have grown 
weary of his pampered life and sought 
an adventuring party to add a touch of 
excitement to his otherwise dreary ex- 
istence, Alternately, his parents might 
have ordered him to join a party to 
teach him humility. 

There are no special requirements to 
be a Patrician. The majority are male, 
but noblewomen are also included in 
this category (although such a charac- 
ter would more correctly be called a 
Noblewoman or Aristocrat). 

To abandon this kit, the Patrician 
must renounce his birthright. He will 
forever after be ostracized by all the no- 


bility from his homeland and may even 
be disowned and disinherited by his 
family. 

Preferred Schools: The Patrician can 
specialize in any school, but prefers 
those that he perceives as most power- 
ful, such as conjuration/summoning, 
alteration, and invocation/evocation. 

Barred Schools: The Patrician will 
not specialize in necromancy, a school 
he considers disgusting and repulsive. 

Role: The Patrician prefers the com- 
pany of nobles and other members of 
the upper class. Most Patricians are 
wealthy and have no need to earn 
money, but many still serve their soci- 
eties as administrators, counselors, and 
ambassadors. Since they have access to 
the the finest teachers and universities, 
Patricians are extremely well-educated 
and expert in a variety of areas. 

Fellow player characters will right- 
fully perceive the Patrician to be an ar- 
rogant, condescending snob. On the 
positive side, the Patrician is also well- 
mannered and courteous, even to those 
he considers to be his social inferiors. 
Male Patricians can be extremely chiv- 
alrous to members of the opposite sex, 
regardless of whether they like it or not. 
The Patrician is generally cooperative 
with the party, though he will balk at 
any suggestion that compromises his 
sense of dignity (for instance, he will 
never enter a filthy cavern or search the 
bodies of slain enemies without 
squawking). His first-rate education 
and extensive travels make him an ex- 
cellent source of information. 

Secondary Skills: Required (the 
player must choose one of the follow- 
ing): Bowyer, Gambler, Groom, Jew- 
eler, Limner/Painter, Scribe. 

Weapon Proficiency: Required (the 
player must choose one of the follow- 
ing): dagger, knife. 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: Bonus: 
(General) Etiquette, Heraldry, Riding 
(Land-based). Recommended: (Gen- 
eral) Dancing, Languages (Modern), 


Riding (Land-based), Singing; (Wizard) 
Ancient History, Languages (Ancient), 
Reading/Writing, Religion; (Rogue, 
double slots) Ancient History, Apprais- 
ing, Gaming, Local History, Musical In- 
strument; (Priest, double slots) 
Languages (Ancient). 

Equipment: A beginning Patrician 
must buy all of the following items: 
horse (must be at least a riding horse), 
riding saddle, bit and bridle, horse- 
shoes and shoeing, halter, and saddle 
blanket. He can spend the rest of his 
money as he wishes. 

Special Benefits: The Patrician be- 
gins with more starting money than 
other wizards (see the Wealth Options 
entry below). Additionally, he receives 
a +3 reaction modifier from any noble 
from his own culture, and a +2 reac- 
tion modifier from nobles from other 
cultures. When traveling, a Patrician 
can demand shelter from any fellow no- 
blemen from his own culture. Such 
shelter is offered free of charge and is 
made available for the Patrician and up 
to two persons per experience level of 
the Patrician (for instance, a 3rd-level 
Patrician can demand shelter for him- 
self and six others). 

Special Hindrances: When making 
purchases, the Patrician accepts noth- 
ing but the best, whether it be a meal, a 
room for the night, a weapon, or even a 
chest to carry his possessions. Any time 
he buys any item, the Patrician must 
pay 10 to 100 percent more than the 
listed price in the Player's Handbook. 
The DM will decide the price paid by 
the Patrician, which may vary from 
item to item, depending on the quality 
of merchandise in a particular locale. 
For instance, the best meal in Village A 
might sell for 7 sp, while the best meal 
in Village B might sell for 10 sp. In all 
cases, the Patrician will settle for no less 
than the most expensive item available; 
he always pays at least 10 percent more 
than the listed price. 

If a Patrician lacks the funds to buy 


high-quality items, he can settle for 
cheaper goods, but he no longer re- 
ceives his reaction bonus in that partic- 
ular encounter or community; NPCs 
simply do not believe that he is a noble. 
For instance, if a Patrician settles for a 
standard 5 sp meal at an inn, all of the 
NPCs in the inn react to him normally, 
ignoring his insistence that he’s a noble- 
man. Word will quickly spread 
throughout the community that an 
amusing fellow is pretending to be a no- 
bleman, and soon all of the NPCs in the 
community will react to him normally. 
If a Patrician settles for shabby accou- 
trements, such as a normal sword or av- 
erage saddle, all NPCs will react to him 
normally until he replaces them with 
more expensive items. 

Just as the Patrician can demand shel- 
ter from other noblemen, so can they 
demand shelter from him. Note that 
this can get to be an expensive proposi- 
tion if the NPC noblemen stay for any 
length of time. 

Wealth Options: The Patrician re- 
ceives an extra 150 gp in addition to the 
standard(1d4 + 1) x 10 gp. 

Races: No restrictions. However, if a 
particular race doesn’t recognize or al- 
low socio-economic stratifications in 
the DM's campaign world, that race 
will not have Patricians. 


Peasant Wizard 


Description: The Peasant Wizard is a 
spell caster of modest means whose ex- 
ceptional skills and matchless courage 
have made him a champion of the 
masses. Though his talents have set him 
apart and made him a legend in his 
homeland, he will never forget his 
roots. An advocate of the commoner, 
the Peasant Wizard devotes himself to 
the promotion of equality and justice. 
The Peasant Wizard is the most fre- 
quently encountered of all the wizards. 

There are no additional ability re- 


quirements for the Peasant Wizard. 

No special rules exist for abandoning 
this kit. 

Preferred Schools: There are no pre- 
ferred schools for the Peasant Wizard, 
though illusionists, abjurers, and in- 
vokers are among the most frequently 
encountered. 

Barred Schools: There are no barred 
schools for the Peasant Wizard; how- 
ever, there are fewer necromancers and 
diviners than any other specialist. 

Role: The Peasant Wizard fights on 
behalf of the common people. He con- 
siders himself protector of the helpless, 
actively opposing any action from the 
party that threatens or exploits the 
peasants. For instance, he won't allow 
his party to recruit peasants for combat 
support unless they fully understand 
the risks involved. When a companion 
of the Peasant Wizard bargains with a 
common man for goods or services, the 
Peasant Wizard makes sure his com- 
panion pays the common man a fair 
price. When the party recovers a trea- 
sure, the Peasant Wizard demands that 
the local citizens receive their fair share 
if they helped the party in any way or if 
the treasure was recovered on their 
land. 

The Peasant Wizard sees the wealthy 
classes as a primary reason for the com- 
moners’ miseries, so he has little respect 
or patience for noblemen and the 
wealthy. Aside from the occasional in- 
sult, the Peasant Wizard is likely to 
avoid associating with any Patricians in 
his party. 

Secondary Skills: The player may 
choose his Peasant Wizard's secondary 
skill. The DM might consider limiting 
this choice to skills that are useful to 
peasants such as swimming; it is un- 
likely (but not impossible) that a peas- 
ant wizard could learn heraldry or 
etiquette. 

Weapon Proficiency: Required (play- 
er's choice): Bow (any), dagger, knife, 
spear, dart, sling. 


43 


Nonweapon Proficiency: Bonus 
(one of the following, player's choice: 
Agriculture, Fishing. Recommended: 
(General) Animal Handling, Black- 
smithing, Carpentry, Cobbling, Cook- 
ing, Direction Sense, Fire-building, 
Leatherworking, Pottery, Riding 
(Land-based), Stonemasonry, Weather 
Sense, Weaving. 

Equipment: The Peasant Wizard can 
spend his money on anything he likes, 
within the limitations described in the 
Special Hindrances entry below. 

Special Benefits: When in his home- 
land, the Peasant Wizard will always 
be given food and shelter at no charge 
from his fellow commoners. This cour- 
tesy extends to the Peasant Wizard's 
companions, as long as he vouches for 
them. The Peasant Wizard does not re- 
ceive this benefit in lands other than 
his own, but he always receives a +2 
reaction modifier from peasants in any 
culture. 

Special Hindrances: Aside from 
weapons, a Peasant Wizard may own 
only one item worth as much as 15 gp. 
Aside from this item, all of his other 
items must be valued at 10 gp or less. 
The total value of all his possessions, 
including money but excluding weap- 
ons, can never exceed 75 gp. Any trea- 
sure or possessions in excess of this 
limit must be donated to some worthy 
cause. 

Wealth Options: The Peasant Wiz- 
ard receives only (1d4 + 1) x 5 gp for 
starting money. 

Races: No restrictions. 


Savage Wizard 


Description: The Savage Wizard is 
the spell caster of a remote tribe, cul- 
turally and technologically primitive 
by the standards of the rest of the 
world. Although these tribes com- 
monly maintain functional civiliza- 
tions for thousands of years, their 


traditions, dress, and customs are so 
simple that most outsiders consider 
them unsophisticated brutes. 

There are a variety of Savage tribes 
around the world, ranging from paci- 
fistic societies of farmers and herders 
to bloodthirsty headhunters and bar- 
barians. All, however, are sharply at- 
tuned to the natural world, sharing a 
deep respect for animal and plant life 
and an innate understanding of the 
mysteries of nature. 

To be a Savage Wizard, a character 
must have a minimum Strength score 
of 11 and a minimum Constitution 
score of 13. 

To abandon this kit, a character 
must renounce his membership with 
his tribe and become a citizen of a dif- 
ferent culture. Since tribal roots run 
deep, a dramatic change such as this 
should be slow in coming; a Savage 
Wizard must have advanced at least 
five levels since leaving his tribe and 
experiencing adventures in the outside 
world before cutting ties with his tribe. 

Preferred Schools: Because their 
Constitutions tend to be exceptionally 
high, Savage Wizards excel in the 
schools of conjuration/summoning 
and invocation/evocation. 

Barred Schools: Savage Wizards 
lack the natural aptitude for mastering 
the schools of abjuration and enchant- 
ment/charm. 

Role: Most tribesmen are dazzled 
and impressed by magic, so the Savage 
Wizard typically holds a position of 
great power in his tribe. If not the ac- 
tual ruler, the Savage Wizard is a re- 
spected teacher or tribal counselor, 
Depending on the nature of the tribe, 
the Savage Wizard is known by a vari- 
ety of names, among them Witch Doc- 
tor, Mundunugu, Wangateur, and 
Isangoma. 

The Savage Wizard’s power can 
sometimes work against him, particu- 
larly if his tribe is exceptionally super- 
stitious or if an ambitious tribesman 


schemes to usurp the wizard’s leader- 
ship role. If the tribe becomes con- 
vinced that the wizard is consorting 
with demons or otherwise stirring up 
dark forces better left alone, they may 
expel the wizard from the tribe with 
the threat of execution if he returns, 
This is one way that a Savage Wizard 
might link up with an adventuring 
party. 

In a campaign, the Savage Wizard 
takes the role of an outsider, baffled 
and intimidated by the mysteries of the 
“civilized” world. Products of technol- 
ogy, such as oil lanterns and cross- 
bows, both fascinate and frighten him. 
While he is at home in the darkest jun- 
gles or most treacherous mountains, 
he is extremely uncomfortable in cities 
and towns. If the Savage Wizard is 
from a relatively pacifistic tribe, he 
might serve as the conscience of his 
party, questioning their eagerness to 
kill, their obsession with wealth, their 
selfishness, and their inequitable sys- 
tem of justice. 

Secondary Skills: The Savage Wiz- 
ard's Secondary Skill should be based 
on the primary occupation of his tribe: 
that is, if his tribe is mostly fishermen, 
his Secondary Skill should be Fishing. 
Other likely skills include Forester, 
Groom, Hunter, and Trapper/Furrier, 

Weapon Proficiency: Required (one 
of the following, representing his 
tribe's weapon of choice): spear, blow- 
gun, dagger, knife, or sling. Regardless 
of whether the Savage Wizard eventu- 
ally becomes familiar with new weap- 
ons, he is likely to prefer his tribal 
weapon throughout his adventuring 
career. 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: (Gen- 
eral) Direction Sense or Weather Sense 
(player choice); (Warrior) Endurance 
or Survival. Recommended: (General) 
Animal Handling, Animal Training, 
Fire-Building, Fishing, Riding (Land- 
based), Rope Use, Swimming; (War- 
rior, double slots) Animal Lore, 


Bowyer/Fletcher, Hunting, Mountain- 
eering, Running, Set Snares, Tracking; 
(Priest, double slots) Healing, Local 
History; (Rogue, double slots) Jump- 
ing, Tightrope Walking, Tumbling; 
(Wizard) Herbalism, Religion. A Sav- 
age Wizard cannot take Etiquette or 
Heraldry when first created. 

Equipment: The only weapon the 
Savage Wizard can purchase initially 
is his tribal weapon (see Weapon Profi- 
ciency). He must spend all of his re- 
maining gold when he is created; he 
may not keep any unspent gold. He 
can purchase only equipment that 
would normally be available to his 
tribe; for instance, his tribe probably 
has herbs, nuts, fishing nets, and rafts 
available, but they are unlikely to have 
chains, lanterns, hourglasses, or mag- 
nifying glasses. The DM has the final 
word as to what equipment is available 
to any particular Savage Wizard. 

Special Benefits: The Savage Wizard 
receives one of the following special 
abilities from the list below. The spe- 
cial ability is chosen when the charac- 
ter is first created and can never be 
changed. 

1. The Savage Wizard can manufac- 
ture a protective talisman once per 
week. The talisman is a small pouch of 
herbs hung on a leather cord which is 
worn around the subject’s neck. The 
talisman gives protection from evil to 
the wearer, identical to the effects of 
the Ist-level wizard spell. The talisman 
offers continual protection for a full 
day, after which time the herbs disinte- 
grate. Dispel magic or a similar spell 
permanently cancels the magic of that 
particular talisman. The Savage Wiz- 
ard requires no less than one hour to 
manufacture a talisman. 

2. Once per week, the Savage Wiz- 
ard can construct a small replicant of 
any single victim of his choice. The re- 
plicant is about 6 inches tall, made of 
clay, and crudely resembles the form of 
the victim. It must also contain a lock 


of hair, a fingernail, or other small 
piece of organic material from the vic- 
tim. A Savage Wizard requires one 
hour to manufacture a replicant. 

Whenever the Savage Wizard cuts a 
piece from the replicant, sticks a pin in 
it, or otherwise “attacks” it, the repli- 
cant suffers 1-4 hit points of damage. 
The victim who is represented by the 
replicant suffers an identical amount 
of damage, regardless of the distance 
between the replicant and the victim 
(however, the victim must be on the 
same plane of existence as the repli- 
cant), Every type of damage on the re- 
plicant inflicts 1-4 hit points of 
damage; therefore, the Savage Wizard 
must take care not to destroy the repli- 
cant, for burning, crushing, or throw- 
ing the replicant into a pool of 
quicksand still inflicts only 1-4 hit 
points of damage. The replicant disin- 
tegrates when any of the following 
conditions are met: 

è The replicant has suffered 10 hit 
points (or more) of damage. 

© Dispel magic or a similar spell is 
cast on the replicant. 

è A week passes since the replicant’s 
creation. 


3. Once per week, the Savage Wiz- 
ard is able to forecast the general for- 
tunes of some major undertaking by 
interpreting an omen from observing 
the natural conditions around him. To 
be receptive to an omen, the wizard 
must do nothing but concentrate for 
one uninterrupted turn; if his concen- 
tration is broken, he cannot attempt to 
interpret an omen for another week. 
After the turn of concentration, he 
studies his surroundings for an 
omen—a rippling pond, a gathering of 
clouds, a swarm of insects, or the veins 
in a leaf are all possible sources of 
omens. 

A wizard usually consults an omen 
before starting a journey, engaging ina 
major battle, or embarking on some 


other significant task. If the DM has 
knowledge about the proposed action, 
the omen should reveal the appropri- 
ate information; for instance, if the 
party is considering exploring an aban- 
doned building, but the DM knows it 
contains a spectre, the result should be 
an ill omen. In situations where the 
DM has no information on which to 
base his judgement, roll 1d10 and con- 
sult Table 7. 


Table 7: 
Savage Wizard Omen Results 
d10 Roll Result 


1-2 Il] Omen: The party should not 
undertake the task this day. If 
they ignore the omen, all party 
members will suffer a —1 penalty 
on “to hit” and saving throw rolls 
for the rest of the day, their 
chance for encounters will be 
doubled, anda —3 reaction mod- 
ifier will be applied to all encoun- 
ters. 


3-4 Great Danger Exists: If the party 
proceeds, their chance for 
encounters is doubled for the rest 
of the day and a —3 reaction 
modifier applies to all encoun- 
ters. Opponents have a +1 ap- 
plied to their chance to hit. 


5-7 Neutral Omen: The information 
is vague. No special modifiers 
apply. 


8-9 Favorable Omen: The party 
members’ movement rate is in- 
creased by 50% for the rest of the 
day, and opponents have a —1 
applied to their chance to hit. 


10 Auspicious Omen: All effects of 
a Favorable Omen apply; addi- 
tionally, all party members gain 
a +1 on all saving throws made 
for the rest of the day. 


45 


Special Hindrances: The Savage 
Wizard's strange appearance and man- 
ners make strangers wary of him. 
Therefore, he suffers a -2 reaction ad- 
justment from all NPCs not from his 
own tribe (PCs can react as they wish, 
but they should quickly become accus- 
tomed to the Savage and accept him as 
an equal.) 

Wealth Options: The Savage Wiz- 
ard begins with only (1d4 +1) x 5 gp. 
As the campaign progresses, the Sav- 
age will have the opportunity to ac- 
quire more treasure, and it is up to the 
player whether he appreciates its value 
or rejects it as a worthless. (For in- 
stance, a Savage might accept gold but 
have a superstitious belief that re- 
quires him to reject gems.) 

Races: No restrictions. 


Witch 


Description: The Witch is a wizard 
whose powerful magical abilities are 
extraplanar in origin. Though wizards 
typically learn the basics of spellcast- 
ing at magic academies or from learned 
mentors, Witches learn magical skills 
from entities and their minions from 
other planes of existence, or from 
other Witches. 

Occasionally, these extraplanar en- 
tities contact youthful humans or de- 
mihumans for magical instruction; 
other times, humans and demihumans 
seek out the entities through arcane rit- 
uals and petition them for instruction. 
The entities agree to such instruction 
for a variety of reasons—some hope to 
train their students to eventually be- 
come emissaries; some hope to use 
them as conduits for various forces; 
some hope to seduce them as consorts; 
and some simply share their magical 
secrets for their own amusement. 

Whatever the motives of the extra- 
planar entities, they exude a powerful 
directing influence over their students. 


However, a few Witches with particu- 
larly strong wills are able to maintain 
their own drives while using their mag- 
ical skills to further their own goals. 
Such Witches face a life-long struggle 
with the forces who relentlessly strive 
to direct their spirits. 

The requirements for becoming a 
Witch are higher than for any other 
kit. Because her training is more de- 
manding than that received by most 
other wizards, she must have a mini- 
mum Intelligence and Wisdom of 13. 
To resist the corruption inherent from 
contact with extraplanar entities, she 
must have a minimum Constitution of 
13, The vast majority of Witches are 
female, but male Witches are also pos- 
sible, commonly called Warlocks. 

The Witch kit cannot be abandoned. 
If a Witch manages to sever all ties 
with the entities responsible for her in- 
struction (usually requiring the power 
of a wish or its equivalent), she loses 
two experience levels. If she still 
wishes to pursue a magical career, she 
must relearn the experience levels that 
she lost. 

Preferred Schools: The most appro- 
priate school for Witches is 
enchantment/charm. Conjuration/ 
summoning and necromancy are also 
good choices. 

Barred Schools: There are no barred 
schools for Witches. 

Role: Regardless of her actual align- 
ment, all but her closest friends are 
likely to presume that a Witch is in col- 
laboration with extraplanar spirits, 
and will shun her accordingly. There 
are few places where a Witch is wel- 
come, and for the most part, a Witch 
will need to conceal her identity when 
traveling to assure her safety. 

A Witch's player character compan- 
ions need not have such fears or preju- 
dices against her, especially after she 
proves herself in life-and-death situa- 
tions. However, there might always be 
a veil of suspicion between the Witch 


and her companions, as if they cannot 
quite bring themselves to trust her 
completely. Any player characters 
with suspicious natures, particularly 
those with primitive or unsophisti- 
cated backgrounds, may never fully 
warm up to a Witch and will avoid be- 
ing alone with her, sometimes even ac- 
cusing her of betraying the party or 
bringing them bad luck. (The DM is 
free to encourage this type of role- 
playing, but not to the point of dis- 
rupting the campaign. If this distrust 
becomes problematic, the DM might 
remind the PC leader of the party that 
the Witch is indeed a good-aligned 
character and it is his job to promote 
good will among his companions.) 

Although a Witch learns her magical 
techniques from extraplanar entities, 
once on her own, she learns her spells 
in much the same way as any other 
wizard. Still, her techniques for cast- 
ing spells may differ significantly from 
the standard methods. The casting 
times, ranges, and effects of her spells 
are no different from the same spells 
used by other wizards, but she may use 
different verbal, somatic, or material 
components, as well as meditation. 
These differences should make her 
seem even more threatening to outsid- 
ers, as well as making her seem more 
remote to the other player characters. 

Secondary Skills: Required: None. 
Recommended: Scribe. 

Weapon Proficiency: The Witch is 
not allowed an initial Weapon Profi- 
ciency, nor can she acquire a Weapon 
Proficiency as she advances in level. 

Nonweapon Proficiency: Bonus 
Proficiencies: Herbalism, Spellcasting. 
Recommended: (General) Artistic 
Ability, Brewing, Cooking, Languages 
(Modern), Weather Sense; (Wizard) 
Ancient History, Astrology, Lan- 
guages (Ancient), Reading/Writing, 
Religion; (Priest, double slot) Healing. 

Equipment: When a Witch is first 
created, she must buy her weapons 


46 


from among the following choices: 
Dagger or dirk, knife, sling, staff sling. 

Additionally, the Witch can choose up 
to 1,500 gp worth of magical items from 
Table 89 (Potions and Oils), Table 91 
(Rings), Table 92 (Rods), Table 93 
(Staves), Table 94 (Wands), and Tables 
95- 103 (Miscellaneous Magic) on pages 
135-139 of the Dungeon Master's Guide. 
These items are free—she doesn’t have 
to pay for them (but she cannot keep any 
of the leftover 1,500 gp). 

Special Benefits: When a Witch is ini- 
tially created, she automatically gains 
the spells detect magic and read magic; 
these spells are in addition to any spells 
she normally receives. 

As a Witch increases in level, she au- 
tomatically gains the following abili- 
ties. These are all naturally acquired 
abilities, and do not count against the 
number of spells she can know or use. 
All of the following abilities can be used 
once per week. 

3rd Level: The Witch acquires the 
ability to secure familiar. This is identi- 
cal to the Ist-level wizard spell find fa- 
miliar, except that a Witch does not 
need to burn 1,000 gp worth of incense 
and herbs in a brass brazier. Instead, 
the Witch must merely concentrate for 
one turn. If a suitable familiar is within 
1 mile per level of the Witch, it will ar- 
rive within 1d10 hours. A Witch can 
have only one familiar at a time. 

5th Level: The Witch acquires the 
ability to brew calmative. Assuming 
she has access to the proper ingredients 
(usually available in any forest), the 
Witch can brew one dose of an elixir 
that has the effect of asleep spell when a 
victim comes in contact with it. One 
dose is sufficient to coat a sword or any 
other single weapon. The elixir has no 
effect on victims with more than 8 HD; 
victims can resist the effects of the elixir 
with a successful saving throw. 

The Witch requires one hour to brew 
the elixir. The elixir loses its potency af- 
ter 24 hours. 


7th Level: The Witch acquires the 
ability to brew poison. With the proper 
ingredients, available in most forests, 
she can brew one dose of Class L con- 
tact poison (see page 73 of the DMG,) 
sufficient to coat a single weapon. The 
Witch requires one hour to brew the 
poison. It loses its potency in 24 hours. 

9th Level: The Witch acquires the 
ability to beguile any single person or 
monster (assuming the person is no 
higher than 8th-level or the monster has 
no more than 8 HD). Beguile is identical 
to the 4th-level wizard spell charm 
monster and the Ist-level wizard spell 
charm person, except that the victim is 
not allowed a saving throw. To cast be- 
guile, the Witch must merely point at 
the victim and concentrate for 1 round; 
there are no verbal or material compo- 
nents. 

11th Level: The Witch acquires the 
ability to brew flying ointment. Assum- 
ing she has access to the proper ingredi- 
ents (usually available in any forest), 


A 


the Witch can brew one dose of an oint- 
ment which, when rubbed on the skin, 
gives the recipient the ability to fly, as 
per the 3rd-level wizard spell fly. The 
dose is sufficient to affect one human- 
sized subject; the effects persist until the 
ointment loses its potency 24 hours af- 
ter it is brewed. The Witch requires one 
hour to brew the ointment. 

13th Level: The Witch acquires the 
ability to inflict a witch's curse on any 
single person or creature. This is ex- 
actly identical to the 4th-level wizard 
spell bestow curse, except that its effect 
is automatic; the victim is not alloweda 
saving throw. The effect of the curse 
persists for 24 hours unless the curse is 
dispelled by a remove curse, wish, or 
similar spell. To cast the spell, the Witch 
must merely point at the victim and 
concentrate for 1 round; no verbal or 
material components are required. To 
determine the effects of witch's curse, 
roll 1d8 and consult Table 8. 


47 


< 
AANASSSSS) 


Table 8: 
Effects of Witch’s Curse 


d8 Roll Result 
1-3 One ability of the victim is low- 
ered by 3 points. Determine 
which ability is lowered by rolling 


1dé: 

1 = Strength 

2 = Dexterity 

3 = Constitution 
4 = Intelligence 
5 = Wisdom 

6 = Charisma 


4-5 The victim's “to hit” and damage 
rolls are reduced by 4 points, 


6 The victim becomes blind, as per 
the 2nd-level wizard spell blind- 
ness. The effect persists for 24 
hours or until the witch's curse is 
dispelled. 


Table 9: Selected Oriental Weapons for the Wu Jen 


Weight 
Name Cost in lbs. Size 
Bo stick 2cp 4 L 
Boku-toh 6cp 3 M 
Jitte 10 cp 2 S 
Shuriken 10 sp I ai S 


Speed Damage 
Type* Factor S-M L 
B 3 1-6 1-4 
B A 1-4 1-2 
B 2 1-4 1-2 
P = 1-6 1-4 


* B = Bludgeoning weapon, P = Piercing weapon. 
* * Ten large shuriken weigh a total of 1 pound. 


Description of Weapons: 


Bo stick: A staff of hard wood that is very difficult to break and is normally 6-7 


feet in length. 


Boku-toh: A wooden replica of a short sword, usually used for practice since it 
cannot cut or slash. Used aggressively, it can cause bludgeoning damage. 

Jitte: A tapered iron bar with a short hook near the handle. Although the hook is 
not sharp enough to cut or pierce, the jitte can be used to strike blows. 

Shuriken: A small throwing weapon in the shape of a star with needle-like projec- 
tions. They are thrown by hand and easily concealed in folds of clothing. A large- 
star shuriken has a fire rate of 3, a short range of 5 yards, a medium range of 10 


yards, and a long range of 20 yards. 


7 The victim loses 1 hit point per 
hour for the next 24 hours. These 
lost hit points cannot be recov- 
ered by normal or magical means 
until the witch's curse ends in 24 
hours or unless the curse is dis- 
pelled. If the victim is reduced to 
O hit points or less within 24 hours 
of receiving the curse, or before 
the curse is dispelled, he dies. 


8 The victim immediately lapses 
into a state of temporal stasis, as 
per the 9th-level wizard spell. The 
effect persists unless the curse is 
dispelled. Otherwise, at the end 
of 24 hours, the victim is reduced 
to 0 hit points and dies. 


Special Hindrances: Because of their 
non-conventional training, Witches do 
not earn bonuses to their experience for 
high ability scores. Witches cannot be 
multi-classed or dual-classed. 

Generally, outsiders are terrified of 


Witches. Unless an NPC is exception- 
ally open-minded or has extremely high 
Intelligence or Wisdom (13 or more in 
either ability), the Witch receives a -3 
reaction roll. If the NPC is uneducated, 
comes from an extremely superstitious 
or unsophisticated culture, or has low 
Intelligence and Wisdom (under 10 for 
both), the Witch receives a —5 reaction 
roll. Additionally, if a Witch lingers in a 
superstitious or culturally unsophisti- 
cated community for more than a day, 
she runs the risk of facing a mob of hos- 
tile citizens bent on running her out of 
town, imprisoning her, torturing her, or 
executing her. (The DM decides the size 
of the mob, their intentions, and the 
likelihood of their accosting the Witch. 
As a rule of thumb, assume a 20 percent 
chance of a 4d6-member mob forming 
in a hostile community if the Witch 
stays for a day. This chance increases 
by 20 percent for every additional day 
the Witch remains; the size of the mob 
increases by 2d6 members.) 


The Witch must periodically struggle 
with the extraplanar forces striving to 
direct her. The forces are so powerful 
that they cannot be dispelled; all the 
Witch can do is endure them. When un- 
dergoing these internal struggles, the 
Witch suffers penalties to her combat 
abilities and saving throws. 

The DM has three options for deter- 
mining the frequency and intensity of 
these penalties, depending on the needs 
of his campaign and how much book- 
keeping he is willing to undertake: 

1. The Witch suffers a —2 penalty to 
her attack rolls and a —2 penalty to her 
saving throws on any night with a full 
moon and the three nights before and 
after the full moon (the penalties apply 
to a 12 hour period from about 6 p.m. 
to6a.m.). On most worlds, a full moon 
will occur about once per month; if the 
moon of the DM's world has a shorter 
or longer cycle, increase or decrease the 
number of nights the Witch is affected; 
she should be affected about seven 
nights out of 4 weeks. If there are sev- 
eral moons, the Witch is affected by 
only one of them. 

2. There is a 25 percent chance per 
day that the Witch will be subjected to 
an internal struggle with extraplanar 
forces. The DM determines this at the 
beginning of the day; the Witch is 
aware of the result. Throughout that 
night (a 12-hour period lasting from 
about 6 p.m. to 6 a.m.), the Witch suf- 
fers a —2 penalty to her attack rolls and 
a —2 penalty to her saving throws. 

3. The Witch struggles with the extra- 
planar forces every night. For a 12- 
hour period lasting from about 6 p.m. 
to 6 a.m., she suffers a —1 penalty to 
her attack throws; there is no penalty to 
her saving throws. 

Wealth Options: The Witch receives 
the standard (1d4 +1) x 10 gp as starting 
money. 

Races: No racial restrictions. 

Note: The Witch is among the most 
complex of all the kits, and many of the 


details are left up to the player's discre- 
tion. For instance, he may wish to de- 
sign specific daily rituals for his Witch, 
or he may wish to expand on the 
Witch’s relationship with the entities 
who originally trained her. What ex- 
actly are they? Where are they? Can 
the Witch contact them for favors? 
What exactly happens if the forces suc- 
ceed in controlling the Witch? Does her 
alignment change? Her abilities? Her 
relationship to the party? There are 
many possible variations on the Witch 
kit, and the DM is encouraged to exper- 
iment, as long as he avoids the tempta- 
tion to make her excessively powerful, 
and keeps in mind the potential disrup- 
tions in his campaign. 


Wu jen 


Description: The Wu Jen is a wizard 
from cultures based on medieval orien- 
tal civilizations. He is a sorcerer of mys- 
terious power and uncertain fealty. 
Unlike the oriental samurai, the Wu Jen 
seldom answers to a lord or master. His 
primary allegiance is to himself and to 
his craft. 

The Wu Jen seldom lives among the 
masses, preferring instead to dwell in the 
wilderness where he can contemplate the 
secrets of nature without interruption. 
Living the life of a hermit, the Wu Jen 
concentrates on purifying his body and 
mind, thus making him more receptive 
to the supernatural forces of the world. 

To be a Wu Jen, a wizard must have 
an Intelligence of at least 13. He cannot 
be of lawful alignment, but may still be 
good, evil, or neutral. 

The Wu Jen kit cannot be aban- 
doned. 

Preferred Schools: Wu Jen prefer the 
schools of conjuration/summoning, al- 
teration, and invocation/evocation. 

Barred Schools: There are no barred 
schools for the Wu Jen. 

Role: Unless the campaign has an 


eastern setting, the DM, in conjunction 
with the player, should invent a plausi- 
ble explanation for the Wu Jen's appear- 
ance so far from home. Perhaps the Wu 
Jen is on a religious pilgrimage. Perhaps 
a magical device or spell transported 
the Wu Jen to the western world, either 
intentionally or unintentionally. Or 
perhaps the Wu Jen is on a decade-long 
quest for knowledge or self-awareness, 
and his travels have brought him to the 
other player characters. 

Whatever the reason, the Wu Jen 
should add a touch of oriental intrigue 
and exotic culture to a western-based 
party. His fellow player characters 
should find the Wu Jen’s habits strange 
and fascinating. For instance, a Wu Jen 
prefers to record his spells on scrolls in- 
stead of in spell books. Perhaps he 
prays to the sun for an hour each day at 
dawn, or maybe he eats only roots and 
berries. A Wu Jen keeps his emotions 
hidden, and his motives are equally dif- 
ficult to discern. It is unlikely that the 
Wu Jen shares the party's goals and 
moral code; if he agrees to join the 
party, it is probably due to his intellec- 
tual curiosity. 

The DM is within his rights to forbid 
Wu Jen from the campaign. Before a 
player selects this kit, he must check 
with the DM to make sure that Wu Jen 
are allowed, 

Secondary Skills: Required: Scribe. 

Weapon Proficiency: Required 
(choose one of the following): Blow- 
gun, short bow, dagger, dart, sling. Al- 
ternately, the Wu Jen can choose from 
the selection of oriental weapons listed 
in Table 9. 

The Wu Jen has an automatic and 
permanent +1 bonus to hit whenever 
using the weapon he has chosen for his 
Weapon Proficiency. 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: Bonus 
Proficiencies: Etiquette, Artistic Ability 
(Painting, Calligraphy, or Origami). 
Recommended: (General) Riding 
(Land-based), Cooking, Dancing, Sing- 


49 


ing; (Wizard) Astrology, Herbalism, 
Spellcraft; (Priest, double slot) Musical 
Instrument; (Rogue, double slot) Blind- 
fighting, Gaming, Juggling, Tumbling. 

Equipment: The Wu Jen must buy all 
weapons from the choices listed in the 
Weapon Proficiency entry above. He 
may have no more than 10 gp remain- 
ing when he has finished purchasing his 
equipment. 

Special Benefits: When a Wu Jen 
reaches 4th level, he gains the power to 
summon massive magical energies that 
allow him to cast any one spell that is 
three or more levels lower than his level 
at maximum effect. The spell automati- 
cally has maximum range, (if desired), 
duration, and effect. Thus, a 4th-level 
Wu Jen can cast a 1st-level spell at maxi- 
mum effect. A Wu Jen can use this abil- 
ity once per day. 

Special Hindrances: The Wu Jen op- 
erates under special taboos that do not 
affect other characters. Though the ta- 
boos may seem trivial or even ridicu- 
lous to other characters, the Wu Jen 
takes them quite seriously —violating a 
taboo causes the Wu Jen to lose levels of 
ability, lose spells, become ill, or even 
die (the DM decides the exact penalty). 
A 1st-level Wu Jen has one taboo and 
gains an additional taboo every five 
levels thereafter (at 6th level, 11th level, 
and so on). The DM selects the taboos. 
Some suggestions follow; the Wu Jen: 

© Can't eat meat or animal products 
(including milk, eggs, and cheese). 

© Can't sleep within 20 yards of a 
member of the opposite sex. 

œ Can't wear a certain color. 

© Can't carry gold (or other precious 
metal) on his person. 

œ Can't bathe or must bathe fre- 
quently. 

e Can't cut his hair or fingernails. 

æ Can't intentionally take the life of 
an insect. 

æ Can't drink alcoholic beverages. 

© Can't sit facing the north (or other 
direction). 


© Can't speak after sunset (except to 
cast spells). 


Wealth Options: The Wu Jen starts 
with the normal (1d4+1) x 10 gp. 

Races: Normally, a Wu Jen must be 
human. The DM may make exceptions 
in his campaign, elves and half-elves 
being the most likely choices. 

Note: For more detailed information 
about the Wu Jen, along with addi- 
tional spells, weapons, and proficien- 
cies, see Oriental Adventures. The DM 
may need to make some adjustments to 
adapt the descriptions and statistics to 
AD&D® 2nd Edition rules. 


Recording Kits on the 
Character Sheet 


To record a wizard kit on character 
record sheets, follow these steps: 

1. In the space where the character's 
school is recorded, add the name of his 
wizard kit. 

2. When recording the character's 
Nonweapon Proficiencies, add the bo- 
nus proficiencies the character receives 
from his wizard kit. Mark the bonus 
proficiencies with an asterisk to indi- 
cate that they are free. 

3. Make notes about the character's 
special benefits and hindrances and 
other pertinent information in any 
available space on the sheet. 


Modifying the Kits 


The DM is encouraged to modify the 
kits to more accurately represent the 
history, cultures, and events of his cam- 
paign world. However, he should not 
violate the nature of the kit; males 
should not be allowed to be members of 
the Amazon kit, nor should Patricians 
be allowed to be necromancers. Com- 
mon sense must prevail. 

However, if there are no oriental or 
eastern-styled cultures in his world, the 
DM is free to disallow the Wu Jen kit. 


Similarly, if a natural disaster wiped 
out all traces of Amazon society in his 
world, he can disallow the Amazon kit. 


Creating New Kits 


Using the kits above as guidelines, 
many new kits can be created. If the 
DM has a certain type of wizard that he 
would like in his world, he should de- 
sign a Wizard Kit for that personality. 

To design a Wizard Kit, the DM 
should consider the following questions 
about the wizard and his role in the 
campaign. 

Description: What's this wizard like? 
Is he drawn from a specific literary, 
mythological, or historical source? Are 
there any special requirements for a 
character who wishes to be this type of 
wizard? 

Role: What place does this wizard 
have in the campaign? How is he re- 
garded by his own culture? By other 
cultures? Is there a particular attitude 
or outlook he needs to belong to this 
Wizard Kit? 

What kinds of activities does this 
wizard tend to perform in a 
campaign—is he a bold man of action? 
A withdrawn scholar? An impulsive 
show-off? What is his relationship with 
the other characters—is he friendly, dis- 
tanced, wary, impassive? 

Preferred and Barred Schools: Are 
there certain types of specialties that 
seem especially appropriate to the wiz- 
ards described in your kit? If so, note 
them as preferred schools. Are there 
other specialists that seem particularly 
inappropriate to your kit? Note them as 
barred schools. 

Secondary Skills: If using the Second- 
ary Skills system, you need to decide if 
this Wizard Kit requires such a skill. If 
there isn’t a particular secondary skill or 
skills common to all wizards of this type, 
then do not require a secondary skill. 
But if all members of a Wizard Kit share 


50 


the same skill—or one of a small number 
of skills—then you might require it of all 
characters who take this kit. 

Weapon Proficiencies: Often, certain 
types of wizards tend to favor certain 
types of weapons. Others select their 
weapons from a wide range of choices. 
If the wizard described in your kit 
seems to prefer one or two weapons 
more than others, note this in the kit. 
Keep in mind, however, that all wizards 
share certain weapon restrictions—see 
Chapter 5. 

Nonweapon Proficiencies: As with 
weapon proficiencies, many wizards 
tend to have certain skills in common. 
For instance, it would be hard to imag- 
ine a Patrician who wasn't skilled in Eti- 
quette. Therefore, one or two 
nonweapon proficiency slots can be 
given free of charge to characters taking 
this kit. If appropriate, the proficiencies 
can come from the Priest, Rogue, and 
Warrior listings. Normally, the cost in 
slots for non-wizard proficiences would 
be higher, but this can be ignored when 
kits are being given free. 

Equipment: If a wizard is known for 
using certain types of equipment, re- 
quire that such a character have this 
equipment before the campaign begins. 
If some but not all wizards of this type 
use the same equipment, then it needn't 
be required; instead, simply list it as 
recommended equipment. 

Special Benefits: Although not neces- 
sary, most Wizard Kits should have 
some special benefit. Any kind of bene- 
fit is acceptable, but it should relate to 
the way this wizard operates in fiction, 
mythology, or similar source material. 

Possible benefits could include: 

e Bonuses to reaction rolls, particu- 
larly from certain categories of people. 

e Bonuses on wizard proficiency 
uses, especially in specifically defined 
situations. 

e Bonuses to hit and/or damage, es- 
pecially against certain categories of en- 
emies, or in special circumstances. 


è Special resistances, such as an im- 
munity or bonus to saving throws 
against specific magical attacks or types 
of magic. 

è Special rights in the culture in 
which the character normally travels 
(such as immunity from prosecution or 
free lodging on demand). 

Special Hindrances: One or more 
special hindrances should be imposed 
which limit the character as much as his 
special benefits help him. 

Possible hindrances include: 

è Penalties to reaction rolls, espe- 
cially from certain categories of people. 

è Penalties to hit and/or damage, 
particularly against certain categories 
or enemies, or in special circumstances. 

è Restrictions from learning certain 
nonweapon proficiencies. 

è Special restrictions in the culture 
in which the characters normally travel 
(for instance, the wizard is prohibited 
from owning property or is punished 


excessively for certain crimes). 

Wealth Options: Does the wizard 
have less or more starting gold than 
other characters? Are there any restric- 
tions as to how his starting gold must be 
spent? 

Races: Note any variations for wiz- 
ards of specific races. Are any races 
barred from the kit? Does any race re- 
ceive special benefits, proficiencies, or 
hindrances when taking this kit? 

Notes: If there are any additional de- 
tails about the kit, explain them fully. 

You can also adapt kits to other 
classes by adjusting the skills, weapons, 
proficiencies, benefits, and hindrances. 
A campaign might include Academi- 
cian Priests or Patrician Warriors. 


At the end of this book is a blank Kit 
Creation Sheet. Copies of this sheet 


51 


may be made to help you design new 
kits. The DM or players can design new 
kits appropriate to the character types 
they would like to play. However, if a 
player designs his own kit, he should 
check all details of the kit with his DM. 
The DM may make changes, or he may 
disallow the kit altogether. 


Suggestions for New Kits 


Here are a few ideas that might be de- 
veloped into new kits: 

Dragon Master (a wizard with a spe- 
cial affinity for dragons and the magic 
they use) 

Outlaw Wizard (a wizard who is 
rightly or wrongly wanted by the law) 

Spiritualist (a wizard with a special 
interest in ghosts, spirits, and extra- 
planar phenomena) 

Nomad (a rootless wizard with no 
permanent homeland) 


Chapter 4: Role-Playing 


Your wizard character now has a spe- 
cialty, an interesting variety of low- 
level spells, a nice set of proficiencies, 
and a kit from the previous chapter. 

Ready to adventure? Not quite. 
There's more to role-playing a wizard 
than casting spells, checking proficien- 
cies, and swinging a staff at the bad 
guys. In this chapter, we present sug- 
gestions for role-playing techniques 
that will help your character come to 


life. 


Wizard Personalities 


No two wizards are alike. They may 
have the same specialties, the same 
spells, even the same backgrounds, yet 
each has his own set of quirks, flaws, 
goals, and interests that make him a 
unique personality. 

This chapter provides descriptions of 
different wizard personalities drawn 
from fantasy literature and mythology. 
Players should look at them all and see 
if any of the descriptions fit their con- 
ceptions of their characters. 

Each player should think about what 
his character would be like if he actu- 
ally existed—would he be bold or cau- 
tious? Greedy or generous? 
Considerate or selfish? Thoughtful? Im- 
pulsive? Flamboyant? 

If any of the personality types listed 
seem right for your character, feel free 
to use the description as a basis for 
making role-playing decisions about a 
PC's actions and goals. The descrip- 
tions can also be used to help decide 
how a PC interacts with NPCs and with 
other members of his party. If none of 
these descriptions seem exactly right for 
your character, perhaps one or more of 
them will inspire you to create a new 
personality type. 

Each personality description below 
includes the following information: 


Character Description: This section 
describes the character's general atti- 


tudes, motivations, and outlook, and 
how he is most likely to function in a 
typical campaign. In some cases, sug- 
gestions are given as to what types of 
players might find this particular per- 
sonality type the most enjoyable to 
play. 


Best Suited For: Some personality 
types are more appropriate for certain 
alignments than others, and some are 
more appropriate for certain kits than 
others. This information is provided 
here. 

These are only recommendations, 
not hard and fast rules, and using align- 
ments and kits other than the ones sug- 
gested might require some imaginative 
rationale on the part of the DM and the 
player, For instance, an Entertainer/ 
Savage Wizard could exist, but he will 
probably be rare in a typical campaign 
world. Novice players are advised to 
remain within the alignment and kit 
recommendations in this section. 


In Combat Situations: Each person- 
ality type approaches combat situa- 
tions in a slightly different fashion. 
Some might charge straight ahead with 
their weapons swinging, while others 
might hold back to size up the enemy 
before committing to a course of 
action. Some might cast their strongest 
spells first, others might hold them in 
reserve. This section details each per- 
sonality type’s combat style. 


In Role-Playing Situations: This sec- 
tion explains how the character is likely 
to react when encountering NPCs. 
These suggestions should be used as 
guidelines when role-playing conversa- 
tions, including interrogations, inter- 
views, and small talk. This section will 
also give an idea how the character 
might interact with the other player 
characters. 


52 


The Altruist 


Character Description: The Altruist 
is a selfless humanitarian, his actions 
fueled by a passion for justice. The Al- 
truist regards his magical skills as a spe- 
cial gift to be used to promote the 
common good, and he devotes his life 
to the welfare of others. He is admired 
by the oppressed, scorned by oppres- 
sors, and respected by all. 

Because his goals are simple and his 
values are unambiguous, this personal- 
ity type is a particularly easy one to 
play. It is a good choice for characters 
of beginning players. Experienced play- 
ers, however, may find him a bit bor- 
ing, and the DM should be aware that 
an entire party of Altruists can lead to a 
lifeless campaign. 


Best Suited For: Any kit is appropri- 
ate for the Altruist. Obviously, this 
type of character should be of good 
alignment, lawful good being the most 
frequently encountered. 


In Combat Situations: The Altruist is 
a courageous, aggressive combatant. 
He is as selfless on the battlefield as he is 
in all other walks of life; if an Altruist 
has a single protection from evil spell, 
he will cast it on the most vulnerable 
member of his party, using it on himself 
only if he’s absolutely certain that all of 
his companions are safe. He attacks 
honorably and with mercy, accepting 
the surrender of his opponents when- 
ever possible. He assumes leadership 
roles if necessary, though he seldom 
seeks them. 


In Role-Playing Situations: The Altru- 
ist is polite, even-tempered, and thought- 
ful. He has little patience for liars and 
cheaters, and NPCs who exploit the help- 
less are especially repugnant to him. 
Most NPCs, except those of evil align- 
ment, admire and respect the Altruist’s 
strong moral code, but some NPCs may 
see him as self-righteous and pompous. 


Role-Playing 


The Brooder 


Character Description: The Brooder 
is tormented with self-doubt; he wor- 
ries about his relationship with the rest 
of the universe, where he fits in with the 
rest of mankind, and the meaning of his 
own existence. He may dwell for days 
on the ramifications of some seemingly 
insignificant action. If he makes a 
wrong decision or a decision he per- 
ceives as being wrong, he may become 
consumed with self-loathing, spiraling 
into a deep depression that can persist 
for weeks. Holding himself to impossi- 
bly high standards, the Brooder is con- 
tinually disappointed with his 
performance as a wizard, a citizen, and 
as a human being. 

Obsessed with perfection, the 
Brooder tends to be an extremely 
skilled spell caster and combatant. His 
mind is sharp and his actions are precise 
and correct. Although he usually suc- 
ceeds at whatever he attempts, his ac- 
complishments seem to bring him little 
fulfillment or joy. 

Not surprisingly, the Brooder’s out- 
look on life is dismal. He believes the 
struggle between good and evil can 
never be won; it will continue to claim 
victims on both sides for all eternity. 
Friendship is valued but transient; a 
friend today can be an enemy tomor- 
row. Acts of courage and selflessness 
are admirable but ultimately futile. Ex- 
istence is a tragic joke—men are only 
puppets in the hands of incomprehensi- 
bly cruel gods. 

Because the Brooder seldom voices 
his opinions, this personality is a good 
choice for players who tend to be quiet. 
Conversely, the Brooder is a nice 
change of pace for players who nor- 
mally take charge. 


Best Suited For: Because the Brooder 
tends to reject moral absolutes, he grav- 
itates toward neutral alignments, par- 
ticularly neutral good and chaotic 


neutral. The Brooder can use any kit, 
but the Academician, the Mystic, and 
the Wu Jen are especially good choices. 


In Combat Situations: The Brooder is 
an excellent fighter. Cowardice is un- 
known to him; since he doesn't believe 
his own life is particularly precious, he 
fights as if he has nothing to lose. He is 
calm and clear-thinking in times of cri- 
sis, using his spells to their maximum 
effectiveness. If necessary, he will un- 
hesitatingly risk his life for a friend. 

If the Brooder is preoccupied with a 
past mistake or a depressing philosoph- 
ical revelation, he may be slow to join a 
battle. Likewise, if the Brooder is in a 
state of mind where the differences be- 
tween good and evil seem especially 
ambiguous, he may decline to partici- 
pate in a fight. Usually the Brooder can 
be roused to battle by a firm request 
from the party leader or the gentle urg- 
ings from a trusted companion. Even in 
the depths of despair, the Brooder will 
not stand idle and allow harm to come 
to his companions. 


In Role-Playing Situations: In most 
encounters with NPCs, the Brooder 
will remain quiet and distracted, leav- 
ing most of the talking to his compan- 
ions. He is loathe to offer his opinion, 
and seldom cares to hear the opinions 
of others. Most of the time, he is simply 
apathetic. Most NPCs perceive the 
Brooder to be emotionless and preoccu- 
pied, and keep their distance. Sensitive 
NPCs might feel sorry for him. 

The Brooder’s attitude can be ex- 
tremely frustrating to his fellow player 
characters. Since he keeps to himself 
most of the time, usually his compan- 
ions will only be able to guess what he's 
thinking or feeling. 

Some PCs may attempt to befriend 
him. Kindness and patience will even- 
tually break through a Brooder’s shell. 
Although he may not show it, the 
Brooder feels friendship deeply, and 


53 


may even share his deepest thoughts 
with a companion who has been kind 
and caring. 


The Commander 


Character Description: The Com- 
mander is a natural leader who exudes 
authority. This may be due to his up- 
bringing, his training, his innate ten- 
dencies, his birth order (these types 
tend to be first-born), or any combina- 
tion of these factors, but whatever the 
reasons, taking charge comes automati- 
cally to the Commander. He is decisive, 
imposing, and inspiring. 

The safety of his companions is of 
paramount importance to the Com- 
mander, and he feels personally respon- 
sible for their actions. The Commander 
is not always the leader of his party—he 
understands that a leader cannot func- 
tion without able followers—but he al- 
ways tends to act like one, issuing 
orders, taking charge, and showing ini- 
tiative whenever others are slow to act. 

Players selecting this type of charac- 
ter should be prepared to make most of 
the decisions for the group. If a player is 
uncomfortable with this role, he would 
do better to choose a different personal- 
ity type. 

Best Suited For: Lawful and neutral 
are the most appropriate alignments for 
Commanders. Characters of evil align- 
ment might demonstrate good leader- 
ship, but are too self-centered to fit the 
nature of this personality, Chaotic char- 
acters usually lack the necessary disci- 
pline needed for leadership. 

A Commander can take the Amazon, 
Anagakok, Militant Wizard, Patrician, 
Peasant Wizard, Savage Wizard, or Wu 
Jen kit. Academicians tend to be too an- 
alytical and Mystics are too self- 
absorbed. Most Witches will have 
difficulty gaining the complete trust of 
their parties, though Witch Com- 
manders are certainly feasible. 


Role-Playing 


In Combat Situations: A Com- 
mander is a master tactician and superb 
strategist. In combat, his mind is con- 
stantly at work, looking for weaknesses 
in an enemy's defense, weighing attack 
options, considering the best positions 
for friendly forces, and deciding when 
to withdraw and when to press ahead. 
Even if someone else is actually in 
charge, the Commander inevitably will 
be issuing orders and attempting to 
boost his party’s morale. 


In Role-Playing Situations: Unless he 
is outranked or asked to refrain, the 
Commander will presume to speak for 
the group in NPC encounters. He will 
negotiate a group rate for the party at 
an inn, and speak to the local authori- 
ties about recruiting extra men for an 
anticipated battle. Depending on his 
manner, NPCs may see the Com- 
mander as either arrogant or accommo- 
dating, but they will always be 
impressed with his self-confidence. 


The Counselor 


Character Description: The Coun- 
selor is a learned man of calm self- 
assurance who typically serves as an 
advisor to rulers, administrators, mili- 
tary men, and adventurers. 

A Counselor is typically older than 
other adventurers and is usually more 
experienced, but could also be a youn- 
ger character with a special talent for 
understanding human nature or a natu- 
ral empathy. 

A man of integrity and great dignity, 
he is respected not only for his knowl- 
edge, but also his insight into human 
behavior. He believes in moderation 
and justice, and has a helping hand and 
kind word for all. 

The Counselor is a good choice for 
players who like to play thoughtful, 
even-tempered characters who are 
more apt to be advisors than leaders. 
Since novice and low-level characters 


lack the experience for this personality 
type, mid-level and high-level charac- 
ters (especially those with high Wis- 
dom scores) are the best choices to be 
Counselors. 


Best Suited For: Because a Coun- 
selor's relationship with others is based 
on trust, characters of good alignments 
are best suited for this personality type, 
especially lawful good characters. Cha- 
otic good characters can function as 
Counselors as well, although this type 
of Counselor will be guided more by his 
own personal philosophies than by any 
accepted standards of law and moral 
values. Neutral characters tend to be 
too selfish; it is unlikely that other char- 
acters would turn to them for advice. 
Evil Counselors are not likely to be ac- 
cepted in a party whose members are 
mostly good and/or lawful. 

Any kit can be adapted to this per- 
sonality type. The Academician is a 
logical choice, but the Mystic and Wu 
Jen also make good Counselors (the Wu 
Jen has much eastern wisdom to offer, 
while the Mystic is eager to share his in- 
sights into the human condition). 


In Combat Situations: The Coun- 
selor is a veteran of many battles, but 
because he is likely to be of advanced 
years, he is not the best physical com- 
batant. He most likely will remain in a 
protected position, probably near the 
back of the party or in a good vantage 
point from which to cast spells. 

The Counselor is also an excellent ne- 
gotiator. Whenever possible, he will try 
to seek common ground with an aggres- 
sor in an attempt to avoid combat. The 
Counselor seldom takes the role of a mil- 
itary leader, but usually functions as the 
leader's chief advisor and consultant. 


In Role-Playing Situations: All but the 
most mean-spirited and evil-hearted 
NPCs will respect the Counselor for his 
wisdom and compassion. The Counselor 
will never turn his back on a person in 


54 


trouble, and is forever making the prob- 
lems of others his own. At the same time, 
the Counselor is a shrewd judge of char- 
acter and is usually the first to spot a 
charlatan or a duplicitous NPC. 

In a campaign, the Counselor is eve- 
rybody's best friend. He always has 
time to hear his companions’ problems, 
no matter how trivial, and serves as a 
source of both comfort and sage advice. 


The Intimidator 


Character Description: Many believe 
that the wizard is the most powerful of 
all mortals—the Intimidator is con- 
vinced of it. Radiating power and confi- 
dence, the Intimidator faces all 
challenges head on. There's no oppo- 
nent too tough and no obstacle too dif- 
ficult for him. His access to magic 
makes him superior to all others—at 
least he believes this to be fact. His reac- 
tion to common people—that is, people 
who cannot cast spells—ranges from 
sympathy to impatience, but as long as 
they acknowledge his superiority, he 
can tolerate them. 

Usually, this amount of confidence 
evolves over many years, so most In- 
timidators are mid-level or high-level 
wizards. But an especially powerful or 
an especially arrogant lower-level wiz- 
ard might easily be an Intimidator. 

An inflated ego alone is not 
enough—this personality type is pri- 
marily intended for wizards who are in 
fact more powerful than their contem- 
poraries. To qualify as an Intimidator, a 
wizard should have higher than normal 
scores in at least two abilities other than 
Intelligence (for instance, a wizard with 
Strength and Charisma scores of 12 or 
more would be a good candidate for an 
Intimidator), However, even if a char- 
acter lacks exceptional abilities, he 
might still be an Intimidator if he has a 
reputation as a no-nonsense aggressor 
and has the personality to match. 


Role-Playing 


Best Suited For: The Intimidator is 
suited to any alignment, though char- 
acters of neutral and chaotic alignments 
might make better egomaniacs; neutral 
good, neutral evil, chaotic good, and 
chaotic neutral are all appropriate 
choices. 

Any kits that suggest aggressive, 
grim characters are good for the Intimi- 
dator, with the Savage Wizard and the 
Militant Wizard being obvious choices. 
More passive types, such as the Mystic 
and Academician, are less appropriate 
for the Intimidator. 


In Combat Situations: The Intimida- 
tor loves nothing more than a good 
fight. He is a shrewd, dangerous oppo- 
nent bent on extinguishing every one of 
his enemies. 

Although he does not attack reck- 
lessly, the Intimidator prefers to face off 
with the most formidable opponent on 
the battlefield. Where some wizards 
might use fireball to frighten a group of 
opponents by sailing it over their 
heads, the Intimidator would scare 
them by firing it directly at their leader, 
incinerating him. 

In Role-Playing Situations: The In- 
timidator is accustomed to getting his 
way. If reason fails, he will threaten, 
frighten, or otherwise intimidate NPCs 
to get their cooperation, unless a player 
character companion intervenes. 

The Intimidator is a man of few 
words. He knows that a snarl or a stare 
can be a much more effective way to co- 
erce uncooperative NPCs than long 
speeches or kind words. Needless to 
say, the Intimidator is not especially 
adept at delicate negotiations. 

In a campaign, all player characters 
will respect the Intimidator, but he’s 
likely to associate only with player 
characters he sees as peers, such as 
high-level warriors and other wizards. 
The Intimidator will tend to be patron- 
izing and condescending to the rest of 
the party, treating them as well- 


meaning children, incompetent bum- 
blers, or outright irritants. 


The Mercenary 


Character Description: The Merce- 
nary sees the adventuring life as a 
means to further his personal wealth. 
He may accept a job with a party at a 
set salary or might agree to take a fixed 
share of any treasure the party finds. 
Any interest he has in the party's goals 
are secondary to his pocketbook. 

Not all Mercenaries are interested in 
money. Some may be interested in ac- 
quiring souvenirs for their personal col- 
lections, while others may wish to 
hoard magical devices or fatten their 
spells books. In all cases, however, the 
Mercenary’s first interest is in himself. 

A Mercenary is not necessarily a 
criminal or a thief—he prides himself 
in his professionalism and has no 
shame about his interest in wealth and 
material possessions. Since his motiva- 
tions are straightforward, the Merce- 
nary is a good personality type for 
novice players. 


Best Suited For: The Mercenary is 
best suited for neutral alignments, par- 
ticularly neutral good and lawful neu- 
tral. Lawful good characters are less 
inclined to exploit others for personal 
gain, while evil characters are more 
likely to turn to criminal activities to in- 
crease their wealth. 

This personality type is suitable for 
any kit. 


In Combat Situations: The Merce- 
nary is a good, professional combatant. 
He takes orders well, offers strategic 
suggestions when asked, and fights val- 
iantly alongside his companions. How- 
ever, he will not volunteer for 
dangerous missions, nor will he unnec- 
essarily risk his neck unless he gets extra 
pay or there's a chance of recovering an 
especially desirable treasure. 


55 


In Role-Playing Situations: The Mer- 
cenary tends to let the other player 
characters do most of the negotiating 
and interacting with NPCs. He may 
take a more active role if he suspects an 
NPC has information about a treasure 
or about any of his other personal inter- 
ests, Otherwise, there are no restric- 
tions for the Mercenary—he can be 
humorous and personable, introverted 
and serious, or arrogant and obnox- 
ious, as determined by the player. 


The Mystery Man 


Character Description: The Mystery 
Man is a genuine enigma. Surrounded 
in a veil of secrecy, his motivations, his 
goals, and the details of his background 
are kept hidden from even his closest 
companions. He favors dark clothing 
and speaks only when necessary; his 
words are often cryptic or vague, sug- 
gesting that the Mystery Man knows 
far more than he chooses to reveal. 

No one is certain why the Mystery 
Man behaves as he does. Perhaps it is 
due to an oath to an ancestor, or per- 
haps it is a neurotic compulsion. What- 
ever the reason, the Mystery Man is 
clearly determined to operate on his 
own terms. Consequently, the Mystery 
Man is a good personality type for 
players who feel comfortable with off- 
beat characters. 


Best Suited For: The Mystery Man is 
perfectly suited for neutral alignments, 
especially neutral good and lawful neu- 
tral, but any alignments are possible. 
The Mystery Man's reason for main- 
taining his veil of secrecy might suggest 
an appropriate alignment. For instance, 
if he has taken an oath to avenge the 
death of his spouse, he might be lawful 
good. If his magical aptitude makes him 
feel like an outcast from society, but he 
still identifies with order and organiza- 
tion, he might be lawful neutral. If he 
conceals his identity because he is an es- 


Role-Playing 


caped criminal, he might be lawful or 
neutral evil. 

Any of the kits can be adapted to the 
Mystery Man. 


In Combat Situations: Typically, the 
Mystery Man listens impassively to the 
orders of his leaders, then fights as he 
chooses. The Mystery Man can be 
counted on to do the unexpected; as a 
battle gets underway, he may suddenly 
vanish, then abruptly appear in the 
midst of an opposing force. He might 
use control undead to command un- 
dead creatures to lift him to their shoul- 
ders and carry him into battle. He 
might summon shadow for a whispered 
conversation, dismiss the shadow, then 
use light to make himself glow while he 
attacks an opponent. 

While his fighting style is eccentric, it 
is startlingly effective. Opponents are 
usually baffled by the Mystery Man’s 
tactics or are intimidated by his manner 
and appearance. For these reasons, the 
Mystery Man is a first-rate combatant. 


In Role-Playing Situations: The very 
presence of the Mystery Man is enough 
to make many NPCs uncomfortable. 
While he usually lets his companions do 
most of the talking, NPCs often are so 
intimidated by the Mystery Man that 
they are quick to cooperate just to get 
rid of him. Many NPCs of the opposite 
sex find that the Mystery Man’s veil of 
secrecy makes him intriguing and ex- 
tremely attractive. 

While polite and considerate to his 
companions, the Mystery Man has no 
interest in socializing with them. 


The Neophyte 


Character Description: The Neo- 
phyte is a young, low-level wizard: an 
inexperienced novice anxious to begin 
his life as an adventurer and excited 
about the prospects ahead. 

However, the Neophyte's eagerness is 


more than matched by his naivete. He 
has seen little of the world outside of his 
homeland; when encountering new cul- 
tures or experiencing new situations, he 
may be confused and intimidated or cu- 
rious and impulsive. Since he tends to 
overestimate his abilities and underesti- 
mate dangers, he constantly gets him- 
self into trouble. Still, his cheerful 
outlook and youthful enthusiasm en- 
dear the Neophyte to his companions, 
and he is a welcome member of any 
party, even if his friends usually have 
their hands full looking after him. 

Hopefully, the Neophyte will not be 
naive forever. With experience comes 
wisdom, and with wisdom comes so- 
phistication. As a campaign progresses, 
the Neophyte should temper his impul- 
siveness with caution and his brashness 
with maturity. Therefore, this personal- 
ity type is only a temporary one—at 
some point, the character will abandon 
the role of the Neophyte and grow into 
a different personality. The road from 
innocence to maturity is a fascinating 
one, making the Neophyte an excellent 
choice for novice wizards and begin- 
ning role-players. 


Best Suited For: The entire range of 
neutral and good alignments are open 
to the Neophyte. Characters with evil 
alignments should be avoided—they 
aren't trusting or naive enough to make 
enjoyable Neophyte characters. 

Since all wizards begin their careers 
as novices, any kit suits the Neophyte, 
although the serious-minded Wu Jen 
and Academician are less likely to ex- 
hibit the Neophyte’s enthusiasm and 
impulsiveness. 


In Combat Situations: The Neophyte 
has probably experienced little combat 
in his life, especially the life-threatening 
variety. Although understandably ner- 
vous, he is also determined to do his 
best and prove to his comrades that he 
is not just a child who needs to be pro- 
tected. Unfortunately, this attitude 


56 


often results in inappropriate and inef- 
fective tactics; the Neophyte is likely to 
charge his opponents head-on, regard- 
less of their size or strength, or fire mis- 
sile weapons at anything that moves. 
He might seem to cast spells at random, 
sometimes squandering his most pow- 
erful magic on relatively defenseless 
foes. As an inexperienced spell caster, 
he is not familiar with sophisticated 
casting techniques; for instance, when 
faced with a charging wolf pack, he's 
more likely to use magic missile on a 
single wolf instead of casting it on a 
nearby cliff-face to cause an avalanche, 
thus destroying the entire pack. 

Assuming his companions can keep 
him from accidently killing himself, the 
Neophyte gradually learns from experi- 
ence, becoming a more skillful combat- 
ant as he matures, Eager to learn, a 
Neophyte will make a good student toa 
more experienced comrade. An older 
and wiser PC wizard might wish to take 
a Neophyte under his wing to show him 
the ways of the world. 


In Role-Playing Situations: Gener- 
ally, the Neophyte does not know how 
to act around NPCs, particularly those 
older than him. He might be shy and 
say nothing, or he might blurt out 
something inappropriate. Figures of au- 
thority intimidate him, smooth-talkers 
take advantage of him, and attractive 
members of the opposite sex reduce him 
to a blathering, stammering idiot. 

The Neophyte tends to accept people 
on face value; he never guesses that a 
friendly stranger might be picking his 
pocket. Friendly, personable NPCs will 
find the Neophyte charming and amus- 
ing; impatient, businesslike NPCs will 
find him exasperating and annoying. 


The Obsessive 
Character Description: The Obses- 


sive is motivated by a single, all- 
consuming goal. This goal might be 


Role-Playing 


learning. a particular spell, locating a 
long-lost mentor, acquiring a particular 
magical item or artifact, or avenging 
the death of a loved one. The goal 
might also be completely unrealistic, 
such as ridding the world of all evil, or 
filling his spell books with the formulas 
of every known spell. 

The Obsessive focuses on the resolu- 
tion of his goal to the exclusion of all 
elses He views his association with an 
adventuring party asa means to an end; 
for instance, he might join an adventur- 
ing party if he learns that they are jour- 
neying toa faraway kingdom where he 
believes an artifact might be located. 
The Obsessive cooperates with an ad- 
venturing party only to the extent that 
their goals don’t conflict with his. 

If his goal is realistic, it is unlikely 
that a character will remain an Obses- 
sive forever. A player selecting this per- 
sonality type might want to choose a 
second personality type for his charac- 
ter once he reaches his goal. This sec- 
ond personality type might also suggest 
a goal for the Obsessive. For instance, if 
a character is a Commander at heart, he 
might become an Obsessive if he is con- 
sumed with finding an evil NPC re- 
sponsible for killing all of his men. 
When he brings the NPC to justice, the 
Obsessive reverts to Commander. 


Best Suited For: Characters of any 
alignment can be Obsessives, though 
certain.obsessions are more appropriate 
for certain alignments. For instance, an 
Obsessive bent on avenging his daugh- 
ters murder probably has a strong 
sense of justice; he’s probably of lawful 
alignment. A greedy Obsessive who 
seeks a legendary fortune in gold could 
be of a neutral alignment, possibly neu- 
tral evil. 

Any kit can be used for the Obses- 


sive. 


In Combat Situations: The Obsessive 
tends to be a brutal, savage fighter, since 
he sees opponents as another obstacle 


between him and his goal; he wants 
them out of the way as quickly as possi- 
ble. Negotiation makes him impatient; 
he would rather blast his adversaries to 
bits with a fireball than waste time talk- 
ing. That does not mean that the Obses- 
sive takes unnecessary risks—after all, 
he cannot reach his goal if he’s dead— 
but he is prone to recklessness and can 
easily endanger his companions if he is 
not kept in check by a firm leader. 


In Role-Playing Situations: In all 
cases, the Obsessive is more concerned 
with his personal goal than the goal of 
the party. He'll question NPCs intently 
for information about his goal, and if 
they have nothing to offer, he will seek 
out other NPCs to interview. If the 
party leader convinces him that he is 
operating to the detriment of the party's 
goals as well as his own, the Obsessive 
will restrain himself, but this will prob- 
ably be only temporary. 

In a campaign, the Obsessive is self- 
absorbed and humorless. He will talk 
incessantly to his companions about his 
own goal, but his eyes will glaze over 
when they share their problems or 
opinions with him. The Obsessive's at- 
titude does nothing to endear him to his 
companions, but depending on the na- 
ture of his goal, they may feel sympa- 
thy or compassion for him. 


The Showman 


Character Description: No one en- 
joys being a wizard more than the 
Showman. He delights in dazzling 
friends and foes alike with surprising, 
dramatic magical effects. Nothing stirs 
the heart of a Showman more than 
learning a new magical effect or putting 
a new twist on an old spell. He sees 
magic as a fine art, comparable to 
sculpting, composing, and painting. He 
has more appreciation for a well- 
executed cantrip than for a mundanely- 
cast 9th-level spell. 


57 


The Showman casts spells with a flair. 
He considers both opponents and allies as 
potential audiences. If a spell requires a 
short phrase for its verbal component, 
he'll incorporate the phrase in a song or 
poem. If a spell requires him to point at a 
subject, he will use a series of elaborate 
and dramatic gestures to arrive at point- 
ing his finger. His alteration spells are 
strikingly imaginative; his illusions are 
breathtaking works of art. Nothing frus- 
trates a Showman more than having to 
use a spell in the same way twice, espe- 
cially if his audience of friends or foes has 
seen it previously. 

The Showman’s flamboyance is eas- 
ily matched by his ego. He wallows in 
the approval of others; applause is like 
music to him, a compliment is like food 
to a starving man. However, even the 
most casual criticism can send him sulk- 
ing and an insult can devastate him. 

Most often, the Showman is cheerful 
and upbeat. Most people find him great 
fun to be around, and no one can argue 
that his approach to magic is genuinely 
entertaining. This is a good character 
type for players who want to introduce 
more humor and playfulness into a 
campaign. 


Best Suited For: The spontaneity typ- 
ical of the chaotic alignments makes 
them good choices for the Showman, 
but good and evil alignments are appro- 
priate (the good-aligned Showman 
loves to share his skills with others and 
bring smiles to their faces; the evil- 
aligned Showman enjoys frightening 
and intimidating them). The Showman 
is not likely to be drawn to the cautious 
and self-centered neutral alignments. 

The Showman is best suited for the 
Amazon, Peasant Wizard, Witch, and 
Wu Jen kits. The Academician tends to 
be too cerebral, the Anagakok and the 
Militant Wizard too serious, the Savage 
Wizard too unsophisticated, the Mystic 
too introspective, and the Patrician too 
stuffy. 


Role-Playing 


In Combat Situations: The Showman 
relishes combat, since it gives him a per- 
fect opportunity to show off his spells. 
Needless to say, the Showman will al- 
ways go for the most spectacular, dra- 
matic, and dazzling effects—if he wants 
to scare away an opponent with phantas- 
mal force, why create a simple ogre or 
troll when he can create a multi-headed 
werewolf with purple tentacles and 10- 
inch golden fangs? Unfortunately, his 
flair for the dramatic sometimes finds 
him squandering his higher-levels spells 
unnecessarily, such as in using lightning 
bolt when the less-spectacular magic mis- 
sile would be just as effective. 


In Role-Playing Situations: Since the 
Showman views all new acquaintances 
as potential audiences, he enjoys meet- 
ing people from all walks of life. The 
Showman is especially fond of mem- 
bers of the opposite sex, and will often 
go to great lengths to impress and daz- 
zle them, sometimes at the expense of 
the business at hand. Most NPCs see 
the Showman as endearing and charm- 
ing, but some find his attention-getting 
antics obnoxious. 

Among his companions, the Show- 
man is appreciated for his pleasant atti- 
tude and positive outlook. He is always 
able to boost morale with a clever trick 
or entertaining demonstration. At 
times, PC leaders might have a problem 
impressing the Showman with the seri- 
ousness of a situation or getting him to 
focus on an important task, but flattery 
or indulgence usually get the Show- 
man’s cooperation. 


Changing Personality 
Types 


Players are encouraged to alter the 
above personality types in any way 
they see fit. Characteristics of one per- 
sonality can be combined with charac- 
teristics of another to create brand new 
types (Brooding Commanders are pos- 


sible, as are Obsessive Mystery Men). 
The DM is also free to modify the per- 
sonality types and make suggestions to 
his players. As always, the DM has the 
right to forbid the players from choos- 
ing extreme personalities for their char- 
acters; for instance, the DM might 
decide that Mercenaries are too disrup- 
tive to his campaign and suggest an al- 
ternative to his players. 

Sometimes, a player might wish to 
change his character's personality. 
Maybe the character has matured and 
outgrown his old personality type. Or 
maybe the character has reached a turn- 
ing point in his life that has forced him 
to change his outlook or rethink his 
philosophy. 

Since the personality types are not 
governed by a strict set of rules, players 
can change them whenever appropri- 
ate. However, such changes should be 
rare, and typically should mark a major 
turning point in his life; a player should 
not change his character's personality 
just for the sake of trying something 
new. A personality change should de- 
velop naturally out of the events of the 
campaign, perhaps as a result of a cata- 
strophic event; for instance, an Altruist 
might become a Brooder because a 
friend or family member was brutally 
murdered by a hoard of pillaging orcs. 

Following are some ways such 
changes might occur. 

The Altruist may become disillu- 
sioned when a formerly trusted com- 
panion sells him out or when he realizes 
that his good intentions are unappreci- 
ated by the commoners he has vowed to 
defend. This Altruist might then be- 
come a Brooder. If his altruism turns to 
cynicism, he might decide to become a 
Mercenary. 

The Brooder may experience an en- 
lightening event that gives him a more 
positive attitude; for instance, he could 
earn the admiration of a child or he 
could fall in love. Since he is sensitive 
and introspective by nature, a former 


Brooder could become a Counselor. 

The Commander could become fed 
up with the constant responsibility for 
the others in his party, or the burden of 
command could begin to overwhelm 
him. Depending on his disposition, he 
could become a Brooder, a Counselor, 
an Altruist, or even an Intimidator. Re- 
gardless of his change (unless he is con- 
sumed with bitterness or completely 
amoral) he'll still have leadership ten- 
dencies and likely will find the urge to 
give orders impossible to resist. 

The Counselor isn't likely to change, 
since his personality type is associated 
with maturity and experience. He could 
temporarily become a Commander if 
no one else was available, but most 
other personalities are so contrary to 
his nature that he would find it difficult 
to change himself. 

The Intimidator is not likely to 
change much, either. Possibly, falling in 
love or experiencing some other dra- 
matically positive experience could 
soften him enough to make him con- 
sider changing his outlook. In time, a 
reformed Intimidator could become a 
Counselor, or he could eventually as- 
sume the duties of a Commander. 

The Mercenary could easily become 
an Obsessive if he becomes consumed 
with acquiring an impossibly large 
amount of treasure or locating an arti- 
fact that does not exist. Exposure to the 
world’s impoverished and neglected 
might encourage him to change his 
ways and become an Altruist, 

The Mystery Man could become just 
about any other personality type (ex- 
cept a Neophyte) once he decides to 
abandon his veil of secrecy. 

The Neophyte will eventually be- 
come more mature and lose his youth- 
ful naivete. His experiences in the 
campaign will probably suggest a new 
personality for him. (Note that it is ex- 
tremely unlikely that a character will 
change from his current personality 
into a Neophyte; that would probably 


require the character to lose his mem- 
ory and become young again.) 

The Obsessive will not change unless 
he gives up his obsession, in which case 
he will likely become a Brooder. If he 
reaches his goal, he could become 
nearly any personality type. 

The Showman might be forced to as- 
sume more responsibility and become a 
Commander, or he could become disil- 
lusioned with constantly trying to win 
the approval of others and become a 
Brooder. If he begins charging money 
for his performances, he might be 
tempted to become a Mercenary. A 
Showman bent on developing the ulti- 
mate magical effect might risk becom- 
ing an Obsessive. 


Ideas for New Personality 
Types 


The personality types are not con- 
fined to the ones suggested above. Here 
are a few other possibilities: 


© The Sidekick (a trusted companion 
and assistant to a player character). 


© The Compromiser (a superb nego- 
tiator, dedicated to preserving har- 
mony and good relations among his 
companions). 


è The Coward (a reluctant fighter, 
frightened of everything and always ex- 
pecting the worst). 


e The Carefree Wanderer (a happy- 
go-lucky wayfarer). 


è The Sneak (a wizard who loves to 
trick people and take advantage of their 
naivete). 


e The Chronicler (a historian de- 
voted to making a permanent, detailed 
record of his party's activities). 


Character Background 


When a player has selected a person- 
ality type for his character, he can indi- 


59 


Role-Playing 


vidualize him further by making 
decisions about his appearance, his in- 
terests, his family, and other details 
about his background. This informa- 
tion does not need to be recorded on 
the character sheet, but the player is 
certainly allowed to do so. The more a 
player knows about his character, the 
more he will seem like a real person 
and be more fun to play. Here are just a 
few of the many details to consider. 


Name: Some wizards prefer exotic 
names that add to their reputations as 
men of mystery. Such a name is some- 
times a modification of the wizard’s real 
name, such as “Brindon” for a wizard 
whose real name is “Benbrindon 
Swule.” Alternately, a wizard might 
make up a new name for himself; for in- 
stance, Benbrindon Swule might decide 
to call himself “Antra,” an arcane term 
meaning “Champion of the Dawn.” 
Many wizards also add an adjective to 
their names to declare their importance 


Role-Playing 


to the world, such as “Brindon the 
Dark” or “Antra the Magnificent.” 


Age: Think about the wizard’s age 
and how it might influence his outlook 
and attitudes. Older wizards tend to be 
wiser and slower, while younger wiz- 
ards are more energetic and impulsive. 
Wizards frequently have long careers; 
human wizards can be active well into 
their 80s and beyond, However, it is un- 
usual for a novice wizard to be younger 
than 20 or so, since magical training can 
take many years. 


Physical Appearance: What does the 
wizard look like? How tall is he? How 
much does he weigh? What color are his 
hair and eyes? Does he have any inter- 
esting birthmarks? Scars? How did he 
get them? 


Mannerisms: Often a wizard has a 
unique physical quirk, eccentric behav- 
ior, or habitual expression that sets him 
apart from the crowd. Does the wizard 
rub his chin when he's thinking? Does 
he always sleep on his back? Does he 
pick his teeth with his fingernail? 


Beliefs: Is the wizard religious? Is his 
outlook on life generally positive, or is 
he a pessimist by nature? Is he supersti- 
tious? Does he have any phobias? 


Birthplace and Nationality: The wiz- 
ard's birthplace reflects his cultural her- 
itage, which in turn influences the way 
he looks at the world. Is he upper class 
(or the equivalent)? Middle class? Born 
in poverty? 


Family: What were the wizard’s par- 
ents like? Did they encourage him to be 
a wizard, or are they ashamed of his av- 
ocation? Was the wizard an orphan 
(and if so, has he learned why he was 
abandoned)? Does he have brothers 
and sisters? Is he still close to them? If 
not, what happened? 


Birthright: Does the wizard have a 
special birthright, such as a family heir- 
loom or a share of the family holdings? 
Does he stand to inherit this birthright 
when he reaches a certain age or 
achieves a certain goal? 


Education: Where did the wizard re- 
ceive his magical training? Did he at- 
tend a prestigious academy? Was he 
taught by a mentor? Several mentors? 
Is he on good terms with them, or are 
they estranged? If so, what happened? 


Career: Unless the wizard is indepen- 
dently wealthy, depends on the kind- 
ness of strangers, or lives like a hermit, 
he probably has some way to earn a liv- 
ing. In many cases, a wizard's school of 
specialization will suggest a career; for 
instance, a diviner could probably earn 
a good living as a fortune teller. Other- 
wise, the character can pick any career 
or vocation that seems reasonable and 
doesn’t contradict his upbringing. (See 
the following section for suggestions.) 


Clothing: You can tell a lot about a 
person by the way he dresses. A wizard 
favoring dark robes suggests a conserv- 
ative personality, while a wizard wear- 
ing glittering shirts and multi-colored 
trousers is probably as flamboyant as 
his clothing. 


Likes and Dislikes: Does the wizard 
have a favorite food? A favorite drink? 
Does he like music, books, or art? What 
types? What does he do for fun? Is he a 
sportsman? A gambler? A collector? 


Wizardly Careers 


Owing to their wide range of abilities, 
the professions available to wizards are 
almost without limit. Below are a few of 
the most common careers. Each career 
includes the names of specialists and kits 
which are commonly associated with 


it—but note that these are general guide- 
lines only, and there are likely to be ex- 
ceptions in many campaigns. 


Teacher 


A wizard opting for a career as a 
teacher could be either an instructor at 
a magical academy (full-time or part- 
time), a professor at a regular college, 
or a private tutor. The wizard’s back- 
ground might suggest his academic 
field; history, mathematics, and any of 
the sciences are likely possiblities. 

Suggested Kits: Academician, Patri- 
cian, Wu Jen 

Suggested Specialties: Invoker, Ab- 
jurer, Transmuter, Enchanter 


Administrator 


Frequently, the local wizard is one of 
the most learned men in his geographic 
area. If he has earned the trust of the cit- 
izenry, he may be asked to serve as a 
government administrator. Wizards are 
more likely to be administrators of 
smal] villages than large cities, since the 
needs of a small village are not likely to 
be as demanding, leaving the wizard 
plenty of free time to pursue his re- 
search. 

Suggested Kits: Academician, Ama- 
zon Sorceress, Militant Wizard, 
Patrician 

Suggested Specialties: Diviner, Ab- 
jurer, Transmuter 


Advisor 


Noted for their wisdom and insight, 
wizards are sometimes retained by 
monarchs as personal advisors. Di- 
viners are especially sought for these 
positions. 

Suggested Kits: Academician, Ama- 
zon Sorceress, Mystic 

Suggested Specialties: Conjurer, En- 
chanter, Transmuter, Diviner 


Role-Playing 


Trader 


A wizard’s quest for hard-to-find 
components for his spells and his re- 
search can take him to cities and vil- 
lages around the world. A career as a 
tradesman can be a natural outgrowth 
of these travels. Wizard traders are 
most likely to deal in precious gems, 
potions, and various collector's items. 
A wizard may also earn a living as a 
broker in spell components, dealing ex- 
clusively with other wizards. 

Suggested Kits: Anagakok, Militant 
Wizard, Peasant Wizard, Savage 
Wizard 

Suggested Specialties: Transmuter, 
Enchanter, Abjurer 


Physician 


Although the healing arts are more 
typically associated with priests, wiz- 
ards also have been known to work in 
the field of medicine, thanks to their tal- 
ents for manufacturing potions of heal- 
ing and other healthful elixirs. Wealthy 
noblemen have been known to hire wiz- 
ards as their personal physicians. 

Suggested Kits: Academician, Ana- 
gakok, Witch 

Suggested Specialists: Enchanter, 
Abjurer, Necromancer 


Treasure Hunter 


A wizard who spends his days as a 
member of an adventuring party has 
ample opportunity to discover trea- 
sures and earn rewards. Exceptionally 
talented wizards may receive a weekly 
or monthly retainer from an adventur- 
ing party in addition to a share of any 
treasure discovered or rewards earned. 
Such wizards have no need for formal 
careers, assuming their services are in 
demand or the missions they undertake 
are successful. 

Suggested Kits: Amazon Sorceress, 


Anagakok, Militant Wizard, Savage 
Wizard 

Suggested Specialists: Conjurer, Illu- 
sionist, Necromancer, Invoker 


Entertainer 


A wizard with a flair for the dramatic 
can earn a decent—if irregular—living 
as a professional entertainer. Opportu- 
nities include private shows for noble- 
men, annual celebrations, and street 
performances after which the wizard 
passes the hat for donations. Enterpris- 
ing wizards sometimes rent halls and 
stage shows, charging admission from 
entertainment-starved citizens. 

Suggested Kits: Peasant Wizard, 
Witch 

Suggested Specialists: Illusionist, 
Conjurer 


Lecturer 


To earn a living as a lecturer, a wizard 
must have the engaging personality of 
an entertainter as well as the knowledge 
of a scholar. Such a wizard may travel 
from city to city, giving lectures in his 
field of expertise at the invitation of 
academies, royal courts, and private 
organizations. Lecturers with reputa- 
tions as compelling speakers sometimes 
rent halls and charge admission. 

Suggested Kits: Academician, Patri- 
cian, Mystic 

Suggested Specialties: Conjurer, En- 
chanter, Transmuter, Diviner 


Author 


Experienced wizards sometimes re- 
cord their research procedures, tips for 
successful spellcasting, or techniques 
for magical item creation in detailed 
manuscripts. Depending on the reputa- 
tion of the wizard, such tomes can com- 
mand hefty sums. Rarely are more than 
a few copies of any such manuscript 


ói 


produced, but each copy may fetch 
thousands of gold pieces for the author. 
Some wizards also have made names 
for themselves as authors of history, 
mathematics, and philosophy texts. 

Suggested Kits: Academician, Patri- 
cian, Mystic 

Suggested Specialists: Conjurer, En- 
chanter, Diviner 


Fortune Teller 


Diviners can take advantage of their 
skills by charging for their fortune tell- 
ing services. While it is common for 
kings and other noblemen to retain the 
services of an astrologer, palm reader, 
or other type of fortune teller, some 
wizards set up shop on their own, 
charging a fee to anyone in need of their 
talents. Unscrupulous wizards have 
been known to sell their services as for- 
tune tellers to superstitious peasants, 
even though these wizards may lack 
any actual ability in this area. 

Suggested Kits: Amazon Sorceress, 
Mystic, Witch, Wu Jen 

Suggested Specialists: Enchanter, Di- 
viner, Conjurer 


Alchemist 


Many wizards with a flair for re- 
search and laboratory technique be- 
come successful alchemists. Most of 
their work is non-magical in nature, 
creating fertilizers, perfumes, cough 
medicines, tooth powders, and food 
coloring for modest fees. Magical po- 
tions, while requiring more skill and ef- 
fort, are also sold, although few 
commoners can afford such expensive 
creations. 

Suggested Kits: Academician, Witch, 
Wu Jen 

Suggested Specialists: Transmuter, 
Invoker, Enchanter, Necromancer 


Role-Playing 


Wizard Adventures 


Occasionally, the DM might wish to 
slant some of his campaign's adventures 
toward his wizard player characters. To 
do so, he needs to devise a way to bring 
the wizard characters into the adven- 
ture without excluding the other player 
characters. Following are several sug- 
gestions that can be used as spring- 
boards for this sort of adventure. 


The Novice Wizard 


A low-level wizard who has just 
graduated from an academy of magic 
(or has just ended his apprenticeship 
with a mentor) is often sent into the 
world to complete a mission or quest. 
The mission serves as his final exam; its 
completion proves to the novice’s supe- 
riors that he has successfully mastered 
his magical skills and is ready to take 
his place as a full-fledged wizard. Fail- 
ure means that the novice requires addi- 
tional training. 

There are all types of suitable mis- 
sions. For instance, the novice’s superi- 
ors might ask him to journey into an 
uncharted jungle to retrieve the blos- 
som of a rare flower. They might ask 
him to explore the ruins of an ancient 
castle to search for a long-lost spell 
book, or travel to a small village and 
drive off a hoard of invading monsters. 
Since most mentors encourage their ap- 
prentice wizards to seek help (it teaches 
them the importance of cooperation), 
the wizard might recruit his player 
character companions to aid him. 


The Outcast Wizard 


In many societies, the practice of 
magic is considered blasphemous. Or- 
dinary citizens shun and despise all wiz- 
ards, considering them to be disciples of 
supernatural forces. In extreme cases, 
those suspected of being wizards are 


imprisoned or even executed. 

A player character wizard may have 
been operating secretly in such a soci- 
ety, fearing the worst if his true skills 
were revealed. The wizard would wel- 
come the chance to join a party prepar- 
ing to embark on any type of 
adventure, if it were to take him far 
away from his homeland. Alternately, a 
party might encounter a wizard who 
was forced to leave home when his 
skills were discovered by his country- 
men or his family. 


Magic’s Good Name 


In a world where magic has a bad 
reputation, a PC wizard might want to 
join an adventuring party to prove that 
magic can be used as a force of good, If 
the party's mission is successful and the 
wizard is at least partly responsible, 
magic might once again be accepted as a 
respectable and honorable profession. 

There are any number of situations 
incorporating this idea: 


è The PC wizard wants to confront 
an influential ruler in a distant land 
who is responsible for spreading propa- 
ganda about the inherent evil of magic. 
The ruler might be an evil wizard, bent 
on stirring up support from the popu- 
lace to stamp out rival wizards. He 
could also be of good alignment, but a 
bad experience with magic as a youth 
left him prejudiced against all wizards. 


è The PC wizard wants to learn how 
many wizards still exist in the world, 
Perhaps many wizards have gone into 
hiding, and the PC wizard is deter- 
mined to find out what has happened to 
them. 


è The PC wizard wants to discover 
how many young people are interested 
in learning magical skills. Perhaps the 
PC wizard wishes to establish a magical 


62 


academy of his own, or perhaps he 
wishes to find a young novice with 
whom he can share his knowledge. Are 
such students difficult to find? If so, 
why? Will the PC wizard face resistance 
from the family of a potential student? 
From the local authorities? What must 
the PC wizard do to prove that his in- 
tentions are honorable? 


è The PC wizard wants to verify ru- 
mors that a violent feud has erupted be- 
tween two organizations of wizards ina 
distant land, thus sullying the reputa- 
tions of wizards everywhere. The rival 
wizard groups might be of different 
alignments, members of oppositional 
schools, or from different races. Their 
feud might be over a contested piece of 
land or a landmark—such as a tower or 
cemetery—or one group might have re- 
ligious objections to the type of spells 
used by the other group, Settling their 
disagreements can be used as a spring- 
board for new adventures. 


Assisting the Citizenry 


Many wizards serve as administra- 
tors, advisors, or teachers, or hold 
other positions of responsibility in their 
communities. The local citizens are 
likely to barrage such wizards with a 
constant stream of requests for favors 
and assistance. Most of these requests 
will be trivial and easily addressed, but 
others might require the PC wizard to 
recruit the help of his player character 
companions. 

Sometimes, a seemingly innocuous 
request (“Something's been into my 
crops—I think it's a bunch of kids. 
Could you stop them?”) might lead the 
PC wizard to believe that more is hap- 
pening than meets the eye. He might 
summon his companions to help him 
investigate, and their discoveries could 
be the beginning of a long campaign. 
(The party discovers clawed footprints 


Role-Playing 


among the damaged crops. The foot- 
prints lead to a nearby forest, then 
abruptly vanish. What's going on?) 


The Scholarly Quest 


A wizard player character engaged in 
magical research might require a partic- 
ular component that exists only in a 
hard-to-reach part of the world. If the 
journey promises to be dangerous, the 
wizard might ask his friends to accom- 
pany him. Alternately, if a PC wizard 
encounters a party going in the same di- 
rection, he might agree to assist them 
on their mission in exchange for safe 
passage to the location of his sought 
component. After recovering the com- 
ponent, the wizard might have become 
close enough to the other PCs to volun- 
tarily continue on their mission with 
them. Or maybe the other PCs got the 
wizard out of a tough spot and the wiz- 
ard feels obligated to return the favor 
by completing the mission with them. 

The party's mission might coincide 
with something the wizard PC wants. 
For instance, the party might be em- 
barking on a mission to stop a notori- 
ous evil wizard. The evil wizard might 
possess a magical device the PC wizard 
has coveted for a long time. The PC 
wizard could agree to help the party in 
exchange for the magical device. 


Out of Retirement 


An elderly wizard might grow weary 
of his sedentary existence and welcome 
any opportunity to add some excite- 
ment to his life. Such a wizard would 
eagerly join any party of player charac- 
ters if the party's mission promised to 
be exciting and didn’t violate the wiz- 
ard's personal values (a PC wizard of 
good alignment is unlikely to join an 
evil party about to embark on a murder 
spree unless he is pretending to be evil 
in order to stop them). 


Since a party can always use an extra 
wizard, a group of player characters 
might coax an old PC wizard out of re- 
tirement to help them ona mission. The 
PC wizard might be enticed by a mone- 
tary reward, the lure of adventure, or 
the possibility of settling an old debt 
(perhaps the party believes they will be 
facing an old nemesis of the PC wiz- 
ard). The PC wizard also might agree to 
help them out of a sense of loyalty to his 
former companions. 


Magic in the Campaign 
World 


Whether designing a campaign or es- 
tablishing the parameters of a single ad- 
venture, the DM will find it helpful to 
understand the prevalence of magic in 
his world. Is magic relatively 
common—are wizards encountered as 
frequently as any other character 
type—or is magic extremely rare, with 
practitioners relegated to rumors and 
legend? Deciding how much magic ex- 
ists involves not just the number of wiz- 
ards and magical items, but also the 
prevalence of spells, magical monsters, 
and magical effects in general. 

Here are a few of the questions the 
DM should consider when deciding 
how magic fits into his world: 


How common are wizards? The fre- 
quency with which wizards are encoun- 
tered gives a good indication of how 
often a party is likely to encounter mag- 
ical items and spell books. Obviously, if 
magic is uncommon, magical items are 
especially valuable. 


How available are academies and 
mentors? A world with little magic pro- 
vides would-be wizards with few op- 
portunities to learn their crafts. 
Advancement through the various 
levels of skill is likely to be slow. Cer- 
tain specialties may not be available at 


all. Conversely, a world where magic is 
relatively common should have a vari- 
ety of specialists of all levels among its 
population. 


How are wizards accepted among 
the general population? Are wizards 
feared or respected? Revered or de- 
spised? A predominance of magic does 
not guarantee that the general popula- 
tion feels comfortable with wizards; 
though familiarity can foster accept- 
ance, it can also breed prejudice and 
resentment. 


Is there a relationship between magic 
and political power? Wizards usually 
wield more power than any other group 
in a society. Have the wizards used their 
power for political gain? Are they com- 
monly found as rulers and administra- 
tors? Does the general population reject 
the idea of wizard rulers (wizards are 
too strange or too frightening) or do 
they embrace it (wizards are smart and 
deserve to run the government)? 


How integrated are wizards in the 
rest of society? Do wizards live openly, 
or must they keep their abilities secret? 
Are wizards able to walk down the 
street unmolested, or do they invari- 
ably draw a crowd of curious on- 
lookers or hostile townsmen who 
regard them as a threat? Do they live in 
a special area of town, or can they make 
their homes anywhere they wish? Do 
they associate only with other wizards, 
do they mingle freely with people from 
all walks of life, or do they prefer a soli- 
tary existence? 

There are no fixed rules for the 
amount of magic available in a cam- 
paign world, as long as the DM strives 
for consistency and balance. Following 
are some general guidelines for several 
different types of campaigns. 


Role-Playing 


Worlds With Excessive 
Amounts of Magic 


In worlds where magic is relatively 
common, the non-wizard is sometimes 
the outsider. Wizards are the most fre- 
quently encountered character class 
and typically hold all positions of 
power. Wizards of good alignments 
consider themselves caretakers of the 
non-wizard population; wizards of evil 
alignments see the non-wizards as an 
exploitable resource. 

Kingdoms controlled by evil wizards 
often clash with one another. They also 
frequently wage war on kingdoms con- 
trolled by good wizards. The awesome 
power wielded in these conflicts can 
easily devastate the entire world. 
(Think of such conflicts as the wizardly 
equivalent of nuclear war.) 

Mentors and academies of magic are 
common, as are wizards of all schools 
and levels. Novices tend to rise quickly 
in ability, and high-level wizards are in 
abundance. Magical items and magical 
monsters abound. There may bea large 
number of priests as well, since they are 
also magic-users, but an abundance of 
wizards does not guarantee that a 
world has an abundance of priests. 
(Priests get their magical abilities from 
the gods, who may be as generous or as 
stingy with their gifts as the DM 
wants.) 

Worlds where magic is prevalent are 
invariably populated by a large number 
of powerful characters. The DM will 
probably have his hands full trying to 
maintain play balance, devising chal- 
lenging adventures for his player char- 
acters, and prevent non-wizard player 
characters from feeling overwhelmed 
or insignificant. For these reasons, it is 
suggested that only experienced DMs 
attempt to stage adventures in a magic- 
heavy campaign world. Creating a 
world where magic is taken for granted 
can be difficult, but for DMs and play- 


ers up to the challenge, it can be a fasci- 
nating alternative. 


Worlds With Typical 
Amounts of Magic 


“Typical” in this sense means the 
amount of magic present within the 
limits of an average AD&D® campaign 
world. In such worlds, magic is known 
to exist, but real wizards are regarded 
with awe and perhaps a little suspicion. 
Average people may be baffled by 
magic and others may be afraid of it, 
but all are impressed by its power. 

Wizards are uncommon, especially 
those of higher levels. Novices wishing 
to master a particular school of magic 
may have to work hard to find a suit- 
able mentor or academy. In some areas 
of the world, certain specialists may not 
even exist. Spell books, magical items, 
and magical monsters are relatively 
rare; finding one will probably be a ma- 
jor event in the life of any character, 

To avoid violating the unique nature 
of magic in this type of world, the DM 
must be careful to set limits on the 
availability of magical items, spell 
books, and magical effects in general. 
He also may wish to limit the number of 
magic-users by deciding whether PCs 
can be multi-class or dual class charac- 
ters with wizard or priest spells. In a 
campaign where such restrictions are in 
force, evil wizards will not need to be 
quite as powerful to be effective against 
a typical party. Without such restric- 
tions, there are likely to be more magic- 
users in a party, meaning that evil 
wizards will need to be of higher levels 
to be effective opponents. 


Worlds With Low 
Amounts of Magic 


Not surprisingly, wizards are rare 


commodities in worlds where little 
magic exists. Most people have never 


65 


seen a real wizard. In some of these so- 
cieties, wizards are confined to myths 
and legend. A player character wizard 
will likely be restricted to low levels, 
and advancement will be difficult. In 
fact, it may be impossible for a wizard 
to reach higher levels of ability—such 
spells may simply not exist. Magical 
items are extremely rare, if they exist at 
all. Magical monsters are equally rare, 
but those encountered are especially 
formidable, wielding powers unheard 
of by a typical adventuring party. 


Worlds With No Magic 


By means of a portal, a magical de- 
vice or artifact, or divine intervention, 
an adventuring party might find them- 
selves on a world where magic does not 
exist. Alternately, a player character 
may find himself transported from a 
world where magic is common to a 
world with no magic. Aside from the 
PC wizards in the party, such a world 
has no wizards at all. There are also no 
magical items, spell books, magical 
monsters, or magical effects of any 
kind. Such a world will have a number 
of interesting ramifications for wizard 
characters, as well as for the party as a 
whole. 

© There is no way to recharge rods 
and other magical items. 

è There is no way for a wizard to 
learn new spells. 

© Magical research is impossible. 

e Magical potions no longer exist 
(aside from those the characters 
brought with them). 


How would such a world react to a 
wizard? As an analogy, imagine how 
people of our world would react to the 
news that an actual wizard walked the 
planet. Some would beseech him for fa- 
vors, while others would seek to exploit 
him. Some would see him as a hero, 
while others would see him as a physi- 


Role-Playing 


cal manifestation of their religious be- 
liefs. Governments might attempt to re- 
cruit him as a weapon against enemies. 
Scholars might seek to study him. Un- 
sophisticated people, fearful of his 
power, might try to capture or kill him. 

Obviously, a world without magic is 
radically different from the typical 
AD&D® campaign world, but it can be 
a refreshing change for the DM and a 
stimulating challenge for players with 
wizard PCs. There are many interest- 
ing themes to explore in this type of 
campaign world, but the action is also 
likely to be more subdued without 
magical monsters and evil wizards for 
opponents. 


Campaign Variations 


Following are a few off-beat sugges- 
tions for using wizards and magic in a 
campaign. The DM is free to modify, 
combine, and vary these suggestions as 
he sees fit. 


The All-Wizard Campaign 


In this type of campaign, most of the 
player characters are wizards. Other 
classes are allowed, but they are usually 
restricted to one character from each 
class. (That is, a party can have no 
more than one warrior, one priest, and 
one rogue—the rest are wizards.) 

To begin this type of campaign, the 
DM can encourage players to take PC 
wizards by fostering an atmosphere 
where NPCs have a special admiration 
for wizards or where magic is an espe- 
cially revered field of study. Alter- 
nately, the DM can simply require the 
players to use wizard characters. 

All wizard kits are allowed in this 
type of campaign, as are multi-class 
and dual-class characters as long as one 
of the class choices is wizard. The DM is 
forewarned that he will have to be espe- 
cially creative to invent adversaries of 


sufficient power to provide acceptable 
challenges for a party of wizards. 


The Single Wizard Kit 
Campaign 


The DM might decide that all magic 
in his world stems from a particular cul- 
ture; therefore, all wizards must have 
the same kit. This includes player char- 
acter wizards and well as NPC wizards 
of all alignments. Among the kits espe- 
cially appropriate for this type of cam- 
paign are the Amazon, the Anagakok, 
and the Wu Jen. If the DM wishes, 
player characters of all classes might be 
required to take the same kit, but this 
is not necessary for an interesting 
campaign, 

How this type of campaign affects 
the existence of magical items and mag- 
ical monsters is the decision of the DM, 
but there are likely to be fewer of both 
(see Worlds With Low Amounts of 
Magic in the Magic in the Campaign 
World section above). In a campaign 
where all magic comes from an Ama- 
zon culture, all magical items will have 
their origin in that culture. Dragons, 
for instance, may exist throughout the 
world, but all of them trace a com- 
mon ancestry to a land dominated by 
Amazons. 


The Restricted School 
Campaign 


In this type of campaign, certain 
schools of magic do not exist. For in- 
stance, in a world where the school of 
illusion does not exist, wizards do not 
have access to phantasmal force, minor 
creation, or any other illusion spells, 
nor are they allowed to specialize as il- 
lusionists. Researching these types of 
spells is also forbidden. If a spell be- 
longs to two schools, then the spell is 
still available if it belongs to a school 
that still exists. For instance, in a world 


where the school of illusion does not ex- 
ist, rainbow pattern is available since it 
also belongs to the school of alteration. 

Whether magical items that duplicate 
the effects of non-existent schools are 
available is the DM's decision, but for 
consistency, it makes sense to forbid 
them. Another good idea is to give wiz- 
ards access to the spells from the school 
of lesser divination—it is very difficult 
to function as a wizard without them. 

As another variation, the DM might 
consider having more than one non- 
existent school in his campaign world. 
(Schools in direct opposition to one an- 
other, as shown in Figure 1 in Chapter 
2, are good choices to eliminate. For in- 
stance, if the school of illusion is nonex- 
istent, then the school of necromancy 
might not exist either). In an especially 
restrictive world, perhaps only one 
school of magic exists; if only the 
school of illusion exists in the DM's 
world, then all wizards must be illu- 
sionists and have access only to illusion 
spells—spells from any other school do 
not exist. 


The Restricted Level 
Campaign 


Similar to the Restricted School 
Campaign, in this variation, high-level 
magic does not exist. For instance, the 
DM might decide that no spells of 6th 
level or higher exist. Therefore, a wiz- 
ard has access to spells of 1st level 
through 5th level only, and he is unable 
to research higher-level spells. As with 
the Restricted School Campaign, the 
DM decides whether magical devices 
duplicating the effects of higher-level 


spells exist. 


This chapter tells the wizard how to 
make the most of his magical abilities in 
combat. It also includes some tips for 
effective strategy and planning, along 
with advice on weapon selection. 


The Spell Arsenal 
The Wizard’s Advantages 


In combat, there are two important 
advantages a wizard has over the non- 
magicusing members of his party: 


1. The wizard is an extremely versa- 
tile opponent; high-level wizards are 
likely to be the most versatile charac- 
ters in an adventuring party. 


2. While the abilities of most other 
characters tend to confine them to spe- 
cific roles, the wizard can adapt his 
skills to new situations by selecting the 
appropriate spells from his spell books 
(assuming that the wizard has access to 
a variety of spells). For instance, a high- 
level warrior has the same skills today 
that he did yesterday. But a high-level 
wizard begins each day anew, memo- 
rizing a selection of spells from his spell 
books that may be radically different 
from those he memorized the day be- 
fore. With the right spells, a wizard can 
be a master of reconnaissance one day 
and an engineer of destruction the next. 

But if a wizard has a large selection 
of spells in his spell books, how does 
he know which ones will be most help- 
ful on any particular day? Some wiz- 
ards, of course, will simply load up 
with their most powerful spells and 
hope for the best. But a shrewd wizard 
will look closely at his spells and ana- 
lyze their primary functions to decide 
which are the most appropriate to a 
particular situation. 


Chapter 5: Combat and the Wizard 


Spell Categories 


A helpful way for a wizard to analyze 
his arsenal is by assigning his spells to 
various categories. The following sys- 
tem uses six categories based on a spell’s 
use in combat situations. The catego- 
ries include: 


Defensive 1. This category of spells 
provides protection from harm. It in- 
cludes spells that make the subject more 
difficult to hit, increase his resistance to 
damage, and shield him from various 
types of opponents. Usually, a wizard 
casts this type of spell on himself or on 
his allies. 


Defensive 2. This category of spells 
hinders an opponent's ability to attack 
without directly causing damage to the 
opponent. It includes various charm, 
hold, and blinding spells, along with 
spells that add penalties to an oppo- 
nent’s attack rolls. Usually, a wizard 
casts this type of spell directly on one or 
more of his opponents. 


Offensive 1. This category of spells 
increases the chance to inflict damage 
on an opponent. It includes spells that 
give bonuses to attack and damage 
rolls, as well as those that increase 
strength. It does not include spells that 
directly inflict damage. Usually, a wiz- 
ard casts this type of spell on himself or 
his allies. 


Offensive 2. This category of spells 
directly inflicts damage on opponents. 
It includes spells that cause an oppo- 
nent to lose hit points, such as chill 
touch and lightning bolt, spells that 
cause creatures to lose levels of ability, 
such as energy drain, and spells that 
cause damage to specific creatures, 
such as transmute water to dust. Usu- 
ally, a wizard casts this type of spell on 
one or more of his opponents, although 


exceptions include spells that create or 
summon entities to fight on the caster’s 
behalf, such as monster summoning. 


Reconnaissance. This category re- 
veals information about opponents or 
provides warnings about their actions. 


Special. This catch-all category in- 
cludes spells that have no specific offen- 
sive, defensive, or reconnaissance use 
in combat. 


How do you decide which spells be- 
long to which categories? It is not an ex- 
act science, but rather a generalization 
based on a spell’s most common use in 
combat situations. For instance, fireball 
can be used to destroy inanimate ob- 
jects, but in combat situations, it is usu- 
ally used to inflict damage on an 
opponent; therefore, it is an Offensive 
spell—Offensive 2, to be exact. Light is 
helpful for finding the way in a dark ca- 
vern, but in combat, it can be used to 
blind opponents to reduce their attack 
rolls, making it a Defensive spell— 
more precisely, a Defensive 2 spell. (For 
quick reference, it may be helpful to 
note each spell’s category next to its 
name on the character sheet.) 

If a spell seems to fit into more than 
one category, that is to be expected. Re- 
member, the point is not to draw rigid 
boundaries, but to learn to think in 
terms of a spell’s function as opposed to 
its level or flashy name. As an illustra- 
tion, here are categorizations of some 
Ist- and 2nd-level spells from the Play- 
er's Handbook. 


Defensive 1: Protection from evil, ar- 
mor, shield, mirror image, invisibilty, 
blur 


Defensive 2: Color spray, enlarge, 
light, grease, shocking grasp, taunt, 
wall of fog, deafness 


Offensive 1: Spectral hand, strength 


Combat and the Wizard 


Offensive 2: Burning hands, shock- 
ing grasp, chill touch, flaming sphere, 
stinking cloud 


Reconnaissance: Alarm, compre- 
hend languages, message, detect un- 
dead, ESP 


Special: Dancing lights, erase, hold 
portal, jump, mending, spider climb, 
wizard mark 


The various categories are discussed 
in detail in the following sections. Play- 
ers should use the information to help 
them assign their spells to categories, 
which in turn will enable them to 
choose the best spells for their wizards 
to memorize in a particular situation. 


Defensive Spells 


Defensive spells provide protection 
from specific or general types of attacks 
in the following ways: 

e By acting as a shield or barrier 
(protection from normal missiles) 

e By decreasing an opponent's at- 
tack capability (slow) 

e By giving temporary immunity 
(stoneskin) 

e By removing the subject from a 
dangerous situation (teleport) 

e By sending away the opponent 
(dismissal) 

e By reducing the amount of damage 
suffered (armor) 


The school of abjuration offers the 
greatest variety of Defensive spells, but 
Defensive spells are also available in 
every other school. Some particularly 
effective Defensive spells are offered in 
the schools of alteration (gaze reflection 
and wraithform), enchantment/charm 
(sleep and hold person), and illusion 
(hypnotic pattern and mislead). 


Spells in the Defensive 1 category are 
typically cast on the wizard or on his 
companions to provide direct protec- 
tion from attacks; globe of invulnera- 
bility, invisibility, and protection from 
evil are examples of Defensive 1 spells. 

Spells in the Defensive 2 category are 
typically cast on one or more oppo- 
nents to hinder their ability to attack or 
prevent them from attacking alto- 
gether; fumble, ray of enfeeblement, 
and binding are examples of Defensive 
2 spells. 

In general, Defensive 2 spells offer 
more protection than Defensive 1 
spells, since they effectively protect the 
entire party. For instance, a wizard pro- 
tecting himself with the Defensive 1 
globe of invulnerability spell may be 
safe from an attacking opponent, but 
the opponent is free to attack the wiz- 
ard's companions, However, an oppo- 
nent affected by the Defensive 2 sleep 
spell cannot attack anybody in the 


party. 


Following are some general situa- 
tions in which a wizard will find Defen- 
sive spells particularly useful: 


The party has only a few members or 
has only low-level members. The wiz- 
ard’s inability to use armor is his most 
vulnerable characteristic. A wizard 
must either count on his companions 
for protection or provide it for himself. 
In small parties, there probably are not 
enough members to provide body- 
guards for the wizard. A small party 
will also have their hands full in combat 
situations, and probably will not have 
the time or the resources to look after a 
wizard. Likewise, a party of low-level 
characters lacking high-quality armor 
or other protective devices may have to 
depend on their wizard to provide pro- 
tection for them. 


The party has taken an excessive 
amount of damage. A party that has 


lost a lot of hit points is not in a position 
to take chances, especially if they antic- 
ipate trouble. A wizard armed with De- 
fensive spells can help the party 
through any tough times ahead. 


The party includes other player char- 
acter wizards who lack Defensive 
spells. If the party does not know what 
type of dangers it may face, a good idea 
is to have as many different types of 
spells available as possible. It is helpful 
if the wizard arms himself with a 
healthy supply of Defensive spells if his 
fellow magic-using companions do not 
have them or choose not to use them. 


The wizard anticipates being alone. 
If the wizard expects to be alone on 
guard duty or investigating a danger- 
ous locale by himself, operating as a 
spy, or otherwise functioning without 
the company of others, he is safest with 
a supply of Defensive spells to compen- 
sate for his lack of armor. 


The party anticipates encountering a 
specific type of enemy. Many Defensive 
spells offer protection against a specific 
type of attack. If the party believes it 
will be encountering a particular type 
of opponent, the wizard should arm 
himself accordingly. (For instance, if 
the party anticipates encountering an 
evil wizard, Defensive spells such as 
dispel magic and Serten's spell immu- 
nity would be wise choices.) 


Offensive Spells 


Offensive spells increase the ability 
of the caster (or persons of the caster's 
choice) to inflict damage, or directly in- 
flict damage on opponents in the fol- 
lowing ways: 

e By attacking specific targets 
(magic missile) 

e By attacking all opponents within 
a designated area (cloudkill) 


By summoning surrogates capable 
of attacking (monster summoning) 


Schools offering a variety of Offen- 
sive spells include conjuration/ 
summoning (flame arrow and Evard'’s 
black tentacles,) invocation/evocation 
(fireball and death fog), and necro- 
mancy (spectral hand and death spell). 

Spells in the Offensive 1 category are 
typically cast on either the wizard or on 
his companions to increase their ability 
to attack or inflict damage; strength, 
spectral hand, and enchanted weapon 
are examples of Offensive 1 spells. 

Spells in the Offensive 2 category are 
typically cast on one or more oppo- 
nents to inflict damage directly, effec- 
tively functioning as weapons for the 
wizard; flaming sphere, shocking 
grasp, and finger of death are examples 
of Offensive 2 spells. 

In general, Offensive 2 spells are 
more effective than Offensive 1 spells, 
since they inflict damage directly. For 
instance, a wizard successfully casting 
an Offensive 1 strength spell on himself 
must still strike an opponent to inflict 
damage; a successfully cast fireball in- 
flicts damage immediately. 

Following are some general situa- 
tions in which a wizard will find Offen- 
sive spells particularly useful: 


The party is large or has a number of 
high-level members. Again, the main 
consideration is the vulnerability of the 
armor-less wizard. In larger parties, 
there are likely to be enough members 
to supply the wizard with a bodyguard 
or two (note that this does not mean a 
bodyguard in the literal sense, but 
rather a designated member to help 
protect the wizard from attacks). Like- 
wise, if the party has several high-level 
members with a lot of hit points and 
high-quality armor, they will not be as 
dependent on the wizard for protective 
spells. A wizard who does not need a lot 
of Defensive spells is free to arm himself 
with a high number of Offensive spells. 


The party has few warriors. While 
unusual, it is not impossible for a party 
to be completely composed of wizards, 
priests, and rogues. In such a case, a 
wizard with an arsenal of Offensive 
spells can make an acceptable substi- 
tute for a warrior. But note that even 
the best-armed wizard must still con- 
tend with a low Armor Class, meaning 
he will still need to rely on one or more 
of his companions for protection. 


The party is making its last stand. 
When a party is facing its final chal- 
lenge at the climax of an adventure 
(presuming the party realizes they have 
reached the climax of an adventure) or 
is making a life-and-death stand against 
an opponent of awesome power, they 
may need al! of the offensive capabili- 
ties they can muster. If the wizard genu- 
inely feels he has nothing to lose (or if 
the wizard is willing to sacrifice his life 
to achieve the party's goals), he may 
wish to arm himself with as many Of- 
fensive spells as possible to maximize 
his party's chance of success. 


The party anticipates facing an 
onslaught of enemies. A party may also 
need heavy offensive capabilities if they 
anticipate facing a large number of ene- 
mies (such as a battlefield filled with 
hundreds of orcs and goblins) or a few 
enemies with a lot of power (such as a 
cadre of giants). Again, unless the wiz- 
ard is willing to lay down his life for the 
cause, the party should take the wiz- 
ard's vulnerability into account when 
planning their strategy. 


The party includes other player char- 
acter wizards who lack Offensive 
spells. This principle applies to the use 
of Offensive spells as well as Defensive 
spells. If the first wizard in a party has 
nothing but Defensive spells, and the 
second wizard has a variety of both Of- 
fensive and Defensive spells, it makes 
sense for the second wizard to arm him- 


70 


self with Offensive spells (unless one of 
the situations described above suggests 
a different strategy). 


Reconnaissance Spells 


Reconnaissance spells neither inflict 
damage nor provide protection, but 
they serve a vital function in combat by 
furnishing crucial information in the 
following ways: 

¢ By revealing the presence of ene- 
mies (detect evil) 

e By revealing enemy motivations 
(ESP) 

© By revealing enemy actions (clair- 
voyance) 

¢ By revealing future events 
(foresight) 

¢ By revealing past events (legend 
lore) 

+ By employing supernatural guid- 
ance (vision) 


Obviously, most Reconnaissance 
spells come from the school of greater 
divination, but other schools have 
them as well, including abjuration 
(alarm), alteration (comprehend lan- 
guages and wizard eye), and illusion 
(magic mirror). 

Following are some general situa- 
tions in which a wizard will find Recon- 
naissance spells particularly useful: 


The party is entering an unknown 
area, The more a party knows about 
the potential dangers of a previously 
unexplored castle, jungle, or stretch of 
enemy-occupied terrain, the better they 
can cope with whatever they meet. A 
quick survey of the territory by a wiz- 
ard using clairvoyance, detect evil, or 
similar spells can be an effective deter- 
rent against ambushes and other unex- 
pected surprises. 


The party is unsure of the enemy's 
motivations, Not all NPCs are enemies 


(maybe they are hostile because they 
assume the PCs are the bad guys), and 
not all enemies are bent on destroying 
the party (maybe they are trying to get 
back to their leader as quickly as possi- 
ble and the PCs are in their way). A 
wizard using ESP, know alignment, or 
similar spells can clarify the motives of 
NPCs, possibly allowing the party to 
avoid combat entirely. 


The party needs a lookout or a vol- 
unteer for guard duty. A wizard armed 
with spells such as clairaudience, clair- 
voyance, foresight, and wizard eye 
makes an excellent lookout. He can also 
serve as a party's communications offi- 
cer in combat, keeping track of his com- 
panion’s actions, tracking the actions of 
the enemy, and becoming alerted to 
companions in need of assistance. 


The party needs a spy. The wizard 
who knows a variety of Reconnais- 
sance spells makes a perfect spy, either 
acting by himself (in which case he 
should ensure that his chances of being 
discovered are small, since he has no ar- 
mor) or in conjunction with a compan- 
ion who can serve as his bodyguard. 
Unlike rogues or invisible characters, 
who are also good candidates for spy- 
ing missions, a wizard using clairaudi- 
ence, ESP, and similar spells can gain a 
lot of information from relatively safe 
distances. 


Special Spells 


Special spells are those that have lim- 
ited use in combat. They do not offer 
protection, inflict damage, or reveal in- 
formation. Such spells assist the party 
in these ways: 

© By making repairs (mending) 

© By labelling personal possessions 
(wizard mark) 

e By changing appearances (alter 
self and fool's gold) 


è By creating various illusionary ef- 
fects (illusionary wall and minor crea- 
tion) 


Though nearly all schools have their 
share of Special spells, the school of il- 
lusion has a surplus of them, which is 
one reason why the illusionist is consid- 
ered by many to be the least useful spe- 
cialist in combat. 

This does not mean that Special 
spells are completely useless on the bat- 
tlefield. As with all types of magic, 
clever wizards will invariably find a va- 
riety of uses for Special spells. For in- 
stance, the Special spell dancing lights 
does not cause blindness or inflict dam- 
age, but cast at the right time, it could 
be used to distract an opponent, render- 
ing him momentarily unable to attack. 
In general, however, Special spells are 
the worst choices for a wizard antici- 
pating combat. 


A Mix of Spells 


In the examples above, we suggested 
a number of situations where it is to the 
wizard’s best advantage to arm himself 
with an arsenal of spells from a particu- 
lar category. In some situations, how- 
ever, a wizard might be better arming 
himself with a few spells from each cat- 
egory. Here are a few examples: 


The party is beginning a new adven- 
ture. When embarking on a new adven- 
ture or a new episode of an ongoing 
campaign, it is unlikely that the party 
will know exactly what obstacles or 
dangers they will face. In these cases, a 
wizard armed with a mix of Defensive, 
Offensive, Reconnaissance, and Special 
spells will be able to handle a variety of 
situations. As the adventure progresses 
and the party accumulates more infor- 
mation, the wizard can adjust his spell 
mix accordingly, perhaps concentrating 


71 


Combat and the Wizard 


on Defensive or Reconnaissance spells 
as the situation dictates. 


The party has only a single wizard. In 
this case, the party might have to rely 
on the wizard to assume a variety of 
roles—for instance, he may be expected 
to provide magical protection for the 
party (requiring Defensive spells) as 
well as ferreting out information about 
its opponents (requiring Reconnais- 
sance spells), Of course, the more du- 
ties a wizard assumes, the less effective 
he can be at any one of them, but some- 
times such a situation is unavoidable. 


The party has a large number of pow- 
erful characters in a variety of classes. 
The more power a party has at its dis- 
posal, and the more that power is dis- 
persed among a large number of 
characters, the less dependent they will 
be on any one party member. In this 
case, a wizard’s arsenal of spells is not 
as crucial, If the party has a number of 
strong warriors for offensive and defen- 
sive actions (as well as an extra warrior 
or two to serve as bodyguards for the 
wizard), has some rogues for spies, and 
has a magical scrying device, it is not vi- 
tal for a wizard to concentrate exclu- 
sively on Defensive, Offensive, or 
Reconnaissance spells. 


The wizard has no choice. If the wiz- 
ard is just beginning his career, he prob- 
ably does not have a lot of spells in his 
spell books, Likewise, if he has only De- 
fensive spells in his spell book, he obvi- 
ously cannot choose from the various 
categories. 


Weapon Restriction 


Wizards are severely limited in the 
weapons they can use. Little if any of 
their formal training is devoted to com- 
bat, and they usually are unable to de- 
vote the time and effort necessary to 
master such skills. Consequently, their 


weapon choices are confined to those 
that are easy to learn and simple to use. 
As a general rule, the DM should con- 
fine wizards to the following weapons: 


Blowgun 
Barbed dart 
Needle 

Dagger or dirk 

Dart 

Knife 

Quarterstaff 

Sling 
Sling bullet 
Sling stone 

Staff sling 


These restrictions apply to magical 
weapons of similar types as well. For in- 
stance, just as a wizard is denied the use 
of a two-handed sword, he is denied the 
use of a two-handed sword +1. 

In certain situations, the DM may al- 


low a wizard to use a weapon other 
than those listed above. However, the 
DM is cautioned to make exceptions to 
the wizard’s weapon restrictions with 
care, to avoid unbalancing the game 
and violating the special nature of the 
wizard. 

Here are a few situations where the 
DM might consider making exceptions 
to the wizard’s weapon restrictions: 


The wizard’s kit allows for different 
weapons. The Anagakok kit, for in- 
stance, allows for tridents and har- 
poons, while the Amazon kit allows for 
spears and long bows. If the DM gives 
permission for players to pick one of 
these kits, or another kit with weapons 
other than those listed above, he should 
also allow him to use the kit's weapons. 
However, the DM is within his rights to 
forbid the use of any weapon—if he de- 
cides harpoons are unavailable in his 


campaign world, then even an Anaga- 
kok cannot use them. 


Instruction in the use of a particular 
weapon was part of the wizard’s train- 
ing. Just as certain kits allow certain 
weapons, certain cultures might require 
all of its citizens to master certain weap- 
ons. A warlike culture, for instance, 
might insist that all of its male citizens 
are to be trained in the use of swords 
and spears, and wizards are not ex- 
cluded. 

The player must establish these type 
of background details at the beginning 
of his character's career —they cannot 
suddenly be brought into play in the 
middle of a campaign (“Did I forget to 
mention that my character's father 
trained him to use a club?”). As always, 
the DM can veto any background sug- 
gestions that he considers unacceptable 
in his campaign. 


Chapter 6: Casting Spells In Unusual Conditions 


A wizard's adventures can take him 
to all kinds of exotic locations. But if he 
finds himself battling foes beneath the 
ocean's surface or exploring a mysteri- 
ous locale in an alternate plane of exist- 
ence, he will discover that his spells are 
operating a little differently than usual. 
This chapter explains the differences. 

Spell casting abilities can also be af- 
fected by sensory changes, such as a 
temporary loss of vision, an impaired 
ability to speak, and impaired move- 
ment. These problems, as well as how a 
wizard’s spells are affected when cast 
under less than optimum conditions 
and how he might compensate for these 
differences, will be discussed in this 
chapter. 


Casting Spells 
Underwater 


Assuming that the wizard can find a 
way to breathe underwater for ex- 
tended periods (such as a water breath- 
ing spell or potion), most of his spells 
will function normally underwater, 
with identical casting times, ranges, 
components, and effects. There are, 
however, a number of exceptions, de- 
tailed below. Rather than being frus- 
trated by these changes, the wise 
wizard will study them carefully and 
use them to his advantage. 


Spells That Are Ineffective 
Underwater 


The following spells cannot be cast or 
will not function underwater. All spells 
are from the Player's Handbook except 
those labeled NS (for New Spell) which 
are found in Chapter 8 of this book. 

Spells marked with an asterisk { * ) 
will function normally when cast 
within the bounds of an airy water 


spell. 


Ist Level 
affect normal fires* 
burning hands* 
jump” 
mount 
wall of fog* 


2nd Level 
flaming sphere* 
fog cloud" 
pyrotechnics* 
summon swarm 
whispering wind* 
wind breath (NS) 


3rd Level 
fireball 
flame arrow* 
gust of wind 
illusionary script* 
Melf's minute meteors 
wind wall 


4th Level 

fire aura (NS) 

fire charm 

fire shield * (only the flame shield 
version of this spell is forbidden; the 
chill shield version functions normally) 

fire trap 

shout * 

solid fog * 

wall of fire 


5th Level 
cloudkill * 


distance distortion 


6th Level 
control weather 
death fog * 
guards and wards * 
lower water 


7th Level 
delayed blast fireball 


Sth Level 
incendiary cloud 


9th Level 
meteor swarm 


73 


Spells That Are Modified 
When Cast Underwater 


The following spells are altered as de- 
scribed when cast underwater. All 
spells are from the Players Handbook, 
except those labeled NS (for New Spell) 
which are found in Chapter 8 of this 
book. 


1st Level 


Chromatic Orb (NS): The heat, fire, 
and stinking cloud effects are unavail- 
able underwater. 


2nd Level 


Filter (NS): Instead of filtering vapors, 
filter eliminates poisons in the water. 


Ice Knife (NS): Because of water resist- 
ance, an ice knife cast underwater can 
strike targets only within 10 yards. It 
causes a maximum of 1-4 hit points of 
damage. 


Melf's Acid Arrow: The acid from this 
arrow lasts only a single round before it 
is washed away by surrounding water. 


3rd Level 


Fly: This spell enables the subject to 
swim effortlessly at any depth and in 
any direction, even if the subject is en- 
cumbered or is normally too heavy to 
float. The maximum speed is 9. 


Lightning Bolt: Instead of a stroke, the 
electrical discharge takes the form of a 
sphere with a 20-yard radius, centering 
on the point where a stroke would have 
occurred if the spell had been cast 
above water. All those within the 
sphere suffer 1d6 hit points of damage 
per level of the caster; the maximum 
damage is 10-60 (10d6) hit points. A 
successful saving throw reduces this 
damage to half (round fractions down). 


Casting Spells In Unusual Conditions 


Monster Summoning I: Only creatures 
that can breathe and function underwa- 
ter can be summoned. (If available, the 
DM should use the appropriate Aquatic 
Monster Summoning table in the Mon- 
strous Compendium.) 


Phantom Steed: A phantom steed cre- 
ated underwater is a hippocampi with 
a black forebody and silver-gray 
scales. These steeds do not gain the 
special traveling or flying abilities of 
the regular phantom steeds, but they 
do gain the movement rate of 4 per 
level of the spell caster (to a maximum 
movement rate of 48). Otherwise, they 
are similar to the steed created by the 
spell. 


4th Level 


Ice Storm: The hail stones created by 
this spell will be as large as normal, but 
their downward force is greatly re- 
duced, inflicting only 1-10 hit points of 
damage before floating toward the sur- 
face. The sleet variation of this spell is 
useless underwater, since all of the sleet 
melts as soon as it is created. 


Monster Summoning II: Only creatures 
that can breathe and function underwa- 
ter can be summoned. (If available, the 
DM should use the appropriate Aquatic 
Monster Summoning table in the Mon- 
strous Compendium.) 


Wall of Ice: A wall of ice can be formed 
underwater, but it immediately floats to 
the surface and bobs in the water like an 
ice floe. This renders the ice plane and 
hemisphere variations useless. The ice 
sheet variation of this spell inflicts no 
damage underwater. 


5th Level 


Conjure Elemental: Air elementals and 
fire elementals cannot be conjured un- 
derwater. Earth elementals must remain 
on the floor of the sea, lake, or river 
from which they are conjured. While 


unable to leave the floor, they can still 
attack creatures or assault construc- 
tions that are resting on or are imbed- 
ded in the floor. Water elementals can 
be conjured normally. 


Monster Summoning III: Only crea- 
tures that can breathe and function un- 
derwater can be summoned. (If 
available, the DM should use the ap- 
propriate Aquatic Monster Summon- 
ing table in the Monstrous 
Compendium.) 


Transmute Rock to Mud: This spell op- 
erates underwater as it does elsewhere, 
except that the mud immediately begins 
to dissipate. If cast on the ocean floor 
(or the floor of any other body of wa- 
ter), only extremely heavy creatures 
who are unable to swim are in any dan- 
ger of sinking into the mud. 


6th Level 


Chain Lightning: Underwater, this acts 
as a lightning bolt of twice the normal 
size (either a forked bolt up to 20 feet 
wide and 80 feet long, or a single bolt 10 
feet wide and 160 feet long. However, it 
strikes only a single object and inflicts 
only 1d6 hp of damage for every level 
of the caster (save vs. spells for half 
damage). It will not arc to other targets. 


Conjure Animals: Only creatures that 
can breathe and function underwater 
can be conjured, 


Monster Summoning IV: Only crea- 
tures that can breathe and function un- 
derwater can be summoned. (If 
available, the DM should use the ap- 
propriate Aquatic Monster Summon- 
ing table in the Monstrous 
Compendium.) 


Otluke's Freezing Sphere: The frigid 
globe variation of this spell can be ex- 
tremely dangerous to the caster when 
cast underwater. The globe of absolute 
zero matter will instantly freeze the wa- 
ter around the caster into a block of ice 


74 


of a volume equal to 50 cubic feet per 
level of the caster. The entombed wiz- 
ard will immediately float to the sur- 
face. Unless he receives assistance or is 
able to free himself, he will immediately 
begin to suffocate. 


Part Water: This spell can be used to 
form a “tunnel” through water-filled ar- 
eas, no wider than 10 feet in diameter. 
The “tunnel” contains air, enabling 
creatures inside it to breathe normally. 


Transmute Water to Dust: Casting this 
spell underwater causes a “hole” to 
open in a previously water-filled area. 
The size of the “hole” is up to 10 cubic 
feet per level of the caster. Assuming 
there is sufficient surrounding water— 
that is, if the spell was not cast on or 
near the surface of the water—the un- 
affected water will rush in, inflicting 1 
hit point of damage per level of the 
caster to all within (no saving throw). 


7th Level 


Monster Summoning V: Only creatures 
that can breathe and function underwa- 
ter can be summoned. (If available, the 
DM should use the appropriate Aquatic 
Monster Summoning table in the Mon- 
strous Compendium.) 


Mordenkainen’s Magnificent Mansion: 
At the caster's option, the mansion can 
be filled with water, or the influx of wa- 
ter can be prevented, keeping the man- 
sion’s interior tidy and dry. 


8th Level 


Monster Summoning VI: Only crea- 
tures that can breathe and function un- 
derwater can be summoned. (If 
available, the DM should use the ap- 
propriate Aquatic Monster Summon- 
ing table in the Monstrous 
Compendium.) 


Sink: This spell places the subject a 
specified number of feet beneath the 
floor of the lake, ocean, or sea. The 


Casting Spells In Unusual Conditions 


magic of the containment will radiate 
through the water to the surface. 


9th Level 


Monster Summoning VII: Only crea- 
tures that can breathe and function un- 
derwater can be summoned. (If 
available, the DM should use the ap- 
propriate Aquatic Monster Summon- 


ing table in the Monstrous 
Compendium.) 
Casting Spells in Other 


Planes 


As described on page 132 of the 
Dungeon Master's Guide, the AD&D® 
game world consists of many planes of 
existence aside from the familiar Prime 
Material plane. Just as physical laws 
operate differently in these planes, so 
do the effects of magic and the ways in 
which spells are cast. General guide- 
lines for using wizardly magic in the 
various planes are given below. (If 
planning a campaign in one or more of 
the other planes of existence, or if a DM 
is interested in additional information 
about the planes, consult the Manual of 
the Planes.) 


The Ethereal Planes 


From the wizard’s perspective, the 
key features of the Ethereal planes in- 
clude the following: 

è The effects of time occur 10 times 
slower than on the Prime Material 
plane. For instance, for every 10 turns 
that pass on the Ethereal planes, only a 
single turn has passed. Therefore, the 
subjective time for the wizard to memo- 
rize and cast spells is 10 times as long as 
the actual time required. 

è The thick soup of ethereal matter 
restricts clear vision to about 100 yards. 

© Because of the semi-solid nature of 
the ethereal matter, spells that create re- 


straining effects, such as web and wall 
of stone, are easily circumvented by the 
victim—he must only move the ethe- 
real matter out of the way. Restraining 
spells that inflict damage, such as wall 
of fire, are equally easy to circumvent, 
but still cause harm to the victim. 


The schools of magic are affected as 
follows: 

Abjuration: Spells of 5th level and 
above will not function. 

Alteration: All spells of this school 
function normally, subject to the special 
laws of the Ethereal planes. 

Conjuration/Summoning: Entities 
from the Prime Material, Astral, and 
outer planes cannot be summoned. 
Leomund's secret chest places the con- 
jured chest in a location in the Ethereal 
plane different from that of the caster. 

Divination: These spells function 
only if the wizard is in the area between 
the Prime Material plane and the Ethe- 
real planes (called the Border Ethereal) 
and is casting the spells into one of the 
adjacent planes. For instance, detect 
magic will not work in the Ethereal 
plane, but it functions normally if cast 
from the Border Ethereal into the Ethe- 
real planes. Contact other plane, how- 
ever, functions everywhere in the 
Ethereal planes. 

Enchantment/Charm: All spells of 
this school function normally, subject 
to the special laws of the Ethereal 
planes. 

Invocation/Evocation: All spells of 
this school function normally, subject 
to the special laws of the Ethereal 
planes, except that materials created by 
evocation spells are made of ethereal 
matter and have the properties of that 
matter. Bigby’s forceful hand, for in- 
stance, will not stop an opponent. 

INusion/Phantasm: All spells of this 
school function normally, subject to the 
special laws of the Ethereal planes. 
However, illusionary images and items 
do not disappear at the end of the spell’s 


75 


duration, or when the wizard stops 
concentrating, or when the illusion is 
touched. Instead, the images and items 
gradually fade away. Invisibility, 
change self, and fear are not subject to 
fading and function normally. 

Necromancy: All spells of this school 
function normally, subject to the special 
laws of the Ethereal planes. 

Magical Items: Pluses on weapons are 
reduced by one to attack and damage 
rolls (a sword +2 effectively becomes a 
sword +1), Armor and protective de- 
vices are likewise reduced by one plus. 
Magical items that duplicate specific 
types of spells operate under the same re- 
strictions as described above. 


The Inner Planes 


From the wizard’s perspective, the 
key features of the Inner planes include 
the following: 

è Spells that rely on elemental forces 
can be modified to affect all other ele- 
mental types, though each modification 
must be researched separately. For in- 
stance, a spell that affects water can be 
used to similarly affect earth or fire, so 
that a wall of water may appear or cre- 
ate air can be cast. To determine if a 
modified spell can be cast, the wizard 
must roll against his Intelligence as if 
learning a new spell. If the roll fails, the 
wizard cannot make another attempt 
for one full day (as measured on the 
Prime Material plane). These modified 
spells can be used only in the inner 
planes. 

e Modified spells apply only when 
modifying one elemental spell to an- 
other. Positive and negative energies 
are not eligible. For instance, a wizard 
cannot create a wall of negative energy. 

+ In the plane of Fire, all material 
created by spells (such as water and ice) 
is immediately affected by the extreme 
heat. For instance, the ice created by ice 
storm immediately melts. 


Casting Spells In Unusual Conditions 


@ Inthe plane of Water, spells are af- 
fected as described in the Casting Spells 
Underwater section above. 

@ In the Energy planes, matter cre- 
ated by spells is destroyed one round af- 
ter its creation. Spells that inflict 
variable amounts of damage always in- 
flict maximum damage in the plane of 
Positive Energy and minimum damage 
in the plane of Negative Energy. Spells 
that inflict damage over a period of sev- 
eral rounds function for only one 
round. 


The schools of magic are affected as 
follows: 

Abjuration: All spells of this school 
function normally, subject to the special 
laws of the inner planes, except where 
noted in the spell description. Spells af- 
fecting extra-dimensional creatures do 
not affect creatures native to the inner 
planes. When the anti-magic shell is used 
in the inner planes, all magical protec- 
tions are removed from within that 
sphere, removing any protection the 
user may have to survive in that plane. 

Alteration: These spells are the most 
likely to be modified as described 
above. A lower water spell, for in- 
stance, can be modified to lower fire in 
the plane of Fire, and airy water could 
be modified to airy fire. 

Here are a few special cases: 

$ Transmute rock to mud can func- 
tion as fransform element to para- 
element; earth becomes ooze or 
magma, fire becomes magma or smoke, 
air becomes smoke or ice, and water be- 
comes ice or ooze. Each type of trans- 
mutation must be researched 
separately. 

$ Transmute water to dust can be 
modified to transform element to nega- 
tive quasi-element; elemental water be- 
comes ash, air becomes vacuum, fire 
becomes ash, and earth becomes dust. 

® Astral spell will not work in the in- 
ner planes. 

Conjuration/Summoning: Usually, 


spells summoning a particular type of 
elemental creature summon that being 
only in its native plane. These spells do 
not guarantee control over the sum- 
moned elemental, but the elemental is 
not immediately hostile to the caster. 

Spells summoning animals, mon- 
sters, or other Prime Material creatures 
instead summon the elemental versions 
of these creatures. Elemental creatures 
have the same appearance and abilities 
as their Prime Material counterparts, 
but are elementals of that type found in 
that inner plane (except that the Posi- 
tive and Negative planes have no ele- 
mental types), 

Spells that contact beings in the As- 
tral and outer planes do not function in 
the inner planes. 

Divination: These spells function 
normally. Those that call on an entity 
function only if that entity is native to 
the inner planes or Ethereal planes. 

Enchantment/Charm: These spells 
function normally. Hold person and 
charm spells work only against human- 
oid elementals. 

Illusion/Phantasm: These spells func- 
tion normally. 

Invocation/Evocation: Usually, invo- 
cation spells function only if the entity's 
domain is in the same plane as the wiz- 
ard, Evocation spells dealing with ele- 
mental forces can be modified to call 
upon any elemental force. These in- 
clude spells that create items of fire, 
lightning, ice (but not cold), winds, 
clouds, fog, and flames. For instance, a 
fireball can be modified into a lightning 
ball or earth ball, and lightning bolt can 
be modified into fire bolt or air bolt; in 
all cases, the range and damage remain 
the same. Note that spells such as cone 
of cold and wall of iron cannot be modi- 
fied, since they have no actual elemen- 
tal basis. 

Necromancy: Beneficial necromantic 
spells restore hit points, abilities, levels, 
or life. Harmful necromantic spells de- 
prive victims of these quantities. Bene- 


76 


ficial necromantic spells will not 
function in the Negative plane, while 
harmful spells automaticaly succeed 
and inflict maximum damage. Benefi- 
cial spells restore the minimum number 
of hp in the negative quasi-planes, and 
those spells that require a saving throw 
or are based upon Constitution auto- 
matically fail; harmful spells automati- 
cally succeed and inflict maximum 
damage. Beneficial spells automatically 
succeed and operate to their maximum 
ability in the positive quasi-planes; 
harmful spells inflict minimum damage 
and saving throws of 2 or greater auto- 
matically succeed against these spells. 
Beneficial spells in the Positive Material 
plane automatically succeed and oper- 
ate to their maximum ability; harmful 
spells automatically fail. 

Magical Items: Weapon pluses are re- 
duced by two to attack and damage 
rolls (a sword +3 effectively becomes a 
sword +1). Exceptions include those 
with pluses against particular elemental 
creatures and those that draw their 
power from elemental planes, such as 
energy draining swords. Armor and 
protective devices are likewise reduced 
by two pluses. Magical items that du- 
plicate specific types of spells operate 
under the same restrictions as described 
above. 


The Astral Plane 


From the wizard’s perspective, the 
key features of the Astral plane include 
the following: 

è Items or matter created by spells 
are affected by the plane's weightless 
environment. For instance, water forms 
into circular balls; when touched, these 
liquid balls flow over the victim in a 
light film. Liquids that inflict damage, 
such as acid, inflict twice their normal 
damage, and victims covered in liquid 
film cannot speak without letting the 
liquid into their lungs and drowning in 


Casting Spells In Unusual Conditions 


1-4 rounds. Victims covered in liquid 
cannot use spells with verbal compo- 
nents (unless they are affected by water 
breathing or a similar spell or device 
that allows them to breathe underwa- 
ter). The liquid can be removed by ex- 
tensive toweling, entering a plane 
where gravity exists, or spinning the 
victim fast enough so that the liquid is 
flung from his body. 

Fires burn in circular flames without 
consuming their fuel sources. Wall of 
stone and other wall spells, along with 
other spells that create surfaces, gener- 
ate hollow spheres with radii of 10 feet 
plus 2 1/2 feet per level of the caster, re- 
gardless of the listed area of effect. Tem- 
perature is poorly conducted in the 
Astral plane, so spells generating heat 
and cold do not affect those outside the 
spell area. 

è A wizard cannot move or dodge 
while casting spells; if already moving, 
he must continue moving with the same 
speed and in the same direction as the 
previous round in order to cast the 
spell. 

© Spells that require access to the Ethe- 
real or inner planes will not function. 


The schools of magic are affected as 
follows: 

Abjuration: These spells work nor- 
mally, except that they cannot affect the 
fabric of the Astral plane itself; the 
plane cannot be dispelled or held back. 
Dispel magic affects astrally projected 
travelers by casting them back to their 
original bodies; it has no effect if cast 
against the plane or against silver 
cords. 

Alteration: Alteration spells that 
contact the Ethereal and inner planes or 
make use of extradimensional space 
will not work, such as vanish and rope 
trick. 

Objects animated by alteration spells 
have an Intelligence of 0 for movement 
purposes, but they can attack creatures 
adjacent to them. Spells that modify 


movement function only in situations 
where that movement is permitted in 
the Astral plane. For instance, fly only 
works in balls of air, jump only works if 
the subject can push against solid ob- 
jects, and slow and haste affect only 
muscular movement (likewise affecting 
combat) but have no affect on mental 
concentration movement. 

Alteration spells that control or mod- 
ify conditions operate only if the condi- 
tions already exist; wizards cannot call 
these conditions into existence. 

Conjuration/Summoning: 
Conjuration/Summoning spells of Sth 
level or higher do not function unless 
linked with abjuration magic (for in- 
stance, a spell belongs to both the conju- 
ration and abjuration schools). 
Summoning cantrips will not operate, 
but conjuration cantrips will. Spells that 
call for the direct intervention of an en- 
tity will not work unless the entity is a 
native of the Astral plane. 

Enchantment/Charm: Spells cannot 
call into being creatures from other 
planes. Spells that manipulate or call 
into being extradimensional space in 
the Astral plane do not function, such 
as deeppockets. 

Divination: Because of the inherent 
magic of the Astral plane, detect magic 
causes the entire plane to radiate magic; 
there is only a 5% chance for detecting 
a specific magic radiation against this 
background. 

Spells such as true seeing and devices 
such as the gem of seeing reveal the 
fully infinite nature of the Astral plane, 
an experience that can overwhelm the 
viewer. The chance of being over- 
whelmed is 100% minus 5% per level of 
the viewer. Those overwhelmed are im- 
mobilized for the duration of the spell 
or for 1-6 true turns if viewing through 
a device. 

Ilusion/Phantasm: [llusionary spells 
and phantasm spells with an illusionary 
component function normally, but 
phantasm spells without an illusionary 


77 


component will not function. For in- 
stance, phantom steed will not work 
because the spell has no illusionary 
component, but phantasmal force can 
be cast, since it has an illusionary com- 
ponent. 

Invocation/Evocation: These spells 
function normally, except as modified 
by the physical laws of the Astral plane 
(see the explanation of the effects of a 
weightless environment above). The 
spells created by the archmage Bigby 
function differently when cast against 
creatures that are moving by mental 
concentration (those moving 
physically—such as by pushing off 
objects—are affected normally). 

e Interposing hand: Those of lesser 
Intelligence than the caster are stopped, 
others are slowed in movement by 
50%. 

© Forceful hand: If the caster has a 
higher Intelligence than the affected 
creature, the caster controls the speed 
and direction of the creature. Equal or 
greater Intelligences result in no move- 
ment. 

e Grasping hand: This operates the 
same as the interposing hand if the cast- 
er's Intelligence is equal or less than that 
of the victim, but it repels the victim as 
a double strength forceful hand if the 
caster has higher Intelligence. 

© Clenched fish and crushing hand 
function normally. 

Necromancy: These spells function 
normally. However, a clone created on 
the Astral plane requires 1,000 years to 
grow for every day it would take to 
grow on the Prime Material plane. 
Therefore, if a clone needed two 
months to grow on the Prime Material 
plane, the same clone would require 
60,000 years to grow on the Astral 
plane. 

Magical Items: Weapons are reduced 
by one plus to their attack and damage 
rolls (a sword +2 effectively becomes a 
sword +1), Exceptions include those 
with pluses against astral creatures. Ar- 


Casting Spells In Unusual Conditions 


mor and protective devices are likewise 
reduced by one plus. Magical items that 
duplicate specific types of spells operate 
under the same restrictions as described 
above. 

Normal potions in normal vials have 
the viscosity of syrup and tend to cling 
to the sides of the vials; such potions re- 
quire 1-4 rounds to consume with a 5% 
chance that the drinker chokes (no 
damage, but the drinker loses the ef- 
fects of the potion). Drinking potions 
from wineskins or soft flasks avoids 
this difficulty and allows normal con- 
sumption. 

Magical items that tap into extradi- 
mensional space or the Ethereal or inner 
planes do not function in the Astral 
plane, nor do items that call upon 
powers from those planes. 


The Outer Planes 


From the wizard’s perspective, the 
key features of the outer planes include 
the following: 

è Spells that require access to 
powers and creatures in the inner 
planes and Prime Material planes do 
not function (unless otherwise noted 
below). 

è Cantrips will not function. 

è Creatures and phenomena native 
to the outer planes are unaffected by 
Prime Material planar spells that sum- 
mon, communicate, control, or prevent 
entry. Comparable spells exist for each 
plane, but they must be learned by the 
wizard in that plane; animal growth for 
animals of Elysium is an example. 
These are not considered modifications 
of existing spells, but different spells al- 
together. 


The schools of magic are affected as 
follows: 

Abjuration: These spells are useless 
against beings native to the plane the 
wizard is in (for instance, protection 
from evil has no effect on the evil occu- 


pants of the Nine Hells). However, dis- 
pel magic disrupts spells cast by 
creatures native to the outer planes. 
Alteration: The Chaos planes 
(Happy Hunting Grounds to Tarterus, 
inclusive) have a random effect on al- 
teration spells that create matter (such 
as fog cloud) or change matter into 
other shapes (the various polymorph 
spells). The chance of a random effect 
depends on the plane (see Table 10). 


Table 10: Chance of Random 


Effects of Alteration Spells 
in Outer Planes 
Plane Chance of 
Random Effect 
Happy Hunting 
Grounds 20% 
Tarterus 20% 
Olympus 40% 
Abyss 40% 
Gladsheim 60% 
Pandemonium 60% 
Limbo 80% 


Created matter subject to a random 
effect has its appearance altered; for in- 
stance, a fog cloud might be blue in 
color or sparkle like diamonds. The 
change does not affect the properties of 
the matter. The DM determines the na- 
ture of the change. 

The random effect for a spell that al- 
ters the shape of matter is that the spell 
may not function at all, or that it may 
function in an unintended matter. Roll 
1d100 on Table 11 if such a random ef- 
fect is indicated. 


Table 11: Eandom Effects of 
Altered Shapes in the 
Outer Planes 


d100 Roll Effect 


1-10 Target does not change in ap- 
pearance or properties. 


78 


11-30 Target changes in appearance 
(as determined by DM), but re- 
tains all the properties of the 


original. 


31-50 Target does not change in ap- 
pearance, but gains the proper- 


ties of the new form. 


51-70 Target changes to resemble 
some nearby random object or 
creature, but retains the abili- 


ties of its original form. 


71-90 Target changes to resemble 
some nearby random object or 
creature, and gains the abilities 


of that object or creature. 


91-00 Target changes in form and 
function into something not in 
the immediate area. (DMs are 


encouraged to be fiendish.) 


Conjuration/Summoning: Non- 
native beings cannot be summoned un- 
less they are in adjacent planes or 
planar layers. Creatures native to the 
plane can be called upon, but they are 
not controlled by the wizard; any tasks 
given such creatures must be negoti- 
ated. Protective spells that are effective 
in the Prime Material plane do not func- 
tion against native creatures. 

Find familiar will bring an imp, 
quasit, brownie, or pseudo-dragon. 
The DM is free to add other suitable 
candidates or to modify the appearance 
(but not the abilities) of these familiars. 

Enchantment/Charm: Spells directed 
toward specific creatures (such as 
charm person) will not function against 
their outer planar equivalents. Planes 
other than the one occupied by the wiz- 
ard cannot be accessed, though extradi- 
mensional space can be (so spells such 
as deeppockets function normally, but 
spells such as shadow walk will not). 

Magic jar or any similar spell that 
leaves the caster's original body unoc- 
cupied creates the risk of that body be- 
ing occupied by a native of the other 


Casting Spells In Unusual Conditions 


planes (see the Necromancy entry be- 
low for details). 

Divination: Spells that detect or iden- 
tify mainly respond to the alignment of 
the plane, overwhelming the alignment 
of any beings in the plane. For instance, 
if a good warrior is in the Nine Hells, 
know alignment is overwhelmed by the 
plane's evil nature and will not reveal 
that the warrior is good. However, a 
detect good will reveal the warrior's 
goodness. 

Illusion/Phantasm: These spells func- 
tion normally, though the caster should 
keep in mind that many of the powerful 
beings inhabiting these planes are im- 
mune to illusionary attacks and effects. 
However, spells that rely on demi- 
shadow magic and shadow magic func- 
tion at half strength and half effects. 
Shadow monsters, for instance, creates 
creatures with half the standard hit 
points that inflict half the standard 
damage when attacking; shadow magic 
inflicts only half damage and effects. 

Invocation/Evocation: These func- 
tion normally, although they may be 
changed due to prevailing conditions in 
a particular plane. Generally, these 
changes are similar to those experi- 
enced in the inner planes. For instance, 
a wall of ice will begin to melt immedi- 
ately in the heat of the Nine Hells. 

Necromancy: These spells have no ef- 
fect on the natives of the planes. Rein- 
carnation causes revived individuals to 
be of the same alignment as the plane; 
for instance, a PC reincarnated in the 
Nine Hells will be evil. 

Spells that involve a body uninhab- 
ited by a spirit, such as magic jar, havea 
1 percent chance per day per depth of 
layer of being inhabited by native spir- 
its. For instance, a character who died 
on the eighth layer of the Nine Hells has 
an 8 percent chance per day of his body 
being occupied unless it is raised, while 
a body on the 100th level of the Abyss 
has a 100 percent chance of being occu- 
pied on the first day). The spirits will 


not voluntarily release the body (a lim- 
ited wish or spells of similar power will 
dispel them). 

Magical Items: Weapons are reduced 
by one plus for each plane they are 
taken through; this applies only when 
moving from plane to plane, not when 
moving through planar layers. If a 
weapon becomes non-magical, all spe- 
cial abilities are lost. These penalties do 
not apply to weapons designed to affect 
particular creatures of the outer planes. 
Armor and other protective devices are 
similarly affected. 

All other magical items suffer the 
same limitations as the spells they 
mimic. Magical items that reach into 
extradimensional space function nor- 
mally, but those that draw power from 
the inner planes or access the Ethereal 
planes do not function. 


Casting Spells When the 
Caster is Impaired 


Impaired Vision 


A wizard's vision can be permanently 
or temporarily impaired as a result of 
blindness (magical or natural), disease, 
poison, or physical damage. Vision is 
also impaired in darkness. 

The ability to see is not crucial in the 
casting of many spells. For instance, 
mirror image, monster summoning, 
tongues, and comprehend languages 
(when used to translate spoken words) 
do not require the wizard to be looking 
at anything in particular, and can there- 
fore be cast with impaired vision. How- 
ever, spells such as read magic, detect 
invisibility, and comprehend languages 
(when used to translate written words) 
that require the wizard to be looking at 
a particular object or location cannot 
be cast with impaired vision. 

Impaired vision has no effect on 
spells the wizard casts on himself, such 
as change self or armor. Likewise, im- 


79 


paired vision has no effect when the 
wizard is attempting a touch spell (such 
as protection from evil) on a willing 
subject, presuming the wizard is close 
enough to the subject to touch him. 
However, if a wizard attempts to use a 
touch spell on an unwilling subject, the 
wizard must make a successful attack 
roll with a —4 penalty (this assumes 
that the wizard is close enough to his in- 
tended subject to touch him). As with 
all attacks, the DM can modify this roll 
if the victim is unprepared for the at- 
tack or is unaware of it. If the roll suc- 
ceeds, the wizard touches the subject 
and the normal spell effect occurs. 

Spells that are cast on a specific per- 
son, place, or thing from a distance, 
such as charm person or magic missile, 
cannot be cast by wizards with im- 
paired vision. A wizard cannot simply 
blast a magic missile in a general direc- 
tion and hope for the best—the spell 
does not operate that way. Knowing the 
exact destination of these types of spells 
is a vital element of their execution. 

Spells that are cast over a general 
area can be cast by wizards with im- 
paired vision, although their effects 
may not be as precise as they would be 
if the wizard could see. For instance, a 
wizard with impaired vision could cast 
flaming sphere in front of himself and 
direct it to move straight ahead toward 
an area where he hears a group of 
screeching goblins. But if the goblins 
scatter at the approach of the flaming 
sphere, the wizard will not be able to 
accurately direct its movement to run 
them down. 

This limitation also holds true for il- 
lusion spells that create illusionary im- 
ages, such as phantasmal force; at best, 
the illusionist is making a rough esti- 
mate as to the location of his illusion, 
and any adjustments he makes to the il- 
lusion (such as moving it or having it re- 
spond to the actions of other 
characters) is unlikely to be more than 
an educated guess. 


N 

| D 
Aann 
Additionally 
wizard is creating visual illusions from 
memory, and the results might not al- 


the vision-impaired 


ways be as precise as they would be if 
the wizard could see. In general, the 
more complex the illusion cast by a 
vision-impaired wizard, the more easily 
the illusion will be disbelieved by an op- 
ponent; the DM is free to add as much 
asa +4 bonus to the saving throws of 
opponents attempting to disbelieve 
such illusions (see pages 81-82 of the 
Players Handbook for details on adju- 
dicating illusions, and the section on il- 
lusions in Chapter 7 of this book 
Vision-impaired wizards can use 
their familiars for information about 
their surroundings, thus enabling them 
to cast spells with more accuracy and 
precision. Wizard eye and similar spells 
can help a vision-impaired wizard to 
“see” Infravision is not always useful in 
these situations, since it works to en- 
hance the wizard’s natural vision (al- 
though infravision helps if the wizard’s 


vision is impaired because of darkness, 
and not because of disease or damage). 
The non-weapon proficiency Blind 
Fighting is equally ineffective for the 
vision-impaired wizard. 


Impaired Hearing 


A wizard’s hearing can be perma- 
nently or temporarily impaired as a re- 
sult of deafness (magical or natural), 
disease, poison, or physical damage 
(such as repeated exposure to loud 
noises). Unlike the vision-impaired wiz- 
ard, the hearing-impaired wizard has 
only modest limitations on his spell 
casting abilities. 

Although most spells have a verbal 
component, it is not necessary for the 
wizard to clearly hear the words or 
sounds he utters to cast a spell. These 
sounds serve to release magical energies 
which in turn trigger specific reactions; 
as long as the wizard utters the correct 


80 


sequence of sounds, it makes no differ- 
ence if he actually hears the sounds 
himself. Note that a silence spell pre- 
vents the casting of any spells with ver- 


bal components, since silence prevents 
the sounds uttered by the wizard. 
Spells that require the wizard to hear, 
such as comprehend languages (when 
used to translate speech), are ineffective 
for hearing-impaired wizards. Spells 
that create sounds, such as alarm, are 
able to be cast, but the impaired wizard 
will not hear the effects. 
Hearing-impaired wizards casting il- 
lusions with audible elements may 
encounter the same problems as vision- 
impaired wizards. The audible elements 
of such illusions will have to be edu- 
cated guesses, based on the wizard’s 
memory of actual sounds. As with illu- 
sions cast by sight-impaired wizards, 
the more complex the illusion cast by a 
hearing-impaired wizard, the more eas- 
ily the audible element of the illusion 
will be disbelieved by an opponent. The 


Casting Spells In Unusual Conditions 


DM is free to add as much as a +4 bo- 
nus to the saving throws of opponents 
attempting to disbelieve such illusions. 
A hearing-impaired wizard cannot use 
his familiar to serve as surrogate “ears” 
to enable him to cast such spells with 
more precision or accuracy. 


Impaired Speech 


A wizard's ability to speak can be im- 
paired as a result of disease, magic 
(such as a silence spell), or physical 
damage. A gagged wizard will also be 
unable to speak. No spell with a verbal 
component can be cast by a wizard with 
impaired speech; he must be able to 
enunciate each phrase or sound of a 
spell’s verbal component clearly and 
distinctly for the spell to be successful. 

Ventriloquism cannot substitute for 
an impaired-speech wizard’s voice 
when he attempts to speak a spell’s ver- 
bal component; ventriloquism is useless 
to a speech-impaired wizard, since it is 
an extension of sounds the wizard is 
normally able to make. 

Similarly, an impaired-speech wizard 
cannot use his familiar to speak verbal 
components, including those familiars 
capable of speech, since spells only op- 
erate if the wizard himself utters their 
verbal components. 

However, an impaired-speech wizard 
can use the spell vocalize to allow him 
to cast spells that normally require a 
verbal component. Casting these spells 
must take place within the duration of 
the vocalize spell. (For more about vo- 
calize, see Chapter 9.) 

According to the Player's Handbook 
(pages 85-86), the use of components is 
an optional rule. If components aren't 
used for spell casting in your campaign, 
it is assumed that the caster must be able 
to speak in order to cast any spell (see 
the first paragraph in the Casting Spells 
section on page 85 of the PH). Vocalize 
can still help a speech-impaired wizard if 


the components rules are not in use; oth- 
erwise, all of the rules for speech- 
impaired wizards apply. 


Impaired Movement 


Many spells require somatic compo- 
nents (gestures or movements), If the 
wizard is unable to move his hands (be- 
cause of damage, a magical effect, or 
physical restraint) he may be unable to 
cast a spell that requires hand move- 
ments. If a spell specifically requires 
hand movements, the wizard isn't al- 
lowed to substitute another method. He 
cannot just wiggle his ears or rock his 
head in place of the required hand 
movements, nor can he use a familiar or 
other character (or animated object) to 
act as his surrogate to execute them. Ifa 
single finger is the requirement for a so- 
matic component (for instance, if the 
wizard needs to point at the target of his 
spell), then he needs only one free hand 
to cast the spell; otherwise, either hand 
(or any finger) will suffice. 

Note that a movement-impaired wiz- 
ard also might have difficulty with spells 
requiring material components. If the 
wizard has his hands tied, he may not be 
able to reach the necessary material com- 
ponents inside his back pack or mingled 
with other items in a deep pocket in his 
robe. Even if he manages to fish them 
out, certain spells may require him to ma- 
nipulate the material components in a 
certain way (he might be required to rub 
the components together or hold them 
flat in his hand; protection from evil re- 
quires the caster to trace a three-foot- 
diameter circle on the ground with 
powdered silver). If he cannot manipu- 
late the material components as required, 
the spell will not work. When a wizard 
acquires a new spell, the DM should clar- 
ify its casting procedures. 

Remember that the use of components 
is an optional rule. If components are 
not used for spell casting in your cam- 


81 


paign, assume that the caster must have 
both arms free in order to cast any spell 
(see the Casting Spells section on page 85 
of the PH), Any combination of hand 
movements and gestures will suffice. 


Impaired Concentration 


The successful casting of a spell re- 
quires intense, uninterrupted concen- 
tration from the caster. If the caster's 
concentration is interrupted by an at- 
tack, a sudden noise, or any other dis- 
traction, the spell is lost. 

In certain situations, the caster may 
have trouble focusing or sustaining his 
concentration. He may be suffering 
from an extreme headache or other ill- 
ness. He may be dizzy, fatigued, or oth- 
erwise disoriented. Or he may have had 
a little too much wine and is feeling the 
after-effects. In such cases, the DM can 
rule that the wizard is unable to cast 
spells as effectively as he normally 
would. In extreme cases—for instance, 
if the wizard’s headache is so severe that 
he is unable to stand or open his eyes— 
the DM might rule that the wizard is 
completely unable to cast spells until 
his condition improves. 

In less extreme cases, the DM can re- 
quire the wizard to make a successful 
Intelligence Check before attempting to 
cast any spell to see if he can muster the 
necessary degree of concentration. Af- 
ter the wizard announces which spell he 
will attempt to cast, the player rolls 
1d20. If the result is less than or equal to 
the wizard’s Intelligence, the spell is cast 
normally. If the result is greater than the 
wizard’s Intelligence, the spell is lost. 

The DM might wish to add a penalty 
or bonus to these Intelligence Checks. 
For instance, if the wizard is disoriented 
as a result of falling out of a tree and 
landing on his head, the DM might re- 
quire a —2 modifier to his Intelligence 
Checks prior to casting his spells. 


This chapter offers a variety of sug- 
gestions for experienced wizards to help 
them make more of their magical skills. 
Included are suggestions for spell re- 
search, advice on adjudicating illu- 
sions, and some creative casting 
techniques for putting new twists on 


old spells. 


Levels Above 20th 


The Player's Handbook lists experi- 
ence levels and spell progressions only 
for wizards up to 20th level, but there is 
no rule that specifically restricts wiz- 
ards from advancing to 21st level and 
beyond. There are, however, practical 


Chapter 7: Advanced Procedures 


reasons for restricting advancement 
into unusually high levels. Not only is it 
difficult for the DM to design meaning- 
ful challenges for these characters, 
players quickly become bored with 
characters whose powers and abilities 
rival those of the gods. A good policy is 
to enforce mandatory retirement of 
characters once they reach 20th level; 
pages 20-21 of the Dungeon Master's 
Guide explain how this is done. 
Ambitious DMs and curious players 
are free to explore the campaign possi- 
bilities of the upper levels if they so de- 
sire. Table 12 gives the experience point 
requirements and Hit Dice for wizards 
of levels 21 through 32 (this table is an 


Table 12: Wizard Experience Levels Beyond 20th 


Level Mage/Specialist Hit Dice (d4) 
21 4,125,000 10+11 
22 4,500,000 10+12 
23 4,875,000 10+13 
24 5,250,000 10+14 
25 5,625,000 10+15 
26 6,000,000 10+16 
27 6,375,000 10+17 
28 6,750,000 10+18 
29 7,125,000 10+19 
30 7,500,000 10+20 
31 7,875,000 10+21 
32 8,250,000 10+22 


Table 13: Wizard Spell Progression Beyond 20th Level 


Wizard Level 


& 
MOnNnNODOaunauaare 
OonnooaouunwTaunn 
MOnNnNOADAODUUA GH UG 
MOnNnNAODOaaunnnes 


Spell Level 
5 6 7 8 9 
5 4 E 7 2 
5 5 E 4 3 
5 5 S 5 3 
5 S 5 5 4 
5 5 5 5 5 
5 5 5 5 5 
6 6 6 5 5 
6 6 6 6 6 
6 6 6 6 6 
7 7 7 6 6 
7 7 7 6 6 
7 7 Ms 7 7 


82 


extension of Table 20 on page 30 of the 
Players Handbook). A wizard must 
earn 365,000 experience points per level 
to achieve each level beyond 32. After 
10th level, wizards earn 1 hit point per 
level, and they no longer gain addi- 
tional hit point bonuses for high Con- 
stitution scores. 

Table 13 gives the spell progression for 
wizards of levels 21 through 32 (this ta- 
ble is an extension of Table 21 of the 
PH), For 33rd level, add one each 5th-, 
6th-, and 7th-level spell; for 34th level, 
add one each Ist-, 2nd-, 3rd-, and 4th- 
level spell; for 35th level, add one each 
8th- and 9th-level spell; and for levels 
beyond 36th, repeat this progression. 


Spells Above 9th-Level 


There are no spells higher than 9th- 
level, and there never should be. In- 
cluding higher-level spells would not 
only greatly imbalance the game, it 
would also give characters access to 
magic reserved exclusively for gods, 

DMs contemplating the idea of de- 
signing 10th-level or higher spells in 
spite of this advice should first consider 
the implications of wish, generally con- 
sidered to be the most powerful of all 
the spells. To be worthy of its superior 
ranking, any 10th-level spell would 
have to be significantly stronger than a 
wish, and if the game is to retain its in- 
tegrity, that’s a mighty tall order. 

In a high-level campaign, the DM 
might decide that his characters do not 
have access to an adequate number of 
high-level spells. Rather than fuss with 
10th-level spells, the DM is encouraged 
to add to the list of 9th-level spells (see 
the section on Spells in Chapter 2 for 
suggestions). 


Spell Commentary 


Part of the fun of playing a wizard is 
developing new applications for spells 
through experimentation and improvi- 


sation. However, the creative use of 
many spells may not be immediately 
obvious. If a wizard always uses his 
spells in the same old ways, he is not 
taking full advantage of them. 

The following list features some unu- 
sual applications for a variety of spells 
from all levels. Players can also use 
these suggestions for inspiration when 
inventing new uses for other spells in 
their arsenals. Additionally, clarifica- 
tions of several of the game's more eso- 
teric spells are provided, which can be 
used by the DM to help adjudicate their 
effects. 


ist Level 


Cantrip 

The simple effects created by cantrips 
have unlimited potential in the hands of 
a clever caster. Some examples: 

è A wizard is resting in an inn when 
he is awakened by the sound of a bur- 
glar entering through the window. The 
wizard casts cantrip to create wracking 
moans and cries emanating from inside 
a closet. Believing the room to be 
haunted, the terrified burglar may flee. 

è A wizard is searching a dark castle 
when he discovers a dusty book lying 
on a desk. He remembers that similar 
books were trapped to explode in a ball 
of fire when touched; such books were 
marked with a skull on the front cover. 
The wizard casts cantrip, creating a 
small breeze to blow the dust away 
from the book, revealing the skull on 
the cover. 

è A wizard traveling through a jun- 
gle is accosted by a band of cannibals. 
The wizard casts cantrip to create a puff 
of colored smoke. The intimidated can- 
nibals, suspecting that the wizard 
wields powerful magic, decide to leave 
him alone. 

è The companion of a wizard is 
about to engage a dangerous opponent 
in a duel. The wizard casts cantrip to 
cause a slight itch on the opponent's 


face. The opponent is distracted, giving 
the wizard’s companion a momentary 
advantage. 

e A menacing warrior stands before 
the party. The wizard casts cantrip to 
create a banana peel in front of the war- 
rior. The warrior takes one step and 
falls on his face. 


Enlarge 

Much is made in the spell description 
in the Player's Handbook of changing 
the size of creatures, but wizards often 
overlook the usefulness of enlarge to 
change the size of objects. For instance, 
if the party is being pursued through a 
narrow passage or hallway, casting en- 
large on a stone or other object behind 
the party can effectively block the pas- 
sage and prevent the enemy's advance- 
ment. Similarly, if the party is faced 
with a locked or stuck door, the reverse 
spell, reduce, might be able to shrink 
the door just enough to allow the party 
to get through. 


Mending 

In addition to the uses for mending 
listed in the spell description, this spell 
can also be used to repair a leaky boat, 
a torn document, a broken wagon axle, 
or a cut rope (but it won't link the ends 
of two different ropes to make a single 


rope). 
2nd Level 


Invisibility 

Wizards should keep in mind that in- 
visibility is an illusion, a condition of 
artificial reality—it’s not an enchant- 
ment that causes the caster (or creature 
of the caster’s choice) to literally disap- 
pear. As such, invisibility is subject to 
all of the advantages and limitations of 
illusionary magic. Following are the 
most pertinent points: 

è The invisible character can always 
see himself; in effect, he automatically 
disbelieves the illusion. 

è The caster cannot tell with cer- 


83 


Advanced Procedures 


tainty which observers have success- 
fully disbelieved his illusion of 
invisibility; he can only be sure by ob- 
serving their reactions. 

è All objects on the invisible sub- 
ject’s person are also invisible. How- 
ever, the DM might wish to impose 
limitations, since it might not make 
sense for a 30-foot pole carried by an in- 
visible character to also be entirely in- 
visible. The DM might assume, for 
instance, that the illusion extends to a 1- 
foot or 2-foot radius around the af- 
fected subject; hence, all objects in 
contact with the subject that are within 
this area are also invisible. If such a lim- 
itation is imposed, then an object ex- 
tending beyond this range (such as the 
30-foot pole) is entirely visible; parti- 
ally invisible objects aren't allowed. 

e Not every creature with fewer 
than 10 Hit Dice is excluded from notic- 
ing an invisible character. Creatures 
with excellent hearing or those with a 
sensitive sense of smell have a chance of 
detecting an invisible character. The 
DM should take such heightened senses 
into account when determining which 
creatures are allowed saving throws. 

e Opponents do not automatically 
get a chance to detect the presence of an 
invisible creature. They must first have 
reason to believe an invisible creature is 
among them. For instance, a creature 
might have abruptly disappeared, or 
the opponents might hear a mysterious 
sound or notice footprints in soft 
ground. If one opponent successfully 
sees an invisible creature, he can alert 
his companions to the creature's pres- 
ence, at which time they are allowed 
saving throws to detect the creatures if 
they haven't made such throws already. 
(For more about the limits of illusions, 
see the “More About Adjudicating Illu- 
sions" section that follows.) 


Misdirection 
This spell can be used to misdirect the 
results of non-weapon proficiencies 


that impart knowledge. Examples of 
non-weapon proficiencies affected by 
misdirection include Ancient History, 
Animal Lore, Appraising, Astrology, 
Direction Sense, and Herbalism. If the 
subject of misdirection fails his saving 
throw, he receives incorrect informa- 
tion from the use of his proficiency. For 
instance, misdirected Animal Lore will 
convince the subject that a vicious crea- 
ture is harmless, while misdirected Ap- 
praising will convince him that a 
valuable gem is worthless. 


Web 

This spell can be used as a makeshift 
net to prevent damage to falling charac- 
ters, assuming there are suitable projec- 
tions or surfaces available to anchor the 
web. A web of at least 5 feet of thick- 
ness protects a falling character from 
damage regardless of the height from 
which he falls. 


3rd Level 


Hold Person 

The name of this spell should not be 
taken literally. Hold person makes its 
victims rigid—if they're falling, for in- 
stance, it cannot “freeze” them in mid- 
fall and suspend them in the air. 
(However, see the hold monster entry 
below.) 


Item 

Use this spell on a weapon if the party 
is on the verge of being captured. In its 
cloth-like state, the shrunken weapon 
can be concealed up the caster’s sleeve 
or it can be tucked underneath his belt 
or in his trousers. The wizard can later 
use the enlarged weapon to surprise his 
captors or, if the wizard’s hands are 
bound, he may be able to use the 
weapon to cut himself free. Similarly, 
the spell can be used to conceal a grap- 
pling hook or a thief’s pick. (The wizard 
should be careful where he hides a 
shrunken weapon; if a shrunken long 
sword is tucked inside his pants and is 


Advanced Procedures 


enlarged before it is removed, the result 
could be extremely painful.) 


Melf’s Minute Meteors 

One of the most frequently overlooked 
functions of Melf's minute 
meteors (or any flame-producing spell, 
such as fireball) is its ability to ignite com- 
bustible materials. In the right situations, 
this ability is capable of producing a star- 
tling amount of damage, rivaling and of- 
ten exceeding the damage caused by 
spells of much higher levels. 


Tongues 

This spell can be quite useful to the 
wizard for discreetly communicating 
with other characters, but only if he un- 
derstands exactly how it works. 
Tongues acts as a selective translator, 
not as a universal translator—that is, 
not everyone in the spell’s area of effect 
understands the translated language. 

For instance, imagine that a wizard 
can speak only common. All other 
members of his party also speak only 
common. The party encounters a group 
of two dwarves and one gnome; the 
dwarves speak only dwarvish, the 
gnome speaks only gnomish. The wiz- 
ard casts tongues and speaks to the 
gnome; the gnome automatically un- 
derstands what the wizard says, but the 
dwarves and the other party members 
do not—as far as they can tell, the wiz- 
ard is speaking gnomish. Assuming the 
wizard is of sufficiently high level (he 
can speak one additional tongue for 
every three levels of experience) and the 
spell’s duration has not yet expired, he 
can also address the dwarves. Both 
dwarves will understand the wizard, 
but the gnome and the rest of the party 
will not. 

If a dwarf and a gnome begin chatter- 
ing at the wizard at the same time, and 
the wizard is of sufficiently high level 
and the spell’s duration hasn't expired, 
the wizard can understand them both. 
The other party members, however, 
will hear nothing but babble. 


4th Level 


Dig 

This is a very helpful spell when deal- 
ing with large, uncontrollable fires that 
are spreading in a field or other open 
area. To stop the advance of a spreading 
fire, dig can be used to create a 
firebreak—a ditch of broken soil de- 
void of combustible material. A fire 
reaching a firebreak will stop advanc- 
ing, eventually burning itself out. 

If the fire is too large to stop, the wiz- 
ard can protect himself and his com- 
panions by using dig to surround 
themselves with a firebreak and remain 
inside it while the fire rages around 
them. The wizard must take care to 
make the firebreak large enough to pro- 
tect himself and his companions from 
heat damage, which typically affects 
those within 5 feet of the flames. 


Fumble 

This spell can cause a lot of grief to 
opponents in precarious positions. 
Fumble cast on a character clinging to 
the side of a cliff might cause him to 
fall. If cast on a character moving hand 
over hand across a rope bridge, the 
character might lose his grip and fall. If 
such a character fails his saving throw, 
he plunges from the cliff or releases the 
rope. If he succeeds in his saving throw, 
he hesitates, but doesn't fall. 


Otiluke’s Resilient Sphere 

The sphere is an intact bubble filled 
with air. Therefore, a creature or object 
enclosed in the sphere will bob like a 
cork on the surface of an ocean or other 
body of water. 

If the sphere contains more weight 
than air, the sphere will gradually sink, 
but it could be pushed or carried by 
water-breathing creatures with suffi- 
cient strength. 

If a water-breathing character wants 
to explore a dark, underwater cavern, 
the sphere could be cast around a burn- 
ing fire. The protected fire could then 


be carried underwater and would con- 
tinue to burn until the air supply in the 
sphere was exhausted. (The carrier 
should take precautions to prevent be- 
ing burned—in most cases, heavy 
gloves would probably do the trick). 


5th Level 


Hold Monster 

Since this spell immobilizes victims 
and prevents them from moving under 
their own power, it is a very effective 
way to bring down flying creatures. 
Hold monster cast on a creature hover- 
ing overhead will not only cause it to 
fall to the ground, it also might suffer a 
significant amount of damage when it 
hits (1d6 hit points of damage per every 
10 feet fallen). 


Telekinesis 

This spell can be used to scoop up 
slimes, jellies, and other semiliquid 
creatures in jugs or similar containers. 
If the containers are sealed, telekinesis 
can be used to position the containers 
over an opponent's head, then tipped to 
dump their contents. Such containers 
could also be filled with poison, acid, or 
other damaging substances. 


7th-Level 


Limited Wish 

As with wish (see the discussion be- 
low), the DM should decide the limita- 
tions of limited wish before his wizards 
have an opportunity to use it, prefera- 
bly before the campaign begins. Here 
are some suggestions for what a limited 
wish can accomplish. The DM is free to 
alter these suggestions as he sees fit. 

è A limited wish can heal damage 
for the caster or any single character of 
the caster’s choice. A good range is 20- 
35 hit points (Sd4 + 15) of healing. If a 
limited wish is used to heal damage in 
this way, it cannot be used to restore 
life; that is, it cannot affect any creature 
who has been reduced to 0 hit points. 


e A limited wish can temporarily re- 
store life to any creature or person who 
was reduced to 0 hit points or less 
within the previous 24 hours. The lim- 
ited wish restores the subject to exactly 
1 hit point. Success is not automatic; 
the subject is required to make a resur- 
rection survival check. However, the 
effect lasts for only a limited time (1-4 
hours is a good range). At the end of 
this time, the creature reverts to the 
number of hit points he had before the 
limited wish was cast (0 hit points or 
less). 

e A limited wish can inflict damage 
on any single character. A good range is 
20-40 (Sd4 + 15) hit points of damage. 
The victim can save vs. spell for half 
damage. 

e A limited wish can duplicate the 
effects of any spell of 7th-level of less. 

e A limited wish can change the out- 
come of any action the wizard took 
within the past 24 hours, as long as the 
change is reasonably minor. For in- 
stance, the wizard could wish to search 
the body of an opponent he defeated 
earlier that day, but he could not wish 
to single-handedly have fought and de- 
feated an entire army. 

All of the general restrictions that ap- 
ply to wish (see below) also apply to 
limited wish, The suggestions regarding 
the selection of appropriate durations, 
casting times, and areas of effect also 


apply. 


8th Level 


Sink 

This spell is a terrific way to help a 
character who is on the verge of falling 
off the edge of a cliff or losing his grip 
when hanging from the edge of a build- 
ing. While the subject clings to the cliff, 
the wizard casts sink. If the spell is suc- 
cessfully cast, the subject becomes 
stuck to the cliff and won't fall. How- 
ever, the spell expires in four turns, at 
which time the subject risks falling. 


85 


Advanced Procedures 


9th Level 


Wish 

Since it can theoretically have any ef- 
fect, no spell is more difficult for the 
DM to adjudicate than wish. The DM 
can save himself a lot of headaches if he 
decides the limits of wish before his 
campaign begins. 

The DM is not obligated to discuss 
the ramifications of wishes with his 
players before a campaign begins. In 
fairness, however, he should be willing 
to give his players a general idea of his 
approach. While it is impossible to an- 
ticipate every conceivable use of a 
wish, there are a few key areas the DM 
should consider: 

© How far can a wish move a charac- 
ter from one place to another? How 
many characters or creatures can be af- 
fected? Must the conjurer have first- 
hand knowledge of the destination? 

e What types of items can a wish cre- 
ate? How much treasure? Are such cre- 
ations permanent? 

+ How many creatures can a single 
wish bring back to life? 

+ How many creatures can a single 
wish destroy? Could a wish automati- 
cally destroy, for instance, a 20th-level 
wizard? How about a dragon? Are 
there alternatives to eliminating crea- 
tures other than wishing them dead? 

Following are some guidelines for 
what wishes can accomplish. As al- 
ways, the DM is free to alter these sug- 
gestions in any way he sees fit. 
Suggestions noted with an asterisk ( * ) 
typically require a penalty for the 
caster. The nature of the penalty is up to 
the DM; possibilities include 2d4 days 
of bed rest, a temporary loss of 1-4 
Strength points, a permanent loss of 1 
Constitution point, damage of 2d10 hit 
points, or any combination of these 
penalties. 


e A wish can create a random 
amount of treasure for the caster. A 


good range is 1,000 - 10,000 gp (1d10 x 
1,000). The treasure can include gold 
pieces, jewelry, gems, items, or any 
combination desired by the caster 
within the randomly determined mone- 
tary value. Magical items are excluded 
(they require a separate wish). 

® A wish can heal damage for the 
caster, his companions, or any characters 
or creatures of the caster’s choice. A good 
range is 45-70 hit points (Sd6 + 40) 
healed. These recovered hit points can be 
spread among as many characters as the 
caster desires; for instance, if a wish heals 
50 hit points, the caster could heal 20 hit 
points of his own damage and heal 10 hit 
points for three of his companions. If a 
wish is used to heal damage in this way, it 
cannot be used to restore life; that is, it 
cannot affect any creature who has been 
reduced to 0 hit points. 

è% * A wish can restore life to any 
creature who was reduced to 0 hit 
points or less within the previous 24 
hours. The wish restores the subject to 
exactly 1 hit point. Success is not auto- 
matic; the subject is required to make a 
resurrection survival check. 

* * A wish can destroy any single 
creature of 10 HD or less, or any char- 
acter of 10th level or less within the 
caster’s visual range. The affected crea- 
ture or character is allowed a saving 
throw vs. death magic; if the check is 
successful, the creature is unaffected. 
(Be careful with this—in many cases, it 
is a better idea to advance the spell- 
caster to a future time period in which 
the target creature no longer exists, as 
described on page 197 of the Player's 
Handbook). 

è A wish can teleport without error 
the caster and up to a dozen compan- 
ions to any location. The caster must 
have been to the location previously. 
The location can be in any plane of ex- 
istence. 

* °A wish can permanently add one 
point to any ability score of the caster 
or any person of the caster’s choice, as 


Advanced Procedures 


long as the score is not raised above 16, 
It takes 10 wishes to permanently raise 
any ability score each point beyond 16. 
(For instance, it takes 20 wishes to raise 
a character's Strength from 16 to 18.) 

*% A wish can temporarily raise an 
ability to 18 for 1-6 hours. 

*® A wish can duplicate the effects of 
any other spell. 


What can't a wish do? Aside from the 
restrictions above, a wish should never 
grant experience points or extra levels 
to a character. Nor should wishes be 
able to duplicate artifacts or create ex- 
tremely potent magical items (a potion 
of invisibility might be acceptable, but 
a sword +4 might not). 

The DM retains the right to disallow 
any wish he believes is too potent. He 
can also bestow an interpretation of the 
wish that follows the literal instructions 
of the wizard, and not the wizard’s in- 
tended meaning (greed and gross ma- 
nipulation of the rules should not be 
rewarded). 

Examples: 

è If the wizard wishes for an entire 
castle of his own, the DM might have 
the castle appear in mid-air, then crash 
to the ground in a heap of rubble. 

è If the wizard wishes “to never 
again suffer damage from bladed weap- 
ons,’ the DM might turn him into a 
stone statue. 

è If the wizard wishes for a dragon 
to vanish, the dragon might pop out of 
sight, then abruptly reappear in an- 
other location, perhaps a few yards 
from the dragon’s original position. 

è If the wizard wishes for a fortune 
in gold, the DM might teleport this for- 
tune from a king's private treasure 
vault. The king will then send his best 
men to arrest the thieving wizard. 


The DM is responsible for determin- 
ing the components, duration, casting 
time, and area of effect each time a wish 
is to be cast. The DM should first deter- 
mine what effect the wizard intends to 


86 


achieve with his wish, then decide the 
components, casting time, and so forth, 
basing his decisions on his limitations 
for wishes in his campaign. The ele- 
ments should be logical and reasonable. 
Here are some guidelines: 

Components: Wishes have only ver- 
bal components. Keep them simple. A 
short, spoken phrase is usually suffi- 
cient. 

Duration: In most cases, the effects of 
a wish will be permanent. The DM 
should decide in advance if there are 
any exceptions. 

Casting Time: If the wish mimics the 
function of another spell, use that 
spell's casting time as a guideline, per- 
haps making it a little longer if the wish 
effect is significantly more powerful 
than the mimicked spell. For instance, if 
a wish is used to teleport a party (as de- 
scribed above), note that the teleport 
without error spell has a casting time of 
1. Since the wish has a more powerful 
effect, a casting time of 4 or 5 fora tele- 
porting wish is appropriate. When in 
doubt, use the casting times for other 
9th-level spells as guidelines, or use a 
casting time of 1 round. 

Area of Effect: In most cases, com- 
mon sense will determine the area of ef- 
fect. For instance, if a wish is to be used 
to heal damage, the affected persons 
should be within sight of the caster. The 
DM can be reasonably generous with 
areas of effect. If the caster wishes for 
5,000 gp to be deposited in a chest 1,000 
miles away, that is within reason. 

As an example of how all of these ele- 
ments might be determined, imagine 
that the wizard wishes to teleport him- 
self and his party to the wizard’s home 
town. The DM determines the elements 
of the spell as follows: 

Verbal Component: Speak the name 
of the desired location. 

Duration: Instantaneous. 

Casting Time: 1 round. 

Area of Effect: All characters within 
a 20-yard radius of the caster. 


d Procedures 


7 ” 
M nro a lho at cissclic a no 
MOT ADOUT AQjuc ILALL 15 
TT . 
iiuSIONnS 


Whether an NPC is able to disbelieve a 
PC wizard’s illusion or whether a PC is 
able to disbelieve an NPC illusion is ulti- 
mately up to the DM. The DM should al- 
low a saving throw against an illusion if 
the subject has any reason at all to doubt 
the existence of what he is experiencing. 
To account for the degree of realism in a 
given illusion, as well as any information 
available to the subject about the per- 
ceived illusion, the DM should modify 
the subject's saving throws with appro- 
priate bonuses and penalties. 

How does a DM make these deci- 
sions? There are a number of factors 
that can be considered to help deter- 
mine bonuses and penalties for saving 
throws. It’s unrealistic to expect the DM 
to meticulously evaluate every aspect 
of an illusion before he decides on the 
modifiers, but the following can be 
used as general guidelines. 


Ne AERP awu in 23ag) 
Wei iQ Veaswit 


Ae) AMM Sa 


omplexity—Non-Living 


The most important element in deter- 
mining an illusion’s believability is its 
complexity. The more complex the illu- 
sion, the more difficult it is for the 
caster to get all the details right, and the 
more likely it is for a subject to notice a 
mistake. There are more details to a 
fire-breathing dragon than there are to 
a stationary boulder, so it is no surprise 
that a subject would be more likely to 
disbelieve the illusionary dragon than 
he would the illusionary rock. 

An illusion can be a re-creation of a 
non-living (inanimate) or a living (ani- 
mate) object. These need to be treated 
in different ways. 

In general, the complexity of non- 
living objects depends on size (a pebble 
vs. a boulder), number (a single boul- 
der vs. a dozen boulders scattered over 
an area), and appearance (a smooth 
gray boulder vs. a sparkling, multi- 


88 


colored gem). External forces affecting 
the object also affect its complexity 
(wind blowing pebbles along the 
ground or an avalanche of boulders 
tumbling down a hill). 

If the illusion has an excessive num- 
ber of sensory elements, the subject's 
saving throw may receive a positive 
modifier. What constitutes an excessive 
number of elements? A single color or 
texture (for instance, a smooth gray 
boulder) is not excessive. Multiple col- 
ors and textures (a pile of various types 
of gems or minerals) or several different 
sensory elements (a field of variously 
colored flowers that have a variety of 
fragrances) could be considered exces- 
sive, as could the illusion of motion, 
such as boulders tumbling down a hill. 

These factors are not necessarily cu- 
mulative; in fact, only in the most ex- 
ceptional cases would an illusion of 
non-living objects result in a saving 
throw modifier of more than +2. 


Examples: 

è An illusion of a single blue dia- 
mond. Saving throw modifier: 0, Noth- 
ing about this illusion is particularly 
difficult since it is a single, stationary 
item. 

è An illusion of ten thousand spar- 
kling blue diamonds tumbling in an av- 
alanche down a hillside. Saving throw: 
+2. There are a large number of items, 
they're sparkling, and they're in mo- 
tion. The comparatively high saving 
throw bonus is also justified by the ex- 
tremely unusual effect—a character 
might accept an avalanche of boulders, 
but an avalanche of diamonds is likely 
to arouse suspicion. 


Complexity—Living Objects 


Generally, the higher the Hit Dice or 
level of the illusionary creature, the 
more complex it is to convincingly cre- 
ate and the more likely it is for a subject 
to disbelieve. An illusion of an ant is 
easier to create than the illusion of a 
dragon. This also applies to illusionary 
NPCs—a 15th-level warrior is harder 
to create than a peasant with 3 hit 
points. Similarly, the more creatures in- 
cluded in the illusion, the harder it is to 
create; an illusion of 20 peasants would 
be more difficult than a single peasant. 

Illusions of active creatures are more 
difficult to create than illusions of rela- 
tively inactive creatures. If the illusionary 
creature is executing a simple action, such 
as standing still, polishing its sword, or 
grazing in the grass, no special modifier 
for the subject's saving throw may be re- 
quired. However, if the illusionary crea- 
ture is executing a complex series of 
actions, such as singing a song while 
dancing and juggling, or attacking with 
two weapons while shouting a war cry, a 
modifier may be in order. 

If the illusionary creature is a generic 
monster or NPC—that is, it is a “typical” 
orc or NPC warrior—there is no need for 
a special modifier for the subject's saving 


throw. However, if the illusionary crea- 
ture is a specific, one-of-a-kind monster 
or NPC that the subject is familiar with— 
such as a friend of the subject, or the sub- 
ject's pet dog—the subject should receive 
a special modifier. 

As with the modifiers for inanimate 
objects, these factors are not necessar- 
ily cumulative. Only in exceptional 
cases would an illusion result in a sav- 
ing throw modifier of more than +3. 

Examples: 

e An illusion of a single orc standing 
still, polishing his sword. Saving throw 
modifier: 0. Nothing is particularly dif- 
ficult about creating an illusion of a sin- 
gle, low HD creature engaged in a 
relatively simple action. 

e An illusion of King Sluz, the fa- 
mous orc ruler, brandishing his five- 
pronged trident, screeching a war cry, 
and leading a squad of six snarling orc 
soldiers. Saving throw modifier: +3. 
The modifier assumes the subject is fa- 
miliar with King Sluz. Casting a believ- 
able illusion of a well-known NPC is 
always extremely difficult, particularly 
when he is executing a complex action 
and is accompanied by other creatures. 


Magical Effects and Special 
Attacks 


Magic is common in most AD&D® 
campaign worlds, so opponents are not 
necessarily suspicious of extraordinary 
effects that appear to defy natural laws. 
However, in certain instances, illusions 
that incorporate magical effects or spe- 
cial attacks will require saving throw 
modifiers. In general, a wizard cannot 
create excessively bizarre magical ef- 
fects in his illusion without arousing the 
suspicion of the subject, adding a sav- 
ing throw modifier of as much as +2. 

Example: 

e An illusion of a pile of sticks that 
abruptly bursts into flames. Saving 
throw modifier: 0. This is not an unusual 
magical effect. 


89 


Advanced Procedures 


e An illusion of a pile of sticks that 
bursts into green flames; the flames then 
change into a miniature replica of a pur- 
ple castle with frog's legs; the castle tap 
dances, and finally turns into a pumpkin 
with the subject's face before disappear- 
ing in a puff of pink smoke, and the sticks 
are unburned. Saving throw modifier: 
+2. This is downright bizarre, easily jus- 
tifying the higher modifier. 


Illusions are seldom perfect, and wary 
subjects will always be alerted to an im- 
age’s illusionary nature by its imperfec- 
tions. For instance, if a wizard uses a spell 
such as phantasmal force to create an illu- 
sionary creature, the creature might lack 
one or more obvious sensory elements, 
such as sound, aroma, or body tempera- 
ture, which can be a dead giveaway that 
the creature is only an illusion. In extreme 
cases, the subject's saving throw can be 
modified by as much as +4. If the wizard 
is using a better spell, such as improved 
phantasmal force, any sensory elements 
lacking in the illusion will not be as obvi- 
ous, and the subject's saving throw rarely 
will be modified by more than +2. 

Examples: 

© An illusion of a bee. Saving throw 
modifier: +1 (phantasmal force), 0 (im- 
proved phantasmal force). The illusion- 
ary bee won't buzz in a lower-level 
illusion, but it will in the higher-level 
spell 


© An illusion of a hissing fire lizard 
covered with filth. Saving throw modi- 
fier: +4 (phantasmal force), +1 (im- 
proved phantasmal force). The 
lower-level illusion won't be able to du- 
plicate the lizard's hiss, body heat, or 
the smell of the filth. The higher-level 
spell will do a better job, but the modi- 
fier assumes that at least one of these el- 
ements is imperfect or missing. 


Revealed Illusions 


As explained on page 84 of the Play- 
ers Handbook, if one subject success- 
fully disbelieves an illusion and informs 
another subject of the illusion, the sec- 
ond subject receives a modifier to his 
saving throw. The amount of this mod- 
ifier depends on the reliability of the in- 
formant and the magnitude of the 
illusion. If the informant in unreliable 
and the illusion is formidable (for in- 
stance, an illusion of a deadly monster), 
the subject might ignore the informant 
entirely; in this case, no special saving 
throw modifier applies. If the inform- 
ant is reliable (the subject’s commander 
or friend), and the illusion is relatively 
minor (such as the image of a small 
fire), the subject's saving throw can be 
modified by as much as +4. 


Intelligence 


It makes sense that a highly intelli- 
gent wizard would be able to create 
more effective illusions. It also makes 
sense that subjects with low intelligence 
would be less likely to disbelieve an illu- 
sion. Therefore, if the caster's Intelli- 
gence is exceptionally high (18 or 
more), the subject's saving throw might 
be modified by —1. If the subject's In- 
telligence is exceptionally low (7 or 
less), his saving throw might be modi- 
fied by —1. A —2 modifier is possible if 
both the caster’s Intelligence is high and 
the subject's Intelligence is low. 

Remember also that characters with 
exceptionally high Intelligence are au- 
tomatically immune to low-level illu- 
sions. These immunities are 
summarized on Table 4 of the Player's 
Handbook. 


The Illusion-Casting Subject 


Characters and creatures who can 
cast illusions themselves are much 
harder to fool. If the subject is an illu- 
sionist NPC or a creature with illusion- 


Advanced Procedures 


casting abilities, he receives a +1 bonus 
to his saving throw. 


Summary of Modifiers 


For quick reference, Table 14 summa- 
rizes all of the situations described 
above, giving a range of possible modi- 
fiers to the subject's saving throw. 
Again, these are sugggestions only, not 
hard and fast rules, and the DM is free 
to tinker with them as he sees fit. These 
modifiers are not necessarily cumula- 
tive; in fact, modifying any saving 
throw for disbelieving illusions by +4 
is unusual, while modifying a throw by 
+6 (or more) should occur only in the 
most exceptional circumstances. 


Table 14: 

Summary of Possible 

Modifiers for Saving 

Throws vs. Illusions 
Modifier 

Factors of Range for 

Illusion Subject 

Complexity (use one 

of the following): 

Non-living Oto +2 

Living Oto +3 

Magical effects Oto +2 

Flaws (use one of the 

following): 

phantasmal force 

or similar spell Oto +2 

improved phantasmal 

force or similar spell Oto +4 

Intelligence of caster 

and subject -2to0d 

Illusion-casting subject +1 to 0 


Spell Research 


Wizards can research new spells by 
following the rules on pages 43-44 of 
the Dungeon Master's Guide. Most of 


the details are left to the DM so he can 
customize spell research according to 
the needs of his campaign. If a DM is 
having trouble devising a useable sys- 
tem or is not exactly sure how to pro- 
ceed, some suggested rules are given 
below. These rules apply to researching 
new spells; rules for researching exist- 
ing spells can be found at the end of this 
section. Again, all of these rules are 
optional—the DM can make any ad- 
justments or additions that seem rea- 
sonable to him. 


Defining a New Spell 


The first step in researching a spell is 
defining exactly what the spell is in- 
tended to accomplish. The player be- 
gins by making a rough draft of the 
proposed spell, including its effects, 
school, range, duration, and area of ef- 
fect. The DM will then adjust these ele- 
ments, making sure the proposed spell 
does not duplicate the effects of an ex- 
isting spell, or is not a minor variation 
of an existing spell. The DM, working 
with the player, will establish the spell’s 
casting time, saving throw, and, most 
importantly, its level. (For help with de- 
termining the elements of a new spell, 
see the Spells section in Chapter 2.) 

Every proposed spell is not automati- 
cally acceptable. The DM can veto a 
proposed spell for any of the following 
reasons: 

e The player character already 
knows the maximum number of spells 
of the proposed spell’s level. (This is al- 
lowable if the optional Researching Ex- 
tra Wizard Spells rule on page 44 of the 
DMG is being used.) 

© The proposed spell is not of a level 
allowed by the player character's Intel- 
ligence, as per Table 4 of the Player's 
Handbook. (For instance, a wizard 
with an Intelligence of 9 cannot cast 
4th-level spells. Therefore, he cannot 
research them.) 

¢ The proposed spell belongs to a 


school in opposition to the player char- 
acter’s school. 

è The player proposes to research a 
spell of 10th-level or higher. (No spell 
can exceed 9th- level.) 


Spell Components 


If the DM is using the optional rules 
for spell components (page 44 of the 
Dungeon Master's Guide), the compo- 
nents for the proposed spell should be 
established before the research begins. 
If the spell is of a relatively low level, 
the components should be fairly sim- 
ple, but higher-level spells might re- 
quire unusually obscure components, 
such as the cloak of a spectre, the 
freshly-clipped toenail of a troll, or a 
handful of dust from the Abyss. (The 
quest for a needed component makes 
for an excellent adventure spring- 
board.) In any case, the wizard must 
have all necessary components in hand 
before he can begin his research. 


Cost of Research 


Page 44 of the DMG gives a general 
range of costs for researching new spells 
(100-1,000 gp per spell level, plus 1,000- 
10,000 gp for a laboratory). Following 
is an alternate way to establish research 
costs. 

There are two categories of expenses 
required for research: the Basic Invest- 
ment, and the Operational Cost, 

The Basic Investment is a one-time 
expenditure, representing the funds 
spent to buy the scrolls and books 
needed, as well as the funds necessary 
to assemble a suitable laboratory. 

The library costs for each spell level 
are summarized in Table 15. 

There are two ways a wizard can 
avoid the Basic Investment for a li- 
brary. 

1. The wizard already has a suitable 
library of his own (see the Wizard's Li- 
brary section below). 


2. The wizard has access to a large li- 
brary, such as those existing in major 
cities or in academies of magic. (The 
DM decides if a library of acceptable 
size is available to the wizard). 


The Basic Investment for a labora- 
tory is 1,000-6,000 (1d6 x 1000) gp. 
The DM determines the cost of the lab- 
oratory, either by rolling randomly or 
setting a specific price. As with the li- 
brary, there are two ways a wizard can 
avoid paying the Basic Investment for 
a laboratory: 

1. The wizard has purchased a labo- 
ratory previously. Once a wizard pur- 
chases a lab, it becomes a permanent 
part of his possessions. He never has to 
buy another one unless, of course, it 
blew up in a lab accident or is otherwise 
destroyed. 

2. The wizard has access to a labora- 
tory in a major city or at a magical 
academy. A city or academy that has a 
suitable library will usually have a suit- 
able laboratory, but the decision be- 
longs to the DM. The DM might also 
require the wizard to pay a modest 
weekly rental fee—say, 20-120 (2d6 x 
10) gp—for the use of the lab. 


The Operational Cost is an ongoing 
expense necessary to sustain the re- 
search. The Operational Cost must be 
paid every week and mainly represents 
the price of additional books, supplies, 
and scrolls. The weekly Operational 
Cost is equal to 200-1,200 (2d6é x 100) 
gp. The DM determines the Opera- 
tional Cost, either by rolling randomly 
or choosing a fixed price. There is no 
way for a wizard to avoid paying the 
weekly Operational Cost. 


The Wizard's Library 


Before a wizard can begin research 
on any spell, he must have a sizeable li- 
brary of arcane books and scrolls. The 
size of the library is expressed in terms 


91 


Advanced Procedures 


of its value. The value of the library 
necessary for each spell level is summa- 
rized in Table 15. 


Table 15: 

Library Values Necessary 

for Spell Research 

GP Value Can Research 

of Library Spells of This 
Level 

2,000 Ist 

4,000 2nd 

8,000 3rd 

14,000 4th 

22,000 5th 

32,000 6th 

44,000 7th 

58,000 8th 

74,000 9th 


For instance, before a wizard can be- 
gin researching a 4th-level spell, he 
must have access to a library worth at 
least 14,000 gp. If he has no books at all 
in his library (perhaps because he has 
never researched a spell before), he 
must spend 14,000 gp on books before 
he can begin. If he has a library of lesser 
value (for instance, if his library is 
worth 4,000 gp), he must spend what- 
ever money is necessary to increase the 
value of his library to’ the appropriate 
level. (If he has a 4,000 gp library, he 
must spend an additional 10,000 gp be- 
fore he can research a 4th-level spell.) 

For the most part, books that are 
suitable for research are hard to find. If 
a wizard is assembling his library prior 
to research, assume that it takes 5-10 
(1d6é + 4) weeks of searching to locate 
1,000 gp worth of books. 

Books can sometimes be purchased 
in the bookshops of any major city or 
from NPC book collectors. A fortunate 
wizard may stumble upon such books 
during his adventures and keep them as 
he would any other discovered trea- 
sure; these books, of course, don’t cost 


him any money. The quest for a partic- 
ular book can be the basis for an entire 
adventure. (The DM determines the 
value of any discovered books.) 

For the purposes of spell research, 
whether a library is of suitable size de- 
pends on its value, not its actual num- 
ber of books. However, as a point of 
interest, assume that the cost of a single 
research book varies between 100- 
1,000 (1d10 x 100) gp. Therefore, a li- 
brary suitable for researching 4th-level 
spells is valued at 14,000 gp and con- 
tains 14-140 books. 

Once a wizard has assembled a li- 
brary of sufficient value, he can begin 
research, but he still must pay the 
weekly Operational Costs. The Opera- 
tional Costs correspond to the purchase 
of additional books and supplies. Half 
these Operational Costs can be consid- 
ered to be new tomes. Therefore, over 
the course of his research, the wizard’s 
library will increase in value. For in- 
stance, assume that a wizard with a 
14,000 gp library has a weekly Opera- 
tional Cost of 400 gp to research a 4th- 
level spell. After he has researched for 
four weeks, he'll have spent a total of 
1,600 gp in Operational Costs and his 
library will have increased in value 800 
gp. (Buying books with Operational 
Cost funds is assumed to be part of the 
research process and requires no extra 
time.) 

As his research progresses, a wizard 
can opt to spend more than the mini- 
mum amount of money required for his 
Operational Costs in order to buy addi- 
tional books to increase his chances of 
successfully researching his spell. The 
effects of these additional expenditures 
are explained in the Research Time and 
Chance of Success section below. 

When a wizard spends money on li- 
brary books, whether spent as part of 
the Basic Investment or as Operational 
Costs, the books then become part of 
his permanent library. Therefore, once 
he has assembled a library valued at 


Advanced Procedures 


14,000 gp, he will never need to make 
another Basic Investment in library 
books when he wants to research 4th- 
level spells. Once he has assembled a li- 
brary valued at 74,000 gp, he can 
research spells of any level without ever 
making another Basic Investment in 
books. Clearly, a wizard’s library is one 
of his most precious possessions. The 
prudent wizard will go to great lengths 
to keep his library safe and protected. 


Initial Preparation 


After the Basic Investment is made 
(or avoided, if the wizard already owns 
or has access to a suitable library), the 
wizard must spend preparation time be- 
fore the actual research begins. This ini- 
tial preparation involves basic reading 
and reviewing of notes; in addition, the 
wizard must prepare himself mentally 
and physically for the grueling task 
ahead. This initial preparation lasts a 
number of weeks equal to the level of 
the proposed spell, plus one. Therefore, 
a wizard attempting to research a 5th- 
level spell must spend six weeks in ini- 
tial preparation. 


Research Time and Chance of 
Success 


According to page 44 of the Dungeon 
Master's Guide, a wizard can check to 
see if he has successfully researched a 
spell after he has spent the minimum 
number of weeks required in research. 
The success check is the same as his 
chance for learning any new spell. 
Though this is a simple, straightfor- 
ward method for checking success, it 
does not consider the researcher's expe- 
rience level (a more experienced wizard 
would probably be more successful at 
researching spells than a less experi- 
enced wizard) or the level of the spell (a 
high-level spell would be more difficult 
to research than a lower-level spell). 
Nor does it consider any extra funds the 


92 


wizard is willing to invest to increase 
his chances of success. 

Following is an alternate method of 
checking for research success. While 
more complicated, it produces results 
that the DM might find more realistic. 

The minimum amount of time 
needed to research a spell is two weeks 
per spell level; for instance, a minimum 
of eight weeks is required to research a 
4th-level spell. During this time, the 
wizard is poring over old texts, cross- 
checking references, taking notes, and 
conducting experiments. 

It is essential that the wizard is free 
from interruption during his research. 
Since 10-12 hours per day of intensive 
study are required, a wizard engaged in 
research is precluded from participating 
in adventures or any other time- 
consuming activity. If a wizard’s study 
is interrupted, the DM can rule that the 
research has suffered a set-back, requir- 
ing an additional amount of research 
time before success can be checked. 

While engaged in research, the wiz- 
ard must pay the required Operational 
Cost every week. If he runs out of 
funds, he must interrupt his research to 
earn more money before he can resume. 
At the DM's discretion, this interrup- 
tion might also require that the research 
time be lengthened. If the wizard’s re- 
search is interrupted for an extended 
period—say, a week or more—the DM 
might require the wizard to start his re- 
search all over again. 

When the minimum research period 
is over, the wizard can check to see if he 
has discovered his spell. If he fails to 
discover it, he can continue with his re- 
search and check again every week 
thereafter. 

The following formula is used to 
check for a successful discovery: 


Success chance = [10% (base chance) 
+ researcher's Intelligence + research- 
er's experience level] — (level of spell be- 
ing researched x 2) 


As an example, assume that a 7th- 
level wizard with an Intelligence of 10 is 
researching a 3rd-level spell. His suc- 
cess chance is equal to 10 percent (base 
chance) + 10 (his Intelligence) + 7 (his 
experience level)—6 (the level of the 
spell, multiplied by 2). Therefore, his 
chance of success is 21 percent. If the 
DM rolls 21 or less on percentile dice, 
the wizard has learned the new spell 
and can add it to his spell books; the 
new spell is then treated like a normal 
spell for all purposes. If the wizard fails 
the check, he can continue his research 
and check for success again in another 
week. (Note that this chance of success 
is somewhat lower than it would be if 
the wizard were trying to learn an exist- 
ing spell. But this is logical since the un- 
certain nature of a new spell makes 
learning more difficult.) 

The wizard can increase his chance of 
success by spending more than the re- 
quired amount of money for his weekly 
Operational Costs. For every extra 
2,000 gp he spends per week (this is in 
addition to his weekly Operational 
Costs), his base chance increases by 10 
percent. The base chance of 10 percent 
can be increased to a maximum of 50 
percent in this way (the wizard can 
spend as much as 8,000 extra gp per 
week). In our example above, if the 
wizard had spent an extra 8,000 gp, his 
chance of success would have been 61 
percent (50 + 10 + 7—6). The extra ex- 
penditure applies to the current week 
only—if he wants to increase his chance 
again next week, he'll have to spend ex- 
tra money again. 


Example of Research 


Following is a step-by-step example 
of spell research. In this example, an 
8th-level wizard with an Intelligence of 
12 is attempting to research a 3rd-level 
spell. This is his first attempt at re- 
searching a spell. He has no library or 
laboratory, but he has plenty of money. 


The DM has decided that no special 
components are necessary to research 
this spell. 

1. The wizard has no lab, so the DM 
determines that the wizard must spend 
1,000 gp to establish a suitable lab. 

2. The wizard has no library, so he 
spends 8,000 gp over the next eight 
weeks locating the appropriate books. 
(The wizard must have an 8,000 gp li- 
brary to research a 3rd-level spell.) 

3. The DM establishes the Operating 
Costs to research this spell at 500 gp per 
week. 

4. The wizard spends four weeks of 
preparation time before beginning his 
research. (The preparation time is the 
number of weeks equal to the level of 
the spell plus 1.) 

4. The wizard begins his research. He 
spends six consecutive, uninterrupted 
weeks in research, the minimum num- 
ber required to research a 3rd-level 
spell. During this period, he invests 
3,000 gp in Operating Costs (500 gp for 
six weeks). At the end of six weeks, he’s 
ready to check whether his research has 
been successful. Note that the value of 
his library has grown to 9,500 gp during 
this period. 

5. The DM determines that the wiz- 
ard's chance of success is equal to 10 (the 
base chance) + 12 (the wizard’s Intelli- 
gence) + 8 (the wizard’s level)—6 (the 
level of the spell, multiplied by 2), which 
is 24 percent. The DM rolls percentile 
dice, and the result is 66. The check fails. 
(If the wizard gives up at this point, he 
won't be able to learn the proposed spell 
unless he starts from scratch at some 
point in the future; in the meantime, he 
can console himself with the fact that he 
has acquired a nice library.) 

6. The wizard continues his research 
for another week. He spends the re- 
quired 500 gp for his Operating Costs, 
but also spends an additional 4,000 gp 
to raise his success chance by 20 percent 
(the cost is 2,000 gp per 10 percent 
boost). The increased investment af- 


93 


Advanced Procedures 


fects the percentage chance for this 
week only. 

7. At the end of the week, the DM 
checks again to see if the wizard has 
been successful. This time, the wizard’s 
chance of success is 44 percent (the 20 
percent increase represents the addi- 
tional investment of 4,000 gp). The roll 
is 34, so the wizard is successful—he 
can add the new spell to his spell book. 

If the check had failed again, the wiz- 
ard could continue the research for as 
many weeks as he is willing, until either 
his patience or his money run out. He 
must pay the Operational Costs each 


wi 


Researching Existing 
Spells 


In addition to researching new spells, 
a wizard can research existing spells 
(those listed in the Player's Handbook 
and—if the DM allows them—the new 
spells from Chapter 9 of this book). 
Since it makes sense that information 
about existing spells is easier to find 
than information about spells that do 
not yet exist, it is easier for a wizard to 
research them. 

To account for this difference, make 
the following adjustments in the above 
procedures when a wizard is research- 
ing an existing spell: 

1. The Operational Cost is reduced to 
100-600 (1d6 x 100) gp per week. 

2. The base chance of success is in- 
creased from 10 percent to 30 percent. 

The lab costs, library costs, prepara- 
tion time, and minimum number of 
weeks for researching existing spells are 
the same as research of new spells. The 
cost of increasing the base chance is also 
the same (2,000 gp per 10 percent in- 
crease), as is the total amount that can 
be spent (8,000 gp). Notice, however, 
that spending the 8,000 gp maximum 
increases the base chance to 70 percent 
(20 points higher than the 50 percent 
limit when researching new spells.) 


Advanced Procedures 


Limiting the Success Chance 


Notice that a wizard’s chance of suc- 
cessfully researching a spell could ex- 
ceed 100 percent, particularly when a 
high-level wizard is researching an ex- 
isting low-level spell. Although auto- 
matic success is certainly in the spirit of 
the game (according to Table 4 of the 
Player's Handbook, all wizards of 19th 
level and above have a 100 percent 
chance of learning new spells), some 
DMs might prefer to eliminate any 
chance of automatic success. If so, we 
suggest requiring that all wizards must 
roll for success, even if their calculated 
chance exceeds 100 percent; a roll of 95 
or higher is treated as failure. 


More About Magical Item 
Research 


Magical item research is discussed in 
detail on pages 84-88 of the Dungeon 
Master's Guide and needs little elabora- 


tion here. However, a few points are 
worth mentioning: 


Laboratories: The laboratory require- 
ments for researching magical items are 
different than those for researching spells. 
Spell research requires shelving, easels, 
writing tools, files, and similar supplies, 
while item research requires test tubes, 
beakers, burners, chemicals, and other 
equipment. 

Consequently, a wizard who invested 
in a spell research laboratory will still 
need to buy equipment to research an 
item. For example, assume that a wiz- 
ard just spent 5,000 gp on a laboratory 
for spell research, and now wants to re- 
search a new potion. The basic cost for 
an alchemical laboratory is 2,000 gp 
(see page 87 of the DMG). Since the 
5,000 gp laboratory is useless for potion 
research, the wizard must spend 2,000 
gp for alchemical equipment. 

Libraries: Just as a wizard’s spell re- 
search lab is relatively useless for item 
research, so is his spell research library. 


94 


However, a sizeable library of magical 
tomes probably contains short-cuts, 
hints, and formulas that will help the 
wizard in his item research. At the DM's 
discretion, access to a sizeable library 
(say, with a value of at least 74,000 gp) 
can increase a wizard’s chance of suc- 
cess by as much as 10 percent. Access to 
a library doesn’t change the amount of 
time it takes to research and create an 
item, nor does it change the amount of 
money that must be spent. 

Specialist Bonus: If a specialist is re- 
searching an item that duplicates an ef- 
fect of a spell from his school, his 
chance of success can be increased by as 
much as 10 percent. If the DM uses this 
rule, he should also deny a specialist the 
chance to research an item that dupli- 
cates a spell effect from any of the spe- 
cialist’s oppositional schools. The 
researcher's school has no effect on the 
amount of research time required, nor 
does it affect the amount of money that 
must be spent. 


This chapter includes a variety of 
new spells that can be used to supple- 
ment the choices provided in the Play- 
ers Handbook. These spells expand the 
options for the schools of abjuration, 
divination, and necromancy, thus mak- 
ing these specializations more attractive 
to player characters. 


Spell Descriptions 


The game statistics listed for the 
spells below follow the guidelines on 
page 129 of the Player's Handbook. All 
of these spells are acquired, memo- 
rized, and recorded in spell books as de- 
scribed on page 41 of the Dungeon 
Master's Guide and page 81 of the Play- 
er's Handbook. 


Spell Components 
Material Components 


In accordance with the listings in the 
Player's Handbook, material compo- 
nents are given below for the spells that 
require them. The DM must decide the 
precise amounts of these materials, as 
well as any other details about them. 
For instance, color spray requires a 
“pinch” of colored sand—the DM de- 
cides what exactly constitutes a “pinch.” 
Likewise, dancing lights requires a 
glowworm—must the glowworm be 
alive, or can it be a preserved specimen? 
Less fussy DMs can allow their wizards 
as much latitude as they wish with ma- 
terial components, as long as they meet 
the general requirements of the spell de- 
scription. 


Verbal and Somatic 
Components 


The DM makes the decision regard- 
ing precise verbal and somatic compo- 
nents for any spell, although 
suggestions from players should be 


Chapter 8: New Spells 


considered; specific verbal and soman- 
tic components are not required, but 
they add color to the game by giving 
players a clearer idea of exactly what 
procedures must occur in order for their 
PC wizards to cast spells. Requiring 
specific components can also make for 
some challenging game situations. For 
example, if a wizard is gagged, he may 
be prevented from casting spells with 
spoken verbal components. Similarly, a 
wizard with his hands bound behind 
him may have problems casting a spell 
whose somatic component requires spe- 
cific hand gestures. (See Chapter 6 for 
more information about impaired cast- 
ers and spell components.) Verbal 
components can be single words, brief 
phrases, snatches of poetry, chants, or 
nonsense syllables. They can be spo- 
ken, whispered, shouted, or sung. Ver- 
bal components can also be groans, 
grunts, coughs, whistles, or any other 
vocally-produced sound. 

Often, the verbal component will re- 
late to the effect of the spell. For in- 
stance, the verbal component for 
feather fall might be the whispered 
word “float,” while a low, eerie moan 
might work for detect undead. Dimen- 
sion door might be the spoken word 
“open,” while the verbal component for 
gust of wind might be a slow exhalation 
of air. 

Somatic components can be any type 
of physical gesture. For some spells, 
merely touching or pointing at the tar- 
get or subject is sufficient. More elabo- 
rate gestures are suitable for 
higher-level spells. In many cases, the 
somatic component will relate to the 
spell's effect. For instance, the somatic 
component for audible glamer might 
require the caster to put his hand to his 
ear as if he were listening. Rapidly rub- 
bing the hands together might suffice 
for chill touch, while wiggling the fin- 
gers like a spider might serve as the so- 
matic component for web. 


95 


First-Level Spells 
Copy (Evocation) 


Range: Special 
Components: V, S, M 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Casting Time: 1 round 
Area of Effect: One object 
Saving Throw: Special 


Copy enables the caster to make a per- 
fect copy of a map, letter, or any other 
written or drawn document. The caster 
must have a blank parchment or a book 
with blank pages of sufficient size to 
hold the copy. The caster holds the 
blank object over the object to be cop- 
ied, then casts the spell; the copy imme- 
diately appears on the formerly blank 
object. The copy is permanent and is a 
perfect duplicate of the original. 

Copy can also be used to copy spells 
from a new spell book into the caster's 
spell book, assuming the caster's spell 
book is of sufficient size to contain the 
new spells. The caster must first roll to 
see if he can learn the new spells; if so, 
he can cast copy to instantly copy them 
into his spell book. 

The material components for this 
spell are a piece of blank parchment (or 
a book with blank pages, as described 
above), and a drop of black ink. 


Chromatic Orb (Alteration, 


Evocation) 


Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Duration: Special 

Casting Time: 1 

Area of Effect: One creature 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell causes a 4-inch-diameter 
sphere to appear in the caster’s hand. 
Within the limits described below, the 
sphere can appear in a variety of colors; 


New Spells 


each color indicates a different special 
power. The caster can hurl the sphere at 
an opponent up to 30 yards away, pro- 
viding there are no barriers between the 
caster and the target. If the target is no 
more than 10 yards away, the caster’s to 
hit roll is made with a +3 bonus. If the 
target is 10-20 yards away, the caster's 
roll is made with a +2 bonus. If the tar- 
get is 20-30 yards away, the caster’s roll 
is made with a +1 bonus. 

If the chromatic orb misses its target, 
it dissipates without effect. If the target 
creature makes a successful saving 


ing which time the victim makes his at- 
tack rolls and saving throws at a —4 
penalty, and his AC is penalized by 4. 

Heat from the orb is intense enough 
to melt 1 cubic yard of ice. The victim 
suffers a loss of 1 point of Strength and 
1 point of Dexterity (or for victims 
without these attributes, —1 to hit and 
a penalty of 1 to AC) for 1 round. 

Fire from the orb ignites all combusti- 
ble materials within 3 feet of the victim. 

Blindness from the orb causes the vic- 
tim to become blind as per the spell. 
The effect lasts for 1 round/level of the 


+ 4) rounds; a successful saving throw 
vs. paralyzation halves the number of 
rounds. 

Petrification from the orb turns the 
victim to stone. If the victim success- 
fully saves vs. petrification, he avoids 
turning to stone and instead is slowed 
(as per the spell) for 2-8 (2d4) rounds. 

Death from the orb causes the victim 
to die. If the victim successfully saves. 
vs death magic, he avoids death and in- 
stead is paralyzed for 2-5 (1d4 +1) 
rounds. 


throw, the chromatic orb is also ineffec- | caster. Corpse Visage (Illusion, 
tive. Otherwise, the color of the orb de- Stinking cloud from the orb sur- | Necromancy) 

termines the amount of damage | rounds the victim in a 5-foot-radius 

inflicted and its special power, as sum- | noxious cloud. The victim must save | Range: Touch 


marized on Table 16; details about the 
special powers are listed below. The 
caster can create a single orb of any 
color listed for his level or lower; for in- 
stance, a 3rd-level wizard can create an 
orange, red, or white orb. 

The material component for this spell 
is a gem of the appropriate hue or any 
diamond. The gem must have a value of 
at least 50 gp. 


Light from the orb causes the victim 
to become surrounded by light to a ra- 
dius of 20 feet, as if affected by a light 
spell. The effect lasts for 1 round, dur- 


vs. poison or will be reeling and unable 
to attack until he leaves the area of the 
vapors. 

Magnetism from the orb has an effect 
only if the victim is wearing armor 
made from iron. The iron armor be- 
comes magically magnetized for 3-12 
(3d4) rounds. Other iron objects within 
3 feet of the caster will stick tight to the 
magnetized armor; only dispel magic or 
a similar spell can release the stuck 
items. At the end of the spell’s duration, 
the stuck items are released. 

Paralysis from the orb causes the vic- 
tim to become paralyzed for 6-20 (2d8 


Table 16: Chromatic Orb Effects 


Components: V, S, M 

Duration: 1 round/level 

Casting Time: 1 round 

Area of Effect: Creature touched 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell transforms the caster’s face 
or the face of any creature touched by 
the caster into the horrifying visage of a 
rotting corpse. The effect of this illusion 
is so startling that when it is viewed by 
opponents, the wizard’s party adds a 
modifier of +2 to their surprise roll. 
Creatures with low Intelligence or 
higher (Intelligence of 5 or greater) and 
with 1 Hit Die or less (or who are 1st 
level or lower) must make a successful 
saving throw when first viewing corpse 
visage or flee in terror for 1-4 rounds. 

Corpse visage does not distinguish 


Level of Color of Orb Hit Points Special between friend and foe, and all who 
Caster Generated of Damage Power view it are subject to its effects. If the 
Ist White 1-4 Light spell is cast upon an unwilling victim, 
2nd Red 1-6 Heat the victim is allowed a saving throw to 
3rd Orange 1-8 Fire avoid the effect. 

4th Yellow 1-10 Blindness The material component is a rag or 
5th Green 1-12 Stinking Cloud piece of cloth taken from a corpse. The 
6th Turquoise 2-8 Magnetism cloth must be prepared by dotting it 
7th Blue 2-16 Paralysis with paints of assorted colors. 

10th Violet slow Petrification 

12th Black paralysis Death 


96 


Detect Disease (Divination) 


Range: 10 yards 

Components: V, S, M 

Duration: 1 round/level 

Casting Time: 1 

Area of Effect: 1 creature or object 
Saving Throw: None 


Detect disease reveals to the wizard 
whether a subject creature or object 
carries a disease, whether normal or 
magical. Additionally, there is a 10 per- 
cent chance per level of the caster that 
he is able to identify the exact type of 
disease. 

The material component for this spell 
is a twig or small branch from any tree. 


Divining Rod (Divination, 
Enchantment) 


Range: 60 yards 
Components: V, S, M 
Duration: 1 round/level 
Casting Time: 1 round 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell enables the caster to en- 
chant the branch of a ginkgo or fruit 
tree to locate a common item that is hid- 
den from view. Unlike locate object, 
the caster does not need to have a spe- 
cific mental image of a particular item; 
rather, he only needs to state the name 
of the general type of item he wishes to 
locate, such as buried treasure, edible 
plants, or fresh water. However, divin- 
ing rod will not locate invisible or magi- 
cal items, nor will it locate items 
protected by obscure item or a similar 
spell. 

Once the branch is enchanted, the 
caster holds the branch with both 
hands. If the desired item is within the 
range of the spell, the enchanted branch 
points in the direction of the item and 
gently pulls the caster along. The spell 


is not blocked by lead or any other sub- 
stance. However, if an impenetrable 
obstacle is reached, such as the ground 
or a wall, the branch presses against it 
and stops. If there is no item matching 
the description within the spell range, 
the branch does not react, although the 
caster can move about and continue to 
search. 

The material component for this spell 
is the branch from a ginkgo tree or a 
fruit tree, such as peach, apple, or 
lemon. The branch must be shaped like 
the letter Y, so that the caster can grasp 
a fork of the branch in each hand. 


Protection from Hunger and 
Thirst (Abjuration) 


Range: Touch 

Components: S, M 
Duration: 1 day/level 
Casting Time: 1 

Area of Effect: One creature 
Saving Throw: None 


When protection from hunger and 
thirst is cast, the recipient requires no 
food, water, or nourishment of any 
kind for the duration of the spell. The 
recipient can be the caster or anyone he 
touches. Each day the caster (or the 
subject of the caster’s choice) is under 
the effect of the spell, he is fully nour- 
ished as if he had eaten and drunk nor- 
mally. At the end of the spell’s duration, 
the subject is no more hungry or thirsty 
than he was when the spell was origi- 
nally cast. 

The material components for this 
spell are a small piece of dried meat and 
a cup of water. 


97 


Second-Level Spells 


Choke (Necromancy, 
Conjuration/Summoning) 


Range: 30 yards 
Components: V, S, M 
Duration: 1 round/level 
Casting Time: 2 

Area of Effect: One creature 
Saving Throw: 1/2 


By means of choke, the caster causes 
a pair of ghostly hands to appear 
around the throat of a single victim. 
The victim must be a human, demihu- 
man, or humanoid, and must be within 
30 yards of the caster. The hands will 
choke and strangle the affected victim 
for the duration of the spell; each 
round, the victim suffers 1-4 hit points 
of damage from the choking hands. If 
the victim makes a successful saving 
throw, he suffers half- damage each 
round. 

Choke can be negated by dispel 
magic or a similar spell; the victim can- 
not wrench the ethereal hands away 
from his neck. The victim makes all at- 
tack rolls ata —2 penalty while affected 
by choke, 

The material component for this spell 
is a handkerchief or similarly-sized 
piece of cloth that has been tied in a 
knot. 


Death Recall (Necromancy, 
Divination) 


Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Duration: Special 

Casting Time: 1 round 
Area of Effect: One corpse 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell enables the caster to visual- 
ize the final minutes of the life of any 
creature or person that died within the 


previous 24 hours. When the caster 
touches the subject's corpse, the caster 
goes into a trance. The caster then has a 
vision of the final 10 minutes of the sub- 
ject's life as seen by the subject himself. 
The vision ends with the last scene the 
subject saw before he died, at which 
time the caster awakens from his trance 
and the spell is over. 

The material component for this spell 
is a fragment from a shattered mirror. 


Detect Life (Divination) 


Range: 10 feet/level 
Components: V, S, M 
Duration: 5 rounds 

Casting Time: 2 

Area of Effect: One creature 
Saving Throw: None 


By use of this spell, the caster can de- 
termine if a creature is alive, including 
creatures in a coma or trance, or under 
the influence of feign death. Any form 
of mental protection prevents the effec- 
tiveness of this spell, as does any thick- 
ness of metal. An inch of stone or wood 
is treated as 10 feet of open space for the 
purpose of determining whether the 
spell functions. 

The material components for this 
spell are a holy symbol and a hair from 
the head of a newborn animal. 


Filter (Abjuration) 


Range: Touch 

Components: V, M 

Duration: 1 turn/level 

Casting Time: 2 

Area of Effect: 10-foot radius sphere 
around creature touched 

Saving throw: None 


This spell creates an invisible globe of 
protection that filters out all noxious el- 
ements from poisonous vapors; there- 
fore, a creature protected by filter takes 


no damage and suffers no penalties 
from poison gas of any kind, including 
those created magically (such as stink- 
ing cloud). The exceptions are poison- 
ous vapors created by a dragon’s breath 
weapon (such as the chlorine gas of a 
green dragon); in these cases, the crea- 
ture protected by filter suffers half- 
damage. 

The material components for this 
spell are a strand of spider web and a 
scrap of cotton cloth approximately 
one inch square. 


Ghoul Touch (Necromancy) 


Range: 0 

Components; V, S, M 
Duration; 1 round/level 
Casting Time: 2 

Area of Effect: One person 
Saving Throw: Special 


When this spell is in effect, the cast- 
er's touch causes any single human, 
dwarf, gnome, half-elf, or halfling to 
become rigid for 3-8 (1d6 +2) rounds 
unless the victim makes a successful 
saving throw vs. paralyzation. Addi- 
tionally, the paralyzed victim exudes a 
carrion stench in a 10-foot radius that 
causes retching and nausea. Those 
within this area who fail to save vs. poi- 
son will make their attacks with a —2 
penalty until the spell reaches the end of 
its duration. 

The material component for this spell 
is a small scrap of cloth taken from the 
clothing of a ghoul or a pinch of earth 
from a ghoul’s lair. 


98 


Ice Knife (Evocation) 


Range: Special 
Components: V, S, M 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Casting Time: 1 round 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


This spell fires a dagger of ice at the 
target. The caster makes a normal at- 
tack roll as if attacking with a missile 
weapon, factoring in the range from the 
attacker to the target (the ice knife has a 
long range of 30 yards, a medium range 
of 20 yards, and a short range of 10 
yards), A successful hit causes 2-8 (2d4) 
hit points of damage. If the ice knife 
misses its target, consult the rules for 
grenade-like missiles on pages 62-63 of 
the Dungeon Master's Guide to deter- 
mine where it lands. 

When an ice knife strikes a solid ob- 
ject or a creature, the knife shatters, re- 
leasing a wave of numbing cold. All 
creatures within a 5-foot radius must 
make a successful saving throw vs. par- 
alyzation or suffer 1-4 hit points of cold 
damage and become numb for 1-3 
rounds. Numbed creatures have their 
movement rates reduced by half and 
their chance to hit reduced by 2. Prox- 
imity to major sources of heat, such as a 
roaring bonfire, improves a creature's 
saving throw by +2. 

An ice knife that misses or is lost can- 
not be picked up by the caster (or any- 
one else) and thrown again. If the ice 
knife is touched, it instantly shatters, 
releasing a wave of cold as described 
above. If a lost ice knife is not touched, 
it melts away in a pool of water 1 round 
after it was originally created; this melt- 
ing occurs regardless of the environ- 
mental temperature. 

The material components for this 
spell are a drop of water from melted 
snow and a tiny silver dagger. 


Vocalize (Alteration) 


Range: Touch 

Components: 5, M 

Duration: 5 rounds 

Casting Time: 1 round 

Area of Effect: One spell-casting crea- 
ture 

Saving Throw: None 


This spell allows the recipient to cast 
spells that normally require a verbal 
component without the caster needing 
to make a sound. Such spells must be 
cast within the duration of the vocalize 
spell. This spell is also useful in situa- 
tions where quiet is desired, or when 
the recipient is under the influence of a 
silence spell. 

Vocalize does not negate a silence 
spell, but merely offsets it for the pur- 
pose of spell casting; if a spell caster un- 
der the effect of vocalize casts a spell 
that has some audible effect, that sound 
will be masked for as long as silence re- 
mains in force. Vocalize does not affect 
normal vocal communication. 

The material component for this spell 
is a small golden bell without a clapper. 


Third-Level Spells 


Bone Club (Enchantment, 
Necromancy) 


Range: 0 

Components: V, M 
Duration: 1 round/level 
Casting Time: 1 round 
Area of Effect: One bone 
Saving Throw: None 


A wizard can use this spell to enchant 
a bone, causing it to become a magical 
club. This magical weapon acts as a 
club +4 against undead, inflicting 5-10 
(1d6 +4) hit points of damage, and a 
club +1 against all other opponents, in- 
flicting 2-7 (1d6 + 1) hit points of dam- 


age. The bone can be from any animal, 
providing the bone normally could be 
wielded as a club; for instance, a human 
femur could be enchanted by this spell, 
but a skull could not. At the end of the 
spell’s duration, the bone club reverts to 
a normal bone. 

If the proficiency rules are being 
used, characters with a weapon profi- 
ciency with a club also have a profiency 
with a bone club. Those wielding a 
bone club without the club profiencey 
suffer the penalties described on page 
52 of the Player's Handbook. 

The material components for this 
spell are an appropriately-sized bone 
and a pinch of dirt from a grave. 


Delay Death (Enchantment, 
Necromancy) 


Range: 30 yards 
Components: V, S, M 
Duration: 1 turn/level 
Casting Time: 1 round 
Area of Effect: One creature 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell enables one person or crea- 
ture to postpone death. If delay death is 
cast before the indicated creature or 
person reaches 0 hit points, he is able to 
fight, cast spells, communicate, and 
take all other normal actions until he 
reaches — 10 hit points. However, from 
the time he reaches 0 hit points until he 
is reduced to —10 hit points, the af- 
fected person or creature makes all at- 
tack rolls and saving throws at a —2 
penalty, and his movement rate is re- 
duced by half. 

When the subject reaches —10 hit 
points, he is dead and delay death is no 
longer in effect. Note that the spell has a 
limited duration; if the spell expires af- 
ter the affected subject has reached 0 hit 
points but before he has been reduced 
to —10 hit points, the subject dies in- 
stantly. A deceased subject previously 


99 


under the effect of delay death can be 
raised normally by raise dead and simi- 
lar spells. 

The material component for this spell 
is a chip from a tombstone or a sliver of 
wood from a coffin, 


Hovering Skull (Necromancy) 


Range: Special 
Components: V, S 
Duration: 2 rounds/level 
Casting Time: 4 

Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell creates a glowing human 
skull with sharp fangs. The skull hovers 
about a foot above the caster’s shoul- 
der; as the caster moves, the skull hov- 
ers along with him. If the caster stops 
moving and concentrates, he can men- 
tally command the hovering skull to 
move in any direction within a 30- foot 
radius. 

The caster can see through the skull’s 
eyes as if they were his own; for in- 
stance, the hovering skull could be or- 
dered to investigate a dark cave or peek 
over a high wall. Additionally, the 
caster can order the hovering skull to 
attack victims with its razor-sharp 
teeth. If the caster’s concentration is in- 
terrupted while controlling the skull, 
the skull immediately drops to the 
ground (but it takes no damage). If the 
caster resumes concentration, he can 
continue to command the skull. 

The hovering skull has the same sta- 
tistics as the caster, except the skull has 
3 hit points and inflicts 1-6 hit points of 
damage with its bite. Attacks directed 
at the skull do not harm the caster, nor 
does damage directed at the caster af- 
fect the skull. 

The material component for this spell 
is the tooth from a human skull. 


Invisible Mail (Evocation, 
Abjuration) 


Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Duration: Special 
Casting Time: 2 

Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


A variation of the armor spell, this 
spell enables the caster to cover his 
body with an invisible suit of plate mail 
to temporarily raise his AC to 3. Its ef- 
fects are not cumulative with other ar- 
mor or magical protection (a character 
cannot improve his AC better than 3 
through use of this spell), but Dexterity 
bonuses still apply. 

For each level of the caster, the invisi- 
ble mail absorbs 1 hit point of damage 
that would normally hit AC 3; how- 
ever, the invisible mail offers no protec- 
tion against magical weapons or 
attacks. When the invisible mail has ab- 
sorbed as many hit points of damage as 
the wizard has levels of experience, the 
invisible mail disappears. The invisible 
mail does not hinder movement, nor 
does it add weight or encumbrance. It 
does not interfere with spell casting. 

Example: A wizard with a normal 
AC of 10 has shielded himself with in- 
visible mail. The first opponent attacks 
with a normal dagger; the attack is 
made against the AC 3 of the invisible 
mail, The attack is successful, causing 2 
hit points of damage, but this damage is 
absorbed by the invisible mail and the 
wizard is unharmed. A second attack is 
made with a sword +1. The invisible 
armor offers no protection against this 
magical weapon, so the attack is made 
against the wizard’s normal AC of 10. 

The material component is a small 
fragment of plate mail. 


Iron Mind (Abjuration) 


Range: Touch 

Components: S, M 
Duration: 1 hour 

Casting Time: 3 

Area of Effect: One creature 
Saving Throw: None 


The person or creature affected by 
iron mind is immune to all charm and 
hold spells for a full hour. Additionally, 
he automatically disbelieves all illu- 
sions cast by 3rd-level wizards (or their 
equivalent) or lower. 

The material component for this spell 
is a small chunk of iron ore or any small 
item made of solid iron, such as a nail. 


Pain Touch (Divination) 


Range: Touch 

Components: V, M 
Duration: 1 round/level 
Casting Time: 3 

Area of Effect: One creature 
Saving Throw: None 


Pain touch enables the caster to 
touch an opponent in such a way as to 
induce extreme pain. The spell works if 
the caster touches any exposed part of 
an opponent's body. The caster must be 
within arm's length of the opponent for 
the spell to work. The spell requires a 
normal attack roll. 

The pain causes no damage, but for 
the next 1-4 rounds, the victim will be 
—2 on his chance to hit and his AC is 
worsened by 2. The caster can cast the 
spell and touch the victim in the same 
round. Pain touch is only effective on 
human, demihuman, and humanoid 
opponents. 

The material components for this 
spell are a needle and the finger from a 
scorched glove. T 


100 


Snapping Teeth (Conjuration, 
Alteration) 


Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 

Duration: 1 turn/level 

Casting Time: 3 

Area of Effect: 1 creature or object 
Saving Throw: None 


By means of this spell, the caster 
causes a set of teeth to appear on a per- 
son or object; the teeth appear in the ex- 
act location touched by the caster. The 
snapping teeth are contained in a 
mouth-like orifice about 6 inches in di- 
ameter and are capable of snapping at 
victims within 1 foot. A person or crea- 
ture with the snapping teeth can cause 
them to snap at will, effectively giving 
him an extra attack per round. A nor- 
mal attack roll is made, and a successful 
hit inflicts 1-4 hit points of damage. 
Note that the victim must be within 
range of the teeth and that normal fac- 
ing considerations must be accounted 
for (for instance, snapping teeth in the 
back of a person's head can only attack 
victims that are behind the person). 

Snapping teeth can also be placed on 
a non-living object, such as a tree or a 
door. In such cases, the snapping teeth 
are invisible until they make an attack. 
The snapping teeth will attack any vic- 
tim that comes within 1 foot; they at- 
tack as a 4 HD monster, and each 
successful hit causes 1-4 hit points of 
damage. These attacks are automatic 
and are not controlled by the caster. 

Attacks cannot be directed against 
the snapping teeth, but dispel magic 
causes them to vanish. 

The material component for this spell 
is a tooth from any carnivorous animal, 
such as a wolf, shark, or serpent. 


Fourth-Level Spells 
Duplicate (Conjuration) 


Range: Touch 
Components: S, M 
Duration: 1 hour/level 
Casting Time: 1 round 
Area of Effect: One object 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell creates an exact copy of 
any single item the caster touches. The 
item to be copied must fit inside a 20- 
foot cube. The spell has no effect on liv- 
ing creatures, including undead, nor 
will it copy magical items. The dupli- 
cated item is identical to the original in 
every way—for instance, a duplicated 
sword can be wielded to inflict damage 
as a normal sword—but detect magic 
can reveal its true nature and dispel 
magic can cause it to disappear. The du- 
plicated object exists for 1 hour/level of 
the caster, at which time it vanishes; 
permanency does not affect duplicated 
items. 

The material component for this spell 
is a pinch of coal dust. 


Fire Aura (Abjuration) 


Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Duration: 2 rounds/level 
Casting Time: 4 

Area of Effect: Caster 
Saving Throw: Special 


By means of this spell, the caster sur- 
rounds his body with an aura of magi- 
cal green fire. The fire aura extends 1 
foot from the casters body and pro- 
vides illumination in a 10-foot radius. 
The fire aura provides complete immu- 
nity to all forms of fire, both natural 
and magical; the flames can be extin- 
guished only by dispel magic or a simi- 
lar spell. Those touching the fire aura 


suffer 2-8 (2d4) hit points of damage; 
additionally, if the touched victim fails 
to make his saving throw, his body is 
set afire with green flames. 

The flames persist for 2-8 (2d4) 
rounds and can be extinguished only by 
dispel magic or a similar spell. Each 
round the victim is engulfed in these 
flames, he suffers an additional 1-6 hit 
points of damage; the victim's attack 
rolls are made with a —2 penalty during 
this time. 

The material components for this 
spell are a scrap of singed paper and a 
piece of flint. 


Halo of Eyes (Abjuration, 
Conjuration) 


Range: 0 
Components: V, M 
Duration: 1 turn/level 
Casting Time: 4 

Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


Halo of eyes creates a halo of func- 
tional eyeballs that sits atop the caster’s 
head, enabling the caster to see in all di- 
rections at the same time. Additionally, 
these magical eyes all have infravison 
to a distance of 60 yards. The caster can 
see opponents on all sides of him, pro- 
viding they are not invisible, and there- 
fore can never by struck from behind or 
suffer a penalty for a back attack. Un- 
der normal conditions, the caster can- 
not be surprised. Attacks cannot be 
directed against the magical eyeballs, 
but their vision is obscured by blind- 
ness and other magical and natural ef- 
fects that would hinder the wizard's 
normal sight. 

The material components for this 
spell are the feather of an eagle and an 
eyelash from the corpse of any crea- 
ture. 


101 


Otiluke’s Dispelling Screen 
(Evocation, Abjuration) 


Range: 5 yards/level 
Components: V, S, M 
Duration: 1 round/level 
Casting Time: 5 

Area of Effect: 20-foot square 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell creates a shimmering 
screen of violet energy in any shape the 
caster desires. Any creature passing 
through the screen is affected by dispel 
magic with the same level of effective- 
ness as that spell cast by the wizard. 

The material components for this 
spells are a sheet of fine lead crystal and 
a chysolite gemstone worth 1,000 gp 
(both vanish after the spell is cast). 


Wind Breath (Evocation) 


Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Casting Time: 1 round 

Area of Effect: Cone 60 yards long and 
30 yards wide at the base 

Saving Throw: 1/2 


A variation of gust of wind, this spell 
allows the caster to fill his lungs with air 
and expel a powerful wind. The 
strength of this wind is about 5 miles 
per hour for every level of the caster. 
Those outside the area of effect do not 
notice the tremendous winds, though 
objects may be blown out of the spell’s 
area into their path. The DM should de- 
termine the precise effects of the wind 
breath using the following parameters 
as guidelines. 

If the wind breath is 30-50 miles per 
hour, there is a 10 percent chance that 
small boats capsize, a 1 percent chance 
that ships capsize, and a 10 percent 
chance that a man is knocked down. 
There is a 20 percent chance that 


branches snap, light articles are blown 
away, and tents and sails tear. Crea- 
tures caught in the cone of the wind 
breath suffer 1 hit points of damage 
from blown sand and grit. 

If the wind breath is 50-70 miles per 
hour, there is a 70 percent chance that 
small boats capsize, a 20 percent chance 
that ships capsize, and a 50 percent 
chance that a man is knocked down. 
Trees bend and there is a 70 percent 
chance that branches snap, and a 20 
percent chance that a trunk snaps. 
Medium-sized articles are blown away, 
and there is a 50 percent chance that 
tents and sails are torn, and a 40 percent 
chance that shacks are blown down. 
Creatures caught in the cone of the 
wind breath suffer 1-4 hit points of 
damage from sand and grit. Flying crea- 
tures are blown back 10-40 (10d4) feet.) 

If the wind breath is 70 miles per hour 
or more, there is a 100 percent chance 
that small boats capsize, a 70 percent 
chance that ships capsize, and a 70 per- 


cent chance that a man is knocked 
down and blown 10-40 (10d4) feet to 
suffer 1-6 hit points of damage per 10 
feet blown. There is a 70 percent chance 
that tree trunks snap, and a 100 percent 
chance that branches are ripped from 
trees. Heavy articles are blown away, 
medium articles are ripped from fasten- 
ings, and tents and sails have a 70 per- 
cent chance of being destroyed. There is 
a 20 percent chance that common build- 
ings are blown down and a 60 percent 
chance that shacks are flattened. Crea- 
tures caught in the cone of the wind 
breath suffer 1-8 hit points of damage 
from blown objects. Flying creatures 
are blown back 50-100 (40 + 10d6) feet. 

The material component for this spell 
is a handmade silk fan with a value of at 
least 1 gp. 


102 


Fifth-Level Spells 
Force Shapechange 


(Necromancy) 


Range: 10 yards/level 
Components: V, S, M 

Duration: Instantaneous 

Casting Time: 1 

Area of Effect: One creature/level 
Saving Throw: !/2 


With this spell, the caster can force 
any shapechanger or magic- wielder us- 
ing any form of a shapechanging spell 
to instantly revert to his true form (or 
his most common form). To use the 
spell, the caster points at creatures he 
knows or believes to be shapechangers. 
If the creatures are indeed shape- 
changers, they must make a successful 
saving throw or immediately revert to 
their true form and suffer 3-30 (3d10) 
hit points of damage from the wracking 


pain caused by the forced change. The 
change takes a full round, during which 
time a victim can take no other actions. 
If the saving throw was successful, the 
victim does not change form, but still 
suffers half damage (2d10/2). 

The material components for this 
spell are a hair from the hide of any ly- 
canthrope and a live butterfly, released 
when the verbal component is uttered. 


Invulnerability to Normal 
Weapons (Abjuration) 


Range: 0 

Components: V, M 
Duration: 1 round/level 
Casting Time: 2 

Area of Effect: 5-foot radius 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell creates an immobile, 
faintly shimmering magical sphere 
around the caster that cannot be pene- 
trated by non-magical blunt weapons, 
edged weapons, or missile weapons. 
The caster can use these weapons from 
inside the sphere to attack opponents 
normally, Spells can also be cast 
through the sphere. The sphere can be 
negated by dispel magic. 

The material components for this 
spell are a piece of a broken non- 
magical weapon and a scale from a 
dragon. 


Know Value (Divination) 


Range: 10 yards 
Components: V, M 
Duration: Instantaneous 
Casting Time: 3 

Area of Effect: 10-foot cube 
Saving Throw: None 


Know value enables the caster to 
know the total value of all coins, gems, 
and jewelry within the area of effect, 
within the limits that follow. 


The items must be clearly visible. 
They cannot be concealed on people, 
hidden in a chest, or buried in the 
ground. The items must also be con- 
tained within an area no larger than a 
10-foot cube, and this area can be no 
farther than 10 yards from the caster. 

Further, know value will only reveal 
the value of 75% of the total number of 
objects in a treasure pile, up to a maxi- 
mum of 10 pieces; the DM determines 
which pieces the spell affects, and the 
caster does not know which particular 
pieces have been appraised. The spell 
does not detect the presence or value of 
magical items, and it ignores the value 
of personal property, such as clothing, 
weapons, and other equipment. Know 
value does not reveal the number or na- 
ture of any type of hidden objects. 

The material components for this 
spell are a copper piece and a phony 
gem. 


Mordenkainen’s Private 
Sanctum (Alteration, Abjuration) 


Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Duration: 1 hour/level 
Casting Time: 2 turns 
Area of Effect: One room 
Saving Throw: None 


With this spell, privacy is ensured in 
a room of up to 1600 square feet (40 feet 
x 40 feet, or the equivalent). From the 
outside, the windows of the room ap- 
pear to be dark and cloudy, preventing 
those with normal vision, infravision, 
or any other type of vision from seeing 
inside. Those inside the room can see 
out the windows as they normally 
would. No sounds of any kind can es- 
cape from the room. Scrying attempts, 
such as ESP. clairaudience, clairvoy- 
ance, and crystal balls cannot penetrate 
the room, and a wizard eye cannot en- 
ter. The caster can leave the room with- 
out affecting the spell. 


103 


The material components for this 
spell are a thin sheet of lead, a piece of 
opaque glass, a wad of cotton or cloth, 
and a pinch of powdered chrysolite. 


Mummy Rot (Necromancy) 


Range: Touch 
Components: V, S, M 
Duration: 1 round/level 
Casting Time: 5 

Area of Effect: One victim 
Saving Throw: Special 


This spell allows the caster to attack 
with a rotting touch similar to that of a 
mummy. If the caster touches a human, 
demihuman, or humanoid victim, the 
victim immediately loses 2-12 (2d6) hit 
points and is infected with a rotting dis- 
ease which is fatal in 1-6 months. For 
each month the rot progresses, the vic- 
tim permanently loses 2 points of Cha- 
risma. While infected, the victim 
recovers lost hit points at 10 percent of 
his normal rate. 

The rotting disease can be cured only 
with a cure disease spell; cure wounds 
has no effect. A regenerate spell will re- 
store damage but will not otherwise af- 
fect the course of the disease. If a victim 
makes a successful saving throw, he is 
not infected, but he still suffers 2-12 hit 
points of damage. 

The material components for this 
spell are a piece of rotten fruit and a 
piece of a mummy's cloth wrapping. 
OTON 


Rary’s Telepathic Bond 


(Divination, Alteration) 


Range: 20 yards 

Components: V, S, M 

Duration: 2 turns per level 

Casting Time: 1 round 

Area of Effect: Two or more creatures 
Saving Throw: None 


With this spell, the caster forms a tel- 
epathic bond between two or more 
creatures with Intelligence of 6 or 
higher. The bond can be established 
only between willing creatures who are 
within 20 yards of each other. The crea- 
tures need not speak the same language 
to communicate via the bond. The 
bond can be placed upon one creature 
for every three levels of the caster; 
therefore, a 9th-level caster can forge a 
bond among three creatures. The 
bonded creatures can remain in mental 
contact as long as they remain on the 
same plane of existence. If either crea- 
ture enters a different plane, the spell is 
terminated. 

Rary's telepathic bond can be cast 
only once to affect a single pair of sub- 
jects. However, if the caster is able to 
cast the spell twice, the same subjects 
can be affected again. Example: A wiz- 
ard can cast telepathic bond twice. The 
first casting links Subject A to Subject 
B. The second casting can affect Subject 
A again, linking him with Subject C. 

The material components for this 
spell are two pieces of eggshell; the 
pieces must be from the eggs of two dif- 


Throbbing Bones (Necromancy) 


Range: 10 yards 
Components: V, M 
Duration: 1 round/level 
Casting Time: 3 

Area of Effect: One creature 
Saving Throw: 1/2 


This spell causes the bones of the af- 
fected creature to throb and pulsate in- 
side his body. The spell can be cast upon 
any single living creature or person 
within the caster’s range, providing the 
creature has a physical form and has 
bones inside its body; for instance, 
throbbing bones will not affect insects, 
ghosts, or worms. 

For the duration of the spell, the af- 
fected creature's AC is worsened by 2, 
its movement rate is halved, and all its 
attacks are made with a —2 penalty. 
Additionally, it suffers 1-4 hit points of 
damage per round; this damage is 
halved if the creature makes a success- 
ful saving throw. However, a successful 
saving throw has no affect on the move- 
ment, attack, and AC penalties. 

The material components for this 
spell are both pieces of a small bone that 
has been snapped in half. 


Wall of Bones (Conjuration, 
Necromancy) 


Range: 60 yards 

Components: V, S, M 

Duration: 1 turn 

Casting Time: 1 round 

Area of Effect: 10-foot square/level; 
6-inch thickness/level 

Saving Throw: None 


This spell causes a wall of bones to 
erupt from the earth in whatever shape 
the caster desires within the limits of the 
area of effect. The wall is a random con- 
struction of bones from many types of 
creatures. The wall need not be verti- 
cal, but it must rest upon a firm founda- 


104 


tion or it will collapse. Since the wall 
has many small openings and gaps, it 
provides only 50 percent cover. Missiles 
can easily be fired from behind the wall, 
and creatures of small size (less than 4 
feet tall) can wriggle through openings 
in the wall at the rate of 10 feet per 
round. However, the wall has many 
sharp edges and creatures wriggling 
through it suffer 1-8 hit points of dam- 
age per 10 feet traveled. 

If the spell is cast in an area occupied 
by creatures, the wall of bones appears 
everywhere except where the creatures 
stand. Creatures in the affected area 
suffer an immediate 2-16 (2d8) hit 
points of damage when the wall ap- 
pears. The wall can be smashed by crea- 
tures wielding blunt weapons with a 
Strength of 18 or greater. Every 10 hit 
points of damage causes a 5 foot x 5 
foot x 6 inch section of the wall to col- 
lapse. The wall of bones is unaffected 
by animate dead. 

The material component for this spell 
is the branch of a withered tree taken 
from a cemetery. 


Sixth-Level Spells 


Blackmantle (Necromancy, 
Enchantment) 


Range: 60 yards 
Components: V, S, M 
Duration: 1 turn/level 
Casting Time: 1 round 

Area of Effect: 15-foot radius 
Saving Throw: Neg. 


Blackmantle creates a shimmering 
aura around all creatures within the af- 
fected area that negates all healing and 
regeneration, both natural and magi- 
cal, For instance, a potion of healing 
has no effect on a creature under the in- 
fluence of blackmantle, a troll cannot 
regenerate lost hit points, and cure light 
wounds is useless. 


Blackmantle is negated for any target 
creatures who make successful saving 
throws. Otherwise, it persists for 1 turn 
per level of the caster. If the creatures 
are still alive at the end of the spell’s du- 
ration, any active curative forces will 
operate normally; for instance, a ring 
of regeneration will resume its func- 
tion. However, consuming a potion of 
healing or applying a staff of curing 
while blackmantle is in effect will have 
no affect when blackmanitle wears off, 
since these types of magic work in- 
stantly. In such cases, the dose of potion 
of healing and the charge from a staff of 
curing are not only wasted, but the aura 
generated by blackmantle actually ne- 
gates the potion of healing or the staff 
of curing, rendering it useless. If a po- 
tion of healing or staff of healing is ap- 
plied after the spell wears off, the 
healing magic works normally. 

The material component for this spell 
is a small mummified animal, such as a 
mouse or a toad. 


Dead Man’s Eyes (Necromancy) 


Range: Special 
Components: S, M 
Duration: 1 round/level 
Casting Time: 1 round 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: Special 


Dead Man's Eyes causes the whites of 
the caster’s eyes to turn black and his 
pupils to reshape themselves into small 
white skulls. The caster can affect one 
victim per round, providing the victim 
is within 3 feet of the caster and meets 
his gaze. Victims are affected as fol- 
lows: 

e Victims with 2 Hit Dice or fewer 
(or victims of level 2 or lower) instantly 
die. No saving throw is allowed. 

è Victims with 2+ to 5 Hit Dice (or 
victims of level 3-5) instantly die unless 
they save vs. death magic at a —2 pen- 


alty. Those who succeed in their saving 
throws suffer 2-12 (2d6) hit points. 

è Victims with 5+ Hit Dice or more 
(or victims of level 6 or greater) suffer 2- 
12 (2d6) hit points of damage unless 
they save vs. death magic. 

If the caster’s gaze is reflected back on 
him (by a mirror, calm water, etc.), he 
must make a saving throw vs. spells or 
suffer the same effects as a5+ Hit Dice 
victim. At the end of the spell’s dura- 
tion, there is a 5 percent chance that the 
caster will become blind for the next 5- 
10 (1d6 + 4 hours). 

The material components for this 
spell are two eyeball-sized glass mar- 
bles. The marbles must be the same 
color as the caster’s eyes. 


Dragon Scales (Abjuration) 


Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M 
Duration: 1 turn/level 
Casting Time: 1 round 
Area of Effect: One creature 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell causes the body of the 
caster (or any single person or creature 
touched by the caster) to become com- 
pletely covered with dragon scales, ef- 
fectively raising the subject's Armor 
Class by 2 for the duration of the spell; 
this modification is in addition to the 
subject's normal AC (for instance, if the 
subject's AC is 6, dragon scales raises it 
to 4). 

The color of the dragon scales is the 
same as that of the scale used as the 
spell’s material component; however, 
the color has no bearing on the effect of 
the spell. Dragon scales also temporar- 
ily reduces the subject's Charisma by 2 
points. 

The material component of a spell is 
a scale from any dragon. 


105 


invulnerability to Magical 
Weapons (Abjuration) 


Range: 0 

Components: V, M 
Duration: 1 round/level 
Casting Time: 3 

Area of Effect: 5-foot radius 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell creates an immobile, 
faintly shimmering magical sphere 
around the caster that cannot be pene- 
trated by magical blunt, edged, or mis- 
sile weapons; all such weapons are 
harmlessly deflected (missile weapons 
strike the sphere, then immediately fall 
to the ground). However, the sphere 
offers no protection against magically- 
created creatures (such as golems) or 
from creatures whose attacks are mag- 
ically based (such as the gaze of a me- 
dusa). The sphere offers no protection 
against spells such as magic missile, or 
spells that simulate the effects of weap- 
ons. 

The caster can use magical weapons 
from inside the sphere to attack oppo- 
nents normally. Spells can also be cast 
through the sphere. The sphere can be 
negated by dispel magic. 

The material component for this spell 
is a piece of a broken magical weapon. 


Tentacles (Conjuration, Alteration) 


Range: 0 

Components: V, M 
Duration: 1 turn/level 
Casting Time: 1 round 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


By means of this spell, the caster 
causes two 10-foot-long greenish tenta- 
cles to grow from his body. One tenta- 
cle grows on each side of the caster's 
body, centered between his armpit and 
his thigh. The caster can use the tenta- 


cles as normal appendages to grasp 
tools, use weapons, or help with climb- 
ing. 

Each tentacle can make an attack, ef- 
fectively giving the caster two extra at- 
tacks per round; a tentacle can strike to 
inflict 1-6 hit points of damage, or it can 
wield a sword, dagger, or other weapon 
(at the same ability of the caster). The 
flexible tentacles can easily reach vic- 
tims on any side of the caster’s body. 

If an unarmed tentacle makes a suc- 
cessful strike against a victim who is 
man-sized or smaller (less than 7 feet 
tall), it also grabs and holds the victim 
to inflict an automatic 2-8 (2d4) hit 
points of damage in every subsequent 
round. To free himself, the victim must 
sever the tentacle; there is no way to 
loosen the grip other than severing the 
member, killing the caster, or negating 
the spell with dispel magic. A tentacle is 
severed if it takes 10 hit points of dam- 
age; damage directed at the tentacle has 
no adverse effects on the caster. 

A caster with two intact tentacles 
adds a 40 percent bonus modifier to his 
climbing success rate (see page 122 of 
the Players Handbook,) and adds a 20 
percent modifier if he has only one in- 
tact tentacle. 

The material component for this spell 
is a dried tentacle from a small octopus. 


Seventh-Level Spell 
Zombie Double (Necromancy) 


Range: 0 
Components: V, S, M 
Duration; 1 turn/level 
Casting Time: 1 turn 
Area of Effect: Special 
Saving Throw: None 


This spell creates a ju-ju zombie dupli- 
cate of the caster. The zombie double has 
the same memories, consciousness, and 
alignment as the caster; essentially, the 


caster now exists in two bodies simulta- 
neously. In all other respects, the zombie 
double is the same as a normal ju-ju 
zombie (AC 6; MV 9; HD 3 +12; #AT 1; 
Dmg 3-12; SA strike as a 6 HD monster; 
SD immune to all mind-affecting spells, 
including illusions; immune to sleep, 
charm, hold, death magic, magic mis- 
siles, electricity, poisons, and cold-based 
spells; edged and cleaving weapons in- 
flict normal damage while blunt and 
piercing weapons inflict half- damage; 
magical and normal fire inflicts half- 
damage); THACO 16. 

The zombie double cannot cast 
spells, but it can use any weapons that 
the caster can use. It is also able to 
climb walls as a thief (92 percent). The 
zombie double can be turned as a spec- 
tre. If it strays more than 30 yards from 
the caster, the zombie double becomes 
inactive and collapses to the ground; it 
becomes active again the instant the 
caster moves within 30 yards. 

The material components for this 
spell are a bit of wax from a black can- 
dle and a lock of hair from the caster. 


Eighth-Level Spells 
Defoliate (Necromancy) 


Range: 30 yards 

Components: S, M 

Duration: Special 

Casting Time: 1 round 

Area of Effect: 50-foot square/level 
Saving Throw: None 


By means of this spell, the caster 
causes all vegetation within the affected 
area to wither and die, crumbling into 
black ashes. All vegetation is affected, 
from the tallest tree to the tiniest blade 
of grass. Intelligent plant life, such as 
treants, are also destroyed. The power 
of a wish or its equivalent is required to 
restore the destroyed vegetation; other- 
wise, nothing can grow in the defoli- 


106 


ated area for a full year. Note that since 
defoliate causes plants to crumble to 
ash, there is no danger of a creature be- 
ing struck by a toppling tree; however, 
creatures hiding in trees will find them- 
selves plummeting to the ground when 
this spell is cast. 

The material components for this 
spell are the petal from a withered 
flower and a sliver of charred wood. 


Fear Ward (Abjuration) 


Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Duration: 1 turn/level 
Casting Time: 1 round 
Area of Effect: 5 foot radius 
Saving Throw: None 


Fear ward creates an aura around the 
caster that makes him immune to all 
forms of fear, including that caused by 
dragons. Additionally, fear ward pro- 
tects the caster from attacks by all 
forms of undead; the spell is equally ef- 
fective against physical and magical at- 
tacks. Dispel magic has no effect on fear 
ward, but a wish will negate it. 

The material components for this 
spell are the fangs of a spider and a hair 
from the head of a ghoul. 


Shadow Form (Necromancy) 


Range: 0 

Components: V, S, M 
Duration: 1 round/level 
Casting Time: 1 round 
Area of Effect: The caster 
Saving Throw: None 


By means of this spell, the caster tem- 
porarily changes himself into a 
shadow. The caster gains the move- 
ment rate, Armor Class, hit dice, and 
all abilities of a shadow. His chilling 
touch (requiring a normal attack roll) 
inflicts 2-5 (1d4+1) hit points of dam- 


age on his victims as well as draining 
one point of Strength. Lost Strength re- 
turns in 2-8 (2d4) turns after being 
touched. If a human or demihuman vic- 
tim is reduced to O hit points or 0 
Strength by the caster in shadow form, 
the victim has lost all of his life force 
and is immediately drawn into the Neg- 
ative Material Plane where he will for- 
ever after exist as a shadow. 


All of the caster’s weapons and 
equipment stay with him, but he is un- 
able to use them while in shadow form. 
He is also unable to cast spells while in 
shadow form, but he is immune to 
sleep, charm, and hold spells, and is un- 
affected by cold-based attacks. He is 90 
percent undetectable in all but the 
brightest of surroundings. Unlike nor- 
mal shadows, a wizard in shadow form 


107 


cannot be turned by priests. 

At the end of the spell’s duration, 
there is a 5% chance that the caster will 
permanently remain as a shadow. 
Nothing short of a wish can return the 
caster to his normal form. 

The material components for this 
spell are the shroud from a corpse at 
least 100 years old and a black glass 
marble. 


Chapter 9: Wizardly Lists 


This chapter contains a potpourri of 
ideas, items, and rule variations that 
can be incorporated into existing cam- 
paigns or used as springboards for new 
adventures. 


Twenty-five Helpful 
Familiars 


As explained in the 1st-level find fa- 
miliar spell, summoned familiars are 
not restricted to the choices listed in the 
spell description. To expand the num- 
ber of possibilities, substitute Table 17 
below for the list on page 134 of the PH. 
If the find familiar spell is successful, 
the DM rolls percentile dice and con- 
sults this table to determine the results. 

All details of the spell still apply as 
stated; if the roll indicates a creature 
not commonly found in the immediate 
area, the DM can roll again or simply 
choose a more appropriate creature 
from the list. The DM can also substi- 
tute different small animals suitable to 
the area; for instance, the DM might 
substitute a duck for a crow, a mink for 
a raccoon, or a bluebird for a raven. (In 
general, summoned creatures should 
have 1-4 hit points and, if able to make 
attacks, should be able to inflict no 
more than 1 or 2 hit points of damage 
per round. Armor Classes for creatures 
of this size range from 6-8.) 


Table 17: Summoned Familiars 


d100 Roll Familiar 


1-3 Bat 

4-10 Cat 
11-14 Chipmunk 
15-18 Crow 
19-22 Dog 
23-24 Fox 
25-26 Gull 
27-30 Hawk 
31-33 Hare 
34-37 Lizard 
38-40 Monkey 


41-42 Mouse 
43-44 Otter 
45-46 Owl 

47-48 Parrot 
49-50 Raccoon 
51-52 Rat 

53-54 Rooster 
55-57 Raven 
58-59 Skunk 
60-61 Snake 
62-63 Squirrel 
64-66 Toad 
67-70 Weasel 
71-74 Wolverine 
75-00 No familiar 


available within 
spell range 


SHSSSSSSHSSSSSHSSSSSSSSSHSSSSSSSss 


Five Unusual Sources For 
Spells 


When a wizard learns a new spell, he 
usually acquires it from a teacher, a dis- 
covered spell book, another wizard, or 
his own research. But there are many 
more ways to learn new spells—some 
of the more unusual possibilities are 
listed below (in all cases, the wizard 
must successfully learn a new spell once 
it is revealed to him). 


Most dragons are masters of magic. 
A friendly dragon might teach a wizard 
a new spell as a reward for helping him 
or as a bribe to leave him alone. 

The DM should note that the magic 
of dragons is significantly different 
from the magic normally wielded by 
wizards, so it is unlikely that a wizard 
could learn to cast a spell in the same 
manner as a dragon; however, a dragon 
of exceptional intelligence might know 
the formula for a spell useable by hu- 
mans (or know where to find it) and re- 
veal the information to a wizard. 


108 


2. Monuments 


Ancient obelisks, monoliths, and 
other structures are occasionally in- 
scribed with the formulas of spells. Lo- 
cating such a monument can be an 
adventure in itself. For instance, a wiz- 
ard who died thousands of years ago 
may be entombed in a pyramid in the 
heart of an unexplored jungle; prior to 
his death, the wizard inscribed the for- 
mulas of his spells on the walls of his 
tomb so he could have access to them in 
the afterlife. 


3. Other Planes 


The alternate planes of existence are 
filled with an unending variety of weird 
phenomena, strange landmarks, and 
bizarre entities. A wizard might find a 
magic formula spelled out in giant 
runes stretched across an entire plane of 
the Abyss. Or he might stumble across 
a horde of ape-like creatures in the 
plane of Elysium chanting the formula 
of a spell. The inhabitants of the ele- 
mental plane of Fire might know the se- 
crets of a variety of fire-related spells, 
while the occupants of the elemental 
plane of Earth might be willing to share 
the formulas for earth-related spells in 
exchange for a favor. 


4. Summoned Creatures 


A creature summoned as a result of 
invisible stalker, monster summoning, 
or a similar spell might negotiate for his 
freedom by offering to teach the caster 
a spell or show him where to find a spell 
formula. If the summoned creature is 
exceptionally knowledgeable, it might 
be able to dictate a formula to the wiz- 
ard; it might even be able to cause a 
spell formula to magically appear in his 
spell book (in which case, the wizard 
has his normal chance to learn it; if he 
fails, the spell formula disappears). 


Wizardly Lists 


5. Gems, Crystals, and Mirrors 


Magic-using creatures from other 
planes of existence sometimes use gems, 
crystals, or mirrors as substitutes for 
spell books to record the formulas of 
their spells. Although wizards from the 
prime material plane are ordinarily un- 
able to use such items to record their 
own spells, a DM might allow that a 
wizard could stumble across such a gem 
or mirror; if the wizard studied the 
item, a cloud of mist might materialize 
inside it, containing the symbols of a 
spell formula. 


SHFSSHSHSHHSSHSHSHSSHSSSISHHHSSHSS 


Nine Magical Items That 
Have Not Yet Been 
Invented 


If your wizard is interested in re- 
searching new magical items and is 
looking for an unusual project, he 
might consider one of the choices listed 
below. All of these items have been pro- 
posed by wizards over the years, but 
none has yet been successfully re- 
searched. The DM and the player must 
establish the exact effects for these 
items as well as the details of the re- 
search. Keep in mind that if the research 
was easy, some other wizard would 
surely have completed it by now. 


1. Seeds of Wealth 


These are seeds that grow trees that 
bear gems instead of fruit. 


2. Portable Bridge 


This is a bridge that can be folded up 
and carried in a pocket. When un- 
folded, the bridge can span a river or 
chasm without the use of pillars or 
other supports. The portable bridge is 
as strong as a bridge made of stone. 


3. lron Heart 


This is a mechanical heart capable of 
replacing a damaged or aging human 
heart. No surgery is required; the me- 
chanical heart is merely placed on the 
recipient's chest and it is absorbed into 
his body. Presumably, the mechanical 
heart would increase the owner's endur- 
ance and resistance to disease. 


4. Paper of Writing 


Any words that the user speaks or 
thinks will magically appear in writing 
on this paper. 


5. Scope of Seeing 


This is a portable viewing scope with 
unlimited range. No physical barriers 
block the view of a person using the 
scope of seeing, The scope enables the 
user to observe the details of the sun, 
the moon, and distant worlds. It also al- 
lows the user to see completely through 
the earth to observe locations on the 
opposite side. 


6. Liquid Iron 


When kept inside a container, this 
substance remains liquid. When poured 
from the container, the liquid turns to 
iron. Before the iron hardens, it can be 
formed into any number of useful 
items. 


7. Cold Fire 


This type of fire looks the same as 
normal fire, but it generates no heat. 
Cold fire would be useful for torches in 
cramped quarters, and also would be a 
safe light source for homes, since there 
would be no danger of accidental fires. 


109 


8. Dark Fire 


The antithesis of cold fire, dark fire 
generates heat the same as normal fire, 
but it produces no light. With flames as 
black as shadows, dark fire would be 
useful in making campfires for soldiers 
or other travelers who did not wish 
their location to be revealed by bright 
flames. 


9. Mirror of Recall 


Staring into this device enables the 
user to recall with precise detail any 
book he has read or any sight or con- 
versation he has ever experienced. 


§SSSHHHHSSSSSHHSHSSHSSSSSHSSHISSSS 


Five Debilitating 
Afflictions 


Following are several afflictions that 
affect only wizards. These afflictions 
can occur as a result of a curse, a side- 
effect of magical research, or a penalty 
from a wish. Assume that an affliction 
can strike at any time—short of a wish, 
there is no way a wizard can inoculate 
himself to prevent the onset of these af- 
flictions. 

Unlike some organic diseases, suffer- 
ing from one of these afflictions does 
not render a caster immune to future 
bouts with one of these conditions. A 
spell caster who survives one of these 
diseases is equally as likely to suffer the 
disease again in the future as a caster 
who has never contracted the disease. 

The DM can use these afflictions to 
temporarily handicap a powerful PC 
wizard or to liven up a dreary stretch of 
a campaign. Unless indicated other- 
wise, all afflictions can be cured by cure 
disease or a similar spell. Unless the DM 
decides that a particular affliction was a 
result of a magical attack or effect, dis- 
pel magic will not help. 


Wizardly Lists 


1. Bertrek’s Amnesia 


Description: The wizard afflicted 
with Bertrek’s Amnesia has trouble re- 
membering all of the details of his mem- 
orized spells. Just as he attempts to cast 
the spell, he suddenly forgets a crucial 
element of its formula, and the spell 
fails to work. 

The onset of Bertrek’s Amnesia is 
usually preceded by a day or two of 
mild headaches. The mild headaches 
persist as long as the wizard is afflicted 
with this condition. 

Susceptibility: Bertrek’s Amnesia can 
strike any wizard, but it seems to affect 
wizards with Intelligence scores of 14 or 
less. 

Prognosis: A full day of bed rest usu- 
ally cures this condition, presuming the 
wizard refrains from casting spells, 
studying texts, or engaging in other 
strenuous mental activities. Without 
rest, the affliction can persist indefi- 
nitely. 

DM’‘s Notes: When a wizard is af- 
flicted with Bertrek’s Amnesia, he must 
make an Intelligence Check when at- 
tempting to cast a spell. If the check is 
successful, the spell is cast normally. If 
he fails the check, the spell is lost in a 
fizzle of useless energy and is wiped 
clean from the memory of the caster un- 
til it can be rememorized. 

After every full day of rest, the DM 
rolls 1d20 to see if the wizard is cured; if 
the roll is less than or equal to the wiz- 
ard's Intelligence score, the wizard is 
cured. Otherwise, the wizard is auto- 
matically cured after he has been af- 
flicted for 2-8 (2d4) days. 


2. Chronic Incandescence 


Description: The wizard afflicted 
with chronic incandescence continually 
radiates light from his body. The glow 
is bright enough to penetrate any thick- 
ness of clothing and extends to a radius 


of 20 feet. The glow persists regardless 
of whether the wizard is resting, casting 
spells, or performing other actions. 

The onset of chronic incandescence is 
usually preceded by a day or two of 
sporadic glowing, particularly while 
the wizard is asleep. 

Susceptibility: Chronic incandes- 
cence can strike any wizard. 

Prognosis: Darkness cast on the af- 
flicted wizard sometimes cancels this 
condition. Dispel magic has also been 
known to work. Otherwise, the afflic- 
tion usually passes within a few days. 

DM’s Notes: A wizard with this af- 
fliction glows as if affected by a 1st- 
level light spell. This does not affect his 
ability to cast spells, but he will find it 
difficult to hide from enemies. 

Cure disease and similar spells have 
no effect on chronic incandescence. If 
darkness, 15' radius is cast on the af- 
flicted wizard, he can make a save vs. 
magic; if he fails the check, his condi- 
tion is negated. Likewise, if he fails a 
check against dispel magic, his condi- 
tion is cancelled. These spells can only 
be attempted once each on an afflicted 
wizard. The afflicted wizard cannot 
cast these spells on himself. If these 
spells are unavailable, or if he success- 
fully saves in both cases, the condition 
disappears in 1-4 days. 


3. Conjuritis 


Description: A wizard afflicted with 
conjuritis produces bizarre and unex- 
pected effects when attempting to cast 
any conjuration or summoning spell. 
Usually, there is no warning of the onset 
of this affliction. 

Susceptibility: Conjurers are the 
most likely wizards to be affected, but 
any wizard who knows one or more 
conjuration/summoning spells can be 
stricken with conjuritis. 

Prognosis: Conjuritis is difficult to 
treat. Dispel magic has no effect on con- 


110 


juritis, nor does cure disease or similar 
spells. Fortunately, conjuritis eventu- 
ally clears up after running its course. 

DM's Notes: When a wizard afflicted 
with conjuritis attempts to cast any 
conjuration/summoning spell, the DM 
rolls 1d20 and consults Table 18 for the 
result of the spell. 


Table 18: Conjuritis Results 


Result of 
d20 Roll Conj./Summ. Spell 
1 The immediate area is filled with the 

sounds of thunder, while lightning 
flashes overhead. The thunder and 
lightning persist for 1-4 rounds, but 
have no effects on the characters or 
their abilities. 


2 A plush toy animal 10-40 feet high 
appears in an area in front of the 
caster. The toy animal can be a rab- 
bit, a dragon, a cow, or any crea- 
ture of the DM's choice. The toy 
animal crumbles to dust immedi- 
ately if it is touched or disturbed in 
any way. 


3 Dozens of mushrooms of various 
sizes suddenly pop up everywhere 
within a 10-40 foot radius of the 
caster (this occurs even if the caster 
is indoors). Each mushroom has an 
image of the caster’s smiling face on 
its cap. As soon as any of the mush- 
rooms are touched, all of them 
crumble into dust. 


4 The area within a 10-40 foot radius 
of the caster fills with multi-colored 
soap bubbles. On the side of each 
bubble is an image of the caster’s 
smiling face. 


5 Thetemperature within a 10-40 foot 
radius of the caster suddenly rises or 
drops (DM's choice) 20 degrees 
Fahrenheit. The change persists for 


1-4 rounds, then the area reverts to 
its previous temperature. 


6 The immediate area fills with the 
sounds of human shrieks and 
screams. There is no apparent 
source of the sounds. The screams 
persist for 1-4 rounds, then fade 
away. 


7 The casters flesh turns purple (or 
green or blue or any other color or 
combination of the DM's choice). 
The effect persists for 1-4 rounds, 
then the caster's flesh reverts to its 
normal color. 


8 The area within a 50-foot radius of 
the caster is filled with a thin mist, 
light green in color (or light purple 
or light orange, or any other color 
of the DM's choice). The mist smells 


of cinnamon (or mint or rotten fish 
or any other aroma of the DM's 
choice), The mist dissipates in 1-4 
rounds. 


9 The area within a 50-foot radius of 
the caster abruptly turns pitch 
black, as if it were affected by a 
darkness spell. If the area was al- 
ready dark, it abruptly becomes 
bright, as if affected by a light spell. 
This effect persists for 1-4 rounds. 


10 An image of whatever the caster 
was attempting to conjure appears 
10 feet in front of the caster, hovers 
in mid-air for a few seconds, then 
disappears. If the caster was at- 
tempting a spell that did not con- 
jure or summon an item or 
creature, the hovering image is of 
the caster. 


11-20 The caster’s spell works nor- 
mally. 


A wizard probably will not know 
that he has conjuritis until he first expe- 
riences an unexpected result from a 
conjuration/summoning spell; that is, 
when he first receives one of the results 
numbered 1-10 on Table 18. After he ex- 
periences this first unexpected result, 
there are two ways he can be cured. 

1. As soon as the wizard casts two 
consecutive conjuration/summoning 
spells with normal results (that is, the 
DM rolls 11-20 on Table 18), he is cured 
of the affliction. 

2. As soon the wizard casts four nor- 
mal conjuration/summoning spells (a 
result of 11-20 on Table 18), he is cured 
of the affliction; these spells need not be 
consecutive. 


4. Barlow’s Blacksickness 


Description: An extremely danger- 
ous disease, blacksickness causes the af- 
flicted wizard to weaken every time he 
attempts to cast a necromancy spell. In 
extreme cases, afflicted wizards have 
died from this disease. The affliction is 
accompanied by stomach cramps, 
blurred vision, and nightmares. Its on- 
set is usually preceded by several days 
of nausea. 

Susceptibility: Barlow's blacksick- 
ness primarily affects necromancers. It 
can also strike any wizard who knows 
and uses necromancy spells. 

Prognosis: This is a difficult afflic- 
tion to treat. Strangely, the very act of 
casting the spells associated with the 
disease also seems to help cure it. Oth- 
erwise, the affliction can linger any- 
where from a few days to several 
weeks. 

DM‘s Notes: A wizard afflicted with 
blacksickness risks suffering damage 
whenever he casts a necromancy spell. 
When an afflicted wizard casts a necro- 
mancy spell, he must make a Constitu- 
tion Check, with the level of the spell 
used as a negative modifier. (For in- 


stance, if the wizard has a Constitution 
of 13 and casts a 4th-level necromancy 
spell, he adds 4 to his 1d20 roll when he 
makes his Constitution Check.) If he 
passes the check, there are no ill effects. 
If he fails the check, he suffers 1-4 hit 
points of damage. Regardless of 
whether he fails his Constitution 
Check, the spell is cast normally. 

There are two additional side-effects 
of blacksickness. 

1. If the afflicted wizard suffers 6-10 
hit points of damage in the same day as 
a result of failing Constitution Checks 
required for casting necromancy spells, 
he will experience wracking nightmares 
when he sleeps that night. Throughout 
the following day, he will experience 
blurred vision and stomach cramps, 
and will make all attack rolls at a —2 
penalty. Cure disease or similar spells 
have no effect on this condition. 

2. If the afflicted wizard suffers 11 or 
more hit points of damage in the same 
day as a result of failing Constitution 
Checks required for casting necro- 
mancy spells, he will immediately col- 
lapse. He will be unable to cast spells, 
engage in combat, or undertake any 
other strenuous activities for the next 
24 hours. (He can still walk without as- 
sistance, but his movement rate is 
halved.) 

Cure disease, dispel magic, and simi- 
lar spells have no effect on blacksick- 
ness. Aside from a wish, there are two 
known cures. 

1. The DM secretly rolls 2d6. This is 
the number of necromancy spells the af- 
flicted wizard must cast in order to 
purge his system of the blacksickness. 
The necromancy spells can be of any 
level; for instance, if the wizard needs 
to cast four spells, they could all be 1st- 
level spells, they could all be 9th-level 
spells, or they could be any combina- 
tion of necromancy spells from any 
level. Each time a necromancy spell is 
cast, the afflicted wizard must still 
make a Constitution Check and suffer 


Wizardly Lists 


the effects as described above. (Obvi- 
ously, the wizard’s health is safer if he 
refrains from casting more than one or 
two necromancy spells in the same 
day.) 

The DM does not reveal to the wiz- 
ard the total number of spells he needs 
to cast to cure himself—instead, the 
DM should tell the wizard that he's 
gradually getting better after he casts 
each necromancy spell. The DM can 
tell the wizard that he is cured after he 
has cast the last required spell, then has 
cast one subsequent necromancy spell 
that gives him no ill effects. 

2. Blacksickness persists for 4-32 
(4d8) days. The DM should determine 
the length of the affliction at its outset, 
but not reveal the information to the 
wizard. If the wizard has not yet cured 
himself, the affliction is over at the end 
of this period. 


5. Immaterialism 


Description: The wizard afflicted 
with immaterialism gradually fades 
away until his body is transparent, 
making him appear as if he were made 
of glass. In this condition, he is unable 
to fight, cast spells, or perform any 
other ordinary actions. The onset of 
immaterialism is preceded by a gradual 
lightening of the victim’s skin color. 

Susceptibility: Immaterialism usually 
strikes illusionists, but any wizard who 
knows or uses illusionist spells can be a 
victim, 

Prognosis: If treated early, immateri- 
alism can usually be cured with cure 
disease or a similar spell. However, the 
condition becomes harder to treat as it 
progresses. Untreated, immaterialism 
can last for several weeks. 

DM’s Notes: Immaterialism pro- 
gresses over three distinct stages, each 
with different symptoms. The affliction 
can be cured at any stage. 

1. In Stage One, the afflicted wizard’s 


skin turns white, as if it had been 
bleached. He suffers a —1 penalty to his 
Charisma, but there are no other ill ef- 
fects. At this stage, immaterialism can 
be cured with cure disease or a similar 
spell; no saving throw is required. Oth- 
erwise, Stage One persists for 2-8 (2d4) 
days. 

2. In Stage Two, the afflicted wizard’s 
skin remains white, but his body has 
the consistency of firm gelatin. He con- 
tinues to suffer the —1 penalty to his 
Charisma. His natural Armor Class is 
also increased to 7. Because of this im- 
proved AC, some afflicted wizards al- 
low their condition to advance to Stage 
Two before attempting a cure. At this 
stage, immaterialism can be cured with 
cure disease, but the afflicted wizard 
must make a saving throw vs. spells; if 
the wizard succeeds in his saving 
throw, he resists cure disease and re- 
mains afflicted with immaterialism. 
Untreated, Stage Two persists for 2-8 
(2d4) days. 

3. In Stage Three, the wizard and all 
of his gear become insubstantial; he ap- 
pears as if he were made of glass, but he 
has no substance. The afflicted wizard 
cannot cast spells, engage in combat, or 
take any other action aside from mov- 
ing and speaking. He has a —4 penalty 
to his Charisma. However, the wizard 
is affected only by magical or special at- 
tacks, including weapons of +1 or bet- 
ter (such attacks are made against the 
wizard’s normal AC), The afflicted wiz- 
ard is able to pass through small holes 
or other narrow openings as long as 
Stage Three persists. At this stage, im- 
materialism cannot be cured with cure 
disease or any other spell short of a 
wish. Stage Three persists for 2-8 (2d4) 
days. 


SHSHSHSHSSSSHSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSS 


112 


Nine Principles of 
Conduct For Academy 
Graduates 


As a condition of graduation in many 
magical academies, a new wizard is ob- 
ligated to promise to uphold the acad- 
emy’s principles of conduct. A 
sampling of these principles are listed 
below. 

Not all academies subscribe to all of 
these principles, while others might in- 
clude principles other than the ones 
given here. Further, these principles pri- 
marily apply to academies who accept 
students of good and lawful align- 
ments; the principles of evil and lawless 
academies will probably be signifi- 
cantly different from these. The DM 
must decide which principles apply to 
specific academies and what 
penalties—if any—might apply to a 
graduate who violates them. 

1. The wizard will operate discreetly. 
He will reveal the secrets of his teach- 
ings to no one. 

2. The wizard will operate within the 
laws of his country. 

3. The wizard will meet all of his ex- 
penses from his own funds. He will not 
accept charity. 

4. The wizard will live in seclusion. 
He will strive to minimize his social 
contact with non-wizards. 

5. The wizard will minimize his con- 
tact with kings, princes, and other 
rulers. 

6. The wizard’s home will include at 
least one room reserved exclusively for 
research and study. 

7. The wizard will be patient. He will 
persevere in the face of adversity. 

8. The wizard will not attempt to cir- 
cumvent accepted magical procedures. 

9. The wizard will strive to add to the 
existing body of magical knowledge 
through original research. 


SHSHSHSHHHHSHSHSHSHSHSHSHSHSSHHSSS 


Six Common Alchemical 
Processes 


While the creation of potions and other 
magical substances often involves a com- 
plex series of laboratory techniques, there 
are a number of basic processes common 
to most experiments. 


1. Calcination 


This is the process of reducing sub- 
stances (usually minerals and metals) to 
ash by first crushing or grinding them 
to powder, then subjecting them to high 
heat. 


2. Sublimation 


This is the process of heating a solid 
substance until it is vaporized, then 
quickly cooling the vapor to return it to 
a solid form. 


3. Distillation 


This is the process of boiling a liquid 
until it turns to vapor, then cooling the 
vapor until it condenses back into a liq- 
uid, thus purifying the liquid. 


4. Absorption/Adsorption 


This is a method for purifying gases 
or liquids by exposing them to charcoal 
particles or other filtering substances; 
the impurities are attracted to the parti- 
cles, thus purifying the gas or liquid. If 
the impurities are actually taken inside 
the particles, then absorption has taken 
place. If the impurities remain on the 
surface of the particles, then adsorption 
has occured. 


5. Flame Test 
This is a method of identifying un- 


known substances by holding them ina 
hot flame. The color of the flame indi- 


cates the nature of the substance; for in- 
stance, a green flame indicates the 
presence of copper. 


6. Chromatography 


This is a simple method for analyzing 
certain types of unknown substances. 
The substance is first dissolved in water 
or other liquid. A sample of the liquid 
then is poured into a glass tube lined 
with filter paper, and a solvent is 
added. Because the components of the 
substance move through the filter at 
different speeds, each will appear as a 
different colored band in the tube. 


SHISSHHSSHSHSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSHSSSS 


Eleven Useful Additions 
to a Wizard’s Laboratory 


A wizard’s laboratory typically in- 
cludes a variety of books, crucibles, 
flasks, jars, tripods, herbs, and even a 
skeleton or two. Following are several 
less common but extremely useful items 
that might be found in an especially 
well-furnished laboratory. The cost of 
each item is given in parentheses. 


1. Granite Table Top 


This is an ordinary desk with a top 
made of polished granite or quartzite to 
resist staining and damage from acids 
and other potent substances. (150 gp) 


2. Glass Mask 
This is a face mask made of glass de- 
signed to protect the wizard from inhal- 


ing poisonous fumes and to protect his 
face from splashed chemicals.(10 gp) 


3. Alchemist’s Globe 


This 3-foot-diameter glass globe sep- 
arates into two sections. When assem- 


113 


bled, the sections form a tight seal that 
prevents air from entering. Items and 
substances can be locked inside the 
globe to isolate them from outside con- 
ditions. Small and large globes are 
available. (150-250 gp) 


4. Athanor 


A small furnace consisting of an oven 
and a deep pan of sifted ashes. Sub- 
stances to be heated are placed in a 
sealed container and covered in ashes 
for slow, even heating. (80 gp) 


5. Descensory Furnace 


This is a medium-sized furnace pri- 
marily used for heating liquids. The liq- 
uid is poured down a funnel on the top 
which runs into a container in the belly 
of the furnace. (100 gp) 


6. Heat Bath 


This is a small furnace holding a deep 
pan of water containing metal rings to 
hold variously sized flasks and tubes. 
The substance to be dissolved is placed 
in a glass tube, which in turn is placed 
in an appropriately-sized ring in the 
pan. The furnace gradually heats the 
water and thus the substance, (75 gp) 


7. Dung Bed 


This item consists of a box made of 
glass or other non-flammable material 
with a tight-fitting lid. The box is filled 
with hot dung or clean, dry sand. 
Treated substances are placed in the 
dung bed to keep them warm. (25 gp) 


8. Analytical Balance 


An extremely precise scale for weigh- 
ing solid materials, the balance is sensi- 
tive enough to distinguish a blank piece 
of paper from a paper with writing on 


Wizardly Lists 


it. To keep it dust-free, the balance is 
covered with a glass case. (400 gp) 


9. Burette 


This is a thick tube with a valve on 
one end used to measure liquids pre- 
cisely. (1 gp) 


10. Filter Paper 


This is a specially treated paper that 
filters solids from liquids. A funnel is 
lined with the paper, then the liquid to 
be filtered is poured in the funnel. Solid 
material will not pass through the pa- 
per. (1 gp/10 sheets) 


11. Hand Centrifuge 


This is a machine consisting of sev- 
eral rings for holding test tubes with a 
hand pump on the top. Test tubes filled 
with liquids are placed in the rings, then 
the wizard rapidly works the pump, 
causing the tubes to spin in a circle. The 
spinning causes the heavier substances 
in the tubes to sink to the bottom, while 
the lighter substances remain near the 
top of the tube. (100 gp) 


SSHSHSHSHSSSSHSSSSHSHSHHSHSSHSSSSSS 


Four Prerequisites For 
Admission to an 
Academy of Magic 


While some wizards are self-taught 
and some acquire their skills from a pri- 
vate tutor, many wizards learn the art 
of magic at a training academy. Most 
large cities have such academies; some 
specializing in a particular school of 
magic, while others offer training in all 
of the schools. Usually, there are a mini- 
mum of three requirements for admis- 
sion to an academy. 


1. Sponsorship 


All applicants to an academy must be 
recommended by a sponsor known by 
one or more of the faculty members. 
Exceptions are made if an applicant is 
an orphan or demonstrates extraordi- 
nary aptitude, but in these cases, a fac- 
ulty member must agree to sponsor the 
applicant; the faculty sponsor is then 
personally held responsible for the ap- 
plicant’s failure or success, 


2. Personal Interview 


Because training a wizard requires a 
major investment of time and effort, 
academies screen their applicants care- 
fully to make certain that a prospective 
student is sufficiently dedicated to per- 
severe through years of rigorous educa- 
tion. Typically, a panel of faculty 
members interviews each applicant in- 
dividually, quizzing him at length about 
his background, his interests, and his 
reasons for wanting to become a wiz- 
ard. The panel then votes in secret; a 
single negative vote results in the rejec- 
tion of the applicant. 


3. Entrance Examination 


Following a prospective student's 
successful interview, he is given a bat- 
tery of examinations to measure his ap- 
titude in a variety of academic areas. 
The student must demonstrate a basic 
competence in philosophy, literature, 
and history, and exceptional skills in 
writing, science, and mathematics. He 
must also pass a physical examination 
to make sure he is in good health. 


4. Tuition Fees 


If a prospective student passes his en- 
trance examinations, he must then 
make arrangements with the academy 
administration to pay tuition fees. The 


114 


tuition fee ranges from 5-20 gp per day, 
depending on the academy's reputa- 
tion. The tuition can be paid daily, 
weekly, or monthly, but it must be paid 
in advance. Failure to pay tuition re- 
sults in immediate suspension, unless 
the student has made previous arrange- 
ments with the administration. 

The tuition covers the cost of books, 
laboratory fees, faculty salaries, and 
room and board, but it does not include 
expenses for spell components, research 
materials, or damage caused by the stu- 
dent in his research. Occasionally, 
scholarships are available for unusually 
promising students. 

After a student is admitted to an 
academy, he must undergo a probation- 
ary period lasting a minimum of six 
months. During this time, the student's 
classroom performance is evaluated on 
a weekly basis and his behavior both on 
and off campus is closely monitored. If 
the student is not performing ade- 
quately in the opinion of any faculty 
member or adminstrator, he may be 
dimissed from the academy. Except in 
the most extreme circumstances, he is 
not eligible to apply for readmission. 
No amount of the tuition paid prior to 
his dismissal is refundable. 


SHSHSHSHSSSHSSSSSSSSHSSSHSSSSSSISS 


Nineteen Courses in a 
Typical Academy 
Curriculum 


The course of study varies from 
academy to academy, but most include 
the classes described below. Usually, all 
of these classes are required to gradu- 
ate, but the DM might decide to vary 
them according to the needs of a spe- 
cific student or the educational philoso- 
phy of a particular faculty. 

The length of time necessary to grad- 
uate also varies from school to school, 
depending on the student's aptitude, the 


1 


\\ 


\\ 


NÑ 


V 


\ 


W \\ i 


intensity of the training, and the quality 
of the faculty, but generally, four to six 
years of full-time study are required to 
graduate from an accredited academy. 
This period can be lengthened by as 
much as two to four additional years if 
the student specializes in a particular 
school. 

A student usually takes four to six 
courses per quarter, with each quarter 
lasting three months. A minor course, 
such as Survey of Literature, might last 
only a single quarter, while a major 
course, such as Spell Tutorial, might be 
taken every quarter until the student 
graduates. An average course lasts one 
to two hours per day, four to six days 
per week. 

The curriculum of a typical academy 
of magic includes the following 
courses. 


1. Physical Training: Various exercises 
and activities to improve physical fit- 
ness, with an emphasis on dexterity 


training for manipulation of spell com- 
ponents. 


2. Philosophy of Magic: The study of 
logical methods of thinking with appli- 
cations to practical problems of spell 
use. Exploration of metaphysics, the- 
ory of knowledge, and ethics. 


3. Basic Astrology: The relationship of 
the stars, planets, and other heavenly 
bodies to magical processes. Topics in- 
clude lunar phases, astral movement, 
and the influence of deities. 


4. Spell Theory: How spells function; 
spell interaction with physical laws. 


5. Fundamentals of Meditation: Basic 
techniques for reaching higher levels of 
intellectual perception. Topics include 
transcendence, self-actualization, and 
dream analysis. 


6. Language Instruction: Grammar, 
phonetics, and conversational idioms 


Sever 


Sel pa 


of human, humanoid, and demihuman 
languages. 


7. History of Magic: Overview of wiz- 
ards and magic throughout the ages 
with an emphasis on historical break- 
throughs in spell research. 


8. Magic and Society: The wizard as 
viewed from a cultural perspective, A 
survey of societal relationships and 
cross- cultural comparisons of wizards 
around the world(s). 


9. Power Thinking: Emphasis on in- 
creasing the student's understanding of 
thinking as a process to increase the 
strength of his cognitive skills. Topics 
include creativity, memory, concentra- 
tion, and problem solving. 


10. Survey of Literature: An introduc- 
tion to the study of magic literature, 
with an emphasis on analysis. A broad 
range of authors from a variety of cul- 
tures and historical periods are exam- 
ined in detail. 


Wizardly Lists 


11. Library Instruction: A survey of re- 
search techniques, including classifica- 
tion systems, spell indexing, basic 
reference books, and assembling a per- 
sonal library. 


12. Fundamentals of Spell Transcrip- 
tion: Topics include penmanship tech- 
niques, paper and ink selection, proper 
structure, revision, basic calligraphy, 
and proofreading. 


13. Principles of Casting: An introduc- 
tion to basic casting techniques of low- 
level spells. Includes component 
theory, spell design, and safety proce- 
dures. Instruction for specific schools 
of magic are available for prospective 
specialists. 


14. Spell Tutorial: An individualized 
course tailored to meet the needs of in- 
dividual students. Students can concen- 
trate on improving skills in specific 
schools of magic or explore techniques 
from all schools. 


15. Spell Seminar: A discussion group 
addressing topics of special interest to 
students, with an emphasis on problem 
areas. Students are expected to conduct 
demonstrations for the group, with 
criticism periods to follow. 


16. Spell Practicum: Addressing low- 
level spells, the practicum provides stu- 
dents with the opportunity to practice 
their skills in both a laboratory setting 
and in the field. Emphasis is on creative 
application. 


17. Formula Analysis: Theory of spell 
formulas, emphasizing techniques ap- 
plicable to original research. Topics in- 
clude elementary spell functions, 
tabular and graphical presentation, 
variability, and metaphysical equa- 
tions. Basic alchemical principles are 
covered in subsequent sessions of this 
course. 


18. Laboratory Techniques: Practical ap- 
plication of the principles covered in For- 


mula Analysis. Topics include herbalism, 
alchemical reactions, natural and unnat- 
ural metabolism, and basic scientific pro- 
cedures (all alchemical processes 


described earlier in this chapter). 


19. Introduction to Ist-Level Magic: 
Ist-level spell instruction. Includes cast- 
ing techniques, practical applications, 
and general theory. Individualized in- 
struction available. 


SHSHSHSSSSHHSSSSSSSSSSSHSSSSSSSSSS 


Nine Organizations For 
Wizards 


Wizards are most comfortable in the 
company of their fellow practitioners, 
especially those with whom they share 
common interests, and often form their 
own associations and organizations. A 
few such groups are listed below. The 
DM is encouraged to design variations 
of these groups; for instance, a Necro- 
mancy Syndicate, a variation of the Di- 
viners Syndicate, might exist in a 
particular DM's campaign world. 

Each organization's description in- 
cludes the following information: 

Description: The purpose of the 
group. 

Membership: The types of wizards 
belonging to the group. 

New Member Requirements: Condi- 
tions a prospective member is expected 
to meet in order to join the group. Usu- 
ally, this consists of paying an entrance 
fee or being sponsored by a current 
member. 

Annual Dues: The fee that a member 
must pay each year to remain an active 
member. 

Benefits: The advantages of being a 
member. 


The Brotherhood of Alchemy 


Description: This group consists of 
wizards whose primary interest is al- 


116 


chemical research, particularly the re- 
search of new magical potions. The 
group compiles and exchanges informa- 
tion about their current projects, with 
the implicit understanding that such in- 
formation will not be shared with out- 
siders. Violation of this rule results in 
immediate expulsion from the Brother- 
hood. 

Membership: The bulk of the mem- 
bers are transmuters, though a few en- 
chanters and invokers are also 
included. 

New Member Requirements: New 
members must pay an entrance fee of 
100 gp and show evidence of original 
magical item research within the last 
year. 

Annual Dues: 20 gp 

Benefits: The Brotherhood can help 
its members obtain hard-to-find re- 
search supplies and laboratory equip- 
ment. They can also offer assistance to 
members who have reached a dead end 
in their research. 


Legal Defense Front 


Description: This group provides le- 
gal defense to wizards unjustly accused 
of criminal activity, Their services in- 
clude legal representation, financial 
support, and personal counseling. 

Membership: Any wizard of lawful 
good alignment can be a member. 

New Member Requirements: A new 
member must be sponsored by a cur- 
rent member and must pay an entrance 
fee of 200 gp. The entrance fee may be 
waived on a majority vote. 

Annual Dues: 50 gp 

Benefits: If a member is accused of a 
crime, the Front will provide 1,000 gp 
or more toward his defense. The Front 
can also provide expert witnesses and 
legal representation if necessary. Their 
counseling service advises members 
about the acceptance of magic-users in 
various cities and cultures, giving spe- 


cial attention to places where magic- 
users are routinely persecuted and im- 
prisoned for minor infractions of the 
law. 


The Silver Swan Club 


Description: Primarily a social orga- 
nization for unmarried wizards, the Sil- 
ver Swan Club holds regular dances, 
picnics, and other social events for its 
members. The highlight of the year is 
the annual Harvest Moon Festival, 
when the club stages an all-night party 
in a rented castle. 

Membership: All wizards are wel- 
come, but the membership comprises 
mainly young, low-level wizards. 

New Member Requirements: A new 
member pays an entrance fee of 20 gp. 

Annual Dues: 5 gp 

Benefits: The club provides its mem- 
bers with excellent opportunities to 
meet potential friends and mates. 


Wizards’ Liberation Society 


Description: This organization seeks 
to further the interests of wizards 
through political pressure on local and 
national governments, Their methods 
include negotiation, demonstrations, 
and one-on-one lobbying. Some fac- 
tions are rumored to use violence to un- 
derscore their messages. 

Membership: All 
eligible. 

New Member Requirements: A new 
member must be sponsored by a cur- 
rent member and pay an entrance fee of 
50 gp. The fee is waived if the prospec- 
tive member has exploitable political 
connections (for instance, if he is re- 
lated to a government official). 

Annual Dues: 10 gp 

Benefits: The Society can exert con- 
siderable influence on governments to 
adopt laws beneficial to wizards. The 
Society can also put its members in con- 


wizards are 


Table 19: Random Generation of Fantastic Materials 


D20 Roll Category A 
1 song 

2 dream 

3 breath 

4 memory 
5 heart's desire 
6 teardrop 
7 strength 
8 smile 

9 blessing 
10 touch 

11 courage 
12 scent 

13 whisper 
14 kiss 

15 shadow 
16 wisdom 
17 secret 

18 sorrow 
19 epitaph 
20 gratitude 


tact with government officials and as- 
sist them in working with government 
bureaucracies. 


Foes of the Wand 


Description: This is an organization 
of purists who adamantly oppose the 
use of magical wands or any other mag- 
ical devices. Such devices are perceived 
to be a threat to the craft of magic; only 
the use of spells is acceptable to the Foes 
of the Wand, If a member is ever caught 
using a magical item, he is immediately 
expelled. 

Membership: All wizards are eligi- 
ble, but the membership is primarily 
composed of older mages of higher 
levels. 

New Member Requirements: The 
only requirement for a prospective 
member is the donation of a magical 
item to the Foes. The Foes then destroy 
the item in a solemn ceremony, after 


Category B 
stone 
flower 
meadow 
child 
butterfly 
mountain 
grain of sand 
snowflake 
flickering candle 
widow 
eagle 
tombstone 
dragon 
skeleton 
mermaid 
river 
unicorn 
goddess 
giant 

city 


which the prospective member vows 
never to use a magical item again. 

Annual Dues: None 

Benefits: Once per year, each mem- 
ber can exchange a magical item for a 
spell of comparable power. The magical 
item is destroyed, then the Foes allow 
the member to copy one spell (of their 
choice, not the member's) from their 
spell books. 


Diviners Syndicate 


Description: More of a business than 
a fraternal organization, the Diviners 
Syndicate sells advice, predictions, and 
omen interpretations to members of the 
aristocracy. Their fees are expensive, 
but because the syndicate pools the tal- 
ents of a sizeable number of skilled wiz- 
ards, their advice and predictions are 
extremely accurate. 

Membership: Only diviners of eighth 
lever or higher are eligible. 


New Member Requirements: The 
prospective member must pay an en- 
trance fee of 500 gp and bring at least 
one new client to the syndicate. 

Annual Dues: There are no annual 
dues. However, to remain in good 
standing, a member must spend a mini- 
mum of eight weeks per year working 
exclusively for the syndicate. 

Benefits: Members in good standing 
split the syndicate’s profits at the end of 
the year. A member's annual share is 
usually 5,000-30,000 (1d6 x 5,000) gp. 


Center for Monster Control 


Description: This organization com- 
piles information about magical mon- 
sters and makes this information 
available to its members at no charge. 

Membership: All wizards who have 
first-hand knowledge of magical mon- 
sters are eligible. 

New Member Requirements: A new 
member must pay an entrance fee of 10 
gp. Additionally, the prospective mem- 
ber must have first-hand knowledge of 
a magical monster or a monster wield- 
ing magical powers (such knowledge is 
usually acquired as a result of a battle), 
The membership votes on whether the 
prospective member's knowledge is of 
sufficient usefulness to the organization 
to allow him membership. 

Annual Dues: None if the member at- 
tends all bi-monthly meetings. The 
member may be assessed a fine if too 
many meetings are missed without 
good reason. 

Benefits: The organization supplies 
information to its members about mag- 
ical monsters, including their abilities, 
their weaknesses, and suggested strate- 
gies for defeating or avoiding them. 


League of Extraplanar 
Travelers 


Description: Similar to the Center for 
Monster Control, this organization 


compiles information about alternate 
planes of existence and makes this in- 
formation available to its members at 
no charge. 

Membership: All wizards who have 
visited one or more alternate planes of 
existence are eligible. 

New Member Requirements: A new 
member must pay an entrance fee of 20 
gp. Additionally, the prospective mem- 
ber must have proof of a visit to at least 
one alternate plane of existence. The 
membership votes on whether the pro- 
spective member's knowledge of that 
plane is of sufficient usefulness to the 
organization to allow him membership. 

Annual Dues: None if the member at- 
tends all bi-monthly meetings. A fine 
may be assessed if a member misses too 
many meetings without good reason. 

Benefits: The organization supplies 
information to its members about the 
alternate planes, including inhabitants, 
physical laws, and how spell casting is 
affected (the DM should consult Chap- 
ter 6 for details about magic in other 
planes—the league has all of this infor- 
mation available to its members). 


Fellowship of Sages 


Description: This is an organization 
of sages who are expert in a wide vari- 
ety of subjects. The sages charge for 
their advice, giving a percentage of 
their fees to the Fellowship for its up- 
keep. 

Membership: All types of wizards be- 
long to the fellowship, each with one or 
more areas of expertise. 

New Member Requirements: A pro- 
spective member must pay an entrance 
fee of 100 gp, plus he must have a non- 
weapon proficiency in one or more of the 
fields of study listed on Table 61 of the 
Dungeon Master's Guide. If the wizard is 
a recognized authority in one of the fields 
of study not available as a nonweapon 
proficiency in the DM's campaign, he can 


still be admitted to the fellowship with 
the DM's permission. 

Annual Dues: None. However, each 
member must provide 15 percent of the 
fees he charges for his sage advice to the 
fellowship, 

Benefits: As long as a member spends 
a minimum of eight weeks per year 
working exclusively for the syndicate, 
he has access to the advice of the other 
members at no charge. If he fails to 
spend the minimum of eight weeks per 
year, he must pay their normal fees. 
Advice is given according to the rules 
for sages on pages 106-107 of the DMG. 
However, the chances listed on Table 61 
(page 107 of the DMG) of finding a sage 
in the fellowship who is expert in a 
given field are doubled; for instance, 
there is a 20 percent chance of finding 
an expert in alchemy. When using the 
Sage Modifiers table (Table 62 of the 
DMG), assume that a fellowship sage 
always has access to a complete library. 


SHSHSHSSHSHSHHSHSSSHHSSHSSSSSHSSHSS 


400 Fantastic Materials 


Occasionally, the DM will need to in- 
troduce a fantastic magical material 
into his campaign, Such a material 
might be required as an ingredient for a 
PC wizard’s magical research (espe- 
cially if the DM is using the fantastical 
approach to magical fabrication de- 
scribed on page 84 of the Dungeon Mas- 
ter's Guide), it might be the focal point 
of a quest, or it might be a necessary 
component to remove a curse. 

If the DM has no specific material in 
mind, he can generate one by rolling 
1d20 two times on Table 19. The first 
die roll selects an element from Cate- 
gory A; the second die roll selects an el- 
ement from Category B. The selected 
elements become part of this phrase: 
“The (Category A) of a (Category B)” 
For instance, if the first die roll is 3 and 


the second die roll is 5, the fantastic ma- 
terial is “the breath of a butterfly.” 

If he desires, the DM can simply pick 
elements from each category to form 
specific materials. He can also substi- 
tute similar elements for the choices in 
Category B. For instance, he might sub- 
stitute “bumblebee” for “butterfly” (so 
the example above becomes “the breath 
of a bumblebee”) or “diamond” for 
“stone.” 

If random rolls produce results that 
seem inappropriate or frivolous (such 
as “the breath of a stone”), the DM can 
roll again for either category or substi- 
tute any category choice he wishes. 

Unless the DM has a specific meaning 
in mind, the players must discover the 
precise meaning of a fantastic material 
or the means to produce or locate it. 
Discovering the meaning of a fantastic 
material can easily become the premise 
for a new adventure. 


SHSSHSEGSHSSHSHSSSSSESSSSSSSSSSSSS 
Five Incredible Locations 


There are a vast number of magical 
places that are rumored to exist 
throughout the world; a few of them 
are listed below. Whether they actually 
exist remains to be discovered (and is 
up to the discretion of the DM), but the 
search for any one of them could be 
used as the basis for an adventure or a 
springboard for a campaign. 


The Island of Ghothar 


This island is the former stronghold 
of the master conjurer Ghothar. Gho- 
thar mysteriously vanished several cen- 
turies ago, and left the bulk of his 
magical treasures secured in a chamber 
in the deepest recesses of his island. Not 
only is the treasure cache rumored to be 
of incomparable value, it is also said to 
include one of Ghothar’s spell books, 


containing the formulas for many high- 
level conjuration spells. 

The Island of Ghothar is enchanted 
to continually drift in random direc- 
tions at speeds up to 25 miles per hour. 
There have been no confirmed sightings 
in over a century, meaning that the is- 
land conceivably could have drifted 
anywhere in the world. 


About the Island 

Refer to Map 1. 

The island resembles a cylinder 
about 50 yards in diameter and about 
165 yards tall. Nearly three-fourths of it 
is submerged, meaning that only about 
35 yards of the island is above sea level. 
The island is made of granite; the gran- 
ite is permanently surrounded with a 
wall of force, making it virtually invul- 
nerable to damage. 

The island is divided into five levels, 
each about 25 yards tall from top to 
bottom (except for Level 1, which cor- 
responds to the surface of the island). 
The floors are solid granite nearly 10 
feet thick, permanently covered with 
wall of force. 

The only passageways between levels 
are the magical portals located at vari- 
ous points on the floors (see map). The 
portals are 5-foot-diameter rings made 
of black and white pearls imbedded in 
the granite. The portals are completely 
airtight. When a creature or person 
touches the granite area inside the ring 
of pearls, the creature or person is in- 
stantly transported to a specific loca- 
tion on the island. The destination of 
each portal is indicated in the Map Key. 


Map Key 


Level 1: This is the surface of the is- 
land, the only portion that is visible 
above sea level. There is a portal on the 
center of the island. Those stepping on 
the portal are instantly transported to a 
random area in Level 2, abruptly find- 
ing themselves underwater. 


119 


Level 2: This level is completely filled 
with sea water. There are two 10-foot- 
diameter openings on either side of this 
level leading to the open sea. Depend- 
ing on where in the world the island 
happens to be, this level could contain 
various forms of dangerous sea life who 
have taken shelter here; such sea life 
might include sharks, giant eels, or gi- 
ant octopi. 

2a. Portal: Those stepping on this 
portal are instantly transported to the 
top of the island (to the area marked 
with an X on the Level 1 map). 

2b. Portal: Those stepping on this 
portal are instantly transported to the 
floor of Level 3 (to the area on the Level 
3 map marked with an X.) 

2c. Portal: Those stepping on this 
portal are instantly transported to the 
floor of Level 4 (to the area on the Level 
4 map marked with an X). 


Level 3: This level is completely filled 
with a noxious yellow gas that smells 
like dead fish. The gas is so dense that 
normal vision is reduced to 10 feet. 
Characters entering this level must save 
vs. poison; those who fail suffer 1-2 hit 
points of damage per round of exposure 
to the gas. 

3a. Portal: Those stepping on this 
portal are instantly transported to a 
random area in Level 2, finding them- 
selves suddenly underwater. 

3b. Portal: Those stepping on this 
portal are instantly transported to the 
top of the island (to the area marked 
with an X on the Level 1 map). 

3c. Portal: Those stepping on this 
portal are instantly transported to the 
floor of Level 4 (to the area on the Level 
4 map marked with an X.) 


Level 4: This level has floor-to-ceiling 
walls of granite that divide the level 
into various sections. The walls are one 
foot thick and are permanently covered 
with wall of force. 

4a, 4b, 4c. Fake Portals: These circles 
of pearls resemble the portals found on 


Wizardly Lists 


other levels of the island, but they are 
not portals. Instead, when any charac- 
ter steps on one of these fake portals, he 
activates a special monster summoning 
III spell. The spell instantly summons 
1d4 3rd-level monsters (selected by the 
DM from his 3rd-level encounter ta- 
bles). The summoned monsters appear 
near the ring’s perimeter and attack ev- 
eryone in sight. If the monsters are 
killed, they disappear; otherwise, they 
fight for 2-8 (2d4) rounds, after which 
time they vanish. There is no effect if 
the monsters step inside one of the fake 
portals. The monsters will avoid the 
real portal (4d). 

4d. Portal: Those stepping on this 
portal are instantly transported to the 
floor of Level 5 (to the area on the Level 
5 map marked with an X.) 


Level 5: This is Ghothar's treasure 
cache. The exact composition of the 
treasure is the decision of the DM, but a 
suggested cache includes a spell book 
with a dozen conjuration/summoning 
spells of various levels, five magical 
items, and an assortment of gold and 
gems worth 20,000 gp. (Rumors 
abound that Ghothar found the secret 
of eternal life and still exists in an alter- 
nate plane of existence; if this is true, 
Ghothar might return someday to re- 
stock his cache with a different assort- 
ment of treasure. He might also change 
the traps in his island, especially if his 
previous treasure has been stolen.) 

Those stepping on the portal on this 
level are instantly transported to the 
top of the island (to the area marked 
with an X on the Level 1 map). 


The Sphere of B’naa 


The Sphere of B’naa is located in a ca- 
vern beneath one of the world’s highest 
peaks. Its precise location is not 
known. The sphere was created eons 
ago by a consort of wizards led by a 
high-level mage named B’naa. The 


sphere supplied transport for the wiz- 
ards to alternate planes of existence. 
Because of the magic involved in cre- 
ating and sustaining the sphere, it is ex- 
tremely difficult to use and virtually 
impossible to use by non-wizards. 


About the Spheres 


Refer to Map 2. 

The sphere is located in an immense 
cavern at the end of a 200 yard long 
passage winding deep inside the earth 
beneath an ancient, towering mountain 
range. The sphere consists of several 
layers (like an onion), each about 20 
feet thick. The layers are separated 
from one another by bands of shimmer- 
ing white light. The portal to the alter- 
nate planes lies in the center of the 
sphere; to get to the portal, a person 
must pass through each layer. 

Once the magical requirement for a 
layer has been met, characters may pass 
through the layer of shimmering light 
to the next layer. If any character passes 
back through a light layer that he has 
already passed through, the magical 
condition must be met again in order to 
re-enter that light layer. Characters 
may pass freely toward the outer 
spheres (for example, from layer 4 to 
layer 3). 

Each layer is permanently enchanted 
with special features representing the 
various levels of wizard magic; for in- 
stance, the first layer of the sphere rep- 
resents ist-level wizard magic, the 
second layer represents 2nd-level wiz- 
ard magic, and so on. If the proper level 
of spell is cast on a layer, its features 
change dramatically; these spells can ei- 
ther be cast on the layer itself or on any 
subject inside the layer. Magical items 
that duplicate the effects of spells do 
nothing to change the features of the 
plane, nor do priest spells. The effects 
are explained in detail in the Map Key. 


120 


Map Key 


Layer 1: This layer is filled with 
brightly blinking lights of all colors. 
Those in contact with this layer must 
save vs. spells or become blinded for 
the next 2-8 (2d4) rounds. If any 1st- 
level wizard spell is cast at the layer or 
at a character inside the layer, the layer 
instantly fills with dancing lights and 
characters no longer risk being blinded. 
The dancing lights persist for one turn, 
after which the layer reverts to its origi- 
nal features. 


Layer 2: This layer is filled with 
greenish-yellow fog that obscures all 
sight, normal and infravision, beyond 
two feet. Those in contact with this 
layer suffer 1-4 hit points of damage per 
round (save for half-damage). If any 
2nd-level wizard spell is cast at the layer 
or at a character inside the layer, the fog 
instantly becomes harmless, similar to 
the fog produced by fog cloud, and 
characters no longer risk suffering dam- 
age. The harmless fog cloud persists for 
one turn, after which the layer reverts 
to its original features. 


Layer 3: This layer is dark and empty, 
but a powerful gust of wind of about 30 
m.p.h. blows from the inner wall to- 
ward the outer wall, rendering man- 
sized creatures unable to proceed to 
Layer 4. If any 3rd-level wizard spell is 
cast at the layer or at a character inside 
the layer, the wind subsides to a gentle 
breeze and characters can proceed nor- 
mally. The gentle breeze persists for one 
turn, after which the strong wind be- 
gins to blow again. 


Layer 4: This layer is filled with roar- 
ing red flames similar to those produced 
by a fire trap. Those in contact with this 
layer must save vs. spells or suffer 5-8 
(1d4 +4) hit points of damage (save for 
half damage). If any 4th-level wizard 
spell is cast at the layer or at a character 
inside the layer, the flames turn green 
and no longer generate heat; characters 


Wizardly Lists 


suffer no damage from the green 
flames. The green flames persist for one 
turn, after which the layer is again filled 
with roaring red flames. 


Layer 5: This layer is solid granite, 
similar to that produced by wall of 
stone. If any 5th-level wizard spell is 
cast at the layer, the granite disappears, 
revealing the bands of shimmering 
white light that border the final layer 
(Layer 6) of the sphere. The granite re- 
appears in one turn, 


Layer 6: This is a 20-foot-diameter hol- 
low sphere containing a structure made 
of shimmering white light. The structure 
rests at ground level (relative to the ca- 
vern that the entire sphere lies within). 
The shimmering structure has four open- 
ings, all leading to a central area contain- 
ing a golden chair. A character can walk 
to the chair through one of the openings, 
sit down, and instantly be transported to 
another plane of existence. 


<a e (Ea Ess 
AT Teh LON 
fo) NST a 


Level 5 


Side View 


(= 
25 Yards 


Opening A: If a character walks 
through this opening, he will be trans- 
ported instantly to the Ethereal planes 
when he sits in the golden chair. He will 
be transported to any specific location 
in the Ethereal planes he has in mind; 
otherwise, he will be transported to a 
random location in the Ethereal planes. 


Opening B: If a character walks 
through this opening, he will be trans- 
ported instantly to the inner planes 
when he sits in the golden chair. He will 
be transported to any specific location 
in the inner planes he has in mind; oth- 
erwise, he will be transported to a ran- 
dom location in a randomly chosen 
inner plane. 


Opening C: If a character walks 
through this opening, he will be trans- 
ported instantly to the outer planes 
when he sits in the golden chair. He will 
be transported to any specific location 
in the outer planes he has in mind; oth- 
erwise, he will be transported to a ran- 


12i 


dom location in a randomly chosen 
outer plane. 


Opening D: If a character walks 
through this opening, he will be trans- 
ported instantly to the Astral plane 
when he sits in the golden chair. He will 
be transported to any specific location 
in the Astral plane he has in mind; oth- 
erwise, he will be transported to a ran- 
dom location in the Astral plane. 


The Sage Tree 


The Sage Tree is a huge oak tree 
about 10 feet in diameter and over 100 
feet tall. It grows somewhere in one of 
the world's densest forests. The Sage 
Tree contains the spirits of a dozen of 
the wisest scholars who ever lived. Af- 
ter the scholars died, the gods of good 
rewarded their devotion to pure knowl- 
edge by placing their spirits in this oak 
so they could engage in philosophic dis- 
cussions for all eternity. 


OTN 
AITITA 
One 


Granite 


10 Yards 
Maps by Stephen Sullivan 


If a wizard locates this oak (recogniz- 
able by a slight pulsation near its trunk 
that resembles a heart beat), he can ask 
it any question as if he were consulting 
a wise sage for information (the wizard 
can ask any question relating to the 
fields of study listed on Table 61 of the 
Dungeon Masters Guide), The Sage 
Tree will only respond to wizards of 
lawful good alignment, and it will an- 
swer only one question per day. 

If these requirements are met, two to 
five (1d4 + 1) human faces will sprout 
from the tree in an area five to ten feet 
above the base of the trunk. The faces 
appear to be carved from wood. One of 
the faces will politely ask the wizard to 
repeat the question, then another face 
will offer an answer. Immediately, a 
second face will offer a different an- 
swer, If there are additional faces, they 
too will offer different answers. 

After all of the faces have offered 
their answers, they will ignore the wiz- 
ard and engage in a heated argument as 
to who is wrong and who is right. The 
argument will continue for at least 2-8 
(2d4) rounds, during which time the ar- 
gument will drift off into topics com- 
pletely unrelated to the wizard’s 
question. At some point in the argu- 
ment, one of the heads will abruptly ask 
the wizard for his opinion to settle their 
argument—the head will ask for the 
wizard’s opinion on a subject totally 
unrelated to the wizards’ original ques- 
tion. Typical questions asked by a head 
might include: 

e If a star falls from the sky and 
lands in the ocean, should the star still 
be considered part of the heavens, or 
has it now become part of the earth? 

è Ifa large animal kills a smaller ani- 
mal for sport, should it be held account- 
able for its actions? 

è If two men share equally in a busi- 
ness and one of them dies, should the 
widow of the dead man receive his 
share of the profits, even if she does not 
participate in the business herself? 


è Are a wizard’s skills more impor- 
tant than those of a craftsman? Than 
those of an artist? 

è In what ways is a dragon the equal 
of a man? 


If the wizard refuses to answer the 
head's question, all of the heads with- 
draw into the tree trunk and disappear. 
They cannot be summoned again for 
another 24 hours. 

If the wizard makes a reasonable ef- 
fort to answer the head's question (the 
DM decides if the wizard has made a 
reasonable effort), the heads will nod in 
agreement, saying they will discuss the 
issue further at another time. One of the 
heads will then ask the wizard to repeat 
his original question. The heads will 
consult briefly with each other, then 
one of them will answer the question. 
To determine if the heads have arrived 
at the correct answer, the DM should 
roll 1d20. On a roll of 18 or less, the 
heads have answered correctly. On a 
roll of 19 or 20, the heads have an- 
swered incorrectly. The DM should cre- 
ate an incorrect answer that will be 
believable and consistent with what 
they players already know about the 
adventure. 

After the heads answer the wizard’s 
question, they bid him farewell and 
withdraw back inside the tree. The 
heads will not answer another question 
until 24 hours have passed. 

If the tree is cut down or otherwise 
destroyed, the essences of the sages will 
be transported to another tree some- 
where else in the world. As with the 
previous tree, the new Sage Tree will be 
recognizable by a slight pulsation near 
its trunk. 


The Garden of Jertulth 


This is an enchanted garden devel- 
oped by the ancient mage Jertulth. The 
garden is rumored to exist in a clearing 
in an uncharted jungle; its precise loca- 


122 


tion is not known. The garden is only 
about 10 feet by 10 feet square, but its 
enchantment is so strong that it radiates 
magic for a radius of one mile. 

The garden appears to be a normal bed 
of wild flowers of various types. How- 
ever, if anon-magical weapon is buried in 
the garden beneath three feet of soil and 
left undisturbed for a year and a day, 
there is a good chance that it will change 
into a magical weapon. No more than 
two weapons can be buried in the garden 
at the same time; if more than two weap- 
ons are buried, the enchantment will not 
work and the weapons will be unaf- 
fected. If a weapon is removed from the 
garden before a year and a day have 
passed, the magic is negated; the weapon 
must be buried again, and another year 
and a day must pass before the enchant- 
ment takes hold. 

If a weapon remains buried in the 
garden for a year and a day, roll 1d20 
and consult Table 20 for the result. 


Table 20: Results from 
the Garden of Jertulth 


D20 Roll Result 
1-3 The weapon is unaffected. 


4-6 The weapon has become a 
weapon +1. 


7-10 The weapon has become a 


weapon +2. 


11-12 The weapon has become a 


weapon +3. 


13 The weapon has become a 
weapon +4, 


14-15 The weapon has become a 
weapon +1, +2 vs. magic- 
using and enchanted creatures. 
This weapon always provides a 
+1 bonus. The +2 bonus takes 
effect when the sword is em- 
ployed against wizards, spell- 
casting monsters, and 
conjured, gated, or summoned 


( Wall of Light 


To Cavern 


16 


17 


pl, A 


creatures. (The +2 bonus will not 
operate against a creature magi- 
cally empowered by an item that 
casts spells, such as a ring of spell 
storing. 


The weapon has become a weapon 
+3. However, 2-8 (2d4) days after 
it is taken from the garden, the 
weapon loses its enchantment and 
reverts to its non-magical form. 
Permanency or a similar spell can- 
not prevent the weapon from los- 
ing its enchantment, although a 
wish could. 


The weapon has become a weapon 
+3. However, 2-8 (2d4) days after 
it is taken from the garden, the 
weapon disintegrates into dust. 
This enchantment is so powerful 
that nothing short of a wish can 
prevent the weapon from disinte- 
grating; however, if a wish is cast 
on the weapon, it will lose its +3 


18 


19 


Layer 6 (Detail) 


Golden Chair 


bonus and revert to a normal 
weapon. 


The weapon has become a weapon 
+1, cursed. It performs in all re- 
spects asa +1 weapon, but when it 
is used to attack an enemy, the 
sword will weld itself to the wield- 
er's hand and force him to fight un- 
til the enemy or the wielder is slain. 
After its first use, the wielder can 
never rid himself of the cursed 
weapon—it will always appear in 
his hand whenever an opponent is 
faced. The wielder can be freed of 
the weapon by remove curse, lim- 
ited wish, wish, or a similar spell. 


The weapon has become a weapon 
—2, cursed. The weapon gives off 
a magical aura and performs well 
in practice, but when it is used 
against an opponent in combat, it 
lowers its wielder's attack rolls by 
2. Only by careful observation can 
this lowering be detected. All dam- 


123 


== \\| 


ENN 
SIZ 
ave Roof” 


age scored is reduced by 2 hit 
points, but a successful hit will al- 
ways inflict at least 1 hit point of 
damage. As with the weapon +1, 
cursed, the weapon —2, cursed 
will always appear in the hands of 
the wielder and force him to fight 
until the enemy or the wielder is 
slain. The wielder can be freed of 
the weapon only by a limited wish 
or a wish. 


20 The weapon has turned to dust. 
The Shadow Trees 


This is a grove of spindly, leafless 
trees growing somewhere in a dark jun- 
gle. The trees have black bark, and 
their uppermost branches always sway 
as if being blown by a breeze; they sway 
even in the absence of wind. 

On nights with a clear sky and a full 
moon, the shadows of the branches 
spell out one or more omens and warn- 


Wizardly Lists 


ings on the ground. The omens appear 
as shadowy runes of any number of an- 
cient languages; a wizard can translate 
the runes with comprehend languages 
or a similar spell. The omens and warn- 
ings are always 100 percent accurate, 
though their phrasing may be ambigu- 
ous. Rumors tell that once per year, the 
shadow trees spell out the formula of a 
wizard spell of a random level which 
can be translated by comprehend lan- 
guages, read magic, or a similar spell. 


§SSSESSHSSSSSSHSSSSSHHHSSHSHSSSSSS 


Twelve New Magical 
Items 


If the DM wishes to determine the 
discovery of the following items at ran- 
dom, he can use the magical item tables 
on pages 135-139 of the Dungeon Mas- 
ter's Guide. Each item below belongs to 
a particular table; when a DM's Choice 
result is rolled on the appropriate table, 
the DM can use the indicated item as 
one of his options. For instance, the po- 
tion of elasticity listed below belongs to 
Table 89 (page 135, DMG). If a 20 is 
rolled, the DM can use the potion of 
elasticity as an option for the DM's 
Choice. 


Potion of Elasticity 


A character consuming one dose of 
this potion is able to stretch his legs, 
arms, neck, or any other appendage up 
to a distance in feet equal to twice his 
Constitution score; for instance, a char- 
acter with a Constitution of 15 can 
stretch up to 30 feet. A character can 
stretch only one appendage at a time; 
for instance, he can stretch one arm, 
one finger, or his neck. Whenever he 
stretches any appendage, he must make 
a Constitution Check; if he fails, the 
stress of the stretch causes 1d6 hit 
points of damage. The potion lasts for 


1-4 turns; during this time, the charac- 
ter can make as many stretches as he 
likes, as long as he checks for damage 
for each stretch. 
Add to: Table 89 (page 135, DMG). 
XP Value: 300 


Candle of Everburning 


This resembles a normal wax candle 
about 6 inches tall. However, once the 
candle is lit, the flame can be extin- 
guished only by the spoken command 
of whomever is holding it. Otherwise, 
the flame continues to burn; it will burn 
underwater, in any alternate plane of 
existence, or in the strongest of winds. 
Dispel magic and similar spells have no 
effect on the flame. The candle of ever- 
burning can burn for 24 hours before all 
of its wax melts away. 

Add to: Table 101 (page 138, DMG). 

XP Value: 300 


Medallion of Steadiness 


This is a silver medallion of a horse's 
head. While wearing it, a character can 
never be thrown from his mount, 
whether a horse, a dragon, or any other 
creature suitable for riding. 

Add to: Table 96 (page 137, DMG). 

XP Value: 1,000 


Dragon Slippers 


These slippers are made of green silk. 
The magic of the dragon slippers is acti- 
vated if the wearer concentrates and 
speaks the word “change.” If activated, 
the dragon slippers cause the wearer to 
appear as a 20-foot dragon with bright 
yellow scales, a barbed tail, and long 
green fangs; the wearer does not gain any 
of the abilities of a dragon. While the illu- 
sion is in effect, the wearer retains his 
normal abilities and statistics. The effect 
lasts for one hour, but can be cancelled 
any time by the command of the wearer. 


124 


Add to: Table 98 (page 138, DMG). 
XP Value: 3,000 


Parchment of Monster 
Holding 


This 1-foot-square piece of parch- 
ment can hold any monster summoned 
by a monster summoning I spell. The 
wizard unfolds the parchment and lays 
it before himself prior to casting the 
spell. If the spell is successfully cast, the 
summoned monster is immediately ab- 
sorbed into the parchment, appearing 
there as a colored image. The caster can 
then refold the parchment and carry it 
with him, holding the summoned mon- 
ster indefinitely. When the parchment is 
unfolded and laid on the ground, and 
the wizard speaks a command word, 
the monster appears, remaining active 
for the normal duration of the monster 
summoning I spell. 

Any single parchment of monster 
holding can be used only once; after the 
monster is released, the parchment 
crumbles to dust. The parchment also 
crumbles if it is torn or defaced in any 
way. 

Add to: Table 104 (page 139, DMG). 

XP Value: 150 


Singing Skull 


This item resembles a small human 
skull, about 3 inches in diameter, made 
of ivory. Once per day, the owner can 
command the skull to sing. The singing 
skull sings eerie, depressing tunes for 
one hour (or less, as ordered by the 
skull's owner). All those within 50 feet 
of the singing skull must make a suc- 
cessful saving throw vs. spells or suffer 
the effects of a fear spell. The owner of 
the singing skull is immune to its ef- 
fects. 

Add to: Table 103 (page 139, DMG). 

XP Value: 2,000 


Wizardly Lists 


Airboat 


This appears to be a canoe made of 
stone and measures 3 feet tall, 12 feet 
long, and 4 feet wide. Inside are five 
evenly spaced stone planks, each capa- 
ble of seating two human-sized passen- 
gers. A plank on one end of the canoe is 
marked with a star symbol in the cen- 
ter. The airboat is also fitted with two 
sets of stone oars that fit in ridges 
carved in both sides of the craft. 

The airboat responds to the mental 
orders of its commander (the character 
sitting on the plank with the star sym- 
bol). Only a wizard or priest can serve 
as an airboat commander. 

The airboat can move in any direc- 
tion in any medium. While moving, the 
airboat is surrounded by an aura of 
light that allows all of its passengers to 
breathe normally, even when traveling 
through water or airless space. The 
aura surrounds the craft to a distance of 
10 feet. 

The airboat has a movement rate of 
40. It can move only if it is being rowed 
with at least one set of the stone oars. If 
only one set is used, the craft has a max- 
imum movement rate of 20; if both sets 
are used, the craft has a maximum 
speed of 40. A single character can op- 
erate two oars, or two characters can sit 
side by side on a plank, each operating 
an oar. To move at maximum speed, the 
rowers must complete a stroke every 
two seconds; if the stroking rate is less 
than this, the maximum speed de- 
creases proportionately. For instance, if 
one set of oars is stroking once every 
four seconds, the airboat has a maxi- 
mum movement rate of 10. 

The commander must remain seated 
on the star plank. He can take no 
actions other than commanding the 
craft, If he moves from his seat, at- 
tempts to operate the oars, or takes any 
other action, the airboat stops moving. 
Similarly, if his concentration is inter- 


; 


ruped, the craft stops. If it stops moving 
while in the air, it hovers in place. The 
airboat can hover in place for only 1 
turn, after which it sinks gently to the 
ground. If it stops moving while on wa- 
ter, the boat simply drifts. 

Add to: Table 104 (page 139, DMG). 

XP Value: 20,000 


Ring of Resistance to Breath 
Weapons 


This ring gives the wearer complete 
immunity to all breath weapon attacks 
from creatures other than dragons; the 
wearer suffers half damage from 
dragon breath. 

Add to: Table 91 (page 136, DMG). 

XP Value: 5,000 


Collapsing Spell Book 


This resembles an ordinary traveling 
spell book, except that it can be folded 
over and over until it is a square one 
inch on each side, The book can be un- 
folded when its owner wishes to consult 
it, then folded back into its small size 
for easy carrying. 

Add to: Table 95 (page 137, DMG), 

XP Value: 1,500 


Spoon of Mixing 


This spoon increases the chance of 
successfully combining magical potions 
to create a new effect. When combining 
potions as per the rules on page 141 of 
the Dungeon Master's Guide, the per- 
centile dice roll on Table 111 is modified 
by +10 when using the spoon of mix- 
ing. Treat all results greater than 00 as 
00. Note that by using the spoon of mix- 
ing, there is no chance that the com- 
bined potions will create an explosion, 
a lethal poison, or a mild poison. 

Add to: Table 102 (page 138, DMG.) 

XP Value: 1,500 


125 


Pen of Excellence 


A pen of excellence grants the user 
the following abilities: 

© He can write at twice his normal 
speed (particularly helpful for wizards 
copying new spells into their spell 
books). 

e He can draw accurate pictures of 
anything he sees with the precision of 
the finest artist. 

e If the user has a sample of another 
person's handwriting, he can create a 
perfect forgery of that handwriting. 

Any type of ink can be used with a 
pen of excellence. 

Add to: Table 102 (page 138, DMG). 

XP Value: 1,200 


Bracelet of Scaly Command 


This coral bracelet enables the 
wearer to control water-dwelling crea- 
tures with animal intelligence or lower 
(mainly fishes and reptiles). The crea- 
tures must be within a half-mile radius 
of the caster in order to be controlled, 
and they must be within 30 feet of each 
other. The number of creatures that can 
be affected is a function of Hit Dice. 
The spell affects 1-10 Hit Dice of mon- 
sters. Monsters with 5+3 Hit Dice or 
more are unaffected. 

The center of the area of effect is de- 
termined by the spellcaster. The crea- 
tures with the fewest Hit Dice are 
affected first, and partial effects are ig- 
nored. The caster does not have to be in 
the water to command the creatures. 

This control lasts for 2-12 (2d6) turns 
and cannot be dispelled. No saving 
throw is allowed against the magic of 
the bracelet. The wearer can use this 
ability once per week. 

Add to: Table 96 (page 137, DMG). 

XP Value: 2,500 


School Creation Sheet 
I n  ——— a 
e a aa aa R E S ee 
Type of Magic/Type of Effects: 


Spells: 
Level Description 


EET 


Ethos — —— 


126 


Wizard Kit Creation Sheet 
Wizard Type: 
Coe eee ee a eg 
Dungeon Master: 


Preferred C—O. ee ee ee) 
Barred Se a ee S eee 
————— ee a ee 
Se ——— ee eee ee ee) oe 
———— EE eS ee eae eee Se ee eee eee 
a a ESS 
E E a 


a gae a E a es 


dd aul M ee 


ee eee UU 


ee oe a 


Specul eS l 


Weah EE EE SSE 


ee 
oC Eee 


127 


Players Handbook / Rules See 


The 
Complete 


Wizard’s 
Handbook 


If you thought all wizards were alike, think again! 
The masters of magic now have a new guide to creat- 


ing more interesting and imaginative mages, just 
when you thought you had them ‘figured out." The 
Complete Wizard’s Handbook will put a whole new 
twist on wizards from personality and dress codes to 
schools of magic to building that dream laboratory. 
Look out, world - you'll never look at a mage the 
same way again! 


$15.00 U.S. 0-88038-838-2 


TSR, Inc TSR Ltd 
POB 756 F 120 Church End, 
Lake Geneva, Cherry Hinton 
WI 53147 Cambridge CB1 3LB 
U.S.A United Kingdom 
ADVANCED DUNGEONS & DRAGONS, AD&D, and the TSR 
6363"02 


logo are trademarks owned by TSR, Inc. 
©1990 TSR, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Printed in the US.A. 


